

THE ART
OF THE RENAISSANCE
CRAFTSMAN


13


THE ART
OF THE RENAISSANCE
CRAFTSMAN
An Exhibition of Fifteenth
Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Century Workmanship
FOGG ART MUSEUM • MAY MCMXXXVII
HARVARD UNIVERSITY • CAMBRIDGE


Printed by E. L. Hildreth & Company, Inc., Brattleboro, Vermont.
The plates are Full-Tone Collotype by the Meriden Gravure Company,
Meriden, Connecticut.


The members of Professor Paul J. Sachs’ Seminar in Museum
Practice present as their Exhibition “The Art of the Renaissance
Craftsman.” In choosing this subject, they have hoped in a modest
way to revive interest in a field somewhat neglected of late.
To those American Museums, private collectors, and dealers who
generously interested themselves in the promotion of this Exhibi-
tion, the Fogg Museum and the members of the Museum Class
hereby acknowledge their debt.
With regard to the authorship of the works included, the own-
er’s attribution has in each case been respected.
Thanks are due to the anonymous lenders and to the following:
The Clapp and Graham Company, Inc., New York
Dr. Paul Drey, New York
French and Company, Inc., New York
Stephen V. Grancsay, New York
Dr. Jacob Hirsch, New York
Edward L. Jellinek, Buffalo
E. John Magnin, New York
The Lord Duveen of Millbank, New York
The Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
The Museum of the Rhode Island School of Design, Providence
The Pierpont Morgan Library, New York
Dr. and Mrs. Alexander Hamilton Rice, New York
Arnold Seligmann, Rey and Company, Inc., New York
Mrs. Jesse Isidor Straus, New York
The Harvard College Library, Cambridge
The Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford
Joseph E. Widener, Philadelphia




INTRODUCTION
Skill, technique, and ingenious methods were the pride of the
Renaissance artist. We are, therefore, presenting our subject from
the point of view of craftsmanship, rather than from that of his-
tory, sociology, or even art history. Our present civilization may be
a mechanical one, but our curiosity and respect for the craftsman’s
work persist. Since it was during the Renaissance that the crafts-
man reached the highest point in his development, a survey of his
creative production is now of greatest interest.
Our exhibition is an attempt to prove that there is no funda-
mental difference between the talent exerted in the painting of a
fresco or the carving of a statue, and that employed in fashioning
an enamelled dish or a jewel. Indeed it was very often the same
man, whether we call him artist or craftsman, who made both.
To do the subject justice it would be necessary to call on the
greatest European and American museums. A most extensive ex-
hibition would have to be arranged, for there are few opportuni-
ties for embellishment which the Renaissance craftsman has failed
to seize. Within the limits of our exhibition we have tried to show
clearly that he applied his skill not only to objects where embellish-
ment is usual, but also to objects of the most utilitarian and com-
monplace use.
The explanation for this application of ornament to the realm
of daily life lies in the conditions under which the craftsman
worked. With the growth of metropolitan areas, the expansion of
commerce, the rise of a wealthy middle class and the emergence
of a leisured aristocracy, there came into being a new type of
patron who was enlightened, lavish in his tastes, and generous. He
was beginning to be seized by the full tide of that enthusiasm for
Graeco-Roman antiquity which was one of the principal charac-
teristics of the Renaissance. Evidences of this enthusiasm are found
not so much in the mythological symbols used by the artists, as in
the pagan or neo-pagan attitude towards life, which was expressed
in a love for beautiful surfaces and a delight in sensuous qualities.
The useful object from the Renaissance which we put under a
glass case and label as an objet d’art, must be viewed in the light


of this sensual and materialistic mood. Even the objects used in the
Church were submitted to this influence.
The use of precious metals and gems was not an invention of
the Renaissance; during the entire Middle Ages there was a vast
demand for them by Church and State. From the fifteenth century
on, however, they were no longer the exclusive appanage of the
Kings and the Bishops. They came to be employed by a much
greater number of less exalted personages. And for these people
it was the sumptuousness of the setting which counted, rather than
the specific value of the gold or the stones.
Nor can the Renaissance craftsman be regarded primarily as an
inventor of techniques. He was heir to the traditions of workman-
ship carried on throughout the Middle Ages. He revived a few of
the processes which had fallen into disuse since antiquity, but his
main contribution was his refinement of the techniques employed
by his predecessors.
In preparing this catalogue, we have felt that a series of brief
historical summaries of the important crafts illustrated in this ex-
hibition, together with a description of some of the techniques,
would be of service to the visitor. Our notes, and the selected
bibliographies which accompany them, are meant solely to support
the thesis that appreciation is increased by the knowledge of how
things are made.


TAPESTRY-WEAVING
Flemish tapestries have been highly prized since the Middle Ages.
The principal centers of manufacture during that period were
Tournai, Lille, Oudenarde and especially Arras, which was so
celebrated that the name of the town became synonymous with the
article it produced. With the destruction of Arras in 1477, how-
ever, a change took place. The other towns continued to manu-
facture tapestries, but a new center, Brussels, arose; by the six-
teenth century it was an established place for the production of
tapestries.
Many fortunate circumstances conspired to give Brussels its sov-
ereignty. It was the center of the wool trade with England, of the
silk trade with the Orient, and of the dye trade for the whole of
Europe; thus all the materials for tapestry-weaving were at hand.
In addition, it had a flourishing school of painters, and it was the
residence of the Regents of Netherlands, who supplied the patron-
age.
The weavers of Brussels were by the sixteenth century recog-
nized as the best in the world. The height of their reputation was
reached in 1515, when Pope Leo X commissioned Peter Van Aelst
to execute a series of tapestries after designs by Raphael. As famous
as Van Aelst was the dynasty of the Pannemakers, one of whose
members, Peter, became official tapissier to the Regents of the
Netherlands. The high standard of workmanship of the Brussels
tapestries made it necessary for the market to be protected. There-
fore, by a regulation of May 16, 1528, the weavers were required
to sign their larger works with an individual mark as well as with
the double B around a red shield, symbolic of Brussels in Brabant.
A characteristic of Renaissance tapestries is their dependence
upon designs furnished by celebrated painters. Several members of
the Van Orley family, Jan Van Roome, Jan Cornelisz, Vermeyen,
and Michael Coxie are all painters whose names occur in historical
records in connection with the designing of tapestries. Bernard van
Orley is the painter about whom we are best informed. Born in
1491, he gained great reputation for his religious paintings and
portraits. He became court painter to Margaret, Regent of the


Netherlands. It is difficult to recognize a uniform style in his
paintings, and it is even more difficult to describe his share in the
designing of tapestries, although many of his cartoons are pre-
served. The method employed by the weavers in making use of
the artist’s sketch renders the detection of the original design a
hopeless task at times. The small cartoon prepared by the master
was enlarged and amplified by his assistants to the size of the
tapestry. The execution of the details was often left to these assist-
ants. The borders, too, were usually executed by specialists. The
original design, finally, sometimes underwent considerable changes
at the hands of the weavers.
Two methods of tapestry-weaving were employed during the
Renaissance: the haute-lisse process and the basse-lisse process. In
haute-lisse, the loom stands vertically, the front of the tapestry faces
the weaver, and he copies the design which has been traced in
charcoal on the warp. In basse-lisse, the loom is placed horizon-
tally, the back of the tapestry faces the weaver, who follows a car-
toon copied in reverse. The most celebrated of the Renaissance
tapestries, according to modern scholars, were done in basse-lisse.
Bibliography
W. G. Thomson, The History of Tapestry (New York, 1906).
H. Gobel, Wandteppiche (Leipzig, 1923-1934), vols. I—III.
G. L. Hunter, The Practical Boo\ of Tapestry (Philadelphia, 1925).
See also bibliography of the Van Orley tapestries, p. 18, below.
THE GOLDSMITH’S CRAFT
The art of the goldsmith has always been considered one of the
noblest crafts, perhaps because it deals with precious metals and
stones. It is as old as antiquity and has come down to the present
day with almost uninterrupted traditions, but at no time has it en-
joyed a more flourishing state than throughout the Renaissance.
Then, like all the other arts, it felt the aesthetic impulse that was
transforming life. It flourished everywhere—in France, in Ger-
many, in Flanders, in England, in Italy —but it probably came to
its fullest bloom in Germany and Italy. In the latter country the
names of many great artists are associated with it. Benvenuto Cel-
lini lists in his Treatise on Goldsmithing and Sculpture, Ghiberti,


Michael Angelo, Donatello, Albrecht Diirer, Martin Schongauer
and Andrea Mantegna as the leading goldsmiths of the time. In
Germany, the craft flourished particularly in Augsburg and in
Nuremberg. In the former city, David Altensetter and Daniel
Mignot, and in the latter, Wenzel Jamnitzer, brought to perfection
the German tradition. They took over from Italy the new style of
fantastic designs and elaborate decoration of a classical order and
changed it to suit the German taste, made it, in short, a little more
ingenious, bizarre, and robust.
At this epoch the art of the goldsmith was inseparable from that
of the jeweler. Vasari stated that one was not considered a good
jeweler unless he was a good designer and knew how to work in
relief. It is not surprising therefore to find that the settings of
Renaissance jewels are sometimes more important even than the
stones.
The goldsmiths, especially in Germany, were often more than
craftsmen or artists; they were in addition men of social and politi-
cal importance. As owners of reserves of precious metals and as
guardians of the wealth of many of their clients, they had gradu-
ally assumed the funcdons of the banker and at times of the mint-
ers of coinage. The growth of modem banking, however, coin-
cided with the development of the Renaissance, and the goldsmith
slowly passed his powers as a moneylender over to the great new
banking houses like the Medici. The goldsmiths throughout this
period carried on the traditions of the guilds that had grown up
in the Middle Ages and held under strict regulation the quality of
workmanship and the purity of the metals.
Time has dealt harshly with much of the Renaissance plate.
Wars and financial crises have caused it to be melted down for
its monetary value. For example, almost all of the gold and silver
vessels in England were turned in to help the cause of Charles I
during the Civil Wars; the entire French collection, including the
magnificent service of Charles V, was minted in the seventeenth
century by order of Louis XIV. Many collections, however, pre-
serve today some of the famous pieces by the great Renaissance
craftsmen. Among these must be mentioned the Louvre, the Krem-
lin, the Grimes Gewolbe in Dresden, the Imperial Museum of
Vienna, the Kunstgewerbe Museum in Berlin, the British Museum,
the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the J. Pierpont Morgan Col-
lection in the Metropolitan Museum of New York.


The following list of technical terms and processes is an attempt
to aid the visitor in understanding the variety and intricacy of the
works exhibited.
Technique: Silver and gold are ductile and malleable metals, that
is, capable of change of shape and stretching under hammering. A
plate or sheet of either metal, by the use of stakes and the proper
hammers, can be worked or “raised” within broad limits. By
careful manipulation and annealing the raising of these metals
may be carried to fantastic heights. Pieces of plate, complicated be-
yond the limits of the media, are often made of several sections
joined to make a whole. Both metals are easily cast, and, on ac-
count of their resistance to corrosion, they have been valued in
addition to their intrinsic worth.
Annealing: A reheating of the metal to restore its original ductile
properties that have been lost in hammering.
Applied Ornament; This is of two kinds. One is cut-card work,
in which a piece of flat or sheet metal is cut to the desired shape
and applied with solder. The other is cast ornament, in which the
decoration, usually in relief, is first cast in the desired form and
applied with solder or rivets.
Embossing: Ornament produced by hammering from the back
surface.
Engraving: Incised decoration with a sharp instrument. Some of
the metal is removed.
Flat Chasing: Similar to engraving, except that a dull instrument
is used and the line is depressed. None of the metal is removed;
there is only a change of plane.
Moulding: Cast and applied ornament, such as moulded rim,
moulded band, and the like.
Mounts: A term used to describe the metal framework support-
ing some object of a non-metallic nature, as silver mounts of a
coconut cup or silver-gilt mounts of a faience bowl.
Ormolu; An alloy of copper and zinc, and sometimes tin, cast
and chiselled, particularly for scroll-work. Its color approximates
gold and is often heightened by a wash of gold lacquer. The term
may also describe gilded brass or copper ornament.


Pierced Work: Decoration with piercings and perforations. A
liner of metal, glass, faience, shell, etc., must be supplied if the
work is a container.
Plate: A general term for fashioned gold and silver.
Punch Work: Design worked in depressed dots by a dull pointed
tool. Indentation.
Repousse: Raised ornament produced by working the surface of
the metal with suitable tools against a back of pitch, lead or some
other semi-ductile material.
Silver-Gilt: Usually, gold applied to silver as an amalgam with
mercury and heated until the mercury evaporates, leaving a thin
gold deposit; or else, by means of a chemical solution in which the
gold will replace a small amount of silver, again coating the sur-
face.
Strap Work: Engraved ornamentation in bands with parallel
borders. The space between the borders is often filled with floral
motifs. More geometric than ribbon scrolls.
Bibliography
J. J. Marquet de Vasselot, Bibliographic de I’orfevrerie et de I’emaillerie
frangaises (Paris, 1925).
Marc Rosenberg, Geschichte der Goldschmiedekunst (Frankfort, 1908).
E. A. Jones, Old Silver of Europe and America (New York, 1928).
E. Plon, Benvenuto Cellini (Paris, 1883).
Vasari on Technique, being the Introduction to the "Lives," translated by
Louisa S. Maclehose (London, 1907).
The Treatises of Benvenuto Cellini on Goldsmithing and Sculpture, translated
by C. R. Ashbee (London, 1898).
Geschichte des Kunstgewerbes, edited by H. T. H. Eossert (Berlin, 1935),
vol. VI.
ENAMELS
The use of enamel in ornament goes back to the time of the
Egyptians and the Assyrians, who applied it on brick and pottery.
The Greeks and Romans decorated their jewelry and bronzes with
it. In the Middle Ages, the art of enamelling went through suc-
cessive revivals in Byzantium, Cologne, and Limoges. The proc-
esses employed were those of cloisonne, champleve and basse-taille,


all variations on the method of fusing the enamel to the base within
containing walls. In the late fifteenth century and throughout the
sixteenth century, Limoges came to be a renowned world center
for a new type known as painted enamel, described below. Among
the famous enamellers of this period must be mentioned the sev-
eral members of the Penicaud family, particularly Jean II Peni-
caud, Leonard Limousin, Jean Courtois, Martial Courtois, Pierre
Reymond, and many others. These artists enjoyed royal favor and
patronage. The royally-endowed manufactures at Limoges were
the source of many painted enamels now exhibited in the Louvre
and in other famous galleries.
PAINTED ENAMEL
Enamel, a substance similar to glass, is formed by fusing various
borates and silicates at a low temperature. This mixture may be
easily combined through a firing process with nearly all the metal-
lic oxides, and in this way may be given color. A wide scale of
rich dark and light tones is possible. Enamel is applied by firing to
a base of metal, glass, or pottery.
The sixteenth-century painters on enamel evolved what is known
as the “grisaille” process, from the bluish-gray tone of the result-
ing work. Two methods, a simple and a complex one, were used;
we shall describe the former which was more generally employed.
The enameller proceeded thus: a copper plate, scraped clean and
hammered into a slighdy convex form, was covered with a thick
coat of black, or sometimes dark blue or dark brown enamel. After
firing, this served as a smooth base on which the design was
placed. The artist proceeded by “envelage,” that is to say, he drew
the details, the accessories and the form by means of lines cut into
the dark enamel with a point. This base was then covered with a
glaze of white enamel to deaden the too vivid black, and to insure
a less sudden transition between light and dark. In order to obtain
a softer gray tonality some craftsmen used as their background the
first white layer fired on the dark ground.
When figures were used in the design, they were not silhouetted
but made to stand out in dark or light according to the require-
ments of the composition. The various degrees of opacity of the
enamel enabled the artist to place each person and each thing in
the proper plane. A final touch was added after the successive lay


ers of enamel were fired: all parts that needed highlights were
touched up with gold.
Besides the grisaille processes, modifications in the methods of
using polychrome enamels were also introduced in the sixteenth
century, particularly by Leonard Limousin. These improvements
resulted in greater precision, especially in the rendering of flesh
tones, and contributed to the popularity of the numerous enamel
portraits made after engravings and drawings by contemporary
artists. The flesh parts were prepared on a thick layer of white
enamel, and on this layer, melted and hardened by fire, the flesh
tones were painted with a brush, light rust bistre being the color
generally used. The face was modelled and the features shaded by
fine hatchings and dots; the hair and beard, prepared on light or
dark yellow enamel, were repainted with bistre of a darker tone.
Bibliography
Edouard Gamier, Histoire de la verrerie et de Vemaillerie (Tours, 1886).
Claudius Popelin, UEmail des peintres (Paris, 1866).
Alfred Meyer, UArt de Vemail de Limoges (Paris, 1895).
NIELLO
Niello is the Italian form of the Latin, nigellum, the diminutive
of niger, “black.” The process of making niello is as follows. The
niello powder, a black substance composed of powdered silver,
lead, copper, and sulphur, is placed in engraved lines on a metal
plate, usually silver, and then fired. It melts and runs into the
lines. The plate is then cleaned by scraping and burnishing.
Our knowledge of the process and materials is derived from
Eraclius, a Roman writer of the eleventh century; Theophilus, a
monk of the twelfth century; Benvenuto Cellini, the famous sculp-
tor of the sixteenth century, and Vasari, the contemporary biogra-
pher of the sixteenth-century artists.
The purposes to which nielli were put were many. Niello plates
were often applied to a Pax, a “Majesta,” or other ecclesiastical
objects —reliquaries, crucifixes, croziers, and candelabras. Niello
had its domestic uses, too, adorning boxes, cups, plates, knife-
handles, buckles, pendants and rings. Many times it was used for
the outside cover of book-bindings.


Antiquity knew of this process and even in Russia just before
the war such articles as cigarette boxes were still being adorned
with niello. But it was in the Italy of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries that it was extensively and exquisitely produced.
Such famous painters as Antonio Pollaiuolo and Francesco
Francia practiced this art. The head of one shop and the most re-
nowned medallist of his time was Maso Finiguerra. He was in the
same workshop as Antonio Pollaiuolo for a time. Vasari and Cel-
lini both claim that Maso depended upon Pollaiuolo for his de-
signs, but that no one could better Maso in the making of the
nielli, because he was such a superb draftsman. Also both state
that it was Maso who developed the idea of printing engravings
from the proving of the niello plates.
Such prints taken from plates engraved in the niello manner are
distinguishable from ordinary line engravings. The chief char-
acteristic of a niello print is the dark background of deeply-cut
parallels, of clear cross-hatched shading, which throws the figures
which are more lightly shaded into strong relief. Sometimes in-
stead of a print, the artist would make a sulphur cast of the plate
as a record. The brilliancy of a niello plate is reproduced by the
sulphur cast through the effect of the lines of ink against the pol-
ished sulphur surface.
Bibliography
A. M. Hind, Nielli in the British Museum (London, 1936).
Texier, Dictionnaire de Vorfevrerie (Paris, 1857).
A. Blum, “Les nielleurs du XVe siecle et Maso Finiguerra,” Gazette des
Beaux-Arts, 6e per., IX, 1 (1933), 214 IT.
E. de Rothsschild, “Maso Finiguerra et les nielleurs du Quattrocento,” Acad.
Beaux-Arts, Bulletin, XVII (1933), 82—88.
CRYSTAL
Although since ancient times it had never completely fallen into
disuse, the art of carving on crystal was revived during the Renais-
sance. The Italians, as in everything else, led the way. Cellini, for
example, tells of engraving the Zodiac on a crystal ball. It was the
Germans, however, who carried the craft forward by the rediscov-
ery of the Roman method of cutting with the wheel. The Emperor
Rudolph II encouraged, with the other arts, the art of crystal cut


ting. Zaccharias Belzer, Kaspar Lehmann and the Italian family
of Miseroni worked under his patronage.
As with jewel cutting, from which the art sprang, there are two
ways of cutting crystal; deep cutting, the intaglio process by which
the ornament is cut into the surface (this was the method used to
some extent in the Renaissance); and high cutting, the cameo or
relief process, where the design is raised over the surface which
has been cut down around it. The latter method, because of its
vigorous effect, was popular in the Renaissance and especially so
in the Baroque period. The final step in the process was rubbing
with diamond powder.
Bibliography
D. Osborne, Engraved Gems (New York, 1912).
R. Schmidt, Das Glas (Berlin, 1922).
RENAISSANCE MEDALS AND THEIR
CASTING
Italy was the first country in modern times to develop the art of
casting bronze. Quantities of ancient medals were discovered in
her soil even before the fifteenth century, and the enthusiastic
movement for collecting them, in which Petrarch took an active
part, soon led to their imitation.
Pisanello, Alberti and Matteo dei Pasti, in the fifteenth century,
were among the first of the Italian artists to cast portrait medals,
although Pisanello always considered his work in this field sub-
ordinate to his painting. The medals came to be larger than their
antique models as the desire grew for more impressive portraits.
Much stress was also laid on composition and design, particularly
in the plaquettes, a form practiced by Donatello, Andrea Riccio,
Bertoldo di Giovanni and many others, in the fifteenth and six-
teenth centuries. Both medals and plaquettes were cast by the cire
perdue process, described below. After 1550, portrait medals were
increasingly made from a die stamp.
In Germany and Flanders, where the fashion for bronzes was
taken up, the interest was not so much in execution or design,
which was the prime consideration in Italy, as in vivid portraiture.


Diirer in Germany and Quentin Massys in the Netherlands de-
signed medals enthusiastically. In France, medallists were greatly
cramped by an official connection with the Mint.
Cire perdue (lost wax) is a process for casting bronze. A mould
of plaster (the material usually employed in the Renaissance) is
taken from a clay model. The interior is then filled with liquid
wax. The mould is removed, leaving a wax replica of the original
model. The wax model is next coated with a heat-resisting sand,
and a vent allows the wax to flow out during a gende pre-heating
lasting two or three days. Then the molten bronze is poured into
the sand supported space left by the lost wax. Vents allow the
gases to escape freely so that no air bubbles may mar the surface.
After a few days for cooling the moulds are knocked away and
the resultant cast is cleaned and polished.
Bibliography
Benvenuto Cellini, Autobiography, translated by J. A. Symonds (London,
1907).
Vasari on Technique, translated by Louisa S. Maclehose (London, 1907).
H. Liier, Techni\ der Bronzeplasti\ (Leipzig, 1902).
Master Bronzes, Catalogue of the Exhibition of Bronzes (Buffalo, 1937).


CATALOGUE
The objects marked with an asterisk are not illustrated
1. Tapestry, The Last Supper, Manufactory of Brussels,
circa 1532; Bernard van Orley (1491-1542), designer.
Wool, silk, and gold thread, 10 ft. 2 in. by 9 ft. 7 in.
The Last Supper is framed in a border made up of a design of
sword-lilies, ivy-leaves and poppies attached to a palm trunk, and
clusters of figs, oranges, grapes and pomegranates, interspersed with
owls and parrots, the birds of wisdom and folly. Beneath a balda-
quin placed in front of an arcaded wall, Christ sits at table in
the midst of His disciples, His right hand raised as if at the mo-
ment of saying, “One of you shall betray me.” John leans upon His
shoulder; Judas, on the opposite side of the table, holds in his hand
a bag of money. On the floor behind him a dog gnaws a bone. On
the table and on a carved stand in the foreground are gold and
silver vessels. In the center of the canopy above Christ is a wreath
which surrounds an image of Moses, who holds the Tables of the
Law in his right hand. On the wall beneath the arches is hung a
tnille-fleurs tapestry. The chair in the left foreground is carved
with acanthus leaves, the legs of which terminate in heads of dol-
phins and the arms in heads of fantastic animals. A mask deco-
rates the point where the arms and legs join the seat. The little
table holding the vessels has legs in the shape of griffins. Through
arcades is seen a distant Northern landscape, and on the floor, in
alternating tiles, the double-headed eagle of the Holy Roman Em-
pire and the Austrian lion. The insignia of the city of Brussels, a
red shield between two B’s, is woven in the selvage in the left-
hand corner, and the monogram of the weaver, not yet identified,
in the right.
2. Tapestry, The Ascension of Christ, Manufactory of
Brussels, circa 1532; Bernard van Orley, designer.
Wool, silk, and gold thread, 10 ft. by 9 ft. 7 in.
The Ascension is framed in a border similar to that around the


Last Supper, except that the owls are missing and the lower band
has a different arrangement of fruits. The scene takes place on a
flowery hill before a mountainous background which rises behind
a medieval walled town representing Jerusalem. Before a multi-
tude approaching and kneeling on all sides, Christ, making a ges-
ture of benediction with His right hand and carrying the red-cross
Banner of the Resurrection in His left hand, rises in a cloud. In
this cloud are seen two angels’ heads and a skull, suggesting re-
spectively supernatural power and triumph over death. In the
middle distance the Virgin kneels, and in the foreground, Paul,
Peter and John, who have just awakened from sleep, gaze in ad-
miration at the ascending figure. The story is told according to the
Gospel of St. Luke.
These tapestries are mentioned for the first time in an inventory,
made in 1565, of the possessions of the Royal House of Saxony;
they are listed under the title of the “Old Passion.” From that
epoch until after the World War, they remained the property of
the Kings of Saxony, and hung in the Dresden Picture Gallery.
Both tapestries lent by French and Company, Inc., New York.
Literature
W. Schafer, Die Konigliche Gemdlde-Gallerie im Neuen Museum zu Dresden
(Dresden, i 860), I, 25; 11, 6 ff.; O. Richter, Dresdner Geschichtsbldtter
(Dresden, 1893), no. 1, 65 ff.; K. Woermann, Katalog der Kgl. Gemalde-
galerie zu Dresden, Grosse Ausgabe, 6th ed. (Dresden, 1905), 878-880,
nos. e and £; E. Kumsch, “Die Dresdner Passionsteppiche und ihre Bezie-
hungen zu Durer,” Mitteilungen aus sdchsischen Kunstsammlungen, IV
(1913), 25—28; Katalog den Staatliche Gemdldegalerie zu Dresden, 10th ed.
(Dresden, 1920), 320, no. e; H. Gobel, Wandteppiche (Leipzig, 1923), I,
417; Cinq siecles d’art: Catalogue de Vexposition universelle et Interna-
tionale de Bruxelles, 1935, 11, 48 ff. and 73; L'Art et les Artistes, XXX
(1930), 301; P* Lambotte et P. Jamot, De Van Eyck a Breughel: Catalogue
de Vexposition du Musee de VOrangerie (Paris, 1935), 84; Catalogue of the
Official Art Exhibit of the Great Lakes Exposition (Cleveland, 1936), pp.
35“36.
3. Relief, The Annunciation of the Virgin, by Gio-
vanni Antonio Amadeo (1447-1522). Marble, partly
gilded; Italian, XV century; h. 24 in., w. 23% in.
The plaque is divided vertically by the architectural setting. In
the niche at the right, the Virgin, in a robe falling in heavy folds,


kneels before a prie-dieu, Her left hand on a book and Her right
on Her bosom. On the left, the angel Gabriel, kneeling on one
knee, announces to Her the Virgin Birth. Three angels stand be-
hind him. A distant landscape, seen through the branches of trees,
forms the background. Cherubs and the dove descend from the
heavens, while the figure of God the Father, seen half-length
through a cloud to the left, holds an orb in the left hand and raises
the other hand in blessing. The medallion at the base of the pilas-
ter showing a combat between a horseman and a foot soldier, the
design of the pilasters, the two portrait medallions in the spandrels
of the arch, and other parts of the relief are gilded.
On the authority of the Duke of Trivulzio, this relief, one of
five from the tomb of Duke Salieto Visconti in the Certosa of
Pavia, was removed from there in 1756 to Palazzo Trivulzio in
Milan.
Lent by Dr. Jacob Hirsch, New York.
4. Statuette, Christ Seated, by Vecchietta (1412-1480).
Boxwood, Italian, Siena, XV century; h. 9 14 in.
Christ seated, leaning on His left arm, with His right arm raised
to His left breast in a gesture of suffering. He wears the crown of
thorns, and is nude except for a drapery thrown across the left
thigh.
Formerly in the Alphonse Kann Collection, Paris.
Lent by Mrs. Jesse Isidor Straus, New York.
5. Crucifix, Agate, gold, and enamel, attributed to Ja-
copo da Trezzo, Italian, second half of the XVI cen-
tury; h. 9 14 in., w. 5 14 in.
Upon a cross, composed of five pieces of agate, the crucified
Christ, worked in gold, is suspended. Below His feet, on a band
which conceals the joining of two pieces of agate, is a skull and
cross-bones of enamel, the skull being that of Adam. Behind the
head, and set on the ornamental bands which form the intersection
of the cross, is a nimbus. There is a similar nimbus on the reverse.
Both of them are composed of flames radiating from a carved
gem, the one in front symbolizing the sun, the one in the back
the moon. On the terminals of the cross and at the intersections of


the arms, and around the enamelled INRI inscription, the gold
bands are adorned with applied scrolls. A clasp on the reverse sug-
gests that the crucifix was intended to be worn on a chain.
This crucifix is said to have been given by the Emperor Charles
V to his son Philip 11, King of Spain. Jacopo da Trezzo, to whom
the work is attributed, served both rulers as medailleur, goldsmith,
and architect, and was technical adviser in the construction of the
Escorial.
Formerly in the collections of the Escorial; Guilhou; Sambon;
Jacob Hirsch; Charles Brown.
See J. Babelon, Jacopo da Trezzo et la construction de I’Escurial (Paris,
1922), p. 253, pi. VIII.
Lent by Dr. Jacob Hirsch, New York.
6. Cross, Rubies, gold, and enamel. Italian, Florence,
XVI century; h. 3% in.
Six large table-cut rubies, arranged in the form of a cross, are
set in an elaborate open-work design of enamel over gold, which
forms a border and develops at the extremities into settings for
smaller stones. The base contains eight rubies of a triangular shape,
and at the top and sides there is a single ruby turned diagonally.
The reverse is enamelled in green, red, and white. There is a
jewelled ring at the top for a chain.
See H. Granville Fell, “Jewels of the Renaissance,” Connoisseur, XCVI,
no. 407 (1935). P- 3-
Lent by the Museum of the Rhode Island School of Design, Providence.
7. Pendant, Gold, enamel, cabochon stones, and baroque
pearls. Italian, XVI century; h., with chain, 5 in.
A male figure, wearing an enamelled garment, swinging a
spiked club in his right hand and carrying a shield in his left arm,
rides astride a marine monster. Cabochon stones are set in the body
of the fish, whose scales, dorsal fin, teeth and gills have highlights
in enamel. A short chain, attached to the head and tail of the fish,
ends in a ring. From this ring hangs a pearl. A large baroque
pearl is suspended from the center of the monster’s body.
Lent by Arnold Seligmann, Rey and Company, Inc., New York.


8. Pendant, Gold, rubies, emeralds, pearls, and enamel.
Italian, XVI century; h., including chain, 2 in.
A pendant, displaying the bust of a bearded man in an arched
niche, hangs by a double suspension chain from a ring adorned
with volutes and a small pendant pearl. At the bottom is a floriated
apron which acts as a support for the columns of the niche and for
the base upon which the bust rests. The bust is made of a baroque
pearl, with the head and drapery in enamel and gold; the niche
and apron are set with rubies and emeralds and decorated with
enamel. Pearls are suspended from semi-circular extensions at the
sides of the columns and from the lower part of the apron.
See the Catalogue of the Spitzer Collection (Paris, 1893), 11, 49, no. 1833.
Lent by Dr. Jacob Hirsch, New York.
9. Pendant, Gold, enamel, rubies, brilliants, and pearls.
German, XVII century.
The central piece of the jewel is composed of small enamelled
statues of Venus and Mars standing in a shell-niche under a broken
arch. The sides and base are set with table-cut rubies and brilliants.
This niche rests upon a scroll-work apron, set with a ruby, which
upholds on two lonic columns a pediment broken in reverse
curves, also set with a ruby. Two pearls hang from the cornices of
the pediment, and three from the apron. The whole is adorned
with polychrome enamel. The convex surface made by the niche
on the reverse of the jewel is decorated with a floral arabesque of
black enamel.
Lent anonymously.
10. Pendant, by Benvenuto Cellini (1500-1571), gold,
baroque pearl, rubies, and enamel; h. 3V2 in., not in-
cluding chain.
The inscription on the back of this jewel, falit aspectus can-
tusq syrenae, indicates that this sea-creature is a siren. The figure
is composed of a large baroque pearl to which head and arms in
flesh-colored enamel, and a tail in green enamel, have been at


tached. The siren is adorned with a girdle of table-cut rubies be-
neath which leaf-shaped scales of gold and polychrome enamel
flare out. A necklace, armbands, bracelets and shoulder straps
conceal the joining of the enamel and the pearl. With her right
hand the siren is combing her hair; her left hand probably held
a mirror. The jewel is suspended by three gold chains attached to
a scrolled cartouche in colored enamels, which in turn is joined to
two gold rings. All the enamelling is over gold.
Formerly in the collections of Lord Canning; the Marquess of
Clanricarde; the Earl of Harewood.
See D. Ainslee, Adventures Social and Literary (London, 1922), pp. 120—
121.
Lent by The Lord Duveen of Millbank, New York.
11. Portrait of Charles, Comte de Montpensier, Con-
netable de Bourbon, by Leonard Limousin. Enamel,
framed; small restorations at three corners. French,
1525; h. 8 in., w. 6 in.
A head-and-shoulders portrait, in profile to the left, of the Con-
stable of Bourbon, with black beard and moustache. He is dressed
in a white shirt with embroidered borders, a buff doublet, a cloak
with a fur collar and a black-and-gold cap with a white plume.
The background is a deep lapis-lazuli blue.
The subject of this portrait was one of the most celebrated men
of his day. He fought with Louis XII in Italy from 1507 to 1509,
and was made Constable of France by Francis I. He commanded
at Marignano in 1515, and was Viceroy of Milan in 1519. Losing
favor with Francis, he plotted with Charles V and Henry VIII
against his King, but was betrayed. He fled, and returned to raise
the siege of Pavia in 1525. He was killed in the attack on Rome
on May 6, 1527.
Formerly in the possession of the House of Bourbon-Orleans and
in the Thomas Fortune Ryan Collection.
See L. Bourdery and E. Lachenaud, Leonard Limousin (Paris, 1897), no. 7;
Catalogue of the Thomas Fortune Ryan Collection (New York, 1933), p. 130
(colored plate).
Lent by E. John Magnin, New York.


12. Plate, Enamel, grisaille, signed I. C. (Jean Courtois).
French, Limoges, middle of the XVI century. Oval,
h. 15% in., w. in.
The oval center of the dish is surrounded by a double border.
The inner one, connecting the center with the rim, is composed
of a design of arabesques. The border around the rim indudes
masks, griffins, sphinxes and other mythological figures. The scene
represented in the center is the Feast of the Gods. A table is set on
clouds and nine gods and goddesses are seated around it. In the
right foreground Amor, with bow and quiver, is seen running
towards Psyche, seated at the right. Next to her is Pan, then Nep-
tune, Juno, Zeus, Hebe, and three other deities. Back of them,
holding flowers, hover three nymphs with butterfly wings.
The composition is related to that employed by Raphael in the
Farnesina, and is probably based on sixteenth-century engravings
which simplified Raphael’s design.
See Nagler, Kunstlerexi\on, 111, article on Coxie; Bartsch, Le peintre-
graveur, XIV, 189 £f.; La Favola di Amore e Psiche, with engravings by Luigi
Fabri after Raphael (Rome, 1811), pi. XXXI.
Lent by Arnold Seligmann, Rey and Company, Inc., New York.
13. Plate, Enamel, grisaille, and gold foil, signed M. C.
(Martial Courtois). French, Limoges, circa 1580. Oval,
h. 15% in., w. 21% in. Frontispiece.
The oval sunk center of the dish is surrounded by a double
border, the inner one of arabesques and the one on the rim filled
with masks, scrolls, and mythological figures in various poses. The
composition in the oval is elaborate and highly finished. It repre-
sents a scene from the Apocalypse, as is indicated by the inscription
apoca xvii in the lower left-hand corner. On the right, the scarlet
woman, holding a golden cup in her hand, is riding on the seven-
headed dragon, which issues from a lake or marsh. An emperor,
king, pope, cardinal, bishop, and monk are at the forefront of a
crowd kneeling before the monster. In the background is a mag-
nificent city, and the landscape is enriched with numerous trees
and plants. The reverse of the plate is also elaborately decorated,
with a composition of strap-work and cartouche ornament, ter-
minal figures, animals, and masks, surrounded by a gold border.


The ground color of the piece is a purplish black while the
colors used in the center composition are an opaque light blue,
lavender, white, pale green, dark blue, and a transparent red. Gold
is freely used. On the reverse the figures are painted in various
brilliant colors with the ornament pencilled in grisaille.
The subject painted in the center of the dish is an illustration
of Revelations XVII, 3rd and 4th verses. Albrecht Diirer and a
number of other artists have represented this passage of the Apoc-
alypse referring to the Scarlet Woman of Babylon.
Formerly in the Magniac and Borrodaille Collections.
See The Magniac Collection (London, 1892), no. 258, pis. VIII and IX;
described in the 1862 (No. 1851), and in the 1874 (No. 732) Catalogues of
the South Kensington Loan Collection; The Burlington Fine Arts Club:
Catalogue of a Collection of European Enamels (London, 1897), no. 143.
Similar plates may be seen in the British Museum and in the Dresden Grimes
Gewdlbe. See C. H. Read, The Waddesdon Bequest (London, 1902), no. 31,
pi. IX; Das Grime Gewdlbe (Berlin, 1877), pi. XX.
Lent by Joseph E. Widener, Philadelphia.
14. *Cup and Saucer, Enamel on brass. French, Limoges,
XVI century. Cup, h. 314 in.; saucer, diam. 6 in.
The Triumph of Amphitrite is painted in enamel on the cup.
The spouse of Neptune is shown holding a trident and seated on
a chair supported by sea-horses rising from the foam. On the
saucer, a border composed of pairs of dancing putti, separated
from each other by masks, surrounds a central disc filled with
grotesque dolphins.
From the collection of the Fogg Art Museum, Cambridge.
15. Enamel, signed I. C. (Jean Courtois)
on flange. French, Limoges, XVI century; h. 6] 4 in.;
diam. of base 7% in.
These candlesticks, as the decorations of the sockets and the
bases suggest, are meant to complement each other. The scenes
depicted, the ornamentation and the medallions are similar in
character. One has on the flange beneath the socket a design of
satyrs and foliage after engravings by Coraglio, and the other, a
design of amorini and animals after designs by Polidoro. The bases


of both have medallions with mythological subjects; one, the
twelve labors of Hercules; the other, the twelve gods and goddesses
of the Roman Pantheon.
Formerly in the Horace Walpole and Vernon Collections.
See the Sales Catalogue of Strawberry Hill (May 7, 1842), p. 127.
Lent by Arnold Seligmann, Rey and Company, Inc., New York.
16. Frame for Mirror, Silver, silver-gilt, and enamel, on
a copper-gilt support. German, Augsburg, circa 1600.
Over-all h. 34 in., w. 19% in.
The glass is surrounded by the inner frame to which archi-
tectural ornaments, supported on a copper-gilt plaque, are applied.
At the bottom, a mermaid, in the center of a lyre-shaped apron
ending in a shell, acts as a caryatid, and two brackets with lion
masks, one on each side, as supports for the frame. The mermaid,
whose bifurcated tail ends in acanthus chalices, is surrounded by
volutes. On each side outside the frame are winged putto-busts,
which, as they dissolve into volutes, take the form of brackets to
sustain the weight of the top. The top itself is a broken pediment.
The central part is flanked by scrolls and is adorned with heads
and busts of putti, a ram’s head, and a triton in a medallion, placed
in the center of a symmetrical palmette design. On each side of
this, two putti, holding garlands, recline on the sloping surfaces
of the pediment. At the top, a putto stands, his right arm stretched
toward the beholder.
The silver ground of the inner frame is enamelled with vases,
floral scrolls, and birds in blues and greens. Eight engraved silver
medallions are set within the borders of the frame, four oval ones
in the sides, and four penannular ones in the angles.
The four oval medallions represent the following subjects: left,
a warrior with a lion-headed weapon and shield; right, a warrior
with halberd and shield; at the bottom, a nude female figure lying
in water among reeds, with a dolphin at her right (this nymph
probably to be identified as Melantho, who was seduced by Nep-
tune assuming the shape of a dolphin); at the top, a nude female
figure reclining on the ground, in a landscape with trees, a human
figure, and a stag pursued by two dogs. The nymph is presumably
Aegina, reaching out with her right hand for what may possibly


be interpreted as a flame, this being the shape Zeus assumed to
ravish her. The other part of the scene corresponds precisely to
one of the illustrations of the Adonis myth in the Frankfort edi-
tion of Ovid’s Metamorphoses ( cf . O. Schmitt, Reallexi\on fur
deutschen Kunstgeschichte, Stuttgart, 1933-34, p. 195, fig. 1).
The four medallions in the corners have the following subjects.
Lower left: a draped female figure with a crown, seated and hold-
ing a cornucopia. Probably Ceres, Goddess of Fertility. Upper left:
a draped female figure holding a sceptre in her left hand; before
her, two peacocks, the birds of Juno. Upper right: a half-draped
figure, seated and holding a heart in her left hand; behind her is a
cupid, and before her two swans. Probably Venus. Lower right:
a nude female figure, seated and holding in her right hand a large
arrow, while with her left she points at a spear-head on the ground;
she is adorned with a feathered headdress, a girdle and an arm-
band. There is a palm tree in the background. Probably Diana.
Formerly in the collection of the King of Bavaria.
Lent by French and Company, Inc., New York.
17. Salt, Silver-gilt, repousse and engraved.
English, London, 1587; h. 4% in.
A four-sided column, square in plan, stands upon four cast,
scrolled feet. It is decorated in repousse with animal masks, ara-
besques, and flowers on a granulated ground, and is separated from
the base and overhanging moulding of the top by raised bands of
ornament. The base and underside of the top are in repousse with
masks and lobed floral forms. The engraved upper surface of the
pedestal is provided with a well to be used as a receptacle for salt.
See the Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, XXXI, no. 184, p. 27.
Lent by the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.
18. Cup, Coconut shell with silver mounts.
English, London, 1574. Maker’s mark: HR conjoined,
unidentified; h. 10% in.
A plain, polished coconut shell, set in silver mounts to form a
cup. Four straps, three in the shape of herms and one broken to
join the handle, curve around the shell and tie together the cir


cular stepped foot, which is embossed with a floral band, and the
wide lip, engraved with a scroll vine and bird pattern. The slightly
dotned cover is decorated in repousse with masks and flowers, and
is surmounted by a boss with a turned finial. There is a cast
thumb-purchase at the junction of the hinged cover and the plain
S-shaped handle.
See the Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, XXXI, no. 184, p. 27.
Lent by the Museum o£ Fine Arts, Boston.
19. Monstrance, Silver-gilt, embossed, with applied cast
ornament. Spanish, early XVII century. Unidentified
marks; h. 37V2 in.
The glass receptacle in the center, containing a crescent-shaped
holder for the sacred wafer, is surrounded by symbolic rays. It is
enclosed in a tabernacle, consisting of twisted columns with Corin-
thian capitals, pilasters, which dissolve into ornament, and an
architrave. The dome on the drum which surmounts the architrave
is also to be regarded as part of the tabernacle. Above, a pelican,
the emblem of the Redemption, stands on a four-handled vase.
The stem of the monstrance is divided into four parts: the base, a
pedestal-like member supporting a vase, and a heavy moulding.
The base is adorned with acanthus leaves and rays of beads; other
parts of the stem, as well as the architrave and the dome of the
tabernacle, are decorated with busts of winged cherubs, cherub
heads, and scrolls. Plastic volutes and finials are applied to the
stem and to the architectural frame of the receptacle.
See E. Wenham, “Spanish Ecclesiastical Silver in America,” Apollo, XXV
(i937)> 15. %• VIII.
Lent by French and Company, Inc., New York.
20. Pax, Copper-gilt, cast, with engraved details. Italian,
dated 1560; h. 7 in.
Within a tabernacle two cherubs with haloes standing on a
plinth support the half figure of a draped Christ. Two interrupted
Corinthian columns rise from a base, which is adorned with floral
and mythological reliefs, and support a plain architrave on which
rests a pediment filled with cornucopias, floral volutes and lotus


flowers. Across the plinth on which the angels stand is the inscrip-
tion ADI X 29 DI NOVENBRE MD-LX -J-.
See E. F. Bange, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin: Beschreibung der Bildwerke
der christlichen Epochen, 3rd ed. (Berlin, 1922), 11, 48, no. 354, pi. 34,
There is a similar piece in the Joseph E. Widener Collection, Philadelphia.
(See Catalogue of the Hainauer Collection, no. 174.)
A similar piece with a different pediment in the Lee Collection has been
attributed to Giovanni Bernardi del Castelbolognese. See Works of Art in
Silver and Other Metals Belonging to Lord Lee (London, 1936), no. 82.
Lent by French and Company, Inc., New York.
21. Ciborium, Gold, chased and repousse, with attached
cut ornaments, surmounted by an enamelled cross set
with rubies and emeralds. Italian, circa 1600; h. 5% in-
A circular box, resting on four feet made of scrolled leaves and
cherub heads, with a conical lid decorated in the same manner.
On both box and lid are leaf ornaments and floral borders of a
classical character in low relief. The inside has an image of the
Virgin holding the Child and seated on a heart, done in repousse.
A wreath of leaves surrounds the image.
Sec H. Granville Fell, “Jewels of the Renaissance,” Connoisseur, XCVI, no.
4<>7 (i 935). P- 6.
Lent by French and Company, Inc., New York.
22. Ostrich Cup, by Johannes Claus, ostrich egg and sil-
ver-gilt. German, Nuremberg, circa 1625. Marks: I C
in quatrefoil; N in oval; h. 19% in.
An ostrich, holding a horseshoe in its mouth and a stone in its
right claw, rests on a base representing the ground; sleeping liz-
ards, frogs, water-snakes, a lobster and various other aquatic ani-
mals lie on it. The ostrich egg forms the body of the bird, with
convex silver-gilt plates simulating the feathers. Around the neck
is a dog-collar which formerly held rubies. Such cups were popular
in Germany during the late Renaissance. The peculiarities of the
ostrich have long captivated the popular imagination; its egg was
supposed to be that of the phoenix or the griffin. Many fables ac-
count for the actions of the bird as represented by the artist here.
The horseshoe is an allusion to the belief that the bird eats iron to


acquire courage. As for the rock it holds, some authorities see in
it a symbol of the fighting qualities the ostrich manifests when in
danger, while others connect it with the story of the crane who
stands on one leg and holds a stone in the other, so that if he
should fall asleep, the sound of the stone in crashing to the ground
would waken him.
See E. Alfred Jones, Old Silver of Europe and America (Philadelphia, 1928),
pp. 201, 204; B. Laufer, Ostrich Egg-shell Cups of Mesopotamia and the
Ostrich in Ancient and Modern Times (Chicago, 1926); H. Green, Shake-
speare and the Emblem Writers (London, 1870), pp. 233-234.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.
23. Lion Cup, Silver-gilt, embossed, with repousse base.
German, Augsburg, early XVII century. Marks: pine
cone, and M S in an oval on the lion’s breast; h. n%
in.
A walking lion holds a fluted shell in his paws; this receptacle
is filled by the tilting of the cup from the spout projecting from
his mouth. His tail is bifurcated. The head is detachable for the
purpose of pouring in the wine.
Formerly in the Gutmann Collection.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.
24. Covered Cup, Ivory and silver-gilt. German, Nurem-
berg, late XVI century; h. 14 in.
A tall, covered beaker on a foot, with mountings of silver-gilt.
The fluted body is connected with the base by a floral boss, which
is repeated on the cover as a support for the silver-gilt figure of
an armored warrior with a spear. The flutings of the body are in-
terrupted near the base by a plain band. The foot, lip and rim of
the cover are mounted in silver mouldings.
Lent by Arnold Seligmann, Key and Company, Inc., New York.
25. Cup, Majolica with silver-gilt. Italian, XVII
century; h. 9% in.
From a domical base with a wide-spreading foot rises a bal


uster stem which supports a figured majolica cup, held within two
hinged straps that tie the stem to the broad, everted lip. The
stepped cover is slightiy domed, with an overhanging rim, and it
is surmounted by a cast figure of an armed warrior holding a
spear. The silver mounts are richly chased and decorated with
repousse with floral bands, arabesques and volutes. There are two
mythological scenes painted on the cup, of nude and semi-nude
figures in a classical landscape.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.
26. Nautilus Cup, Nautilus shell, incised and carved;
mount of silver and silver-gilt, cast, repousse, and in-
cised. German, 1680. Mark: G N in an oval; h. 18 in.
The flat base is decorated with acanthus leaves in repousse and
bears an applied coat of arms. On the base stands a tortoise which
supports Atlas who, in turn, upholds the nautilus shell, framed in
silver straps. Two of these vertical straps are in the form of mer-
maids. The back of the shell is carved with an arabesque pattern.
The sides are engraved with a nautical scene: Neptune, riding on
a shell drawn by a hippocamp, and accompanied by tritons and
nereids. The opening to the interior of the shell is covered with
a niello representing Bacchus riding on a casket and holding a
cup in his right hand. Two youthful figures, in silver-gilt, stand
on the rim of the shell, wearing cuirasses and high boots. The
one on the left holds a vase of flowers in his right hand and a
flail in his left. The figure on the right holds a sheaf of grain
and a wine bottle. Between them sits an old man in a heavy coat
and fur hat, warming his hands over a fire. According to the in-
scriptions at the base these figures represent the four seasons.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.
27. Cup, Nautilus shell, silver, silver-gilt, and
ivory. German, Breslau, XVII century. The shell was
engraved by Cornelius Bellekin, Dutch, early XVII
century. Marks; C, with H B monogram in oval; C H


monogram in shield; “c. Bellekin fee.” engraved
across front of shell; h. 12 in.
The bell-shaped, bracket base, engraved on its upper part to
simulate waves, supports a dolphin standing on its lower jaw and
upholding the shell with its tail. The shell is engraved with two
scenes: on the right, women and children in a meadow, sym-
bolizing Peace; on the left, a cavalry charge, symbolizing War.
The shell is surmounted by a nude male figure in silver-gilt stand-
ing on a support made by four intersecting brackets, and holding
a dolphin.
There are only four other examples of engraved nautilus shells
by Bellekin; two of these are in the Grimes Gewolbe in Dresden.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.
28. # Spoon, Silver-gilt and mother-of-pearl, engraved.
German, XVI century; 1. 7*4 in.
The metal rim of the mother-of-pearl bowl is engraved with the
bust of a woman and two dolphins. At the junction of the bowl
and the stem is a mask in relief between two applied dolphins.
The back of the bowl is engraved with a feasting scene. The
handle, hinged to the stem, is composed of a small rectangular
plaque to which is attached a scrolled dolphin.
Lent by French and Company, Inc., New York.
29. *Fork, Silver-gilt and porcupine quills. Flemish, XVI
century; 1. 10% in.
The handle of porcupine quills is treated as a column with
floral junctions, and is terminated in a silver-gilt child holding a
shield.
See the Catalogue of Jewels and Precious Wor\s [Morgan Collection] (Lon-
don, 1910), no. 96, pi. LXXIV, 1.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.


30. # Spoon, Carnelian and gold enamel. Italian, XVI cen-
tury; 1. 7/2 in.
The carnelian handle and bowl are, joined together by a gold
band with floral designs in green and black enamel.
See Catalogue of Jewels [Morgan Collection], no. 97, pi. LXXIV, 2.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.
31. * Spoon, Silver-gilt and crystal. German, early XVI
century; 1. 6/ 2 in.
The crystal handle, engraved with a trefoil design, terminates
in a silver-gilt finial composed of a scroll and a helmeted head.
Lent by French and Company, Inc., New York.
32. Book Cover, Silver, silver-gilt and niello. German,
XVII century; h. of covers 5*4 in., w. 3% in.; w. of
back 2 in.
The center of each cover contains a circular niello medallion,
with conventional designs. Around them are panels filled with a
pattern of scrolled silver filigree. Niello is used for the borders in
foliate and animal designs surrounding the panels. The back of
the cover is composed of bands of silver filigree, similar to that on
the panels. To separate each filigree and also to produce a still
richer effect, strips of niello decoration have been inserted between
each band. Four chains, attached to the top and converging in a
single ring, originally secured the book to a girdle.
Formerly in the Kreuzenstein Collection, Vienna.
Lent by the Museum of the Rhode Island School of Design, Providence.
33. # Dish, Dinanderie in brass and niello. French, XVI
century; diam. 19 in.; diam. of niello 1% in.
The bowl of the dish is decorated with concentric bands of
alternating repousse and punch-work, placed around a central
niello, which represents a huntress offering a stag in sacrifice. The
broad rim is decorated with rows of punch-work.
Lent anonymously.


34- Door Knocker, Cast bronze, by Alessandro Vittoria
(1525-1608). Venetian, XVI century; h. 17 in., w. n
in.
Neptune stands on the forelegs of two winged hippocamps,
swinging a trident in his right hand. The sea-horses rest on a
shell-shaped base, filled with incised waves. The bodies of the
animals are stylized in acanthus leaves; their tails are bent and
brought together behind Neptune’s neck. At this point there was
a hinge which was connected by a ring with the door.
Alessandro Vittoria was the most successful pupil of Jacopo
Sansovino. He was active in Venice as decorator and sculptor in
marble and bronze. His work in these varied fields is convincing
proof of the close association between the minor and the major
arts, particularly during the period covered by this Exhibition.
Provenance: Palazzo Pisani, Venice.
See L. Planisceg, Venezianische Bildhauer der Renaissance (Vienna, 1921),
pp. 475-477* %• 502.
Lent by Edward L. Jellinek, Buffalo.
35. Burgonet of the Papal Guard, Steel, etched and gilt.
Italian, 1550.
The bowl and crest, at the base of which a plume-holder is at-
tached, are forged from a single billet. The bowl is etched in bands
enclosing strapwork, masks, and half-figures, and the crest, on
both sides, with arabesques around central medallions containing
images of Neptune and Amphitrite.
See S. V. Grancsay, Catalogue of the Loan Exhibition of European Arms
and Armor (Brooklyn, 1933), p. 10, no. 38.
Lent by Stephen V. Grancsay, New York.
35a. # Morion, Steel, etched and gilt. Italian, 1575.
This morion formed part of the armor of the state guard of
Francesco de’ Medici. Its bowl and high comb are richly etched
with medallions and dismembered panoplies on a finely punctuate
(looped) background, framed in interlaced strapwork. The gilding
a mercure and the black color are restored.
The armorer’s marks are stamped on the outside, and within the


brim is stamped the crest of the Medici surmounted by a crown
and the initials F. M.
From the collection of Pierre Lorillard Ronalds.
Lent by Dr. and Mrs. Alexander Hamilton Rice, New York
36. *Table Clock, Brass, gilt, cast in relief and etched.
German, late XVI century; h. 2 l / 2 in.; diam. 5% in.
The dial of the clock is composed of two concentric bands. The
outer band has twelve Roman numerals for the hours, and the
inner band, Arabic numbers for the minutes. A pattern of ara-
besques decorates the face of the clock. The bottom is of iron,
and is decorated in etched and open-work. The hands and works
are probably replacements.
The drum is ornamented with a series of reliefs. The first scene,
executed in open-work, represents a Roman emperor being
crowned by Victory, while a figure symbolizing Virtus stands
looking at the left; the second scene, a half-draped hermit, prob-
ably St. Jerome, who seems to be praying for the life of the lion
crouching before him, while a warrior in front of him turns back
towards two horsemen approaching from the right. A youthful
monk is in the background. These two scenes are repeated farther
to the right in relief. A third scene, not repeated, shows the em-
peror again, walking to the left, accompanied by an attendant.
The fourth and last scene represents a hunt. The emperor, with
two attendants, is attacking a lioness and her cub. In the fore-
ground an Amazon lies wounded, and on the left Virtus strides
over a lion that has felled a deer.
Lent by Dr. Paul Drey, New York.
37. Watch, Copper-gilt, engraved and open-work. Ger-
man, XVI century; diam. 3 in.
Under a crystal in a hinged frame is an engraved dial made up
of a series of concentric bands, two of which are divided in twelve
and twenty-four segments respectively, with Roman numerals to
denote the hours. The inner ring of numerals is for the alarm
mechanism, the outer, for telling the hour. The dial is pierced in
three places for winding and setting the alarm. There is only one
hand, of steel, cut with a spiral twist design.


The back of the case is decorated with an engraved and pierced
vase design framed by concentric bands of chess-board and scale
pattern. Vine and flower arabesques rise from a vase and encircle
confronted stags and squirrels. The sides of the case are in open-
work scrolls. The interior mechanism is beautifully engraved.
Lent by the Clapp and Graham Company, New York.
38. Medal, Bronze, light patina. Domenico Malatesta,
called Novello, Lord of Cesena; by Pisanello (1395-
1448). 84 mm.
Rev. Bust, looking left. Inscriptions: above, dvx eqvitvm prae-
stans; across, malatesta novellvs cesena dominvs.
Obv. The youthful lord kneeling before a crucifix, in a barren,
rocky landscape; to the left stands his horse. Above: opvs pisani
pictoris.
See G. Habich, Die Medaillen der Ualianische Renaissance (Stuttgart, 1923),
p. 36, pi. VI, 2.
Lent by Dr. Paul Drey, New York.
The medals listed below come from the Gustave Dreyfus Col-
lection, Paris. For complete bibliography see G. F. Hill, Renais-
sance Medals (Oxford, 1931), to which the reference number is
given in each case.
All these medals are lent by The Lord Duveen of Millbank,
New York.
39. *Medal, Lead, John VIII Paleologus, Emperor of
Constantinople; by Pisanello. 103 mm.
Obv. Bust to right, wearing hat with tall crown and upturned
brim. Inscription: iqannhs baxiaeys kai aytokpatdp pqmaidn
o n aaaio Aoros.
Rev. The Emperor riding to right, raising his hands folded as
he passes a wayside cross; behind him, a mounted page seen from
behind; rocky landscapes. Inscriptions: opvs pisani pictoris, and
EPrON TOY lII2ANOY ZOPPASOY.
Hill 1.


40. * Medal, Lead, Gianfrancesco I Gonzaga, first Mar-
quis of Mantua; by Pisanello. 100 mm.
Obv. Bust of Marquis to left, wearing tall flute hat. Above:
lOHANES FRANCISCVS DE GONZAGA CAPIT(anCUs) MAXI(mUs) ARMI-
GERORVM PRIMVS MARCHIO MANTVE.
Rev. The Marquis in armor riding to left; on the right, a
mounted page seen from behind; in the field, a ring-shaped door-
knocker. Inscription, opvs pisani pictoris.
Hill 2.
41. *Medal, Bronze, Filippo Maria Visconti, Duke of
Milan; by Pisanello. 104 mm.
Obv. Bust of Duke to right, in tall soft cap. Inscription: philip-
pvs maria anglvs dvx mediolani etcetera papie anglerie qve
COMES AC GENVE DOMINVS.
Rev. The Duke riding to left; on the right, a small mounted
page seen from behind; between them, armed horsemen to front.
Mountainous landscape with tops of buildings in background. In-
scription. OPVS PISANI PICTORIS.
Hill 3.
42. Medal, Bronze, Don Inigo D’Avalos, Chamberlain to
the King of Naples; by Pisanello. 79 mm.
Obv. Bust of Don Inigo to right in broad-brimmed hat. Above,
DON INIGO DE DAVALOS.
Rev. A sphere representing earth, sky and sea; below, per wise
fa; above, shield of arms of Avalos.
Hill 22.
43. Medal, Bronze, Mohammad 11, Sultan of the Turks;
by Costanzo da Ferrara (circa 1481). 123 mm.
Obv. Bust to left, in turban and cape. Above, sv(l)tanvs mo-
hameth othomanvs tvrco rvm imperator.
Rev. The Sultan riding to left; trees and buildings in back-
ground. Around, me belli fvlmen popvlos prostravit et vrbes
constantivs p(ecit), inscribed below on tablet.
Hill 102.


44- # Medal, Bronze, Francesco Sforza, Duke of Milan;
by Sperandio of Mantua (1425-1504). 86 mm.
Obv. Bust three-quarters to right, in armor. Above, franciscvs
SFORTIA VICECOMES DVX MEDIOLANI QVARTVS.
Rev. Renaissance building with four cupolas. Inscription: opvs
SPERANDEI.
Hill 115.
45. # Medal, Bronze, Charles VIII, King of France; by
Niccolo Fiorentino (second half of the XV century).
95 mm., three piercings.
Obv. Bust to left, wearing cap, and collar with pendant of St.
Machael over robe. Around, karolvs octaws francorvm ierv-
SALEM ET CICILIE REX.
Rev. None.
Hill 262.
46. # Medal, Bronze, Girolamo Savonarola, Dominican
preacher; in the manner of Niccolo Fiorentino. 95
mm.
Obv. Bust to left, in habit with hood raised. Inscription; hier-
on(y)mvs sAvo(narola) FER(rariensis) vir nocTiss(imus) ordinis
PREDXCATHORVM.
Rev. Map of Italy showing the chief cities marked with their
initials; above, issuing from a cloud, the hand of God threatens
the land with a dagger. Inscription: gladivs domini svp(er) teram
CITO ET VELOCITER.
Hill 282.
47. Medal, Bronze, Giovanna Albizzi, wife of Lorenzo
Tornabuoni; in the manner of Niccolo Fiorentino. 78
mm.
Obv. Bust to right. Above, vxor lavrentii de tornabonis 10-
ANNA ALBIZZA.
Rev. The Three Graces. Above, castitas amor pvlchritvdo
amor.
Hill 288.


48. *Medal, Bronze, Pietro Bacci, called Aretino; by
Leone Leoni (first part XVI century). 60 mm.
Obv. Bust to left, wearing gown and chain. Above, diws petkvs
ARETNVS.
Rev. Truth, nude, seated, crowned by Victory; before her, a
Satyr (Hatred) crouching; she points at him and looks up at a
divinity in the clouds.
Hill 427.
49. # Medal, Bronze, Camilla Ruggieri; by Alfonso Rus-
pagiari (1521-1576). 68 mm.
Obv. Bust to right, placed on a voluted bracket; fine loose
drapery. Above, camillae rugeriae, and, incised on truncation of
arms, ar.
Rev. None.
Hill 447.
50. # Medal, Lead, Charles V, Emperor, 1521; by Al-
brecht Diirer (1471-1528). 72 mm.
Obv. Bust of the Emperor to right, wearing crown, armor, and
Order of the Fleece. Above, carolvs v Ro(manorvm) iMPER(ator).
On a raised border, 14 coats of arms; above, two pillars with plvs
VLTR(a) on scroll.
Rev. Imperial double-headed eagle, charged on the breast with
shield of Austria-Hungary. On raised border, 13 coats of arms;
below, in a wreath, N (for Nuremberg).
Hill 583.
The plaquettes listed below come from the Gustave Dreyfus
Collection, Paris. For complete bibliography see Seymour de Ricci,
Reliefs and Plaquettes (Oxford, 1931), to which the reference
number is given in each case.
All these plaquettes are lent by The Lord Duveen of Millbank,
New York.
51. Plaquette, Bronze, dark patina. Leone Battista Al-
berti (1404-1472). Bust of the Artist. H. 200 mm.
Bust of a clean-shaven man, profile to the left, with short curly


hair. Round his neck, a drapery, loosely knotted in front. Below
the chin, a human eye with wings. On the right, the inscription
•L.BAP.
de Ricci i.
52. Plaquette, Bronze, A Satyr and a Bacchante; by
Donatello (1386-1466). Diam., 171 mm.
On the left, a satyr, half-length to right, with a goatskin over
his right arm, which holds a cup. The left hand is uplifted, with
the second and fifth fingers outstretched. Behind him, a thyrsus.
On the right, a bacchante, half-length to left, draped in a goat-
skin, with ivy in her hair, presses her breast into an ornate rhyton,
terminating in the protome of a horse.
Between them, a grotesque mask above a cartouche with the in-
scription: natvra fovet qvae NECESSITAS vrget. In the background,
behind a high wall, a vineyard, with a herm, a large vase.
de Ricci 3.
53. # Plaquette, Bronze, black patina. Virgin and Child
with Four Angels; by Donatello. Diam. 222 mm.
The Virgin is seated behind a rail, standing three-quarters to
right, Her head inclined towards the Child who is seated on Her
left arm. On each side are two child angels, one of whom, on the
right, bears a covered bowl. Concave surface, surrounded by a
narrow raised rim.
de Ricci 8.
54. Plaquette, Bronze, dark brown patina. The Judg-
ment of Paris; by Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519).
H. 135 mm., w. 130 mm.
On the right, seated on a rock, Paris bends forward to give the
apple to Venus, standing nude before him, her left foot uplifted.
On the left, the draped standing figures of Juno and Minerva,
de Ricci 16.


55- *Plaquette, Bronze, high-relief, black patina. Saint
John the Baptist; by Bertoldo di Giovanni (died
1491). Diam. 195 mm.
The saint is figured half-length, three-quarters to left, the head
three-quarters to right, draped in a goatskin and mantle, the right
hand pointing to the sky.
de Ricci 124.
56. *Plaquette, Bronze, high-relief. The Entombment;
by Andrea Riccio (1470-1532). H. 145 mm., w. 207
mm.
On the right, Saint John and two bearded men are lowering into
a sarcophagus the dead body of the Lord. On the left, His feet are
supported by the kneeling Magdalen. Behind her, the Virgin with
uplifted arms, accompanied by another holy woman,
de Ricci 128.
57. Plaquette, Bronze, black patina. Orpheus and Eu-
rydice; by Peter Vischer the Younger (1455-1529). H.
194 mm., w. 150 mm.
On the left, the nude figure of Eurydice, standing three-quarters
to left, at entrance of a rocky cave. On the right, standing three-
quarters to left, a bow and viol in his hands, the nude figure of
Orpheus, with short curly hair. Above, on the right, the artist’s
mark, a spear accompanied by two pallets and transfixing two
crescents.
de Ricci 431.
58. Ivory. Infant merman and dolphins. Ger-
man or Flemish, early XVII century; h. 2% in.
The infant merman, crowned with a garland, is seated on one
dolphin while grasping the head of another under his arm. The
group is placed on a porphyry base.
From the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection.
Lent by the Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford.


59- Manuscript, Hours of the Virgin, Italian, Florence,
second half of the XV century. 225 leaves, 6% in. by
4, on white vellum. XVIII century Italian binding
tooled in gold.
This Book of Hours, containing twenty-three leaves illuminated
by a painter of the School of Attavante, was executed for a member
of the Franceschi-Pitti family in Florence. The page reproduced
herein shows in the central panel the figure of David with his foot
on the head of the decapitated Goliath. The background is com-
posed of streams, trees and a litde village. Around the central panel
is a foliate border with medallions in the center of each side. The
medallion at the top, supported by two cherubs, contains a cross;
in the three other medallions are busts of Old Testament prophets.
See Exhibition of Illuminated Manuscripts Held at the New YorPublic
Library, with introduction by C. R. Morey, catalogue by Belle da Costa
Greene and Meta P. Harrsen (New York, 1934), no. 126.
Lent by the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York.
60. Book-Binding, Maroon leather, gold-tooled. French,
second half of the XVI century. Paulus Jovius, His-
toric! (Lyon, 1558). 13% in. by 8 % in.
The binding has the name of the owner, lois de ste maure
marquis de nelle, stamped in a central medallion. The ground is
decorated with an intricate tracery pattern of spirals of leafy stems.
The field is filled with small fleurons. In each corner is stamped a
medallion from a medal of Henry II of France. The obverse shows
a Henry, profile to right, in cuirasse and crowned with laurel, with
the inscription, henricvs ii galliarvm rex invictvs pp. The reverse
displays a quadriga with two divinities seated and Fame, stand-
ing, blowing her trumpet, with the inscription, ob res in ital.
GERM. ET GAL. FORTITER AC FOELIC. GESTAS IN VOTO PUB. 1552.
This binding is of the type known as “stationery” bindings, that
is, made for sale, not by command. The name of the owner was
stamped in after purchase. A similarly stamped binding, together
with the original medal, may be seen in the Walters Art Gallery,
Baltimore.
See A Guide to an Exhibition of Armorial and Related Bookbindings, 1500-


ißoo. Pierpont Morgan Library. With a preface by Betty Carson Tyson (New
York, 1935).
Lent by the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York.
61. Book, Printed by Aldus Manutius (1450-1515), Ven-
ice, December, 1499. Francisco da Colonna, Hypnero-
tomachia Poliphili. First edition in-folio, 234 leaves,
11% in. by 8% in.; 168 woodcuts of various sizes; vel-
lum binding. Hain 5501, Proctor 5574.
This book, which tells of Poliphilus’ “Strife of Love in a Dream,”
shows both in its text and its illustrations the interest in art and
architecture characteristic of the period. The woodcuts are cele-
brated, and, according to one authority, the “largeness of the pic-
torial effect which many of them show excuses the attempts to
connect them with Giovanni Bellini and other great artists.” The
author, Francisco da Colonna (1433-1527) was a Dominican monk
who had studied architecture but did not practice it.
The page illustrated shows capital and lower-case type, an initial
and a woodcut, all in notable composition. The bibliophile Dibdin
called this book “the most perfect specimen of the press of Aldus.”
Formerly in the possession of Charles Eliot Norton.
See T. F. Dibdin, Bibliotheca Spenceriana (London, 1815), IV, no. 833;
Catalogue of Manuscripts and Early Printed Booths in the J. Pierpont Morgan
Collection, with an introduction by A. W. Pollard (London, 1907), 11, no.
373; A. W. Pollard, Early Illustrated Books (London, 1893), pp. 102-107.
Lent by the Harvard College Library, Cambridge.
62. # Book, Printed by Louis Baubloom, called “Cyaneus,”
for Jacques Kerver, Paris, August, 1546. Francisco da
Colonna, Hypnerotomachie, ou Discours du Songe de
Poliphile. First French edition, in-folio, 162 leaves,
12% in. by 8/4e in.; 181 engravings of various sizes
more or less freely adapted from the Italian edition
described above; vellum binding.
A French printing of Colonna’s Hypnerotomachia. It is based
on Aldus’ edition, and though usually considered to be lacking the
monumental qualities of the latter, it is highly regarded for its


elaborateness and elegance. The initials are famous and are often
reproduced.
Formerly in the possession of Charles Eliot Norton.
See D. B. Updike, Printing Types, Their History, Forms and Use (Cam-
bridge, 1922), I, 198-199; R. Brun, Le livre illustre en France au XVI siecle
(Paris, 1930), p. 174.
Lent by the Harvard College Library, Cambridge.
PRINTS
Visible proof of the importance of the objets d’art during the
Renaissance, and the high standard demanded in their design and
workmanship, is afforded by the drawings and prints made by
well-known artists for the goldsmiths. While such men as Cellini
in Italy and Jamnitzer in Germany, both of them good instances
of the artist-craftsman, made their own designs and then executed
them, many of the others called the established contemporary ar-
tists to their aid. Diirer, Holbein and Schongauer—all sons of gold-
smiths—together with the so-called lesser masters, have left designs
that were worked into sumptuous plate.
These prints and designs, a selection of which is offered here as
a supplement to our exhibition of fashioned material, are of inter-
est for their own beauty as well as for their connection with objets
d’art.
With the exception of Nos. 65 and 66, all these prints are lent
by the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. They are not reproduced.
63. Arabesques with Marine Attributes,
by Peregrino da Cesena. Niello-like engraving, Italian,
Bologna, circa 1460.
The Bolognese school of Francia, to which Peregrino belonged,
produced a majority of these niello-like engravings, which, as Hind
suggests, may have been used by workers in niello or by gold-
smiths.
See J. Duchesne, Essai sur les nielles (Paris, 1826), no. 360; A. M. Hind,
A History of Engraving and Etching (Boston, 1927), p. 70. For discussion of
niello technique, see pp. 13-14, above.


64. # Panel of Ornament with a Double-Headed Eagle,
by Peregrino da Cesena. Niello-like engraving.
See Duchesne, no. 359; A. M. Hind, Nielli (London, 1936), no. 262.
65. Triton and Two Infant Fauns, by
Zoan Andrea. Engraving, Italian, late XV century.
Zoan Andrea (fl. 1475-1505) was working in Mantua in 1475
and later in Milan. With the Master of the Sforza Book of Hours
(see below) he made a series of twelve arabesques, from which this
print and the next are taken. The signature -jA is in the lower
right-hand corner.
See A. von Bartsch, Le peintre-graveur (Vienna, 1811), XIII, 307, no. 24;
A. M. Hind, Catalogue of the Early Italian Engravings in the British Museum
(London, 1910), no. 4.
From the Fogg Art Museum Collection.
66. * Arabesque: Satyr with a Violin, by the Master of
the Sforza Book of Hours. Engraving, Italian, Milan,
late XV century.
The Master of the Sforza Book of Hours flourished about 1470-
H 97-
See Bartsch, XIII, 309, no. 30; Hind, Catalogue, no. 10.
From the Fogg Art Museum Collection.
67. Box, by Marcantonio Raimondi. Engrav-
ing, Italian, late XV century.
Marcantonio Raimondi (c. 1480-1530) is one of the most cele-
brated of Italian engravers. The design of this box has been tradi-
tionally assigned to Raphael. It may have been drawn, as Bartsch
concludes from the fleurs-de-lis on the top and the salamanders on
the frieze, for Francis I, King of France.
See Bartsch, XIV, 363, no. 489; Delaborde, Marc-Antoine Raimondi (Paris,
1888), p. 236, no. 213; J. D. Passavant, Le peintre-graveur (Leipzig, 1864),
VI, 42, no. 278.


68. *Two Spoons and Pocket Knife; (or Whistle, Knife,
and Toothpick), by Heinrich Aldegrever. Engraving,
German, early XVI century.
Heinrich Aldegrever (1502-1555), one of the so-called “Little
Masters,” was a painter as well as a goldsmith-engraver. Among
his 300 and more prints for goldsmith’s work, this design is per-
haps the finest. Compare with the spoons (no. 27 and no. 30) in
this exhibition.
Bartsch, VIII, 443, no. 268.
69. Cup with Cover, by Wenzel Jamnit-
zer. Etching and engraving, German, Nuremberg,
XVI century.
Wenzel Jamnitzer (1508-1588), “the Cellini of Germany” was
one of the first Nuremberg goldsmiths to use Renaissance designs
and forms. He has left some forty plates of designs for cups, cans,
and other vessels as well as examples of his goldsmith work, which
are mostly in European collections.
See R. Bergau, Wenzel Jamnitzers Entwiirfe fur Prachigefasse (Berlin,
1880), no. 20; G. K. Nagler, Die Monogrammisten (Munich, 1858-79), 11,
325, no. 844; V, 354, no. 1759.
70. # Vase, by Wenzel Jamnitzer. Etching, German, Nu-
remberg, XVI century.
See Bergau, no. 29.
71. # Ornamental Goblet with Lid, by Virgil Solis. En-
graving, German, Nuremberg, XVI century.
Virgil Solis (1514-1562), a prolific engraver of Nuremberg, is
known for his rather fantastic designs for goldsmith’s work.
See Bergau, no. 26.
72. # Tall Beaker with Mascarons, by Paul Flindt.
Punch-engraving, German, Nuremberg, late XVI cen-
tury.
Paul Flindt (fl. 1590-1620), goldsmith and engraver on metals,


continued the tradition of Wenzel Jamnitzer. The only known
example of his goldsmith’s work is a dish in the Kremlin.
See D. Guilmard, Les maitres ornemanistes (Paris, 1880), p. 374; no. 58;
Nagler, IV, 982, no. 3399.
73. for Jewelry: The Virtues, by Daniel Mi-
gnot. Engraving, German, Augsburg, late XVI cen-
tury.
Daniel Mignot, a goldsmith-engraver who was working in Augs-
burg at the end of the XVI century, has left about 150 plates of
designs for goldsmith’s work.
See Berlin, Katalog der ornamentalische Sammlung des Kunstgewerbe-
Museums (Leipzig, 1894), no. 423; Nagler, 11, 486, no. 1248.
74. # Design for a Sword-Hilt, by Pierre Woeiriot. En-
graving, French, XVI century.
Pierre Woeiriot (1531-1589), an engraver and sculptor of Lyons,
is perhaps better known for his historical plates and small por-
traits. However, he made a large number of designs for goldsmith’s
work.
See Robert-Dumesnil, Le peintre-graveur frangais (Paris, 1844), VII, 135,
no. 378.
75 and 76. # Two Designs for Pendants, by Hans Col-
laert. Engravings, Flemish, late XVI century.
Hans Collaert, the son of an engraver of Antwerp of the same
name, was noted as a designer of ornaments. The prints here ex-
hibited are from a series of designs entitled Monilium Bullarum
inauriumque artificiosissimae icones, published after his death in
1581.
See Guilmard, p. 480, no. 13; Ch. Le Blanc, Manuel de I’amateur
d’estampes (Paris, 1856-88), 11, 38, nos. 125, 134.
77. *Tankard, by Wenzel Hollar. Etching, English, XVII
century.
Wenzel Hollar (1607-1677) was by birth a Bohemian and by
adoption English. He spent most of his life in England working


first under the patronage of the great collector, Thomas Howard,
Earl of Arundel, and then after an interruption of some years
caused by the Civil War, as a free lance. After having produced
over 2500 prints on a wide range of subjects, he died in great
poverty. This print is a design after a drawing by Holbein.
See G. Parthey, Wenzel Hollar (Berlin, 1853), P- 54 2 > n - 2636.
78. Chalice, by Wenzel Hollar. Etching,
English, XVII century.
This print was made after a drawing in the Earl of Arundel’s
collection (now in the British Museum), Waagen, Treasures, 11,
p. 204. It has been attributed to Mantegna (see Paul Kristeller,
Andrea Mantegna, p. 460).
See Parthey, p. 544, no. 2643.


1


2


3


4


5


6
7
8
9


10


11


12


16


19


21
20


23
22


26
24


35
32


34


37
38


42
43
47


52
5 1


57
54


59


60


61
