

THE WOMBYA ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRA-
LIAN ABORIGINES
R. H. MATHEWS


July-September, 1900)
THE WOMBYA ORGANIZATION OF THE AUSTRA-
LIAN ABORIGINES
By R. H. MATHEWS
The object of the present paper is to define the geographic
limits of that portion of Australia which is occupied by aggrega-
tions of tribes distinguished by having eight intermarrying sec-
tions in their social structure. It is proposed to give this type
of division the name of the Wombya organization, after the
Wombya tribe, owing to their having been the first people in this
part of the country whose sectional divisions were accurately
reported and described. 1
The accompanying map shows the northeastern corner of
Western Australia, the northern half of South Australia, and the
northwestern corner of Queensland, being the whole of the terri-
tory within which the Wombya organization prevails. Within
this region each native tribe is divided into two primary phratries
or groups, which may be called A and B. Each of these phratries
is subdivided into four sections, making a total of eight divisions
of the community. A name is given to each of the eight sec-
tions, by means of which the members of the different divisions
are readily distinguished ; and identification is further facilitated
by a masculine and a feminine form of each of these names.
The accompanying table, illustrating the divisions of the Chin-
galee tribe, exhibits the rules regulating the intermarriage of the
several sections and the names of the resulting offspring. Exami-
nation of the table will show that the sons of the women of either
phratry marry the daughters of the women of the other, and that
the children of both sexes belong to the same phratry as their
mother, but to a different division of it.
1 Proc. Avier. Philos. Soc., Phila., vol. xxxvn, pp. 151-152.


Taking the first name in the table, we see that a Jimmitcha man
marries a Nungalleeinjah woman, who is his regularly appointed
spouse ; but he has the alternative of marrying a Nalainjah maiden
instead ; or, polygamy being allowed, he may take a wife from
each of these sections. If he marry a Nungalleeinjah woman his
sons will be Taraleeinjah, and his daughters Naraleeinjah ; but if
he select a Nalainjah woman his sons and daughters will be Tun-
Divisions of the Chingalee Tribe
Section of Parents
Section of Offspring
Husband
Daughter
Jimmitcha
Chunainjah
Chemarainjah
Tampachina
Nungalleeinjah
Nalainjah
Naraleeinjah
Nungareeinjah
Taraleeinjah
Tungareeinjah
Chulainjah
Chungaleeinjah
Naraleeinjah
Nungareeinjah
Nalainjah
Nungalleeinjah
Chungaleeinjah
Chulainj ah
Tungareeinjah
Taraleeinjah
Nameeinjah
Nanainjah
Nabajinah
Nemarainjah
Tampachina
Chemarainjah
Chunainjah
Jimmitcha
Nabajinah
Nemarainjah
Nanainjah
Nameeinjah
gareeinjah and Nungareeinjah, respectively, the sectional name
of the offspring being determined through the mother.
Again, a man of the Chunainjah section, whose proper wife is
Nalainjah, can marry Nungalleeinjah. That is, Jimmitcha and
Chunainjah can exercise their choice over the same two sections
of women. Similar privileges are accorded to the men of the
other sections. Chemarainjah and Tampachina may marry as
stated in the table, or they may reverse their wives the same as
Jimmitcha and Chunainjah can. Chungaleeinjah and Chulainjah
may marry as in the table, or to either of the women opposite
their respective names. The same applies to Tungareeinjah and
Taraleeinjah and their alternative choice of a wife.
Totems consisting of animals, plants, and inanimate objects
are attached to certain pairs of sections, and these totems descend
generally from a father to his sons and daughters, but this rule is


subject to modification. Certain totems are allotted to, or are
inherited by, two sections in common, one of the sections belong-
ing to phratry A, and the other to phratry B. Hence we find
that Jimmitcha and Taraleeinjah, who stand in the relation-
ship to each other of father and son, have a collocation of totems
attached to them ; Chemarainjah and Chulainjah have another lot
of totems; Chunainjah and Tungareeinjah have another, and
Tampachina and Chungaleeinjah have their own totems in the
same manner. The section names composing each phratry are
those given in the “ wife” column of the table. The masculine
form of each name can readily be found in the “ offspring ”
columns.
As Jimmitcha is a man of A phratry, his son Taraleeinjah
belongs to B phratry, therefore it follows that the totems allotted
to this pair of sections will fluctuate from one phratry to the
other in each generation. And this also holds good in regard to
the totems of the other pairs of sections. Owing to the alterna-
tive allowed to a man in choosing his wife, already explained, the
men of the Jimmitcha, Taraleeinjah, Chunainjah, and Tungareein-
jah sections are more nearly related among themselves, as fathers
and sons, than they are with the men of the other four divisions,
who are their brothers-in-law. If we take Chemarainjah, Chula-
injah, Chungaleeinjah, and Tampachina as examples, it will be
found that the rules in force in the preceding four sections also
apply to these.
In tracing the genealogy in the direct line given in the table it
can readily be demonstrated that a brother’s son’s progeny inter-
marry with a sister’s son’s progeny ; but if we follow the descent
of the offspring in the alternative line previously referred to, it is
found that a brother’s children intermarry with a sister’s children.
Study of the table will show also that by taking the men of one
phratry in a certain order they are the fathers of the men of the
other phratry in continuous alternation ; taken in another order
they are brothers-in-law one of the other; and by taking them in


a different way they are related as brother’s children and sister’s
children. The reader can easily select examples for himself.
On the accompanying map, No. 1 shows the country of the
Wombya tribe, including Cresswell and Burnett creeks, Corella
downs, Eva downs, Beetalo downs, Walhollow downs, etc. 1 In
this tribe some of the totems have certain country assigned to
Fig. 61—Geographic distribution of the Wombya organization.
them; for example, the Kangaroo, Eaglehawk, Emu, and White
hawk will each have certain plains, ridges, scrubs, waterholes,
and the like. The same custom is observed among different
tribes of this organization. Each section has also certain restric-
tions as to the animals and plants which they may use as food.
No. 2 is the territory of the Inchalachee and Warkya tribes,
who occupy the sources of Gregory and Georgina rivers, and from
Camooweal to Lake Sylvester. Their eight divisions have pre-
viously been given. 3
No. 3. The Yookala, Karrawar, Wonyee, and Yangarilla
1 For their divisions see Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, vol. xxxvil, p.
152.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxm, p. hi, table 5.
AM. ANTH. N. S., 2 —32


tribes inhabit the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria from Calvert
river to the Nicholson, and southerly to the Inchalachee territory.
Their sectional divisions have also been reported. 1
No. 4. On the coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria, from the Cal-
vert to the Roper, including the McArthur and other streams, are
the Yanyular, Willangan, Binbingha, and Yuggamurra tribes. 4
No. 5 on the map is the country of the Chingalee, Yungmanni,
and Koodangie people, whose social structure forms the subject
of the present article.
No. 6 represents the hunting grounds of the Koorangie, Mud-
burra, Tooinbol, etc., on upper Victoria river. Particulars of
their intermarrying divisions have been given. 3
No. 7 refers to the Geelowng, Oolwunga, Wartaman, and Hal-
lurra tribes on the lower Victoria. Their eight sections have else-
where been tabulated. 4
No. 8. On Ord, Fitzroy, and Margaret rivers and their tribu-
taries are the following tribes amongst others: Nigena, Keha,
Lunga, and Mayoo, whose eight sections have also previously
been given. 6
On Sturt creek and on Ord and Victoria rivers certain totems
are more generally known, and appear to be invested with
greater importance, than others. Among these are the white
crane, or spoonbill, and the eaglehawk.
No. 9 is the territory of the Meening, Jarroo, and Munga
tribes, inhabiting Sturt creek and stretching southeasterly, meet-
ing No. 10 on the map. Their eight divisions are particularized
in a previous paper. 6
I now wish to add lists of totems attached to certain pairs
of sections who are related as father and son alternately from
1 Ibid., vol. xxxii, pp. 251-252.
2 For their divisions see Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., vol. xxxviil, p. 77
table 3.
3 Ibid., p. 78, table 4.
4 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxm, p. 112, table 6,
6 American Anthropologist, N. s., vol. 2, p. 186.
6 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales , vol. xxxm, p. 112, table 7


generation to generation. The section names given in the work
last quoted will again be used.
The Choongoora and Chabalye sections have the following to-
tems : Eaglehawk, water-snake, pelican, tree-snake, fish, mos-
quito, curlew, desert-quandong, death-adder, sugar-bag, centipede,
stone spearhead, shag, cockatoo, rat, wasp, nut-wood, grasshopper,
grass, pigeons (all kinds), plain turkey, ants, whistling-duck, and
native bee.
The totems of Chowan and Chowarding are as follow: Eagle-
hawk, certain stars, brown hawk, native dog, sun, rain, coolabah
tree, wild potato, black-head snake, clouds, thunder, ibis, water-
hen, boree tree, native-companion, black duck, and scorpion.
To the Chambeen and Changalla sections the undermentioned
totems belong: White crane, galah parrot, lignum bush, opos-
sum, wind, copperhead snake, iguana, mopoke, moon, lightning,
and frog.
Chagarra and Chooaroo are allotted the, following totems:
White crane, blood-wood tree, mussel, kangaroo, native cat, rock
wallaby, wild orange, bilbee rat, wood duck, crow, and porcupine.
In consequence of the alternative rules of intermarriage, of
which mention has been made, certain totems are common to the
four sections Choongoora, Chabalye, Chowan, and Chowarding,
and other totems are common to the remaining four sections
above mentioned.
No. 10 represents an aggregate of tribes, among which may be
enumerated the Ulperra, Illyowra, Warramonga, Kaitish, and
Wolpirra, whose hunting grounds are from Tennant’s Creek to
Alice Springs, extending some distance on either side of the
overland telegraph line from Adelaide to Port Darwin. The
names of the sections and the rules of their intermarriage have
already been particularized. 1
The names of the sections in each of the tribal aggregations,
Nos. 1 to 10, differ somewhat, but the principle is the same
1 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. xxxii, pp. 71-73 ; vol. xxxm, p. 113.


in them all. The curved line (x —x —) on the map from the
Gulf of Carpentaria to the Indian ocean is the southern limit of
the Wombya organization. All the tribes adjoining this boun-
dary on the southwest, south, and southeast, possess a divisional
system comprising four sections only.
In their initiatory rites circumcision and introcision are prac-
tised, the former by means of a piece of stone chipped or ground
to an edge, the latter with a stick prepared for the purpose or a
smooth stone of requisite size and shape found in a watercourse.
Throughout the region represented on the map no woman is
allowed to marry until the operation of introcision has been per-
formed, nor can a man marry until after the ceremony of circum-
cision has taken place.
Among the tribes on Fitzroy river, Sturt creek, and at other
places, in the event of the death of a child, the mother is com-
pelled to carry its body about with her for several weeks and in
some cases for months. If a woman’s husband, or an adult son,
dies, the wife or the mother, as the case may be, is not allowed to
eat flesh for a long time, nor is she permitted to speak to anyone,
but must communicate by signs only, until the father of the
deceased bites her on the palm of the hand. This breaks the ban
of silence, and she may then converse with her people as before.
In cases of death from snake-bite, or the result of an accident
of any kind, the body is placed in a tree on a platform of sticks,
eight or ten feet from the ground, and is covered with boughs,
accompanied by the weapons of the deceased. When the death
is caused by violence, the body is not buried but is left where it
lies. In other cases the corpse is interred.
Owing to the barren character of most of the territory dealt
with in this paper, it is only on the rivers and creeks that water
can be relied on throughout the year. Back from these water-
courses there are weatherworn holes or depressions in rocks,
known as “ rock-holes,” in which water collects during rainy
weather. There are also a few small springs at wide intervals


where a limited supply of water can be obtained. In times of
drought these rock-holes and most of the springs become dry,
and the natives are compelled to keep in the vicinity of the rivers
and watercourses ; but as soon as the rain comes in sufficient
quantities to replenish the rock-holes and revive the springs, the
people make an exodus into the back country and remain there
as long as the water lasts, because that is the only time they can
pursue the game and obtain other foods in those parts of their
hunting grounds. They proceed first to where the water is
known to disappear most rapidly ; then they go to those places
in rotation where it remains longer, and in this way utilize their
water supply to the greatest advantage. They sometimes carry
water in bags made from the skins of small animals, such as wal-
labies and opossums, when going on hunting expeditions into
waterless country.


