





COLONY
WE LIVE IN.
ii.
STdclattrr:
FREARSON 4c BROTHER, PRINTERS 4c PUBLISHERS,
Kino William Stbbet.




THE 60E0NT WE EIVB IN.
PART 11.
The love of one’s native land—the home of childhood—
is a tender sentiment which all human beings more or
less cherish, and which generous hearts never lose,
whatever may be the fate which separates them from it;
because it is associated with some of the best and purest
feelings of human nature. It has given rise to great
and heroic deeds of bravery and self-devotion worthy of
deep respect and admiration. But if over-induged,
it keeps back progress and narrows the circle of human
interests and sympathies. It causes multitudes of
people to linger in over-populated and time-worn coun-
tries, where, in cramped circumstances or corroding
poverty, they are stunted both in body and mind ;
whilst opportunities of improvement to themselves and
relief to the home they love is too often offered to them
in vain.
Emigration is only a wider application of the princi-
ple which Nature herself establishes in families. When
the little ones grow up, and the nest which sheltered
their helplessness can no longer contain them or their
parents support them, they have to leave it and form
nests for themselves. Thus it should be with the human
family. When the land which gave them their birth
and fostered them becomes over-tasked and impover-
ished by her children, it is their duty as well as their
advantage to seek a new home. What if that home
should be further off than could be wished, they have
but to enlarge their ideas and affections, and adopt with
their new country the new relations which belong to it.
The colonies in Australia are rapidly growing into
importance ; and the whole world is beginning to recog-
nise the fact that many good and useful things are
produced by them, and that people—even ladies and
gentlemen may make them their homes without
becoming savages or losing the refinement of their early
training. The deep-rooted antipathy existing in Eng-
lish society against colonists is greatly to be deplored,
and is out of keeping with the liberality and nobility of
spirit which should belong to a great nation, and which,


in these enlightened times, should make England take
the lead in the encouragement of general progress,—
but most especially in the well-being and well-doing of
the loyal subjects of our beloved Sovereign.
It would be well if, instead of frequenting places so
well known in Europe, the generality of tourists in search
of health or change of thoughts would pay the colonies
a visit, and judge for themselves of the vitality, the
freedom of spirit and intelligence which pervade com-
munities whose members are busily working out for
themselves the problem of life under the powerful stim-
ulus of hope and the cheering sense of possibilities for
the future. _ .
There is an unspeakable charm in witnessing the
growth of a new world so full of promise to unborn
generations of the human race. What a contrast it
forms to the hopeless, helpless state of poverty, squalor,
and deformity which meets one on all sides in great
centres of population ; and which, in the midst of splen-
dour and the gaities of affluence, depress the spirit, and
grieve the kindly heart of the benevolent philanthropist
whose greatest efforts of charity can do so little to
relieve! u The poor are with us always,” but there
need to be but few where all things are so propitious to
the working classes, and their inducements to industry
so evident.
One of the greatest attractions to travellers is
novelty : and a new phase of humanity is a study well
worthy the attention of candid and thoughtful men
whose liberal training and broader range of thought fit
them so well for the reception of new impressions, and
who turn to profit the 11 here a little and there a little’
which they gather on their way. Visitors of this class
are not uncommon here, and amongst them may be
found some of England’s proudest names, combined with
genius, talent, and the quiet dignity of good breeding.
Their visits may be looked upon as some of the peculiar
advantages of colonial chances. They are always the
first to recognise what merit they meet with, and inva-
riably express approbation of and pleasure at the success
of South Australia. May their influence, some day,
serve to remove the unjustifiable ban under which Eng-
lish men and women are placed by the narrow prejudice
and ungenerous estimate of their compatriots.
4


Like good and prudent builders, the people of South
Australia have been content to spend her earlier years
in the construction of her solid foundations, and in wise
preparations for her superstructure. And now, apparent
to all eyes, must be her steady growth and fair propor-
tions. Far and wide agriculture, following closely the
footsteps of brave exploration, is working out the
designs of Nature, and receiving from her the stores she
has so long been ready to yield to man. Townships
are springing up where so lately the wild man wore out
his incomplete existence ; happy families in picturesque
homes animate the beauty of the primeval bush, whilst
the cheering sounds of labour break its solemn silence.
The steam-engine flashes along through the still recesses
of forests never before disturbed by the hand of civiliza-
tion ; and along the slight wires of the telegraph travel,
as silently as swiftly, the busy thoughts of man.
Large tracts of country, which were deemed to be mere
worthless swamps, have been, through the skill
and untiring energy of our Surveyor-General, Mr. Goy-
der, turned into rich pastures and fertile soil, —where
vegetation amply repays man’s labour, and which sheds
life and beauty where before a desert had been. Reser-
voirs in all directions are storing up water, so precious
in a dry country, and herds and flocks will now be
comparatively safe, where, in times past, so many have
perished from drought.
The bush of South Australia is fast receding to its
boundaries, and with it the poor doomed race which
vegetated in it. Our good friend, the genuine “ Bush-
man ” of primitive days, will soon be a mere shadow of
what he was. His hardships and privations, his dan-
gers and powers of endurance, his gallant struggle with
difficulties, his self-denial, his quiet, manly simplicity
of bearing are all attributes of heroes, and may well
dignify the legends of our colonial history. But whilst
some of them are still in existence, let us give them our
hearty and earnest greeting and sympathy. Well would
it be if their example were kept in view ; and when
small difficulties and vexations —inseparable from a new
country—arise, the late arrivals would remember how
smooth and comfortable things at the worst are for them
in comparison with the trials, uncertainties, and per-
petual dangers of the earlier settlers, who had no habi-
5


tations, no food but of the coarsest kind, —such as no
emigrant of this present time would condescend to eat ;
—no means of communication with loved ones far away,
except at long intervals of time ; and in perpetual dread
of the savages who might, at any time, have destroyed
the small band of adventurers who came to rob them of
their country. Little can those who now reach our
shores imagine all that has been done to prepare for
them such a beautiful home, where they have hut to
work honestly, and he true to themselves, to secure the
blessings of peace and easy circumstances in a land of
freedom and plenty !
Adelaide is now teeming with busy throngs. Gangs
of men are working on tramways ; handsome buildings
—both public and private —are being erected on land
which, originally bought for a few pounds, is noAV worth
fabulous suras. Plate-glass and ornamental shops are
becoming the rule, in front of which may be seen ele-
gant and well-appointed equipages ; whilst vehicles of
all descriptions are in constant circulation. Some with
the abundant produce of hill and plain ; others with the
multifarious materials of busy industry. Others again,
in great variety of shape and style, conveying here and
there the well-to-do families of the citizens, farmers, &c.
Bands of music—thanks to our German fellow-colonists
—enliven the hours of business ; and on all sides one
may notice well-dressed people threading their way from
shop to shop and greeting friends here and there. All
breathes of plenty and successful industry.
We have Botanical Gardens which are becoming
famous in distant lands, not only for their intrinsic
value and striking beauty, but also for the real merit of
their Director, Dr. Schomburgk, who combines so hap-
pily great patience and skilful industry with the high
privilege—a diploma from Nature—of creating beauty at
his will. These Gardens are free to all from morning
until evening; and in summer-time music adds its
charm to their general attraction. Whilst recreation
and pleasure seem to be the chief objects of this delight-
ful institution, few, perhaps, think of the wide-spread
benefits which emanate from it, and which in the future
will bloom and bear fruit for generations to come.
We are fortunate in having for our fellow-colonists
many Germans, whose sober, industrious habits, and
6


simple tastes make them desirable members of a young
community. They are cheerful, sociable, and their
musical skill has done much to awake in the English a
taste which might have remained dormant in many but
for them. They have, too, the happy continental gift of
finding amusement and imparting it to others without
expense or formality. It is a real pleasure of a summer
evening in the country to hear numbers of young voices
singing in parts, and keeping time with their steps, as
they return through green fields and lanes from some
holiday spent with Nature. They make excellent colo-
nists, and it is to be hoped that their success may
induce many to join them in our happy land. The
English may, with advantage, follow their example in
many ways.—Public amusements abound in Adelaide.
A new theatre has just been built, which is much
admired and well attended. We are often visited by
histrionic artists of various degrees of excellence, and
vocal and instrumental celebrities ; all of whom
are well received and much appreciated. Minstrels,
both black and white, attract immense crowds of people,
young and old, rich and poor, who never seem tired of
being amused. Immense circuses, of “world-wide”
repute, frequently come here, to the great delight of
multitudes who flock from all parts, regardless of
distance, to enjoy their time-honored feats, to laugh at
their perpetual and well-preserved jokes, and to marvel
at their wild animals, their dwarfs and giants, and many
other eccentric and monstrous productions of Nature.
Then, there are panoramas, dissolving views, exhibitions
of pictures, national products and industries, and all
kinds of interesting and instructive objects of art and
scientific wonders, —to the great benefit of our favoured
population. There are public balls—some masked and
in costume—well got up, and respectably frequented.
Concerts, lectures, recitations, flower shows, bazaars,
rinking, and many other in-door amusements. Whilst
for the open air—hunting, racing, shooting, cricket,
archery, polo, football, regattas, boat-racing, lawn tennis,
athletic sports, croquet, &c., &c., are the fovourite pass-
times. Picnics, which are so suitable to our genial
climate, arc very general, and prove a valuable resource
to townspeople almost all the year round. They afford
a healthy change to thousands whose occupations in-
7


door from week’s end to week’s end, give a peculiar zest
to this enjoyment of the free, pure air of the hills or
the sea-side ; whilst they enable friends to meet in social
gatherings who, from the smallness of their houses, or
restricted means, would be kept apart. Nothing can be
more desirable than this mode of spending a public
holiday, when each family can partake of the general
advantages without trouble or much expense. The
Mayor of Adelaide, Mr. H. Scott, whose name deserves
to be recorded, most kindly provides in summer even-
ings concerts in the open air for the general public, who,
wearied with the heat and toil of the day, can sit on their
door-steps, or lounge about at ease with their children
around them, whilst good music is played for their especial
pleasure and relief. In winter, every Saturday night,
the same privilege is granted them in comfort and
warmth within our splendid Town Hall, —where the
grand tones of a fine organ add another charm to the
entertainment. It need hardly be said that the Hall is
crowded. For young people who wish to spend their
evenings in self-culture, many resources offer them-
selves. There is the Institute where they can read ;
there are evening schools ; lectures on most instructive
as well as interesting subjects, delivered by highly
competent men ; debating societies, &c., &c.
We have, in South Australia, besides a variety of
soils, the great advantage of high hills, where cultivation,
after luxuriating in the rich damp gullies at their base,
has gradually mounted to high summits dotted with
residences, which are becoming more and more numer-
ous. There may be found the fruits and vegetables so
familiar to Old England.
Adelaide has an excellent Market, where may be
seen pine-apples, bananas, apricots, pomegranates,
loquats, oranges, lemons, shaddocks, citrons, melons,
figs, grapes, almonds, peaches, quinces, apples, pears,
plums, mulberries, medlars, besides walnuts, hazel-nuts,
strawberries, raspberries, gooseberries, cranberries, cur-
rents —red, black, and white. Under favourable condi-
tions our climate will produce all kinds of vegetables ;
and green peas may be had all the year round.
We have excellent butcher’s meat which is sent, even
for miles, to our homes. The kangaroo, which is very
good if well cooked, and the tail of which makes capital
8


soup, can be had frequently, as well as hares and rabbits
in profusion. There is fish in abundance ; but so well-
off are the fishermen that they do not condescend to
work more than three or four days a-week, and thus
cause a scarcity much to be regretted. A company is,
however, being formed, which, it is hoped, will remedy
our present state of partial deprivation. We have
poultry as good as can be found anywhere, and the fol-
lowing game—quail, six kinds, bush-pheasant, (ncella-
ted leipoa,) pigeons (bronze wing,) two kinds, and Mur-
ray crested pigeon, bustard, or native turkey, wanderer,
curlew, or thick-knee bustard, dotterel, snipe, dunlin,
sand-piper, water-rail, coots, cranes, or native compan-
ions—very large birds—emu, bittern, three kinds ; nan-
kine birds, spoon bills, two kinds ;herons, three kinds;
black swsn, coreopsis, or Cape Barron goose, magpie,
geese, black duck, widgeon, teal, wood, or tree duck,
grebe, waterhen, wattle-bird.
We have in our city an excellent Bathing Establish-
ment, where swimming is taught to both sexes ; and
frequent swimming matches in summer time cause much
interest and amusement. There are also Marine Baths
at Glenelg, which, during the warm season, thousands
of people eagerly avail themselves of ; —a large propor-
tion of whom go by rail from Adelaide and its suburbs
after the business of the day is over. They swarm on
the beach and jetty where musical bands may be heard
“ now loud as welcomes I faint, now, as farewells ! ”
amidst the incessant tramp, tramp of the multitude, the
splashing of waves, the busy, cheerful hum of human
voices, and the merry laughter of happy childhood. To
sit quietly, imbued with the well-being and pleasure of
so many fellow-creatures around, to gaze on the glories
of the distant sea and the shadowy forms of vessels and
boats, to watch the wavelets breaking into sparkling
gems under the rays of our exquisite moonlight is a
joy good for the heart, and one only to be dreamt of in
cold gloomy climates.
Our city is well supplied with water by pipes from
distant reservoirs. Each house—and even cottage— may
have the great luxury of a bath ; and trees, shrubs, and
flowers may have theirs, too. So that, in all directions,
we may see pretty gardens blooming in the town and
its environs. When the trees which are planted in the
9


streets are grown up, the general effect will be most
attractive by its cheerfulness and homelike beauty.
The Volunteer movement is proving a great success
here. We are most fortunate in officers who spare no
pains in their endeavours to bring to perfection the
efficiency of the corps. It is an immense advantage to
young men who, being taught the sterner duties of man-
hood through discipline, order, and self-control, become
self-reliant, and better fitted to take honourable posi-
tions in our midst as citizens and heads of families.
Whilst the drill and various exercises call forth their
strength, and improve appearance and bearing, the
uniform proclaiming them as it does our protectors and
defenders, gives them a claim to our interest and
esteem.
Social life in our colony offers much which it is inter-
esting and useful to consider, and which only those who
live in it can fully understand and appreciate. From
many quarters, in great variety of conditions
and influences, assemble men and women with widely
differing ideas and views of life and humanity, from
whose diverse antecedents proceed distinct and salient
characteristics which make society a tiling quite apart
from what it is in old countries. Exclusiveness, which
forms the basis of English society, can have no existence
where personal interest, as a rule, is so much involved
with social relations, and where the rapid success of
individuals lifts many from humble stations to the
plateau where, by right of birth and education, stands
the gentleman. Thus brought together face to face,
men learn to set aside the curtain of mere conventionali-
ties, and with a clearer eye behold one another and
themselves. Natural affinity soon brings en rapport
those of solid worth ; and the diversity which circum-
stances effect brings out in high relief the strength of
character, and the originality which give such zest to
intercourse and weight to men’s thoughts and opinions.
Little by little the niind expands to receive fresh impres-
sions—a more comprehensive plan of Nature seems to
develop itself to one’s inner perception,—and life itself
bears a new meaning! The requirements of civilized
society, with its perpetual round of heartless forms and
deceitful ceremonies, have a powerful tendency to make
a mould in which nature by early training is made to fit
10


■with more or less friction, more or less deterioration,
according to the plasticity of the subject to be operated
upon ; and a polish, different in degree but still the
same, hides a man from others, and too often from
himself. It is contact with Nature’s unrepressed which
is needed for that education which makes the broad-
minded, large-hearted brother of mankind —the cosmo-
politan gentleman. The man who derives benefit from
travelling is he who, not content with seeing the strange
countries he visits, seeks there to learn Nature’s general
laws, and from their inhabitants the lesson of good to
humanity. Hood says : “ Some minds improve by
travel, others rather resemble copper wire or brass,
which gets the narrower by going further.” The Eng-
lish have been famous for their persistently keeping
aloof from the peoples whose countries they visited ; and
until of late years this reproach was well merited. But
“John Bull” knows better now, and much he has
learnt in consequence. Colonization has a very salutary
effect on some natures, but they must be of the first-
named order of travellers mentioned by Hood. The
others might just as well stay at home, keeping well
within their shells lost the light of intelligence and
liberality should offend their weak sight.
It is much to be regretted that many of the immigrants
who came to South Australia, amongst the Irish,
—although brought out at public expense, and thus
removed from want and misery in their own country,—
should express notions as unreasonable, as they are inju-
rious to themselves and unfair to the colony. They
come here, for the most part, ignorant of the most rudi-
mentary knowledge expected from their class ; they are
taught, well fed, and paid high wages, which in a little
while enables them to place money in the Savings Bank,
in proof of which the Bank now holds in trust a million
of money, and in a few years they may become proprie-
tors of lands and houses. Yet one hears them ever
complaining, and envious of those who, by toil and per-
severance, are in advance of them ; and on all sides one
hears lamentations over those very unsubstantial castles
in Ireland which some unprincipled ruffians have
defrauded them of. They maintain, in most emphatic
language, that their lives have been blighted by their
being “ brought out to such a purgatory !” that they
11


knew all you have with immense trouble and patience
taught them before they left home ; and finish by
expressing their firm belief that they are as good as any
lady or gentleman in the land ! Well, perhaps they
may be ; but the want of gratitude, and the grudging
feeling they exhibit towards the English who befriend
them, must ever be a sad blot on their nationality. It
is to be hoped that, with time, their sense of the ridicu-
lous—so strong a feature in them—may effect what
better qualities fail to do ; and, that finding their own
peculiarities so ugly in others, they may become more
amenable to reason, and more sensible of the great bles-
sings and advantages they enjoy in this bountiful land.
There is here a wide field of opportunities for the rich
to turn to good account Fortune’s ample gifts. And it
is not the least of our advantages, that we are proud to
acknowledge, that whilst all are ready to respond to the
numerous calls on their charity, some there are who
extend their bounty to the encouragement of arts and
sciences, the fostering of talent, genius or industry, and
in generally promoting the advancement and ameliora-
tion of their fellow-colonists. It is a pity, and a
reproach too, that some, after making fortunes in the
land of their adoption, should desert her when they
ought t© return her benefits by their devotion to her
interests and success. They cannot realise how much
greater would be their position as benefactors, enjoying
the fruits of their good deeds, than in seeking afar for
that consideration which is not to be bought. As a
rule, in the old world the fortunate colonist is but little
esteemed. Mr. Froude speaks of England as “a step-
mother to us, who never regards her colonial children
as the equals of those at home.” He says that she treats
them as if they existed for her advantage, and not for
their own, and other things as encouraging. Many a
man who, after growing rich here, goes back to his
native land, thinking his wealth will gain for him the
privilege of admittance into the charmed circle of the
“ upper ten,” finds himself as far from it as ever. If he
be wise, he returns to the sunny land which has proved
such a real mother to him ; where he is greeted with
the peculiarly cordial welcome from those who have
shared with him the hopes and fears, the troubles and
joys which belong to the exciting life of thriving colonies.
12


Better far that he should identify himself thoroughly
with the new world, and dignify it by his presence, than
to be looked upon as an alien in the old ! It is surely
a prouder thing to stand on an elevation he has gained
for himself, than to be the mere puppet raised up by
fortuitous circumstances. “If the colonies are really
the germs of nations that are to be, this question of
absenteeism is the most vital of all questions to them,”
18


