



f°v °\ b


THE QUESTION SETTLED
RELIGION versus SUPERSTITION
BEING A BRIEF EXAMINATION OF THE BASIS ON WHICH
THE POPULAR FAITH OF THE CHURCHES RESTS
GNOSTEES
”Ow Act on 6 OEOS Several rrjr nor Artipiowiov
7) nor A yyt\(or aireair, on warm rn epyn ’ Avtm ’Avror So!;a£ei.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1885




THE QUESTION SETTLED:
RELIGION versus SUPERSTITION.
Ih 55 jv f? 66
3.65-T7
THESE pages are not addressed to those who are satisfied
with the religious views which they at present entertain, but
are meant solely for those who have experienced that the
formal religion of the churches fails to satisfy the longings
and aspirations of their higher nature, and who consequently
desire “ Light! more light! ” The writer hereof may mention
that he has no sympathy for those iconoclasts who would
destroy all forms of religion without having anything better
to put in their place. He holds that even a false conception
of God and man’s destiny is preferable to that blank negation
which crushes hope and tends to the gloom of endless night,
and he believes that the chief causes of the prevailing
atheism are the false and irrational conceptions regarding
God, and the life to come, popularly taught in the churches.
The word “ atheism ” is not here used in its offensive sense,
for the writer has known many who hold that the attributes
of matter account for all the phenomena in nature, that
matter contains within itself the elements of motion and
force, and possesses the powers and potencies of all forms of
life, whose lives would contrast favourably with the lives of
those who are the most assiduous in their attention to the
popular religious observances.
That there is a widespread declension from the old
standards of faith in all the Christian sects we have evidence
from all quarters. This is now frankly admitted even from
the pulpit, as the following quotation from a lecture delivered
in Paisley, Scotland, by the Rev. David Watson, minister of
the Presbyterian Church, shows. Mr. Watson says : —“ The
great, the wise, and the mighty are not with us. That I fear


we must all own to, however much we may grieve to say
so; and the more we read of the history, the poetry, the
biography, and the literature of the age, the more we will think
so. The best thought, the widest knowledge, and the deepest
philosophy have discarded our church. . . . They are not
even nominally with us. They look not for our heaven, they
fear not our hell. They detest what they call the inhumanities
of our creed. . . . Why are these, and such like men, without
the pale of the Christian Church ? Not that they are unfit—
we own that; but we are unworthy of them, and by the mob
force of our ignorant numbers have driven them out. They
shun us because of our ignorant misconceptions of heaven,
man, and God. They feel our evil communications corrupting
their good manners ; they feel our limited vision narrowing
the infinitude of the horizon; and, therefore, as an indispen-
sable to the very existence of their souls, they separate
themselves from us, and forsake —and greatly unwilling are
many of them to do so—the worship with us of our common
God.”
It is truly surprising that in this a Protestant country, pro-
fessing religious liberty to all (the right of private judgment
being the very keystone of Protestantism), there is still a
social stigma thrown at all who disconnect themselves from
the unprogressive popular faiths, and Freethinkers are consi-
dered wicked people, who would subvert morality and put an end
to all religion if it were in their power to do so. Here is what
Professor Tyndall, in an address delivered by him before the
Birmingham and Midland Institute, referring to Freethinkers,
says ; —“ If I wished to find men who are scrupulous in their
adherence to engagements, whose words are their bonds, and
to whom moral shiftiness of any kind is subjectively unknown ;
if I wanted a loving father, a faithful husband, an honourable
neighbour, and a just citizen, I should seek him and find him
among the band of Freethinkers to which I refer.” Does
this not prove that the rejection by Freethinkers of the God-
dishonouring doctrines of the churches does not, to say the
least, alter them for the worse ? Then why should free
thought, which is admittedly very prevalent, be so generally
denounced by the Protestant section of the community ? It
should be borne in mind that all the great reformers in the
past have been Freethinkers, and that but for their free-thought
principles, for which many of them have suffered death, the
world would not be even so far advanced as it is in regard
to science and religion. The true religionist, like the true


scientist, only holds his views of to-day as stepping stones to
the higher views of to-morrow.
“What is truth ?” is a question that was put of old, but which
was not, and never will be, fully answered, for truth in itself
is absolute and infinite; consequently man’s conception of it
is, and always will be, relative and progressive. Although
we, however, as finite beings, cannot attain to absolute truth,
it happily lies within our power to discover error by careful
research and earnest study. Error bears the same relation to
truth as does darkness to light—darkness, as all are aware,
being merely the absence of light. In all the established
religions of the world there is a certain amount of truth,
otherwise they would not have been accepted even by semi-
savages ; far less would these religions have existed for so
many years, or thousands of years, as some of them have done.
In almost every one of them the same fundamental truths are
to be found, though differently expressed, and thus far they
may all be said to be divine.
The varying theological superstructures or theories erected
thereon, which have so perplexed the minds of mankind in
the past, and still continue to do so, are, when critically
examined without prejudice, found to be mere human inven-
tions designed to override the natural rule of right implanted
in man, and to enslave the intellect of the ignorant or credulous
so as to bring them under the power and control of an astute
priesthood.
Religion and theology, which are generally but erroneously
considered to be synonymous terms, are quite distinct. There
can but be one true religion, while there are many theologies.
Morality, in its widest sense, and unselfish love for our neigh-
bour constitute true religion, or “religion without superstition,”
for it is only by doing good to the seen that we can in any
way serve the Unseen, In the popular forms of religion,
foolish and God-dishonouring creeds, which have been the
cause of all the religious wars and persecutions in the past, as
well as the sectarian hatred in the present, and which have
nothing to do with true religion, have been mixed up with
good deeds, because the latter would be too simple for priest-
craft to thrive on; whereas the former supply endless themes
for the clergy to explain and to dilate upon without any fear
of their exhausting them, for in the present day they appear
as far off explanation as when they were first propounded,
and, doubtless, they will continue to be so until the general
intelligence of the people has outgrown the whole, as it has


already part of those foolish creeds, such as the doctrine of
eternal torment in a physical lake of fire and brimstone,
prepared by a loving Father, whose mercy endureth for ever,
for the great majority of His children ! The truths contained
in the various religions of the world bear a very small propor-
tion to the errors which they comprise ; and, unfortunately,
our popular forms of religion are no exception to this general
rule. Let us now briefly consider the latter, and carefully
examine the credentials on which they rest.
Protestantism, which now includes over a hundred different
sects, as, doubtless, the reader is aware, is but an offshoot
from Romanism. It was instituted less than four centuries
back by a German Augustine monk, named Martin Luther,
whose conscience happened, fortunately, to be a little less
elastic than that of the rest of his class. In the year 1510
Luther was sent to Rome on the business of his order; when
there, this brave man was so disgusted with the ecclesiastical
system and habits, more especially with the scandalous sale of
indulgences, at that time openly carried on by the court of
Rome, that he declared against them, and nailed to the church
door his celebrated ninety-five theses. The Pope, Leo X.,
had Luther’s writings committed to the flames, and at the
same time issued a bull of excommunication against him,
which Luther, in return, publicly burnt with the decretals.
Luther subsequently translated the Bible into German. He
died in the year 1546, leaving a number of works, including
his celebrated catechism. The history of Protestantism since
the Reformation is so generally known that it would be super-
fluous to trace it here ; so we will now proceed to consider
Romanism, the foundation from which Protestantism sprang,
and examine the basis on which it rests. The reader should
bear in mind that if the foundation be unsound, it follows, as a
matter of necessity, that the superstructure based thereon
cannot be reliable or trustworthy, however beautiful or how-
ever popular it may be.
The first step of the Roman Catholic system is as follows ;
—The clergy of that church present themselves and say
“ Receive us as infallible teachers, on credentials which we
ourselves bring, and on data which we ourselves lay down.”
Thus bearing witness of themselves and demanding to be
received on their own testimony. They also lay down rules
of their own making, independently of any reference to the
Bible, for, as a matter of principle, they scrupulously put the
Bible aside at this part of the system. These rules which


they advance on their own authority, as criteria of unity,
sanctity, universality, apostolicity, &c., are sagaciously adapted
to their own interests; and they expect to be received by
their fellow men on these questionable credentials, and
demand to be received as infallible teachers sent from God,
upon no other authority and testimony than their own.
Having insisted on this first part of their infallibility and
exclusive right as teachers, founded solely on their own
testimony, then as a second step they bring the Bible in their
hands, and say, “ Receive this book from us as an inspired
book, not on its own intrinsic evidence, for it has no such
evidence, but simply on our infallible authority. We declare
the book to be inspired, and therefore it is inspired.” They
have even gone further than this, for they have taken up
other books, which were rejected as uncanonical by the early
church Fathers, and have required them also to be received as
inspired on their own testimony only ; this they did at so
late a period as the sixteenth century. So far, then, both the
Romish clergy and the Bible are to be understood to have no
other credentials, and are proposed to be received and
reverenced on no other authority, than the testimony of the
clergy, who say to the world, “We are the holy Catholic
apostolic men ! We sanction the Bible.”
As the statements of this book, sanctioned by them, might
lead its readers to act under their own influences, and to
judge of the pretensions of the Church of Rome by what is
therein set forth, the Roman clergy, although they have
introduced the Bible as an inspired revelation from God, say:
“ Receive this book, however, only as a dead letter, conveying
no meaning to you of itself —a dark and dangerous book, full of
numberless obscurities—a book no part of which Jesus wrote,
or gave orders to His apostles to write—a book of which it is
impossible to entertain a rational conviction that it is genuine
without recurring to the tradition and authority of the
Romish Church —a book written by men who, themselves,
made frequent mistakes —a book out of which laymen have
no right to argue (not even a Supreme Court judge)—a book
whose meaning they are not to take from any consideration
of its contents, but from them (the Romish clergy) only, as
the sole expounders of it; from those men who, antecedently
to the introduction and consideration of the Bible at all, have
laid down rules, in the strength of which you are to receive
them on their own word as fallible and unintelligible, except
in the terms of their explanation—that is, in fact, they


substitute their word for the “ Word of God,” or rather that
which they have sanctioned as such.
Even then, however, the safeguards of the Romish system
are not complete ; for, if the Bible were admitted to comprise
the whole inspired communication from God to man—if the
whole divine message were lying before man, common-sense
might suggest the propriety of judging of the authority and
credentials of the teachers by the statement of the book
itself. The Romish clergy, therefore, go further, and say ;
“ You must not receive the Bible as the whole will of God ;
you must believe also, on our authority, that besides this
inspired volume there is, as a check over it, to limit and fix
its meaning and to add to it where it is deficient, an illimit-
able and ever-lengthening something called Tradition, which
is laid up in the minds of your infallible clerical teachers,
and which is the true and unerring guide of the church.
And we assert it to be our right, in the giving forth, as a
matter of divine authority, the averments of this divine
tradition, to determine absolutely the meaning of every
sentence in the Bible, so that no man, however learned (not
even Dr. Moorhouse), is permitted to see any other meaning
in any passage therein than that which we sanction.”
There is, however, something very mysterious about this
priestly tradition, as to where it is, and what it is ; for it does
not exist in the collective mind of all the clergy ; it is not to
be found in the mind of any one of the clergy ; it is not the
general council of the clergy, for there is no such conclave
existing ; it is not the Pope without a council —he would not
presume to affirm that it is ; it is not the Pope and council
taken together, because such councils, with Popes at their
head, have differed from each other. But, notwithstanding
its evident nonentity, it is professed to be an authoritative,
living, perpetual interpretation of the Bible, so as to settle all
doubt, “ according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.”
An i yet no such full and comprehensive interpretation of the
Bible exists, or has ever been put forward ; and no such
unanimous consent of the Fathers exists, for they differ in
respect to the meaning of the Bible as much as any other
commentators. Still the Romish clergy say: “This unwritten
and invisible word is the true guide, if you can but get at it.”
To state the case still more briefly, the system of the
Romish Church is as follows :—First : her priests present
themselves as infallible teachers, on the strength of credentials
furnished by themselves. Secondly :we are asked to receive


the Bible as inspired, wholly and solely on their authority.
Thirdly : we are expected to receive the Bible in no other
meaning than they choose to put on its various statutes ;
and Fourthly : we are asked to believe that the main substance
of divine authority and revelation does not lie in the Bible,
but on something unseen and intangible, even to themselves.
They then say : —“ Receive from us a whole host of doctrines,
precepts, practices, ceremonies, &c., which we, as infallible
teachers, enjoin—which we grant ‘ cannot be clearly proved by
the Bible,’ but which we require you to receive on the authority
of that unwritten word, which we tell you is in our possession.”
This brings in the whole system of Popes, and masses, and
saint-worship, and image-worship—of purgatory, penances,
indulgences, auricular confession—of chrisms, and unctions,
and relics, and crossings, and holy water, and holy wells, and
miracles, and pilgrimages, and all the other peculiarities of
this priestly system, which have no support whatever from
the Bible, and are admitted, even by the Romish clergy
themselves, not to be clearly provable by it. The truth is,
the foundation of the whole system rests simply on the
testimony of the clergy to themselves, on credentials of their
own invention. On these they base their own infallibility,
the divine inspiration of the Bible, the fact of another more
full, more minute, and more authoritative though unwritten
revelation, and every other device of the system. Such is the
complicated, cunning, and irrational scheme of that church
which has warped the judgments, enslaved the consciences,
and preyed on the fears of millions upon millions of earth’s
inhabitants during the last fifteen centuries, and, unfor-
tunately, still exists in our midst. It is truly surprising that
a system so established should have stood so long; but, being
based on sand, the advancing flood of intelligence, through
our state schools, colleges, and the daily discoveries of
science, will ere long level the whole pile of mockeries to the
ground. It is from beginning to end an unauthorized human
invention, which may suit the credulous and superstitious, but
it can never satisfy the inquiring mind, or those who think for
themselves. That there is good in the Romish system, as in
all others, no one can deny; but it is this small amount of
good in each that has gilded their priestly pills, and made
them, if not palatable, swallowable by the credulous masses.*
* The writer has to acknowledge his indebtedness to one who, as a young man,
was educated for the Catholic priesthood, for much of the foregoing regarding the
Romish system of religion.


Let us next consider the Protestant systems, with their
claim of divine authority for the Bible, and see if these rest on
any surer foundation than does Romanism—from which they
originally sprang—bearing in mind the fact that if the stem
is rotten at the core, its branches cannot be very healthy,
although they may appear green on the surface. As it is
only the Roman Church that can have the slightest pretence
to apostolic succession, any claim by the Protestant churches
to such succession is the height of -folly; so the latter must
rely entirely on the authority of a book, or rather set of books,
which the parent church has declared to be a dead letter to
all outside the pale of the Catholic Church, containing no
intrinsic evidence of its being divinely inspired, and which it
is impossible to entertain a rational conviction that it is genuine,
save as expounded by the Romish clergy. Notwithstanding
this baulk at the commencement, let us briefly examine the
book itself and see if the Protestant claim, that it contains the
sole and plenary inspiration by God to man, can be sustained,
for if not it necessarily follows that, like the parent Romish
Church, these dissenting churches must all be living frauds,
merely kept up for the sake of those pious wolves in sheep’s
clothing who thrive on the substance of their flocks ; who
preach and pray, not, as they profess, from love to God,
without money and without price, but for the sake of place
and pay, thus obtaining money under false pretences, and
trifling with those who, in many cases, so generously support
them.* Yet these deceivers retain the popular respect.
There are two ways of judging of the claim set forth by
the Protestant churches of the divine authority of the Bible ;
one is by its external evidence, and the other by its internal
evidence. It will not be necessary to dwell on the former ;
suffice it to say that the Bible is divided into two Testaments—
viz., the Hebrew and the Greek, or the Old and the New
Testaments, as they are generally termed—both of which are
made up of a number of books or epistles. We do not
possess a single original manuscript of any one of these, but
merely copies of copies, and not two of these agree ; whole
chapters, even, are wanting in some that are present in others,
* The reader must have noticed in the papers the howl of indignation recently
raised by a learned Bishop of one church, and an irascible Dean of another, at a
legal dignitary who boldly endeavoured to let the people know how grievously
they are being duped. “ Mind your own business, and let us carry on our little
game in peace, you legal intruder,” constituted the substance of the Dean’s howl.
This looks ominous !


and marginal notes in some of those copies are found incor-
porated in the bodies of others. The dates at which any of
these books were written are not known for a certainty ; the
names attached to them are only suppositionary, and some
of them, such for instance as the four gospels, are not the
writings of the men whose names are attached to them, but
are said to be only according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
and, judging by the geographical errors which they contain
they were evidently written by men who were little acquainted
with the country about which they wrote. That they were
not written till long after the date of the occurrences referred
to is certain, for it is therein stated that these sayings are
“ commonly reported among the Jews until this day, clearly
proving that, instead of being divinely inspired, they are
merely “ old Jewish fables and commandments of men, which
turn from the truth.” It is only reasonable to suppose that
if the various books which constitute the Bible had been
divinely inspired, they would have been divinely preserved.
The oldest copies of the gospels extant are written m Greek,
and not in the language of the country to which they relate.
The chief incidents they record are not corroborated by any ot
the contemporaneous historians; and our English translations
are constantly being modified by retranslations, \vhole verses,
which were contained in the authorized version, being omitted
in the recent revised edition of the New Testament as being
spurious. But we will pass over all this, and proceed with the
internal evidences, and see if these bear out the claim that the
Bible is divinely inspired.
In forming an opinion of a book we can only judge ot it y
the style of its composition and the consistency, rationality,
morality, and truthfulness of the statements which it contains;
therefore, in judging of the Bible we must proceed on similai
principles, with ‘this difference, however, that if the latter is,
as claimed for it, divinely inspired, we may reasonably expect
to find it free from all those imperfections which naturally
occur in the works of uninspired writers, for “ to err is human.
Bishop Marsh admits that “ the Bible must be examined by
the same laws of criticism which are applied to other writings
of antiquity;” and Dr. Hampden, Bishop of Hereford, writes
“ Before we admit any supposed revelation we must explore
its nature from an actual survey of it in all its parts. It is
not faith, but evidence, that establishes a revelation, therefore
reason is the sole principle by which our belief, as rational
beings, should be regulated. To declare, as many foolishly do,


that we are not to judge of religion and the Bible by our
reason is worthy of the dogmatism of Popery, the insolence of
tyranny, and the impudence of priestly arrogance.
The fact that the Bible is divided into two Testaments—the
Old being superseded by the New—is in itself clear evidence
that it is not an infallible record, otherwise the Old Testament
would not have required to have been amended by the New;
and the fact that the New Testament rests upon the Old,
which it is designed to amend, testifies to its not being the
work of an infallible author. In the divine laws of God
manifested in nature we find no amending act; on the con-
trary, science has demonstrated the immutability of natural
law. It is only the works of men’s hands that require to be
amended as increased knowledge and experience are gained.
If it is admitted that the Old Testament is divinely inspired,
it follows as a natural consequence that the New cannot be so ;
and if the New is claimed to be divinely inspired, the Old
Testament, which it amends, clearly cannot be so, unless it be
assumed that the Infinite is changeable and developes in
knowledge like His finite children—men. That the Bible is
not as claimed for it, “ The Word of God ” is clearly evident,
because to assert that it is a plenary inspiration from God to
man, containing all wisdom necessary for man to know, is to
limit the Infinite, and to set bounds to human knowledge and
progression. As has been truly remarked by Dr. J. W.
Draper, in The Conflict between Science and Religion : “A divine
revelation must necessarily be intolerant of contradiction ; it
must repudiate all improvement in itself, and view with
disdain that arising from the progressive intellectual develop-
ment of man. But our opinions on every subject are con-
tinually liable to modification from the irresistible advance of
human knowledge.” Another writer has observed that “ A
wise man changes his opinions, a fool never.”
Let us now consider a few of the statements contained in
the Hebrew or Old Testament, and see if the conceptions of
God therein set forth are worthy of a sane man’s acceptance.
It must be admitted that both in the Old and New Testa-
ments God is represented theoretically as all-wise, all-just,
and all-merciful, but practically, as the very reverse ; as
unchangeable yet changeable, as invisible yet visible, as
impartial yet partial, and as a Father to be loved, yet who
is a cruel tyrant to be feared. In Genesis we are informed
that (according to the Jewish chonology) some six thousand
years ago, God, who we are led to infer dwelt from


all eternity up to this period in chaotic idleness, made the
heaven and the earth, and all that in them is, in the space of
six days. If this be true then science lies, for both astronomy
and geology are at variance therewith. After having created
man, God is represented as having pronounced him good, but
found him bad ; then repented for having created him, and
in His anger resolved to destroy, not only him, but the whole
vegetable and animal creation ; after which He repented having
done so, and resolved never to do it again. Rather strange
proceedings, it must be admitted, on the part of an all-wise
and unchangeable Deity; but these are trivial compared to the
eternal curse represented to have been pronounced by a God
who is Love on all humanity yet unborn, merely because
Adam and Eve eat a fruit which a talking serpent pointed
out to them as being palatable. On this God-dishonoring
fable hangs the doctrine of the fall of man, as an antidote
to which such questionable means are represented as having
been resorted to some eighteen centuries back.
It would occupy too much space to go into all the state-
ments contained in the Old Testament, so we will pass over
the interesting accounts of how a loving and all-merciful
Father drowned all his children, except eight, like a lot of
rats in a flood; how He sent two she-bears to destroy forty-
two children for calling out “ baldhead ” to an old man ; how
He sent the most disgusting plagues on Egypt on account of
a thieving tribe called Israelites ; how He commanded the
slaughter without mercy of His children the Amorites, Am-
monites, Midianites, &c.; how He caused a whale to swallow a
man, and an ass to speak to another, &c. We shall now take
into consideration briefly the moral characters of the leading
celebrities of the Old Testament. Moses was a murderer,
having killed the Egyptian ; Abraham a liar, having passed
his wife off as his sister; Jacob another liar, having obtained
his father’s blessing through deception ; Lot was guilty of
incest ; Solomon of wholesale bigamy ; David of adultery
and murder, yet he is said to have been a man after God’s
own heart. Talk about scoffing at the Bible ! It is surely
better to do this than to scoff at that Supreme Power through
whom all things exist—the Eternal Source of our intel-
ligence ! We shall next take into consideration the Greek or
New Testament conception of God and religion.
That the birth, life, and death of the hero of the gospels
are more in accordance with Grecian ideas than with Judaism,
all unprejudiced students of Greek and Hebrew mythology


must admit. The miraculous conception, in which a maiden,
the affianced bride of a Jewish carpenter, is represented as
having been seduced by a spirit, is almost on the same lines
as the tale of Lasda and the swan, and is certainly the most
astounding ghost story on record. Talk not of blasphemy,
the blasphemy lies with those who inculcate such a God-
dishonouring fable. After the marriage of this maiden with
the carpenter we are informed that, if it were not for a dream
the latter had, it was his intention to have put her away
privily, so that in a measure the whole story hangs on a
dream. We are further informed that on the birth of the
infant He who “ filleth all space with His presence, yea,
whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain,” incarnated
Himself in this babe. One might as reasonably believe in
the compression of the ocean into a teacup. This fable,
almost in every particular, corresponds with the ancient
Hindoo account of the incarnation of Vishnu, the second
person in the Hindoo Trinity, in the infant, Jezeus Chrishna,
who is also represented to have been born of a maiden, without
the intervention of man, on the 25th of December. There
is, in fact, such a striking resemblance and concurrence
between many of the tales recorded of this Lord and Saviour
of the Hindoos and those related of Jesus in the Gospels,
that it is evident that they have both been derived from a
common origin ; and when the irrational character of many
of the accounts regarding the latter, taken in their literal
sense, are considered, such as his being taken to the top of a
pinnacle of the - temple, his raising the dead to life, his
physical resurrection from the grave after death through
crucifixion, and his bodily ascent to heaven—it is clearly
evident that ancient astronomical allegories have been amal-
gamated with the natural events of a noble life, which, instead
of having been improved, has been travestied thereby. As
has been truly remarked, “ all religions centre around astro-
nomical worship,” and the so-called Christian religion is not
an exception to this, for even its festivals were determined
upon an astronomical basis, as has been clearly illustrated by
Edward Maitland in his Keys of the Creeds.
Taking the Gospel accounts of the birth, life, and death of
Jesus in their literal sense, who that has not prostituted his
reason at the shrine of folly can really credit them ? Were
such tales related as occurring in the present day would a
single individual be found who could believe them ? Then
why should anyone credit them as having occurred in former


times who has the slightest knowledge of science, through
which the invariability of God’s laws has been demonstrated
over and over again ? Man being the apex of physical
evolution he can only form a conception of God by his
highest ideality of manhood. This being the case, would a
good man have created a broad path leading to destruction
for the majority of his children, and a narrow path leading to
happiness for a few favoured members of his family ? If not,
how can any sane man believe in the literal meaning of such
a God-dishonouring statement, merely because it is written in
an old book which, from ignorance, his forefathers revered
as of divine authority ? Can that which is evil on the part
of man be good when ascribed to God ? Certainly not!
Let us here consider the main points of the popular faith
as concisely represented by the author of Supernatural
Religion.
“ We are asked to believe that God made man in His own
image, pure and sinless, and intended him to continue so,
but scarcely had this, His noblest work, left the hands of the
Creator than man was tempted into sin by Satan, an all-
powerful and persistent enemy of God, whose existence and
antagonism to a Being in whose mind sin is an abomination
is not accounted for, and is incredible. Adam’s'fall brought
a curse upon the earth, and incurred the penalty of death for
himself and the whole of his posterity. The human race,,
although created perfect and without sin, thus disappointed
the expectations of the Creator, and became daily moie
wicked, the Evil Spirit having succeeded in frustrating the
designs of the Almighty, so that God repented that He had
made man, and at length destroyed, by a deluge, all the
inhabitants of the earth, with the exception of eight persons
who feared Him. This sweeping purification, however, was
as futile as the original design, and the race of men soon
became more wicked than ever. Ihe final and only adequate
remedy devised by God for the salvation of His cieatures,
become so desperately and hopelessly evil, was the incarna-
tion of Himself in the person of the Son, the second person in
a mysterious Trinity of which the Godhead is said to be
composed (who was conceived of the Holy Ghost and born of
the Virgin Mary), and his death upon the cross as a vicarious
expiation of the sin of the world, without which supposed
satisfaction of the justice of God His mercy could not
possibly be extended to the frail and sinful work of His own
hands. The crucifixion of the incarnate God was the crowning


guilt of a nation whom God Himself had selected as His own
peculiar people, and whom He had condescended to guide by
constant direct revelations of His will, but who, from the
first, had displayed the most persistent and remarkable
proclivity to sin against Him, and, in spite of the wonderful
miracles wrought on their behalf, to forsake His service for
the worship of other gods. We are asked to believe, there-
fore, in the frustration of the divine design of creation and in
the fall of man into a state of wickedness hateful to God,
requiring and justifying the divine design of a revelation, and
such a revelation as this, as a preliminary to the further
proposition that, on the supposition of such a design, miracles
would not be contrary to reason.”
“ Antecedently, nothing could be more absolutely incredible
or contrary to reason than these statements, or the supposition
of such a design. . . . The whole theory of this abortive
design of creation, with such impotent efforts to amend it, is
emphatically contradicted by the glorious perfection and
invariability of the order of nature. It is difficult to say
whether the details of this scheme, or the circumstances which
are supposed to have led to its adoption, are more shocking
to reason or to moral sense. The imperfection ascribed to
the divine work is scarcely more derogatory to the power
and wisdom of the Creator than the supposed satisfaction of
His justice in the death of Himself incarnate, the innocent
for the guilty, is degrading to the idea of His moral
perfection. The supposed necessity of repeated interference
to correct the imperfection of the original creation, the nature
of the means employed, and the triumphant opposition of
Satan, are anthropomorphic conceptions totally incompatible
with the idea of an infinitely wise and all-mighty Being. The
constitution of nature, so far from favouring any hypothesis of
original perfection and subsequent deterioration, bears every-
where the record of systematic upward progression.”
Bibliolators have now to “ torture ” many of the biblical
statements in order to endeavour to harmonize them with the
ascertained facts of science; and, instead of having the candour
and honesty to admit that many of the statements in the Bible
are, in the light of modern intelligence, repulsive, inconsistent,
and untenable, the clergy, as a rule, have recourse to the
most palpable sophistry and quibbling to gloss this over. As
an instance of this take the following admission made by the
Rev. H. Andrews at a late meeting of the Suffolk Congrega-
tional Union. He is reported to have said : —“ Some of the


dogmas elaborated in the midst of mediaeval superstition are
being quietly supplanted by brighter and more inspiring propo-
sitions concerning human life and destiny.” The primary
false dogma —viz., the divine authority of the Bible—which is
antagonistic to the reception of new light, will, in like manner,
sooner or later have to be admitted as untenable; the first
step towards which has already been taken in the general
renunciation of the verbal inspiration of the Bible. Now that
the grand fact that truth is an essential requisite of religion is
being realized, it may truly be said that the time is past for
the clergy to try to darken light by mere quibbling or
assumption. Owing to the inevitable law of progression, the
day is approaching, if it has not already arrived, when, in the
pulpit, the preacher’s conscience will upbraid him for the
falsities uttered by him, and even pious credulity will be
ashamed of its blind superstition, and will recognise the great
book of Nature as the only divinely inspired volume ; this
sublime testament, having neither inconsistencies nor faults to
correct, needs no amendment and no revision at the hands of
fallible men. Its rocky pages are ever open to all, and are
constantly revealing new truths to the world. The popular
faiths, being merely credulity founded on ancient superstition,
which will not stand a rational analysis, decry deubt as being
sinful, whereas every doubt is a prayer to God for “ more
light ” from whatever source derivable. These faiths are, in
reality, moral straight-jackets with the word “ Love ” pro-
minently stamped on their outside ; while “Fear” is the lace
with which the oily-tongued priests cramp the intellect of their
too confiding and credulous supporters. Faith, in that which
is irrational, is the clerical term for credulity. All hail to the
eclipse of faith and the advent of truth! should be the
ejaculation of every lover of righteousness.
As the whole of the superstitious superstructure of the
popular faiths rests on the divinity of Jesus, it is well to note
that the incarnation of the Infinite, or the commingling of
human weakness with divine and omnipotent power, is a
monstrous absurdity and an infinite impossibility. Who,
without trampling his reason beneath his feet, perverting his
conscience, and insulting his common sense, can really believe
that God, that almighty omnipresent power by whom myriads
of worlds, revolving with marvellous rapidity and accuracy of
motion, are sustained, and whose existence stretches through-
out eternity, was ever transformed into a human bantling that
hungered, thirsted, and wept, was cooped up in a human body


susceptible of being measured by a foot-rule and weighed on a
set of scales ? A fiction so self-condemnatory and absurd as
this can only be believed in by those whose judgments have
been warped before they were capable of reasoning ; and
such a pagan fiction could only have retained its sway over
educated minds from its having been, in its inception, cun-
ningly interwoven with one of the purest codes of morals that
has ever been presented to the world. Sir Isaac Newton is
credited with having declared that the incarnation of God is
not less absurd than the impanation of God, or God in a piece
of bread ; Evanson maintained that a virgin daughter produc-
ing her father, and a creature giving birth to her Creator, is a
blasphemous impiety ; and Jerome held that those who
confess the Trinity must bid farewell to science. Granting
that the worthy Jesus stood far above the common plane of
humanity, even at the top of the ladder of moral manhood,
those who deify him but rob him of the credit that, as a man,
is due to him for the exemplary life he is reported to have
led ; to assert that he communicated to the world truths, or
inculcated a system of morals previously unknown to man,
argues, as Buckle remarks, either gross ignorance or else
wilful fraud on the part of the asserter. The great charm and
beaut}' of his life, as represented in the gospels, lay in his
trust in a loving Father, and in his endeavour to act in accord-
ance with what he taught.
There is nothing that those who are creed bound hate more
than truths which contradict the dogmas that they believe,
and from the obliquity of the vision of those who have been
brought up in the popular faiths they erroneously consider
Christianity synonymous with religion, whereas the one is a
belief and the other a life. The word Christianity is here
used in its popular sense, viz., as belief in the deityship of
Jesus and faith in his crucifixion as an atonement for the
sins of those who are credulous enough to believe this
heathenish doctrine. Assuming, for sake of argument, that
the Gospel account of his parable of the good Samaritan, in
which the faith of the priest and Levite is counted as naught,
is correct, and that he said “ The flesh profiteth nothing ; the
words that I speak unto you they are spirit and they are
life;” also on love to God and love to man, “ hang all the law
and the prophets,” it is evident that Jesus could not have
consistently taught the very opposite, as the vicarious
sacrifice doctrine clearly is. A writer has truly observed:


“ Christianity has been tried for eighteen centuries, the
religion of Jesus remains to be tried.” It is not by a man’s
faith but by his daily actions that his character or individuality
is formed, and the only benefit that is derivable from any
particular faith or belief is just so far as it leads to right
action. If men’s lives are not benefited by retaining this
irrational faith in the sufferings of another, as was illustrated
in the opening pages hereof, why adulterate true religion
with such a useless and cumbersome appendage, and more
especially so when the various interpretations connected
therewith are the chief causes of the prevailing dissension and
sectarian jealousy throughout Christendom? On the moral
ethics of Christianity, which harmonize with both science and
philosophy, and which so many desire to have taught in our
State schools, all sects are agreed. The real danger is that
if moral lessons are taught as part of the Bible they may give
to its God-dishonouring falsities the semblance of truth in the
minds of the rising generation, as they, unfortunately, have
done in the minds of their progenitors.
To sum up the whole matter, the truth is that a false and
misleading idea has been assiduously indoctrinated into the
minds of the masses by the priesthood of the various sects,
for the purpose of retaining their authority over the credulous
portion of the community, viz., that it is absolutely necessary
in religion to have a Church or Book of special divine
authority by which to regulate individual action ; whereas,
religion is a natural instinct of the human mind, for every
one, from the lowest to the highest, has the rule of right
within him, if he will but listen to the voice of reason, and
attend to, and cultivate the natural instincts of his higher
nature. It should be borne in mind that “ authority bears no
relation to truth,” for it as often attests what is false as it
does that which is true. All assumed authorities differ, and
even no two sects relying on the same authority agree. So
long as men trust to these assumed divine authorities and rest
on the opinions of others, instead of exercising their divine
right of individual judgment and examining for themselves
in religion, as they do in all else, so long will they be mental
slaves to error, and be misled by the opinions of men who, in
ignorant and superstitious times, assumed the position of
Deity, with the evident intention of over-riding the natural
rule of right implanted in the human soul—that light that
lighteth every man that cometh into the world —which


cannot and is not to be found in a Church or Book, for the
tenets of no Church or Book are universally known.
“ When from the lips of truth one mighty breath
Shall, like a whirlwind, scatter in the breeze
The whole dark pile of human mockeries,
Then shall the reign of mind commence on earth
And starting forth, as from a second birth,
Man, in the sunshine of the world’s new spring,
Shall walk resplendent as some holy thing.”
Let us, in conclusion, consider the oft-repeated question :
“If from the Catholic you take away the authority of the
Church, and from the Protestant the infallibility of the Bible,
what substitute therefor have you to offer them ? ” The
answer to this is very simple, viz., a good God, a rational
faith based on facts that are capable of demonstration, and
the higher law of truth and right. P'or a Church, with all
its old heathen superstition and false promises, we offer a
religion of common-sense and truth ; for an angry, jealous,
revengeful, and irrational God, we offer a loving and ever
merciful Father, who needeth not the praise of men or of
angels, for all His works glorify Him, and who requireth no
other sacrifice from His children than that they shall live in
love and fellowship with each other, refraining from evil, and
doing all the good that lies in their power; for a heaven
of gold, and glitter, and ceaseless hallelujahs, we offer a world
of light and love, which is governed by as natural and immu-
table laws as is the one on which we are now, where, with our
reason unfettered, our judgments more clear, we can advance
and continue to work for the regeneration of the human race,
where friends are reunited in love and harmony, and where
there is hope for all ; for a hell of fire and brimstone,
with its devil and imps with their toasting forks continually
goading their unhappy victims, and all its other attendant
horrors, we offer a world of retributive justice, tempered with
mercy, where remorse of conscience is the only tormentor,
and a deathless memory the only recording angel, and where
even the greatest sinner can, in time, cover over his evil deeds
by helping others to progress; for a God of anger, who is
to be feared, we offer a God of perfect love (which casteth
out all fear), who delights in the happiness of all His children
both here and hereafter ; for a superstitious religion of forms,
ceremonies, and spiritual ignorance, we offer a religion that is
in accord with science and in consonance with the advancing
intelligence of the age—a religion which presents a higher,


nobler, and more rational conception of God and of His
works—a religion which demonstrates His infinite love and
boundless mercy, not to the few, but to every human soul,
irrespective of their faith or belief—a religion which teaches
that there is no escape from the just consequences of wrong-
doings, yet holds out eternal hope for all—a religion which
points out that the possession of knowledge, like that of
wealth, carries corresponding responsibilities with it a
religion in which holy aspirations and good deeds take the
place of psalm singing, lip-service, superstitious rites, foolish
observances, absurd ceremonies, and senseless creeds a
religion in which all mysteries are open to inspection,
requiring neither priest nor parson to explain them away by
clerical sophistry—a religion the chief enemy of which is
ignorance of its facts—a religion the gospel of which is being
revealed daily to those who, with earnestness of purpose and
singleness of heart, seek for true wisdom—a religion which
inspires, purifies, and exalts man to a knowledge of the high
destiny that, in the countless ages of eternity through the
inevitable law of progress, awaits every human soul—a religion
which, by pure and unselfish actions and great and noble
aspirations, will in time bind all the race in spiritual thought
and harmony—a religion which, in the hour of trial and
affliction, supplies real comfort and consolation to the be-
reaved—a religion which truly robs death of its sting and
the grave of its victory, which will, ere long, do away with
crime, cruelty, war, and bloodshed, and which is destined
eventually to unite the whole human race in the bonds of
brotherly love, and to usher in the long-looked-for age of
universal peace on earth. Such is the religion without super-
stition which we submit for the reader’s consideration, and
which, from experience, we, with confidence, can recommend
to all who love truth and who desire “ more light.”
“A faith whose parable is plain,
And needs no priest to tell ;
Its law— ‘ Be kind, be pure, be just; ’
Its promise— ‘ Thence be well.’”




,
■
■ ■ • •? ■: ■ V ,
■
-
, ,■ - ' ■ •' . -
■ -


