

OR,
Vision of St. John in the Isle of Pathos :
AN ORATORIO.
THE WORDS SELECTED FROM HOLY SCRIPTURE,
THE MUSIC COMPOSED BY
REV. G. W. TORRANCE, MUS. DOC.
TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE,
TUESDAY EVENING, 27TH JUNE, 1882.
PRICE— THREEPENCE.


PRINCIPALS:
Mrs. Palmer, Soprano.
Mr. Armes Beaumont, Tenor.
Miss Christian, Contralto.
Mr. Silvanus Angus, Bass,
Organist - - - Mr. David Lee.
Leader - - ? Mr. Edward King
BAND AND CHORUS,
Comprising Members of the several Choirs and Musical
Societies of Melbourne.
CONDUCTOR I
Rev. G. W. Torrance, Mus. Doc.
hon. sec.:
J. Lake, B.A.
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
The following work does not aspire to paint in music the whole, el-
even the chief part, of St. John’s wondrous vision ; the necessary
limits of a musical performance would alone forbid the attempt. A few
only from among the more impressive and dramatic scenes of the
Apocalypse are here represented ; and if disappointment be felt at the
choice made from such abundant material, it must be remembered that
the vast comprehensiveness of the subject, and its varied beauties, only
increased the difficulty of selection.
The Composer, however, has endeavoured—so far as the limits of his
task would permit—to embrace the main scope of the Revelation, from
the opening words of promise and warning to the closing invitation and
response. And if the prominence given to some of “ the words of
this Prophecy,” by their emphatic reiteration in music, tend in any
degree to awaken religious feeling, or to develop a truer appreciation of
the Divine Art, this contribution to the Sacred Music of our day and
colony will not have been offered in vain.
G. W. T.


THE REVELATION;
Vision of St, John in the Isle of Patmos:
AN ORATORIO.
PART I.
CHORAL-RECITATIVE.
Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of
this prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein : for the time is at hand.
SYMPHONY.
RECIT.—TENOR, and CHORUS.
I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and heard behind
me a great voice, as of a trumpet, saying—
I am Alpha and Omega,
The First and the Last.
And I turned to see the voice that spake with me . . .
and when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead. And He
laid His right hand upon me, saying unto me —
QUARTET, with CHORUS.
Fear not; lam the First and the Last: I am He that
liveth and was dead ; and behold I am alive for evermore,
Amen ; and have the keys of hell, and of death.


CHORUS.
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith
unto the Churches : To him that overcometh will I give to
eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the
paradise of God.
RECIT. and AIR—BASS.
And behold a throne was set in heaven, and One sat on
the throne
And out of the throne
proceeded lightnings, and thunderings, and voices. . . .
And before the throne was a sea of glass like unto crystal;
and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne,
were four beasts
QUARTET, with SEMI-CHORUS.
And they rest not day and night, saying—Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to
come.
FULL-CHORUS.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour,
and power: for Thou hast created all things, and for Thy
pleasure they are, and were created.
RECIT.—TENOR.
And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice—
Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals
thereof?
DUET—SOPRANI.
And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the
earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon.
RECIT. and AIR—TENOR, with CHORUS.
And they sung a new song, saying—
Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof: For Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to
God by Thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation: And hast made us unto our God
kings and priests; and we shall reign on the earth.


SOLI and CHORUS.
( The opening of the Sixth Seal.)
And lo ! there was a great earthquake; and the sun
became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became
as blood; and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth
. . . And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is
rolled together; and every mountain and island were
moved out of their places. And the kings of the earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and
every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks
of the mountains; and said to the mountains and rocks
Fall on us, and hide us from the face of
Him that sitteth on the throne; and from the
wrath of the Lamb : For the great day of
His wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand ?
AIR—TENOR.
After this I beheld, and 10, a great multitude which no
man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues, stood before the throne and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying—
QUARTET, with CHORUS.
Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb. . .
Amen : Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks-
giving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God
for ever and ever. Amen.
AN INTERVAL OF TEN MINUTES.


PART 11.
INTRODUCTION.
RECIT. —CONTRALTO.
What are these which are arrayed in white robes ? and
whence came they ?
SEMI-CHORUS.
These are they which came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb.
AIR—CONTRALTO.
They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more;
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For the
Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them,
and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters ; and
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
RECIT. and CHORUS.
And the four-and-twenty elders, which sat before God
. . . fell upon their faces and worshipped God, saying—
We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty,
which art, and wast, and art to come ; because Thou hast
taken to Thee thy great power, and hast reigned.
RECIT.—TENOR.
And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of a great thunder; and I heard
the voice of harpers, harping with their harps.
AIR—SOPRANO.
And they sung as it were a new song before the throne,
and before the four beasts and the elders : And no man
could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four
thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.


QUINTET.
Here is the patience of the saints ; here are they that
keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
RECIT. and QUARTET, with CHORUS.
And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me,
Write —
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth : Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from
their labours : and their works do follow them.
RECIT—TENOR, and CHORUS.
And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire :
and them that had gotten the victory . . . stand on
the sea of glass, having the harps of God. And they sing
the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb—
Great and marvellous are Thy works, Lord God
Almighty : just and true are Thy ways, thou King of Saints.
Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and glorify Thy Name?
For Thou art holy : for all nations shall come and worship
before Thee ; for Thy judgments are made manifest.
CHORUS.
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen. . . . For her
sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered
her iniquities. . . . Alas, alas, that great city Babylon,
that mighty city ! For in one hour is thy judgment come.
RECIT—TENOR, and CHORUS.
And after these things I heard a great voice of much
people in heaven, saying—
Alleluia, salvation, and glory,
and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God. . . .
Praise our God, all ye His servants, and ye that fear Him,
both small and great.
* * * * * *


RECIT.—TENOR
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first
heaven and the first earth were passed away.
DUET—CONTRALTO and BARITONE.
(Violoncello Obligato.)
Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will
dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and God
Himself shall be with them, and be their God.
CHORALE.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying;
neither shall there be any more pain : for the former things
are passed away.
CHORAL-RECIT. and SOLO.
lam Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. . . .
I am the root and offspring of David, the bright and
morning star.
QUARTET, with CHORUS,
And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him
that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come ;
and whosoever will, let him take the water of Life freely.
He which testified! these things saith, Surely I
come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus. Amen.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders Lane, Melbourne,
