

THE
PUBLIC SURVEYS
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.


Abrahams, Sculpt Degotaras Photo-lick
Col.Sir Thomas Livingston Mitchell. Kt.D.C.L.
&c.&c.&c.
Surveyor General of New South Wales.


THE
PUBLIC SURVEYS
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
ds&nrs:
PRINTED BY J. DEGOTARDI, ROBIN HOOD LANE.
1886.


CONTENTS.
PXBB.
Early Days .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
A Hard Worker .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
British Surveys .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
Royal Instructions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
An Australian Geodetic Survey .. .. .. .. . 17
‘ Fallacies of the Faculty ’ .. .. .. .. .. .. 21
Time Meridians .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Geographical Nomenclature .. .. .. .. .. 44
‘ Proper ’ Surveys .. .. .. ■ . ■. .. .. 50
Adequate Surveys .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Progress of Location .. .. .. .. .. .. 81
The Survey Department .. .. .. .. .. .. 87
Department of Crown Lands .. .. .. .. .. 109
Lands Titles Office .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11l
Appendix .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 117


“It often happens that principles of science are long known, and even familiar,
before society has confidence to apply them. But I may say for my Surreys of this
Colony, that understanding the beauty, if not usefulness, of superior methods of
precision, I hare erer leaned to the side of practical utility.”
SIR THOMAS MITCHELL.


ANYONE taking an interest in the Survey-
Department of New South Wales, and having
time for the search, will find occasional no-
tices of the first Surveyor-General, Augustus Alt,
Esq., and of his deputy, Mr. Charles Grimes,
in the series of remarkable works that were pub-
lished by the chief officers of the settlement within
a few years after its establishment at Sydney in
1788. At that epoch there existed the greatest
solicitude to learn anything of the new country
discovered by Captain Cook, and of the progress
made in Lord Bathurst’s great experiment. But
public curiosity soon abated, and we now look back
through the almost Cimmerian darkness that ob-
scures the history of the surveys of this Colony for
the next quarter of a century, and upon which more
light may be thrown some day, by careful literary
reference to official records, not omitting the very
original pages of the Sydney Gazette. This is the’
period linked with humorous, though not unkindly
traditions of ‘ Jemmy ’ Meehan, the trusty aid of
more than one Governor; a general impression
whimsically suggesting that he was a characteristic
.5


specimen of the Irish soogmvn or straw-rope sur-
veyor, who has often no mean knowledge and skill
in his profession, and is better known to some as
the Be this as it may, Mr. James
Meehan seems always to have had enough on his
hands to prevent his troubling himself with new-
fangled ideas oftrigonometrical survey. A thought of
the narrow limits of the settlement and a glance at
the—as it then seemed—hopeless barrier of the
Blue Mountains, would have driven such a notion
out of his head, had it ever found entrance. The
urgent need for farms even impressed upon him,
like other conquerors, the advantage, sometimes,
of a rapid march; without lingering to apply the
‘ careful, chain,’ or ‘ seize his territory ’ by formal
advances. The necessities of the times demanded
a man of action, even of the rudest, and there is
no question that the Colony is all the better at
the present day, notwithstanding visions that
have been raised of interminable litigation.
• Next succeed in popular recollection the names
of Mr. Oxley and of his deputy, Mr. Evans, well
known for their exploratory expeditions in 1817-18,
which were fitted out for the purpose of ascertain-
ing the course of the River Lachlan (or Kalara of


the natives) and generally to prosecute the exami-
nation of the western interior of New South Wales.
The former officer, if not the latter also, was in
the Royal Navy, as were or had been, other mem-
bers of the infant department now at length taking
growth; and this fact is witnessed in the recurrence
of a few technical expressions that show the early
staff to have been more conversant with maritime
than with land surveying.
It was as successor to Mb. Evans that Sib,
Thomas (then Major) Mitchell came to the Colony
in 1827, with a commission to become the future
Surveyor-General. The Major at that time was
thirty-five years of age, and had already won a
high reputation for varied service. Those who
have not had the privilege of seeing the magni-
ficent originals in the Quarter Master General’s
Department at home, may form some idea from the
‘Atlas of Plans and Battles,’ that he well merited
his title of the ‘Duke’s famous draughtsman,’ and
the eulogium pronounced in the House of Com-
mons by Mr. Goulburn, Chancellor of the Exche-
quer, ‘ that his military plans would ever remain
a monument of the glory of England.’— Mr. Oxley
being in delicate health and desirous of speedily


initiating his new deputy, Major Mitchell took
almost the entire conduct of the Survey Depart-
ment, his first care being to arrange and cata-
logue the plans, which by that time had become
numerous. The next step was to give geographi-
cal expression to these detached surveys by con-
necting and compiling them into a general map
of the Colony, a task absolutely necessary in ful-
filment of 4 Royal Instruction ’ to divide the terri-
tory into counties by natural features. With
such assistance as he could obtain, the Major in a
short time accomplished a trigonometrical survey
quite sufficient for this purpose and for many
others,* the result being the publication in
1835 of his 4 Map of the Nineteen Counties ’ in
three sheets and engraved in the Colony on ship’s
copper by the late Mr. Carmichael. This work
must ever be admired ffir its intrinsic merits and
for the circumstances under which it was pro-
duced. In its formation no less than 900 plans
were collated by the Major, and 4 rendered down ’;
the available material, after this process, being
reduced to the scale of the map with almost
microscopic fidelity. Major Mitchell also added
• See Appendix o*


new matter, marking points, and expressing fea-
tures not to be found in the detail surveys. In
the latter respect, the ‘ Map of the Nineteen
Counties’ is stated, in a notice of it in the journal
of the Royal Geographical Society for 18S8, to re-
present ‘ better than any other they had seen, the
great physical features that mark the face of the
country ’; though it is a question to this day,
whether as an orographical map, of the same
extent and by one hand, portions of it have ever
been excelled, save by the Major’s own plan and
model of part of the Pyrenees. The scale of
about 8 inch to a degree, though small, is as large
as that thought worthy for the general map of some
important countries, and could not have been con-
veniently exceeded in a general map of so great a
territory as that of New South Wales, had the
trigonometrical observations been extended as was
. originally proposed.
In respect to its merits the most favorable testi-
mony has been given from time to time by com-
petent judges in presence of very jealous scruti-
neers and in evidence before the Commissioners
of inquiry in 1855, though notice was taken of
one point where it differed from other compila


tions, the error was not spoken of as accumulative
or seriously detractive from its general correct-
ness.
But to appreciate the character of the Map of
the Nineteen Counties fully, we must know the
state of things that existed in the British Isles up
to a recent period in their history. The Royal
Geographical Society tells us, in its volume for
1837, that ‘the collation of routes, corrected here
and there by observations for latitude and longi-
tude, such, anterior to the commencement of the
national map of England, known by the name of
the Ordnance Map, begun in 1796, was the only
method in use. There were errors in the position
of some important points as the Lizard, to the
amount of seven miles, and many of the best county
maps exhibiting blunders of three miles in a di-
stance of twenty ! ’
The following alfords a yet better contrast.
The scale of the Royal Instructions Map, as al-
ready stated, is about 8 inches to a degree, and
the area of the nineteen counties alone, about
38,000 square miles, or nearly the size of Scot-
land. It was two years after the publication of


this map in a little known Colony with an ill re-
putation somewhat kept down by a distance of
sixteen thousand miles from the parent state,
that we find, in 1837, the ‘Geographical Journal’
thus lamenting the want of progress in the geogra-
phy of the British Isles :— ‘ No national map of
Scotland exists, but the points of the great trian-
gulation are established,* a small general map
on the scale of 8 inches to a degree, by Mr. John
Arrowsmith, almost finished, combines all that is
accurately known of Scotland.’ He must be very
uninformed indeed of the merits of a distinguished
geographer, who would for a moment doubt the
accuracy of Mr. John Arrowsmith, but after what
has been said of the maps of England, the correct-
ness of this map of Scotland may be questioned.
Observations on the south western coast by Mr.
Galbraith discovered remarkable errors in po-
sition of most important points on the best charts.
Some tracts, as the Mull of Cantire, were shewn
to be out many miles in longitude on a most dan-
gerous part of the coast, as appears, it is believed,
in an outline diagram given in a prospectus of a
* A mistake. Orders only had been issued for the continuation of the
primary triangulation commenced in former years.


new Atlas, published about the period by the
Messrs. Black of Edinburgh. The area too was
underrated. This was stated so late as 1853, in
the Literary and Scientific Register to be 30,059
square miles, whereas the Ordnance Survey is said
to make it, in round numbers, to be 43,000 square
miles to Ireland’s 42,000.
The Nineteen Counties Map was completed in
ten years after the date it was first called for and
about seven after Major Mitchell’s arrival in the
Colony; but the benefit of the trigonometrical sur-
veys necessary for it was felt soon after they were
undertaken. The laying out of the Great Sou-
thern Road was commenced in 1828, a time when
rewards were still offered for the most accessible
ways into the Interior. The construction of that
by the Yictoria Pass and others followed and they
were effected without the aid of the nicely con-
toured plans, that it would have been the height
of folly for Major Mitchell to have expected in his
time or in ours, though in a moderately undula-
ting country like England where every rod of
ground has its price, they can scarcely be too highly
estimated. Moreover, experience in the discharge
of duty showed that results did, always de


pend on a clear perception of the scientific neces-
sities. Thus in road-making strange disturbing
elements were encountered; sometimes in push-
ing a road in the only way it was plain it should
go, a sudden side wind would blow it into an-
other direction altogether; causing some curious
diversions though not new as a dynamical pheno-
menon ; the same having been observed in other
countries besides N. S. Wales.
Sir Thomas Mitchell in reviewing his own la-
bors *at this period, states :— ‘ The objects for
which an accurate Map of New South Wales was
chiefly required in 1827 were various and impor-
tant. The locations of settlers were scattered across
a very extensive territory, intersected by mountain
ranges, rivers, and rocky ravines imperfectly
known, but of which some knowledge was not more
necessary to enable the immigrant to make a selec-
tion of his grant, than for the government to
know the position thereof after it had been selec-
ted. For this purpose surveys, chiefly of rivers,
had for some time been carried on ; but although
useful for the one purpose they were unconnected
• Evidence on Crown Lands, Sept., 1854.


with any general plan for the completion of a sur-
vey of the Colony, and consequently insufficient
to determine the contents of the large tract of
land remaining unlocated; still less were they
sufficient to determine the extent of counties,
hundreds and parishes, into which the whole Co-
lony was required to be divided, and of which
divisions such natural lines were to form the boun-
daries.’
‘ The arrangement of great roads across a coun-
try of such extent, and where the means at the
disposal of Government for their formation were
very considerable, was also an object of primary
importance which could not be accomplished with
certainty as to the comparitive merits of different
lines and obstacles to be surmounted without a
general survey thereof! ’
‘ln order to carry out systematically the sur-
veys of such natural features as were required for
these and similar purposes, or in other words to
form a map of the country, it was necessary to de-
termine accurately the true relative position of
the most conspicuous heights or objects and their
distance from each other. This is in fact all the


trigonometrical survey I have attempted here, and
although it is not to be compared with the cele-
brated scientific operations of the same description,
carried on under more favorable circumstances, it
is nevertheless sufficiently correct for all the pur-
poses for which the (general) survey of this coun-
try is required.’ * Indeed, Sir Thomas Mitchell
attributed all the advance of this Colony since
1827, and more especially its most rapid advance
in public works and complete measurement of
farms, which characterises its history between
1827 and 1887, to the general survey commanded
by the Royal Instructions of 1825.
Some notice must now be taken of the authority
vested in the Surveyor-General at the period we are
considering. Royal Instructions had been issued
in 1825 to Governor Darling, directing the ap-
pointment of three discreet and skilful persons to
be Commissioners for the Survey and Valuation of
tho Waste and Ungranted Lands of the Colony,
and for their Division into Counties. The Chief
Commissioner was to be the Surveyor-General for
the time being, and, though long before the days of
* See Appendix b, c.


* Free Selection,’ in the modern acceptation of the
phrase, it is not unlikely that a mature experience
of its kind had dictated the insertion of the clause
for adjustment of differences of opinion : —‘ You
shall suspend the ultimate decision upon any such
question until you shall have transmitted to Us,
through one of Our principal Secretaries of State, a
full statement and explanation of the question in
discussion, and until you shall have received Our
instructions for your guidance therein.’ This
would seem to have been a prudent provision, that
while the power of the Surveyor-General was es-
tablished as a desirable counterpoise, it should
never be allowed the semblance of a factious oppo-
sition.
Having to determine the Western boundaries of
the County of Argyle, Major Mitchell made his
first excursion to ‘the interior’ in May 1828; and
calling upon Mr. Oxley at his residence near Ber-
rima, that gentleman, only a few days before his
death, impressed upon his deputy the necessity of
always looking to the Royal Instructions as his
main support in the performance of what might
prove disagreeable duties. Perhaps in conversing
on the affairs of his department, Mr. Oxley fore


saw the trouble that was impending, and that the
Major, whose natural character and military habits
little disposed him to yield, might be too unbend-
ing in his capacity of Chief Commissioner.
Be this as it may, soon after, in 1830, Major
Mitchell was informed by the Colonial Secretary
that the office of Commissioners had ceased ; and
in 1833 a despatch was received from the Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies, the Honorable Mr.
Stanley (now Lord Derby) declaring ‘ The King's
surprise and disappointment' at the little apparent
progress made in the Survey of the Colony, and
in which the immediate location of the lands has
been interfered with by the time devoted to a tri-
gonometrical survey which it was evident was in-
ferior in point of urgency to it.
Such a charge, so expressed, deeply stung Major
Mitchell who promptly and successfully met it
by sending home his three sheet map dedicated
to Mr. Stanley, which arrived during the Secretary-
ship of Lord Glenelg who wrote a despatch highly
approving of the Survey. But a wounded feel-
ing remained to be healed (if it ever were com-
pletely so) and a spirited representation at a later
period that ‘ the service of the Government should


not be a state of punishments without rewards,’
probably quickened a bestowal of the well-earned
distinction of knighthood.
Thus after many difficulties (the greatest that,
as Stephenson said, of £ engineering men,’) Sir
Thomas Mitchell honorably attained another
stage in his career and commenced a new era in
the Survey Department by establishing a most
useful map, founded neither on such route as those
already noticed nor on the geodesic one implied by
such vague terms as £ proper survey,’ or £ trigono-
metrical survey as usually so understood,’ and on
which it is but fair to say Mr. Stanley had been
led to think his time had been misspent. It is
true that in its compilation he had determined
most of his points by construction, and fixed many
of his lines by two sides and the included angle as
convenience dictated. But such cases fall within
rules of which there is no monopoly, and having
taken every independent means of checking his
work we may be disposed to concur with an emi-
nent writer, who sums up an encomium on the
official service of Major Mitchell in these few but
emphatic words:— ‘ He has completed the first
Trigonometrical Survey made of a British Colony.’


It is not the object here to give a list of Sir
Thomas Mitchell’s services apart from the subject
of our title, * yet the topic of route surveys re-
quires some notice of his explorations in the in-
terior. More than one opulent man in the Colony
of Victoria calls to grateful recollection the at-
tractive pages that first lured him to the shores
of ‘ Australia Felix ’ ; and many others will yet
live to dwell more at leisure on the picturesque
and faithful descriptions that the pencil of the
author so beautifully illustrated in his ‘ Tropical
Australia,’ published in 1848, and in which he first
made known some of the choicest parts of the now
flourishing Colony of Queensland.
Over this extreme range of about 17 degrees
and centreing on Fort Bourke, were laid down
chained routes, connected with the territorial sur-
vey and with the prominent features that were
noted in the several journeys. No available
means were neglected to make their delineation
premanently useful; and to this day, explorers
have little difficulty in finding the camps of ‘ the
* Even a short notice of those of old Officers of the Department had to
be abandoned.


Major,’ which are still welcome starting points, or
as the French perhaps better phrase it, of points
de repere. These facts testify to progresses more
Roman in their character than indicated by Camp
numerals that sometimes only figure upon paper.
In the expedition of 1845—46, eleven hundred
and fifty miles were measured, and on recrossing
his former path, on his return, Sir Thomas Mit-
chell was enabled to verify, by the situation of
Mount Riddell, his previous surveys in 1831,
which gave to that hill the same latitude, and but
a small difference in longitude.
To those who, acknowledging the great results
accomplished, may have a glimmering recollection
that it was said *he bore down difficulties by the
strength of his equipment,’ it is enough to notice,
that the total cost of this last great expedition,
extending over a period of more than twelve
months, did not exceed fifteen hundred pounds.


If there be one entitled to the name, the only
geodesic survey yet commenced in the Southern
Hemisphere is thought to have been pursued, if
not initiated, by Sir William Denison during his
government of Tasmania, and who, from his at-
tainments and professional knowledge as Captain
of Engineers, was well qualified for such a work.
As the sister Colonies of Australia are not al-
ways well informed of the proceedings of each
other, the first evidence of the progress of Sir
William that attracted notice here, was an at-
tempt, he is said to have made, to east his r&secm
or net, across Bass’s Straits.
Whether the advances for concurrence in such
an operation were opened with the courteous sa-
lutes that, with or without lively flourishes, he-
ralded the peaceful parade of English and French
triangulators on similar occasions, is not known ;
but whatever they were they failed in their object,
p


having excited, it is said, feelings, that were far
from condusive to philosophic amenity.
In such a case, it is not difficult to guess the
impressions left on each side; —on the one a con-
firmed opinion of the utter insufficiency of mere
‘ recmnaissance ’ surveys ; —on the other, an ire-
ful imagination depicting to itself a single barren
triangle—a sort of monumental trivet—reposing
in the midst of a small island, of which large por-
tions, though cleared of the aborigines, were un-
peopled and unsurveyed. *
But in seriously presenting such a picture, in-
justice would he done to eminent men. We are
hound therefore to believe, that on his promotion
to the Government of New South Wales, Sir
William Denison brought with him no recollec-
tions of a fabulous nature, and that it was only a
strong sense of duty, supporting active business
habits, that instituted an early inquiry into the
conduct of the several public offices. The love of
science that influenced him, like a predecessor, Sir
George Gipps, naturally caused him to take spe-
• See Appendix d.


cial interest in Sir Thomas Mitchell’s department,
even though close inspection might seem to con-
firm any unfavorable prepossessions that had
possibly flowed through various channels.
It is to be remarked that Sir William Denison
is reputed to have carefully studied every topic of
importance connected with the sphere of his future
government, and that he arrived in the Colony no
novice. - It was therefore not a little to the secret
edification of a few behind the scenes, when they
beheld the new state of things in the Survey
Office, and that where Mr. Stanley had formerly
found Sir Thomas too trigonometrical, the new in-
quiry tended to doubt that he had been trigonome-
trical at all.
The episode of ‘ the King’s surprise and dis-
appointment ’ had evidently been overlooked until
too late. The inconvenience of renewing such a
contest at the Colonial Office becoming plainly ap-
parent, a strong desire must have arisen to have
the whole question shelved.
It virtually was so by the unexpected death of
Sir Thomas Mitchell towards the end of the year,


after a somewhat toilsome tour of inspection, on
horseback, to Braidwood and the River Clyde.
Like a good knight he died in harness, though he
might long have retired with honor from the
throng.
The event caused a profound and widely spread
feeling of regret, hut tempered with a reflection of
the enduring works that were left. It is enough
in this life for each to do his part; if it be only to
add something to the general welfare. Whatever
may have been their scientific differences, no one
evinced a truer sense on the occasion than Sir
William Denison, who was foremost in shewing
respect to the memory of the departed.


‘ Mathematical Science,’ says the marvellous
Prince of Mirandola, ‘ does not bestow wisdom’;
and Sir William Hamilton, in his ‘Discourses on
Philosophy,’ observes, that when raised to an ob-
ject of exclusive study, it even affords the
greatest occasions of error.
With the utmost honesty of purpose, a mathe-
matician may go wrong in the application of his
favorite science, either in demanding a greater
nicety than is consistent with a clear perception of
the object in view, in relation to others, or in a
vicious management of fractions.
Even in ordinary operations such as those of
land-surveying, a want of common sense is some-
times perceptible. The ‘ Literary and Scientific
Register ’ for 1853 well remarks, ‘where it is not
very usual to measure a distance nearer than with-
in its thousandth part, or an angle from three to
one minute, it is quite a useless labor to aim at
greater accuracy in a numerical result. Why, for


example, should the length of a line be computed
to the fourth or fifth place of decimals, when it
must depend upon another line, whose accuracy
cannot be ensured beyond the unit’s place ? Or
why compute an angle to seconds, when the in-
strument employed does not insure the angle in
the data beyond the nearest minute ? These simply
furnish so many proofs how easy it is for scien-
tific men in their investigations to miss the
point of real utility.’
In a geodesic survey, few know the real import
of what they ask in proposing to measure-—say, a
base of five miles * to the fraction of an inch; or
of the difficulties attendant on a repetition of the
measurement after a lapse of time—at the same
place, with the same instrument, and even same
operators ; —not to mention the still greater ones
of measuring an equal base at a distant part of the
earth, within the same limit of error under altered
conditions.
* About tbe length of the Hounslow base. That at Lough Milligan was
extended by angular means two miles longer, with an apparent , pos-
sible error, on re-measurement not exceeding two inches, or 1:221,760.
One in a quarter of a million, however, is no very great result upon
paper while we find that * one in a thousand 1 is an excellent one on
the ground.


But we will suppose a knowledge of these diffi-
culties, if not the power to cope with them. It
must be further admitted that it is not necessary
to express a base line of five miles by the number
316,800 (inches) to measure an arc, say of ten de-
grees, represented by the number 36,000 (seconds)
and which can scarcely be determined to unity.
For example, the expression
1000 . angular units
1000 0, linear „
shews that units in the angular arc representing
tens in the linear one, there is no obvious necessity
for adding decimals to the latter ?
We may, in further illustration, suppose the arc
of the meridian of 600 miles to be measured by an
equilateral triangulation from a base of 6 miles.


Here it is manifest that the base will be re-
peated a hundred times in the arc, and the possible
error of deficiency or excess will amount, if re-
ported truly by the triangulation, to x x 100.
Why then strive to make it appear that x does
not exceed 1 inch or 100 inches in the whole,
when the angular arc to be measured cannot be
verified astronomically to say 100 or 200 feet ?
Common sense tells us that the base, measured to
1 foot, would have headed the proper programme,
unless, regardless of expense, it were determined
to eliminate all possible errors.
But we will presume our base to have been
measured to the fraction of an inch, expressed by
one or more figures in the decimal:—it by no
means follows that our angular means will give
corresponding results in the sides of the triangles
forming the network of the arc.
It is in vain also to expect any reliable result
from the means of any number of observations, un-
less the telescopic power of the instrument em-
ployed be at least equal to its angular one. Thus,
in finding the vertex —by intersection of an equi-
lateral triangle founded on a base of five miles.


measured to tli<4 £ fraction af an inch/ the optical
means must enable us distinctly to peruse the di-
visions of an inch on a foot-rule, at the distance
of the Lighthouse from Sydney. In ordinary sur-
veying, practical men are content to read the com-
paratively coarse divisions of a foot on a levelling
staff, at ten chains or a fortieth of the distance.
It may, however, be instructive to consider how
we are to find the angular equivalent of the frac-
tion of an inch at five miles, when we have to seek
it on a circle of one foot radius (not to say one of
three and a half inches), including the dimensions
and power of the telescope that such an intsru-
ment should hear.
As no one, with his eyes open, can long persist
in trying to make others believe, that he knows or
does more than he can, without incurring in some
quarter or other an imputation of charlatanism, so
the interests of science can afford a frank admis-
sion, that the fair exhaustion of every resource of
ingenuity in the processes we are treating, is for
other objects than the ostensible one, of a sufficient
degree of accuracy for the purposes of life.
Three legitimate ones present themselves: First,
the proof of what has been done—or can be hoped


for—towards perfection in such a .work, though the
benefit may not be immediately apparent; second,
the margin of improvement left in the construction
and management of angular instruments; and
third, the establishment of means for detecting
any changes in the relative positions of points
established, a question of interest to the geodosist
and physical geographer.
In this last respect, we are greatly assisted to
our purpose by a geodesic survey in connection
with the measurement of an arc of the meridian :
for, assuming a territorial network to consist of
equilateral triangles with sides corresponding in
accuracy with a base of five miles measured to
* the fraction of an inch,’ on going over the angles
we might expect to find them equal also:—yet, on
actual observation, we should probably find them
vary among themselves, either simply or in groups,
and afford us much contemplation in determining
instrumental imperfections with errors of observa-
tion, reduction, and calculation, on the one hand,
and irregularities in the form and density of the
earth, on the other; including the unknown allow-
ance to be made for horizontal refraction, which is
only called i extraordinary,’ because it seldom
comes within the range of our present instruments.


In like manner, we might have commenced by
supposing our network equi-angular; experience
proving that except by accident, the sides would
be anything but equi-multiples of five miles to
the fraction of an inch, on actual measurement.
So far, the case may have been put in the simplest
point of view; and its profound study in relation
to the unsymmetrical spheroid we actually live
upon, and triangulate under complicated condi-
tions, is doubtless productive of results that are
a gain to science and, remotely, to humanity. But
it is delusive and impolitic to permit such a work
out of its own province. To offer such a survey is
to offer a stone to a hard working man who only
asks land to grow bread for his children —when
he and his opulent fellow-colonist can be granted
their lands and secured in their boundaries by the
sufficient means that ought to be quite within the
reach of all survey departments.


Again, astronomers, without a shade of the ire
proper to celestial minds, may sometimes be insen-
sibly influenced by the national tinge of the glasses
that they look through. For instance, to say that
continental observers are coming round to the Bri-
tish practice of arriving at as many direct results
as possible,* may be a desirable and gratifying fact.
But to imply, that the beautiful system of repeti-
tion invented by Tobias Maybe, and practically
exemplified by Borda in his reflecting circle, em-
ployed with such effect in the great survey of
France, failed—because it did not act with all
* Mason and Dixon, in the last century, actually measured an arc of
the meridian in Pennsylvania, and though triangulators hardly allow place
to the result obtained, there was a great advance in accuracy over a simi-
lar measurement made in England by Norwood in 1635. Perhaps the
time may come when this despised method may excite sufficient interest to
be employed again in measuring an arc of 15 or 20 degrees in the flat
regions of central Australia, and where if the feat is ever accomplished, of
measuring a great arc in which many nations may join, the individual
hardships will not require the perseverance, patience and fortitude dis-
played by those fanatical pilgrims in India, who have been known to
take two years in devoutly measuring hundreds of miles to their goal, on
the ground, with their naked bodies.


the correctness demanded by theory, is unjust,
upon the mere ground that readings in one un-
broken arc were not found as superior as they
were supposed to be, over the mean of a number of
independent observations. But a ready answer as
to the practical value presents itself in the un-
deniable fact, that by the angular work performed
with reflecting circles of small diameter, which at
this day would be considered coarsely divided, the
arc of the meridian was measured in France, that
is still quoted as a model of its kind; and when
we have frequent mention of the base of verifica-
tion at Melun, and not of that at Romney Marsh,
in the English survey, at a fraction of the distance
from its primary. Space does not admit of re-
ference to more refined modern measurements in
the British surveys, nor does it to those in France,
conducted by General Pelet and his colleagues of
the Dep6t de la Guerre.
But another instance may be given, in conse-
quences arising from these surveys. Whatever
emotions were excited by the French Revolution
of 1789, the learned men of all civilized countries
became fully alive to the great scientific reforms
that were speedily initiated ; while the national


system of weights and measures, established under
the name of the ‘ Systeme metrique ,’ drew great
attention with, no doubt, much individual approba-
tion. Its basis was not disapproved of in England;
hut to have referred our standard in any way to the
metre, would have been to have favored a revolu-
tionary emblem. This was the more obvious, when
an early consequence of the adoption of the new
system was the abolition of all local measures,
which were even more numerous than they were
with us. We therefore elected —to refer our unit
of length, to a certain proportion of the length of
the pendulum vibrating seconds in the latitude of
London; though not disdaining to quote the French
Commissioners, that the standard, if lost, might be
recovered by the same means that were employed
to create it.
But we did not prudently rest here : modem re-
visions having necessitated some corrections in the
data by which the length of the French arc was
determined. It was said, that the miHre could no
longer be exactly defined, and the superiority of
our method was freely implied, whereas the fact
was overlooked or blinked, that these corrections
did not affect the metre in ordinary use, or in the


‘ systeme usuel,’ but simply created for astrono-
mical purposes, a small co-efficient that might be
held constant until further notice.
Meanwhile, not only the bases, but the sides of
triangles dependent upon them, always remain to
be estimated in any linear measure of any nation,
and by known proportions, the metre, if lost,
can be readily recovered. On the other side, we
opened ourselves to a recuperative argument.
Having chosen to pass over a standard, dependent
upon space, to choose one involving a consideration
of time as well, our adepts seem now to feel, that
irregularities in the figure and density of the earth
render our seconds pendulum no longer available
for the parallel of latitude, elsewhere than for the
locality, of London. Perhaps we might have dealt
frankly with ourselves, and concluded that commer-
cially, and operatively, it did not much matter.
But it seems not: we had measured geodetical bases
to the ‘fraction of an inch,’ and our only refuge was
to adopt the recommendation of the Commissioners
appointed to inquire into the national weights and
measures in 1841, who could devise no better
plan, than the recommendation, that a ‘proper’
number of copies of the several standards *be


distributed in convenient depositories throughout
the United Kingdom; a proposition unobjection-
able of its kind, though just as available in the
‘ early days ’ of the long armed King.
It might have been remembered, that if a pen-
dulum beating seconds in London is local, so is
the meridian of Paris ; with this disadvantage, if
it be one, that the length of the seconds pendulum
can be found again, as it was said it could be
before, whereas only a portion of the fourth of the
great circle passing through the poles in the meri-
dian of Paris could even be triangulated. It must
therefore be supposed, that confidence had been lost
by us in any repetition of the pendulum process,
which indeed was very natural, if we felt that two
independent Kater Committees (if we may so term
them) could not produce standards of length which
would separately verify the Lough Milligan base,
to the former possible error of two inches in seven
miles.
♦
Howsoever they may be established, standards
of length in modern times appear to be more than
equal to the work they have to do—and in the
astronomical data arrived at, not much dependence
is to be placed in figures beyond a moderate extent.


The celebrated and indefatigable astronomer
De La Jaults states that he had calculated some
hundreds of eclipses and scarcely ever used any
other than his own logarithmic tables, to five
places of figures, contained in a small pocket
volume.
Great discrepancies exist between the state-
ments of great authorities, unless they are to be
attributed to typographical errors, which will not
be an admissable plea when their importance is
considered.
Taking an ellipticity of ~ Bessel deduces
the equatorial diameter of the Earth to be
41847199-9966 feet* or 7925-606 miles, and
Considering that more than one clever writer has almost overwhelmed
us in trying to explain ‘ What is a Million,* the effects of a steady contem-
plation of the above prodigious number must vary on individual minds-
Many persons, if not indifferent, would be stupified, others would swell
with rising admiration, some would laugh in their sleeves; but they
would be wrong. The fair explanation perhaps is that the figures
(cyphers ?) simply express an arithmetical result, and Mr. Aiet’s close
agreement a similarity of processes. But in the character of a ‘ signi-
ficant ’ result derived from a base of five miles measured to the fraction of
an inch, no dependanoe can be had beyond ihe first five or six figures; all
the rest might be held as naughts.
D


Airy agrees with his result to within 200 feet.
In round numbers the result miles
gives the semi-diameter as 3,962
but Arago makes it 3,989
Difference 27
The last mentioned astronomer * takes the ellipti-
city and, in giving some of the measures, states
that they are obtained mathematically from the
moon’s motion, with much more precision than they
can be determined on the ground.
In whatever way these differences may be
reconciled, enough of uncertainty exists to render
astronomers anxious to institute additional measure-
ments wherever practicable, though, considering
the small portion of the globe that is not covered
with water, there is not much expectation to be
indulged that we shall make any considerable
advance in this kind of re-search. Still we must
always look forward ; and we have been recently
informed by no less an authority than the Astro-
nomer Royal of England, that ‘ It is probable that
* Popular Lectures on Astronomy. Eoutledge, London.


the province of New South Wales, and the continent
of Australia generally, may be the scene of impor-
tant geodetic and hydrographic operations ; either
for the purpose of territorial survey of a high order,
or for the scientific measures of arcs of meridian
and arcs of parallel.’


Much might be written on the absurdity, to say
no more, of assigning astronomically determined
parallels and meridians, for territorial boundaries,
unless for temporary reference.
A notable instance, in Australia, caused the
expedition of 1839—40, ordered by Governor Sir
George Gipps (R. E.), to ascertain the position of
the 141st degree of east longitude, being the boun-
dary line between New South Wales and South
Australia.
This operation was entrusted by his Excellency
to a late Admiralty surveyor, Mr. Tyers, assisted
by Mr. Townsend of the Survey Department, New
South Wales, and was effected as well as could be
done witb slender means.
Mr. Tyers’ line commenced about a mile west of
the mouth of the river Glenelg, and ended at
Chowella, on the river Murray ; the report of the


expedition being appended to a despatch sent home,
and published in ‘Papers respecting New South
Wales,’ ordered to be printed 1841; it also appeared
in the form of a small pamphlet at Sydney.
Since the separation from New South Wales of
the Port Phillip or Southern District, and its erec-
tion into the Colony of Victoria, there has been a
fresh adjustment of the longitude in favor of South
Australia. How, and by what authority, it is
presumed official documents exist to show, as in
the measurement by Mr. Tyers, which, like
Portia’s leaden casket, may yet yield the best
choice that is open in the matter.
Little is to be learnt on this question from
maps, scarcely two agreeing. Some give Mr.
Tyers’ line, others have apparently confounded the
south end of his trial meridian, run and marked for
some distance on the east side of the mouth of the
river Glenelg, with his adopted one, about two
miles distant, on the west side of that river. They
therefore slope to Chowella. One of the latest
published, gives a boundary that looks like Mr.
Tyers’ line run in the true meridian till it strikes
the Murray above Chowella.


Besides these difficulties, other maps leave it
open, whether the 141st meridian of east longitude
is, or is not, the boundary between the two colonies
south of its intersection with the river Glenelg.
If not, that river comes ‘ cranking in ’ upon South
Australian territory, with perhaps no commensurate
advantage. While, in the other case, we have the
mouth of a river belonging to Victoria, emptying
itself into the sea, within the limits of another
Colony,
As a practical problem, had the Astronomer
Royal himself undertaken the task of solving it
chronometrically, he would have been finely set,
with the best assistance and appliances, to have
certified the 141st meridian to 4 seconds of time,
or 1 mile, from the prime meridian of Greenwich.
While, had officers of engineers, and even astro-
nomers, been duly consulted, they might, in absence
of natural boundaries, * have felt it their duty to
counsel the rejection of a time meridian, and urge
* From the confluence of the river Darling with the Murray, though the
country is generally flat, there appears to he a natural line of division
through Lakes Albaoutyd and Hindmarsh to the right bank of the river
Glenelg, and so to the sea. Or, if an arbitrary must have been taken.


the adoption of a local one passing through some
well defined geographical point, or at a stated
distance from it. Had this been done, the 141st
meridian would have been reduced to a convenient
expression (if employed at all) to the chagrin of
none except those who lay out lines and then fall
down and worship them.
In the actual difficulty, the best chronometrical
definitions leave not a line, but a band or warp of
lines, forming hundreds of miles of debateable border
land, to be fought over by rivals, neighbours, who
may be disposed to * cavil at the ninth part of a
hair.’ It may even now be a puzzle for ‘ unin-
structed ’ outsiders to speculate, whether New
South Wales, being interested in the prolongation
of the 141st meridian north of Chowella, may not,
some day, reclaim the imperial line as originally
marked by the Captain-General, and, with her
sisters, come to this high complexion.
regardless of the natural drainage of the country and considerations con-
nected with it, the meridian of Cape Northumberland might have done.
But the true north-western boundary of Victoria seems to follow the course
of the river Murray to the sea, though this is to digress from the immediate
question.


Vict. ' Come, here's the map; shall we divide our right
According to our three-fold order ta’en ?
S. Aust. ‘ See, how this river comes me cranking in.
I’ll have the current in this place damm’d up;
And here shall run, in a new channel,
Fairly and evenly ?
Vict. ‘Yea.
But mark how he bears his course, and runs me.’
S. Aust. ‘ I will not have it altered !
N. S. W. ‘ Speak it in Welsh!
KING HEN. IV., PART IV., ACT 111, SC. I.
In the original determination of the 141st meri-
dian, though it was not his expedition, Sir Thomas
Mitchell had the fairness to admit that the results
of some of his observations combined with measure-
ments made by surveyors of his department favored
Mr. Tyers’ line; which he always refused to reject
until sufficient reasons were brought against it.
Nevertheless it cannot be said that he adopted it;
for, long after, he warned the Government of the
danger of leaving the exterior boundaries of the
Colony in a loose condition.
In his evidence before the Commissioners of
Inquiry, 10th July, 1855, Sir Thomas Mitchell


says : —‘ In obtaining the longitudes that appear
upon my map, as laid down by the methods before
mentioned, I was content to date from the allowed
meridian of Parramatta Observatory, without
entering deeply into the question of the so-called
absolute position of that line with reference to the
meridian of Greenwich. At the time that I under-
took the survey of this country, then including
that, now called Victoria, there was no necessity
for the rigorous determination of longitudes, to
serve as lines of boundary between territories in
this part of the world—a mode of proceeding more
parliamentary than accurate, and which I should
regard as altogether ridiculous, were it not preg-
nant with future mischief. The finest chrono-
meters that ever came to this Colony have given
but doubtful results.’
A late article in the ‘ Riverine Herald,’ coming
under notice, while this little work is going
through the press, shows the, foresight that was
exhibited, if we can suppose that the decision
of the Captain-General was not really final.
Whatever scientific uncertainty attached to the
original measurement of part of the 141st meridian,
the introduction lately of an additional element


into the question appears to have increased the
uncertainty of two or three miles in longitude to
more than ten times the quantity.
Yet, in one sense, the permanent adjustment
seems current enough. From an early period to
the time of Captain Fitzroy, with his twenty or
thirty chronometers,* numerous observations must
have prompted the statement that the longitude,
provisionally adopted, of the Sydney Observatory
is true to 4 seconds of time or 1 mile. Other obser-
vations for longitude have been made at Melbourne;
and from the electric communication between the
two capitals, it may be almost taken for granted
that the Government Astronomers here and (if any)
at Melbourne have long since discharged one of
their first duties in determining the difference of
their meridians.
Moreover, Proeschel’s Map of New South Wales
and Victoria indicates that electric telegraphic
* In 1837, Captain Fitzroy, in an address from the President of the
Royal Geographical Society, was publicly complimented on being the first
circumnavigator who had carried a complete chronometric chain measure-
ment from East to West round the Globe.


communication extends to the mouth of the river
Glenelg. With a trial meridian in connection
with the secondary ones above mentioned, a short
chained measurement should give the 141st degree
of east longitude; and if chronometric meridians so
far from the prime one he distrusted, the determina-
tion could be checked by observations of the moon
and moon culminating stars according to two or
three methods. That of Struve, without saying
it is the best for adoption, was practised with
great success in Russia, results being confidently
given from 2to 4 seconds of time; that is from half
a mile to a mile of longitude. But there is no real
need for all this nicety.' Having found the sought
for meridian, if a joint commission ‘make it so’ then
would commence the duty of surveyors to run the
line to any convenient extent.
There is another solution. It is believed that a
clause in the Constitution Acts of the several
Australian Colonies, gives the power of adjusting
inter-colonial boundaries. Will these Colonies
liberally agree, at this early stage of their existence,
to return to the course that common sense at first
recommended, so soon as a sufficient knowledge of
geographical features enables them to do so ?


Though it is doubtful how far a surveyor may
spare time for the culture of the natural sciences,
attention to the subject of geographical nomen-
clature falls quite within his province, so far as
intelligence and discernment should prevent the
introduction of barbarisms on his plans.
In this Colony we have :
1. Aboriginal or ‘native’ names.
2. Those given by colonists of all classes and
countries.
3 A particular set by coasters and fishermen:—
4. And another by maritime surveyors, who
believe themselves privileged to fill up all
blanks left by Captain Cook.
5. Many by land surveyors, who in the exercise
of their own inventive faculty, or in
their adoption of current names, often in-
crease the confusion.
6. Some by men in authority, who are fond of
calling places after their own names or those
of their friends.


For want of any effective attempt to reduce
these names to sound standards, they become more
and more sophisticated, and render the com-
pilations of correct and instructive 4 Gazetteers ’
a matter of impossibility at present, in the present
point of view. This, however, helps to prove, if it
were requisite, that it is better to return to pro-
priety than to wander further from it, though the
step may have its difficulties. Something may be
expected in time, from the better education of the
people; but then only from a better hope of
adherence to that which belongs as a specialty to
a department of government. Already, members
of the survey department have been instructed to
adopt the native names of localities where elegible,
but in all cases where artificial features have to be
named, there can be no objection, but the contrary,
to the employment of our own familiar appellations.
No one wishes the names of 4 Sydney,’ or 4 Pitt
Street,’ or 4 George Street ’to be altered. But
one might demur to divisions of Australia named
after the Muses, or, in the minor nomenclature of
townships, to endless 4 Milk,’ 4 Bread’ and 4 Butter’
Streets, and similar series of names, which it is to
be hoped, future Corporations will deal mercilessly
with; it would in such cases save public time and


foster local attachment, if the wishes of the neigh-
bourhood were consulted, without countenancing
those capricious changes, that, on returning after
long absence, often render it difficult to recognise
the place of one’s birth. Corporations too need
little encouragement in their favourite pursuit of
numbering and re-numbering streets,
A small volume of scraps might have been
collected of the strange, and even repulsive, medleys
of local names that have been given us in the
course of years past, in the public press of this and
the neighbouring colonies, and in works relating
to them, as evidence of complaints, humourous or
otherwise, that occasionally come to the surface.
There is a considerable fund of information to be
collected on this subject.
The Rev. Dr. Lang (whom nothing seems to
escape in his multifarious labors) draws attention
in one of his letters, to the odd name of ‘Collector,’
a post town on the south-western border of the
County of Argyle. The name is evidently coupled
with queer recollections of the ‘ customs,’ for
some people with a sort of dubious affection call
it ‘ The old Collector ’ ! This place is really the


‘ Colegdar ’ of Major Mitchell and the Coleictar
of Captain P. P. King ; and if some resident would
take the trouble before it is too late, the name
will be found, most probably, descriptive of the
locality, as we generally find in the names given
by primitive races. As Ulladulla is no longer
Holy Dollar, or ‘Bodalla, Boat Alley’ we may live
to see Collector erased from the Post Office Direc-
tory. Having instanced a denaturalized native
name, another of an opposite character is presented
in ‘ Gabo Island,’ well known from the Lighthouse
erected on it. It is off the promontory, at the
S. E. extremity of the Colony, called ‘ Cape Howe’;
and, as is often the case where two languages are
spoken, an aboriginal would be almost sure to give
a * white fellow ’ the name ( belonging to him—
that is, according to his own pronunciation in this
case, e Gahe Ho.’ So Gabo it is, and likely to
remain to the end of the chapter; we even expect,
in course of time, to hear of a Cape Gabo.
One more name may be adduced in favor of a
work that is being performed in old countries,* and,
* In Ireland, ignorance and carelessness in the rendering of Celtic names
greatly increased the prolixity of deeds by the introduction of endless
aliases. The Ordnance Surveys have done much to remedy the evil.


to a certain extent, may be in this, when men take
pleasure in that which is ‘ racy of the soil ’ as
they ought to be acquainted with it.
There lies in Port Jackson an island known to
the early authorities as ‘ Rock Island ’ or the
* Rocky Island,’ perhaps from an overhanging rock
at the south-western corner, as appears in an old
pencil sketch. This island, given as one of the
marks for anchoring in Neutral Harbour, was a con-
venient place of confinement for refractory prisoners
at a period when the confusion incidental to the
formation of a new settlement in the woods, and
the untrusty characters of many of the public
guardians, rendered it difficult to control a large
body of men. So we are not at all surprised to find
in Collins, a notice, of a prisoner having been placed
there for a week on bread and water ; this instance,
or like ones, being probably the origin of a by-name,
never once mentioned by writers of that period,
though since made to rhyme with ‘inch by inch cut,’
in allusion to the process to which the island was
afterwards subjected. It is believed that many
years ago, long before the days of Admiral Fitzroy,
a proposal was made to erect a ‘ Temple of the


Winds ’ on this once picturesque little island,* to
shelter an observer furnished with a barometer and
other apparatus; including signals to be hoisted for
the warning of small craft in the harbour, on the
approach of southerly ‘ bursters,’ or on any porten-
tous indications of a change in the weather. But
previous to the erection of a costly, and, as it seemed
at the time, most important defence, the island
had almost bodily disappeared, and, in its mutilated
condition, was made the subject of a sketch by the
unfortunate, but accomplished W. A. Miles, who
wrote underneath: —
ISLAND : CALLED BT CIVILIZED MAN, PINCH-GUT ;
BUT BT THE UNTUTORED SAVAGE, MATTE-WAN-YE.
Twenty-eight years ago, a paper entitled ‘ Consi-
derations on the Political Geography and Geogra-
phical Nomenclature of Australia,’ byCaptainYetch,
Eoyal Engineers, F.E.S., appeared in the ‘ Geo-
graphical Journal.’ Though it possesses little
interest at this day, the title indicates a branch of
* The islands named ‘ Clarke,’ * Shark,’ and ‘ Garden ’ are becoming
rapidly denuded of their verdure,and when pleasure seekers have reduced
these woody spots to masses of barren rook, we may begin to speak of the
once beautiful harbour of Port Jackson. It is depressing to reflect that
people cannot learn or be made sensible, that there is only one kind of
liberty really worth having— half liberty, the liberty of acting well.
E


inquiry that is now much more followed. Those
who wish to study it, should read ‘ Words and
Places’ by the Rev. Isaac Taylor. On those who
dully look upon mountains as obstructions, and
not ‘ familiar with forgotten years,’ * —or on those
who think that ‘ Brummagem ’ is as good as any
other form of a well-known name, the subject is
ill bestowed. But to others it is different; and
the work mentioned, with kindred ones, may well
form part of the technical library of a survey
office.
The language of Mathematics is by no means
as precise as it might be, in the expression of ideas,
which, though sharp enough in themselves, some-
times become hazy through the medium of the
terms that are employed, especially when the same
ones are used by neighbouring nations in a different
technical sense. This difficulty is met at the very
outset in elementary arithmetic. We ought per-
haps to say cyphers, and zeros or naughts, like
the French (chiffres et ziros); whereas in many
of our treatises we are gravely told, that the art
of cyphering derives its name from the manage-
* Wordsworth.


ment of the cyphers or naughts in conjunction
with the significant figures; a cypher being a
common expression for a man who makes no figure,
a word used by the French and ourselves in other
senses.
The same difficulty encounters us again in the
following case ;
Geometry or earth measuring, is a useful art
that preceded the embodiment of the principles on
which it depends, and to which, in a wider sense,
the term is now restricted. In English, a mea-
surer of land is called a land-surveyor; in French,
arpenteur : yet it France, the arpenteurs employed
on the government surveys, are known by the
more pretentious name of geometres ; a word that
in an English ear sounds like geometrician, one
who cultivates the science of geometry.
At a comparatively modern period, it has been
found convenient to introduce the word geodesy.
Geodesy signifies properly the measurement of
land, that is, the art of land-surveying. The sig-
nification of this word has been extended to opera-
tions intended to make known the respective posi


tions and distances of different points on the surface
of the globe. Thus the operations which serve to
determine the length of terrestial degrees, and
those by which are established the main plot of
geographical maps, are geodesic operations.*
Though there is no need to employ this word
for the minor operations, it is so by some ; for the
Deputy Surveyor-General, Mr. Adams, in his late
report, shows that in the neighbouring Colony of
Victoria, they speak of a trigonometric and geodetic
survey, using the word geodetic in a subordinate
sense, when it is really the more comprehensive of
the two.
It is now generally understood, or ought to be,
that the term geodesic, or geodetic, is strictly
limited to that higher and exhaustive kind of trian-
gulation which is solely undertaken to measure an
arc of meridian or parallel, and is extended no
further in the particular region, than may be desir-
able to obtain data for determining the dimensions
and form of the earth.
• Memorial Topographique et Militaire.


It is true a high authority says, ‘few bases have
ever been measured solely for the determination of
the value of an arc of the meridian, or of a parallel,
but have formed at the same time the foundations
of the survey of a country.’
The same authority (Colonel Feome of the Royal
Engineers), in giving an account of ‘geodesical ope-
rations connected with a trigonometrical survey’
(that is with an ordinary territorial triangulation)
observes, that the measurement of an arc of the
meridian is perhaps the most difficult and the most
important of geodesical operations.
The measurement in France by M. M. Mechain
and Delambre of an arc of the meridian towards
the end of last century, was instituted for the double
object of determining the figure of the earth and
some certain standard that might be for ever
recognised by all nations as the unit of measure-
ment. It was not in the progress of the necessary
triangulation that the idea occurred, of connecting
with it the observations made in the construction
of Cassini’s great national map of France; and it
was not until a later period, that measures taken to
connect the Observatories of London and Paris led


to the commencement of the Ordnance Map of
England, since expanded into the Ordnance Sur-
vey of the British Isles,
Having begun with the ‘ more important’ (scien-
tific) considerations, ■ it was allowable, of course,
to append financially and operatively, the ‘ less (?)
important’ details, producing what is called a
‘ correct,’ or ‘ proper,’ trigonometrical survey.
In our conduct of such a one, the rule ever
enjoined (and a very good rule it is) tells us, always
to proceed from whole to part; though whether
this means, always from the more important to the
less so, remains to be examined.
It is allowed that a geodesic survey, in its severe
guise of a ‘ correct trigonometrical survey ’ is the
most complete that can be made, if it be suffi-
ciently comprehensive and accurate in detail.
Being worthy of the reputation of a great nation,
much interest would be displayed by all engaged
until the primary, or perhaps the secondary, trian-
gulation were completed, when the astronomers
and their scientific Mends would probably make


their bow, that is-—take their leave, as would the
officers of engineers of any standing, before the
minor triangulation, not to say ‘interior filling in,’
or insertion of details, which in the south of Eng-
land was mostly effected with the Eater’s or pris-
matic compass, a convenient little instrument,
which we are assured, however, should never be
trusted in any more important part of the work.
From this point of view, we can endeavour to
imagine the pride felt by The Corps in asserting,
that the distance between a cottage at the Land’s
End in England, and one at John O’Groats’ in
Scotland, could probably be determined by their
work to within a few yards.
Yet, looking with the eyes of a proprietor at the
Land’s End, this is pre-cise-ly the result that least
concerns him, though the difference of a few feet
or even inches between himself and a neighbour,
might be the cause of anxiety to them both. But
secured in his boundaries by a good local plan, and
setting out on a tour to John O’Groats, it would
be a matter of profound indifference to him, whe-
ther, in a distance of a few hundred miles, he was a
mile more or less from the end of his journey.


Even in his own county of Cornwall, the seven
miles of longitude before noticed, might little dis-
turb him, save as it affected the average of wrecks
upon his coast. In other respects, being well
compacted with his neighbours in their own parish
or municipality, he would be as little jostled or
incommoded as the occupants of the several cabins
of a ship would be, if they suddenly became apprised
of an error of some miles in the latitude, -when a
degree more or less would make little difference.
In the Townland Survey of Ireland, executed
upon the scale of six inches to a mile, or 1:10560,
there was a marked improvement in laying down
the interim details, in which ‘ sketching ’ was
almost entirely superseded by chain measurement—
as a proximate result this survey was made the
basis of a general valuation of Ireland. Never-
theless for close statistical computation it is not
equal, nor could it be expected to be for the cost,
to good private surveys. The field work will not
bear plotting on a larger scale, and the contents of
some of the smaller inclosures cannot be estimated
nearer than one-tenth of their area. Yet as we
approach the unit of extent, the townland, the
results become very accurate.


As for the English survey, it so little fulfilled
some of the uses of a topographical map, that it
was stated in the House of Commons, to bear no
comparison with the Tithe commutation survey,
that had to be undertaken under the able direction
of Captain Dawson, R. E., in consequence of its
deficiences.
Here, at last, we might expect the superior
‘ filling in,’ for which the minor triangulation is
always supposed to be ready. False economy, or
poverty, may have left the panes of our lattice
nearly vacant, but the frame is always there to
receive the proper glass ?
Nothing of the kind !■—if we are to credit Mr.
Baker, who tells us in pages 58-59 of his excellent
little work on Surveying published in Weale’s
Serials, that even the ‘six fundamental lines'
adopted by the Tithe Commissioners were not
adhered to in all cases.
Mr. Baker gives an instance of a Parish Survey
of his own ‘ setting aside the universal method put
forth by the Tithe Commission authorities, who,
however, did not insist on their methods being


adhered to, as they approved of the author’s maps
as of the first-class where their method was not
adopted. But such was the obsequiousness, or
ignorance, of the great majority of surveyors that,
even in such incongruous cases as the one referred
to, they persevered in the Tithe office rule, jn some
cases by joining together two, three or four trape-
ziums with their diagonals, and sometimes by
making the surveys after their own methods, and
then drawing on their maps, the system or groups
of the systems in question, and making a field
book to correspond thereto; they were thus at
liberty to project lines in any direction they chose,
without the trouble of measuring them; and
many have exultingly confessed they did so, after
their map had received the seal of the Tithe Com-
missioners ; but how far (Mr. Baker gravely
adds) ‘ such behaviour is to be commended, I leave
the reader to judge.’
These persons, if not sclair6 in the sense of M.
Gence, as we shall see by and by, were certainly
‘ wide awake ’in their own. It is, however, fair to
observe, that the general character of these surveys
were remarkable for their correctness, and that the
ordnance surveys which they supplemented, have


proved invaluable for purposes of internal commu-
nication.
The Tithe Parish Surveys, though some of them
had base lines of ten miles in length, were in fact
nothing more than improved estate surveys—and
this enlightens us, how our fore-fathers managed to
exist even before the ‘ Augustan age ’ of Queen
Elizabeth, and long before the existence of County
Maps with errors of three miles in twenty.
It may also be seen that there axe moral consi-
derations, not to be overlooked in the choice of
agents under the very best devised system, and
when, in colonial practice, surveyors mete * out
lands as well as measure them.
* ‘ Good measure and running Over,’ but not in the scriptural sense (Luke
6, 38). Twenty links (or one-fifth) added to a chain with occasional slips,
effected wonders as some of the old estates will show.


The Scales now adopted by the ordnance
authorities, and the details of their work com-
prising the interior filling in/ and the minor
triangulation, are nearly all that can be desired; the
degree of accuracy being limited to a question of
cost, which has always been a stumbling block to
the public. But this state has only been reached
after many difficulties, including the often renewed
* Battle of the Scales/ which, like the renowned
railway ‘ Battle of the Guages/ was for a long
time severely contested.
In a scientific point of view, the art of Geodesy
seems to have nearly reached its limits—at least
in the mathematical knowledge required, as evi-
denced by the noble and almost exhaustive text
book left to us by Puissant, and in a few other
works scarcely less celebrated.
In practice, improvements will always take
place, for instance M. Beuvieu in the ‘Annales


Forestieres’ for 1843, points out a new method of
auxiliary triangulation, which is far preferable to
the old one, in many eases; —and in which we
need not trouble ourselves about the triangles being
well conditioned —or rather we need not think
about it at all, provided the points observed upon,
are well fixed. The graphic mode of obtaining
positions, by observation on three or more known
points best situated [for the purpose, without
reference to the symmetrical system that cannot
be established in new countries of which there are
no maps —has been formed with advantage by Sir
Thomas Mitchell in this Colony; and in America,
on the western coast, in country formerly traversed
in exploratory expeditions by the gallant and
scientific Fkemont. *
In modes of procedure, also, we are no longer
bound to formal systems. These are no longer
the days when men in three cornered hats, square
cut coats and high quartered shoes stepped gravely
forth, cane and snuff-box in hand, to direct a tedious
process of triangulation across a kingdom, from a
base to a base of verification.
In the modem re-vision of the great territorial
survey of France, it is believed that no less than
* Note c.


seven bases were employed and made the founda-
tions of as many systems mutually proving each
other. It has been found, also, that the triangula-
tion may precede the measurement of a base, and
its proportions be calculated from any assumed
one. Moreover as a triangulation need never be
repeated, when correctly done, according to a well
defined degree of conventional accuracy, so the
points belonging to it can be chosen and recovered
independently of it.
Many years since, the demolition by excursion-
ists * of a cairn on the Coast of Scotland, was said
to have cost the nation two thousand pounds for
re-establishing the point it marked. This untoward
event afforded excellent practice for officers of en-
gineers, who on one occasion, it is stated, had made
a gratifying closure of work, which, after going all
round the east coast, agreed to eighteen inches. But
it may be doubted whether, if the point belonged to
a primary triangulation, it would be likely to be
* Doubtless quite as mischievous as those who have not left a
vestige of the cairn, erected on George’s Head in the harbour for Sir
Thomas Mitchell by his son Murray and Alisibr M’Lean of the
Survey Department. Both died young. Both died deeply lamented.
But the latter lived to be Surveyor-General.


recovered more nearly than to 5 or 10 feet by the
original process, while it ought to have been
promptly and easily so, to a foot or two, by mea-
surements referred to it, or, in their absence, by the
aid of local bench marks, at the fiftieth part of the
expense named.
A geodesic survey, when employed as the basis
of a territorial triangulation or not, should be
rigidly confined to its own character. The slightest
strains in the reseau or net work, would rapidly
reduce it to an inferior rank; and as there is
nothing perfect in this world, it is to be feared that
some of the results we most plume ourselves on,
will not bear a very close scrutiny.
The President of the Royal Geographical Society
of London, in the anniversary address of May 27,
1839, thus expresses himself respecting the great
survey of India :
‘ Portions of this survey of India present
instances of accuracy which are highly gratifying.
Lieutenant Shortreed’s survey, in several lines
and points, falls in with the trigonometrical survey of
the western coast by Major Jervis, depending upon


a distinct base line of 31,003 feet (10,334-3 yards)
near Cushina, measured with iron rods 20 feet in
length, by that officer and Captain Robinson of
the Indian Navy.’
* The approximation of the results proceeding
from two such distinct sources is surprisingly
great, so much so that I cannot deny myself the
gratification of quoting the following points from
the official register of these operations.’
(Here follows a table of seven oampared points.)
* Taking into consideration the nature of the
country in which this work has been carried on, it
must be admitted that the comparison of these
results is highly satisfactory, as in two instances
they agree within 12 and 18 inches respectively in
distances of 14 and 18 miles: thus affording a
gratifying proof of the attention of the officers who
conducted the duties of the survey, and the correct-
ness of the processes employed by them.
These two instances are as follows :
Shortreed Jervis Diff.
Feet. Feet. /\ Inches.
‘ Dhuuvee to Salira 58,253-37—92—58,241-54 6 12’
‘Mera to Lighthouse 143,723-75—87—143,742-5 66 18’


The differences of 12 and 18 inches in 14 and 18
miles are certainly four or five times greater than
would be consistently approved of, by those who
work only with bases measured to the fraction of
an inch, that is to 1 in 250,000 or 500,000 of
unity. But, admitting these to be good results,
what, must we imagine, would have been the dis-
may of the excellent president, had he discovered
that his table should have given him feet instead
of inches; yet there is a difference of nearly 12 feet
in a distance of 11 miles in one case, and of nearly
19 feet in a distance of 20 miles in the other.
This far transgresses geodesic limits; and the pos-
sible error of 1 in 6,000, though it may be small
for the sides of a topographical triangulation,
evidently shows, that the survey it belongs to, had
better not depend upon arcs of the meridian, or
bases of five or more miles measured to the fraction
of an inch, to give it a ‘ proper ’ character.
IP


On instituting surveys in new countries, it
seems inevitable that one must begin at the
beginning, that is—one must obey the most press-
ing calls in an economic sense, especially when we
have to explore our territory before we can seize it
trigonometrically, that is to say in a permanent
manner.
In this work, and in the laying out of forms,
the compass has always proved an invaluable instru-
ment despite all the objections urged against it.
Sir George Gipps, in a speech to the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, in 1842, stated that
‘ nothing could be more unscientific than the manner
in which surveys had hitherto been made; they
were all made by compass, and not by theodolite,
and it must be well known that everywhere there
was a variation of the compass, and that variation
itself varied in time/
Sir Thomas Mitchell informs us, that His
Excellency actually ‘ sent to England for a num


ber of theodolites, which he opened at Government
House, and was disposed to insist upon the use of,
by survey upon the back angle principle; but when
he considered the woody character of the country,
and the convenience of the Magnet, he gave up
the point, and said he was convinced of its utility.’
Even at the present day, in France, the very
fount of geodesy, an important class of surveyors
(arpenteurs forestiers) use the compass in their
measurements of the valuable and extensive forest
domains. M. Gence who has written perhaps the
only special work that exists on practical survey-
ing with the compass, speaks highly of its use in
woody countries, points out that errors often arise
from the ignorance, carelessness, or haste of the
operator and not from the defects of the instrument,
and states that, with a good compass, a surveyor
who is intelligent and scrupulous (eclaire et con-
scientieux) may obtain as good results, not to say
better, than with any other instrument.
In New South Wales there are greater diffi-
culties in surveying with the compass, owing to
different causes; one being local attraction, which is
very baffling in some places. Still with due pre


cautions, this method will always recommend itself
in laying out new ‘ grants ’ and other work in the
wild and broken ‘ hush.’
In many parts of the country, in running lines,
the poor surveying ‘devil’ ought like Milton’s
Fiend
O’er bog, or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet pursue his way,
And swim, or sink, or wade, or creep, or fly:—
and it is hut a just tribute to a talented unassum-
ing artist, Angelo Tornaghi, of this city, to men-
tion that some day, it is understood, his atelier will
produce a modification of the transit theodolite, in
which both the solar and the magnetic meridians
will be available, for comparison with each other or
for working with separately. In this sunny clime
the advantage may be great, should experience pro-
nounce favorably. But delicate and complicated
instruments are as bad in their way as geodetic sur-
veys are in others. An excellent form of circum-
ferentor first made by Mr. Tornaghi for a gentle-
man of the survey department, is, it is believed,
much approved of, and getting into general use
throughout this and the neighbouring Colonies.


There is nothing like the circumferentor for general
rough work, and it is a pity that surveyors will
not take the trouble, of acquiring in a few days, the
slight knowledge of practical astronomy that would
enable them to find the actual variation of their
needle, instead of ignorantly or indolently sticking
to the traditional ‘ about 10 degrees easterly .’
Sir Thomas Mitchell never could have hoped
any practical good from his department, unless he
had taken materials as he found them, including
the 900 plans employed in the construction of his
‘ Three Sheet Map.’ In compiling these, he had
to assume that each he adopted gave a trace of a
line of survey, irrespective of its magnetic position,
and that it was sufficient to adjust these lines in
relation to the true meridian, by his trigonometrical
survey, avoiding details that these plans did not
furnish, and which, on the scale of his map, might
have been scarcely appreciable.
To attempt to refine the use of the compass,
under an improved system, in the present day,
would be, in many cases, to encounter the host of
difficulties pointed out by Mr. Adams ; a consi-
deration of them plainly showing that some of the


corrections, if known, would require the aid of a
magnetic chart, founded on a better survey than the
one it was intended to make. Unless a surveyor
had the power of knowing at each moment his
actual variation taken in one quantity, he must be
conscious that his needle agitated with every
passing influence, produces lines more unstable in
their curves than the ripples on a sandy shore.
Yet a surveyor, while disclaiming to be meteoro-
logist, is quite justified in believing that an ‘ en-
lightened and scrupulous ’ observer may do a great
deal with the compass. There are innumerable
cases in which it can be used with advantage, when
simplicity and rapidity of action are more desirable
than great correctness. Thus (without pretending
to assign any limit) when areas are allowable with
1 or 2 per cent, of error, lines need not be
measured nearer than 1 in 200 or 100 *; nor mag-
netic bearings be sought to 3 minutes when a J or
J of a degree fulfils the conditions, in stations of a
moderate length.
• In the evidence taken before the Commissioners of Inquiry, mention
was made of errors sometimes to 5 per cent. ; hut nothing of the ‘ good
measuring , running over ’ of a former page.


In all compass surveys, it is politic to establish
a system of independent checks in fixing the
corners of grants and principal points of traverses,
by means of short lines from starting points, quite
apart from the lines of the survey and usual marks;
and as the corners of grants determine the recti-
lineal figures, no dependence should be placed on
marked-tree lines, or fences replacing them, beyond
their being general guides to the true direction,
which should be described from point to point —so
much more or less, in bearing and distance, as is
done at present—and subject to future alignment,
which should be no greater hardship than it is in
the streets of towns where land is much more valu-
able. Actual encroachment of one grant on an-
other, is a question of proprietorship that ought to
be dealt with in the ‘ Lands Titles Office ’ without
much difficulty.
One of the evils complained of in the present
system of surveying, is the creation of ‘ overlaps,’
attributed to the process of adding patch to patch,
without the preliminary of a ‘ proper trigonome-
trical survey ’ and against which (we have seen
how ineffectually in one instance) the minor trian-
gulation is supposed to be a preventive. But too


much may be made of this ; for in the compilation
of County or Parish maps, where there are numerous
isolated surveys, there is not much fear of overlaps
up to a certain stage of progress. When they occur
they are often only on paper, owing to errors in the
length, and bearings of the section lines. Indeed
it cannot be seen how they can happen upon the
ground where there are sufficient marks to guide
the surveyor, and regard is had to priority of sur-
vey. In actual practice this appears to be only a
case of finding greater or less space than had been
expected. A more serious source of errors of this
kind would arise from delay in ‘ charting ’ surveys
already made, and when the roughest pencil entry
might prevent encroachment on apparently vacant
land by surveyors who may be dependent on im-
perfect tracings. Nevertheless, much cannot be
expected from ‘ charts ’ that assume one magnetic
meridian for all surveys. It certainly does occur to
mind among the ordinary difficulties that may be
avoided or much lessened, one is that arising from
the difference of compasses, without reference to
the secular variation.* A surveyor following close
* Called ‘proper’ error, which is ‘ instrumental* or * personal* as the
term is applied.


upon the tracks of another, often observes this,
and of late years a remedy has been attempted, in
requiring a strict adjustment of surveyors’ needles
by a standard one in the Survey Office. But these
needles rarely remain long in accordance with the
standard. Many, after they have been in use, alter
considerably, as they will do, even in a state of
rest; and this need be no matter of disappoint-
ment except to the meteorologist who is looking
to the construction of a magnetic chart.* So long
as he has a good sensitive needle, a surveyor may
be almost indifferent whether it agrees with that
of another surveyor, or not. Being able, which he
should be, to give the actual variation of the
magnetic meridians of his own surveys,no difficulty
should present itself in working to any other
compass meridians, as he ought to do in adding new
sections to old ones, and which he must, if it be
intended to preserve the parallelism of the lines
*lf there existed an ordnance map on a sufficiently large scale to
enable him to do so, would a meteorologist propose to make his lines of
magnetic curvature so close as to show the influence of every little
patch of ferruginous sandstone in the County of Cumberland? If
so, he would require endless thermometric applique es- Some of the
iron-stones, when strongly heated, make the needle ‘fly again.’ Doubt-
less there is great interest existing on this subject, but what we
most want are GEOLOGICAL MAPS, towards the formation of which,
the surveys proposed in these pages should be sufficient.


among themselves. Practically, many surveyors
accomplish this by taking the bearing of one or
other of the old lines. A better method is to take
the bearing. between two marked natural points
which are, or used to be, introduced into the work,
by many surveyors, to assist future compilation,
though neglecting to note the hour of the day.
Simply for this comparison, it is only necessary
that the points should be well chosen. It is of no
consequence that they should lie in the true meri-
dian or that either should be in the exact locality,
provided one be within a reasonable distance. Nor
is there any magic in aiming at the cardinal points:
it is even objectionable; for many amateurs can
run false lines by them only. What is desirable,
is, that the side lines of the sections shall be
perpendicular to the general direction: and, in
giving a bearing, it is as easy, and more precise, to
state N. 45° W., instead of an elusive ‘ North-
Westerly/ A competent surveyor, when it is left
to his discretion, should be able to deal with these
questions, and, as a man of fair education, to
introduce into his work all notices of the country
he passes through, that may reasonably be claimed
for the public information. ‘Knowledge is no
burden’; at the same time, the less discursive
in his aims, the more likely a surveyor is


to succeed in the performance of his immediate
duties, which, including the management of his
party in the field, are quite enough to employ all
his energy.
Notwithstanding what has been said and quoted
in favor of the use of the compass in preliminary
surveys in new countries, it must be allowed that
for minute plans on a large scale, serving for per-
manent reference in question of property, and for
the construction of County and Municipal maps,
other modes should be adopted at an early oppor-
tunity.
When any part of the country becomes suffi-
ciently opened by proclaimed and cleared roads,
and the necessity arises in the progress of settle-
ment, polygonal traverses, or ‘ surrounds/ should
be made with the theodolite over circuits of con-
venient extent, and with reference to the true meri-
dian, as well as to the angle the sides form among
themselves. In the course of such surveys, the
corners of grants could be easily fixed, and their
distances from each other be computed without
actually remeasuring the sectional lines, thus
‘ taken out of winding ’ and ready to test and be
tested in the course of private surveys.


This method seems to preseat many advantages :
1. The lines, being measured along roads, would
be economised to the full extent, being the natural
building lines of the Colony, out of townships, and
so frequently referred to; for the increase of popu-
lation would create a constantly augmenting num-
ber of milestones, boundary marks, public buildings
and other artificial points for use.
2. Besides the usual proofs of the closure of a
polygon, a connecting line to a suitable point
within the figure (though not necessarily in the
centre) at once converts it unto a group of tri-
angles having a common vertex in that point, pre-
senting a number of rays, one or more of which
may be measured as an additional proof of the
work; and others be made available in future sur-
veys, as the land becomes clearer.
3. The exterior sides or bases of these triangles
being made common to adjoining groups, there is
not only an additional proof of the correctness of
the survey, but overlaps are rendered impossible,
each group being as compacted in itself as we have
already imagined in the case of the Cornishman


and his neighbours, and as we may believe the
City of Sydney to he now within the limits of its
trigonometrical survey.
4. Such a survey carries its own bases and tri-
angulation ; for the distances between vertices,
and the angles formed by any three of them can be
readily calculated, and, under favorable circum-
stances, verified by direct measurement.
5. When the vertices are formed by conspicuous
natural or artificial summits, then there is every
advantage in choosing among them for a more or
less close triangulation with or without an indepen-
dent base.
6. It can be carried on simultaneously in every
part of the Colony, without the primary triangula-
tion that may follow it, when there is a better
knowledge of natural points.
The parish surveys of the Tithe Commissioners
in England were an extensive kind of estate sur-
veys, and executed with the chain in measure-
ments connected with base lines, some of them ten
miles in length. This, the comparatively flat, clear


nature of the country permitted; but most parts of
New South Wales would not favor such a mode of
survey, nor ordnance e chain ’ measurements be-
tween minor trigonometrical points, supposing they
could be established.
It would be the same with the American system
of surveying which is an admirable one and very
eligible when we have hundreds or thousands of
square miles of flat, fertile, well watered land to
cut up into blocks, which in group do not sometimes
close within half a mile. Those skilled in this
system would no doubt do excellent work here,
where the country is worth it and favorable to it.
But they would require a clear field or tabula rasa>
the normal scheme of survey peculiar to the Colony,
rejecting artificial lines except for temporary use,
or the alienation of lands over isolated areas.*
In county maps we appear to arrive at the
useful limit of extent required in the combination
of topographical details; not that we expect to
hang maps of fifteen, twenty feet, or more, on our
walls, but to have the power of making extracts
• See Appendix a, b.


from any part, on whatever scale may be adopted;
and if, on the principle already advocated, the
exterior main lines of each county be common to
others in their respective triangulation and he
made to check each other.
The territorial unit in this country being the
'grant'or 'estate,' the Survey Department should not
be held responsible to take up smaller measurements
necessary to he noted in the Land Titles Office.
If so, four inch maps would answer every reasonable
purpose. Measurements to 1 in 1,000 are nearer than
are needed or can be expected, in a multitude of
eases, but we may assume this proportion as a limit;
and as this is one of the exceptional cases in which
they bestow more care upon th & frame than upon
the picture, triangles with sides true to 1 in 1,200
or 1,500 will be adequate to receive the work by
that process of fitting, which after all, is only a
question of degree between the geodetic and com-
mon surveyor. This limitation affords increased
facility in the establishment of trigonometrical
bases which may be founded on a traverse;
for the most carefully ranged bases are
nothing more. But with the same labour and
cost of time and money, there can be no
objection, if desired, to a greater degree of


accuracy ; and when we consider that the curvature
of the earth in sixty or seventy miles does not
affect a survey 1 in 15,000,* or only a few feet in
the distance from Sydney to Berrima, we have
ample verge within the limits of an ordinary
triangulation, apart from the use of treacherous co-
efficients, that like the edges of oversharp razors
turn on their application, to the disappointment of
few but inveterate hair splitters.—Calling on
memory after a long lapse of years, the writer
remembers the glow of pleasure that he felt on
reading John Heeschel’s remarks about ‘ cui bono'
people in the ‘ Discourse on Natural Philosophy.’
Yet it is well that such people exist; Truth is a
crystal that has many sides and a thousand planes
of cleavage. Some day or other, the people of New
South Wales may desire to treat themselves to the
luxury of an arc of the meridian. It is even now
open to commence one with imperial resources for
world wide purposes, and to none could the task be
more worthily entrusted than to officers of theßoyal
Engineers. But to graft such an operation upon
any other virtually independent of it, is to invest
the whole subject with a parasitical interest
unworthy of its merits and of its dignity.
About in extreme projection.


The efficiency of a Survey Department depends
as much upon the intelligent and active admini-
stration of its functions as upon the practice of any
particular system of survey ; and, though not re-
sponsible for the land policy of the day, such a
department is sure to be embarrassed in a new
colony by the struggles of contending interests.
Many years after delay in the measurement of
small farms had been made one of the grounds of an
unmerited censure, a crowd of starving, anxious
immigrants beset Government House, Sydney.
Perhaps the circumstances were exceptional and not
fairly chargeable to the government. Yet, had
the Survey Department been admittedly up to its
work, it is interesting to conjecture whether any-
thing would have prevented the affecting incident
that subsequently inspired the sympathetic—indig-
nant lines :
THE AUSTRALIAN IMMIGRANTS OE 1843.
1.
‘ I saw deep woods and mountains high j
I breathed the balmy air;
I saw the plains luxuriant lie;
And blest a land so fair!
a


Where many fragrant blossoms wild
Regaled the humming bee,
And universal nature smil’d, —
No shelter was for me.’
2.
‘ I saw the land in idleness
Which might have been a home,
And wandered o’er it till distress
Forbade me more to roam.
Yet not a corner called I mine
Where I might build a nest, —
I have a wife and children nine, —
The infant at the breast.’
3.
‘ Happy indeed had been my lot
(I can both sow and reap)
Could I have owned a little cot,
Or had the care of sheep.—
But not for me that land so fair
Her rich abundance spread,—
All spoke the language of despair
And would not give us bread.’
4.
‘On wife they frowned; on children more:
‘ Large Family ’!—So, again,
We’ll brave the wave, and leave the shore
That bloomed for us in vain.’—


For wh ere the slave still digs for gold *
A ship her sails unfurl’d j
That family’s fate remains untold
It is a damned world.f
Deeply thankful should we be, that times are altered.
Yet there is another side of the picture that we
are bound to look at, though it may not he offered
or taken for much. Political economists may
agree that while labor and capital should go hand
in hand, the nature of circumstances often requires
that one should precede the other.
In the magnificent Colony of New South Wales,
population in proportion to the wants of the coun-
try is as necessary to its welfare as anywhere else.
Nevertheless, the rapid introduction of the unskilled
labor that may in other regions soon command a
return from the soil does not seem desirable.
Here, though there are rich lands capable of sup-
porting a larger population than we can estimate,
they are scattered over a surface that is to a great
extent barren and useless. Prom the uncer-
tainty of the seasons, also, agriculture is a pre-
• South America. t Manfred.


carious occupation; though abundant returns are
often yielded, and would be greater and more fre-
quent under a better system of farming than can
ever be expected from poor hand to mouth settlers,
who have neither the aptitude for association that
we admire in some races, nor the degree of educa-
tion that would tend to make them provident.
While the United States of America appear to
be the natural field for such immigrants, Australia
for the most part seems to invite the capitalist,
who, by embarking his means in the great mineral
and other resources open to him, would not fail to
create a demand for remunerative labor.
Independent of other vast unpeopled tracts, and
the old countries that will yet regain the popula-
tions they have lost; * it is difficult to foretell the
time when the Valley of the Mississippi will cease
to invite the surplus population that is gladly
received from every part of Europe. It is strange
then that people should come sixteen thousand
miles to this distant Colony when they would be
better suited not far from their own shores :
* See Appendix d.


Nevertheless, apart from the misrepresentations of
ignorance or design, people will]oin. their relations
and friends; though it is too much to expect that
the machinery of good government is to work
for them wherever they may choose to isolate them-
selves, almost beyond the reach of law and order.*
If the bonds of society are to be maintained, some
degree of wholesome restraint is necessary. It
is the constriction of the hoops that makes the
cask to hold water; and the pressure from above
that gives stability to the arch. But in absence
of undeniable authority (and where shall we
find it ?) these questions are practically decided by
the general sense, if not by the collective wisdom.
Alison, in his essay on population, says ‘there is
something healthful to the human mind in the
possession of a portion of the earth/ There is
more in New South Wales than may ever be
sought for. But judgment is necessary in the pro-
cess of location ; and indiscriminate settlement on
the sea-coast is already doing injury to the future
interests of the Colony, by the rapid destruction
of some of the finest timber for naval and other
purposes in the world.
It is a grateful reflection, however, that Divine
* See 92 and following pages.


Providence has established laws of compensation
that repair onr errors; and that in every com-
munity there are minds taking interest in the
general welfare, however they may differ as to
the means of advancing it. As a rule, the mass,
even of intelligent educated people, are too much
engrossed with their several pursuits to give much
heed to public questions, and many a man who is
keen for his own interests and those of his immediate
descendants, is incapable, in the general behalf, of
casting a thought beyond the corner of the street;
or is not disinclined to believe with Sir Boyle
Roche, that posterity can expect nothing at our
hands, in that it has done nothing for us!
One fault imputed to the colonists is indifference
to other countries except when touched in their
pockets. But this is only to say that they are as
busy as other people. It would be well indeed if
they were more alive to the opinions that are formed;
But there is no occasion altogether to regret this.
Prophecy is sometimes the cause of its own fulfil-
ment ; and, if prediction of evil has any effect,
they ought, long since, to have been precipitated
into the Republic of Pirates that Sir James
Macintosh, writing in 1807, foretold they would
become.*
* See Note i.


Having endeavoured to show in the preceding
pages facts that were desirable to be known in the
history of the Survey Department from its origin
to the transition period that, under the New Con-
stitution, succeeded the death of Sir Thomas Mit-
chell, the last Surveyor-General appointed by the
Imperial Government,—and having also touched
on the methods of conducting territorial and other
surveys,—some notice is now due to the present
state of the department, at the same time taking
a retrospective view.
Excepting in the necessary changes consequent
on alterations in the Land Laws and Regulations,
and the increase that has taken place in this
department, now subordinated to that of the Mi-
nister for Lands, there is not much, apparently to
note, of public interest during the last eleven years;
and it is by no means a matter of astonishment
that any enterprising reformer should find, in some
respects, but a small advance since the days of
Mr. James Meehan.


But experience proves the power of routine,
even where improvements are admitted to be de-
sirable. The head of a department, even when not
driven from pillar to post between the government
and the public, is soon made to feel that he is no
Hercules, and that often he is but one of the
wheels in a rumbling piece of mechanism. Some-
times, indeed, he may be driven to covet plenary
powers under a mild despotism; but, if a sensible
man controls his impatience, being content to
watch opportunities and try and make way, if he
can, through the series of wise compromises that
are said ever to attend true progress.
In the department, as it was under Sir Thomas
Mitchell, there was much to commend in the
sagacity that kept to the only means at command.
Sir Thomas had to accept his suveyors, as he had
done the office plans, for better or for worse.
Had he once insisted upon their abandoning the
use of the compass in their work, or tried to force
upon them the knowledge of practical astronomy
sufficient to enable them to find the variation of
their needles, he would have brought the work to
a dead-lock, and been placed himself in a worse
plight than he was supposed to be in, when attacked
on the subject of small farms.


Mr. Brownrigg, a civil engineer and surveyor
of much experience in Sydney, stated before the
Commission of Inquiry in 1855, that he found the
greatest difficulty in getting good surveyors to
assist him. There were plenty who offered and
professed proficiency, but who were utterly incom-
petent. If this was the case, after the discovery
of gold in the Colony had given such a spur to
enterprise and, connected with it, to increased
demands for the measurement of land, we are
inclined to credit the testimony, that it was diffi-
cult to induce good surveyors to come out to the
Colony, and that when they did, it took a long
time to accustom them to their new field of action
and to the colonial practice of surveying.
Notwithstanding the difficulty of replacing them
or of adding to their numbers, Sir Thomas Mit-
chell had some excellent surveyors, and looking
to the actual efficiency of the Survey Department
in his times, it must have been considerable, when
in a space of twenty-seven years, the original nine-
teen counties had been extended to the number of
ninety-two, which were laid out with the sites for
one hundred and seventy Towns and Villages
within an area open to selection, more extensive
than thrice that of Great Britain and Ireland.


Respecting the general system of location, and
of measurement, the following extract from Sir
Thomas Mitchell’s evidence before the Board of
Inquiry will speak for itself:—
185. ‘Have you been able to form any idea of
the actual wants of the public, year by year?—
What quantity of land in the year do you think
the public would be satisfied with ? ’
‘ With a population increasing by immigration,
it would be impossible to say, as there is a larger
influx of immigrants at one time than at another;
while the acquisition of the means of purchase, by
gold digging, is also uncertain in amount.’
186. 4 Has it ever been the principle of the
Government, to keep the supply of land far in
excess of the demand ? ’
‘ There has always been a wish, on my part, to
do so ; but that has never been possible from the
rapidly increasing demand for land in isolated
situations.’ ‘Judging from the sort of letters
we receive, I should say, that the public suppose
they have a right to require us to measure lands
in any part of the vast extent of country now sur-
veyed, if they are applied for,..’


187. ‘Do you not think the system of isolated
surveys most injurious and expensive to the
country ? ’
‘ It is expensive.’
188. ‘ And injurious ? ’
‘ No; we want to see the land peopled. ’*
189. ‘ Has it never been the object of the Govern-
ment here, to measure off a large tract of land
suitable for permanent occupation, and to have it
open for selection to any new comer who may
arrive in the Colony and desire to take up land ? ’
‘ Yes; but that has been greatly overdone by
attempting what is called a running survey over
the whole country, which will never answer here.
It has been at various times a plan entertained by
different theorists, to divide the country into square
miles, open to selection. Knowing myself that
the country was only partially good, I have
opposed such schemes ; but it was, nevertheless,
acted on by Sir George Gipps, while I was in
England, to a very considerable extent in the North.
Trees were marked to shew sides of square miles,
• See Appendix^.


and the whole country divided into districts and
parishes by those square miles. A surveyor
brought an action against the Government after-
wards for a considerable sum, for work thus per-
formed and recovered it'; but there is not, I believe,
now, a single mark thus made that would serve to
indicate any one of the divisions of the country,
thus surveyed and divided at so great an expense.
Indeed, the whole is included in some cattle run.
Good land occurs only in isolated patches, and the
Australian mode of surveying the country is
adapted to its character, and will ever be found the
best suited to its colonisation and the security of
possession. No such system as may suit Ireland,
or Canada, or New Zealand—or even South Au-
stralia, will answer here so well as what has grown
into gigantic use from great practical experience.
It has been the object of the government where
land was unequivocally good along water frontage,
to divide it. and offer it for sale; and we have a
good deal in that state now. We have a hun-
dred thousand acres open for sale in various
localities.’
190. ‘ Has it ever been offered for sale ? ’
* Yes ; it has been constantly advertised.’


191. ‘ And put up for sale ? ’
‘Yes.’
192. ‘Then that is saleable now, without being
put up at auction ? ’
‘Yes. A person may go to the Treasury and
pay down his money for it, and take possession.’
Such was Sir Thomas Mitchell’s statement,
agreeing with the Commissioners in their report,
as to the evils of detached measurements ; hut un-
like them, looking upon the system as unavoidable.
The Commissioners, on the other hand, recom-
mended abandonment.
The system under which every appplication for
the purchase of particular lands is entertained
should be at once abandoned. It is evident that in
so extensive a territory as New South Wales, it
must be impossible to maintain a sufficient staff of
surveyors to meet the demands of the public under
this system, which seems to be founded on no law,
but to have grown up by degrees, until every one
imagines that he has a right to require, that any
lands which he may point out, should be surveyed
for sale, at whatever cost and inconvenience to the


department, and consequent detriment to the
interests of the public.’
This system, in addition to its disadvantages
with reference to the Survey Department, may
occasion many social and political evils. It tends
to promote an unnecessary dispersion of population,
which should be rather checked than encouraged,
for it leads, without any corresponding advantage,
to increased difficulty and expense in maintaining
the authority of the government, and the settlers
in isolated situations are removed from the re-
straining influences of society, and their children
are exposed to the danger of growing up in igno-
rance, and almost in barbarism. *
It should be considered the duty of the depart-
ment to keep the supply of land, surveyed and
ready for sale, as much as possible in excess of the
demand; and in order to leave no excuse for de-
sultory applications, care should be taken to survey
lands in eligible situations, and of a quality suit-
able, as far as possible, to the purposes for which
they are likely to be required.
* See Appendix/.


The surveys being conducted methodically, the
surveyor would be nearly always occupied in the
actual measurement of lands, instead of moving
about from place to place with his party and equip-
ment, endeavouring in vain to satisfy the require-
ments of a pernicious and impracticable system.’
The Deputy Surveyor-General, Mr. John Thomp-
son, deposed before the same board, that practically
no difficulties had ever arisen respecting boundaries
from the secular variation of the compass : that
is—official difficulties. Sometimes private ones
arose, he believed; but that the methods adopted
in dealing with them mostly led to satisfactory
adjustments.
This statement follows out what was stated by
Major Mitchell twenty-one years before in testi-
fying to the merits of the officer just named. In
a report on his department in 1884, he says,
‘ There are none to whom I feel so much indebted
for the present advanced state of the most essen-
tial business of the Survey Department as to Mr.
John Thompson, who, as chief draftsman of this
office, has so arranged the numerous surveys, mea-
surements, and graphic records of grants, as for


several years to supply materials for the volu-
minous correspondence that I have on such sub-
jects, with the surveyors, the government, and
the public. This gentleman’s peculiar talents have
been devoted with such advantage to the public
service, that no mistakes have occurred as to the
localities of grants however ancient, and that few
or no disputes have originated respecting boundaries.’
The Commissioners of Inquiry, in their Report,
state with reference to the Corresponding and
Registry branch, that though the duties were of a
very cumbrous and voluminous nature, which
could not but lead to very considerable and un-
necessary expense, they did not seem, by any
mea*is, to be confined to the Survey Department
but to form part of a general Whole. They further
state ‘ we must bear testimony to the admirable
order in which the documentary records of the
department appear to be kept, the perfection of
the various registries by which prompt reference to
and immediate information on any required points
are ensured, and to the existence of method and
arrangement in the conduct of this branch of the
department.’


Such a deliberate opinion could not but have
been gratifying to the responsible officers, and not
least so to Mr. Heney Halloean, at the head of
the corresponding and financial duties, and who,
after lengthened service, has lately been promoted
and is now Under-Secretary for the Colony. The
names of this gentleman and of his predecessor,
Mr. David Buncombe, are the only ones that occur
in the same capacity during a long range of more
than forty years.
There is one matter which would leave the
reader with imperfect impressions, if passed over
in silence.
The Commissioners of Inquiry of 1855, at the
conclusion of their report, state :— ‘ The alleged
inefficiency of the department seems also in a great
measure attributable to the want of that mutual
good feeling and cordial co-operation between the
Surveyor-General and his officers, without which
it is impossible, under any system however ex-
cellent, that the duties of the department can be
efficiently administered.’
These remarks seemed hardly called for under
the 6th head of their commission, and perhaps
H


would not have been made, on out-door rumours,
had not some quarrel about surveyors been elicited
by them in the course of their inquiry.
After what has been related of the memorable
campaign ending in an expression of ‘ The King’s
surprise and disappointment,’ it is not wonderful
that a loyal old soldier should occasionally be sub-
ject to chronic fits of ‘ Governor,’ and—though not
belonging to the Vice-regal happy family—find
himself, sometimes, anything but at home in his
own office : but men will talk loudly sometimes if
they fancy themselves in their own house, and even
say things that they deeply regret; yet though
persistent in a fend, he could hardly be called ran-
corous ; for few men bore less real animosity than
Sir Thomas Mitchell. Had his opponents known
it, often a word would have disarmed him, and, if
in the wrong, he ever sought to make amends if
the opportunity was not cut off from him.
Sir George Gipps was by no means the bugbear
that he seems to be made by the necessarily fre-
quent mention of his name in connection with a
department that he took so deep an interest in.
After all was over, he paid a friendly visit to Sir


Thomas Mitchell in London, The ‘ Two Knights’
met again, and the fact permits the revival of two
amusing squibs that were fired in a warm contest.*
They give an idea of the frequent by-battles, some-
times degenerating into ‘free fights/ that attend
the course of governments, and but a faint one of
the trouble they create at home, when we bear in
mind the ‘ forty ’ colonial dependencies adminis-
tered to, in the ‘ sleepy hollow’ of Downing-street.
Yes! a‘sleepy’ hollow, if one can be called so,
that contains watchful eyes. Eather, like the
quiet studio of a discreet physician, it guards the
secrets of families, till, in the course of all things
human, they are buried by time.
In the difficulties encountered, nothing can be
judged of from the size of a colony; for it is re-
lated that in the early establishment of one, a
population of seventy-five persons, the governor
included, comprised no less than three political
parties. But this case is not so bad as another,
told of the visit of a ship to Lord Howe’s Island,
not far off our coast,when the two or three families,
living on that little spot,were found, if not at open
• See pages 136, 138.


war, as far as possible removed from each other.
We can scarcely exceed this story, unless we
suppose a man left to quarrel with himself, the
best of all quarrels, if it lead, as we hope, to
everlasting reconcilement.
********
Any further notice of the Survey Department
must be fragmentary. Much might be said on the
internal organization of the office and on the
distribution of space for the work to be done. In
a larger building, on a better site, more scope would
be given; though not ensuring the excellent
arrangements that were effected in the Ordnance
Establishment at D üblin by Captain Larcomb,* or
more recently,by another officer of engineers,Colonel
James, at Southampton. At the latter place,from the
increase of work, operations are conducted on a far
larger scale, including, it may be called, a manufac-
tory throwing off thousands of maps and plans, some
in various styles of art. Sir Henry James’s work
on photo-lithography and allied processes ought-
alone to make his name familiar wherever art is
valued. Much might be learnt from the details,
though belonging to a different system and worked
* Now Major-Gen. Sir Thomas A. Larcomb, K.C.B , Under Secretary
for Ireland.


with a precision, that with feebler means we
could only hope to slowly follow. Perhaps the
time will come when photographic copies will pre-
vent the bandying about of original documents
that should never leave the office, not even to go
to ‘ Lands.’
In reference to the improved organisation of the
Survey Department that now seems necessary,
something has resulted from Commissioners of In-
quiry, but more would be learnt if officers of the
department were occasionally consulted. Among
them are always some who take an interest in the
service and would be proud of the countenance of
their superiors. But no one can be expected to
forward the general interest to his own injury : if
the official need not live, the man must, and also
his family if he have one. The greater the sub-
division of labor in a civilized'community, the more
men become educated to specialties, and should
their occupation cease, they are not to be shook off
with crustacean facility. A true reduction in the
public service as far as expediency permit, is better
effected by declining to fill or create useless appoint-
ments, than by cutting down salaries, or dismiss-
ing worthy servants who should be promoted or


translated, in preference to any new candidates for
appointment, be their patronage what it may.
In the case of surveyors, their introduction from
home seems to have been a failure, and points to a
course of special training in connection with the
department. Even natives take some time to
become accustomed to the life, and the intimate
knowledge of a district is not to be gained in a
day, though when acquired, the advantage is so
great that it represents a certain capital. Hence
the desirability of a surveyor being employed, if
possible, always in the same district. A true sur-
veyor will always take interest in his own work,
will best know how to pick it up and to combine
it in general surveys. He will also have a whole-
some dread of following after other surveyors who
act upon the maxim ‘ that it will be all the same in
a hundred years’ It would be well for such to
admit the possibility of its being otherwise to
themselves, if they take the blackfellow’s view
that they may ‘ jump up ’ again. In that case
poetical justice would require that they should be
employed on their own or similar work in expia-
tion of former errors.


Like some other classes subject to vicissitudes,
surveyors are not remarkable for providence;
emerging occasionally from the solitude of the
bush, they act foolishly as sailors do, and the pos-
session of talent and education often tend only to
increase the evil, through the stronger revulsion
that takes place in the feelings.
A surveyor, in traversing the extensive and
difficult tracts of country to be found in the[]colony,
has not only to do his surveying but to maintain
himself and party, under the most difficult circum-
stances and where it is not simply making a tran-
sit from one place to another. He may therefore
be said, if he does his duty, to he in perpetual
campaign. Still, to some, the life has itsj’charms
and would be followed with enthusiasm, if there
were any assured hope of being able to retire with
a modest competence in fifteen or twenty years.
Though not overpaid, a surveyor on the staff
should rather look to such a result, than to the
increase of his salary; and the government should,
acting loco parentis, encourage such an idea.
Indeed the whole community is interested in the
well ordering of this question, for its own interests
and for those of the man. For in the words of


an English writer in the Civil Engineers’ and
Architects’ Journal, ‘those colonial surveyors
are not civilisers but the pioneers of civilisation.
They lead the forlorn hope. When they have
made the breach practicable, others enter in and
gather the spoil.’
A new period has arrived in the history of the
Survey Department, and introduced by the in-
creasing necessity of setting in order some of the
work already done. Hitherto no difficulty to speak
of has been experienced in relation to the boun-
daries of old grants. At least, little or none has
been known to the Survey Office which does not
profess to take up boundaries. It is also believed
that, as yet, little has occurred elsewhere. But
if the department is not to expire with the
exhaustion of available surveys of waste lands, and
is to be a fit coadjutor of the Lands Titles Office,
new steps should be taken, and the commencement
of new county surveys seems to be the first; —the
next, in connection with them, a revision and ex-
tension of Sir Thomas Mitchell’s trigonometrical
survey with a view to assist in the formation of a
complete general map of the territory of New South
Wales as it now exists. It might be done, it is


conceived, at no great outlay, and would be addi-
tionally useful as an index to the choice of trigo-
nometrical stations.
Should a triangulation of a superior order ever
follow, the advantage of such a preliminary work
would be felt, and the want of which, some time
since, is said to have caused in Victoria the expen-
diture of fifteen hundred pounds in the establish-
ment of a single trigonometrical station; that is a
sum equal to the whole cost of Sir Thomas Mit-
chell’s expedition into Tropical Australia.
With an instinctive feeling, already the dread of
impending change has caused some to take alarm.
One class of persons fear that the proceeds of
the scale of Crown Lands will cease to add largely
to the revenue, and even become wholly absorbed
in the expenses of survey. This would be bad
enough; but —the idea of any part of the expenses
of the Survey Department falling on any fund
would be intolerable.
There appears to be no difficulty in finding an
answer in this case. It is true that the Land
sales have been at times very productive to the


revenue, and though the proceeds be subject to
heavier deduction for the expenses of survey than
some thought desirable, they have legitimately
borne it. But the land itself, as portion of the
fixed capital of the country, cannot be said to be a
legitimate source of revenue in the process of chang-
ing hands.
The mice may be very comfortable in their
cheese but in lapse of time they will eat them-
selves out. The greater their number and greed
and waste, the sooner the catastrophe.
But though the land is sold, it still remains
Avith the purchasers—the taxable material. Re-
venue or no revenue from land, the territorial sur-
veys of a country have to be maintained. They
are so at great but necessary cost in civilized
countries that have not a foot of public land to sell,
or if they have, do not sell it.
Another class of persons fear that they will be
disturbed in the possession of their land; whether
they dread defective surveys, or feel themselves in
the wrong place it is immaterial to inquire, but it
is the duty of the government to try and settle
these difficulties in a lasting manner.


Taking certain grants in succession, as the necessity
is most pressing, an act of the Legislature might
make registration of title under Torrens’ Act
compulsory, and in all cases, where it should be
done, distinct possessory title given to any por-
tions of land that might be found encroachments
on other grants. This would enable the Surveyor-
General to declare in favor of such and such lines
as representing the boundaries of the original
grants as nearly as could be ascertained. In this
useful work, he would receive and confer great
assistance in acting in concert with the Registrar-
General, as noticed elsewhere.
But thence-forward, possessory titles should be
discountenanced. They are so in the United States
of America, unless something like good grounds
are shown for the original acquisition of the pro-
perty. It would be well if it were so in this coun-
try, for no good can be hoped in the moral progress
of the people if they are left to be tempted to spo-
liation and waste.
There is a known maxim in the Civil Law,
that IT IS FOR THE INTEREST OF THE STATE THAT
EVERY ONE CONDUCT HIS AFFAIRS PROPERLY.* It
may also be said that, in the general interest, it is
* Interest reipubliose ut quilibet ae sui bene utatur.


the duty of government to act as public trustee
and guardian in certain cases, under reasonable
circumstances, and with sufficient guarantees
against abuse.
If the principle were conceded, and acted on
capital in houses and lands would not be allowed
to lessen in value through the neglect or disap-
pearance of the owners (looking as if they were
in Chancery). On the contrary, a source of revenue
would be executed, defenceless interests would be
protected, and, occasionally, property would lapse
to the State.
It would also lay the foundation of a new
branch of statistics, which, if placed under
Parliamentary control, would be of great use to
the Public, and to Statesmen—including Ministers
of Finance.
In Ireland, the police are very serviceable in
collecting information on agricultural and other
economic subjects. Perhaps they are so here, or
may be hereafter. This is a pleasing and desirable
aspect of their duties. Would it were the ‘most
important ’ one, and that they were usually hailed
as friends, and not as enemies.


Sometime after the discovery of gold in 1851, Sir
Thomas Mitchell complained much of the time of
his surveyors being taken up in the measurement
of pastoral runs.
Sir George Gipps who first appointed Com-
missioners of Crown Lands, intended that these
officers should be surveyors ; but Sir Thomas Mit-
chell was not desirous they should he, unless
placed under his direction as ‘Surveyor-General.
If they had been, how for such a union of duties
would have consorted with the dignity of those
who are looked upon as representing in no small
degree the distant central authority, cannot he
determined.
Nevertheless, Commissioners going their rounds
have frequent opportunities of observing country,
and, their other duties permitting, it might have
been a happy alliance if they had joined to their
other qualifications a sufficient knowledge of sur-
veying for the construction of sketch maps of their


districts, and which would have been useful for
some purposes. One was the gradual delineation
of the boundaries of forfeited and vacated runs,
and their adjustment, if desirable, more in con-
formity with natural features; enabling the govern-
ment to give their incoming tenants better de-
scription of their lines.
In other cases, a little tact on the part of a com-
missioner, possessing a knowledge of surveying,
might have prevented litigation.
Another use of such maps, would have been the
assistance they might have given in striking out
provisional county and other boundaries.
Some men have a special talent for these kinds
of survey, which might have been h source of
useful emulation to the commissioners and enabled
them to give graphic proof that they had a better
topographical acquaintance with their districts than
can possibly be learnt in their travels from one
head station to another.


A notice of Public Surveys would be incomplete
without reference to that most important institu-
tion, the ‘ Lands Titles Office/ whose cheerful,
handsome, though small building adorns this city,
and in its external promise of the excellent arrange-
ments to be found within, contrasts in memory
with ungainly structures, that in their irregular
passages, lumbering presses, and mouldering con-
tents, offered sordid types of material and moral
decay.
Mr. Torrens has aptly stated that the best pub-
lic surveys in Great Britain take no note of the
ever varying boundaries of private property. But
it ought to be a quality of such surveys that they
can be used for the purpose.
In the French communes, there is always in
the ‘ Mairie/ or ‘ Municipal Chambers/ a local
map on which all such changes are recorded, and
consequently the right person can be rated for a


tenement ‘ Grand comme votre chapeau ,’ or, as we
say, ‘ as big as a dog kennel.’
Except that of the city of Sydney, there are at
present no such plans in this Colony, and the au-
thorities at the Lands Titles Office have to exer-
cise a sagacious discretion in giving the ‘illustrative
sketches ’ (Plans 1) that they attach to their titles.
In this matter, the official surveyors ought to
obtain the outlines of grants from their parent
establishment, the Survey Office. In return, their
measurements would test what they received, and
furnish ‘ filling in ’ materials for any maps or plans
that might be published both by authority and
private enterprise.
This reciprocal intelligence would prevent the
surveys from becoming obsolete, which they will
assuredly do, if subjected to a course of endless
fusions. It is imperatively necessary to preserve
the boundary lines of grants in all cases ; so that,
if a proprietor hold a piece of ground at the junc-
tion of four sections, it should be considered a case
of four titles, though shown in one deed.


Illustrative sketches are more than mere plans.
If they are on a scale to admit of the length of
the lines being written on them in words and not
only in figures, they are deeds almost in themselves,
and greatly shorten the body of the title.
The employment of some of the photographic
processes, alluded to by the Deputy Surveyor-Gene-
ral, would be of the greatest advantage. Some
years since, in a French lawsuit, a peasant aston-
ished the Court by demanding the photograph of
a document that it was impossible to show in evi-
dence. ‘ The apparatus cannot lie ’ and the ‘fairest’
of 1 attested ’ copies must ever yield in worth to
the claims of a fac-simile.
Slight alterations in the size of photographic
extracts do not alter their value, any more than
does the smaller size of an engraving when it
shrinks after being struck from the plate. If a
scale be attached to an illustrative sketch, it is only
affected, for all practical purposes, proportionally
with the other lines, and if the quantities be
written as well as figured, they will equally appear,
obviating the necessity of any scales at all. But
in some form they should appear on the plan;
i


for surveyors are in the practice of giving these
particulars in separate 1 descriptions ’ for embodi-
ment in the deeds. Where however a photo-
graphic extract could be taken from the general
plan, say of a municipality, it might be sufficient.
But in broaching these and other ideas on the
topic of Surveys, the writer’s main object
will be attained if they afford matter for discussion.
Natural alarm has been taken here at the intro-
duction of the new system of registering titles
under what is familiary known as ‘ Torrens Act.’
Yet there is much in the measure to reconcile the
legal profession. Like every other species of pro-
perty even ‘real’ estate resolves itself into a ques-
tion of money, and whether in the shape of sale,
purchase, or loan, the benefit to agents is one of
commission. A temporary disadvantage may be
felt, but it is confidently expected that it will be
more than compensated by the greatly increased
number of transactions consequent on the almost
perfect security given, and the facility with which
the mercantile community may make even land a
temporary investment. Should this be so, many
solicitors would be glad to save the office room
taken up by multitudinous papers. They would


also have a sense of greater security. Some years
ago in London, one of the judges accidentally set
fire to his chambers. In the destruction that
followed,an eminent solicitor suffered an irreparable
loss of deeds and documents of great value, belong-
ing to himself and numerous clients.
Should we ever have Judges in Title, great
powers should be given them. They should take
their own means of arriving at written decisions
which might remain open to revision until finally
confirmed. Chosen from men of character,and hold-
ing a position of high responsibility and dignity,
they should possess the almost unlimited confidence
of the community. Nor should they be made to
feel that virtue has no material reward. It ought
not to be expected that they should be indifferent
to the ordinary motives that are allowed to
weigh with other members of the community.
On the contrary, true policy points out that
every one in such a department should have one
of the strongest of inducements for promptness
and simplicity of action. In the sense of Guibeet,
only mistakes in policy are costly; a judicious
outlay is economy. Or, in his own words, ‘En
politique, il ny a que les erreurs qui content; les
depenses utiles sont economic.'




APPENDIX.
Note a. page 1. About tbe year 1835, some popular and enter*
taming papers were written by tbe late Mr. Govett, for the
Saturday Magazine, narrating his experiences while surveying in
the County of Argyle, N. S. Wales. At a more recent date, a
writer gave some account of the life of a surveyor in Canada : it
is believed in the new issue of the Penny Magazine.
Note 6. page 4. In reference to some observations in the
Governor’s speech to the Legislative Council in 1842, Sir Thomas
Mitchell thus explained injustice to himself, and to officers of his
department who had ably acquitted themselves ;
‘ So far from the surveys of the coast not being attempted to be
carried on by this Colony, they have been wholly completed by it>
the results eagerly sought for and readily adopted by the
Admiralty’s surveying officers; and wisely, as being much more
detailed and accurate than any made by sea could possibly be.
The map of Commander Stokes, just published, affords sufficient
evidence of this; the very accurate work by Mr. Surveyor
Townsend appearing thereon, between Cape Howe and Wilson’s
Promontory, including Port Albert.’
It is well known that Sir Thomas always spoke gratefully of
the appreciation of his labors by Captain P. P. King, and other
scientific officers of the navy.
Note c. page 11. In 1840 was published a Report by Captain
Dawson, of the Royal Engineers, ‘ on Surveying considered with
reference to New Zealand, and applicable to the Colonies generally.’
It was transmitted as a text book for Surveyor-Generals of
Colonies in Lord John Russell’s Circular Letter of 14th January,


1841 ; and as it is now very scarce and never likely to be re-
printed in its entirety, an extract is here given :
‘A trigonometrical survey may either precede or follow the
location survey. In my opinion it should follow. The system of
survey I have suggested, provides for the actual setting out upon
the ground the limits of the sections for which a title is claimed ;
and any probable error which could arise in setting out those
limits, if moderate care were taken, could affect only in a trifling
degree the contained quantities of land, and might be amply com-
pensated to the settler by a percentage allowance on the sections...
This appears to me to be a simpler and better method of meeting
the evil which might arise from accidental causes than that which
would be afforded by any attempt at a strictly accurate survey.
A percentage allowance involves a present sacrifice of land. A
trigonometrical survey calls for a heavy outlay of money ; and it
appears to me there can be no difficulty in choosing the alternative
for an infant Colony.
The following seem to be the ‘ulterior objects’that Captain
Dawson had in view :
‘The Future Trigonometrical Operation.’
‘ When at some future time it shall be deemed necessary to
combine these several detached surveys of sections into one general
map,showing the several groups in their true geographical positions,
and tracing the intermediate lines of coast, lakes and rivers, and
the lines of road which have been opened for communicating
between the detached points of settlement, then will the necessity
arise for the trigonometrical operation to which I have alluded,
and then should it be undertaken ; not with a view of detecting
minute differences and irregularities in the sections individually,
but to fix the groups in position, relatively to the principal
geographical lines and features of the country, so as to show what
land still remains to be laid out; and how the whole country may
be divided, by natural lines, or otherwise, into counties, hundreds,
parishes, &c. For this purpose a trigonometrical survey, such as
has been effected by Sir Thomas Mitchell, in Sydney, will be


fully sufficient, as shown by the result in its application
there.’
Extract of a despatch, dated Santa Fe, September 14th, 1846,
from W. H. Emory, first Lieut. Corps Top. Engineers to Lieut.
J. W. Abert, or, in his absence to Lieutenant W. G. Peck, from
a Narrative of a Military Tour, page 24.
‘ With the limited number of instruments that can be placed
in your hands, it is not expected that you will conduct the survey
on strict geodetic principles, yet, it is believed that sufficient
precision can be attained to answer all the requirements of the
military and civil service.’
‘ The country from Taos to Fra Cristobal contains nearly all
the ground that is worth cultivating ; and for the whole distance
it is open and bounded by high and conspicuous peaks, affording
great facilities for conducting your operations. I have established
the astronomical position of six points in this territory,
and I shall establish two more
‘ These points are quite sufficient and will be the base of your
operations; and upon them you will form a trigonometric canvas.
For this purpose the rule requiring every angle of the series to be
greater than 30 0 may be wholly disregarded. And after having
determined by triangulation the position of any three conspicuous
peaks, the position of any other points which are in view of the
three first named, may be determined by the problem of three
points, as is practised in hydrographic surveys. Many such
points will present themselves.’
Note d. p. 18. Where it was open to imagine that the author
had drawn on his own fancy, an article in the Australasian,
December 9th, on ‘ Our Salmon River,’ seems to show that in the
year of grace, 1865, the good people of Hobart Town in Tasmania
were nearly as little acquainted with the sources of their fine river
as they are with those of the White Nile; and that if any
geodetic surveys supervened the labors of a local Jemmy Meehan,
they certainly were never benefited by those of an intermediate
Sir Thomas.


The prince of Australian, rivers for sustained beauty and
grandeur is certainly our Derwent from its cradle to its grave. Its
course is short, but ever changing; grand,where it is not beautiful;
and beautiful where not grand. It possesses all the attributes
essential to great width, depth, rapidity—in one word, power.’
‘ Tasmania, as all the world knows, is a land of mountains.
The Australian Alps, after making their way across Bass’s Straits,
here tower up once more, and spread themselves in all directions
before taking their final plunge under the Southern Ocean. The
mountains run up and down and cross and re-cross in the wildest
confusion, not unlike the Highlands of Scotland, and, like them,
hold in their dark breast some" splendid lakes ; but the Scottish
lakes are down in the valleys, while those of Tasmania are hung
up among the clouds. Lake St. Clair, out of which the Derwent
flows, the grandest and wildest of them all, is more than 3,000 feet
above the sea. Though the island has been settled above sixty
years, it is little more than twenty since this lake was discovered,
and the region between it and the Western Ocean has been only
systematically grouped in the last five by Mr. Gould. It lies
on the edge of a prodigious wilderness, with which no man
living is really acquainted. Herdsmen, shepherds, hunters, fowlers,
in the far-back times bushrangers, have traversed its borders; but
few, very few, have been within its solemn precincts, and no one
can be said to know it. This is a curious state of things in an
island which has been colonized for sixty-three years, that such a
terra incognitia should exist, but'it is only one of a dozen.’
It is indeed strange to read this of a tight little island, whose
hundred and twenty miles of excellent macadamized road,
traversing it from North to South between Launceston and
Hobart Town, were praised long before the discovery of Lake
St. Clair, for the facility with which they were rattled over in a
few hours, in the good old English Coaching style. But we are
not done yet. In ‘Jottings about the Huon’ shortly after,
apparently by the same pen, it is stated that ‘ the noble stream has
its head somewhere or other (where nobody exactly knows) in
what we have dubbed ‘No-man’s-Land,’ ‘ Such is the western


half of Tasmania, which, from the creation to the present time,
has kept its dark secrets impenetrably to itself.’
Note e. page 30. In its essence ; —namely, the ordering of
weights and measures in harmonious progression with the system
of numerical notation employed, apart from the adoption of any
particular modulus. In that respect, other systems have their
advantages; but the decimal seems too widely and firmly
established to be ever superseded.
Note/, page 84. ‘ Dislike to be taught is a trait of the English
character; insomuch that your true born Englishman positively
refuses to learn anew of any one who can teach him at first hand,
and will only learn of ‘ experience.’ In a scientific matter he will
not learn from the veriest Newton.’— Spectator, February 2th, 1850.
Note g. page 84. ‘ The deserts of Mesopotamia, now so barren,
were overloaded in ancient times with the riches of Nature ; and
nothing but a renewed distribution of the Waters of the Euphrates
is necessary to revive the productiveness of the soil; and in all
the plains of Persia, now for the most part deserted, traces of a
system of irrigation are to be seen equal to the boasted works of
the Milanese territory. Wherever water can be brought, the
rocks of Catalonia are covered with magnificent harvests; and
even under the rays of a vertical sun, the plains of Bengal are
converted by the aid of irrigation, into fruitful and productive
fields.’ —(Alison, page 486.)
The International Commission, in their Report on the Isthmus
of Suez Ship Canal * give similar testimony :
‘ When the adjoining lands are cultivated, there would spring up
* Weale; London, 1857.


from the midst of the present barren regions an industrious
population, by whom all the resources of a fertile country could
be devoted to supplies for the ships. Nor is there any cause to
fear that, in anticipating such a result in the future, we are
indulging in an over-flattering illusion. The whole of this
country is, even to this day, teeming with numerous and unmis-
takeable traces of its former habitation by man. The Bible
likewise testifies to the great historical events of which it was
the scene. To restore these regions to their former fertility,
nothing more is required than to bring back to them once more
the waters to which they owed their former fruitfulness, and of
which they have been deprived only by neglect or political
events.’ (pages 134, 135.)
In North America, the basin of the Mississippi alone contains,
according to Chevalier, 1,015,000 square geographical miles, or
more than eleven times the whole surface of the British Isles, and
nearly seven times that of the whole kingdom of France. The
whole of that splendid surface is not only rich and fertile, but
watered with noble rivers, and almost entirely destitute of hills
or sterile spots. Sir Archibald Alison, in his ‘ Principle of Pop-
ulation,’ says, ‘if it were peopled in the same proportion as the
British isles, the portion of America, alone, lying between the
Alleghany and the Rocky Mountains, would contain about three
hundred and fifty millions of inhabitants.’
But even this immense field for immigration sinks almost into
insignificance compared with others. Of virgin territories, there
is the vast valley of the Amazon, that alone, it is estimated,
would support more souls than now exist in the entire world.
Professor Agassiz has lately returned to Boston in the United
States, with such an account of the capacity and extent of the
Nile of South America as must make the mouths of Geographers
water. Indeed, the Nile is a mere mountain torrent compared
with this superb river, by far the longest in the world—a river
which, with its great tributaries, drains the better half of a
continent into its channel, and in flowing out into the sea, darkens
the waves for eighty miles with the rich alluvial washing from


millions of acres of forest and savannah. Agassiz computes
at 4,000 miles the entire course of the stream, and he describes
its valley—if that name can be used—as a vast and unbroken
plain, perfectly level and densely covered with luxuriant vegeta-
tion. Yet the great Naturalist declares this glowing and humid
region to be very healthy and bitted bob universal
colonization. The temperature is Italian rather than African;
for the great Amazon, flowing always against the trade winds,
heeps up a healthy stir in the atmosphere. It is plain that the era of
this vast southern land is coming.*
The year closes with the following pithy notice among Reuter’s
telegrams
‘ Rio Janeiro, Dec. 8, 1866.’
‘ The Rivers Amazon, Tocantins, and San Francisco have been
thrown open to the trade of all nations.’
In hailing this liberal measure, all honor must be given to the
Emperor of the Brazils, whose capacity, varied attainments, and
enlightened views, are well known throughout the civilized world.
Note i. page 94. ‘lf something of this sort be not done, I
venture to predict that Botany Bay, which must in spite of fate,
speedily grow strong and populous, will in fifty years become the
greatest nuisance on the face of the earth—an unmixed community
of ruffians, who will shake off the yoke of England, and, placed
at a distance which makes them inaccessible to conquest, will
become a republic of pirates, the most formidable that ever
roamed the seas. England, in rearing such a community, is
preparing not only conquerors for India, but enemies to herself
and to all mankind.’
Sir James Macintosh : Letter from Bombay in 1807.
(See Literary Gazette, 1855.)
Note j. page 94. ‘ Even civilized men, when transferred to a
wide wilderness, where each has to work hard and isolatedly for
* Daily Telegraph of November 1, 1866.


the first requisites of life, soon show a retrogression to barbarism:
witness the plains of Australia, as well as the backwoods of
Canada and the prairies of Texas. Fixity of residence and
thickening of population are perhaps the prime requisites for
civilization ; and hence it will be found that all civilization as yet
known has taken place in regions physically limited.’ —Vestiges of
Civilization, page 392.
But something more than mere population is requisite .-—indeed,
a great deal more, if we agree with some writers. One, in the
Spectator, holds —‘ Until we can infuse into the mass of expatriated
humanity some of the elements of axistrocratic society, there is
very little chance of our effectively guarding ourselves against the
evils which we so greatly deplore. And here we see the great
want of our colonial system. The Colonies are not attractive.
The higher classes of society, in the present condition of things,
will not betake themselves to Australia. Bank will not go to
Australia. Capital will not go to Australia. Talent will not go
to Australia. They would rather find standing room at home.
Let us only hold out sufficient inducements to the higher classes
of English society to expatriate themselves to our distant settle-
ments, and instead of a confused mass of poverty and crime going
forth to pollute the Colonies, we shall have well-ordered assemblies,
composed of different classes of society, all associated with one
another, all recognizing the different links in the chain of
emigration, and all performing their several functions to the
benefit of the entire body.’
The remark, that civilization has taken place in regions
physically limited, rather applies to its early state. With the
printing press and modern means of rapid communication, notions
that are sound in themselves, become tempered by experience ;
and in relation to the elements that should compose new societies,
much will always depend on the new conditions of their existence.
In the present state of the world, we can scarcely hope for the
well ordered assemblies above described, until we find just laws
administered to rich without pride, poor without envy, and both
without covetousness. At least, until these passions are reduced


within manageable bounds; and to this end administrations of
superior beings would almost be necessary; indifferent to distinc-
tion, save as they could best serve God.
The subject, however, of a superior kind of emigration merits
serious attention. Many families who are struggling to keep up
appearances in a highly artificial state of society, have, neverthe-
less, sufficient means to live in a Colony without the necessity of
entering into its pursuits until familiar with their new scene of
action ; and with the assurance,they cannot have at home, of never
living to see their children want bread. Yet nothing but the
most urgent necessity will induce most of such families to enter
communities where they believe the tendency is rather to cut off
cherished associations than to maintain or extend them. This
dislike to go forth is very natural, and, in some respects, well
founded. But, should the day ever come when a truly British
Empire shall be established, composed not of a mother country
and dependencies, but of a federation of British states, where
each with sufficient powers of self-government, looks reverently to
to the central authority, and with its meed of Imperial honors
cheerfully accepts its share of Imperial responsibilities and
burdens : —ln such an Empire the ‘ venue’ might lie anywhere.
There would be no ‘expatriation,’ there would be no— painter.
It will be long,too,before throat-cutting is necessitated by a dearth
of land. Indeed, that occupation appears to be most followed in
countries where everyone can place himself at a distance from his
fellow-man. At the same time, much remains to be done before
the world sees free trade embracing free citizenship. And, in our
own interest,we must rather desire the emigration of British subjects
to British Colonies than to other countries, however tempting the
climate, or rich and easy of acquisition the soil. But in the
colonies, at least in that of New South Wales, alarm has arisen,
under self-government, against the possible monopoly of large
tracts of land by capitalists. There is no doubt that some of the
early grants in the neighbourhood of Sydney, and elsewhere, should
never have been made. Still, it may be argued that the welfare
of the colony would be best promoted by the application and
maintenance, as far as possible, of the principle of free trade to


land. In other words, by the bona fide sale for cash of the
public lands, in greater or less quantities, suitable to the wants
of large or small buyers.
It must indeed be confessed, that it is almost impossible for any
system of laws to maintain a procrustean standard for land or for
any other commodity. Not only are larger portions of the soil
than allowable by the land act constantly acquired through
riskful and demoralizing agency, but the grants actually made to
free selectors often rapidly pass into the hands of creditors, chiefly
country store-keepers. In Canada, it has been alleged that a great
hindrance to the progress of that colony existed in the prevalence
of large tracts of land that were suffered to lie unimproved in the
midst of growing settlements. But it was overlooked that many,if
not all of these, were free grants.
In New South Wales a different form of evil has of late
presented itself. In many places, selectors free to choose before
survey on almost nominal terms, pick the eyes out of the soil; and,
though many are successful, most are content if they can make a
bare living, without the power, if they were inclined, to purchase
the back country that they practically command—not unfrequently
as cattle stealers. While, were the sale of large tracts permitted,
not only might there be larger, surer and readier returns to the
treasury, but, being made by men of capital, good land would be
often averaged with bad in comprehensive plans of improvement,
entailing the employment of remunerative labor.
It is to be borne in mind, as a rule, that the possession of
capital implies the knowledge of investing it to more or less
advantage. There may be difference of opinion on the subject of
sufficient price, or on the best mode of selling the Crown lands,
by auction or otherwise. But one effect of a changeable or
vacillating land policy is evidenced in the fact that, grantees
under the old regulations having found, by the new, their estates
diminished in value one half or two thirds of the original cost,
irrespective of improvements, many of them have retired in
disgust from the colony. Another effect is, that the Government
is not likely to get payment of the balances due by free selectors,


even when solvent; at least, if influences prevail that are working
to prevent enforcement against the ‘ Poor Man ’ and his assigns.
The term poor man is used quotatively to prevent a wrong
impression out of Australia.
As in other countries, there is want, sometimes most distressing;
and which must exist until ‘ the poor die out,’ which they will
never do—not even in a land flowing with milk and honey : hut
the colonial expression ‘ poor man ’ seems rather to be employed
in a political sense; for the writer has met ‘ poor men,’ boasting
of the title, who were very well off; and even possessed of wealth,
that is, of a few hundreds, or even thousands, may be deemed
such.
The designation seems opposed to that of ‘ gentleman,’ and
improperly so, in the true acceptation ; for it is in the power, it
must be hoped, of every man of right mind to be the almost
Christian, without much learning, or the polished exterior that
is a recommendation in cities, if not in the bush.
Looking to the future of New South Wales, Sir James
Macintosh certainly did not ‘ softly body forth ’ a ‘ beauteous
thought ’ of the future ‘ Queen of the South,’ and one very
different from those entering into Mrs. Boyd’s enthusiastic waking
dreams of the future ‘Happy Land.’ Yet evoking the laws of a
different polarity, we may pardonably indulge an expectation that
the progress of New South Wales will be distinguished by very
different conquests from those that signalised the march of ancient
Rome.
In spite of all drawbacks, including the mistaken opinions of
friends or foes, there is an excellent spirit in the community, and
a fine colony is advancing, though not so rapidly as many think
it ought to be. The land is, or has been, the great bone of con-
tention ; and partly, perhaps, from the secret dislike in human
nature to see, or fancy, others better off than ourselves.
‘ Great complaints have been made not only against the abuses
of ‘ Squatting,’ but even against the system ; forgetful that the
Colony owes almost everything to it, and that without the foun


dation it laid, the discovery of gold would have been much less
prolific in its results, if even made.
This interest is still, and deservedly, a very powerful one.
But others of great importance, are now springing up,
or extending ; and making allowance for the natural bias to
one’s own calling, the following paragraph from the Mining
Journal, of Nov. 17, possesses much truth and significance:—
‘ The advices by the present mail, from Australasia generally,
are most unsatisfactory in a commercial sense In fact, the
complaint from Victoria is that ‘ too much of the banks’ money is
locked up in not readily convertible squatting securities, and that
there is too little money available for the daily operations of com-
merce.’ This not only refers, it appears, to the commercial
interests in its more ordinary sense, but applies equally to the
mining.’
‘ These allusions have special reference to Victoria, where the
gold fields are the great source of wealth and benefit to the Colony;
yet, strange to say, if these averments be true, the bulk of assist-
ance rendered by the banks has been to the pastoral and squatting
interests, although it is obvious that the more the gold-producing
localities are supported in this way, the greater wdll be the
production, to work its influence, not only locally, but in the
mother country and over the world. The same spirit of short-
sighted policy has also been worked out in South Australia, and
the present mail brings intelligence of a failure in Adelaide of an
important mercantile firm, which has shaken certain interests to
their centre, and this arising almost entirely from the desire to
monopolise sheep walks and cattle runs, fostered by a ready
advance on the part of the banks to promote such gigantic oper-
ations. It appears that one bank, we believe the South Australian,
with a capital of £500,000, lent about one-fifth of this amount to
this firm alone, which has its resources almost exclusively engaged
in pastoral pursuits.’
‘ South Australia is as an important in its production of copper
as Victoria is for gold, yet strange as it may seem, it is neverthe-
less most true that these most important branches of their


industry are relatively overlooked by the banks, in their monetary
arrangements, for the more uncertain results of agriculture and
pasture, -which are subject to every kind of drawback, in the shape
of drought, plague, and disease, by which thousands of heads of
cattle are destroyed with great rapidity, and whole crops totally
annihilated ; whereas the yield of metal is totally devoid of all
these casualties, and must, necessarily, be a better security for the
advances made. It is certainly remarkable that the banks which
owe their origin, influence, and position to these mineral produc-
tions, both in Victoria and South Australia, should so completely
overlook the staple commodities of both colonies, and it is a
subject of grave importance for the directors and shareholders of
the respective banks to look into. Indeed, it is a question whether
the banks were not in every sense of policy and commerce bound
to support these interests in their need, instead of adopting such
stringent measures that failure was inevitable where there were
not means independent of bank accommodation, and producing
stagnation in every branch of the trade and commerce of the colony?
With regard to the actual alienation of the Crown lands,
changes were doubtless required to meet altered circumstances.
Still, the best system cannot be that which strives to ‘ protect ’
even the poor man. Fair play is all that he has a right to. It is
enough that he should be able to purchase land in the public
market on the same terms as others; and, if unable to acquire it
without credit from the State, he should (in such a country as
New South Wales) be content with the wages of his labor, and
the hope of a legitimate ambition,that is almost sure to be realized
with self denial, and if he be content, in a well-ordered society,
to prove himself man before calling himself master.
Many immigrants, too, shew themselves to be most inconsistent
with their former selves. Even the most communistic at home, on
bettering themselves in a colony, are often disposed to shut the
door of a British Inheritance against after comers ; from the
erroneous notion that, when there is plenty of room, and plenty to do
in it, the market may become overstocked. Not that they at all
object to people coming with plenty of money; unmindful that


capitalists are not likely to be attracted anywhere by restrictive
land laws and ‘protective’ tariffs.
In New South Wales this spirit of exclusion, which once
objected to free immigration, is far from being entertained by
numbers of intelligent colonists. It has been ably combated by
the Fourth Estate ; and several Legislators have only acted in
opposition to their private convictions, from the apparent necessity
of meeting temporary exigencies and of dealing with things as
they found them. It is to be hoped that these questions, when
thoroughly fermented, will, like good liquors, work themselves
clear, and the colony is well disposed to see its way through them.
Meanwhile much good is neglected. The population, living on
comparatively easy terms in a fine climate, may be tolerably well
off, but is without sufficient means to embark in many pursuits
besides that of ordinary agriculture. Many useful projects
languish or are neglected from want of the sufficiently large
masses of capital, that would not only give remunerative employ-
ment, but, by increasing the wealth of the colony, afford many
desirable opportunities of rising in the world, and creating those
leisured orders who are less bound to live by bread alone, and
whose existence in healthy proportions, is essential to the well
being of every society.
But capitalists are well able to take care of themselves, though
it is the interest of the colony to invite them. Whatever the fate
of their speculations the colonists get their money, and their
outlay creates a permanent accession of wealth, even if they do not
ultimately become settlers. Nevertheless, after past experience,
it is hardly to be expected,with regard to the land, that men, instead
of losing a great portion of their capital in twenty years, would
be content even with the absolute certainty of greatly increasing
it, when they can do so safely, in less time, in other investments,
and —in other countries.
Note k. —On the subject of the Transfer of Land at 112 and
following pages, no notices of intended transfer should have legal
effect unless the names of the original grantees were given. It is


unreasonable to expect that parties interested can recognize estates
under the fancy names often applied to them. And even when
notices are quite formal there should he cheap and ready means
of proving their authenticity.
Some time back, a Parliamentry Document (Council Paper) was
refused in evidence before the Supreme Court of the colony, upon
the ground that that there was nothing to certify whence it came
from. No doubt the proper officer should have been brought
forward to verify it; regardless of cost, personal inconvenience,
and waste of time both public and private.
It may also have been objected that the Document was
printed. Lately a voluminous account being brought into the
High Court of Chancery in England, it was gravely argued
whether, being printed, it could be received. The usual rule of
the Court is to require accounts in writing. With due solemnity
the Court decided that in this case a printed account might be ac-
cepted. One would suppose that a print would be more reliable
and referable than a mere transcript; and the words ‘in this case’
seem to indicate that it was a Parliamentary Paper.
In appeal to the highest Court of Judicature in the realm, the
House of Lords, all documentary evidence is obliged to be printed,
and the practice has its advantages : though the expense to
litigants has been complained of. It is conceived, however, that it
would be far greater if the requisite number of copies were
‘ engrossed.’
This is a matter that concerns every one, and should be taken
up by the press. The writer has seen newspapers in France, that,
besides more than one Imperial stamp, had a short form annexed,
enabling any one, for a trifle, to have it filled up and attested by
the signature of the well-known public officer appointed for the
purpose.
In respect to deeds, it sometimes happens that, besides the
greater risk of destruction in private hands, owners are deprived
of them by accident or the malversations of agents, and consider
themselves very fortunate if they can recover them, even by the
payment of a large sum of money.


But even tlien the danger is not over, for a question of severance
may he raised, and the owner, unless he can produce living
or other evidence that may he conclusive in support of his deeds
and title, may find that no dependence is to he placed on
documents commencing with the well known preamble—
Ib JJI ta folmn tym ffaxtmds jsljiill cme,*
and that he is reduced, purely and simply, to a possessory title—
it would he hoped of sufficient standing.
Mr. Sims, in his Manual for the Genealogist, &c., has some
curious remarks on the severance of deeds, and which might have
been studied with advantage by the Corporation of the City of
London when they sought to recover portions of their ‘ White
Book’ from the Trustees of the British Museum ; supposing that
there were any legal advantage in the re-possession.
Mr. Sims states that there are families whose title deeds to their
estates are now in the Museum at Oxford, and other places;
as specimens of mediaeval art, or for their literary
Having being ‘ severed,’ it is said, they are not legally available;
for one of the first questions in our Courts, at the present day, to
a witness producing an old grant or document, is, “ where did you
obtain it 2”
Even a transfer by mischance from one department of Govern-
ment to another has been alleged to operate a ‘ severance’ of certain
documents. All this goes to prove the importance of Mr. Torrens’
system of registering Titles. Once cancelled, deeds may cheerfully
be acknowledged to have only a literary or genealogical value ;
though, on these accounts, perhaps highly prized by a family. In
such cases if the person entitled to their possession do not elect
to leave them in the safest and most appropriate of depositories, he
may be free to reclaim them ; though, in many cases, he W'ould be
content not to do so if art could supply him with fac-similes.
Furthermore, in the Colony it is a laudable object of ambition,
as it is at home, to found a family; and there seems no reason why
* In a deed of the Ifth century, under view, the emphatic form is:—
“ Omnibus hoc scriptum visuris yel audituris.”


original grants should not issue through the medium of the Lands’
Titles Office; and, if desired, from personal motives and in the
cause of art, they could he choice specimens of calligraphy, and
even illuminated in a handsome style, at a much less cost than in
former times. The margin of a deed might also be made useful as
•well as ornamental, and convey information that it might be
desired to perpetuate.
But these details may be considered frivolous in the present age,
and in a Colony where as yet there are few social distinctions, and,
(in a small scattered population,) not many examples of that
honorable and useful member of society—the educated country
gentleman.
In close connection with the foregoing observations and those
on photographic processes at pages 100,113, are notices which the
writer had the pleasure of since meeting with.—
‘ Application op Photo-zincography. —ln the consideration
of the Writs Registration (Scotland) Bill by a select committee
last Session the question was raised whether the process of photor
zincography might not be applied to the copying of documents,
which are to appear upon the register. Colonel Sir H. James
stated to the committee that a deed could be copied by this process
at a third or a fourth of the expense of copying by hand, and of
course there would be no possibility of error in copying. Several
copies could be obtained at a very much lower rate than one copy,
and it is obvious that greater security could be obtained by making
several copies, and depositing them in different places. Copies of
documents may thus be obtained without risk to the original ;
there is no fire, no artificial light, and no risk of spilling a bottle
of ink over the original. The original would also be less handled.
The committee were of opinion that the Lord Clerk Registrar
should be empowered, with the consent of the Treasury, to apply
this process as a substitute for the engrossing of writs in the
Sasine-office, if experiments should prove it to be available.’—
Times, September 27, 1866.
National Manuscripts. —Fac-similes of National Manuscripts,,
from William the Conqueror to Queen Anne; selected under the


direction of the Master of the Rolls, and Photo-zincographed by
command of Her Majesty Queen Victoria. By Colonel Sir
Heeny James, R.E., F.R.S., Director of the Ordnance Survey.
With translations and notes. Published by authority of the
Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury.—This series of
Photo-zincographic Fac-similes of some of the most interesting
of our National Manuscripts, copied by order of Her Majesty’s
Government, by Colonel Sir Henry James, E.E., Director of the
Ordnance Survey; with translations and introductory Notes by
W. Basevi Sanders, Esq., Assistant Keeper of Her Majesty’s
Records; consisting of Royal Charters and Grants, and the Letters
of Royal and Eminent or Remarkable Persons, has been selected
under the direction of the Right Hon. Sir John Romilly, Master
of the Rolls; by Thomas Ddepus Hardy, Esq., Deputy Keeper
of Her Majesty’s Records; and includes some of the most remark-
able Original Documents deposited in Her Majesty’s Record Office,
together with a few from other repositories, including the most
perfect Original Copy of Magna Charta now extant. They are not
only of the highest historical interest, but at the same time
illustrate the changes which have successively occurred in our
language and handwriting from the reign of William the
Conqueror to the reign of Queen Anne. The Fac-similes are
arranged chronologically, and the Translations are interleaved so
as to appear opposite to each page of the Fac-simile of the
Original Manuscripts.


See Note, page 15. Of tlie Surveyors, several met with a tragic
end. Foremost in recollection rises the name of Edward
Kennedy. Young, handsome, and full of promise, he was miser-
ably slain in the ill-fated expedition to Cape York.
The following are some lines to his memory by his Chief, who
could truly say that it was not his expedition.
Elegy on the Death op Kennedy.
Weep fair Britannia! not that thy brave son
Fell in his youth ; so Britons often die ;
But that his fall records no victory won ;*
A needless sacrifice his ashes lie.
The terrors of “ the battle-field, the wreck,”
May sometimes sickness, sometimes famine know.
But the proud “ monarch of a peopled deck ”
In glory falls against a generous foe.
Compared with such, thy sufferings how great;
And thy reward, poor Kennedy, how small!
No generous public to lament thy fate ;
Few knew the aim of thy untimely fall.
Thy gallant bearing, thy unswerving truth,
Had well a field of chivalry adorned;
Uncheered by lady’s smile was passed thy youth,
Afar from those by whom thy death is mourned.
The parent’s heart that nestled fond in thee,
That heart how sunk ! a prey to grief and care :
So decked the woodbine sweet yon aged tree;
So from it ravaged, leaves it bleak and bare.
And thy poor comrades, the banished brave,
Whose dues had won their freedom, only found
Starvation, sickness, death without a grave—
Each bone a jest to savages around !
* Not so—though dearly purchased ! His papers, stained with his
blood, were recovered through the aid of the faithful aboriginal, ‘Jaoky
Jacky,’ and are deposited somewhere in the Survey Office. From them
the late Surveyor General Maclean, when draftsman, made an admirable
compilation, showing nearly the entire track of the explorer. This
was long before the erection of the Northern District of N. S. Wales
into the Colony of Queensland; and now some fruits may have been
gathered in the progress of settlement northward. It is to be hoped so,
in partial exculpation of what appears to have been an ill advised, ill-
organized expedition.


THE TWO KNIGHTS.
‘ However, I have now learnt to say Ho ! ’
Speech, of Sir 0, Giptps in Council.
Negat contrarius alter.
There was a knight in Paynim Land,
Vice-regal state had he :
And all the men that there did stand—
Must do him fealty.
There came to him an errant Knight,
‘ To the mountains let me go ;
That there I may essay my might
But the other Knight said No !
Out spake the errant Knight again,
In higher tones and holder :
‘ The Queen, whose virgin hand did lay—
The Knighthood on my shoulder!
Said, ‘ Still Australia’s map is blank ;
Untraced her rivers flow :
Be thine the achievement to explore— ’
The other Knight said No !
Out spake a gallant Captain then,
And said, ‘ this Knight hath ta’en
The measure of many a battle field,
And storied ridge of Spain;
He’s made for us of counties more
Than Ordnance map can shew ;
Deign o’er his Triangles to pore,—
But the other Knight said No !
Then for the desert wilds prepared,
And tropic’s burning ray ;
The errant Knight led forth his steed,
And thus was heard to say :


‘ Give me twelve men, and hundreds ten
Of pounds, and I will go,
And ope a way to fair Cathay— ’*
The other Knight said No !
Since travel was denied, he chose
In Council Hall to sit,
And in the matters of the State,
To exercise his wit ;
And whensoe’r he voted there —
To help the poor and low;
To right the wrong and curb the strong—
The other Knight said No !
‘ Since tent and field no laurels yield,
Nor Senate nor surveying;
My lance in chimney comer laid,
In stall my charger neighing ;
I pray thee try thy courtesy—
To England let me go
But never courteous mote he be,
So the other Knight said No !
A woeful man then was that Knight,
And woeful are we all ;
That we beneath the government—
Of such a churl should fall;
For if we ask him civilly,
The truncheon down to throw,
And the land to leave, his loss to grieve
He’s sure to answer No !
*ln reference to a new exploratory expedition, the Governor
stated in one of his despatches home, that no leader had yet offered
for the honor of the enterprise.


A GOVERNOR’S GOD-SPEED.
S CENE—Government House, Sydney.
Sir T M I have sent for you
That I may tell you at this interview,
That what is wanted for your expedition
Shall he supplied to you on this condition,
That henceforth you in no way interfere
With your department, nor at all go near
Your Office. Sir, I would leave matters there
In order ere I go. I cannot spare
You Mr. Townsend longer with your party,
He must return forthwith. You have my hearty
Good wishes of success : and I can tell you,
And better fortune never yet befel you ;
(God knows I am glad of it myself) beforg
You can approach the Carpentarian shore,
My government of this Colony will be o’er.
Indeed ! Sir. Yes ! I have surmounted here
Difficulties greater than they may appear—
Your Excellency will excuse me when I say
No difficulty should lie in the way
Of Acts of Parliament. lam obliged to speak
In a set phrase to you who do not seek
This house to enter but with formal mien,
Yet as we never, probably, again
May meet ( To this I cannot say Amen.)


I from my heart shall wish you a God-speed !
I thank your Excellency, hut I had need
Of some more gun-powder for which to day
You have refused the cash, and I must pay.
‘ Tis very strange Sir T M you
Cannot he made to -do as others do !
As of the family, to this house they come ;
Give freely their advice ; make it their home ;
Unceremoniously. You are the chief
Of those who stand aloof. (Alas ! how brief
Must be advice to absolute—) I want
A List—What’s that ? A list, Sir. Oh, I can’t
See without glasses.—(Puts them on.) Now in this I see-.
Six dozen pins, I think that dozens three >
Were quite enough of pins. This list to me '
Is quite superfluous, I’ve already said
Rather than that your journey be delayed,
The equipment shall be wholly left to you :
At leisure I shall look these items through.
To equip the party then I know not how
O’Reilly duns me for the powder now
Which has been bought. I cannot help it, you
May pay for it then—other articles too,
That seem to me not wanted, you shall pay for,
Especially all such as you delay for.
I do not understand then, the condition
On which —Mind this is not my expedition !
Your Excellency may .then call it mine;
Although two years ago the whole design,
Part of a general plan, I did submit.
Myself of Public dtities to acquit —
That might be so. It was so, and I must also say
That only with obstruction and delay
Have you met this half executed plan
Of fifteen yeard suspension—Any man,
No matter who, may carry it out but me ;
Sturt, Leichhardt—l think it should be done by sea.


Lord Stanley —Better know great Nature's Laws.
You by that reference gained a whole yearns pause
And lost the finest season that e’re was.
Annihilated my department then.
No duty left me but to go again
To the interior; I before you laid
My plan of exploration, and you said:
Provided that the Council did reduce
The Estimates by so much, you’d not refuse —
A thousand pounds or two. That promise made,
(Of reference home then not a word was said,)
Was by you broken. When the Expenditure
Had been reduced—and when by vote made sure
Even of the money —you requested permission
From home to send out such an expedition.
Before I go, Sir, I must now speak out;
My sense of wrong leaves me no room to doubt
That a bad feeling —Good morning ! Oh!
All others too are interrupted so,
With a good morning cutting their speech short!
Such the etiquette of this Vice-regal Court.
Officials domesticated here discharge
Their duties thus! Good morning, then, Sir George. —
Exit, Sir T—— M


ERRATA.
Page 2, line 6, for his read him.
„ 10, ~ 16, „ comparitive „ comparative.
~ 13, ~ 13, „ has ~ had.
„ „ „ 19, „ by „ j—
„ 14, „ 9, ~ route „ route surveys.
„ 18, „ 2, „ condusive ~ conducive.
~ 23, ~ 14, „ the „ an.
~ 24, „ 20, „ means ~ mean.
„ 25, „ 13, „ internment ~ instrument.
~ 26, „ 7, ~ geodesist ~ geodesist.
„ 28, „ 23, „ two years ~ years.
~ 29, „ 2, ~ readings ~ the mean of readings.
„ „ „ 3, „ were not ~ was not.
~ ~ „ ~ „ they were „ it was.
~ 31, ~ 15, ~ than for ~ than in.
~ 32, „ 12, ~ even „ ever.
„ 33, „ 2, „ DeLaJaulxs,, DeLaLande.
„ „ „ 10, ~ admissable ~ admissible.
~ 36, „ 17, „ at „ near.
~ 38, ~ 23, „ Albacutyd „ Albacutya.
„ „ ~ 24, ~ arbitrary ~ arbitrary one.
„ 42, ~ 5, „ current „ cursive.
„ 48, „ 10, ~ Australia „ adoption.
~ 45, ~ 15, „ elegible „ eligible.
„ 46, „ 7, ~ numbering „ re-naming.
~ 51, ~ 13, ~ it ~ in.
„ ~ „ 19, „ introduce „ re-define.
~ 53, „ 19, „ not „ only.
~ 56, „ 9, „ latitude ~ reckoning.
„ ~ „ 14, „ interim „ interior.
» ~ „ 16, ~ as a ~ Asa.
„ ~ „ 25, „ accurate „ correct.
~ 68, „ 24, ~ were ~ is.
„ ~ ~ „ „ their „ its.
„ 60, „ 19, „ M. Beuvied „ M. Beuvi^re.
„ 64, ~ 10, ~ campared „ compared.
„ 75, „ 9, ~ question „ questions.
~ 76, ~ 12, „ unto ~ into.
~ ~ ~ 22, ~ compacted „ compact.
„ 77, ~12*13, ~j“ “, d E‘ J>, independent bases
~ 78, „ 21, ~ feet, or more ~ or more feet.
„ 88, „ 17, „ Suveyora „ Surveyors.
„ 93, ~ 13, „ apppllcatlon ~ application.
„ 102, ~ 2, „ introduction „ importation.
~ 105, ~ 19, „ any „ any other.
„ 106, „ 10, „ for „ far.
~ ~ ~ 11, ~ consorted ~ comported.
„ 108 ~ 10, „ executed „ created.
„ 131 ~ 5, ~ Parliamentry „ Parliamentary.
