

THE RIDD
INSTRUCTOR
A Complete Manual
covering the erection,
overhauling and
operating of the
RIDD MILKING
MACHINE
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Taylor & Son, Russell Place, Melbourne.
Published by
THE RIDD COMPANY Ltd.
495-497 Bourke Street, Melbourne


IMPORTANT
THIS Booklet is issued as an instruction
from The Ridd Company in respect
to erection and operation of the Ridd
Plant and the handling of the Dairy Herd.
The plant must be erected and operated
in accordance with instructions contained
herein, otherwise the Company can take no
responsibility. Where a recommendation is
given by the Company, it must be read as
an instruction as far as the Company’s
liability under its guarantee is concerned.
The Purchaser must not work with parts
that are worn or rubber that has lost
elasticity, but the plant must be maintained
in thorough good order and condition—as
near as possible to the condition in which
it was supplied—if satisfactory results are
desired.


Write for Milking Catalogues.
The New Detachable Releasor Plant— RIDD TYPE.


IMPORTANT
THIS Book has been prepared in
great detail, mainly from instructions
issued by Mr. Ridd, but the advice of
all experienced fitters and experts has also
been taken, with the result that the Instruc-
tions as presented herein are complete in
every detail.
If a Ridd Machine is operated in accordance
with the instructions laid down in this booklet,
IT ABSOLUTELY MUST GIVE THE
UTMOST SATISFACTION TO THE USER.
You will understand, however, that the machine
must be operated as we instruct herein. ' If not
you cannot get the results the machine is capable
of giving you.
We advise all users to make a thorough
study of the Instruction Book, taking one chapter
at a time and thoroughly understanding it in
every detail. The user who adopts this policy
will run his machines in a thoroughly efficient
manner, but with the user who does not read his
Instruction Book, and operate the plant accord-
ingly, a certain amount of difficulty must be ex-
perienced.
We cannot urge too strongly upon users of
the Ridd Machine the necessity of thoroughly
understanding their plant, and of making a care-
ful studv of this booklet. ’ ♦


Before Commencing to Milk with
the Machines:
TEAT-CUPS AND CLAWS.
SEE THAT—
There are no holes in the Claw Tubes.
There is a good Pulsation in each Teat Cup.
You have not a burst Inflation.
The Teat Cups are drained and all the water shaken out.
The Caps on the Pulsating Tube of Claw are screwed up
tightly. (
The Inflations are not twisted in the Cases.
The Mouthpieces are in the Inflations.
The Inflations are not stretched beyond the Cases.
LONG TUBES.
SEE THAT—
All Tubes are coupled correctly.
The 5-ft. and 7-ft. Tubes are not kinked.
There are no leaks in the Milk Tubes.
The Sight Glasses in the Milk Tubes are not broken.
The 7-ft. Pulsator Tube is clear.
BUCKETS.
SEE THAT—
The Pail Rings are seating and are not stretched beyond
the Flange.
The Down Pipes in the Bucket Tops are screwed home.
PIPE LINE.
SEE THAT—'
Pulsator Tube Taps are turned on.
The Vacuum Gauge registers 15-in. of Vacuum.
All Plugs previously removed for cleansing Pipe Line
are tightened up.
The Relief Valve is working.
VACUUM TANK.
SEE THAT—
The Ring on the Vacuum Tank Lid is adjusted and
preventing the admission of air.
Unions coupling Vacuum Tank are tightened.
The Vacuum Tank is clean.
PULSATORS.
SEE THAT—
The Pulsator Belts are not slipping.
The Pulsators are working correctly.


VACUUM PUMP.
SEE THAT—
The Valves in Vacuum Pump are adjusted and have only
Ys- in. of lift.
There is no leakage past Packing Gland on Piston Rod
of Pump.
The Tap on Oiling Cock of Pump Valve is shut off.
NICKEL PIPING.
SEE THAT—
The i % Nickel Tubing is coupled correctly.
The iYk Rubber Rings are not cut when Tubing is being
pushed home.
The Union on the Tubing is coupled properly to
Releasor; do this before Releasor is tightened into
stirrup by thumb screw.,
RELEASOR.
SEE THAT—
The Releasor Valves are seating properly all round on
the Rubber Rings.
The Stall Tap operating the Releasor Pulsator Tube is
open.
The Releasor Pulsator Tube is coupled and has not a
kink in it.
The Rubber Ring on the Check Attachment is in place.
The Releasor is tightened into stirrup by thumb screw.
The Aluminium Valves are free from corrosion, which
prevents them from seating.
The Release Chamber in Releasor is clear of Pulsating
Tube.
THE COW.
SEE THAT—
The Milk is started in each Teat.
The Cows’ Udders are washed.
VACUUM GAUGE.
SEE THAT—
Care should be taken to see that the spring of the Vacuum
Gauge has not become corroded or stiff. If there
is any doubt as to whether the Gauge is registering
correctly or not it should be sent to the Company for
overhaul. This should be done at least once a year.
A safe rule to follow is always to milk with as low a
Vacuum as possible, so that if the Vacuum Gauge
is out of order no harm will accrue.
The most important point, however, to watch, is the
Squeeze or Pulsation of the Inflation. MILKING
SHOULD NEVER TAKE PLACE WITH A
VACUUM THAT IS TOO LOW TO GIVE A
GOOD, DEFINITE PULSATION.


A “RIDD” Machine is only a “RIDD” so long as it is
operated in accordance with these instructions.
If you attempt to operate a machine in a different manner
to that instructed by the Inventor you are attempting to make
really a different machine to what the Inventor intended,
consequently you are likely to meet with trouble.
INSTRUCTIONS
For OVERHAULING, OPERATING
and ERECTING
RIDD MILKING MACHINES
DO NOT HAVE MACHINES HUNG UP
:: AND HAVE TO MILK BY HAND ::
Every user of a Milking Machine in 'his own interests should
have on hand the following supply of spares:—
4 Inflations (in ordering state whether for screw top or plain
cases).
6 Claw Tubes
6 Long Temporary Cases for Inflations (plain case only).
4 Small Mouthpieces.
6 Large Mouthpieces.
1 33m. Milk Tube (no stock).
6 Sight Glasses.
2 Pail Rings.
3 Claw Ends for Vacuum Tubes.
3 Tap Ends for Vacuum Tubes.
3 Tap Ends for Pulsator Tubes,
i Top Valve for Vacuum Pump.
i Bottom Valve for Vacuum Pump (in ordering Pump parts
state diameter of flywheel and maker’s name if shown).
1 Ring for Vacuum Tank (state diameter).
ADDITIONS FOR RELEASOR PLANTS.
2 Valve Rings (state whether valves are 2)4in. or 3in, in'
diameter).
i Rubber Ring for Check Attachment.
3 Rings for Combination Taps,
i End for Pulsating Tube.


Ridd Cleansing Powder—a valuable asset on the Dairy
Farm.
You would not harness a horse with its head towards the
cart, therefore do not attempt to operate the Ridd in a contrary-
manner to that instructed.
Outline of Method of Working
“Ridd” Machines.
The motive power is supplied by the Engine. This is communi-
cated to the Vacuum Pump either by a direct drive from the Engine,,
or through a shafting as an intermediate.
The Engine driving the Vacuum Pump creates a Vacuum by
exhausting the air out of the Vacuum Tank.
The Vacuum actually works and determines the successful opera-
tion of the Milking Machines. If, therefore, you have not the neces-
sary vacuum, the machine, or any part of it, cannot operate correctly
in the manner that was intended by the Inventor.
From the Vacuum Tank, inch piping is carried along the bails
to the centre of the last bail, in the centre of each bail the inch piping
is cut and a stall tap introduced. The Pulsator is taken off the main
Vacuum Pipe with an Inch Tee.
You will note from the arrangement of the Pulsator that it is
always subject to a continuous Vacuum.' From the Pulsator, there-
fore, piping is led back along the bails, and is broken, and a.
stall tap introduced at the centre of each bail as in the case of the-
inch piping.
You will note that the Pulsator is subjected all the time to a
direct vacuum, and that the valve of the Pulsator alternately opens
and closes the port serving the Pulsating Pipe.
The consequence of this action is that there is an alternate
vacuum (when port is closed) and an atmospheric pressure when the
port is open. This alternate vacuum and atmospheric pressure runs
down the Pulsating pipe to the Pulsating tube.
In the centre of each bail you now have a stall tap going direct
from the inch piping carrying a continuous vacuum. Another stall
going from the Pulsating pipe carrying an alternate vacuum and at-
mospheric pressure. Coupled to these stall taps are;—
The vacuum tube running direct into the bucket, or, as in the case-
of the Releasor, on to the Milk Tube of the Claw.
This Vacuum pulls through the Milk Tube of the Claw and into
the inflation, and when the teat of the cow forms a block, stopping
the admission of air, the vacuum is of course transferred to the cow’s-
teat.
Coupled to the Pulsating Stall Tap is what we call the “7ft. Air
Tube.” The alternate vacuum and the atmospheric pressure is con-
veyed by this Tube to the Pulsating Tube on the Claw From there-
the action is conveyed to the Pulsating Chamber in the Teat Cup—
that is, the chamber that lies between the inflation case and the out-
side wall of the inflation
Imagine then the Teat Cup blocked at the mouth with the cow’s
teat, and a continuous vacuum inside.
Whilst there is an atmospheric pressure in the Pulsating Chamber
and a vacuum on the inside of the inflation the atmospheric pressure
causes the inflation to collapse, and to squeeze on the cow’s teat, thus
squeezing out the milk.
The next action of the Pulsating Tube is to withdraw the air from


The Ridd will give you satisfaction only whilst you
follow these instructions.
The instructions contained herein are issued after ex-
perience with the machines, extending over twelve years of use
.and observation.
the Pulsating Chamber. The consequence of (his is that there is
an equal vacuum inside and outside the inflation, with the result that
the natural elasticity of the rubber causes the inflation to fly back
from the teat of the cow. This operation is then repeated.
The Pulsator is set so as to cause this action to occur 45 times
per minute.
It will appeal to you at once that when the atmospheric pressure
causes the Teat Cup to collapse the vacuum inside the Teat Cup is
cut off simply because the rubber inflation collapsing on the teat of
the cow leaves no space, and if there is no space there can be no
vacuum.
The Releasor System acts practically in the same manner, as far
as milking is concerned, but (he method of erection is a little different.
The inch pipe is carried from the Engine Room into the Milking Shed,
but is only used to serve the Pulsator with a vacuum.
The vacumm that is used in milking is maintained through the
Releasor, and along the nickel tubing, and from there to the Teat Cup.
From (he above explanation you will see that the two most im-
portant things in the erection of a Milking Machine are: —
1 To have a good body of vacuum.
2 To have a perfect Pulsation.
If either of these points are missed, the machine cannot possibly
milk satisfactorily.
THE RELEASE VALVE.
The Release Valve on a Milking Machine is simply to determine
the measure of vacuum required. We advise farmers to
commence with a 13-in vacuum, and the Releasor Valve should be
set to register this vacuum on (he gauge. After the herd has been
milking for a few days, the farmer may increase to 15-inch. Milking
should never take place, however, at a higher vacuum than is-inch.
Laying out of Plant.
Upon going to a farm the first thing to do is to carefully design
the erection of (he Machines. The Engine Room and Separating
Room should be carefully studied.
Unpack your Plant. Lay out the Engine and Vacuum Pump,
and Releasor; carefully study the position of each of your Units, tak-
ing pains to see that there is sufficient room all round the Engine, the
Vacuum Pump and the Separator, so that the operator can pass round
and give attention to all parts, without any danger of being caught in
belts, and by working parts of machinery. See that everything is
arranged so that a perfect satisfaction in the Engine and Separating
Room will be given. 1
Before a Fitter commences to do anything he should have the
whole job planned out in his head, and the position should be ex-
plained to (he User, showing him just where each individual item is
going;, what this is going to drive or be driven by; where the belts
will be; and where any overhead-piping is going to run.
Such attention, as per above, will probably save pulling down
some Unit or Units and re-erecting when the mistake of location is
discovered.


Do not operate the Plant on some system of your own,,
and then blame the Inventor of the Machine.
If you have any trouble with the Milking Machine, the
remedy for it will be found in this Instruction Book: therefore-
peruse it carefully.
CHECKING PLANTS—Having then set out the position of
every Unit the Plant should be laid out and gone carefully over.J
Get from the Farmer Packing Sheet, which has been mailed him
under separate cover. This will show you just what has been sent.
Check the material by this sheet, and then check the material against
the job. This can be easily ascertained once the exact plan has been
decided upon, and there is no reason why the Fitter should not be
able to tell at the start that he has or has not got every item required
to the last screw.
Before any work is done the outfit should be checked in this
manner, and if there are any shortages the Office should be advised-
immediately, so that they can be sent on and time not lost in delay
waiting for shortages. We have known Fitters wait until they
actually have to use a part before they discover the shortage. Such,
a practice to be roundly condemned.
Main Shafting.
The correct method of driving any number of Machine Units off
the Engine is first of all to drive on to a main shaft, and off this main
shaft are driven the Vacuum Pump, Separator and Pulsators, etc. It
does not, however, exactly follow that a main shaft is always neces-
sary, for often-times it is more economical and just as convenient to
drive the Vacuum Pump direct off the Engine, and to drive the Pulsa-
tors off the Vacuum Pump Shaft.
Speaking generally,' wc advise the installation of a Main Shaft,,
but it is an extra to the Plant.
If a Main Shaft is supplied the first thing to do is to have this-
erected, and all the various driving Units must of course be arranged,
so that they are in line with the shafting.
It is not part of the Company’s contract to supply posts for
shafting; but see there is a strong post for every bearing and that
the bearings are securely held by the bolts provided. Always try
and erect bearings for shafting so that the pull is pulling the bearing;
towards the post and is not pulling the bearing away from the post.
When these conditions cannot be given us to work and so erect
shafting securely we can take no responsibility if shafting pidls down.
It is the Farmer’s responsibility to see that correct supports are.
provided. >’
Ascertain right away the, speed of the Engine and see,that you-
have the correct pulleys to drive your main shaft at a speed which
will allow the other pulleys to be driven at their correct speed. Go-
over each driving and driven Unit, and see that the right pulleys
are on the job.
Wc find that the most convenient speed at which to drive the
main shaft is 180 to 200 revolutions. The method of ascertaining
the speed of the shafting is as follows: —
Having obtained the speed of your Engine, multiply this by the
diameter of the driving pulley on the Engine shaft, and divide the
total by the speed at which the shaft is to be driven, and the result
will give the diameter of the pulley required.


This book should be carefully preserved. It is the most
important part of the Milking Machine.
Until you have used and carefully observed the machine
for twelve years you cannot know as much about it as is
•contained in this Instruction Book.
EXAMPLE—Engine speed, 300 revolutions. Multiply by diam-
meter of driving pulley, 8 inches. Divide by speed of shaft required,
no revolutions, equals 22 inches (approximately). Therefore a 22
inch pulley would be required to drive a shaft at no revolutions.
• In such a case we would advise putting a qin. pulley on the
Engine, and then cutting the driving pulley on the shaft down to nin.
This would be a most economical way to 'handle the matter, and
economy for the farmer must always be studied by you.
If, however, no Main Shafting is required, and the Vacuum Pump
is being driven direct off the Engine, .you must have the correct
pulley on the Engine to drive the 24m. pulley on the Vacuum Pump
at no revolutions.
Therefore: multiply 24m. (diameter of Vacuum Pump pulley) by
no. , Divide by speed of engine—say 300 —and approximately a
-pin. pulley is required.
Similarly, if the Pulsator Shaft is to be driven off the Vacuum
Pump Shaft, a qin. pulley is provided for the Vacuum Pump Shaft,
driving on to a sin. pulley on the Pulsator Shaft, giving the Pulsator
Shaft a speed of 88 revolutions—no x 4 divided by 5 equals 88.
Off this Pulsator Shaft at 88 revolutions, the Pulsators arc driven
—the Releasor Pulsator is driven at a speed of 27 revolutio,ns, and the
Milking Machine Pulsator at a speed of 44 revolutions.
Releasor—BB x divided by 8 equals 27 revolutions..
Machine—BB x 4 divided by 8 equals 44 revolutions.
Having thus laid out the position of your Shafting, and ascer-
tained that you have all the correct pulleys for driving your various
Units, you proceed with the work of erecting your Main Shafting,
•or, in the case of there being no Main Shafting supplied you, proceed
to erect the Vacuum Pump.
The Main Shafting will generally be either i)4-in. or i)4-in.,
which should carry a Plummer Block or Bearing every 5 feet. See.
therefore, t'hat you have the necessary bearings, and also a pair of
collars to keep the shaft in position.
Al) shafting should be erected perfectly level, and the bearings
arranged so that the shaft will run freely in the bearing. If the
bearing is not absolutely in line with the shaft more Engine power
is required and the bearings, of course, cut out very quickly.
T'he next Unit to erect is:
The Vacuum Pump.
First ascertain the exact position, so that when the Pump is
erected the 24-inch pulley will be in perfect alignment with the driv-
ing pulley on the Engine or Majn Shafting.
The next thing to, do is to get the Foundation Block erected.
Generally we recommend a concrete block, but there is very little
vibration in the Pump, and many wood blocks are erected with
perfect satisfaction.


We have never yet found a Ridd NOT working satisfac-
torily that was operated in accordance with these instructions-
Get this firmly fixed in your mind—Operate the machine
in accordance with the instructions laid down and it simply
must do its work satisfactorily and efficiently.
If a concrete block is required, a box will first of all have to be-
made to place the cement in whilst setting.
If the Pump is to be held down by holding-down bolts, then a_
templet will have to be made with four pieces of timber. Place the
Pump on the templet, mark the position of the bolt holes, bore these
out, place the holding-bolts in the templet holes, and put the templet
with the holding down bolts over the concrete bed box. It is always
as well to cut some pieces of Inch piping, lift the holding-down bolts,
and put these holding-down bolts through the inch piping. This-
method ensures that when the concrete sets around the bottom of the
holding-down bolts, and the templet is removed, the inch piping pre-
vents the concrete hardening around the holding-down bolt stem...
The Pump can then be got into line, and the bolts and strong mixture
of cement running down the sides of the bolts after the exact position
has been ascertained. It is, however, usual to set into the concrete
block two pieces of 4 x 2, and screw the Pump down to this with the
coach bolts provided.
If Pump is set into the concrete in this manner, the wood must
be thoroughly soaked in water before being set into the concrete.
All concrete blocks should be set on as solid a foundation as
possible, and the earth should be dug out so that the concrete block
is lying upon a clay foundation.
The method of mixing concrete for Engine and Pump Blocks
is as follows: .
Take three parts of gravel,
Two parts of screenings or sand,
and One part of cement,
Mix thoroughly when dry.
After the ingredients have been thoroughly mixed, spray the
pile with water, mixing very carefully until the right consistency is
obtained. Great care should be taken to see that all gravel, screen-
ings, and sand used is thoroughly clean. The presence of dirt will,
of course, cause the Engine foundation to fall down. The Engine
foundation also will not set unless a thorough mixture has taken
place; and be careful cement and screenings are thoroughly wet, and
mixed properly both wet and dry.-
When it is impossible to get gravel or screenings, many of our
experts have broken up clean bricks—three parts of broken brick
and two of sand to one part of cement makes a good foundation,'
The bricks, however, want to be broken up into pieces of not more
than i-inch to cubical measurement.
Through not washing the gravel carefully, and through not mix-
ing the ingredients thoroughly, many an Engine Block has fallen
down as soon as the Engine has commenced to run.
This is expensive to the farmer, and expensive to the Company,
and reflects very grave "discredits upon the expert. Therefore, in
putting in concrete foundations, watch the above outlined points-
most carefully.
When erecting the block, provision should be made so that the
block will project 2-inches around the base of the Pump or Engine,,


Every time a complaint is investigated we find the user
"has not studied his Instruction Book.
You have to put a Screw-driver in the slot of a screw to
drive the screw home—This Book explains every similar
operation with the Ridd no matter how simple.
and the block should project sufficiently upon the floor to give the
fly-wheel a 6-inch clearance.
Having thus erected the Pump Block, and the Pump being set in
the correct position, the following points should be attended to: —
PUMP VALVES.
The set screws should be adjusted so as to give the valve a lift
of at the outside 1/16-inch to )4 - in c h. The valve set screws should
be filed off flat on the valve end.
Instruct farmer to watch that the lift on valves does not increase.
The greater the lift on the valve, the greater the noise that the Pump
will make in operation.
THE PACKING GLAND ON PISTON ROD.
Examine this and see that it is in order. Explain to the farmer
that this packing sometimes gets dry, and the consequence is that
the Vacuum Pump loses air through it. If any trouble is experien-
ced with this, of course a new piece of Tuck’s Packing may be re-
quired .
Explain ‘the action of the Packing Gland to the farmer, an’d its
importance in the working of the Vacuum Pump.
LUBRICATION.
See that the Grease Caps and Lubricator are full, and in thorough
order.
S. and M. TYPE PUMP.
There are two types of Vacuum Pump' supplied with Ridd
Machines:—
S. and M. Type (as illustrated) 6-inch Cylinder.
B. and M. Type 7-inch Cylinder.
When ordering parts use the letters before the numbers: S. & M.
31 or B. & M. as the case may be.


Get the habit of using Ridd Powder on your Milking.
Machines.
The Ridd is so simple that a child can understand it—but
you must show the child first. This Book is our endeavour to
explain every detail.
PARTS FOR PUMP.
S & M 27 B & M Valve Hood.
S & M 28 Packing Gland Union 84.
S & M 28a Valve Set Screw.
S & M 29a Connecting Rod Brasses.
S & M 29 Piston Rod Guide.
S & M 30 Piston Rod.
S & M 31 Connecting Rod.
S & M 32 Connecting Rod Crank Shaft Brasses
S & M 33 Flywheel, 24-inch.
S & M 34 Lubricator Crank Shaft.
S & M 35 Crank Shaft Brasses.
S & M 36 Crank Shaft Guide Blocks.
S & M 24 Complete Vacuum Pump.
PARTS SHOWN SEPARATELY.
S & M (Old Type) Valve Cap 95.
S & M (Old Type) Bottom Valve 84.
S & M (Old Type) Top Valve 89.
S & M (New T'3'pc) Valve Set Screw 28a.
S & M (New Type) Valve Hood 27.
S & M (New Type) Top Valve 85
S & M (New Type) Bottom Valve 86.
Packing Gland 28 All Types.
B & M 89 Valve Set Screw.
B & M 90 Valve Clamp.
B & M 67 Top Valve.


Vacuum Tank.
OLD TYPE TANK.
16 Ring for Swinging
Type of Tank 16-in.
x iJ4-in. x %-in.
63 Ring for Old Type
Tank 4%-in. x %-in.
x


You have only yourself to blame if you do not study/this
"book and operate your plant accordingly.
You have never yet got satisfaction with any pieces of
machinery until you understood its principle of working. The
same thing applies to a Milking Machine.
The Tank should be erected at a height that is convenient so
that it may be washed out without taking down. See that the lid or
trap is properly secured with t'he washer supplied. Advise the farmer
that this is the first place to look at when he finds that he cannot get
a vacuum. We find now and again through carelessness the lid or
trap of the Vacuum Tank occasionally gets bent, with a consequent
admission of air.
The Vacuum Tank, especially with Releasor Plant, should be
washed out every day—preferably after the night milking.
In all cases the lid of the Vacuum Tank should be left off between
milkings.
The Vacuum Tank must not be supported to the roof by hooks,
wire, or any other contraptions. The business-.like way is to support
it by inch piping, and this should be done in every case.
Vacuum Pipe between Tank and
Releasor or Bails.
BUCKET PLANT.
No particular instruction is necessary, but care should be taken
to have as few sharp angles and bends as possible.


We do not write all this for fun. We do it because
think it is necessary for you to have the information.
This Book is an education to everyone interested in Milk-
ing Machines—The opposition will study it ravenously and
adopt many of the ideas as they have done in the past.
RELEASOR PLANT.
Where Releasors are installed most particular attention must
be given to the Vacuum Pipe between the Vacuum Tank and the
Releasor. A brush can be run through any section by simply un-
screwing the plugs. Advise the farmer, too, that this is necessary,
and should be done at least twice a week.
Not only must you be careful in the erection, but you must ex-
plain to the farmer that it is erected in such a manner that he can
pass the brushes through it. Impress upon him the necessity of
doing this.
CROSS PLUG AND TAP.
FIG.3
FIG.2
The Illustrations show the pipe line between Releasor and the
Vacuum Tank (Fig I.), showing how the crosses and plugs are fitted.
Fig 2. Shows a cross with a i-inch reducing bush and
Plug ready for insertion. One cross on each plant is now fitted in
this manner.
Fig 3. Shows the Plug removed from the bush and a Stall
tap inserted (the Plug) taking the place of the stall tap for
the time being. It will at once be seen that by the aid of this
reducing bush a stall tap can always be inserted at any place on the
pipe line where there is a i-inch Plug, and through the stall tap hot
water and soda (preferably Ridd Powder) can be sucked through
thus cleansing the pipe line thoroughly and effectively.
The Main Vacuum and ⅜ -inch
Pulsator Piping.
The pipe should not finish in a dead end, but should finish in the
last milking stall, and the end of it should carry an inch to
elbow, which in its turn takes the stall tap.


For cleaning Marble, Enamel, Aluminium,
Copper, Paint, use RIDD CLEANSER.
If you attempt to operate a machine in a different manner
to that instructed by the Inventor you are attempting to make
really a different machine to what the Inventor intended,
consequently you are likely to meet with trouble.
IMPORTANCE OF KEEPING THOROUGHLY CLEAN.
Too much importance cannot be attached to (he cleansing of
the whole of the Vacuum and Pulsating pipe systems both in Bucket
and Releasor Plants. The whole successful working of the Machine
•depends upon those pipes being kept thoroughly clean. If pipes
are dirty and partially blocked up the milk will become contaminated
and the machine will not and cannot work as it was intended to do
by the Inventor. Below wc show a ground plan of the arrange-
ment of the pipe line in both Bucket and Releasor systems.
METHOD OF CLEANING.
RELEASOR SYSTEM.
.A Vacuum Tank
B. t-inch Blk Piping leading
from Tank to last Pulsator.
C. Pulsators
D. D.D. )fj-inch or Pulsator Pipe
E. Pulsator Pipe Pulsator to Re-
leasor.
F. Stall Taps on Pul-
sating Pipe.
G. Combination Taps.
I. 1.1. Bends or Crosses.
J. Releasor.
H. i)4-mch Nickel Tubing.
G. and H. and J. Combination Taps and Nickel Pipe Line and
Releasor are not dealt with under this heading.
C.C. Pulsators: these alternately connect and disconnect the i-in.
Vacuum Pipe to the Pulsating Pipe; therefore, to ensure a
continuous connection the belt must be thrown off the Pulsator whilst
•cleansing the pipe system.
Now turn the Pulsator pulley round by hand until the “port”
or opening in the Pulsator serving the section of the Pulsator pipe
to be cleaned is closed by the slide valve of the Pulsator (imagine
this to be tig<ht) section F. D.D.. A continuous vacuum will now be
pulling through Right section D.D., through 8.8. and into Vacuum
Tank A. Now couple a tube to F. (extreme Right) place end in
bucket of boiling water and Ridd Powder, open stall tap at F. and
water and soda will be sucked through D.D. (Right) and 8.8. into
Tank A.
Now shift Pulsator Slide Valve as before so that Port serving


A “RIDD” Machine is only a “RIDD” so long as it is
operated in accordance with these instructions.
Every part—every piece of tubing—every bend—every
item of the Ridd is explained herein in the most elaborate
detail.
D.D. (Right) is open and Port serving D.D. (Left) is closed.
Couple Tube to F. (extreme Left) and proceed as before.
When the Pipe Line is cleansed thoroughly with water and Ridd
Potvder the stall taps in turn should be opened slightly and air sucked
through to carry away any beads of moisture that may remain.
BUCKET SYSTEM.
The method of cleansing is the same but the arrangement of the
Vacuum Pipe differs a little, but read foregoing paragraph.
A. Vacuum Tank
B. Vacuum Pipe l-inch
F.F.F.F. Vacuum Taps
C. Pulsator
D. Pulsating Pipe Jfi-inch
G.G.G.G. Pulsating Taps
Throw belt off Pulsator; couple tube to F. (extreme Right) and
suck water and soda through 8.8. to Tank A.
Close Pulsator port serving D. (Right) couple tube to G. (ex-
treme Right) and suck water and soda through D. (Right), 8.8. (Left)
to Tank A.
Close Pulsator port serving D. (Left) couple tube to G. (Left)
and suck \vater and soda through D. (Left), through B. (Left) to-
Tank A.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE PULSATOR.
Users must understand that irrespective of the arguments of the
opposition or of their own theories, the Ridd is distinctly a pressure
machine, and unless the user understands this and operates the
machine from this point of view he cannot get the results that the
inventor intended, and that the great majority of users do get.
The pressure is applied to the walls of the Inflation by the
atmosphere, and is controlled and regulated by the vacuum pump
and pulsator. Consequently if the Vacuum Pump is out of order or
•■he Pulsator is out of order, or the Pulsating Pipes are not clear, the
whole principle of the machine is thrown out, and the Ridd Machine
is being operated as a suction instead of a pressure milker, and all
evils that surround such machines will in consequence surround a
badly operated or badly attended Ridd.
Realising then that to get effective pressure the air has to pass


Ridd Powder is a combination of soap. Soda and Elbow
Grease—with a very small percentage of the latter.
THE RIDD COMPANY always lead, others follow.
This is the first complete Book on Milking Machine operation
■ever published in the World.
through the Pulsator Port down the Pulsator Pipes and so into the
chamber, between the Inflation and Case, users will understand' that
the Pulsator Pipes must always be thoroughly clean and clear. In
ninety nine cases out of one hundred a Ridd that is not working up
to standard we find upon inspection has this fault. It is imperative
that at least twice a week hot water and soda be sucked through
the Pulsating Pipes so as to keep them thoroughly clear. Air must
be sucked through after the water so that there is no lodgment of
water in the pipes. If this point is not attended to it is impossible
for the machine to work satisfactorily.
Some users, after using the Teat Cups, are not careful to shake
the water out of the Pulsating Chamber in the Teat Cup, and trouble
is experienced through this. After the Teat Cups have been washed
they should be picked up in the hands and shaken thoroughly so that
all water is ejected from the Pulsating Chamber.
Attention should be given to the Pulsator. The trouble with the
Ridd Pulsator is that it is so simple that a farmer is oftentimes tempted
to forget that he has it in his shed and allows it to become blocked
with oil, dust and milk solids. The Pulsator should be examined
carefully at least every week and all lodgments of foreign matter
cleaned away. Of course we know that the milk does not pass
through the Pulsator, but air has to, and if anything prevents the air
from passing through, unsatisfactory milking will result.
A bad pulsation is also caused through a leaky Inflation, and
through Inflations being used that have stretched too long for their
cases. Many users of the Ridd machine get into the habit of going
on using Inflations without examining them. The Ridd Inflation
really lasts too long in many cases, but if users want results they will
see that their machine is provided with new Inflations at the beginning
of every season, and that when the Inflations have stretched too long
for the cases, .longer temporary cases are used for the balance of the
year. We would impress upon the minds of users of the Ridd Ma-.
chine to realise the importance of seeing that Teat Cups are tested
periodically and see that a good definite squeeze is received in each
Teat Cup. Every Ridd Machine, no matter how old it is, is capable
of giving as good satisfaction as is a machine upon the day that it was
installed, but it is only by attention to the various details of the ma-
chine that the best results will be achieved.
If you have been using old Inflations for over a season let us send
you a new set, and you will be surprised at the difference in results
you get.


THE RIDD MECHANICAL
PULSATOR. A
Showing the 16 simple parts of the Ridd Mechanical
Pulsator, including screws. Our competitors require 160
to 180 parts to do the work achieved by the above 16.
M.P. I. —Pulley M.P. 6. —Connecting Plate.
M.P. 2. —Slot. M.P. 7. —Crank.
M.P. 3. —Main Casting. M.P. 8. —Arm Screw.
M.P. 4— Top Slide. M.P. 9.—Washer.
M.P. s.—Arm. M.P. 10. —Interchangeable Screws-
If Ordering Parts please Quote Number and Letters.


RIDD AUTOMATIC PULSATOR
The Automatic Pulsator with
the Stop-over-port. For use with
Steam Ejector Plants, or in cases
where the shed is a distance
from the engine room.
A.P. I —Cylinder
A.P. 2—Face Slide
A.P. 3—Lever Rod
A.P. 4—Weight on Lever Hod
A.P. 5—Piston
A.P. 6 and 7— Set Screws
A.P 8—Bolt for adjusting Face Slide
A.P. 9 - Cylinder Caps
A.P. 10— Set Screws for Piston Studs
A.P. 11— P 5 ston Studs
A.P. 12-Buffers
A.P. 13— Slot at top of Cylinder
A.P. 14— Slot at Face of Cylinder
A.P. IS—Lock Nut on Set Screws
e
t fee* *25
r* Egg
r gsi -• &
If Ordering Parts Please Quote Number and Letters


The Ridd is the most simple Machine on the market-
This book makes it doubly simple.
A "RIDD” Machine is only a “RIDD” so long as it is
-aperated in accordance with these instructions.
Pulsators.
Examine the ports and see that the slide valve opens well over
each port on both sides: if it does not clear each port a poor vacuum
will result.
Before erecting the Pulsator just hold it in your hand, turn the
pulley round, watching carefully to see that each port is cleared cor-
rectly. Examine the screw fastening the connecting rod to the
■crank. This must 'have a clearance of about i/32nd inch, if not, file
the connecting rod or the screw will work out. The same applies to
the screw on the slide block underneath the Pulsator.
When oiling the Pulsator, too much oil should not be used, as
it is likely to choke up the chambers underneath the ports.
Explain the action of the Pulsator carefully to the farmer, so
he may understand just what it is doing.
AUTOMATIC PULSATOR.
This Pulsator must not serve more than two bails off each port,
.and do not attempt to work any plant requiring the Automatic Pulsa-
tor to serve three bails.
The action of the Automatic Pulsator is different to the mechani-
cal, but the same result, viz., “a stop over the port” is achieved.
This feature in the Automatic Pulsator is obtained by the lever,
rod, and weight. The vacuum pulls the lever rod up to the centre
and without opening the port. As soon as the lever is, however, over
the centre, the weight causes it to drop suddenly, opening one port
and closing the other.
In setting the Automatic Pulsator care should be taken to see
—first, that it is set quite level on the pipe line: next, that it has a
slight set back so that the lever is holding the slide valve on to the
face of the Pulsator. If the Pulsator is not set back slightly the slide
valve has a tendency to open out from the face, and of course lose
the effective working power of the Pulsator. This faulty action will
be observed when Pulsator is put plumb or hanging forward.
The Automatic Pulsator is taken off the inch vacuum pipe with
an inch to nipple and bend. The lfj-in. pulsating pipe is taken
off the Pulsator with the aid of a bend and nipple.
When screwing in the pulsating pipe be careful to see that it
docs not screw past the port hole.


A RlDD—this Book—and a man who can read—and
you get the most perfect Milking Machine in the World.
Ridd Cleansing Powder will do the work in half the time
-and miles better.
The set screws at each side of the Automatic Pulsator are to regu-
late the pull of the vacuum, consequently regulating the speed of the
Pulsator. The tighter these screws are screwed down the less
the pull of the vacuum, consequently the slower does the Pulsator
run. The correct speed is as in the case of the Mechanical Pulsator
—45 pulsations per minute. This means that each port should open
45 times per minute.
After an Automatic Pulsator has been working a week or two,
the leather washers become loose, and the Pulsator gradually increases
in speed.
T}ie only thing that the farmer has to watch in connection with
the Automatic Pulsator is its speed, and if you show him how to time
it, and impress upon him the fact that quick pulsation does not neces-
sarily mean quick milking, but always means bad milking, he will un-
derstand the necessity of keeping the Pulsator running at the correct
speed. Show him how to do this, and see that he understands the
point thoroughly.
In all cases this Unit is to be taken off the i-inch Piping, between
the Vacuum Tank and the Releasor.
New Automatic Pulsator.


PART LIST. Order by Letter and Number.
'N.A.P. 14 Main Casting N.A.P. 9 Nipple
N.A.P. 1 Cylinder Cap N.A.P. 10 Slide Block Set
N.A.P. 3 Needle Valve Lock Screws
N.A.P. 2 Needle Valve Nut N.A.P. 11 Slide Block
N.A.P. 4 Lever Arm N.A.P. 12 Nipple Socket
N.A.P. S Lever Weight N.A.P. 13 Slide Valve Retainer
N.A.P. 6 Lever Weight Screw N.A.P. 15 Piston
N.A.P. 7 Driving Rod N.A.P. 16 Leather Washers
N.A.P. 8 Slide Valve -N.A.P. 17 Lever Arm Screw


Everything is simple to the man who knows how-—i
Book tells you how.
Knowledge is power—Your understanding of this Book
increases your efficiency tenfold.
The New Automatic Pulsator embodies the same “Stop-over-
Port” principle found in the Ridd Mechanical Pulsator and The Ridd
Automatic Pulsator, it differs, however, from the Automatic Pulsator
in that it can be regulated to a slower speed and will operate on
lesser vacuum. Unlike all other Pulsators the N.A.P. is controlled
by two distinct vacuums. The first operating the Pulsator proper
through ports shown over 12, and the second operating the Teat
Cups through ports shown under 13.
The N.A.P. is coupled to the pipe line in the ordinary manner
with 46-in. bends and tees; but the pipe line is tapped a second time
and at x-in. to 46-in. inserted; to the 46-in. take off of which a stall tap
is introduced and a coupling made from the stall tap to nipple 9 which
is inserted into socket 12. By the aid of this stall the speed of the
Pulsator can be regulated. By this system the minimum of Vacuum
is taken to operate the Pulsator (it can be operated on 3-in. vacuum)
and the whole vacuum preserved for the operation of the Teat Cups.
The Needle Valves are used simply to balance the Vacuum ser-
ving each end of the Pulsator Cylinder and to lock the Vacuum pull
when the correct pulsator speed has been adjusted.
Altogether we highly recommend this type of Automatic Pulsator,,
it is most certain and definite in action.
Releasor Pulsator.
In the case of the 4-Unit Plant, the Releasor Pulsator must be
driven at 27 revolutions. This, of course, would be too slow for
milking, and therefore the Pulsator would have to serve the Releasor
only.
A stall tap is introduced directly into the Chamber underneath
one of the Releasor ports. From this stall tap is coupled a 46-in.
solid tubing, which in turn is coupled to the cock on the Release Cham-
ber. The action of this tubing is explained under another heading.
On the opposite side of the pulsating chamber in the Pulsator to
which is inserted the stall tap, the plug is, of course, left screwed
home. The farmer should be instructed after each milking to take
this plug out, and put a brush through the stall tap, thus cleansing
out the stall tap and the pulsating chamber in the Pulsator.
Pulsating Pipe.
B. Shows Pipe after cutting before being
rimered out. Note the bore of pipe
is reduced and an edge for the col-
lecting of matter which still further
'reduces the bore of the pipe.
A. Shows a clean cut pipe; rimered out
correctly.
A
B


You have invested your money in a Ridd. This Book
teaches you how to get the best value for your investment.
An Instruction Book that is an Instruction Book—i
glossary.
The size of this is It is carried, as previously
explained, from one of the ports in the Pulsator over each
milking bail. In the centre of each milking bail it is cut,
and the stall tap introduced with the aid of a Jfj-inch Tee and
bend.
The Pulsating Pipe should be examined thoroughly before
it is erected, to see that there are no beads of rust blocking
the free passage pf air.
When it is- cut it
should also be rimered
or filed out, so that the
full clearance is
obtained for the air to
pass up and down.
Ejectors.
When erecting Ejector Plants care should always be taken in the
operation of the Wheel Valve.
The operation of this valve in a very large degree determines the
success or otherwise of the Ejector. The Wheel Valve wants to be
open as little as possible.
If it is open too wide the rush of steam is inclined to block the
Ejector Nozzle and prevent the expansion of the'Steam Molecules.
Therefore always advise the user to work with the Wheel Valve open
as slightly as ever possible.
Vacuum Gauge.
The Vacuum Gauge should never measure more than 15 inches
whilst the process of milking is being carried on.


A “RIDD” Machine is only a “RIDD” so long as it is
operated in accordance with these instructions.
Ridd Powder lessens the drudgery of cleaning up after
milking and is a preserver and cleanser of Rubber.
The user should be instructed always to keep 'his eye bn the
Vacuum Gauge, for most harmful results will occur if he is milking
at a higher vacuum than we recommend, and successful milking can-
not very well be carried on if he milks at a lower vacuum.
The Vacuum is, of course, regulated by the Release Valve, and
the farmer should be instructed always to keep the Vacumm at not
more than 15 inches.
Often-times some dirt, chaff, or some other foreign substance,
will get into the pipe line. We have known a piece of Binder Twine
that has been used for packing a joint get underneath the Vacuum
Gauge, with the result that the Vacuum Gauge would not register,,
and the farmer was using an excessive vacuum.
Instruct the user, therefore, of the importance of being always
certain that his Vacuum Gauge is registering correctly.
An ordinary healthy man can suck about 17 inches of vacuum,
and this is a fairly good test as to the correctness or otherwise of the
Gauge. If you can suck more than 17 inches easily, you know the
Vacuum Gauge is not right. If you cannot suck up to 15 inches, then
the Vacuum Gauge is out of order. Test it before erecting it in the:
shed.
Release Valve.
The Release Valve is taken off the Inch Piping at 1
some convenient point with an Inch Tee. The func-
tion of the Release Valve is to regulate the measure-
of Vacuum. The stronger is the tension on the
spring the harder is the valve to open.
The Release Valve should be set so as to register
iS-in., and the farmer should be shown how to set it.
Before erecting the Release Valve, see that the
seat is clean, and that it is working properly. Many
a time a loss of vacuum is caused by some foreign
substance getting between the seat of •'he valve and
the valve. If the farmer finds he is losing vacuum,
this is one of the first things he should give atten-
tion to.


Do not forget the Ridd is the pioneer of successful
Milking Machines.
You would not harness a horse with its head towards the
cart, thetefore do not attempt to operate the Ridd in a contrary
manner to that instructed.
Milk Pipe Line.
IN CONNECTION WITH OVERHEAD PLANT.
50 Combination Tap
51 Rubber Ring for Combination
Tap 50, or Ridd System V/x
inch Pipe Fitting
83 Ground Plug for 50
109 Pipe Carrier
no 1 -in. Pipe Union, unthread-
ed
Hi ij4-in. Pipe Bend, Ridd
Coupling System
112 Section of Pipe, latest
Tap
113 Section of Pipe, old Tap
114 Showing Tap being in-
serted into Bracket
The Pipe Line should always be kept as low as possible, 5 feet
is the ideal height to attain perfect milking.
The Piping used for this purpose is IJ4-inch solid brass or copper
tubing, which has been tinned or nickelled. This pipe carries the


For cleaning Marble, Enamel, Aluminium,
Copper, Paint, use RIDD CLEANSER.
• If you have any trouble with the Milking Machine, the
remedy for it will be found in this Instruction Book; therefore
peruse it carefully.
milk from the Teat Cups to the Releasor, and as first grade cream
cannot be obtained if there is any foul lodgment in any section of
this pipe, care in erection must be carefully observed.
Into each side of the Combination Tap is inserted the
tubing, the Tap therefore forming a carrier for the i}4-inch tube.
This is why we call it the Combination Tap.
The i}4-inch Milk Pipe should be erected as level as possible
and should not have a fall one way or the other.
When fitting the tube into the Combination Tap observe
that the Combination Tap has a shoulder against which the
tubing should butt.
If the gauge of the tubing is larger than the projection of the
shoulder in the tap, then the tubing should be filed down so that a
perfectly smooth joint is obtained. The tubing has not
been cut squarely at the warehouse, as it more often than not
to be cut again on the farm.
After you get the exact length required you must see that the
tubing is cut absolutely square so as to fit smoothly up against the
shoulder in the Combination Tap. If, of course, it is not square,
there will be a crevice left in which milk solids will lodge and con-
taminate the fresh milk.
No matter how careful the erector is, however, he cannot, of
course, make an absolutely perfect joint, and the possibility of milk
lodging should be pointed out to the farmer. He should be instructed
to take down the Milk Pipe at least twice a week, and see that the
Combination Taps are cleaned out thoroughly.
The most important thing is to see that the first grade cream is
always obtained, and all bends and elbows mitigate against this. It
is, however, necessary sometimes, owing to the levels to raise the
Releasor from the Pipe Line. In such a case elbows supplied,
and a piece of tubing between an elbow running from the
Releasor to an elbow on the Pipe Line is inserted to keep the Releasor
at the necessary height.
The edge at the end of each length of ij4-inch tubing should be
taken off with a file, so that they do not cut the rubber rings in the
Combination Taps.
At the last Combination Tap insert a’ piece of tubing 12 inches-
to 18 inches and let this be supported by the carrier fitting provided;
into this fitting insert the Wood Plug file the groove and explain the
necessity therefor to the farmer. The groove in the wood plug


The Ridd will give you satisfaction only whilst you
follow these instructions.
The instructions contained herein are issued after ex-
perience with the machines, extending over twelve years of use
and observation.
should always be kept thoroughly clean. If the additional piece of
piping is not inserted as the above and the piping finished at the
Combination Tap, poor milking in the last bail will result.
Combination Taps.
The use of these has been explained in a previous paragraph.
The Milk Pipe is simply pushed into each end of the Combination
Tap up against the shoulder. A vacuum, however, is obtained by
the aid of iJ4-inch rubber ring.
You will notice that when the pipe is inserted into the Combina-
tion Tap there is a wedge shaped recess into which the round rubber
ring is pushed home, thus forming a perfect vacuum joint. The
importance of pushing these rings home thoroughly, however, must
be impressed upon the user, otherwise he will find that there is such
an admission of air at each Combination Tap joint that he is not able
to get a vacuum.
The Plugs in the Combination Tap want referring to. Each
one of these has been ground into its seat by the Mechanic, and each
plug is chained to the main portion of the Combination Tap. The reason
the chain is provided is so that the plugs will not be mixed up when
washing. If they are, there will be an admission of air through the
seat of each plug, which will make it impossible to get a vacuum.
When the Plant is erected you should go over all these plugs
with a match; if one is admitting air, then grind it into its seat again.
Explain the reason of this to the farmer, so that he will know how
to act if he has any trouble in the future.
The Releasor.
To get a clear idea of the
work of the Releasor, you
must understand that air is
being drawn through the up-
per portion of the Releasor
all the time. Air, however,
goes through the check at-
tachment which is fixed on to
the Releasor Helmet, and is
described elsewhere. This
check attachment is fixed at
poine E in the illustration
following.


Do not operate the Plant on some system of your own,
and then blame the Inventor of the Machine.
Until you have used and carefully observed the machine
for twelve years you cannot know as much about it as is
contained in this Instruction Book.
Milk, then, is drawn along
the Main Milk Pipe (which
connects at point /A), and
drops into the centre attach-
ment of the Releasor.
Valve B is held in a closed
state by the vacuum; point
D is connected up with the
Pulsator Tube, which alter-
nately creates a vacuum and
admits air 27 to 4s times
"very minute.
You will at once see that
ivhen this Pulsator creates
a vacuum in the Release
Chamber, there is, therefore,
an equal vacuum in the Re-
leasor Helmet and Release
Chamber, with the conse-
quence that valve B is al-
lowed to open, and the milk
consequently drops in the
Release Chamber, valve C
of which is kept closed by
the outside air pressure.
The next operation of the
Pulsator ADMITS air into
the Release Chamber, which
air pressure at once closes
valve B and allows valve C
to open and release the milk.
This is just plainly the
operation of the Releasor,
and its extreme simplicity
cannot possibly be overesti-
mated.
A vacuum is maintained in each section of the Releasor by the aid
of the valves seating on a square section rubber ring.
Before erecting the Releasor you should examine the valves care-


Ridd Ppwder is the most powerful Fat Solvent known to
Chemists —2/6 per 51b. bag.
If you attempt to operate a machine in a different manner
to that instructed by the Inventor you are attempting to make
really a different machine to what the Inventor intended,,
consequently you are likely to meet with trouble.
fully and see that they work freely, and that they close thoroughly
down on the rubber ring and make a perfect joint.
If (he valve ring is inserted in the groove, and is buckled, of
course, air will be admitted past the valve, and the Releasor will not
work satisfactorily. Therefore be careful to see that the valve rings
are perfectly level, and explain the point to the user of the machine.
You must see that the farmer thoroughly understands the work-
ing of the Releasor, (hat any .little thing that goes wrong he can
adjust easily.
The day before this article was dictated we received a telegram
from a user saying that his Releasor would not work. We sent an
expert post-haste, and found that one of the valve rings was buckled.
This little joke cost us a few pounds, caused the farmer a great deal'
of annoyance, and all because the expert had not instructed him in
this little detail when (he Plant was erected. Therefore be careful
to give all the instruction that is possible to the user of the machines.
If air is admitted into the Releasor from any point where it is not
supposed to be admitted, the Releasor cannot work.
The union that couples the 12 feet of tubing to the Releasor
should be examined carefully. See (hat it is thoroughly air-tight, and
watch also the Combination Tap rings.
All pipe fittings on the whole job, and the Vacuum Tank, should',
also be examined most carefully. We have found a cracked elbow
cause untold trouble, stop the milking, and upset things generally,,
therefore watch the pipe fittings and see that they are perfect.
Before the Releasor is put into use, and whilst the Vacuum Pump,
is in operation, all joints and connections should be gone over
thoroughly, to see that there is not the slightest admission of air,,
except where we intend air to be admitted.
Instruct the farmer that the Releasor should be taken down and:
cleaned after every milking. He should not only wash the Releasor,,
but he should'dry it thoroughly, and when dry it should be laid on its.
side in such a position that the inside of it is exposed thoroughly to
the air, so that it will be dried thoroughly by the atmosphere and.
dried as quickly as possible. If the Releasor Helmet, for instance,
is laid down on a bench in such a manner as to shut (he air from the
inside it will rust, because such a length of time is taken in drying by
the atmosphere that oxidisation sets up. The Releasor cannot and
will not rust if it is dried properly. If Releasors rust it is purely
the fault of the user. They are made of stamped copper, have three


If the quickest results, as far as milking is-concerned and ir\a:
installed in a she
Enlarged • Plan-of-• Engine-• Rqoa/l-
Plans of Double Bail Shed, also Rao


ium of results generally is required,' the Ridd Machine should be
>uilt to this Plan.
tN-STAU,-
Shad, supplied gratis on application.
A


We have never yet found a Ridd NOT working satisfac-
torily that was operated in accordance with these instructions.
Get this firmly fixed in your mind—Operate the machine
in accordance with the instructions laid down and it simply
must do its work satisfactorily and efficiently.
coats of tin, and in some cases a further coat of nickel. We 'have
done everything possible to prevent the article from rusting, but
once it gets into the hands of the farmer it depends upon himself
whether he will have a rusted, Releasor in a few months, or a perfect
Releasor for a few years.
The baffle plate at the top of the'Releasor is to minimise the
danger of the milk getting through the i-inch piping into the Vacuum
Tank. We do not use the two felt discs now: the method of assem-
bling as follows:
One disc with centre holes inserted into the female portion of the
baffle plate first, then a rough sponge, and then a flange disc with the
outer holes. This is all that is necessary. The sponge, of course,
requires washing after every milking. '
RELEASOR VALVES.
These are made in 2 sizes as two different sizes, of Releasors
have been supplied.
These Valves are inches and 3 inches in diameter respectively.
In ordering Releasor Valve always state the size of Diameter.
The Releasor Valve has to be made of Aluminium to enable it
to operate correctly—All Aluminium corrodes with the milk acids
however, and we never use it in connection with the- Milking Machine
unless it is absolutely necessary.
Sometimes corrosion takes place on the face of the Valve and
prevents it from seating properly upon the Valve Rings—therefore
always watch the Valves and scrape off any corrosive matter that
appears.
RELEASOR RINGS.
58 Main Releasor Ring, 6Yz- in. 54 Baffle Box Ring, inner
outer diam. x Jfj-in. x fjj-in. diam. x 54-in. x %-in.
Is also used as pail ring 60 3-in. Valve Ring
for Bucket Tops 65 Valve Ring


Every time a complaint is investigated we find the user
has not studied his Instruction Book.
We publish this book at great expense to help you, not
for you to throw the book aside and forget about it as soon as
you have received it.
59 3-in. Valve, Hinge Type 88 Valve, Hinge Type
•87 Valve, Pin Type
POSITION OF RELEASOR ON i-INCH PIPE LINE
WHEN ERECTING.
14 Vacuum Tank 43 Release Valve
46, 46, 46 Crosses 44 Vacuum Gauge
41, 41 Pulsators $6 Releasor
ERECTION OF RELEASOR.
The i-inch Vacuum Pipe coming from the Vacuum Tank should
carry a i-inch Cross
From this Cross the Releasor Pulsator should be erected about
2or 3 feet away from the Releasor. Sufficient i-inch pipe should be
inserted into the other side of the Cross to carry the Releasor—The
second Cross should be screwed on the end of this i-inch pipe— to
the bottom portion of it the Releasor should be suspended. The other
two portions of the Cross should be fitted with i-inch Plugs for
cleaning.
The Pipe running over the bails carrying the Machine
Pulsator Release Valve, and the Vacuum Gauge should be led off


Ridd Powder lessens the drudgery of cleaning up after
milking and is a preserver and cleanser of Rubber.
You have never yet got satisfaction with any pieces of
machinery until you understood its principle of working. The:
same thing applies to a Milking Machine. '
from the first Cross carrying the Releasor Pulsator situated between
the Releasor and the Vacuum Tank.
By following this method of erection you will notice that no air,,
either from the Releasor Valve, or from the Machines, or Releasor
Pulsator will pass over the top of the Releasor Helmet. If this
point is not watched a pulsation is caused in fhe Releasor Helmet
which in consequence interferes with the action of the Releasor and
the Cups drop off.
Raising Can.
In installing Raising or Receiving Cans the milk should always
enter at the highest inlet and be taken away at the lowest outlet.
The Raising Can is used so as to keep the Pipe Line as low as
possible and at the same time give the necessary elevation to the
Releasor.
The Nickel Pipe continues along the facia board past
the nearest Bail to the Releasor. At the end of the facia board a
cross piece of timber is nailed to the facia board—Over this hangs
the Raising Can at right angles to the facia board, the lj4-inch Nickel
Pipe fitting into the Pipe fitting at the back of the Raising Can.


You have only yourself to blame if you do not study this
book and operate your plant accordingly.
You have to put a Screw-driver in the slot of a screw to
drive the screw home—This Book explains every similar
operation with the Ridd no matter how simple.
When the Raising Can is made secure in this manner a piece of
ij4-inch Nickel Pipe of necessary length from the bottom of the Can
to a height corresponding to the centre of the Releasor Union is cut
and inserted into the Can.
A V must be cut in the bottom of the pipe so as to allow the
milk to get from the Can into the pipe—On the top of the pipe the
elbow with the Ridd special pipe fitting is placed.
From the other end of the elbow a short piece of Nickel pipe of
necessary length runs from the elbow and is sweated on to the tail
piece of the Union Coupling on the Releasor.
From this you will see that you can have the Releasor at almost
any height and at the same time keep the pipe line down to S feet.
The elbow also enables the Releasor to be set off at any angle
required, to the pipe line.
The Milk Receiving Can.
THE MILK RECEIVER.
This is used for plants that have already been installed without
the Raising Can.
It enables the Releasor to deal with a sudden inrush of milk due
to 2 or 3 very easy cows being milked at the same time—or to the
sudden rush of milk caused by the falling off of a set of Teat Cups.
It lessens the likelihood of Teat Cups falling off.
It increases the Vacuum Space and gives a more lively action to
the Teat Cups, consequently with this attachment they are inclined to
milk out quicker than without it.


Ridd Powder is the most powerful Fat Solvent known to
Chemists—2/6 per 51b. bag.
The Ridd is so simple that a child can understand it—but
you must show the child first. This Book is our endeavour to
explain every detail.
Its use also results in an improved pulsation owing to the milk
being able to get away from the inside of the Teat Cup more quickly.
We advise those users who have not the Receiver— to have one
installed for it is certainly more than worth its cost.
Its use will be greatly appreciated by all who desire to get
absolutely the best results out of their machines.
METHOD OF ERECTION.
At a distance of one foot from the Union Coupling to Releasor
cut 12 inches out of the Nickel Tubing.
Hang the Receiver on to the 6-ft. x i-ft. Face Board and couple
the two ends of Nickel Tube in the same manner as you do to the
Combination Tap.
Be careful to file the ends of the Tubing so that they butt squarely
against the shoulder on inside of Pipe connection.
Pulsator Tube from Releasor
Pulsator to Releasor.
This tube is supplied of -Hs-inch solid tin tubing.
On each end of the solid tin tubing will be found
a rubber connection to connect to the stall tap in
the Pulsator in one case and the cock in the Re-
lease Chamber in the other. s The Pulsating tube
is 3 feet in length.
The Releasor Pulsator is 3 feet away from the
Releasor. The reason that 6 feet of tubing is
supplied is so that it can be carried up from the
Releasor, thus forming a trap, and minimising
the possibility of milk getting through the cock
in the Releasor to the Pulsator.
The solid tin tubing is flexible, so that it can
be set at any angle required.
Although milk does not readily pass through
this tube, milk vapours do. The milk vapours
solidify, and if the tube is not cleansed at night
time, in the morning there will be a blockage.


We do not write all this for fun. We do it because
think it is necessary for you to have the information.
This Book is an education to everyone interested in Milk-
ing Machines—The opposition will study it ravenously and
adopt many of the ideas as they have done in the past.
with the consequence that until air has been rushing into the tube, and
has been exhausted in turn for a few minutes, the pulsations are not
going into the Release Chamber. If the pulsations do not go into the
Release Chamber, of course the valve on the inside chamber cannot open,
with the result that theßeleasorHelmetwill be full of milk,and the milk
will then be drawn into the inch piping and into the Vacuum Tank.
The milk will in all probability block the vacuum, and the Teat Cups
in consequence fall off all round the shed. The farmer will wonder
what is the matter, and wire to the office for an expert. There-
fore explain to him the necessity of keeping this pulsating tube
thoroughly cleansed, and in taking care to see that a kink does not
take place in the tube or rubber connections, which kink will block
the passage of air.
Impress this point home on the farmer as hard as you can.
Failure to instruct him in this connection will mean milk getting into
the Vacuum Tank, the cups falling off all around the shed, and general
dissatisfaction.
To clean this tubing proceed as follows;
Uncouple the 6-feet end at the Releasor Cock. Place it in a
bucket of boiling water and Ridd Cleansing Powder. Throw the
belt off the Releasor Pulsator so that the port serving the pulsating
pipe is closed.
Now let the boiling water and Cleansing Powder solution be
sucked through the pulsating pipe into the pulsating chamber in the
Pulsator, from there into the l-inch piping, into the Vacuum Tank.
Take the Tap off, the Vacuum Tank, allow the fluid to escape, and
leave the Tap off all night so that the air can get to the inside of
the Vacuum Tank and make it thoroughly sweet.
Be careful to explain these details thoroughly to the farmer. It
has caused us a lot of trouble in the past through fitters not under-
standing the importance of this pulsating tube.
These instructions complete the actual mechanical erection of
the machines.
In the case of the RELEASOR PLANT, coupled to the Combi-
nation Tube is a 6-in. solid rubber connection. Inserted in this is
Yi- in. nickel tubing to the end of which is connected a 27-in. Milk
Tube. The milk thus passes up the nickel tubing through the
Combination Tap, and into the Milk Pipe.


Ridd Powder thoroughly scours and cleans —it finds the
dirt and grease.
From Stall Taps to Teat Cups.
78 Ferrule j4-in. for Coup-
ling Tube ends
79 Ferrule s'B-in. for Coup-
ling Tube ends
1 Pulsating Tube
4 Nickel Milk Tube
5 sft. Vacuum Tube
6 27m. Milk Tube
7 Milk Tube on Claw
8 Claw Tubes
9 Teat Cups
21 Pulsating Tap
49 Milk Tube i*4-in.
50 Combination Tap
51 Combination Tap Ring
88 Sight Glass
87 12m. x lin. Slotted Tube
5 33‘i n - Milk Tube with slot
6 12-in. Milk Tube with slot
104 27-in. or 33-in. Milk Tube
without slot (state length)


A RlDD—this Book—and a man who can read—and
you get the most perfect Milking Machine in the World.
Every part —every piece of tubing—every bend—every
item of the Ridd is explained herein in the most elaborate
detail.
In the case of a Bucket Plant a S-ft. Vacuum Tube is connected
from the Stall Tap serving the inch piping to the down pipe on the
top of the Bucket.
From the Stall Tap serving the or Pulsator Piping a 7-ft.
air tube is connected to the or Pulsating Tube on the Claw.
You will note that 3-in. from the end of each of these Taps a
ferrule has been inserted, and a solid rubber end is provided for
coupling to the Stall Tap.
The main body of the tube has canvas inserted. This is to
protect the tube against being collapsed by the Vacuum. The solid
rubbfr end therefore couples to the Stall Tap easily, and if the ends
get broken in use the farmer has simply to purchase new ends to put
on the ferrules instead of having to buy the whole tube as he does
in the case of many other machines.
So x in. Rubber end
7-ft. Pulsating Tube to
j£-in. end of Claw.
81 li-in. x Rubber end
7-ft. Pulsating Tube to
Stall Tap.
82 j4-in. x Rubber end
from s-ft. Vacuum Tube
to Stall Tap or Down
Pipe on Bucket.
21 J-g-in. Stall Tap for Pulsa-
ting Pipe or Vacuum
Tube in Bucket Plants.


For cleaning Marble, Enamel, Aluminium,
Copper, Paint, use RIDD CLEANSER.
THE RIDD COMPANY always lead, others follow.
This is the first complete Book on Milking Machine operation
ever published in the World.
The Bucket.
The Bucket presents no difficulty
ties. An air-tight joint is secured
by means of a Pail Ring just placed
on the Bucket top.
When the Bucket is washed it
should be dried also. After it
has been dried with a cloth, it
should be placed on its side so
that the air can get to the inside
of it thoroughly. This prevents
rusting. Buckets simply washed and turned upside down rust quick-
ly. The rusting of the Buckets depends upon the care the farmer
takes in drying them. Impress this point upon him most thoroughly.
THE 33-INCH MILK TUBE
This Tube is connected to the cock on the Bucket. The other
end of the 33-inch Milk Tube is connected to the Milk Tube on the
Claw.
The Milk Tube is all solid rubber, and is provided with a Sight
Glass.
To insert the Sight Glass push one end into the slot of the Milk
Tube, and then grip the Milk Tube at a position each side of the slot,
by both hands, stretch it over the knee, and the slot will stretch far
enough for the other end of the Sight Glass to be easily pushed home,
as the elasticity of the rubber pulls the tube back each end of the Sight
Glass will be thoroughly covered.
A special brush is provided for cleansing the Milk Tube. Show
the farmer how to clean it. The brush should be passed right through
the Milk Tube: it cannot be pushed in at one end and pulled back-
wards and forwards.


The Ridd is the most simple Machine on the market—
This book makes it doubly simple.
You have invested your money in a Ridd. This Book
teaches you how to get the best value for your investment.
The Claw.
The two outer cross tubes
(72) serve the Pulsating
Chambers in the Teat Cups;
the two inner cross tubes
(71) serve the inside of the
inflation and carry away the
milk into the larger of the
two main tubes on the Claw.
The Pulsating Cap should
always be screwed up as
tightly as possible.
The Cap, however, on
the milk or the larger of
the 2 long Claw Tubes can
be left loose—but it should
never be loose enough to
prevent 15 inches of Vacu-
um being obtained whilst
milking, and if this vacuum
cannot be maintained—it is
a point that should be at-
tended to at once.
8 CLAW
TUBES, 4V4
inches long to
connect from
Claw to Milk and
Air Nipples.
Caps (73, 74)
are provided at
each end of the
main tubes, so
that they can be
removed and a
claw brush push-
ed through for
cleansing pur-
poses.
Explain the necessity of cleansing the claw to the farmer, and
show him how to do it.
Before putting the claw into use, it is most necessary that the
fitter should be certain that each port in the claw is cleared, and
where necessary is tight.
Put the eight claw tubes on the claw. Take the two at the far
end of the claw, and two at the near end of the claw, turn them, back
and hold with the hand, blow through the Jfs-in. or small mam tubing.
You should not be able to blow any air through—if you can there is
a leak in the soldering. Now allow one of the claw tubes to fly back,
blow through the small tube, and you should be able to blow freely,
and ascertain that there is a free passage. Bend this tube down and


Knowledge is power—Your understanding ot tflis Book
increases your efficiency tenfold.
An Instruction Book that is an Instruction Book—not
glossary.
go through the whole four tubes in this manner, seeing that each one
has a free passage, and that when all four are bent down no passage
is obtained.
Do exactly the same with the Milk Claw Tubes, which are the
two inner cross tubes on the claw. In the case of the large claw
sometimes used, the position of the cross pieces as far as inner and
outer are concerned, is reversed.
The Teat Cups.
96 Top for Screw Top Case 9 Plain Top Case
97 Screw Top Case 11 Inflation for Plain Top Case
98 Inflation for Screw Top Case
The Teat Cups are attached to the Claw by the aid of short Milk
and Air Tubes. The Milk Tube is of course on the centre of the
inflation, and the pulsating tube or air tube at the side of the inflation.
These short tubes coupled to the claw are as follows: —
Milk Tube on the end of the outer cross piece on the claw.
Pulsating Tube on the end of the inner cross piece on the claw.
The Teat Cup being assembled, examine carefully the nipples and
see that they have a good hold in the inflations.
23 Milk Nipple for either type of
above Inflation
10 Air Nipple for either type of
above Inflation
Sometimes a nipple causes the seat of the inflation to project so
that a ridge is formed, and air gets into the Pulsating Chamber at
each side of the ridge. If this is so, the Pulsating Air Nipple hole in
the inflation wants burning out a .little, for it is too small.


The Ridd is as thorough in detail of design and perfection
as is this Book in detail of instruction.
Ridd Cleansing Powder—a valuable asset on the Dairy
Parm.
Again we have noticed that the Inflation Cases are sometimes
perhaps just 1764th inch too large, and that in consequence there is
an admission of air into the Pulsating Chamber.
Watch this point. If you find that the Inflation Cases are slight-
ly large, just place each one of them horizontally on the crank shaft
■of the Engine, tap the ends inwards slightly with a hammer, and this
will prove to be effective.
There are two types of Teat Cups—the one described above, and
the No. 2or Screw Top. The Screw Top Teat Cup is not provided
with a mouthpiece; we generally recommend the Ring Top or No. 1
Teat Cup.
In the case of the Screw Top Cup care must always be taken to
see that when the Cup is screwed on the Inflation is not twisted.
After screwing the Cup on, if the Inflation is twisted, just turn the
bottom of it so as to bring it back straight. Impress upon the farmer
the importance of never trying to milk with the Inflations in a
twisted state.
The Inflations should be released from the Cups at least once a
week, but this applies more especially to Screw Top Inflations. This
is necessary to see that the Inflation is not sticking to the Cups. We
have found many Inflations that have not been removed from the
■cases, and have cemented themselves so hard to the screw cap that
when the farmer has wanted to remove the Inflation he has had to
use such force as to tear the top of the Inflation. Therefore they
should be removed frequently.
Explain these little points to the farmer most carefully, for it is
attention to small details that makes the whole Plant successful.
The Temporary Inflation Case.
69 Shows an Infla-
tion which has stret-
ched beyond the
standard case. In
such a case satisfac-
tory milking cannot
be achieved and in-
jury to the milk
yield is likely to re-
sult. We therefore
supply No. 70.
70 Long Inflation
Case, which takes up
the stretch and en-
ables the Inflation to
be used satisfactorily
for a longer period.
The illustration
shows the Stretched
Inflation assembled
in the long Case.


You have the Best Machine in the World. Will you da
your part and operate it correctly ?
We publish this book at great expense to help you, not
for you to throw the book aside and forget about it as soon as,
you have received it.
The Favourite Teat Cup.
These illustrations refer to one of the many different types of
Ridd Teat Cups, patents for which are held by the Company.
We recommend the No. I type as being the most efficient milker, but
where the sleeve type of Inflation is required we supply Teat Cup
as illustrated above.
The same system of internal ribs (Ridd Patent) is adopted as-
in the No. I Inflation. Without these ribs no Inflation, in our opinio*
based upon years of experiment and observation, can be satisfactory.


Dirt and Grease don’t stand a chance in the home where
Ridd Cleanser is used.
Cleanliness is the first principle in successfully operating
any Milking Machine.
Mouthpieces.
Mouthpieces are provided to insert into the top of the Inflations.
Some users milk without the mouthpieces, but this is not to be recom-
mended. The Inflation was made to work with the mouthpiece; re-
moving the mouthpiece and working without it allows the udder of
the cow ta be drawn into the Teat Cup, and the consequent danger
of strangulation of the milk passages.
We have had several complaints from users about these,
but the complaints generally come from farmers who have been
using the L.K.G. Machine, and have got into the habit of just
getting hold of the Claw, and pulling the Teat Cups off
The Ridd Teat Cup is quite different in construction and action
to any other, consequently the procedure for the RIDD CUP must
be followed: —By catching hold of the Claw and just pulling the Teat
Cups off the user is likely to pull the Claw Tubes out and also to
place an undue strain upon the cow—and to pull the Inflation away
from the mouthpiece.
The more this is done the easier the Mouthpiece will come out.
When taking off the Ridd Cups one hand should support the Claw.
The Vacuum should be cut off at the Stall Tap or by pinching the
33-inch Milk Tube.
The Vacuum being cut off the Cups will come off quite easily.
If any one Cup sticks at all, the forefinger and thumb should be placed
on top of it and pulled) down thus making certain that the Ring comes
off and that the Ring is not strained in the Inflation.
If this procedure is followed no trouble will be experienced.
Mouthpieces coming out of the Inflation is caused in ninety-nine
cases out of one hundred through faulty operation.
In washing the Inflation care must be taken not to subject them
to very hot water. If this is done the Inflations will not last one
half as long as if washed in cold water, and they will become so loose
at the top that they will not hold the Ring.
When the Inflations get worn the Mouthpieces originally supplied
slip out easily; we therefore supply with each plant a number of
larger Mouthpieces, which must be used after the Inflations stretch
slightly at the top.
The ENGINE and VACUUM PUMP should now be started.
Each Teat Cup should be examined carefully in turn.
The three Teat Cups should be turned down so that the Vacuum
is cut off, and is serving one Teat Cup only.
Place the thumb in the Teat Cup, blocking the admission of air,
and see that each Teat Cup is pulsating strongly and evenly.


A Serviceable and Practical
UDDER PUMP
All remedies for Mammitis aim at reaching the germ of the
disease and destroying the Bacteria by means of an antiseptic.
Outward applications and ordinary injections are often failures
because they fail to penetrate to the seat of the trouble.
We believe that this is the only satisfactory method of quickly
stamping Mammitis out of a Dairy herd.
Fig l shows the Pump assembled complete.
Fig 2 shows the internal arrangement of the Pump. The Cotton
Wool is' saturated with F'ormalin, Peroxide of Hydrogen or Kero-
sene. The Piston forces fresh air through the saturated wool into
the udder in the form, of a fine spray which thoroughly impregnates
the whole of the quarter and destroys the injurious germ.
THE RIDD UDDER PUMP forces
Antiseptic Air into every crevice and
fold of the Udder, and its effect is a
thousand times more certain than any
previous remedy introduced.


Everything is simple to the man who knows how—this
Book tells you how.
Ridd Cleansing Powder—a valuable asset on the Dairy
Farm.'
After this has been ascertained, go to the Releasor, see that the
valves on the Releasor are opening and closing regularly.
Of course you will have ascertained that the correct vacuum is
being registered on the gauge.
Starting the Machines.
When installing a Plant you should always place the Inflations
in water for at least 24 hours before you commence to use them.
This results in softening the Inflations a little.
Before putting the Machines on to the cows, it is necessary to
wash the whole of the pipe system with boiling water and Ridd
Cleansing Powder. This applies more particularly to the Overhead
Plant.
Get a bucket of water as hot as possible, carry it into the bail
farthest away from the Releasor, mix a solution of Ridd Cleansing
Powder. Put the end of the 4-ft. Nickel Tube into the bucket, and
suck the wholp bucket full of boiling water and Cleansing Powder
through the Nickel Tubing and through the Releasor. This should
be done two or three times, and the Nickel Piping should then be
taken down and examined. See that everything is thoroughly clean,
and especially tljat the Nickel Pipes have been fitted into the Combi-
nation Taps in such a manner that no milk solids are likely to lodge
in the crevices.
In the case of the Bucket Plant, the i-inch Piping and the Pulsa-
tor Piping should be washed out as described previously, and hot
water, not boiling, should be sucked through each set of Teat Cups
into the buckets.
IN HOT WEATHER. Before commencing to milk with the
Machines, at the evening milking, it is as well to suck a bucket of
cold water through the whole milk pipe system. The sun in many
cases heats up the pipe system between milkings to such an extent
that this precaution is necessary.
When the washing of the Plant has been completed, before putting
the Teat Cups on the cows, examine each Teat, and each quarter.
If there are any blind Teats point them out to the farmer.
If there is any inflammation showing in either the Teats or
Quarters, point this out to the farmer. Upon the examination of
each Teat no hard beady substances should be able to be felt in the
Teats. If such growths are present, they indicate that the cow has
previously had some Teat or Udder trouble. Be most particular
with such cows to see that the milk has started and will flow freely.
Such animals arc always likely to develop udder diseases, and the
farmer should be advised to watch them carefully.
Now take a bucket of warm water and Condy’s Fluid, and wash
the udder of each cow before commencing to milk her.
Before putting on the Cups, take a stream of milk-from each Teat
to see that the milk is flowing freely.
Turn the four cups back from the cross pieces of the claw,
so that the vacuum is cut off, then open the stall tap serving the
main Vacuum Tube.
Release one cup, place it squarely on the Teat, and push up


Ridd Powder is free from injurious acids,
take the tinning off Dairy Utensils.
Do not look upon this as a mass of print but realise that
every sentence is of importance.
towards the udder. . The Vacuum will immediately grip the Teat and
the other cups can be put on in the same manner. Watch the Sight
Glass, and in a few seconds milk will be seen passing through into
the bucket.
When commencing a new Plant it is always advisable not to
endeavour to milk the cows right out at the first milking. Milk
them half out and then take the balance by hand. The second milking
34 of the milk should be taken and it is almost as well for the farmer
to only take about 34 of the milk by the Machines for the first week,
and at the end of a week he should take the lot.
It is just as well to break the cows into the machines gradually
and any sensible man will admit this.
Care should also be taken to see that a 13-inch vacuum only is
used, anyhow for the first week of milking.
For the first few milkings, cows naturally cannot be expected to
milk quite as well as they have by some system of milking that they
have been used to for perhaps a number of years. The best results
with machines will of course be achieved on heifers: the cow that is
most difficult to handle is naturally the oldest in the herd.
For the first milking Mo not leave the cow immediately the cups
have been put on for the first time, but watch the Sight Glass and see
that the animal is giving down milk freely. In ninety-nine cases out
of a hundred the cow will barely notice that she has the machines on,,
but it is the odd cow that you want to always be prepared to meet.
If the cow endeavours to fight against the machines, put a little
weight on the claw with the hand, but of course not sufficient to pull
the cups off. If she does not give her milk then it will be necessary
to remove the cups and start the milk in the Teats again. Do this
two or three times, and yom'will invariably find that the hardest cow
will get into the habit of letting her milk down.
Naturally the coWs will be a bit nervous at the first milking, and
a little mess will be made in the shed. This, however, will be all
overcome in the first few days, and in handling cows with the mac-
hines, especially for the first milking, the operator wants to be as quiet
and gentle as possible, and at the same time not nervous. Do not
attempt to be rough with the cows, for this is the worst way to get
results with Milking Machines at the start. It generally takes from 3
to minutes to milk a cow out.
You will notice that the cow is milked by the slackness of the)
quarter. When the quarter appears to be empty, grip the quarter at
the base of the udder lightly but firmly, and draw the fingers down
towards the base of the Teat. This should be done two or three
times on each quarter, and an alternate pressure should be put on the
Teat Cups with the hand.
To remove the Cups just pinch the 33-inch Milk Tube with the
forefinger and thumb, thus cutting the vacuum off from the Teats —
push one of the Teats in with the thumb, and allow a small amount
of air to pass into the Teat Cup. This will destroy the vacuum in the
other Cups—put the hand round the Cups so that they do not fall
down. Now release the pressure on the milk tube with the finger
and thumb, but release it very slightly, just sufficiently to allow the
small remnants of milk in the cups and claw to pass into the milk


With the aid of this Book anyone who can read can get the
same satisfaction from a Ridd as can the inventor.
Dirt and Grease don’t stand a chance in the home where
Ridd Cleanser is used.
tube. (This release of the milk tube is of course only momentary,
and the tube should be closed again immediately, and the stall tap
shut off).
When removing the cups, especially in the Releasor Plant, great
care should be taken, and the farmer should be instructed most care-
fully, otherwise when he Is removing the cups he is likely to allow
such a volume of air to pass into them that the air will be cut off the
vacuum, drive the milk along the nickel piping, and form a block at
the entrance to the Releasor. This, of course, must result in the
other sets of Teat Cups in the shed falling off.
If the Teat Cups fall off, it is generally the fault of the operator.
Stripping.
Strip each Teat to see that there is no milk left in the quarter
immediately the cups are off—do not leave the cow for five minutes
and then come back and strip her—and advise the farmer accordingly.
For the first two or three milkings, and indeed after every milk-
ing right through the milking season, the farmer should be advised to
have a jar of Sykes’ “Animol” handy. If he does not care to use this,
then he may use Vaseline, with which has been thoroughly mixed a
small quantity of Carbolic Oil.
Before the cows are turned out into the pasture, the quarter and
teats should be slightly smeared with some such ointment.
System in Milking.
The Dairy Farmer will find that he will get far better results
•with the machine if he gets down to a good quick system of handling
the plant and allots a given time to each cow for milking.
The system should be arranged so that the_ Cups are never on
a cow for more than 4 minutes. If a Farmer thinks that a cow will
not give her milk down in this time he is wrong—She may not do
so for the first 7 or 8 milkings, but within a week’s milking she will
give all her milk down to the machine.
It is a great mistake to allow the cups to remain upon a cow too
long. (
We always find that if there is any trouble it is when a man does
not milk the cows in rotation but milks in a haphazard manner, leav-
ing the cups upon one cow for perhaps 3 minutes and upon another
for 10 minutes.
Users with a large plant should reduce the number of milking
units in proportion to their herd so that they never have more milk-
ing units in use than will milk 12 cows- per hour.
Thus if a man is dealing with a herd of 30 cows and he has a
■6-unit plant, he should put 4 units away until he has more cows —
-and he should not have the whole 6 units in operation at once, other-
wise he will have some cows with the cups on for too long a period.


for treatment oP N)
r Abortion,
Mile Fever,
TYfrflvfMlTlS. ,
IGE PRICt 22 r e
MILK FE-VE-R
ANTISE-PTIC
■v\.CVLINC»eR
M
I. 1
Upper? SYRING&
ABvRTIPM poucne
Q ‘fror/i 1 he RIDD C9MPANY LTD., 495 Lour Re st.. Melbourne.
Directions for Use on opposite page.


Directions for Using Ridd Veterinary Outfit
FOR MILK FEVER —Assemble as per illustration. At the value side of the
bulb on the syringe you will And that the rubber lube is coupled with a tinned ferrule.
Detach the valve end of the tube and the ferrule; now insert the end of the milk
fever cylinder into the short tube attached to the bulb of the syringe. Unscrew one
end of the milk fever cylinder and pour 3 to 5 drops of the Antiseptic Fluid into the
cotton wool; screw the cap back on the cylinder, and place end of syringe and insert
the nickel Teat Needle. The syringe is now reudy for use. The nipple is inserted well
up the teat to its base. Squeeze the bulb of the syringe about 20 times with a firm,
but gentle pre sure. Sterilized air will thus be injected into the quarter.
The cow should be given Sykes’ Drench in small quantities, as per special in-
structions.
ABORTION— Assemble the outfit as per illustration. The valve end of the rubber
tube is coupled to the r ibber tubing attached to the bulb of the tinned ferrule. At the
delivery end of the springe the bone mouth-piece is inserted, and the tapering end
of the mouth-piecc is pushed on the long cleansing douche. The cleansing douche is
to be inserted into the uteris of the cow, as per illustration.
Abortion Powders should be mixed in a glass bottle, and drawn from a glass,
enamelled or earthenware bowl, whilst the co .v is being irrigated.
i
5/
For Washing out Cows
and Mares.
Recommended by Veterinary Sur-
geons as the most reliable appliance
obtainable.
The accompanying illustration explains
the method of washing the cow :
1. Inside the Uterus (womb).
3. Vaginal Canal (Syringe tube in posi-
tion.
4. Rectum or last gut.
5. Anus.
6. Bladder.
tE
MILK fever
NCCD1.E
JOINED WTM rCfl"ULC
ABORTION OOUCHF
JOINED WTTM FERRULE
MAMMIT1S— Assembe as per illustration. Couple the
valve end of the rubber lube to the short connection attached
to ths bulb of the syringe. Insert the teat Nee le in th ■ de-
livery end of the syringe, as in the ca e of the milk fever outfit.
Shake the bottle of Udderine thoroughly, put the valve end of
the syringe into the bottle and draw one-fifth of the dose into
the bulb of the syringe. . , .. . ..
Now insert the needle into the teat, and squeeze the bulb 30
or 40 times, thus injecting into the Udder of the cow the full
charge of UJdcrine, plus a quantity of ai •. .
Now nject in the same manner an eggcup-full of warm water
th t has been boiled. ... . ,
Follow additional directions, as per printed matter or special
letter.
Alter the Outfit has been used, it should be
cleansed thoroughly with hot water 'NOT BOILING),
to which has been added a quantity of soda, making
a strong solution.
The most Up-to-date and Reliable Appliance
procurable for Irrigating Cows and Mares*
•f


You have the Best Machine in the World,
your part and operate it correctly ?
Will you do
This book should be carefully preserved. It is the most
important part of the Milking Machine.
The Cow and the Milking Machine.
We do not believe in surrounding the Milking Machine with a
Jot of mystery.
Every farmer has considered the question of whether the mac-
hines will injure the cows, or whether they will not, and no doubt he
has often heard stories of Machines having injured cows —we are
not speaking of our own Machine particularly, but of all Milking
Machines.
One of our users made a remark to-day to the effect that if his
son was to take a knife and cut off one of his cow’s teats, he would
be an unreasonable man to blame the knife.
Just exactly the same thing applies to the Milking Machines.
The Milking Machines want to be understood, and an intelligent
farmer will get down to it and understand just what it CAN do and
just what it CANNOT do.
Every provision has been made in the “Ridd” Machine (and it is
a provision that has been made in no other machine in the world)
to prevent any danger of the cow’s teats being even slightly inflamed
by cups being left on too long.
You will notice with the “Ridd” Machines that there is always
a certain amount of milk left in the Teat Cups.' This is retained for
as long as the Teat Cups are on the cow, and the reason that Mr. Ridd
designed his Teat Cup so that this would happen was so that the cow’s
teat would never be subjected to a hot, dry vacuum. This is why the
“Ridd” is superior in milking qualities to all other machines on the
market.
Now we have honestly described above all that can happen to a
cow, and there is nothing else that the Machines can possibly do.
This wants to be impressed strongly upon the farmer, but there
is this danger, and this also wants to be impressed upon him —that if
any cow comes into the herd with Mammitis, or contracts Mammitis
or Garget in some other manner, the machines can take the disease
from one cow to the other, and are likely to take it far more easily
than the hand milker, for the simple reason that the Teat Cups will
carry the germ, and spread it once infection is established. There-
fore we advise the farmer always that, before milking, the cow’s teats
should be washed in an antiseptic solution, such as Condy’s Fluid,
and that before they go into the paddock, a preparation such as
"Cowol” should be smeared on to the quarter.
Every operator should be thoroughly conversant with all Syke’s
Cattle Medicines, and he sdiould explain the value of them to the
farmer. No farmer should be without the knowledge that is con-
tained in Sykes’ Booklet, and no farmer should be without Sykes’
Cattle Medicines, for they will quickly get him out of trouble if he
has any difficulty with his herd.
Farmers are often-times suspicious of the Medicines and the
position should be clearly explained to them.


With the aid of this Book anyone who can read can get the
same satisfaction from a Ridd as can the inventor.
For
Copper,
cleaning Marble, Enamel, Aluminium,
Paint, use RIDD CLEANSER.
A certain good friend of ours had been negotiating for the pur-
chase of a “Ridd” Machine for three years. The opposition had filled
his head with stories of injury to the cow, etc., etc., and when he
eventually purchased the “Ridd” Machines, for two or three weeks
he was looking around, and we believe that he was almost disap-
pointed to find that the machines did not injure the cows!
About a month after he started working the machines, however,
one of the cows contracted Milk Fever, and he immediately put it
down to the machines. If he had known anything about cattle
diseases, he would have known at once that the cow had Milk Fever,
would have given her a dose of Sykes’ Drench, pumped some air into
the udder, and the cow would have been out of trouble in a few
hours.
Instead of this he blamed the machines, and wrote to us. We
sent an expert, and from the symptoms that he described, there was
no possible doubt about the disease, and as luck would have it, he had
another cow showing the same symptoms, which immediately respon-
ded to Sykes’ treatment for Milk Fever, and he was then convinced
that he had blamed the machines wrongly.
After purchasing a new machine the farmer is ready to blame
the machine for any condition in his herd that he has never noticed
before.
Every farmer should be thoroughly conversant with symptoms of
Mammitis, Garget, and Milk Fever, so please explain these things
thoroughly to him, and if he has not Sykes’ literature, write us and
we will send him a set free of charge.
Mammitis.
(INFLAMMATION OF MAMMARY GLANDS).
This disease is remarkably prevalent in Victoria this year, and is
on the increase to an alarming extent.
The contagious nature of the disease makes it very important that
every Dairy Farmer should protect himself against its ravages.
We are taking this opportunity of making the Dairy Farmer alive
to the danger that he is faced with, and you are urged in your own
interests to adopt such a system of handling your herd that there is
no possibility of your being a loser through a disease which is easily
prevented but is very hard to eradicate once it has established itself.
Mammitis does not afflict milking machine herds only. It is
just as common in herds milked by hand as in machine-milked herds,
but we must admit that the machine has greater possibilities of carry-
ing the contagious germ than has the hand-milker. Consequently, a
machine-milker should be particularly careful to see that everything
possible is done to prevent his cows becoming affected. It is foolish
and unwise for the machine-milker to think the cause of the disease
has anything to do with the machines for it has not, except that the
machine can act as a carrier.
The Milking Machine will not act as a producer or cause of the
complaint.


nee.
TRADE
MARK
CURES
SORE
TBAT*S
y
AN OINTMENT FOR ANIMALS
The improved treatment based on a scientific
formula and designed to destroy bacterial
growth Antiseptic, Soothing, Healing.
Easily Applied - Jlhvays Effective
:: Should be used after each Milking ::
Guaranteed to prevent the spread of Mamrnitis, Cow
Pox and other Infectious Diseases common among cattle.
MAMMITIS
The Remedy !
!miiL
REGISTERED
A Sure and Safe
Remedy for
Mamrnitis,
Garget,
Inflamed
Hard and
Caked
Udders
The Ridd Company Ltd., Melbourne


The Ridd is as thorough in detail of design and perfection
as is this Book in detail of instruction.
Dirt and Grease don’t stand a chance in the home where
Ridd Cleanser is used.
Mammitis is particularly contagious, and can so easily be spread
from one affected cow to the whole of the herd. It is a disease that
shows only during the lactation or milking period of a cow, but can
lie dormant in the system during the dry or>off period. Consequently,
many cows that have'the Mammitis and have dried off are bought by
dairy farmers at sales and are introduced into the herd, with very bad
results from the farmer’s point of view.
The disease can be caused by the neglect of inflammation caused
by the cow catching cold in the quarter through lying on cold, wet
or stony ground'. Often-times the heaviest milkers are the easiest
affected.
The farmer, therefore, should use a preventive system on every
cow he is milking, and by doing this is able to combat with the trouble
and, in most cases, will experience any loss whatsoever.
To prevent Mammitis it is as well to smear each quarter after
milking with vaseline and carbolic oil solution. If milking with ma-
chines the teatcups should be immersed in a solution of Condy’s Cry-
stals and water between milking each cow. To do this turn the milk
tap on and off quickly whilst the cups are in the solution. Immediately
any cow shows signs of inflammation in any teat or quarter she should
be milked by hand and Sykes’ Udderine injected into the affected
quarter, whilst the outside of the quarter should be massaged freely
with Sykes’ Animol, and the cow should be given a dose of Sykes'
Drench. If the trouble continues the above treatment should be per-
severed with, and it will be found the cow will be all right in two or
three days.
The above is the Sykes method, and we believe the best method
.that is known, but at the same time we mention the following as being
a simpler and less expensive remedy:
Inject into the quarter a solution of boracic acid and water, but
be careful to see that the teat needle through which the injection is
made is thoroughly sterilised before and after using. It is far better
never to inject anything into the udder than to inject through a
syringe that is not thoroughly sterilised.
Rub the udder with equal parts of kerosene and Stockholm Tar
until a lather is produced. Some dairy farmers state that the worst
case can be treated successfully with this system, but great care should,
of course, be used to see that the milk is not tainted with the kerosene.
Of course all milk from diseased cows should be immediately
destroyed. *
All treatment for Mammitis aims at penetrating to the interior
of the udder and destroying the germ. Extensive applications pene-
trate through the minute tissues (vessels) in the pores of the skin
while internal applications are injected through the Milk Duct. In
our opinion there is not one of the above methods so sure and effl-
casious as the Ridd treatment, with Ridd Pump, illustrated in this
booklet. Indeed it is the only practical and sure way of combating
the evil. By this system the anti-septic is carried into the udder in
the form of Anti-septic-air (if such a term is permissible). This
air thoroughly searches out and impregnates the whole of the quarter
and destroys all germs it forces its way in contact with. The results
we have noticed to date are remarkable.


Every half hour you have to spare should, for the first
three months, be given to this book.
Ridd Powder is a combination of soap. Soda and Elbow
Grease—with a very small percentage of the latter.
Washing the Machines.
64 Hard Bristly Inflation Brush too s-ft. Brush for Tubes
99 Soft Inflation Brush 102 3-ft. Brush for Milk Tubes,
100 Double Brush for long lengths both Rubber and Nickel
of Vyi-in. Tube 103 Claw Tube Brush
Immediately the milking is finished, not ten minutes afterwards,
but immediately, cold water should be sucked through each set of
Teat Cups.
Dairy farmers should know that cold water loosens milk par-
ticles and that 'hot water dissolves them, and that if hot water were
used firstly the milk would bake on—about a gallon of cold water
should be sucked through Cups followed by one gallon of hot water.
Between milkings the Cups should be hung in a sweet airy place—
night and day but out of the sun.
BUCKET PLANTS—As soon as the last cow is milked, turn off
pulsating tap, or take pulsating hose off claw. Do not start to wash
up without doing this. Then suck clean, cold water through, raising
the cups out of water several times during the process; this allows a
current of air to rush through the cups and claws. Then repeat this
process with hot water, only sufficiently hot to hold your hand in it,
with Ridd Powder added. By no means use boiling water.
After every morning milking take cups off claws, leaving short
rubbers on cups, then make a strong solution of hot —not too hot —
water and Ridd Powder, and brush out inside of inflation with a very
hard BRISTLY BRUSH.
A special hard bristle Brush is supplied for this purpose by the
Company.—This brush should be used with an up and down motion
in the inflation and the dirt will be easily cleaned out of the
crevices—and at the same time the bottom of the inflation cleaned.
Some users get very great success in cleansing the Ridd In-
flation by making a strong solution of Ridd Cleansing Powder and
water and filling the teatcup with this and then emptying into the
Inflation a handful of small shot and shaking the teatcup round just
as one would wash a bottle. Of course the shot is retained and used
over and over again.
Some users claim that this is better than any brush.


Do not look upon this as a mass of print but realise that
every sentence is of importance.
Ridd Cleansing Powder will do the work in half the time
—and miles better.
Do not be afraid to use plenty of elbow grease in this process,
as this is one of the main things in preserving the inflations. Then
pass the small brush supplied through the short rubbers—be sure
and pass it right through the nipples—also a larger brush through
the milk tube.
Take caps off claw every morning, brush out well, and as the
claw is metal it may be scalded in the same way as separator parts.
Then connect the short air tube to claw, leaving the short milk tube
free for air to pass through, and hang in an airy place until milking
time, and once a week take cups to pieces and disinfect Rubbers
only, inflations and tubes, for about 30 minutes in mild solution of
Formalin or Condys’ Crystals, if the latter, be sure the crystals are
dissolved thoroughly before using—then hang up to air as usual, but
it is advisable to allow inflations to dry before placing them in the
cases. It is important that the pulsation chamber be kept dry to
get best results. If when working the exhaust of pulsators has a
dribbling sound detatch air tube from claw for one second and tilt
claw, and water if there, will run out —Open Vacuum Tank immedia-
tely plant has stopped—-and if milk in same, in any quantity, there is
some defect, either in buckets overflowing, broken inflation, or Re-
leasor Valves not seating. In such a case the plant should be re-
started and cold and hot water sucked through the tubes or pipes
to the Vacuum Tank. Keep Vacuum Tank clean and if milk should
get there by any means—the milk will not be lost.
Before starting to use the cups again, take off milk tube and
hold the four cups firmly in your hands with the open ends, milk and
air tubes of claw facing downwards, give them a few quick swishes
in an up and down motion until all the water flies out. See that
there is no water left in them, otherwise it will be surging up and
down the tubes and retard pulsation.
When this is done, attach the set to vacuum and air hose ready
for starting.
Be sure and empty buckets before getting too full, otherwise the
milk will be drawn through pipe line into vacuum tank, and will cause
the pipe line and vacuum tank to smell.
If you 'have allowed your buckets to overflow, when finished
milking take a bucket of cold water and suck through the vacuum hose
on end bail, allowing a little air to rush through during the process.
Repeat with hot water and strong solution of Ridd Powder. Then
take lid off bottom of tank, and leave end stall tap open until next
milking to allow a free current of air to pass through. This is not
necessary unless you let the bucket overflow.
MILK PIPE OR RELEASOR PLANTS.—As soon as
the .last cow is milked go through the same process as with
Bucket Plant. After the cups and claws are done, take half a
bucket of clean (cold), suck it through the nickel pipe of
end bail, up through the milk pipe into the Releasor. Repeat this
with hot water and Ridd Powder, then let torpedo brush or washing
cloth through the pipe line.
After sucking cold and hot water through cups and nickel pipe
line —Considerable moisture remains in the pipe—therefore, before
using sweat cloth or half a yard square of cloth of open texture—
ring same out of hot water always and insert into pipe line corner-


COWOL
A Sure Preventative for
Mammitis, Garget, Sore Teats
and Swollen Udders.
t n'ii
OWOL
isepticOilfbruseontheTeats
Udders of the Dairy Cow
Healing Cows'Tea rs
e
Inflamed Udders
ina/lcick ofO?<'^ , 9 loo ' ,5
3D COMPAQ IuMfLBOt
Prevents and Heals Cracked Teats, Inflammation
and Sores.
Should be used in every Cowshed.
3/6 per 21b. Tin
An Invaluable Remedy that no
Farmer should he without.


Cleanliness is the first principle in successfully operating
-any Milking Machine.
Ridd Powder thoroughly scours and cleans —it finds the
dirt and grease.
wise, three parts, keeping one part in hand and blocking end of pipe
until vacuum rises till say 14 inches then let go, and this process will
take up all moisture and leave interior of pipe bright as a gun barrel.
Then leave all taps open, plug out, and free passage of air—the
greatest purifier between milkings.
It is also ’ necessary to remove Sight Glasses from milk tubes
weekly, to prevent bacteria accumulating around same—do this before
■disinfecting.
Leave the plug out of milk pipe to allow a free current of air
through until next milking. Releasor to be washed after every
milking, and not put together until milking time.
The Milk Pipes to be taken down at least twice a week, and the
brush supplied drawn through them, taking care to put each length
hack into the bail it belongs to.
Then take the next tap out of clip again, and so on to last bail.
When washing the Releasor do not remove the valve rubber rings.
II they are removed see that they are put back properly, otherwise
there will be a leakage of vacuum.
When the Releasor has been washed thoroughly; it must also be
dried with a cloth. ,
However dry it is, it still has to go through a certain drying pro-
cess by the atmosphere, and it should be laid on its side so that the
air can get readily at the inside of the helmet and the Release Cham-
ber. If this point is not observed the Releasor will rust.
Combination Taps.
They should be taken down daily and cleaned thoroughly.
Examine all crevices and see that there is no lodgment of stale milk.
Be careful to keep the plugs in the Combination Taps as they are
not interchangeable.
Faults and How to Locate Them.
TEAT CUPS FALLING OFF; .RELEASOR PLANT.
This is either a total loss of vacuum or some tube has become
■detached. If all the tubes are in order go over the Pipe system
thoroughly, and find out what is causing the loss. In all likelihood
it will be that some obstruction is holding the Release Valve down—
-probably the lid of the Vacuum Tank is not. seating properly.
POOR MILKING.
Poor Milking in any particular set of Teat Cups means a bad
pulsation—either the Pulsaror piping is blocked or you have a burst
Inflation. If milk is getting into the Vacuum Tank at the same
time this is almost certain.
Therefore take out the Inflations and examine them thoroughly.
If they are all'in order, perhaps some obstruction is blocking the 7-ft.
Pulsating tube. A little canvas from the vacuum hose may be turned
in and is acting as a flat valve. Or there may be a lodgment of oil


The Standard Brand for
Twenty Years.
— . .'A • • • • v
: v* * fv*\
CALVINO
CL C AN5lN^ g C ?^
sr-ssSS^
"• »"sr t*«» , ‘** ut *
& s& —*
* «»■’:: ■ ——■«
»«»******_!
Always look for this label and you will get the right kind. 1/6 Packets
16/-dozen. Each packet contains two doses. Always wrapped in Red Paper
NEVER SOLD IN BULK.
SYKES’S DRENCH
is a powder given in thin oatmeal gruel through the mouth,
to cows that have aborted, or healthy animals after calving
retaining the whole or part of the afterbirth. SYKES S-
DRENCH cleanses and completely cures all inflammatory
and feverish disorders; also Colds, Chills, Red Water, Cos—
tiveness, Milk Fever, Indigestion, Hide Bound, etc. We
make this statement, which is endorsed by over five thousand
testimonials.
How to Drench a Cow
Stand on right side of the cow, place the left hand inside
her mouth and take a firm grip of the upper jaw. Lean your
back against the cow’s shoulder. Place the nozzle of the
Drench Tube or bottle at the side of the mouth, well back
over the tongue, and gradually pour the Drench down the
throat, giving the animal time to breathe and swallow. If
the cow coughs, lower the head and cease pouring down the-
fluid until the coughing is over.


Do not forget the Ridd is the pioneer of successful
Milking Machines.
Ridd Powder lessens the drudgery of cleaning up after
-milking and is a preserver and cleanser of Rubber.
•under one of the ports of the Pulsator. If this is not the case, then
•the Jfj-inch Pulsating pipe has become blocked and requires cleaning.
Examine the cases of the Inflations,and see that they are fitting
tightly around the bottom of the Inflations, and are seating properly
■on the rubber flange.
TEAT CUPS FALLING OFF; RELEASOR PLANT.*
' This is probably due to faulty operation, as described previously.
If care is not used when taking the Teat Cups off the large body of
air rushing into the Milk Pipe quickly destroys the Vacuum, and all
cups will drop off. The milk in the pipe is driven furiously along
into the Releasor Helmet, with the consequence that the Vacuum
Pump is only working in the Releasor, and not maintaining the
vacuum in the pipe line.
This will result in the milk being drawn up through the Releasor
Helmet and Baffle Plates into the i-inch Piping, and into the Vacuum
Tank. The felt or sponge disc will also become soaked with milk
and will have the effect of cutting off the vacuum.
If the operator finds difficulty at the commencement in handling
the cups, it is far better to work without the felt discs. Very little
milk will then get into the Vacuum Tank, and the cups will not fall off.
Another cause of trouble with a Releasor Plant is that the valves
are not seating properly on the rubber rings, consequently the Re-
leasor is not acting.
RELEASOR VALVES.
The Releasor Valve Ring may not be seating. In assembling
the Releasor it should not be tightened up fully with the thumb screw.
The Thumb Screw should just be tightened enough to hold the Re-
leasor in position, and the Vacuum will lift the rings altogether evenly
—then tighten up the Thumb Screw.
With Releasors where valves are simply hung upon points, the
valve sometimes dances on the inner chamber and drops off, conse-
quently all the above troubles will be pronounced.
The Releasor also cannot work unless the pulsating pipe is
thoroughly clear. If the Releasor does not work, of course the milk
will get into the Vacuum Tank and at the same time it will be most
•difficult to keep the cups on.
BAFFLE PLATE RING.
The ring on the Baffle Plate may not be seating correctly,
consequently there is an inrush of air at this point.
FAULTY PUMP VALVES.
If the Pump Valves are leaking necessarily the Vacuum Pump
will not be creating sufficient vacuum.
MILK GETTING INTO THE VACUUM TANK.
With a Bucket Plant this occurs through the bucket being allowed
to overflow, or through milking with burst Inflations. In either case
the whole Vacuum system needs cleansing out as described previously.


Every half hour you have to spare should, for the first
three months, be given to this book.
Use Ridd Powder in your home—it cleanses floors, sinks,,
etc., etc.
COMBINATION TAP RINGS.
These Rings may not be seating in the Combination Tap, with the:
consequence that there is an admission of air which is breaking down-,
the vacuum.
PLUG AT THE END OF PIPE LINE.
Too deep a groove may be cut in this which will allow too much;
air to get into pipe line.
LOSS OF VACUUM.
If this is not apparent through any of the above-mentioned causes,,
the whole Vacuum Pipe System wants going over with a lighted
candle, and a leakage will, of coures, immediately be discovered,
because the flame will be drawn towards the leakage.
If the Pipe System and Vacuum Tank are in perfect order, give,
attention to the valves on the Vacuum Pump. These may have been-,
worn or broken, and of course if the pump valves are not acting no-
vacuum can be obtained.
The Packing Gland on the Piston Rod on the Pump also wants-
examining. This may have become 'hard and dry, and air may have-
been escaping through it.
If you have completed the work of erection in accordance with,
this Pamphlet, and have thoroughly instructed the Farmer in the use
of the Machines, then ask him to sign the Clearance Sheet, which is
on the back of the Packing Sheet by which you erected the Plant.
The Expert must not consider his job is complete until this
Clearance Sheet is Signed
Ordering Parts.
Instruct farmers when ordering parts for the machines always ten
give full description so as to save the possibility of error.
For instance, there are two types of Inflations, there are two
sizes in Releasor Valve Rings, and unless the part required is fully
described an error may easily be made to the annoyance of both the
Company and the purchaser.
When parts are illustrated and numbered in the Instruction Book,
the number should always be used when ordering.
. Always advise farmers to carry three extra Inflations, Valve
Rings, extra Pail Rings, Combination Tap Rings, and an extra Claw,,
extra Down Pipe, extra Rubber Ends, and all small articles that are
likely to be required.
Very often, right in the middle of the season’s heaviest milking,,
a farmer will wake up to the fact that he is short of some particular
parts that require replacing, and on account of this he is unable to
use one milking unit.
The wise farmer will never put himself in this position, but will
always have a small reserve stock to fall back on in case he needs,
something urgently.


HOT WATER
-
Beadily obtainable is a necessity
in EVEBY DAISY where
Super Grade
is desired in the Factory
Beturn.
Hot Water is required to
Thoroughly Cleanse all Metal
Parts of the Milking Machine
and to wash out all Pipes, Cans,
Vacuum Tanks, Releasors, etc.
. Use Hot Water always where
its use is specified in this In-
struction Book.
This illustration is that of an
ideal Water Heater for use upon
the Dairy Farm.
With the aid of a few chips a continuous
flow of water at the rate ot 2 \i gallons per
minute can be obtained.
Water connections can be coupled to any
existing pipe line or to Supply Tank provided
specially—either of 8,12, or 16 gallon capacity.
The Heater may be used anywhere re-
quired, either indoors or out, and the water
delivered to any desired point.
To ensure a supply as stated above, all you have
to da is to light the fire and keep the supply tank fall.
TESTIMONIAL.
The Ridd Milking Machine Company,
Bourke Street, Melbourne.
Dear Sirs, —We have been using one of your “20th
Century” Bath Heaters in our dairy for about six
years, and can thoroughly recommend them to any-
body requiring a quantity of hot water for washing up.
They are quick, simple, and economical. A couple
of hands full of dry sticks will give us enough hot
water to wash cans, buckets, separator, etc., and with
dry sticks you can get heft water immediately. ■%
Yours faithfully,
KIRBY BROS.
"Wattle Bank,” Daylesford, 3/2/19.


BIDD
3 1508 01972103 9
Born under the Mountain
CLEANSED
(From a Formula by Ambroae Ridd)
INDISPENSABLE ON THE DAIRY FARM
For Cleansing and Washing . .
Milking Machines Separator Parts
Milk and Cream Cans The Dairy
Clothes *. Floors
* r Sinks, Etc., Etc.
A GREASE ERADICATQR
The Most Powerful Fat Solvent known to Chemists
2/6 per 51b. Bag
, Purchase a Bag'to-day and Save a Week’s Work.
Agents Wanted Everywhere
Qprn under the Mountain
*
Jhe Ridd Company
Ltd.
495-497 Bourke Street
Melbourne
Born under the Mountain.
