

9(4l^
The Courier-Mail
ATOMIC AGE
EXHIBITION
ROYAL NATIONAL SHOW • BRISBANE • AUGUST 1947
SIXPENCE


/
A
s.
Y
\6
Co*
******
iA?
V
£;
s
:,|IA
sv>h
ih
hit
If
a »*»«
I
■ fOR^
V
I
y4hi
ylH*',
>A»*
: . jm<^
. * *'
*?■ ? |
\ > *s&?s ■’• '
**V* 'fl\**r *
„» **z*x *r
***&*** :
0
eof> *
•*■-
*%?
■


The Courier-Mail
ATOMIC AGE EXHIBITION GUIDE
The Courier-Mall Atomic Age Exhibition has been produced with
one object in mind, and that is to show simply and clearly the implica-
tions of the Atom Bomb and the Atomic Age.
The main part of the Exhibition was brought across the world
from London, which is the only city in the world to have sfeen it pre-
viously.
The exhibition is divided into three main sections. The first covers
the science behind the atomic bomb, beginning with the structure of the
atom ard ending with the principle and some details of the bomb itself.
The second section describes the effects of the five atomic bombs
which have so far been detonated.
Finally, a big section of the exhibition explains the immediate and
future possibilities of atomic energy as a constructive force.
Highlight of the exhibition is the reconstructed bombing of Hiroshima.
%
By means of animated models and sound track, the dropping of the first
atomic bomb to be used in war will be re-enacted every few minutes
whilst the exhibition is open.
For this purpose a 265 sq. ft, model of Hiroshima as it was when
official Allied observers went in after the bombing, has been built. Only
data from official photographs and reports were used in its construction.
Mr. J.. B, Hawker, an architect sent by the British Government to
assess the atom bomb damage in Japan, has checked the model.
The uranium metal on show is many times more than existed in the
world before 1940. Although it is off about a million
particles per pound per second —close contact with the metal for several
hours would be needed to produce any symptoms of radiation sickness.
On the basis of uranium 235 content, the large uranium ingot dis-
played has the potential power of 500 tons of T.N.T. as an explosive, or.
75 tons of coal as a fuel.


THE SCIENCE BEHIND
THE ATOMIC BOMB
THE ATOM, ITS STRUCTURE AND SIZE.
Everything, you, the ground you walk on, the water you drink, the
air you breathe, is composed of separate particles called ATOMS.
If a pin one inch long were magnified to reach from Brisbane to
Bombay, the individual atoms in it would be the size of golf balls.
A pin magnified to this size would have atoms the size of golf balls.
An atom has the form of a miniature solar system, tiny partieles
called electrons revolving like moons round a central core or nucleus.
The nucleus in turn is built up of two other kinds of particles called
protons and neutrons.
There are 96 basic kinds of atoms, differing in the size of their nuclei
and the number of electrons they contain.
Different combinations of these 96 atoms give all the materials we
know.
Close-up of an atom. Inset:—the core or nucleus still more magnified.


THE ENERGY OF THE ATOM
There is great energy in the whirling electrons —energy we tap and
use as electricity. The heat energy of coal and oil also oomes from
electrons.
But inside the nucleus, held like the power in a giant spring, is
colossal energy—the energy of the atomic bomb.
The only sources of this atomic power yet tapped by man are the
ores of the heavy metal —uranium.
These yield the two. super-explosives—uranium 235 and plutonium.
A fast neutron “ bullet” splits the uranium 235 nucleus into five fragments-
Three of these are neutrons, which in this and succeeding diagrams are
enlarged for clarity.
SPLITTING THE ATOM
Neutrons —tiny particles chipped from atoms —can be accelerated to
great speeds in special machines.
If a fast neutron hits an atom of uranium 235 it splits the nucleus
into five fragments—two main pieces and three neutrons.
These fly out with colossal energy—atomic energy.
The same thing happens to an atom of plutonium struck by a fast
neutron.
THE KEY TO THE MYSTERY
If we could recover the fragments of a split atom we should find
they weighed a little less than the unsplit atom.
This missing weight is the key to the mystery of
atomic power. It has been changed to the energy
which gives the fragments their great speed.
Substance can change into energy and at
such a rate that the tiny quantity of matter
lost when one atom of uranium 235 or
plutonium splits, is equal to the energy got
by burning 50,000,000
atoms of coke.
When the uranium 235
atom splits, tome of its
substance it changed into
energy.


This interchange of matter and energy was predicted by Einstein in
1905 as a result of theoretical calculations.
It means that as energy producers, 1 lb. of split uranium 235 or
plutonium atoms are equal to 1,500 tons of coal —enough to keep a
kitchen fire burning continually for 300 years.
.. ; \,
THE EXPLOSIVE CHAIN REACTION
The three neutrons shot at high speed from a splitting atom could
split three other atoms in a lump of uranium 235 or plutonium. These
would throw out nine more fast neutrons to carry on the process so
that a chain of splitting atoms would run right through the metal. In
the final build-up of this “chain reaction’’ millions of particles would be
flying outwards in an instant of time. Colliding with the atoms of
oxygen and nitrogen in the air the particles would generate enormous
heat by friction. The air round the bomb would become hotter than
the sun. Expanding instanteously, it would throw off a shock wave
and then rush outwards as an overwhelming superheated blast.
The lump of metal would, in fact, be a bomb of
crushing power—an atomic bomb.
The explosive chain reaction in a lump of uranium
235 or plutonium. One splitting atom throws out
fast neutrons which split other atoms, the final effect
being a colossal explosion.


MAKING URANIUM 233
The only source of uranium 235 is natural uranium metal. To make
1 lb. of uranium 235, 140 lbs. of uranium are needed, for the bulk of
the natural metal is composed of atoms of uranium 238 —a non-explosive
substance.
Uranium 235 and uranium 238 atoms are exactly alike except for a
slight difference in weight. They cannot be separated in a chemical bath.
One of the methods used to separate them is to shoot electrified
uranium vapour between the poles of a powerful magnet.
The lighter uranium 235 atoms travel in a shorter curve than tha
uranium 238 atoms and the two are caught in separate boxes.
One way of separating uranium 235 from uranium 238 .
All the methods are based on this slight difference in weight between
the two atoms.
They are so laborious, that to produce 6$ lbs. of uranium 235 a day,
a vast plant covering 70 square miles and employing 75,000 people had
to be built.
It was located at Oak Ridge, Tennessee,
URANIUM IS A KILLER
A piece of uranium 235 is like a machine gun. Bursts of high-speed
atomic “bullets” are continually triggered off by stray neutrons in
the air.
These, together with gamma rays—super X-rays also produced by
splitting atoms —can destroy flesh.
All uranium 235 plant has therefore to be shielded by feet-thick con-
crete to absorb the “bullets” and death rays, and is operated by remote
control.


MAKING PLUTONIUM
If an atom of uranium 238 is struck by a neutron travelling at
average speed, instead of splitting, it absorbs the neutron. Then two
electrons shoot from the mass and an atom of a new substance—
plutonium—remains. Because it is a completely different element, plu-
tonium can be extracted from uranium in a chemical bath.
This makes it easier to manufacture than uranium 235.
The world’s main plutonium factory is at Hanford, Washington State,
U.S. It consists of three huge structures called “piles,” in which the
plutonium is made, and a chemical separation plant.
Each pile is basically a block of graphite (pencil lead) containing
slugs of uranium metal. The graphite slows down neutrons produced
by uranium 235 atoms in the slugs to average speeds. These neutrons
convert uranium 238 to plutonium. From time to time the slugs are
removed and processed in a series of chemical baths. The plutonium
is made into bombs. The uranium recovered from the baths is remade
into slugs and put back in the piles.
Plutonium, like uranium 235, is strongly radioactive, so the pile has
to be shielded with thick concrete. The chemical baths are similarly
shielded and set deep in the ground. The entire plant has to be worked
by remote control. About 20 lbs. of plutonium is produced daily.
How plutonium is produced in a “pile” for bomb manufacture.


“X"—THE CRITICAL SIZE
A piece of uranium 235 or plutonium the size of a golf ball could
never explode. Stray neutron “bullets” would split atoms in it, but
the fragments would escape from the surface before a chain reaction
could get started.
A piece of explosive metal the size of a football would automatically
detonate. High-speed fragments cannot easily escape from a piece so
thick. They would be certain to start an explosive chain reaction.
Between these two sizes is a size “X,” just on the border-line of
safety. The number of high-speed fragments produced in it, at any
moment, is just balanced by the number of fragments escaping at its
surface.
Lumps smaller than this critical size are safe. Bigger lumps auto-
matically explode.
The critical size of uranium 235 or plutonium—the size just on the border
line of safety—lies between the size of a golf-ball and the size of a football.
The atomic bomb could not be built until the critical size “X” was
known. The scientists found it by experiment.
The exact figure for the critical size is an official secret. From
scientific reports it can be calculated as about iOO lbs. for uinninm
235 and slightly less than this for plutonium.


THE ATOMIC BOMB
The atomic bomb is a huge aerial torpedo weighing 9,000 lbs. It Is
so long—about 25 feet with its two parachutes—that to carry it, a
Superfortress has to have its two separate bomb-bays linked.
This length is made necessary by the detonating mechanism —a long
gun-tube through which a piece of uranium 235 or plutonium is fired
at another.
The explosive “bullet" and the “target" are each below the critical
size and therefore safe when held separately at opposite ends of the
gun-tube. But when brought together, they exceed the critical size—
about 100 lbs. —and automatically explode.
The gun-tube is the only mechanism yet devised which can bring the
two pieces together rapidly enough to give the full explosive effect.
If the pieces approach slowly, stray particles in the narrowing gap
Cause a less-powerful, premature explosion.
The great weight of the bomb—just over four tons—is made up
chiefly by the gun : tube and two thick rings of lead foil. These are
wrapped round the tube to absorb dangerous radiations from the ex-
plosive which would injure the bomber crew. They bring the final
diameter of the bomb to just under two feet.
Two “drogues"—parachutes open at each end —check the fall of the
bomb. This increases the accuracy of the time fuse operating the
detonating mechanism. Four small fins complete the streamlining.
At the required height above the target a small propellant charge
fires the bullet along the gurf-tube, bringing about an explosion equal
to the bursting of 20,000 tons of T.N.T.
At the end of August, 1945, the U.S, Government had ten completed
atomic bombs in stock. Since then production has continued at a rate
of about six per month.
The total atom-bomb stocks at the beginning of 1947, scattered for
security reasons throughout America are believed to number 108.
A shower of gamma rays—death rays penetrating feet-thick walla.


The atom bomb cut
away to show the deto-
nating mechanism in
action. When the
bullet strikes the target
the combined mass ex-
plodes with the force of
20,000 tons of T .N. T .


ATOMIC BOMBS
IN ACTION
ATOM BOMB No. 1. NEW MEXICO, JULy 16th, 1945
At dawn on July 16th, 1945, the first atomic bomb was detonated on
top of a 100-feet steel tower deep in the New Mexico desert. It contained
uranium 235. This is how an official observer watching nearly ten miles
away, described the explosion:—
“There was a blinding flash lighting up the whole area brighter than
the brightest daylight. Then came a tremendous, sustained roar and a
heavy pressure wave which knocked down two men outside the control
centre. Then a huge multi-coloured surging cloud boiled to an altitude
of over 40,000 feet.
“The steel tower was entirely vaporized. Where it had stood was a
huge, sloping crater.”
ATOM BOMB No. 2. MIROSHIMA, AUGUST 6th, 1945
The first atomic bomb to be used in war was dropped from an Ameri-
can Superfortress airplane flying over the Japanese town of Hiroshima
on August 6th, 1945.
It exploded 1,000 feet above the ground at 8.20 a.m. as the 255,000
people of the city were beginning their day.
In an instant the uranium in the bomb changed from a small cold lump
of metal to, a mass of swelling gas, millions of degrees hot. Round it
grew an immense ball of incandescent air.
A shower of gamma rays—death rays penetrating Ceet-thick walls—


View of Hiroshima abowing total destruction resulting from dropping of
the first atom bomb, August 6th, 1945.
flashed out with the speed of light. And with them, unseen bullets —the
high-speed fragments of the uranium atoms.
Then followed the shock wave of the bomb shattering buildings and
bodies. And then the hoi blast of expanding air —a noisy super-hurricane
whirling the charred wood and stone to dust.
This is how J. E. Vine, The Courier-Mail war correspondent, described
the atomic bomb’s destructive power:—"Photographs shown at U.S.
Strategic Air Force Headquar-
ters to-day (Guam, August, Bth,
1945) showed that in the space
of a few hours there was prac-
tically nothing left but a waste
of grey ashes which had been
Hiroshima.”
The great heat from the atomic bomb
at Hiroshima affected the paint on
this gas-holder, 17 mites from the
centre of damage. Where the surface
Was shielded by the wheel and spindle,
a “shadow” was cast or seen in the
picture.


Evidently a man had sat on this granite step which was 200 yards from
the centre of damage at Hiroshims The heat was intense enough to
burn the polish from the granite surface except where he covered it.
The entire heart of the city was vaporised. When the smoke and dust
had gone this was the reckoning in human life and suffering;—
Within a mile-wide ring centred on the main crater, nine out of every
ten people died. Within a larger zone covering three square miles, only
three out of every ten survived.
Those who died in the blast had a merciful end. It was the shelterera
who suffered most. Struck by gamma rays—the unseen death rays from
the bomb —they died after days or weeks of wasting sickness.
f The final death roll was 92,133. More than 100,000 were injured
imd disfigured.


ATOM BOMB No. 3. MIROSHIMA, AUGUST 9th 1945
Three days later the second atom bomb was dropped on Japan. It
exploded at ground level on the city and naval base of Nagasaki—home
of 260.000 people.
One and a half square miles of the city was totally destroyed. More
than 39.000 people died; 25,000 more were injured.
The gigantic Mitsubishi steel works, hundreds of yards long, looked
like a child’s Meccano set that someone had trodden on. And on the
hill nearby, where once was one of the most up-to-date hospitals in the
Orient, there was a sagging shell with bones lying among the ashes.
No one came out of that hospital alive.
This bomb used plutonium instead of uranium 235. It was not as
effective as the bomb of Hiroshima, because of the geographical position
of Nagasaki and failure of the bomb to explode at the required height—
-1,000 feet above the target.
The tremendous heat can be judged from its effect on this wooden crate
1 mile from the centre of damage. The wood was scorched where it faced
the explosion, but parts in the shadow of the spars Were untouched .


The turgel array for the fast test of the atomic bomb against massed warships at Bikini lagoon.


"OPERATION CROSSROADS"
ATOM BOMB No. 4. BIKINI, JULY, 1946
On July Ist, 1946, at the coral atoll of Bikini, in the South Pacific, ths
U.S. Navy staged phase one of Operation Crossroads —the tests of atomif
bombs against warships.
The “guinea-pig" fleet of condemned Japanese, German, and U.S.
warships was anchored in the lagoon.
More than 4,000 rats, goats, and pigs, some in protective clothing,
others smeared with special ointment, were left aboard to test effects of
flash and gamma-radiations.
A plutonium bomb was dropped from 30.000 feet.
As it exploded, high-flying planes released heat and radiation recorders
fitted to parachutes: robot planes flew through the spreading cloud.
After helicopters had tested the water for radioactivity, scientists en-
tered the lagoon to assess the damage.
This is the message which The Courier-Mail Special correspondent
flashed from Bikini:—
“The bomb missed the bullseye, Nevada, by 300 yards, but it did more
damage to more ships than any one bomb ever did before."
“Five vessels, including one modern cruiser,
were sunk, and nine others, including two
battleships, two cruisers, and a carrier, were
heavily damaged/'
The target array for the shallow underwater test
of the atom bomb against massed warships.


The huge column of water thrown [?] by the underwater explosion of the
atom bomb in Bikini lagoon. The dark patch in the column is believed
to mark the remains of the Arkansas —the battleship destroyed in the test.
ATOM BOMB No. 5.
The second phase of Operation Crossroads began on the morning of
July 24th.
An atomic bomb in a huge watertight tank was suspended from a
barge, a few fathoms below the surface of the lagoon. The "guinea-
pig” fleet —mainly ships that survived the first explosion —lay at anchor.
Exploded by radio-impulse from a ship miles away, the bomb burst,
throwing 10,000,000 tons of water into the air, as a gigantic water-spout.
Fifteen minutes after the explosion, the radioactive haze, which cov-
ered the target area, began to clear.
The 26,000-ton battleship Arkansas had vanished. The aircraft car-
rier Saratoga and the Jap battleship Nagato sank later. A deluge of
radioactive water embraced 90 per cent, of the target array.
A third naval test was scheduled for March, 1947, to take place in
the open Pacific.
An atomic bomb, built as a mine, was to be exploded 3000 feet down.
U.S. naval scientists predicted that the vibrations set up by the deep
detonation would rip open the seams of the strongest capital ships in a
large area above the bomb. (These scientists were accurate within 5%
in their predictions of the explosive and radioactive effects of the Bikini
bombs).
This test has been abandoned but the pressurised atomic mine was
designed. It is in this form that the bomb would most probably be usedl
against ships in an}' future wax.


IF BRITAIN WERE
This chart shows what atom bombs could do to British people and
their homes. It is based on what actually happened at Hiroshima and
Nagasaki.
Official graph showing actual effects of atomic bombing in Japan and calculated effects
atomic bombs would have on British cities.
Because of its small size, its crowded cities and the fact that accurate
survey maps of the entire country are possessed by every foreign nation,
Britain prpvides the world’s most vulnerable targets for atomic rockets.


ATOMIC ENERGY IN PEACE
INDUSTRIAL ATOMIC POWER
Each plutonium pile at Hanford generates atomic heat equivalent to
many thousands of horsepower.
This heat is wasted in these piles, but it could be used to generate
electricity.
The "blue-print” shows the experimental plant the U.S. Government
hopes to have working next year.
The U.S. official blue-print of an atomic pile for industrial use
Splitting atoms in the uranium rods will generate heat, raising the
gas. circulating round the rods, to a very high temperature. This gas
will change water to steam. After driving a turbine and generating
electricity, the steam will be condensed to water and pumped back to
the pile to be reheated.
In later models the gas may be used directly to power a jet engine.


“Dampers” of cadmium
metal let into the graphite
ballast or “moderator” con-
trol the pile. When pushed
In, they slow down the chain
reaction by absorbing frag-
ments which would split more
atoms. When the “dampers”
are gradually withdrawn, the
chain reaction grows fiercer,
freeing more and more heat.
Although lib. of uranium
235 could give as much
Heavy water pile
energy as 1500 tons of coal, it may be years before uranium can com-
pete commercially with coal as a fuel for existing towns and factories.
But for undeveloped areas, especially in the Empire, it has immense
and more immediate possibilities. Atomic power is portable power Piles
could be built on the site of mineral deposits, saving transport ' i nsts.
Industry could begin on land derelict for lack of power.
The first application of commercial atomic power will probably be
unlimited hot water piped to houses and factories from a central source.
Atomic fuel for transport will almost certainly find its first use in
ocean liners and warships. The U.S. Navy has organised a wide scale
programme of research in an attempt to develop atomic ship pronulsion
in five years.
The use of atomic propulsion for aircraft and rockets is a long way
off, but a definite possibility.
The development of miniature piles using rods rich in uranium 235 or
plutonium and heavy water ballast instead of graphite, may speed these
applications.
But it is through medicine and pure science that the most immediate
end perhaps the greatest benefits of atomic energy will be-achieved.


Using long-handled tongs. an operator introduces chemicals from a “pilè
into a separating chamber to be made into “artificial radium." ( The root
of the chamber on which the man is standing. and the sides, are covered
with thick concrete to absorb dangerous tags.)
ARTIFICIAL RADIUM
Just as the atom bomb made the coral at Bikini radioactive, so a*
atomic pile can give the powers of radium to common substances. These
products can replace radium for treating disease.
Radium costs about £13.000 a dram. There are only a few pounds of
it in the world. Scarcity and price have limited the use of radium to a
fraction of the people who might have benefited by it. A high-powered
pile is now being built in Britain to produce radioactive substances for
medical work cheaply and on a large scale.
For many purposes the artificial product is better than radium. It cast
be made to act right at the source of the trouble. Thus phosphorus made
radioactive is eventually deposited in the bones when small amounts of
it are taken in with the food. There its rays can attack unhealthy tissue
at close range.


LABELLED ATOMS
When small, harmless amounts of radioactive substances are intro-
duced into the body, their presence there can be detected by instru-
ments held outside the body. A millionth part of a millionth of an ounce
of radium can be detected this way.
This principle is being used to trace the paths of atoms round the
body, revealing their exact course and fate.
Thus the exact path of a pinch of radioactive salt, injected into the
vein of a leg, can be discovered, and the time taken for these "labelled
atoms” to reach the heart accurately measured.
Such work is revealing new facts about the body’s make-up and func-
tion in health and disease. For instance, the precise work vitamins do
in the body is largely unknown. By feeding them in radioactive forms,
their paths and functions in the tissues will be discovered. Scientists
have already made radioactive vitamin B, discovering new and vital
facts about its nutritional value. Experiments with drugs like penicillin,
made radioactive will show their exact mode of action, giving a com-
pletely new approach to medicine.
Using "labelled atoms,” biologists are trying to solve the innermost
secrets of life —what makes plants and animals feed, grow, sleep and
reproduce their kind.
At this moment botanists and chemists are probing the mystery
On which all life depends—the process by which the leaves of plants
make sugar and other foods from air and water. When this is solved,
chemists will be able to make foods synthetically. Man will be less
dependent on the whims of weather.


Sir J. J. Thomson
Lord Rutherford
Sir James Chadwick
John Dalton
THE SCIENTISTS BEHIND THE SOm«
The fact that ali matter is composed of separate particles called
atoms was first stated as a workable theory by the British chemist,
John Dalton, in 1808. It was not until 1897 that the first main step in
elucidating the structure of the atom was made, when Professor J. J.
Thomson, working at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, dis-
covered the electron—a minute negatively charged particle found in
all atoms.
’"wenty-three years later, Lord Rutherford, from the evidence of hia
own brilliant researches and the work of other scientists, concluded
that the proton—a positively-charged particle already produced ex-
perimentally —was an integral part of the atom.
At the same time, Rutherford suggested the existence of the neutron
—a particle like the proton, but uncharged. This remained a theory un-
til 1932, when Sir James Chadwick proved the neutron’s existence.
Further details of atomic structure were worked out by other scient-
ists. notably Niels Bohr, of Copenhagen.
Hundreds of years before Dalton, the alchemists had predicted that
one element could be changed into another —lead into gold, for instance.
It was not until 1919 that Lord Rutherford, at the Cavendish Lab-
oratory, accomplished such a transmutation. Using radium as a source
|Of bombarding particles, he converted atoms of nitrogen into oxygen,
I


This change involved the chipping of small pieces from the cores of
atoms. The atom was not really split until 1932, when, in the same
laboratory, J. D. Cockcroft and E. T. S. Walton, using a powerful elec-
trical apparatus, split atoms of the metal lithium, converting each into;
two atoms of the gas helium.
Seven years later, in Berlin, Professor Otto Hahn reported experi-
ments in which, using high-speed neutrons as "bullets,” he had split
atoms of uranium.
The Nazis missed the significance of this discovery. But Lise Meitner
and O. R. Frisch—German refugees sheltering in Copenhagen—sug-
gested to Professor Bohr that the splitting of uranium must liberate
great energy and might be the basis of an atomic bomb.
A few weeks later, Bohr passed on this news to scientists in America.
Their enthusiasm was aroused. Led by Profeasor E. Fermi, they
quickly proved that when a uranium atom splits, not only is great
energy released, but other neutrons which could carry on a chain re-
action are produced.
With these facts and the knowledge that the Germans were busy with
military atom research, the British and U.S. Governments collaborated
In costly experiments to prove, first that an atomic bomb was possible,
and then that its use in war was effective.
The thought and discoveries of men and women of many nations He
behind the release of atomic power.
Professor Niets Bobe
Professor Otto Hahn
Dr, Lise Meitner
Professor Enrico Ferric


THE BRITISH ATOMIC ENERGY PROJECT
At Government establishments and universities, British scientists
whose research made the atom bomb possible are striving now to develop
atomic power for constructive purposes.
This research is controlled by the Minister of Supply, Mr. John Wilmot,
The main station, under the directorship of Professor J. D. Cock-
croft, is at Harwell, near Didcot, Berks. There two “piles" are being
built for research and to provide radioactive by-products for medicine
and industry.
Lord Portal of Hunger*
ford is responsible for
supplying raw materials
for building the piles. A
huge consignment of uran-
ium ore is being processed
now at the atomic raw
materials factory near
Preston, Lancs.
None of it will be used
for making bombs.
The scientists hope to
solve the major research
problems of harnessing
atomic energy to industrial
power production within
three years. Then the
Where the British atom research is being done
project may be transferred to the Ministry of Fuel and Power.
All the radioactive by-products are to be dispensed through a National
Centre set up by the Government at Amersham, Bucks,


Dictionary of the Atomic Age
ATOM
The smallest piece of an element which
retains the characteristics of the element
Composed of a definite number of protons,
neutrons, and electrons, an atom changes
Its Identity If It loses some of Its constituent
particles Thus, by losing protons and
electrons an atom of radium changes Into
an atom of lead
ATOMIC ENERGY.
The energy set free when the nucleus oi
a heavy atom Is chipped or spilt by collid-
ing with a fast particle A bit of the
nucleus Is annihilated, appearing as «
relatively enormous Quantity of energy
CHAIN REACTION
A self-sustaining process whereby fast
fragments from one splitting atom split
more atoms, setting free still more frag-
ments which parry on the reaction
CRITICAL SIZE
The size of a lump of pure uranium 235
or plutonium In which the number of high-
speed fragments produced at any moment
Is Just balanced by the number of fragments
escaping at Its surface. In a piece smaller
than the critical size a chain reaction Is
Impossible. In a larger niece It Is Inevit-
able
CYCLOTRON.
A machine in which particles can be
accelerated to such speeds that they can
be used for bombarding and smashing
atoms
ELECTRON.
The smallest known particle. A constituent
of all atoms
ELEMENT
One of the basic substances of which the
Universe is built. There are 92 natural
elements. Lead, oxygen, and lodine are
examples
FISSION.
The splitting of the nucleus of a uranium
or plutonium atom, setting free energy and
fragments that win split more atoms
GAMMA RATS.
Extremely penetrating rays capable of de-
stroying living tissue, produced when atoms
split
GEIGER COUNTER
An apparatus for registering the rate of
breakdown of atoms
HEAVY WATER
A compound of oxygen and hydrogen like
water, but containing a special form of
hydrogen called heavy hydrogen Made by
an expensive electrical process from ordin-
ary water. It Is a most effective ballast
material for use In atomic olles
NEUTRON,
A particle composing the nuclei of atoms
Neutrons can be ejected at high speed from
splitting atoms. Being uncharged they are
very efficient at splitting other atoms
Charged particles—protons, for Instance-
are usually repelled by the nucleus
NUCLEUS.
The core of an atom where nearly all
the “substance”—composed of protons and
neutrons—ls concentrated.
PILE.
An atomic battery producing plutonium
and generating heat Composed of uranium
and a ballast material, usually graphite
'pencil lead) or heavy water
PLUTONIUM.
A heavy metal made by bombarding atoms
of uranium 238 with neutrons. It can be
made to liberate atomic energy explosively
and was used In the Bikini and Nagasaki
bombs
PROTON.
A positively-charged particle found alone
with neutrons In the nuclei of atoms
TRACER.
A small quantity of radioactive atoms,
whose path through a living organism can
be traced by means of electrical Instru-
ments.
URANIUM.
The heaviest natural atom known. It
exists in several forms. One. called uranium
238, Is used In making plutonium. Another
—uranium 235 —Is the explosive used In the
Hiroshima atomic bomb
