

THE
“STAR OF PEACE”
GOLD MINING COMPANY,
(LIMITED),
HAWKINS’ HILL,
Reprinted from the Australian Magazine, for June, 1880.
WITH CORRECTIONS AND ADDENDA.
TAMBAROORA,
WITH
PHOTOTYPE AND PLANS.
SYDNEY:
P RINTED BY JARRETT & CO., 100 & 102 LIVERPOOL STREET.
1880.






STAR OF PEACE
GOLD MINING CO
Hawkins Hill






HAWKINS' HILL, END.
FROM A SURVEY BY T. S. PARROTT, MINING SURVEYOR.
N.B. —All the dark shading, with the exception of that marked, “ Krohmann's Amalgamated," denotes the property of the Star of Peace Company.
The valve of Gold produced is to 31st December, 1579, and in some cases is far short of real amount, owing to difficulty in obtaining correct returns .




THE
“STAR OF PEACE”
GOLD MINING COMPANY,
(LIMITED),
HAWKINS’ HILL,
Reprinted from the Australian Magazine, for June, 1880.
WITH CORRECTIONS AND ADDENDA.
Tambaroora,
WITH
PHOTOTYPE AND PL'ANS.
SYDNEY:
Printed by JARRETT & Co., ioo & 102 Liverpool Street.
i 880.




The "Star of Peace" Gold Mining Company
Limited,
AND OTHER COMPANIES ON HAWKINS HILL.
[Reprinted from “The Australian Magazine,” for June, 1880.]
The history of the far-famed Hawkins Hill will, probably, be
written when its golden stores have been fully developed by well
conducted mining operations.
The results already obtained are extraordinary, and might
well be doubted by persons not resident in the colony of New
South Wales, if unsupported statements were made, and as the
object of this fragmentary compilation is to present to the notice
of capitalists elsewhere, the great mining field which is open for
exploration, numerous quotations from good authorities are in-
dispensable. The want of proper mining records with regard to
each mine, and the difficulty, in some cases, of obtaining any
reliable information, will account for the incompleteness of some
of the accounts herein: and the omission of any doubtful reports
which have been published has been caused by a desire to avoid
exaggeration.*
The patience, energy, and perseverance of the pioneers who
worked, and of those who contributed to support them in their
laborious operations—sinking shafts and driving tunnels in the
hard rock, for years, before they succeeded in opening out, at the
necessary depth, on the quartz veins, and revealing their wonder-
ful mineral wealth—was followed by a mania for investment,
during the years 1871 and 1872, which spread throughout all
classes in New South Wales, and attracted investors from the
adjoining colonies.
The country near Hawkings Hill was taken up in small areas,
for miles, north, south, east, and west of the proved claims; and
* The erroneous report, quoted in Professor Liversidge’s “Minerals of New
South Wales,” 1876, and in the “Australian Dictionary of Dates,” 1879, as to 100
cwt. of gold being obtained from 200 cwt, of stuff from Beyer’s and Holtermann’s
claim in February, 1873, should be corrected in future editions of these valuable
records. Probably the correct account is that contained in Mr. Robinson’s pam-
phlet on New South Wales, viz.: “The Empire's telegram from Hill End, dated
February 1, 1873, says : * Beyers and Holtermann have raised one hundredweight
gold in two hundredweight of stuff, to-day. Expect to shoot out monster specimen,
with at least two hundredweight of gold, on Monday.’ ”


in many cases, on the representation of mining adventurers, and
of other persons who were not qualified to conduct mining opera-
tions, a large amount of capital was injudiciously invested and
expended.
The haste to become rich, and the expectation of speedy
returns from unproved mining leases, was checked when it be-
came evident that, however profitable mere speculation in buying
and selling shares proved to be in some instances, yet mining was
altogether a different affair; and, as a permanently remunerative
industry, would have to be conducted on proper principles. Many
sound ventures were as hastily abandoned as they were under-
taken, because of the inability of most of the shareholders to meet
their numerous engagements. All, however, is not lost. Many
well situated shafts and tunnels, which cost thousands of pounds,
which were not sunk or driven to the requisite depth or distance',
and which can be utilised, are available for future working when
amalgamation of the various small holdings (in good positions
with respect to the known veins) becomes possible.
A very simple amendment of the Mining Act would tend to
promote enterprise on Hawkins Hill, and other goldfields in the
colony. The amendment required is one that would permit
holders of small leases to amalgamate without running the risks
they now have to incur in establishing their claims to be con-
sidered the fiist applicants for the extended area. Under the
present system, if an amalgamation be desired, the holding must
first be surrendered, then forfeited by notification inthe Gazette ;
and any person, holding a miner’s right, who happens to obtain
early information of the date when the notification of forfeiture
will appear, may himself, or by arrangement with an agent, peg
out the ground, serve the necessary notices, and be in the position
of first applicant for the forfeited ground ; thus depriving those
who have expended thousands of pounds in preliminary mining
operations of the fruits of their labour and enterprise.
If the owners of the small leases between the Star of Peace
Company and Krohmann’s Amalgamated Company could safely
surrender their leases, and convert them into one lease for the
whole area, to be worked by one company, under reasonable labour
conditions, the necessary capital would, doubtless, be forthcoming
to support such a good venture; as, in that case, the chances of
failure would be lessened, the various shafts and tunnels could be
made available for further exploration, and the operations could
be conducted economically, and with an almost certain prospect
of success.
It is beyond the means of ordinary working miners, even by
co-operation, to develope the resources of Hawkins Hill at the
great depths to which mining will be pursued. Shafts must, in


future, be carried down from one to two thousand feet, with
proper appliances for pumping and raising mullock and quartz.
The cost of sinking main-shafts through the hard rock (including
timbering) varies from £7 to £lO per foot, irrespective of the cost
of the drives and cross-cuts required in opening out the mines.
In 1872 many of the shafts which were sunk only two or three
hundred feet, at the rate of from two to four feet per week, cost
two and three thousand pounds each; and the cost of sinking a
main shaft had to be repeated on every small claim, whereas by
amalgamation of the interests one shaft would have sufficed to
work several holdings on the same line of veins. Besides this
every small company had a mining manager, legal manager,
a Board of Directors, &c. It is not surprising, therefore, that this
extravagant mode of working conducted, in most cases, by un-
skilled men under no local supervision, led to the abandonment
of many fair ventures before they were properly tested.
Fortunately for the Star of Peace Company, and principally
due to the tact and energy of Mr. Alfred Fairfax (one of the
Directors who is now residing at Hill End), the risk has been
overcome, and the ground has been secured to an extent which
warrants a liberal expenditure of capital in developing the
resources of the mine for any depth that may be found necessary
on any of the proved veins on Hawkins Hill.
. In support of these views, the Commissioner in charge of the
Western Gold Fields concludes his report for 1872 as follows :
“ In conclusion, I trust that as the anticipations entertained
in my report of 1871 of the prosperity of the past year have been
fully realised, the present temporary evil in mining affairs may
only be the precursor of renewed vigour in that direction, by the
investment of capital with more caution, and the establishment of
companies on a sounder basis for developing the mineral wealth
of the country. Many of the works being carried on are in their
nature for a lengthened period of an unproductive character, but
solid results will ere long be obtained from mines at present of
little apparent value. This is especially noticeable in the vicinity
of Hill End, where the sinking is through strata of the most un-
yielding character, and the progress necessarily slow. Such
ground can only as a rule be profitably worked in large areas
and with ample capital at command. To attempt to work it in
ordinary claims without capital is now found to be quite imprac-
ticable, and, with the exception of comparatively shallow alluvial
deposits, the same may be said of all classes of gold-mining at the
present date. The era of gold digging is rapidly giving way to
gold mining, and our gold fields were never in a more hopeful
condition as regards their future development than at present,
although the feverish excitement concerning them has somewhat


abated in consequence of the results, disastrous in many instances
of rash and unguarded speculation in mining ventures, which
from the first contained no element of success.”
HAWKIN’S HILL, HILL END,
TAMBAROORA DISTRICT.
Hawkin’s Hill is about 56 miles from Bathurst by the ordinary
coach road, via Sofala; and about 32 miles from Bathurst by the
“ bridle-track” road, Bathurst being 145 miles, by railway, from
Sydney.
The following description of the Gold Field is taken from the
report of the Gold Fields Commission presented to Parliament,
dated 12th December, 1871: —
“ The villages of Tambaroora and Hill End are situated on
either side of the actual division of waters on the high table land
between the Turon River and Pyramiul Creek; they are about
miles apart, and but slightly lower than the dividing ground,
whilst the beds of the Turon and Pyramiul lie in gorges some
1500 feet beneath With respect to the probable
importance and permanence of the Tambaroora Gold Field, in
which we include Hawkin’s Hill Reefs and the Town of Hill
End, there is at present every appearance to justify the most
favourable anticipations. Taking the claims at Hawkins Hill, now
upon the gold, and so well known as a centre, we find that the
line of unoccupied reefs extend to the north of the Scandinavian,
Johnstone’s Hill, Red Hill, and Golden Gully, through Tamba-
roora, almost to the Green Valley Creek, a distance of 4| miles ;
and to the south across. the Turon River, by Chambers' Creek,
towards the Macquarie River, a distance of about 7| miles. In
the Green Valley are gold-bearing reefs, which are now well occu-
pied and rapidly rising into importance. It may be said that
there is now in all, with the Green Gully reefs, a distance of
12 miles of promising reefing country, occupied by about 800
men, and on which an expenditure reaching to about £IIO,OOO
has already been made. That portion of Hawkins Hill already
proved is nearly half-a-mile in extent, and is now producing gold
in quantities hitherto unknown in New South Wales. No claim
on the supposed line of these veins is abandoned, and claims are
being vigorously worked with a large expenditure of capital, for
a distance, as before stated, of 7| miles to Chambers’ Creek —a
fact which shows the belief of the most intelligent and enterpris-
ing miners in their continuance. The depths of the shafts in the
proved claims varies from 140 to 250 feet, and it is as yet im-
possible to form an idea as to the depth to which the gold-bearing


veins may be pursued. Some of the reefs lying northerly from
Hawkins Hill, and as above-mentioned, have been in places
profitably worked ten years since, but were abandoned because of
want of capital to overcome difficulties from water and other
causes.”
The Commissioners conclude with an expression of their
opinion that it is a “ valuable and permanent field for mining.”
From the yearly reports of the Commissioner of the Western
Gold-fields, the following statistics are compiled :
Gold Field,
Licences
Leases of Auriferous Tracts.
0 _s
.2 'S
* "§
Year
Miners’
Right.
Business
Licenses.
No', of Leases
issued.
Quartz Veins—
Acres.
1 a
P< ■H
£ S
Tambaroora ...
1709
93
No Return
given.
No Return
Given.
4000
1871
Do.
3794
305
1261
7596
8000
1872
Do.
2618
184
116
507
6000
1873
ESCORT RETURNS OF GOLD, from “ Mines and Mineral Statistics
Published by the Government of New South Wales.
99
Year
1870
1871
1872.
1873
Tambaroora
oz:
18.698
oz :
42,073
oz:
80,592
oz:
62,834
The appearance presented by the western slope of Hawkins
Hill and the relative position of most of the celebrated mines is
shown in the illustration, the boundaries are shown on the plans
annexed to this pamphlet.
GEOLOGICAL FORMATION.
The geological formation is thus described in a report dated
23rd February, 1872, by Mr. J. J. Coates, C.E., and Mining En-
gineer :
“ The country for a radius of many miles around Hawkins
Hill may be pretty accurately described as having originally con-
sisted of a series of slate beds, varying in colour from light grey
upon the surface through light and dark green to blue. This
system is known to geologists as chlorite slates, the depth of
which varies from a mere surface covering to 400 feet. Below
those beds a vast uniform talcose slate formation occurs, of a blue
or dark blue colour.


“ These latter beds are of unknown depth, and in them are
situated the rich lodes of Hawkins Hill; in fact above them
no gold of considerable importance has as yet been discovered.
The whole series of strata dipped to the eastward with a
gentle inclination below the horizon, probably between ten and
fifteen degrees, and striking, as far as I have yet been able to
ascertain, from north to south.
The characteristics thusjjdescribed were subsequently altered
by an eruption of volcanic rocks from below (greenstone). The
effects of such eruptions in the Hill End district is very apparent,
and offers one of the finest lessons explanatory of the real mode
of the deposition of gold in quartz veins.
“ I have now been some fourteen years directly connected with
goldfields, and during that period as a scientific observer, I have
acquired valuable information as regards the physical appearances
presented in the immediate vicinity of rich gold-bearing lodes. I
have never visited the site of a rich quartz vein without being
able to find in close proximity volcanic rocks of the kind known
to geologists as trachytes or diorites ; in fact, so well known are
these rocks to the geological miner of the modern school, that they
are called gold producers, and stand in the comparison of their
relative values as follows:
“No. I. —Diorites (Greenstone), —A composition of horn-
blende and felspar. This is supposed to be, if we except granite,
the most slowly cooled of volcanic rocks, and undoubtedly bears
evidence of being in direct contact with highly auriferous lodes in
America, Australia and New Zealand.
“ This rock traverses Hawkins Hill from north to south.
“ No. 2.— Trachyte. —This stone, as its name implies, is of a
rough, coarse character, and its composition, where I examined it,
in the Tambaroora district, seems to be a combination of felspar
of various colours, hornblende and quartz. This rock is a good
gold producer, where its eruption took place slowly.
“ The Thames goldfield, in the province of Auckland, New
Zealand, is a mass of trachyte, which covers a cracked and much
disturbed slate deposit. In one or two instances this broken for-
mation is traversed by diorite dykes, and almost in contact with
them occurred the rich gold deposits found in the Caledonia, the
Golden Crown, the Long Drive and Hunt’s claims.
“ The great steepness of Hawkin’s Hill on either side has re-
sulted in a bending downwards, or gravitation of the unsupported
surface-edges of the slate planes and the quartz lodes, and thus
may be accounted for, the fact that, previous to your Company
occupying this ground, there existed an opinion that the rocks
constituting the eastern slope of Hawkins Hill dipped or inclined
to the westward.


“ The vertical height of the main ridge line above the deep
Creek is about 750 feet, while the trough of Oakey Creek to the
westward is only about 400 feet below that point.
Mr. Warden Sharpe writes as follows respecting the geolo-
gical formation in his report for 1878 “ Before concluding my
remarks about Hawkins Hill, I may mention, as an interesting
fact, that Mr. Pittman, the geological surveyor, recently sent up
by the Government to make a geological survey of this place, has
shown me some fossil corals discovered by him in rocks taken from
Messrs. Vere and Company's claim on Hawkins Hill. Mr.
Pittman states that the overlying rock on Hawkins Hill is
metamorphosed conglomerate, and not diorite, as is generally
supposed."
The writer of this paper has been unable to obtain a
copy of the report made by the Government Geological Surveyor,
but some very valuable information is contained in the articles
published by Mr. Parrott, mining surveyor, &c., in the Sydney
Mail of January, 1879 and appended hereto.
The Sydney Morning Herald, of 11th June, 1872, contains
the following interesting account of events preceding the rich
finds in 1872 :
“ It is several years since reefing was commenced at Hawkins
Hill. The first gold on Hawkins Hill was obtained by Mr. J.
Wythes, whose finds led to the discovery of the reef now known
as Rowley's, which was along the upper part of the hill. The
western face of the hill may be said to be full of quartz-bearing
reefs in veins, which increase in number and richness as the
sinking becomes deeper. They vary from a few inches in width
to three feet. The principal reefs, the course of which have yet been
traced are known as Rowley's, the Frenchman s, Steven s, the
main line or Paxton and Krohmann's, and Fisenstaodters, these
occurring in succession as you descend the slope. I am not
aware that any payable reefs have been found on the eastern side
of the hill, although tunnels are being driven in there. Rowley’s
vein was worked twelve years ago; and, if I mistake not, it was
from it that “ Old Daddy Nichols" padded out some fine bars of
gold. Another tradition runs to the effect that, after surfacing
was given up on Hawkins Hill, “ Billy the Spider' (if the gentle-
man had any other name I haven't heard it) put in a blast, the
stone from which yielded 800 ounces to the ton. Rowley s reef
was followed down to a depth of 150 feet, when it was thought
to have been exhausted, and was abandoned. Mr. William
Adams, whom I met with the other day as manager of a claim on
the Red Hill, is entitled to whatever honour attaches to the dis-
covery of the rich vein known as Krohmann's and Paxton s.
One Saturday afternoon he was out there looking for his horse;


when sitting down to rest, he knocked off a piece of quartz
thickly studded with gold. This led him to prospect the place;
and the spot is now known as the site of the Old Rose of
England. A rush took place the first thing on the following
Monday morning, when a large number of claims were marked
out. Soon afterwards a small company, known as the Rose of
England, came over here from Ballarat, and obtained some large
dividends. The reef was taken up for a distance of at least a
mile and a half, and claims were worked with varying success.
Most of the old claimholders, who within the last two years have
amassed fortunes, had previously struggled along for years,
et mes . enduring severe privation, all their resources being
exhausted in the labours and expense of the enterprise to which
they had committed themselves, and in which they still had
heart. Things began to look up about eighteen months ago;
and within the last nine or twelve months the vast influx of
Sydney capital has precipitated the progress of mining industry
to an extent beyond the expectations of the most sanguine.
Twelve months ago claims began to change hands at what were
then supposed to be high figures; although subsequent experience
has shown that the prices then obtained were generally below
the actual value of the properties transferred. Thus for instance,
one gentleman bought a one-sixth share in a mine for which he
paid £1525, which a year ago was thought to be an extreme
price. Last week, however, he sold one-half of that share (or
one-twelfth of the whole) for £5500 in cash. A fifth share in
Paxton s was sold for £3OOO eleven months ago; a few weeks
after it was sold for £6OOO, and it has since been proved that
£12,000 would not have come up to its intrinsic value.
The following quotation is from the first of a series of articles
on Ihe Hill End Gold Field,” published in the same journal in
January, 1880:
As early as 1857 a little reefing was done, and
reef on the crown oi Hawkins Hill, paid well in patches. By
1860 the Hill and its vicinity were dotted with a few more holes,
though no one then working there anticipated the enormous
wealth that would one day be unearthed from beneath his feet.
The Rose of England Co. did fairly; and, among others, Mr.
Rawsthorne, the present Mayor of Hill End, had a claim. It paid
only fairly for a time, but when, in 1869, a crushing of 20 tons went
63 oz. to the ton, the Hill was rushed. The history of this rush
too, is known, and to attempt to enumerate half the successful
claims and refer to their working, would befit only an exhaustive
(and exhausting) work on the district. It sounds like a fairy
tale, even now, to hear of the cake of 24,000 oz. of gold, which
was shown at the Exhibition of 1871 as the result of one crush


ing by Krohmann’s Company; to hear that 30 tons of stone
yielded about 3500 oz., and that the result of three months’ work
was 5673 ozs.; to know of the mass of quartz raised by Holter-
mann, and that Beyers and Holtermann’s Company cleared 15,000
oz. for three months’ work, getting this from a little over 100
tons of stuff; to hear that Carroll and Beard’s Company got GOO
oz. from 2 tons of stuff; and that 5534 oz. were obtained by them
from 411 tons. Large returns were obtained by Hurley and
Moore, Rawsthorne, Brown, Cock and Attwood, Crichton and
Beard, Star of Peace Company, and Fisher and Beard, &c. The
gross return of gold from Hawkins Hill from 1870 to 1873 was
phenomenal.”
Amongst the Gold Mining Companies deserving special
notice, on the main line on the western slope of Hawkins Hill,
which have been worked since the early part of the year 1872,
are the “ Star of Peace,” “ Krohmann’s,” “ Beyers and Holter-
mann’s,” “ Carroll and Beard’s”—the last three Companies having
been amalgamated since February, 1879, under the title of
“ Krohmann’s Amalgamated Co., Limited,” —“Paxton’s,” and a few
others, which will be referred to hereafter.
THE STAR OF PEACE GOLD MINING COMPANY, (LIMITED.)
This Company was formed on the 10th May, 1872, and registered
under the Mining Partnerships’ Limited Liability Act, with a
nominal capital of £90,000 in 90,000 shares of £1 each; of which
84,000 shares were issued as fully paid up, and the remaining
6000 shares were reserved for future allotment. The area of
ground then held by the company was 153 feet on the course of the
main line of veins (running north and south), and 600 feet from
west to east. It is bounded on the south by “ Paxton’s” rich
claim (124 feet 6 in. on the base-line), which was floated for
£160,000, and partly on the north by Fischer, Beard & Co.’s claim
(136 feet), which was floated for £60,000, also by Meyers’ ground
and Hermann’s, the latter being floated for £50,000.
The Star of Peace Company’s claim was originally known as
“Bromley’s,” afterwards named the “Star of Peace” by Mr.
Alfred Fairfax, one of the principal purchasers, and one of the
largest shareholders at the present day. Previous to the forma-
tion of the Company the claim was held by seven shareholders,
who sold their shares at the rate of £5500 per half-share, making
the total cost to the purchasers about £77,000. After paying a
call of £5O each (£700) to meet the first cost of working the mine
the purchasers formed the venture into a limited Company, as
aforesaid.


By purchase and negotiation the area has been increased to
17 acres, with 1300 feet in length on the course of the various
veins as shown on plan; 11 acres of which are held under renew-
able leases direct from the Government (and this is the most
valuable portion so far as is at present known) at a rental of £1
per acre, and six acres are held and worked by the Company
under tributes of 10 per cent, and 15 per cent, respectively to the
lessees from the Crown. The 11 acres comprise the leases
formerly known as “ Bromley’s,’' “ Rose of Australia,” “ Great
Extended,’' “ Golden Crown/’ “ High Change,” and “ Goldenville/'
The 6 acres held under tribute include the leases formerly known
as “ Oxon’s,” “ Crown Prince,” “ Matthewson’s," “ Morning Star/’
and “ Speculation,” which are amalgamated under the title of
“ The Crown Prince United Company/’ and also of Hermann’s and
Meyers’ leases.
As may be supposed, it would have been impossible to
acquire such an extent of ground, during the excitement caused
by the unparalleled finds in Krohmann’s, Beyers’ and Holter-
mann’s, Carroll and Beard's, Paxton’s, and the intervening claims
on the south of the Star of Peace, known as the Rampant Lion,
Hickson's, Creighton and Beard's, Attwood’s, Brown’s, Raw-
thorne and Porter’s, and the Monte Christo; together with the
rich finds on the north in Fischer and Beard's, Hermann's,
Meyers’, &c. The extent of ground held by most of the Com-
panies on the the main-line, and the rates at which the ground was
sold and estimated is shown in a table further on. It will be ob-
served by the plan that all the known rich veins on Hawkin’s Hill
run through the ground held by the Star of Peace Company; and as
the underlie is about 1 in 3 (and greater at some depths) to the east-
ward, the veins, which proved so rich in the claims enumerated, en-
ter the easteon ground secured by the Star of Peace Co., at about 800
feet level, and at more moderate depths in some cases, and could
be worked from that level downwards in the eastern ground south
of the Star of Peace, and in the northern portion almost from the
surface downwards. Besides which there are several veins, such
as “ Steven's/' the “ Frenchman's," “ Rowley's,” and other easterly
veins, which can be worked to advantage at moderate and great
depths only by the Star of Peace Co.
The following is an excellent description of the lines of veins,
as given by Mr. Warden Sharpe, to the Department of Mines, in
his report for the year 1875 :
“We now come to the famous Hawkins Hill veins. They
may be divided into three systems, —Centrally a main line, and
on either side an outside one. The main line consists of:—
“1. Holman’s veins—two in number and 6 feet apart. These
have been wrought from the Monte Christo Mine to Paxton’s, a
distance of about 346 feet. The mines now at work on them are


Rawsthorne’s, Cock and Attwood’s, Hickson, Creighton and
Beard’s, and Paxton’s. The average width of these veins is from
6 to 8 inches, and they have been generally payable.
“2. Paxton’s veins are about 6 feet west of Holman’s, and
three in number. One of these, the hanging wall vein, is known
also as Krohmann’s big vein; and Rawsthorne’s —these vary in
width from 1 inch to 3 feet; the bearing of all the veins on the
Hill worked is from sdeg. to 12deg. east of north.
“ 3. Brown’s veins are a mass of leaders in the horse between
Paxton’s and the Star of Peace, and have supplied a large propor-
tion of the gold which has made Hawkins Hill so celebrated.
This system of veins does not extend further north than Paxton’s
north shaft, there being none of them in the horse in the Star of
Peace vein.
“4. Thirty feet west of Paxton’s vein we have that known as
the Star of Peace, and which is probably identical with Holter-
mann’s veins ; this appears to be the main vein of the Hill, and
has been traced from Carroll and Beard’s on the south, to
Mathewson’s on the north, a distance of about 760 feet; the
average size of this vein is about 8 inches, and the yield 3 ozs. to
the ton. In the Star of Peace mine it has been proved payable to
a depth of nearly 500 feet. In Fischer and Beard’s it is 3 feet
thick in places, and has yielded as high as 7 oz. to the ton. The
last large crushing from this vein, at the 480 feet level, gave
about 40 ozs. to the ton. West of this we have—
“ 5. The series of veins which gave the rich crushings known
as Holtermann’s, Krohmann’s, and Carroll and Beard’s—the width
of these veins varies from 2 to 4 inches, and the vein stone is
enclosed in soft black slate, they appear to be represented in
claims north of the Rampant Lion by a vein known as the west
vein, which has been very rich in Paxton’s mine.
“ East of the main line, and separated from it by a dyke of
trachyte are the veins known as ‘ Stevens’, the Frenchman’s, and
Rowley’s.’ The first of these has been worked to a depth of over
300 feet, and the gold appears to go down in narrow perpen-
dicular shoots, but not sufficiently diffused to make the vein a
payable one. It is probably identical with the Rose of England
vein, and, if so, has been worked from Tallentire and Beard’s as
far north as the Trust and Try. The Frenchman’s vein has been
worked to a depth of 240 feet, and shafts sunk to a depth of 260
feet. The mines in which this vein has been worked most are the
Cornish, the Frenchman’s the Amalgamated, and the Cornelian;
it is generally supposed to be the same vein as the Scandinavian,
and, if so, has yielded payable gold in the Scandinavian lease.
The average width is about 6 inches, and varies from 1 inch to 2
feet; the dip is east, lin 4, and the bearing 7deg. west of north.


Rowley’s vein was worked some years back, and appears rather
as a lode enclosed in sandstone than a quartz reef. The gold was
all extracted from the matrix by washing without the aid of
machinery. The bearing and dip are the same as the last.
The leases known as the Crown Prince and Londonderry have
sunk shafts to catch this vein, but without success, finding only a
narrow leader at 120 feet. The only mine working on this line is
a 4-acre lease, known as the Rose of Australia or Goodwin’s Ven-
ture, and they have a shaft down GO feet, driving for a vein to
the west, between Rowley’s and Stevens - ’. This completes the
eastern system.
“ The westerly system is separated from the main line by a
broad belt of trachyte, and comprises Brand’s veins, about a dozen
in number, worked mainly in Brand and Fletcher’s claim, and
Eisenstadter’s vein, worked in the Royal Standard (better known
as Eisenstadter’s), the Lady Belmore, and others; this reef is
from 4 to 5 inches thick, and the deepest working on it is in
Eisenstadter s lease, 250 feet; it has been worked at intervals for
about 1 mile; the stone has gone as high as 7ozs. in the Lady
Belmore lease. The Royal Standard is the only claim at present
at work on this line. This completes the veins known as the
Hawkins Hill veins proper. I may here remark that at the pre-
sent time the only mines on Hawkins which appear to be paying
anything more than working expenses are Paxton’s, the Star of
Peace, and Fischer and Beard’s.
“ With regard to Hawkins Hill, some of the leases have
stopped working altogether ; others are being worked on a more
economical system than heretofore. The gold mine known as
Carroll and Beard’s is associated with those known as Krohmann’s
and Beyers and Holtermann’s. The main shaft in the first-men-
tioned company’s ground is being sunk to a greater depth than
that yet attained, viz., 530 feet, with a view of thoroughly proving
the three mines. For a similar reason the Star of Peace Company
include in their working the mines known as Mathewson’s,
Oxon s, and Meyers and Steven’s. The Patriarch, a well-known
lease on Hawkins Hill, in the hands of a few enterprising and
wealthy men—is being thoroughly prospected.”
Mr. F. C. Macarthur, who was Mining Registrar at Hill End
in 1875, writes as follows in his report for that year to the De-
partment of Mines:—
“Of the hundreds of claims started in this division during
the last five years, the following only are now at work on Haw-
kin’s Hill: —Carroll and Beard’s, Krohmann’s, Rawsthorne, Star
of Peace, Paxton’s, Monte Christo, Cock and Attwood and Dwyer,
Beyers’ and Holtermann’s, Herman’s, Matthewson’s, Hickson
Creighton and Beard’s, and Brown’s, the three latter of which are


on tribute, and I understand at present are confining their opera-
tions to cleaning and skinning the old workings. In the immedi-
ate neighbourhood of Hill End the following companies are at
work:—The Excelsior, Lombard Street, Cornish, Frenchmen’s,
Dragon, and Patriarch (formerly known as the Trust and Try.)
“ I attribute this failure not to the want of gold, but to
the evident incapacity of many of the persons who had the
immediate superintendence of the mine (so-called mining mana-
gers.) The almost invariable idea in these bubbles seems to
have been to put down a perpendicular shaft to strike the
reef on the underlay at 200 feet, at about which depth the
richest shoots of gold in this district have been found. In very
many instances the workings have been abandoned before this
depth has been reached; and when the depth has been attained
without striking the vein sought, in very few cases have cross-
cuts been put in to find it. In other mines that were started,
when the reef was struck about the depth intended, if payable
gold was not immediately found, work was suspended without
thoroughly testing and prospecting the ground by driving, &c.
The reefs here can be traced on the surface for miles, and the
payable gold yet obtained is known to run in shoots, consequently
the chances of striking it by sinking a perpendicular shaft 7 feet
wide in a reef a mile long are exceedingly small.
“ Everything here in the way of mining during the year
1872, was taken up in a hurry, and again dropped in a hurry,
many people having large interests in many different companies,
finding they were not able to pay into all, drew off completely,
consequently the stoppage of work in shafts and tunnels before
reaching the vein sought.”
Mr. Warden Sharpe, in his report for 1878, expresses his
opinion that, “In the present state of things it would almost
require a lode of gold to tempt capitalists to invest their money
in gold mines.”
Notwithstanding this, the following extracts from the
reports issued by the Department of Mines, will show the favour-
able opinions entertained of the Star of Peace mine, and others,
by officers of high standing in the service of the Government,
who have special opportunities for judging impartially.
Report for 1877 (p.UB) from Mr. W. C. Weston, Mining
Register, Hill End :
“ Since my annual report was transmitted, I have been able to
obtain some further particulars with reference to the Star of
Peace mine, which I have the honour to submit for the informa-
tion of the Honourable the Secretary for Mines.
“ The rich veins formerly worked in Paxton’s mine, could
not (until the discovery I am about to mention was made) be


traced into the adjoining 1 mine the Star of Peace, although various
cross-cuts were put in at different times by different managers.
About a fortnight since at the 160 feet level, about 12 feet east
of Paxton's veins, and about 20 feet from Paxton’s boundary,
are three veins known on Hawkins Hill as the Easterly Working.
A crushing of 28 tons was taken out and gave the handsome
return of rather more than ounces to the ton; besides the
stone crushed, about 80 lbs. of really magnificent specimeus were
sent to Sydney, I am informed for transmission to the Paris Ex-
hibition. Having taken out this rich patch the company are now
driving south, leaving the veins standing which are apparently
payable. I may add that this discovery will not benefit the
mines south of the Star of Peace, because in them the veins con-
taining the shoot of gold have been taken out, but there is a
probability that some of the mines on the north may strike the
same shoot of gold perhaps still further towards the east.”
Mr. Warden Sharpe (1877) reports “Next is the Star of
Peace mine. This company now holds all the ground east of the
rich claims, as far south as the Great Western Undaunted,
embracing an area of 10 or 11 acres. The work of this mine
during the past twelve months has been mainly confined to the
Star of Peace vein, the main shaft on this having been sunk to a
depth of 760 feet. The sinking has shown a constant variety of
changes, in the form of new veins, blows, &c.—veins appearing
and disappearing, veins breaking up into leaders, and on several
occasions gold has been struck which was thought to be payable,
but on trial the results have been, so far unsatisfactory. The
water is heavy in the mine at the bottom of the deep shaft. Of
late, I may here mention, that dynamite has been used almost
entirely in the shaft and stopes with great economy, giving
general satisfaction. Some few months back a shoot of gold was
struck in sinking the shaft, and great expectations were enter-
tained that this was a discovery of great value; but a few feet
sinking showed that the gold did not extend to any depth. At
the 630 feet level a drive is being put in towards the north in the
hope of picking up a new shoot of gold from Fischer and Beard’s
blow. Operations have also been resumed in the backs, on the
western vein, the only representative of the very rich veins in
Krohmann’s, Beyers and Holtermann’s, and other claims further
south. At the 240-feet level, lam glad to be able to report that
payable stone has been struck, and the manager expects to get
enough money from this vein to carry on the deep workings
without drawing on the capital of the company. Preparations
are being* made to test, the foot-wall of Paxton's veins, as also
Holman's in the shallow ground from the old south shaft. This
company is working* the lease known as the Crown Prince, on


tribute, which is separated from the Star of Peace lease only by
by Fischer and Beard’s and Hermann’s. The operations of the
Crown Prince are confined to working on two blows; one in the
northern part of the lease, known as Mathewson’s blow—up
against which, and for a short distance south, the vein, (the Star
of Peace) shows very good gold. The other blow, on the south
boundary, known as Hermann's, or Fischer and Beard’s, has
just run into the Crown Prince lease from Hermann's. Where it
crossed the boundary the stone appeared very good; but nothing
has been seen in it since, although it has been sunk upon for
some distance. The present Crown Prince United comprises the
leases formerly known as Mathewson’s, Oxon’s, the Speculation,
and the Morning Star."
Report of 1878 (p. 11). —Assays made by Mr. W. A. Dixon,
F.C.S., F.I.C. : —“No. 26. Quartz, from the Star of Peace G. M.
Company, Hill End, from a depth of 700 feet. The specimen
was reported to be an average piece of stone, and was studded
with minute specks of gold, contained—gold, 32 ozs. 19 dwts. 14
grs. per ton; silver, traces.’'
Keport for 1878 (p. 134) —Report of Inspector of Mines,
Mr. W. H. Slee
“ The principal mine at work at Hill End is the Star of
Peace; it is now the mainstay of this place, as far as the employ-
ment of labour is concerned. The company has lately erected a
battery of Stampers for quartz crushing purposes : they intend to
add the latest and most effective gold-mining apparatus for the
treatment of their blanketings and pyrites. An assay of stone
containing arsenical pyrites from this company’s mine gave 5
ozs. of gold per ton, a great per centage of which is lost by
actual crushing, especially with machinery which has no proper
appliances for the saving of pyrites and the extracting of gold
therefrom. At the end of this year, there were between 400
and 500 tons of stone at grass to be treated by the company's
new battery. The deepest part of the Star of Peace Company's
mine is over 700 feet."
Report of the Geological Surveyor in charge, for the Colony
of New South Wales, for the year 1878 :
‘'Mr. Pittman was sent to make a geological survey of Hill
end and Tambaroora. He is still engaged upon this work, and
is obtaining much important information regarding the mode of
occurrence and position in the silurian strata of the gold-bearing
quartz veins. His survey, together with the underground sur-
veys of mines at Hill End, recently made by Mr. T. S. Parrot,
C.E.. L.S., for this department, will afford reliable information,
not only regarding the mines upon this important gold-field, but
also for guidance in prospecting for other gold reefs. The reefs


hitherto worked are very variable in thickness, extent, and in
the yield of gold; as regards the latter, for instance, parcels of
quartz crushed have yielded up to 2100 ozs. of gold per ton.
Some splendid specimens of gold in quartz from the Star of
Peace mine, at Hawkins Hill, were sent to the Paris Exhibition.
They weighed 797’9 ozs., and by the specific gravity test I cal-
culated that they contained 144-9 ozs of gold. As far as our
observations have been made, the auriferous quartz veins appear
to be confined to certain beds or strata ; and if further examina-
tion prove this to be the rule, it will show that future mining
operations should be directed only to the reefs traversing those
particular sets of strata, and thus prevent the expenditure of
capital and labour upon the non-payable portion of the reefs.”
The Report of the Department of Mines for the year 1879 is
not yet published, and will not be ready for some months. (Mav,
1880). J
RESULTS OBTAINED FROM STAR OF PEACE MINE AND
PROSPECTS FOR FUTURE WORKING.
The gold obtained from the workings of the Star of Peace
mine, to 31st December, 1879, equalled 17,808*78 oz., which rea-
lized £68,862 Os. 2d. The Dividends paid amount to £13,690
12s. 6d. The total Expenditure, including purchase of crushing
battery of 15 stampers, boilers and engine, winding engines,
erection of buildings, dam, and other permanent works, and pur-
chase of new leases, amounted, on 31st December, 1879, to
£64,178 18s. Bd. As the expenditure for machinery, buildings,
&c., and the extension of the area available for mining purposes,
considerably increased the value of the property, the Directors, in
carrying out their plans, required more funds than were available
and accordingly the 6,000 reserved were allotted, and 5,000 pre-
ferent shares were created, thus increasing the nominal capital to
£95,000. On the 31st December, 1879, there were 945 unallotted
preferential shares, and the capital account, on that date, stood at
£94,055, as per balance sheet appended.
BALANCE SHEET
OF THE
STAR OF PEACE GOLD MINING COMPANY (LIMITED),
To 31st Decembek, 1879.
Dec. 31, 1879. DR. £ s . <j.
To Capital Account—9o,ooo shares of £ 1 each 90,000 0 0
~ Preferential Shares—4oss shares of £ 1 each ... ... 4*055 0 0
„ Loan £625 0 0
„ Interest due thereon 104 10 0
TT , . , , 729 10 0
~ Unclaimed Dividends ... ... ... .. ... ... 54 12 Q
» Sundry Creditors ” 1,582 17 10
£96,422 0 4


Dec. 31, 1879. Cb. £ s. d.
By Star of Peace Gold Mine ... .. ... 90,000 0 0
~ Amount added .. ... .. .. ... 4,055 0 0
94,055 0 0
~ Sundry Debtors 75 911
~ Profit and Loss... 2,291 10 5
£96,422 0 4
It is now proposed to make an arrangement with the pre-
ferential shareholders to surrender their preferential shares so as
to induce capitalists to subscribe sufficient capital to work the
mine to the depths required in order to test the underlie of the
veins on the eastern boundaries of the claims in which the extra-
ordinary yields of gold were obtained. In order to do this
economically it will be necessary to obtain the most modern and
effective appliances for pumping and haulage; and it may be
necessary to increase the battery power, and to improve the
method of mining generally by the use of labour-saving machines
where they can be employed to advantage, to sink a new main
shaft or shafts, and to effect many improvements on the surface
of the mine. For these purposes it is estimated that a working
capital of about £40,000 will be required, not necessarily to be
expended at once, but in order to be in a position to develope the
resources of the mine as experience may indicate to be the most
advantageous to the shareholders.
The basis on which it is proposed to place the company
before capitalists, is as a limited liability company, under the
aforesaid Act, with a nominal capital of £lOO,OOO, none of the
shares being preferent. It is then proposed to issue 50,000
ordinary shares, at £1 per share. By this means, £50,000 will
be raised, the whole of which will be placed to the credit of the
Company, excepting a sum sufficient to meet the liabilities of the
Company, which, on 31st December, 1879, amounted to £6422
os, 4d. The Directors guarantee that the deduction for such
purpose shall not exceed £BOOO, leaving £42,000 available as
working capital, or more if the liabilities of the Company should
be lessened in the meantime by the productiveness of the mine.
“ STAR OE PEACE ” WORKINGS AND PROSPECTS.
On the original “ Star of Peace” there are two shafts, both con-
nected with a winding engine of sufficient power for the present
depth of the workings. The main shaft is perpendicular for only
200 feet. This shaft is continued on the underlie of the Star of
Peace vein for 521 feet, making the total depth of shaft 721 feet.
The lowest level is 821 feet, which is reached by a winze track,
114 feet south of the shaft, to a depth of 56 feet from the lowest
stope at the 765 feet level. This shaft has been well timbered
and laddered all the way down, at great cost. The other (South)
shaft is about 220 feet deep.


On Herman’s Tribute there is a good working shaft, 400
feet perpendicular, and continued on the underlie for 100 feet
deeper; also another working shaft, down about 300 feet on the
underlie of Stevens’ Vein. The main shaft on “ Matthewson’s
is also used for working to a depth of over 500 feet. The above
are the principal shafts used at present, but there are other
available shafts which will be useful for future operations. The
shafts on the respective leases are fully described in other parts
of this paper, also in the mining manager’s report, which con-
tains a detailed description of the drives, cross-cuts, and workings
generally. It is therefore unnecessary to repeat the particulars.
As the “ Star of Peace” Vein proved very profitable (enabling
the Company to declare dividends for some time) the operations
have been chiefly confined to working on the underlie of this
vein, to the neglect of the eastern and western veins of the main
line, which have proved so profitable in Paxton’s other leases on
the line. The “ Star of Peace” vein has been completely stoped
out, from the 150 to the 500 feet level; and on the south side of
the shaft, the vein has been stoped out for about 140 feet in
length to the 700 feet level. As the “ Star of Peace” workings on
the underlie have extended eastward, beyond the original eastern
boundary, and all the eastern ground on the boundaries of the
celebrated leases has been acquired by the “ Star of Peace”
Company, it will be seen by the plan that there is great scope for
future working below the present level to the northward and
southward of the shaft. The great defect in the working
hitherto, has been the neglect to test the veins east and west of
the “ Star of Peace” vein, by judicious cross-cutting at various
levels, whilst the “ Star of Peace’’ vein afforded the means of
carrying on such explorations.
The Mining Manager reports, Feb. 13, 1878 :
“ For a depth of 500 feet in this shaft, no cross-cuts have
been put in east, therefore the veins known and worked so suc-
cessfully by the adjoining claims have not been tested by the
“ Star of Peace” Company. I refer to Paxton’s vein—Paxton’s
east vein—(at present being worked at 160 feet level), the new
vein, Stephen’s, Frenchman’s, and Rowley’s, all of which have
proved rich on various parts of the Hill, and remain to be tested
by this company.”
And again, on Feb. 16, 1880, the recently appointed Mining
Manager reports :
“It appears to me that, notwithstanding the extent of this
Company’s land, all that is known is confined to the Star of
Peace vein—which has been stoped out for some length north
and south, down to about 800 feet. For some 300 feet there has
not been a cross-cut put in to try for anything else to the west-


ward, so that when I came on I had to see about this most
important work. We have had to carry on these cross-cuts
under the disadvantage of knowing that the Company’s finances
were in a low state, and that we were not getting gold anywhere
in the mine to meet current expenses. We had nothing to go by
to find gold, only learning from our own cross-cuts. We have
put in some 90 feet of cross-cuts to the west, and from these
cross-cuts it is quite plain that we are in a new country .in the
bottom, something like what Carroll and Beard went through
before coming to their new vein which they are now opening out
on, and, probably, by cross-cutting to the west at our bottom
level, we might come on to the vein they have, or another in the
same westerly channel. We have also stoped out for 40 feet to
the south and downwards beyond where the gold stopped in the
bottom, without coming on to anything payable. All the pros-
pecting that we have done in the bottom shows that we are in an
unsettled country and that we require to go deeper to give the
veins time to make more settled. The hanging wall I have not
had time to explore, but when I tell you that there is only one
cross-cut to the east for 500 feet, and that Paxton’s and other
easterly veins that have been so rich at higher levels lie within
from 20 to 30 feet of us, you will agree with me that this is a
matter that ought to be looked to as soon as possible—the more
so as the Star of Peace now owns all the eastern ground for the
whole length of the rich part of Hawkins Hill.”
The crushing plant consists of a battery of 15 head of
stampers, capable of crushing 150 tons of quartz per week. The
quartz is conveyed by tramway from the Star of Peace shaft, and
from Matthewson’s shaft, to the battery. Considerable excava-
tions have been made on the “ Crown Prince United” area, and
two dams erected at considerable cost to supply the boilers and
battery with water. Besides the winding-engine at the “ Star of
Peace” main shaft, a winding-engine has also been placed over
“ Matthewson’s” main-shaft. Although the battery works are as
satisfactory as possible, under the circumstances, yet appliances
will be required for concentrating tailings, and specially treating
quartz containing pyrites.
The late Rev. W. B. Clarke, in “ Notes on the progress of
Gold Discovery in Australasia,” (p. 5), wrote as follows :
“ The value of pyrites is beginning to be found out as an
auriferous gangue ; and, as proving the truth of the long-ad-
mitted belief, that gold is mechanically held in the pyrites, I learn
that from a quantity of that mineral, only a week ago crushed at
the mortar in the University, actual plates of gold were found
adhering to the pestle,”


From this it would seom to follow that some such mechanical
process as that lately patented by Messrs. Denny and Roberts,
and which has given extraordinary results on being tested at the
School of Mines, Ballarat, is likely to prove effectual in solving
the difficulties which have been hitherto experienced in treating
blanketing and tailings economically.
It will, probably be found advantageous, also, when sufficient
capital is raised, to introduce the ordinary rock drills, or diamond
drills, in many mining operations which are now carried on very
slowly, and at great cost, by hand labour.
Sir G. W. Denys, Bart., Machine v. Hand Labour in Mining,
writes :
u ln order to save the time of those who may not have the
patience to read my story, I will, before commencing it, answer
the question every miner is certain to ask at the outset—Does
boring by machine drills pay ? I answer decidedly, yes, wher-
ever you have plenty of water power, and a long distance to go.
I do not hesitate to affirm that I have driven 550 fms. with the
borer in one-third of the time, and for half the money it would
have cost to drive the same distance by ordinary hand labour.
I am, indeed almost afraid to hazard an opinion as to what it
would have cost to drive by hand labour, for at bottom I do not
believe it could or would have been driven at all. Further,
wherever extensive mining operations are intended, whether
machine drills are to be used or not, an air compressor put up at
the commencement will pay for itself five or six times over.’*
More attention will have to be paid in future, when the
expense can be borne, to exploratory workings.
Mr. Lamont Young, Assoc, R.S.M., F.G.S., &c., writing on
Mining as a Commercial Industry, says —“ One of the points
often overlooked in lode mining is the benefit of occasionial cross-
cuts, or side excavations, in order to insure the full width of the
lode being exposed. A false “ wall” or side is a very common
thing, and numerous instances have occurred where the rich
portion of the lode has been thus missed, and the poor alone ex-
plored.
“ When it is determined to commence extracting some of
the mineral exposed, not more than one-half the workmen em-
ployed on the mine should be set to this work, and where the
character of the deposit is very variable, it is better to have two-
thirds of the workmen always employed on exploratory workings.
By this means a moderately rich mine may be made a success,
whereas the ill-advised process of extracting all the ore as soon
as it is exposed to view, has often ruined the most promising
undertakings. As an eminent authority on mining matters has
observed, ‘ When the exploratory workings of a mine commence
to languish, its days are numbered,”


In the Star of Peace lease a cross-cut has been driven west,
40 feet from the 750 feet level, cutting in that distance no less
than 14 veins, or leaders, varying from 2 to 4 inches in thickness,
and one or two showing gold, with a very promising country. In
Fischer, Beard and Co.’s lease, on the north boundary, a cross-cut,
at a higher level, driven 60 feet to the west, cut only three veins.
In Krohmann's Amalgamated Co.’s deep shaft, between the 595
and 660 feet levels, several new veins and leaders (some payable)
have been cut, underlying eastward, which were not met with in
the cross-cut driven 97 feet westward from the 500 feet level.
The same tendency to multiply and increase in size, at
greater depths, will, probably, prove to be the case with regard to
the easterly veins; for, a cross-cut from the Star of Peace work-
ings, at the 700 feet level, proved that the easterly veins were
growing larger, and were nearer together by 25 feet than they
were at the 250 feet level.
These facts tend to prove that there are a great number of
veins existing at considerable depths, which are not to be found
at higher levels.
Quartz-mining in this colony, has not yet been carried on at
any great depth. Probably there is no shaft or quartz reef in
New South Wales which is one thousand feet deep. In Victoria,
we learn (in April, 1878,) a quartz reef was cut in the Magdala
Company's shaft at Stawell, at a depth of 1917 feet; and mining
is successfully conducted in that colony, at depths exceeding 2000
feet. The Magdala Co's Shaft is now (May 1880) 2339 feet
deep. There is no reason to suppose that the vein on Hawkins
Hill will be unproductive at such depths or greater depths ; and
it is not unlikely that the veins will enlarge, and perhaps unite
in forming a large reef, or reefs, below the present levels. No
other Company on Hawkins Hill has such a large and valuable
area of ground, or can offer equal facilities for deep mining on
the proved veins as the Star of Peace Company.
“ STAR OF PEACE " CRUSHINGS.
The crushings for the “ Star of Peace Company’s mine and
Tribute workings are enumerated below. Some of the crushings
were considerably above the general average, but the following
shows the total quantity of stone crushed by the “ Star of Peace"
Company, and the yield up to 31st December, 1879 :
Tons of Gold. Realised Value.
Stone. oz; & s d
Star of Peace (Bromley’s) 7428£ 13762-19 53,162 311
Hermann’s 886 1,158-67 4518 10 2
Meyer’s 373 f 2,443-81 9,438 12 2
Matthewson’s 48 108-57 424 14 4
Crown Prince (United) 509 313-44 1203 19 9
Goodwin’s (Rose of Australia) .... 123 30-10 114 19 10
9,368 17,816-78 68,862 0 2


The following crushings are some of those above the average:—
Tons of Stone. Oz. of Gold.
1871 “ Star of Peace” 103 501-22
1873 April „ 305 1785-84
July ~ 264 662-90
1874 March ~ 366 953‘95
July „ 492 1168-29
Nov. „ 300 963-55
1876—March „ 183£ 779-12
1878— Jan. to June—Received for 640 oz. of Specimens 1
Sent to. Paris Exhibition j i 0
1879 — September—(From 750 to 781 feet levels) 70 174-5
» it >j / 75 181*25
and Specimens ( 28-0
1874 —Nov.—Meyers’ 137 1317-11
1876—June— „ 78J 678-85
„ 36 143.38
1878 —Decemberi(Hermann’s) 108 424-80
~ 106 204-70
1876—Juue (Matthewson’s) 48 108-57
The Star of Peace Company’s workings are thus described
by the Heraldls reporter in January, 1880 :
Under the able guidance of Mr. T. Moustaka, the energetic
manager, I went all over the workings of the Star of Peace. The
shaft is straight for 200 feet, and after that it slopes 578 feet, to
follow the line of reef. Its total depth is 778 feet, and it is a
good ladder-way, with landing places every 25 feet. The first
vein met with was at the 120-feet level, where Paxton’s vein
(which is, properly speaking, three veins), one that has paid
splendidly, came in. At 160 feet Krohmann’s vein, which has
been very rich, was met, and the manager stated that not much
had been done on this in the Star of Peace. At the 410-feet
level we went north and saw Herman’s Blow, which was worked
by Herman and Fisher and Beard, from this level to the 130 feet
one, and which, in the intervening space, yielded about £52,000
worth of gold. In the hope of catching this “ blow’’ again, a
drive has been put in north, at the 755-feet level, in the Star of
Peace. At the 410-feet level there are fine indications of two
strong veins forming as if going north, and both gold-bearing.
At the 410-feet level we then went 33 feet east and 20 feet north,
coming to the Paxton Blow on the Paxton veins. Worked from
this level to the 112 feet one, it yielded about £7OOO worth of
gold. Herman’s ground, worked on tribute by the Star of Peace
Company, lies to the north of the main shaft, and in addition to
the two blows I have mentioned, several more would probably be
discovered if the crosscut 43 feet in east from the Star of Peace
shaft, at the 410-feet level, and that 33 feet in east at the 260-
feet level from Paxton’s vein, were carried further. The Star of
Peace vein, taken out from the 130-feet level down to the 440-


feet level, all on tlie north side of the shaft, has yielded £40,000
worth of gold. Returning to the Star of Peace shaft and de-
scending to the 700-feet level, I saw at a distance 10 feet south
from the shaft, a crosscut 44 feet in to the east. There I counted
9 veins—Paxton’s 3, 2 middle ones, 2 eastern ones, and the two
Star of Peace veins—all close together and all rather fine. At
the 136-feet level a crosscut has been put in west, and here are
five veins (close together, and apparently making into one) all
new, except one which Mr. Moustaka informed me had been rich
in Krohmann’s claim. These veins are all gold-bearing, but not
sufficiently so to pay for being worked. Altogether, at this low
level, we met fourteen veins, showing that the country is making
down again in veins and leaders. At the 750-feet level 50 feet
south of the shaft I saw another vein coming in three feet back
from the foot wall. This is two feet thick, and is a mass of small
veins, which the manager thinks will close together as they go
down. Two or three good specimens from this level were shown
me, and these bore the precious metal in little dabs. These bits
of good stone are scarce, but their presence seems to indicate that
the gold is going down. At the 771-feet level I examined the
bottom of the shaft, and saw the hanging-wall vein, which at a
higher level was only three inches thick, had made into a thick-
ness of nine inches showing the colour. The foot wall vein also
comes in again, and takes its proper course after 20 feet of
breaks—from the 750-feet level to the 735-feet level. At the
735-feet level, a drive is in 100 feet north. The hanging-wall
vein here is over a foot thick, and the foot-wall one 6-inches,
both looking well but not being payable, a rather tantalising
state of things. The manager told me that he expected, in
driving another 100 feet north, to cut Hermanns Blow, which has
been proved so rich at higher levels, and that when he had traced
that he would work for the others. Ascending the shaft, I saw,
at the 160-feet level on the eastern veins, where under the present
management a patch had been taken out which yielded between
£3OOO and £4OOO worth of gold, and I also saw where, in the
Paxton claim, a very rich crushing had been got. After this,
daylight was reached, and a most interesting survey was over.
Until they can afford to put down a straight shaft, the btar
of Peace Company are safe from curious visitors to their claim,
for toiling down and up 775 feet of ladder-way, and exploring
drive after drive, with the fumes of dynamite occasionally striking
your nostrils, is notan unmixed pleasure. Those who stay on
top can admire the machinery, winding-engine, driving-engine,
and 15-head battery, all very complete, and also a number of
ingenious wrinkles, due to Mr. Moustaka s fertility of resource.
My experience below leads me to the conclusion that the btar of


Peace Company, with 11 acres of ground 1300 feet along the
length of the line, and nearly all the eastern ground, is in a very
fair position, and that the shareholders, some of whom have paid
into the concern very heavily, are likely to be rewarded for their
enterprise. In common with most miners and geologists, I think
that the gold which has been got in reefs at high levels must
come in again at deep ones. In the Star of Peace claim, it should
be found south or north, and at a depth of about 1000 feet—a
depth that the Company’s machinery is nearly fitted to work to.”
PROPOSED AMALGAMATION WITH KROHMANN’S, CARROLL, AND
beard’s.
On the 2nd November, 1876, the following special report
was presented by the directors of Krohmann’s Gold Mining
Company (limited), and also by the directors of Carroll and
Beard’s Gold Mining Company, recommending an amalgamation
with the Star of Peace Company, but, in consequence of the
difficulty attendant upon getting the consent of the requisite
numbei of shareholders, and owing to difference of opinion, the
proposed arrangement was not effected.
The directors have convened a special general meeting of
shareholders, to be held at the Company’s office, on Thursday,
the 23rd November, instant, at 12 o’clock noon, for the purpose
of discussing and authorising, or otherwise, as the meeting may
determine, a proposal for amalgamating this company with the
Star of Peace Company.
. “ The basi s on which it is proposed to effect this amalgama-
tion is, that the Star of Peace Company should assign to this
Company 20,000 fully paid up £1 shares, in consideration of the
transfer to it of the whole of Krohmann’s assets, including lease
plant, funds, &c.
“A similar proposal has been submitted to Carroll and
Beard’s Company, although in that case 15,000 shares will be
allotted to the Company, instead of 20,000, as with us.
The directors of the Star of Peace Company have expressed
their willingness, subject to the concurrence of the shareholders,
to amalgamate with the two companies on these terms, or with
either of them, in event of the two deciding against the proposal,
or failing to get a competent meeting to effect the desired object.’
After careful consideration of this scheme, the directors
have resolved on recommending its adoption, for reasons which
they now proceed to state.
The Star of Peace Company has within the last twelve
months acquired all the ground lying immediately to the east of


the mines formerly known as the rich claims, and stretching from
Paxton’s on the north to Carroll and Beard’s on the south. All
the veins in this part of Hawkins Hill underlay to the east, and
at certain depths, ranging from 650 to 800 feet, will pass under
the eastern boundary into this newly acquired ground of the
Star of Peace Company. The veins have been followed down in
Carroll and Beard’s mine to a depth of 698 feet; and at the
present moment a drive is in progress towards this Company’s
ground, at the 694 feet level. At this depth the vein is large in
size, being 18 inches thick, and promising in appearance, but not
gold bearing. This level is found to be about 35 feet in a hori-
zontal line from our eastern boundary, and as the vein underlays
at an angle of rather more than 1 in 2, we shall reach that
boundary in about 70 feet of sinking It is generally believed by
experienced miners that the veins which carried such remarkably
rich deposits of gold in the upper levels will not always continue
barren ; but no one can pretend to say whether, if they do make
gold again, they will do so above or below the 770 feet level, at
which depth, or thereabouts, the veins cease to belong to this
company.
“ A plan has been prepared for the information of the share-
holders, shewing the relative position of this Company’s ground
as compared with that of the Star of Peace Company, and
showing also the extent of ground which the Company possesses,
both in its own right and under tribute.
“ In this Company we have in hand at present about £4OOO
sterling, a sum sufficient to pay for a large amount of prospecting;
but unfortunately any sinking we may do on the course of the
veins would only carry us towards the Star of Peace ground;
and to sink deeper in a vertical direction (though strongly recom-
mended by some good miners, notably by the late Mr. Cowell)
does not appear to the directors to be a desirable method of
using up the funds in hand, particularly as Carroll and Beard’s
shaft, situated within 40 feet of our boundary, has been sunk
vertically to a depth of 510 feet without any important discovery
being made.
“ Taking all the circumstances into consideration, the direc-
tors think that these funds would be better used in making terms
with the Star of Peace Company than further prospecting of
our own ground. On the basis of amalgamation now submitted
to you, every four shares in Krohmann’s Company would entitle
the holder to one share in the Star of Peace Company; but it
must be borne in mind that that Company would possess a very
large area of land, would have considerable facilities for econo-
mical working, and would have greater chances of discovering
another run of gold than we have, restricted, as we are, to our
present area.


“It is proper to mention that the Star of Peace stock con-
sists of 84,250 shares issued, and 5750 shares held in reserve. In
order to carry out the proposed amalgamation, that Company
would have of course to increase their nominal capital by the
creation of new shares. The Company is said to be free from
debt, and to have in hand at this date cash to the extent of
about £7OO, also 200 tons of stone at grass, estimated to produce
about £l4OO, making in all a working capital of say £2lOO. The
Company’s plant comprises one engine in position for winding,
and two engines with a battery of 15 head stamps not yet erected.
Beside its own leases, the Company holds several adjacent mines
on tribute, as shown in the accompanying plan. Further infor-
mation respecting it can be obtained from its printed reports, or
from its manager.
“It is necessary to draw special attention to the fact that
no general meeting is competent to deal with the question unless
there be present in person or by proxy a majority of the share-
holders both in number and value. As there are 347 share-
holders on the register, it will be requisite that at least 174
should be represented at the meeting. It is particularly desired,
therefore, that every shareholder who may be unable to attend
in person, will take care to be represented by proxy. A form of
proxy is enclosed herewith, which may be filled up in favour of,
and forwarded to any of the directors resident in Sydney, who
will vote in respect thereof as he may be instructed by the
sender. It must be understood that all proxies sent to the
directors without special instructions to the contrary will be used
in favour of the amalgamation.
“ Any resolutions that may be passed at the meeting now
convened, will need to be confirmed at a second meeting before
they can take effect. This second meeting will in due course be
convened for the 11th day of January next; and, to save time
and expense, shareholders are requested to send proxies for the
second meeting along with those of the first. The proper forms
for this purpose are also enclosed.
“Geo. W. Lord, Chairman.
“ Sydney, 2nd November, 1876.”
HERMANN’S GOLD MINING COMPANY.
(Hermann's Lease, 86ft. x 300 ft.)
This Company was formed, with a capital of £50,000, to purchase
the area (about 90 x 300) on a portion of the northern boundary
of the Star of Peace.


According to the report (to 30th June, 1877) presented to the
shareholders the value of gold realised by the company prior to
making arrangements for having the ground worked by a party
of tributors was £1193 14s. Bd. The gold consigned to the A.J.S.
Bank from this mine, from May to October, 1877, inclusive, was
2945 oz.; value (at £3 17s’ 6d.), £11,411 17s. 6d., making a total
of £12,605 12s. 2d. since the formation of the company. The
report of the Directors shows that 360 tons of quartz crushed
under the tribute arrangement, yielded 2,4320 z. Bdwts. of gold,
and 450 z. of silver. The ground has since been leased on tribute
by the Star of Peace Co. Mr. William Plummer’s report, pre-
sented to Hermann’s G.M. Co., on 17th August, 1877, respecting
the workings, will be found further on.
Mr. Warden Sharpe, in his report for 1877 (p. 62), reports
thus:—
“ Next and adjoining Fischer and Beard’s is Hermanns lease
which is let on tribute. The tributors have sunk a shaft 360
feet against time, to reach a shoot of gold on the Star of Peace
vein traced up to the boundary ; and great praise is due for the
courage displayed in attempting so costly a work, as the failure
to complete it within the stipulated time would have been fol-
lowed by the forfeiture of the tribute and loss of all the outlay.
The tributors were rewarded by several remarkably good crush-
ings, but now have passed through the shoot and can find nothing
payable. This valuable deposit, just mentioned, existed in con-
nection with the large blow on the Star of Peace vein, known as
Fischer and Beard’s blow, and is identical with that now being
worked on the south boundary of the Crown Prince. ’
It is said that, from another shaft sunk previously by the
original proprietors on Steven’s vein, to the depth of 280 feet on
the underlie, about £14,000 worth of gold was taken. The lease
is now worked on tribute by the Star of Peace Co.
The workings have been much extended by the Star of Peace
Co. Full particulars of the present state of the workings are
given in the mining manager’s report.
The following report was presented to the Director’s of
Hermann’s Gold Mining Company by Mr. Plummer, on the 17th
August, 1877 :
“In submitting my report to the shareholders for the half-
yearly meeting, I wish to remark that it is more encouraging than
either of the former ones, as this time I can state that there has
been 519 ton of stone raised and crushed, which yielded 27970z5.
2dwts. 18grs. of retorted gold.
“ Main shaft was sunk to cut the Star of Peace vein at the
354 feet level, where there was a drive put in north of the shaft
47 feet, which drive is on the company’s western boundary, and,


from this 354 feet level, the vein has been worked to an additional
154 feet in depth, and the stopes varying in length from 47 feet
to 56 feet north from the southern boundary, which will make
the shaft from the brace, or top, 408 feet deep ; and this shaft is
timbered with sawn timber, and has a ladder-way from the brace
to the 393 feet level, or to within 15 feet from the present bottom.
I may also here state that this is the only workings at present
opened up in this shaft.
“ The Blow.—The drive that was put in at the 354 feet level
cut the blow. 47 feet north of the southern boundary, where it
was 4i feet in thickness; this blow is proved to be 30 feet in
length, but not in the company's mine as yet, for it is not running
in the same direction as the main vein, but going east and west
for the above mentioned distance, and at this level there was only
the thickness of the blow to take away, but when the main vein
was taken away in depth so the blow became longer—that is from
east to west bat at the 389 feet level this blow cut out and a
new one was discovered south of it, which is of the same thick-
ness, but better in quality. At present at the 408 feet level, this
blow in the company's mine is 15 feet in length, which is to the
company’s western boundary, and by the time the main vein is
worked another 154 feet in depth and it keeps its present angle,
the blow, if it should continue, will be the whole length of 30 feet
in the company’s mine ; and, moreover, I may state, that this blow
is of considerable importance to the company’s mine; for so far
as it has been worked through Fischer and Beard’s mine, it has
been a success, and it is proved that it is feeding the Star vein
with gold ; therefore I believe that this blow is the principal part
of the mine, for as long as the blow continues so will the gold in
the Star and other veins that intersect the country round” about
this part ; the stone from this blow—from present appearance
and what has been crushed this time—will yield about 3ozs. of
gold per ton.
“ The number of men employed at present are 20, raising stone
at the rate of 20 to 25 tons per week, but how long it will con-
tinue at this rate I cannot say, for the main vein—that is the
Star vein—south of the blow for 18 feet in length is about three
inches in thickness, and the remaining 34 feet, which is to the
company's southern boundary, the vein is from 8 to 9 inches in
thickness, which will produce stone at the same rate as what is
already taken out; therefore I think there will be three or four
crushings more got out just at the same rate, and much of the
same quality as the crushing that is now completed, namely,
3£ozs. per ton; my reason for stating three or four crushing is’
that Meyer's Company have worked their mine—adjoinin” the
company's southern boundry—and left the vein visible to produce


that number of crushings, and whether this small vein that I have
already mentioned will come back south, or not, will take time to
prove.
“ Present and future prospects are of a better nature than
they were a month ago, for at that time the new blow that I
already stated was not discovered to be so good as at present,
therefore in this portion of the mine there is an improvement,
and, moreover, the new discovery that was made in the Star of
Peace, will prove that this vein, that is now being worked in the
company's mine, carries gold to a great depth, which ought to
enhance the value of the company's property/'
Meyer's Lease (about 50ft. x 300 ft.)
This ground is also held on tribute by the Star of Peace Co.
From a shaft about 140 feet deep on Steven's vein, the first
holders obtained several thousands of pounds worth of gold.
Some very good crushings have been since obtained (as per sum-
mary) by the Star of Peace Co. from this lease. The workings
have been considerably deepened. The present state of the work-
ings is shown in the mining manager’s report on Hermann’s and
Meyers’ leases.
The Rose of Australia
Is situated immediately on the eastern boundary of the original
Star of Peace claim. It was formerly worked by Blunt and
party. A shaft (7ft. x 3ft.) was sunk to a depth of 120 feet to
cut Stevens’ vein—the Frenchman’s, Rowley's, and other easterly
veins also ran through this ground. The workings from the Star
of Peace shaft on the main line of vein have extended eastward,
on the underlie, into the Rose of Australia lease.
In Mr. Frappel's report (1872) on this mine, when it was
proposed to form a company with a capital of £12,000 to work
this lease (120 ft. x 600 ft.), he gives the following information
respecting Steven's, the Frenchman’s and Rowley’s veins :
“ I find by compass bearings you have Rowley’s vein, French-
man’s rich vein, and several others that have as yet not been
tested, while the underlay of the Steven’s vein from its present
dip, is sure to strike into your ground at a depth of say five or
six hundred feet. This vein is so rich and has been so thoroughly
tested, it requires no comment from me. Steven’s vein runs
through your ground, and I believe your shaft and that of Messrs
Vickery will strike it in sinking, this Steven’s vein is remarkably
well defined and is noted for the extreme regularity of its yield.
I have inspected this vein in several of the claims underground,
and can therefore speak with some authority in the matter. I


never saw a better defined quartz vein or one that ran so regular
with such smooth and even walls, while the variation along its
length is very small, only a degree or so. Rowley’s vein—this
vein was worked to a depth of 100 feet several years ago, long
before the celebrated Hawkings Hill veins were discovered, and
has, with the exception of perhaps a few of the “ celebrated
claims,” never been surpassed in richness; over £20,000 has been
obtained out of a small claim, and not one ton of stone was ever
crushed. The whole of the gold was obtained in a narrow band
of decomposed slate and washed out by the dish, after working
for some 150 yards it ran out and has remained to the present
time unprospected, but it stands a very fair chance of being
thoroughly tested now, as so many claims are taken up all around
you; this is evidence that points strongly to the value of your
mine.”
Goldenville (o' o ie)
A Company was formed, with a nominal capital of £12,000,
to sink a shaft to cut the rich veins underlying to the eastward,
from Hickson, Creighton and Beard’s into this ground. The
working capital reserved was insufficient to sink the shaft to the
requisite depth. Most of the £12,000 having been paid for the
purchase of the ground.
The following is from the Hill End Observer, January 25,
1873: —
Goldenville.—This company’s shaft is down to the depth of
220 feet, perpendicular; it is eight feet four inches by three
within timber, well slabbed and centred within 30 feet of the
bottom ; also a good ladder-way from top to bottom. The shaft
is at present let by contract to be sunk a further depth of 60 feet
at £4 18s. per foot.”
There is a chamber at the 220 level.
The shaft was continued at about 260 feet, not deep enough
to cut the veins.
The lease was purchased by the Star of Peace Company.
The Great Extended, 723*)
This lease contains a large area of ground with the same
advantages, as regards the underlie of the main or central line of
rich vains, and also for working “ Steven’s/’ “ the Frenchman’s,”
“Rowley’s,” and other more easterly veins. The following is
taken from the &. M. Herald of January 10, 1873.
Latest from Hill End.—The Observer of Wednesday reports
as imder:—Starting this morning (Tuesday) on a tour of
inspection to Hawkin’s Hill, we first paid a visit to the Great


Extended, where the shaft is down to the depth of 2GO feet, but,
at present, they are engaged in driving to the east, and have
already completed about 70 feet of such work, and are now
driving through a sort of conglomerate of rock and slate. It is
anticipated that at 20 or 100 feet similar stone to that found
in the shaft will be come upon, and as over 20 veins and leaders
were cut in the shaft, the prospect is a good one. A leader cut
whilst sinking was tested, and the stone therefrom yielded at the
rate of 4 oz. to the ton. The manager informs us that, at about
90 feet in the drive, the Frenchman’s vein might be looked for,
and many other known leaders running into this ground.”
The Hill End Times, of January 25, 1873, reports :
“Great Extended.—This company’s shaft is sunk to a depth
of 260 feet perpendicular. They cut three gold-bearing veins in
sinking. Have started a cross-cut to the east at a level of 250
feet from grass, which is now in 75 from the bottom of shaft, in
which 2 veins have been cut, both showing a little gold, but not
payable. Still driving to the east.*”
The western boundary of the lease adjoins the eastern
boundary of “ Paxton’s,” and all the celebrated leases as far south
as Krohmann's, where it joins the “ Golden Crown” lease.
The Golden Crown (£' *• 8 oj)
This lease is situated on the eastern boundary of Krohmann’s
and Carroll and Beard’s, and is well adapted for mining on the
main line of rich veins underlying therefrom into this lease, at
about the 800 feet level; and also for working the eastern veins,
Rowley's, the Frenchman’s, and Stevens’, &c., at lesser depths.
The southern boundary adjoins that of the Great Western Un-
daunted lease.
High Change (£ o do)
This is a small and peculiarly-shaped area of ground, which
was taken up on the eastern boundary of Rapp's, with the inten-
tion of sinking for the rich veins underlying to the eastward. No
work has been done except the commencement of a shaft. This
ground has also been secured by the Star of Peace Company.
CROWN PRINCE UNITED COMPANY.
The following description of the leases formerly known as
Oxon’s, the Crown Prince, Matthewson's, the Morning Star, and
Speculation, but now held by the Crown Prince United Company,
and let on tribute to the Star of Peace Company, may prove
useful on account of the experience gained m the working
(especially in Matthewson's) of the direction and*relative posi-
* The Star of Peace Company’s Mining Manager reports (in 1880) that this
shaft is 400 feet deep.


tion of the veins going north of the “ cross-course” met with in
Matthewson’s. Hitherto all efforts have failed to identify (on
their northerly course past the cross-course) the respective veins
known and named in the celebrated leases south of Matthewsons.
This will acceunt for the somewhat lengthy account given of
some of the leases.
Oxon’s (59 x gob)
This lease was purchased by a comany for £25,000 on the
following representation per prospectus : —“ This claim may be
confidently recommended as one of the best investments ever
offered to the public, being of a thoroughly sterling character,
and in good working order. Two shafts have been sunk to a
depth of 210 feet each, and a considerable body of stone has
been raised, which will go at least six ounces to the ton, and
will be available as an immediate dividend for the shareholders.
This claim is now within a few feet of Paxton’s and Holman’s
rich level.”
By some modification of the original terms by which the
whole of the money was to be paid for the lease, a certain sum
(but not sufficient) was reserved for sinking a straight main shaft
for central or main line of veins.
The following is from the Hill End Times, of 22nd January,
1873 : —“ Oxon’s: This company formerly worked on Stevenson’s
vein. At present they are sinking a straight shaft to cut the main
rich veins at a good depth. The dimensions of the shaft are 9
feet 6 inches, by 3 feet 6 inches down to the depth of 64 feet,
well slabbed and centered, with a good ladder way to go up and
down by.”
This shaft was sunk much deeper. In 1877 the timber was
taken out of the shaft to a depth of 180 feet by the Star of
Peace Company.
This valuable property was amalgamated with Matthewson’s,
the Morning Star, ond Speculation, and the Crown Prince, under
the title of the Crown Prince United Company. The whole
area belonging to the Crown Prince United Company is leased
to the Star of Peace Company, under a tribute of ten per cent.
Cbown Prince ( a -“• £).
This lease has a large area, and is well situated for deep
working on the main line, or for working any of the eastern veins
at a moderate depth. The following report (22nd January, 1873)
taken from one of the Hill End newspapers will show the work
then done: —
“ Crown Prince.—Shaft sunk on Stevenson’s vein to a depth
of 200 feet. At 170 feet from the surface there is a cross-cut put
in to cut the Frenchman’s vein, which is 85 feet east of Steven-


son's. The last-mentioned vein showing gold has been drove on
north 90 feet, but showing no better, the manager thought it ad-
visable to sink a shaft on it. The shaft is at present down about
20 feet; got a reef about two and a half inches thick, shewing
gold but not payable.”
Small shafts were also sunk on Rowley's vein, in some places
to a depth of 100 feet on the underlie; but, although so much
gold was obtained from a mere surface cutting on the vein in the
early days, nothing more has been done. During the present
year (1880) operations have been commenced by the Star of Peace
Company to work a vein on this lease, 30 feet east of Rowley s,
and a trial crushing of 8 tons obtained therefrom in February
last gave 17oz. 12dwts.; March 11th, 17 tons yielded 68oz. 14dwts.
12grs., and another crushing of 30 tons in April yielded 440 z.
12dwts. 18 grs of gold.
MATTHEWSON (iboX££).
This lease, named the Shakespeare, was formed into a com-
pany in 1872, on the following basis, extracted from the pros-
pectus :
“ This company is proposed to be formed for the purpose of
purchasing and working the claim on Hawkins Hill, known as
Matthewson and Party's. The claim consists of live men's
ground, taken up under the old regulations, and comprises 150
feet on the base line of the reefs, with a width of GOO feet. It is
situated on the main line of all the rich veins worked in Kroh-
man’s, Hurley's, Brown's, Paxton's, etc. Between Paxton’s and
the Shakespeare, lie Bromley’s Star of Peace, which is valued at
£70,000, Gondolph’s, and Fisher and Beard’s. The latter is getting
rich stone and shares are quoted at more than double the
price now asked for this claim which is in immediate proximity,
and on the direct line of their veins. On the north it is bounded
by the Trust and Try, and Tippett’s, and on the east by the
Crown Prince, known as Rapp and Renatau’s.
“ Matthewson's mine has been at work nearly two and a half
years. A shaft has been sunk to a depth of 220 feet. At 160
feet a drive was put 34 feet to the west, which cut three veins—
two of them showing gold. At the bottom of the shaft another
drive was put in to the west GO feet, cutting a gold-bearing vein
which requires a greater depth to test its richness. At the same
level a drive to the east cut a payable vein about 4 inches wide.
The drive is being continued in the daily expectation of opening
one of the rich veins running through Paxton and Holman’s
ground.
“ With a view to the employment of more labor so that the
shaft may be sunk to a greater depth, and the proved veins be


opened out, the present proprietors propose to otter to a company
their interest in the mine for the sum of £26,000, of which they will
take £15,000 in shares paid up to £1 each, £IO,OOO in cash and the
balance of £IOOO of the capital will be placed to the credit of the
company as a working capital. After this sum has been expended
all shares (including the promoters’ shares) will be alike liable to
calls, but no call shall exceed sixpenee per month per share.”
The main shaft was continued perpendicularly, to a depth of
about 350 feet. Several very fair crushings were obtained, but
the working capital reserved proved insufficient to develope the
resources of the mine, and when calls were made on all shares
alike some of those who held a considerable number found it to
be too great a tax on their resources to respond. An amalgama-
tion was effected in 1877, by which Matthewson’s Oxon’s, the
Crown Prince, and the Morning Star were formed into a company
named the Crown Prince United Company. The whole of
the amalgamated area was let under a tribute of 10 per cent for
ten years°to the Star of Peace Company, and the workings have
been deepened to about 500 feet below the surface. _ A large blow
of quartz was found in this lease which has continued down to
the 480 feet level. .
This lease deserves special notice on account ot the cross-
course ” (bearing given below) which, so far, has caused great
difficulty in tracing the main line of veins northward. The fol-
lowing extracts from the report of the Hevald s correspondent
will be useful and interesting to all concerned. From Sydney
Mail, 26th' October, 1872
« Considerable apprehension has been excited amongst some
claim-holders north of the Hill by a recent survey of Matthewson’s.
In his claim the veins run N. 8' E. ; another survey gave the
Frenchman’s as N. 6’ W. Do these veins gradually converge till
they meet ? Do they amalgamate or cross one another, or do
they, by altering their direction, run parallel ? These are the
questions asked. The Never Fail has cut a vein at 180, which
should not have been reached under double that depth. Is this
a new vein, or has it altered its course ? Time will, I suppose,
tell us the secret.
I suppose the great nugget will attract attention to the mai -
vellous belt of veins traversing our hill once more, and for the
information of those who know them not, I propose giving an
idea of their number and position as they stand in Paxton’s
claim, which may be taken as a fair standard in all on the same
line. * The main belt occupies a metamorphic slate dyke about 90
feet" wide, and having a general direction of about 8* E. of N. On
either side of this dyke, and separated from it by courses of
diorite, are other veins, to wit —on the east, Steven s, the


Frenchmans, Rowley’s, or Daddy’s, and others; on the west,
Brandt’s, Gard’s, or Eisentadter’s, and others.
“ The Main Line. —Commencing with Paxton’s, we find
three veins, occupying about eight feet in width, together with
the enclosing slate. This eight feet is known as Paxton’s work-
ings, and varies in width, having been as much as 16 feet wide.
Seventeen feet east of Paxton’s are three veins worked upon for-
merly by Paxton, and now the most easterly one, I believe,
making a good show in the Rampant Lion, being 10 inches wide
and expected to go six ounces to the ton. Brown’s line seems to
have cut out at the present depth. Forty feet west of Paxton’s
workings, is a vein known as Holtermann’s, because, 1 believe,
that gentleman first got gold in it. This is the vein at present
working in the Star of Peace, and giving good gold, more espe-
cially as it goes towards Dr. Fischer’s. Next in order, and about
twelve feet more to the west, comes Krohmann’s woi’kings, which
are from ten to twelve feet wide, and not got through at that.
People, talk of our veins being narrow —granted; but see how
rich they are, and how numerous.”
Sydney Mail, October 18, 1873. —“ Several gentlemen inter-
rested in the course of Matthewson’s vein, north and south, de-
voted a couple of days in the early part of last week to tracing
it into their respective claims. Its bearing on the north of the
cross-course, as far as could be judged by the small part laid bare,
is N. 030 W., bearing of cross course N. 61'00F., and S. 61'00 W.
The line thus determined at the level of Matthewson’s drive runs 40
feet east of Morning Star shaft, and about 55 feet east of both
the Great Western and Great Amalgamated. Now the Morning
Star is about 42 feet, the Great Western 111 feet and the Amal-
gamated 174 feet above level of Matthewson’s trace, or respect-
ively 342, feet 411 feet, and 474 feet above the level of the drive;
hence with an underlay of one in the three, they should cut the
vein in their shafts at 222 feet, 246 feet, and 309 feet respect-
ively. The Morning Star has just cut a vein at 219 feet,
which there can be little doubt is the one in question ; and the
Amalgamated, about six feet in a west cross-cut at something
undej 300 feet, cut a small vein, which might be the same, and
at 270 feet, or thereabouts, lost the blow they so long carried
down in their shaft. Of the veins cut in the Great Western, I
know nothing. Such facts as these are worthy the notice of
shareholders, as tending to give a clue to the whereabouts of
what may be expected to prove valuable in their mines. The line
has not yet been carried south, but the manager of Fischer and
Beard’s is of opinion that the vein makes a turn in his ground,
and thinks he is now on the turning point,”


Morning Star.
The Morning Star Company was formed, like most others at
at the time, with insufficient working capital. For a lease with
about 60 feet on the line of veins, the original proprietors
received £11,500, in cash and shares (mostly in cash), and the
working capital consisted of £295, and 205 unsold shares, the
nominal capital being £12,000.
The following extract from the report of Mr. Coates will
show what work was executed when the lease was taken over by
the Company:—
“ After most careful survey of your Company’s ground, I
find that it is situated upon the direct “strike” or course of the
lodes and veins at present being worked in the claims of Messrs.
Mathieson, Fischer, Bromley, Paxton, Holman and Co’s to the
south; also the lodes known as Stephens’, the Frenchman's,
Rowley ’s, and Nichol’s, opened in several claims to the northward.
The ground is traversed by a gully from which a tunnel some
one hundred feet in length has been run, cutting an auriferous
lode in your claim, which is supposed from its character and
direction, to be that known as Stephens. A shaft has also been
sunK to a depth of one hundred and fifty-five feet, and cross
drives opened from it fifteen feet east and twenty-one feet west.”
After expending a few hundred pounds in clearing out the
easterly shafts referred to below, in an extract from the mining
manager’s report, without any profitable result, it was resolved to
continue sinking the western straight shaft from the 155 feet
level.
“ Old workings. —A tunnel, quite useless, cutting only some
40 feet below the surface, driven 25 feet to cut Steven’s vein, and
25 feet along it, with a shaft half way in, down 16 feet.'
“A shaft filled upon the Whip-road —sunk to catch Steven’s
vein—given up before the vein was cut, which would have been
in about 100 feet.
“ Old shafts on Rowley’s vein, filled up or fallen in, and an
old shaft on Fischer’s vein, down which I went as low as the
water in the bottom would allow. It is said that gold, 6 oz. to
the ton, can be obtained from the bottom up the hill, or south-
wards. What I saw of the vein in it was no thicker than my
finger. A road cut through this claim to the Crown Prince
exposes several veins in the line of this as also in that on Rowley’s
• »
vein.
Two thousand additional (£1) preferent shares were created,
and most of them allotted; but before the necessary depth could
be attained, it was found impossible to obtain payment of calls
from a sufficient number of the shareholders to keep the work


going. The lease was sold try order of the Sheriff, and purchased
by a few persons who joined in the amalgamation of leases
referred to previously.
It is stated that a vein was cut in the western shaft at 30
feet from surface. This shaft was continued down, by the com-
pany, from 155 to about 277 feet from brace. At 225 feet a vein
was cut, but not tested, as it was intended to sink the shaft 300
feet. The following is an account of the vein by the Herald’s
correspondent:—
“ October 3, 1873. —The Morning Star has cut a vein at a
depth of 225 feet, apparently eight inches thick, and full of
mineral. A drill has been put through it, and a few chipsbroken
off, nothing else. I hope, in my next, to be able to say more
about it.
“ October 11, 1873. —The vein I reported in my last as having
been cut in the Morning Star proves to be about eight inches
wide, with a mixture of some two feet of rich black slate and
quartz on the foot wall side of it, and fine black slate beneath
that again, suggesting the close proximity of another reef. It
would be premature as yet to say what it is. The existence of a
westerly heave, the probability of which I suggested some time
back, is now proved beyond doubt in Matthewson’s, and though
the measurements would make the Morning Star vein fit very
well with Matthewson’s, with the supposed heave of six feet, it is
not impossible that the heave is 26 feet, which would about
bring Paxton’s vein there. Should the Morning Star vein be
identical with these latter, we may expect another vein, the
‘ clay vein* in a few feet, and a third at no great distance
further.”
The following extract from the Company’s report to 31st
December, 1871, may prove useful for guidance in future mining
operations
“No 3 (or Westernmost shaft) is distant about 99 feet east
of the western boundary of this company’s lease, about 73 feet
west of a line due north from Matthewson's shaft; and the ele-
vation of the mouth of the Morning Star shaft (No 3) is about
40 feet above the mouth of Matthewson's shaft. No. 2 shaft,
down 99 feet perpendicular, on Steven's vein, is distant about
137 feet east of No. 3. No. 1 shaft, down 110 feet on the under-
lay of Fischer's vein, is distant about 198 feet east of No 2; and
the eastern boundary of the Morning Star lease is about 147 feet
from No. 1 shaft.
“The Frenchman’s vein is about 92 feet east of Steven’s
vein, but has not yet been tested in the company's ground."


Speculation.o’ oss?’
This lease was purchased by the proprietors of the Morning
Star Company, after the Morning Star Company’s interest was
sold to them. It has since been included in the amalgamation
of leases known as the “ Crown Prince United Company,” worked
under tribute by the Star of Peace Company.
Paxton's Gold Mining Company.
From Paxton and Holman’s claim, on the southern boundary of
the Star of Peace a considerable quantity of gold was produced
(as will be seen by the following extracts) before the company
was formed.
From the half-yearly reports to 31st December, 1879, it ap-
pears that, since the formation of the company, 91120 z., realized
value £35,224 ss. 10d., has been produced.
The following extract is taken from the third of a series of
articles by the Herald’s reporter, published on the 10th January,
1880. It is interesting on account of the statements made as to
the early crushings from this mine, which are not easily obtained.
“ Amongst the richest and best managed claims on the Hill
was Paxton’s, which was taken up at the latter end of 1866, and
first worked in February, 1867. Four men began to work it at
first, but its extent was eight men’s ground, 122 feet along the
line of reef, by a depth of 300 yards. It was taken up in con-
sequence of rich yield’s in Kawsthorne’s claim, but for 18 months
the owners were unrewarded for their enterprise, and shaft after
shaft was sunk without any payable reef being struck. One of
these shafts was down to 120 feet, and as ventilation was neces-
sary it occurred to the partners that they might come up about
20 feet and drive to another shaft for air, the mere connection of
the two serving, as every miner knows, to establish a constant
current. One of the original shareholders one night, or more
strictly speaking, one morning (since it was after midnight), as
he went down to do his shift of work, noticed something glitter
in the roof of the drive. With a faint hope and expectation of a
turn of fortune, he and his mate put in “ a popper,” that is a tiny
blast of powder, and dislodged a piece of quartz, barred with a
streak of gold as thick as a knife-blade. Following up the search
they discovered in the blue rock three narrow veins of quartz,
each gold-bearing. Still one was only as thick as a shilling, and
the other was like a knife-blade, and one of Mr. Paxton’s part-
ners was sure it would not pay. How delightfully his opinion
was falsified when this very stone subsequently yielded 800 oz.
of gold to the ton. Each shift was able to get out half a bucket-
ful of this stone, that is about 5 cwt. a week—something like a


weekly income of £BOO to be divided between four men. This
continued for some time, and then the veins of “ stringers” began
to thicken. As they did so they became poorer, and developed
into veins several inches thick, getting, finally, too poor to follow.
The party then sank, and got payable veins in the shaft, which
for a considerable period went about soz. to the ton, and which were
worked profitably in other claims. Paxton’s party drove south
along these veins (called the East workings) to the boundary,
and their work paid them pretty well, while to the north, towards
the Star of Peace boundary, it was poor enough. Mr. Paxton
suspected that they were not on the proper line, and they drove
to the westward until they cut three veins that gold was being
got from in the next claim (called Paxton’s) veins that fairly ran
gold. They were the hanging wall vein, the middle vein, and
the footwall vein, varying from six to thirty inches in width, and
these veins, got in the whole length of the claim, were worked
down to a depth of 260 feet. The veriest tyro in mining can
understand this richness when he learns that two tons of the
substance (it would be a mistake to call it stone) taken from
the middle vein, yielded 4250 ozs. of gold, that is nearly
£17,000 worth. At this time ten weeks work yielded the
shareholders £12,460 worth of the precious metal, and the eight
weeks following gave them £28,000. The next crushings went
to the tune of £6,900 and the following list of crushings may
prove interesting : —lB70—June, 214 tons went 637 oz. 19 dwts.j
September 3, 77| tons went 243 oz. 18 dwts.; September 17, 90
tons went 349 oz. 6 dwts. ; October, 203 tons went 508 oz.
2 dwts.; November, 99 tons went 338 oz.; December, 261 tons
went 820 oz. 1871—May, 530 tons went 1301 oz. 3 dwt. 4 grs.
Prom January, 1871, for three months or more, the only work
done was timbering the shaft. In 1872, £47,000 worth of gold
was taken out. The mine was formed into a company. The
yields then began to fall off, and a few dividends were paid. The
claim is now being worked on tribute. Whether or not it will
yield another such golden harvest as that which scattered evanes-
cent luxury around Hill End remains to be seen, and recent
indications at Hawkins’ Hill would lead one to the impression
that the hope, which, according to the poet, “ springs eternal in
the human breast,” has some reason for saltation in the case of
the present owners of the Paxton’s mine. Allusion has been
made in this article to the splendid yield of 4250 ounces of gold
from a crushing of two tons. Well, this gold was shown at the
Joint Stock Bank just as it was turned out of the crucible. It
was a hemisphere i4£ inches across and 10 inches deep—the half
of a glorious golden orange, as eagerly coveted as the glittering
apples of the Hesperides, and, indeed as jealously guarded as


were its nymph-tended prototypes by the dragon that Heicules
slew.”
A more lengthy account, containing a description of the
workings of Paxton’s mine, is taken from the Herald of Bth
June, 1872 : T 1 •
“ Let me now take a ran across the western slope of Hawkins
Hill, and give some information gathered on a visit which
I paid the other day to Paxton and Company’s mine, from which
those of your readers who have not made a descent undergtound,
may obtain some notion of the character of the workings of the
principal mines on the hill, for all the mines necessarily resemble
each other in their general features. Paxton’s, moreover, enjoys
the reputation of being one of the best worked mines on the hill,
it having for nearly the last two years been under the manage-
ment of °Mr. .Thomas Foote, a miner of great practical experience
in Cornwall and South Australia. The mine consists of eight
men’s ground, and has a frontage of 122 feet 6 inches along the
line of reef, with a depth of 300 yards. It was taken up m
1866, and the workings date from early in the next year, the
first crushing being had some thirteen months later. Something
like twelve months ago one of the five shares into which the
claim was then divided sold for £4OOO, or at the rate of £20,000
for the whole. A few weeks, however, the claim passed into the
hands of the company who at present hold it for £160,000.
£40,000 was taken out of claim last year, and £30,000 has
already been realised this year. One crushing, representing the
proceeds of the first eight weeks’ work in the year, yielded 7103
ounces of gold from 261 tons of quartz, giving a dividend of
£4BOO on each of the five shares then held, besides working
capital. Thirty-eight men are employed in this claim, working
day and night shifts. The mine is worked by a north and a
south shaft, the dimensions of one being 8 feet 6 inches by 3 feet
6 inches, and the other 7 feet by 3 feet, with a ladder-way of 3
feet by 1 foot 6 inches for the workmen. Both shafts are
divided by a platform. The upper part of the shafts is through
broken ground, but the rest of the descent is through very hard
rock*
<( Having ascertained some general facts about the giound,
I saw the worthy manager knocking the ashes out of his pipe,
which I took to be a pretty good indication that he was ready to
make a start for down below; and by the time I had “ peeled
off ” my coat, and stowed that incumbrance in the smithy, my
guide was ready, candle in hand to make descent. Iheie is veiy
little to be seen as you look down one of these shafts but a black-
ness as impenetrable as that which shrouded fabled Erebus, and
you have not even the small satisfaction of hearing the hammeis


of the workmen who are dealing Herculean blows against the
granite walls of the caverns below. You may, however pat
yourself metaphorically on the back that you are going down
Paxton's ladders, instead of being lowered ignommiously dangling
in a slino-, with the chance of knocking your head or your knees
against the sides of the shaft, to say nothing of! dipping away
from the rope altogether. To be sure, a breadth of eighteen
inches is hardly scope and verge enough m all cases . and it you
are inclined to obesity I warn you to pause and reflect upon the
dead certainty of your being jammed inextricably, it would be
safer to undergo a course of Bantism than run the risk of being
squeezed into jelly or lengthened out like a f usa f®l h
straightness of the ladder, too, is rather a novelty' ’
no help for it, and whether you like it or not, you must e p
yourself perpendicular. If any one were to propose that you
should up a perpendicular ladder to the top of St. Ja >
steeple or nearly twice the height of it you would probably
doubt whether it could be done. Try it, and you would find that
the world could be easier. You are hardly down half
a dozen steps of Paxton’s ladder before a blast comes up the
LnnTwhichVows out your candle The manner who always
insists on being below anybody he takes down J**’ | Y
wire in the shaft, which communicates with a hammer and
iron plate on top, and in another minute you find yourself in
almost total darkness snugly-Wwithout further
mTshap a TlieTdd>t placed in length, which occur first on
one side of the way and then on the other and there is a board
one sicie oi tu« w j making a right-about turn from
upon which you can lest belore maKin 0 o ~
1 i a n n pr Those who are not used to tins kmu oi
XWthat ifreqihes a good deal of
to go down; but the ascent
strongest man breathe hard ana la; . 1 r i p
for the first 120 feet, and we then go down
stones packed closely together up +Pp anllerv and a
by placing huge timbers diagonally across the gallery, and
framework of saplings transverse y aevoss • j oose roc k
TP pep ofnlls form a capital storehouse tor tne loose rocK
brought in blasting; and
method of stacking themaway The north
mg operations be V and underlay
rXSlwVthl of three vmns— . PaxtW,
which wore cut at 120 feet from the surface, and which have been


Continuously worked from that depth. These three veins have
been worked for 135 feet (or, from the surface, 2G5 feet), and for
a length of 122 feet G inches, which is the width of the claim on
the course of the veins. Having spelled for a minute or two on
one of the stulls to make a note of these particulars, we make
another start for a lower level, which we reach partly by ladders
and partly by a rope, in a portion of the claim down to which the
ladder shaft had not yet been continued. The descent by the
rope is by no means difficult so long as you prop yourself well off
from the rock, though if you should have the ill luck to slip you
stand a remarkably good chance of ‘barking ” your shins; or,
worse still, by slewing round, making a serious rent in your in-
expressibles. The rope brought us to the bottom stopes, or
galleries, which follow the direction of the veins, north and south.
There is something very impressive in the massive walls of these
underground chambers, which is perhaps enhanced by the very
mdefiniteness of their outlines, the feeble light of the candle you
hold in your hand being barely sufficient to dispel the gloom
which encompasses you. It just “makes darkness The
sound of the men s hammers, as with heavy blows they drive the
drills into the rock, does away with a good deal of the romance
with which the sable majesty of darkness is apt to invest a place
like this; and I should decidly recommend anybody who wants
to conjure up phantoms “ horrible and awful ” to slink away into
some low-browed cavern where the men are not working, and
there he may revel in the sepulchral echoes of his own voice, or
have his weak nerves startled by the thunder of the blast’ex-
plosions. One might grope about in the worse than Egyptian
darkness of these subterranean vaults for ever without the
remotest chance of finding his way out, at least, that’s the impres-
sion anyone would get who is not accustomed to mining. When
you get clear of the underlay, and come to a point where you can
look straight up the shaft, you hardly realise the fact that that
little spec at the top of the tunnel, so distant and dim, can be
daylight.
But to return. We will suppose that we are safely landed
on the bottom stopes, where we see a number of men now at
work. Here we discover three well-defined veins, varying in
width from six inches to thirty; and we learn that from the
centre of the three lodes a couple of tons of stuff was taken
out a short time ago, and out of it was crushed 44000 z. of
gold. The shareholders would not object to a few tons more
of that sort of stuff. All the veins appear to be coated with
a thin layer of slate. The rock between the central lode and
the foot wall is first broken; and the rock between the central
lode and the hanging wall is next shot down by powder in


masses of from one to eleven tons. The return or hanging
wall lode is then taken down clean by itself, and sent to the
surface fit for crushing. The underlay of these lodes is east,
and is as two feet three inches in six feet hypothenuse. The
waste stone, as before stated, is packed up on stubs between
the walls of the workings, in some places to a height of 25
feet. Proceeding downwards alone the course of the central
lode, which is worked from the bottom by underhand stoping,
we reach the south shaft which is well and strongly timbered.
On the underlay it is five feet long, and is the width of the
workings, which vary from eight to twelve feet. It is planked
down on the foot wall with two-inch planking; and immediately
below it there is what is called a pent-house, or a framework
of timber and stone, which prevents anything falling on the
men who are working beneath it in sinking the shaft to a depth
lower than the level of the present lowest workings. It is in-
teresting to watch how smoothly and almost noiselessly the large
iron buckets glide up and down the shaft, each pursuing the even
tenor of its own way, collision being altogether out of the ques-
tion. Each bucket will hold about 3cwt. of quartz, and the haul-
age is done by a horse working round a whim at the top. It will
be seen that all the work is done by stoping, for the rock is too
hard for the manager to think of driving. He can stope ten
fathoms for very little more than it would take to put a drive
through the claim, to say nothing about taking out the ground in
back stopes after the drive was through. Having scaled another
wall of rock by means of a rope, we ascend the south shaft by
ladders fifty feet, and step on to a plat ” —which in
mining phraseology must be equivalent to platform,
and then, passing along a cross-cut (or corridor), we
come to the west workings, which are parallel to those we
have just left, the dividing wall being called a “ horse.”
We have proceeded along the cross-cut about 16 feet when we
discover Hurley's vein, so called from the fact that it proved very
rich in that gentleman's mine. A few paces further on, and three
other veins crop out on the surface, and these are styled Brown's
veins for a similar reason. It is thus pretty evident that the
horse's back is destined to be broken some day or other, and the
veins which run through it seem to promise work for many years.
At the end of the cross-cut Krohmann’s east vein has been struck
and like the other four, runs the whole length of the claim. It
was from this vein that Krohmann’s got their first- rich crushing,
but here it has only been partially worked. This vein has also
been struck in the Rampant Lion, where it is said to be turning
out very rich. There is another vein west of the present work-
ings, Jcnown as Krohmann’s “ rich '’ vein, which in this mine


has not yet been touched. A winze or monkey shaft is being
sunk in the west workings to meet a cross, cut from the east
working ten fathoms below. The workings upon this level are ex-
pected to prove very rich, and from present indications it is thought
that the stone will run at least four oz. to the ton for the whole
length of the claim. In addition to the veins actually struck,
other veins are known to occur in this claim, although they
have not yet been seen. In all probability the next cross-cut
west will disclose them. Proceeding along the westerly workings
northwards we come to a pass about two feet square, down
which the quartz is taken from the back stopes to the main level,
and is wheeled from there out through the cross-cut to the field
whence it starts on its journey up the main shaft to the sur-
face. All through the mine the veins run through close-grained
tough granite or green stone; but it is somewhat softer in the
westerly workings, and the ground is therefore broken in upon
by back stoping, and the quartz is then taken out by driving
along under the vein. A steel is put in through the level, and a
stope of six feet high is carried on in front of the men. Stopes
of smaller heights are then carried in succession until the piece
of ground between the two levels is all taken away. The width
of the workings varies according to the width of the vein, and the
breadth runs from four to six feet. The width of the vein in the
westerly workings averages eighteen inches. Retracing our
steps from the northern end of the westerly workings for a dis-
tance of forty feet, we climb up through the back stopes, five
fathoms above the level we have just traversed. We then walk
along a narrow gallery or stope, which is literally roofed with
gold ; for our candles reveal shining specks of the precious metal
in the marble-looking quartz above our heads. We come to an-
other cross-cut, five fathoms above the main drive in these work-
ings. We have the pleasure of again seeing Krohmann's vein
cropping out upon this high level, and proceeding through the
cross-cut we again pass through Brown and Hurley's rich veins
running through the “ horse." The air throughout the veins is
as pure as that above, or, rather, no appreciable difference can
be perceived; but in the part of the workings to which we have
come we are greeted with a cold blast from the Rampant Lion,
the wall between the two having been broken down. Hurrying
along the cross-cut, we are glad to get back to the eastern work-
ings, if only to keep the candles burning. There are throe veins
at the back of the eastern workings which were formerly worked,
and the last crushings from which yielded 5 oz. to the ton. The
sinkings, however, have gone 130 feet below that level, and these
veins for that distance have not been touched. The eastern
workings are 100 yards from the eastern boundary, and the""west-


ern 190 yards from tlie western boundary of the claim, and this
ground is known to be traversed with seams of gold-bearing
quartz other than those I have already mentiond. It will thus
be seen that, without going an inch deeper, there are veins which
will take many years to work out. Perhaps the most noticeable
characteristic in this mine is the thoroughly methodical way in
which the work is done—regard being had rather to the perma-
nent working of the mine than to the exigencies of general
requirements.”
Fischer and Beard’s claim,
on a portion of the northern boundary of the Star of Peace,
(original lease), has yielded about £41,000 worth of gold, since
the formation of the Company in the early part of 1873, and
£16,000 has been paid to the shareholders in dividends. The
Company was formed to purchase the mine- with a capital of
£60,000, in £1 shares. There was very little working capital
reserved from the sale of the shares. The amount of gold taken
out previous to the formation of the Company is not generally
known. The main shaft is perpendicular to a depth of 380 feet.
A crosscut, driven 60 feet to the west, from the 310 feet level,
cut only three veins ; whereas, a cross-cut driven 40 feet to the
west, from the 750 feet level, in the Star of Peace lease, cut no
less than 14 veins or leaders, one or two showing gold, in a
promising country. _____
The following summary is supplied by Mr. G. Hardie, of
Sydney, the legal manager of Krohmann s Amalgamated Gold
Mining Co., which now comprises the following ( originally) three
companies “ Carroll and Beard Gold Mining Company (limited)
was floated on May 2nd, 1872, capital £90,000 in 90,000 shares
of £1 each. The amount of gold raised by this company up to
December 31, 1888, was 15,0350z5. 2dwts., which realised
£57,008 17s. 3d. The amount of wages paid to same date is
£20*065 ss. 3d., and the dividends amount to £36,000, being Bs.
per share upon 90,000 shares. Krohmann s Gold Mining Co.
(limited) was floated on April 3rd, 1872, capital £BO,OOO, in
80,000 shares of £1 each. The amount of gold raised by this
company to December 31st, 1878, is 48,1890z5., valued at
£183,760 2s. 2d. The wages up to same date amount to
£25,758 18s. Id, and the dividends £157,000, being £1 19s. 3d.
per share on 80,000 shares. Beyers and Holtermann s Gold
Mining Co. (limited) was floated on April 17th, 1872, capital
£72,000 in 72,000 shares of £1 each. The amount of gold raised
by this company up to December 31st, 1878, is 26,4030z5.
15dwts., valued at £106,407 15s. 9d. The wages to. same date
amount to £22,538 16s. 9d, and the dividends paid during the same
period were £1 Is. 7d. on 72,000 shares amounting to £77,700.


It is difficult to obtain a complete record of the crusbings of
tbe three companies; but a few of the extraordinary results
obtained, as per half-yearly reports, are given below:—
KROHMANN’S G. M. COMPANY.
Quartz—Tons. Cwt. Oz. of Gold.
15 7 ... ... . ■ ... .. 6,989-13
185 ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,982-35
53 15 ... ... ... ... ... 5,673 80
BEYERS’ AND HOLTERMANN’S G. M. COMPANY.
Quartz—Tons. Oz. Gold
273 ... ... ... ... ... 15,510-81
CARROLL AND BEARD’S G. M. COMPANY.
Quartz—Tons Oz Gold.
25 ... .. ... ... ... 2,543
411 ... .. ... ... ... 5,534-80
56 ... ... ... ... ... 3,086-82
The quantity of gold obtained from Beyers’ and Holter-
mann’s claim, previously to the formation of the Company,, was
thus stated in the prospectus published in the S. M. Herald , oi
February 13, 1872 :
£ s. d.
“Gold divided prior to sinking new Shaft, working since Feb. last, 4000 0 0
March 3, 1871 —1475 oz. yielded ... ... ... ... ... 5714 14 0
June 24, 1871—1348 ~ „ 5199 18 3
Dec. 23, 1871—2331 „ „ 8959 12 5
Disposed of to mates, 8 oz. ... ... ... 32 0 0
£23,906 4 8
Less Expenses and Wages in full ... ... .. ... 1,836 0 0
Showing a net division of ... ... ... ... ... £22,070 4 8
The last three crushings have been taken out within the last
nine months, at an average employ of ten men and one horse.”
The following also describes certain crushings as resulting
from Mr. Krohmann’s claim, not iucluded in the Company’s
accounts :
Date Tons. £ s. d.
March 7, 1871 ... ... 19 ... ... 1314 19 0
May 18, 1871 ... ... 30 ... ... 44 11 0
Aug. 5, 1871 ... .. 17 ... ... 2236 15 0
„ 8, 1871 7 474 5 0
Sep. 22, 1871 ... "... 38 ... ... 155 9 0
Nov. 2, 1871 ... ... 91 ... ... 1625 2 0
202 5851 1 0
Kiohmann's cake of gold, weighing 5612 oz., the result of
a crushing of about 16 tons of stone, was exhibited at the Sydney
Intercolonial Exhibition in May, 1872.
In March, 1873, the mine was visited by the Governor of
New South Wales, who “ fired a shot and brought down about
5 cwt. of stone, out of which 70 lbs. of good specimens were
picked,”


“ Extracts Relating to Neighbouring Mines. Sydney
Empire, November 4, 1872 : — f Beyers and Holtermann’s Claim :
The all-absorbing topic of interest has been the unprecedentedly
rich yield of gold from Messes. Beyers and Holtermann’s mine at
Hill End. On Saturday morning, the 19th October, a mass of
stone was shot out richer than anything that had ever been seen
in the mine. The golden mass is about five feet long by two feet
wide at one end, and tapering to a point at the other, with
an average thickness of one inch. It was as much as twelve
men could manage, with crowbars, to convey it from the mouth
of the shaft to the treasure-room, and required all their strength
to help the whim-horse to raise it out of the shaft. Subsequently
about 2 cwt. more was dislodged, and the crushing yielded two
cakes, weighing 11,088 oz. The crushing is still going on, and
Messrs. Beyers & Co. expect 4000 ounces more. Paxton and
Holman’s mine, recently sold for £160,000, has its main shaft
sunk to a depth of 300 feet. The last crushings gave a return of
4,400 oz., value £1 7,490, from only two tons of quartz. Brown’s
mine, only 37 feet in length, has yielded £50,000 within the last 18
months. Krohmann’s mine: The main shaft is 230 feet deep.
A recent crushing gave the almost unparalleled return of /133
ounces to the ton/’
The following is extracted from the first report of Kroh-
mann’s G. M. Co., to 31st December, 1872, presented 24th Feb-
ruary, 1873 :
“ The Directors have much pleasure in submitting their First
General Report to the Shareholders.
“ The Company was formed in the month of May last, but
the accounts now presented to you embrace a period of nearly
thirteen months, as the Company at once obtained possession of
of the stone which had been raised since the 20th November,
1871, paying the expenses incurred in raising same. From the
gol 1 produced by that stone a dividend was declared of ss. per
share; from the next crushing in the month of August last, a
dividend was declared of 7s. 6d. per share; and from the crush-
ing which took place in the month of November last, a third
dividend was declared of Bs. per share, thus the sum of 20s.
6d. per share has been returned to the shareholders in the shape
of dividends within eight months from the formation of the com-
pany, representing, however, the result of about 12 months work
in the mine.
“ The Directors have deemed it prudent to establish a Re-
serve Fund in order to meet any contingencies that may hereafter
arise. This fund has been started with the sum of £2OOO placed
in one of the banks on fixed deposit for six months,


“ The crushing which has just taken place will yield about
14,150 ounces of gold. Some specimens have been brought to
Sydney for sale, supposed to contain about 250 ounces, making
the total quantity of gold to be dealt with 14,400 ounces, tho
estimated value of which will be £55,440. The Directors have
declared a dividend of twelve shillings and sixpence per share,
payable after arrival of the gold in Sydney, of which due notice
will be o-iven; and they have determined further to increase the
Reserve” Fund by the additional sum of £2OOO, making the total
of the Reserve Fund £4,000, and retaining about £3,400 to meet
current expenses until next crushing.”
« Gold Account, December 31st, 1872, 24,079 oz. 8 dwts :
£93,231 2s. 6d
The first report presented by Reyers and Holtermann’s G-
M. Co., to 31st Dec., 1872, showed that the Company had been
formed’ in April, 1872, and that 20s. per share had been paid in
dividends up to the day of meeting in February, 1873.
Carroll and Beard’s g. m. co.
Paid 2s. for the first half-year, 4s. for the second, and 2s. per
share for the third half-year. This company, however, sank a
good main shaft to the depth of 500 feet perpendicular, and
erected excellent surface works, including a 12-horse power
eno-ine and boiler, and winding-gear, capable of working to a
depth of 1000 feet. This company’s shaft was used for prospect-
ing the ground to the east to a depth of 734 feet until 28th July,
18*77, when that work was stopped near the eastern boundary.
A western cross-cut was driven from the 500 feet level, a distance
of 97 feet. “The last 10 feet of cross-cut passed through three
small quartz veins, but not gold-bearing,” This work was stopped
on the 2nd February, 1878. In February, 1879, an amalgama-
tion of the three companies was effected, and the principal work
of Krohmann’s Amalgamated Gold Mining Company (limited),
since that date has been sinking the main shaft.
The mining manager reports on the 7th October, 1879,
«Present depth 590 feet from surface. Have cut two small
quartz veins about 1 inch thick, carrying a little bright mundic,
but not gold-bearing. Sinking through good-looking slate at
present.” On 21st October, “ Present depth 595 feet. Have cut
a quartz vein three inches thick, showing fine colours of gold ; it
also carries a little bright mundic. Still sinking through good -
looking slate. We may not be far distant from another vein.”
On 18th December, 1879, “We have cut through the vein at the
614 feet level (perpendicular) ; it measures over 2 feet 6 inches,
correct measurement, and shows payable gold. The vein is of a


transparent character, with dark seams running through it, allow-
ing gold to be seen some distance into the stone. The gold is fine
in & character, but well distributed through the vein.” On 27th
December, 1879, “ 622 feet level from surface. The last eight
feet of sinking was on new vein, the first four feet the vein was
from 2 feet to 2 feet 6 inches thick, showing payable gold through
it, but showed best gold towards hanging-wall. At this level the
vein split into two veins, separated by a small belt of slate about
]f) inches thick Foot-wall vein is about 7 inches
thick, not carrying any gold at this level; these veins may come
together again lower down. Hard slate hanging-wall, softish
slate on footwall, with a great many small quartz leaders dropping
from the vein and dipping west. ’ January 13th, 1880, Pre-
sent depth 628 feet, sinking through slate with small quartz
leaders intermixed, not gold-bearing. At. this level drives
north and south are being put in by the side of the new vein.
The trial crushing of 19 tons, taken from this
vein, yielded 14oz. 16dwts. 12grs. of gold. It was not a fair hesti,
as there was 18 inches of slate and quartz, not carrying any gold,
mixed with the 9-inch gold-bearing vein, which made the crushing
poor.” February 24, “ Present depth 641 feet, sinking through
slate intermixed with quartz leaders, not gold-bearing. I think
we are not far distant from another vein by present indication at
bottom of shaft Twenty-five tons of quartz
taken from vein .... yielded 520 z. ldwt. retorted gold.,
April 6th, “ Forty-three tons quartz have been treated at Peyer s
battery; yield 2260 z. retorted gold.” April Bth. “ About 659
feet from the surface we have cut three quartz leaders, all show-
ing gold. From present indications I think we are not tar
distant from a good vein.” April 20th, 1880. “The perpen-
dicular shaft has been sunk a further depth of tour feet,, making
present depth 660 feet. Quartz leaders recently cut in shaft
are going perpendicular, and continue to show colour of gold,
think they will lead to a vein which ought to be gold-bearing,
according to present indications.” May 18th, 1880. Perpen-
dicular shaft has been sunk a further depth of five feet, present
depth 669 feet. The small quartz leaders in shaft show nice
colours of gold. These leaders have commenced to dip west;
with present indications we ought not to be far distant from a
vein. North drive on new vein at 628-feet level has been ex-
tended nine feet; present length of drive 82 feet from shaft.
Vein taken down is nine inches thick, and shows gold. PacK-
stoping same vein from north drive ; have taken down the vein,
it is eight inches thick and shows nice gold through it; have
raised 15 tons of quartz from this vein, making 35 tons ot stone
at surface. Upper levels, stoping out north and south on western


vein at 240-feet level. Stoping out south on same vein at 210
feet level. Have raised seven tons of quartz from these
veins; it looks 2-oz. stone. There are 23 tons of stone at
surface/’
The following account of the veins cut in Carroll and Beard’s
Shaft is taken from a report dated March 4, 1873, by the then
Mining Manager, Mr. Thomas Chappell. The shaft was then
only 260 feet deep :
“ I will now describe the veins as found in shaft. The first
was crossed at 170 feet from surface; width of vein, 10 inches.
About 10 tons has been taken from this vein, which yielded
about 4 ozs. per ton. Second ditto, 190 feet, width from 2to 3
inches. About 23 tons has been taken from this vein, which
yielded 18 ozs. per ton. It is not intended to abandon those
veins; on the contrary, provision has been made for working
them m a proper manner, viz., by a series of 60-feet levels. The
first of those levels has been commenced at 220 feet from surface.
The shaft at this place has been thoroughly secured, and strong
doors fitted, to allow access when required. I presume share-
holders would not be very well satisfied for those two last veins
to be worked, and allowing richer ones to remain in abeyance;
but, whether or no, it is imperative that the westerly veins should
be worked first, which are the rich ones, otherwise the ground
would be liable to collapse. The next vein was struck at a depth
of 230 feet; this is Krohmann’s rich vein. About 34 tons has
been taken from this vein, yielding about 80 ozs. per ton; and
has been worked to a further depth of 10 feet, making the total
depth of present workings 240 feet. I may state that this vein
has been worked only from shaft to Krohmann’s boundary, a
distance of about 40 feet. The top of the vein was only a mere
thread; now driving towards Rapp’s at same level, in a distance
of 12 feet, only a trace of vein; in fact, the vein and gold is dip-
ping south so rapidly, that I do not expect to be well on the gold
at Rapp’s boundary at a less depth than 300 feet. The shaft has
been sunk to a depth of 260 feet, 20 feet below the present work
ings. At the bottom of shaft another vein has been struck, at a
distance of 8 feet west from the other; both veins have been
taken out to bottom of shaft the length of the shaft only. Both
veins look exceedingly well, and will average from 2 to 3 inches
each. The shaft has been carried down vertical all the way, and
it is to be continued so. The total yield of the last crushing of
2 tons 13 cwt. is 799 ozs. 19 dwts. —over 300 ozs. per ton. This
requires some explanation. On account of the short time avail-
able for crushing, the seconds were not crushed as usual. There
is now at the mine sor 6 tons of seconds; if this had been put
through with the other, the yield would have been about 100 ozs.
per ton more, in conformity with previous crushings.”


MR. krohmann's observations.
Mr. Krohmann’s experience, in sinking on the main belt of
veins, east of the workings of the veins cut iu the deep shaft by
the Amalgamated Company, is interesting, and worth recording
for future guidance.
The following is taken from the report of S. M. Herald's Hill
End correspondent, dated 2nd March, 1872 :
“ Mr. Krohmann says ‘ In sinking my shaft I cut a vein 40
feet from the surface, and another at a depth cf 45 feet more,
both of which carried gold, but remain at present untried. Eight
feet further down I cut a vein four feet thick which went 2 oz. to
the ton, and is known as Krohmann's big vein. In. 2 feet 6 in-
ches more I cut another from 12 to 18 inches thick with no gold
showing; and again, in 2 feet 6 inches, another three inches thick,
yielding 8 oz. to the ton. I sank on the underlay of this for
some distance: when I drove into the foot wall, or west, 12 feet
6 inches, and cut a vein 4 to 6 inches thick, yielding 130 oz. to
the ton.
“ A continuation of the straight shaft cut this vein at 120
feet. Four feet further to the west I came on a vein, not showing
on the surface, which increased from half-an-inch to 7 inches in
width, and went dwts. to the ton. Ten feet further west
brought me on the vein from which my Exhibition specimens
came ; 24 tons from this yielded 2,711 oz.
“ Continuing the drive four feet brought me to a leader
carrying a little gold, and again eight feet more discovered the
new vein which looks so very promising. Beyers and Porter are
at work on this vein, but none of it has as yet been crushed.
“ All these veins are in a shaft sunk on the base-line of the
claim, and thus a belt of fifty-three feet contains ten auriferous
veins.’*
Not only Paxton's but all the claims south thereof, up to the
north boundary of Beyers and Holtermann’s, have given very
large returns. It is difficult, and almost impossible, in many
cases, to procure complete records of the crushings, but the
following examples will give some idea of the results obtained.
It must be borne in mind that the veins underlie to the east-
ward, into the Star of Peace Company’s eastern ground, from all
the companies south of the Star of Peace Co. as far as Carroll
and Beard’s southern boundary.
Rampant Lion Co.
The following is extracted from the first report of the com"
pany to 30th June, 1872 :
“ The capital of the company was fixed at £27,000 in 5400
shares of £5 each. Articles of Association were prepared and
executed by all shareholders, and scrip issued.


“ The mine, prior to its coming into the hands of the present
proprietors, had been worked without plan or system, and with a
view only of getting out patches of rich stone for immediate
returns. This state of things has thrown upon the present pro-
prietary a large expenditure for unremunerative work, in order
to open out the ground and provide accommodation, both under-
ground and at surface for more extensive operations. 291 tons
of stone were crushed last April, yielding 577 oz. of gold, and
371 tons crushed in July yielded 1019 oz. 15 dwts. The expen-
diture to 31st July has been £2747 15s. 4d. One dividend of
2s. 6d. per share was declared in April, and a second dividend of
7s. 6d. per share is now recommended, being equal to 20 percent,
per annum.”
A crushing of 70 tons, averaging 3 oz. 17 dwts. per ton is
reported in the Empire of 27th Sept., 1871 ; other records have
not been sought. It will be observed that the claim has very little
ground to the eastward, owing to its peculiar shape.
Creighton and Beard's Claim.
It is stated in the Herald of 16th February, 1872, that the
last crushing from this claim was 30 tons of quartz, which yielded
11340 z. 7dwts. lOgrs. of gold.” It, and the adjoining claim, under
the title of Hickson, Creighton and Beard's, was formed into a
company some time afterwards, with a capital of £36,000. The
proceeds of gold for the half-years ending 31st December, 1873,
30th June, 1874, and 31st December, 1874, were £9431 os. 3d.,
£4157 19s. 10d., and £IBO6 2s. Bd., the deepest working then being
about 270 feet from the surface. Several dividends were paid.
Cock, Attwood and Dwyer’s Claim.
The following is from the prospectus of the next claim,which
was formed into a company : —“ Cock, Attwood, and Dwyer’s
Claim, Hawkins Hill.—Capital, £90,000, in 90,000 shares of £1
each; 10s. payable on application, and 10s. on allotment. Shares
will be allotted in the order of application, and the list closed as
soon as they are taken up.
* * * * * *
Mr. William Cock, one of the proprietors, gives the following
account of the present condition of the claim, and from this it will
be seen that the workings are most judiciously laid out, and that
there is work in sight for some years to come :—■ The crushings
from February 18th, 1867, to October 4th, 1869, were taken
principally from the veins known as Paxton’s and Holman’s veins.
These veins we left in 1869, and sunk our shaft until we were
fourteen feet farther to the west, where we met with other veins
which gave us large yields, and the veins known as Paxton's and


Holman's vein we have standing near 100 feet in height un-
worked. These veins in Paxton's claims, about one hundred feet
from our boundary, are now turning out an immense quantity of
gold. These veins will be our future ones for operation when we
have finished the working of the more westerly veins. We have
driven still further to the west, and the last crushing of quartz
mentioned in the list is the first we have had from the new vein.
The bottom of the drive we put to the west, for the last dis-
covered vein is very rich ; but we have plenty of other ground to
work before working on this. There are veins farther towards
the west which we have not seen, and also at the east, golden
veins, and I believe very rich in other claims, but we have no
necessity at present to go farther.’ The crushings of stone taken
from the claim have been as under: —
Tons. Ozs. of Gold.
Small quantities taken out from February,
1867, to December, 1868 .. 56 374
July, 1869 30 167
October, 1869 4o 160
December, 1869 ... .. ••• ••• 28 96
March, 1870 80 307
May, 1870 54 1070
October, 1870 272 2001
February, 1871 304 700
August, 1871 478 2303
January, 1872 !83 1511
1530 9239
From the above statement it will be seen that, like the neighbor-
ing claims, the stone increases in richness as the workings go to
lower depth, and also that these workings are in so forward a
state as to allow of large quantities of stone being sent to the mill
every three months. The stone now being raised is almost equal
to Krohmann’s late find.” A considerable quantity of gold has
been taken from the lease since the above date, and the workings
have been considerably extended, but the particulars are not
known.
Brown’s Claim
was formed into a company, the price paid being £35,000 with
no working capital. The following description by the Hey aid t>
special reporter, was published in that journal on July 26 an
August 1, 1871 : ,
“As the claim of Mr. James Brown is the most celebrated
on the Hill, it was naturally the very first which I desired to
visit. Without any request on my part, Mr. Brown, the moment
he heard the object of my visit, offered to take me over his work-
ings, and give me every explanation and information T might


require. This kindness was all the more gratifying from the fact
that he was on that day about to break down a bench of rock
containing some three or four tons, which was known to contain
some very rich stone.
The Northumberland claim, the property of Mr. James
Brown, has turned out, up to the present time, gold to the value
of no less a sum than £28,000; and yet it is very little more than
one man's ground, being only 42 feet along the base line of the
reef, with a depth of 300 feet, or 50 yards on each side of the
base line. It has now been at work about five years, but it was
not till July, 1869, that the rich veins, the yield of which has
has been so astonishing, were met with. Until then, the claim
had been barely paying wages, but after the golden stone had
been reached, it continued to give splendid crushings up to the
very last, when 2,300 ozs. were obtained from 800 tons of stuff.
I use the word “ stuff” because, beside the quartz, a very large
amount of the slate has to be sent to the crushing batteries,
owing to the gold which is more or less scattered through. This
I shall explain further on, but I mention it here for the purpose
of showing that the yield of gold, large as it is, by no means
represents the return from the quartz alone. That, if crushed by
itself, would give a far larger yield, but being worked up with
the slate, which cannot be thrown aside, because of its holding a
payable amount of the precious metal, the average yield per ton
is much reduced.
The claim is situated not quite a quarter of a mile from a
blind gully, which joins the first fall of the Nuggety Creek, and
stands in the midst of a number of rich claims, second only to
itself. The winding paths by which these workings are reached
are such as only quartz-miners and mountain goats can traverse
with ease. At least that was my impression, though by dint of
daily toiling on them for the last ten days, I have got habituated
to them to the extent of being able to traverse them without the
fear of a slide into the Nuggetty Gully, some four hundred feet
below, being always present to my eyes. The workings are
reached by a down shaft 130 feet deep, at which depth the de-
scent is continued on the underlay of the strata enclosing the reef
and its rich casing of slate for 80 feet further, making in all 210
feet. Besides this, portions of the works have been carried down
12 feet deeper than this. The haulage is done by means of a
horse-whim in the usual manner, but the difficulty of obtaining
a level platform for a horse-whim for the working of the shaft,
for a blacksmiths’ shop and men’s huts, and for the storage of
the stone brought up for crushing, may be surmised from the
fact that such platform has to be constructed on the face of a
hill which slopes down to the gully below at an angle of some-


thing like 36 degrees. Some considerable expense has to be
incurred in the construction of such a platform, which has to be
mainly quarried out of the side of the hill, in the erection of huts
and store-rooms for rich stone, in the construction of a whim,
with all its massive timbers, and in roofing in the whole of that
part of the claim upon which work has to be carried on, includ-
ing the ring round which travels the horse that works the
whim.
Having gone thus far with my description of the'above ground,
let it now be supposed that lam preparing to go below. I look
down the shaft, which appears as black as Erebus, for the slope
of the underlay prevents the lights of those working below from
being seen. I receive my instructions —I am to taice care when
I come to the roller at the top of the underlay, which catches the
rope and prevents it chafing against the rock,_ against which it
would otherwise cut through its strands in a week. lam to take
care to turn my face round to the west, so that I may push my-
self off from the sloping rock with my feet, and walk down in
true mining fashion, instead of being lowered ignominously on
my back, like an empty hide bucket skedding down the boards
of the incline. I store up all the instruction thus given, seat my-
self in the rope, received a lighted candle in my hand, and look-
ing probablv not very much like the candle-bearing penitents of
the olden time, I gave the signal and I descend only about three
yards, for the terrible draught up the shaft has extinguished my
light.’ lam hauled up again, and my candle is lighted. Once
more I am lowered, but I only descend about thirty feet when out
goes the candle again. The manager of the works stops the de-
scent, but I sing out to him not to mind the candle, and on my
assuring him that I am in no way alarmed, and only on receiving
this assurance two or three times, does he give tlm order to lower
away. lam jolly enough in the down shaft. With my feet f
keep myself from spinning round, a gyratory performance that
ropes in general have a tendency to cause the uninitiated to per-
form ; and at last I come to the roller. Obeying the instructions
I received, I turn my face westward, and descend the sloping
platform in the most creditable manner. But lam in the dai ,
I have no idea of the direction I am going—and as I am, of course,
guiding myself by the use I am making of my feet, I gradua y.
without knowing it, get to the edge of the timber track laid down
on the lower face of the underlay to prevent the bags from being
rubbed to pieces against the rock. I get to the edge of the
track, catch my foot in the alarm bell, trip, tumble over on my
back, and the next minute I find myself comfortably stowed away
between the timber track and the side of the shaft, and the rope
going gracefully down leaving me behind, still seated, however,


in the sling. When those below saw the bights of the rope com-
ing down, and leaving the end up above, there was some conster-
nation, for there was no knowing what had become of me, as
from my having no lights I was invisible. I quickly put them
at ease by responding to their call to me. I was only about 20
feet above them, and could have easily descended that distance
by the rope if I could only have got hold of it. This they would
not allow me to do, but directing me to hold tight they gave the
signal, and I was hauled up ignominously from my recumbent
position, and was then lowered down the rest of the distance
without mishap. What I saw below I must leave for my next
letter.
As soon as I had cleared myself from the rope, and lighted
the candle, which I still carried in my hand, I took a survey of
the spot upon which I had been landed. It had the appearance
of a large cavern, some twelve feet in height, and perhaps eigh-
teen feet in width, cut in the form of a rude arch or dome. It was
a part of the old workings, before the rich veins which have
given such great yields were cut. There was nothing particular to
see here, except the hard blue slate, which forms the main stra-
tum of rock which has to be worked in at this depth. Intersect-
ing this slate mighj; be seen several veins of quartz, the working
of which had caused the large rocky chamber in which we were
standing. “ Never mind this,” said Mr. Brown to me, “ Come
along with me and I will show you something worth looking at.”
And so he did ; for turning west through an arched cutting, the
remains of an old drive, he led me into an excavation, much
more extensive than the one I had just left. It was probably
some fifteen feet in height, and extended nearly across the whole
width of the claim. To the south it opened out by a drive into
the adjoining claim of Porter, Rawsthorn, and Co., thus causing,
by the connection between the two shafts, the great current of air
which had extinguished my candle in the descent. From the
arched cutting a rocky road-way had been left for the passage of
barrows, &c., in removing the stone, the ground on either side
having been cut down to a depth of from six to eight feet. That
part to the south of the roadway had been more deeply excavated
than the other, and three or four men were at work cutting
across the veins east and west, in order to lay them open and
make them easier to work.
The excavation to the north was the one to which my atten-
tion was more particularly drawn. Here two men were employed
in breaking down what is termed a bench of rock through which
several auriferous veins were known to run. This bench was
about seven feet long, three feet wide, an I five feet high, and
had been left after the barren slate had been removed from the


Eastern side of it. Descending from the rocky platforms to the level
of the workers below, we waited until the picks of the miners
should open up the riches enclosed in the mass of rock before us.
We were not long delayed, for half-a-dozen strokes of the pick
had not been given before there was an exclamation, “ Here you
are,” and a small vein about an inch thick, and closely studded
with gold was laid open. Bit by bit the vein was taken out, and
then the bench was still further entered, behind the first vein the
slate which encased it was also thickly powdered with gold; and
only an inch or two at the back of this was found another vein,
even richer than the first, whilst, as it fell, the slate on its western
face was perfectly suffused with gold, either fixed in it or retained
there by the stiff pipeclay, which had forced its way through the
interstices of the rock. Still further in the bench, or west, a very
very fine vein was opened, about three inches in width, and
shewing on its western side so large an amount of gold, so closely
packed in the stone for about an inch of its width, as really to make
it appear to consist of as much gold as stone. But, besides this
vein, for fully twelve inches the slate was as rich as the quartz.
In addition to the metal which covered it as I have above de-
scribed, numbers of small leaders of quartz, from a hair s width
to a quarter of an inch wide, intersected the slate in all direc-
tions. These veins all showed themselves to be more or less
auriferous, whilst the slate in contact with them was likewise full
I sat watching this interesting process for three hours, until
the men knocked off for dinner, and in all my experience of the
gold-fields I never came across so veritable a Tom Tiddler s ground
in any refining country I have yet seen. The western portions of
the veins, if separated from the other and less rich part, would
give an almost fabulous yield, and one that I am perfectly afraid
of hinting at, lest I should be accused of exaggeration ; but tak-
ing the stone as it now stands, if it were crushed alone without
the slate, &c., which is sent up with it, would, I am sure, give a
return of 300 ounces to the ton, at least. But because I put the
yield of the western part of the quartz so high it must not be
imagined that the remainder contains nothing. Gold is to be
found running through the whole of it, and even the poorest
part of the eastern face would give a very handsome return to
any who were lucky enough to get it. The nature ot the
vein stone I should imagine to be, at a rough calculation—the
western third, 750 oz. to the ton; the centre third, 40 oz. to the
ton; and the eastern third, 10 oz. to the ton. It was a lot o
stone similar to this picked out from amongst the slate, and
crushed separately, that gave the handsome return of 920 oz. tor
35 cwt. This, however, was taken from the claim of Messrs.


Attwood and Dwyer. Mr. Janies Brown prefers to take the whole
of the stone he intends to crush and work it altogether. And this
course is pursued by most of the large claim-holdors; so that,
whilst stone quite equal to that above-mentioned is raised in
nearly all the shafts, the average per ton is much reduced by
the admixture of slate and poorer stone.
Some idea of the value of the quartz raised from this claim
may be gathered from the facts, which I have from Mr. Brown
himself, that he has taken out £28,000 from the ground, and that
he has now on hand stone, which is to be crushed next week,
which he expects will give him another £12,000. The claim is
most undoubtedly a rich one, but Mr. Brown well deserves that it
should be so, if only as a reward for the great perseverance with
which he held to the ground through difficulties which would
have deterred many a faint-hearted man. Through months and
years he worked for an amount of gold that barely paid him
wages, while the labor was of the hardest description. One
after the other his mates left him, utterly discouraged, selling
their shares at a merely nominal figure, whilst he, with untiring
energy, determined to test the ground so long as he was in a
position to do so. He was almost at the last resource when he
struck the rich vein, which encouraged him to proceed, and since
then he has found the ground getting richer day by day. In the
first instance, after getting his shaft down, he drove into the hill,
easterly, and in that direction only the poorer veins were found
that enabled him to keep going. He then determined to try what
driving in the other direction, or westerly, would do, and he had
not to go more than eight or nine feet before he struck the first
of the rich veins he is now working.
Before leaving the shaft Mr. Brown showed me his strong-
room, in which he keeps the richest of the quartz under lock and
key, so as not to expose the men who are washing for him to the
temptation of appropriating it. The sight was a very fine one,
for here, in a gallery cut in the rocks, and closed up by a strong
door, was all the picked stone from the mass of quartz preparing
for crushing. There might have been some three tons of it thus
set aside, which, if crushed alone, would have given 250 oz. to the
ton. This stone is not sent to the machine in the ordinary way,
for it is kept below until the last moment, and it is then put into
a bag, which it never leaves until it is shot out into the feeder of
the crushing battery.
Having seen all that was to be seen, I ascended the shaft
without, as I innocently believed, the occurrence of any contre-
temps. I indulged in a great deal of self-glorification, as I was
drawn up, from the circumstance, that I was able to keep my
candle alight during the ascent, in spite of the great draught that


sent the flame curling down over the edge of the sperm, which it
tapered off in the most elegant of points. On reaching the mouth
of the shaft, I pointed with exultation to the candle which I still
carried alight in my hand; but alas ! my pride of prowess was
only momentary, for on coming into the dim lights I found that
the drippings from the sperm candle had all collected in the most
careful manner upon the front of my trousers ; for as I sat in the
sling of the rope, as one does in a chair, the knees being extended,
caught every drop of sperm which fell from the fast-burning
candled’
Porter and Rawsthorne’s Claim.
' ' About £40,000 worth of gold was taken out of this claim
prior to its formation into a company with a capital of £120,000,
but the quantity obtained since, and the extent of the workings,
is not generally known.
The Monte Christo.
The following is from a prospectus to form a company to
purchase one-half of the claim :
“ The Monte Christo Gold Mining Company,
Hawkins Hill, Hill End, Tambaroora (Limited)
Offices : Bank Chambers, corner of George and King-sts, Sydney.
Capital, £15,000, in 000 Shares of £25 each, paid up,
200 of which will be reserved by the Proprietor.
The Company is being formed to purchase and work one full
half of that celebrated golden claim and mining plant known as
the A 1 or Messrs. Hurley and Moore’s, situated on Hawkins Hill,
Hili End. , , v
The extent of the claim is 69 feet on the base line of the
reefs by 600 feet. The shaft is more than 200 feet deep, with
drives east and west, and besides the rich veins alieady worked,
others of payable quality have been proved.
A quantity of stone is now being crushed, of which 12 tons
are expected to yield at least 50 oz. to the ton, and tue remaining
40 or 50 tons to average 10 ozs. On the same reef there is still
abundance of stone of the same quality, which will be available
for dividends to this Company.
********
The crqshings from this claim have been as follows :


No. Yield,
tons. cwt. oz.'dwt. gr.
Victorian Engine ... .„ ... 3 7 254 0 0
>, „ ... ... ... 4 4 100 0 0
„ „ ... ... .. 7 10 151 0 0
» „ - ... ... ... 4 0 95 0 0
» ... ... ... 5 0 150 15 0
,» „ ... ... ... 7 0 165 10 0
~ ~ ... ... .. 2 10 167 0 0
„ >, ... ... ... 4 12 133 0 0
» m ... .. ... 4 15 10 12 25
„ „ ... ... ... 9 15 1861 0 0
„ m ... •• ... 13 0 1189 5 0
„ „ .. ... ... 27 0 211 0 0
„ „ .. ... ... 12 15 601 1 21
Chappell’s Engine, being a new vein, from
which 685 tons were crushed, yielding 899 3 0
(This vein is held in reserve.)
64 0 1108 0 0
Crushings taking place this week, ending March 23, will be
duly published in the Sydney papers.”
A considerable quantity of gold has been obtained from this
lease, since the publication of the above.
The next claim is Beyers and Holtermann’s, of which an
account has been given.
The Rose of England.
The fifth claim south of Carroll and Beard’s is the Rose of
England, of which the following account was published in the
prospectus in 1872 .
“In the early workings of the Rose of England, gold to
value of £28,000 was taken out in the upper tunnel, and the
following is an extract from the Herald written at the time:—
Gold Yield at Tambaroora.—Some of the shareholders
in the Rose of England claim picked up from the surface of their
ground fifty pounds weight of gold, and on the 14th they crushed
one ton of picked quartz, and the yield was 812 oz., being the
greatest I believe on record. On the following day they crushed
nine or ten tons, and 550 oz. was the yield, making a total of 1362
oz., being the proceeds of eight or nine days’ labour. There are
several of the claims on the same reef turning out very rich, and
probably I shall have something pleasing to communicate very
soon/’
From the Empire of 27th Sept. 1873, it appears that Jeff-
ree’s Rose of England (a claim adjoining the southern boundary
of the above) produced 532 oz. from 37f tons of stone.
In Sydney, it is difficult to obtain information respecting the
work now being done on the principal leases, on the main line
south of Carroll’s and Beard’s, and north of the Morning Star
lease, which is the northernmost portion of the Star of Peace
Company’s workings.


Some important ventures have been entirely stopped for
want of capital, and some are let on tribute in order to comply
with the labour conditions, and to hold the leases until a favour-
able opportunity presents itself for securing sufficient working
capital. A brief notice of some of the more important leases will
here be given ; and, no doubt, those interested who may happen
to peruse this paper, will supply full information for future
publication, respecting the present state of their workings and
prospects.
LEASES NORTH OF NORTHERN BOUNDARY OF STAR OF PEACE
company’s WORKINGS.
The principal leases in this direction are the Trust and Try
(or Patriarch), Tippett’s, Londonderry, (both on northern boundary
of Patriarch); All Nations, Great Western,'(both on northern
boundary of Tippett’s) ; Frenchman’s, (on northern boundary of
All Nations); Niagara (now Cornelian), on northern boundary of
the Frenchman’s; Great Amalgamated, (on northern boundary
of Great Western) ; Great Exhibition, Royal Saxon, and Scandi-
navian, in their respective order, going northwards. There is a
kind of gully or depression, running in a south-west direction
from about the north-east corner of the Morning Star boundary
to about the middle of the southern boundary of Matthewson’s,
which probably accounts for the cross-course in Matthewson’s
lease.
The Patriarch (formerly Trust and Try).
This lease, which bounds the Morning Star on the north, was
formed into a company, with a nominal capital of £24,000. The
following is extracted from the prospectus :
“ The Trust and Try Claim is situated on Hawkins Hill, a
short distance from the rich claimof Paxton and Co., Hixson and
Co., &c., on the one side, and on the north side, in a direct line,
come the claims, Tippett’s, All Nations, Frenchmans, and the
Niagara —the last of which, as we have seen by the papers, has
just struck heavy gold, it is said 12 ounces to the ton.
“ The whole of the rich veins known as Paxton s, Steven s
and Krohmann’s, must pass through this claim, and those on the
north side, known as the Frenchman’s, supposed to be that now
struck in the Niagara, must, of necessity, be contained in its
boundaries.
“ The proprietors of the claim state that it is now two years
and a-half since they commenced sinking. They have a shaft
down on one line 160 feet, and another 90 feet: they expect to
strike the Frenchman’s veins in about 40 feet further, and as
they are now short of funds, they propose to sell one-half of


their interest in the claim for the sum of Twelve Thousand
Pounds (£12,000) £2OOO of which will be applied for the working
of the claim.
“ The proprietors believe that £SOO will he sufficient to put
them on the gold.”
The working capital reserved proved (as in many other cases)
insufficient to sink the main shaft to the required depth. The
company’s interest in the lease was sold, and purchased by a few
persons who have continued the operations. The main shaft has
been sunk to a depth of over 360 feet. A crushing of 18 tons
from the Frenchman’s vein at that level, in February, 1878, gave
a yield of 49ozs. Another vein some feet to the westward of the
Frenchman's vein has also been tested.
In July, 1878, steam was got up for the first time to work an
engine erected for bailing water and winding from the mine.
The mine is still (1880) working.
The Frenchman's Co.
This is a small claim but celebrated for the excellent crush-
ings obtained therefrom, from the Frenchman’s vein. It is
bounded on the north by the Niagara (now Cornelian) and on a
small portion of the northern boundary by a portion of the
southern boundary of the Amalgamated.
According to newspaper report of 27th April, 1878, the main
shaft on the Frenchman’s lease was being deepened from the 336
feet level. This company was formed with a capital of £12,000,
with only 4000 shares reserved. The rest (8000) were sold at
£1 per share to purchase the mine. They have about 120 feet on
the line of reef.
The area has since been increased, and the mine is now
being worked under a new title or name.
Cornelian and Amalgamated Leases.
The Great Amalgamated and the Cornelian, with a joint area
of 5 acres 2 roods 3 perches, are to be amalgamated together, if
possible, to form a company to work the Frenchman’s vein, which
runs nearly on their common boundary at the 250 feet level. The
Frenchman's vein, underlying east into the Cornelian, can be ad-
vantageously worked from the 250 feet level, and deeper in that
lease. The Amalgamated bounds the Cornelian on the west. A
cross-cut 45 feet to the west, from the 190 feet level of the
Amalgamated shaft, cut a cluster of veins in January, 1873. In
March, 1878, tributors working at the 240 feet level, and 70 feet
north of the Cornelian shaft found a blow of quartz over 12 feet
wide on its course. It is expected that the quartz from this lease
would pay if it were specially treated and if there were


adequate means for crushing a large quantity on the lease near
the workings. The Cornelian was originally called the Niagara.
It adjoins the northern boundary of the Frenchman's.
The Hill End correspondent of the 8. M. Herald reports on
May 28th, 1878. “Cornelian Tribute just finished crushing 143
tons for a result of s|dwts per ton. With a body of stone some
1G feet in thickness and economical appliance with which to ex-
tract the gold, this could be made a dividend paying mine, instead
of which, with the appliances available, it is a loss to all concerned.”
An attempt has lately been made to jump the Cornelian;
and, until the dispute is settled, the proposed amalgamation must
remain in abeyance.
The Great Western
Is bounded on the north by the Amalgamated, referred to
above; on the east by the Frenchman's and All Nations; and on
the south by the western half of Tippett’s northern boundary.
Some very good stone has been raised from Tippett s workings.
The following is a newspaper report (1872) of the Great Western
Company's and adjoining workings :
“ Next south is the Great Western Company's 2-acre lease,
on which two shafts have been sunk, and a drive of 190 feet.
Good indicatioas now exist here. On the Frenchman’s line, east
of the Great Northern Extension Company, is the Niagara claim,
adjoining the Frenchman’s. It is a 4-acre lease, the shaft being
113 feet deep, and 6 feet x 3 feet, timbered and centred. They
cut a golden vein at GO feet from the surface, and were on the cap
of vein this morning. The Frenchman’s party-
are raising good stone within 30 feet of the latter Company s
boundaryr 'They cut the vein at 80 feet, having a breadth of 12
to 18 inches. Extent of claim, four men’s ground. Joining the
above claim, on the south, is the All Nations Company, they
struck gold at 80 feet, and have about 25 tons on grass, as have
also the Frenchman. In a few months good crushings will be
rpadv
In Sept., 1873, the Great Western shaft was down over 300
feet in hard rock, and the sinking was going on.
The Great Exhibition Co.
sank a shaft over 409 feet through hard rock, and drove some
distance to the west for the veins sought for. There was a very
good engine and winding-gear on the lease, but the works are
now at a stand-still for want of capital to prosecute the venture.
The Scandinavian and Royal Saxon.
The following reports are from a Sydney newspaper:
“ The Scandinavian (1872) intend shortly erecting a pump-
ing engine on their reef, which will be a decided improvement on


the present style of working, and will more than double the
value of the mine. Had they proper shafts and the workings
well opened out, it would be a valuable property—their present
shafts are of the old style, exceedingly small, so much so that it
is a wonder how operations are carried on through them.
“ The Royal Saxon shaft is down 155 feet, and is 6 feet 6
inches by 3 feet 3 inches in the clear, timbered and centred all the
way. On Friday, a vein was cut in the bottom of the shaft in
which gold was visible.”
“ 28th May, 1878 —Royal Saxon tribute has just touched the
vein at 40 feet in the new shaft, but not having broken any down
I cannot state its quality until next week.”
“27th April, 1878 —Scandinavian are working a small vein
near their western boundary with overhand stopes from 35 feet
towards the surface. Sank another shaft 50 feet and entered a
cross-cut east to a distance of 65 feet. Nine tons quartz in the
paddock, expected to yield better than the last crushing, which
gave 1 oz. to the ton. Intend to crush again next week.”
Southern Leases on the Main Line.
The following are some of the most important leases south
of Carroll and Beard’s, in their order going south. These leases,
in most cases, were sold to companies at a very high figure ; and,
therefore, represent large nominal capitals, with little (if any)
working capital:—
Rapp's g. m. co.
Rapp’s lease adjoins the northern boundary of Carroll and
Beard’s. Large returns were said to have been obtained from
the flat veins in the early days of quartz-mining on Hawkins Hill
and Rapp's is one of the leases in which the yields were very re-
munerative to the proprietors. This lease was sold to a Company
formed with a nominal capital of £125,000, and with little (if
any) working capital. There is a tunnel and shaft on the lease;
the shaft is a very troublesome one to work, being small and
carried down 400 to 500 feet on the underlie (to the eastward)
which is very great in this mine, and the expense of working
under such circumstances is proportionately extravagant.
The Hill End correspondent to the S. M. Herald reports,
27th April, 1878 :
“ Rapps’ tribute have renewed the old tunnel, and opened
communication with the main shaft, at a distance of 300 feet, and
and are now opening the Messrs. Rapps' old workings, where the
best gold was originally discovered.”
Guiding Star.
King and Co.’s and Hotston and Co.’s joint tunnel was
driven eastward on the boundary of the two claims. King and
Co.'s claim is next south to Rapp's. The following account of


Work done is taken from the Hill End Observer of 24th August,
1872 :
“ The tunnel is now in a distance of 492 feet 6 inches, and
they have to go a further distance of 68 feet 7 inches to reach
their eastern boundary. At a distance of 100 feet from entrance
of tunnel they cut a large vein ; at 240 feet, two small veins;
at 252 feet, Brand and Fletcher’s vein ; at 292 feet, a westerly
vein ; at 300 feet, a small vein; at 364 feet, a 22-inch vein, and
near that two small veins, gold-bearing. Then came 15 feet
nearly all veins; at 387 feet a three-inch vein, gold-bearing also ;
at 400 feet, a vein running from 1 to 6 inches, and also a small
vein ; at 410 feet, a four-inch gold-bearing vein ; at 415 feet, one
small gold-bearing vein; at 457 feet, one gold-bearing vein ; and
at 483 feet one mica vein. The work is steadily going on driving
to the east. The figures, with regard to the length of tunnel, and
distance from boundary, are the results of a survey made yester-
day by Mr. Robinson, the Government surveyor.”
The following is extracted from the prospectus of the Guid-
ing Star, published in the S. M. Herald of 24th October, 1872 :
“ Hill End, October 16, 1872.
“ From the surveys we have made of a great number of the
claims on this hill, with the underground workings carefully laid
down, we have been enabled, with some degree of accuracy, to
ascertain the direction of the run of gold found in Krohmann’s,
Beyers and Holterman’s, etc., and we feel convinced that the
veins cut in your tunnel at from 360 feet to 400 feet in, are on
the top of the gold, and by sinking on these veins you will come
on something good. We believe this to be one of the best pro-
perties on the Hill.
“ Cowdeiiy, Brothers, C.E.”
Lately an amalgamation was effected between these two
leases, and those known as Johnson’s, the Rose of England, and
the Great Western Undaunted, and the whole area is to be worked
under the title of the Victoria Company ; but, owing to litigation
caused by the action of some persons who endeavoured to jump
Johnson’s lease, mining operations have not been so vigorously
pursued as they would have been if the question of title were set
at rest.
Johnson’s Co.
Johnson’s lease is bounded on the north by Hotston and
King’s, and on the south by the Rose of England; with which
leases, and the Great Western Undaunted, it has since been
amalgamated.


The Company was formed to sink a shaft, from the surface,
through a tunnel, which had been driven eastward a considerable
distance. A straight shaft was sunk, which cut the tunnel at
208 feet from the surface, and the shaft was continued to a depth
of about 114 feet below the tunnel level, or 322 feet in all. Nov.
1873. Work was stopped because of the general failure to reserve
sufficient working capital.
Hose op England. —(Next Lease South to Johnson’s).
From Hill End Observer, January, 1873.
“Rose of England.—This tunnel is driven by contract, at the
rate of £4 12 Gd. per foot; present length, 377 feet. Ground a
little better.”
Correspondent S. M. Herald, October 9, 1873 :
“ The Rose of England main tunnel is in 510 feet, and the
manager is of opinion that the slate they have just cut is the
main body of slate carrying the rich veins, He has no doubt
that the vein he cut, 40 feet from the present face, is identical
with that last cut in Brown’s claim, and which, with such good
promise, gave so poor a return. Thirty feet back again a gold
bearing vein was cut in country too hard for it to prove payable, but
about in the line that the present run of gold ought to take.
Another 130 feet of driving will bring the tunnel to the east
boundary of the claim. The shaft on the rubble vein has been
left for an old tunnel, nearer the centre of the ground, which is
being put in order, and will cut at about 15 feet above the level
of the bottom of the shaft.”
GELLARD’S AND JEFEREE’S LEASES (Amalgamated).
From the Hill End Observer, January 15,1873 :
“ Gillard and Jeffree’s Amalgamated.—This company’s tunnel
is worked by contract, and making good progress, considering
the nature of the ground, which is hard; present length, 320
feet. The manager has started another tunnel to cut the patchy
vein at a distance of 70 feet. This veiu was very rich in the
Rose of England claim, but was never much worked in Gillard
and Jeffree’s. Some of the men are busy repairing the whim
previous to starting operations in the old workings.”
The above is the next lease south of the Rose of England.
Correspondent S. M. Herald, July 10,1877 :
“The Gillard and Jeffree. —Tributers are pushing ahead upon,
the Rose of England’s vein, as I understand, following a ‘clue,
rather than a quartz vein, in a manner that none but men who
know the ground could. They expect, I need hardly say, a good
return, and certainly deserve one,”


8. M. Herald, May 7, 1878
« Jeffree and Gellard have finished crushing, 7 J tons from
King’s vein, which gave 27 oz. 12 dwts. 12 gr. of gold.
Beard and Tallentyre* Lease.
Adjoins Jeffree and Gellard’s southern boundary, and the northern
boundary of the Armstrong Co.
Hill End correspondent, 8. M. Herald, Ist August, 1872:
“ Tallentire, Beard, and Co. have a fine tunnel in 240 feet, and
they are working now on the Rose of England vein—stoping up.
The stone will go from 12 to 15 oz, but is rather thin. All the
rich veins have been cut in this tunnel, and it has been pioposed
to sink on them, but I suppose they will not do so whilst the vein
now being worked continues as rich as at present.
Hill End Times, 27th January, 1873 : —Beard and lallen-
kire. This claim is well situated, and has all the rich veins of
Hawkins Hill running through the ground, some of which have
been worked and gave good returns. Last crushing (about two
months since) gave 21* ounces to the ton Having cut several
veins while driving, the manager thought it advisable to sink a
shaft in the tunnel, so as to cut those veins at a good depth one
of which they will get at a depth of 60 feet. The shaft is let by
contract, and has reached the depth of 20 feet.
The Armstrong Co.
The Armstrong lease bounds the “ Rose of England, No. I,’
on the south. The Company was formed to drive a tunnel
to cut the main line of veins to the eastward. Work was discon-
tinued for want of sufficient capital. T 1 .
Correspondent 8. M. Herald, 6th May, 1874. The Arm-
strong tunnel is 499 feet in all to the face. A vein was cut at
450 which, after being tested to a small extent, showing fair gold m
nlaces was left and the tunnel continued 49 feet without effect.
& tunnel has for a time been discontinued and the vem taken
in hand as-ain with every prospect of a payable result. An un
derhand .slope of about It feet high is being earned along north
and is now about 20 feet from the tunnel. The stone m the
bottom’of this towards the north is evident 71great J u nproved
and there is every reason to expect the next sto P e will be all that
can be desired.”
OLD ROSE OF ENGLAND, No. 1.
This lease is the tenth south of Carroll and Beard s
From a report of the Ilerald’s correspondent, dated 27th
September, 1873, it appears that the work then done, was as o -
lows: —


“ The Old Rose of England No. 1, is in five shares and worked
by a private party, For the past two years it has been steadily
worked by the shareholders, who sold one-fifth of their ground to
raise a working capital, and during that time first three and then
latterly four men have sunk 280 feet below their tunnel, and
have timbered and centred, and put in ladder way for 180 feet,
below which the rock is of the most solid description. The whole
of the timber is puddled at the back, and in the most rainy wea-
ther the shaft is as dry as a bone. At 270 feet in the shaft a
vein was cut over 18 inches thick, showing no gold, and at 280 a
vein 4 or 5 inches thick has been cut with fine gold well into the
solid stone. Nothing can be said of them at present; they are
rapidly converging, having decreased the distance between them
4 feet to 1 foot in about the width of the shaft. These veins are
believed to be identical with Paxton’s veins, otherwise known as
Krohmann’s big vein, and it is expected that a few feet more
sinking will show a third vein. The tunnel is in 160 feet from
the surface, 44 feet beyond the Rose of England vein, and the
shaft is started about 100 feet in. The shaft has been carried to the
surface, 44 feet above the tunnel, making its total depth over 320
feet, and as its brace is in round numbers 300 feet below
Beyers and Holtermann’s, some idea of the depth attained may
be formed. The cost of the shaft has been about £I2OO. The
first 60 feet was sunk in fourteen weeks by three men, and an
extra man has been employed in sinking last 100 feet. I may
add that the whole has been sunk by windlass.’*
Great Western Undaunted Shaft.
This venture was undertaken to cut the rich veins at a depth
of from 900 to 1000 feet. The shaft is a good one, and well
timbered, and was sunk to a depth of about 516 feet. About
£SOOO was expended on the work, when it was stopped (in 1873)
for want of capital to carry it down to the required depth. At
about 250 feet from the surface one of the numerous easterly
veins were cut in 1872,
The shaft is near, and about the middle of, Rapp’s eastern
boundary. The elevation is given in the table, and it will be
seen that the shaft is in an excellent position to work the main
belt of veins, as they underlie from the eastern boundary of Rapp’s
lease, and also to work the more easterly veins to a great
depth.
The Long Drive Co.
Was formed with an area of 21 acres on the eastern slope of
Hawkins Hill. The object was to drive a tunnel near the foot of
the eastern slope of Hawkins Hill, from the bed of Deep Creek,
which is about 300 feet lower than the bed of Oakey Creek on


the western side. The tunnel to the western boundary of the
company’s lease would have been about 1000 feet in length;
and the tunnel would then have been about 650 feet below the
ridge of the hill. This venture was abandoned for want of suffi-
cient capital, after the tunnel had been driven a short distance.
Another object was to drain the leases on the other side of the
Hill. But, even if the work had been completed, it would have
only partially served that purpose, for some of the workings on
the western slope, are now considerably deeper that the level of
the proposed tunnel. According to the statemeut in the prospectus.
“ The vertical height of the main ridge line (Hawkins Hill) above
the Deep Creek is about 750 feet, whilst the trough of Oakey
Creek to the westward is only about 400 feet below that
point.” _
The following table will show the nominal capitals fixed in the
prospectuses issued in the early part of 1872, at which valuations
most of the companies extending northwards from tae Rose of
England were floated with little, and, in most cases, no wonting
capital. The width of the leases on the course of the reefs, areas,
and elevation of the principal shafts and tunnels, have been taken
from the map compiled by Messrs. Cowdery, Brothers, and pub-
lished on 20th December, 1872, after the completion of their
survey. The excellent map prepared by Messrs. Cowdery, also
shows the outcrop and course of the veins, with respect to each
lease, at surface and at other levels: —
d
o >
. . w
a.B
r- <D
l' s i .
Reported Value of
Name of Lease or
Nominal
V. P Hi o
Besult-< Obtained
Company.
Capital.
w O
O S
.2hS h
before February,
1872.
■3 S
1 § a
>
W EH
£
ft. in.
No cr’sh’ng, on g’ld
Johnson’s
15,000
164 0
s 1164-44 )
T.M. 951-21 |
to \
Hotston & Co.
3w Guidii
star Am a]
gamated.
98 6
»> >*
h
65,000
King & Everett’s
104 6
T.M. 876-11
«•
Sapp’s
a '
125,000
!72 0
S. 1189-96)*
T. 1031-70 \
Carroll and Beard's
90,000
98 0
S. 1215-30
,, rich stone
about £30,000
Krohmann’s
80,000
128 0
S. 1219-80)
S. 1221-90 i
Beyers & Holtermann’s .
72,000
125 6
S. 1246-48 >
S. 1235 in (
about £20,000
* The Bose of England and Bapp’s gave heavy returns several years before 1872,
from the upper and flat veins, but complete records have not been published.


Name of Lease or
Company.
Nominal
Capital.
Width of Ground on
Course of Veins.
Elevation of Shaft or
Tunnel Mouth above
Summer Level of
Tuion.
Reported Value of
Results Obtained
before February,
1872.
£
ft. in.
Monte Christo
60,000
66 3
S.
1279 25
about £50,000
Rawsthorne’s
120,000
68 0
S.
1279 35
about £40,000
Brown’s
35,000
45 0
S.
1318 86
about £60,000
Cock, Attwood, & Dwyer’s
80,000
57 0
s.
1327-21
about £35,000
Creiahton and Beard’s
32 6 i
s.
1326-62
Feb., 1872, first
/
crushing, about
80,000
(
£5000
Hickson’s ...
29 6 )
s.
1322-55
no crushing yet,
/
rich stone
Rampant Lion
#
27,000
34 0
s.
1326.50
first crushing
about £2000
Paxton’s
.
160,000
124 6
s.
1342-78 )
about £30,000
s.
1343-20 |
Star of Peace
84,000
153 0
8.
1353-30
Fischer and Beard’s
60,000
136 0
8.
)
not known
T.M 1238 57
Hermann’s ..
50,000
90 0
s.
1396-83
about £6000
Oxon & Co. ..
25,000
59 0
S.
1343-65
Meyers’
o
20,000
ro 0
s.
1401 22
Mattliewson’s
£
26,000
127 0
s.
1319-17
Morning Star
12,000
67 0
s
1361 85 )
3 (
s.
J380T6 \
CD
A. R. P.
Speculation
g
0 0 35f
Crown Prince
Ph
2 1 H
s.
1394 06 )
s.
1376-38 }
Trust & Try (Patriarch) ..
48,000
1 3 32
s.
141479
s.
1384-13 |
Tippett’s
/ \
12,000
0 3 74
s.
1430 70
"p
s.
1407-72 \
All Nations ..
O
25,000
'*1*
CO
o
s.
1431-87
<D
s.
1452 58 }
Frenchman's
24,000
0 2 32 J
s.
1444 89
’
55 l
s.
1436-95 \
Londonderry
. i
0 3 12
Great Western
-P
10,000
I 3 28
s.
1430-24
Niagara (Cornelian)
■K
o
24,000
2 2 0
s.
1452-94
Gt. Northern Amal-
8.
1493 14 )
gamated . .
<
3 2 31
s.
1453-97 \
Great Exhibition .
l /
48,000
4 3 8£
8.
1537-30
Goldenvillef
12,000
0 0 16
8.
1406 67t
Great Western;];
i
Undaunted ..
.
J
40.000
3 3 21
8.
1292 -21{
t On eastern boundary of Rampant Lion and Hickson’s, Creighton and
Beard’s.
X On eastern boundary of Rose of England, Johnson’s, Ilotston’s, King’s, and
Rapp’s ; and on southern boundary of eastern ground secured by Star of Peace
Company.


Memorandum of gold consigned to the Australian Joint Stock Bank Sydney
(as certified by the manager), from the undermentioned mines, during the year
1872, and subsequently.
Oz. Gold.
‘Paxton’s G. MCo 15M03 to endLotl Nov., 1876.
‘Hermann’s G. M. Co. ... -■ ay . Anrii’ 1877*
Hickson, Creigton, and Beard s Co. ... 12,-05 to ApA
Beyersand Holtermamn’s Co!* ... {Jgfcgj?;
Ei?christoco.::: ::: ::: gj
Rawsthorne s Co • Aug . and Oct., 1832.
* Brown s Go. ••• ••• j Mar. 1873 & Jan 1877*
, n 9066 to Sep. 1877.
Fischer and Beard s Co. ... - J b dof April, 1879.
Star of Peace Co. ... •• ••• ______
137,064
xr i fell fid £531 123 consigned to one bank only. ‘Some of the above
IlShte been woATd on’tribnte of\ate .years, and the arrangement, for tram.
mitting goldlhave not Bankte. not include all the gold produced
The gold consigned to the A.J.b. „ f Peace Cornmny, for it appears
from the leases adjoining and south o M '- ia j£ em td that Paxton’s orushings
by previous quotations from the Sydney Mommy Herata, m l 6 t >
for 1870 yielded gold to the Aalue ot ... ••• . 40*000 0 0
For 1871, about .. ••• ••• “ 47,000 0 0
The value of gold produced by Paxton’s G.M^ Co from j.
1873 to 1878 (both years inclusive), was, per report .
, . , ... ...£128,032 710
Making a total value ot ... •"
Tak bout „ 0
ation of Co. _ 26,000 0 0
Hermann’s, about ••• ia7 q, ... 68 862 0 0
Star of Peace (to December 31, 187 J) ••• _ 47,000 0 0
Hickson, Creighton, and Beard s, ab ••• 8 000 0 0
Rampant Lion, total not known, at least ... 40j0 )0 0 0
Cock, Attwood, and Dwyer, over ... - 50.000 0 0
Brown’s, (before Co. was floated) about ... 40 , ( )00 0 0
Porter and Rawsthorne’s, over ... ••• . _ 35,000 0 0
Monte Christo, over ...
—C a ch H^“7;; 7 7 ore **& S 81-0.313 0 0
By Co., to December 31, 18<» )
Krohmann’s (before Feb. 1872) 0 0 ( 203 760 0 0
aboUt vo, ,« 78 183 760 0 0 ) 203 ’ 760 0
By Co., to December 31, 1878 ; 57,008 0 0
Carroll, Beard, and Co., to Dec. 31, 1878 ... I
, . ...£874,975 7 It
Making a total of ...
Or more, from these leases alone.
Stotetoo/ ounces wera conveyed from Tamba-
roora to the Royal Mint, Sydney, the value o£ which, at £3 17s.
6A,=£791,271 Is. 2d.


viz. ?- e ESCOrt retUmS from Tambaroora for the following years are as under-
Year- 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879
02 ■ OZ. OZ. O Z. oz m
. 34 > 306 17,468-82 18,310-30 11,583-89 9,923
£414°373 17s Id" LIT’ * ,° f W 5 oz ‘> value > at * 3 178. 6d. per ounce,
of £1 205 644 it’ %, kg a total value lor the ten years—lB7o to 1879 inclusive—
ti’/i. 5 ’ 644 13s - 3d ’ conveyed by Government escort to the Mint, the chief part
of which was obtained from a very small area of ground on Hawkin’s Hill. P
Of i 8 tak “ fro “ thc
MINING AND MINES AT HAWKINS HILL.
By T. S. Parrott, Mining Surveyor, &c.
Tnp T t W R INS *?“’ °m Hi !! End ’ is a B P ur from the minor range which divides the
luron River from Tambaroora Creek a tributarv of \ Tn. , 0
which flow into the Pyramil River, a Le T £°
(Erection of the spur is slightly west of north and east of south At first rio-SX!
s nothing to cause one to regard the spur as being in any way conspßuou
the numerous other spurs which run down to the Turon River aXearlv Vim ZZ
angle with the meridian as Hawkins Hill. On closer examination htwr /
ke noticed that the Hawk™ Hill .par is considerably^^SoTdeZ’ s ,ed Zn
%tsssr* wW “ “ s BurJa “ is very nu,ch b/ ° k - -* ss-rasa?
i, , Along the whole length of its surface numerous quartz reefs mav be traced
I
and, although nothing at this time was done whh the miaS ZJ
progress was made in mining the alluvial deposits, which wro’^d°ta 8 £ Srable
posits were not discovered until about 1870 or 1871 at which time l?.avy. avy de '
created such a furious excitement in Sydney and the ™W * th n lr dl f °very
time some of the quartz veins then Sngworkedat tMs
levels, that is WlflO to 200 feet,
parts neariy 50 per cent, of gold. This, Rdfto the SSte S JT®
that the veins were eauallv rinh af miv danfii ± 9 I,n Sydney
north or south of the Reality from which Sd distanc ®
consequently speculators from all the colonies were aom L it f g ? M won > and
were floated in Sydney to work ground which i • °° n ° n tbe spot ’ and companies
remote from the zope 7j veTpeVhS°hj ‘T’ W "
centagee of gold: apdiM* pot


both as regards the great losses of capital in Sydney and the injurious effects of
such senseless operations on legitimate mining interests, which at this time were
beginning to attract the attention of capitalists. And the inexperience of New
South Wales miners in quartz-reefing rendered them peculiarly liable to be misled
by the extraordinary reports which reached Sydney daily from the scene of these
wonderful discoveries. Many small leases in the vicinity of Hawkins Hill were
put into the Sydney market, and floated for £60,000, £lOO,OOO, and in some cases
£160,000, leaving no reserve fund, nor fund for working the mine, and it is not
therefore a matter of surprise that under these circumstances the quartz-mining
industries in New South Wales rapidly decayed, and nearly collapsed altogether.
I am disposed in this case to attach very much blame to the people of Sydney who
advanced their capital for speculative operations in the vicinity of this gold-field,
which the most scantily informed persons must undoubtedly have pronounced ut-
terly worthless if they had not been led away by continuous news of the heavy
deposits of gold. But in opposition to the opinion which is now almost universal
in Sydney, I do not hesitate to affirm that working the quartz reefs for gold is as
legitimate an industry, and one which may be as profitably developed, as perhaps
any other mining industry, not even excluding coal; but in order to do this it will
be necessary to profit by the experience gained in other parts of the world where
quartz-mining has been conducted on a much larger tip ale, particularly in the
Western States of America, and to a lesser extent in Victoria and other parts of the
Australian colonies. If this is done in the district which includes Hill End an 1
Tambaroora, and the best methods adopted for raising the quartz and afterwards
using means for treating it by such appliances as will prevent the enormous loss of
gold which has hitherto been so conspicuous in our quartz-crushing machinery, I
feel sure a channel will be opened not only for the reception of capital, but for
the permanent employment of a numerous and industrious class of miners.
“ I may be told that it costs more than £4 to produce an ounce of gold, com-
paring the outlay with the yield, and that therefore gold-raining is an industry
that cannot be profitably followed —at all events in this colony I am only sur-
prised that hitherto it has not cost £6 an ounce ; and if it can be shown that in
past years the gold has cost no moro than £4 an ounce to produce, I think there
may be obtained abundant evidence to show that, under different and less costly
methods of mining and treating the ores, a large margin will be left for profit on
the capital expended. I have here before me a map showing mineral leases in the
district around Hill End and Tambaroora. From this it is shown that hundreds
—and perhaps thousands—of leases have been taken up, I presume about the time
of the mania in 1870 or 1871, and on many of these leases enormous sums of money
were sunk without Jthe slightest {chance of getting any return ; for the land was
taken up without any consideration as to its fitness for mining operations, and pro-
bably with nothing about it to indicate the presence, of gold-bearing reefs. It is
therefore not to be wondered at that, in the national accounts of income and
expenditure for producing gold, large sums of money were placed on the debit side
which should not have appeared at all. The Journal, of Science says : ‘ The uncer-
tainty which attends the conditions of any of our mineral lodes or veins is one of
the causes which have led to the unfortunate spirit of gambling which marks, too
many mining speculations. It may never be possible to pronounce with certainty
whether a mineral lode shall prove rich in the metalliferous ores in depth. But it
is certainly within the limits of human knowledge to.be able to pronounce on . the
high probabilities of any subterranean exploration being remunerative or otherwise.
There is much truth in this ; and as miners are known to be an intelligent class of
men, it would be well if some system were inaugurated by means of which the
valuable information obtained by practical miners in their underground operations—
where they have unexampled opportunities of noting many facts in connection with
the deposit of metallic ores and metals—could be placed in the hands of scientific
men, whose researches might enable them to decide as to the cause and effect of many
strange things in connection with the deposit of metals, which might eventually
lead to the establishment of regular and uniform laws.
“ With regard to the origin of the formation of mineral veins there is much
doubt and uncertainty, one class of theorists believing only in the theory of lateral
secretion, infiltration; and another class believing only in the theory of sublima


tion’ ’ or “ injection. ’ ’ Agricola was the first to propound a theory of veins in his work
“De ortu et eausis subterraneonum,” dated 1546. In this theory the agents were
water, which dissolved the enclosing rock, heat, and cold. In 1700 Balthasan
Koesler explained the veins as being mineral matter filling fissures. In 1703 Bicher
ascribed the formation of ores and metals in the lodes to underground gases, which
penetrated upwards from the centre of the earth into the lodes, or rather into the
suitable vein stores and earths existing in them. Stahl, in 1700, considered the
lodes to have been formed in the enclosing rock at the time the world was created ;
and Henkel, in 1725, ascribed the presence of ores in lodes to vapours. Hoffman,
in 1738, believed veins to be the matter filling fissures; and Quinnermann, in
1746, believed the veins and ores to have been formed by a transformation of the
rocks.
“Lehmann’s theory is very distinct and specific, but meets with little favour
at the present day. He describes the lodes as branches of a great deposit, which is
probably situated near the centre of the earth, and compares the lodes to the bran-
ches of a tree. He says the origin of the metals is in the centre of the earth, and
that they find their way into the vein fissures in a humid and gaseous condition.
Delius, in 1770, considered the vein fissures to be a consequence of the contraction
caused by the drying up of the earth ; the rain water penetrating the rocks dis-
solved the elements of the rocks and metals, and conveyed them into the fissnres,
where by subsequent evaporation they crystallized out. Gerhard believed the lodes
to be the matter filling fissures. He says the vein stone and ores have been intro-
duced by water which had previously dissolved them out of the enclosing rock.
The theory which attributes the tormation of lodes to a metamorphosis, in
consequence of change of structures and decomposition caused by water and heat,
belongs to Von Trebra, whilst Lasius considered the fissures were caused by revolu-
tions of nature, the fissures being filled with water which was impregnated with
carbonic acid and other solvents, thus rendering it suitable to dissolve the particles
of earth, metal, and other substances in the rocks which it has penetrated from the
the fissures. Werner believes the fissures may have been caused by compression in
consequence of the specific gravity by the drawing off or separation of the rocks
towards an exposed side—as the side of a valley—in consequence of the contraction
caused by drying, by earthquakes, or other causes. He says the fissures, as well
as the matter filling them, have been formed at very different periods, and that
‘ ‘ the vein stuff arose from a net precipitate which filled them from above, that is
from a wet and mostly chemical solution which covered the region where the fis-
sures existed, and at the same time filled the open fissures.” The original theory
of lateral secretion has, up to the present time, been subjected to many modifica-
tions. This theory may be defined as follows Lodes are formed by mineral
matter coming out of the bounding rock and filling the fissures. Gerhard in 1781
assumed that the water percolating through the rocks has, aided by carbonic acid
and other solvents, dissolved out certain ingredients, and that afterwards, whatever
may have been the reactions causing it, a precipitation from these solutions took
place in the fissures. Cotta says, where it can be assumed that the elements of the
mineral matter filling the veins exist, or have existed in the enclosing rock, no objec-
tion can properly be made against the theory of “lateral secretion especially in
this the case when the term lateral is not applied literally, but is understood in the
sense that the solutions, after their impregnation, by dissolving out particles of the
enclosing rock, still had a free movement in the fissures, so that every particle was
not necessarily deposited exactly at the point where it was dissolved out of the en-
closing rock. “ Infiltration,” which is closely allied to the theory of lateral secre-
tion, is described by Beamont as follows The lodes are essentially products of
volcanic emanations, in which he includes igneous fluid injections, gaseous subli-
mations, and aqueous infiltrations by means of hot mineral springs. Yon Dechen
excludes the igneous fluid injection, and confines himself to the belief in infiltrations
from below.
A#,:
11. 1 *'•'
_ “With reference to the theory of sublimation, Cotta says; “ ‘The pos-
sibility of the formation by sublimation of many of the ores and minerals
occuring in lodes, especially by the agency of chlorine, fluorine, and
boron, has been proved beyond doubt—first of all in the specular iron, which


frequently occurs as a product r of sublimation in the volcanic fiissures.’ Plattner
proved the formation of magnetite by sublimation in the Frieburg reverberatory
furnaces. Minerals are very frequently formed in metallurgical operations. Thus
orthoclase, galena, and most probably, copper pyrites and blende. Referring to
this subject, Cotta speaks of the formation of a lode in the floor of a reverberatory
furnace at Frieburg, where the cracks in the masonry were partly filled with a
combed structure, consisting of galena, a galena-like combination, and copper py-
rites, which Plattner considered to be the product of a long, continuous sublima-
tion. It is, nevertheless contended that melting may, to a very great extent, have
influenced these results. In addition to these, some writers attnbute the formation
of all lodes to igneous fluid injections, but I think it is becoming now to be gene-
rally admitted that different kinds of lodes have been formed m different ways,
and not exclusively by any one of the methods I have just indicated.
Returning to the gold-bearing quartz veins in the vicinity of Hill End, it may
be useful to inquire whether there is anything in their nature by means of which we
can trace their existence to any one of the causes indicated m the theories above
referred to. Upon a subject surrounded with so much doubt and mystery as the
formation of mineral veins, we can hardly expect to throw much additional light,
but if the collecting of the information gained by practical miners, and studying
the results of a detailed and accurate survey of the underground workings m the
mines of this most important locality, will enable us, in any way, to account for the
presence of heavy depooits of gold at certain points, and so act as a guide for future
explorations, such labours will not be without their uses.
It is said by some geologists that the older the rocks which containthe mineral
veins, the more plentifully are they likely to be found charged with mineral matter,
assuming that the aggregation of metals in the veins is a work occupying vast
periods of time. Whether this view is correct or not, lam quite unable to say
but with regard to the geological formation of the country around Hill End and
Tambaroora, and its bearing on the subject of mineral deposits, it is no doubt
possible to collect such information as will be practically useful. In addition to the
survey which I have just completed, Mr. Wilkinson, the Government geologist, is
now about to carry out a more extended survey over a larger area in this district,
the result of which cannot fail to throw much light on the peculiarities which are
known to exist in the formation of the mineral veins at Hawkins Hill. It was the
opinion of the late Rev. W. B. Clarke, that the rocks m this locality occupied a
position between the Upper Silurian and the lower Devonian formations, and the
imperfect character of the cleavage planes would favour his view. In the adjoining
colonv of Victoria, the gold-bearing veins are more generally associated with the
lowe/sflurian rocks • but it is possible that the detailed and searching survey now
be7n- conducted by our Government geologist, may enable that gentleman to speak
more' positively as to the age of the Turon rocks, and assign to them a much lower
position thl7 that suggested by the late Rev. Mr. Clarke. In any case, it has
already been proved that these quartz veins are richly impregnated with gold, and
from the exraordinary richness of the alluvial deposits m these localities, it must be
irom tne e*™ora nnn-ntirirs of srold have been liberated by the decomposition of
reaper surface of the rocks ; and although it has been said that rich metalliferous
deposits are more frequently found at or near the junctions of igneous rocks with
sedimentary or metamorphic ones, the assumption is by no means reliable for they
are “s frequently Sd Smote irom the junction of these rocks. It may, however,
the Rathans Mountain,, near Gaetein
makes the following remarks ‘ The fissures are the consequence of mechanical
Srces caused by movements in the mountains, which can be recognised by the
faults’and friction surfaces. In what manner did the n^iX n the n °last morigi-
minerals penetrate ? It is highly improbable that these es P ec ially the last, ongi
nated from the wall rock, while we have found this to be very
of the Hungarian and Transylvanian gold veins in S r^nstones • It is I the : more
improbable as, according to Reissachen, whose statements are founded on verg
careful experiments in the concentration works,
rock decreases and soon ceases, with the increasing distance from the clefts, especi


rpi y «!j!,i Chief fiss ” e -. The c oUnt r y rock also contains no pyrites which might be
evidenfdv g ° d \- ThlB and the other mefcals have, therefore
evidently penetrated from some direction, in a dissolved condition, into the
fissures, and have penetrated from these into a portion of the wall rock : of what
sort the solutions, especially that of the gold, were is still a problem.’ ”
J'fT the manner in which the gold occurs, chiefly in the upper portion of the
Jmfld ’Jd^ ght be &u PP° sed that the gold penetrated from above. In this case, it
ly R h f V fi? ome f f on |, the rocks which formerly overlaid those now at the
surface. .But there actually occur, as we have seen, auriferous beds or belts of
impregnations in the clay slates and chloritic schists of the Tyrol, which overlie
, k rf!ir? nd r ca BC i hlStS of tk \ central rid s e - whose destroyed prolongation may
It 7 haV v c l oVere 1 d the central chain at Saltzburg. So Cotta says it
til* 1 ? 7 P r °hable that the gold found in the quartz veins has its origin in the
bounding rocks; and I believe this will be found to be the case at Hill End, for
during the extensive underground survey which I have just completed, I noticed,
at levels varying from one to 500 feet, that the bounding rocks contained a large
proportion of iron pyrites, which if subjected to a proper test, will, I am
confident, be found to contain gold. At all events, it has been Jproved by Mr.
Thompson, M.E., that fine gold exists in similar rocks in Victoria, which
no doubt, becomes liberated on the decomposition of the pyrites and aggregates in
month 61 T B ' f IU a' 6 tu- k ?. ow * a 8 thc , Long Drive, and about 30,) feet from its
thew h ,’ll« nfih ed i a Wh ft hquidpercokting through the solid rook and coating
the walls of the drive with a substance very much like quartz, and so great is its
power ot cementation that the clappings of rock on the floor of the drive, in some
places, were so firmly bound together as to form one solid mass. This, I presume
is silica in solution and may serve as a practical illustration of the formation of quartz
ems m open fissures It this fact can be established in respect to the rooks
cnld n< h ng H • he r emS atda f kms Hdl > h ma y assist us in any future explorations for
gold, by directing particular attention to those parts of j the rock which favour the
lat r ° f T Ubter f aneous currents, such as “faults,” “cross-courses,” &c.
ilitfierto, so tar as I can learn, no law has been recognised concerning the aggre-
™° f m the se veins by wluch to regulate the operations of the miner, but
it is nevertheless a fact--which appears to have escaped observation—that the rich
deposits have invariably been found in the vicinity of some fault, or cross-course
1 here is a cross-course passmg through the ground now leased by the .star of
i. ® ac , e C ” m P any ’ ar i d which may be traced from the surface to a depth of four or
400 feet ’?? dir eetion of this cross-course is nearly east and west, and at
400 feet it is several feet wide, and contains masses of quartz, clay, and clay slate
fp d haS i W ° well-defined walls on the north and south similar to the walls enclosing
g 1 “ clmed to believe, judging from past experience in
these mines, that heavy deposits of gold may be found in the vicinity of this course
5 fpf Ver ’ WG / re d f®ctmg attention to these somewhat complex problems,
ot the aggregation of gold in the veins, the practical miner would do well to con-
centrate all his energy and skill into the question of separating the metal from the
18 C T n T y porteda t Hill End that nothing has Contributed so much
y -P ai ? the , ? olla P se of this as yet unexplored quartz region as the crude
methods which have hitherto been adopted for saving the gold ; it is asserted only
the coarse gold is saved, whilst the fine gold, of which the quartz in this locality
contains a large per centagc, is allowed to escape from the boxes. From what I
have seen of <he stone in this locality and the almost entire absence of pyrites in
tte ajahmg rtofl 1 am somewhat surprised to hear of the inefficiency of the
methods empioye*! for treating the gold, and must say that the extraction of the
gold m this locality should be a very simple matter. In 1875, Professor Liversidge
made some analysis for the Mining Department on samples of quartz tailings and
other waste gold-bearing products. The result of this inquiry went to show that
enormous quantities of gold and silver were annually cast away and irrevocably
lost, whilst if ordinary precaution w ro taken and the methods adopted which
prevail m other countries, and which are based on scientific principles, nearly the
wnolo of this metal would be saved.
“ This evidence howwer, should, no doubt, be receiv. d with some caution, as it is
possible the samples do not fairly represent the bulk of the tailings. In any case
it would be wise if repeated tests of the tailings at Hill End were systematically


applied, in order that a constant record of the reducing operations might be kept.
During my recent visit to Hill End, Mr. Alfred Fairfax of the Star of Peace Com-
pany, selected a piece of stone from a paddock of 2 » or 30 tons, which had been
obtained from a ebpth of 260 feet. I saw the piece of stone myself, and although
it showed gold freely, I had no idea that it contained such a per centage as the
following analysis of Mr. Dixon will show: —
‘ “ School of Arts Laboratory, 28th ‘ eptember, 1878.
“ ‘ A. Fairfax, Esq.
“ * Dear Mr,- The sample of quartz left with me yielded free gold, 12,021 oz.
19 dwts., 19 grs. ; combined, 375 oz. 11 dwts. 19 grs., per ton.
“ ‘ The above weighed 64 oz. (Troy), and produced 2 oz. >1 dwts. 18'95 grs.,
which I return herewith. I have examined the pyrites and find them to be simple
arsenical pyrites, containing much gold and very friable.
“ ‘ ( igned) W. A. Dixon, F.C.S., F.I.C.’ ”
«< The abandonment of some of the claims and the want of interest exhibited
by proprietors in others have enabled the Star of Peace Company to get possession
of nearly the whole of the east ground on Hawkins Hill, into which all the known
gold-bearing veins dip at a greater depth than hitherto worked. The acquisition of
this ground will enable the Star of Peace to carry on their mining operations in a
more systematic and vigorous manner, which will tend very much to develope this
dormant field ; and I believe, in a very short time, this company will be able to
demonstrate the fact that when the mines are properly worked, they will yield
liberal returns. On this property there is one shaft already down 76J feet; and
on extending my survey to the bottom levels of this shaft, I found that the veins
worked on the upper levels were, at this depth, converging; and, further, that new
veins were developing —that is, between two veins which are known to be identical
with two at the upper levels, there are now found at this depth other veins; and if
the whole of this group of veins continue to converge at increasing depths, there
may yet be found important and extensive quartz reefs, containing enormous masses
of stone, and, possibly, yielding heavy per centages of gold; in any case, some rich
stone has already been found at these lower levels, although there are some who
say that gold will not be found at great depths at Hawkins Hill. New machinery,
with all the latest known appliances for saving gold, is now- being erected on the
property of the Star of Peace Company ; and it is proposed farther to reduce the
working expenses by the use of rock-drills, cages, and other time-saving arrange-
ments, °so we may hope soon to hear of this remarkable hill being thoroughly
In other parts of the hill, such as at Carroll’s and Beard’s, Krohmann’s,
Beyer’s and Holtermann’s and others, the operations are not of an energetic charac-
ter and the effort to find gold at the deeper levels is almost entirely abandoned. I
am nevertheless convinced that if the veins are worked to the lower levels, they will
prove to be more permanently remunerative than the shallow workings from which
such enormous yields of gold have been already taken. '.
“ there is no doubt that the knowledge possessed by scientific men of
the chemistry and geology of gold-mining is of immense value; but, at the same
time I am of opinion that the observations of the practical miner, and the infor-
mation he is able to obtain ftom observed facts, extending over a large period of
time if properly noted and preserved, would enable us to carry on mining opera-
tions’ with much less danger to capital and generally with much better chance of
success. ij PARROTT, Mining Surveyor. &c.
Pitt-street, Sydney, October 16, 1878.”
STAR OF PEACE WORKINGS AND PROSPECTS.—(Continued.)
Some corrections are required in the account under the
above heading; but as regards the workings, depth of shaft, etc.,
full and correct information can be obtained by a perusal of the
mining manager’s report, appended hereto.


With respect, however, to the rate of tribute payable, and
the guarantee of the Directors, the following corrections require
notice here, viz.:—
The tribute payable, under the present arrangement, to the
proprietors of Hermann’s and Meyer’s leases, is 25 per cent, to
the former, and 20 per cent, to the latter; but it is expected that
the rate of tribute will be lessened. The tribute to the Crown
Prince United Company being only 10 per cent.
The guarantee of the Directors, with respect to the maximum
amount to be deducted, if required, to pay off liabilities, should be
that the deduction from the amount subscribed shall not in any
case exceed £lO,OOO ; and that, as the productiveness of the mine
may enable the Directors to lessen the liabilities of the company,
no more than is required to pay the debts will be deducted. (See
circular.)
The following explanations are necessary :
Besides the 15-head of stampers erected, there are 15-head
not yet erected ; and, as the 30-horse power engine and boilers
would easily drive the 30-head of stampers, the crushing power
of the battery could be increased to about 800 tous per week.
All the working shafts are connected by tramway with the
battery, and also with two 10-horse power winding engines. In
addition to the two dams on the Crown Prince United area, there
is also a very large dam erected, some distance northward, which
supplies a large quantity of water for crushing purposes.
The Goldenville shaft, to which reference has previously been
made, is considered to be in an excellent position for future
operations, as it would cut the underlie of the rich veins from the
Rampant Lion, Hickson’s, Creighton and Beard’s, etc., at a
moderate depth, if it was sunk deeper; and would make a very
good main shaft for working the eastern ground.
The following abstract of the mining manager’s report to
25th May, was published in the Herald of 28th May, showing the
nature of the mining operations which are being pursued at pre-
sent :
“ Star of Peace Gold Mining Company.—Mining Manager’s
Report, Hill End, 25th May :— f Star of Peace mine, 240-feet
level: Underhand stoping here on west vein; shows gold well
through the vein; looks like 3oz. stone. Crown Prince United
Tribute, Matthewson’s shaft, 220-feet level: backstoping on
Matthewson’s vein, which shows payable gold. 330-feet level,
Paxton’s vein: Driving, and backstoping south; vein 3 inches
thick. We have some very good stone this week; the gold is
well through the stone. Herman’s shaft: Sinking, and under-
hand stoping on Steven’s vein, in Oxon’s ground; the vein is


from 6to 12 inches thick, showing colors of gold. Forty men
employed on the mine and tributes.’ Since receipt of the fore-
going report, the following telegram, dated the 27th May, has
also been received by the mining manager : — f Had rich stone last
night, Steven’s vein in Crown Prince. Will bank some.
The following is an abstract of a later report from the mine :
“ .June 8, 1880. —Mining Manager’s report: Western vein, 240
feet level: crushed 18 tons from here for 19 oz. 12 dwt., 8 gr.
retorted gold. The vein continues to look the same. The stope
is 70 feet long, and shows gold along the bottom for the whole
length andwe are still working north on it. Crown Prmce Tribute
(Stevens’ vein),— 360 feet level; crushed 27 tons from here last
week for 13 oz., 15 dwts., 5 gr. retorted gold. Since then, we
have 25 tons at grass, showing gold in the stone and slate casing.
160 feet level: Raising stone from the south end of the blow
here: shews a little gold in the stone. Crown Prince United
Tribute (Matthewson’s and Oxon’s.) —Crushed 75 tons from here
last week for 47 oz. 11 dwt. retorted gold. The two levels we
are working on here show about the same; but I will shift some
of the men from here into the Star of Peace mine, to back stope
on Paxton’s vein.”
Mining Manager reports, 9th June, 1880 : —“ Took men down
to the 150 feet level to back-stope on Paxtons vein. * *
Went down the pass on Fischer and Beard’s boundary, found a
block of ground about 50 feet down, shows a fine large: vein with
stopes ready for underhand stoping—saw some coarse gold m the
vein and expect it will be better than the backs—will therefore
commence work here. * * * Mullock room for a long time.
Will only have the quartz to haul. * * * The break m this
vein—above and below it—generally carries good gold.
As it may be desirable to supplement, at some future time, the
information herein contained, the writer would be obliged if any
reader interested in the development of the gold-bearing veins on
Hawkins Hill (extending from about the Scandinavian on the
north to about Armstrong’s tunnel on the south), would furnish
reliable records relating to the workings in any of the leases
which have been imperfectly described ; together with informa-
tion as to depth of shafts (perpendicular, and on underlie) ;
length of tuunels; veins cut, with names of veins (if known)
and characteristics, and at what depth or distance; nature of
country passed through; also any records of crushmgs not noticed
herein • together with any facts that may be useful for publica-
tion; to the Editor of The Australian , No. 1, Little George-street,
Sydney.


Hill End, 21st April, 1880,
STAR OF PEACE CO.
MINING MANAGER’S REPORT.
“ The Chairman,
Star of Peace G. M. Co.
Dear Sir—
13th hXnt*- y ° U a rCP ° rt 0n different 11111168 as in yours of the
The Star of Peace (proper) lease has a frontage of 153 f eton the lino nf
and extends east and west for a considerable distance. The lease is bounded tn ’
north by Fischer and Beard’s, and on the south by PaxW« 18 60unded ° n tHe
been worked from two shafts by an engine and windint ™ Th h*.
4ft 3 in. x 8 ft. 6 in., divided into ladder way and working Th T h”** - 8
sunk vertical for 200 feet-cutting Paxton’s and easTernvfinT Zhi I t u lB
worked for a depth of 150 feet on the underlay. FroJn the bottom of C the '2oo
the shaft is continued on the underlay of the Star of Peace vein for 2 f °
mg total depth 780 feet. Prom the bottom stjpe at level
south from the shaft-there is a winze sunk for *6 W !l t vu 4 , fee
821 feet. There i» a eroee-eut ‘" ij the 765 feet leve ' Z 2F& '***T ‘"S
yemp, some of them ehowmg gold, and a. there are only ihroe ZiITLZTtf if
m higher levels, this proves that we have a new counfrv in L u* Known to be
may have rich new v-ins coming in at any time from the west whera
have found in Krohmann’s 600 feet vertical shaft, and which they are no w working
There is a drive north at the 750 feet level, for 140 feet from the shift Ti ' a • n '
was intended to be put in till the blows of’quarL toE
in Herman s and Fischer and Beard’s, were reaehed and prospected at this level—
fLds Th™ other ,P roB Pecting purposes-but the work was suspended for want of
funds There are three short cross-cuts to the west from this drive cuttimrTeveral
gold-beanng veins. There is also a cross-cut in west at 821 feet level cutting the
softbl frt e 8 a most promising country for gold wRh
soft Hue slate in abundance, which is one of the best indications on Hawkins Hill
There is an easterly cross-cut at 700 feet level cutting Paxton’s and fasteriv vS,s
of Peu.ce vein was stoped out from flip 1 fn kaa i j
during this time they paid dividends. The best srold froin W t levels, and
north side of the shaft, down to the6oo feet wL thpT T? “
the vein and the ground left standing till the 700 feet when if w«t «f h T
the bottom on the south *idt of the shaft for about 140 feet Luth b?fl t 0
some 800 feet south at this level as we are outside the boundarv Af ft
c aims on the west of our eastern ground. Some of the shooN of ™ h
****?" ““Star of peryl^r^diriirXi?
uc no trouDle it we had a smaH pumping arrangement, but with our nri™ifiV«
«cS;rL7 a w a f? 6 . 0 ™ 1 ' ™ feet of an beEffte
7? l 6et l T as a very laborious, expensive, and unsatisfactory way •as by the
time the bucket reached the top it would be often only half full. 7 Our main shaft
sutn fh mg C ! ntred ’ ! h6bucket whe » would nearly always come Tn contact
fid] U b^w ater ’ - Je /^ the r ° P 8 e ’ and ° ften dama ge the shaft, and 7 in cases when the
HK vT ed the en^ pty one . u P the shaft some distance and then dropped it
lay shaft in roncsTnd°ub am?lg f * mUch ' Tho wear and tear on this under-
lay snart, in ropes and other material, was verv e-renf _ .


only 16 feet from it. It is most remarkable, when we find that cross-cutting has
been so neglected in the working of this claim, and the Star of Peace vein so persis-
tently stnck to, that when it became poor the Company had no capital to expend on
these most important works, and till the Company’s finances are in a more flourish-
ing condition, these veins must remain hidden. But, if we had sufficient capital to
carry on the work as it ought to be, the dead work that has been done in this mine
in the way of sinking and otherwise, could all be made available in developing the
mine, and, no doubt, with profitable success.
The Star of Peace Company, besides their own lease, also own all the eastern
ground into which the world-famed reefs of Hawkins Hill dip, from such leases as
Carroll and Beard’s, Krohmann’s, Beyer’s and Holtermann’s, Paxton’s, and the
others, cutting them off when they attained a depth on the underlay of from 4 to
700 feet. This Company has also secured a large extent of ground on tribute,
comprising several well-situated leases lying to the east and the north of us, on
favonrable terms ; and there cannot be a doubt but that this Company own oxm of
the most valuable mining properties in the colony, now nearly idle for want of the
means to sink a good shaft, with hauling power and small pump to keep the water
The Star of Peace Lease is bounded on the south by Paxton’s Lease, which
has a frontage of 124 feet 6 inches on the line of veins. This was worked from
two shafts. The North Shaft ts 8 feet by 3 feet, divided into a double working
shaft and ladder way. This shaft is sunk 170 feet vertical and 400 feet on the
underlay of the Star of Peace vein. This vein was stoped down to tho 260 feet level
for the full length of the claim, and from this to the 520 feet level it was only
stoped out to 40 feet south of the north shaft, and up to the Star of Peace houn-
darv on the north. Paxton’s vein was cut in the vertical shaft at the 130 feet ie\ei
and stoped for 260 feet for the full length of the claim, up till 70 feet from the sur-
face. This vein was sunk on to the 390 feet level. The westerly veins were stoped
to the 260 feet level. The easterly veins have been stoped out to the -300 teet level,
and there are tributers now working chiefly on these veins, and have been making
good wages for some time. The South Shaft is sunk vertical for 138 feet, an con-
tinued on the underlay of Paxton’s vein, which has been worked out to the 320 teet
level. The best gold‘in all the veins was got from 130 to 260 feet levels. Somo of
this was very rich indeed, but as there are no statistics kept hero, 1 cannot say
what amount this claim turned out. ,
To the north of the Star of Peace is the lease of Fischer and Beard s company.
This lease extends for 136 feet on the line of reefs, but has very littleeastern
around. Our tributes of Herman’s and Meyer’s cutting them oft, even m their
most westerly veins, at about the 400 feet level. This lease has been profitably
worked up till now, but the ground is now nearly all cut out. They had very good
gold in the Star of Peace vein, in which they had a blow or large mass of quartz
that paid very well. They had also good gold in Paxton s, and in the westerly
veins, as well as in some cross leaders of considerable size.. Work is still being
carried on here by Fischer and Beard’s company. The crushmgs from Fischer and
Beard’s from August 1874 to 16 April (this month), have been 3327 tons of quartz,
which yielded 9023 oz. 8 dwts. gold. This would give a very high average return,
and shews how rich the quartz have been in this claim, some of the crushmgs m
’74 and ’75 going from sto 10 oz. per ton. Before ’74 I have nothing certain, but
understand that the quartz did average from 2 to 3 oz(?) per ton.
To the east of the Star of Peace lease is our lease, called the
Bose of Australia.—This lease has a frontage of 100 feet on our eastern bound-
nrv There was a shaft sunk on it for 100 feet. There are several gold-bearing
vems nassino- through it, one of which, Rowley’s, was very rich, but was not
worked much over 100 feet deep. The bottom of our deep shaft is some distance
into The Goldenville is a small piece of ground to the east of the rich claims known
ITl f T ion and Hickson’s, Creighton and Beards, and cuts off their gold
at tbouUffiO feet level. There has been nothing done to this ground since it came
into this company s large leaBe) including all the gronnd to the east
The Great L * ag p axton > S) Cock and Attwood’s, Brown s, Monte
of the rich claims Holtermann ’ Sj and cuts off the belt of rich veins as they
Christo, ana


dip east at from 500 to 700 feet on the underlay. From the position of this lease it
will be doubtless one of the best portions of this company’s property, and when we
are in a position to sink a permanent, vertical working shaft, this is the place for
it. There is a vertical shaft sunk on this lease for over 400 feet, cutting several
gold-hearing veins, and I believe there was some crushing stone raised from some
of them, hut I cannot find out anything certain. We have done nothing here since
it came into our hands.
The Golden Crown is a lease joining the Great Extended on the south, and is
the most southern lease belonging to the Star of Peace. The Golden Crown has a
frontage on the line of veins for nearly the whole length of Carroll and Beard’s and
Krohmann’s rich claims, and is their boundary on the east, cutting them off on the
rich belt of veins at about 700 or 800 feet on the underlay, so that its position for
deep sinking cannot be beat on Hawkins Hill.
The tributes held by the Star of Peace Company are Herman’s, Meyer’s,
Oxon’s, Matthewson’s, Morning Star, Crown Prince, and Speculation. The last
five tributes we call the Crown Prince United.
Herman’s and Meyers’ leases have a frontage of 136 feet, being the eastern
ground opposite Fischer and Beard’s, who occupy the western portion. These
leases have the outcrop of Stevens’ veins, but do not include the western veins from
Fischer and Beard’s lease, till they attain a depth of 250 to 400 feet. There is a
good vertical shaft on Herman’s lease for about 400 feet with a continuation on the
underlay of the Star of Peace vein for another 100 feet, with ladder and divisions all
the way. There has been very rich stone from this mine out of Paxton’s vein,
which makes a blow of quartz, and also the Star of Peace vein has been good.
Little or nothing has been done to prospect the western veins from which Fischer and
Beard have done so well out of, There is also an underlay shaft on Stevens’ vein,
on which we are now erecting poppet heads preparatory to underhand stoping from
the 300 feet level, where there is a good deal of crushing stone in sight. This vein
is also intersected by a cross-cut, 140 feet long, from Paxton’s vein, in the vertical
shaft at the 260 feet level. This cross-cut also cuts Paxton’s easterly veins, and a
new vein, on which we found a blow of quartz, and on which we will open on by-
and-by. These leases extend some distance to the eastward of Rowley’s vein, and
the several other veins, between which have been very little prospected even on the
surface.
Oxon’s Lease, one of the tributes of the Star of Peace, has only a frontage of
59 feet, but extends east and west for a great distance, all the veins on Hawkins
Hill run through it. The only work done by previous holders of this lease was
stoping on Stevens’ vein, which was done about 200 feet deep, and was very good.
We can work this ground either from Herman’s shafts or Crown Prince shaft, on
both of which we have winding gear connected with engines.
The Crown Prince Lease, a tribute of the Star of Peace, is a very extensive
one, having a frontage on the line of reefs of 192 feet. The out crop of Stevens’
vein is on its western boundary, and it extends to the east farther than any other
lease. There has been very little work done on this lease, and from its situation,
having a great many rich lines of reef cropping out on the surface, ought, with a
small outlay in prospecting, to turn out something good. The main shaft on this
lease is sunk on Stevens’ vein to a depth of 262 feet, and this vein has been stoped
out from near the surface and crushed before it came into our hands. There is also
a cross cut putin from this shaft at the 173 feet level for 115 feet, cutting several
gold bearing veins, and on one of them, the Frenchman’s, we are now backstoping
for crushing stone. We are also raising crushing from a vein to the east of
Rowley’s vein, which has crushed as high as 16 oz. per ton. We have crushed 4 oz.
per ton.
To the west of the Crown Prince lease is the lease of Matthewson Co., another
tribnte of the Star of Peace. The main shaft on this lease has been sunk over 500
feet, partially vertical. There are large blows of quartz in this lease, and the
principal veins of Hawkins Hill run through it, and it has any amount of westerly
ground to cover the new westerly run of gold-bearing veins, which are being worked
in Krohmann’s Co.’s ground. We are nowraising a crushing from two veins, one at
the 220 and the other at the 330 feet level. To the north of the Crown Prince and
Matthewscn’s are two more tributes of the Star of Peace, called The Morning Star and


Speculation; they occupy 67 feet on the line of reefs, and have a good extent of
both east and west ground. There is a shaft sunk on the Morning Star, which cut
some gold-bearing veins, but I cannot ascertain anything certain about it. ltie
leases are in a good position-they are our last tributes on the north, and we
bounded on the north by the Trust and Try lease, now called the Patriarch, I his
is a lease worked by the proprietors. There is a winding engine on the lease and
good shaft, the whole covered over with a roomy galvanised iron rooted shed, liie
shaft was sunk to a depth of 360 feet vertical. At the 307 feet level there is a,
cross-cut in 185 feet east, cutting several veins -Steven s, Frenchman s, and wha
was supposed to be Rowley’s. These veins all carry gold. The Frenchman s vein
is small here, about two inches thick, but would have yielded very well if crushed
by itself, but being mixed with other quartz reduced the average to oz. per ton.
They also cut Paxton’s vein in the vertical shaft. . . .
Forming the southern boundary of our most southern lease is a large lease called
the Great Western Undaunted. This lease extends north and south on the line
of reefs for 575 feet; is the eastern boundary of the leases known as Rapp s, King
and Everett’s, Hotson’s, Johnston’s, and a part of the Rose of England, wherethe rich
gold was first found on Hawkins Hill. This lease cuts off those westerly leases on
the rich belt of veins at about 500 feet level, and consequently is good property.
There is a very good vertical shaft sunk on the lease for over sbo_feet, timbered and
centred, and they were getting into slatey country of the rich vems when work was
stopped. This lease has passed through several hands, and there has been no work
done on it for about six years.
The plant on the Star of Peace mines and tributaries consists of an eight-horse
power winding engine, connected with the shafts on the Star of Peace and Her-
man’s tribute. There is an engine house, blacksmith shop and, store room. There
is also a detached powder magazine and office. On Hermanns tnlmte -JJ?
poppet heads on two shafts, and blacksmith shop. On the Crown Prince United
there is a batterv of 15 head of stamps, and with the best gold-saving appliances in
the district, driven by an engine and two boilers of 15 horse-power e<acK Connec-
ted with these boilers is a winding engine for hauling from Matthewson a and
Crown Prince, which have each poppet heads and sheds on the shafts, there is a
tramway leading from all the shafts to convey quartz to the battery. On Rowley s
line the hauling is done by horse-whips from both shafts. As yet we are only
working from the surface to the 70 feet level, and of course this is a quick way of
hauling from shallow levels. There is also a watchman s house and changing room
here.
You ask me on what portions of the mine I would advise you to commence
further explorations and my plan of working the mine if we had sufficient capital
to work all the ground. I have no plan “ cut and dried for working all this Com-
pany’s ground. If I did not know so much of the ground as I do, it would be
easier for me to answer this question. If the veins passing through the ground
were only two or three in number, even if they were m differents parts of the mine
I might on this short notice advise in the matter, but from east to west of the ground
there are some dozen ormore gold-bearing veins on the surf ace-besides those we know-
are coming in at deep levels. Thequestioms of such magnitude that I will only point
out some of the most important things that will have to be done to develope and
work this Company’s extensive property. Being of opinion that the deep ground
is of first importance in connection with capital, I would recommend a good work-
vertical shaft to be sunk on the part of the ground that would appear to have
the most advantages. Now on this point there may be a difference of opinion
Bearing in mind that Krohman’s Co. have got into a new belt of veins, and are
now opening on a payable vein, which shows signs of unprovement as they go
north—this is about the 600 feet vertical level from the old line of reefs and shafts,
on which the present Star of Peace main shaft is situated—and at the same time
that thev are still sinking through a most promising country for gold, and as Kroh-
ground extends to°only 450 feet from the Star of Peace southern
boundary—also hoping that this Company may secure Paxton s lease, which would
reduce the distance by another 124 feet—it might be well to continue the Star of
Peace vertical shaft, which is now 200 feet down, to cut this new country. All that
would have to be done with the 200 feet of top shaft already sunk would be tim*


bering the bottom part and centering it. Of course, as Krohraann’s Co. continue
to drive north on this vein fresh light would be thrown upon it, but from what I
know now I would certainly predict getting payable gold, perhaps very rich, when
we had sunk this 400 feet or thereby. This would be the most economical way of
working the westerly veins, and if we owned Fischer and Beard’s ground we would
have a fine scope of westerly ground to work. Of course the deeper we went we
would be getting further from the old belt of veins, which at the 600 feet level
would be about 200 feet east from the new country.
Then, again, on the Great Extended lease, from its position, which I have
already described, there has been a vertical shaft sunk to the depth of over 400 feet
which, although too small for our purpose, could be cut down and re-timbered for
this depth at a much smaller cost than if the old shaft were not here ; and when
the shaft was sunk to the belt of veins, it would most likely come on to rich stone
and be m a central position for cross-cutting to the east and west, as well as for
working from north to south, and the deeper we went of course would be “•ettino 1
n l < ; al [ er to the westerly country or its easterly dip; at the same time we would drain
all the veins we have been on heretofore, so that we could go on to test the blows
of quartz we have north at deep levels, as well as the Star of Peace and other veins
1 i o d be lV m<i & en ® ra % follow up our workings in the present bottom levels
ot the Star of Peace shaft, so that the work we have done here at so much cost may
be made subservient in our future operations of developing the mine. J
In the northern and eastern portions of our ground, there has been so little
done heretofore, we must go on prospecting to the best of our power some of the
many veins we know are gold-bearing in that quarter. To continue the cross-cut
m the Crown Prince shaft at 173 feet level east, to cut Rowley’s line of veins,
would be a good way to test those veins for the upper shoots of gold, which
have been so rich in Hawkins Hill. There has been very little done to prospect
this easterly belt of veins, and the little work that was done on Rowley’s vein
alone, yielded some £40,000 worth of gold, to the first claim holders at very little
cost of labor. J
We are now about ready to stope and sink on Stevens’ vein in Herman’s
tribute, which has been very good here, sometimes as high as 14 oz. per ton. There
has only been a block of ground about 60 feet in length by 300 feet deep cut out
and if this is payable downwards, we will have an opportunity of cross cutting to
the east at deeper levels. In fact there are a great many places that I could point out
as most likely places to prospect from if we had the means, but as it is a desidera-
tum, under the present circumstances of the company to get gold where it can be
found at the least expense, I am doing my best to get it in this way, and with the
hope of coming on to a rich patch at any time. Meantime, lam studying the
country we go through, so that when we have the means I may be the better able
4° advise with more certainty of success than I could now of the most likely places
to try for gold.
. ,J 1 as l t about the price of packing, carting, and crushing the quartz from the
rich claims in 1872. So far as I remember it was from 14s, to 16s. per ton, but
about this time the Sir Hercules Battery Company was erected in Oakey Creek
with tramways running from all the claims on Hawkins Hill as far north as Fischer
and Beard’s. This company took the quartz from the different claims, carried them
to their Battery, and crushed them for 12s. per ton. This, of conrse, was a con-
siderable reduction in the price, but owing to the packers lowering the price and
other causes, the Hercules Battery was not generally patronised. Being a large
battery, of course the working expenses were great, and not having constant work
to meet this, the Battery ceased working. Since it stopped the tramways and other
outside works have been going out of repair and getting destroyed by the hand of
time and wholesale robbery, and would now take a large sum to put them in work-
ing order. The Battery is the largest in the district, and could be started at small
outlay. The Battery is the property of the Sir Hercules Quartz Crushing Com-
pany, and Mr. Campbell of Mort and Co.’s, Circular Quay, is the legal manager I
understand.
I am, dear sir,
Your obedient servant,
James W. Marshall,
Mining Manager.”


ADDENDA.
The following are some of the crushings from Fischer, Beard
and Co’s lease, recorded in tho Reports issued by. the Mining
Department, from 1875 to 1878, viz
Quabtz Crushed. Average Yield. Total Yield. Depth at which
of Gold per ton of Gold Quartz, was obt.
Tons. cwt. qr. oz.dwt.gr oz.dwt.gr.
, r7 k 353 0 0 4 6 6-16 1544 0 0 230 tt.
}Sfi 481 0 0 2 4 6-80 1066 8 0
18,6 ;;; 385 0 0 213 22-87 1038 12 0
” oco 0 0 1 11 9-47 568 5 0
.sis ::: S» °« « » i9ott-
-1739 0 0 4339 13 0
ERRATA.
p 6 . ... for “ Pyramiul,” read Pyramid
Page 12"( line 7) Z for “15 per cent, read 25 per cent.
Page 23 (line 27) for “vein,” read me,






