

he I G. ):i
(Under the War IrtrGeesietioriS hv,ets)c
A Handly Digest ©f the idmmmmjomiih
Siuiiuierg Rules deeding with Land' Pur * :-
Landlmd and JDanh .
Reni s Bilk of dele, eds, m eßeding
Sdßierg ihet dependents, end CidilimWo
ween
EegEsli eed AiaiitralaMsA TSare 'Law Cow
AID AI
luiiDmiiA
SEG'ONB jrDlI TS'O'No
BY
B, H, TiSBIAUttlo RußDimg
SYDNEYo
■' ■:t :■ AAA ; ■ sidw«i s . ■ rAp." '''--diggs,
TIII; LAW -BOOK COMPANY OF AUSTRALASIA, LTD.
51-53 ELIZABETH STREET.
191 A


f . 4
4 R44. ' ■ — ■ —. ■ - '4 . f
- 4 4R4. 4. R v.:"-' ' R ;; — 4e|
: ; ; ,■■ ■ v-v "V: - V ;; V' /■ ■ ..V < ,1
■■444,44 ■■■■■'■ "'■ - ■ -' ■'■" - w /: 444*''44o...'..'.- 4.-f
1
: V" 4-4.4'i
!■
' I'
4 I
\ & }
■ !
f
1 -1 ' : : ' • : ■ : - 1
\
'/'R |
Page. j
Editor's Note ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 i
. f
' ' ' ■ • • . • . - . . n . , 4 ' I
. • •;
Memo, of Dates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 i
■ . I
- 4 4 ' ■ ■ ■ I
Soldiers 3 5 5 Mora/kmroi, -with AmeMm'Stite taeor'pcwatad 3 „ -5 1
" ' :
!
'' 1 ■ 1 >.. ,,, 0,, 44
*" ■ 1
f
■ ,5 Jliorartoriiisa, 44.44. lobraojooroted 14 '4
;
1 - ' « '., 1 , ,, 4
:
■''4; a-/;:/;v-Vav-4 "4444Rp • '4'. RRRp441 RR44 40 4 ; 4RR R 4R I l.R 4.4444 RRR:":--4444 44 R
' : ' R 4 ' . _ | . ... 4 : 4 . ' R" Ill . R'-.-o o 44 1 : ,:. .;".... ; ' j
|
Cover.
\
■■ v " " CoiJiinonwealtbiLa'w Reports! 4.. I
... ' j °°* *°° "* ltt ° I
oo„ . ' o.o Ire i
' ■ - - 4 ' ' ■■■■' :' ■ ' 4.. i
44 o ■ : ■ . ■ :e4:44r4B-.p:popr44;4(
5
, ■■ . . ■ - . . . - . ;
4' R 4: r 4 4R;pr4 44: , 4 ,R s4.. 1
■ I
1 ' ' ' 4 ' ■■ .■ 4 4 . .44 - — . ■ I
:: ; 4.:a " . . . 4 :, . ..4f
■■ ■■'. 44 ; ~'.'RRRa; 4444-.v.4 ',4-"'4.4444.44.4-' 4R4-''"- 4-4;e4RR;lR : j
; 4 *1 1 . 4 : 4o 144 < 4i
4440414 44- 4 . 1 - 4,441 1.4444:R?'RR ; 444 4 4444B;444 : j
]
44!-4vl44"^."4.4 ; '>-4'.14; Rt-rrpppo, 44.44.op: : v44o4 i; 4 ' |
•'■"4 .'.' 4040. Op ' 4 v4.* 4 .;....' 4 -■■■■[
■ . ... 1 4' : ' 40 : > i


"The Moratorium"
(Under the.War Precautions Acts).
A Handy Digest of the Commonwealth
Statutory Rules dealing with Land Pur-
chases, Mortgages, Landlord and Tenant,
Rent, Bills of Sale, etc,, as affecting
Soldiers, their dependents, and Civilians.
II ■ % N. ' \
WITH
English and Australasian Case Law &c.,
i ' ■
AND AN
| INDEX.
j SECOND EDITION.
BY
E. H. TEBBUTT, Solicitor,
SYDNEY.
S^DNEG:
THE LAW BOOK COMPANY OF AUSTRALASIA, LTD.,
I\ 51-53 ELIZABETH STREET.
1918.


EDITOR'S NOTE TO SECOND EDITION.
" THE WAR PRECAUTIONS ACT 1914-1916 " is constituted by The
War Precautions Act 1914 (No. 10 of 1914), as amended by The
War Precautions Act 1915 (No. 2 of 1915), The War Precautions Act
(No. 2) 1915 (No. 39 of 1915), and The War Precautions Act 1916
(No. 3 of 1916).
These Acts, which are to be read with the Defence Act 1903-
1917, continue during the War and no longer. Under them the
Governor-General may make regulations on a very great range of
subjects. By section 6, contravention of a regulation is an " offence
against this Act " punishable (summarily) by a fine of £lOO or six
months imprisonment,—(indictment) by fine of any amount or
imprisonment for any term, and (in certain cases) by Death. Pro-
vision is made also for trial by court-martial. The Acts themselves
are not re-printed here, in order to economise space, but, as a matter
of fact, their text chiefly amounts to a copious, endowment of the
executive with a power to make and enforce regulations.
Offences against the Regulations can be prosecuted only with
Ministerial consent : see War Precautions Acts, s. 6 (3A) ; Holland,
v. J ones (23 C.L.R. 149)-; and Ex parte Smith (35 W.N. 54 [N.S.W.]).'
Proof of " mens rea " : Murphy v. Kenny (1916 V.L.R. 335) ; Ross
v. Sickerdick (22 C.L.R. 197). Evidence —Proof of statutory rule
under this Act : see Grieve v. Lewis (23 C.L.R. 413).
The Regulations which are " consolidated " here, were origin-
ally published in the following order. They are such an important
addition to the law of property, contract and procedure, and have
assumed so complex and bulky a form, that it is hoped that this
little edition may assist the economy of public time and patience.


Number in " Statutory Rules "
and reference in Commonwealth
Statutory Rules of Practical Utility.
NAME.
DATE.
War Precautions (Active
Service Moratorium)
Regulations, 1916.
28 July, 1916.
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 220)
War Precautions (Supple -
. mentary) Regulations,
1916.
11 Oct., 1916
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 346)
(wholly J| repealed by-
No. 284)1 :
War Precautions (Active
Service Moratorium)
Regulations.
10 November, 1916.
(C.S.R., Vol, 6. p. 379)
War Precautions (Mora-
torium) Regulations.
10 November, 1916.
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 383)
22 December, 1916.
(C.S.R., Vol. 6, p. 441)
24 January, 1917.
(C.S.R., Vol. 7, p. 6)
23 March, 1917.
(C.S.R., Vol. 7, p. 101)
1917 No. 253
(C.S.R., Vol. 7, p. 328)
28 September, 1917.
War Precautions (Active
Service Moratorium)
Regulations.
15 October, 1917.
(C.S.R., Vol. 7, p. 345)
War Precautiohs (Mora-
torium) Regulations.
6 February, 1918.
(C.S.R,, Vol. .8, p. 16)
War Precautions (Active
Service) Regulations.
26 March, 1918.
(C.S.R., Vol. 8, p. 136)
It will be seen that the S
only to soldiers, or their de-
intended only for civilians at
s " Moratorium
dependants, ar
m "is of two kinds, the
and the general Regul
'Active Service," applying
ttions, which are no doubt
Regulations.
and their property,
The two " sets " of Regulations are independent of one another.
But, nevertheless, in dealing with any mortgage, purchase, lease,
etc., the practitioner must consider both " sets." : By Reg. 118.
of the " Civilian 5 ' moratorium it will be seen that there is a ten-
dency to convergence.
E. H. TEBBUTT,
JUNE 10TH, 1918.
928 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


of°du0 ] date ei of Subject to these Regulations, the time for any payment of
seouredfby P rinci P al money secured by a mortgage (legal or equitable) of land
mortgage. contracted by a member or the female dependant of a member
r S MitPjfcf by e^ ore ie da, t° on which he became a member of the Forces, or
283. before the first day of January, J 916, whichever last happens, is
hereby postponed so that such payment shall fall due upon the
expiration of six months after the cessation of the present state of
war and not earlier.
Mortgage.—Cf. cases noted at p. 18, in respect of the " civilian " mora-
torium. There is no definition of " Mortgage," as apparently it does not
matter when the payment fell due, though in respect of land purchases, only
payments fallen due since Lst May, 1916, are protected : see clause 4.
Interest.—See clause 6.
of°due n date nt of W Subject to these Regulations, the time for any payment
money Se ~ ° f P urchase - mon ©y (whether the whole or an instalment thereof)
As amended by under an a greement for the purchase of land, entered into by a
283 1916 ' N °' membcr or the female dependant of a member before the date on
which he became a member of the Forces, or before the first day of
January, 1916, whichever last happens, which payment has fallen
due since the first day of May, One thousand nine hundred and
sixteen, or hereafter falls clue, is hereby postponed so as to fall due
upon the expiration of the period of six months next after the day
on which it fell due or would fall due if these Regulations had not
been made, arid not earlier, or upon the expiration of six months
after the cessation of the present state of war, and not earlier.
(2) This Regulation shall not apply to any amount payable
as interest, and when an instalment includes interest as well as prin-
cipal, and the agreement neither states the rate of interest nor
indicates what parts of the instalment are principal and interest
respectively, then, for the purposes of this Regulation, the rate of
interest shall be deemed to be five per centum,per annum.
Other Contracts.—See Reg. 13
Repealed by R. K
1918, No. 283. '
" Postponed."—The conditions on which payment is postponed apply
(1) wheiy the purchase was made before enlistment, or before Ist January,
1916 (whichever is last), and (2) payment must have fallen due since Ist May,
1916. V' J
Mortgage.—See Reg. 3, ante, ancl, as to interest, Reg. 6.
payable in be . ■(1) When a mortgagor or purchaser avails himself of the
respect of right conferred by these Regulations to postpone the payment of
postponement. a RJ sum, interest shall he payable on such sum in respect of the
period of postponement.
l" b l9i6, t No.' by (2) The rate of the interest payable at any time by virtue of
283 - this Regulation shall, unless the rate thereof is hereafter agreed
upon by the parties before the interest falls due, be—
(«) six per centum per annum,
(6) the rate payable on the date when such sum would have
been payable if these Regulations had not been made,
whichever is the lower rate : Provided that, if the rate of interest
payable under any mortgage or agreement is thereby fixed by


reference to rates current, in the case of some specified class of
transactions, at the times when the sums of interest respectively
fall due or are paid (as the case may be), the rates payable by
virtue of this Regulation shall, at the option of the mortgagee or
vendor, be as so fixed or as fixed by this Regulation, but so that
the rate shall not in any case exceed six per centum per annum.
(3) Interest payable by virtue of this Regulation shall be
payable at the close of the same intervals of time as are provided by
the mortgage or agreement with respect to the interest thereby
secured, or, if no provision is so made, then quarterly. .
Interest under Civilian Moratorium. —See Reg. 4 thereof.
Repealed by
1916, No. 288.
(5) In the case of a payment which fell due on or before the
date of these Regulations, the period of postponement shall, for the
purposes of this Regulation, be deemed to have commenced on the
day immedately following the date of these Regulations.
Principal Moneys.—ln 'mortgages, see Reg. 3 ; purchases, Reg. 4.
7. When, under any mortgage or agreement to which these when one
Regulations apply, the principal or purchase money is to be repaid
or paid by instalments, and the mortgagor or purchaser avails him- to
self of the right conferred by these Regulations to postpone the be postponed
payment of any of such instalments, then, notwithstanding that for llke peilods-
in other respects these Regulations may have ceased to operate,
the times when the subsequent instalments respectively fall due
shall each be postponed for a period equal to the period of postpone-
ment effected by these Regulations with respect to the first-men-
tioned instalment; but the interest to be paid with such subsequent
instalments shall, if these Regulations have so ceased to operate,
be at the rate fixed by the mortgage or agreement.
8. (1) These Regulations shall operate as a stay of all proceed- Proceedings
ings, whether by action or any other means and whether in any Court not*
or otherwise, heretofore commenced to enforce the payment or in
respect or in consequence of the non-payment of any principal or
purchase-money to which Regulation 3 or 4 applies, and of all reme-
dies for the recovery thereof ; but shall not otherwise prejudice
or affect any such proceeding or remedy or alter or affect the rights
or obligations of any party, except so far as may be necessary to
give effect to the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) Upon the termination of the postponement effected by
these Regulations, all proceedings so stayed may be continued, and
all such remedies may be pursued, as if the period of postponement
had. not intervened.
(3) In. particular, but without limiting the effect of this
Regulation, it is hereby provided that the period of postponement
effected by these Regulations shall not he taken into account in
calculating the time, as fixed by any Statute of Limitations or other
Act or State Act, within which any action for the recovery of any
postponed sum is to be commenced, or any other remedy for that
purpose is to be pursued.
Civilians. —Cf. Reg. 4. post.


eases' of great
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regula-
hardship. tions, any Justice of the High Court or Judge of the Supreme Court
of a State shall have power, with respect to any mortgage or agree-
ment, to order that these Regulations shall not apply thereto,
if he is of opinion that, in the special circumstances of the case,
the postponement effected by these Regulations is; not necessary in
the interest of the mortgagor or purchaser, or would cause hardship
or loss to the mortgagee or vendor (as the case may be), or to any
person towards whom, with respect to such mortgage or agreement,
he stands in the position of trustee.
R Hb i9i6, t No. isy a Ppbcation for an order under this Regulation shall
283. be made by motion, with notice to such persons as the Court con-
siders entitled thereto, or ex 'parte in any case in which by reason of
special circumstances the Court considers such procedure to be just
and equitable.
SffeftSV* (3) Repealed. ,
As amended by Justice C| : Judge may make all such interlocutory and.
fgg 1916 No- fi na, l orders in the matter of any such motion, including any orders
as to costs, as, having regard to the objects of these Regulations
and the circumstances of the case, he deems proper : Provided that
the costs of the application shall be borne by the applicant unless,
from the circumstances of the case, the Justice or Judge thinks fit
to order otherwise.
(5) The order of a Justice or Judge determining any such
summons shall be final; and no order or direction, whether inter-
R? l9lfi 6 NCK 2sir foeutory or final, in the matter of any such motion, and no other
proceeding under this Regulation, shall be appealed/against, ques-
tioned, or reviewed in any manner whatsoever, or - be restrained or
removed by prohibition, injunction, certiorari, or otherwise howso-
ever.
Hardship or loss. —See note at p. 10. See provision in " Civilian " Regu-
lation ÜB, -post. CF. McDonald, v. Ilcnare Apatan, 17 G.L.R. 474 (N.Z.,).
contracts and 19. These Regulations shall not be held to prevent, or to alter
S™K?d. the of—
(a) any contract, made after the date of these Regulations,
concerning any mortgage or agreement to which Regula-
tion 3 or 4 of these Regulations applies ; or
(b) any instrument made or thing done in pursuance of any
such contract.
Date of these Regulations.—Reg. 163 (the first made) is dated 28th Julv'
1916. -
ll. The provisions of the preceding Regulations apply to
61 an y mortgage or agreement contracted or entered into by a member
dependant is a ie -^' orces or female dependant of a member of the Forces
party jointly jointly with a person who is not a member of the Forces or a female
persom her dependant of a member of the Forces in like manner as they apply
i9i6 rt No 283 R ' a moi J§ a § e or a greement contracted or entered into by a member
of the Forces only or a female dependant only, as the ease may be.
Protection from
°f 12. (1) No person shall, under a bill of sale, or writ of exeeu-
lTveUhood, &c., Hon or other process issued by a Court, -or by way of distress, or
dependants of un( ler £be provisions of a hire-purchase agreement made prior to
soldiers.


the first day of June, 1916, or to the enlistment of a member of the
Forces, whichever last happens, seize or take possession of--
(a) any chattels which are used by any female dependant of e 6 r
that member of the Forces to support or assist in sup-
porting herself or any of the family of the member ; or
(b) any furniture or wearing apparel belonging to any such
member or female dependant :
Provided that if the furniture and wearing apparel
.belonging to the member and his female dependants exceed
in value £lOO,. any articles may be seized and taken posses-
sion of under due authority of law if the articles remaining
are not less in value than £lOO.
(2) In any prosecution for an offence against this Regulation
an order may be made for the return of any articles seized or taken
possession of in contravention of this Regulation, or for payment
of their value.
Of. the embargo on goods, etc., under the Australian Soldiers' Repatriation
Act, Ho. 37 of 1917, s. 20.
As to mortgages of chattels in the " Civilian " Moratorium, see p. 15.
Removal of Goods by Landlord after Moratorium. —Cf. Shottland v. Cabins, -
Ltd., 31 T.L.R. 297. v
Mens rea. —Informations preferred against Myerson by "female depen,
dants," alleging that he did by way of distress take possession of furniture
contrary to Reg. 12. It was proved before the magistrate that defendant
had no knowledge that goods did in fact belong to " female dependants " at
time of seizure. Conviction and fine of £3O. Defendant appealed to Quarter
Sessions, and thence to High Court ; alleging that " mens rea " was necessary.
The matter came on for hearing Bth April, 1918, but decision not yet given :
Woolsey v. Myerson, ex rel. H. G. Edwards, H.S.W. Bar., of counsel for" respon-
dent.
13. (1) No writ of action or other legal process shall without writs
leave of the High Court or the Supreme Court be issued out of any Sidfers akd ns
Court in respect of any liability of any member of the Forces or | e ™eMants.
a female dependant under any contract or agreement (not being a
Inserted by R,
contract or agreement to which the provisions of any. of the pre- 1916 No - 283 -
ceding Regulations apply), where the contract or agreement was
entered into on or before the twentieth day of September, One
thousand nine hundred and sixteen.
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that having regard to
all the circumstances of the case it would be inequitable to the
other party to the contract or agreement to give to the member
or female dependant, as the case may be, the benefit or protection
of this Regulation, and that it would not inflict hardship on the
member or female dependant, as the case may be, the Court shall
grant leave to the party making the application.
(2) Application for the leave of the Court under this Regu-
lation may be made by motion, with notice to such persons as the
Court considers entitled thereto, or ex parte in any case in which
by reason of special circumstances the Court considers such pro-
cedure to he just and equitable.
(3) Any such application may he made to and disposed
of by a Justice or Judge in Chambers.


(4) The leave may be granted on such terms and condition?
(if any) as the Court thinks fit/
Leave to proceed , . . hardship to female dependant. —On an application
under this regulation for leave to commence proceedings against a member
of the A.1.E., the Court cannot take into account the fact that the proceedings
may inflict hardship on a female dependant of the member : Re J. A. Munro,
1917 V.L.R. 74 ; 38 A.L.T. 127 (Vic.), But see now clause 15 of these
Regulations.
Mortgagee, in possession prior to Regulations—Mortgagor a member of
tie A.I.F, Application to compel mortgagee to vacate possession—Order
forbidding lease, sale, or foreclosure.— ln re Hanly a/nd the Queensland National
Bank, Ltd., 1917 Q.W.N. 18 (Q.).
Writ Issued'; judgment set aside: Cf. Gramophone Go, v. King, (1914) 2
Ir. R. 535, —K.B.D. Moratorium not pleaded, "Judgment," Waiver, cf.
Connell v. Phoenix Co., 34 N.Z.L.R. 666.
Customer had running account prior to 20/9/T6. Goods ordered sub-
sequently ■; decided, on facts, each order a separate contract : St. Heaps v.
Jeffreys, N.S.W., 20/9/'! 7 ; ex rel. W. W.Perry.
superior Courts
14. Where it appears to the High Court or the Supreme Court
issu? of process 011 mot * on ma de by or on behalf of any member of the Forces or
in certain eases, female dependant that any writ of action or other legal process
i9i7No m?' isSUed 0r l )ro I )osed to be issued out of any Court in respect of any
°" * liability of any member of the Forces or a female dependant under
any contract or agreement (not being a contract or agreement
to which the provisions of any of the preceding Regulations apply)
that the contract or agreement is, so far as the member or female
dependant is concerned, harsh and unconscionable, the Court may
make such order upon such terms and conditions as it thinks fit
prohibiting or suspending the issue of the process, or if the process
has already been issued prohibiting or suspending further pro-
ceedings in pursuance of the process.
ton o sicSls of 15 ' in relation to any transaction entered into whether after
between the commencement of the present state of war and before the eom-
™e b s e and f meneementof this regulation, or after the commencement of this
others. regulation, it appears to the High Court or the Supreme Court (or,
i9i e 7 No. b 2 y 7i ß ' where the matter at issue does not exceed in value the sum of Five
. * hundred pounds, to a County or District Court or a Local Court of
Full Jurisdiction), on motion made by or on behalf of a member of
the Forces or female dependant, that the transaction is harsh and
unconscionable to the member or female dependant, or is such that
a court of equity would give relief, the Court may reopen the trans-
action and take an account between the member or female depen-
dant and the other party to the transaction, and may make such
order as it thinks just as regards the transaction, and as regards any
property affected by the transaction, and any such order shall be
of full force and effect, and shall be complied with by the parties
Exercise of to the transaction.
jurisdiction in Hardship.— See note to Reg. 13 above.
Chambers, &
1917 No. 271 R ' 16 : Any ma Her arising under either of the last two preceding
Eentai of regulations may be disposed of by a Justice or Judge in Chambers.
bym"mbers U of lu£ige in Chambers.— Cf. Reg. 13 (3).
the Forces and
dependants. LANDLORD AND TENANT,
inserted by r. _ 17. (1) The owner of any dwelling-house to which this regula-
tion a PP^ es w Pieh is tenanted by a member of the Forces or a
R. 1918 No. 81. parent or female dependant of a member shall not, without the


leave of a Court of Summary Jurisdiction, increase the rent charged
■to, that member or parent or female dependant in respect of the
dwelling-house, and any increase made in contravention of this
regulation shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary,
be irrecoverable :
Provided that —
(a) where the owner incurs expenditure on the improvement
or structural alteration of a dwelling-house (not including
, expenditure on decoration or repairs) an increase of rent
at a rate not exceeding eight per centum per annum on the
amount so expended shall not be deemed to be an increase
for the purposes of this regulation ;
(b) any transfer to a tenant of any burden or liability pre-
viously borne by the owner shall for the purposes of this
regulation be treated as an alteration of rent, and where
as the result of such a transfer the terms on which the dwel-
ling-house is held are on the whole less favourable to the
tenant than the previous terms the rent shall be deemed
to be increased whether or not the sum periodically payable
by way of rent is increased ;
(c) any increase of rent in respect of any transfer to the owner
of any burden or liability previously borne by the tenant
where as the result of the transfer the terms on which the
dwelling-house is held are on the whole more favorable
to the tenant than the previous terms shall be deemed not
to be an increase of rent for the purposes of this regulation ;
(d) where the owner pays the rates chargeable on the occupier
of any dwelling-house an increase of the rent of the dwelling-
house payable for any period shall not be deemed to be an
increase for the purposes of this regulation if the amount
of the increase does not exceed the increase in the amount
payable by the owner in respect of the rates during the
same period, and for the purposes of this paragraph the
expression " rates " includes water rates and charges.
(2) A person shall not in consideration of the grant, renewal, As amended by
or continuance of a tenancy of any dwelling-house to which this R " 1918 No " 81 *
regulation applies require from any member of the Eorces or parent
or female dependant of any member of the Eorces, the payment of
any fine, premium, or other like sum in addition to the rent.
(3) No order for the recovery of possession of any dwelling-
house to which this regulation applies, from a member of the Eorces .
or a parent or female dependant of a member of the Forces, or for
the ejectment therefrom of a tenant (being a member of the Eorces
or a parent or female dependant of a member of the Forces) shall
be made so long as the tenant continues to pay rent at the agreed Substituted by
rate as modified by this regulation and performs the other conditions R ' l9lB No " 81 '
of the tenancy, unless—
{a) the tenant has committed waste, or has been guilty of
conduct which is a nuisance or annoyance to adjoining or
neighbouring occupiers, or the premises are reasonably
required by the landlord for the occupation of himself or
some person in his employ or in the employ of some tenant
from him, or on some other ground which is deemed satis-
factory by the Court making the order, and


(b) the Court is satisfied that in all the circumstances of the
case and in the interests of justice it is desirable that the
order for recovery or ejectment should be made ;
As amended by
R, 1918 No, 81.
(4) Any member of the Forces or parent or female depen-
dant of a member of the Forces may, if he or she thinks fit, require
the owner of a dwelling-house to which this regulation applies, which
is vacant or is about to become vacant, to let the dwelling-house
to him or her at a reasonable rental, and the owner shall, unless he
has reasonable cause for refusing so to do, let the dwelling-house
accordingly.
(5) For the purposes of this regulation a reasonable rental
shall be the equivalent of such weekly rental as represents the
average weekly rental received in respect of the property during the
period in which it has been occupied during the twelve months
preceding the date of the commencement of this regulation, or, in
the event of rent not having been received in respect of the property,
either at all or for any period more than three months during the
said period of twelve months, such rental as is determined by the
judicial or other authority or person thereto authorized in writing
by the Minister (in this regulation referred to as the 1 authority ") :
Provided that where any improvement or structural alteration
of a dwelling-house (not including decoration or repairs) has taken
place, an allowance for the value of such improvement or alteration,
to an extent not exceeding eight per centum per annum on the
amount expended thereon, shall be taken into consideration in deter-
mining the reasonable rental of the dwelling-house.
(6) This regulation shall apply to a house or. part of a house
let as a separate dwelling (or as a dwelling and shop) where the letting
does not include any land other than the site of the house and a
garden or other premises within the curtilage of the house and where
the rateable value of the house or part of the house —
(a) if based on rental value does not exceed Seventy pounds
per annum ; and
(b) if based on unimproved value does not exceed Three
hundred and fifty pounds ;
and every such house or part of a house shall be deemed to be a
dwelling-house to which this regulation applies.
In X.H.W. rent is also regulated under the "Fair Rents Act," No. 66 of
1915.
Ignorance Of law. —Rent increased and paid by tenant in ignorance of
moratorium. Held, irrecoverable by tenant : Sharp v. Chant, 86 L.J.K.B.
(C.A.) 608. (1917) E.L.R.1K.8. 771; 1.1.6 L.T. 188 ; 33T.L.R. 235 ;61 S.J. 352.
Distress for Rent. —See Reg. 12.
forms' 1 &c h h P y' W le owner °f an y shop which is leased to a member of
members of the the Forces or a parent or female dependant of a member solely for
female an business purposes and the owner of any land which is leased to a
dependants. member of the Forces or a parent or female dependant of a member
f° r the purpose of carrying on farming or dairying pursuits shall
As amended by n °t, without the leave of a Court of Summary Jurisdiction if the
R. 1918 No. 81.


rent payable does not exceed Seventy pounds per annum, or of a
County or District Court or a Local Court of Full Jurisdiction if the
rent payable exceeds Seventy pounds per annum, increase the rent
charged to that member or parent or female dependant in respect
of the shop or land, as the case may be, and any increase made in
contravention of this regulation shall, notwithstanding any agree-
ment to the contrary, be irrecoverable :
Provided that—
(a) where the owner incurs expenditure on the improvement
of the shop or land, or the structural alteration of the shop
or of any building erected on the land, as the case may be
(not including expenditure on decoration or repairs); an
increase of rent at a rate not exceeding eight per centum
per annum on the amount so expended shall not be
deemed to be an increase for the purposes of this regulation;
{ h) any transfer to a tenant of any burden or liability pre-
viously borne by the owner shall for the purposes of this
regulation be treated as an alteration of rent, and where
as the result of such a transfer the terms on which the
shop and land is held are on the whole less favourable to
the tenant than the previous terms the rent shall be deemed
to be increased whether or not the sum periodically payable
by way of rent is increased ;
(c) any increase of rent in respect of any transfer to the owner
of any burden or liability previously borne by the tenant
where as the result of the transfer the terms on which the
shop or land is held are on the whole more favourable to
the tenant than the previous terms shall be deemed not to
be an increase of rent for the purposes of this regulation ;
(d) where the owner pays the rates chargeable on the occupier
of any shop or land an increase of the rent of the shop or
land payable for any period shall not be deemed to be an
increase for the purposes of this regulation if the amount
of the increase does not exceed the increase in the amount
payable by the owner in respect of the rates during the same
period, and for the purposes of this paragraph the expres-
sion " rate's " includes water rates and charges.
(2) A person shall not in consideration of the grant, renewal,
or continuance of a tenancy of any shop or land require from any
member of the Forces or parent or female dependant of a member
of the forces the payment of any fine, premium, or other like sum
in addition to the rent.
(3) No order for the recovery of a shop or land from a substituted
member of the Forces or a parent or female dependant of a member R - 1918 No '
of the Forces or for the ejectment therefrom of a tenant (being a
member of the Forces or a parent or female dependant of a member
of the Forces) shall be made so long as the tenant continues to pay
rent at the agreed rate as modified by this regulation and performs
the other conditions of the tenancy unless —
(i) the tenant has committed waste, or has been guilty of
conduct which is a nuisance or annoyance to adjoining or
neighbouring occupiers, or the premises are reasonably
required by the landlord for the occupation of himself or


some other person in his employ or in the employ of some
tenant from him, or on some other ground which is deemed
satisfactory by the Court making the order, and
(ii) the Court is satisfied that in all the circumstances of the case
and in the interests of justice it is desirable that the order
for recovery or ejectment should be made.
RIMIII'NO si Registrar of Titles of any State may, upon submission
' to him of a notification of re-entry by a lessor for registration in
accordance with the law of the State, require such evidence as he
deems necessary that the re-entry does not contravene any pro-
vision of these Regulations and may refuse to register the notifica-
tion until such evidence is submitted to him.
Registration. —Cf. the " Civilian. " Moratorium, Reg. 11 (o), in respect of
MortgageSa
For Index to " Soldiers' " Moratorium, see p. 26.
For Index to " Civilians' " Moratorium, see p. 25.


CIVILIANS
EDITOR'S NOTE, —This Moratorium does not apply to transactions of
Members of the Forces or female dependants: see Reg. 11 (e), post, at
p. 23. But note the exception in Reg. 11 (B).
Regulation No. 284 of 10th November, 1916, as amended
by No. 324 of 22nd December, 1916, No. 13 of 24th
January, 1917, No. 76 of 23rd March, 1917, No.
■ 253 of 28th September, 1917, and No. 28 of
6th February, 1918.
WAR PRECAUTIONS (MORATORIUM) REGULATIONS.
I. These Regulations may be cited as the War Precautions short title.
(Moratorium) Regulations.
2. In these Regulations, unless the contrary intention appears— Definitions.
" Mortgage" means any deed, memorandum of mortgage,
instrument, or agreement whereby security for payment
of moneys or for the performance of any contract is
granted over land or chattels or any interest therein
respectively, and includes an equitable mortgage by
deposit of title deeds, and any document by which the
duration, of a mortgage is extended ;
Mortgagor " means the person liable under the provisions As amended by
of a mortgage, or entitled to redeem a mortgage, and in- R ' 1917 So ' 76 "
eludes any person who has guaranteed the payment of any
money the payment of which is secured by a mortgage, or
the performance by the mortgagor of any covenant,
condition, or agreement expressed or implied in the mort-
gage, whether such guarantee is expressed in the mort-
gage or in any other instrument;
" Mortgagee " means the person entitled to the benefit of the
security of any mortgage ;
" Supreme Court " means the Supreme Court of a State ; As amended by
R 1917 No 18
' The Court " means the High Court or the Supreme Court
of a State, or in the case of a mortgage in which the
principal sum does not exceed Two thousand pounds, a
County .or District Court or a Local Court consisting of a
Special or Stipendiary Magistrate ;
' The rate provided in the mortgage " means the rate of
interest provided in the mortgage, or, where there is
provided in the mortgage a reduced rate of interest in
the case of punctual payment, the reduced rate; and
shall not in any case be construed to refer to any in-


creased rate of interest stipulated to be paid in any con-
tingency.
Court, —As to jurisdiction, see Reg. 8:B. Decision final, Reg. Bc.
Mortgage.—Agreements for purchase are protected like mortgages : see
Reg. 10, post.
Bill of Sale and collateral P.N, —Of. Porter v. Stephenson, 11 N.Z.M.C.R.
84 (N.Z.) ; Gleeson v. Golello, 9 M.C.R. 178 (N.Z.), and other N.Z. cases under
" Mortgage," in " The Australasian Annual Digests," 1915, 1916, 1917.
to e to S cer- .3. These Regulations shall not apply to any fluctuating
tain fluctuating advance exceeding Two thousand pounds which is made by way of
advances. bank overdraft secured by a mortgage, unless the High Court or
As amended by the Supreme Court, upon the application of the mortgagor, deter-
-32<k Ol6 No " mines that having regard to the matters mentioned in sub-regulation
(5) of Regulation 4 of these Regulations it is desirable that these
Regulations should apply.
Guarantee ... security for Mortgage.—Appellants guaranteed, respon-
dent bank the repayment by a company of amount advanced by bank on
mortgage. The bank proceeded against guarantors under specially endorsed
writ, and applied for leave to sign judgment under Order XIV., r. 1, of the
Rules of the Victorian Supreme Court, 1916. Held, that the appellants should
have leave to defend, as the question whether the War Precautions (Mora-
torium) Regulations, 1916 No. 284, as amended by No. 324, afforded a good
defence to the action was arguable : Clarke v. Union Bank of Australia, Ltd.,
23 C.L.R. 5. (And see further as to pleading, under the RR. of the Victorian
Supreme Court : Union Bank of Australia Ltd. v. Clarke (No. 2), 1917 V.L.R.
329 ; 38 A.L.T. 193 ; 23 A.L.R. 161 (Vic.). The definition of " Mortgagor "
has been since amended.)
As to other cases on Mortgage, etc., see notes to next Regulation.
" Tricky pleading. "—See Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd. v.
Worrall, 35 W.N. 5 (N.S.W.), in note to next Regulation.
" Sub-regulation (5) of Regulation 4." —As to leave to proceed where the
security is " wasting," or mortgagor's conduct unworthy.
4. (I) A mortgagee shall not, without leave of the Court —
Limitation of
rights of
(a) call up or demand payment from any mortgagor of any
part of the principal sum secured by the mortgage ;
mortgagees.
(b) exercise any power of sale ;
(c) commence any action or proceeding, or continue any
action or proceeding commenced after the twentieth day
of September, One thousand nine hundred and sixteen,
for breach of any covenant, agreement, or condition
expressed or implied in any mortgage other than a cove-
nant, agreement, or condition for —-
(i) the payment of interest, or
(ii) the insurance, maintenance, or cultivation of the
mortgage property, or the payment of rates, taxes
and other charges, or the doing of any acts for
the preservation of the security ;
(d) commence any action or proceeding, or continue any
action or proceeding commenced after the twentieth day
of September, One thousand nine hundred and sixteen.'
for interest at any rate higher than the rate provided in


the mortgage or the rate payable under sub-regulation (7)
of this Regulation, as the case may be ; or
(e) take any steps for obtaining an order for foreclosure or for
possession or occupation :
Provided that where interest is in arrear for not less than inserted by r.
three months or the mortgagor fails to observe the pro- 1917 No - IS-
visions of any covenant, agreement or condition expressed
or implied in the mortgage for any of the matters specified
in sub-paragraph (ii.) of paragraph (c) of sub-regulation (1)
of this Regulation, nothing in this paragraph, shall pre-
• elude the mortgagee from entering into possession of the
mortgaged property, but in any such case the mortgagor
may at any. time within two months after the mortgagee
has. entered into possession apply to the Court for an Order
requiring the mortgagee to vacate the mortgaged property,
and in the event of the application being granted by the
Court the mortgagee shall vacate the mortgaged property
in accordance with the order of the Court.
(2) Applications for the leave of the Court, other than substituted by
applications for the leave of. a Local Court, may be made on sum- R - 1917 No - 18 *
mons which must be served on or by motion which must be notified 76
to such persons as the Court considers entitled thereto, or ex parte and 25 5.
in any case in which by reason of special circumstances the Court
considers such procedure to be just and equitable, and applications
for the leave of a Local Court may be made on summons which must
be served on all persons affected by the application at least seven
clear days before the day appointed for the hearing of the applica-
tion.
(3) ~ ............. . . . » Repealed fey
(4) In dealing with any application for leave under this 91 N °' & '
Regulation, the Court may, subject to this Regulation—-
(a) grant the application on such terms and conditions (if any)
as the Court thinks lit ; or
(b) refuse the application :
Provided that the" Court shall not grant any application for As amended by
leave to commence or continue proceedings for the recovery from a R " 1917 No ' l3 '
mortgagor of any part of the principal sum secured by mortgage,
or for foreclosure, unless the Court is satisfied that, having regard
to ail relevant circumstances, including the ability of the mort-
gagor to redeem the property out of his own moneys, it would be
unjust and inequitable not to grant it.
(5) In any case where, after the date fixed by the mortgage
for repayment of the principal sum, the principal sum or any part
thereof remains unpaid and the mortgagor satisfies the Court that
he is unable to redeem the property, or to repay a portion of the
principal sum, as the case may be, from his own money, the Court
shall not grant leave to take any proceedings for such redemption
or repayment unless the Court is satisfied—
(a) that, by reason of the wasting nature of the security, the As amended by
continuance of the mortgage would seriouslv affect the R ° 1917 Nos - 18
security; or ' and 258 '
(b) that the conduct of the mortgagor has, in respect of any
breaches by him of the covenants of the mortgage, or in


respect of any matter affecting the rights or remedies of
the mortgagee, or in respect of dealings with the mort-
gagee, been such as to render him undeserving of the bene-
fit or protection of these Regulations.
Repealei. (gj
(7) In any case where after the due date for repayment of the
principal sum or any part thereof,.the principal sum or part remains
unpaid, the time for repayment of the principal sum or part shall,
unless and until an application for leave is dealt with by the Court
under this "Regulation, be by force of these Regulations extended
upon the terms that interest shall continue to be payable at the close
of the same intervals of time as are provided by the mortgage with
respect to the interest thereby secured, or, if no provision is so made,
then quarterly, and at the following rate :
(a) in the case of a mortgage of which the principal sum or
unpaid part does not exceed Two thousand pounds—the
As substituted
by R. 1917 No
253.
rate provided in the mortgage, or rate of six per
centum per annum, whichever is the less ; and
(b) in the case of a mortgage of which the principal sum or
unpaid part exceeds Two thousand pounds —the rate
provided in the mortgage, or six per centum per annum,
whichever is the greater :
Provided that—
(i) in the former case the Court may, on the application of the
mortgagee, fix a higher rate, not being higher than the rate
provided in the mortgage or six per centum per annum,
whichever is the greater ; and
(ii) in the latter case the Court may, on the application of
the mortgagor, fix a lower rate, not being lower than the
rate provided in the mortgage or six per centum per annum,
whichever is 1 the less.
Second Mortgagee.—A second mortgagee is not'entitled to be Heard on an
application by a first mortgagee, under Reg. 284, for leave to realise Ms
security : Be World's Picture, dkc., Co., and Fourth Victoria P. B. Society,
1917 V.L.R. 76 ; 23 A.L.R. 40 ; 38 A.L.T. 140 (Vic.).
Bankruptcy . . . Puisne mortgagees . . Wasting security . . Costs.—
The Regulations do not cease to apply when the mortgagor is bankrupt. The
Official Assignee and creditors are entitled to protection, and the Court must
consider the rights of puisne encumbrancers. Protection allowed to second
mortgagee by allowing first mortgagee to sell at reserve fixed by Court :
Ex parte Sautelle ;. Ex parte Negus, 34 W.N. 74 (N.S.W.). Cf. Phillips.v.
Johnson, 17 G.L.R. 310 (N.Z.)
Application by Mortgagee.;— The Court will not lay down any general
rule as to the circumstances in which an application by a mortgagee under the
clause will be granted or refused. The Court has an unfettered discretion:
Re Annie Rofus I Rohs v. Strawhorn, 1917 V.L.R. 32 ; 23 A.L.R. 22; 38
A.L.T. 117 (Vic.).
Wasting Security, Onus of Proof?*—On application for leave by mortgagee
under this clause, the onus of proof is upon the mortgagee to satisfy the Court
that, either by reason of the wasting nature of the security the continuance
of the mortgage would seriously affect the security, or that the conduct of the
mortgagor has in the respects mentioned in the regulation been such as to
render him undeserving of the benefit or protection of the Regulations, and
unless the Court is so satisfied, it has no discretion to gyant the relief asked for :
In re Hynds, 22 C.L.R. 541. Cf. Thomson v. Claridge, 17 G.L.R. 226 (N.Z.)
Fluctuating advance.—See Reg. 3, ante. p. 16.


Trad© buildings, Costs, &c. Costs are in the discretion of the Court, and
wi ordinarily follow the rule that in suits for foreclosure or redemption the
mortgagee is entitled to his costs unless guilty of some misconduct. Buildings
and machinery erected for trade purposes, such as flour-milling, & c , are m
themselves of a wasting nature, but it does not necessarily follow, in View of
the particular circumstances of the' case as to use, upkeep, etc., that the
security would thereby be seriously affected if the mortgage were continued
ior a reasonable period: Worrall v. Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney 17
S.R. 457 ; , 34 W.N. 208 (N.S.W-.). Appeal under Reg. Bc. dismissed' as
incompetent, 24 C.L.R. 28. -
Contract of Sale . . , Leave to Proceed,"—Purchaser, which owed instal-
ment of £125, was a proprietary company in business of buying and selling
land on long terms,, and of money lending, with assets £340 in current account
.and unrealizable assets £12,500, with liabilities of £35,000 due on contracts
extending over long terms. Though it was unlikely to meet its liabilities
as they fell due, it would be able to do so eventually, and it required the
money at the bank in order to carry on its business. Vendor was a banking
company. Held, that m the circumstances leave to proceed should be granted :
London Bank of Australia Ltd. v. Australian Trusts Proprietary Ltd., 38
A.L.T. 118; 23 A.L.R. 8 (Vic.). '
Foreclosure, leave to proceed, etc. —Leave to call up mortgage-, foreclose
etc., refused, as the mortgagee had not satisfied the Court that the existing
circumstances justified the giving of leave to depart from the prima facie
provision 01the regulation, viz. : that having regard to the general dislocation
ot affairs, directly and indirectly occasioned bv the war, it is contrary to
public welfare to permit mortgagees to rigidly enforce their strict rights against
debtors. fact that a mortgagee had, before the making of the
Moratorium regulations, obtained a judgment against the mortgagor for
the amount of principal and. interest due, which he may have a right to enforce,
is not a ground for giving leave to proceed : In re Allen, 23 C.L.R. 220.
Member of the Forces-—Leave to Proceed—Female Dependant, etc. —See,
generally, the Active Service - Moratorium, ante, and notes to clause 13
thereof.
Costs.—-Mortgagee asked mortgagor to consent to exercise of powers
under mortgage. Mortgagor took no notice of the request. Harvey, J.,
allowed costs of application to be added to amount secured :Ex narte: Shaw
34 W.N. 74 (N.S.W.). '
Fluctuating advance Pisadillg.—Defendant (sued by bank for payment
of overdraft) pleaded {inter alia ) that if a fluctuating advance, by a bank,
made by way of overdraft and secured by mortgages, is called up by the bank!
it. then ceases to be within Reg. 3, and at once, becomes a mortgage debt
within Reg. 4. ' That seems to me a palpable fallacy . . ."—( Gordon , J.l.
Plea struck out as tricky • Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney v. Worrall and
another, 35 W.N. 5 (N.S.W.).
Mortgagee 111 possession. But a mortgagee who entered on or before
-oth September, 1916, is in a more favourable position : see Reg. 8.
to execute Mortgage—Specific performance— Guarantee.-
Li. Veale and anor. v. Goodwin, 1916 N.Z.L.R 757 ; C4.L.R. 563 (N Z ) and
Boswell v. Beid, 1917 N.Z.L.R. 225 ; .G.L.R.:84 (N.Z.). v ' (
' Second Mortgage to secure overdraft.—Cf. Re Keir and National Bank of
New Zealand, 1916 N.Z.G.L.R. 255 (N.Z.).
n* Transfer of land subject to Mortgage—Right of Mortgagor to Indemnity.—
Cf. Snow v. James, 1916 N.Z.G.L.R. 146 (N.Z.).
Mortgage seeured by P.N.'s.— Hoore v. Farlow. 1917 G.L.R "19 7N z )•
' Gleesort v. Golello, 9 M.C.R. 178 (N.Z.). ' —' ; -v. y- ' •>'
■ Equitable Mortgage.—Memorandum of. deposit of deed, with bank, held
V?' f moitgag-b, .but an equitable.,charge : London County ds Westminster
Bank v. Tompkins, 86L.J.R.K.8. 1521. (1917) Eng. W.N. 228 • 33T.L.R. 471.


Bankruptcy.— Apparently a notice of suspension of payments will be an
act of bankruptcy, though the debtor be protected by moratorium : of.
In re Sahler, 84 L.j.K.B. 1275; 112 L.T. 133; (1915) H.B.R. 119 ; 59 S. J. 106.
Jurisdiction of 5. In every action or proceeding by a mortgagee for the recovery
Kco/er^Tf 8 of any sum for interest secured by a mortgage, the Court hearing the
iTmortga C ge red action or proceeding may, if in its discretion and in the circumstances
of the case it deems it just and expedient, in lieu of giving judgment
for immediate payment, give judgment for payment at a date to be
fixed, or by instalments payable at such times, as the Court in its
discretion determines, and for this purpose the Court shall have
jurisdiction to cause judgment to be entered in such form as it deems
best to give full effect to the intent of these Regulations, and to
direct the method of enforcement of the judgment. .
Where inert - 6. Where by the terms of a mortgage payment is provided by a
bylkuiments 6 . series of regular instalments and the rate of interest is not fixed in
the mortgage or the instalments are expressed to be for principal
only and interest is stated not to be payable the instalments shall for
the purposes of these Regulations be deemed to include interest at
such rate as is assessed by the Court.
Interest. —See also Reg. 4 (7).
Mortgages 7 _ Where a mortgage for a specific amount provides for the pay-
demand. 011 ment of the principal sum on demand, and a demand has not at the
As amended by commencement of these Regulations been made, the principal sum
R. 1916 Mo. 324. for the p lir p ose only of these Regulations be deemed to be pay-
able immediately after the commencement of these Regulations.
Commencement of Regulations.— The earliest of the Regulations is No.
284 of 10th November, 1916.
Mortgagees in 8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding
possession. Regulations, any mortgagee in possession, who entered into posses-
sion on or before the twentieth day of September, 1916, may exercise
all his powers under the mortgage without leave of the Court :
!I > Provided that, on the application of the mortgagor, the Court may,
if in all the circumstances it thinks it just and equitable so to do,
forbid the mortgagee from exercising any power of sale or of fore-
closure, and may otherwise make such order in the premises, as it
thinks fit. ' R , ~ , ~
(2) The provisions of Sub-regulations (2), (3), (4) and (6) of
Regulation 4 of these Regulations shall apply to any such applica-
tion in like manner as they apply to applications for the leave of the
Court under Regulation 4. -■ ' _ , •,
Costs. 8a;. The, costs of any application under these Regulations to
inse ted by b the Court, shall be in the discretion, of the Court, if C ..u. ..
1917 No, 13.
Amended • ■ .Court—Defined, by Reg. I.
Jwisdietioß of v . .• ,8B The jurisdiction conferred on a Court by these Regula-
gssar ' «sns may be exercised by a Justice of Judge of yaCourt sitting
inserted by r. either in Court or in Chambers, or, in the case of a local Court, y a
1917 No. 253. - gp ec i a i 0 r Stipendiary Magistrate. -
-- Court. — See-definition ol Court at Reg. 1.


I of being the " Mortgagor " in respect of
[describe transaction] and being entitled to the benefit or protection
of the War Precautions (Moratorium) Regulations made pursuant to
the. War Precautions Acts, 1914-1916, do hereby consent to the
exercise by the Mortgagee [name] of the following power, namely
[describe], this consent being given by me by the advice of Mr
Solicitor of the Court, whose certificate is subscribed hereto.
Solicitor. Signature
[Address] , (Mortgagor).
T, of.. a Solicitor of the Court, hereby
certify that the above-written consent of [name] is given
by my advice.
Date
Bc, Any determination decision judgment direction order I)ocii , ir , lw of
or assessment made or given by any Court in any matter arising Court final,
under these Regulations shall be final and conclusive and without *
appeal.
This regulation is retrospective, so as to include any determination of
the Supreme Court of a State made before 28th September, 1917, the date on
which the regulation was made : Worral v. Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney
Ltd., 24 C.L.R. 28. " The intention of the legislating authority to put all these
matters on the same footing, namely, total unappealability, is quite clear . .
—Barton, J.
9. (1) When a mortgagor is entitled to the benefit or protection Consent by
of these Regulations, he may consent to the. exercise by the mort- Sercisemf °-
gagee of any power, but such consent shall not take away the neces-
sity of the leave of the Court, unless the consent is in writing and
witnessed by a solicitor of the High Court or the Supreme Court,
who certifies in writing that the consent is given by his advice.
(2) If consent is given and certified, the leave of the Court
shall, so far as the consent extends, be unnecessary.
Suggested Form of Consent. —
Witness :— Signature.
Consent & Waiver. —Cf. Johns and others Mulinder, 1916 N.Z.L.R. 422 ;
G.L.R. 2 : 64"( N.Z.) ; and Charles v. Welch,' 1917 N.Z.L.R. 489; G.L.R. 295.
Connell v. Phoenix Co., 34 N.Z.L.R. 666
10. (1) The provisions of these Regulations shall extend and
apply, mutatis mutandis, to agreements, for sale and purchase of agreements for
land (including exchange), and to leases of land containing an p* §^ s d e o{
optional or compulsory purchasing clause. j and aild t( ? .
leases contain-
(2) For the purposes of these Regulations an agreement chasfng clause,
for sale and purchase of land shall be deemed to be a mortgage of
such land to secure payment of the unpaid purchase-money and
interest thereon, and fulfilment of the conditions set forth in the
agreement.
(3) For the purposes of these Regulations a lease of land
containing a purchasing clause shall be dealt with in all respects as
if the lessee had already notified his exercise of an option to purchase
under an optional purchasing clause, and as if the lessor were mort-
gagee and the lessee were mortgagor of the land, and as if the rent
reserved by the lease were interest and the agreed purchase-money
were principal moneys secured. The term .of the lease shall, if neces-
sary, be extended for the purpose of giving effect to this provision.


Default.—The vendor.of land has a remedy, see next regulation, which
is not available to a mortgagee, i,e., he is permitted to give notice and proceed
without having necessarily to invoke a Court.
Exceptions.—This regulation does not apply to the cases mentioned in
Reg. 11.
Stock and land sold together.—Cf. Poynter v. Holt, 1916 N.Z.G.L.R. 69
(N.Zi).
Agreements -
for sale and
purchase of
land where
purchaser
makes default
10A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regula-
tions, if the purchaser of any land under an agreement for the sale
and purchase of land—
('a) is in arrear, for a period of twelve months, in respect of any
payment of principal or interest due by him under the
agreement; and
(6) makes, during any period of six months, no payment in
respect of any portion of the amount due by him under the
agreement,
the vendor may forward, by registered post, to the purchaser,
addressed to his last known place of address a notice intimating
that he proposes, after the expiration of a period of one month
from the date when in the ordinary course of post the notice should
be delivered to the purchaser, to exercise any or all of his rights
under the agreement for sale and purchase of the land.
Inserted by R.
1917 No. 253.
..(2) After the expiration of the period specified in the last
preceding sub-regulations the vendor may, unless the Court upon
application made by the purchaser within the period so specified
otherwise directs, exercise any or all of his rights under the agree-
ment as if the provisions of these Regulations had not extended and
applied to the agreement.
Suggested Form. —
To [purchaser].
of v.- [address].
REFERRING to a certain contract or agreement made on [date] between
me as Vendor and yourself as Purchaser whereby I [name]
agreed to sell and you to purchase the land known as [ describe fully]
AND WHEREAS you haVe been for a period of twelve months in arrear
in respect' of a payment of [" principal "or " interest '' ] AND WHEREAS
you have during a period of six months made no payment in respect
of any portion of the amount due by you under the said agreement
TAKE NOTICE that I the said Vendor propose after the expiration of a
period of one month from the date when in the ordinary course of post
this notice should have been delivered to you to exercise any or all of
my rights under the said agreement for sale and purchase of the said
land.
As witness my hand this day of.;. .....191,
[ V endoP % Signature]
Witness "
[Registration receipt to be appended to copy of notice and identified
by person posting it.]
Non-applica-
tion of
Regulations to
certain
mortgages.
(a) any mortgage, or an agreement for sale arid purchase, or
any lease containing an optional or compulsory purchasing
clause, which is executed after the twentieth day of
September, One thousand nine hundred and sixteen, if
the mortgage agreement or lease contains a condition or
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regulations
these Regulations shall not apply to—


covenant expressly excluding the provisions, of these
Regulations ; or
(b) any agreement for the sale and purchase of leasehold
interests in land only, whether such agreement was entered
into before or after the twentieth, day of September,
One thousand nine hundred and sixteen ; but this pro-
vision shall not extend so as to exclude from the provision's'
of these Regulations agreements for the sale and purchase
of land partly freehold and partly leasehold ; or
(c) any transaction in relation to which any member of the
Forces or a female dependant is entitled to any benefit
or protection under the provisions of Statutory Rules
1916, No. 163, as amended by any subsequent regulations ;
or
(d) any mortgage to secure the repayment of a loan granted As amended-'by
by a registered building or friendly society to one of its and r. 1917 No.
members ; or 253 -
(e) any loan made by a life assurance company on the security
of one or more of its policies, other than an industrial
policy, provided the rate of interest payable on the loan
is not greater than —
(i) the rate of interest usually charged by the company
before the commencement of the present state of
war for a similar loan, or
(ii) seven per centum per annum,
whichever is the less.
" (e) Soldier or dependant." —See the
'Active Service " Moratorium,
Option of Purchase—No formal notice to exercise option.—Cf. Soutme v.
'Finnis, 1917 N.Z.L.R. 341 ; G-.L.R. 162 (N.Z.).
11A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the last INSERTED BY R.
preceding Regulation, if, for the purpose of legislation enacted 1916 No " 824,
in consequence of the war, restrictions are placed upon the marketing
of any produce, and the producer is thereby rendered unable to
meet, out of the proceeds of the land, any payment of rent falling,
due, or which has since the fifth day of December, One thousand
nine hundred and sixteen, fallen due, upon any land used by him for
the purpose of or in connection with the production of the produce
the right of the lessor to recover the rent or possession of the land,
notwithstanding that proceedings may have been commenced prior
to the commencement of this Regulation, shall be postponed until
with respect to any specified period the producer has received the
proceeds of his produce, or until, with respect to that particular
class of produce, the Attorney-General by notice published in the
Gazette declares that as regards that specified period the producers
have received a substantial part of the proceeds of their produce,
whichever first happens.
(2) Where any payment of rent is postponed in accordance
with this regulation, interest at the rate of five per centum per
annum shall be payable by the producer to the lessor in respect of
the period of postponement. -


Court may 118. (1) Where any Court has made an order for the payment
against 6 6 by any person to any other person of a sum of money and the Court
cert g ata en casis. is satisfied that immediate payment of the whole or part of the money
inserted by R. wo it Id inflict great hardship on the person ordered to pay the money
191? No. 253. r e a son of the operation of these Regulations or the War Precau-
tions (Active Service Moratorium) Regulations upon his property
or investments, or upon the realization thereof, the Court may,
upon the application of the person ordered to pay the money, in its
discretion, if in all the circumstances it thinks it desirable so to do,
order that the payment of the whole or part of the sum of money
in question shall be deferred until such time and upon such condi-
tions as the Court thinks fit.
(2) An order may be made under this Regulation in respect
of the payment of money made by any Court before the commence-
ment of this Regulation as well as in respect of orders made after the
commencement of this Regulation.
Transfers of lie. The Registrar of Titles of any State may, upon the sub-
mo?tgagees e f y mission to him for registration in accordance with the law of the
inserted BY R. State of a transfer of property on sale by the mortgagee thereof,
1918 No. 2.8. require such evidence as he deems necessary that the sale sought
to be given effect to by the transfer does not contravene any pro-
vision of these Regulations and may refuse to register the transfer
until such evidence is submitted to him.
Registration. —l. The Registrar-General of New South Wales, in cases
where the consent of purchaser, and. certificate of a solicitor (under Clause 9,
ante) are provided, does not require further evidence. _ _
2. In other cases, the Registrar-General, in addition to the ordinary
requirements, requires it to be shown (usually by statutory declaration,) that
(a) the mortgagor is not a member of the Forces ; ( b ) No order of the Court
has been made restricting mortgage® from exercising power of Where
sale was made subsequently to 20th September, 1916 (Reg. 8), evidence is
also required that mortgagee was in possession prior to that date and had con-
tinued in possession up to the date of sale. But if the sale were made before
20th September, 1916, though later than the " Soldier " Moratorium, evidence
is required that mortgagor is not a member of the Forces, or female dependant.
If sale were made prior to the " Soldier Moratorium date, no such evidence
is required. (It may be. added that " entry into possession," in the case of
vacant land, is a matter of nicety, in which the payment of rates and the affixing
of a notice on the land itself may assist proof.) Of course where there is an
Order of the Court for sale, the Registrar-General will not require the evidences
mentioned.
Leases. —In the " Soldiers " Moratorium the Registrar-General is also
clothed with powers of inquiry before registering the " re-entry " of a lessor,
see Reg. 19.


INDEX TO " CIVILIANS' " MORATORIUM.
BANK and fluctuating advance 16
BUILDING SOCIETY mortgages 23
CHATTELS,' mortgage of ■ 15
CONSENT to. waive Regs. ... 21
COSTS, in discretion of Court... 20
COURT —
powers of, in " hardship " 24
application for leave of ... 17
defined ... ... ••• 15
jurisdiction of ... ... 20
DATES, memo, of ... ... 4
FEMALE DEPENDENT, transac-
tions of ... ••• ••• 23
FLUCTUATING AD VANCE ... 16
FORECLOSURE, forbidden ... 17
FRIENDLY SOCIETY mortgages 23
GUARANTOR, protection to ... 15
HARDSHIP, relief against ... 24
INSURANCE, breach of covenant 16
INTEREST —
loans on policies ... ... 23
generally ... ... 15, 18
JUDGMENT, payment by instal-
ments ... ... ... 20
LAND PURCHASE—
treated like mortgage ... 21
when in default ... ... 22
LEASE, with purchasing clause 21,22
LEAVE OF COURT, when un-
necessary ... ... ... 21
LIFE ASSURANCE, loans ... 23
MAGISTRATE, jurisdiction ... 20
.MEMBER OF FORCES, transac-
tions of ... ... ... .23
MORTGAGE, &C.—
defined ... ... ••• 15
by Building society, &c.... 23
interest prescribed ... 18
of chattels ... ... 15
" Payable on demand " ... 20
purchase of land deemed a 21
rate provided in, definition 15
registration of sale under 24
MORTGAGEE —- .
general restraint of ... 16
in possession (20 Sept..,
1916) 20
second and third. ... 18
POLICY, loan on life ... ... 23
POST, notice by... ~.. ... 22
PROCEEDINGS against mort-
gagor, restrained ... 17
PRODUCE, marketing of, and
rent ... ... ... 23
REDEEM, mortgagor unable to 17
REGISTRATIONS of transfers ... 24
REGULATIONS —
sundry exclusions from ... 22
when " excluded "by
parties ... ... 22
RENT and marketing of produce 23
SALE, power of, restrained ... 16
SUMMONS, procedure by ... 17
SOLICITOR, witnessing consent ' 21
VENDOR, "notice " to pur-
chaser ... ... J.i 22
and purchaser ... ... 21
WAIVER, consent of mortgagor 21
WASTING NATURE of security... 1,7
For " Soldiers' " Index—see p. 26.


INDEX T0 "SOLDIERS'" MORATORIUM.
A.NXOVANC'I-:, by tenant 11
APPEAL against Judge's order 8
; BILL OF SALE, process under.. 8
CHAMBERS, proceedings in 9, 10
CHATTELS, not to be taken ... 9
CITIZEN FORCES, reference t0... 5
CONTRACT, &c., where harsh... 10
CONTRACT, concerning mortgage 8
COSTS, in applications by mort-
gagee, &c -.. ... 8
COURT—
leave to proceed ... ... 9
may prohibit process ... 10
DAIRY, land, rent ... ... 12
DATES, memo, of ... ... 4
DEFINITIONS ... ... 5
DISTRESS, restrained ... ... 8
DWELLING HOUSE, rental ... 10
EXECUTION on chattels, res-
trained ... ... ... 9
FARM, rental ... ... ...12
" FEMALE DEPENDENT " de-
fined ... ... ... 5
FINALITY of decision ... ... 8
FURNITURE, distress, &e. ... 9
HARDSHIP—
protection against 10
provision for ... ... 8
HIRE-PURCHASE, seizure tinder 8
" HOUSE," included in " land " 5
INSTALMENT of principal ... 6-7
INTEREST, rates payable, mort-
gage or purchase ... 6
JOINT MORTGAGE, &C„ soldier
and civilian ... ... 8
JUSTICE OR JUDGE, powers of 8
LAND, defined ... ... ••• 5
-LASM-TERRR- -fflro- TENANT 10 -14
LEASE, registration of ... 14
LIMITATIONS, statutes'of , .... 7
" MEMBER OF- THE FORCES "
defined ... ... ... 5
MORTGAGE—
Instalments postponed ... 7
Principal of, postponed ... 6
NAVAL FORCES, reference to 5
NUISANCE, by tenant 11-13
ORDER, on motion ... ... 8
PARENT OF SOLDIER, &C., in
rent cases ... 10—14
PENALTY and prosecution ... 9
PENSION, female dependant on 5
POSSESSION of dwelling, order
for ... ... ... 11
PREMIUM, not to be exacted
against tenant ... ... 11
PROCEEDINGS stayed ... ... 7
PURCHASE MONEY, land, pay-
ment postponed ... ... 6
RATES, as affecting rent ... 13
REGISTRATION, lease and re-
entry ... ... 14
RENTAL-MATTERS ... 10-14
SHOP AND DWELLING, rental,
&c 12-13
TENANCY, generally ... 10-14
WASTE, in tenancy ... 11-13
WEARING APPAREL, seizure ... 9
WIFE — see "Female Depen-
dent " ... 5
WRIT, against soldier, &c.,
issue of ... ••• 9, 10
For Civilians' " Index, see p. 25.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia for the Publishers, by
Simmons Ltd', 55 Druitt Street, Sydney.


V©[!M!®« 24, M@w nmWffiMßsp
111 i«:!S«M8fi! 11l fcflftl
Subscriptioin £2 per nolsiinie.
TM I c C (jflp (1 hoi 3 f 3 .3-do Oi tile
- le Con id of taa,] - j , ,
of Australia. . They are. the only Reports eon.taJ.niag all the decisions
of/the highest tri banal of the Commonwealth, aoc! their accuracy
gf ~ n T , - i he dodges ,
hi J uica(3, m 1 Ce Cou r y c ] 24
books (vols, 1-23) have already been, poblished,, -
Mew and Secondhand Sets band
hi w god i . . 'Vid m
. ' . ' - - -Volumes Ito 19,.■- ' ■ ■C-
i«'t ii j • M hfc M.' o2 Jss.
' OM "d-'


A KEY
TO
IN REPORTS
, , 1 ! i J . 11 M -
1917.
Contains a
WyeA of
,
I ' ■ Australasian Cases on Appeal ■
to the House of -Lords
and. Privy Cornell ■ ■
n - Reports
Gazett ■ - i -
1 .
B ©ports
EICIH coiiitfo : -"p : i : . :
1 - ■ Commonwealth. L&w - •' - P ;:
Reports
- itejeorts.
A
WeCkiy Wotes
Land Appeal Coort Oaves
Lo , d
Reports
QWIIlgMIBc . :
AWy. State Beporta rt P
Weekly L otos
■ t
Reports
P'n i d R i , W T'
IRsjpovin
WACRiWd pa i at
Law Reports .
.
I -; / a i |
Argus Lara Reports
'Ml a "W i 'L
The Alspp I me imem mrmmsi ami dmmfisi m \
