









, ->a-%
/o/6/p^
si^y-o
44
TIE TRAGIC PASSING OF JOHN O’NEILL
INVESTIGATING THE MURDER CHARGE
George William Auburn In The Dock
The First Day's Proceedings
Address Of The
Crown
Prosecutor
hot for a great number of rears has the
public mind of Western Australia been so
disturbed as the result of a murder ease
than it has in the charge which was pre-
ferred against William George Auburn in
the Supreme Court to-day. As evi-
dence of this, a large crowd —mostly men—
gathered in the Government Gardens early
this morning in order to secure seats in the
public gallery of the Court when it was
opened. The trial gives every promise of
being a long one, for the' official list shows
that 53 witnesses are to be called for the
prosecution, and it may be taken for grant-
ed that a number of witnesses will bis put
up for the defence.
The jury which has been called to deaj
with the case has au onerous duty, and it
would not be out of place to call to mind
the words of the Chief Justice (Sir Robert
M’Millan) in a recent case hinging on the
present one, when he warned the public to
be careful, of making rash and improper
statements until the jury, the legally ap-
pointed body to deal with the matter, had
sifted the evidence put before it.
AUBURN’S ARRIVAL.
Shortly after 9.30 am. people began to
collect in the avtame leading to the front
«f the Court buildings in the hope of catch-
ing a view of the prisoner. They were dis-
appointed, however, for a posse of police in
charge of Inspector Johnston cleared them
from the vicinity.
Auburn came in the “Black Maria,’” and
among thoso who met him as bo stepped
down from its grim interior was his father.
The prisoner was manacled, and strongly
guarded, but had time to grip his father 1 ©
arm before he was hurried to the cells. An-
i burn was his usual immaculate self, and he
| did not bear any signs of undue stress or
! emotion. A black serge suit was again his
i dress.
I It is understood that the accused was
brought from Fremantle gaol during the
week-end, and the police van took him from
the lock-up this morning. He arrived at
a few minutes after 10 o’clock.
A LARGE JURY PANEL.
Thai it was expected counsel would free-
ly exercise tire right to challenge was evi-
dent from the large numbers of jurymen
who bad been summoned to attend.
THE JUDGE ENTERS.
Prompt at 10.30 Mr. Justice Draper,
wearing the scarlet robes of a Judge in
Criminal Session, took the Bench and the
jury panel was cheeked over and Auburn
brought up.
THE INDICTMENT.
The Judge’s associate read out the indict-
ment, that William George Auburn wa«
charged with the wilful murder of John
George O’Neil at Claremont on April 4,
1924,
NOT GUILTY,
Auburn pleaded “Not guilty” in a dear
voice.
An born, ■who had lost some of hia fresh
eoktr, took a great interest in the calling
of the jury. Both sides exercised their
right to challenge, eleven of the panel
being rejected. / . (
Th H JDSY" BIrAN ki.T.kii
The jury, selected after the Grown had
ahallengod six, and the conns el for the ac-
cused fire persons, comprised Messrs. Ellis
Medcalf (foreman), John M&zza, Alfred
Charles Murphy, Michael John Morrissey,
Francis Walter Major, Dominie M'Ginley,
Albert Mitchell, George Henry Maxwell,
Horace Maryvalo, William James M‘Quire,
Edward James Mills, and Alex M‘ Gee.
COUNSEL BRIEFED.
Mr. Hubert Parker (Crown Prosecutor),
assisted by Mr. A. G. Haynes, appeared for
the prosecution, while Mr, M. G. La van,
and with him Mr. J. F. Walsh, represented
Auburn.
witnesses out of court.
On Mr. Lavan’s application his Honor
ordered all witnesses out of Court
A LONG CASE.
Mr. Parker told the jury that as the
case was expected to last for a number of
days and they would be locked up during
that period, the opportunity wogjd b® given
them through the Sheriff to secure any
clothing or requisites. To the inquiry of
the Foreman of the jury, Mr. Parker said
the Sheriff would provide board and lodg-
ing. No relative, however, would bo able
to sc© members of the jury, and any mes-
sages would have to go through the
Sheriff.
THE PROSECUTOR'S ADDRESS.
At 10LS0 a.m. Mr. Parker opened hi*
address.
“In this ease, the accused stands charg-
ed with the, wilful murder of John George
O’Neil. '-»£{ is the most grievous crime
known in the law. If he l>e guilty, he is (
guilty of a most foul and atrocious mur-
der. Ton will not be worried about the
aspect of the case whether O’Neil was ,
murdered. Ido not tlunk the defence
will Question that aspect of the csfxc. You
lave to determine, and it is
A Solemn Duty,
whether by the evidence to be laid before'
voa, you are in a position to prove that j
tire accused is the man who murdered *
O’Neal” He said it gave him great sat-;
isfaction in the task he had before him to |
find that the accused had been able to \
avail himself of the two learned counsel j
representing him, and be was convinced j
they would present in the most favorable (
manner every argument that might be ,
made in his favor. i'
This‘was
A Case of Circumstantial
evidence. Circumstantial evidence might i
be the weakest of all evidence on which to j
convict a person for crime. On the other
hand it might he the strongest possible
testimony in bringing home the crime to
the accused. In this case tiny would find


it was of the latter type. They would find
if they gave close attention to the evi-
dence that the more the details were ex-
amined into, so the more conclusive did it
become that the accused committed the
■ acme with which he was charged. If
fl-ey were satisfied after giving due con- j
sideration to the evidence, that the ac-
cused was the person who committed, the
murder, ho need hardly say
They Must Not Shrink
from their verdict accordingly. In.
cases of this hind a motive was usually
looked for and motive was usually looked
for when fliers was not sufficient cvidenca
'tr convict otherwise. It was quite unne-
cessary to prove motive in the case of any
crime. Many crimes were committed with-
out any apparent motive, while there wars
many that appeared to nave a most inade-
quate motive. Lord Coleridge, in summing
up to the* wry in a murder cKhtged on
July 10, 1910, said, “If the facts aro
clear, it would not be wise for you to seek
alvouj to find amotive. The apparent ab-
sence of a motive was immaterial.” When
the ease above referred to went to the ,
Court of Appeal in London, the Lord Chief )
Justice said that the summing up of Lord
Coleridge was the most able summing-up
he had ever read. The firry could take It,
therefore, that it would not be wise to seek
to find a motive, for it was immaterial.
However, thev would find, on paying olose
attention to the evidence, .there was
A Motive in This Case.
He would not take up the jury’s time bv
going into that fo.r the moment. They
heed not worry two straws about the ques-
tion of motive.
He proposed to detail the story briefly
starting from March 14. The accused was
a friend of Miss Sadler, and he visited her
place (she resided-with her married sis-
ter, Mrs. Moir) also daily. About March
;14, during a conversation, it was sng-
I gested making a trip to Wagin, and the
! accused said he would get a car and
take them himself. He said he would
! get a ear from Mr. Ford, a sales-
I mac of the Wintcrbottom Motor Co.
When Miss Sadler asked he said it would :
be a Brack Six car. On March 29 Mrs.
Moir received a telegram from Wagin say-
ing her sister was iIL Talk apropos the
trip took place and on March 30 Mrs. Sad-
led told Auburn that if her sister got any
worse they would go down by car or first
train. Auburn said “Don’t do that I
: will take yon down on Saturday. If ycra
! sister gets worse I will take vou down dur-
ing the week.” On the Ist, 2nd, or 3rd
April Mr. Blackmore, a dentist’s assistant,
• and friend of Auburn, was. told by the lat-
ter that he was going to Wagin early on
Saturday morning. The accused also told
a man named M’Kenzie, a driver on the Os-
borne Paarfc team, the same thing. Auburn
ordered
Two Numbar Plates, "P.SS.”
He said he wanted them quickly. The same
day the accused asked Miss Sadler to go to
Abbott and Rich’s place and get ,the plates
because he would not be able to get them,
‘ as he would be in Fremantle that day. At
the same interview, on the night of the
3rd, Auburn told Miss Sadler he would bo
back at their place at S or 8.30 next even-
ing with the car, and would start on the
teip at 6.30 the morning after.
The deceased kept his car at a garage
m Hay-street, run by a man named Hynes.
On April 3 and 4 two extra seats in the car
were unscrewed and taken out. The car
was also overhauled and about 14 gallons
of petrol put in the tank, while two tins
were carried in the body of the car, toge-
ther with a tin of oxL The car was in
good running order, having been overhaul-
ed for the purpose of
Making a Long Journey.
Two new tyres were fitted on the back and
the two best tyres placed on the front
wheels. By the removal of the seats con-
siderably more room was available in the
back for luggage. On April 4 Miss Sad-
ler got the plates from Abbott and Rich,
and about 7 pm. the accused called at her
\ place and received them.' He also 'at'’that'
| time had with him a small parcel aboat two
feet long and about an inch in diameter,
also wrapped in newspaper.- This, Miss
Sadler picked np, and from the -weight of it
she concluded it was
A Bar of Iron.
She remarked “What have you got that
fort’' and Auburn jocularly said “To Lit
you over tho-head with if you don’t behave
yourself.” Accused left with the parcel
and the number plates. Before going, he
said he would retain in about half an hour
with the car and stay the night. Ho was
wearing a- dark blue suit He (Mr. Par-
ker) was unable to enlighten the jury any
further regafWng the number plates. In-
quiries had been made, but so far he had
heard nothing more of them.
Mr. Parker touched upon the evidence of
M‘Csllmn, father of Mrs. O’Neill, who help-
ed him pack the car. A heavy overcoat
was put in the car, and there were also the
ease of petrol, the lubricating oil and the
three spare tyres. These were
Preparations for a Journey.
The witness Hynes would tell them that
When O’Neill left he did not keep any space
in his garage for the murdered man’s car,
and there would not have been any space
for it for some days, although O’Neill al-
ways kept his own car there. An adver-
tising agent named Tracey was in town
that night, and at 10.25 pan. was proceeding
homeward to Nedlands on his motor cycle.
He would tell the jury that he noticed a
car coming towards him just after passing
the SUbiaco entrance to King’s Park, and
it . was on the wrong side
of the road. The driver of the
car slewed to the right, and than outward
and as the result T'racey said something to
trim, and also took his number.
It was No. 3481,
which was deceased’s car. Tracey cculd
not see who was in it, but was positive
about the number. A lad named Edward
Collins was at a picture show at the Leed-
orviilc Oval that night, and about 10.50
pm. he crossed the read to his home. He
had been in bed about a quarter of an hour
when he heard a car go past the house
and pull np a few yards further down the
road—Vincent-strect —where it was sub-
sequently found by the police. It was
left outside the premises of a man namci
Chinnery. He saw it there at 4 am. It
was without lights, and at 4.40 he made an
examination of it and found the number
to bo 3481. Ai about 6.30 am. another
member of the Collins family saw it, and
the boy who had heard it the previous
night saw it there about 9 am. It was
subsequently removed by the police.
They now reverted to the
Accused’s Movements.
Auburn boarded an Osborne Park car at
11.20 pm. A witness (Lynn) would say
that he was at a boxing tournament that
night at Esplanade Gardens. The night
w&s so oppressive that many of the spec-
tators removed their coats, and it was an
open-air resort Lynn caught the same
tram, and the accused boarded it. Lynn
said, somewhere about the LeederviUe Ho-
tel He wore an overcoat, and was close
to Lynn. There was only a short distance
between Vineent-street comer near where
the car was found, and the Lcederville
Hotel, only a small block or so being be-
tween The jury would notice that in a
I statement Auburn made, he said he ecu
acd a coat Lynn could not say whose,
accused alighted, but tnerc was a fish shop
along the route, and the occnpipra would
swear positively that Auburn, ami he him.
-°lf admitted it, went into the jlhuo that
night. It was, they said, betWEou 11 .SO
and 11.40, and he purchased sUme fish,
paying la or 2s. This was important be-
cause the jury -would sec later tbrtt the ac-
cused said he found the overcoat on the
road, because ho only had 3d, and was
walking from town to Leedemllc. At
11H0 a man named Eddy, who bid known
bim for years, saw the accused in the Os-
borne Park team, or waiting for it. The
accused rode on the front platform with the


driver, M'Kenzie. He kept bis hands m'
his overcoat pocket, and M'Keuiio coaid
not say whether it was buttoned or not.
.When the car reached trsborne Park .»
somewhat unusual thing happened, inas-
much as accused asked M’Keniie to sea
him over to the hotel where ho lived, a dis-
tance of 50 yards. He
Said Ho Was “Crook.”
M'Keczic did see him across, tart he would
say ho did not assist him. The evidence
would disclose that accused remained
standing throughout the tram journey.
(hi the sth. about 5 o’clock, a man em-
ployed at the Swan Brewery
NOTICED A BODY
in the river at Crawley. Through him the
police were notified, and Constable Ban-
near, on taking the body from the water,
found that it was that of a man. and that
the head was battered. Tracks of motor-
car were found, indicating that it had gone;
along the road towards the University,
turned and came back, thus placing the
driver’s seat nearest the river. That was |
a distance of about 70 paces from the river,
and there were distinct marks showing
where the
BODY BAD BEEN DRAGGED
down. It had gone over the tracks, and
somewhat obliterated them. There would
be no evidence of footprints or tracks Of
any particular individual. He wanted the
jury to remember that the driver’s scat
nearest the river, as that would be im-
portant when Wcstana-road was being con-
sidered.
The body was identified, and a post-
mortem examination held showing terrible
injuries, there being ten distinct wounds.
It was arranged, said Mr. Parker, that
the two Miss Quiglevs were to go in the
car to Wagin, and, in order to be ready,
had breakfast at 6.15 a.rn. on the Saturday.
When at 10.30 the accused had not shown
tip. Miss Sadler telephoned to him, and he
came along about 11. He told her he had
ACCIDENT WITH THE CAB,
and was wearing a grey suit, because the
blue one had been damaged while he was
effecting repairs. He said, “If you really
want a■ar 1 will lure one.” That was
done. A taxi-man named \V. Binge, after
first driving to the Osborne Park Hotel to
pick up the accv-ed’s coat, set out about
3.30 with the
Party for Wagnt-
The party consisted of Miss Sadler, Mr.
and Mrs. Moir, the two Misses Quigley,
Auburn, and the driver. The time was
about 2 o’clock on Sunday morning when
they got to Wagin. The coat was taken
from the car and put aside by the accused,
i The yardman at the hotel where • they
I stayed got the coat in the morning, ami
j looked after it During the day they went
, to the hospital’, and later to Quartcrmaino’s
i farm. Naturally the
| Murder was Discussed
■on the way down, Singe as a motorman
having heard of it before he left Perth. It
was mentioned at Armadale, where they ob-
tained refreshments; ■at the Wagin Hos-
pital. and at the farm. On the way back,
i just after they left the farm, accused was
I told that his coat was not there, and ho
said he must have left it at the hotel. Mr.
! Allport was asked to-get it, and ho sug-
gested that he send it to Perth by a car
which he knew would be leaving shortly
after. This course the accused agreed with.
Up to this time, and even some time later,
the accused never mentioned to anyone that
he had
Found a Coat.
They arrived back in Perth about 9.30 os.
Sunday, and some two hours later accused
met a friend named Holmes, who said to
’him, “What do you think of. the murder,;
George?” to which the accused replied, i
‘ ‘What Murder?’ ’ N i
this despite the discussion on the way ' t* j
1 Wagin. Shortly after, Auburn met an- i
I other man, who mentioned the murder, ac- ■
1 cased saying he had only just heard of it. *,
On the Monday a housemaid at the Os-
borne Park Hotel was abont to
“do out” the bathroom, and sau
some dark clothes in' the bath in water.
The accused told Tier not to worry abont
the bathroom, as he was going to* •
Wash Somp Clothes
that _ got spattered with mud on
the journey to Wagin. Those who
went to Wagin said there was no inud-
That evening there appeared in “The
Daily News” a notice that O’Neil’s over-
coat was missing. At 8 o’clock the ac-
cused reported to the police that he found
an overcoat under the West Perth subway,
bnt that it was at Wagin. His presence
at the subway he explained by saying that
he had been to the pictures, but having
only threepence in his pocket he had to
walk to the Leedervillo Hotel via the sub-
way, so as to get on the threepenny traar
section to Osborne Park. That day he told
McKenzie, the tram driver, that he was
going to the police to report the
Finding of the Overcoat,
and that was the first time ho mentioned
to anyone but the police that he had found
an overcoat.
On the same day he saw Miss Sadler, but
did net tell her anything about the coat.
Miss Sadler said she would only go for a
drive if Auburn, wjio had asked her, took
the two Misses Quigley. "This was agreed
to. Although the murder was mentioned
again, there was no mention of the finding
of the overcoat or the finding of the
Blood at Westanarroad.
They would find that ■ the accused jOtf/fad
be made the Wcstana-road disco-.erj'on
Monday, but he did nc. mention either
of these facts on Tuesday. He put it to
the jury, if anyone had found any possible
clue, would they have kept it to them-
selves They would have • endeavored to
I have made, small heroes of themselves
| among their particular coterie. The ac-
cused told the police he found the blood
at Wcstana-road owing to the fact that
Charlie Jackson had given him a motor bike
to fix and he was, taking it out for a
run when he happened on Westana-road.
A Charlie Johnson said he spoke to the
accused on Tuesday or later about repair-
ing his motor hike, and later took’ it along
and left it at Eddy’s shop for- the accus-
ed. On the 13th the accused went out to
see Charlie Johnson and to ask where tbs
motor cycle was. On Monday, therefor*,;
Auburn had not got the motor cycle, and ;
on the following Sunday Charlie John-
son’s bicycle was still out of order.
Otmtbming his opening address in the
O’Neil murder trial, the Crown Prosecutor
(Mr. Hubert Parker) said: — v
On Wednesday, 9th April,.Miss Sadler
went to Wooroloo, and the accused saw
her off. That might not appear now im-
portant, bnt it fixed certain dates. Au-
burn called in to see Det,-Sgt. Purdue, ex-
plained the discovery of the coat, and said
■ he had written down to Wagin to have it
returned. On the Tuesday evening he
asked Miss Quigley for Alfport’s address,
and on the Wednesday told the detectives
ho had written for the coat. Neither a
telegram nor letter had ever been received
by Allport. On that day the police took
a hand in the matter and sent for the coat,
and had it forwarded to the detective of-
flee, Perth, through the police at Wa-
gin. On that same day the accused
saw a man named James and to|d
him he had found O’Neil’s coat under the
West Perth subway. He saw Miss Sadler
again, but did not mention the discovery
to her or James the finding at Westana-
road. He saw Blackmore at the Economic
'corner, and told him .he had found the.
coat, but did not mention Wcstana-road.
On Thursday, April 10, the overcoat was
received at the police station. Detective-
Sergeant Purdue was going down Koe-
street, and at William-street saw the ac-
cused talking to York. He (accused) in-
dicated that he wanted Purdue to go to the
police station. He then told York about
the overcoat. York said, “Who is that?”
The accused said, “That is Detective Pun


I Am Helping the Detectives.
I found the overcoat.” No mention was
made of how he found it- On the fol-
lowing Snnday he told York how he came
to find it,_ telling the same story os told
the detectives, about the threepenny bit.
On Friday, April 11 —a week after the
murder —the accused went to tho detective
office to show them where he had found
the coat. Coming back from the subway
he told the detectives that he also had
found the spot in Westana-road. The de-
tectives returned to the police station and
went to Westana-road. He would like the
jury to bear in mind that the
Deceased and His Murderer
were the two people who knew where tho
murder took place, and the accused had
taken the detectives to that spot. At
Westana-road Auburn showed them where
the car had run into the bush. The rib-
bon road undulated over some small hills,
and in a hollow it was shown where the
car had run off the road and struck a she-
oak knocking the tree over, and running
on for about 12 yards. The accused point-
ed out where a body had been pulled out
of the car apparently, across about 10
yards of ground, and then pulled back.
By looking at the spot they found appar-
ently where the deceased had been piffled
ont of the car, placed on the ground, and
where his
Head Was Undoubtedly Battered In,
for blood had spurted up on to a tree, Sft.
or 9ft. high. What apparently happened
was that the accused was hit while driv-
ing. They might say that the passenger
was liable to serious accident to interfere
while a man was driving. They had to
remember that the accused was a motor
expert. While the levers of a Buiek car
were on tho right of the driver, there was
a switch in the middle of the board in
front, and by turning this off the car would
be pulled up, the engine acting as a
brake. That was apparently yhat hap- ,
pened. Upon returning to tho detective
office. Auburn made a statement. j
(This statement is identical to the one ■
submitted to the Coroner’s Court.)
At the spot on Westana-road tracks led
off to a couple of houses where attendants
of the Old Men’s Home resided. Those
men went along that track twice daily, j
and it was right at the exact point. One i
of them would tell the Court that he at |
no time noticed anything unusual there. ■
The jury knew what such roads were. All
the way along could be seen tracks turning
Off Into Hie Bush,
and counsel ventured the opinion that the
marks of a motor car leaving the road
slightly were not such as to attract atten-
tion. However, the witness would say he
saw nothing at all. After taking that
statement the detectives told tho accused
they would have to visit his home and in-
spect his room. Auburn wanted them to
do it straightaway, so that his parents
would not know, saying it would kill his
mother. It was after hours, and they, ou
arrival, were met by Auburn, sen. In the
room they found, among other things,
A Blue Suit
which had been washed and not pressed.
It was one of thope in which what was call-
ed a jigger button was used. This button
was missing from the suit. Counsel also
wished to mention now that among the
things found in the deserted car was a
jigger
Button Covered with Blood,
which proved to be human blood. There
was not much blood on it now owing to it
having been in the analyst's hand, but ha
would swear that it was human blood. Two
tailors would say it fitted to the coat, and
that certain buttons on the suit were sewn
on by an amateur. When the detective*
produce# tho button Auburn remarked,
“It’s like it all right.” He said the suit
had been washed. When the jury saw the
suit they wo~ld not find it in good order, .
because it was a mass of holes owing to
the analyst having cut pieces from it fof
testing purposes. Auburn said they were
the clotlies* which he used when working'
on cars, and they pot dirty, and be
Washed Them in Petrol and Cold Water 1
and soap, and so cleaned them himself. 1
Auburn was wearing a hat, and there _wa« j
another old one in the room at that time.
The evidence would be that he always wore
tile one hat.
, After the visit to the hotel they return-
ed and took a further statement from the
accused relating to the clothing. After
that accused was taken along to Dr, Bar*
ker, the time, being 1 or 2 a.m, on Satur-
day (April 12).
Auburn's Arm,
the doctor would tell the jury, was what ;
was termed keloid. It had been damaged i
and badly pieced up, and broke out occa- i
sionally. It would be shown that, apart
from a little inconvenience, it caused no-
harm, for Auburn could work with it.
About noon on April 12 accused went
again to Blackmore and told him he had
been out with the detectives, and men->
tioned the Westana-road discovery. This
was his first mention of thi? occurrence
except to tho detectives. He also referred
to 'the clothing, and said it was his old
suit. Regarding the finding of the spot
on Westana-r6ad, he said he wac out in
Singe's :ar and
Noticed the Tracks.
Singe would give evidence that he never
took Auburn along that road.
At 2 o’clock that afternoon he saw De-
tective-Sergt. Purdue and asked “to be
allowed to go until Monday.” Purdue
«aid he could go. Auburn also said that
if he were permitted to go he would give
him satisfaction. This was important.
Purdue told the accused that-be only
wanted what was right and just, and asked
accused if he meant by his remark that
he would truthfully and honestly
Clear Up O’Neffl’a Murder.
Auburn replied in the affirmative. Pur-
due reported the position, and when Au-
burn was further asked if he intended to
give satisfaction to the authorities he said
he did. When it was once more repeated
Auburn said ‘ ‘ Satisfaction to you but not to
me.” He left stating that-he would re-
turn at any time required, and it was
agreed that h'e should return at 2 pun. on
the following Monday. At 8 p.m. on the
Saturday, he told York that he found the
Westana-road spot, when passing by it.
He did not say how he passed it He
also told him that he had washed the suit
two or three weeks before, and of the
finding of the overcoat. In that con-
versation he mentioned that he walked out
from town as he only had 3d. That con-
firmed what he had told the detectives.
The jury would find Auburn a person
either of bad memory or an uneasy con-
science, because he
Told Different Stories
so quickly one after tho other. As an
instance, he told the police that he located
the (spot on Westana-road while riding
there on a motor cycle. That was at
midnight on the Friday, and yet the fol-
lowing evening he -informed Blackmoro
it was while he was in Singe’s car—two
different stories in under 24 hours.
On April 13 James went out to Osborne
Park and met accused outside Eddy’s shop,
where he was repairing Johnston's motor
cycle. As James approached he remov-
ed the belt and pushed the machine along,
so his arm was not very bad at that time.
He told James he washed the suit because
ho bumped his arm while carrying a cy-
linder or some other portion of a car, and
the blood got on the clothes, so he decided
to wash them.
Later that night he was with one James
in the city, and they met anotner fellow who
proved to be Monson. They
Talked of the Murder,
and the accused told of what had happen-
ed, and Monson advised him to say nothing
more. Monson observed that it was no
use going along to tho detectives- and be-
coming flabbergasted. Monson had learn-
ed bv then how many times Auburn had
seen "the detectives. Accused accepted


Monson’s advice. The jury could see that ’
up to that time he was prepared to talk,
to say everything, in fact, but his attitude
changed. First of all, he went and save
Crisp, and said he was
Suspected of the Murder,
and desired a reference to his character to
allay suspicion. He told Crisp of tho but-
ton and the suit, and *he finding of the
overcoat, and remarked that he had been
helping the detectives. Also, he notified
Crisp of his finding of the tracks. Crisp
asked him where he was on the Friday
night, and when told of the accused’s
movements asked him was it not possible
that someone could identify him, or had
seen him, or that an incident had occurred
that would be worth remembering. Auburn
said he had not taken that ranch notice.
Crisp asked if there was anyone on the
tram ho (Auburn), could refer to whom
he knew, and expressed the opinion that
“surely the conductor must know yon,”
Auburn said he did not‘think so, and yet
the driver of that car was the man who
helped him boms.
On Monday, April 14, the day he was
?oing to give satisfaction, he was with
lonson from about 11 a,m. to 4 pun., and
during that time
Mra Sadler waa Telephoned
at Woorloloo. She was asked if anyone
had been up to see her, and counsel be-
ieved she said no one had. If anyone
did approach her, she was told to say no-,
thing. At 2 p.m. he did not keep the ap-
pointment, but at 5 o’clock Purdue found
him ’ pacing up and down his office. He
made then the third statement, in which he
said ho
Knew Nothing of the Affair
more than the statements already made,
and he “could not reasonably and truth-
fully answer any more questions or make
any further statement ’ ’ than what he had
already done. He also told the detective
that he did not wish liim to think ho was
“pulling their legs”; he could not truth-
fully say anything more. Accused told
him that when they wanted him not to
grao him in the street, but let him know
and he would come in. On April 18
A Warrant Was Obtained,
and he was arrested- Accused did not tele-
graph about the overcoat, nor write a let-
ter about it. In ope instance he said he
carried the overcoat, whereas he wore it,
and was wearing it for a very good rea-
son. He'did not tell Miss Sadler of such
things, and counsel would point out that
the night was exceedingly oppressive. The :
humidity was something like 80 deg., and 1
ttu night was more oppressive than the
overage night for January, February, or
March this year. Yet it was a very thick
! overcoat, and it was remarkable that a
' person did not remember whether he wore
jit or not.
After a brief reference to the chemical
tests, Mr. Phrker said that apparently
O’Neil was hit twice on the head while
wearing his ( hat. Tho
Blood Had Sported
up to the hood of tho car and apparently
he sliced down and his head lay against
Ibr. mjddie c£ the scat
Tho hat was not taken from the accus-
ed until the day of Ills arrest. It was
shown tp a doctor, who found qbont 14
tiny spots of blood on it. He tested only
five and got crystals of human blood.
The overcoat, ho (Mr. Parker) might men.
tion, was nqt such as might be expected
a person who dressed as,the accused dress-
ed would wear.
This concluded Mr. Parker’s opening
address to the jury, which occupied one
and three-quarter hours.
THE EVIDENCE.
Joseph Julian, a Swan Brewery employe,
examined by Mr. Haynes, outlined the find-
ing by him of a body in the water near the
deep hole at Crawley. It was 14 or 15 feet'
from the shore, with feet towards tho shore.
He reported to the caretaker of the Craw-
ley Baths.
Constable Frederick James iianncar gave
evidence relative to tlic taking of the body
from the water, similar to that taken in the
Coroner’s Court.
THE BODY DEAGGED.
The witness, cross-examined' by Mr.
Walsh, said he noticed “drag” marks on
the ground from the Crawley-road to the
water’s edge. This track just missed a
six-wire and went under a two-wire fence.
Both fences were parallel to the bank. It
was apparent the body had been dragged
by the feet. There were no clear foot-
prints of any person having dragged the
body. The footprints were not clear
cnongh to take a cast from, and he did not
know if an attempt at taking a cast was
made.
Joseph Hardy, morgue orderly, told of
the taking of the body to the morgue and
the handing over of the clothing to Detec-
tive-Sergeant Purdue.
O’NEIL’S APEIL 4 LUNCH.
Henry Cooper, taxi-driver, said he knew
O’Neil, who had been on the same rank as
witness. He identified the body at the
morgue.
Mr. Walsh: How many driversare on the
rank?
Witness: Ten or eleven.
How many would there be on the rank
all day long?—Three or four.
Did O’Neil go home for his lunch —No
to the Y.M.CJL
Did you go with him to the Y.M.CA. on
April 4?—Yes.
POST-MOETEM EXAMINATION!
Dr. Donald Stewart Mackenzie, CJI.M.O.
of tho Perth Hospital, related tho post-
mortem examination made on the body of
John George O’Neil on April 6 last. He
indicated the wounds found on the head
of the deceased. Death was due to frac-
ture of the skull and pulping of the
brain. The wounds might have been caus-
ed by such *oi instrument as a bar of iron
about the size of a ruler, with a bolt on
the end. With the exception,.,of the
wound over the left eye, ail wounds could
hrve been caused bv -a be- of iron. There
were a number of instruments in the car
which could have caused such wounds.
EIGOE MOETIS.
Mr. Lavan said there was certain evi-
dence given in the Lower Court -which
might or might not be brought up. He
sought permission to cross-examine Drs.
Mackenzie and Barker at a later stage.
His Honor: Now is the proper time to
cross-examine. If you wapt to make ap-
plication later, I will listen to it.
Mr. Lavan: There is no doubt that from
i the injuries you have described a great
deal of violence was used?
Witness: Not necessarily. , It may have
been a heavy instrument that was used.
From the wounds indicated, would yon,
expect to see a great quantity qf blood?
Yon mean escaped blood —haemorrhage 7
Yes. I stated that when I examined the
heart it was empty.
Would death be instantaneous? —It would
be a quick death. i j
Do you remember when yon first saw
this body ?—On Sunday morning.
Do you_[cnow whether you were the first
doctor to tee it? —I understand so.
Would it be possible for .you to throw
any light on the question of rigor mortis 7
Quite impossible.
Can yon not give the jury an idea of how
long the man had been dead when you salt
it?—Not from the point of view of rigor
mortis, and decomposition varies according
to climate and other conditions.
There is nothing to guide you as to the
time of death?—Ho, not in hours.
You tell us what nature of instrument
might have caused his death? May I put
it to you that, with tho exception oh that
over the eye, any heavy blunt instrument
could cause them—could a spanner do it?
—lt conld.
Would a poker do it? —It would have to
be a heavy poker.


Would the instrument nave to be heavy?
—Yes, it -would require a good -weight.
It would have to be heavy?—lt should
weigh a pound or more. You must also
have regard to the amount of force used.
I do not know what force was used.
And, of course, when you talk of the
force, that would depend upon the force
that the man who used it would be able to
apply?—Yes.
His strength, for instance? —There are
innumerable factors.
That would be one, and also the distance
he stood away 7 Your attention is direct-
ed by the prosecution that in one direction
there are many blunt instruments which
could cause the injuries?—Yes, except that
over the eye.
In regard to that, yon tell us yon found
some sharp edges in the car which might
cause it: anything with a chisel edge could
do it?—Yea.
Re-examined, the witness said the in-
juries could have been inflicted with a cold-
chiseL The heavier the instrument the
less, force would be required. Several of
the wounds might alone have only stunned
the victim. A man knocked unconscious
might groan.
AUBURN’S ARM INJURY.
Dr. G. W. Barker, who was present at
the post-mortem, gave corroborative evi-
dence, Witness had also examined the
accused one night subsequent to the murder.
He examined accused right upper arm and
found a “heaped-up” scar of about four
inches of an old wound. It would not af-
fect the muscular action or use of the arm.
To Mr. Lavan the doctor said that when
he examined Auburn’s arm it was “wcep-
; ing” serum with traces of blood. If ho
got a knock on the scar it might cause some
i pain, but witness thought that if. it bled at
; all it would not bleed very much,
| The witness said if a person got a
! knock on a “keloid” or scabby wound
; sufficiently hard to make it bleed, it
would npt in his opinion be sufficient to
, permit jt. trickling down to his hand, if
the person had his clothes on. It would
only bleed a little before coagulation
started.
O’NEIL’S HAT.
Herbert Alexander Hammond, warehouse
assistant at Wiseman Bros., was yachting
on April 5 last, and picked up a felt hat
near Foam Jkut.
James Frederick Kinghorn, water-police-
man, related how he had received the hat
found by Hammond and handed it to the
CJD.
O’NEIL’S WIPE AND FATHER-IN-
LAW;
Mrs. Thelma O’Neil, widow of the late
John George O’Neil, taxi-driver, said
that on April 4 her husband said he was
going away on a trip, and she packed his
suitcase, putting in four changes of under-
clothing, and shaving gear. He left at 7.20
p.m - ■
Leonard Nelsou M'Callnm, engineer in
the Government Railways, Midland Junc-
tion, said the deceased was his son-in-law.
His car was a seven-sealed Bmck Six.
numbered 3481. He assisted O’Neil
to pack up the car and put
In the repair outfit, with” span-
ners and spare bolts, and a lifting
jack. He changed £1 for Mrs, O’Neil, i
who gave her husband ss, or let |
The overcoat O’Neil put over the back of j
the scat alongside him when he left. A
suit case and rug was also taken, but there
were no bloodstains on the case when it
Was taken away.
: The suit case revealing blood splashes
■ was exhibited to the jury,
i Continuing, the witness said a pair of
motor goggles were put in the case. He
knew these yvere not usually used around
the (own- O’Neil had a blue suit with a
link button, but this suit was still at his
residence with the button intact. The suit
he wore on the trip had an ordinary single
fast button. Another suit at home of
very light material had a link button, hut
this was also intact. _ On April 6 he
went to the police station and
identified the motor car there as O’Neil’s.
Another stage in. the lengthy proceedings
involved in the trial of William George
Auburn was reached in the Criminal Court
to-day. The trial is exciting even greater
public interest than the sensational events
of, tie night when the deceased was so
foully, murdered: The less ardent ofi
Court habitues- were evidently not prepar-
ed to-day to submit to the inconvenience
of long waiting before the doors were
open, jind yet the overflow was of consid-
erable proportions. A . large crowd hnng
listlessly about ,the ■ Court buildings
throughout the day. The first to arrive
were three women, who started the queue
at 8.20 a.m.
George William Auburn has pleaded not
guilty to a charge that at Claremont on
April 4 he wilfully murdered John George
0 -'Neil. Auburn, who, finding the jarrah
form uncomfortable, has been provided
with a chair, maintained a nronouneed in-
terest in the proceedings.
Mr. Hubert Parker (Crown Prosecutor),
assisted by Mr. A. G. Haynes, appeared
for the prpseention. while Mr. M. G. La-
gan. with him Mr. J. F. Walsh, represent-
ed the accused.
THE EVIDENCE.
When our report closed yesterday, the
witness-box was occupied by Francis
Hynes, proprietor of the Paramount Mo-
tor Garage, Hay-street. He said O’Neil
used to park his ear w^h, him. O’Neil,
on 3rd April, overhauled his engine and
took his car away the next evening. Wit-
ness outlined the fitting up of O’Neil’s car
before it was taken from the garage.
CAR IN GOOD CONDITION.
When the car left it was-in good condition.
He had since seen the car and it was
damaged, so as to put it out of action,
thoqgh it might go forward for some dis-
tance when it would probably stop alto-
gether. It would work perfectly in the
reverse. The damage could be caused by
faulty driving, such as improper handling
of the gears or by the car pulling in the
sand where the wheels had no grip, or it
might bo caused by general wear and
tear.
The Court then adjourned until to-day.
The first witness this morning was Mr. J.
T. Tracy.
O’NEIL'S CAR SEEN,
James Thomas Tracey. advertising
agent, residing at Pcrth-Premantic-road,
Ncdlands. said he was riding a motor-
cycle on the homeward journey from Perth
between j.O pin, and 10.30 p.m. on April 4.
He estimated that he would pass the
Rokeby-road entrance to King’s Park be-
ty?ecn 10J.5 and 10.30. Just on the Ned-
lands side of the entrance he saw a motor-
car swcrVc on'to its incorrect side, and,
fearing a collision, he slowed down. The
car, however, turned back to its correct
side. As it passed him he made a note
of its number. It was “3481.” Ho could-
not say how many were in the car, and
had no idea who its ereo pants were.
Mr. Lavan: I* would take von 10 or 15
minutes jo gel to fhe "Park entrance from
Perth 1
-Witness: Not more; possibly less.
THE OAR AT LEBDEEVILLE.
Edward Collins, a 14-year-old schoolboy,
residing at 295 Vincent-strcet, Leederville,
said ho was at the pictures on the night
of April 4. He went home to bed about
11 o’clock and heard a motor car com©
along the street and make a “burring”
noise.
Witness was asked to imitate the sound, |
prompting his Honor to remark that he
was nonplussed as to how to put it in,
.waiting. (Laughter.)
The car; continued witness, stopped not
far from, his home. Between 8 and 9;
o’clock, the following morning he saw . 'a
car in front of Chinnery’s in the sand.
There- were three or four houses between
Chinnery’s and witness’s home. He did
not; see the newspaper that morning, and
up to. seeing the car he had not heard of
the murder. He learned of it for the first
time that afternoon. j


Cross-examined: It was in the afternooni
that his mother showed him the report of ‘
the murder. It was just after lunch. A
policeman first questioned him in relation
to the murder, that being on the same day
about 10 o’clock.
'Mr. Lavan: Have yon heard a car make
a noise like that before?—No.
It went along the road, after it passed
ytou, what was the next thing you heard?
—I went to sleep.
I don’t want to bo unfair to you, Ed-
ward; you are only a boy; yon sec, you
told Mr. Parker you heard it stop?—Yes.
Then you went to sleep; nothing more
occurred? —That’s after I beard it stop.
Yon did not know where it stopped, how
far along, for instance?—l think just near
the' lamppost
Aren’t you saying that because you saw
it there next day?—No, if was in the
All you can say is that apparently it,
stopped some distance past your place,
when the noise ceased?—Yes, it did.
. Whereabouts, you cannot say t —l saw it
next morning.
You cannot say it was the same ear?—
No. ■■■■■■;■
AT 11.50 PM.
Herbert Charles Collins, horse driver at
Whittaker’s, Snbiaco, residing in Yincent-
street, Leedervillc, said that on April 4
be got home about 11.50 pjn, and noticed
ing outside Chinncry’s house with no
a motor car between the Lcederville Pic-
ture Hall and Oxford-street, It was stand- '
lights burning. The bonnet of the ear was i
facing west. He did not see anybody in it.
At 6.30 a-m. the next day he saw it in the
same place. Under it there was a bar sus-
pended, resembling a brake rod. Constable
Drysdale spoke to him on the afternoon
of April 5.
The witness was closely questioned by
Mr. Lavan about the time of his arrival
home on April _4. He said he remembered
the clock striking 12 just after, he got in.
The clock, his mother had-told him, was a
few minutes fast.
Mr. Lavan: Yon had no difficulty in
seeing the car on the Friday night?
Witness; No.; i
Yon did not examine it?—No.
Was there anything about it yon notic-
ed?—Nothing, except that Jnere were no
lights.
: You saw a car there at 6.30 on the next
morning ?—Yes.
Could yon say it was the same car? —
Well, it was in the same place. /
Mr. Haynes: You saw the color of the
ear on the Saturday? - ;
. Witness: Yes. _
. And on the-previous evening?—No, it
was dark.
From the general appearance of the, car
would you think there was any difference?
—No. ,
AT 4 AM.
' Another resident of the neighborhood
w)io saw the car was Itenben Victor Chin-
ncry, a butcher, of Vincent-street. He
said that at 4 a.m. be put his head .out of
his bedroom window to call his brother-in-
law, and observed a car outside the house.'
It was unlighted. Witness left- home
shortly before's o’clock, and on examining
the car, he looked at. the number by match-
light.. It was 3451. The left-hand front
door was open, and the hood was_ raised.
He reported his discovery to the police that
afternoon. , . .
In answer to Mr, Walsh, the witness said
that he could see that the car was drawn
off the road, theJ,wo wheels on the left sidq
being in the sand.
THE CAR BLOOD-STAINED.
Constable Drysdale, stationed at Lecder-
ville, said that in consequence qf a report
on April 5 ho went to the car, which was on
the south side .of Vincent-street, facing
west. It was shortly after noon. The
right-hand wheels were about two feet ..op
and from the edge of the rqpd. Witness
noticed stains resembling blood on the car,
and there were .bushes and gum Reaves
hanging to the forefront of the undercar-'
riage, There were stains on the wind
screen fronting the steering wheel on the
hood above the_ driving seat, and ■ an the
spotlight, the mirror of which ws,« broken.
There was also a big stain at the back por-
tion of the seat in front and a pool un-
derneath the cushions. _ There were other
bloodstains whore the driver would sit, and
in the back of the car. A white-looking ■
substance was also noticed -on a matting in
the rear portion resembling brains, anU
there were also stains on the undercar-
riage, blood having evidently found its
way through.
THE BLOOD-STAINED BUTTON.
A button, witness said, was found on tile
matting stained _ with what looked like
blood, and containing a shank about half
an inch in length. It was the button pro-
duced, Witness gave it to Inspector Con-
don subsequently. Underneath a brake
rod lay at right angles to the car. It was
tied at one end with a piece of insulated
wire, and the other end trailed on the
ground. The rod was placed in the car,
which contained an attache case, case of
petrol, lifting jack, and small cushion. The
mirror of the spotlight (produced) was in
the same condition as when ho first ex-
amined it. .
Mr. Parker told the jury that there were
several spots on the shattered mirror, which"
they would later have the oppornnity of
examining. ' ■
Witness informed Mr. Lavan that Vin-
cent-street was a ribbon road. There
was no doubt that the whole of the interior
of the car was freely bespattered with
blood, particularly the ria-ht-hapd side.
There, was blood higli_up on the back seat
and on the mat, but witness did not notice
any blood on the cases; ; ,
Mr. Lavan: Let us have a look at the
attache case. Where did yo” say it yr&sl
Witness: On top of the petrol case.
Sec that (pointing to a part of the case),
• —lt has the appearance of blood.
Yes, and a good deal of it, too ?—Yqp.
Where was the petrol case 7—On ths
floor on the left-hand side at the rear.
’ Continuing, the witness said he did not"
notice a rug. The car was parallel to
Vineent-strecL '
“GRATING” OR “BURRING”?
Probationary-police Constable Arthur
Murray said he had had seven or _ eight
years’ experience as a motor mechanic and
driver. On April she went with Inspec-.
tor Condon to Lcederville about 12 noon,
where he saw a Bnick car No. 3481, stand-
ing in the position described by previous
witnesses. When it had been inspected by
Inspector Condon witness toot the driving
scat, and after putting the car into re-
verse gear backed it on to the road. When
he changed to first gear he found the car
would not go. Borne men gave it a push
and then it started off. On the way to the
I police station it refused, to negotiate a
' couple of hills, so he went another way..
| When ho was entering the- police yard it
stopped. It was pulled into the yard-and
backed into a shed.
Mr. Lavan: When yon went to put the
car in gear yon noticed a grating noise.
Witness; Yes.
It was not a burring noise? —No..
His Honor: What’s the difference be-
tween a burring noise and a grating noise?
Witness: Well, I have heard them, but
1 could not describe them.
Mr. Lavan: I have an idea what he
means.
His Honor: He says it was a grating
and not a burring noise; I want to know
what be means. (To the witness): Can
yon tell us?
Witness: No.
MOTOR MECHANIC’S EVIDENCE.
William M‘Donald, motor mechanic, of
Hay-street, Perth, said he had had experi-j
encc with Buiek cars over an umber of |
years. At the request of the police he ex-1
.amined a grey-colored, blood-stained Bnick;
Six.' He found the ball races and the j


"fa
pinion shaft broken, enabling . it to bo
driven in reverse, but not forward. Wit-
ness tried to drive it forward, but could
not do so. It made “a very great grating
sound.” Witness had since made a fur-
ther attempt, with the same result and
noise. The damage could have been caused
through ordinary wear and tear or through
a ball breaking. The former would be a
gradual effect and the grating would arise
gradually. In a Baick Sis tho gears were
on the right of the switch on the left If
the car was running about 30 miles an
hour and the switch was turned off, Hie
ear would pull up suddenly.
Mr. Parker i Suppose a person were
sitting on the left side of the driver would
it be possible to tarn it?—Yes, it is simply
a push-in swteh.
in the. event of such a happening would
it cause this damage to tho ball-race and
pinion?—l hardly‘think so; it would put
a slow pressure on it.
If it ran into a small tree?—l don’t
fMnk so. Proceeding, he said the damage
could be caused by jumping the car* out
of sand and dropping the clutch too sud-
denly. Witness knew Auburn slightly be-
fore'the trial, and had seen him driving a
motor-car.
Mr. Lavan: From what you saw he was
a competent driver?
Witness: Quite.
Would a man who suddenly dropped his
clutch and caused such damage be a com-
petent driver? —No.
Would the sand in the case of a ear being
jumped out of the sand have to bo very
heavy?—Yes; if the wheels began to spin.
Would that happen, if _ you had two of
the wheels on a macadamised road and two
in sand, which.is not very heavy?—No.
‘ Mr. Parker interjected that it. did not
follow he was going to allege that it hap-
pened at the place in Vinccnt-street, where
the car was found.
’Mr. Lavan: I am not suggesting you did.
His Honor: Does Mr. Parker suggest ii
did not occur in Vrncent-strcct
Mr. Parker said it was suggested it oc-
curred before it passed the home of the boy
Collins.
Mr. Lavan Go witness); I you
hear all sorts of noises in your experience
with cars? What would you describe as
a “burring” noise?
Mr. Parker: How can this witness de-
scribe what another person deems to be a
“burring” noise? •
■ Mr. L avSii; I am not asking that; 1
want to know what he would call a “bur-
ring” noise.
• Mr, Lavan (to witness): This was a
harsh, grating noise, and loud; would you
hear it at a distance? —Yes.
Would you hear the noise you described
some distance off? —Yes, 50 yards.
Still as a harsh, grating noise? —A grat-
ing noise. .
On the question of taming off tho switch,
does not that apply to many makes of ears?
—Quite bo.
A PICTURE PROGRAMME.
Are you also operator at tho East Perth
Picture Show?—Yes. ' 1
On the night of April 4 can you say what
programme was shown?
Mr. Parker was inclined to object, and
his Honor, having stopped writing, Mr.
Lavan said, if necessary, be would
call evidence. However, ha would
assume that a certain programme was
shown. (To the witness): Assuming tho
programme consisted of these three pic-
tures, “Potash and Perlmutter,” “Alias
the Night Wind,” and “The Pirate,”
what time would the-show be flni&heaT—•
About 10.45.
On tho basis that those pictures were
shown, did you work it out? —Yes.
Mr. Parker (re-examining): Who asked
yofl. to refresh your memory?
Witness: 1 was rung up by Mr. Norton.
: Who is he?—The manager of the show,
, And he asked, you to look up the pro-
fSrammo' for that particular night?—He
asked me if I remembered April 4.
A.s the result of that conversation you
looked up -what the pro,gramme was? ;
Mr. Parker: If the programme consisted
of those three pictures, it would be over
at 10.457
Witness: Yes. >
; Do', they often cut a lot out of a pictufc?
—Not to that extent. j
To' the extent of making a difference at
what7 —Not more than a' couple of jfain-
utes in the whole programme.
There are sometimes delays in the pic-
tures, breakage and one thing and another:
Do you know if there was any this qight,
or any delays at all7 —I don’t think so.
I take it delays are not uncommon 7
It would not make live minutes difference.
You cannot say if there was a delay of
five minutes that night?—No.
Have you known of competent ear ‘driv-
ers meeting with accident to their cars? —
Yes. :•
Sometimes careless driving will damage
their machinery?—Quite so. '■
AT SCHOOL TOGETHER, j
John Monson said he had known afccused
about seven years. They went to 'school
together, and were friends. On April 14
he met Auburn in William-streeiti near
Hay-street, about II a.m., and regained
with him till about 4 p.m. They went
to the Post Office about 4 o’clock,'.and at
Auburn’ request witnses ragntepuji
Auburn ’s' request witness rang np the
Wooroloo Sanatorium, and asked for Miss
Sadler. Auburn could hear what was
said. Witness heard a female voice which
asked who was speaking, and he-said “a
friend of George’s.” Auburn then took
tho receiver. Witness heard j&im ask
why she had not written to him. ;,Thc con-
versation lasted for only about a; minute.
Witness and Auburn had discussed the
murder. Auburn told him on" April 13
that he had found an overcoat ’And given
it to the police. Accused also' said the
detectives had questioned him, and that ho
had made statements —several, in fact,
which had got him “muddled.” Witness
told him it was no good making” state-
ments and getting “muddled.”. Witness
advised him, if he was “rauddlbd,” to see
a solicitor. No . mention was made of
any further statements to the police.
The witness went on to refer to the meet-
ing with Auburn and James on Sunday,
April 13. Subsequently he .said he was
interviewed by Detective-Sergdant Purdue,
who questioned him, apd his answers were
taken down in writing.
Mr. Haynes; Was it read over to jwa?
• Witness: Yes. ■■
Was it correst 7—What was read out
was , correct. Ido not know, what was on
the paper. ' .
Did you sign it 7—No. •
Further questioned by jMr. Haynes,
witness answered that Aubilrn never told
him anything about the murder ‘out at
the ordinary.” j
MONSOBFS REQUEST.
Cross-examined, witness said he did not
remember, when they first met on the Sun-
dav night, talking to Auburn alone.
Mr. Lavan: When werelvou asked for
a statement by the detcctfves 7—l cannot
remember, it was a holiday,
It would be April 25, apd this was on
the 13th. • When you met pn the Monday
it was not by appointment?—l said that
if he was in town I would possiblv see
him. ;
. Tou remember anything else apart
from what you have told ui, conversations
or anything else? —It was just the same as
he would speak to anyonei
Nothing at all you can add?—No; but
I would like that statement to be read,
sveryone thinks I am holding something
I cannot help what othefr people are
thinking?—l’ve got to help it, though.
A WITNESS BREAKS DOWN.
Ellen Josephine Sadler, whom it will be
remembered was one of the most important


itj
witnesses in the’Coroner’s 1 Court, was
next called. Her face was completely
obscured by a thick black veil, and she
was attractively attired. Immediately
she entered the box Miss Sadler broke
down,, and, realisms: the inadvisability of
examining her at that stage, the Crown
Prosecutor instructed that she should be
stood down and another fitness called,
while she recovered her composure. Miss
Sadler was aecommodated_ with'. a scat in
Court, and, lifting her veil, •'appeared to
become deeply interested in the proceed-
ings. ; ; ;
INSPECTOR CONDON.
Inspector .Stephen Condon, in charge of
the C.I.D. gave evidence of having
received the overcoat (produced), and of
Jus visit to Vincent-strcei', to where , the
car was standing. Ho referred to • the (
finding of a button in the car. j
Mr. Walsh: Did you sc’ the suit.case iu
the carl <
Witness: Yes. _ | j
Did you open, it?—Net
Were you present when'the suit case
was opened?—Yes, in my office.
Have a look at its contents now; are
thev the same?
Witness (after an inspection of the suit
case): Yes.
HISS SADLER.
Miss Sadler was again called, and this |
time it was possible to proceed with her '
examination. She said she fiaoT»Eßii'“ go-
ing with ’ ’ Auburn about 14 months, and
had known him for two years. Until
April 9 she was living with her married j
sister at Woodroyd-strcet, St. Lawley, |
where Auburn paid visits. Witness re-
ferred to a suggestion made about three
weeks prior to April 5 that they should
accompany Auburn to, Wagin by motor car.
He said a car was being loaned to him by
Mr. Ford, of Winterbottom’s, and firstly
that it would be a Buick Six, aid then that
it would be a Willys-Knight. It was ar-
ranged finally they should go on a Satur-
day, and they went ion the day fixed. Wit-
ness told Auburn ;that advice had been
received that her sister at Wagin was ill,
and -that it she got worse she (witness)
would go down by tram. Auburn said
that if she became no worse it would not
be , advisable for; witness to go, as they
intended going oil the Saturday.
Witness, proceeding, said that on the
day before the trip she went, at Auburn
request, te .Abbott and Rich, qpd got “a
pair of plates. The request, had been
made of her on April 3 saying ,\.would not
be in town that day, as he was going to.'
be in Fremantle. . Accused also promised'
I to call at witness’ place, where he had heed
i invited to .' stay the night s'o
as •an early start could be ef-
fected the } following day. He said
he would have the ear with him. He came
to the house, that night about 7 o’clock,
dressed the same as he was now, and' so
far as she remembered, wearing a grey hat
It was the hat he wore to Wagin. Auburn
I had a grey- overcoat last winter, but she
had not seen it since; it was worn out.
( Witness gave him the number plates that
i night and told him she had not paid for
I them, but had entered them up to Geo.
! Auburn, jnn., Osborne Park Hotel. Auburn
looked .“a little different”; he seemed
, slightly annoyed, although he might not
, have been. She did not recollect Auburn
saying to what nso he would put the plates.
There was a parcel on a chair under his
hat.; She ilid not see him bring it with
him; but it was about two feet long and
about as thick as an ordinary ebony ruler.
Tb'e parcel was, so far as she loiew, tied
iu’ three places. She picked it up and,
judging by the weight, she thought it was
a ■ piece of iron. It might have been
wood. She asked Auburn what he had it
’for ■ he jokingly answered “Tn-knock yon
on'the head with.” He left the house
about 7.40. She did not know what be-
came of the plates and parcel. Auburn
said he might be back to sleep the mriit.
but he did not rctnrn that night. Wit-
ness ’phoned him the following monum* -
r.t the hotel, and asked him where he cot !
,tv .He said he would explain “when '
he came out home.” . Witness saw the '
accused later ,o'n in the dav, and he
expressed his regret at havinn-
disappointed her the previous night j
/ U-'
The more interesting stages-reached at
yesterday’s session of the Dalkeith murder
trial have lent added interest to the pro-
ceedings. There was again a siege of the
Court buildings, and early-comers gained
precedence, although those who did not
obtain admission waited in the vicinity,
presumably in the hope that a few seats
might become vacant during the day. A
hush of expectancy swept around the Court
when Miss Sadler was called to resume her
evidence.
The accused, William George Auburn, is
charged before Mr. Justice Draper with
having on April 4 last, at Claremont, wil-
fully murdered John George O’Neil, a taxi-
driver. Accused pleads not guilty, and is
defended by Mr. M. G. Lavan and Mr. J. P.
Walsh. Mr. Hubert Parker (Crown Pro-
secutor), assisted by Mr. A, G. Haynes,
conducts the prosecution.
Auburn's interest in the proceedings was
nndiminished. and he several times com-
municated with counsel through a clerk.
JURY’S PEES.
When We. Honor entered ho informed the
jury that, he bad received their communi-
cation, noted its contents, and forwarded
it to the Minister for Justice. It is pro-
bable that the jury’s communication • re-
lates to a request for increased fees in
view of the length of the proceedings.
MISS SADLER’S STORY.
Prior to the continuation of the exam-
ination of Miss’Sadler, his Honor showed
her a passage, reading: “He said he was
coming tack with the car to stay the night
—he said this as he was going away,’’from
the deposition signed by her at the coro-
ner’s inquest. When ,-wed if it was cor-
rect she said it was. ,
Further examined by Mr. Haynes, Miss
Sadler said that they stopped at Armadale
on the road to Wagin, hut there was no
discussion about the , murder at that town-
It was not mentioned. She could not re-
member any discussion; between Armadale
and Wagin, nor;could she-recollect any re-
marks- about the murder om the way bade
to Perth. ■ It was on the Tuesday after
the return from Wagin. that she went out
in the motor-car.
Mr.- Haynes: Was there any reference on
thet right to the murder? —I think there
w»s. ■■■■" "■■" ; - ' ■
In Auburn’s presence?—Yes.
Hit, - Honpr;, Where?
Ti'i'ness: In the car. .
;WitK whom?—The two Misses Quigley
and v, self.
In Auburn *s presence?—Tea.
V< incss asked the Quigley girls what
they:-thought, of it, and they said it was a
terrible thing. ■ :
'Mr, Haynes: Did Auburn say anything?
-Witness: Not that I can remember.
A TELEPHONE MESSAGE.
Witness, continuing,, said she went the
following day to Wooroloo. Before going,
Auburn had not mentioned to her the find-
ing of an overcoat. She saw him just
prior to her departure. Some days after .
she received a telephone message. “It
was supposed to be from Mr. Auburn.”
She did not recognise the voice.
Mr. Haynes: You say on a Wednesday
you think, the Wednesday after you left?—■
I think it was, but I am not sure it was a
Wednesday. •


Mr. Haynes: iJiri we person say' who!
Was speaking? |
His Honor: She-says she did not know ■,
the voice. (To witness): Did you receive t
any other message that day?—No. f
, Do yon really say you do not know who
was speaking ; No, I don’t know. I said
so from the first.
Mr. Haynes: Did you get any message
from.any other person about that time?
Witness: No.
Did you (speak on the phone to anyone
about that time?—No. !
A,question as to what happened on the;
telephone provoked argument. Mr. Parker
said the witness had told them she receiv-
ed the message, and there was only one
message. He instanced the _ case of a
letter. A letter was admissible, although
the writing might'not be known. In this
case a ■ person said she was telephoned by
a. certain person, and “you are not bound j
to recognise the voice," the same as the
handwriting. He pressed that the question
be allowed- • They had evidence a person
did telephone,' and that Miss Sadler did
speak on the telephone. Surely it could
be asked what name the person gave.
His Honor: She said she got no message
from any other person at that time.
Mr. Lavan said it was really asking his
Honor to take a risk-.
His Honor; This is a criminal trial, and
the ordinary course should prevail. She •
said she received a message from a person
i : —whose voice she did not recognise—on '
i the Wednesday' following her arrival. She j
j said ■ she did not' know to whom she spoke. I
i Mr. Parker: She said she did not recog-
nise the voice'.
Mr. Lavan: What is the difference?
His Honor (to the witneiss); Yon
told us»’- you did not get any other
message from airy other person at that
time ?—Yes; '
What do you mean by “at that time”?
>• —It was the first and last'message I got
;all the time I was at the Sanatorium-
After some :delibcration, his Honor gave i
permission to ask the question. I
; Mr. Haynes: What was said- ,by the I
voice at the other end?—The voice asked
toe if 1 was speaking. (To {.he Judge):
The voice inquired if Miss Sadler was
(speaking. I answered “Yes," and the
i person said, “I am speaking on behalf of
George.” •■■■ - -
» Did he continue to speak, or did some-
one else come, to the ’phono?—lt was the
same person speaking the whole time.
Mr. Parker asked his Honor would he
put a certain question. First of all the
witness said she could not hear the voice
distinctly.
’ Mr- Lavan;, She said, she could riot re-
cognise it.
- Sir, Parker: There. is the distinct evi-
dence: . ... , .
Mr. Haynes: There is only the one voice
up. to date.
His Honor: She said the same person
spoke the whole time......
Mr. Haynes: She means while she was
speaking.
Witness; The whole of the time I was
at the ’phone.
His Honor: You mean the same person
at the other end. ;
At-Mr. Parker’s request his Honor again
referred to the witness’ deposition.
ON BEHALF OF GEORGE.”
Having perused' the deposition, his
Honor told Mr. Haynes he could cross-
examine the witness on that point.
Mr. Haynes read short passages from
the deposition, and the witness agreed
they were correct
When asked by counsel, Miss Sadler
said the person on the ’phone said he was
speaking on behalf of George. Witness
was astonished, and said, “I beg your par-
don.’’
Mr. Haynes: That is correct?
Witness: Yes,
What did he say to you?—He asked if
anybody had been up to see me.
And what did you say?—"No."
: And what did he say ? —‘ ‘lf anybody
comes up, do not tdn any informa-
tion.”
His Honor: Ten still say ft yu the
same voice all the time?
Witness; Yes. '
Mr. Haynes: Yon remember what yon
said yesterday about the coat. with the
button? •
Witness: Yes.
You told us yon saw it off the coat?—
Yes, on two or three occasions.
When he was visiting you?—Yes.’
Mr. Haynes: I would like your Honor
to note that.
■ Hi a Honor; She said yesterday that she
had seen it several times in the last three
months when he was at their place.
Mr. Haynes: Now she says “when he
was visiting her.” ■ .
His Honor (smilingly): I do not think
it will be difficult for the jury to infer
that.
ME. LAV AN’S CROSS-EXAMINATION.
Mr. Lavan: As a matter of fact. Miss
Sadler, yon have known Auburn for about
four years?
Witness: Well, yes; but I have known
him to speak to for about-two years. - ■
Were you employed at one time at a pic-
ture show? —Yes.
Dp to when ?—About eight months ago.
ALONE AT THE PICTURES.
Do yon know of your own knowledge
whether it was a practice of Auburn’s to
go to a picture show by himself? —I do.
ADBUEN’S ARM BLED.
Do you know whether there is a tang
scar on his right arm? —I do.
Have you seen it? —Yes.
When? —At our place once when it
broke open and he bathed it in the bath-
room: •' ' .
When was that?—l cannot remember.
It has often broken open at the tea table.
At Mr. Moir’s? —Yes. _
Why did he have to wash it ?—Because
the blood was trickling down his arm.
Could you give us any idea how many
times you saw that occur?—A.good many.
To what extent did it bleed?—l have
seen it run right down hi* arm into, the
palm of his hand-
Do you remember if at any time you
saw a scab on the scar?—Yes. _
Do yon remember any particular occa-
sion when he hurt his arm at the house?—
No, I do not remember.
Did yon ever notice what caused it to
bleed? —No. • *
Mr, Lavan: I will try and jog yonr me-
mory. Do you remember a Sunday when
you and George were skylarking-„and you
hurt his arm ?—Yes, I do. I knocked his
Do yon know whether it bled on that oc-
casion? —It did. . . . ;
Did he give any indications to suggest
he was suffering pain of any kind?—Yes,
he did- . ■ ,
Try and cast your memory back agam-
Do you recollect him knocking something
into a door or something?—He has knock-
ed it several times. .. ;
But what have yon seen?—l saw mm
knock it on the door , a couple of times.
And it bled?—Yes. .
THE WAGIN' TEIP.
The question of this trip to Wagin had
been discussed for some weeks, and defi-
nitely fixed for three weeks? —Yes.
Any suggestion of going in another direc-
tion at ail, east, south, or west?—No, none
at aIL
How long was it to be for?—Go down on
the Saturday and return on the Sunday.
Was a long protracted trip over suggest-
ed?—No.
. How long were you at Mrs. Moir’s be-
-1 fore April 4?—l have always stayed there.
He (Auburn) was a very frequent visi-
tor. I want you particularly remember the
week before the Wagin trip. When ho ;
■did come to the house to stay the evening,
when did he usually leave ?—Sometimes he
- would leave to catch his last tram and some-
times he would miss it.


/pfl
A THEATRE NIGHT.
I will take first, Thursday night, April 3.
Where did you go with George that night?
—To the play at His Majesty’s.
What was on there?—l really cannot re-
member. ;
Did bo go to the house for you ?—He did.
And did he take you home after the the- j
atre? —Yds.
It was pretty late when you’d leave, so
it would be after Uf—l. think it was about
half-past.
The night before that, was ho at your
house? —Yes, He was up that night.
Did he leave to catch a late tram that
pight?—Yes.
| How long would it take from where you
1 are living to the corner of Beaufort and
Newcastle streets, where the Osborne Park
tram swings around?—About quarter of ah
hour.
It would vary a little if the tram stopped
at every street? —Yes.
About what time wonld he have left on
the Wednesday?—So far as I remember, it
was between ll and 11.30.
Was he up on the Monday and Tuesday
that week? —Yes. We went to <Hxs Majes-
ty’s on the Tuesday.
And he took you home that night? What
time wonld he, leave that night?—lt wonld
be about 11.20/
On the Monday, did he leave early?—l
think in time to catch his last tram.
WAGIN TRIP AGAIN. .
I Now, Miss Sadler, when be suggested this
trip you told ns he spoke of borrowing a
car?—Yes.
Would you personally be in favor of him
hiring a car for yourself and family?—l
’would not.
And wonld tho family favor it?—No.
When was the number who wonld go. ar-
ranged?—On the previous Sunday night.
There was a good deal of talk, I suppose ?
You say, “I think,he said tnat he would
borrow one from Mr. Ford, of Wintcrbot-
toxn’s.” You remember that:name 'being
mentioned? —I do.
What was it that Auburn said that; Ford
would lend one, or that he wonld borrow
it? —I think he said, "Mr. Ford said he
would lend him one.”
Are you sure? —Yes.
. You told us that during these conversa-
tions two cars were suggested; who, as a
fact, suggested the Bnick and Willys-
Knight?—Mr. Auburn.
Are yon sure you you did not say you
would like to go in a Willys-Knight ?—NO,'
I don’t think it was me. _ ,
Try and think —can you remember it?—■
No, I don’t. V " ■
Is your memory clear about it?—Yes.
The Buick was first to be mentioned ?
Who was it said they would go halves
in petrol ?—My brother-in-law suggested it.
Where did that conversation take place?
—ln the dining-room.
Were you present?—Yes.. _
It was first just to he a trip to see your
sister?—Yes.
And then the news came she was ill? —
Yes.
Wss there only one wire?—No, there was
one on the Saturday and one on the Mon-
I dav, and a, letter-in the afternoon,
j Yon say that on the at Auhnrn’s
< request, yon nroeured number plates at
Abbott and Rich’s, and that he told you
he, would not be in town, as ho was working
iu Fremantle?—That was what I under-
stood. '
When did he ask that?—During the day
on Thursday. Ha was at our place about
IZ3O.
Are you sure of that? I want yon to re-
member the length of time back. Are you
sure he was out there at that timet—l
think it was the Thursday.
Well, are you sure?—Yes, I’m sure... .
■ About 12J30, did he just call in and go
away?—Yea. -
.. Who was there when he came? —My
brother-in-law and married mater;- -
That -was the time he told yon to get
them. Are you sure of the time ho‘treat
op there?—No', I can’t say I am.
Might it have been earlier?—l can’t say.
" It was in the forenoon?—Yea.
His Honor remarked that ho would hot
take the question. Firstly, witness said the
time was 12.30, then that she was hot sure,
and then, when Mr. Lavan suggested it, she
said it was the forenoon.
Will you swear that on that occasion Au-
burn told yon he wonld be working in Fre-
mantle the following day?—l will not
swear to it, but I think ho said that.
Did you know where he was working?—
No.
Are you sum he mentioned 6 o’clock?
Didn’t he say he wonld not he in town early
enough?—Yes, I think he did.
Are yon clear with regard to this: "He
said on the Thursdav night that he wonld
be np at 8.15 the following night, and
bring the car with him”?—Yes.
On the Friday he arrived about 7?—Yes.
■ «Do you still sav he said he wonld not
be up till B.ls?—Yes, he said that.:,
’ Yon said to Mr. Haynes: "He was
dressed as he is now.” I want yon. to
hare a good look. (Anbnrn stood up in the
dock.) Is that the snit he was wearing on
the Friday night?—lt looks very much like
it. ' r..V .•
He had another blue suit?—Tes,
Was there some difference?—Yea, it was
not as new-looking »s the one he is wear-
ing now and; the one he wore on the Fri-
dav. • ■
I suggest that, vrm had not seen him
wearing the other blue suit, for some time
Is that so?—That is so.
The one that von sav was not so new
as this one. was that the one that the but-
ton was off?—Ter.
THE MISSING BUTTON,
Prior to the fourth of April, how long
was it that you saw him wearing the suit
with the button off?—Between twp and
three months. .
After further questions about the -button,
Mr. Lavan and his Honor, both confessed
that they were unable to understand the
witness.
Mr. Lavan: Did you sec him wearing the
oldest suit for three or four- months before
April 4?—Yes, I did.
_ Will you tell me. when it was you saw
him wearing that other suit?—lt would be
about three weeks before April 4. •
, That was the last time ?—Yes.: ■
Will you swear it was not three or four
months? —(No reply.)
A considerable period?—Well, I cannot
remember.
Do you think it was longer than three
weeks?—lt may have been longer.
His Honor: What makes you think ii waa
three weeks? j
Witness: I don’t know. I just think so.!
Are you sure you did not see him wear- r
ing * the suit for some time before April i
4 at all events?—Yes. 1
The nearest you can say is three , weekly
and you are not sure of that ?—No
How many times have you seen'the. but-
ton off?—Three or • four times. ,
Did you offer to sew it on on hear any-
one else offer? —No.
Did you notice that a piece of cloth,
had come away with' the button? —I' did
not take that mnch notice.
THE "lEON” (?) BAR.
On the Friday night, who let him in—
He just walked in the door himself —the
back door. X was in the kitchen with
Mrs. Moir.
When he came in will you swear ho had
anything.with him?—No, certainly not.
How long after he arrived was it you
say you noticed a parcel on the chair Un-
der his hat?—About a quarter of an hour.
Yon and George, I suppose, had both
gone out?—No, wo remained in thekitchen.
Mrs. Moir went out,
Before you saw the parcel?—Ye*.
And „you say this parcel ■ was on_ the


chair under Ids hat.' Ha. no been sitting
down ?—No.
Ho just threw his hat on the chair f
Yes, the baby's high chair.
If he had brought a parcel and put it
down thcro would you not have seen it?—
Yes, I think so.
Your brother-in-law is a plumber; have
you ever scon any parcels tied up of the
nature you have described?—l have, yes.
So that , the position now is that When
ho came in ho threw his hat on the chair
and you saw no parcel, and vou think you,
would if he had had it?—Yea.
When he took his hat off and threw ,it
down he would place the parcel down first;
did you see anything to suggest that?—.
No.'
When was it this little incident occurred
when you said you spoke to him about the
parcel?—l thought then he bought the par-
cel and I picked up the hat when I went to
the sideboard’ for something.
You thought it was his?—As a matter of
fact I thought it was the evening paper;
he always brought the papers with him. .
As a fact, was he not in 1 the habit of fre-.
quently bringing along rolled-up papers?!
■ —Yes, he was.
But you noticed nothing that night?—
Nothing whatever.
And you say you picked that parcel, np,
and at the time you thought it might be
the evening paper?—Yes.
You say it resembled a paper?—Yes. .
Can you say definitely whether that par-
ed was tied at all?—Yes, I think it was
tied in three places.
I want to remind yon that you said to
Mr. Haynes that, so far as yon know, if
was tied in three places. You say you
think so? —Yes, I am not sure.
■ You will not swear to it? —No.
’ You picked it up?—Yea.
You said it would be about two feet
.long?—Yes. It would ,be about the
length of a newspaper folded up. ’
The witness was handed a paper and
folded it to the length and thickness die
.thought the parcel was. •..*.* •
When measured the paper folded was
IZi inches. "
I. You said, “Judging by the weight ■ of
- it, I took it to be iron or wood.” If yon
I took a piece of iron and a piece of wood
I of that length, there would be a big dif-
ference.-
Was it thesarae weight as it would be
if it was'a piece’of wood wrapped up?
His Honor: How docs it compare with
the weight of that paper?
Witness: It was heavier than that. .
| Mr. Lavan: Was it a light weight? ■
| Witness: It was not what you - could
call a heavy weight. .
i Was it about the weight of a piece of
’ wcod/wrapped up?—Yes, about that.
‘ Could, you give us any idea of . the
1 weight ?—No, J could not.
j: You cannot sav.what it was?— No.
j ’ Nothing to indicate what it was?— No.
j Rut it was comparatively light in
[weight?—Yes ’
Y'ou asked him what he had it for?—
iYcs‘
(I, Yho was present ?—l'o one.
i What he said iokinzlv in answer.to vem
was “To knock vou op the.head with’’?
—Yes.
’ He was in the habit of joking with vou?
—Oh. ves.
If it had beep a newspaper he might sav
the same?—Yes.
A BIT “SNAKY.”
' Things were not too harmonious that
• night—you were a bit “snaky ” with each
other? —Yes.- - .
! Mr. Hav/ics was nuzzled bv the .word
;“snakv,” whereupon. Mr. Lavan explained
I that' it.related to a misunderstanding and
I peevishness, and he added, “it was only
for the benefit of the gallery.” (Laugh-
ter.)
Mr, Lavan: You were a bit “snaky”
|with him, and-he apparently with you?—:
Yea.
He asked you to go to town with him!
—Yes.,
WHI you swear that yon were told 'if '
anyone saw yon to give no information? —• j
I will. •
You don’t remember what day it was
on which the telephone message came J—•
No, I think it was a Tuesday.
Your memory is not boo good T—The
person who was in the office with mo could
probably tell you.
Yes, ’but. I want to test your memory.—
.It was* the Tuesday, because Mr. Purdue
csine up on the Wednesday,
It took you some time to remember
that? —It w«s a long time ago.
; Yon admit that it is difficult to remem-
ber after a few days, a particular conver-
sation?—Yes.
, On the Saturday, April 5, ' Auburn had
j a grey suit on?—Yes, he used to wear it
j occasionally. _ If the weather .was bad he
would wear it as the suit was thick.
There was nothing unusual about his
wearing it, if it was raining, and there was
no cause for yon to remark upon it t
Well, 1 didn’t like the suit.
If he wears it always on a wet or cold
day, why did you remark about it on that
day?;—(No answer.)
Will you swear you remarked about that
grey suit?—No, I will not. swear.
You have oh other occasions?—Yes, but
I did not that time.
In view of that answer, will you swear
that he ever told you his blue suit was
torn?—Yes.
But if the grey suit’was not discussed,
why should you ask about the blue suit?—
(No answer.)
Can you answer that?—No.
You arc clear about that grey suit? —
Yes, it was not discussed.
May you not be making a mistake as to
the dav on which he told you his blue suit
was tom?—l don’t think so.
You won’t even adroit a possibility of a
mistake?—lt is quite possible I made a
mistake, but I do not think so.
When yod were engaged at picture shows
did not Auburn often go in by himself?—
Yes. ,
Mr. Haynes: Auburn fold you the blue
suit got tom.- Did lie tell you how it got
tom?- —I don’t think; I can’t remember.
You, were in the kitchen when Auburn
called. What were you doing?—When 1
saw you before you said you would not
ask me that question. ■ I refuse to answer
it
Yon were busy with something?—Yes,
you know perfectly well I was.
When be came in, did you-see him im-
mediately?—No, but he came straight into
the kitchen and put his hat on the chair
You picked up the parcel?—Yes.
Was it tied up?—l don’t remember.
Did you see Auburn go out that night?
—No.
When you said Auburn bad remarked
that the car broke down, Mr. Lavan ask-
ed, “Where did the brain wave came
from?” Do you think that a fair ques-
tion ?
His Honor: The jury won’t be bothered
with brain waves.
'You mentioned to Mr. Lavan about the
°'°?d running down Aubnm’s arm?—Tts.
■ Did you ever sec it come through his
shirt?—Yea. . .
Did you ever notice a considerable quan-
tity?—Yes.
, Hie Honor : What do you mean by a-con-
siderable quantity? j
Witness: A lot.
At the conclusion of her evidence wit-'
ness asked: May ! agk one question? Why
have they not mentioned that Detective
Purdue asked me to recognise a tube of
cocaine, a.cigarette holder, and a powder-
puff? ’
Mr. Parker: It was something which
arose during the course of the inquiry.
His Honor; Is it evidence?
Mr. Parker: It has nothing to do with
the case. .
Witness: Well, why did they ask me to
recognise it?
Mr. Lavan; I object .to 1 any questions
about this.
His Honor; It has nothing to do with


the case-.
Miss Sadler occupied the ■witness box
for five and a quarter hours.
W «.
" And did you refuse?—l did.
Ho left when ?. About, bqw long was
ho there altogether?—lt was .7.40; 1 look-
ed at the ekxyk.
Who saw him off the premises?—My
brother-in-law.
You do not know whether he took any-
thing away with him I—-Ho1 —-Ho had nothing ia
his bands when he left the kitchen, bar
lis hat '
' And ha did not indicate where he would
stay that tight? ion said be told von
jp the .Thursday he would bring the car
up about 8.15?-—Yes.
■' And the question <•" his staying-Jfriday
eight was discusseil —It'was.
When he went awa* ou -.ho Friday no
Lad been invited to stay ? —lie had-
-1 And we know he did not return, Di-
theugh expected back. He said, in fact,
he might be back to sleep that night?—•
Yes. -
' You were not clear about it? —lie said
he might. ~
On any other occasion has he been ask-
ed to stay and has not stopped?—Yea.
Bv the way. have you ever complained
to him of keening back thijgs which you
thought he should have told you 7 —Yes,
several little things.
Mr. Lavan: Your Honor will see how it
is material later on.
His Honor wondered whether it was
“not the usual thing.” (Laughter.)
THE WAGIN TEXT ONCE MORE.
When ho got to your place on the Sat- j
nrday after you bad rung him up, who I
Was there ?—My broth cal-indaw, luinixOr- •’
tied sister, and myself.
Did he remain long?—I was. not there
when ha came. and. while T was home he
was there about three-quarters of an Pour. -*
What time did you understand you were
to leave on this-trip on the Saturday t—l '
thought early, in the morning.
No definite time was fixed ?-—No. - ;
When be came up to see you the Satur-
day. he said he was sorry he could not
keep,his appointment?—Yes.
What appointment?—He did not say.
.Yon told us you-thought he said there
was something the matter with the ear.
Are you sure he said that?—Yes. •
Why did you say to Mr. Haynes “I
think”?—l thought it over, and I don’t
say things unless I am sure.
, When did you think it over? —Just now.
What else did he say about the car at
that time?
AH INTERLUDE.
■ Before the witness could answer, Mr.
Lavan made a discovery. Pointing to the
table in front of witness,, he asked, * 'Are
those depositions in front, of you?”
“Yes,” replied the witness, “but I am not
looking at them.” There was no doubt
that the witness was paying no attention
to the depositions, and Mr. Lavan told net
he knew that was so, but it gave him a
surprise. As a matter of fact! the ex-
amination was on a portion of the wit-
ness’ evidence which was in the deposi-
tion, but was not open before her. Hia
Honor joined in the hearty laughter which
Mr. ■ Lavan’s surprised outburst gave rise
to. '
“PUT IT nr WRITING. ”
When the cross-examination was resum-
ed, Mr. Lavan put further questions rela-
tive to Auburn’s remarks about the car,
and brought from the witness the state-
ment that shedid not know it was com-
ing .'to this or 'she would have put it all
down in writing.”
Mr, Lavan: Yes, it is hard to remember
conversations after some weeks, especially
when there is cross-examination.
Yon told,ns that he knew you and your 1
family would be averse to him hiring a;
car?—Yes.
•» You. did not to spend so nmen
money?—Yes.
Did yon hear him speak to Mrs, Moir
about it?—No.
AH you Snow is that subsequently he
did arrive with the car?—Yes.
He came with Singe’s car, picked up'
the Quigley girls, Mr. and Mrs. Moir, and
the children, and then went to Osborne
Pork for his case and overcoat t—Yes.
Mr. Layah: Did Auburn get an overcoat
and bag from the Osborne Park Hotel ?
■ ’Witness: Yes.
’■ And the murder was discussed at the
hotel?—Yes, but Auburn was not there.
Where did you stop on the road to
Wagin?—At Armadale.
Some,of,the party left the ear at Quar-
tern: ainc’s, near Wagin?—My sister,
Moir, and her husband children.
You and Misses Quigley, Auburn and
Singe went into WaginT—lea, arriving at 1
am. Sunday.
You stopped at Armadale for refresh-
ments?—Yes
Was.the murder discussed at Armadale
when they all together?—No. So far
as ■ I can remember the murder was not
discussed during the whole trip to Wagin,
and back. ■
The car went to Quartermaine’s next
day and brought the Moirs in and subse-
quently all went back to the farm,, with
the exception of the Misses Qpigley ?
Yes, at 12-30 we went out
Later, Allport’s ear arrived with the
Qu : i ev sisters?—Yea, but we had lunch
before the second car arrived.
What did you return to Perth?—
About 9.30 that night.
Did Auburn go away with the car then?
—No, be went, later.
Was it wet the day you lef- " - Wagin?
—Yea. • -
When .did you 'see Auburn again?—
About 7.30; on the tram near my place
on Monday night.
A,.‘ ’FAREWELL’ ’ TBJP.
. When was the Tuesday night trip ar-
ranged ?—On the Monday.,
Was it as a farewell trip because you
were going to Wooroloo the following day?
-rY'es.
- How were - you, sitting?—The Quigleys
were sitting in front and (smiling) Qsprge j
and I in the back.
' Did you hear any more of the murder
'after. Singe mentioned it?—No, not until
•:wo: went out on the Tuesday.
' Yon do not remember whether Auburn
passed anv remark? —No.
You told Mr. Huru.es that up to the
time you went to Wooroloo. Auburn had
not said anything about finding a coat? — i
.Yes.' •
You have said that he was sometimes
reticent? —Yes.
There ‘ was a telephone conversation ?
Yes.' ■ . ■ >
Was there anything said about your not
having written to Auburn? —Yes, there
.was.
You did not remember that until I re-
minded you I —No.
Were,yon asked if you were sick? —Yes.
; Did anybody say “vou bare written to
your brother-in-law arid not to mo”? —I
don’t remember it.
B:it.won’t deny it?—No.
' Did you sav -von were too busy attending
lectures?--'Yes, I believe I did.
Do yon remember being asked if yon re-
membered the last Friday yon saw Auburn ?
■—Yes.;
A TELEPHONE CONVERSATION.
That is April 4?—Yes.
-Bid. not that person on the ’phone say.
“Wasirit I'up.at your place about 7
o’clock that night end left at 7.30”?—N0,
I do hot remember that; I remember him
saying, “Do you remember me being up at .
'your place on Friday night?”
• You cannot say the time?—No, I do not ;
remember.
‘ Did the voice say, “If anybody asks you j
•anything von will be telling them the truth ;
if yon tell them what von told me now”?— '
No, I am positive that was not said. ‘
Arc you sure that von wore asked if
, anyone had been to see yon?—Yes, and I


said “NV;” • T ■was instructed to say fiiat, I
as some one, -happened to he in the office. I
It, was not tme that no one had been to ,
- Will you swear that you were toM if
anyone saw you to give no information?—•
I will.
You don’t remember what day it was
on which the telephone message came?—
No, 1 think it was a Tuesday.
Your memory is not boo good?—The
person who was in the office with me could
probably tell you.
Yes, but I want to test your memory.—
It was the Tuesday, because Mr. Purdue
came up on the Wednesday.
It took you some time to remember
that? —It w«s a long time ago.
You admit that it is difficult to remem-
ber after a few days, a particular conver-
sation 7—Yes. • I
On the Saturday, April 5, Auburn had
a grey suit on? —Yes, he used to wear it
occasionally. If the weather was bad he
would wear it as the suit was thick.
There was nothing unusual about his
wearing it, if it was raining, and there was
no cause for yon to remark upon it? —
Well, I didn’t like the suit.
If he wears it always on a wet or cold
day, why did you remark about it on that
day?—(No answer.)
Will you swear you remarked about that
grey suit?—No, I.will not swear.
You have on other occasions? —Yes, but
I did not that time. . ■ •
In view of that answer, will yon swear
that he ever told you his blue suit was
tom? —Yes.
But if the grey suit was not discussed,
why should you ask about the blue suit?—
(No answer.)
Can you answer that? —No.
You are clear about that grey suit?—
Yes. it was not discussed.
May you hot be making a mistake as to
the day on which he told you his blue snit|
was tom? —1 don’t think so. |
You won’t even admit a possibility of a;
mistake?—lt is.quite possible I made •■!
mistake, but I do not think , so. j
When you were engaged af picture shows i
did not Auburn often go in by himself? —
Yes. '
Mr. Haynes; Auburn" told you the ’blue
suit got torn. Did he tell you bow it got
tom?—l don’t think; I can’t remember.
You were in the. kitchen when Auburn
called. What were you doing?—When 1
saw you before yon said you would not
ask me that question.-' I refuse to answer
it
You were busy with something?—Yes,
you know perfectly well I was. ■
When he came in, did you see him im-
mediately ?—No, but he came straight into
the kitchen and put his hat on the chair.
You picked up the parcel?—Yes..
Was it tied up?—l don’t remember.
Did you see Auburn go out that night?
—No.
When you said Anbnrn had remarked
that the car broke down, Mr. Lavan ask-
ed, “Where did the brain wave came
from?” Do you think that a fair, ques-
tion ?
His Honor; The jury won’t be bothered
with brain "waves.
You mentioned to Mr. Lavan about the
blood running down Anbnrn’s arm ?—Yes.
Did yon ever sec it come through his
shirt?—Yea.
Did you ever notice a considerable quan-
tity?—Yes.
His Honor: What do you mean by a con-
siderable quantity?
Witness: A lot.
At the conclusion of her evidence wit-
ness asked: May I qgk one question? Why
have they not mentioned that Detective
Purdue asked me to recognise a tube of
cocaine, a cigarette holder, and a powder
puff? -
Mr. Parker; It was something which
arose during the course of the inquiry.
His Honor: Is it evidence?
Mr. Parker: It has nothing to do with
the ease.
Witness: Well, Tchy did they ask me to
recognise it? , '
Mr. La van; I object to any questions
. about this.
His Honor; It has nothing to do mta
, the case. . . .
Miss Sadler occupied the vntness box
for five and a on alter hours.
.*"* (Proceeding.)
There seemed this, morning to he a fall-i
ing off in the number of sightseers who
wended their way to the Supremo Court j
buildings in the hope of gaining admission ,
to the gallery' overlooking the Criminal;
Court The “overflow” was not nearly so'
largo aa on the previous days, possibly be- j
cause the less ardent feared exclusion from I
the Co art and a wait in the rain. >’
A noticeable feature this morning was
the increased number oif women who occu-'
pied the foremost positions in the gal-
lery. '
George William Auburn (21) is charged
with, the wflfnl murder of John Geoigc
O’Neil, a taxi-driver, at Claremont on April
4. He is defended by Mr. M. G. Lavan, i
with Mr. J. F. Walsh. The Crown ease is!
being conducted by the Crown Prosecutor;
(Mr. H. Parker) and Mr. A. Q. Haynes, i
DISCUSSING THE MURDER.
Lillian Elizabeth Jane Quigley, continu-
ing her evidence, stated, in reply to Mr. I
Walsh, that it was the men who discussed
the 'murder at Qnarlermarne’s farm. The
accused was standing a little away from
the giwp. She could not say what dis-
tance, as she fid not take much notice. It
was after 2 P-m. on the Sunday when this
occurred. On the following Tuesday she
..gave the accused Allport’s address.
' THE WAGES’ TRIP.
William Singe, taxi-owner, who took the
party to Wagin, resumed his testimony. He
said that the farm was reached before mid-
day. The murder was referred to during
that meat Afterwards they repaired to
the front verandah, where witness spoke to
Qnartermainc. Accused came along a
little later. Ho stayed with them about
five minutes, and then left Wh3o he was j
present, witness and Quartennaine spoke
about the murder. When the party enter-
ed the car to leave it was again discussed.
Witness beard Auburn remark, “A terrible !
thing.” Perth was reached at 4 pan. Re-
cused alighting at Moir’s, Witness was :
not paid for the trip, which cost £2l Ig.
Mur. Parker: Does that inekidc another
trip?
Mr. Lavan:. Please, Mr. Parker 1 •
Mr. Parker: I am only referring to the
Wagin trip.
Witness: £l9 for the Wagin trip. Pro-'
reefing, be said that Auburn engaged him
for another nm on the following Tuesday
evening, when Auburn, Miss Sadler, and the
Quigley girls went on a trip to Cottesloe.
Witness had not received any portion of
the amounts. He had never"driven Au-
burn along Wcstana-road. Excepting these
two occasions witness had never driven
Auburn in his car. Auburn never told
witness he had .found an overcoat or that
he discovered the spot on Westana-road
where the murder took place.
HARE NOT PAID.
Mr. Lavan: You gave your evidence at
the inquest, that is over a month ago?—
Yes.
Was that evidence correct?—To the best
of my knowledge.
On tec matters yon gave evidence yon
told the truth? —Yea.
Your memory as to conversations would
he better then —teat’s reasonable?—Tcs,
that is reasonable.


ttacnssed yonr erktencc -with
anypocr?—Teg, this morning 'with Mr.
Packer.
And yrrt were in the box yesterday. Did
y<m say in the low Court that Auburn
said he would pay yon for the Wagin trip
on the Tuesday?—Yes, I believe I did He
said he would pay on the Monday- or tho
Tuesday.
Did you expect to get back on the Sun-
daly?—l did not know.
Did you not say prcriornsly you would be
paid when you got back on the Sunday?—
Yes. I expected payment on my return.
AN OBJECTION DISALLOWED.
When Mr. Lavan.put tho last-mentioned
question Mr. Parker, rose in his place with'
the evident intention of objecting, but was
not allowed to proceed. His Honor said
he would not have the cross-examination
interrupted.
Mr. Parker: But, pardon me, your Honor.
His Honor: No, you must not interrupt.
Mr. Patter: your Honor
His Honor: I am not going to hare the
cross-examination interrupted. Will you
sit down, Mr. Parker?
Mr. Parker thereupon sat down.
TRICKS OF MEMOEY.
Mr. Lavan: When you came back to
Woodroyd-streefc, Auburn said he would
pay you on Monday or Tuesday?—He en-
gaged tho car for the Tuesday.
Do I understand that ho first said he
would pay you when he returned? —That
was at the Post Office.
And what did he say there?—On our re-
turn—
Now, Singe, did you say this at the
lower Court: “He came to the car and
said, ‘I want you to go urgently to Wagin,
somebody sick. I will pay you . when I
return- on-the following Tuesday’?”—lf
it is down on the depositions I suppose I
did. (After being shown the deposition):
It is my signature.
You did say it?—lt is here.
Was not your evidence rea<j by the Coro-
ner, and you said it was correct? —Yes.
Was it true? —It is only a matter of me-
mory.
Exactly. But is it true?—Yes.
Then what you say here is untrue? —I
would not say that.
You told us yesterday it was an urgent
case of a lady sick in hospital at Wagin—
is that right?—Yes.
Did you say it before?—lf it is mere, 1
did. .
But it isn’t in the depositions, you see?
How long have yon known Auburn? —Tea
or eleven years.
You picked up the Moir family first?—l j
forget exactly. i
You said Auburn never told you about
au overcoat, except to drive out to the
hotel to pick up his coat and bag?—Yes.
It had been raining during the morning?
—lt was starting to drizsle about 3.30.
Was it a threatening morning?—A; bit
dull,
You went to the hotel and picked up the
baggage, and then to Wagin. and you both
staved at the Federal Hotel? —Yes.
You arrived at 1 or 2 a.m. ?—Tes.
On. the road down you said there was
no mud, but-a few splashes on the way
back here and there?—Ono or two cross-
ing the creeks., .
You and Auburn, both had your btggagnt
—Yes.
Difi you have a bag?—-My _ things were
not in a bag. I lost my pyjamas on tiM
way down. . ; •
CONVERSATIONS A.T QUARTER-
MAINE’S.
Next morning, you say, you want to 4Jt»
hospital; he went in and you stayed oat-
side. You Said yesterday you were walk-
ing on Quartermaine’s verandah, and oc-
casionally Auburn camo along and walked
close by?—You are referring to the hos-
pital. .
No, did you say he would occasionally
walk close by?—Yea.
Did you say you could not say wnataer
he heard your conversation or not?—He
was within hearing.
Did you say it or not ?—Tes, he was doae
enough to bear.
His Honor recollects you saying ho -was
at the back of tho house; I take it he came
around?—Yes.
You went on to say occasionally ho would
walk close to yon and Quartermaina t—•
Sometimes ho was close up to us.
Not for long though?—He would stay »
minute or two, and he moved away be*
fore returning.
How long would he wait?—A minute or
two, and go back again. He walked to and
fro.
What was the longest time ?—A minute
or two at a litoe.
Did he stop and stand with you?—Ha
kept walking.
Then ho did not stop 7—He may have
stopped.
Well, did he?—l cannot remember.
You have a bad memory ?—I admit that
You admit that?—Yes.
Did yon not tell the jury he stopped for
five minutes?—Well, he. was walking along.
You do not know whether he heard a
word of the conversation? —I think ha
must have.
How closo was he? —Almost touching at
times.
Did you not swear yesterday that tho
nearest he was was five yards?—l must
have.
Mr. Parker (to Mr. Lavan): Because
you said it.
Mr. Lavan: That is an improper sugges-
tion. I ask you to keep quiet, Mr. Par-
ker. - - .
That being so, what von said yesterday
and what you say to-day— one of ; them
must be untrue?—l dou’t think so.
Obviously one of them must be wrong?
—With men on a ten or eight foot veran-
dah, with a man walking along, he would
he almost touching them at times.
His Honor: Was ho walking right
around? , ,
Witness; No, just along the front.
How wide is the verandah?—Nino di
ten feet.
Mr. Lavan: When you said yesterday,
that when you and Quartermaine wer«
talking he remained five minutes, what did
you intend to convey?—That ho was walk-
ing along for five minutes.
You admit you have a bad memory?—l
have not a good one,
It is- two months since you-'were down
there?—Yes.
DISCUSSING THE MURDER.
Is it true that the murder was discussed
at the dinner table?—Yes. ;
Who waapresent at the dinner.table?-
Alt, bar the two Misses Quigley.
Have you ever before stated (hat there
•was a conversation, at the table —at the Co-
roner’s Court?—l was not asked.
You were asked about these conversa-
tions about the murder? —Yes.
Did you suggest this?—No, I didn’t. -
That is, conversations at Quarter-
I tnaine’s?—Yes, and- I think I said there
I were conversations about it at Quarter-
f mainc’s.
At the time of this walking up and down
business and you talking to Quartermaine,
had the others arrived? —As they arrived-
it ended.
Were you not asked at the Coroner’s
Court this question, Was there not any
mention of the murder at Quartermaine’a
farm? —There waa.
But were you asked it ?—I think so.
You did not refer to that at tho table?
•—I was not asked.
But you were asked about the conversa-
! tious at Quartermaine’s? —It was spoken
of all the time.
Why did you not say there was a con-
versation at the dinner table? —I was not
asked.
. You have said so; do not evade the ques-
tion. _ You were asked about these con-
versations. Do you think you said it?—l
don’t know.


Would you like to see your depositions!
—No, I forget.
But yon have had two interviews with
Mr. Parker. (Shown the depositions.)
Now, do yon say yon did not say it?—l
may not have, hut It was mentioned there;
it was the topic of the day.
To bo fair to yon, did yon say this at
the Coroner’s Court; 'I first heard of‘the
Crawley murder abont 11 am. At 2 pm.
in Auburn’s presence it was again referred
to, and it was said it was a dastardly thing
to do.” That is at Qnartcrmaine’s farm.
Was it when you and (Juartcnnaine were
talking!—We were talking after lunch.
This incident referred to your conversa-
tion with _ Quartermaine ? —He and I had a
conversation.
In Aubnm’s presence!—Yes,
That would bo to what you refer? —Yes,
it would be that conversation.
You now teR us that in the presence of
the whole party in the motor car you said
it was a dastardly thing to do?—Yes.
Auburn passed fS> remark?—Not to ras
knowledge.
He said nothing at the dinner table ear
to Quartermaine?—No; I don’t remember
him saying anythii.v about it at Quart***
maine’s farm the >bolc time we ws*9
there. '
Now listen V> this in your erridencc-rn-
chief, “When the car was at the house a
■'conrersatSonl about the murder cropped
up.” is that right?—Yes.
“Auburn was there when they were in
the car-a, moment on two before me left;
and that was the time of the conversa-
tion.” is that correct? —Yes. , !,
“Accused sat next to Miss Sadler; I
did not join in the conversation,” is that
correct ?—I said it was a dastardly act.
But you said you did not join in the
conversation!—l said that; ■
“I heard him say it was a terrible
thing”—is, that correct?—l forget whe-
ther he did. -
But you have already sworn half a do-
zen times he did not. —I think he did.
• But you said he did not join in the dis-
cussion' about the murder' at Quartcr-
maine’s at all.
His Honor: When did you say it was a
dastardly thing?
Witness: I cannot remember whether it
was on the way down or oh the way back.
■ Mr. Lavan: Singe, you have' no recollec-
tion of him saying anything in the ear!—
No. : ’
Why did'.yon say “at the car”!—l am
not sure. , ' , ■ -,
Did yon say that at the Coroner’s
Court!—lf it is in the depositions I did.
His Honor, said that the witness, could
not have been expected to learn his evi-
dence and his depositions by heart.
Mr. Lavan; Look at them. Did you
say it!—l don’t know.
It’s not there, is it? —No. . '.
On the Tuesday you again . took Au-
burn out; the arrangement was made op
the Sunday?—Yes. ,
Yon had not been paid, bnt yon were
content to make the second trip?—Yea.,
Re-examined, witness said the reference
to “a dastardly thing” may have been
made on tht Tuesday.
Mr. Lavan objected to this question, but
his Honef ruled that Mr. Parker was en-
titled to seek an explanation.
Witness told his Honor that he had
known Auburn, sen., about 12 years. He
knew him when he had a hotel in Freman-
tle, the Bedford Hotel, and now at the Os-
borne Park HoteL
WAGIN DETAILS.
Charles .lost, yardnwn at the Federal
Hotel, Wagin, said he-first saw the over-j
coat (produced) about 6 a.m. on April 6.
It was in one of the mangers in the stalls
in the hotel yard. Witness took it to his
room. He locked the door of his room
when he was out of it, and kept the key ui ;
his pocket Witness put the overcoat in
his room, and it was afterwards given to |
Allport That was the, following day,:
Monday. ’ ■. " ■'
Mr. Lavan asked no questions'.of the
witness.
t Robert Norton, night -, porter at the
* Federal Hotel, Wagin, said he saw accus-
> ed with the motor driver (Singe) about 2
> a.m. on April 6. They stayed the night.
| Witness did not know who paid for theit
> accommodation. •'
I Cons table M. O’Brien, who is stationed
at Wagin, said that about 8 o’clock on
the night of April 9, he received a tele-,
phone message. He interviewed Allen’
Keith Aiiport, as the result, in connection
with the overcoat (produced). Witness ‘
wrapped it in a parcel and despatched it
> to Inspector Condon. r i
> Herbert Burrows, delivery clerk employ-.
> ed in the railways parcels post depart-
{ ment, recollected on April 10, a parcel'
• being received in the wrapping (produc-
ed). It was in good order and condition j
when handed over. 1
Constable George Win. Robinson, testi-
fied to having delivered the parcel to In-
spector Condon.
THE OVERCOAT AT WAGIN.
Allan Keith Allport, an employe of Hal-:
colm’s Stores, Wagin, remembered a par-;
ty arriving at that place between 1 and. 2
a.m. on April 6. The Misses Quigley and
Miss Sadler stayed there. Later that day
he went to Quartermaine’s farm, arriving
after 2 pan. He heard a conversation
about an overcoat. One of the “ Misses
Quigley asked Auburn if be had his over-
coat. Auburn said it was in the back of -
the oar. Miss Quigley looked for it, ■ and
while she was so doing Auburn talked to
members of , the party. Miss Quigley
pointed out that the overcoat was not in
the car, whereupon Auburn said he must
have left it at the Federal Hotel/’’ Miss
Quigley asked witness t$ collect the over-
coat, and he promised to do so. Auburn
was the next to speak to witness, telling
him he thought the yardman would know
where the coat was, because he had said to
him, “Don’t go away and leave that coat.”
Witness asked Auburn to describe the coat,
which he did, and it was arranged that wit-
ness should send it to Perth by a car, which
witness knew would be leaving short'y af-
terwards. The coat was to be left at Arm-
strong’s garage. Auburn did not tell wit-:
ness that he had found the coat. Witness
got .the coat from Jost on the Monday
and took it to the cliaffhonsc at Malcolm’s
store and hung it up, where it remained
until Constable O’Brien called for it. It
was then •in the same condition as when
ho received it. No communication from
Auburn about the coat was received by
witness. ....
Continuing, witness said he could not not
remember if there was • any conversation
about the murder at Quartermaine’s in An-
burn’s presence.
Mr. Lavan: Did Auburn say, “I think
the coat is in the . back of the car”!—
Yea.
And he told you where he left it and de-
scribed it? —Yes.
Was Singe there then!—No.
You were there when they started off?—
Yes. ' , i
; Mr. Parker; Whal was the conversation
then
IHa Honor ruled the question inadmis-
sible. ...
’ THE NIGHT OF APRIL 4.
t ; Alfred Henry Eddy, an ‘engine - driver ;
hving at the comer of Palmerston and:
Bnlwer streets,' said he had known the ac-
cused and his family several years. , On
the night of April 4 witness saw Auburn
at the ML Hawthorn .tram terminus'-about
11.4,5 p.m. Witness bade him a casual
good-mght. They were waiting for ■ the
last tram to Osborne - Park. It- Was a
warm , night. Auburn wore an overcoat.
Witness-would not be able to identif,
again; although it looked a dark, rourii
and heavy coat They boarded the last
car, which was not filled. Several 'seats
were vacant. Witness sat inside, Auburn
travelling on the fp ut platform with the
motorman. Witness could not say whether
the coat was buttoned up.


AUBURN SAWS WOOD,
Witness had seen Auburn using a cross-
cut saw on a jarrah tree at Osborne Park.
He was not wearing his coat on that oc-
casion. Witness noticed blood on his shirt
sleeves. ,
Mr. Lavau smiled broadly.
Coutinun ?, witness said they hound his
arm with lint." Auburn continued to saw
subsequently.
Mr. Lavan; How long were you waiting
for a tram?—l got there about ' 11.45
p.m.
He was already there? —YeS.
There was nothing wrong with' him—lie
appeared to be the same as usual? —So far
as I could see.
Is it not a fact that almost invariably
on that tram lie stands with McKenzie,
the driver? —Yes; in fact I often ri-’o there
myself. ■ ■
When Auburn was sawing wood: you saw
blood on his sleeve?—Yes. .
Who bound it up?—My eldest bsv. :
Was it trickling?—lt was showing blood.
It was necessary to bind it up, any-
how? —Yes. . •
Mr. Haynes: You saw blood was run-
ning down bis - ami ?—Not running down,
-perhaps'-a couple-of inches.’--'- ;
What were the size of the spots, on the
sleeve? —Oh, a Fair size. I was anxious
about it, and thought it wanted an antisep-
tic.
What did you put on it?—lodoform.
Any other occasions? —Yes, when he and
1* witness were attending to a motor truck.
Was that heavy work? —Oh, no. t _
Do’you know if he knocked
could‘not say.,
j Did it bleed much?—Not very much.
I Did vou bind it up?—Yes.
:!... How*far did the blood come down?—l
| could not say.
. FISH AND CHIPS SUPPER.
I Ena Isla Golding, who with her sister
t conducts a fish and chips, and soft drinks
shop in Oxford-street, said she knew Au- |
burn as a frequent customer. When he
went there he invariably did so tor cool
drinks. The accused was at the shop on
! April 4, between 11.30 and 11.45, calling
for fish and chips. They were paid for
by the accused, but she could not say the
exact amount. The smallest payment tor
fish and chips "she imagined’’ was fid, j
but Auburn paid more than t|jat. He
was dressed in a dark overcoat, and wore
a good, light felt hat. She thought the j
color was dark grey. She could not swear j
to the overcoat. The hat (produced)
■was shaped in the manner that Auoum
wore his, but she could not positively say
it was the. hat. Auburn, since April 4,
had been in the shop. He called at the
shop frequently until the night prior to j
his arrest. She did not notice any dif- j
! ference in the hat on those occasions. He .
did not wear an overcoat at these times,
j -Mr. Lavan: It was always late when ho -
called? , , j
Witness; Generally at the same tune, |
between 11 and midnight. j
Do you remember him getting fish and
chips before ? —I don t, although he might
have'done.
The time you gave on April 4 was ap-
proximate ?—Yes,
What quantity he was served with you
don’t know? —No. _ _
You saw your sister serve him? —Yes.
. But did not hear the amount ?—No.
How far would it he from your place
to the Osborne Park tram?—There are
only two tram stops, and they are very
close tp each other. ,
Loma Dorothy’ Mary Golding substan-
tiated her sister’s evidence. Auburn, she
- said, paid for fish and chips. She could
not say the amount, but she did not th-nk
it would be less than one shilling.
"AS A GENTLEMAN.’’
Mr. Lavan: His appearance was the
same ? ,
Witness; He always treated us as a gen-
tleman, Mr. Lavan. ~ _
Yes. I.know; but afiart from the over-
coat, his. appearance was 'always the
same?—-Yes.
His Honor: Can you say what fcinl of
suit or what color he wearing on
Friday night?—No. N
THE NUMBER PLATES.
' Alice Mary Place, bookkeeper at the
office of Abbott and Rich, signwriters, said
she had seen the accused at the office on
April 3.. He spoke to the foreman of the
workshop, Mr. Nelson, and asked for a
pair of number plate? to be painted
“P 38.” The number plates were made
and brought to witness, who handed them
to Miss Sadler, who called for them about
3.30 p.m. on the Friday.
Mr. Walsh; How do you fix the div the
accused called? *
. Witness; We have a record.
George Nelson, sign writer, employed by
Abbott and Rich, gave evidence about the
numberplates.
. Mr. Layan: Did he say the plates were
for the Osborne-Park Ward of the Perth
Roads B^iardf— Yes.
A WARM NIGHT.
William Patrick Leen, chemist in Ox-
ford-street, Mount Hawthorn, said he knew
Auburn by sight. On the night of April
4 he was at a. boxing contest at the Esplan-
-1 ade Gardens. It was a "pretty warm”
night, and some people around the ring
had their ooata off. Witness travelled
home to Mount Hawthorn that night on a
tram about'll.2o. Up to the Leedervillc
Hotel the back platform was "fairly full,”
I but it emptied there. (Laughter.) Auburn
was also on the tram," having boarded it
either ’ at- the Leedemlle Hotel or beyond
that point. Yinccnt-strect was the next
street after the hotcL His attention was
attracted to Auburn because of the fact
that the accused wore an overcoat. Wit-
ness did not notice where Auburn got off
the car. i,
Mr. Lavan: .Yon cannot give us the ex-
act time? —No, not to the minute.
Do you know what time the contest
finished ?—No.
You walked down to Wellington-strcet?
«—Ycs. and had a conversation when walk-
-1 ing along Hay-street-
Then you cannot say what time the ear
left ?—No.
How many were on the platform when
Auburn boarded the tram?—Two, someone
else- and myself. ,
Mr. Haynes: Was it after 11 when you
caught the tram? —Yes.
j THE HOTEL HOUSEMAID.
Marie Coombs, a resident of Osborne
j Park, said she was employed at the Os-
borne Park Hotel for six weeks, leaving
about a week after Easter. During that
time her duties affected the accused ’s
room, which she had to clean out. She
did this about 9 a,m. as a rule, and did not
go near it at other times. About the time
of the murder witness noticed an Overcoat
hanging behind the. door of Auburn’s
room. She did not think she would recog-
nise it now, having seen, it only onto! Wit-
ness ah» made the accused’s bed. .. On
one occasion, early in April, and after "the
Crawley affair,” the accused went away,
and did not use his bed for one night.
A MYSTERIOUS PARCEL.
It was also her duty to sweep his
room, and at one time she came across a
parcel about.loin.-long, and an inch in dia-,
meter, wrapped in newspaper. Witness
kqockcd it, and it rolled along. It made
"a bit of a noise,” and seemed to be "a
piece of iron.” It was about the time
Auburn was repairing the motor cycle of
the boy Johnston. She did not remember
the date, but it was "easily*a week after
the Crawley incident.” One morning she
went to the bathroom for a jug of water.
It was after "George’luid been to Wagin’’
He told witness he had been away to the
south-west. The bathroom incident was
on the Monoday or Tuesday’ following.
When she went for the water she saw some
dark clothes lying in water in the bath.
(Proceeding.)


In reliable quarters it is anticipated that
the greater part of three weeks will have
elapsed by the time the Dalkeith'murder
triaL proceedings'.will..to completed. .Ac-
cused, George William Auburn, is charged
before Mr. Justice Draper and iury with
having, on April 4, wilfully murdered John
George O’Neil, taad-driver.
Accused pleads not guilty, and is defend-
ed by Mr. M. G. Lavan and Mr, J.' p.
Walsh. Mr. Hubert Patkgr (Crown Pro-
secutor), assisted by Mr. A. G. Haynes,
•onducts the prosecution.
When our report of yesterday’s proceed-
ings closed, Eileen Coombs housemaid at
the Osborne Park" Hotel, was in the., box.'
She was then eroF-examined by defendant’s
eounseL
Mr. Lavan: Was the old coat on the chair
when yon left?
Witness : Yes.
When yon were there did you not see
him with any other clothes? —No. -
You only saw the overcoat on one occa-
sion? —Yes,
He slept in the room on Friday night
and yon did dt out on the Saturday and
Sunday?—Yes.
Auburn used to do. a lot of repairing of
bicycles, etc.?—Yes.
You were once away from your employ-
ment? —Yes, for a couple of days.
George used to keep spare parts and bars
«n his room ? —I did not see any.
Are yon sure it was after the Crawley
affair that yon saw this parcel?—Yes.
Did you ever have need to go to the fire-
place in the room?— I No.
You never picked this parcel up f —No.
Did it move along flat when you.touched
it with the broom ?—I could not say.
You cannot say whether it was round or
flat ? —lt looked round when it was wrapped
Did yon see how, he waa, dressed when ho
went to Wagin?—No.
What- time was it when you went into
the bathroom? —It was after nine.
There wr.s nobody in the bathroom?—
No.
The door was open in the ordinary way?
—Yes. "
It was either the Monday or the Tues-
day?—Yes. ■ ;
What was in the-bath?-—Dark material.
You cannot say if it was a suit or what
it was ?—No. ...
In tho Lower Court you said you thought
he said he got his clothes splashed with
mud. When did you find it out?—Tho
moment I said it I knew I should not have
said it.
The Coroner read your evidence and you
signed it. Did you correct it then? —I
don’t remember.
Anybody been interviewed by you ?—Mr.
Parker, once.
Any.of the detectives?—No. '
Was it not when you saw Mr. Parker
-‘hat you first knew you used the words “I
think’’?—Afterwards 1 realised I was
quite wrong. : , . ''' i •
When vou were giving your evidence 4
No. •
The same day?—i cs.
You told ’ me if waa while you
were giving your evidence.
His Honor said there was no need to
intimidate the witness. ■ .
Mr. Lavan retorted he was not. He had 1
a duty to perform, and he intended to do
it. (To the witness): Did you see Auburn
about the house that Saturday morning?—
He was down at breakfast.
- You don’t know what suit he was wear-
ing"—No.
Where were you when he asked for the
cloth? —Upstairs.
You could have gone in when you chose?
—I. suppose -undoubtedly I could.
The, parcel in that - room, Auburn . would
know- vou -swept out the room every .morn-
ing?—Yes." ■ "
And the easiest place for you to find it
would be under the bed? —1 suppose it
would.
Re-examined; Auburn kept the suits he
was not wearing'on.th'o-b&ckg. 'of'cnairs m
bis room. She did not remember seeing the
washed clothes'-on a chair. The lireplacc
contained a small deal boz; she did not
know its contents. It was after 9 a.ro.
when she saw the material in the bath. To
her knowledge the boarders did not use the
bath after 9 a.m.
As she was leaving the Court the witness
was .seen to almost collapse. Police offi-
cials attended to her the while she wept
bitterly. She soon recovered her com-
posure.
George Stuart Ford, of Winterbottom’s
Ltd., said he had, known Auburn for about
five years. Within the last six months
Auburn. had not approached witness with
regard to the hire, loan or purchase of a
motor car.
Mr. Lavan: Do . you remember George
Auburn breaking his arm and being put
on the insurance fund? —Yes. I do know.
Mr. Haynes: Which arm ? —I think it was
while he was cranking a motor car; if so.
it would be his right arm.
Edgar B. Curlcwis, Commonwealth Me-
teorologist, supplied comparisons of the
temperatures of January, February, and
March as against that on April 4, 9 p.m.
being the selected time.
The Court adjourned until 10.30 a.m. on
Monday.
On the completion of yesterdav’s hear-
ing there were 17 witnesses for the Crown
yet to be examined.


When the Conyt assembled this morning l
to continue the hearing in the Dalkeith i
murder trial there was another “capacity
house” in the public gallery, while a large !
number who failed to gam admittance •
found the warm sunshine outside th.o Cou/t
inviting. They waited around the doors
in the almost rain hope of finding a place
later on.
Defended by Mr. M. G. Lavan, who has
Mr. J. F. Walsh with him, George William
Animm (21) is charged with the wilful
murder of John George O'Neil at Dal-
keith, Cbremcmt, on April 4.
prior to the resumption of proceedings,
policemen and clerks walked into court car-
rying further exhibits in the shape of she-
okk bushes wrapped up in hessian. They,
signalled the calling of the detectives to
give evidence. ■
The Crown ease is being conducted by
the Crown Prosecutor (Mr. H. Parker)
and Mr. A. G. Haynes.
“AN UNCOMFORTABLY WARM
NIGHT.”
The Commonwealth Meteorologist (Mr.
B, Cnriewia), continuing his evidence, said
he considered that at 9 pan, on April 4
it was “an uncomfortably warm night.”
It had not appreciably improved by 11
mm.
■ THE LAST TEAM HOME.
Norman McKenzie, motorman on the.
Government tramways and a resident' of
Osborne Park, testified to havink known
Anbum for about 12 months. Auburn
boarded the last tram to Osborne Park on
the night of April 4. He travelled on the
front platform, standing throughout the
run. Auburn wore an overcoat, and had
his hands in the pockets. Witness eonld
not say if the overcoat was buttoned. When
they reached the terminus Auburn asked
him for a match, which accused said he
required “to see his way in.” He took
some matches from the box witness offered
him.
“I TEEL OEOOK.”)
Auburn then asked if witness would do
him a favor. He said he would, and asked
what it was. Auburn replied, “I feel crook
to-night. Will you walk up to the hotel
with ms?” Witness agreed. That bad not t
happened previously. Witness gave Auburn
no assistance, simply walking with him as
far as the side gate. He struck a match
and said “Good night,” and witness left.’
The overcoat was heavy, and witness could
not swear, to the color and would not re-
cognise it again. Auburn wore a light felt
hat, which was usuaL Witness bad chaffed
Auburn about his hat. Auburn referred to
witness as “Mac” —everybody, did, and
witness addressed him as ‘George.” The
hat (produced) was like that Auburn wore.
Auburn’s hat had braid around the rim,
and so did that exhibited in Court.
THE FINDING OP THE OVERCOAT.
On April 7 or 8 Auburn taught a morn-
ing tram from Osborno Park and told wit-
ness he had “picked up an overcoat on
Friday night coming under the subway.”
He added that ho had left it at Wagin, and ,
he was going in to inform tho police that
he supposed' the® overcoat was John!
O’Neil’s. On the night of April 4 Au-
burn did not mention being jostled or
bumped by anyone. “Something was men-
tioned about slipping downstairs or some-
that effect” He did not say when
he slipped down stairs. He said his am
had bled, and that was the cause of it
Witness saw no blood.
AN ALIBI.
On Monday, April 14, said witness, ac-
cused asked if witness remembered Friday
night, refreshing witness’s memory by re-
ference to the walk from the tram to the
hotel. When witness said ho did accused
said that was all' he wanted to know.
Witness asked the reason ioj
: tho question, and the accused said
“You must know.” Witness said he, did-
not, and accused said, “I want you to
; prove I came home in that car, and went
I to the hotel; mv name has been mixed up-
in this murder ease,” Before his (ac- !
cused’s) departure for Wagin, he men-
tioned the trip to witness, saying he was’
going early on the Saturday.
Mr. Lavan: On every occasion going
home he stood on the front platform? ,
Witness: Yes. ■
On that tram do you remember Mr.
Eddv and Jack Garner? —Yes.
Where were they riding?—Gamer was
cu the platform for a little while, but then
went inside: I think Eddy was on the
beck platform.
Db you know Auburn has a bad arm? —
Yes. .
Have you seen it bleeding?—No.
You have seen a bad scar on the back
of his hand?—Yas.
Bleeding?—No. ■ ■
You have seen it in a bad condition?—
Yes. ,
When he asked von to remember the
ti am incident, he wag asking'von to re-
member something that was true? —Yes.
You say he had an. Overcoat' bn with la* :
hands in his pockets?—Yes, ho! did net.
have his hands in-his pocket when bo paid .
his fare. ~ - /
NO BLOOD NOTICED/
You noticed nothing unusual about him
that night?—No,
You said before you saw no blood at
all?—I still say so.
He was close to you?-—Yes.
Did you 1 see any part of his clothing^—
Only he had dark trousers and a light
hat. •
That hat which Mr. Parker referred you;
you can't say if that was the hat?—No.
You noticed nothing about the hat ami
he was close to you?—No, - •
You cannot-say whether It was April 7
or S when he mentioned ;gqing. to , the"
poliee?- ; -It was one of days. .
You said first that Auburn told you", ha
was taking the ,coat to the police* - and
then you corrected yourself—you remem-
bered it was in Wagin. '
His Honor:.Ho,did hot.say he was tat-
ting it. ' :r ', ■
Mr. Lavan: Ha said at firpt.... (To nrit-
ncss); Didn't iron?
Witness: Yes, :
Isn't this' what ho said: That he had
been in to the’police about the coat I —No.
May- he have said it?—Yes.
It was a fortnight afterwards yon were
asked to remember the conversation?—
Yes.
When was O’Neil’s name mentioned.?—
On April 7 or 8.
What was it again?—-I’m not clear
whether ho said it was O’Neil’s coat’ or
O’Neil’s supposed coat. I said it in the
Lower Court,
Have you been through your evidence.,
with anyone?—No, I just scanned it over
In the paper.
On the night ox'the fourth, what did. ha
eay about his, arm?—That he either slip-
ped or fell down tho stairs, and his arm ■
bled again.
Did he say is op has been bleeding?—
Has been bleeding.
Are yon suro he said something' about
supping Hown- a staircase, or something
like that?—Yes. '
Were you sure in the Lower Court?—
Well, it syas mentioned. ’
I know, but, were von sarc of it then?—
A? sure as I am now.
You would be in a better position to
remember in the Coroner’s Court?—Yes.
Do you remember using the words ,r I
think ho said”?—No. • <v "?
Would you like to see whether you did?
.—lf it’s there I’ll believe it.
If von did sav it, it would imply yon
had some doubt about it? —It~* would.
.Do you know if (hat arm used to'cause
him trouble at times?—l do, but only by
him telling me about it.
Do you remember how, when travelling
on the pafcform with others, he was carefnl
to keep away so ho would not got humped?
—Yes.
_ THien did you remember about his going
to Wagin?—Ho mentioned it in several eon-
ver sations.


itfi
As a general rule; did he catch the last
tram?—Wall, the last two. n.lB and 11.50.
More often XLso?—About fifty-flftv.
Mr. Parker: You collect; the fares?
Witness: Yes. ' ■ • '
AUBURN PAID TEAM PART!.
Did Auburn pay a fare that night?—
Yes.
Do you remember which hand he used?
—No. ■ - - ;
Did you see any blood on the'hand he
used ?—No.. ■ ■ S.
Did he have to put it in his trousers’
pocket?—Overcoat pocket, I think;
Who is Jack Garner?—A young man.
Where does he reside?—He is a gardener
in Albert-street.
Was he in conversation with Auburn?—
I think they spoke.
At this stage Mr. Karan Said he was not
called Garner, and Mr. Parker did not pro-
ceed with the questioning.
"On what hand is that scar ?—The right
hand, I think. « ’
Do you remember when'you saw it and
what was wrong?—No. ‘
Have you ever seen anything wrong with
the hand?—A big scar.
-How long is it since you saw the sear?—
[ Could not say. -
WESTANA-EOAD DISCOVERIES.
Thomas Robinson, police motor driver, !
deposed that he went on April 11 to Wes-
tana-road, having Detective-Sergeants Pnrr
due, Doyle, and- Kennedy,' and Auburn as
passengers. : They were directed by- Au-
burn and stopped at a spot about half-way
along the road. He was present when the
ground was examined, and saw Kennedy
pick up a piece of glass. Auburn was also
there. It was near the spot where-the she-
oafc was pushed. over. Auburn said it
looked like a piece of glass from a spot-
light. . Witness saw the piece of glass fit-
ted into the spotlight (produced).
Mr.-* Lavan-. Where this was picked up it
was evident that a car had been there; you
saw the tracks? . .
Witness: Yes.
And the broken trfee? —Tee.
No other part of a car but the spotlight
is mirrored? —No.
And seeing the car had been there, and
the tree had been broken down, it occurred
to you it must have been a spotlight?—l
never gave it a thought. ■
It would occur to you ?—Probably.
0. E, QUASTEEMAItrS STORY. -
Charles E. Quartermain, a new witnesn,
said he was a farmer residing at “May-
field,” West Wagin. _ He remembered the
party coming to Wagin about. April 5. They
were all “perfect strangers” to witness ex-
eept Miss Sadler.
Witness proceeded to enumerate the mem-
bers of the party, and commenced by re-
ferring “to this’fellow Ormond, or what
yon call him.”
Accused joined in the burst of laughter
which succeeded this remark. Witness
said he was introduced all round- Some
time after their arrival Singe, Auburn, and
witness were together.
His Honor: So far we have had no sug-
gestion of such a conversation on the Sat-
urday. ,
Mr. Haynes: Your Honor will see why.
“DID YOU HEAR OF THE MURDER?”
Proceeding, the witness said Singe, the
driver, remarked; “Did you .hear abacs W/
terrible murder this morning? Witness,
said he bad not. Auburn was present. H e -
(witness) said he would not hear of it on- ,
til he received a paper, and asked how .
happened* Singe remarked that
what he could hear the murdered man had
been knocked about with a bottle, ■ Id#-
added that the murdered man was a motor;
driver, and. did not have art enemy in the
world. Singe then turned to Auburn ami-
■said:'-“Bo you think he did.’ * Auburn'
replied No. ” Binge also said bp-thought
two or three must have donc.it. and An*;
burn agreed with .him, ~ • . v.
“MOST TERRIBLE MURDER.”
While Singe, -fyihufu, Moir,. and witness
were together the following . afternoon;
Singe said he would like to see the , paper,
and read about the murder,- which her©-;
gsrded as the most-, terrible that had .ever,
been -in -Perth.-- He ashed -Auburn--if he.
thought it was .that-.;-and: Auburn said he
did.” v;
QUAETERMAINE ’E EYIDENOE CON
TINDED.
Mr. Lavan: When were yon first asked
to remember all these conversations? ’
Witness:- Last Saturday. -
■ April 5 to June 14; this night 'they
arrived, who went to the shed with you?—
Singe, and I think Auburn. 1 '
You think?—l would not be sure. It
was dark this night, and I am a bit —
A bit shortsighted, so you can’t really
say whether Auburn was there or* not?—
Oh, yes I could, I could tell the difference
between a man and woman at 15 yards.
(Loud Laughter.)
Where was Moir f —On the ' verandah
talking to the wife. ,
You can tell me now, after two months,
where the different parties were? —Yes.
You have a fair memory?—Yes.
Was this conversation a matter of about
a minute? —Oh no, a few minutes.
The mention of the murder at the table
finished the conversation about it? —Yes.
You went on to the verandah ' with
Singe?—Yes. ■ • ■ -
Was Auburn there? —No.
AUBURN WAS PRESENT.
Re-examined: Witness was certain the
conversation on the Saturday night was
Qonduetod in Auburn’s presence. -Au-
burn was referred to, and might have been
a little distance off in the darkness, but
he was referred to, and witness heard his
voice.
Granted permission to ask another Ques-
tion, Mr. Lavan said;— You say he was a
few yards away in the darkness?
Witness: Yes. ,
And you heard his voice T-^-Yes.
You are a bit shortsighted, you couldn’t
see him; how do you know it was Auburn's
voice?—When I would hear a voice along-
side me I wonld turn round (giving an il-
lustration from the box).
So you did look at him?—Too right, I
didl (Loud laughter.) .
DETECTIVE-sSERGEANT DOYLE.
Detective-Sergeant John Doyle said that
on the morning of April 5, he went with
Purdue and Kennedy to Crawley, where !
they arrived about 9 a-m., and found the '
dead body of a man on the edge of the
water. There was a handkerchief there
with the initials.“J. O’N” on it. Wit-
ness saw a drag mark and motor esur,
tracks. On Friday, April 11. about 2
pun., witness saw Auburn at the detec-
tive office with Purdue. It was arranged
that Auburn should go with 1 witness and
show the exact spot where he found the
overcoat. On the way there Auburn
said,“On Monday afternoon last I was
on the road between Claremont and Ned-
lands, and I saw tracks where a motor ear
had, broken down some scrub, and also j
tracks where something had been dragged ■
into the bush and dragged out again. I 1
will show you these tracks if you like, ’ ’
Witness said, “ Al| right, I will get you
to show them to ns.” At the subway ,
Auburn indicated a.spot on the north-west j
corner of the subway-near a street grat- I
ing, and said that was where he found the
coat; On the way to the detective office
Auburn said, “What about those tracks I
told you of, aren’t you going down to see
them?” Witness said he was first going
back to the office to get Purdue. After
a conversation about the tracks, Purdue,
Kennedy, accused, driver Robinson, and
witness left for Wes tana-road. /


at westana-road.
Witness, continuing, said they went to
the spot m Westana-road, being directed
by the accused. The photographs (pro-
duced) were taken on the Saturday morn- :
ing, and showed the spot as they found it,
except for a shovel'and sticks with paper
at the ends of them, which indicated tmcics,
Mr. Parker said, he did not propose to
call as a witness the person who took the
photographs.
Mr. Walsh said the defence might be
supplied with copies. _
. Mr. Parker said he would make an effort
to secure copies.
The jury and his Honor perused the pho-
tographs. ' . .
Accused, proceeded the witness, indi-
cated tracks where a motor-car had ran off
the road, and anoarently broken down the
sheoak scrub and a gum-sucker. The tracks
of the front wheels were off the macadam,
and the left rear wheel was just .on it.
Auburn also indicated two drag-marks,
leading from the stump in the sheoak scrub
fifteen paces into the bush from the road.
“WHERE IT WAS DRAGGED.”
The accused, said witness,’ pointed to a
drag-mark on the Claremont side, and
said, “That is where it was dragged in,”
and pointing to that on the Nedlands side,
be said, “That is where it, was dragged
out.” Presuming it was a motor car, if
it had run into the bush as indicated by
Auburn — /
To his Honor: The way the scrub was
broken down, and where the tracks stop-
ped would indicate which way the car was
going—towards Claremont.. - .!
Resuming, the witn'ess said the side near-
est Claremont would be the front portion
of the ear. The drag mark .was similar to
that seen by witness at Crawley.
His Honor wanted Mr. Parker,to dear
up the matter, of the motor car track and
the drag mark separately.
MOTOR CAR TRACKS.
Mr. Layan remarked that this passage of.
the witness’ evidence was pure theorising.
Witness said one of the drag marts led
from the.car and branched off; the other'
came back over the same track .for a. dis-
tance, and then branched off. There was
nothing to show which way the object was
dragged. ’ The Car apparently bumped
into the stump, knocking it down, and
stopped immediately.
BLOOD AT WESTANA-EOAD.
The tracks formed almost a letter, “Y.’
After accused pointed out where the tracks
had gone in and out, Kennedy called,
“There’s blood here,” and almost simul-
taneously Purdue called, “There is blood
hero also.” Auburn could hear. Kennedy
was at the spot'indicated on the photo by
the shovel, and Purdue where the sheoak
had. been broken down. Witness picked
up two locks of hair at the spot indicated
by the shovel, and a couple of feet from
the broken sheoak he found p third hang-
ing on a twig. Witness took samples, of
sand, and twigs, which seemed to .have
blood on them, and left Westona-road about
6 p.nil, leaving some constables in charge.
A HIDDEN HANDKERCHIEF.
On the way to Perth Auburn said he
had not yet seen the overcoat, which the
detectives received back • from Wagin, and
witness said he would show it to him. When
it was shown to him accused recognised it
as .the coat he had found under the sub-
way. Kennedy and witness examined the
coat, and inside the lining found the hand-
kerchief (produced), which had on it the
name “J, O’Neil.” Later that night wit-
ness, Purdue, and accused went to the Os- :
borne Park Hotel. In accused’s room in
the upstairs portion of too hotel, on toe
back of a chair covered by other cloth-
ing, he' found the coat' and trousers pro-
duced. The trousers and coat had the ap-
pearance of having been recently washed,
■but not pressed.’
the lost button.
■Accused in . reply. to witness said he
■washed the clothes about two weeks previ-
ously, because 'he had dirtied them when
working on a motor car. He said he first
used petrol and then cold water and soap.
Witness pointed out to Purdue a small, hole,
and Auburn said, “There used to be a.
link button there, but I lost it about .six
months ago, and I cut a hole
in the serge when entting the link off.”
AUBURN’S INJURED ARM.
Witness, continuing, said Sergt. Purdue
Ithen produced a button, and indicated the
button on.the coat. Accused said, “They’re
alike alright!” Sergt. Purdue took pos-
session of the ooat and trousers, also three
j waistcoats. • At that time accused ■ was
dressed in, another blue suit. There was
also a grey suit and a dirty blue coat and
trousers in the room. Witness examin- j
ctl the coat Auburn was wearing. He
removed the coat showing them the wound ,i
on the arm. Witness saw “a large sort of '
weal” there. It appeared to be an old,
wound, and was not bleeding. Auburn di- ;
rected their attention to his shirt sleeve,
which showed traces of a pussy yellow
matter, with traces of blood through it.
There were similar marks on the sleeve of
hrs ooat lining. These were over the
spot where the wound was found. Auburn ■
also showed them the inside of the sleeve
of his pyjama eoat, which showed toe
same marks.
WOULD GIVE* SATISFACTION.
When they returned to the detective of- ;
five a statement was taken from the nc-
| eusod, witness being present part of the. ;
; time. Afterwards witness, Purdue, nail '
the accused proceeded to the house of Dr.
Barker in Hay-street West. The arm was
examined by Dr. Barker, after which the :
detectives took the accused back to the
hotel. Witness next saw Auburn at 2
p.m. on Saturday, April 12. Auburn was •
at toe detective office and remained there
until about 7 p.m- Witness heard Purdue
say to the accused. “Yon say that if yon ;
arc allowed to go until 2 p.m. on Monday
nest you will then return to this office
and give the authorities satisfaction re-
garding the murder of the late John George
O’Neil.” An burn said,
“Yea, Satisfaction To Ton, But Not To
Me.”
On Saturday, April’l2, witness went t J
Westana-road and was present while a.
photo : of, the spot was taken just as it;
was when it was first pointed out by the '
accused, with the exception of marks made ’
when the detectives were there. Ho took 1
possession of certain sljc-oak scrub, which ‘
bad been apparently knocked oyer. The'
shr-oak was produced. There was also
some she-oak attached to the stump and at!
the spot indicated on the photo by the’
shovel, which he brought to Dr. Atkinson. 1
They appeared to have blood on them.
Two days later witness saw the accus-'
ed at toe detective office at about 5.5 p.m., ■
l~nt Purdue was not then there. Witness'
went, out, and , on his return saw
accused, pacing ..up . and down
the room, dictating a statement to Purdue, i
It was read over to accused, who signed it. 1
About 7 p.m. witness was present when
Purdue said to the accused. “You can go
and have .voar tea. ” “ WTiere 1’ ’ asked
the accused.'f‘Anywhere you like,” Purdue
replied, and accused said, “Nothing worse
than that?” Purdue said, “I do not un-
derstand you.” and accused said, “Don’t
grab me in toe street when you want me.
Let me know, and I will come til. On
April 16 witness was present at the
ARREST OF THE ACCUSED.
. Accused made no statement. Witness
accompanied the accused to the police i
station, and there took- possession of his *
hak He wore the same hat every time wit-!
ness saw him.. There was au old and dirty j


| hat in his room which he said he wore when *
working on motor cars. The hat-band was 1
i given to the bacteriologist. He did not
j locate a person named Charles or, Charlie
Jackson, who' owned amo tor cycle.' Ex-
haustive inquiries in the, motor registra-
tions’ list located- a Charles Johnston,
■ owner of an old motor cycle.
Mr. Lavan: Every time von saw Mm
from the inception he wore the hat yon sub-
mitted to the bacteriologist?
Witness: Yes.
Have you told ns everything so
far as he is concerned?—Everything of im-
portance. ,
Ik is a common thing for cars to be
stolen?—Occasionally.
You had a gentleman recently who
STOLE CABS GALORE?
• —Two or three. ' (To his Honor) ; Not
stealing, because they are abandoned after-
wards.
The first time you came into this matter,
so far as Auburn was concerned, was when
you took him to the subway?—Yes.
Arid on the.way back he volunteered this
piece of information about the tracks?—
Yes. •
That he saw certain tracks of a motor-
ear and tracks of something having been
dragged along, and of-the broken bush?—
Yes. -
Then you went back-to the noliec station,
and, after speaking to Purdue, you all went
to Wcstana-road?—Yes.
When you got to Wcstana-road yon saw
tracks of a car on the side of the road? —
Yes. ■ ; ' .
■ Were they then apparent?—l wouid not
have noticed them.
Did Purdue say in the other Court they
were 'apparent?—l don’t know what he
said.- ■ ’ ■ -' I
If a person was sitting down he would
notice them?—lf he was looking at thorn.
•- Well, yes, he would not see tbgm it he
was not looking at them. That’s the same
as not looking at me and saying you could
not see me in Court?—A man can stare at
you and 1 not see you.
. Even when he is. staring at you?—Yes, a
vaeaint stare, yon know what I mean.
Wcstana-road leads down to Bay Ticw-
tearraoc?—Y'es. - ’
And is a popular route for motorists ?
Yes.,
You told us the smashing of the scrub
was apparent. It would be 'several days
after the 4th when ho showed you the
tracks. , They were visible?—Yes.
Seven days afterwards, and you had no
difficulty in seeing them? —No.
. Yon say the front wheels apparently
stopped about 2ft. past where the shcoak
was. broken down ?—From the stump.
■ Did'you notice oil here (pointing to the
photograph) i —lt was on the gumsucker.
r Would it be seen if yon were 'standing
of-'- sitting- there? —If his attention
was- drawn- 1 to it.- There are
hundreds of • people who would
pass there and never see it.
You could not say whether that car
came from Nedlands,or Claremont? —No.
Did the drag, marks show where the car
was ?—No.
• How far from the road would the drag
marks be discernible ?—Three or four feet.
You say he point' J out these tracks,
that he had arranged to show yon what
he WffltTnot apparent-two trades went
to a point—thaUfrcrc was a dragging tme
way and then another?—l would not say.
THE WESTANA TRACKS.
You see,, two tracks converge to a point
where. something is being dragged, is «
not reasonable to say that.it has been drag-
ged one way and back another?—lt de-
pends what it is dragged on. Dragging
an article through sand I could not tell you
—a “nigger” might. . A
I am asking you as a man, notas .*
“nigger.” Would it not indicates to yon,
as a reasonable man, that what I suggest
had happened?—ln sand J. would not say,
in the scrub I mibht.
-You say the accused said, -•‘Ttas'ia
•where it was dragged in, and this where
it was dragged out?”—Yes.
And still you say it would not be appar-
ent that it had been dragged ■ in one way
and out the other? —I would not say that
occurred.
Arc yon quite sure Auburn said the words
I have just quoted?—Yes.
You told us of the discovery of blood at
various spots, and the samples taken. All
that took place, so far as Auburn was con-
cerned, was the pointing out of the tracks
and the remark “That is where it seems
to have been dragged in, etc.?”—Yes.
. Did he say that was what it looted like?
—No, he said it was dragged.
When vou showed Auburn the overcoat
he immediately said it was the overcoat he
had found?—Yes.
Was it after he came from Wcstana-road
when a statement was taken?—Yes.
How many hours after 2 o’clock was the
statement taken? —It was about 9 o’clock.
Seven hours?—We did not get hack from
Wcstana-road until 6.30.
MAKING A STATEMENT.
From 6.30 until after 9 o’clock he' was
with Purdnc?—Yes.
I take it you were not. silent when with
him; you were questioning him?—No.
He was three hours with Purdue taking
this statement?—Yea.
Purdue was alone with him?—Yes.
He had had no tea? —No, none of us.
Did he have any mid-day meal?—l don’l
know. After or 3 hours with Purdue
vou took him to the hotel; how long were
vou there? —About half an hour.
The coat was quite observable?—lcoufd
sc-c a coat there. It would be easily seen
in the daytime.
His other clothing was on the backs of
chairs? —The grey suit was, the other blue
one was over the washstand. ■
It is a common practssev.it was quite
visible to anyone coming into the room?
—The grey suit was, because there " was
no clothing over it.
At the time he was wearing the navy bine
suit he is now wearing?—Yes, I think it is.
And it was the suit he was wearing all
the time you saw him? —Yes, I think.
There was no link, button on the old bine
coat? —No.
When he mentioned about the lost but-
ton, did he say anything besides what you
have, told ns?—l don’t think so; oh,. yes,
he said something about sewing it on three
times.
Something was said about his arm?—Yes.
Did you mention it in the lower Court?
—No. ,
Is the mark on his arm red?—Y'es.
Is it inflamed? —Not very., I should
say it was in the same condition for, some
time.
You saw marks on his. shirt to indicate
blood?—It seemed pgus, with traces of
blood.
His pyjama sleeve showed the same
thing?—Yes.
And the coat of his suit?—Yes.
At the detective office, after their re-
turn about 10.30, Auburn was mostly with
Purdue?—Yes, I was in and out.
After the taking of the statement you
went to Dr. Barker’s?—Yes.
What time did you get there?—About
12.30.
Was it 1 o’clock when you finished at
Dr. Barker’s? —Yes.
ABOUND THE CLOCK.
This young man was with the police
from 2 pun. to'2 aun.?—Yes.
During which time two statements were
taken ?—Yes. .
And all the time he was without food?
—Yes.
So far as the taking of the statements,
Purdue was concerned?—Yes.
Did yon ever at any time try to extract
anything from this young man? —No.
Did yon not say: “Now, don’t be a fool,
come on, let us have it”?—No.- ■
Never at any time?—No.
Did von say; “Think of your father and
mother; get it out and don’t be a fool”?
—No, I did not.
Are you sure! —Yes. _
.'Proceeding.)


V Chesses “ for ' the Crown. re-
mained to be examined when Mr. Justice
JJraper andjury this morning resumed the
hearing ot the O’Neil murder trial. It is
I generally anticipated that the best part of
three weeks will have elapsed before the
filial stage is reached. Meanwhile public
interest continues unabated, the demand for
accommodation being far greater than the
capacity of the Court. . ■ . ,
■ George William Auburn, the accused, is
charged with having, at Claremont on
April 4 last, wilfully murdered John'George
O’Neil, a taxi-driver.. ile-pleads not guil-
ty, and is defended by Mr. Mi G. Lavan,
with Mr. J. F. Walsh, while Mr.- A. G.
Haynes assists the Grown Prosecutor (Mr.
Hubert Parker) in conducting the Crown
case. .... /.
AUBURN’S STATEMENTS.
When our report closed yesterday De-
tective-Sergeant Doyle was under cross-:
examination regarding Auburn’s , state-
ments. ■ - ■
Mr. Lavan: Auburn came in again on the
Saturday to the detective office,' and was
there until 7 pun. ?
■ Witness: Yes.
With whom?—Purdue most'of the time.
Alone? —Most of the time. -
He had five hours-there, and you tell us
you only kno— what he said leaving the
room?—I was only there then. -
He had been, up until 2 a.m., and from
2 in. the afternoon he had been with the
detectives?—Yes.
And he was there from 2 until 7 the
next day?—Yes,;with Purdue until he went
for tea, and I was with him about an hour.
Are you sure Auburn said “Satisfaction
to you, but not to me”?—l, am sure of it.
You heard nothing before that?—No.
Didn’t he say this, that if he were.al-
lowed to go until Monday he would give
“satisfaction to you and satisfaction to
me”?—No.
Axe you certain of that?—-I am.
' The next you saw of him was on the
Monday evening. How long was he at the
office.then? —Prom about 5.5 until 7.
With you or Purdue? —I am. not sure,
now I think of it, whether it was the Sat-
urday or Monday evening that I stayed
there while Purdue went to tea.; ,It was
the Monday evening. .
There you are; you have been telling us
it was the Saturday evening?—lt, was the
Monday. .
So all people can make mistakes ?—I sup-
pose so. •
Were yqu present when the statement
was taken? —Yes.
No questions.?—No.
He was allowed to go t —Yes.
From the Friday to the Monday he was
being ■ continually interviewed ?—On . the
Friday, Saturday, and Monday again.
DOYLE RE-EXAMINED.
Re-examined by Mr. Parker, the witness
said it was a common thing for cars to bo
taken in the city. All suburban and ont-
stations were notified of the’ unlawful re-
moval of a car.
Are there tracks leading off Westana-
road? —Along Westana-road there were
tracks leading off at various places. .
“IRRELEVANT MATTER.” ‘
Mr. Lavan strenuously objected, and his
Honor expressed an inclination to agree
with him. Counsel said it .did not arise
out of the cross-examination. ■ • ' . ,
Mr. Parker said he would recall - the wit-
ness later.
His Honor said too much irrelevant mat-
ter was being introduced. . _
When Mr. Parker asked the witness later
on if there were not many motor tracks in
the locality, Mr. Lavan again objected, and
his Honor deemed the matter irrelevant, and
said he would: not have the case dragged
on interminably. ' .
Mr. Parker protested that it was a mat-
ter arising out of the cross-examination,
and the defence must have some object. If
the case was being dragged on, why did not
his Honor restrain Mr. Layap in his cross-
i examination ?
r 7'Tlis'"Honbr;.Y(m^ai» , »otVtotiti^to'tik
; any questions unless thov have been the
subject of cross-examination.
. Mr. Parker continued to hold the view
that it was a matter arising out of cross-
examination, and Mr. Lavan that it was
not ,
The evidence then proceeded.
1 Who was Auburn with out at Westana-
roadt—Mostly with the motor driver.
How long were you there?—About three
hours.
Prom 6.30 Purdue was with him?—Yes.
What was Purdue doing with him?—l
don’t know.
You went to Osborne Park?—Yes.
On the Saturday he got there at 2 end
left at 7t—Yes. ■ • ’
Was Purdue there T—Yes.
lYhat was he doing?—l do not know.
ACCUSED NOT DISTRESSED.
During any of this time did the accused
appear cpnfused or distressed?—No.
Was he pressed in any way?—No.
Did ho seem Unwilling?—No.
A RESIDENT NOTICED NOTHING?
Henry Chas. Worrall, an attendant at the
Old Men’s Home, said he lived in a house
appearing in the photograph, and knew the
track well,, going along it twice a day. Be-
tween April 1 and April 13 he passed there
twice daily. -He noticed nothing unusual
there.
Mr. Lavan: It is all bush around there?
rWitness: Practically.
You were not looking specially ?—No.
There.might have been a dozen tracks
there and you would.not see them?—No.
You did not,even see the trees down?—
No.
The trees down : and tracks woujd not be
noticed ?—No..
■ Mr. Parker: It is a common thing to see
trees down?
Witness: Yes.
The Court adjourned until 10.30 a.m. to-
day. On resuming
DETECTIVE-SERGEANT PURDUE.
Detective-Sergeant Grenville Purdue
opened'his.evidence with a description of
the ground in the vicinity of the'spot where
the body was found at Crawley on the
morning of April 5. It was similar to
that given by previous witnesses.
FOOTPRINTS AT CRAWLEY.
Mr. Parker; In the tracks were there
any footprints ?
Witness: There were parts of prints In
places.'
Did you get any.casts?—No, there were
no impression that would give a cast.
Why ?—‘There was only loose dry sand.
AUBURN AND THE COAT.
On April 7, said the witness,’ about 8
p.m,: he saw the accused at the detective
office, this being the first occasion on which
witness had seep the accused. Auburn
said: “I believe you are looking for a coat
in connection with this Crawley affair.”
When witness said he was, accused asked
for particulars of the coat. Witness was
to gti into the inspector’s office to get the
particulars, but before he went accused said
he thought he had the one they were look-
ing for. Witness obtained the particulars
and told accused it was a heavy dark green
English coat with a stripe. Auburn said
that .would be it, and on being asked to
bring it.in, told witness that he had left it
at Wagin. He would wire for it. _ Auburn
; said,he bad found it on Friday night under
the . West Perth sub-way; that be had
picked it up and looked at it under the
r light, and seeing no one about took it with
him. ‘' He said he had been at the Grand
•picture show, and added, “To tell you the
. truth I had only threepence left and walk-
ed'out that_way to catch the tram at the
Lecderville Hotel comer, so that
I . • eould get to the Mount
Hawthorn terminus for a penny.’”
Witness knew that was possible, and that
the fare from Mt. Hawthorn to Osborne
Park was 2d. . Auburn said he found the


7 7 w"
coat on the west side of the subway, tie'
gave witness his name and address, and j
also said he thought the coat must have*
fallen, out of a motor ca rooming from the
direction of Marquis-street, and going to-
wards a street which joined Oxford-street.
Accused returned on the night of April 9,
about the same time, and asked witness if'
the detectives had received the coat. Wit-
ness said they had not, and asked him if he
had kept his promise to wire for iL He
said he had not, but had written to Mr.
AUport, of Wagin, to send it down. Wit-
ness caused the Wagin police to be tele-
phoned, and told the accused this was
being done. He left soon afterwards.
Witness next saw Auburn the following
afternoon. At the time witness was pro-
ceeding along Roe-street by car. He saw
Auburn with a young man named York,
on the north side of the Horseshoe Bridge.
Witness signalled to Auburn that he
wished to see him at the office, but did nat '■
speak to him. He called in that night, i
and witness asked him when it would be
convenient for him to show them where he
picked up the coat. Auburn said any
time would suit him, and it was arranged
for 2 p.m. the following day, April U,
Auburn presented himself as arranged, and
went with Detective-Sergeants Doyle and
Kennedy to the subway.
WESTANA-ROAD EPISODE. .
' Witness saw them about an hour later
upon their return. Doyle reported in ac-
cused’s presence, the position in which the
coat was alleged to have been found, and
also, told witness the accused had men-
tioned to him that when he had been out
on a road between Claremont and Nedlanda
the previous Monday, he noticed where
some scrub had been broken down, a motor
car had run into the bush, and something
had been dragged. Witness conversed
with Anbnrn on this matter, and he veri-
fied Doyle’s statement. Auburn express-
ed a willingness to accompany them to the
locality, arid they all left straight away, j
Passing through Nedlands they turned into-
Westana-road, and after going some dis- i
tance, the accused remarked that it was ,
“just down here,” indicating a hollow.
About 80 yards before they stopped witness
noticed a motor track leading into the bush .
and, suggested that the motor driver stop,
but accused said that was not it. There-
were several vehicle tracks leadipjr off
Westana-road into the bush. At a place
indicated by the accused, witness saw where
a car, had left the road, and where some
she-oak scrub and gumsuckers had been
knocked down. That was when they got
out of the car. The gumsucker seemed to
have oil on it. On the she-oak there ap-
peared to bo blodo. At this time the
other officers and the accused were further
into the bush, and just prior to witness
noticing the blood on tho she-oak Kennedy
called out that there was blood where he.
was.
Witness here gave evidence about the
discoveries similar to that given by Detec-
tive-Sergeant Doyle.
The party arrived hack in P.crth-about
6.30 pun., and a statement was taken from
the accused. It was signed by accused
about. 8..30'p.m.
STATEMENT BY AUBURN.
MOVEMENTS ON FRIDAY NIGHT.
The statement was .read by Mr. Parker.
It was' as-follows:-
“I am a motor expert and reside at
the Osborne Park Hotel. On Friday,'.
April 4, I was home the best part of the-
.!,day,' and came,to the city bv the 6.45
■ p.m.-tram from Osborne Park.- I arriv-
ed in the city at 7.25 p.m. On Thurs-
day, April 3. J was at home all day,;
and came to town in the evening, meet-
ing a young la£y, and with her went io
His Majesty’g and returned home by the
tram. I usually catch the 11.28 pun.
tram from the Palace Hotel.
AT THE PICTURES.
“When I arrived in the city on,the 4
evening of April 4, I went straignt.
the Grand pictures alone, and remained
there until the finish of the programme
at 10J.5 or 10.25 p.m. I was alone in
the pictures all the fcvening, and saw
no one that I knew that I can remem-
ber. When I left the pictures I walk-
ed straight out to Marquis-street en
route to Oxford-street, LecderriHe.
THIS OVERCOAT.
“When passing under the,Wiest Perth
railway subway I picked up an overcoat-
It was about 11.30 p.m. This overcoat
I have since been tad. belong<4 to i».
late Jack O’Neil. I have mver seen
Jack O’NeiL The coat was Ivinjt on the
roadway in the north-west corner unde*’
the snbw~i-. I saw no one about,
picked up the coat and dusted it, and
had a look at it just under the light close
by. I did not sec anything unusual
about the coat. •- I took the coat home.
I carried it.
AUBURN KNOCKED DOW.
• ‘ When I got near-the Ho-
tel I was walking on the footpath oh
the east side, and two men wclrc coming
in an opposite direction. I went to
get out of their way, and went the same
side as they did, aad they bumped me
and knocked me over, causing a wound
in my right arm to be broken open,
which for some time on and off had been
breaking and giving mo trouble. The
bump caused it to bleed, and the blood
ran right down my arm to the palm of
my hand. , “
HOME TO OSBORNE PARK.
“I continued on to the I«eedervilie
Hotel corner, and caught my tram to
the Osborne Park terminus. It was
1145 p.m., when I caught tho tram, and
I got home at midnight. The motor
man of the Osborne Park tram
me up to the gate because my am was
paining me. I did not tell llim I had
found a coat.
THE WAGIN TRIP.
“On Saturday morning I drove into
town with my father in his motor. 1
stopped in town and engaged ‘Billy 1
Singe’s taxi and went up to my girl’s
place at Woodroyd-street, Mt. .Lawley.
After this I went to Wagin, with Mrs.
Moir, her three children, three other
ladies, Mr. Moir, and myself.
“When I picked up. Singe,at 3 p.m.
it was raining, and I had no coat, and
he asked me if I had one, and I said
only one that I picked up out at the
Park. He said he would run out and
get it, and he did. I then took tho coat
to Wagin with me. It was in the back
all the time, and I didn’t use it. I left
Wagin Sunday morning with the same
party, but left the coat behind at the
Federal Hotel, and forgot to pick it up.
We went down the road for petrol. We
arrived back in the city at 9.40 p.m.
Sunday.
REPORTING THE COAT.
“I called at the C.I.D. on Monday
night, April 7, and reported that 1 had
found a coat under the subway, and that
. I had left it at Wagin. I, wrote for it
to Wagin. I called in again on April 9,
and the coat had not then arrived. And
on April 10 I was requested to call at the
C.T.D. at 2 p.m. to show where I had
found the coat. On the night of April
11 I saw the coat I had picked up at the
C.1.D., it having been returned from
Wagin. '
THE CRIME SPOT AT DALKEITH.-
“On April 7 I was through Westana-
road, Dalkeith, in the afternoon. I was
on a motor cycle belonging to Charlie
Jackson, North Beach road, Osborne
Park. I was giving a trial run, and was
on my own. ;When_going along . Wes-
tana-road towards Nedlands the hike:
stopped half-way up the hill., I took,off'
the belt, and pushed 'it up the hill.' , t
then jurooed on the bike and free-wheel


cd. and the bike ran down toThe level
ot the road and stopped. I not the hike
on the stand, and pnt the belt on, and
down on the srrass or crcnind
riplit nn agrainst some banksia or sheoak.
1 ‘ While I was sitting down T noticed
the track of a car nad a broken tree, also
gum-snekers broken down, with oil on
the leaves. I also noticed that ‘ the
grass had been levelled off in two places,
indicating twp tracks. I was sitting
near a tie-tree. I did not walk into
the bush. I, onlv walked and saw the
oil on the gum suckers. . I onlv stood
there, and had a look at the tracks and
oil. , y
INFLUENCE OF A DREAM. '
“I left soon after, and did not think
any more about it until I got home. A
leaf, caught in the pulley of the belt, re-
minded me of the spot. I never gave
it another thought, and said nothing, and
wonld not have only I dreamt of putting
the belt on the bike and the newspaper
saying that if anyone bad any informa-
tion about the ear of O’Neil or anything
strange happening to call at the C.I.D.
“On the afternoon of April 11, 1 re-
ported to C.I.D. officers what I had seen
at Westana-road. I would have, men-
tioned it before only it did not seem im-
portant to my mind. I went soon after
telling them with them to Westana-road,
and pointed the place out to them. I
also indicated the two tracks where the
grass had been knocked down and the
tree being down and marks as if some-
thing had been drawn over the grass.” ,
INSPECTING AUBURN’S BOOM.
Witness submitted the statement and hia
report to Mr. Condon, and it was decided
to make an inspection of his room. Ac-
cused, who accompanied the detectives,
asked if they could not go out straight
nway and get in- without his dad and
mother seeing them. It was after P pan*,
and accused asked to be allowed to stay
outside while witness had a talk with his
. father. At the hotel his request was com-
, plied with. Doyle and witness went in
through the back entrance and had a con-
versation with Mr. Auburn, sen., and then .
called the accused in. They followed ac-
cused tb his room occupied, by him only.'
Among the contents Doyle found a coat
and trousers which had been “rough
dried.” Witness did not actually see
Doyle pick them up. To Doyle; Auburn
said he had washed them about a fortnight
bcte"e, and that he wore them
when working on motor cars.
He had cleaned them up. expecting
to get further wear out of them. They
were washed with petrol, cold, water, and
s<v-p. Doyle indicated to witness the lack
of a button on the coat, and accused said
there had been a link button on it, that he
had made, himself, and that it had been
lost about six months. There was also
another old blue serge coat and trousers
marked with grease, suggesting they had
been used by accused when he was work- ■
ing. The same applied to a hat they
found. . ■ ■
When discussing the link button, wit-,
ness took one from his pocket and invited
the accused to examine it with, the coat
Accused said “it is like.it all right.’Wit-
ness took possession of the coat and hou-;;
sers, and three vests. .. . ' , V
AUBURN CAUTIONED.
They all - returned to the C.I.D. office
the • time - being between 10.30 ' and T :
o’clock. Witness cautioned the accused '
and telling him that he would take anolha-y
statement from him, and that he need nsC
answer any questions, or say anything scf.
less he wished.' Witness took the • state r;
xnent which was given to Auburn, _ wb*.
read and signed it. He attached hift WV.-
nature, to it about .12.25 a.m. . rv.y.t. ; j
- Detective-SergeantPurdue read ■ A* 1 * I
bum’s second statement. v •, I
THE CLOTHES AND THE BUTTON. '
The statement was headed “George
Auburn, Jum, further sltates,” and set
forth:— ~ ,
“Aiter being cautioned that I need not
answer any questions or say anything,. .1
say as follows: —The coat and trousers
found in my room at my home, Osborne
Park, are my property, and were taken
■ possession of by the detectives on this
date. ■ They were washed by me about
‘ two weeks ago by using petrol and cold
water and soap. No one saw me wash
them - that I know of. I washed them
■ in the bath in the bathroom. They-were
hung on the line, to dry. ■
“The coat that I washed originally
' had a link'button on it. The link , button
; had become worn, and had been sewn on
■ by myself two or three times.-'The link
■ button had been' missing for over six
months, but I do not know where I lost
it. 'I was showri a link button by the de-
tectives to-night, and it was the same
pattern- as one at present on my, washed
. coat.- T washed my clothes because I
, thought I might be able to make some
use of them. I used them-when I went
opt in a motor car. The coat and
trousers were made in Melbourne.
FEIDAY NIGHT’S TEAM.
“Mr. Lean, of Trouchet’s Pharmacy;
was on the tram from Leederville Hotel
corner to Mt. Hawthorn on Friday xugiit,
April 4; when I' got oh at 11.45, and
• Cecil White* recently of Osborne Park,
was also on the same 'tram. Armstrong’s
Agency will know where he is. M‘Kcn-
’ zie - was driving the Osborne Park ■ car
on this night. I cannot think of: any-
one' else who saw me this night. ■ . . , ,
NO BLOODSTAINS.
“There were no bloodstains on my
clothes before I washed them that .1.
know of. When I lost the button I
.cut the link off at the same time
cutting the material, and I sewed it to-
gether, leaving the single button on the
, outside of the coat, as it now is. I meant
by ‘using these clothes to go out in -the
car’ was ;when cleaning it or attending
to some mechanical work; also on the :
push bike. ' '
■ “1 remember' trying to put on the oyer-
coat.l found under the subway on.tlio j
way to the tram, ■ I am not sure if I
did get it on or not. I got off the'train
at Anzac-road, and went into : the ash
• shop close by, which Mrs. Eddie used to
keep. Then l went straight up to the Os-
borne Park tram. It was the No. 1(5 ..cal-
that T caught at Lcederville .l
have read over this statement, and it: is
truthful. ’ ’
AUBUENNOT -FLABBERGASTED.
During the taking of the statements; pro-
ceeded witness, accused was not flabbergas-
ted or unnatural; his demeanor was qniet
arid comparatively and he showed
no signs of distress or confusion. They all
went to Dr. Barker’s,’and accused’s right
arm was examined. Witness then told Au-
burn they would take him home. He said
he did not want to go to his home. How-
ever, this'was done, and witness again saw
Auburn, .sen. Prior to their, parting air ap- 1
pointment - was made for 1 Auburn to meet
them later that day.- He-came in at 2 p.m,
and in'; conversation -asked witness if : be 1
would be allowed to go-until 2 p.m.-oa
Monday. He remained at {be-office-oh that
occasion from 2 until 7.30 o'clock - Whem
Auburn made the .request referred ro ,wit-
ness said he would report .the. raatter, and,
see what could be done. Auburn said, that
if, lie were allowed to go'until Monday be
would give witness satisfaction. Witness
said he personally was not- looking for; sat-
isfaction, and that he wanted what was
right and just. He said to. Auburn: “Do
you, mean by satisfaction that you will hon-
estly, and truthfully clear up the murder
of John O’Neil?” Auburn replied “Yes.”
It was decided to let him go, and in the
presence of Doyle witness said, “You say
if you. are allowed to go until 2 pan. Mon-
day you will give satisfaction to the, au


nltyt
thorities?”; He said he wouM7~Wilness
repeated the former question-as to the in-
terpretation of his remark about giving sat-
isfaction. Auburn agairi said, “Yes,” and
added, ‘‘Satisfaction to you, and not to
me.” He then left. ~ ~ ...
; “I GET YOU.”
■Reverting to the Friday, the witness said
that after the return from Westana-road
accused asked witness if ho thought that
he (accused) would come to report the coat
if he were concerned in the affair. Witness
said it was apparent why he-would. Ac-
cused asked, why, and witness said, ‘‘The
coat is in Wagin, and is advertised for in
to-night’s press, and it’s a matter of who.,
gets in first.” The accused said, “I get
you.” Accused also asked witness if. he'
thought he. (accused) would have come to
tell about the finding of the place in Wes-
tana-road if he was concerned in it. Wit-
ness said the only reply he could give was
‘‘that certain persons return to the scenes
of; certain crimes, sometimes in search
of something that -might be ‘ lost,”
Auburn 'did'not keep the‘appointment for.
Monday, but latCr that day witness found
him’ at his. office.- He- said: “•‘■FvC'wnie
in to make a statement,-which is the truth.”
Witness'invited him - to sit down, but. while
pacing to and fro in the room he dictated
the statement he - wished to make. At .times
he would come;over for himself and see
what was being written; at others'he would-
ask witness what'he had written down. At
its completion it.was read over by witness
and then by Auburn, who signed it. .. .
AUBURN’S THIRD STATEMENT.
I KNOW NOTHING.” -
“I called at the C.LD. at 5.10 pan. oh
April 14,' 1924,. and said 1 wished to
make a statement, -which is ' the truth.
That statement is that I-know nothing
about the affair, furthermore than ‘ the
statements I have already made, and I
“ cannot reasonably and truthfully answer
any more questions, or .make any more
statements than I have already done.
And I have already endeavored to make
that point clear before. And it is not
within my power to'answer any more
questions regarding the whole affair (I
mean by the affair the murder of John
O’Neil), as the statement that-1 have now.
given is absolutely truthful, and com-
pletely final.”
THE SATISFACTION PROMISE.
Witness referred to the promise made
on the Saturday to give satisfaction. He
said: ‘‘l don’t want you to think I am
pulling your leg.” He ..added that, he
could not honestly and, truthfully say any
more. Auburn left about 7,o’clock,.witness
telling him he could go and , get his tea.
Auburn asked ‘‘Where?”,and witness told
him wherever he liked. Auburn replied.
“What do vou mean?” Witness said, :‘I
mean you can go.” Finally Auburn said,
“If , you want me, don’t grab me. in the
street, let me know and I’ll come in,” On
April 16 accused was arrested on warrant
at Osborne Park about 1.30 p.m; The .de-
ceased’s motor car .had, been locked up and
kept under witness’s supervision.
■ INSPECTING O’NEIL’S CAE.
Mr. Parker said the was at thc_ Su-
preme Court, and could 7 be inspeefed'by the
jury at any time.
His Honor, • upon asking the foreman if
the jury desired to inspect the car, was,
informed they had already done so. At
a later stage the foreman said some mem-
bers of the jury desired a further inspec-
tion of the car.’ : ”
His Honor ’thought' it might he arranged
. for 12.45 that day.
Mr. Parker ’ suggested that it might be
better if the jury saw the car after 4 p.m.,
when-they “would have plenty of time at
their-disposal. ■ • ■
■ His Honor: But they finish their day’s
work at 4, Mr.'Parker.
It was decided that the inspection should
be madc-at 1.45. - 1
Witness.explained that he had submitted
Samples of clothing, etc., to the Govern-
ment j Bacteriologist. . ,
.A • search .had failed,..the witness said,
to locate the man-Johnson, mentioned by
the accused.”
At Osborne Park-on; the Friday witness
saw- the inside of, the right sleeve of the
coat: the accused' was wearing, and it had
pns , matter-on it. j :-. -
MISS SADLEE AT WOOROLOO.
i Mr. Parker: Did you go to Wooroloo?
Witness: On Sunday, April 13, and Thurs-
day, April 17.
The 17th was the day after the arrest ?
—Yes. '
“You saw whom?—Miss - Sadler.
, ’ Those were the only interviews yon had ?"
— Yea.. ' : . ...
SIR.. LAV AN’S CROSS-EXAMINATION.
hip. Levan:“You have told us everything
of importance!
Witness; I! cannot say that. ’ -
Is .there anything , you can tell us before
I -.commence cross-examination?—No,. hot
there are, things which the acci ved has said
to me .which:l do not consider \re strictly
evidence. . ; ,’-V " ~:v.
Had Miss Sadler’s name been mentioned
before April 13?—No.
How long have you been-in the detective
force?—Somewhere over 20 years.
You are ■ a: sergeant ?—Yes. .
When you went to' Crawley you saw
where 6p4t hfid. been'dragged through a
fence? —I saw where something had been
dragged.
And'if led;the body?—Yes. To his
Honor: There, -as. no blood, on the motor
car oh.'the shit opposite the driver.
' Mr. Lavan continued to press the wit-
ness about the car tracks. -
WITNESS OBJECTS.
■ Witness _ objected to counsel’s methods;
asking ;which of-. them was ■ asking or ’an-
swering the question. Mr Lavan, he said,
had interrupted while He was answering his
■Honor. - • > - :
• Mr. Lavan: Don’t let us start off with
any. unpleasantness.. ,
There were .some footprints that had not ’
been dragged-over!—Yes, in the sand. ;
Were they taken?—No. ’ ' ;
Covered up?—Soibe.were, I think. :
The Monday-you Saw Auburn?—Yes. 1
‘‘The Daily'News” comes out between
4 and S o.’clock?—Yea.'
He came in about 87—Yes. - "
And told you about the coat?—-Yes. , (
; Did he say he thought it was.-, the - coat
you were looking .for after you gave “ the;
descrintionf—No. ■■■,,;■ - - i
I suggest be did?—l say he did'not. v |
Are you sure he did not say he would
write for it that night?—He said he would
wire for .it. ,
Even'. the itnost astute /! detective could
mistakes ’ about conversations?—
There' was no. niistake Here. " ,= ”; '
not -***&& that, so. we can take' it
that-it is impossible for you to make
j mistakes?—Apparently cvcrvone is liable :
to. . •
... AUBURN CALLED VOLUNTARILY."
■ -He called in voluntarily each time?—Yes.
He told you he wrote to Allport for the
coat?—Yes.
;; Only you -and himself-there?—Yes.
Was anything said about Allport’s ad-
dress?—No;
j Will you. swear there was no conversa-
tion about Allport’s , address?—l have
i sworn. ■•, . s i
j Will you swear ?,-! have done so, ' ‘
‘Well, I can ask you again. You answer
the questions. • Aubnrn,you say, was pre-
sent when von ordered the telephoning to 1
be done?—Yes. h
.Next day you saw him in Roe-street.!
What time was it?—-Between 3 and 4. j
You beckoned tohim to go to the office?"
—Yes. > ' ' ' ■■
He went there? —I saw him that evening 1
■Are you’sure it was at your office? Y es .' I


Did yon see him again that evening?—]
No; I understand he was there in my -ab-1
sence. ■ .]
lon saw him at the police office that day? J
—Yes. ■ •. ••
Did he speak to you at the police office'
that night ?—Yes.
Yoii did not see him again that night?—
'No.
It may'be a mistake on your part; are
you ; sure you'did not?—l am sure.
;-- Do yOu remember seeing him in the!
Utfeet.that. night near M‘Carthy’s Hotel ?—i
j don’t remember. ‘ ■ j
" Would yon say yon did,not?—Yes. /
At‘ any rafe,*yoti say all that occurred
was the question when it would be conveni-
ent to, show you, the spot ?—Yes.
: You did Jndt., accompany,, him to the •:
subway?—2s o.'
; WESTANA-EOAD ONCE MOEB.
After the,return Doyle told you certain
things?—Yes.
■•Auburn verified that? —Yes.. , . , •
.-...You,asked him to take you to the place?,
'Yes. -
• And:-he freely ‘agreed to do so?—Yes.
When -you* got there, you ■ puflod up on
the'slope of the hill—On the incline. -■ •
• He told yon it wasn’t there,., and you
went down andjhe indicated where it was?
--Yes, down in" the hollow.
, When you got out the tracks were ap-
parent?—When we had a close look.'
Before the dose look?—No.
‘'Did you say in the Coroner’s Court it
was apparent ?—No. ' ' 7
- Did you. sav at,.that Court that, .after
viewing the place it was, apparent that a
motoycar had left the road a id ran a few
feet parallel with the main After
viewing the place.
Did you say it?—No.
Can you explain why the note taken by
the morning and evening paper reporters
confirms wfiat l say? , Will you swear you
did not say it?—Yes. ' ,
‘ Mr; Parker said be thought, it was time
the depositions were put in. - There were,
so to ’ speak,'. 'two' irresponsible'^persons-^-
..!; MrVLavanThree. I had a nbte, too.''
Mr.'Parker: Well, three, including Mr.
LavanV-and one-responsible -person taking
the note.*'— - • , • • ■ ;
WHICH WILL YOU TAKE? r '.
His Honor agreed. ;He asked if Mr.
Lavan \wonld 'be-welling fo take the paper
reports of thi^.,trial in preference to the
witnesses' 'at this trial. If " that
was so, he ' (his Honor)' could point out
one very strong point against Mr. Lavan.
; The witness was shown his deposition,
which did not contain the word “apparr
ent.” . - ; -'■ ■ • - - .... ...jrva
7 Mr. Lavan said if ho did not use. 7.. the
word apparent'his note and that of the
two newspapers was the same, Itivraa * »
strange thing.
His Honor: I don’t think-so. *
Mr. Lavan: Very veU; 1 will leave it-to
the .jury. * ■
To the Witness: Was it apparent the
sheoak had been, broken: down ?—lt was
easily visible.
And the scrub, too?—-We found that the
car had gone.through it. . ' ;
The drag marks were in the shape of an
inverted letter ‘‘Y”? —Yes.,
7 You say Auburn said, this is. where .it
was dragged in and ’ this where, it was drag-
ged out?—Yes. 7 "■
Are you sure he said that? —'Yea.'
And. nothing else?— Yes, nothing else. ’
Would it not appear from .what.you. Baw
that the same thing had been dragged up
and then down?—From -personal observa-
tion I could, not say. <>
Was it after the mirror incident you
came'away?—Yes, I did not remain long.
You say. there, are cattle marks?—l do
not.want.to rely on hearsay. I saw-fresh
tracks there. , ■* ', .. . '
What time was it you went to Wcstana-
road ?—Soon after three. ~ ■ „ > . !
It was from Nedlands to,Bay,/view-ter-
race?—l think sp. ... •
[ taking the statements. r ’
[ At what time did yon getbafek to the
I detective office 6.30. <
• That’s approximate?—Yes. ; : k ■
Did you remain with AnbnrnVuntil'you
went to his home? —Not all ; the-time.
Kennedy and Doj’le were also with him.
When did yon take the statement from
him?—About 6.30-
When did you finish 1 it?—lp-about 7an"
hour and a half. •. . .
When did you go to Osborne Park-Hotel?
—About 9.30.
' May I put it that, it took you- from 6.30
■ to 8.30 to get that statement ?—About that.
I Sergeant Doyle said it .waa three hours
! he was with yonj the statement was com-
pleted after 9 o’clock?—So-it was. ;• r\
How do you mean?—lf it was complet-
ed before 9 it was-completed after 9.
Mr. Lavan: It is no use trying to bandy
words- with me. ■ -
I It is dear which Doyle meant ?—Well, I
I say before nine. '
i Doyle said he was with you'for''.three
j hours ?—That is possible. ' ’ '
! Taking the statement?—No. ; ' .
You told' him you were going to his home ?
Yes .
no caution:
That statement 'you, took—l don’t care
how long you were at it—did you caution
him beforehand?: —No.* * •
And all-the time he was fasting?—So
was I. , ' - ; ,
I don’t think-it would do yon any harm.
Fe was under the. thumb, you know?—
What”do you mean? • .
Were you not continually questioning
him?—Certainly, not. Not in’the; way, you
infer. . * . .
You need not, anticipate' what I "infer;
were you questioning him?—Nfi*
Will you tell me‘how it takes two hours
in your own time, and , three hours in
Dovle’s estimate,to take that statement?
—You can sec the number of ‘sheets, -v
I put" it .to you that all thiit time you
were'pressing this bay?—Well, I, toll yon,
Mr. Lavan. I . was not. - '-77'
Very well; you say you were not. You
took him away to the hotel? —Yes.
You took him back again?—Yes. ;
And you took a further, statement ?
’Yes,'' ,V
■ Then yon took him to'Dr. Barker’s? —•
Yes. 7-. 7; .7t;-
What time' did .you’finish' there, *t
vyhat time?—About la.m. / 7 '
• This boy never had a'bite all the time?,
—Bite of what? . _ ■ .
Food.—He could- have had it if: he asked.
’ You did not ask him?—No, and 'neither
did- he. - *
Do you say the statement was read to
him and that he read it over?—Yes, I ;did
that in accordance with your instructions
last time. • ■ ,; : ,7
I'did not ask yon that.' Ton may be
dever as a detective, but just answer ques-
tions.. ;:.v'.! ..v 7.- v
Under. .further.', questioning,, the witp.es*
said he took down the name Jackson, - as : the
accused said .it, but he* would not. say; the
accused did not 'mean JohnsotirtThc misr
take was possible.
: -Before, you went' out to the hotel, he did
not seem' desirous, that his', mother .'should
see him, ai. the sight of a number of - de-
tectives would kill her ?—There' was : - no
suggestion about a number pf-detectives.^:
■ 'And he tells you to come out-after closing
time, as otherwise it ■ would kill his mother ?
—Yes. •" 1 ' ■■ 7 77' '
Did you see the blue ' suit until Doyle
Showed it to you ? —No.
' Doyle directed your attention to the
mark inside?—Yes. •
And it was apparent that a link button
had been sewn there —There was a hole
there. I. could not say it was • apparent;
As soon as you did that he said immedi-
ately there was a, link button there, that
had come off?—Yes. ~ ; ■ ' V"
. Doyle .showed him, the two buttons, and
he said what?—lt’s like it, alright.
. . . 7 .mm • • i 1 • A .
i.. il:_


What' diet as say aoom, inis mmoai—-
That "he lost it about six 'months'ago and
did .not know where he lost it.," '
Did' he - say 'anythin? about sewing/ it
bn ?—He said he had sewed it on two or
three ■ times.* -- • -■ ;■ ■ * '
And about cutting the serge?—Tea, I
remember; it ,■ r' : .■' ■' . ■ :
At that; time and every ■ day you, saw
him, he was wearing a ; blue, serge. suit I—-
Yes. ;■ ' *■■ v;t • ■ :
Like the one he has on now? —Same
style.. ~ ;
•Did:he wear the same hat every.time?
—Yes. .•i. v- ■ ?.,■
That dirty old? blue-suit, , did you no-
tice, it did not have a link button?—No.
Doyle says he did;, it doesn’t, matter.
Yon returned to the C.I.D. •; office and then
to Dr. Barker’s, so he was ,24 hours more
at the' C.I.D. when you .took the second
statement* from him?—Yes.
How* long did it ; take 7—About, an hour,
I • expect. ■
Sure it .was not more; '. you had . him
there for two : and a-half .hours ?—Yes.
Who was present?—Kennedy and Doyle,
at intervals. : > .
But very little?—l would not sav
that.- ; i : -
You do not know who was in .and how
long?—No. '
I put'it to vou again—vou told us
vou cautioned him before taking it—-that
vou were putting questions to him and
ercss-examinihg him?—So-far .as this
statement was concerned there was no
cross-examination.- - - . '
J. Ah!- Am I to -aceetit it- that with re-
gard to the other statement there was a
cross-examination?— " ■
Then why differentiate bv saying “with
regard- to this statement”? —Yon asked
rue to refer only to this statement. ’ Not
at any time was he cross-examined.','
After that was taken,you took him to Dr.
Barker ’s.?—lt might have, been half an hour
or an hour after.- ; -.....
I .take it- he was -not sitting down chew-
ing his finger nails? —We were discussing
general topics. ...
_ Did you take him aside at Dr. Barker’s
to talk to him? —Yes.-
While you were. there, .that is at ~Dr.
-Barker’s, when you came out and took him
to one side, did vou stand near the back of
the.car? —Yes. ■
1 “I’LL ADMIT EVERYTHING.”
Did- you say. this: “If you get in first:
everything ,-wfll be all right- for-you;, ho ;
who hesitates is lost’’?—l did not. ;
. Didn’t vou say “Don’t be a fool, get it
off your, chest quickly”?—Certainly I did ;
not. As a matter of fact, when; he made
the remarks about'the effect on his mother-
he also said ‘ ‘ Put me in and, ITI admit;
everything.”' ‘ .
Sergt; Purdue, that was a most impor-
tant statement?—lt was questionable whe-
ther it was admissable.
Y'on have given every other conversa-;!
tion?—ln answer* to your questions. *■ ■ ‘ |
You- have told us about his statement*, .'j
about his mother, etc. "S Why not say they’'
were, not- admissablef-rlf .you.keep: gofer
yon will get more.
; Why was it not admissable?—l submit-
ted it to the Crown Prosecutor; .he is the
better judge.
< Did you at any. time in any Court sug-
gest that he said anything of the kind?-
Ha- 1 ■■■■■.
“GOING TOO DEEP.”
. The . witness made a reference to Mr.
Lavan’s “going too ; deep,” and Mr. Lavan
in reply to an interjection of his Honor,
said.be was not going to be threatened. ;
His Honor: It does not seem, to frighten
you very much, Mr, Lavan.
- Mr, Lavttn; It may not, but it'will bo
discussed in my address to the jury. (To
the witofSs)': -You? took or sent him home
that morning?—Yes. 1 ..
-He did not want to go to his home?—
This boy 1 was:calm, cOol, and collected;
you had him from 2 p.m. the previous
* day until; about 2 a’.m. that day, and
| never at: any time did he " have a bite
■to cat or anything to drink?—l have said
1 so.- • 1
!• Do you think that‘a fair thing? After,
' all hc_ is only a young man?—l am not re-
sponsible for all these things. lam like
the. Clerk in your office—he carries ont in-
structions. If he had wanted something
;to - cat someone- would probably have been
sent out for it. : ~ ~ ,
, Of course they would. .Do you thins
- that. a fair thing, to kcep_, him like that ?
I ebiild- not say, whether it was or not.
i There was a discussion about him going
I home • for .the week-end? —Yes.
. As ho left?—N > .about half or three-
quarters of an hour before. : ■ ? 1
• W;hen was Dooyle there ?—Just as he left,
I but ,1 that matter* was not. discussed again
then. ' , ’ •’ ,
, . ..“AS AN ACCOMPLICE.: ’
.. , AS ftvyiwujuvu,
■ Dii he not say on the Saturday “Haven ’t
I tbld-you the truth?”—Nothing of the
kind I ■ we discussed the thing with him aa
an- accomplice. _ 4 ,. .. ~
„ Did, he not say at that time it would
clear up, everything so far as he was con-
cerned?— Nothing of the kind.
Did he say “Satisfaction to you and t«
him”?-r-No, “Satisfaction to you, but not
to me.”
! You said on the Friday that the coat was
advertised for on the Friday night?—tes-
Until this day yon never said anything
about. Auburn'- asking you if you would
think he was concerned, if he brought the
coat in? —No, I was not aaked-
. The same old answer.. Do you suggest
that.it was not important?—l wanted to
be fairi , . .
Well, why’ did you bring it m to-day T—i.
Because I was asked. . •
EE-EIAMINATION.
Re-examined, the witness said that ou
.the day they went to Wesitana-road ac-
cused was in -the office from 6.30. to 9.33.
Auburn’s demeanor was “just ordinary’ ;
there was no argument or , anything im-
proper. H© talked and asked questions. Is
there had been any_ suggestion of accused
wanting food or. drink he would' have got
it.- There was no .sign of fatigue; he was
the same at 2 a.m. as when-he came in at
2 p.m.' In the taking of the second state-
ment; Doyle and Kennedy were coining itt
and ‘ont of the room. The words, “Pat
me'id, and; I'll admit everything,wets
used by Auburn when told the. detectives
would have to search his room, and wb?,a
he mentioned the effect it;would‘have oa
his mother. It was between the first, and
second statements. . ; • .


tie hearing was resumed this
morning of the Dalkeith murder trial, the
Crown had still a dozen witnesses to call,
and it seemed unlikely that the defence
would be entered upon before Friday, The
public interest remains undiminished, only
early comers being. afajg to gain admission
to the public gallery. !
. The accused man, George William Au--
bum, is aged 21, and described as a me-
chanical expert. Hq .is alleged to havei
on April 4, at Claremont, wilfully murdered
John George O’Neil, a.motor driver.
The;.defence is condncted by Mr. M. G.
Lavan, with Mr. J. F. Walsh, while the
Crown Prosecutor (Mr, H. Parker) is as-
sisted by Mr. ,A. Q. Haynes.
When our report cloeed yesterday De-
tective-Sergeant Purdue, iri answer to a
question from Mr. Justice Draper, was ex-
plaining what he meant when he said he
discussed the matter with Auburn as an
accomplice. He said that on April .12 the.
accused asked him how it happened. Wit-
ness replied that they could go on the lines !
of what appeared in the Press; that it was
reported that there was a party, including
a woman, in the car;, that something oc-
curred in the back of the car, of which the
driver did not approve, whereupon he was
struck by someone from the hack of the
ear. The car was travelling along, that
road towards Claremont, and when the
driver was struck the car would be inclin-
ed to jump off the road. Accused agreed
that this was likely to happen if the driver
lost control Witness told accused ho
would be sitting in the front seat, and as
he was of a mechanical turn of mind wit-
ness would expect him to be sitting next to
the driver. Auburn said “You’re of
the opinion someone behind hit him, and
yon don’t think it could be done by a man
sitting beside him." Witness answered
“Not unless you were the only one in the'
car with the driver." Tim deceased would
probably be groaning from the first blow,
and would likely be dragged into the bush..
There was ..something in the Press about a
light having appeared,- and probably that
would frighten him and he would put the
body back in the car. Auburn made bo
comment.
To his Honor: Up to that time no offer
was made to the accused as an accomplice.
’ His Honor told. Mr. Parker that the rea-
son he-asked the.question was that the jury
might have been misled by the witness ’ re-
marks., ‘ ,
Mr. Parker: Had an offer been made
up to that time?
Witness;- No, nor any threat
JOHNSON’S MOTOE BICYCLE-
Charles Johnson (15), living with his
parents in Osborne Park, said he knew Au-
burn. Witness had the use-of a motor
cycle belonging to his uncle, about which
witness had with Auburn.
The motor cycle had been given to Auburn
to repair on several occasions: Beticecn
April 8 and April.lo witness told Auburn
be wanted the bike fixed up, and; it was
taken' to the hotel, but as Auburn was not j
there it was left at Eddy’s shop. .Witness ;
could not,say how long it was between his
conversations with Auburn and' his taking
the motor cycle to Eddy’s shop. - Ho
thought it was three, to. f°ur days. On
Sunday, April 13, Auburn came on a -push
bicycle to see witness. There were tome
remarks about the defects of the motor
cycle, and accused said he did not .kpow
about It being at Eddy 's, but he would go
and do it- up. . -
Witness had not finished his evidence
when the Court adjourned until next day.
Up°n resuming to-day '
• Johnson said that Aabnrn did not go to
see him until April 13. , He did not come
to see witness between April 8 and April
10, but between those days witness left the
bicycle at Eddy’s shop. Prior to April S
the bicycle had not been used for mne
months. Witness got it back on
Auburn was arrested, April 16- Auburn
had only been to witness’s place once—on
April 13.
A MATTSE OF DATES.
Mr. Lavas: You say you lire a mile and
* quarter to two miles from the hotel?
Witness Yes.
... And you arc frequently in and out to
Osborne Park? —Yes.
You have brought the cycle in many
times’for George to repair?—Yes.
You-leave it at the hotel or at. Eddy's?
—Mostly at the hotel.
. It might be-there for a fortnight on oc-
casions?—Yes. •_ .
You have said that you took it. down,
there between April s and April 10?—No,
it was down there between the eighth and
the tenth.
When did you take it down?—lt may
have been before; I cannot say. ,
Witness: There was a mistake yesterday.
Mr. Haynes got mo a bit. muddled. He
said the- bike was not taken away till the
Sunday. That I cannot- swear. He got
me mixed np.
His Honor: Who told yon. that? , /
Witness: Nobody. -
Mr. Lavan; Have you spoken to : any* (
body about this case?
Witness: No.
Yon said you cannot swear to dates—is
that right?—Yes; I have not an excellent
memory.
It may havo been there some days be-
fore the Bth or 10th?—It-nay have beep.’
I haven’t got an ..excellent memory.
You.remember Auburn, sen., speaking to!
you, and in consequence you put the bike,
in Eddy's yard?—-Yes. . _
Can you swear that that did not happen
on April 4?—No.
At any rate, yon did not shift it Until
April 16?—Yes,
There all the time?—Yes, so far as I
know.
What time of the day was it you took it
away?—l did not notice the time ofday.
What Sunday was it George saw yon?—
On April 13.
It might have been the second Sunday
after you brought the bike there?—lt may
have been.
What was that conversation?—He asked,
me, I think, what I had done to the- bike.
I said to him I had left the oil tap turned!
on, and it ran into the engine, and I drain-
ed it aJTout from the bottom and took thej
bike to him for repairs. The conversation
dropped at that.
HIS HONOE INTEEVENES.
, His Honor: You told us yesterday when
he came he was on a push bike, and he
asked you. what you had done to the bike
and you said you had left it at Eddy’s ?
Witness: I did leave it at Eddy’s.
•His Honor read the witness’s deposi-
tions and witness answered that he had
stated the. previous day that Auburn had
asked him what be had dona with the
bike.
■. His Honor: You told us that yon told
him you had left it at Eddy’si
Mr. Lavan said the witness the previous
day also referred to the oil
. His Honor: He may have mentioned the.
oil but he also referred to Eddy’s. ' *
Mr. Lavan: I cannot help that. ' '' i
His Honor; I know you can’t.
-Mr. Lavan, reading from his notes, reiter-:
ated that the witness spoke about the oil
the preceding day. ;
His Honor: Yes, and he now says it stop-
ped there. .Yesterday he said he told Au-’
bura ho left it at Eddy’s.
Mr. Lavan: Sturdy I am entitled to test
his memory, • >
His Honor: You are.
Mr. Lavan: All von told him was about
the oil tap and that wa.<i all?—Yea
Yon do not know. much about motor-
cycles?—No. .
TO EEPEESH THE MEMOEY.
Before re-examining the witness, Mr.
Haynes asked that sections of the deposi-
tions of the witness, and also a statement:
made a few days after the arrest of Au-
burn, be: shown to the witness.


/Zjlrjvr
■ His Honor tnougnv alter, reading the
portions of the depositions referred to,
that it wpe not necessary to show them to
he witness.
A police notebook containing the state-
ment made by the witness was shown to
him.'and ho said-it bore his signature. :
His Honor reminded Mr. Haynes that he
ccrild not cross-examine the witness.
Mr. Haynes denied that it was his in-
tention to do so. He simply desired to
ask the witness to refresh his : memory
from memoranda taken at the time.
" Hr. .Lavan objected, stating that there
was nothing to show how many days after
the purported, conversation the note was
taken.
His Honor (to the witness); When did
vou make that statement ?—I don't know
whim it was.
Ton said it was after Auburn's arrest,
how long after?—The detectives question-
ed me on April 16, and they questioned me
Seine lime after. It was at my own
home. . : . . ■ • ■■
Mr. Haynes: Was it at a time when the
feet* • were fresh in your memory; about
how Icing before the inquest started?—l
don’t, know.
His Honor again interrupted Mr.
Havnes," who thereupon said be would let
His Honor read the notes, preparatory to
him muting a further application.
“THE JURY THE BEST JUDGES.”
His Honor said the witness- had given
his evidence yesterday, and ■ again to-day.
If-there is any alteration in his manner
the jury are the best.judge- of If
MORE WESTAN/ AD.
James G. Jacobs, police constable; said
he was at Westana-roiad on April 13, when
he noticed a banksla tree about 18 inches
from the shovel shown on the .photo, pro-
duced. On the leaves there appeared to :
be blood-«tains, and one leaf about:
eight feet from, the ground had a hair,
and also blood-stains on it. In all there
were nine blood-stained leaves. Witness
handed them over to Detectivc-Sergt. Pur-
due. ■
THE LINK BUTTON
Edward. Reginald Berry, tailor, carrying
on business in Perth,, said ho had had 30
years experience. He had seen the button
produced before, but it looked cleaner now,
while the shank seemed to have been han-
dled. There was some material on the
end of the shank, and it appeared to have ,
been handled. There was,-however, little
difference. Witness had examined the 1
coat produced, and the button together, ,
using a magnifying glass. In his opinion
the material at the end of the. shank was
the. same material as the coat. He found,
that the material at the end of the shank
fitted “very nicely.” in the hole in the
coat. ■ •
• Continuing, the witness said that where
the:hole was a tailor would not have sewn
the button on; he would have sewn It on
to: the canvas. He would do so to make
if a firm job; if not it would break qaay.
There had been in - this instance at least
three, sewings-on,, including the hole in the
edge of the .coat .The button on the op-
posite side was sewn on by an amateur.
There were signs where the cloth had been
cut where the shank wouldbe. _He wouid
not say it had becn cut with scissors. The
cloth was broken about a,half-inch from
the hole, and had the appearance of having
teen drawn together with thread. Wit- -
ness could not say definitely whether the;
cloth’was euj| underneath 1 the stitching
without breaking the stitching. In his
opinion the shank had been pulled arid not
cut. He felt confident of that, and. in
his mind, it was the shank in Court. The
wool on the shank fitted so closely into
the hole and was the same as the coat.
The appearance of the hole suggested
something had been pulled out, and not
cut.
Mr, Lavan: Dealing with the buttons;
thev are a commonly used button?
Witness: Yes.
Have yon examined the buttons ■ to sec
if they are the same! —Yes.
Will you swear they are?—No.
Are they different?—Yes. the button on
the shank and on the outside are different.
Did yon tell the police that?—Yes.
Were you ever asked that question till
I asked you?—No.
Just look at the sewing on the outside
button, and that on the shank button,, are
they not entirely different?—Yes..
The outside one has been sewn on by an
amateur? —No doubt of it
The inside button, not the . shank?—lt
was sewn on by a tailor.
AMATEUR OB PROFESSIONAL?
Sweat'it?—The threads that go through
the holes are sewn by a professional. They
arc parallel. '
And could udt an amateur sew them
parallel?—He could. . •
That is what I say ?—lt is not my ex-
perience that he would sew them parallel.
If you take the buttons, one is cross-
stitched and one is parallel?—Ye?.
: The class of • cloth in that coat is an
ordinary, every day serge ?—Ycs. •
When was it you used, the magnifying
glass, before the Coroner’s Court?—-Yes.
Did you express the same opinion with
and-without the glass?—Yes.
Have you ever attempted to compare
the : material on the shank with any other
serges besides that on tbs coat No.
' Will you swear that it is not the game
as that in these serges worn by these gen-
tlemen, if his Honor will permit the ex-
amination? ‘
His Honor said it was already in evi-
dence that it was an ordinary everyday
serge.
Would not that pieoe of material on
that shank match many different serges?—
No.
Would it match others?—lt is just pos-
sible.
ANY EVERYDAY SERGE.
Any every day saiga of that color,
would it not match?—Yes, of the same
color.
different SERGES.
There are a few every-day serges of iha
same color ?—There are some; you very sel-
dom get two serges exactly alike.
Every two serges of exactly that color
would match?—l did not,say that.
Are, not the shades of bine in serge in
many instances hard to distinguish ’ —
They may be, but to a tailor, no.
Do you. say there was sufficient cloth
there to .judge it ?—I gave it as my opinion,
Vou did not swear it? —No.
You say that it still fits that hole?—
Yea.
Will you swear it fits it?—No, I won’t
swear it; I gay, in my opinion, it fits it.
I have never sworn it yet.
' Did you ever say it did?—l only gave it
as my opinion.
Did you not make the direct statement
that it did in the Coroner’s Court?—l
didn’t swear that shank came out of that
hole. _ 1 was very careful not to swear it.
If it is cut off or pulled off and the serge
is washed, what would be the effect?—lt
would cause a fraying. ■
Could yon say it fitted then ?—lt would
have some effect
It would either enlarge or contract the
hole?—Yes.
According to yon, it seems to fit abso-
lutely?—Yes, my opinion only. '
Jigger buttons are common; you have
often seem them off?— I They do, not last
very long.
You told ns that there are signs of where
the cloth had been cut? —Yes.
Where yon refer to the stitching?—Yes,
but before I venture an opinion I would
like to open the stitching.
Ee-examined: The odd button was that
on the outside; the shank button coincided
with those on the coat. There was very
slight difference. The serge in the suit
and that on the button agreed hi shade.
One seldom got two serges alike in color. A


tnuor eouia ten ttie difference, but to" tb«
average layman all bine .serges were alike..
In some eases blue serges had to be shrunk
before being: wade np. A tub of*water'ttm
not used for that -purpose; it done with
a hot jron. The effect on tie hole in wash-
ing would depend on the handling. If
the whole suit had been washed in cold
water it would-show little difference. It
would be greater for instance, if a brush
was used on it or if it was rubbed by hand.'
Mr. Parker proceeded to quote a section
of the deposition which Mr. Lavan had re-
ferred to in his cross-examination of the
witness. Defendant’s counsel complained
that he did not put all that Mr. Parker
wanted to use to the witness.'. :
His Honor; But the jury heard it
. Mr. Lavan if your Honor- objects,'
all right.
MORE TAILORING EVIDENCE.
George David Cterctcko, a tailor in Perth,
said he had had 38 years’ experience. He
had examined the coat and button pro-
duced. He had seen the button before, bnt
it seemed to be a “little bit loose and fray-
ed about” now. There was a small piece
of serge adhering to-the shank,- He- had
compared the button with the coat, using-
a; magnifying glass. It appeared to wit-
ness that the button had been pulled out
of the coat, though ho could not .swear .to
it It seemed to fit in, ; The hole in the
coat had “ a little, tail bn it,” and there
was a stitch or two'on the shank which ap-
peared to correspond. ; The material, , he '
thought, was about the same.- n
Mr. Haynes: Are there many-pieces of.
serge the same color?
Witness: Oh, yes, I Suppose thousands.
Blue?—Yes.. , , . ;
Arc there many shades of bine?—Tcs,'
many.
From the sewing on of the outside button,
he should say that “a little girl would sew
it on as well.” The “jigger”, button y-as
sewn on the'outside, that is the fact was,
.sewn as a tailor would sew it, hut the other
part, that is the neck, seemed amateurish;
Mr. Lavan: If the'outside button came
off it would have to be re-sewn?—Yes.
And the inside one, too?—Exactly.
And if the shank came off? —A tailor
would sew another shank.
Is there a man on the face of the earth
who could swear that that little piece of
material adhering to that shank came off
that coat?—Not unless'he had seen it.
Try it now?—The stitches are different
to what they were. It’s no use me trying
it now. ' ';, ~ •*- '
■Just to please me?—l know it is-impos-
sible now, with ■ those two stitches there
now.
They have worked down?—Yes.
If a serge of that quality were washed
after the button had been tom off, what
would happen?—lt would be ravelled a
little.
Would not the class of material that
shank correspond with many serges?—l
have said it was, impossible to compare it
nmess it was taken from the. shank. :
There are many serges approximating to
that shade?—Yes.
And it would bo impossible to tell the
difference?—Yes. ' •
. Are all the buttons on that coat, com-
m°my used buttons?—Yes.
4U T° Mr. Haynes: The outside button was
the odd one on the coat. It had a marked
difference to a tailor.
“WHAT MURDER?”
• Martin Holmes, filter, employed
in the Tramways, said bfl had known the
accused for. seven or eight, month?. Wit-
ness saw him on the Sunday after the mur-
der at the corner of Newcastle and Bean-
tort streets, between ‘‘U and 11 pan. Wit-
ness asked “What do you think of the
murder, George?” and lie replied! “What
™urder?”. Witness said a motor driver
had had his head bashed in, and his body
had been found at Crawley. . Accused told
witness he had just come back from Wagin,
a ud that wa' ■'he first he had heard of tha
murder.
. Mr. Lavan did. not ask any questions. '.
murder the main topic.
Theodore Percy Crisp, chemist’s assist- •
ant employed by Mr. Trouchet, at the cor-
ner of Barrack and Wellington streets,
testified to having known Auburn four
years. Witness saw the accused about
10.30 or 10.45 on April 6, at the corner of
Beaufort and Newcastle streets. -He hand--;
ed witness a shilling, which he had bor- ’
rowed to book a seat at a theatre. The
mnrdcr was the main topic of their con-
versation. Witness asked Auburn what'
ho thought about it; He replied that lie
had heard practically nothing of-the affair,"
because he had been away to- the country
for the week end. He mentioned cither
Wagin or Narrogiu, and said that the first -
he had heard of it was when be met Bill ,
Holmes just before he encountered wit-
. nars. ,
Thedßor-e Percy Crisp, chemist *3 assist-
ant, continued;—
REFERENCE TO CHARACTER.
Ob the following Sunday accused came
into this shop about 7.30 pum, and asked
witness for a reference to his character.
Witness asked him why he required it.
Auburn made no reply at first, and asked
if witness knew him to be a drunkard, or
if he had ever seen him drunk. Witness
said he had not, and asked him why he
■wanted the reference. Auburn, replied,
“To tell yon, the truth, I’m suspected of
the murder case,” Witness told him he
ought to know where he was on the Friday
night. Accused said, “That’s the worst
part of it, I was at the Grand Theatre on
my own.” Witness replied, “But surely
someone must have seen you there,
George,” and asked him was there not
some incident of that night he could recall.
Witness advised him to advertise and get
someone to oome forward and clear him.
UNKNOWN IN TRAM.
: He also asked. Auburn if there, was no
one in the tram in which he went home,
who knew him. Auburn said he did not
think so. Witness expressed the opinion
that the Osborne Park conductor must
know him. Auburn again said he did not
think so, .smd told witness the detectives
had. been out to his home, searched his
rooms, and found a suit which had been
washed and not pressed, and which he had
not worn for four or five months. He also
said ■ that one of the detectives
noticed - a button was missing from
the coat. Mid one of them ask-
ed him how long it had been off.
Auburn said he answered that he really
could not say, ~ One of them, he said, pro-
duced a button and asked him was it the
button off the suit. Auburn did not , say
what ■ answer he gave to that question, but
he told witness he-, was the man who found
the overcoat and .the tracks on Wcstana-
road. He did not explain where he found
the overcoat or bow he discovered . the
tracks. . ,
■ Mr. Lavan; On the sixth, did yon sec
him talking to Holmes?
, Witness; N 0... ,' _ ' ■ ' , - ,
Isn’t this what.he said; He had heard
very little about it?—He said he had heard
practically nothing only what Bill Holmes—
At any rate, he said that all he knew
was what Holmes told him? —Yes. ,
And he told you he had been -cither- to
Wagin or Narroginf—Yes.
You saw him next on the 13th, when no
spoke of references to his character?—
Yes. . - ' ' 1
Did he, say that he had not had the mut
on, or that he had not worn it to town.tor
four or five months?—Had it 1 on.
On , the 13th, can you remember those
conversations accurately ?—Ye&
- Did-he not say that at the theatre he
did not take much notice? —Yes,
He also said that about the-tram? —Yes.
•Did he not say “I cannot remember”? —
No.
Look at the deposition—you swore that..
at the Coroner’s Court? —Yea. , \
Did-he say that?—He said he did notj
remember or he did not take any notice. 1
May he have been referring to the thea-i
tre when he said, “I do not remember?”j
—Ho may have. '


" You" Vent dh to say that the conductor
mast know him?—Yes.
Are yon sure he said what yon have
told ns?——l am positive.
/You have not said that before?—l know.
- It would be strange if he said that about
the tram conductor if ho had given his (the
conductor's nazaa to the police?—lt
would.
To Mr. Haynes: Witness asked him if
he- eonld. remember any incident in the
theatre, ;
THE OVERCOAT.
Cecil Herbert James, salesman, said he
had'known Auburn for two or three years.
He remembered Auburn coming into the
ehop where witness worked on about April
9 and mentioning that he had found an
overcoat under the subway at West Perth.
He said ho understood it belonged to John
O’NciL On April 13 witness went to the
Osborne Park Hotel between 4 p.ro. and 5
(un. In front of Eddy’s shop witness saw
accused working on a motor cycle. They
conversed for a time, and then Auburn
took off the belt of the motor cycle, wheel-
ed it- to the hotel, and put it in a shed.
They, went, to Auburn's bedroom, which
the accused said the detectives bad search-
ed and found a suit which he had washed
some time previously. Ho mentioned the
button which the detectives had. The but-
ton off the coat he said he had lost some:
time before. He also said that’ a good
many young fellows wore jigger buttons,
and ho did not think that should con-.
nect him with the murder. "
, Ref erring to the suit, accused said . he
washed it some time previously, because
while_ working on a motor he was carrying
a cylinder, and in some way knocked his
arm, causing the wound on bis arm, to
bleed, and the blood ran down Sis arm on
to his coat. Later that day witness and
Auburn came to Perth, and after tea walk-
ed up and down Hay-street, where they
met Monson. The three had a drink at a
fruit shop near the ■ To.wn' Hall
and then walked up Hay-street.
MONSON’S ADVICE.
The conversation turned on the murder,
and Monson asked Auburn if he had made
any .statements- to the detectives. Auburn
replied that, he had made a dozen or a
half-dozen, witness was not sure of the •
number, and he was fairly muddled in so .
doing. Monson advised him to make no
further statements, saying it was not much
use making statements it he Auburn) got
muddled. Monson told him not to say
anything to. anyone. , When Auburn wen t :
to the tram he was accompanied by Monson.
witness remaining on the pavement. They
were speaking together, it would'be only
for about a Auburn boarded the
tram and Monson returned to witness.
TEE WESTANA TRACKS.
. Auburn told witness while they were in
his room that he found the tracks-at Wes-
tana-road. He did not say how he came
to find them. Auburn usually wore a'grey
felt hat, with a braid around the rim. Wit-
ness bad a good idea what it was like, but
he could not swear to it. Auburn, always
dressed neatly. ;
THE BAD ARM.
- Witness had seen Auburn a
motor cycle to start it. He had not §ecn
accused c.hopping wood. . Witness knew j
he had a bad arm carrying a bad scar. On !
April 13 Auburn told him that after-push-)
ing the bike up the hill to the shed, “it
sometimes got sort of poisoned and made
him feel crook. At other times it did
not affect him.” Witness could not re-
member Auburn previously saying the am
affected him. He had not seen Auburn do-
ing'very heavy work.
iiciivv woiji.
Mr. La van: Was he doing anything heavy
on this date?—He was pushing the bike.
And he complained that he sometimes
got crook?—Yes.
. Hare yon on. any other occasion seen
him doing any heavy work that would cause
him to complain?—Only pushing the bike.
. You saw him on April 9 —a Wednes-
dav?—Yes,
I' want vqn to be clear about -what he'
said about the coat?—l think he iust said
he found it; that it was at Wairin, and
that he understood it was O’Neil’s.
Did he toll von he had been to the po-
lite about it on the Monday night?—l
think be told me he had, but not on the
Monday night. . . .
Yo do not know what he was doing with
the bike when you arrived on the 13th ?—?
No„
Too, have seen his arm; have you seen
it bleeding?—When I saw it there waa «
j fair amount of blood on his shirt.
Was it bleeding at the’ time?—l saw
bleed.
As if it had been bleeding at. some prior
time! —Yes.
In the bedroom he told you about the
detectives, the search, and «o on.?—Yes.
Did he not say also he did not know
where he lost the button?—Ye*.
How long after the event ware you
I asked for the statement?—There-was •
holiday following:-it was the Tuesday. It
wonld be about April 33.
You don’t protend to remember the
whole of the conversation T—No.
Did he mention that the suit had been
washed more than once? —I wonld not say
be did. I can’t remember that ho did.
Did he refer to another washing—once
for grease stains and the' other because
the arm was bleeding?—l cannot say
about the two washings.
You won’t say he did not? —No.
Norman Andrew York, motorman on
tne tramways, said he first met Auburn
about three weeks before the murder, and
saw him and conversed with- him several
times np to April 10. Witness was with
: him at the corner of Roe and William
streets on the Thursday after the mur-
der. - They saw Detective-Scrgt. Pnxdce
pass in a car, and noticed him wave his
, hand to the accused. Witness asked who
, it was, and he said Detective Purdue, and
; u he wants me to go to the detective office
.about the overcoat. To witness’s queo-
' tion “What overcoat?’’ Auburn said,
- “Oht 1 did not tell you; I found an over-
! ccat under the West Perth sub-wav, and I
think it belongs to John O'Neil.” They
■ again mot at the Economic Stores corner
the following Saturday, James being with
Auburn when witnese carnc np. Auburn
said he had been no lo the defective of-
fice about finding the spot at Nedlands.
He said he took the detectives to the spot
and was there for “a fair while.” He
told witness that he found the spot when
passing by, and that the detectives had
been to his bouse late the previous night,
they went” to his room and picked up a
coat.
Witness did not know that Auburn ever
worked in Premantle. He told witness he
was at the Grand pictures on the night.of
April 4. He said he was there alone,
and after the show he had a look around,
and, seeing nobodv he knew, and only hav-
ing 34 in his pocket, he walked to the Lce-
derriUe Hotel -via the West Perth sub-way.
where he picked up the coat. Ho caught
| the tram at the Leederville Hotel for Os-
1 borne Park. Witness commented that it
must be pretty awkward to have detec-
tives questioning him all the time. Wit-
ness also said, “You’re in the mud.” Au-
burn replied, “Yes, a pretty awkward po-,
dtion.” . /
j Mr. Lay an:- Yon had not seen him be*
\ tweeh the previous Sunday, and thcThnfs-
-1 dev, when Purdue beckoned to hiny?—l
1 might have seen him in Hay-street. '
! But not to talk to him? —I could not
sat* . A .
Pnrdbe beckoned m the direction of
Roe-street?—Yes. . - _
Did yon sec Auburn again on* the Thurs-
day j_j don’t remember seeing him. I
am positive I did not. / ’ .
You say he said the button was off for
two months and then yt>n,*said .he said he
: lost it seine time ago?—Two months xSa
i long time. t . ,
1 j)jd he say he did not remember when ho


, lost the button^—it yjis so long, ago?—He
j said it had been off two months.
I There is nothing :in your depositions
j about two months; . What I put to yon is
that what you sald at the inquest—“lt had
.. been off a good few months; he could not
; remember when he lost ,the button; it was
so 1 long ago’'—was correct?—'Yes
;■ When yon were spealdmg with regard, to
the murder, nothing else was said?—No.
/ Yon said you thought it must be awk-
* ward questioning him a fair deal. Did he
I gay a “fair deal”?—He referred to.several
; statements.,
Did yon in fact say “You’re in the
mud?” Read your depositions?—l said
there I might have said, “You’re in the
mud” or something to that effect
You are not sure'what words you may
have used?—No.
Did you ever know he had a bad arm?
•—Yes. • ■ >
When?—Just after I first knew him.
How? —He showed it to me.
Was there any blood there? —There was
a little.
fHPmawnaaMß
qjb7>*t~
. As it • was most likely that' during lo-
: day. Mr." Lavan would open his defence
. with his statement to the jnry. there was;
increased public interest in' the Dalkeith
murder trial. When proceedings were
; resumed this morning, Dr. Atkinson was
the only Crown witness to be examined.
' The end of the trial seems , yet far dis-
tant, as it is understood that Mr.'Lavah
has a large number of witnesses to call.
George William Auburn, defended by
Mr. M. G. Dayan, with Mr. V J. F. Walsh, 1
pleads not guilty to a charge of having
wilfully murdered John George O’Neil, at
Claremont, on April 4. Mr. A. G.
Haynes assists the Crown Prosecutor (Mr.
EL Parker). -
CONVERSATIONS WITH AUBURN.
After our report closed yesterday,
Harry B. Hcarne, motor mechanic, em-
ployed by Grave and Dwyer. Hay-street,
said he had known the accused slightly for
six or eight months. On Wednesday,
April 9, he with a man named Blaofcmorc,
met Auburn, who said that his girl had
gone away to Wooroloo. . He said he had
been to the CXD. and had reported: the
finding of an overcoat, which he had left
at Wagin. He told witness and •Black-
more that he found it under, the-subway,
and that he showed it to Singe on the.fol-
lowing day. ! : : ;
“A TERRIBLE THING.”
Charles Edward Blackmore,, dental. as-
sistant, said he had known Auburn 1 about
18 months or two years. He saw hna on
April 1,2, or 3, when he said he was
going to Wagin to see “his girl’s” sister,
who was ill. Auburn said he was going
early on the Saturday. On the Monday
after the murder witness saw him about
10 or 11a.m.. It would be nearer 10 than
11, he thought, but he was not sure it
was after 10. Auburn-came into the sur-
gery, and . told witness he did not gel the
Dodge he' was going id get, and had hired
Singe’s car, which had cost him £23 10s.
Discussing the murder, the accused said
it was “a terrible thing,” but .said no-
thing about finding an Overcoat, and did;
not mention Wes tana-road.
The witness also gave evidence Concern-
ing the meeting of the three,;Auburn, wit-
ness, and Hcarne. , ■ , / .
IN SINGE’S CAR.
Witness again. met accused on the. Sat-
urday at the surgery, where they .had/a
conversation,' wherein Auburn, mentioned
Westana-road, and bloodstains, ■ sav ing, he
found the, spot while driving, .along in
Singe’s car, and that he ;had- taken the
detectives down there. He. said be ■ was
with the detectives-till 2- a.m.; and that,
they had gone out ,to Osborne Park and
searched his room, telling, witness' about
the coat and button. :
Mr. Lavan: You can’t tell me' any one
of those three dates you mentioned?. ,
Witness; No.- . ’ . '
You referred to something about; a
Dodge car. Did anything happen about a
Dodge on one of those dates ?—rKot on
the Monday. '-v - ■ y . -
Mr. Lavan continued to question the
witness on the point, and witness explain-
ed that he had misnndcrstool counsel
Mr. Lavan: Of course you would mis- ;
understand me. Haven’t I a loud voice?
Mr. Haynes: That’s the trouble, it’s too
loud. ■ - .
Witness told Mr, Lavan he had a fair
memory; Witness saw accused on the-
Monday, .and they conversed again about
the Dodge car and the trip. . _
Mr. Lavan: Have you said to-,
day that he told vou he found bloodstams?
—He told me that, but I might not have
remembered it, •
Would you be surprised to know that
.your depositions contain no reference to
it ?—I might not have been asked.
If you didn’t say it at the Coroner’s
Court, what was your reason?—l may not
have thought of it at the time.
How does it occur to you hereany-
body,been stirring your, memory?—No, .


' I put it to yon he never did, end this
is fabrication on your parti—-I don t
think so.
Are yon clear it was said! —ics.
Do. you remember any discussion about
Singe’s, car except the one yon have told
ns, fo r instance a trip to Cottcsloe on the
Tuesdav? —There was a discussion about
a trip to Cottcsloe Beach, but I won’t
swear to the day. He asked me to come
on the trip in Singe’s car.
But not of a trip to come, a trip .that
had passed?—Not that I remember.
Will yon deny there was anything said
about it?—No. .- •• ... , -.
On the Saturday, was a drive which had
taken place the previous Tuesday talked
about?—l can’t remember it
You asked him where,, he .found, the
tracks, and he said Westana-road. Did
you not get mixed,- up between tnat and.
other conversations about Singe’s car*—
No I did not. . - , A ..
You don’t think it possible?—No.
THE COATS TANGLED.
How long had yon seen the link button
missing?—The coats have been mixed up.
You have told me there was one he
had not worn for three or four months?—l
take it it was that one. George; w?as refer-
ring' toi but it was not that one. . ~
Mr. Lavan continued to press the wit-
ness about the coat, extracting, from the
witness the bpinion that counsel had
them tangled, too.” . , ■ ■- .
Yon did refer to a coat which ho bad
not worn,for some months, of which the.
link button to your knowledge was imsS-
ing?—He had it off at one time; he Wore
that coat a long time. - . • ■
When did vou seo it off?—No idea.
What is the reason you say it is not
that- coat (produced) ?—George .told me
about a post, and it was that one he was
talking about I thought it was another
coat, and I told.him I had, not,seen him:
wearing it for three or four months. ..
Mr. Lavan continued pressing the wit-
ness on that point for some time.
Mr. Parker: It is suggested you are
fabricating in your evidence; have you
anything against Auburn ? ■
Witness: Auburn’ was one of my best
3 "Court then adjourned to to-day.
COATS AND A LINK BUTTON.
On resuming this morning,
Charles Edward Blackmore, re-called, ex-
amining a coat, produced by Mr. Levan, i
said it looked like the coat he thought)
Auburn referred to in their conversation, 1
Mr. Parker: Can you say anything about
a link button?
Witness; I thought there, was a link but-
ton on it.
Sir, Lavan: Look at the inside of that
coat, do you suggest there was ever a link
button on' it?
Witness: There might have been onee.
If it is sworn to that there never was,
will you contradict it?—l said there might
have been. ' * ,
I am not saying that; I am asking yon if
it is sworn there never was one, will yon
contradict it; it is a slmnle question?—l
can only say I thought there was a link
button on it.
You said distinctly- the link button was
missing, and that you had. not seen him
wearing it for some.months?—There might
never have been one on it.
Did you not say that the coat you re-
ferred to when speaking, to Auburn you
had not seen him wearing for some months?
—I have, not yet said this is the coat:
If there never was a link button on that
coat, obviously it could not.have been that
coat?—l did not say it is the coat; it is
very much like it. . -
' DEL ATKINSON’S EVIDENCE.
BLOOD-STAINED CLOTHES.
Dr. Reginald C. E. Atkinson, Acting Gov-
ernment Bacteriologist and Principal Medi-
cal'Officer, said the coat and trousers ex-
hibited were handed to him on April 15. He
tested them-for blood, taking several pieces i
of material for that purpose, choosing at
first places where there were obvious
stains. In some cases he used a glass. A
chemical test was first applied—the benzi-
dine test. At all places marked with pins
he obtained results consistent with the pre-
sence of blood. There was a largo and
distinct stain about the middle of the back
of the coat. He did not try the precipitin
test because he failed to get the haemin test
for blood. Blood was very soluble in;
water,, particularly recently-shed blood.
Cold water, was a very good solvent. Pre-
suming that bloodstains got on those clothes
on the, Friday and on the Monday' the
clothes were put in cold water he would not
expect to .find more, than he did find. The
overcoat was received by witness also on
April 15, and he tfonnd a bloodstain in the
cotton lining on the right-hand side. On
the right cuff there was a clot of blood.
That on the cuff gave a definite precipitin
test for human blood. There was an-
other stain in the vicinity of the same na-'
tore, There was a faint reddish smear on
the .inside, which witness submitted to the
benzidine test. The test of the inside
spot was consistent with blood.
Witness got.the hat from Detective Doyle
on April 16. He detected nine ■or ton
spots on the hat . They were very small,
some larger than a pencil point, others not.
The larger spots were mostly above the
brim, two only being underneath, and one
in the front. Witness submitted a num-
ber of the tests..
In his opinion there was human blood on
the hat. . • The precinitin test for human
blood was the best known scientific test.
.He . scraped off a number of specimens
from’ stains on the hood of the motor-car
over'the front seat. They were tested,
and found: to contain human blood 1
* An: exhibit of sand and sheoafc twigs,
handed to him by Detective-Sergeant Doyle,
showed on examination • small clots of
human blood. On the same day Doyle
handed witness specimens of hair, which
were apparently the same. Sand and scrub,
also received Doyle on April 16, re-
vealed clots of human blood. • Sergeant
Purdue witness two packets con-
taining blood specimens and one containing
blood, hair and brain. The , blood was
human b100d... Witness received a number
of banksia .leaves in the Coroner’s Court,
j They contained human blood. He also
[ was hauded. a. button at the Coroner’s
Court, and found human blood on it Wit-
ness also examined three waistcoats, but "ot
no reaction whatever.
ME. LAVAN CROSS-EXAMINES.
Mr. Lavan: The benzidine test is one of
blood only ?
Witness ; No.
By that alone you cannot say whether it
is human blood?—No.
If yon get a result in that it is consistent
with many things besides blood?—Some-
times.
Give us an indication.—lt has been said
that manure will give the test,-also, soiled’
earth, also a substance called oxydase. They
are ferments found in tissues where oxyda-
tion goes on-
. That is the first test made?—Yes.
Having got that, it does mean that it is
blood ?—Not absolutely.
Mr. Lavan referred a test book to the
witness (Martin Dale and Westeott).


Witness said he would not necessarily re-'
gard them as an authority on blooe.
Would you deny they are competent an-,
thorities on blood and bloodstains? —No, I
would not.
Will you swear there was blood of any
kind on these garments ?—I will not.
His Honor: On which?
Witness: Trousers and coat
: Mr. Lavan; The haemin crystals arc only
the coloring matter of blood?
Witness: Yes.
If yon found those crystals, would it ab-.
solulcly .determined that it was blood .of
. some kind?—Yes.
Bat not human blood?—No.
Will water prevent the haemin test?—lf
it removed entirely the color.
■ ;Is there not a further test, besides the
haemin crystals?—Yes.
Hicro-spectroscopic ?—Yes.
Did yon apply that?—Yes.
It returns to this, you couldn’t swear
there was human blood on those coat and
trousers? —No. ; .
The question of the haemin crystals on
the. microscopic test has nothing to do with
the precipitin test?—No.
Then, why did you not ■ apply the pre-
cipitin?—Because it was no good testing
for human Blood if I did not know it wgs
blood.
If you got a result from the clothes con-
sistent with blood, would you not apply
the precipitin test? —Noi
Why?—For the reason I’ve explained.
Would it not tell you in that case whe-
ther it was blood, human blood, in.fact?
—No.
If clothes were washed in cold water. ;
and yon got the benzidine test, would you
net expect to get the precipitin test from
that? —I might.
The precipitin tqst is looked upon as a
pretty reliable test?—Yes.
Is it absolute? —If properly applied it
is absolute.
To His Honor: Animals of the same spe-
cies give the same results.
• To Mr.: Lavan: The blood of a higher
ape may give the same reaction as human
blood.
Did you prepare your own serum?—No.
So that you are not aware of the condi-
tions under which it_ was prepared?—No.
The 1 greatest earo is essential in its pre-
paration?—Yes.
If it is riot' taken, you may get a falla-
cious test?—Yes. ’ . '
So that in applying tout precipitin test
for.’human blood you are nsipg a scrum
of which vou know absolutely nothing as l
tc' its preparation?—Except that I tested
it when I received it.
How, long ago was that?—l ordered it
fer the examination. ■ '
How d’d vou test it?—To see if it com-
plied with the label; against a number of
animals’ blood (horse, ox, bird., sheen,
cminea-pig. and pier). I obtained ho pre-
cipitin reaction with those animal bloods.
I therefore decided that the serum was ;
specific for the human Wood.
Bv getting negative tests from certain 1
’animals, von assumed it was human blood?
—T it anti-bnman serum. /
Shouldn’t you make both a positive and
negative test with human blood at the same
time?—Yes. T told vou that at first.
You told us the nnti-hriman serinm would
rocnon,! human
Wood?—I don’t think I Vaid that.
Tho serum that is obtained would give
the, same as from the higher apes?—You
might get the precipitin test from the high-
er ape with an anti-human serum.
You do not know how that serum 1 was
prepared or from what it was prepared?—
No. ■ v;'< 'r, V
If it were prepared from the blood »f
the higher apes it would not react to a peo-
‘per test?—No. '
On the inside of the overcoat you ap-
plied the benzidine test? —Yea, to the
smear I applied others; I got . haemin
crystals from one, but there was msufoei-
ent blood for the precipitin test,/
These two large «y >:
if they were blood at all ?—I wonld not;
ewcar.it: . .. , ,
Is it not possible ana has if not , been
found frequently that the precipitin test
can be obtained from infinitesimal quan-
tities?—No; I don’t think so. What do
yon mean by infinitesimal?
What part of a gramme wonld you eflll ,
infinitesimal ?—A millionth part of a
gramme.
Listen to this;; do you • know Profeaßa
McWheeney?—Yes. .
A competent authority on bacteriology
and pathology?—Yes-,
Do you .agree that one; 200,000 th „ of, a
gramme will give the precipitin. , test? —
Provided he can get A of one i* a
thousand. The precipitin test does, aot
go much farther. ;
Do yon agree .or disagree that it can. bs
done with-an infinitesimal. quantity?—ll
can be done with a very small quantity.
You did not have enough.ffr-N6. >L used
it all up with the haemin test. ...
Is not the haemin test used always be-
fore the precipitin test;y-^-Jtis’by. ifie.'-''
If the quantity is .So /small,’ how Ban
these people do it?—They are doing it ex-
perimentally. ; They might have had ■ the
blood; I had;to find it. ■ ■ ■
Do yon mean to suggest that, having got
the benzidine test, you could not apply the
precipitin test?—l could- not- apply "it to
the same blood. - v V
But conld you not apply it after the
benzidine test ?—lf I had the material.
But having a result consistent, with blood
could yon not apply it? —Yes.
Did you?—No. . . -
Will you swear that they are human
blood stains on the hat?—l will swear they
are ape or human, _ ,
The witness, at Mr. Layan’s request, de-
scribed the method of his test on the hat.
If they were • lying in water you 'would
not get the crystals?—lt would have to be
a thorough washing. , V ■
Suppose they had been washed three
months before you would not: get the, crys-
tals—that is, if the coloring matter was de-
stroyed ?—lt dissolves the matter. My ob-
ject in answering Mr. Parker’s question
was to explain that if the: stain. had bpen
there approximately ’within'a mpnth it
would come out fairly easily. '
At any event, one, two, three or six
months, if it was well washed, it would
come out!—Not necessarily all of it.
How long should it bp before it fixed f-r-T
could not say; within a.month I would ex-
pect it to como oat easily. ", ; '
It ’might be moref-^Yes.
EE-ESAM3NATION.
Mr. Parker: This book (referring to the
first book produced by Mr. Lavan) says
that by this test blood of mummies
to 5,000 years old can be identified as hu-
man—do you agree?
■Witness: I cannot agree; there is a dif-
ference of opinionp it all-depends.upon the
solubility of the material they are test-
ing.- , ■
Presume human; blood got on that suit,
and' it was- not washed' for five months
after, would you Oxpcct to get-some color-
ing?—l wonld expect to get more definite
evidence of human blood than I did get.
Further,questioned, witness said that if
there was blood the reaction was almost ;
instantaneous. Regarding many <jf (Iv&'i
spots on the suits the blue color signifying.:
blood appeared almost instantaneously. ..
Mr. Parker: What is your opinion of
that?—l simply say there is strong-pre-
sumptive evidence of the presence of blood.
VfTiere did yon get the serum?—-The
Commonwealth Serum Laboratory.,
Do yon agree with this text book again
that by means' of the re-agent we have'
been able to detect one of blood- ip. .a-’,
100,000 th part dilution?—lt is a delicate
test,. '■ ■'


: " THE DEFENCE. - -.*
MR. LAVAN’S ADDRESS.-
Mr. M. G. ]^van, counsel, for .the -
ed, commenced his opening address in de-
fence at 12.25 pah.
In this case, he said, the prisoner at the
bar, George William Auburn, stood charged
with the crime "of wilful murder. It was
scarcely necessary for him to impress upon
them the supreme. gravity of the charge
with which the accused was charged. It
was a charge upon which depended the
Life or Death
of a human being. Upon their verdict
would depend whether Auburn would walk
from the Court a free man or-whether, on
the other hand, he would be sent to an ig-
nominious death. -
The case had been a long, and a trying
one; an arduous one for the jury, for Ms
Honor, for the'Crown counsel and for him-
self. Particularly arduous had it been, for
him. t It was a task that ;, would try any
man,' and in acting' for the defence he
could almost say that he had the life or
death of a fellow human being almost in
his hands. It was" a task that no person,
would envy, and it was certainly not a
task’ that he envied himself having to nm-
dertake. He could not help saying at.the
outset of his ease that he had sympathy'
for them in the long duty which-bad-been
thrust ujxm them.;, They had.been taken
from their busmess._ pleasures and- homes.,
It -was his intention so far - as- opening
the case was concerned not. to delay, one
moment longer than he could possibly help.
He had a'
Duty Cast Upon H3m ■ -
aa ah advocate to defend Ahbnrh'-- ; 'i'i
what he deemed to be a proper manner. He
could assure them that so far as he was 1
concerned he had not and would not cotf-
sciously ask one qncstion wMch did not-
seem to have rightly or wrongly some re-*
levant point to the terrible issue which they-i
had to try. He could promise that neither 1
in his opening address nor- in Ms-exam!-'
nation of the witnesses whom be-was going-
to call would he consciously-waste - any-
time. H*. did not, intend to comment
the evidence- to be submitted or that pflt :
forward;by the prosecution at that stage'.
A later, opportunity would.be provided him.'
. Before he proceeded with the calling of,
the evidence there were one or two brief}
remarks to make. He asked and implored
the jury, by everything thcy held nearest
and dearest, to maintain
An Open Hind
in connection with the charge, until the
case had finished; .until all the evidence had
been heard. Then it wonld be for, the}
jury to judge. In their 'hands; and in ' no
others, rested the fate of the unfortunate
young man in the dock. : Fortunately in '
this case they would not he troubled with
any questions'of law;-for there were none-
so far as he could see; There was an
abundance of facts. In fact, there were;
So many facts -it
Made One's Brain Ecel ;
trying to; retain the various ramifications
of the case. It would be for them to say.
on these; facts .whether - they, .wege.satisfied
the accused was. ginlty ov inhoccnt of the;
charge.’.. He also wantedihehi not,to make;
nn their minds until they had heard 6vef9--‘
thing, and to eliminate from their minds-
anything tbev may have heard or read in
connection with the ease outside the: pre-;
oincts of the Court. He knew it . was dif- ‘
ficult; The human mind ; was very recep-.
live; and he would have something more to
say'oh this point.at a later:stage'. ‘He h'egfi
ged of them, - for. the. and,
humanity, to eliminate- from , their , minds
anything thevmay have heard -.or -.read'of;
the. case, and .to- judge the-, man ; solely,; W;
the facts heard within the four- walls of.
the Court.
Mr. Lavan, continuing his address-
lie did not pretend for one mo-
ment that, in opening hia case, it -would he
possible tor him to deal with every bit of
the evidence given for the Crown. He
pointed out there was
A Mass of Evidence.
They had been going for nearly two weeks
and had examined between 30 and 60 wit-
nesses, and it would be impossible for any
man to remember and to carry in h£s
mind everything that might have to be
dealt with. Ail he could hope to do was
to indicate in a broad way the evidence ha
was about to call He would do this
without comment of . any kind. The first
witness he proposed to call in this case
would be George William Auburn, the ac-
cused. There was no necessity for George
Auburn to go into the witness-box,' but ho
(Auburn) is
Not Afraid
to face his accusers. If he had wanted
to do so, he could have made a statement
from the dock upon which statement ha
could not be cross-examined, and it could
not be commented upon even by counsel
for the Crown that he had failed to give
evidence on oath. Auburn would bo
going into that box to give his evidence.
Auburn would tell them his age; ne is
about 21 years old- Ho was a motor me-
chanic, and worked in Win ter bottom’s for
some time, and got some training there in
the mechanical section, and the driving of
cars. He does jobbing work on cars, mo-
tor cycles, and he supposed, cycles. Ha
resided with his father, a respected mem-
ber of the community, who had lived here
many years, ana was the lessee and licen-
see of the Osborne Park Hotel He
Would Traverse His Movements.
beginning with the Monday of the week in
which they were particularly concerned,
prior to April 4. Auburn would say he
was in town every night during that week.
They would remember he went on two
nights of that week to the theatre with
Miss Sadler, and took her homo. •On
two other nights be was up “there’’ with
her, and came down on each occasion in
time to eaten tbe tram which would bring
him out in time to connect up with the
tram to Osborne Park. The last car to
Osborne Park leaves the hotel corner at
IJL2B. Auburn would tell them he some-
times caught that last car, and sometimes
one a little earlier, because they would re-
member he used to get oil the tram and go
into Miss Golding’s small shop. Approxi-
mately the distance from Miss Goluing’s
to the Osborne Park tram was about 300
yards.
Auburn would have to catch a car a little
earlier than the one that left the Palace
Hotel at 11.28 on the frequent occasions
he went into the shop. The 11.28 ran right
through and joined the Osborne Park train.
He therefore would not have time to walk
the 300 yards, and he would catch on
those occasions a car some time prior to
the last car. Bat the car wMch he caught
to Osborne Park from the junction .of Mt.
Hawthorn was almost always the last one
on that route.
Tbe first date of importance with wMch
they had to deal really was Thursday, April
3. On that date the jury were told cer-
tain number plates were ordered- Auburn
would tell them that his memory was that
the nlates were ordered on the Wednesday,
but the jury had the evidence of the peo-
ple at the place that it was Thursday. Whe-
ther it was or not, Auburn was still of
opinion it was the Wednesday. The plates
were ordered, at all events. It would be
for the jury to remember, later on, that
the first person to whom he went to order
the plates was Edward Ramsay, who was
a coach painter, of Newcastle-strect. Ram-
say knew and had known Auburn since he
was a boy. Also, he had known Ms father
and had done work for him in connection
with motor cars. Auburn, who had known


him many years, went to Ramsay to secure i
a set of plates, and the 'plates he ordered,
or wanted to get, were the number plates
that applied to his father’s own car,
was P3B. 'That was the registered num-
ber of G. Auburn’s, sen., own car. His
(accused’s father’s) car was a single seal-
er, and, counsel thought, an Overland. As
counsel had said, the first person Auburn
approached was Ramsay. The latter was
unable to do the work, they knew whv, and
referred him somewhere else. As the re-
sult of that he went to Abbott and Rich>
and there he did order the plates contain-
ing the number P3B. The jury would be
told that he was asked when he wanted
them, and he said as soon as they_ could
supply them. There was no question of
saying to get them dgne in quick time, he
wanted them as soon as he could get them,
and, counsel thought, in the absence of his
notes, that Auburn said he would call for
them next day, or something to that ef-
fect. At any rate, whatever day it was,
the plates were made, and Auburn arranged
to call next day. On the Thursday night
he requested •
MTiss Sadler to Call
for them. The jury would remember they
went to the theatre that night, and he ask-
ed her to call for them on the Friday. Au-
burn would tell them that be did not tell
iMlsa Sadler that he would be in Fremantle,
or that ho was working there. He simply
said he would not be in town early enough.
She went in on the Friday, got the number
plates, took them to her house, and—-coun-
sel did not remember if there was evidence
on the point—he thought, said she did ned
pay for them. There was no evidence as
to whom they were charged to.
His Honor: There was some.
Mr. La van: Oh, jgs. I understand they
were booked, up to (ieo. Auburn, jun., Os-
borne Park Hotel. Continuing, counsel
said on the Friday, Anbum was at home
most of the day. After all,
Friday was the Day
they were really mostly concerned with in
this case. In the evening Anbum went in
to Perth by the 6.15 ear. A question was
asked about the 6.45 tram, but Auburn
would tell the jury it was the 6.15, and
counsel also asked them to bear in mind
that it was impossible to be completely ac-
curate about times, but he would later put
in the Osborne Park timetable showing
when the trams did mn. He believed it
was 6.15, or very close to it. Auburn
would say that ’** -> caught that car,. came
right in, caught another at the intersection
of Newcastle and Beaufort streets, and
went to Miss Sadler’s place, arriving there
about 7 o ’clock. It would be quite clear
to the jury he did arrive about 7, so that
it could not possibly—this they would see
from the times nod distances to be proved
—be the 6.45, and that it would be the 6.15
car. When he reached the house that
evening he had nothing whatever with him
in the shape of any parcel of any _ kind
whatever. Auburn wou]d give evidence
that it was some weeks before that that the
question of the
I Trip to Wagin
J had been suggested. * It was talked of
generally for some weeks, and finally three
weeks before the actual date of the trip it
was fixed that the trip to Wagin would
take place on (he Saturday . three weeks
ahead (April 5). Auburn would*tell them
that he did imt say that he was going to
Borrow a Oar
and that he mentioned the names of two
cars —the Buick and the Willys-Knight,
and that Mr. Ford’s name was mentioned
as a man from whom he would borrow
the car. Counsel did not propose
to go into detail, but accused would tell
them why he said these things. He would
say that on the Thursday night he did tell
Miss Sadler that he would be up the iol
lowing night with the car to make an early
start on Saturday morning for Wagin,
Counsel thought they would find these in-
cidents would be satisfactorily explained.
On the Friday night he went; up, and it
was important that they bearin mma mat
prior to this, the number of the party was
arranged. The party which was going to
Wagin'was /-■•burn. Mr, and Moir,
Miss Sadler, me two Quiglays, and three
children. That party was arranged 'seve-
ral days before the Friday. When he
went to the house, accused would tell them,
he
Brought Nothing With Hint.
Be came in, threw his hat down on a high
chair —one of those chairs used by child-
ren—got talking to Miss Sadler, and h«,
would say that he saw no parcel on that i
chair, and that he did not pick up an 1
article and say “to rap you on the head!
with.” They would be told by him, and !
it would bo borne out in evidence, that
when he left he took nothing away with
him. Counsel would refer afterwards to
the effect of that evidence. Accused
would tell why the number plates were ob-!
tained. For some time he had been pro-
mising his father to get him a new.set of!
number plates. He ordered them, and
brought them to Moir’s, and so far as,he:
is -aware now, ho did not take them away ,
from Moir’s, because he has no reoollec- ■
tion of taking anything from Moir’g, and
he (counsel) thought the evidence would*
convince them on that. When he left
Moir’s, although it had been arranged that ,
he come up on the Friday and bring the
car and stay that night, there was nothing;
definite as to whether he ■ was reluming .
that night or not. , j
There Was a “Tiff”
between himself and Miss Sadler. ‘ He
wanted her to go into town, but she was
in a temper—accused might have been, too
—and she would not go. He left at ap-
proximately 7.30 or a little later. Coun-
sel wanted the jury to bea r in mind that
Auburn did not pretend to be accurate in
his times. He had no watch; or had not
at that time, but he arrived about 7, and
stayed about half an hour. Counsel
thought they would be satisfied he left at
7.30 or 7.40. Accused would say that
he did go to
The Grand Theatre.
The time he actually got into the theatre,
and the time he got out he could not say.
Counsel did not know, but he supposed it
would be about 10 minutes’* run from Mi.
Lawley to Barrack-street. The time Au-
burn got out he was unequally able to tell
them, but counsel thought he would be
able to satisfy them as to the approximate
time he got out of the show.
After the luncheon adjournment Mr.
Lavau continued his address to the jury.
Ho had said that Auburn left the pictures
and went straight up Beanfori-street'over
the byidge and went to the shop of two la-
dies vfiio carry on business at the corner
of Beaufort and Newcastle streets. These
ladies would say that since they took over
the business early in March George Au-
burn had been a regular customer every
night, for certain provisions, and always
came in there after 11 pan. These two
ladies would substantiate that it was about;
10 p.m. on the Friday night that Auburn
came into the shop. They would give their
reasons for fixing the time, as in the past
he had always come in after 11 p.m. for
the purpose of getting supplies. His un-
usual action in coming in that night at 10
rv,#. —when they were not ready to supply
his order—
Bather Surprised Them.
When they beard these witnesses they
would be satisfied he thought that at ap-
proximately 10 pm». that night Auburn
was in fact in mat shop. After making
the purchases Anbum walked back along
Beaufort-street in order to go over the
Railway Bridge and catch his car at Trou-
chet’s comer. He did this because he,
thought he had a better chance of getting :
a seat than l>> waiting at the comer of*
Beaufort and Newcastle streets. Before he
got to the comer he discovered that all,
the money he had left was 3d. He walked!
up Barrack-street, along Hav-street, and
down to Murray-street to see if ho could
come across anyone* he knew for the pur-


pose of - petting' some money. He dicta ’t,
and when he pot to the comer of Murray
and William streets he .
Decided to Walk
out to the Leederville Hotel From here
to Osborne Park the fare was 3d. Au-
burn would tell them he , strolled along lei-
surely. What time it was when he got to
the subway be could not say, because ho
had no watch, hut a. witness would be
called who would.tell the time it would
take to walk at an average pace from the
shop in Beaufort-street along the roads he
had indicated to the subway, and then on
to the Leederville Hotel. It would be
shown that walking at an ordinary pace
it would take 55 minutes to the Leederville
Hotel and something between, 35 and 40
minutes to the subway. If Auburn left
the shop -about 10.5 and strolled along
leisurely it would be getting on close to 11
pun. _ before he got to the subway.
Going under the subway he
Picked Up a Coat
and examined it. He does not reeotlect
putting it on. From there he walked to
the Leederville Hotel. He took the road
tc the left, the natural road. He struck the
Thomas-street bridge, and walked along the
footpath on the Perth side. Two men
walking into the opposite direction
Cannoned Into Him
and hurt him on, his wounded arm. At
the Leederville Hotel he picked up a ear,
at what time he does not know. It must
have been one before the last, because be-
fore going on he got ont and made some
purchases at Miss Golding’s shop. He then
had to walk some 300 yards and catch the
Osborne Park car. That must have, been
before the llj2B car. Opposite the Oxford
Hotel is the shop of the two Miss Golding.
On the car also was a young man, Cecil
White. He did not see White until the
latter was leaving the cor.' , He then -
Borrowed 2s from White,
went to Miss Golding’s shoo and spent the
2s on goods. He then walked to the Mt.
Hawthorn terminus and canght his car, on
which were three men he knew. He stood
on the front of the car with the driver,
M'Kenzie, as has been his usual practice.
He asked the driver for some matches, and
that be should
See Him Home
as far as the hotel, as he felt a bit crook.
Auburn undoubtedly suffered from his arm,
as will be shown. He was wearing an
overcoat when M’Kenzic walked with him
to his home. This evidence will establish
Auburn’s* movements that night. He
honed to convince the turv that he had no-
thing to do with the murder.
On the Monday Homing
the weather was threatening, and Auburn
wore his gr«v suit down to breakfast.
Miss Coombs'-waited on the table, and
saw him about the bouse, and she would
say what clothing he had on- He got a
ring from Miss Sadler some time about 11
o’clock, and she had told; the jury what he
said. He came in the car
With his Father to Town,
and went up to see Miss Sadler. 1 She
asked why he did not come back on the
previous night. He will say that he told
her there was some difficulty about the car
that would be explained to them.' He did
not mention any part of the car or say it
broke down- Accused would say that Miss
Sadler made no reference to the grey suit,
and that he did not say he tore, his blue
suit. It was his custom on days that were
wet or threatening, as this was, to wear
his grey suit. She was going the
Following Morning to Wagin,
and when she told him of it he said he
would hire a car. He (Auburn) then left
Moir’s to hire a car, which he did from
Singe. Singe’s' car was a large one in
that it contained “dicky” seats, and the
party was a large one. The party was.
picked up; the car went to Osborne Park,
and got the bag and overcoat which, was at
the Hotel -Nothing much turned on the
Waein transaction, except that the coat was !
taken and was unfortunately left at Wa-
gin, They had been told there was a i
Discussion About the warder
at Quartermaine’s between Singe, Quarter- i
maine, and Anbum, wjiyn they were putting I
petrol in the car. They would be convinced,,
counsel thought, that that story was not:
correct, next morning, which seemed;
to he . a hurried morning, the coat was left i
behind inadvertently. The party had ;
dinner at Qnartermaine’s and the jury had
been told the murder was discussgd in the ,
presence of Auburn, and also on the ver-
andah, but Auburn would say the first be
heard of the murder was when he got back
to. Perth. !
When ho got off. Holmes spoke to him
about the murder. Auburn said
“What Murder?”
That was the first time Auburn had hoard
of it There was another witness he saw;
that night. Mr. Percy Crisp spoke to him
shortly after, about the murder, and .he
said that all he knew was what Holmes had;
just told him, explaining that he had been
away in the country. Auburn then went
home, and on Monday came into town early
in the'' morning, seeing Blackxaore about 3
o’clock. Auburn went home 'early that
Monday, and went over to Eddy’s store.
There was a motor cycle in the yard be-
longing to Charlie Johnson, with some, bags
thrown over it Auburn took the bicycle
to his own place, and there effected some
temporary repairs. In the afternoon ho
left home with the machine, and went up
Oxford and Thomas streets, through Clare-
mont and back
Through Wes tana-road.
He would say that at one point the belt
came off the machine, and Auburn pushed
the bicycle to the top of the hill, thei
mounted it, and coasted to the bottom.
Here he got off to effect the repairs, and
sat down. It was here lie noticed tbe
tracks of a car, and the broken down foli-
age, together with traces of engine oil H«
fixed up the bicycle and returned to Perth.
He did not inform the police of that find
for some days afterwards, for he did not
attach a great deal of importance to it at
first. On the following Friday bo
Told the Police Voluntarily.
It wonld be proved to the jury that on the
previous Friday—April 4 —Charlie John-
son did bring Iris bicycle to the Osborne
Park Hotel. Mr. Auburn, sen., would
say he saw , Charlie Johnson there, had a
conversation with him, and saw him take
the bicycle in the 'direction of Eddy’s.
George Auburn was seen with a motor
cycle at the hotel just before dinner time
on the Monday, and was seen later m .the
afternoon to ride off in the direction of
Perth. On Monday night he went into
town and read in the paper that an,
Overcoat Was Missing,
belonging to O’Neil. It struck him that
possibly this coat might have something
to do with the murder, and he went to the
detective office and told them about it-
Auburn will say he did not tell Purdue
he would wire for it. Auburn came to
town on Friday, and told M‘ Kenzie he had
been to the police about the overcoat the
night before. In the evening, in accord-
ance with an arrangement made previous-
ly, he took Singe’s* car. to Cottesloe with
Miss Sadler and tfie two Miss Quigleys.
The
Murder Was Discussed
to. some extent in tjje car. Auburn had
asked one of the Miss Quigleys for
Mr. Allport’s Address
at Wagin, and she told him. On the Wed-
nesday. Auburn went into the detective
office'and saw Detective-Sergeant Purdue,
and there had been some conversation re-
garding the coat. He will say hO'.did not
tell Purdue he had wired or written for
it, but'that be told him Allport’s address
as given to him by Miss Quigley. On the
same day he saw Cecil James, and told him
about the .. ,
* ; Pinding of the Cost
in the subway. On Thursday he was-
with York in Boe-street Detective Pur-
due beckoned to him, and said he wanted;


to see- him at the detective office. All
that happened was that Purdue asked
When It Would Ba Convenient
for Auburn to show them where he had
found the overcoat. The hour fixed for.
the visit was 2 pan. on the next day. He
pointed out to Doyle and Kennedy the
spot. ■ On the way he also told them of bis
discovery on the previous Monday. They;
all saw Purdue later, and shortly after a
motor car was requisitioned and a party
of them, including Auburn,
; Went to Westana-road.
On the way they pulled up at the top of
the hill, but Auburn said the spot was fur-
ther down. A little way on he told the
detectives they had arrived at the spot.
Two of the "detectives said there were two
tracks coming to a common point, and go-
ing on like an inverted “Y.” Auburn
isallgcd to have said “This is where ho
was dragged in (on the - Claremont side)
and this is" whore he was dragged out (on
the other side).” He will tell you that
he. said nothing of the sort.
There were some remarks about
The Drag Marks,
but he did not say that. It was impos-
sible for counsel, to remember everything;
the only other point he could thinkof was
the piece of glass. , Auburn said it look-
ed like a piece of glass from a spotlight.
They got back to Perth some time after
six. _and he was kept there until after
nine.""At that time he was there with Pur-
due, and during that time the statement
was taken. Purdue said that before they
went away the boy said something about
breaking bis ijother’s heart, and_ asked
them to go out after nine. The -jury, did
not need counsel to outline the truth of
that statement. Purdue said to counsel
that Auburn exclaimed
“Put Me In, And I’ll Admit Every-
• thing ”
That statement would be denied, and
counsel thought the jury would be con-
vinced it was not said.
Purdue had told the Court that -there
was a conversation in which Auburn said
“Would I have brought you the coat if
I were a guilty man?” and Purdue said
something about the coat being advertised
for in the naners. Auburn then asked
the" same ouestion relative to the finding
of the Westana-road tracks, and Purdue
said something about
‘'Murderers Going Back To Their
. - Tracks,”
or words of that kind. Counsel pointed
cut to Purdue at the time that this evi-
dence was not given in the Lower Court,
and counsel cross-examined him verv close-
Iv about it. It was counsel's duty to do_ s<j.
eod he “went for him over _it. ”
There was no time when cross-examining
fo ask anything, but he had since Keen in-
formed by Auburn that a conversation of
that nature did take place. Auburn, how-
ever, would denv that he sa’d to Set. Pur-
due. “Put me inside and T will admit every-
thing.” and he would gi ve ample reasons
whv he didn’t say it.
Auburn was kept from 2 o’clock until
9.30 '
Without Bite or Sun.
; He was then taken out to the hotel, where
some clothes were examined hanging on the
of a chair in a room. Sgt. Doyle
picked up the suit which had apparently
been-washed some little time before, but
aaa not been pressed. Auburn • said he
naa washed it preparatory to cleaning it
up, as he had got oil on it. Auburn would
he had not worn the suit into town for
some time. Be had. two suits made in
Melbourne about two years ago. One was
*• hest and the other hacked about
W “T e tinkering with ears. Auburn had an-
other old blue coat which had been produc-
ed m court. It was important to remember
that
The Old Blue Coat
” at any time a jigger button on
It. The coat which had been washed a
fortnight before had had the jigger button
on for some months. It had evidently been
aewn on several times, and the last time
when snipping off the shank it had clipped
a little of. the material, and the hole nad
been sewed up by Auburn. After that Au-
burn was brought to detective office
at 10.30, and they didn’t get to Dr. Bar-
ker's until 1 aun., so the detectives had
him for another couple of hours, and all
the time without anything to eat. The doo-
\ tor
i Examined the Scar
on his. arm.
After he left Dr. Barber, Purdue called
him on one side. He will tell you later
what the detective said. Ahburn was
then taken home, it being arranged that he
should return to the detective office at 2
the following afternoon. He wag kept
there five and. a half hours. There was a
conversation about going home till Mon-
day, but he did not .say to the detective,
“I will give you satisfaction; to you, and
not to me.” What he badsaid. when
Purdue pressed hurt, was, “I Will give
Satisfaction to You and to Me.”
On the Saturday morning he- had met
Blackmore. At no time had he mentioned
to Blackmore anything about a Dodge car.
He talked with Blackmore on. Saturday
about the trip to Wagin, and about the
trip on a previous night. The murder was
also mentioned, as . well as the finding of
the tracks. ; He did not say he had found
them while driving in Singe’s car, as
Blackmore had stated. What happened
was that they talked about Singe’s car and
other matters, and ho doubt Blackmore
had mixed up what had been said. That
night he Saw Percy York also. There was
a conversation about the overcoat, and the
finding of the spot at Nedlands as he
passed by. On Sunday Auburn had an
interview with Percy Crisp. In the main
the statement regarding the interview is
correct, but it is
Not Correct in One Particular.
Crisp said Auburn had stated he did not
know the motor man on the tram. Auburn
said that did not occur, for he had told
the" detectives the names of the people on
the car. Cecil James went ont to the
hotel on the Sunday. Auburn had a bicy-
cle, and they went into town together and
had tea.
There was a conversation of the details
of which James is not sure. It was about
Auburn getting blood on his arm through
lifting a cylinder. Auburn says he told
James the clothes had been washed twice,
but the last time was to remove grease and
petrol, which had got on the suit.
Monson Was Next Met, '
and was told by Auburn that
he (Auburn) had got muddled up
and the. jury would think that likely.
Monson advised him to say nothing fur-
ther. Auburn made an appointment with
the detective for 2 p.m. the next day, but
did not keep it. There was a meeting
with Monson, not by appointment, and
Mias Sadley Was Bung Up.
The conversation, as detailed, was partly
accurate and partly inaccurate. He asked
if anybody had been up to see her, ana she
said no. He asked if she remembered bis
being at Moir’s, and leaving about 7.30.
She said she did. He told her if anybody
came to sec her to tell them what she bad
told him; that was the truth.
On the- Monday Auburn did not go to
the detective office at the time arranged.
He went later, and Auburn, who , had his
hat pnd coat off, said:
“I Cannot Tell You More Than I Have.”
Then a conversation took place, and he
asked if he could go to tea, which he did.
Before he went he said if they wanted him
to let him known , and he would come in.
Two days afterwards he was arrested. Two
witnesses would be called who drove
through Vincent-stre.et in a motor car be-
tween; U. 15 and 12 midnight on Friday,
and who would, siy there was no motor
car there at that time. Mr. Moir, who
would' be called, would sav that Auburn
hud no parcel with him wh°n he called on
toe. Friday evening, nor when he left.
Moir, too, had seen the arm bleeding and


bandaged nn, and hacT also ’ board thp re-
quest by Auburn to Miss Sadler to go into
town. lip was also present the following
day when Auburn turned up. Auburn did
not say anythin;? about
The Car Breaking Down
or. of tearing hij. clothes, or of the grey
suit. Moir was one of those who took
the trip to Wagin, and .whose name was
mentioned as being preseilt when a con-
versation took place about the murder in
Auburn’s presence. Moir would say he
heard of the murder outside the Osborne
Park Hotel when Aubtirn went inside.'The
murder was never afterwards discussed in
Auburn’s presence. He would say that
the statement of Quartermaine was incor-
rect, in so far as it was he* and not Au-
burn, who went down to get the petrol to-
gether.
Auburn, Som, Would Give Evidence
in regard to George’s pm, and further
would say that George invariably washed
his own clothing, mid nearly always used
the bathroom for this purpose. ‘Mrs, Auburn
would be called to eubstantate the fact.
The defence of George William Anbom
was commenced in earnest this morning in
the Supreme Court • before Mr, Justice,
Draper,and a jury.
The accused, who is 21 years of age, and
is described as a mechanical expert, is al-
leged to have on. April 4 wilfully murder-
ed John George O’Neil,-a taxi motor dri-
ver, at Claremont.-
The defence is conducted by -Mr. M. G."
Lav an, with Mr. J. F. Walsh,- while the i
Crown Prosecutor (Mr. H. Parker) is as-
sisted by Mr. A. G. Haynes.
Yesterday afternoon, Mr. La van practi-
cally devoted himself to an opening ad-
dress to the Tnrv, the aeeused only being
in the witness-box for a" few minutes.
This morning Anbnm again took
his stand as a witness, the public portion
of the Court being filled as usnaL
A policeman accompanied Aubuyn to the
witness-box and occupied a seat close by.
To Mr. Lavan, the accused said he did
not know John Georgo O’Neil, and had
never seen him in his life. On the Thurs-
day night he told Miss Sadler he would
be un the next night with the car. Burin"
the Thursday he was assisting the batman
in the hotel. Till about 3.30 pm. he re-
mained home on the Friday. He then
went to town, returning home about 5.30.
ON FRIDAY NIGHT.
He cangbt a tram on Friday, April 4,
at 6J5 p.m., and.had to catch three differ-
ent trams to get to Miss Sadler’s place,
reaching the house a few minutes after 7.
Ho left again about 7AO. At Moiris, where
Miss Sadler was living,- he first saw Miss
the children*, Mrs. Moir was in the bath-
Sedler, and then Mr. and Mrs. Moir and
room when he went into the house, and
Mr. Moir was in the hall, ho thought.
Three weeks prior to this a motor trip
had been discussed. On the Friday night
he was wearing the same suit as he now
wore, and the hat that was in Court., .Miss
Sadler said she handed the plates to him
on the Friday night. She either handed
them to him or mentioned something about
them. He took nothing with him ta the
heuse. He went in the back door of Moir’«
and put his hat down on a chair. He saw
no parcel such as Miss Sadler described.
He had no recollection of any conversation
such as “I will hit you on the head” tak-
ing place. It was arranged that they
should start early Saturday morning—
about Bor 9. That night at the house
relations between him and Miss Sadler
were rather strained. It was not the
first time. He asked if she would go to
town and she refused, saying she had too
much work to do. When hh left ho took
nothing away with him. He went to town
by tram and went to the corner of Mur-
ray and Barrack streets. It all depended
cn the traffic how long it takes to 'get to
Perth. He could not say how long it
took that night. He went to tho Grand
Theatre. After the show he went up Bar-
rack-street into Beau fort-street, and to a
shop at the corner of Newcastle and Bean-
fort streets, a shop to which he went re-
gularly for supper. On other nights he
rurally called about 11.30 to get hot pies
and a bottle of cool drink. This night he
got the same, but the pies were cold. Ha
nsid for what he got, and then walked up
Beaufort-street, intending to catch his
tram at the Wellington-street corner.
ONLY THREEPENCE.
When oh top of the Beaufort-streot
bridge he found he had insufficient money
to take him home. He walked up Bar-
rack-street, along Hay-street, and down
William-street, as far as Mnrray-strect.
Having seen nobody h e knew, he decided to
walk to the Leederville Hotel. He had
threepence. He walked leisurely along
Mumy-strcet. down Geoip-strect, into
Marquis-street, and under the subway into
Railway-parade.


FINDING THE OVEECOAT
In the subway he saw an overcoat, which
ho picked ttp, put over his arm, and walk-,
ed on. He could not say whether he put
the coat on. From , Railway-parade
he turned off to the Leedervillo Hotel. l
HIS ABM BLEEDS.
When walking along a footpath on the
oast side, .near Chinese gardens, he acci-
dentally bumped into two men going in
the direction of Thom'as-street bridge. It
caused his arm to bleed.
Mr. Lavan raised the. Question of the
jury seeing the accused’s arm, and it was
decided it should bo examined at 12.15.
Continuing, the witness said one trickle
of blood went to the palm of his hand.
The wound had been in his arm for two
and a half years, and it bled badly at
times. ....
To,his Honor: It was not caused at the
same time as the arm was broken.
His Honor inspected a map produced by
Mr. Parker, tracing the movements out-
lined by Auburn. _ ,
The accused, proceeding, said that he
reached the Lcederville Hotel, and caught
a tram at that comer. Tho number of
the car might have been 15 or 16. When
he had boarded that he saw tho witness
Lean. .
A LOAN OF 28.
Later on he saw Cecil White as he was
leaving the -tram. He stood on the back
platform for a time before alighting. He
was not on ths platform when accused got
aboard. White loaned him 2s at his re-
quest. He (Auburn) left the car at the
Oxford Hotel comer, and went to tho fish
shop of tho Misses Golding. He pur-
chased fish and chips, but could not say
what quantity, it might have been Is or
la 6d worth. He walked from there to
the ML Hawthorn terminus. , He thought
it was about a quarter of a mile from ;
Miss Golding’s to tho corner, which dis-
tance he walked. When he got there the
Osborne Park car had not come in, and ;
he had to wait some time for it. He saw
several people there, including Mr. Eddy.
He got on the tram and saw Jack Gardner.
Witness travelled on the front footboard,
r NOT “TOO GOOD.”
He paid his fare, and at his destination
asked M‘ Kenzie, the tram driver, for a few
matches. Witness asked M‘Kenzie to
come as far as the back gate with him, as
he was not feeling “too good.” His arm
had broken open, making him feed unwell.
When his arm was knocked, it sometimes
broke open or got very irritable, and there
was sometimes a good deal of pain with
it. M‘Kenzie went as far as the back
gate, and witness went inside. To get to
bis -room he bad to pass two rooms, his
mother’s and his father’s, He did not
leave the house again that night. From
Mt. Hawthorn to Osborne Park tfLminus
was about a quarter of an hour in the
tram.
THE SATUEDAT.
Next morning he rose about 8 o’clock.
It was a “threatening” morning, and he
put on his grey suiLwhich he usually wore
in wet weather. He went to breakfast, ;
and Marie Coombs served his breakfast, i
Afterwards he frequently saw Miss
Coombs about ■ the house. Between
10 and 3.1 he received a tele-
phone message from Miss Sadler.
It'.- agreed with the version of the conscr- f
wlion outlined hv Miss Sadler. Eventual- i
IV Iri vrml to Miss Sad U-r ’s place, where he !
saw Mr. and Mrs. Moir, and about three- ,
Quarters of an hour afterwards Mise Sad-
Kr carets in. , ,
ARRANGING FOE A CAE.
When he left on the Friday night there
use nothing definite about bis coming back
® l; ” en Miss Sadler came in on the
oiiturday she asked witness why he did
*}?* c< jme up. He said he bed had some
about arranging for the car. Prior
w that there was talk about borrowing a
?° r : Some weeks before he said he would
bcirrow a car from Mr. Ford.- His reason
tor saying he ■would borrow a car wag that
he did not want them to know he was
going to hire a car. He knew they would
be averse to that.
That morning Miss Sadler made no re-
mark about his grey suit; nor did he say
anything about tearing his blue suit. No-
thing was said by him about the car break-
ing down.
THE WAQIN TRIP.
When he left he went to hire a ear, know-
ing that on the following Wednesday Miss
Sadler was going to Wooroloo. He told
her he was going to hire a car, she having
expressed a desire to see her sister at
Wagin. It was her last chance before en»
weqj to Wooroloo. Singe’s ear. was hired
by witness to take them to Wagin. Singe
said it did not matter about payment un,
til the end of the month. The ear wa»
(driven to Woodroyd-strect, where the par-
]ty was picked np, and from there to the
I Osborne Park Hotel, to enable witness to
got his bag and overcoat Some of the pas.
sengers were dropped at QuartermaineV
ferm, these being Mr. and Mrs. Moir and
the three On the road down as
far as Quartermaine’s, witness heard no
mention of the murder. Ho heard Quag'
tennaine’s evidence. Witness did not do
as Qnartcrmaine said be had done; it waa
Moir. The rest of the party drove on to
Wagin, the lady members fitting off at All-
port’s, and Singe and witness proceeding
tc the Federal Hotel to stay the night.
When they arrived, the rooms were book*
cd, and he fwitness) cleaned out the pick
of the ear. The two mgs, overcoat, and
suitcase were taken out. He placed the
overcoat oh a rail while he folded tho
mgs. He had no thought of the overcoat
that night. Next morning, after break-,
fasL they wanted petrol, and there was,
some difficulty in getting It owing to the
Any being Sunday. They called at All-
port's am) the hospital, and fron) there
proceeded to Quartermaine's. Mr, and
Mrs. Moir and the three children were
brought back to the hospital. Afterwards
they went to Quartcrinaine's for dinner,
the whole party being present with the ex-
ception of the Misses Onigley. • Having
had dinner, they set out for Perth, fcavin*
about 3 o'clock.
NOTHING OF THE MDBDER.
He heard nothing of the murder mention-
ed at Quartermaine’s farm. It was not
mentioned at tho dinner table so far as ho
knew, lie remembered someone at the
farm asking about the coat, and he said
it was m the car. Mis& Quigtcv had a
look, but couldn’t find it. He thought
Singe had collected it in , the Morning.
Xhgy came to Perth and went straight up
to Moir’s and then down to the comer of
Newcastle and Beaufort streets ‘to catch a
car. While there he met Mr. Holmes. Mr.
Holmes's evidence regarding the convcrsa-.
Lor. about the murder was correct. Ho
Was talking to Holmes for a eonple of
minutes. That was tho first he knew of
tne murder. Later he met Mr. Crisp, and
witness stated that Crisp’s evidence con-
cerning their conversation was correct. ■
Witness then went home.
THE WESTANA-EOAD DISCOVERY
He knew. Charlie Johnston, who had an
old Quadrant motor cycle, which he had
several times repaired for him. About four
months previously he had done some work
ou it.. On Monday. April 7, ho saw Blaek-
mcrc, between .10 and, 13, and then went
straight, homo,, During the morning
went, to Eddy’s, store, and there saw the
bicycle coveted .with bags. . He took the
bicvcle around, to the back of tho hotel.
About, a week . previous Johnston had
spoken to him about the machine. At tho
hotel ha .practically . dismantled the ma-
chine, , taking an hour or an hour and a-
half.,, In the afternoon ho went. for , a
ride on the machine, whiah he had fixed
up, and went towards Perth over the Tho-
mas-strect bridge, straight down Thomas-
street, along the Nedlands tramline to tho
. Perth-Fremantlc-road.


Ho’went'down ine rertn-*T«ananue-poaa •
to Claremont,' Sown . Day ' View-terrace,
aronnd the river, and into Wcstana-roacL
As ho was going hp an incline the cycle
stopped.' the belt, having come off. He cot
on to'the bike and “coasted” down on to
the level' road. There he dismounted,
and. .having'to put on the belt, he sat down,
feeling a “bit tired” after pushing tin*
bicvclc up the' Other side. While sitting
there he noticed a broken tree and some
motoi' tracks' alongside, and running par-
allel with the road. Some shrubs were
broken down, the leaves of which were
stained with oil. In towards the bush
there were two ' distinct trucks. He was
•there' about ten' minutes altogether before
urocscdinr* along the road to Nedlands and .
thence to his home. He had been along j
Wes tana-road "on a motor cycle several |
times. ‘ He -thought that when he got |
home he put the cycle in Eddy’s vard. |
REPORTING TO DETECTIVES.
On the Monday night he went to Wood-
royd-street to see Miss Sadler. She was in
town and witness went to the detective of-
fice. He had read in the papers that an
overcoat was missing. Ho told Purdue
that he had found a eoat in the West Perth
subway and had noticed the advertise-
ment in the paper, and he asked Purdue
for a description of the coat. After some
time that was supplied, and he said the
coat he had was pretty well the same.
Witness tojd him the coat was at Wagtrv
Purdue asked him when he could obtain it,
and witness said it would probably ccjno
down in two or three days’ lime. If it
did not, he (witness' said he would write
for it. He never said he would wire for
it. Witness also told him when he found
it. and how he had been to the theatre
and walked out that way as he only had
3d, to catch the car at the Leedervillo
Hotel, and also that he thought the coat
had fallen from a car. He also tendered
his name and address to Purdue.'
Continuing his. evidence, Auburn • said
that on Tuesday he came to town in the
morning; he could not remember the ex-
act time. McKenzie was the tram driver,
and witness told him of the finding of the
coat and that he had been to the .detec-
tives. That night he went in Singe’s car
to Cottesloe with Miss Sadler and the
Quigley sisters. When he went up for Miss
Sadler She did make a remark about the
murder. There was also “a little talk”
of it in the car. He asked one of the
Misses Quigley for the address of Allport.
The following day (Wednesday) he saw
Cecil James and told him that he had
found a coat which the detectives believed
belonged to John O’Neil. He called at the
C.I.D. that night, and saw Purdue and gave
him Allport’s address. Witness’s object
in going (here that night was to determine
whether the coat had arrived. Purdue did
not ask, “Have yon wired aw promised?”
and witness did not tell him he had written
to All port. That was all that occurred
at that time.
O’NEIL’S OVERCOAT. * |
Ho knew a man named Hearn slightly,!
and remembered seeing him that night with
Blaokmore. Witness said he told Blacfatnoro
he bad been down to the C.LD. Witness
showed him a copy of ‘‘The Daily News”
referring to the eoat. He did not remem-
ber saying to him that he showed The coat
to Singe the next day, and that Singe said
it was “a decent coat.” Witness _ tojd
Blaekmore he had taken it to Wagin in
Singe’s car. On Thursday, April 10, he
remembered seeing Purdue when in com-
pany with York. Purdue was then in the
police car going along Roe-street, and w t-
ness was at the foot of the Horseshoe
Bridge. Pnrdnc beckoned witness to go to
the police buildings. He told York about
finding the coat, and that the detectives
believed it belonged to John O’Neil. He
went to the detective office straight away
with York, and saw a member of the staff
asking hew long it would be before Purdue
would be back. That night at 8 p.m. he
went back. Purdue was not there, . but
he saw him in front of McCarthy’s Hotel.
Porcine said, ‘‘ Would you mind showing ma :
t’’i spot where the coat was picked up?”
He said .“Certainly,” and suggested an
appointment for 2 p.m. next day. On the
Friday ho went to the detective office at
2 p.m. as arranged and accompanied Dets.
Doyle and Kennedy in the police car to the
subway.
AT WEST AKA-ROAD.
On the way he told the detective what
he bad seen the previous Monday at Wes-
tana-voad. He denied that he had said'
anything about something being dragged 1
in and.out. He had only referred to.vrheel
marks. At that time he offered to show
Doyle the spot. When returning from the
snbway witness asked if Doyle was going
to see the tracks, and he said he would see
Purdue. When they got back Purdue was
consulted, and witness confirmed what
Doyle told Purdue. They went to Westa-
na-rcad immediately, going via Nedlands.
Opposite some tracks Purdue told the
driver to pull up, but witness told them
the place was further down. Witness in-
dicated to the driver where to pnll up. He
showed them the tracks and marks. He
remembered the drag marks in the .sJiape
of an inverted “Y.” but did not say “that
is where it was dragged in and that is
where it was dragged out. ” The detectives
had a conversation among Hicmv'lves about
the tracks, but witness did nlJt join in.
When Robinson showed witness the piece
of glass witness said it looked as if 'it
came from a spotlight and that was obvi-
ous. ' •
THE FIRST STATEMENT.
From there he was taken to tic CJ.D.,
where he arrived, some time after 6 p.m..
They left the detective office about 9.30 to
go to Osborne Park Hotel. That was only
a rough estimate of the time. In the mean-
time he was at the C.1.D., and had no-
thing to eat or drink. Out at Westana-
road, he asked if he could have a shave’
and some tea, but thev said they would
net be long. At tbs detective office he
did not' mention tea. A statement was;
taken from, him, the taking of it occupy-
ing the whole time he was there. Ho
“trot it out in his own way, and he was
questioned, and it was revised.” It was
read over to him, and he signed it. He
did not remember whether he read it over
himself.
“PUT ME INSIDE.”
Witness asked if he conld stop at the
police station, and said that his mother
was ill and the shock might affect her. Ho
eeitainlv did not at any time say, “Put
me inside and I’ll admit everything.” Wit-
ness remained in the ear while they spoke
to his father, and he was then asked to
kad them to his room.
THE WASHED CLOTHES.
' His clothes were there the same as usual
He put his coats on the backs of the
efcaiij, and his trousers and vests on the
seats. Ho believed there was fin old pair
of trousers —he was not sure of the ar-
ticle —on the washstand. There was a
suit which had been washed and from
which the link button was missing in the
room. The button had beep missing about;
he thought, five mouths. Half the shank
was left on the coat, and he e« it off
with a pair of scissors, and in so doing
he went too close and ent out a piece of :
the serge. W Uness drew it together with
needle and cotton. The suit was washed
atout three and a half or four weeks be-
fore that, visit. He washed it because it
became greasy and grimy. He always
Used it when overhauling cars.
THE BLOODSTAINS.
It had also been washed about the be-
ginning of the year, because there were
bloodstains on it. Most of the bloodstains
were from his right arm. To his know-
ledge it contained no bloodstains when
it was washed the second tune. He re-
ferred to the coat and trousers, not the
vest. Ho did most ot lus own. washing
himself, usually using the _ bathroom. He
also pressed and cleaned nis_clothcs, using


i petrol and an electric iron. Ho remembcr-
ieJ telling Sergt. Doyle that the coat had
been washed two or three weeks previous-
ly by-him. A hole was shown him where
, the link button had been, and he said
that on the last occasion he had made the
shank for it. Prior to the suit facing
washed the second time, he had not worn
the suit into town for two months, _ ap-
proximately. At that time he had in his
ptssession the washed suit, the suit ho
was now wearing, and a blue suit. The
old grimy coat (referred to by witness
Blackmore yesterday) had never had a
jink button.
EXAMINING AUBURN’S ARM.
, Mr. Parker asked permission to be pre-
sent when an examination of Auburn s
arm was made by the jury. , After some
argument with Mr. Lavam it was agreed
that the jury should, examine if at 2 p.m.
an” Mr. Parker at 2.15 p.m,
THE COURT. CLEARED.
Quite a number of the spectators at tins
morning’s session carried their lunch with
them, intending, no donbt, to partake of it
without leaving their seats in the gallery.
The gallery, however, was cleared at 1 p.m.
AUBURN’S ARM.
Just before 2 o’clod? the Court was again
cleared, the Press being included in tbe.£xo-
dus. Tho reason assigned for this step
was to give the jury an opportunity of ses-
ing Auburn’s wounded arm.
At 2A5 the police allowed tho gallery to
be refilled and several constables were, re-
quired to maiqiain otrder. Women were
jostled about, and many only gained their
seats with dresses torn ’ and. hats askew.
About 100 people were turned away.
’ Auburn (the accused) to Mr. Lavan said
the detectives showed him two buttons,
which he said looked alike. From the
time of his arrest he was. wearing the blue
suit. During the inquest ho wore his grey
suit. When he went to Fremantle in the
grey suit the blue suit was left at the lock-
up, in order that it might be cleaned. After
he had been in Fremantle some days he
told his brother to bring it down to him
after getting it pressed. He also made ar-
rangement to get a hat cleaned. While
at the hotel the detectives took possession
of some clothing, and the party returned to
the police station arriving about 10,30. An-
other statement was taken from him. This
took from 10.30 p.m. to 12.45, and during
this time he was being questioned mainly
by Detective Purdue.
AT DR. BARKER’S.
From the police station he was taken to
Dr. Barker’s, where his arm was exam-
ined. Purdue then' took him about loft,
from the back of the car and said, “If you
have anything on your mind get it off pretty
quick—straight away.” - Purdue said, “If
you have any friends in oon this they ,will
soon drop you.” Witness asked how the
position stood regarding himself. To this
Purdue never answered. Purdue said ho
would take witness homo and leave him
until the morning. Tho accused said he
asked Purdue to explain the posi-
tion _ to his mother , and father.
T° tins he gave no' “answer.
Jtte advised witness again to “get it off
ms chest. He several times told him to
get it off hm chest Detective *Doyic told
“dn not to be a fooL Purdue askeu if
vntness was telling him everything he knew
j Westana-road, and he replied that
, had done so. Eventually he was taken
home at about 2 a.m. Purdue told him
to return at 2 o’clock on the following af-
ternoon. He saw Blackmore about 12
the Saturday at his surgery. Ha
toiq him that the detectives had searched
ms room, that he had shown them the spot
on Westana-road, and that he had a fur-
to appointment with Detective Purdue
« clock. The Wagin trip was men- ■
S? ned ’ “i Singe’s ear was referred to. 1
rrv was also a reference to the trip on I
t{je Tuesday night. It was a fairly long
conversation. He had not told Blaefcmore
he had seen the tracks along West ana-road
when riding in Singe’s car. Witness, told
Blaekmore the detectives bad found in his
room the suit that had been washed, and
he described it to him. Blaekmore said
he had not seen him wearing it for some
time —for some months, he thought. Wit-
ness also told him the button had been
missing. At 2 p.m. ho visited tho detec-
tive office, and was kept there until about
7.30 that evening, without any interval-
Deteetive Purdue was there practically all
the time. No statement was taken, but
from 2.30 to 7 witness was being question-
the coat being advertised for. Witness
thought he did say to Purdue, “Do you
think I would have brought the coat if I
were guilty?” So far as witness could
remember, Purdue said something about
the coat being advertised for. iWtncss
also asked the same question relative to
Westana-road, and Purdue said, “mur-
derers always return to the scene of the
crime. ’ ’
A SKETCH.
On the Saturday Purdue discussed
with witness several ways the murder could
have been committed. Purdue had a
sketch on paper of tho motor car and sup-
posed that five persons; including O’Neil,
were in it. He had witness sitting next
to the driver. “One way it could have
happened,” said Purdue, “was that some-
thing immoral might have taken place in
the back seat, to which O'Neil objected.
O’Neil was then hit from tho back, and
the blood would go on to witness’s .clothes.
Witness would be an unwilling accom-
place.” Purdue suggested he would be in
the front seat. Witness kept on saying to
Purdue he knew nothing about it, but
Purdue was not content with that answer!
i Purdue would then go over the same
ground and all of a sudden would ask,
“How .did it happen?”—trying to catch
him. He asked Purdue at tho end of the
interview (about 6.45) how ■ the matter
stood so far as he (witness) was con-
cerned. Purdue said “I cannot sav.”
Witness could not get satisfaction. Wit-
ness asked “Can I go home?” and Purdue
said “I can’t say even as to that. I-had
better soe Inspector Condon.” When he
came back he said “If I let von go till
Monday, you will come, in and tell the
truth about the whole affair.” Witness
said he said “I have already told von the
truth.” Purdue said “Yes. we all know
that,” and said “You will come back on
Monday?” Witness said, “I can only tell
von the same.” Purdue then said, “Wo
▼ ill leT yon go if yon come back and give
satisfaction to the authorities.”
“SATISFACTION TO YOU AND MY-
SELF.”
Witness replied, “I will give satisfaction
to you and to myself, loo.” Detective
Purdue then let him go. Witness did not
say “Satisfaction to you and not to me.”
Ort the Saturday night, (12th) witness saw
York. On the Sunday afternoon Cecil
James went out to witness’s place about
4.30. At that time he was repairing John-
son ’s motor cycle. Two or three minutes
later they both went np to the hotel, and
James went with witness to his room. Con-
versation turned upon witness and the de-
tectives, Witness related to James what
had occurred _in . connection with the
searching of his room. He had told James
how he had washed his clothes in January,
. beeausfe of Vie blojd stains upon them fjom
his wounded arm, sod later to got tho
green stains and dirt out of them. That
night witness went to town with James
about 7.30. Th,qy met Monson about 8.15.
The convcrs/iion as detailed by James and
Monson was fairly correct. HC did nob
recollect any mention being made of seeing
a solicitor. Witness did not sec one until
tho 10th. On Monday rooming he; Inet
Monson in town by accident and went-to
the Post Office with him.


TALK WITH MISSSADLEE.
They rang up Miss Sadler. Monson
went to the 'phone first. It was some
time before they could get through. Wit-
ness had asked " Miss Sadler why she had
not written to him, and she replied she had
been busy' attending lectures. Witness
then asked if anyone had been to see her,
and she replied, “No." Witness asked
if she remembered him going up there on
i the ■ previous Friday night. She replied;
“Yes." Witness asked, “How long do
(you think I stopped there?” She re-
plied, “About half an hour.” Witness
then said, “If anyone goes np to see you,
and you say that, you will be telling the
truth.” She replied, “Of course.” Wit-
ness then said, “There is no heed to say
anything else, bnt what I have just told
yon.” Miss Sadler said witness had ar-
rived at her homo about 7 o’clock, and left
half an hour later. Witness did not keep
the appointment at 2 p.m. with the detec-
tives, and did not get to their office till
about 5. No one was there, and ha wait-'
'cd till Detective Purdue arrived. •
SUjirj’yy-
When oar report of-the proceedings in !
the Dalkeith murder trial closed yester-
day, Gcotgo William Auburn, who is
charged with the murder of John George
O'Neil was facing Mr, H. Packer's cross-
examination.
DO YOU KNOW ANYTHING OP THE
CHIME?
The last question put by Mr. Lavan to
Auburn was, “Do you know anything of
the death of John Qeoige O'Neil, or are
you in any way responsible for it?” ’
Auburn answered in a firm voice: “No;
certainly not.” <
Hardly had the witness answered before i
Mr. Parker commenced to question him.
Mr. Parker: Do you really think O'Neil
was murdered?
It is hard for me to answer that qoes-
tion.
Why is it hard?—Why ask me that
question?
Why cannot you answer the question?—
Itisa hard one to answer.
Do you think O’Neil wae murdered?— :
From all accounts he was. «
You are not surprised to know that?—■
Certainly not.
'When do you third:- he was murdered?
•—That is another question that is hard to
ansker.
When do you think he was murdered?—l-
could not answer that question.
'Have you any idea?—l think it is sup-
posed he was murdered on the night of
the 4th.
About what time?—l cannot say.
Was. it early or late in the evening?—
I Cannot answer thak CBjestion; it is be-
yond JDS.
nSPOSTANOE OP TIMES.
Why have yon called all this evidence
about a - certain time ?—I, think that was
quite natural and obvious. '
When did yon first think it obvious yon
should explain your movements on the Fri-
day night ?—When the detectives first ques-
tioned me.
On the Monday?—On the Friday, the
Uth. I thought it was necessary' then.
It did not occur to you at 6 o’clock?—
No, certainly not.
: You did not fHnk it necessary to state
where yon had been?—N6; it was not.
. Accnsed stated he went to Melbourne
abopt 12 months ago, and returned about
September last, bringing with him two bluo
suits. .
AUBUE2TS EAENINGS. ;
Mr. Parker: Since yon came back from
Melbourne, how much money hare you
earned?
I think that is a personal quea*
tioh. ' ’ ~ , ~ ...
•• That’s only one of many. Tell us ap-
proximately. For the three months prior
to the first of April how much did you
earn?—About £6O.
Hod did you cam that,?—At niy father’s
hotel
Employed there?—Yea.
In what capacity?—ln the' bar.
What wore you getting?—About £4 or
£5 ,a week; ho allowed me that. .
Were you always hard up or flush?—
I was never hard up, I always got money
when I wanted it.
Why didn’t you pay Singe?—For the
simple reason that he didn’t want to be
paid until the end of the month.
b THE ABM INJURY.
You had an injury to your arm about
three years ago. Was fiat injury ever
attended,to by a medical man?—No, it was
not.
Have'you at any time been attended to
by a medical man?—No. \
Since the inquest, how many medical men
have seen it?—About four. Drs. Moss and
Bentley, and two others.: , :
Did any of the, doctors suggest any treat-
ment?—No.
' ‘Docs the break of the wrist ever bleed?
—No, never.
Never interfere with your, work?— It jy
weakening to the muscljK.


uoes if intertcro with vour "work?—l
can’t, crank up a car.
Yon have not sufficient strength to crank
up a ear!—Sometimes I bare. I can do
it with my left
Ton cap use,a saw with someone else at
the other end?—Sometimes.
Your arm is entirely useless at times?—
Sometimes. I have cranked up my father’s
ear. ■ ,
- How did yon injure the hand?—l had it
burnt, by an exhaust pipe of a car.
Has it hied for two years ¥—No, but I was
continually breaking it open.
Once a month?—lt broke open two' or
three times-a year. * ~.i
Was there much blood from it?—Occa-
sionally". •
. I suppose the injuries to tout hand and
arm would bleed most when you were work-
ing?—Yes.
Has your arm bled since the inquest?—
No.
A FRIDAY NIGHT INCIDENT.
On the Friday night what happened
when you bumped someone near the Chi-
nese gardens?—-My arm hurst open and
started to bleed. I bumped into two
gentlemen earning in the opposite direc-
tion.
Did you bump both?-—I bumped my
shoulder into one-of them. It was pretty
dark." "
Are you sure it was not moonlight?—
There might have been a moon obscured by
the donds.
Was it a doady night?—l cannot say.
. I presume one man humped you?—Yes,
one on the arm. "
Did you fall over?—No.
Did you curse him?—No. I said "T am
sorry.”
THE BEAUFOET-STBEBT SHOP.
Who beeps the shop in Beaufort-street
you then went to?—I will give you the
name when advised to do so by counsel
What did you buy?—Two 3d pies and a.
bottle of drink.
Bottle of what?—A bottle of I hue juice.
Where did you consume them?—While
I was walking home, I ate the two pies.
Whereabouts?—l think one in Murray-
street, near Qeorgerstrect.
And the other?—Near the" subway.
Sitting on the overcoat ?—No, befora the
overcoat.
When did you sit down end drink the
lime and soda?—l did not sit down.
Where did you drink it?-—I carried it
home. "
Where did you carry it?—On my am.
Eighty or left?—Under the left arm..
Was it wrapped up?—lt was.
■ And did you have the overcoat on?—I
cannot say.
Where did you carry that?—l carried it
some distance. '
Were yon carrying it when you humped
the two men?—Yes.
Where?—Over the left shoulder. ■
- And-the bottle under your arm ?—Yes.
And.your hands in your pockets?—No. ,
Did you drop the bottle ?—No.
Kd it shift?—lt nearly dropped.
What do you xneaij/by it nearly dropped?
It just about slipped out of my hands.
And from your arm?—Yes.
When you recovered yourself, and apolo-
gised to the men, where was the bottle ?
in the same place. . " • ■
ON THE HOME TEAM.
. On the tram where did you carry the bot-
the same place.
Where was the overcoat?—l am not sure
whether I had the overcoat on or not.
When you stepped on to the tram, where
was the bottle?—Under my arm.
And the overcoat? —I cannot say where
it was then.
Yon have no idea?— No, Inhere no i<Sea
whether I put the overcoat on or not. ,
When you get on to the tram do yon not
take hold of the rail ?—Sometimes. I do
not know whether I did this night. .I often
jump on to the car; without touching "any-
thing. . , • ."-r '
With a bottle under your arm?—l can-
not say that ; . ...
You had the overcoat on, and the bottle
under your arm, and yon helped jmiii .-idf
up f—You can assume that. _ v -
T don’t know that I am correct m assum-
ing that?—Yes, as far as the other wit-
nesses go. If the witnesses say I did so
I am willing to bjlieve jthem.
Do you remember the state your arm
was in when you got into the tram?—lt
was pretty bad, and there was blood m the
palm of my hand. There was a slight
trickle. , ' .
Knowing your right arm was had, and
the left hand held the bottle, you don’t
know whether, you used a hand to got on
the car?—My memory is iudEfferept.
Did yon keep the bottle under your arm
all the way?—l cannot say.
Did you take the bottle home? —Yes.
Did you keep it under your arm when
you got off the tram?—Possibly. I some-
times put it between the control box and
the side of the tram.
FISH AND CHIPS.
‘ Ton were in the habit of getting soft
drinks from Golding’s ? —I went there some-
times. I have been going there for about
nine -months, but I don’t always get cool
drinks.
" During March and April did ywi go to
Golding’s?—Yes, practically every night
For iish and chips mostly. < .
You say they kept a bottle of soft drink
on the ice and gave it to you as soon as you
came in? —That was done at the Ncwcastie-
street shop. ... ■ ■
•You know that just outside Golding s
shop is the junction for the trams? —I am
; not awaxG.oj! that. . -
f Was it not £ .practice of yours to go into
1 Golding’s, make, the purchase, run out and
catch the tram again ?—lt has often stopped
.on a Sunday night for me. _ _
How often did yon get a bottle of soft
drink at Golding’s during, March and
■ April?—lt is very hard to say.
1 Was it often?—l cannot say.
Was it seldom?—lt was between the two.
(Laughter m Court.)
Between seldom and often?—Yes. . -
After- yon came back froin Wagin on
April 6, were you not in Golding’s pretty
well every night ?—Pretty well, np to the
time I was. arrested- .
. What did you get?—Soft drinks thcn._
Do you remember Miss Golding saying
that on April 4 she had you pncS
or twice before, and that von were known
as this “Cool Drink Boy”?—Yes.
Does not that refresh your memory?—l
told you I had got soft drinks there, but
not often.
Sufficient to be known as the “Cool Drink
Boy”?—I did not know I was there as
often aa that.
Tie Court adjourned until 10.30 am.


length at the trial
public interest was undimirdshed this
morning -when the third week of the trial
of George Wiliam An bum was commenced.
The accused, described as a mechanical
expert, 21 years of age, is charged with the
wilful murder of John George O’Neil, a
taxi motor drives, on April 4. The body
tri O’Neil was found floating in the Swan
JRrver near Crawley.
The prosecution is conducted by Mr. Hu-
bert Parker, assisted by Mr. A. G. Haynes,
and Auburn is defended by Mr. 1L G.
Lawn, with him Mr. J. F, Walsh.
AUBURN'S ARM.
The erosnon&mination of the accused
was continued this morning.
Mr. Parte: You say your arm was ex-
amined by four doctors, that you knew the
names of two, bat did sot know the names
of the others? Were you introduced to
them?—-Their names were not mentioned.
Mr. Tf»y |u ' brought ™in touch with them.
BLOODSTAINS.
i Mr. latsbi: I mentioned, your Honor ?
t that in the mass of evidence, I had to deal
’ with I might overlook one or two mat;era.
There are two points I should like-to deal
with, and upon them Mr. Parker can cross-
examine.
His Honor: It would be convenient that
you should ask the questions now.
Mr. Lavan (to witness): You had an in-
terview with Mr. Blaefcmorc. Ho says
you told him that, when you saw the tracks,
you saw blood on the foliage? —l did not
tell him that.
You remember the hat you say you were
wearing. According to the medical evi-
dence there were blood stains upon it. Can,
vou suggest how the blood came on to the
hat?—l can only suggest that it got there
when I was swinging my arm, that might
have been bleeding at the time. The hat
was often placed on a chair in my room,
and the blood must have got upon it in
that way. • .
Is that the only way you can account
for the blood? —Yes. it is; through my arm
blooding. •
AUBURN IN MELBOURNE.
Mr. Parte (to witness): How long have
vou had the-hat?—l bought it in Mel-
bourne when I was there last; either 10 or
14 months ago. '
You say yon returned from Melbourne
about last September?—That is about 10
mouths ago.
: You were only there about six weeks.
It would be about twelve months ago that
you bought it? —It could be.
Were you employed in Melbourne?— l
was staying at my uncle’s house, in Hew,
and was there on holidays.
THE BLOODSTAINED HAT.
Where did yon put your hat when you
got home? —I usually put it on the seat of
the chair that held my clothes. .
• Did yon keep it anywhere else?—Pos-
sibly I would put it somewhere else, but
that was the usnal place.
- Where was it when it got the blood on
it?—l cannot exactly say. I was in the
room somewhere I should think. Some-
times it lay on its flat on the chair, and
sometimes on its side. It depended on
|he way the hat landed on the chair.
Can you tell me any occasion when you
were swinging your am? —It was bleeding
ion, one day two or throe months before
. April 4.
Can you remember the date when you
: threw blood upon your hat when swinging
; your arm, and how you did it?—Witness
here demonstrated bow he had swung his
arm.
Have you often done that? —Yes, but I
cannot say how often; perhaps half a do-
zen times, but it may have been less or
more. .
Will you swear positively yon have done
rit half a dozen-tunes? —I cannot exactly I
swear to that. ■']
Have you done it on any other occasion '
except in your room? —1 have often carried j
my hat in my hand when waiting home
after missing the last tram.
. Have you ever splashed the Hood on
your hat except in your room?—Quito pos-
sibly on several occasions when my hat has
been on the side of the Car.
What ear?—My father’s cat.
i Anyone else f s car?—l cannot remember.
Whereabouts on the side of the car? —On
the driver’s side.
Whore would you be? —I would be by
the side of the car.
You are definite that it was on the right
hand footboard?—Yes.
What was it you were doing, when you
had your hat theret—Doing repairs to the
car.
What repairs?—lt would be with the car-
burettor. •
With your coat on? —No. my coat was
not on. My sleeves were rolled right up
beyond the wound.
How often have you been repairing the
carburettor on the ear? —Very often.
Anything else to your father’s ear? —
Yes, I cleaned the cylinder heads on many
occasions.
Whsn yon got the carburettor right,
what did you do?—I washed my hands
put my clothes on.
Am I correct in saying that whenever
you worked on the carburettor it would
he just as you were going out? —No, cer-
tainly not.
BLOOD PROM THE ARM.
Did the blood run down very much on
these occasions? —Yes.
Where was the trickle? —It usually—
But on these occasions when you washed
your hands, put your coat on, and went
out?—Usually down to the palm of my
hand.
It ia a simple question. lam referring
jto theoe occasions? —It is possible besides
going into my palm it went on arid around
my wrist.
Do you mean you don’t know?—l am not
100 sure.
If it did not trickle to the palm of your
hand, where would it go?—lt might have
Jbeen mailing around my wrist when I lift-
ed my hand.
Would you wait for the blood to ran
down before you swung your baud? I am
speaking of the occasions when you swung
your hands. Did you then put your coat
fin and go out?—On two or three occasions
twhen I washed my hands and arms I did.
Did yon bandage it ?—Sometimes. About
two occasions I think I did. >
What with?—The usual bandage.
So there were two occasions at least
%ben you have attended the carburettor
and gone out immediately 7—Yes.
Was . there or was there not at those
limes much blood?—Prom the arm?
: . 'Where else could it be from?—Prom
this hand (holding up his left arm).
T'We wiU cotte to’ that later. Take your
right arm. Except from that wound, did
you-get' blood anywhere else?—That Is the
pnly place.
On those two occasions, was there much
Wood?—lt is hard for me to say. There
iwas .a fair amount.
■ When the blood ran down on those two
loecasions did it drip oft’?—Quite possibly.
Ido not want that. We will get through
Jmuch quicker if you-say “Yes” or n No.”
MB. LAVAN OBJECTS,
Mr. Lavan complained that Mr. Parker’s
statement was hardly fair.
His Honor saw nothing wrong with the I
cross-examination.
Mr. Parker repeated the question.
Witness: It is quite possible the blood
came off. .
And it did not congeal?—lf it had run
long enough, possibly. _
On those two occasions did it congeal
when it ran down? —No.
When it was running off your am to
the extent that it got on the machinery
why didn’t you mop it up?—l could not
say. Mr, Parker.
We will get bark to yonr room. Prior to


swinging yonr hand. did it run down amd
drop off?-—Yes.
In your room, on those occasions when
you swung- your arm it it might hare reach-
ed your hat, did it drop off your hand, wrist
or fingers?—Yes.
And when It eomnvsnced to drip jyas it
then yon swung your hand ? —Before and
after. ■ '
Did yon ever discover blood on any other
garments after you 'had swung yonr arm
in the-bedroomt—l did not.
, What was the last time when you were
working on the carburettor, and yon bad
to swing your baud'?—About two or three
months before April 4.
And in your room?—I could not exactly
say. It might hare been two or four
months.
M I CALL HIM ‘MAC.’ ”
Did yon know M‘ Kenzie on that tram t
Yes.
Yon know him pretty well?—Yes. I
usually call him “Mae.” . .
And he calls yon by yonr Christian
name —Yes.
Used he to chaff yon about yonr hat?—
Yes.
I suppose he would never see yon stuck
for a bob or two if you wanted it ?—I never
had occasion to ask him for money.
But if you were stuck, would you ask
him? —I don’t know., I can’t say that.
How long does the tram stay at tie Os-
borne'Park terminus? —Sometimes about
three-quarters of an hour, and sometimes
a few minutes. It all depends on the traf-
fic.
On .the last trip home, M‘Kenzie gets
off at the Osborne Park terminus? —Yes.
“TWO OH THREE 808.
Couldn’t you have borrowed two or three
bob off him until you got to tho Osborne
Park Hotel?—lt is quite possible. He is
a generous sort of person. , . _
' .Can you understand:', Idm. telling lies
against you, or lies for you?—No. He
has no occasion to do that.
Would you he surprised if he did it,
and also swore those lies? —Yes.
I suppose you are aware that to, commit
Perjury in a case like this means a very
long sentence, possibly a life sentence?—
Yes, I understand that.
THE FALL DOWN STAIRS.
; Don’t think for a moment I am sng-
| gesting- that there has been perjury. Mc-
-1 Kenzie said you told him on that Friday
■ night you had fallen dowji stairs and cut
your arm f—l thjnk IP Kenzie is mistaken.
Thkre was another occasion on which I
told him something to that (iffect.
I As a fact your arm was not injured by
! your falling downstairs ?—Not on that
1 ni f h <-
.The original injury to your right arm
was not caused through your falling down
stairs?—No.
And you did not say to McKenzie that
; the arm had been injured on that night by
i your falling down stairs, audit was a very
! silly tale for M‘Kenzie to make
up?—No, I say Mr. M £ Kenrio L was mis-
taken, It was some other occasion.
"A GENERAL MISTAKE.”
Yon think he is miring up some other
occasion?—Certainly. He has made a gen-
eral mistake. >
Yop frequently go home by the last Mt.
Hawthorn to Osborne Park car?—Yes.
And frequently there are many of the
same.people on. that ear?—Yes, the usual
crowd.
You -know most of them?—Most of them
by sight, and a few by name.
You knew M‘Kenzie’s .shifts, and you
[ knew that- the first week in April he was
on that night shift, and that he was on
{ the last tram?—-Yes. 1
< FELT VERY PAINT.
, What was wrong with you on that night
i that you bad to ask, M £ Kenzie to sec yon
•up to tho hotel?—l was feeling very faint,
it was just about within two streets from
t the Osbpmc Park tenninus that I got very
bnd. 'I wak 'standing on the 1 ront' plat-
form all the time.
tVhat- drinks had you. bad during that
night from the time yon left Moir’s or the
pictures!—l had not any drink at all.
Is that a guess, or is it comet?—lt is
quite correct.
When yon felt faint, didn’t you feel
like a drink?—Yea, 1 did.
Why didn’t yon have it?—On the plat-
form of-the tram?
Yes?—The platform of the tram is not a
conventional piece to have a drink.
Is it conventional to eat two cold meat
pies in Murray-stroet ? —Yes. Jt is ridi-
culous to suggest I should have a drink
on the platform of a tramear.
More ridiculous than to eat cold meat
pies in Mnrray-street on a hot summer’s
night?—l think that would be quite all
right.
| Was it the meat pies that made you feel
: faint ?—! couldn’t exactly say, but I should
i th'nk the main cause would be my arm.
Had your arm ever made you feel faint
on other occasions?—Yes,■ on very many
occusions.
And was it then you used to swing it?
—I usually swung it on account of the
pain, and when it bled.
I’m speaking of when it used, to make
vou feel faint? —It is'quite possible I used
to swing it then.
Just to get over that word “possible,”
nre vou aware that all things are possible?
—Yea.
Did you swing the am when you felt
faint?—l cannot truthfully answer that.
Why not? —Because I am not too sure.
Can you tell me if yon swung your aim
:on that night of April 4 when you got
home? —I went straight to the' bathroom
and washed my'aim, and I had a bottle of
limcjuiee and soda, which is my usual habit.
Before or after, you eat the fish?—l
used to have it tho same as a meal.
On the night of April 4 did you have
your limejnice and ■ soda before or after
eatig the fish?—l couldn’t say.
A QUICK RECOVERY.
You recovered very rapidly from your
fainting fit when you got in f— lt was only
a short thing.
How often have yon got in the tram at
the Leederville Hotel comer at night3—l
think only twice during the last nine or 12
months at night. . - ,
What was the other occasion?—l cannot
exactly remember.
Have you ever walked from the city to
the Leederville Hotel comer at night to
eateh that tram except on this occasion?—
I have often walked right put from the
city to Osborne Park.
At night ?—Yes. ;
What-time?—About half-past 12; al-
ways after the last tram, when 1 had miss-
ed my tram. ■ ,
[ You walked around via Maa-guio-street
I and the subway!—l always used to go un-
| dcr the subway.
Where did you start'from in the city ?~
i Round about the Town Hall.
THE WALK HOME.
1 Walking out from the city you always
■ went via the subway I —Tea, from George-
street.
Why was that?—lt always seemed to
most likely route for me to take.
Wouldn’t you find it shorter the other
way, over the William-street bridge
That is a matter of opinion.
When you purchased these meat pies and
the bottle of lime and soda at the Neweas-
Ue-stroet shop, when did you intend to con-
sume them?—After I got home. That is
my usual custom.
Never mind about your usual custom. Did
you intend to do that on that night?—Yes.
Mr. Lavan, in opening the evidence, said
that after the pictures you walked up to
that shop, and that then you walked hack,
intending to catch the tram at Trcuehet’s
corner, because'the pictures would then be
out. Is that so!—Yes. Generally a crowd
meets the tram there.
.When you did get back to Tronehet’s


comer, were lie pictures out or not ?—lt is
bard to say. Some showstenninatc later
than others.
Did you notice any crowd about ? —Yes,
the usual, crowd.
What do you call the usual crowd? —I
should say the usual crowd, somewhere
near or after 10 o’clock.
When you came out of the Newcastle-
street shop, were the trams packed?—l
don’t think I noticed that.
The trams at that hour of night to Mt.
Hawthorn run every six minutes? —I don’t
know. It may bo so. I know there are a
good few trains then.
What was your intention?—To catch a
tram at Tranche t’s corner and ensure get-
ting a seat.
Were the trams crowded when yon got
there?—l do not know.
WHY WALK Bi.CK?
Why did you walk hack then?—On Sat-
urday nights when the “trots” were on I
usually walked to that corner to get a seat
You cannot get a seat otherwise. That is,
after 11 o’clock. *
What hare the “trots” to do with it?—
Quite a lot
There are none on Friday night?—That
is my reason for walking to Tranche t’s cor-
ner.
Yon are so mnch a man of habit that you
cannot get out of it, and that is why you
walked back there on Friday night?—l did
so to make sure of getting a seat. Com-
mon sense tolls me that the trams are pack-
ed at that hour.
They roust have been packed when they
passed that corner? —Of course.
And yet you did not notice it? —No. I
have seen them packed on other nights at
about quarter-past 10.
You walked all that way with two un-
pleasant *1 a reels?—l would not say they
were unpleasant. The pies were in two
bags, one inside the other, to prevent the
grease coming through. I also had a
bottlh under my left arm.
You then decided to walk to the Leedcr-
rillc Hotel comer? —I found I had no
money.
EATING THE PIES.
"Where in Murrsy-strcet did you eat the
pies?—l had one near Hoskins’ Foundry,
in the hollow, and the other in Marquis-
street, near the subway. I was walking
slowly all the time.
At what time did you catch the tram at
the hotel comer?—l have no idea. I had
no watch.
Was the Town Hall clock lighted?—
Sometimes you cannot hear it chime.
You say you cannot see .the Town Hall
clock Train the Leedejville Hotel?—l do
not think so.
Did you not take a.grave risk in losing
your last tram ? —No. I judged hy ■ the
time I got out of the pictures. I should
have sufficient time to catch the car at
quarter to 12, or the 12 o’clock car.
What time did you get out of the pic-
tures?—l do not know. I did not look at
the Town Hall clock.
TWENTY-THREE SHILLINGS THAT
NIGHT.
What money had you when you left Os-
borne Park that night?—l thought I had
235; one ten-shilling note and the rest in
silver. The note 1 would have in my
upper waistcoat pocket and the silver in the
lower.
.Where did you lose your money?—l did
not lose it.
Hare you often been to the Grand Pic-
tures alone at night?—Yes.
When do they start?—l believe there is
an interval at about 8 o’clock.
When do they finish ?—lt might be at five
minutes past 10 or seven minutes past, or
at 10.20. It is hard to be accurate.
Why do you suggest seven minutes past
10?—I cannot be accurate as to times.
"What time did the evening session start
on the nightpf April If—l do not know.
Why not?—-I cannot trite a reason.,
i here is a clock in the picture show ?
- Yes, end it is quite easily seen.
You were alone, and had nothin" to do ?
—'That is so.
Have yon been to the pictures alone bo.
fore?—’Yes. •>
Often ?—Tt is hard to know what yon
mean hy often.
Is it like vonr previous nnswer-.-betweeu
u oftctt and seldom”?-—I do not mean that.
I have been there on tunny occasions on
rav own.
THE GIRL AT THE PICTURES.
You are well known by the cashiers at
the picture shows.?—l know some of them.
Some at the Grand?—Yes.
.Yon knew some on the night of April 4 7
—HV sight.
When you bought your ticket that night,
did you know the girl who sold it?—Xot
on that occasion. _ The girl who pas usu,
ally had ki t. - I am hound to look
at the girl who gives mo the ticket
(Laughter.)
. Have you made any endeavor yourself
to trace her ?—No. ' ,
When you entered that night, how long
was it before the picture then showing
finished?—l think 10 or 15 minutes.
And you saw the pictures right through?
—Up to the time I came out.
So that you would have left ten minutes
before the pictures came out?—That is
about it.
'Where did you sit that night?—On the
left hand side about three scats from the
left aisle.
Upstairs or down?—Downstairs.
TRACING AUBURN’S MONEY.
What did you pay for your ticket?—ls
Id I think.
Have you no idea?—The usual price
downstairs is Is Id, aud dress circle 2s 2d.
Surely you remember whether you paid
with one shilling and a copper, or whether
you got change?—l don’t remember.
Do you usually go downstairs?—When
I am on my own.
Have you ever been alone downstairs
and seen people about that you knew?—
Many a time.
i Did you get any sweets that night?—l
don’t usually get sweets. '
Then your only purchases were the
bottle of lime and soda and the two pies.
What did you pay for the cool drink?—l
am not sure, the total cost was Is Id,
It must have been 7d then, for your told
ns the pies cost fid?—ln some shops they
charge you Bd.
What did they charge in this shop?—lt
was usually 7d.
Do you mean to say yon don’t know?—
The usual amount for me was Is Id.
Do you mean to say that at this place,
you visited so long and frequently, you
do not know the price they charge for lime
and soda?—The other occupants used to
charge Bd.
Ido not care about them. Do you mean
to say you do not know what the«e people
charge?—lt must have been 73.
By reasonable deduction?—There have
been' several people in that shop.
.When did it change hands?—Two or
three months before April 1. ;
About the same time you last stopped
swinging- your am. Auburn?—Yes.
Can you tell me how much yon paid in
tram fares that night ? —Yes,. I think it
was about Is 2d.
How do you make up the. amount ?—The
Osborne Park car coming in was 2d, Mt.
Hawthorn 3d, Mt, Lawler 3d, return 3d,
from Lecderville Hotel Id, and Mt, Haw-
thorn to Osborne Park 2d.
When did you discover yon did not. have
the money you expected ?—On the bridge.
■How did yon discover it?—By putting
my hand in my waistcoat pocket which
carries the silver.
You have shown us.you had dipped
-your bands into youj- pocket eight times
before that. How is it you didn’t then
discover it?—l bad money in it, bat I
left the majority ot it home.


' Auburnthe money ycm had was 3s 4df
—Quite possible, I had money when I
left. The money I had at home amounted
to 235. I did not say I had it on my per-
son.
HOLE IN HIS POCKET.
Ton told us what yon thought you had
in your waistcoat pocket, and it took eight
dips before yon found out? —My pocket
had a hole in it.
Do yon suggest that at one time you
thought you had it ? —lt is « usual happen-
-IDYou must have discovered your shortap/e
at the shop where yon bought the soda and
pies?—No, on tic bridge.
Bnt yoa only had Is 4d, and you had to
psv Is”Id? It would not be difficult to
know in those circumstances that yon did
not have ten shillings?—lf you looked at
the pocket I think yon would be quite con-
vinced. '
How did yon get the hole there? —Con-
tinual use. I always put my silver m ■
there. ...... i
When did yon discover the hole ? —About ‘
four or five months before April 4
And all that time yon have been putting
direr in it? —Yea.
You did your own mending, washing, and :
sewing on your own buttons? —Sometimes. ;
Why didn’t yon sew up your waistcoat ;
pocket?—lt is something I cannot explain.
MISS QUIGLEY MISTAKEN.
Were you present when Miss Quigley was
invited on ■ Wagin trip?—l was.
Do you .....rgest any reason why she
should' not tell the truth? —None at all.
She states that the murder was discussed
in your presence. . Can yon suggest why
she says that?—lt is easy for her to be
mistaken. She might have understood I
heard of it, or that it was talked of in my
-presence.
How far away were you from the ear at
Quartermainc V?—l think I was on the j
verandah talking to some of the ladies. ;
What women folk were there apart from
those in your party?—Miss agd Mrs.
Qnartermaine. >
Have you ever met those two ladies be-
fore? —I had met Miss Quartemaine pre-
viously.
Do you know where Qnartermaine got the
petrol I believe from a shed 20 or 30
yards away from the house.
Who put the petrol in the car?—Singe.
Who carried it from .the shed to the
car?—l cannot say. I was not there at
the time.
QUARTBRMAIKE MISTAKEN.
; Can you suggest any reason why Mr.
Qnartermaine should tell such untruths?—
1 Certainly not. I gay it may be a mistake.
Did you smoke there after lunch on the
Sunday?—Yes. I think I did.
Can you remember Mrs. Quartermaine
clearing you men out of the dining-room
because your smoking was delaying the
washing up?—Yes.
Will you swear that you never heard the
murder discussed at all when yon men
were smoking?—l swear it.
What was the conversation about?—l
don’t know. I was interested in Miss
Sadler while the others were conversing.
Bnt Hiss Sadler was ont of the room?—
■Not then.
Cannot you tell mo what the conversa-
tion was about?—l couldn’t say. It might
.have been generally about the trip.
; Did you as a fact drive past Quarter-
iMaine’s and come back?—Yes.
_ So Qnartermaine is correct there; and he
is also correct as to your being short of
petrol?—Yes.
NO MENTION OF THE MURDER.
But what is incorrect is that he was told
a man had been murdered, hit on the head
with a bottle, and that Singe said that
there must be two or three in it, and thati
you said, “Yes, I think so”; Qnartermainei
is wrong in that?—Yes. - I
Was there at any time any mention of
the “Sunday Timee”? —Somebody said|
they wished they had seen the “ Sunday
Times.” ‘ . ' /
And why did they wish that T—l don't
remember.
Was it not to see all about the murder?
—lt might have been, but I don’t know.
I am speaking of what yon heard. Might
yon have heard that?—! don’t think Ij
hoard that. j
You have told us that yon have a badi
memory. Will you swear yon did not hear 1
that?—l will. ‘ I
Do yon remember ever saying at any time I
that O’Neil was a decent sort of fellow*—i
No.
Have you ever at any time said that, or
words to that effect* —I have never said
anything concerning O’Neil. ' I might have
said that I had heard he was a detent* sort
of fellow; that might be on the Sunday,
when I was being questioned. it is quite
probable.
Do you remember Singe saying that he
did not think one man could have done it?
- I do not. ,
Will you swear that 'Singe never said it'
in your presence?—l will swear I neyerl
heard it.
PAYMENT FOE SINGS.
When you engaged Singe, what was said
as regards payment?-—I said to him, “How
about cash?” He said, ‘‘That is all right:,
the cud of the month will do me.” !
Did be volunteer that about “the end ofj
the month.” or did you suggest it?—He
volunteered it. There was some more con-;
versation.
What’was the rest of the conversation?—
He said, “It’s all right.”
Without your asking for credit at all?—;
I told him I had no cash on me at the
time.
Did you suggest when you should pay?—
I asked him when he would like to be paid,
and he said, “The end of the mouth will
do me; I khow your father.”
Did you agree to that?—Yes. j
It suited you?—Yes. j
How did you expect to pay at the end of!
the month?—With money I would get from ■
my father.
How much would you get from him?—
About £3C. I would get an advance from
my father, perhaps a month’s advance.
How long an advance?—l could get a
month’s advance or two months’ advance.
What were you going to get?—The
amount of the trip in advance.
And then go without anything for the
rest of the time? —I would not have to go
without anything.
Could you always get, an advance of
about £2O from your father?—Yes, with a
sufficient reason. -
For how many years past have yon been
able to get advances tip to £2O from your
father with sufficient reason? —For the last
two or three years, or the last two years.
Those figures “Two or three” seem
rather common with you. Was it two or
three years, or two or three months?—Two
or three years. Of course, it is very hard
for me to tell.
Would “sufficient reason” to your father
be the hiring of a motor ear to go a ,ioy
ride to Wagin?—l would not call it a joy
ride.
AUBURN’S CREDIT STOPPED.
Was not your credit stopped?—For close
on two months it was, by my.father, a little
over six months ago.
What meanst did your father take to
stop your credit?—An advertisement in the
1 “West .Australian.” ..
Do yoa suggest that all the way to
Wagin and back, and during all the time
at Wagin, you never beard of this murder?
—I swear it.
Y on sat alongside Mi® Sadler for t.»n
hours going and for ten hours coming back,
and it was never mentioned*—That h so.
Tuesday following she was
very frightened to go out In a motor be


cause of the'murder? —Not entirely be-
cause of that.
But she did mention it?—Yea, aa one of
the reasons.
But yet on the Wagin trip she never
mentioned the murder to you at all? —No.
On your way back yon drove past the
Post Office corner and alone: Barrack and
Beaufort streets? —Yep,
You passed numerous newspaper shops
with posters ontside. but yon saw none
deaHnsr -with the murder? —No.
TELEPHONING MISS SADLER
How much did you pay to telephone Miss
Sadler at Wooroloo? —I think Monson
paid.
Haye you refunded him the money?—l
think not.
Where did yon lunch on the Monday?—
( think with Monson. We each paid for
our own-'
What was the cost of the trank line
call? —About 6d. I do not remember if
Monson told me.
What was your intention when, ringing
Miss Sadler?—To see what was tike natter
with her. One reason was to ask why
ste had not written.
You paid at least Is for that?—l have
often paid more to eommunieate'lv??#' her;
as much as 6s.
Simply to tell her to do the obvious,
and to tell the troth about what time you
were at her place, and when you left? —
There has been no occasion before for
that I thought the detectives might want
to prove where I was that night
She would know, and Mrs. Moix would
know? —-It was very nice to hear it from
her.
She did not know jt was you speaking?
The ’phone was very indistinct
Will you swear to the words you used
in the conversation? —I have already
sworn to them.
Your memory is accurate in that re-
spect?—Absolutely accurate.
You know her story differs from yours?
—That is easily explained.
MIBS SADLER MISTAKEN.
You say the ’phone was indistinct?
She says she cbnld hear yon well at her
end?—She is mistaken. We could not
hoar her at our end.
Was it at Monson’s suggestion you rang
her ?—No.
WASHING CLOTHES.
Which waistcoat did you wash on Mon-
day, April 7th? —The one that had been
dyed, tile black one. X cannot say as to
U:e date, it may have been the one Miss
Coombes saw.
How did yon wash it?—l first cleaned
it with a rag and petrol, and then .washed
it in soap and water.
Have yon washed any other waistcoats?
.—No.
Why this one? —I always wore this one
in the bar.
Has your arm ever bled in the bar?—
On several occasions.
Has blood got on to the, waistcoat? —
Quite possibly, without my knowing it.
Have you worn it since? —I think so,
when knocking about at home and when
cleaning the car.
Wb&t trousers did von wear when von
wore the waistcoat after the trip to Wa-
gin?—X think the trousers ol the grey
spit.
The waistcoat was clean after you had
washed it? —I wonld ndfc caO jit spotless,
but it was passably clean forswearing in
the bar.
Where was it dyed?—Either at the
iParisian or ithe Commercial, over 18
months ago.
Did not the dye com© out on to the silk
shirts you washed?—lt came out in- the
wishing, and the- water - discolored . the
slirts when they were rinsed. - The shirts
and the waistcoat were in the same water.
When did you wash the other suit? —In
Ja.nuary or February, of .this year.
His Honor: Was that the' first time it
was -washed?—Yes.
Mr. Parker: How did you wash it?—
First with petrol, and then in soap and
weter. and I then rinsed it* in cold water.
It was him? on the line in the back yard
to dry, and I pressed it two or three days
after. - • ’
And it took two or three days in Fnbrn
ary this year for the suits to dry*—Yes.
And in the sun?—Not all the time.
Of course it wotNd not be at night?—ln
the morning np to 1 p.m. if would be, in
the sun.
NEVER SAW O’NEIL.
Did you ever see O’Neil?—l hare newer
seen him in my life. J
That you know of?—I might have seen
him without knowing him.
When you went with Miss Sadler in the
evening where did you usually go?—lt de-
pended on the evenings. Sometimes on a
cool evening for a walk, and sometimes to
a show.
Where did you intend going on the night
of April 4 when yon asked her to come to
town with you-?—My intentions were to
ask her to come to town while I arranged
for a car.
Where did you intend to go?—To the St.
George's Terrace rank.
How long would that take you?—A very
few minutes.
After getting the car. what did-you in-
tend to do?—My intention was to go for
■a walk around town. It is quite possible
we might have gone to a show.
CAN’T SAY, HOT OR COLD.
I presume it was a hot night?—lt’is not
possible, for me to speak of the weather at
nil, hot or cold.
You do remember you usually went for
a walk on a hot night?—Yes', on cold
nights too, sometimes.
Don't’ yon remember whether it was
very hot walking to the subway?—lt might
have been.
Aren’t you clear?—l am not clear.
How long docs it take the tram to go
from the hotel to Goldings?—About five
minutes; it depends on the number of
stops.
How long to walk from the shop to the
Jit. Hawthorn corner?—Usually five or
seven minutes.
It would take that with a bottle of cool
j drink, a parcel and the overcoat. Feel
| the overcoat; it might refresh your mem-
ory?—lt is decidedly heavy.
ANXIOUS FOE A WALK.
Were yon anxious for a walk that night?
—I was always so, more or less.
But were you that night?—Quite possi-
bly I was.
Were you?—l suppose I was. Some-
times I was more anxious than others.
Then yon did not walk because you only
had 3d?—lt was on account of that.
Not because you were anxious for a
walk? —It might have been both.
Was it?—l say because of the 3d in the
first place.
You could have taken the bottle back and
got 7d?—That was possible.
And being a regular customer you could
have borrowed 3d?—l could hare.
So that when you walked down to Mur-
ray-street it was not to see anyone from
whom you could borrow 3d?—lt was.
Why didn’t yon borrow 3d at the shop?
—lt is not a very nice thing to do, espe-
cially after making a purchase.
And you a regular customer?—Even so.
BORROWING MONEY.
Wh£ not chance borrowing something on
the tram ?—lt wonld be taking a chance.
Why not M'Kenzie?—He doesn't like
lending.
How do you know? —I have seen someone
else ask him.
But he is a great friend of yours? I
have a large number of great friends from
whom 1 might borrow money.
As a matter of fact you did find it easy
to borrow- money that night 7—l did; —"


•' Prom whpm?--Cecil White, at my re-
kjuost. _' "°' '
. Don't you think that remarkable?—!
have said he was a person I hardly knew,
but he was a friend. 1
You were not backward to borrow 2s
froroa man. you did not know much of in
about half a ,minute I—l will admit it was
quick work. ■ ■ ■
JOHNSTON’S MOTOR CYCLE,
■ The cycle you got from Johnston is of
Srery old type?—Yes.
What would be wrong with tbat cycle?
e—ln the first place the lubricating oil tap
had been left turned on. and the engine had
rot plugged. /
Did you rectify' that? —I did.
Before you went out on the cycle?—
Ses,. . _
What else proved to be wrong ?—-The
boarking plug was in very bad condition,
too.
' Fixing that' up would be a matter of
about five minutes? —It might taka ten
minutes.
Was .there anything else wrong with the
cycle at all, from the time you got it until
St was returned? —There _ were a great
tmmbcr of things wrong with it.
When were they repaired?—l don’t
know that they are all repaired yet.
Was the cycle able to go when yon last
(saw it?—Yes, about a hundred yards. That
|would bo on the 16th.
What was wrong with.it then?—The jet
Was blocked up in the carburettor.
That is not a very, difficult proposition?
►—lt was with this bike.
When did that part get chocked up?—lt
yras continually happening.
Was that what was wrong with it on
—No. ■
What was wrong with it on Westana-
Toadf—There was not sufficient lubricating
piL
Was that ail that was wrong with it
then? —Yes, and Die engine seized up.
AT WESTANA-ROAD.
Was it only the over-heating of the mo-
tor cycle engine that stopped it going along
iWestana-road? —Yes; it often happened.
. Could you have coasted down the hill
with the belt on? —The cycle would hardly
have moved at all. It is a fixed-engine
.cycle..,.
Is it a good way of cooling the engine,
to cut off the spark and let the engine run?
(-‘-You cannot do that with a-seized engine.
At the bottom of the hill all you did
was to put the belt on again?—Yes; 1 laid
the cycle on its side, there being no stand.
The handle bars are very wide. ,
You laid it down on the edge of the main
koad?—Yes.
• After-a quarter of an hour or 20 min-
rits you.rode home without, any difficulty?
rr-T had some difficulty to start with.
• Where did you _go on the Sunday, on the
'push bike?—rAlong the, road to Johnson’s
house. ••
: What,was the road like? —Very bad.
Then you did not go for pleasure?—l
Went for exercise. ■ It was all right for a
push bike, because one could get off.
His Honor :Isit a timber road?—lt is
»•. wooden.;, track about 18in;' wide bri each
uide...... '■ 7''
_ Mr. Parker: If is splendid for cycling
if you keep on the track?—Not at that
particular part of the road.
Why did you not ride the motor cycle ?
•—Jt was no pleasure to ride it. Something
might have gone wrong. ; •
You know it well?—Too well. (Laugh-
ter.) It was heavy to push.
And yet you took it all that way around
•Westana-road for a trial? —Yes.
. -THE OAR IN VINOENT-STREET. ■
,‘.jiYou know the spot off Vincent-streci
where the motor par, was, found? —1 have
heard it described. ■ • ' -
From the description you could find the
spot 1 opposite the Leederville Oval, near
the school?—Yes.
How. far is that from Oxford-street?—
Between 20 and 30 yards. t
--/How : far. is Vinccnt-street .. from tfie
■I/CfdfcrviUe tram route?—About 40 yards.
-You got on the tram about CO yards from
■Where the motor car -was abandoned?—
About that/- . - , ;
’ Do the trams stop at Vmcent-strcct?—
Sometimes wheu going out.- . i ■ -»•
You know Loftus-street ?—Yes, ,
’' Going through the subway, up Lof tus-
street, where it joins Vincent-strept, there
is, a steep pinch, which necessitates _ a
changing of gear on a motor car?—With
some cars. V '
Where was the light under which you
Pay you examined the overcoat? —Under
the subway.
Whereabouts? —I could not exactly say,
tinder the bridge.
Have vou ng. idea where? —I think in
the middle.
BORROWING A CAR.
The trip to Wacin was arranged three
Weeks betpre April 4, and you told the
people vou .would borrow the car from
Ford? Why?—l did not want, them ,to
know I was going to hire the car, for they
would not have gone. .
Who did yon mean by they f —Miss Sad-
ler and Mr. and Mrs. Moir.
And you made no arrangements at all?'
(—No, it- was a complete fabrication.
When' did you first tell them you were
going to hire’a car? —On the Saturday
morning.
Why . were you going to take Miss Sad-
ler into town on Friday night, to hire a
ear on St. George’s-terracc rank? That
•would hare been the first she knew of it?
►—Yes. ' -
' From whom were yon'going, to hire the
•ef*—l was going to. Singe .first.
■ Why did you.not?—For the simple rea-
der. I thought I could wait until the Sat-
urday morning.
When did ygu decide that?—When Miss
Sadler would not como to town.
Why didn’t yon hire the car that night?
I was annoyed at Miss Sadler not. com-
ing into town, and I decided to wait'until
the morning.
AN ACT OP PETTY SPITE..
And so annoy Mr. and Mrs. Moir and
the two Quigleys?—Yes, it was an act of
petty spite.
■ Why didn’t you get it on Saturday mor-
ning?—l was detained at homo for a time
in the bar.
When did you know you would bo in
Dm -barf—All .along. It was my usual
daty. - 1 ... . .
■ When did you arrange with your father
to. have Die morning off ? —I do riot, think
1/arranged it until Saturday.
Why didn’t you have the morning off,
lhenf-rl thought I might just as well stop
there.
. Why?—For no particular reasons., The
#eeth«x'was very threatening, and-' I
thought I had better wait until the rain
pleated up a bit. ;■ A-,
• 'Would a threatening morning stop you
going a motor ear trip?—No.
And although it was so threatening you
not have an overcoat or umbrella when
pro came to town?—l went in a car.
THE WAGE? TRIP.
What made yon alter your mind and de-
cide to go to Wagin after all on the Sat-
urday?—l had intended to go all along.
At what time had you intended to go?—
About 9 o’clock, or in the early morning;
v 2» the first place I decided to go' abouf 9.
When did you decide that, you would
work in the bar instead of doing that ?—I
decided to work on till I bad finished in
the bar, about half-past 10, getting on till
Ev _ •
You were only working in .the bar for aa
tentions ?—' w i re Jour in-
out of the bar * l came
' were you to


make after you came out of the bar T—i
intended-to go to town, get s motor, and
go to Moir’s..
‘ And be at Mohr's .about what timet—
About half-past 11. '
With the car?—Yea- ■ •
What car did’you intend to get then?—
Singe’s car. - ■ .
Had yon any other car in view at any
time ?—No, not at any time,
, Did you then know the make of Singe’s
car?—i7es. a Cadillac..
You went down in that cart—Yes.
What was the make of the car you went
down with?—Cadillac.
. Are yon sure it was not a Nash?—l was
not
Yon. had had that car in view all the
time from about the 14th of March I—Yes,
WHY THE EUICK?
Then why did yon tell Miss Sadler and
the Mohrs that yon were getting a Buick
Six?—l told them that because—
Although you knew it was a Cadillac, you
isaid it was a. Buick Six?—That is quite
right, but you must understand that Miss
: Sadler did not know at - that time that I
r was going to hire a car. .
As a fact, O’Neil’s car is a Buick Six?—
Quite correct.
Why s didn’t you come on the Saturday
morning at half-past 11 and get the car?
—For the simple reason that Miss Sadler
rang me. up about half-past 10 and asked
me to come straight up.
And yon didn’t do so? —I did do so.
You came into town in your father's car
to the A.MJV comer of St. George’s Ter-
race, or about opposite Foy and Gibson's
premises in the. Terrace f—Yes.
Yon could then % quite easily have gone
along and seen Singe, but yon didn’t do
so?—I went straight out to Moir’s. I
caught the tram at the Hay and Barrack
street corner.
From where you were it would have been
shorter to . catch the tram in the Terrace at
the Barrack-street comer?—Yes.
>■_. And that coner is a.fsw yards off from
where Singe ’s_stand is T—Quite. correct. ,
I Presumably-Singe’s motor car would get
yon out to Moir’s place quicker than the
tram?—Yes. ,
- CANNOT ACCOUNT FOR IT.
i Can you explain, then, why, if you want-
ed to rush straight out to see Miss Sadler,
you did not go there the quickest way?—
I cannot account for it at all.
Did your father know that yon were go-
ing to sec Miss Sadler? —I’m not sure.
Did he know yon were going to Wagin?
—I explained the idea to him.
Did you tell him yon were going to hire
a car? —Yes.
. Did yon tell him who the party were ?
Yes. -
■ And didn’t yon tell him on your way
into town that you were going to get the
car-?—'No. He understood that.
Didn't yon tell him that Miss Sadler
rang yon up and that yon were going there
direct? It would not nave been very much
out of your father’s way to run yon out to
Miss Sadler’s ?—That is. rather a personal
matter.. - ' . ‘
Too personal-to-ask your father?—No,
not too personal for that; but my father
bad-business in-town. ■
..How■ long would it-,-have .taken him to
go that way?—Perhaps ten minutes. ''
Or perhaps only five?—Yea.
WHAT EXCUSE?
You went to.Mlss Sadler’s?—Ycs._
What excuse did yon give for hiring a !
car instead of getting a loan of one?—l r
said I'had some difficulty in arranging for ;
one.- :
; - Were -you asked 'why you were late ?—At
first, and I' trtft Miks,'- Sadler about -the
difficulty, and that I had stopped to help in
the bar. ' ' • • 1 “
She was .not asked anything about that
in this Court That is-so. ■ v j
Is this the‘first time you have told ■
anyone you stayed to help in the bar? — :
-Yes. ‘
’ Do you-remember'telling. Miss' Sadler
that you tore your coat when attending to
the ear in which you intended taking her
to Wagin?—l did not say that.
, Will you deny saying anything about
tearing your blue suit?—l do deny it
Did you tell her that the car had broken
down? —No.
MISS SADLER MISTAKEN.
Miss Sadler says you named the part
that had broken?—She is pro-
bably mistaken as to the occasion.
It was about a month before in
connection with m 7 father’s car.
Was Miss Sadler’s evidence in tlje Coro-
ner.’s Court truthful I would not say it
was not truthful, but it was inaccurate.
In what respect ?—-She: said something
about, my talking of the car on Saturday
morning. , .
Mr. • Parker: She said “He stated his
dark suit got tom attending to] the car.”
, Mr. ■ Lavan: See what she said in cross-
examination.
MISS SADLER AT THE GAOL.
■ Mr. Parker: - Since the inquest yon saw
Miss Sadler at the gaol?—Yes.
That was at yonr request?—Yes.
Did von kiss her when she arrived?—
Yes. ■ 1 ■ ‘ ■ ■
Did yon tell her she told lies about you
in the Coroner’s Court?—No.
Why did you not tell her so, if she did ?
—lt had nothing to do with me.
Nothing to'do with you, that this girl
should :teU lies about you f—l did not say
anything about her having told lies about
me. .
. .And yet you say it had nothing to do
•with'you?—I admit it had something to do
with,me. ...
Why did yon not tell her she was incor-
rect?—l - was told not to talk about the
case. '
By whom?—By Mr. Lavan, and I have
not done so. ,It was purely a formal
visit.' ■ ’■■.'V' ’ *•''' ■ ; ■ ■ -■ '
“THE LAST TO DO SO.”
1 She-would not have any object in making
up: this story .against you?—She would bo
the last to do so.
Was tho Principal Warder present when
you. spoke to her?—Mr. Hamilton was
there.
Will you deny that yon referred to the
case" in his presence?—l said something
about it, but I could not say what it was.
Will you contradict what the chief war-
der said?—l do not think'so.
. IF was something to the effect that she
had told lies about voui n the Coroner’s
Court?—l did not mention that; that I
swear to, and deny against Mr. Hamilton.
TO SEE "ML”
There was a good deal of conversation
wkick you mentioned the ini-
tial M ?—Yes, that referred to Maud
Moir.
You did not want the principal warder
to know what you were talking abort?—l
““Wt want to make it too public.
_ i°u wanted Miss Sadler to see “M”t—
I do not remember that.
_ Aud you kissed her when she left?—
Yes.
You have applied to see her since she
gave evidence here?—Yes.
There is no reason why she should fahri-
cate a story.about yon?—She would not do
that. ,
So that her story is correct?—l did not
say that. ' , ..
Mr. Lavan: I object.
His Honor: Mr. Parker is not making
that statement; that is only a question. ”
- Mr. Parker: So that what she said is
correct?—No. -
Are you prepared to deny it t—Yes;
Yon say you have an indifferent memory?
—I can remember this.
Mr. Parker: Miss Sadler said sha re-
membered emphatically and would swear
to certain things.
Mr. Lavan: When I put certain things
to .Miss Sadler about ..the tearing., pf tjJ fi


coat she said ihe could not swear tb it’'
having happened at that time.. 'i
Hi_s Honor ; Mr. Lavan’s interruption is ’
not justified. You, Mr. Dayan. interject- ,
ed when Mr. Parker was putting questions,
and in effect told the witness the answer,
Mr. Lavan: I think your Honor will ad-
mit that since 10.30 this morning I hare
jiot interrupted but once.
His Honor: I agree' with you. •
Mr. Lavan: I do not like the suggestion
that I interrupted for any purpose, ' I
resent any such suggestion. - I have been
very fair. _
His Honor: Will you proceed.with your
questions, Mr. Parker?
Mr. Parker: Miss Sadler swore emphati-
cally to certain things in the Coqrt?—Yes.
His Honor said to her: “Did_you or did
you not say he stated his coat was torn in
attending to the car”9—l deny that state-
I do not_ mean deny that the coat was
tom, but will you deny you did not say it?
—ldo. ' ,
She says that was your explanation for
being late? —She is mistaken. ■
MISS SADLER AGAIN MISTAKEN.
But she swore it?—l am sorry she did
so, because she is mistaken.
Has your memory improved ? —I do not
say that.
THE “IRON BAR.”
And she fabricates the story of the iron
bar?—l dp not say so. , ■
What, then, do you say?—She makes a
mistake..
What mistake?—She could easily make
a mistake.
Have you; ever taken a bar there and
said “To hit you over the head with?”
■ —l have never said that with an iron bat.
• With anything?—Yes. ~ _ .
1 With what? —A piece of paper or some-
thing to that effect. , .
When and where? —I cannot say very
well; it was on two or three occasions.
How long ago ?—lt is hard for me . to
say. I cannot fix date and time.
. Can you fix the year?—Yes, this year.
That is, within six months?—Yea.
And you cannot remember any ope of
those incidents, and vet von are prepared
to sweaj. positively that you did not say
what Miss Sadler swears you did?—Yes.
, Ho you remember her saving she picked
it up and that it was heavy?—Yes.
How could that be, with a paper rolled
up?—l did not say it was a paner rolled
up. Did she swear that here? Did she
swear it was mine?
His Honor referred to the depositions,
and Mr. Parker proceeded-
Did you ever take any newspapers roll- I
eel up and tied in three places f—Rolled,
brr not tied.
-Have you ever taken _ them apparently
tin- weight of a bar of iron and as thick
as a ruler?—No.
t There cannot be’ much mistake about
ti-at? —Miss Sadler'could easily have been
mistaken.
Although the promise ,to take these
People away was made on March 14 you
did not attempt to get a car until the Sat-
urday midday ?—Quite corrects
you discussed it frequently, and
the Quigleys had breakfast at 6A5 a.m. to
be ready for yon?—Quite correct.
Have you ever apologised?—Yes.
To whom?—Miss Sadler and the Moirs.
I said I was sorry for not turning up early
in the morning. *
Why?—l told you before ! had some dif-
ficulty in arranging the car.
But yon did not attempt to arrange for
a car?—l told you before it was a fabri-
cation'.
That fabrication seems to have como
quite easily. Did you have any more about
the car —No.
What was 'your intention in refraining
from telling-the truth?—l knew that if I
told them I was hiring a car there would bo
an objection. r
Your intention was to go and get .Singe’s j
car?Miss'Sadler would know -when >6u
drove up?—l would have convinced , her
then. ,
Rat on the Friday night, if you had gone
out, they would know when you turned up
it was a hired car?—lf Miss Sadler had
come into town I, would have explained to
her.
Ton have taught driving to beginners?—
Tcs.
And some of the pupils 1 suppose.fret you
in difficult positions where you have to act
suddenly?—Yes.
Any trouble in getting out of them?—
Ton mean avoidin'* accidents. To. •
CONTROLLING CAR IN EMERGENCY.
You could easily take control of a car
in an emergency?—Yes. '
So that you might pbsslbly_ tell ns this.
Suppose there was a person in front and
the driver was stunned, there would be no
difficulty in getting control of the'car?—
I don’t think there would be mucin
And by turning off the switch the cat
would stop quickly?—Yes.
‘'MY FABRICATION.”
Do you remembero nt ho 3rd you went to
the theatre with Miss Sadler, and I. think
before you left you told her you would bo
up the following night with the car and
stay the night?—Quite correct.
Was it your intention or a fabrication?
: —My fabrication.
More of them?—No, the same One.
What was your idea in lying to Miss
Sadler? —If they bad known I was hiring
a car they would not have come.
You could simply say yoii would.be up
there on the Friday night. How would
they know then? —.They would soon find out
because of the driver, . .
Then at that time you bad every inten-
tion of not going there with a car?—My
intention was to go up there and get Miss
Sadler to come to town.
“NOT TOO'PLEASANT.”
Did you have any intention at any time
of staying the Friday' at Moirs?—No. I
have frequently been asked, but have not
done so.
Why didn’t you go back when you were
expected to?—I coqld not explain that, but
things were not tob pleasant. ...
Let us have the explanation?—l told you
I could not explain it.-
You don’t know ( what the row was over?
-—Yes, I do.
You said you would see her later?—Yes.
You gave her to understand you would
be back?—Yes. - ,
So you were lying again, you had no such
intentions? —No.
It would ' have- been very much
easier to come in from Moirs on
the Saturday instead of coming
right in from Osborne ■ Park ?—Much
easier.
Furthermore it would have avoided a
long walk if you had taken theh 3d tram,
to Moir’s instead of the long tramp home?
—Yes.
And you did not do it; have yon any
reason?—No.'.
THE NUMBER PLATES.
On Thursday night you asked Miss Sad-
ler to get you some number, plates?—Yes.
I understand you promised them to your
father?-—I told him sercral times.
How long before the 4th?—About a
week before was the last time.
What was the first > —Two or three weeks
before. '
Why were you getting them?—The plates
that were there were getting dull. . ..
Where-are they now?—Still on the car.
What is wrong with them ? —They are
dull.
And they have remained dull from April
4 to the present. AVhat became of the
number plates Miss Sadler gave’ ynu?—l
am not sure.
• What do you.mean?—They might be at
■Moir’s,: . , ,


; ■ What'Happened to them?—l said they
are still at Moir’s.
Since April 5 have yon made- any In-
quiries about these plates ?—No.
Yon have never worried about them?—
No., ■ ■ -
Why did yon tell Miss Sadler to. come
into town especially to get them on Fri-
day, because you could not pret in?—l did
not tell her to come in specially. ' > . . ■
An a fact you were in at 3 o’clock?—
Yes. :
Why did you come in?—l came in with
my father. V
■ You did not- worry to see if you could
• save her the trouble ?—She may have
! come in especially.
* You could have given them to your fa-
ther? —Yes.
Did you ever ask Miss Sadler about the
plates?—No.
The Moirs?—No.
Have you ever paid for them?—No.
i suppose Singe alsrf fabricates when he
says that you ordered the- ear because it
Was urgent and wanted to go to Wagin
to see somebody sick?—No, that is right.
It was urgent?—l said it was.
You wchrto The detectives voluntarily on
the 7th?—l did.
And I suppose yon have no complaint
of what was said or done on the 7th?—
No.
THE MISSING COAT.
You went after yon had seen “The Daily
News” about the coat missing?—Yes.
And I think you said “I believe you are
looking for a coat,” and Purdue said
“Yes”?—Yes. . .
And yon said “I think I• have the one
yon are looking for”?—I said that later.
Not (tat night?—Yes, that night, but
later on. ,
t What do yon mean by “at a later pe-
riod”?—-I asked for a description.
■ Is your memory improving on that con-
versation?—lt is perfect on that point.
Tell, me, the whole of - the ■ conversation
with your perfect memory?—l” said you
ore looking for a,coat in this Crawley af-
fair. Purdue said “ Yes,” and I asked for
a description. He gave it to me, and I
said “That is like it,” and he asked where
the coat was. I said “At Wagin.” He
asked whne it . could be got up, and I said
I thought it would be coming within three
days. • • • ■ ' ;
You said. “I think the one I,have is the
one you are looking for?”—No, I die not
say that. I said it seemed somewhat like
it from the description. 1 •
Thev were satisfied then that that was
it?—No. ■
But you were?—No.
Then why did you go in on the Tues-
day?—l went in bn the .Wednesday.
Why?—To give them Allport’s address.
• Why?—So that the coat could come
down quicker.
But you did not think it was the coat?—
It was not my property- ,
Why didn’t you hand it over to the
police on the night you found it?—l didn’t
think of it.
Don’t you pass the police station?—
Possibly Ido. 1 ■ .. ’ ■ ■. .
Why didn’t you hand the coat in to the
■pplice at Wagin?—l could have easily
done that.
Why didn’t yon?-'You went-into the de-
tective office for the sole purpose of hand-
ing in a coat that you did not think be-
longed to O’Neil. Were you or were you
not satisfied in your own mind that it was
O’Neil’s coat?—No, I was not. .
Have you ever before brought lost pro-
perty along to the detective office or the
police station?—No.
You went along , to the detective office
because of what you had seen in 1 ‘ The
Daily News”? —Yes. ■ , •
There is no description in “The Daily
News” paragraph of the overcoat?-— —
His Honor: Please let the witness sec
that newspaper.
Mr. Parker; Do - you remember what
portion _of the paper' it was in?—l think
it was in the “Stop Press.”. /The issue
of “The Daily News" was Banded to tnc
witnes/, who perused the paragraph.)
Was. there any description of the' coat ?
*—l could not, say.
< You thought; .when you went in, that’
there war a liljblihood of that coat being
the one?—Yes, from tho description.
- When rou went into the detective of-
fice you didn’t know the description?—No,
but 1 was told the description.
' By whom?—By Purdue.
When you went into the detective of-
fice, the only reason you had for going
there was that yon thought this was
, O’Neil’s coat because a was missing?
| —Yes.
’ So, when yon went in, you thought there
was a possibility of the, _ coat being
O’Neil’s?—There was a possibility.'
And when the detectives told yon that
I that was O’Neil's chat, or gave you a de-
scription of O’Neil’s coat, yon were less
! satisfied?—l said it was somewhat like it.
Were you less satisfied «r more satisfied?
■ —l will not express an opinion on that.
Yon mean you don ’t want to ?—I mean I
don’t know ,what it is.
Didn’t you think the detectives were ex-
traordinarily casual in not wanting to get
the coat at once? —Oh, no.', ;
NO “THIRD .DEGREE” THAT TIMS.
■ There was no third degree or anything
of that sort? —Not on that occasion
On the night bT Wednesday, was tiers
any third degree?—No,
On Thursday, lOfli, at S ! p.m., when you
went in, why did you go in ?—Because I had
seen Purdue in the afternoon, and he
beckoned me. up to , the police station!"
~ Tell us the signal be gave you as he.pass-
. edy.ou in a motor car?—He pointed .with
his hand in the direction of the .dct©;tiTC
office.. ■ r '-
And you immediately took the bait and
went to the detective office ?—I don’t
know about "taking, the bait.” '
That is my way of putting it?—l went
up in the afternoon, and again in the even-
ing. I think I went up first atout half-
past 2 or. 3, and I was then fold Purdue
■would not be back for some time. I
went in again at S o’clock. Purdue was
out at 8 o’clock, but I met him by chance
” .in I was then
■ down the street with York.
York denies that?—He docs not deny it.
• He says he does not remember it.
| You r memory is really, not so bad; it
seems to bo better than mine?—
Mr, Layan: He is sitting there listening
to the evidence.
Mr. Parker: And I am sitting..hero
listening. /To the accused): You vvent
along at 2 cA’e!oek quite voluntarily?—Yes.
NO MENTION OF WESTANA-ROAD
Up to that time you .had never mention-
ed one thing about Westana-road? —No..
Not to anyone at all?—No.
Had it up till that time impressed you
in any way?—lt had not..
Why?—There was nothing there to im-
press me very much. ■
Nothing where?—Having seen the spot.
, What do you mean by “nothing to. im-
press you”?—Not connecting .the. two
things.
. What.two .things?—The tracks and
O’NciL
But why not? —I couldn’t say that.
..Why did it suddenly impress you that
that overcoat wis O’Neil’s? —It did aot
impress me.
Not although vou went to the detective
office immediately, you came back from
Wagin ?—I said there was a likelihood.
On the Friday, you went along at 2
o’clock, and showed the spot in the sub-
way?—Yes. ■
Yon examined that coat when you got
it originally ?—When I first pieked it up.
Did you see the handkerchief in-it?— •
I did not see the handkerchief until it
was pfhdiiecd in Court.
TRYING 9N O’NEIL’S COAT.
I Have you ever picked up a garment oe-
fere of any sort?—No.
it not strike, von as rather eitfa-.


ordinary that a person who dresses as
you dress should put that coat on as soon
as he has picked it up in a, dirty, dusty
street! —Oh. 1 don’t know.
Have a look af the coat? —I have seen
it. • .
• Put it on and let us see how it fits you.
—(The witness appeared to make some
demur.) - . ■ T
Mr. Parker: If you have no objection, i
would like to see the coat on you. If you
have any objection, don’t put it on. _
Mr, Lavan: It seems a horrible thin" to
ask him. (The accused put on the coat,
with some assistance from the Court
usher.) ■ • .■ _ , '
Mr. Parker (to witness): Would you
mind putting your hands in the pockets?
(The witness did as desired.) It is a
double-breasted coat, and fits rather tight.
UNSUITABLE FOE A HOT NIGHT.
You ■ must be a bigger man than he to
whom the coat belonged?—Quite likely.
It is a heavy coat, and unsuitable for a
hot night?—l should say so.
Did you wear-it that night?—l am will-
ing to believe witnesses who say I did so.
On the Friday afternoon, on the way to
the subway. with the detectives, you men-
tioned the Wetsana-road spot?—Yes.
. And on the way back you asked if they
were not going to look,at it?- —-Yes, while
we wore in the car, .
' Why the sudden anxiety to go there? —
There’ was noiiel I was with the detec-
tives. and wo were talking about the
murder. - .
■ What made you remember the spot?—
Nothing special.
When did you first decide to fell them?
—lt came to'my mind, on the Friday when
I was with them. .
. What made you do so? —I am not ac-
countable for my memory at all times. I
suppose it was because of the detectives.
MOEB AT BASE WITH PURDUE.
You - showed them the spot. Did yon
hot say to the chauffeur, "Robinson, you
can' talk to Purdue, and not to Doyle?”—
I will not deny it.
' -You felt more at ease talking with Pur-
due?—He is more sociable than Doyle.
■ -While-Purdue was away you said some-
thing to Doyle, Tmt he would not talk?—.
He ignored me. ■ , ,
There wag no third degree in that?—
I did not go through the third degree
then.
- THE WESTANA TEAOKS.
Now’ for )he tracks ' off - the road. Ap-
parently the ear pulled into the bush fac-
ing Claremont on the right hand side of
the'road?—l do not remember.
• What did you think ? —I did not think
anything. I saw the tracks.
■ Did you show the way the car went in?
—No. V.v
■ It must have come out backwards ?
Apparently. ’ ■ ■
: Do you remember - telling the detectives
that? —Yes, after they expressed the
opinion theraselvs. 1
• And Purdue saiid "We will see whether
the car, turned round?—He said something
like that. < ■ - ..
Do youretnember saying "It did not turn
round;-it went on?”—I do inot remember
that;, ;•
What did they say about turning round ?
—They suggested something about that.
1 do. not,‘ think I said anythin".
'Did you offer an opinion?—l mf« have
offered mauy. • . ,
't !•«;' t*e hffffifd' George William Auburn 1
heda under-a searching cross-exam nm-
by Mr* Htlbcrt Parker, the Crown Pro-
locutor. and this morning l Auburn again en-
thc witness stand, - when Jie cross-
fjaminatwm was continued.
He: stands chatted with the wilfnl muf-
tter of John George O’Neil, a taxi motor
ffriver, whose body was found floating in
(the gp-an River near Crawley on the mom-
ins of April 5. -
is' assisted by Mr. A. G.
JDaynes, in conducting the prosecution,
gdiOo Mr, M. G. La-ran, with Mr, J J*.
pialah, is defending Auburn, who, is de-
Iferibed as a mechanical expert, 21 years of
Mr. Parker: Purdne ns sot attempted
(fco (paste aQ the ineddents that took place?
♦—l wish he warnid. It would be hard to
Hare ihe:.kS.' : ;:'.:;
i TELLCTG- THE TEETH.
* Give ns m mcah as you am?—l will do
toy best. Purdue did not say much of im-
fcdrtanee. He-asked me if I was telling
IShe truth about everything I knew. I re-
.(lplied "Yes.” Doyle asked me the same
Whing, a»4 T made him the same answer.
JT do. noi think I remember any more of
•jtlle" ebnversatkm.
How long- did it last?—We. were there
jfrom 2 untu about 6.
And that is all you mnember of it?—
IYcs.
Is there anything Purdue has not said
jthat you complain of his not saying?—No.
Is there anything he has said about the
IWestana-road that yon complain about?
»—There was’one thing, but. I have forgot-
ten it. : It was about the mirror. He said
X made the statement first. That is, not
bo. lam hot sure whether it was'Ken-
nedy or Doyle, but one of them said some-
th iug looked like a piece of spotlight mir-
jror and I repeated the words.
Why should you say it was that?—lt
twas quite apparent.
The piece of glass might have come fiom
ja lady’s handbag?—Yes.
Tint you thought It was a bit of a spot-
light?—l agreed with them.
Von. could not find the balance of the
fclass ?—I did not try. I helped the detec-
tives to lift some of the bushes, but did
jnot know what they were looking for.
"A SUSPICIOUS SPOT.”
Did yon tell them this was the spot ? —I
■aid I thought there was a suspicious look-
tag spot at Wes tana-road, because of the
broken down trees and bushes, and the oil
on the bnshe.s, .and the awheel, marks a.long-
pidc. ■
You have been along there frequently,
and seen tracks leading off the road? —Yes.
Have you been there at night?—-I do not
4hiok so.
You have been along suburban roads at
right. I suppose, aud have noticed oars
pulled off the roads on such occasions? —
y>-s.
This is not at all uncommon along these
)bush tracks? —No.
And if a ear pulled up at night, is it not
<what you; would expert to find, broken down
bushes, grease and tracks?—No; it was the
position; of the tracks.
Nothing extraordinary - to find bushes
broken down and oil lying there.? —I don’t
punpose it was.” '
As a matter of fact, is it not common for
tnofoT' ears to pull off along these subur-
ban roads?—Yes, but they do not often
bump into trees.
You think that indicates a murder has
jbeen perpetrated ?—I do not think so.
Is it not likely that a man who murders
teßotbef would do it just off the rpad, and
foil in there?—No.
, It Was very suspicions, after all?—No.
I .. NOT PLABBEEGASTED.
‘ Whefa yon got back to the CXD. at 6
tora.-lypn gave a long statement?—A state-
ment, was .taken from me.
And were. 1 yon flabbergasted in that
•statement?—l cannot say I was.;


Werq yon perturbed in any way?—Ao; t
Jad no-reason to be. ■' _
, And your memory was quite, dear?—Yes.
Arid 1 you had no reason to fabricate S>n
that at all. - - . . , .
. <? NO “THIRD DEGREE.”
Wei!, did you fabricate?—Not intention-
(tily. ; ’-y""
Was there any third degree on that oc-
casion?—-Well, I don’t think so.
Try and refresh your memory. What I
jr.eatl is, was pressure brought to bear?—.
cry little.
Was there any?—A little.
What was it ?—They kept on asking ques-
tions, and revised, every answer I gave. ■
But there was nothing to complain about
fn the statement?—l have no complaint.
.Toot learned counsel has. Is there any
Complaint at all uptivthe time you went
(t'vthe hotel?—No. .
Was any request refused? —I made no
Jrcuuest.
'They were quite decent to you?—lt Is
(Very hard for me. If I want to be fair
|o thd detectives, I suppose they were.
Did yon say td Purdue, “You have been
fair to me and will be fair to you?”—
5 might have said it on one occasion.
That was on April 13, when the last
(statement was taken?—l am not sure
S« hither I said it. . •
You did say it on one occasion?—l won’t
Beuv jti ' ;
You told , Purdue that it would break
fycur mother's heart or something to that
effect?—l said so. They are the exact
{words. t
Why did von say that? —I did not wane
Jhf.i to worry about it.
Why!—The detectives going out to n
feev’s home and. searching his room. It
js quite obvious.
“PUT ME IN” DENIED
Was it not then that you said if they
‘‘put you in” you would admit everything?
t—l never said that. t
Yoii never Said it? —I swear it again.
It is a fabrication of the detectives?—
3. will not say anything about the detec-
tives. I will deny it. I. will make -no
insinuation against the detectives.
After they_fohnd the suit and you came
back, you made another statement?—Yes.
AUBURN’S COMPLAINTS.
Up'to the time yon left for Dr. Bar-
ter, had von any complaint against the
(detectives?—Yes, a lot.
What is the first complaint?—The first
ftvai, I asked them to keep my mother out
of the way when we went to the hotel.
And the next?—-They did not comply
With that, and I asked for something to
cslfon that occasion, I think, and I was
{refused. (To his Honor) ; We were com-
rng.back to the police station when I made
(tie. request. t
( What did von ask for?—Something to
Oat;. And thev said there was plenty of
(time for that. - ';•'■■■ -
Could you not-quite easily have got
nomething at the hotel?—l was nqt allow-
ed Out of the detectives' hands.
Could you not in their presence have
€cne so? —Yes. ;
Could Von not have asked“'vour_ father
tor unifier?—They were not in a condition;
lo he asked. '.: - ... ■
Did you not sug.rest-vou might get them
111) a feed: thev hadn’t had any, vou know?
r~- T ido not see whyT should-supply them
Sfith a fqgd i~
Ton bad supper immediately afterwards?
—No, I asked them when I Was going, to
pet something to eat.
Did you ever repeat your application!
—T think I said it at Westana-roarL
That is before? —I do not remember if
I repeated it afterwards. > ; *
Wlmt is the next complaint?—l asked
them the position, but they would not tell
me anything. . A
What did vou ask them?—l Wanted to
kne-tf what they were doing.T :: j-
Well, what did yonwant?Hid you want
them to lock you up?—'They wanted an-
other statement.
You gave it voluntarily? —It was taken
from me and twisted.
Tell us where it was twisted?—lt was
.pot taken down in my words.-
Mr. Parker read ont the statement and
asked Auburn to point out its inaccura-
cies. :
Auburn first pointed out that he was
net cautioned, but told Mr. Parker there
was no inducement offered him, and he
was not threatened. Referring to the
washing of the suit, Auburn said be told
the detectives it was washed three or
four weeks before—not two weeks, as
stated. When dealing with the boarding
of the tram by Auburn, 11.45 was men-
tioned; this Auburn said was suggested by
the detectives. He did not know the
time, and he calculated it. In .the state-
ment Auburn was credited with having
said that he could hot remember if any-
body saw him on that night. He . said
that he was asked if anybody saw him on
the tram. A section from the statement
was “There were no bloodstains on my
clothes before I washed them that I know
or.” That was incorrect. Auburn said.
Mr. Parker: When they were taking
down your statement, did you tell them?
Auburn: I, was not in a condition; 1
was worried over mv roothpr’s collapse.
Continuing with his flotation of ex-
tracts from the statement. Mr. Parker was
informed by the witness that there was an
omission in the reference to the overcoat
It should have read, “I do not remember
trying on the overcoat.” That, said the
witness, was the position now. He could
not remember. ;
Mr. Parker; Hid you read it over?
“IN A FASHION.”
Auburn: I read it over in a fashion.
Do you still have a complaint about that
statement being a misrepresentation?—l
did not say that ,
Mr. Parker: Where did they twist it?—
The only alteration is that “they were
washed by me about two weeks, previous-
ly,”. and that it should have been “three or
four weeks ago”?—'Yes, but that point
might have been of great importance. ■
Is there anything of importance in that
statement'that they “twisted”?—No.
AN INSINUATION.
Have you any other complaints against
the detectives f—The insinuations at Dr.
Barker’s.
Up to the present that is the lot? —Yes.
There is no ‘third degree” up to the pre-
sent? —I would not describe it as third
degree.
What do you mean by ‘ ‘ third degree ’’ ?
- —1 don’t know exactly; knocking a person
about.
Did von ever suggest to your ~ counsel
that the detectives ever knocked you
about at all? —No. ,
Did the detectives ever at'any time in
any way knock you about?—No.
BULLYING BY LOOKS.
Did they ever bully you in any way?—
Well, that is very hard to describe. Some
people can, bully by looks.
Did they bully yon by looks ?—I think
they did.
Very little. : suppose?—l don’t know.
I’m very' eas, ■ impressed. ■■ ...
Is your ger-ral manner within the last
couple of days here the. same as usual, or
is it abnormal in these times.?—l think it
is about the same;as usual. ■
Then the jury eau understand how easily
you arc: impressed ? —Visibly, Mr. Parker.
You have been just as visibly overcome
during the last couple of days as you were
at the detective office? —I mean that I may
be impressed, while it may not be visible.
What other complaints have you against
the detectives up to the time you left for
Dr. Barker’s?— I don’t think anything.
Now, when you left for;Dr. Barker’s?—
There were too many detectives to do any-
ask have jfou any complaint against


them? —No. There were five or six UeteC'
lives in the car. -
They took you in to Dr. Barker’s? —I
j was taken in by Purdue. - v . ,
Have you any complaint against Dr.
Barker? —No; hie wim Ml right.
Have you any complaint against the’do--
1 teetives while ’Dr* Barker was present?— <
None at all.
“DON’T BE A FOOL.” -
What is your next complaint against the
detectives? —When Purdue took me away
to the back of the car and told me not to
be a fool. . .. ..
Have you any complaint about that? —
Yes. It was an insinuation.
Tell us all the conversation? —He told
me to “get.it off my chest quick,” and he
said if I had any friends or pals they would
drop me very quick.
And therefore you should get in first?—-
Yes; and ho said everything would be all
ri^ht.
"Was not that friendly advice?—l did not
consider it so. ...
Why not?—l had told the detectives
everything I knew. _
Piirduo advised you that, in his opin-
ion, you were in it and someone else too.
That is what he gave you to understand?
—Yes.
THE REWARD PROCLAMATION.
Ho insinuated that to you, and he ad-
vised you to come and report. There was
a proclamation out offering a reward and
a free pardon to an accomplice and you
knew of that? —Yes. I knew all about it
on the Saturday. I heard a lot more about
it that night at Dr. Barker’s.
. You.knew that there was a reward of
£5OO and a free pardon for an accomplice
go long as he was not the actual culprit?
—Yes,
So your complaint ■ about Detective-Ser-
geant Purdue was that he did not believe
you?—One could not exactly call that a
complaint.
But, he thinking that you were an accom-
plice, it was rather friendly advice? —I
would not call it friendly advice.
Arc those practically the words he used?
—Practically, -
In what way was this done that yon com-
plain of it? —It was not done in a very
friendly way, but really in a threatening
way.
Describe it to ns in some way?—l can-
not describe It. '
Well, what did Purdue do?—He just told
me I was to get it off my chest quick, and
the reason'why'they were not putting me
in that night was that they were giving
me a chance.
Have yon any complaint on the score
that they did not put you straight in on
the Friday night?—No; but I was explain-
'ing all the time that I could not give them
any more information.
I think they said they would take ytra
home and yon said yon didn’t want to go
honip?—l. said I didn’t want to go home
and explain my position to my mother and
father.
And Pnrdne said yon were going home,
and he took you?—Yes. -
Did yon complain about that?—l would
not like to lay any complaint, but it is a
ground for one.
■ What would you want thlm to do? What
rise was there for them rriido?—Put mo
in. _ ; —jo ..
Did you want them to do that?—No.
.You came in voluntarily the next day?—
They would have brought me in. ,
Aid yon have no complaint against the
detectives up to that time?—No.
“ADVISED.”
. Did not Purdue show you the proclama-
tion?—Yes. I asked him to define certain
words in it about the Governor “being
advised” that he read to me. He got a
dictionary. •
Why did you ask him about the word
“advised”?—He was talking a lot about
rt.
“The Governor will be advised to grant
a free pardon,” I think the ' rtoemnenr
road, “so long as he is not the actual per-
son.” Were you invited to make a further
statement 7 —No. He asked mo a lot of
questions about how the murder happened.
, When did you leave? —At 7 o’clock after
some trouble. I wanted to know my po-
sition, but they would not tell md. “They
would not let me go until after a
struggle. They asked me to go in or
Monday'and tell than the whole affair. I
said I could not tell them more than I
had. I bad told them the truth.
Did you not say when they showed yon
the proclamation: “I cannot say any
more”?—l told them that on several oc-
casions.
j You used tho word “truthful”?—Yes.
They would only allow you to go on your
undertaking to return on Monday?—Yes.
■ Did yon not say, “If you let me 'go I
will come in on Monday and give satisfac-
tion”?—l said I would give satisfaction
to them and to me too.
What did yon mean? —I meant .giving
them satisfaction, but they would not take
it. I told them all along I bad nothing
to do with the affair..
How' were yon to" give satisfaction on
Monday?—l said I could only repeat what
I had already said.
You said you would give them satkfac-
tion 7 —l should consider that satisfaction,
but it did not satisfy them.
Yon do not complain of them letting you
go?—No.
What do yon complain of on the Satur-
day?—About the sketches and suggestions
they put to me.
Not in disbelieving your story?—l would
not be as childish as that
Nothing else?—l don’t want to make
any complaint.
They did let yon go until 3 p.m. on Mon-
day?—Yes, on the stipulation that I should
tell them where I was going, and ring up
at the hotel on Sunday afternoon. 1 was
to tell them whether I came from the hold
, before 5 o’clock.
You did not take ranch notice of that in-
struction. Yon left in the morning?—l
meant to say the district. (To his Honor):
Not to go into town unless I rang them up.
And you promised to come in faithfully
by 2 o’clock, and yon did not do so?—I
came in at 5 instead.
MONSON’S ADVICE.
In the meantime you had seen Monson
on the Sunday?—>Yes. '
And that night yon told him you had
made half a dozen Statements ?—Some
statements.
Did you tell him yon were muddled or
flabbergasted?—l said something about
being muddled in the statements.
But there was nothing?—Monson asked
me if the statements were correct, and 1
said, “So far as I could think, they were,
but I might have muddled one or two
things up.”
Did you tell him you were flabbergasted ?
—I told him I was upset.
And he advised you to say nothing more?
—Unless T was absolutely sure of it.
And you were with him on the Monday,
and I Suppose discussed your unenviable
position?—lt was mentioned onee or twice.
AY as it not the main and practically the
only topic?—No, only one- of them.
Did you not discuss it at length with
Monson ?—For an hour or more.
Did you complain to Monson a Pout the
way.the detectives had treated you?—l do
not remember.
It was not very much in yonr mind then?
—I do not want to make any complaint
about the detectives.
That does not matter, your counsel has
already, done so. Bid you tell Monson?—
I do not know.
The Court adjourned until 10.30 next
dov. ■
TO-DAY’S PROCEEDINGS.
Ihe .accused showed no impairment of
his composure in the witness-box this mor-
ning, desit■ * <- the fact that it is the 11th
qa\ of his trial. There is U sug-
gestion of frayed nerves on the part of


the counsel, jurors and fatnesses as ' the
; trial proceeds-with what appears to be ele-
phantine slowness', but the youthful cen-
tral figure steadfastly maintains a coun-
tenance and a demeanor that may be de-
scribed as unruffled and undisturbed.
WO COMPLAINT TO MONSON. .
Resuming his cross-examination of the
accused, Mr. Parker asked: —
Did you complain to Monson, when you
saw him. about the 1 detectives'? —I don’t
know that I complained. I just told Mon-
sou what bad happened;
Was vour statement to him in the nature
■pf.ii’ebDiplaint? —l couldn't say. It all de-
pends on how one would take it.
Did you consider if in the natuye of. a
complaint?—Xb.
Therefore, von did not complain and
that c-ournw'-ion with Monsou was within
Vi bonus'o£ the deteetrrea interviewing
you and taking two statements from yon.
As a matter of fact, on the Monday night
yon said ,to Deteetiye-Sergt. Purdue, “I
don’t want you to think I am 'polling
your leg’?”—That Is right.
. Yon also said to him “Yoo have been
fair to me, and I have been fair to yon?”
—I think I said that.
Why did you have your coat and hat off
in the detective office oh that Monday,
April 13?—It was a very, hot day.
Is that the only occasion yoo had yonr
coat and hat off in the detective office? —
I may have had them off on another oc-
casion. l ■
Surely you can remember?—l am not
mire.
THE NUMBER PLATES.
Do yon remember that after the final
statement on that Monday night the de-
tectives put to you a couple of ques-
tions? Do you remember Purdue asking
yon would you like to say anything about
the number plates?—l don’t think 1 re-
member that. •
Were the number plates mentioned on
that occasion?—They may have been, hut
not to my knowledge or recollection.
Would you deny itj—Certainly not. I
sav I cannot remember.
His Honor: There is no evidence that tbs
question was put,.
Mr. Lavan: The Crown Prosecutor's
question is a suggestion to the 'jury that
that was said. The witness says he has
no recollection of it.
Mr. Parker! If my friend will allow it,
I will recall Det.-Sgt. Purdue. ,
Mr. Lavan: That is just a gag. 1 There
is a proper time to do these things.
Mr; Parker: It is only after a certain
time 'hat evidence becomes . admissable.
This e-ridence has only just become admis-
sible. and later I will, if necessary, make
application to recall Det.-Sgt, Purdue to
sav whether that was or was not said.
Mr. Lavan: • Does Mr. Parker suggest
that a statement made by this man at any
time was not admissable? If so, the con-
tention is ridiculous.
GIVING SATISFACTION.
’ Mr. Parker (to Auburn): What do yon
;mc-an by saving that the detectives were
pressing vcm for satisfaction?—l told them
repeatedly that I bad already told them
all I know, and they would not take that.
You mean that they would not believe
you ? —No.
So vou said you would give them satis-
faction on the Monday?—As far as I bad
already given them satisfaction,
You ««««? aatiafacticp to them and satis-
faction to yrut— Yes.
TVn that really had no meaning?—-Not
mere than I am given to understand at
I understand yon did not tell Monson
'that you were flabbergasted?—l may have
grid something to that effect.
Were you flabbergasted?—l V vro al-
ready said that 1 was not
So tb nt was a fabrication of Monson’s?
Was it a lie? - —I w not prepared to
SJTV.
Anyhow, in those two previous state-
ments there was nothing that you wanted
to correct on the Monday?—The state-
ments were not shown to me
•But yon -remembered what you said?—
Tea.
And yon told the troth in those two
statements ?—-Y cs
They were the troth? —-Yes, as far as I
ecold eeo there might have been an omis-
sicn. :
FEAR OF IMPLICATION.
Yon realised on the Monday that yon
were in serious trouble?—Well, no, I did
not.
Did you not realise that you were liable
to be arrested almost immediately on a
charge of wilful murder?—Ye% but what
time on Monday?
Any time at all? —After 7 o'clock I did
not think it.
Dp to 7 o’ejoek?—l had a feeling I was
grim? to be implicated.
Yet you only discussed it with Monson
for about an hour? —I sard I only thought
that.
When did it dawn on yon ?—All day
Sunday and on Monday.
It was while you thought you were, that
you telephoned Miss Sadler?—Yon can put
it that way if von like.
Yon do not <*>sagree with me?—l do not
disagree.
WASHING CLOTHES
Do you often wash your suits?—l have
on two or three occasions.
Ton have told us of two, how many
others were there?—l washed the grey
spit about 18 months ago.
Were there any other occasions ?—No.
And why did you wash them on those
occasions?—They were dirty and greasy.
JVere you able to wear them again in
the street? —Yes.
Have vou ever had suits cleaned at the
cleaners?—Several times.
What are the charges?—los fid to 7s 6d.
Have you ever washed the last coat pro-
dreed? —That ia, the old coat with the
two buttons, no.
Have you ever washed the rate yn woe
wearing?—No, not st all.
_ You got your grey suit some whose about
.six months ago, in the summer?—Yes.
And Miss Sadler, I think it was, says
you oqjf wore it on wet or cold days?-
Yes, usually. , ;
You must have only worn it oaoo?— I
would not say that. I said usually. I
have worn it when it was very warm.
At other times you would wear one of
the blue suits. Did you wear them alter-
nately?—Yes, up to a certain time.
Dp to what time?—Two or throe months
before the 4th.
Are yon sure of that?—l cannot exactly
give you accurate times.
Well, up to that time, yon apparently
wore them alternately? Then it a correct
to say one was yonr best and one was put
away—used about ears?—lt is correct
Which ia correct?—l used them alter-
nately up to two or three months before
the 4th.
Then it is not correct to say that up to
that time you used one as yonr best and the
other about cars? —I always considered one
better than the other.
Why up to three months before the 4th?
—One was better made than the other.
Did the suit you were wearing get very
dirty during the last two or three months?
—I would not say so.
You have practically worn it continu-
ously during the whole time?—Yes.
Why did- you send it to be cleaned?—
When?
You know yon sent it to be cleaned, or
that it has been cleaned?—Certainly it
has.
i When?—While I was in the lock-up.
You wore it at the inquest and immedi-
ately after yon gave it to yonr brother to


be cleaned and pressed?—Not immediate-
ly, but some time after.
How long?—I eould not say.
What did yon go to Fremantle Gaol in?
—My grey suit.
How long was that after the inquest?—■
Pour days after. Instructions were given
to my brother, and it was left in the lock-
up two weeks.
, How do you know?—l am pretty rare it
was.
You asked your brother to have it clean-
ed and pressed ? —I asked him to clean and
press it.
Didn’t you specially ask the chief
warder to take great eare of it?—l asked
him, as I did not want it creased. That
is quite natural.
Was it in the same condition as when
vou got it and part it on for this trial—
that was the first time since the lock-up?—
Yes.
I presume it was much better?—Yes, al-
though it was not very dirty in the first
place.
When you went to Moirs on the night of
the Ist you saw Miss Sadler first, and she
was busy in the kitchen?—Yes, doing
something.
And she was busy more or less ail the
time you were there?—Yes.
I think yon told ns that sometimes you
would have your coat on and sometimes off
while you are working, and you put it on
while your am was bleeding?—Not while
it was bleeding.
Yesterday you told ns distinctly you pul
ft on two occasions when it was bleeding?
—After it had been bleeding.
You want to correct it?—l do not. To
the best of my intention I said after it was
bleeding.
Did you ever have your coat on when
your am was bleeding?—Oh, yes.
Take the blue coat. No. 4; turn the right
sleeve inside out and show the blood marts
upon it?—(Witness examined the sleeve.)
There are no blood marks on it, unless they
have been cut out. I would point out that
this suit was cleaned about six months ago
by the Parisian Dye Co., and has not been
worn since. (The coat was then handed
to the jury for examination.)
How long after the grey suit was washed
was it pressed?—Two or three days.
Why did yon not press the other blue
suit?—lt was not dry enough. It was
keot in the washhouse.
It took that suit the half of March and
half of April to dry?—l would not say
that. It may have been dry a week before
April 4.
THE BUTTON.
When did the button first eome off it f
Some two or three months after I got the
suit. It is not a very important thing
when a button comes off.
What did you do? —I sewed it on again.
The other button became loose, and I sewed
that on, too.
And it came off later?—Yes, and I sewed
it on. On the third occasion the Jigger
button pulled off at the end of the link. I
cut the link off near the coat, and ent a
piece of serge off behind the button. The
outside button of the coat then Became
loose, and I put two or three threads
through it.
What happened to the jigger button?—l
do not know. It probably came off when
I was working on the car.
1 Why do you think that?—That is how
I did lose it. The coat was tight, especi-
ally when 1 was sitting in the driving seat
of the ear.
You think it burst offt—Yes, I may have
lost it in some other way, but that is the
most probable way.
Did you always wear your coat buttoned
up?—Yea.
Do yon mean to suggest that you did
not notice then that your coat was flying
open?—l may have noticed it. I don’t
remember noticing it.
• How long: agowas it that you finally lost
'■year jigger button?—About four or five
Wionths ago.
Did you ever -work in that coat on cars
after losing the jigger button?—Yes, and I
also wore the suit out, as when going to
town.
Didn’t yon find it rather awkward work-
ing on ears with your coat flying open?—
It was not flying open. There was the
other button.
The other button, you say, had only boon
put on with a few threads. Has it ever
pulled off ? —No.
Didn’t you ever sew the jigger button
cm anywhere except immediately on be-
hind tire outside button? —I won’t deny
it.
Have a look at the coat now. (The coat,
which is an exhibit, was handed to the
witness for inspection.) Will yon still say
that yon never sowed the jigger button on
except behind the other button?—l say I
will not deny it.
Have a look at the hole, and then tell
me what you have to say?—lt does not al-
ter my opinion. I will not deny it. I may
have sewn the jigger button on another
place than behind the button.
The hole behind the button, where the
jigger button has come out, apparently is
not behind the button? —Not exactly be-
hind.
Not where it would be if you had bow*
the jigger button through the button?—No.
Yonnave sewn the jigger button on at
least on two occasions, and perhaps more
often ?—Yes.
MISS COOMBES MISTAKEN.
Is Miss Coombes correct in saying that
you washed the clothes because they were
covered with mud?—Sho is not^ correct.
Is that imagination or fabrication on
her part?—lt might have been suggested
to her.
By whom? —I don’t suggest anybody.
Are.you insinuating that someone hat
asked Miss Coombes to say something that
is not correct? —I am not insinuating at
all. I jnst make the suggestion. ,1 don't
wish to follow it any further.
What is in your mind?—l can’t explain.
CONVERSATION IN GAOL.
At the interview yon had with Mias Sai-
ler in Fremantle Gaol, do you remember
telling her to go down a lane past a wic-
ket gate and she would sec *‘M.” and
“B” and so on? —No.
Do yon remember the initial “TJ” be-
ing referred to?—No. If you wish to
know about that conversation, why not put
Mr. Hamilton in the box?
lam going to do so. Mr. Hamilton w3l
further say that you said “after you went
down the' lane you would see the wicket
gate”?—l don’t remember that.
And further that you said “it would be
all right”?—That is another suggestion-
Didn’t you tell Miss Sadler at Fremantle
that she had not told the truth in the
lower Court?—l don’t remember saying
that.
Will you deny having said that? —It is
a very hard thing to deny.
“PUT THE BOOT IN.”
Of course it is; and didn’t yon say to
her, “If you don’t tell the truth in tbo
other Court, I’ll have to pttt the boot in, j
in the other Court?—l did not say that,
Will you deny having said that if Mr. |
Hamilton says so ?—Certainly I will. I
Were there any words to that effect ?—1 ;
don’t think so; I am nearly sure. i
MISS SADLER’S EVIDENCE.
His Honor: He has denied everything,
and I don’t know how you arc going to
prove that he is wrong, Mr. Parker. You
had Miss Sadler in the box and you didn’t
ask her a word about this.
Mr. Parker: Obviously my duty now is 1
to recall Miss Sadler. 1
His Honor: Whether or not you can ro- J
call Miss Sadler now is quite another ques- 1
■ tion. - j
Mr. Parker: It is within the diacretioi j
of the Judge.


'H>the O’Neil mrrrdereaje to-day Mr.
Farcer, while cross-examining AuUtm, re-
ferred to a conversation between Anbnm
and Miss Sadler at Fremantle gaoL
_ His Honor; Yon eoold bare asked Mi«a
Sadler the question when she was in the
box.
Mr. Parker; There were several applica-
tions for leave to treat Miss Sadler in a
certain way and your Honor would not
grant them. Wc could not put leading
questions to her. '
Mr. Lavan: Your Honor win remember
that Miss Sadler was particularly asked,
“Have you been down to Fremantle Gaol
to see Auburn?” That could have been fol- !
lowed by the question, “What occurred”? :
His Honor: She said that nothing oo j
curred, that the ease was not discussed.
Mr. Lavan: What is Mr. Parker going _!
to do now? Contradict bis own witness?
One is not allowed to do that.
, His Honor: She said there was & warder ;
present all the time. ' |
Mr. Parker (to witness): You were 1
speaking to Miss Sadler very often in «'
very low voice?—Yes, but Mr. Hamilton
was there all the time. You are not al-
lowed to speak too low down there. It
most be so that the warder can hear.
His Honor: Who was the warder?—Mr.'
Hamilton,
Do yon propose to make application to
call him?
Mr. Parker answered that he did.
"Mr, Lavan; Yon must first
your right to do se.
His Honor: It is a matter that can be
discussed later.
MONEY PROM HIS FATHER,
Mr. Parker: Did you say yon could
always get money from your father when
yon wanted it?—Yea.
Eighteen months ago did you get any
from him?—Yes.
And from 18 months to the time of your
arrest?—Yes; also before that.
Do you remember a judgment being ob-
tained against yon for £3O? —Yes.
Mr. Lavan: What is the object of all
this? Mr. Parker will say it is only to
show he was hard up. 1 ,
Mr. Parker: Nothing of the kind. Only
to show that he could not get the money
to pay Singe his £22.
His Honor: Obviously that is what it is
for. v
Mr. Parker: And there was no prospect
of getting it.
Mr. Lavan: Are yon sure. We will see
about that. : Ton should not make that
statement.
Mr. Parker: Ton asked me for reasons.
(To the witness): Have yon any objec-
tions to my inquiring into your financial
piosition?
Mr. Lavan: I will make any objections
that are necessary.
Mr. Parker: Very well. (To the wit-
ness) : Yon have-no objection at any. rate.
You can always get it, Do you remember
a man named Bowden, or a similar name ?
—YesJ I do. 1 • "
A JUDGMENT SUMMONS.
Motor accessories: A solicitor demanded
£3O from you ? —I am perfectly aware of
that; you need not go into details.
But the jury want to know?—My char-
acter is quite all right.
I ain hot inquiring into your .character!
—OK, yes you are. 1
You did not pay the money?—No.
A judgment was obtained, and a sum-
mons issued?—Yes,
■- And an order was made for imprison-
ment in default Of payment?—l did not
.know that. ■
You did not know?—No.
r Was it paid?—My father paid it
When?—You know these details, why
question ine?
- Very well. An order was made for £32
for the payment of the money, and a war-
rant was issued for your arrest, and your
father paid it? —I was away in Melbourne
at that time. _ •
Mr. Lavan: Your Honor can see the ob-
ject is to discredit this man
His Honor: That is not the object at all.
Mr. Parker (to witness): In what was it
paid?—l was away at the time.
- £lO a month, who paid it? —My father.
When? —When I was away.
Yon do not even know whether it was
paid ?—No.
Did you ask' your father for the money ?
—He Volunteered to pay it.
After the warrant was issued?—No, be-
fore.
Was it when the judgment summons was
issued? —Yes, I wanted to pay it.
But you didn’t pay one penny yourself?
■—No.
HIRING A CAR.
You engaged Skugo’s car on the Satur-
day. Was that tpe first ear you asked
for?—Yes. .
You mean that?—Ldo.
Will you swear you got-a car from the
very first person yon asked? —Yes, and
that .was Singe.
Did you ever ask Geo. Craike for his car
that Saturday?—l was talking to him.
He refused to give you credit? —1 never
spoke to him about it.
Will you deny you asked Geo. Craike, a
motor driver on the Terrace rank, about a
motor car to Wagin?—l did speak to him
about a trip to Wagin, but I did not ask,
about his car. I asked the price of the
trip. I also asked where. I could find
Singe.
Mr. Lavan asked whether Mr Parker
was entitled to put these questions. He
contended the evidence was inadmissible.
1 His Honor said it was a formal ques-
I tion, and the jury would take the answers
of the witness, and not suggestions.
Mr. Parker (to witness): Was it morn-
l ing or afternoon when you saw Craike?—
■ Afternoon. - '
, Did you tell him you wanted to go to
1 Wagin,’ as someone there was sick, or words
* to that effect?—! said I was going to Wa-
Did you tell him whom you were taking?
—I did not.
1 Any of the party?—l think I said a
party was going. .
Didn’t you ask him what it would cost?
—Yes, but not for his car.
What did he tell you?—l think he said
about £l9. -
Didn’t he ask yon when yon wanted to
go?—I don It think so
Did yon tell him whew you wanted to
go?—I might have said that afternoon.
Did you say straight away ?—No, that
afternoon.,
Did he tell you he had to get a new tyre
before ho could go?—He said it is just as I
well I am not going. ; I would want a new ,
tyro to go with, \
Didn’t he say what about some cash, I:
want a new tyre?—l deny that.. 1
■ Did you-say to Craike, I .can give you a 1
cheque next Wednesday?—Nothing to thati
effect- •
Djd not Craike reply, “I am looking for.;
a cash job?”—lt mightFave been .said in' J
the-course of conversation. He said he
could not go a long trip on account of tho i
bad condition of his tyres. i
Did you see a driver named Moody that i
afternoon?—There was a driver in a cur-
ahead of Craike, but. I don’t know his
name. j
Do you know Moody by sight?—No. j
Do you know a driver named M’KinlcyT
•—I don’t know him by name.
A tall fellow Did yoh sec him Inat
morning?—l might have seen him.
His Honor; Do yon know M'Kinlcy?—l
may know him by sight. There were seve-
ral drivers around the car when I was
talking to Craike.
Mr. Parker: Did not these two refuse to
take you to Wagin because it was not fc
cash job?—l will swca r they did not.
Do you know the driver, George?—No.
Did you speak to any other man?—l
may have done so.
Do you remember_ one or the men. pre-
sumably George, saying bis tyres were bro-
ken?—He may have said so. .


MONEY DUE BY FATHER.
Mr. Parker: Why make such an ar-
rangement when you cannot afford it?—
(Indignantly.) I can afford it. My
father is in my debt to the extent of £2OO
or £3OO for work I have done. That is
to say, I can draw that amount if I want
Does he owe you one penny?—ln a way.
I can draw that when I want it. '
Why have you not drawn it and paid
your debts?—They are all paid except
Singe’s. I can explain about that.
SINGE REFUSED CASH.
If you had not been able to get a motor
on credit, what would yon have done? —I
would have got the money from my father.
I told Singe I could get the cash if he
wanted it, but he said a month later would
do.
Have vou ever heard o£ a taxi driver
refusing his fare? —Singe is in a big way.
His Honor: Do yon sav Singe refused
the money?—Not exactly that. I offered
it, but he said it would do in a month's
time.
Mr. Parker (to witness): Have you had
credit from Singe before? —I have never
had occasion to get it. _
Was it Monson’s advice that you should
refuse to tell the police anything further on
the Monday night?—No.
Is there any blood on the . sleeve of your
other coat?: —I think not. It has been
cleaned twice since my arrest. The Ibek-up
is not a good place to keep clothes in.-
Was there ever any blood on the sleeve 1
of that coat?—There may have been. I
THE FIRST STATEMENT. ,
The witness was then taken the 1
first statement he made to the detectives.
Mr. Parker asked “Is it correct?’’—The
statement says I left home on jthfi Thurs-
day night, April 3, on the 6.45 tram. That
should be the 6.15 tram.
Yon said distinctly you left Osborne
Park at 6.45?—1 did not say so distinctly.
I said I left a little after 6.
.When did you find out you had left
then?—l remembered it shortly after my_
arrest. The statement was only taken 1
roughly. '
1 wUI show yon how roughly. . It says,
Von arrived in the city at 7.25 p.m.?—The :
detectives reckoned that np.
But you signed it as being correct? —It is !
fairly correct.
. It is at 7.25 that the 6.45 tram arrives
in the city?-—Yes. I did not know ihey
Were reckoning it np at the time. I did
not take 6.45 tram.
A STATEMENT CORRECTED
Your statement proceeds, “When I ar-
rived on the evening of the 4th inst., I
went straight to the Grand pictures”?—;
That is wrong. I didnd go straight to
the Grand, though I told the detectives
that. 1 I was merely asked for a rough
statement of my movement. It never struck
me to tell them about Miss Sadler. That
was an omission.
What did you think the detectives were,
taking the statement for?—Purdue told mo
it was being taken as a matter of form, i
Mr. Parker: "Sour statement then goes
on, “And remained there until the finish
o r the programme, at 10.15 or 10.25 p.m. ?”;
—I was not sure of the time then. :
Otherwise the statement is correct? —
Yes.
You did stay until the finish of the pro-
gramme?—-So far as I had seen it. I did
not mean the finish of the show. I saw
the programme through from the point at
which I came in.
You have never suggested that anywhere
before?—No.
THREE WRONG STATEMENTS.
Then there are three wrong statements
in that paragraph?—Yes. ■ - !
And you told the detectives those things?!
—No.
Do you mean o say they put them down
without your saying them?—Yes.
The statement was read over to'you, andi
you agreed to it, and didn’t correct it?— i
Yes. . '
His Honoi*: Didn’t you toll the detec-
tives 10.13 or 10.25 ? —Yes.
ABOUND THE BLOCK.
Mr. Parker: Then you say in your state-
ment, “When I loft the pictures, I walked
around the block once, Hay,. Barrack, and
William streets?”—T walked around the
block after I came out pf the shop.
After yon found you had only 3d, you i
did what?—Walked around the block.
What did you walk around the block l
for?—ln the hope of seeing someone to 1
borrow 3d from. „ , ' i
But I thought you said it was not nice
to borrow a small amount like that?—l
sajd so only as regards the shop.
Don’t you think you would have been
very much more likely to have found
someone on the tram on the way out to Mt.
Hawthorn? —Yes. -
You could have gone to Golding’s shop'
as a final resort? —You might do that, Mr.
Parker, I would not. i
I would do it rather than walk and, fnr- ;
ther, having lived so long at Osborne Park,
I would have expected to find on the tram
someone who would have trusted me fori
2d. You say 'yon thought you were moro'
likely to find someone to borrow 3d flora'
by walking around the block than by going*
on the Osborne Park tram?—Yes.
O’NEIL’S COAT.
Then your statement says, “When pass-
ing the West Perth railway station 1 '
picked up an overcoat. This was about
11.30.” Is that correct? —That time was
calculated by the detectives.
And yon agreed. I suppose you are still ;
of the same opinion?—l would not say
that. '
What has made yon alter yonr mind
since then?—l can’t say exactly.
You gave this statement one week after
April 4?—Yes. .
Then yonr statement goes on. In®
overcoat I have since been told belongs to J
the late Jack O’Nefl. I have never seen!
Jack O’Neil. . The coat was lying in the;
north-west corner of the subway. I pick-;
ed up the coat and dusted it, and looked
at it under the light close by,” WhaVdo
you mean by’“the light close by ? ’ —The '
light under the subway.
That would be pretty'well over the coat";
—Yes. ' ; ’j
Your statement continues: “I did not see
anything unusual about the coat. T took
the coat home by carrying it.” Within a
week afterwards you did not know whether
you bad worn this heavy coat?—That is
so.
THE BUMPING INCIDENT.
Further your statement says, “When I
got near the Leedervi ’ ' tel in Oxford-
street by the Chinese j I was walk-
ing on the footpath on lao east, side, and
two men were coming in an opposite di-
rection. I went to get out of! the road,
and went the same side as they did, and
they bumped me and knocked me over,
His Honor : Is not a statement taken as
a matter of form, supposed to be true?—.
Yes.
Bid you not offer him £2O, and tell him!
he eo" . book a pair of tyres to you?—]
That i- a fabrication.
You have said there is no difficulty ip
getting money from your father when you.
wanted it, and yet you have often walked
home because you had no money. Kow
far is it from the city to your home? —
About five and a quarter miles.
And you would rather wash your own
clothes (than have them cleaned? —That
was not from the economical point of view.
Why did you not borrow yonr father’s
car to go to Wagin?—lt was not . big
enough for the. party , I had the privilege
of using it when I wanted it • ‘
You wanted to make a good fellow of
yourself and take a big party 9 —l had pro-
mised to take them.
His Honor: Miss Quigley says there was
an arrangement made three weeks before
to take the party.


causing the wound on my right arm to
bleed.’’ Did they knock you right overt —
No. They knocked me to one side. It
was more my fault than theirs.
. Did you give the detective to understand
the men knocked you right overt—No.,
Tour statement nest says “This hump
caused the wwund on my arm to bleed and
the blood ran right down my arm to the
palm of my hand.” Was that sot—Yea,
And no one in the tram saw it Which
hand did yon pay yonr fare with—yonr
right hand?—l might pay it with either
hand.
But you had a bottle under yonr left arm,
so yon must have paid it with your right
hand?—l mast hare.
Did you get any blood on your coat? —I
may have done. .
Did you?—l do not know.
Did yon see any on your coat? —I did
not.
Or your waistcoat? —No.
Was vour arm paining yon when . yon
were helped by the tram motormant—Yes.
Or was it because yon were feeling faint?
—I was feeling weak. It was through the
firm.
Did you tell anyone besides McKenzie 1
that it was paining?—l may have; I don’t
remember.
Yonr mother and father, for instance? —
They were asleep when I got home.
MORS CORRECTIONS.
The inference is to be drawn from your
statement that you came to town and went
to Miss Sadler’s with the car?—No, I went
to Miss Sadler’s first.
When you say “I stopped in town” it is
wrong?—That was when I came from Miss
Sadler's!
So that it is wrong to say “I stopped in
town and engaged Singe’s car”?—Yes.
Did yon say “I only had one overcoat —
I picked it up at the Park”?—l might
have, but I think I said “I have a coat;
we will pick it np at the Park.”
It gives a wrong impression?—lt is fair-
ly correct. Just twisted round a bit.
You said “I wrote for it to Wagin’’?—
No. I said I would write.
Did you sign the statement ?—Yes. I
glanced at it casually and signed it.
As a fact yon have never yet written
to Wagin t—Certainly not. , . . There is
nothing here to show I called in and gave
the address of Allport.
WESTANA ROAD ONCE MORE.
At _Westana-road you said you pushed,
the bike up the hilL It is pretty heavy,,
isn’t it? —Yes, but not with the belt off. It 1
is the same as a pnshbike, i
And you stopped right at the bottom of;
the dip?—l should say it was, the bottom, j
Did yon get up any pace coasting down
the hill?-r-Jnst sufficient to keep a 1 bal ;
once. .
Does not the impetus coming down take 1
you over the hollow? —Sometimes.
In this instance it. did not? —No.
How far off the main road were you sit-
ting down?—Just about on it.
■ And that is where the bicycle was?—Yes.
Were the tracks more distinct on Mon-
day, 7th ,than,on Friday, 11th ?—Decided-.
ly more distinct. I understand that De-
tective Purdue put down banksia nuts on
the tracks so, that people would not dis-
turb the marks. ■ i
Did you say “This is where it was drag-
ged out, and this is where it was dragged
in”?—No. ■ : j
That is a pure fabrication ?—I ' would
not say that. It is a mistake perhaps.
When you saw the place did it appear
to you there was anything suspicious about;
it?—No; there was, however, a tree broken
down.
Cattle could have done that?—T.'do not
know.
WHY HE TOLD THE DETECTIVES.
• Why did yon tell tho detectives about
it?—l suppose because I was with them,
and the spot came to my mind! .1 had
been talking to them about the murder.
Did you not teU' tKem you had found the
place where you thought it had happened?
—No . .
What did you tell them?—l told them
of the spot I had found', and that a car had
apparently run into a tree.
Mr. Lavan: The witness did not suggest
he thought it was the place where the
murder had been committed. Mr. Parker
suggests he did so.
Mr. Parker: Did yon tell Detective
Doyle about the spot because you thought
it had something to do with the murder
No; it was a suspicious-looking spot, that
is all.
Suspicious 1 as regards what? —It -looked
as if something had happened there.
Did you not connect it with the O’Neil"
murder?—No.
And yet you wanted the detectives to
look at it?—l did not want them to, but.
I told them about it. ■
You invited them to go in there?—l did
not.
Did yon not later cn say to Detective;
Purdue “Do you think I would have shown
you the spot if I was in it”?; —I said that-
on some occasion.
And now you say you did not know or'
care whether it had anything to do with
the murder? —It had' nothing to do with
me. , •
Was it not yonr own suspicion that it
nriHht have had something to do with it?
—No. . :
Didn’t yon put it to them with the sole;
purpose of disarming suspicions against;
yon?—Certainly not. j
You said later, “Do you think I would
have shown you the Westana-road spot if
I had been in it,” anad didn’t you make a
similar remark about the overcoat?—i
Something to that effect. • -'
You discussed the matter with Detective
Purdue, who said something about people
going back to their old haunts?—He said
something about murderers going back to
the scene of the murder.
It was in connection with the O’Neil,
murder that you told the detectives these
things?—But the murder was not in my
mind at the time.
Yon said von would have mentioned the
Wostana-road spot to the detectives onlv
it did not seem important to yonr mind?
—That is what I said.
You further said in vonr statement that
it did not seem important even when you
did mention it? —It did not.
- NOTHING SUSPICIOUS.
Do von still sav there was nothing sus-
picions at that time, even after seeing
<r.ag marks?—Yes. ,
And you never saw anv blood
Well, you didn’t look very bard?—No,
I told you that before.
Tfacu voti were not looking for 20 mln-
nk-s T—Certainly not. Perhaps a couple of
minutes. ■ ~
MANY INACCURACIES. >
In that first'statement of yours, thero
are a great many inaccuracies? —les, duo
to myself perhaps. ,
And ..you 1 never corrected them after-
wards?—No.’ .
About what time used you to get on the'
tram at Neweastle-street ? —About 2d -
minutes past’ll.
Usen’t von frequently to meet quite >.
number of - fellows just around that cor- J
ner?—Almost always.
■ _ UsCn’t yon to meet them in the shop?—
Yes. ’
■ And 1 sit down and have,a yarn?—Yes.*
Nearly , every night?—Nbt nearly every
night,, but frequently. .
About what time used von to meet? —
About ten minutes past XI.
And then von used to wait until the ;
last tram? —-Generally speaking, ves. j
Why didn't yon go back on the night I
of April 4 to meet yonr pals and borrow !
a couple of pence? I had no definite
friends to meet there. They might have
turned np or not, yon know.


MR. VAN RE-EXAMINES, i
. Re-examination was colnmenced at 12.45 ;
p.m. |
( Mr. Lavaa : On Monday you were cross- j
examined lirst of all with regard to doc-
tors yon had seen. "Where did you sec
any doctors since you have been in prison 'I
—At the lock-up and at Fremantle gaol.
How many doctors did vou see at the i
Perth lock-up?—Three, I think.
And at Fremantle gaol I ?—One or two. j
You saw Dr. Barker"?—Yes.
You mentioned Dr. Bentley’s name. -
When do yon say Dr. Bentley saw you?
—The morning you brought him to see me,
I was afterwards informed it was Dr.;
Bentley. '
It was not Dr. Bentley at all. The doc-
tor you took to be Dr. Bentlev was a doctor,
whom .1 took to see you, and that was Dr.
duett. '
What other doctor did I bring to see
yon at the iock-up?—Dr. Moss.
Do you know what doetor_Baw von at
the Fremantle gaol?—I think it was the
dcctor who usually comes into the Freman-
tle gaol. •
It was not a doctor I brought to see yon ?
—No. ‘ '
It was either Dj. Jnetf or Dr. Moss you
mistook for Dr. 1 was |
told it was Dr. Bentley.
MONEY PROM HIS FATHER.
Who paid your expenses when you went
to Melbourne about 12 months ago?—My
father.
You told us you were employed assist-
ing your father. • Now. at any time, can ,
you or. can you not. if von want some ex- •
trn monev, get it from him?—Certainly.
You , told ns about going to the shop at
the corner of Newcastle and Beanfort
streets, and also that when yon-went to
Golding’s you got soft drinks there?—
Sometimes.
What, did you do with these things?—l
used to consume some at the shop and some
I took home.
HIS ARM BLED.
When you knock your -arm, docs it
cause yon any pain?—Yes, extreme pain at
times.
Why do you swing it?—lt generally eases
the pain a little.
Can you tell us how many times, so far
as yon remember, the blood has run down
your hand ? —On a good many occasions.
Sometimes you shook it while the blood
was dripping?—Yes. j
Can you say with accuracy the last time
that occurred?—Tne last time I noticed
anything'special was on the night of the
4th.
But'about the swinging of the am?—l
cannot remember.
Do you remember M‘ Kcnzie saying in '
the Coroner’s Court "I think Auburn said '
(he wound was caused by having slipped
down some .stairs’’? —Yes.
Do you thiiik there is pinch ijifFercnee
i?, fcping from the corner of Murray and 1
TV ilham streets to the Lcederville Hotel,
by taking the route you took, qy going over
the horseshoe bridge?—No.
The Court adjourned for lunch.
When, the Court resumed at 2.5 pun. Mr.
Parker said: “During the cross-examina-
tion of, accused, I referred to four taxi-
orivers, and put to him the conversation
between him and one driver in particular.,
1 did not put any specific conversation bo-!
tween him and drivers George Moody or -
McKinley/ .
CALLING TAXI-DRIVERS.
His Honor: You put the conversation as ■
regards Craike, and the witness said he, did
vr ow e ither Moody or McKinley.. i
Air. Parker; By name. I put the gene-
ral question to the witness, but nothing of . 1
a pacific mature as regards the others. I;
only got information about this matter as
T came to the Court this morning, and
there was only time to get a statement asi
regards Craike, The inf onnation came, to I
me through a third party. 1 Understand
McKinley is away in the country, but from
two of the other drivers I now have a state-
ment. It is the correct thing-that I should'
put these specific 1 conversations to the ac-
cused to admit or deny. I propose later
on asking for leave to call these taxi driv-
ers to say whether such conversations are
so or not. I could not have called them
before. I now want to put these specific
conversations to the witness.
His Honor: The witness has denied any
general conversation with them. Suppose
at a later stage I gave you leave to give re-
butting evidence on the point. You would
then examine in chief, Mr. Lavaa would
cross-examine, and if you did not put the
questions to the accused he could recall
the witnesses. That would be the better
course to take rather than that the exami-
nation, should now be interrupted.
Mr. Parker; If your Honor likes I will
put the witnesses in the bos now.
His Honor: I will leave it to apply in
the ordinary course. ■
; Mr. Lavan: It would bo better that an
application of this _ kind should be made
elsewhere when the jury are not present.
His Honor: There may be some occasion*
when that would be convenient, and there
might he others when it would not be.
RE-EXAMINATION CONTINUED.
Mr.’ Lavan (to accused): You told ns yon
always went to the shop at the comer of
Beanfort and Newcastle streets to get
pies and lime juice and soda. Does your
father stock limejuice and soda?—No.
After the Wagin, trip, how often were
vou at Moir’s?—On the following Mon-
day night, and on the Tuesday of the mo-
tor trip, and also on , the Wednesday and
the Saturday, but not since.
As regards making inquiries of the
girls at the Grand Theatre, where have
vou been since April 16?—Under arrest.
As regards the coat and trousers, that
the police found washed, vou said vou'
Dressed them two or three d.-ivs after they
had been hung on the line. Was that in
Ji-nuarv? —Yes, some time this year. After
that I wore the suit a good bit. I got that
suit and the snit that I am now wearing
at the same time. The suit I am aearin-
is the dearer by a pound or two. I did
not know Cecil White very intimately. I
used to meet him on the Osborne Park
tram. He was living at Osborne Park
some time prior to April 14. On Sunday.
April .13, the condition of the roads was
rather bad, and on that occasion it was,
easier to use a nush bike than a motor
cycle. The condition of the road was bad
Ton said in cross-examination that on
the night of Friday vou were annoyed
with Miss Sadler, and in consequence
showed, her some petty spite, as vou have
described./ Was the suite directed against
anvone.except Miss Sadler?—No.
On ■ the Saturday morning, when you
got up, what was flic condition of the
weather, and how did it promise?—Tt look-
ed very much like rain: it was very
threatening weather •
How long was it. before vou weut to Wa-
gin that yon told vour father vou ucrc
taking a trip that wav?—T think it was
the Thursday before wo left.
When Miss Sadler paid yon the visit at
Fremantle, was the chief warder standing
' with you all the time?—lt is quite neces-
sary there.
With your legal advisers you were al-
lowed to be alone?—Yes. .
As you put it. Miss Sadler was mistaken,
sind not as Mr. Parker suggested, telling
licsf^ —Yes. . i
With regard to yout staying at Moir’s
on the Friday night, did you not on other
occasions promise to stop', and did not do
so?—A great many occasions.
Ttou were asked by Mr. Parker why you
did not hand in this overcoat, to the police.
1 ou got home on the last tram on the Fri-
day night. On the Saturday you went
Y ° u returned on Sunday, and on
Monday when did you report it to the
police?—On the Monday night.


Yon saw that small piece of mirror pro-
duced, from the spotlight, there being evi-
dence of a car having been there and bro-
ken this tree, and you could see tracks.
Could you suggest any other part of a car
from which the mirror could cornel—
There could be no other part
You said that when you went there on
the Friday there was a difference so far
as the tracks were concerned?—Yes, they
were very distinct on the 7th.
When those statements of the Friday
were taken from you, what was the pro-
cedure. Was there much questioning?—
They' questioned and calculated on various
things.
On the last occasion when you wash-
ed the blue suits, do you know whether
there were blood stains on it ?—There may
have been. That was two or three weeks
before April 4.
“GET IT OFT TOUR CHEST.”
Are you sure that Dets. Purdue and
Doyle said to you, “Don’t be a fool,
George; get it off your chest”?—l am.
Who showed you the proclamation?—
Det Purdue.
Where was it all the time you were
there ? —On the table. I had my arm on it.
The detective went out and got it while
he was giving his sketch.
Resurrecting the incidents of the crime?
—Yes. It was there for about two hours.
There waS some argument about the word
“advise.” I do not know who mentioned
it first.
Mr. ■ wan: The witness complained on
the Sa rday that the detectives had been
making suggestions and sketches for him.
Mr. Parker: He did not say that.
Mr. Lavan: He did. (To witness): You
said to Monson you were muddled. Were
you muddled? —I might have been.
Are there some omissions from the first
statement you made to the detectives?—
Yes. ,
OMISSIONS FROM STATEMENT.
His Honor: Did you point out the omis-
sions?—Not at the time,
Mr. Lavan: Were you shown the state-
ment afterwards?—l'was shown it at the
time, but did not see it again; neither did
I see the second statement again.
Why did you get your clothes cleaned
twice after your arrest ?—To make myself
look respectable. The suit was at Bee-
street for about two weeks. I had my
hat cleaned for the same purpose.
The police had every access to the blue
suit before the inquest?—Yes. It was in
the next cell to mo.
AUBURN’S DEBTS.
_ls it true you did incur from time to
time some debts your father paid?—Yes.
His Honor; That is not a crime.
Witness: I never intended to hide it.
Mr. Lavan: Did you actually engage or
try to engage any other driver than Singe
for the Wagiu trip?—No. I may have
talked to others about it.
Could jou have got Singe's money for
the Wagin trip straight away from your
father if vou had wanted it ®-oCertainly._
Auburn’s re-examination closed at 2.45
p.m.. and he returned to the dock.
THE SOFT DRINK SHOP.
Mrs. Effie Turner Layer, proprietress of
a confectionery and soft drinks shop at
165 Walcott-strect, was examined by
Lavan. She, said she had known the ac-
cused since March 5 last, when she took
over.the business. He had been a customer
at her shop from that time on, coming in
every night.
His usual order was two hot pics and a
bottle of lime juice and soda. He always
told her he was catching the last car at
that corner. It was her custom at 11 pun,
to put on two pies to get hot for him. Au-
burn would come in any time after. 11, and
this happened every night. There was
only one exception, April 4, when he came
in earlier than usual. It was 10.10 on her
clock, and she believed at that time it was
ten minutes fast. He took two pies and
a bottle of soft drink tha4 night- The
pies were cold, as she had hot been pre-
pared for him. It was so unusual that
she passed, a remark, “You are early to-
night, George?" There was only one
other occasion on which he took away cold
pies; it was just after she took over the
business, and had overlooked his order. On
the night of April 4 he did not have an
overcoat.
MRS. LUYER CROSS-EXAMINED.
Mr. Haynes: A number of lads used to
gather there every evening.
Witness: Sometimes.
Auburn used to join them, and they
would have something to eat or drink m
the shop?—He nearly always came alone.
But he used to sit there with his friends?
—There was only one man there this night.
I think Auburn told ns he very often
talked there with his friends?—Yes.
Hid those friends gather there that
night?—There Was only one gentleman,
Miss Johnson, and myself, there when ho
came in.
Who was the other man ?—Mr. White.
Mr. Cecil White ?—No.
. You do not know his Christian name,
where he is, or what he does?—He is an
elderly man, and lives in Golding-street.
, How many other customers came in that
night?—lt is hard to say; there were a
number.
You did not look at the clock when
White came in?—l did not.
But when Auburn entered you did, and
noticed the tifnef—Yes.
I don’t suppose you keep a record of
what time your customers come in, or the
date? —No.
When. did you realise the value of this
evidence? —As soon as he was arrested.
Ho was arrested on April 16, did you
realise it the same day?—That evening.
TO ESTABLISH' AH ALIBL
You realised that your evidence as to his
being in your shop at 10 pun. was very
important?—Yes.
You theught it would establish an
alibi?—Yes. '
In other words, that it would prove ho
could not have been the murderer ?—Yes.
“The Daily News,” in announcing Au-
burn’s arrest, simply gave the details of
the arrest. What was there about the
announcement that caused you to think if
vou could establish his having been in
your shop at 10 o’clock that night, he
could not have committed the
The fact that he was arrested on the
charge of wilful murder impressed us. Wc
remembered that he came in early, and
that he did not come fn again after that
night
You realised that evening the importance
of your evidence ?—Both Miss Johnson and
T said_ he could not have been “there”
that night, as he was in our shop.
Could he not have murdered O'Neil he
fore 10 o'clock?—Yes.
IMPORTANCE OF THE HOURS.
What caused you to conclude that be
could not have committed the murder?—
We were only sorry to know So had been
arrested. '
Had vou any reason to know what time
O’Neil was murdered?—No.
Then there was nothing to impress yon
with the importance of the hours?—No.
We remembered he had been there at that
time. ‘
When did vou first make a statement in
writing?—l do not_ remember.
Are vou certain it was April 4 that Au-
burn was in your shop?—Yes, Miss John-
son had been visiting that night, and re-
timed about five minutes to ten. Auburn
came_ in about five minutea later. On
the Saturday night he did not oome in,
and Miss Johnson spoke about it on the
Sunday morning.
“WE WERE FRIGHTENED.”
■ ■ To whom did you give the statement?—i
To Mr. Lavan.
Mr. Lavan: Mrs. Layer's statement-was
grven on ISa-T 13- :


r - Haynes (to witness) : Notwithstaad-
.incr that you thought, your evidence would
establish this man’s innocence, you were
d( termined not to mention . the matter
either to the nolicc or to the accused man’a
lawyer?—We were too frightened. I had
been urged to go in to Mr. Larvan’s office
and state _ what I knew. . I went thor* '
after the inquest was over. ,
p JO -j*o ■/
■S* i
(U
C 3
§3
u
«m a
I.V
o v
r—t C*,
Ih”’ ‘
v J!
£ 9 •
*l : ■
CL
<sr
If i
•c 5-
«'• 'A
0 ' i
.W i
■** I
S.fs •
o
> ;
.
« fiS. :
s*c9 ®,
m !
g?H M !
O 9»
4>
p P4fc I
3 o '■
ffl’-a »!
» g j
’BSU;.|
4) 2 Si
A O
•*» « Oi
>o «j+3, j
gSj
■fits?


f pnopnea! anammeed yesterday of
yfalSasg farther Crown evidence indicates
"Jkkat the trial of Geo. William Auburn will
PC prolonged further than was anticipated,
iffhe tenth day of the trial opened this
I morning with the secondwitness for th®
hdetatee under cross-examination.
( George William Aubura, mechanical ex-
pHert. 21 years, is charged -with the wilful
' •warder of John George O’Neil, a taxi-
; Mover, on April 4, at Claremont. ■
i Mr. Hubert Parker, with him Mr. A. G,
sjjßaynoa, represent the Crown, while Mr.
Ski. G. Lsvan and P. J. Walsh appear for
SAubura.
[ MBS, LUkJbLR OONTERTCTES.
f : Me*. Effio Turner Layer, who coodueto
* shop at th* corner of • Newcastle and
SBeanfort streets, continued her evidence.
Mr. Haynes: You said yesterday yon
laever had a conversation at any time with
, Hr. Morphy. Do you remember one day
i>i*•eminrr into yoay shop with the “Sun-
y Tins***?
Hjb Honor: How an you going to make
©is eridcHQG, when Oe accused was not
tpTbSBBt.
Mr. Haynes: When, a person makes a
statement with another person inconsis-
tent with present testimony, it is possible
to call evidence to prove it, uni ms it Is j
•Emitted by the witness.
His Honor: Then it is solely « regards
iwfcdiWHty.
Mr. Hamea: And memory.
Mr. Layan pointed out that he did not
•fellaw this procedure early in the trial
wi th Che witness Johnston.
His'Honor: If I give Mr. Haynes leave
to call Mr. Murphy, where is the necessity
to Question this witness?
: Mr Haynes; I want to draw her atten-
’ kkm to something to show her that she is
mistaken. I intend to ask her if he al-
lowed her to read this paper. (To the
»jtneaB): Do yon remember one day
!whcn von asked. Mr. Murphy for bis paper
while he used the ’phone?—l still main-
tain I had no conversation with him.
Do you remember seeing the “Sunday
Times” containing “the accusing eyes”
*r *\ poetry underneath it? —I suppose we
fcenght it ourselves.
Was it before or after Ms arrest?—!
Srould not be sure.
Can you.say. whether it was before or
«tter the inquest?—l think it was before.
Look at the date —April 13. That’s
three days before he Was arrested?—Yes.
Did you go to Mr. Lavan’s office on
sonr own initiative?—Yes.
Did anvtme OD'accrrsed's behalf appmafth
prior to the date von went?—No.
Did yon riot go iqto Mr. Lavan’s office
on Mav 13 because yon had just seen his
advertisement in the: morning paper invit-
ing persons who knew anything about this
XAatter to eomraunicate with him?—l saw
the advertisement amongst “Missing
Friends.”
Mr. Haynes and Mr. Cavan then engag-
ed in a “sub voce” conversation.
His Honor : If yen persist in these con-
versations. I shall adjourn the Court.
Mr- Haynes (to witness); Having seen
that advertisement you decided to call at
M>. Lavan’s office?—Tea.
THOUGHT HE WAS A "PIMP.”
Do you know Mr. Duperuzelt (The man
5n question was then called into Court), —I
Jiave seen him two or three times.
Did you know be was a police recruit
and later on a member of the force ?—I.
thought he was a “pimp.” (Laughter.)
Someone told me he had been seen in the
tehop, and I was told to be careful of him
(because he was a “pimp.”
You had some conversation with him ? —I
(daresay.
Did you ask- him what ho th wight of the
iHKrder, and did he not say that ho did not
know much about it?—l may have dis-
cussed the murder with him.
Did you tell him you were rare Auburn
Vas in the shop on the night of April 4?—-
If "I spoke to tifm about U i wouKTbc sure
to say that.
Did you tell Mm Miss Johnson -was out
kt the time Auburn eame in?—l could not
fcave said so. It is untrue. -
Did you tell him Miss Johnson had said
to .you later on that evening, “Has George
been in?” and you said “He camera an
hour earlier than usual?”—That is not
correct.
I will now call in Mr, WilHanss. Do yon
know that gentleman?—! remember seeing
him in the shop a few times.
Did yon hear that he was a police re-
ciuit? —Yes. -
Do you remember Miss Johnson saying
to him that she was not in the shop when
Auburn came in? —That is a deliberate lie.
A'DELIBERATE LIE.
And the other statenient was, a deliber-
ate lie.' Was it'—l am referring to this
gentleman. _ ' '
Were you in the shop when Miss John-
•en told’Wfiliams she was not there when
Auburn came in?—■!, say she did not say
that in my presence. She was in the
•hop when be came in.
Did she not tell Williams that she had
•shed you later on if George had been in,
and did you not say he eame in earlier
than usual and would not wait for his pies
to get hot?—No.
RE-EXAMINATION.
j Mr. Lavan re-examined the witness.
Hare yon any doubt that Miss Johnson
iwas -in the shop when Auburn eame in on
the night of April 4?—l have no doubt
about it. '
Did you bear anyone say she was not in
the shop then?—No, she was there.
Vow saw, me in response to the : adver-
ti:-nneiit?—Yes.
■ Have •■you .ever seen me before?—No.'
Did 1 anyone approach you from my office
to call and sec me, and did anyone that
you know of approach you on Auburn’s be-
half'before you saw me?-—He.
Drdiydu tell other' people that Auburn
Was irt*yoar place that night?—l mention-
ed ii.„to several after his arrest.
Why did yon look at the clock when Au-
burn. eame in that night?—Because I
thought, the evening had gone quickly and
1 had. not his. pies getting hot.
You were on duty on the Friday night
until Miss Johnson came back?—Yes. On
the Saturday night Miss Johnson was on
duly’’ We 'first' heard of the O'Neil
murder on the Saturday evening. I can
say dclinitely that the evening on which
“George” was in last was that Friday
evening. He has never been in since.
Did anybody speak to yon, on the Sun-
day regarding “George”?—On the Sun-
day iriornir.g Mias Johnson said to me,
“George Auburn didn’t cpme in last
sight;” and 1 said, '‘That's strange.”
Did that state of affairs, as to his not
coming in; continue after that?—Yes, all
the next week. Remarks'were made about
it. ' Ouce or.twice I said to Mias Johnson
that perhaps he didn’t come in because he
was offended, because the pics had not
been ready for him on the Friday night.
From the time you took over the shop,
on March 5 up to the Saturday when he
did not pome in, had he ever missed com-
ing into the shop in the evening?—Not
when I was on duty. ;
Have you any doubt whatever in: your
mind that it was on that Friday. April 4,
be was in last?—l have no doubt.
A CATERER’S STORY,
Fdiion Richard Banks, caterer of the
Aixu of Banks and Parsons, York-atrecL
|Mfc Laorfey, examined by sL-
he remembered the night of AtmulT’’
that night he had a catering Sfa nt 2?
George’s HaU, which fizdshed &t ym'/i
He left ihe hMI by
lamed by Iris partner, Mr Pta4^f 0am ’
member of the firm’s staff. , a
S’rom the haR the
street as far asAxon-strete, Sabia^Thf 7 '
te turned to the right, «md


.axon-street across the
Just over the bridge ho dropped one of his
passengers. After that he went down
Railway-parade as far as LeedcrviHe sta-
tion, and then tamed to the right, going
along Kimberley-street, Leedcrvilte. From
there he went down Yineent-Bbcect. In
Vincent-street, just amend the comer from
Kimbcrley-street; ho dropped his partner.
That left one passenger in the ear beside
himself driving. Yinccni-efcrect crosses
Oxford-street, Leedervilto. Just by the
. lake ho dropped his last passenger. Tbcmee
he proceeded along Yincent-otreet down to
I (The witness marked his
route on a plan of Perth).
NO CAB IN VnrCEKT-STBKBT.
While proceeding along Yineent-stooet,
after Oxford-street, witness
diovo at about fifteen to twenty
miles an hentr, and across Oxford-street
about 15 miles an hoar. His headlights
were ip use. Vincent-street is a narrow
road.
His Honor: What do yon moan by xmr
Witness: There is sand on each side.
Continuing, he said the time would be _
about I2£D ana. when when ho crossed /
Oxford-street. There was no motor car j
in Yincent-streeL When he first heard of >
the murder it was Saturday night, April
5. and in discussion of it it was ramaxk-
■ eil what a queer coincidence it was to have
passed along Yineemt-street and not seen
the car. Witness made the report to
; the detective office some time after the
'murder. This was after the inquest and
before he saw Mr. Lavan. Be noticed Mr.
.Levan’s advertisement in the newspaper. t
'He was not acquainted with Auburn.
Mr. Parker: When did von see Mr. La-
van?—l don’t exactly know.
Have you no idea of the date ?—That I
cannot say. _ .
Gan you say within a week? —I will not
Wear to any date. The detectives have
the date; also Mr. Lavan.
Ton cannot say within a fortnight?—
Nix
Can you say within a month from now?
—I am not saying any date.
Did you often drive around that wav
and take your partner home? —After every
job.
You frequently drove around Vincent-
street? —Not much before the murder.
, Did yon at all before the murder?—Yes,
on one or two occasions.
Did yon make a statement in writing to
Mr, Layan?—Yes, but I do not remember
the date,
When did you first see the detectives* j
-—Before Mr. Lavan's advertisement ap-
peared.
Before tie detectives had time to see
vou, vou had communicated with Mr.
Lavan?—l did not see him until after the
detectives had seen me.
Detectives Purdue and Doyle interview-
ed you at the Mechanics’ Institute? —Tea.
You told them vou had driven along
Yincent-street about midnight on April 4?
■ —l told them the date and the time.
- The detectives cross-examined yon' as
to whether yon had passed a car on the
way and not noticed it?—Yes, but one
could not pass a vehicle at that time of
night without seeing it.
Csuld yon have passed anv car that
night and not remembered doing so ? —One
must remember it at that hour of the
morning, because the roads are so clear.
When we read the paper on Saturday
evening we would remember all the ears
we had passed that nigjjt.
Can you sav how many ears you passed
in Hay-etreet that night?—Oh. no.
How many cars did vou pass in Axon •
street?—None.
Do vou swear positively there’ was no
ear parked under a tree in that street
that night?—l do. '
What were vou doing in the ear? —Driv-
ing.
Whst is the make of it? —A. Huht model
OverienjJ. I have had it 1? months.
"IT WAS A TOED.
’ How many stationary cars did yon see
hi Hay-street while driving home that
night?—l can’t say.
Will yon swear there was no car in Kim-
berley-strect that night?—There was one.
1 think it was a Ford. I took noties of
it.
If yon took notice of it, why do yon say
you think it was a Ford?—lt was a Ford.
What color was it? —A dark brown.
Was ihe .hood up or down? —Up.
Were the lights on or off?—Off.
Which _way was the car facing?—North.
On which side of the road wasJt ?—The
right hand side.
Therefore on its wrong side*—Yes.
Was it on the road.or in the sand? —In
the sand off the road.
Can you show ns on the map whereabouts
it was ?—lt was on the hill past the fire
station.
Any lamps there?—l saw the ear by my
lights.
Was the night moonlight or dull? —Me-
dium.
Was there any moon? —Slightly, I
think.' I cannot remember. The roads
were fairly dark.
And yet you asked the jury to bcliere
that you can tel} the color of a car to be
dark brown ? —Tea, I could, when my lights
were on it. ,
Were there any cars in Railway-parade?
—Just before I turned into Kimberley-
street a Car was coming down towards us.
Then yon saw two cars that night after
leaving Hay-street?—-Yes. That ear was
in motion going down the hill
During the whole of the trip after leav-
ing Hay-street, how many cars did yon see
until yon got home?—l cannot say. I was
not counting the cars I was passing. •
Of course you “were not. Furthermore,
you were talking to Mr. ShilJicy on the
trip?—Yes. ..
Gan you tell me where yon were talking
to him, and where you were not talking to
him?—No.
Were you talking to him much in Yin-
cent-street?—No.
And were you talking to Mm much m
Hay-street?—No, ;;
Might you not have been talking to him
all the way down Ymcent-strcet ?—-That
would be impossible. I could not talk to
him all that time. '
i Are you so empty-headed that you can-
not find anything to talk about for that
distance ?—Not when I had ,my eyes on
the driving wheel.
NOT LOOKING FOB CAES.
* Do you remember telling the detectives
; that reading the paper brought, this. mat-
ter back to your mind, but that on the
other hand vou. had no ..occasion to. notice
this or any other car ? You had, in fact,
no occasion?—No, we were not looking-
for cars.
You were of opinion that you had not-
iced a Ford car in another street. Now yop
definitely fix the color, spot, direction, and
everything else about the ear. Do you
remember its number I—No„
His Honor: Tile witness This not said
fbst be made that statement to tt» pofiea.
Mr. Parker {.to witness): Yon d|d tell 1
the polk® that on reading the paper these ;
tilings were brought hark to'your mind, or j
do you suggest that the murder, .was !
brought back to your mind whan job reed
about it in the paper?—-What was brought
back to my mind was the journey hams,
and that in Yineent-street 1 noticed no car.;
That was brought back to m 3 on the Sat-'
urday night, April & , ,
At what time did yoa eos fltfrpepegtint 1
night?—Just after 7. <
Yon said to the detectives* “'We first
heard of the murder on Saturday evening,
ami got hold of a paper and looked at it,*’
v *~: rhero were several of m
, at the nail at the time. Mr. Shilkey waa one


S.iji/'W'
no immos of vikcest-stbebt.
Will yxta show mo whoa the papery
whieh I will hand to yon, says anything
about Vxncent-streci. Just read through
the account in the pspst (Witness did as
requested).—But is this all the pspee.
I wQI get yon all tha advertisements os
well presently, but is that the article yew
referred tot—-Yea.
If the article did not mmrfSon Vincent-
street, how was your memoay refreshed re-
garding that street?—The xnntdae refresh-.
ed my memory:. I
WoaM Yrneeat-oteßei iapißß yon any !
more than Eailwty-paiasda, -or -ftson-cteeet I
or Waicott-strect >—Sa. \
Yon told tbe Atetha fh«k -yea wen •
of opinion that yon. had noticed a skmi ear !
somewhere else, in nnother stmt, which j
yon could not place*?—Yon so iot* of ctecv i
in tha street.
His Honan Did yon ar <63 yoa sot ted!
the detectives that?
j Witness: I did.
| Mr. Parker: And did ywa fall fee detec-
• fives that yon could not place the ear?—l
could not remember whether the lord ear
was in motion.
Then you went an te«ay flat yon could
not remember what ears yon passed?—
Yes.
_ Did yon teQ tbe detectives that you bad
no recollection of seeing any other ear any-
where that night, although ft fa a common
practice for owners to leave ears in the
street at night?—l don't remember that.
. Take the first portion, as to hawing no
recollection of seeing any other ear any-
where that night. Did you teQ tbe detec-
tives that?—That night was a long night.
MiXKn DP.
His Honor: Answer the question. Did
you tell tha detectives that or not? —I
think I had got rather mixed up.
The question is very simple, and yon
must answer, it one way or the other# —l
did not put it that way.
Mr. Parker: _WeD, did you any anything
like that?—Going home that ug*ht I saw-
no other cap.
Did you say. going home that night, “I
have no recollection of seeing any other
car anywhere”?—Tea, I toM the detec-
tives that. I mentioned one car at a
standstill and one in motion.
Yon did not tell them it was in Kimber-
ley-street. You said you saw a Ford you
could not place T—l may have mentioned
; that.
When did yon recollect it was Kimber-
ley-street ?—Since then. I have a reool-
leq'/on now, it bus Kimberley-street
;V,: ' me when you had seen a «ar at a
. staj, Lilli without the lights on after mid-
night?—ln what street?
When did you recollect to tcH any one
it was in Kimberley-street you saw a car!
’—A -or my interview with the detectives.
L te or after the interview with Mr.
; Lav 1 7—After. I mentioned to imi
f some ing about a Ford car.
1 Do you remember the time of day the de-
| tectives saw y0u?—10.45.
| And I think you told them about Mr.
[ Shilkin being; with you, and that ha work-
jed at Beans. They said they would go
I down and see him there, and you advised
: him not to as Boans objected to their em-
; ployes being interviewed in tbe shop ?—I
i did mention that.
As the result, you went out and saw Mr.
i,.Shilkin I—He was ’phoned.
Yon telephoned him. How long after
■ they left yon?—About 12 o’clock,
i And as a result of that message, where
t did you and he go ?—He met me in Mr.
1 Lavan’s office.
Was it as a result of that message that;
you and Shilkin agreed to go there? —No;,
I went to Mr. lavan first
As soon i 'e detectives left yon?—;
'Jjbe appoirii, was made before the
detectives sav . .
At what timer--HAS. ,
Did yon see him at ILIS?—No,
When did you arrange »or Bhiikin to go
along and see him I —About 12.
You did not keep that appointment?—J;
was with the detectives until 11,45.
So the detectives had no chance of see-,
ing you before you arranged an appoint-
ment with Mr. La van I—The detectives
said they would go and see ShflkiD.
Did you tell Mr, Lavan the detectives
were interviewing Shilkin 7—No.
Did you tell the detectives yon had an
appointment with Mr. Levant —1 may have
mentioned it.
Will you swear you did?—l won’t swear
it
Mr. Parker said he had got a copy of
"The Daily News” of Saturday night,.
• April 5, and he learned the finding of the
! car in Yincent-stxect ■ was mentioned in
j that issue.
To Witness: Are you stiß prepared to
swear positively that there was no sta-
tionary ear along the route you took teat
night from the time yon left Hay-street,
except the Ford ear?-—Te3..
Will you tell me then the next occasion
you had Shilkin out with you, and you did
pass any stationary cars? —We may have
passed them, I did not take that much no-
tice.
Have you ever on other occasions taken
notice of any car or cars you have passed f
—Generally if we see a car at a standstill
we notice it
Re-examined by Mr. Lavan, the witness
said there would be no truth in a sugges-
tion that witness stopped the detectives
from seeing Shilkin. He had no interest
in the ease whatever. When he rang Hr.
Lavatrs office the telephone was answered
by a woman’s voice, Mr. Lavan being out.
He saw the detectives first, and tang up
Shilkin at Mr. Lavan’s request. Vin-
eentrstreet was about wide enough for two
- cars to pass.
Mr. Lavan: If there had been an aban-
doned car in Yincent-street that night fac-
ing towards Oxford-street and standing two
feet on the road could you have failed to
notice it? —I could not have missed it.'
Before you gave the detectives a state-
ment you had been to their office prior to
(M/iug to mine? —Yes,
THE SOFT DEINKS SHOP.
Henrietta Johnson, 165 Beaufort-street,
and carrying on business with Mrs. Buyer
at the comer of Newcastle and Beaufort
streets, was examined by Mr. Lavan. She
said she had known Auburn since the be-,
ginning of March, and had been introduc-
ed to him on the night of March 3. She
had taken over the business on March 5,
and since then Auburn had been a custom-
er of the shop. Up to the night of April 4
he always went to the shop.between II and
11.30 p.m., and had come in every night.
He had a standing, order for two nice and
a bottle of lime fruit and soda. The pies
were, heated for him after U p.m. On
the night of April 4 ho came in at 10
o’clock .just after witness had returned
’from visiting a friend. He took two pies,
bnt they were cold, because he was so
early. Mrs. Buyer had said to him, “You
are early to-night, George,” and she had
looked- at the tiock. It was ten minutes
past 10 by the clock, which was a few min-
utes, past 10 by the clock which was a
few minutes fast. Witness has asked Au-
burn why he was early, but he did hot an-
swer. She did not think he heard her.
He remained in the shop untiLMrs. Buyer
had given him his parcel and then left.
NO DOUBT AT ALL.
Mr. Lavan (to witness) : Have you any
doubt that Auburn was in your shop on
April 4at the time mentioned $-rNo. He
has not been there since. _ I' thought it
strange on the following night thathe did
not come in, and mentioned it to Mrs.
Buyer on the Sunday rooming ’
Had Auburn an overcoat wife him when
he went to your shop on the Friday night*
—He had none. He was dressed in a navy
blue suit.
When did yon first hear of the murder 1


-—From a poiiso constable who ezine in to
the shop at about 2 c'clcwfe Saturday af-
ternoon.
When did yon first make a statement
shoot tixis matter?—To you on May in.
Have yon any personal interest in Au-
burn except as a customer? —None what-
ever. -
Witness was cross-examined by Mr.
Haynes.
You read the report of Mrs. Layer’s «*>
deaec given in the papers?—Yea.
Were you able to fix the date m May
16 before reading the paper?—Yes.
Yon had diseased the murder with your
sister, Mrs. Layer?—Yes.
Yon had also discussed with her the
dates when you made your statements,
and the dates, when the accused came in,
and so forth?—Yes.
Although you had diseased the dates of
making the statements with her, she was
yesterday unable to fix the date closer than
27 days oil the actual date. Your memory
is better?—l remember very well indeed
the date. May 15, when I went in to me
Mr. Lavan.
Yon had no doubt at all about the
date? —Ho. i
A number of lads congregate hi your es-
tablishment in the evening—Sometimes.
Usually a number of D«i” whom Auburn
knew used to sit down in your shop to-
wards U pm. and have a chat and drink
lemonade?—He rusk have known them.
You have seen him talk to them?—Some-
thwea.
The lads used to sit down there and
ehat for about half an hour? —I could not
say how long.
He has been there frequently chatting
with them?—He has hot chatted with
them very often when I hare been there.
He would know that they would prob'ab-
lr ho in there every night?—l don’t know
whether he knew if or not.
Auburn usually came in sit 11?—At 11
or half-past.
Wonld he not see the lads there fre-
quently? I don’t mean every night?—l
dare say he would see them sometimes.
I presume von have had a talk with
vmr sister, Mrs. Layer, since yesterday?
—Not on this case. We were ordered
nor to discuss the ease.
AFTER AUBURN’S ARREST.
• I suppose you saw the full report of the
evidenge is last night’s copy of “The
Daily News,” the whole thing, question
aim answer fr—l tow it. ,
So I suppose you knew what was coming
to-day f—l knew what my sister had gone
through. (Laughter.) I didn’t know
whether I would get the same ques-
tions. ~
When did you first realise the import-
aree-of your evidence? —After George was
arrested.
As soon as he was. arrested? —Yea.
Immediately yon saw in the paper that
he was arrested, yon realised that vour
evidence would "establish an alibi. Yon
tow the notice of his aryest?—Yes.
When you read that norice, did yon re-
alise that vour evidence was highly im-
portant?—More so after the inquest.
You realised that von eonld establish an
»hhi?—Yes.
And that your evidence would prove con-
clusively that Anbury had not committed
the nmtdert—My evidence would prove
that he was in our shop about 10 o’clock.
And that would estab’ish that he could
not have committed the murder? —I really
don’t know what time the murder was
Committed. (Laughter.)
Having seen the paper, you know no one
eonld have murdered him before 10?—I
Suppose so. ■
That bronght it home to yon?—Yes, 1
read U over.
A pity it was published, that’s all. How
did ft strike Opn it was important after
the > inquest?—After rite first announce-
ment I thought the murder was committed
late at night.
MURDERS LATE AT SIGHT,
Why did yon think so?—Oh, I jost
thought.
Prom what yon saw in the paper?—l
thought most murders Were committed late
at night.
Was not 10 late enough?—l didn't think
so. (Laughter.)
Did yon have a standard time for
murders?—lt was just that I had rsi£ j
heard of murders committed'about S or 0. i.
Well, why not at 10?—It could have
been. I-
Mr. Haynes to the witness Johnston):
You have told me you gained the im-
pression, when you read it in the .paper,
that your evidence would establish an
alibi?—-Yes, and after the inquest morej
so. .!
Look at the paper and tell me how yon
think it would- Is there anything there
to establish that impression?—Well, no.
Yon have got a mistaken impression a#
to your memory at' that time. It could
not have created that impression at the*
time?—What impression.
The impression that your evidence would
amount to an alibi?—Well, no, not just this
little bit.
Why didn't you communicate with the
detectives or with legal advisers?—l did-
not like to be bronght into the case.
Both of you were of that opinion?—l
was always a-ainst it.
Is that why you came last?—Possibly.
(Laughter.)
Were you afraid to ring up Auburn's
parents and tell them?—l did not know
until I read the evidence at the inquest
that he said he bad been in the shop that
night.
Was there anyone there when he came
in?—One person.
I suppose that was in the paper this
morning?—l knew it.
Did no one come to see yon or Mrs-
Lurer on Auburn’s behalf before the
ste ement was taken?—No.
Did the article say when Auburn was
arrested?—He was arrested on the 16th.
Was that in the .paper to-day?—Yes, it
.was.
It would be difficult to catch yon on any !
of these dates, if yon were not sure before ,
your memory would be brightened by read-;
mg the paper?—l was not in donbt.
lour memory would be more clear on
the points on the day after Auburn's
arrest than on May 13?—I suppose so.
How do you know Mrs. Luycr looked at
the clock when Auburn entered, the shop
on the Friday night?—l was standing in-
front of it and was looking at her, look-
ing at it. (Laughter.) It is always a;
little fast. .
Do you never nut it back to the right
time?—Oh, no, we always keep it a little,'
fast. ■
How long does it take to heat pies?—
About three minutes.
As Auburn did not go to your shop after
April 4 he must have transferred hia ens-*
tom elsewhere?—It looked like it.
The Court adjourned for lunch.
AT BANNON’S.
On resuming, Mr. Haynes asked: Where;
were you out visiting on the Friday night?,
—At Mrs. Bannon’s place. She is the.)
wife of Constable Bannon. About that
time I often used to go there; perhaps
three or four times a week on an average.
How do you know that that night of
April 4 was the particular night oil which
Auburn came in early ?—Because it ia the
only night he did come in craly.
But, since you visited Bannon’s three
or four times a week, how do yon fix that
Friday as being the Friday on which he
came in early?—That is the only night he,
came in early when I game from Bannon’s. -
Your impression comes to this, that he
came ia early on only one night, and that ,
that was a night you visited Bannon’s?-—i
Yes. i
But bow does that fix it for the partien- \
lar night of the week, Friday, iiDyJu went^


three or ‘ a Week to Banqoa's T. "p
■ —l remember April 4 too well.
Why too well ? —Because that .was the i
only night Auburn came in early that I
visited Bannon’s. , . ■
Why not Thursday nighr, Wednesday
night, Tuesday night, or Monday night,,
when you visited Bannon’s? —He did not '
come in early those other nights.
But what definitely fixes it as being the :
Friday?—That is the only night I came
from Baxmon’s early. ■
There was only one night, bat do you
remember that it was Friday, and not
Thursday?—l was not at Bannons On the
Thursday.
Well, Wednesday?—l know'it was- the
Friday.
Were you at Bannons on the Wednes-
day?—lt might have been a Wednesday
afternoon, and not a Wednesday night.
How was Auburn’s parcel wrapped up
on April 4?—Just in the usual way. The
bottle was rapped in a piece of newspaper;
and the pies were put in a brown-paper
bag.
Did you notice that? —I saw Mrs. Buyer
hand him a parcel over the counter.
Did you see her put the pies In the bag?
—I don’t know.
. Where did he. put them? (Laughter.) I
mean immediately, not ultimately?—He
took one in his hand and,the botU,e under
his arm.
Which arm?—That I could not remem-
ber.
Did he always take the bottle under his
arm? —Generally he just put it under his
arm.
How many times did he come in on Sat-
urday nights before April 4?—l don't re-
member him missing any Saturday night. ~
Well, how many Thursday nights did he
miss before April 4?—We don’t remember
him missing one night up to April 4...
“We” don’t'/—Well. I don’t. j
Yon said “we.”- Do you remember 1
reading this morning’s paper where, Mrs. “
Layer said she did not remember how
many Saturdays or Friday nights ha
missed, or how many Tuesdays, Wednes- :
days, or Thursdays?—Yes.
Mr. Lavan objected that Mr. Haynes
had not asked Mrs. Layer that question.,
Mr. Haynes might have thought he,asked,
that question, but in point of fact had not-
done so. Mrs. Luyer said that Auburn ,
was in every night that she was on duty.
If necessary, Mrs. Luyer could be recalled ,
on that point.
Mr. Haynes: You don’t know how many
Saturday nights he missed, because you _
were not always there?—That is so.
Would the other lady he on duty every
night?—Certainly rot! ' ;
All right; I only wanted to know.
(Laughter.) Did you and she take alter-
nate nights ?—Yes.
And sometimes you were there together j
—Only on a very busy night.
Did you see in the paper, where Mrs.
Luyer said that immediately after you 1
came in on that Friday night Auburn came
in?—Yes. That is correct.
Correct? —Not immediately, but just a
few minutes after I came in.
If Auburn said to the police in his state-
ment shortly before his arrest that be got
to your shop at 10.15 or 10.25
Mr. Lavan objected that this was not
said.
Mr. _Haynes: I am not trying to mislead
the witness. (To witness): If he said Le:
came out of the theatre between 10.15 and,
10.25, he would take about seven minutes.
to get to your shop?—Yes.
If he told the police that it is practi-
cally the same thing as saying he got to;
your shop between 10.20 and 10,30? —He’
did not, though. * J ,
_ If he said that he came out at those
times, and now that he went up to your
shop, would you be prepared to contradict
him?—Yes.
Is he wrong ?—He must be.
You pit you r memory against his?—Yes-
Don’t von think ft strange that if he had
come into yonr shop that night that he
would forget it?—lt surprises me.
ANOTHER CALLER.
Do you know Mr. Roberts ?—Yes, he
came into the shop very often,, -
• Do yon know he was in the East for
some time?—Not until he told me.
Do yon remember him coming in on the
Wednesday after the murder, and saying
he was just back from the East? —I don’t
remember him. telling me that until last
Saturday.
Do you remember that day saying to
him, “What do you think of the murder?”
and he replied,) “I know no more about it
than what I saw in the papepa in - the
East?”—l don't (remember speaking to
him on the Wednesday night.
Can yon recall him entering the shop on
Friday after the arrest, or a day or two
after it?—No, I don’t; he comes in so
often.
Do you remember him saying, “I see
there has been an arrest in the murder
ease,” and you replying, “Yes, we know
that boy well if it is the one I think it
is”?—No.
Nor words to that effect —No; I never
remember speaking to the man about it _
Did you say to him something to this
effect, that Auburn never missed coming
in to the shop, bnt it was funny the night
of the murder was the first night he had
missed for a long time? —No, I did not
say it
Yon remember the report of Mr. La van’s
opening address appearing in last Thurs-
day’s issue of “The Daily News” and Fri-
day’s “West Australian”?—Yes.
Did Roberts call the day after that, and
did he say, “I see by the paper yon say
that Auburn called here that night”?—
Last Saturday afternon he spoke to me,
and said, “I thought you gave mo to un-
derstand that Apnl 4 was the first night
Auburn missed coming in here.’’
What did yon reply?—l told him he was
mistaken. I did not converse with him,
and that it must have been Mrs. Layer.
What else? —He said it may have been
her, he was not too sure.
Did Roberts say anything more? —He
said he was not sure which of ns it was.
Why did vou tell Roberts it must have
been Mrs. Layer he saw t —Because I did
not remember having had a conversation
with him before last Saturday. I told him
then he must have been mistaken who-
ever he spoke to.
TWO MORE.
I will now call in Mr. DnpernzeL Have
vou ever had a conversation witß him?
—(Looking him up and down): Ido not
think I have ever set eyes on him before.
(Laughter.)
I will nuw call im Mr. Robt Williams.
Do you know him?—l know him very well.
Did you know he was a police recruit?
—Yes, ho often came in to the shop.
Do you remember saying to him that
vou were not present when Auburn came
in to the shop on the night of the mar-
dcr? —1 did not say such a thing.
And that yon had asked Mrs. Luyer if
Le had byn in and that she said he had
come in earlier than usual?—l did not
converse about the night before with Wil-
liams. He often asked me about it, but
1 did not answer him. He has frequently
Questioned me about the 4th of April, but
’ I told him I refused to answer him.
His Honor: Did he use the words “the
night of the 4th of April”?—He has
often spoken of the murder, hut I did not
discuss it much with him at any time.
You said vou did not discuss it at all
with him. Did he use those words?—He
has mentioned them to me, and I hare dis-
cussed the murder with him, but I did not
talk about Auburn being in the shop that
night
Mr. Haynes: You had many eonveraa-
| tions with him _ on the subject?—Very


short ones, but he always brought up the
subject first. It seemed peculiar to me
that he should always mention it when
he could get no satisfaction from me.
Would not that be’his curiosity?—l do
not know. • -
. What was the reason for your refusal to
discuss the matter with him?—Well, I
knew he was a recruit or something to d°
with the police, and I was told the first
time I saw him not to trust him; he was
pointed out to me. (Laughter.)
Was that before Auburn|s arrest?—
Yqs;-it was the very first time he came
into the place. ' ■ . ...
Although you can’t trust him, you talked
to him for half an hour? —Quite correct.
If he said specifically that you said
you were not in the shop when Auburn
came in that Friday night, it would be a
deliberate fabrication?—Yes, it would.
Undonbted perjury?—As I bare tola
you, I have never ...
It jvould be an absolute .fabrication; it
could not be a misunderstanding, could it?
—Well, I don’t know.
Could it be a misunderstanding if you
never discussed _ that with him?—Well,
one wouldn't think so.
Therefore it would be an absolute fab-
rication. Did you sec where Auburn took
his.money from that night?—No; I never
saw where he took his money from.
Did you sec . where he took his money
from any night?—l did not take much no-
tice of that. He always had his money
ready to pay me when I handed him his
parcels. , •
Did you notice where he put his change?
—I very ■ rarely gave him change. He
nearly always gave me a shilling and a
penny. __ ?
CALL MR. MURPHY.
Mr. Haynes: Call in Mr. Murphy. (Mr.
“Dryblower” Murphy entered the Court:
spruce, and broadly smiling, to the accom-
paniment of some laughter.) Have you
ever seen that gentleman .before? —Yes.
(Laughter.)
Mr. Haynes; That will do, Mr. Murphy;
you can leave the Court. (To the wit-
ness): You were curious to know who he
was when ho came in, weren’t you?—l
knew him as “Dryblower,” not. as “Mr.
Murphy.” (Prolonged laughter.)
Did he come in three or four times ' a
week to use the telephone?—He used often
to come iu. I' would not say how often.
He lives just around the-corner. Do you
remember his coming, in the day after Au-
burn’s arrest?—l cannot say I do.
Well, do yon remember his calling in one
day shortly after the arrest and the two of
you holding a conversation with him as to
the murder?—Not the two of ns together.
I remember two distinct conversations with
him. / '
About the murder?—Not altogether
abput the murder. The murder was men-
tioned in one conversation.
His Honor; In only one?—Yes, because
the other conversation 1 was with another
person.
Mr. Haynes; Do yon remember your say-
ing, to him, “Fancy that being young Au-
burn in the murder. Do you know him?”—
Yes, I think I remember saying that; it
was on a Sunday morning.
Did he reply “Not that I kngjv of, but
I used to see him when he was a kiddie,
because I used to live near his parents’ ho-
tel, the Tower Hotel?—l think he said
that.
Did, Murphy then say “What sort of a
chap is he; what does he look like?” and
then did you say: ‘Oh, a nice quiet, well-
dressed and well-behaved young chap, so
nicely spoken; used to sit here of a night
and have a drink? —I did say that on the
Sunday morning.
Did you also say, “He used to meet here
a lot of young chaps of a night, and chat
with them, and then go , home on the
tram’,’?— I don’t rememuer that.
It is immaterial, but it is true. Then
did Murphy ask you what Auburn would be
doing up there, and did you say “He brings
his young lady home from town and then
eomes back here and catches his car here”
or words to that effect?—l may bare used’
those words; I don’t remember using
them. ' ~ . ‘
Did Murphy then say to you, “Have you
seed him lately?” and did you reply, “Oh,
not for a long time”?—No, I did not. (This
answer was spoken very emphatically,)
It would not be true for you to say it;
then?—l did not say it.
: 1 am putting it to you that you would
not have said it.
Mr. Lavan: I, object. The witness says
she did not say it.
His Honor: I should say if she did say
it what would it matter? (Laughter.)
But if you said it?—lf I did it would be
incorrect, but I did not see it.
Since Murphy came in on the 17th, would
you have said it was a long time?—lt
was not a long time, no.
What was the reason yon did not want
to be dragged into it? —Dragged into what?
About this affair; you knew Purdne,
knew him at Cue? —Yes, I got to know him
there.
And conversed with him?—Up there,
but I have not spoken to him since.
) Why were you afraid of letting him
I know?—l did pot see any reason to.
i Do yon mean that?—Yes.
Why?—He was the man who interview-
ed Auburn and naturally I thought Auburn
would have told him.
But when you saw the inquest was fin-
ished you still did not go to anybody, de-
fence or prosecution?—No, I did not.
•The inquest closed on May 8. You say
you saw the evidence, therefore you must
have known he did not mention being at
your shop, but you did not gt to tho
your shop, but you did not go to the
■ it.
Would you have stayed out to the bitter
end if Mrs. Luyer had not come in? —I
cannot say whether I would or pot.
It is possible?—Yes.
Although yon are convinced he is inno-
cent?—l am not sure whether I would
have come forward.
Although your evidence would prove his
tmmcencc, if correct?—Yes.


Miss Yfenrtetta Johnson, partner of Mrs.
Effle Lnyer in the meat-pie and soft-drink
•hop situated at the comer of Beaufort
•ad Newcastle streets, was firm in her con-
viction that George Auburn (the accused)
called At their shop at 10 pan. on April 4.
[Yesterday afternoon in the Criminal Court,
while giving evidence in the “O'Neil
murder case,” she corroborated the state-
ments made by Mrs. Buyer on this point.
She was subjected to cross-examination by
Mr. A. G. Haynes.
Mr. Haynes: Did yon tell anyone that
{Auburn was not in the shop on the night
«f the murder I—No. That would be un-
true.
Do you knew what time it was alleged
the murder bad been committed? —No, and
I do not know now.
If Anbora said half a dozen times he was
not in your at 10 o’doek what would
you say?—He would be telling a lie.
EAST PERTH PICTURES.
Herbert M'Crae, film manager for Uni-
X' rsal Films, was then called.
Mr. Lavsn: Do you supply dims to the
Hast Perth Picture Gardens!—l select the
pictures for them, and they arc paid lor
through me.
1 now want to know what pie tuxes were
shown at East Perth on the night of April
4
Mr. Parkery How ooold he say what they
were if he wfn not there?
Mr. Levan: Me can say what pictures he
selected for the night.
His Honor: I do not see how you can
drag in the Esgt Perth Picture Gardens.
Hr. Lavan: T ’ou cannot see yet, but if
you will be pal'" 't. sir, I will show you.
His Honor; J annot see, unless you open
the evidence of 'Vs witness. You have not
' ‘carte blanch< ’ to call everyone to deal
with every topic you like.
Mr. Lavaa: There are certain witnesses
whose evidence I did not refer to in my
opening address, because I did not enow
3 should be calling them. I did tell the
Jury that I should he calling Cecil White;
to «ay that he was at the East Perth Pie-1
Jurcs that night. ■(
Mr. Parker; We do not know yet what
pictures were shown there. i
Mr. Lavan: I ask your Honor to be!
patient with me, inasmuch as you can tell
the jury to disregrd the evidence if yon ■
think it of no value.
Hie Honor: I cannot see any connection
between the selection of pictures for the
Hast Perth Gardens and what may have
been shown there.
Mr. Lavan: I will do so if you will give
tue time.
Mr. Lavan (to witness): What pictures
<3 id vou select for the Bast Perth Gardens
on that night?
Mr. Parker: I object. This is all irre-
levant matter.
At what time does the performance usu-
ally start? —Between 9 and. 9.5; never later
than five minntes past 8.
jtis Honor: How would you gauge the
length of time required to show, for in-
eiance. “Potash and Ferlmutter”? —The
time required is 10} minutes for each
I,oooft.
After argument between counsel as »o
the admissibility of evidence regarding pic-
tures arid times of screening, his Honor re-
marked : Let us get on.
Mr. Lavan (to witness): Ton were not
Tresent when the pictures were shown? —
No. -■>■■■■■-
Mr. Parker: Then yon do not know whe-
ther they were shown?—Yes, I do. They
■were delivered by me on a Friday night,
and returned to me on the Saturday morn-
I ? ‘ CAR NO. 3481.
('has, James Albert Allen, a motor-cycle
taxi -driver, said that 12.45 a.m. on April
L he was in Roc-street waiting for a pas- j
tenger. He noticed a motor car standing ;
abend of him. It was facing towards
He*iufort-street, and on its proper side of
4 he -road. The lights were in use. The
number of the ear was oust. He could not
see anyone in the car, and did not go over
to it.
Mr. Haynes: Yon have seen that car be-
fore ?—I would not say for certain.
You saw the police on the day following
flic murder?—! never.
Didn't you see Constable or Detective
Hickson?—No, I don't know him.
Constable Hickson was called, whereupon
witness s-aid, “I know him now. He was
r.nt in uniform then. I see a lot of them
on my Job. but I don’t know their names.”
Mr. Haynes: Was the ear outside 226
lior-street?—Yes. , .
Did .yon say something to Constable
Hickson to the effect that you were not
sure whether it was No. 3481 or 3401?
I don’t know; I never said that.
You do not know?—l never said that.
Mr. Lavan: He said he did not say it.
Mr. Haynes: Will yon swear you did not
««v-just now. “I do not know”?—T said
“T never said that.”
His Honor; Did you not say in this
Coart, when yon were asked the question,
*• f do not know”?—No.
Mr. Haynes: How did the constable come
to be in a position to ask you whether it
■was- outside 226 Hoc-street that you saw
the oar?—l suppose Mr. Lavan told you.
J think one of the taxi-drivers reported it,
J-' I am not mistaken.
Did vou'.suy anything’to the constable
about Hickson?—No. ■
Did von notice anything about the car
that was in front of you?—Yes. the mm-
bet;, T also noticed that there were tyres
nn the back.
Can two tyres be hung on the back? —
T«h see three hanging on the back some-
limes.
A ROW.
lid you know anything about a row
[where somebody kicked a woman, and one
c: the woman’s dogs, at one place, and a
nun tried to throttle a woman, and another
ran out of the place?—No.
You did not gav anything about that? —
tfc.
How manr passengers did you have
there? —Two.
And hop - long were you there? —I waited
between a quarter of an hour and 20
minutes. .
Then the passengers came hack again?—l
NV-- thev dismissed me then.
w> They told you to go?—They came out
tw> the verandah and told me to go.
'Poxy far were you from this car ? —A'
wetter of about freyn here (the witness-,
brs) to that gentleman (indicating His'
Honor’s Associate).
\ Your lights were playing on the back i
of the car?—Yes.
• Rut you could not sec how many twees
there were? —I saw two. One was haag-
ir," below the other. -
When did you first give a statement?—
) never gave a statement to anyone;- The
first statement. J cave was when I was
sent for hr, Mr. Lavan.
AFTER TWO AND A-HALF MONTHS.
When were-you sent 4or? —Last Sunday.
Three days ago, after a lapse of two-
hud a-half months. Did you have that
jpimber down any where ?—No, hut I had
r : ——(witness paused).
Pat von had what?—l had a Tot ehip-
h: pg me about it.
But von never noted the number down?
’ - ” .
And you will swear definitely that von
did not tell Constable Hickson or anyone
else that the number might have been 3481
and that it might have been some other
number?—l never said that.
You will swear that you never discussed
th* matter with any constable? —As I told
you before, not to my knowledge.
Could you have discussed _it with a
policeman and forgotten about it? —I might
h av ®* . .....
If yon might have forgotten that, might
vou not have mistaken the number? —No.


II yon don’t knogr what yon spoke to
the' policeman about, would vou be pre-
pared to contradict him; as to hi? version
of the interview?—Yes, I would.
' though yon forget whether yon talked
to ,im or not?—Yes. I know the number,
bht I don’t know whether I spoke to the
constable.
A TAXI-DRIVER AND A BARBER.
You know the history of this case as it
appeared in the Press from time to time?
—Yea, but I don’t worry much about
Is it not a fact that a taxi-driver and
a barber can tell you all the latest news*
Generally,
They hare lots of time on their hands,
haven’t they?—Yes.
■ Weren’t you conversant with the evi-
dence against.tjie accused?—l knew it
When dief yop. first realise the import-
ance of your evidence, that you saw car
3481 in Roe-street?—On Sunday morning
cr Sunday afternoon. ,
And why was it that you first realised it
then? —I was. sent for.
"When you were sent for?—l did not
want to be dragged into this case; that’s
why. ■
Although perhaps your evidence would
help to establish this man’s if
true?—Yes, I didn’t want to be pulled into
it.
You would not come into it, although you
realised that? —I was not coming in unless
I was dragged into it.
If you wanted to keep out of it you 1
could have; who sent for you?—Mr.
Walsh.
Were you bound to come in?—He asked
me what I knew, and I told him. I did '
not know whether I was to be called. 1
was handed a paper, and was told I would
have to appear.
You knew you would have to be a wit-
ness?—l didn’t.
Although you knew your evidence was
in his favor, you did not know you were
going to be called?—No.
Did you not tell a policeman or someone
else to go to someone else to corroborate
ynr statement?—No.
Did Auburn put it to you to go to Syd-
ney and start a garage?—No. I,mistook
the man who was speaking to me months
before.
Were there two men?—The man I was
speaking of took me to the Bedford Hotel
and talked about it.
Are yon Charles Alfred Allen? —I,' am
Charles Alfred James Allen.
You have No. 2 motor-cycle taxi?—Yes,
but Hickson, the policeman, .may have
mixed me up with one of the other drivers.
There is no chance of a mistake. Whom
did you tell yon were approached by
Auburn?—l told my brother-in-law.
Did you tell the policeman?—Not to my
knowledge.
Is your memory bad?—No.
But you were able to remember the num-
ber of the car for two months?—Yes. I
also saw it in the paper on the Monday
night.
. Is that the first time you saw it?—Yes,
in print. -
- You can carry a number like that in
your head?—Yes. I did not know whose
car it was.
Did you pass, the car? —Yea, about five
minutes past 3. To all appearances, it
was empty. I glanced in and saw ,no
one.
The Court adjourned at 4 p.m.
TO-DAT’S PROCEEDINGS.
When the Court resumed this morninm
t Mr. .A. G. Haynes (for the _ prosecution)
continued his cross-examination of the
motor cycle taxi-driver, Charles James Al-
len.'
EVIDENCE OF REBUTTAL.
; His Honor said he had been asked yes-
terday whether he would listen to an ap-
plication to allow 1 evidence of _rebuttai. He
; had listened to an application m Chambers,
! and had decided that it could not.be taken
unless the accused was present. He was
l prepared, however, to take it in Court
when- the jury was not present. Ho
thought the best time would be when the
i defence had finished.
■ , Mr. Parker produced the waistcoat of
• Auburn’s which bad the hole in the pocket.
CAR IN ROE-STREET.
: "’Mr. Haynes: Call in Constable Parker.
(Constable Parker came in.)
You know him?—Yes. I knew him in
: Black boy Camp.
• Do you remember his calling on you on
the Monday morning following the mur-
der? —No.
He asked you if you had seen ear No.
3481 in Roe-street early on Saturday
morning?—l do not remember that. 1
Have you a relative who owns a car No.
3081?—No.
Who was your passenger that night?—
I. cannot tell you.
, Has he a car of that number?—l do not
know.
Did you tell the constable you were cer-
tain there was an 81 at the end and a 3
at the beginning, but you were not certain
about the “0” in the middle?—l never
said that.
Do you deny saying that as it finished
with 81 and had a “3” at the beginning,
you were pretty certain it was O’Neil’s
car? —Yes. ‘
Did you tell him you had previously re-
ported the same matter to one of the
police?—No,
Did you tell him anything about an ar-
gument in one of the houses in Roe-street?
—No.
On Monday last, did you meet Mr. Par-
ker before 0 a.m., and some in with him
in the tram?—l walked along, the road
with him..
You told him you had an appointment
with Mr. Lavan?—Yes.
Did you tell him you thought you would
remember Auburn again?—No.
. When did you find out it was not Au-
burn who spoke to you about going East?
—From my brother. It was a case of
mistaken identity. Ido not know Au-
i burn.
Did you go to sec the supposed person’s
•father?—Yes, at the Bedford Hotel,
. You .know Constable Hickson?—Yes.
You remember seeing him pnee at 1.15
to 1.30 a.m. on the Economic corner? —
No. -
Do you remember seeing him at 8.40 p.m.
bn Saturday, April 5, at the Economic cor-
ner?—l don’t remember.
Dp yon remember telling Min that oh the
previous’night you had been in Roe-street
at 12.20 to 12.25 a.ra. with a young chap
whose name you gave?—No.
Did you not know the name of the man
'who hired your car?—No.-
■'Did you say to Hickson that yon saw
a car outside No. 220 Roe-street at 12.20
' to 12 25 ajn. which you thought was 3481
or 3081?—No.
Did you tell him that you would know
1 who were the men in the car ? —No.
A ROW IN ROE-STREET.
Did you say yon would know them be-
cause one of them kicked “Auntie’s” dog
and she remonstrated, and one of them
grabbed her by the throat and tried to
throttle her ?—No.
Yon told neither him nor Constable Par-
ker anything at all about that? —No, not
then.
What do you mean by “not then”? —:
'■ Saturday, April 5.
Well, what day did you make use of those
1 expressions?—l didn’t make use of them.
Did those happenings take place?—No. ,
How do you know they didn’t? —Because
I never said those things.
Did those things take place in Roe-
street? —I don’t get what yon mean.
Did two men have a row about kicking
a dog?—l know nothing about that. There
was no row in Roe-street while I was tiyjre.


■ Didn’t you see two men come out of that
house in Roe-street and ride away on
bicycles?—No.
What was the color of the car in Roe-
street ?—I didn’t notice.
Do yon know that car 3081 is a white
car?—l do not.
Who is the owner of this white car? —I
do not know.
WITNESS COLOR BLIND.
Do you know the number of O’Neil’s
ear?—-No; nor the color. I am color blind.
You told us the reason you didn’t know
the color of the car was because yon didn’t
look at it much? —I have perfect vision,
but lam color blind. (Laughter.)
Do you know the difference between a
dark grey and a white car?—l might. I
would know whether it was dark or light.
Do you know Clift Lloyd, an indent
agent f —No.
A few days following the murder did
you say to Lloyd that between 11 and 11.30
you saw a car in Eoe-btreet? —No. I never
had any conversation with him, and did
not say that
Did you not say to him or anyone else
that you thought it was a car belonging to
a relative of yours or your passenger’s?—
No.
Didn’t you say you looked at it and re-
cognised it as the Buick Six belonging to
O’Neil?—No. '
It would have been all moonshine for vou
to have said you recognised it as O’Neil’s,
because you didn't know his car?—Yes,
it would be untruthful to say it was
O’Neil’s, because I didn’t know the car
or the number. -
When did you find oil’’'O’Neil’s number?
—On the Monday, April 7/ _
You did not know O'Neil’s number be-
fore Monday?—No. I remember looking it
up either in the police book or the news-
paper. I think it was in the paper.
You can’t have discussed it with motor-
men on the rank on Saturday that you
thought it was 3481?—I discussed the mur-
der, that was all.
Would you dispute Uoyd, Parkes and
Hickson?—Yes.
For all you knew, there might have been
someone in the car ahead of you when you
pulled up in Roe-street? —I saw no one in
it. I passed the car coming down and
then going bank.
Did you notice before stopping there was
no one in the car?—Yes.
Why did you not get off your cycle and
converse with the driver while you were
■ Mailing?—Because no on© was in the car.
It does not do to look around much down
there. (Laughter.)
You were looking straight at the number
of the other ear for 20 minutes, and had
nothing else to look at beside the tyres.
Did you not notice that the tyres were tied
on to the car anyhow?—No.
Have you made a note of the number of
other cars? —Yes, often, in similar circum-
stances.
Do yon follow that practice as a rule?—
No.
RE-EXAMINATION.
Re-examined by Mr. Lavan, witness said
the car opposite him that night was facing
Beaufort-street. . He did not get off his
cycle all the time he was waiting outside
the house in Roe-street. ■ When he saw
the number of the car in the paper he re-
membered where he had seen it on the
Friday night. He had no donbt about the
number. It was not a white car. He
had given his statement to Mr. Walsh, so-
licitor, on Monday. He had no personal
interest in the case, and had not come for-
ward for any fee or award.
Mr. Lavan: Did you tell Constables
Parker or Hickson you had any doubt about;
the number of the cart—No, and I did not,
tell them anything about any row in Roe-
street.
The witness then retired.
NO OAR IN VINCENT-STREET.
Roy Shilkin, employed by Doyle Bros,
for about four years, was examined by Mr.
Lavan, and said that on the night of April',
4 he' was with Mr. Banks at St George's
Hall, where Banks had a. catering job. Wit-
ness left with Banks in the latter’s car
just on midnight. The other people in
the car were Banks's partner and a mem-
ber of the orchestra. The car proceeded
from the ball along Hay-street as far as
Axon-street, then turned to the right up
Axon-street across the railway bridge, then
to the left up Kimberley-street, then up
Vincent-street. Before reaching Vincent-
street they dropped the member of the
orchestra on the Axon-street crossing, aud
Banks’s partner in Kimberley-street. The
ear proceeded along Vincent-street to Bul-
wer-street, where witness’s home wai, and
Banks dropped him. After dropping
Banks's partner witness and Banks crossed
Oxford-street, and then proceeded right
along past the Lcederville Reserve. From
Oxford-street onward Vincent-street was a
narrow street, just a ribbon of road. The
time was between a quarter and half-past
12. He saw no stationary ear at all in
Vincent-street. He could swear that
definitely. Banks’s car hs I headlights
that night.
Mr. Parker; Have you ever driven home
with Mr. Banks on other occasions? —One
or two. I don’t remember the exact dates.
One occasion was about the end of May
last. _
Who were in the ear that night?—My-
self, Banks, and three others. We took
exactly the same rente as on the night of
April 4. The people in the car were not
the same. The time was about 12.30 a.m.,
the same as on April 4.
How many cars did you sec that night?
—I don’t remember seeing any, except in
Hay-street.
Will, you swear positively vou never
saw ary cars after leaving Hay-street
that n; ht? —I will not. I was not looking
for th( a. I was not looking for them
•on the night of April 4, either.
Why did vou first go to sec Mr. Lavan
then? —I didn’t first go to Mr. Lavan. 1
went to the detective office. I think it
was May 15, but I am not sure of the
date.
Was that, the first statement made?—
No. I. saw a clerk in the detective office
and told him exactly the same as ■ we
told Mr. Lavan.
Did the clerk at the detective office take
anv notes? —No, he wrote down our names
and addresses.
Did you tell Mr. Lavan exactly the
same? —Yes; that if a car was in Vincent-
street wo could not have missed it.
How many days after did vou see De-
tectives Purdue and Doyle?—About a
week. I think it was the same day as I
saw Mr. Lavan.
How was it vou came to see Mr. Lavan?
—I had a telephone message from Mr.
'Banks, who was in Mr. Lavan's office. I
i went np about half an hour later, and
. met Mr.-Banks at the solicitor’s office.
Mr. Banks had already given a statement.
THs was read over, and I signed it. Not
the same statement, but one saving "I
agree with what Mr. Banks has said.”
You remember the detectives calling on
veu the same day?—Yes.
| Did you not sav that vou were not pre-
pared, to swear that there was no car at
this particular place?—l do not remember
this question being put to me.
And your saying yon wo' not swear
it as you might have been talking and
not noticed it? —I don’t think I said that
either.
I presume vou do talk in the car?—l
may have talbed some of the wav.
Did you talk during the trip In MavT—
I suppose 1 did.
Might, vou not have been talking when
you passed the car? — I always have my
eves in front of me, and for a good part
of the way I look in front of me.
Would von see a ear on the side of the
road?—l would. I was sitting beside the
diiver. Yon could see the 50 yards to
where the car. was presumed to be when
We turned from Oxford-street.


Why do you “presume 50 yards” from
the corner?—l think it was the next time
we went ont in tfep ear that the place
was pointed out to me. That was at the
end of May.
Ho you remember, on April 4, seeing
any cars bn the way home? —Yes. I saw
one in Railwav-parade, and a Ford gtand-
im on the right-hand side of Kimberley*
street near the Are station. _ "*
sir«tsb Aica-A ouuiu/u.
Yon saw Banks’ evidence in the paper"
—Yes. . _
Can two cars pass each other in Yin-
cent-street? —Yes, but T do not think both
could stay on the made road.
Have you ever passed a car in Yincent-
street? —I do nof"remember doing so.
Re-examined by Mr. Lavan, witness said
he first heard about a car being abandoned
'in Yincent-strcet on Saturday, April o.
When Detective Purdue first saw witness
he did not know witness had been to Mr.
Lavan’s office.
If you were talking to the driver while
1 going up Yincent-street, to what side would,
vour head be turned?—To the right.
That is the’side on which the abandoned
ear was said'to be?—l understand so.
‘ The witness was then discharged from
attendance at Court.
GEORGE AUBURN SENIOR’S EVI-
DENCE.
George Auburn said he had been 26
years in the "hotel business; and resided at
the Osborne Park Hotel. Accused was
his eldest son, and was 21 years of ago.
He had known of the proposed trip to Wa-
gin, for his son had mentioned it two or
‘hree days before. Geoiyc had proposed
iii take a party there. He accompanied
witness to town on the Saturday morning
(.April 5). Witness knew Charlie Johnson,
who owned a motor cycle. Johnson was
often at the, hotel. ■- ,
JOHNSON’S CYCLE..
The last occasion it was brought' tjicro
by Charlie Johnson was on Friday, April
4, before lunch. _ Witness saw Johnson
with the machine in the back yard and they
spoke ‘with each other. In consequence
of what witness said, Johnson took the
■ bicycle towards Eddie’s store. After be-
ing taken into town on the Saturday by
witness, George returned' on the Sunday
•night On the Monday witness saw George
at a motor bicycle—whose motor bicycle
witness did not know . It was just inside
the yard by the kitchen door. The time
was just before lunch. Witness passed
a remark to his wife about it. She was
'in the kitchen.' Later on that Monday he
saw George riding the motor bike —between
2 and 3 o’clock. He was riding towards
Perth. Witness next saw Geprge at tea
time. On the morning of the day George
went to Wagin. Miss Coombes served his
- breakfast. Witness knew George had a
bad arm for over two years.
AUBURN’S ARM.
Witness had often seen it bleed, the
blood running right down the am, to ,the
wrist. Witness did not stock limejuice
and soda. He had many times seen
George wash shirts, collars, and so on in
the bathroom and the washhouse. He had
never seen George wash a suit. He had
seen George hang out clothes oa the .line,
and had once or twice seen his suits hang-
ing on the line. He had seen George put
his suits ont one'e or twice.
..It CAR P3B. - .
: He owneii motor car P3B, a single seat- I
which George used to look after. He }
knew George had complained about the v
number • plates on the car. They were ,
very dull ; • * .
To his Honor ;T have had them over 12
months. ’I had to get them, whsnl went
to Osborne Park.
£l5O IN DEBTS.
To Mr. Lavan, witness said he knew
Ramsay well. Ramsay wond know George,
. too. He had had to pay debts Ggorge had
.contracted amounting to abont £l5O during
“’ the last two years. It was true, too, that
■ he_ had stopped George’s credit. Ho had
been allowing George £4 15s. including his
board and lodging', which was worth about
,£1 15s a week. He gave George additioh-
: al money besides that when he wanted it.
: He knew that George had hired Singe’s ear
j to go to Wagin. .
A BIRTHDAY PRESENT.
George Jiad a birthday present of £2l
coming to him which ho could have drawn
had he wanted it. When he offered George
the cheque he said “I have had enough
out of you lately, dad. I will have it
later.” On April 4he heard George come
home about 12 o’clock. George’s coom
was just oast witness’. He saw George
again Saturday morning. He was aware
that George was in the habit of bringing
something home to cat of an evening.
Mr. Haynes asked: On numerous occa-
siOßS before April 4 George promised yon
to gfVa new set of numlyrf Mates, the last
occasion being about three weeks before
April 4?—l remember the occasion. It
would be three weeks to a month before."
He spoke of the plates on several occasions.
He had mentioned it before over a period
of three or four months?—Yes.
What is wrong with your plates?—They
are badly finished and dull.
POOR OLD PLATES.
Is that not a strange sort of present to
give yon?—Ho did not sav anything aoout
a present. He said, “They are poor old
plates. I will get yon a better pair than
that some day, Dad.”
Is that not, giving you a present ?—Cer-
tainly not. I <Vi n ot think so. He
generally gives me better things, and pays
for them, and then charges me up with
them. (Laughter.) .
. Is it unusual to have dull number
plates? —No; but people like to have things
looking as nice as possible.
• You would have no objection to the jury
looking at your number plates?—No; they
are unshapely things, _ and tear your
clothes. The metropolitan number plates
are enamelled, and much better looking.
, Is it the numbering on the plate (hat
is unshapely?—The plate itself.
Have you seen any number plate that is
not squared at the edges?—l would not
swear that I have.
Was there to be anything special about
the^ plates your son was getting for you?
—No; the matter was left to him.
WH not any number plate, squared at
the corners, tear your clothes?—The enam-
elled plates are much smoother, and a little
rounded at the corners.
Were the new plates to be the same
shape as the old ?—I suppose so. It is a
good thing to have spares.
Ramsay made the plates you have, aud
the new ones were to have been made by
the same man? —I suppose so, but George
did not get them made there. lam ready
to bring the car down to the Court for you
to sec the plates now on it.
Did George tell you he had bought the
number plates for you?—No.
Did he afterwards tell you he had bought
■ theta?—No.
He said nothing about number plates?—
No.
Although he had got them?—He had
not got them as £a r as I knew.
Consequently you never made any in-
quiries as to where they were?—No.
Did an account come for the plates?—
No. .
You know of nobody who has made any
endeavor to oWw® number plates?—
No. ■ .
~ THE DETECTIVES' VISIT.
Detective-Sergeants Doyle and Cameron
came out to see you at 8.45 pm. on April
16?—Yes. . .......
Yon were asked by Detective-Sergeant
Doyle, “Do you know anything about
young George getting any number plates?”
and did yon reply, “Np, I don’t?”—
George said he would get me a set, and I
* * j . mi t * . . 'V. J T


told idem mat. "uney asxea me nau jl
seen any number platen about the place,
and I said “No."
His Honor: I can see nothing inconsis-
tent so far.
Mr. Haynes (to the witness): You said i
nothing to the detective-sergeants about
George intending to get the number plates T
—No; they asked me if I had seen any
number plates. My motor car was re-
licensed on August 29, 1923.
Did you ket the plates in August, 19231
-No. When I went to Osborne Park over
18 months ago.
Didn’t you tell Dets. Doyle and Cameron
you had got them since relicensing the ear
about four months before f—The re-
licensing would be the transfer
to the Perth Road Board. I
had to get new plates when I went out
to Osborne Park. I had No. 2728 before.
I deny that I said I got the plates when
I the car.
Would you not have the metropolitan ;
number until August?—l don’t think so. i
I have paid two licences to the Perth ;
Road Board. This one (exhibiting a car j
licence) is only the last one.
THE WAGIN TRIP.
George told you about the proposed trip
to Wagin?—Yes. He never suggested tak-
ing my car, as it was only a small one.
A single seater? —No, it holds two.
(Laughter.)
Conld you drive that wife two women
in it? —I could put anything in it. Seven
or eight or a dozen. I conld open the lid
and pat half a dozen aronnd the side. I
conld put a dozen on altogether. You
could stick them on like bags of chaff, but
it would not be comfortable.
When did you take George into Perth
on the Saturday ? —About 11 ajn. He
wanted to go to Wagin in the afternoon.
When did he fell yon that?—A day or
two before; he said he was going to Wa-
gin on Saturday.
On ■ Saturday afternoon?—-He said
“about Saturday afternoon."
You are sure of that?—Yes.
Did he ask for the Saturday morning
off ?—I told him he conld go after 10-30.
Did he ask yon at any time to have the
whole Saturday morning off? —He asked at
9 o’clock if I was- going into town and
if he could come with me. I said “I will
be going in before 11 o’clock."
He was in the bar prior to that?—Yes.
Did he ask yon prior'to the Saturday
to have the Saturday off? —No. The first
time he spoke to me about going into town
was at 9 a.m. on Saturday. He spoke about
the Wagin trip some days before, and said
he wanted to get awav about 10.30 or
XL
JOHNSTON’S BICYCLE.
When were you first called upon to re*
collect that the bicycle of Johnston’s came
to the hotel ? —When the inquest was on.
Johnston gave evidence at the inquest on
the 30th April? —Yes,
What hours did your son work for yon ?
■ —He might have been working in the
bar, working on the car, or running .mes-
sages. It was really a matter of giving
him something to do. I did not pay him
a regular amount, but he had what he
wanted.
Did yon keep an account regarding him?
—No. He was one of the family; not one
of the staff.
There was no question of your owing him
money?—No. He drew about what I
Would have had to pay another man.
You say you kept no record of pay-
ments to him?—Only through the book-
He often had more than his wages.
He did not sign for any.
Did he draw an advance on wages?—You
would not expect to get that back, would
yon? ; (Laught*^
THE DISTRESS WARRANT.
Ton remember a warrant being issued
against him over a debt of £37?-J-yes. I
got my son to open the document in my
presence. It was a judgment summons for
£37.
Was It not a warrant I—lt, was a Local
Court judgment summons. I did not see
any warrant. I arranged for payment at
£lO a month. I wanted him to make the
arrangement, hut he would not go.
Your son was at home when you made
the arrangement?—He was there at the
time. Ido not know when that occur-
red.
But you said he was there ? —He was
there when I opened the letter.
He was there when you made the ar-
rangement?—l don’t know when I made
] the arrangement.
As soon as you got the summons ytm'
went in and made the arrangement?—No.
I don’t know when I went in.
THE BLEEDING ARM.
As regards the blood on his arm. how
often did yon see it run down his wrist?—
Several times. I have frequently spoken
to him for not looking after it properly.'
Did yon notice the blood running dfnm
his am during the month or so before the
mnfder? —Yes.
Did he have his coat off at fee time?—
He was in a shirt and pants.
Have yon noticed the blood running down
his arm when he has had his coat on? —
No. '
The blood didn’t gush out? —Well, it
didn’t drown anyone. (Laughter.)
The wound is near the shoulder, and fee
blood would take a long time to run down
to his wrist?—l don’t know that it would.
Yon say he had his shirt on. Was, it
rolled up?—Yes.
And he allowed the blood to trickle right
down, to his wrist without attending to it,
or putting a bandage round it?—He often
bandaged it.
Hgw long would it take the Hood to ran
down to his wrist ? A few seconds or some
time? —I don’t know.
Would it trickle down fast or rfowiyf—
It would not run down like water frota a
tap.
Woudn’t he mop the blood up a a soon as
he saw it running down?—He might. '
But did he?—l have often seen him wipe
the blood off on anything that was nearest
to him. When a man is working on a car
he always has something on that ho is not
frightened to do anything with.
Did yon ever see his. clothes hanging on
the line to dry?—Yes.
How long would it take them to drv?—
All day.
His Honor; What clothes?
Mr. Haynes: A suit of clothes?—Yes.
It would not three days to dry,
would it? —I don’t think ttus suit would be
put there night and day.
If the bleeding broke out frequently,
why didn’t you get him attended to?—He
would not allow me to do anything. He
said he was all right, and would look after
it. He used to say “I can fix it up, dad."
A CLOTHES CLEANING MANIA.
In re-examination, Mr. Lsvan
Have yon seen George cleaning suits and
pressing them?—Hundreds of times. He
had a mania for cleaning his clothes.
Have you ever given him anything for
that purpose?—Yes, petroL
Have yon seen him use anything for his
armj—He has often used Rexona, Zam-Bnk
and other things.
As regards the document from Barton’s,
who was the solicitor yon saw?—Mr. Chick.
Do yon remember when that was?—No,
but I can look it up.
You told us the amount of money you
gave to George varied ? Would you have
had to employ a man in his place if he had
not done what he used to do?—Yes.
With regard to tie bicycle coming on
April 4. How do you fix the date?—lt was
the day before George was going to Wagin


EVIDENCE OP GEORGE AUBURN,
' SEN., CONTINUED,
And the Monday you saw Johnston with
the bicycle there, how do you fix that?-"”
It was the day after he came back.
Are you clear about the two days?—
Quite clear. ,
During the adjournment the jury inspect-
ed Mr. Auburn, sen.’s, car.
Mr. Auburn, sen., again entered the wit-
ness-box after the luncheon adjournment.
Mr. Haynes: That number-plate projects
over the edge of the mudgard about three
inches. In consequence of that yon arei
to catch your clothes on the edge of;
r it?—Yes. _ |
, Jlhat number-plate is fitted with a tra-|
Prnmhg,.slide ?—Only about half_ an inch. |
you could slide the plate inwards?
About half an inch.
Not more? —I don’t think so.
Would it be but a few minutes’ work
to file the corner off the plate?—l suppose
so. *
His Honor: Is the position of the plates
on your car fixed?—Yes. I have
had them there, but it is a bad position.
How long have yon had the car? —I
think for 12 months last December.
Mr. Lavan (to witness): Could the plate
in its present position tear your clothes?
—Very , easily. The number plate at the
back was run into by another car.
What was.the number of your old car?
—I think it-was 61. It was a Ford, and
I was not allowed to transfer the number
to the new car.
A TAILOR’S EVIDENCE.
. A new witness for the defence was then
called by Mr. Lavan, namely, Johji Archi-
bald Ewen, a master tailor, carrying on
business in the Bon Marche Buildings, Bar-
rack-street. Witness stated he had car-
ried on the business of tailoring for about
25. years. Upon being handed the blue
suit of accused, witness said he had exam-
ined it three times, as well as the button.
After comparing the material on the shank
of the button with the material of the ppat,
he could not say that the mdSifial in each
case was the same. It was impossible for
anyone to swear that it was. He produced
a bundle of seven different serges and said
the material on the shank was not unlike
any of them. 'lt might ’ come
from any one of these seven
different serges. He had made examina-
tions three weeks ago, a fortnight ago,
and to-day. He had carefully examined
the shank button and the hole in Auburn’s
serge coat. In his opinion it was impos-
sible to sav that the button fitted the !
AMATEUR SEWING.
The stitching on the. outside the
coat had been sewn very amateurishly.
Ihc stitching of the button was sewn the
same as a tailor would do it, parallel. The
other stitching was crossways. The jig-
ger button was not an unusual kind of
button, Bhauk buttons ou clothes were
verv fashionable. If a shank button were
tor? jff such a coat as Auburn’s, and (lie
suit was subsequently washed, the effect
in this quality of serge would be to slight- v
ly fray the edge, and, if the washing was j
rough, to increase the size of the hole, ’
Mr. Parker: If the suit were just put in
the water to soak, would it make any dif-
ference in the hole?—There would be a
difference. ■ t
. Can yon, without knowing the surrofmd-1
mg facts, say whether the washing and
drying would make much difference, or
little?—No one could toll how an amatem
would wash.
You examined the button twice. For
how long?—A few minutes. It is impos-
sible for me to tell if the jigger button
came from this coat.
When did yon look at it 'with a glass
first?—About three weeks ago.
_ Then why examine it to-day with o
glass if yon were previously satisfied?—
To confirm my first impressions, I sup-
pose. ' '
Are these two garments of the same ma-
teria} (coat and waistcoat _were. handed
up) f—X think they' arc, I would not
swear. , . . . , -
o n ticw . t
Will you look at the waistcoat and coat
button, ‘ Are they the same?—Thcy arc
the same. 1
Now look at the jigger button and the
coat button; .which is the odd one?—-It is
impossible for me to say. There is only
one button to match it with, and it may be
the odd one. ' .
Have a look, and tell mo the difference
in the button?—The difference lies in the
ring in the centre. It is very slight. The
button on the coat is a shade larger in the.
ring. ■ ■
One is bevelled?—Yes, the one on the
coat.
COMPARING BUTTONS.
Have a look at the ones on the sleeve.
Are they a little bevelled^ —No/.
Therefore they correspond with the but-
ton on the shank?—Yes.
Does it not appear that the button on
the shank corresponds more with the but-
tons on the coat?—lf does not. '
Which, then, is the odd button? —There
is no bevelling in the sljank or cuff but-
tons, but I will not say it matches it.
You would judge thq, material in the
same way. Which of these nieces of ma-
terial matches that suit? (Some samples
were handed up. Witness examined the
pieces for a minute or so)) —Three are
verv close.
Will yon say that any one of the three
is the same material as the suit ?—No.
So there are three patterns, and the coat
and you cannot tell the difference between
them?—These patterns are not of my estab-
lishment, and they cannot he the same as
the suit.
They are similar to the coat and yon can-
not fell the difference?—The cnat may
have been made of similar material. The
coat has been washed and cleaned.
And yet you can tell the difference be-
tween the three patterns?—-Yes.
Is the shank button the same as when
Von saw it?—No. The sewing has become
Unravelled.
I am speaking of the piece of material
to which the button is attached?—lt has
sol more into a ball shape. ■ Otherwise
it seems the same. The hole ,in the con?
has also slightly altered in shape since I
last saw if
Here is coat No. 4. It is dirty in front.
Does it look as if it could have been
cleaned without being afterwards worn?—
It could have been hanging in a dusty hall.
Grease is merely worked into material when
dry cleaned, and dust may well adhere fe
H afterwards. ; 1
Would you suggest that the coat has
been cleaned since it, was worn?—lt is a
long while since it was cleared. .
. *lr. Parker: It has been worn a lot since
it was cleaned.
Mr. Lavan: Suppose the suit were in a
bedroom across the hack of a chair, and it
were brushed out daily, would it get that
appearance?—There is evidence of grease
spots on this coat .
Suppose the coat was worn on two o**
three occasions about a motor car. would
von expect to find the '•rsase spots?—The
grease ou the coat would sppn become ap-
parent. ,
Who asked w 1 to examine the coat with
glasses?—Vou did.
A SECOND TAILOR.
Albert Ernest Woollands, master tailor,
cf Economic Buildings, examined by Mr.
Lavan, said he had 38 years’ experience
cf all branches, of tailoring. _ He had
throe times examined, both with glasses
and with the naked eve, a blue serge Coat
and. a loose shank button, at the Crown
Law Department. He could not tell whe-
ther or not the piece of serge on the shank
button came from the coat.


DIFFERENT SERGES.
He examined the-' samples of serge with
Mr. -Ewa’n an two occasions. The sample
serges all differed. He. could not say
that the serge on the shank.button had
come from any of the seven samples. The'
serge adhering to the link button was so
small that it might have come from any
serge. When he examined it he could not
say that the material on the shanle button
fitted the hole. It was impossible, in bis
opinion, for anyone to say if the material
fitted the hole.- If the coat had been
it might shrink a little, and the
hole might be frayed a little: it would de-
pend on how it was washed. The loose
button maj have been sewn on by'a pro-
fessional tailor. He had seen a profes-
sional sew the, “cross”, stitch. He would
say that the button on the coat may have
been sewn by an amateur.
. The third week of the Inal of George'
William Auburn on a charge of tic wilful'
murder of John George O’Neil at Clare-;
mont on April 4 draws to a close to-day.|
From present indications there is every
probability that the case will continue for
the greater part of next week. A num-
ber of witnesses for the defence have yet
to be called, while the Crown proposes to
call many witnesses to tender rebutting •
evidence. It has been assumed that the.
addresses of counsel and the judge's sum-|
mint' up will probably occupy ■ three days, j
Public interest runs very high, the daily J
overflow of .the Court assembling iti the i
pardons in little groups to discuss the ]
latest items that percolate out. ;
Mr. H, Parker and Mr. A. G. Haynes fe- 1
present the Crown, while Mr. M. Q. La van:
and Mr. J. F. Walsh appear on behalf of;
the accused. !
A TAILOR’S EVIDENCE.
Albert Ernest Woollands, a master
tailor, of Economic Chambers, tendered
evidence after this paper had gone to press
yesterday afternoon.
Mr. Haynes: Would you say that the
piece of material on the shank button did
not at one time perfectly fit the hole ou
the blue coat?— I do not see how any man
could say that. '
Would you say that if a jigger button
had been sewn upon the material of the
coat it could not have been sewn through
the canvas stiffening?—l should say not.
Is there on the material attached to the
jigger button any sign of a piece of can-
vas? —No. I do not say, however, that a
jigger button was ever sewn upon that coat.
Such a button would usually be sewn
through the thread of the outside button.
Mr. Haynes questioned the witness at
some length as to the sewing-ou of nrdin-.
ary buttons and jigger buttons.
Witness said the outside button of the
four buttons on the blue serge coat was
the odd one.
Mr. Haynes: Has the outside button
been sewn on by hand since the coat was
made?---In my opinion, it is so.
There arc scores and scores of varieties
of everyday buttons?—Yes.
Witness further stated that, blue serge
when unravelled often showed a lighter
color than the original stuff.
Mr. Lavan: If anyone said that the serge
on the button matched the material on the
suit, what would you say?—l think it
would be impossible to express an opinion.
What is your experience with buttons —•
I have found .a slight difference amongst
buttons in a new box.
How would the link button he sewn on?
-—lt might lie sewn on lo the canvas or
only on to the cloth.
A DOMESTIC’S STORY.
Elizabeth Forrest, domestic, said she
was working at the Osborne Park Hotel in i
February and April as housemaid-waitress, j
George Aubnrn lived at the hotel all the •
time she was there. During that time
Geo. Aubnrn always washed bis own ■
clothes. She had frequently seen him ;
doing so in the bathroom. She had seen
him washing pyjamas, shirts, socks, and a-1
blue suit comprising a coat and trousers.
The last-named garments she bad seen
banging on the line, and had turned : the
coat to allow the'wind to blow through.’
Accused has often pressed his suits with
an electric iron on the corr.dor table. She
knew that he had an injury to his arm, be- 1
cause one day she 'collided with him in
one of the passages. lie winced and pre-
sently pulled his coat lowa and showed
her the injury. She saw blood on his
coat. ' . . ' . '
Mr. Parker (cross-examining witness):;
Did you see any blood in Auburn J s room
or splashes of blood on the floor?—No. t
Did you ever seen him work?—Yes, on ;
motor cars and motor cycles. . J
How long was the blue coat on the line 1
after vou turned iLv- Ido not remember,.!
but I do not think it Was there the’next!


i xlay. He never washed his'clothes is the ’
; washhouse; always in the bathroom. Usit-
! 'ally he did not leave his clothes in the r
water to soak.
Do you remember why Anburn' washed
Lis blue suit?—l did not ask him. The
suit I saw washed was not as (rood as the
one he is now wearing. It was lit for him
to wear to town, and as good as any he
bad then.
When you saw his arm bleed, was he.
wiping the blood off?—Yes.
Did you ever see blood on his wrist? —
No. \ ■
Mr. I. a van: But it might have been there;
without your seeing it? —Yes. 1
Used you to go to the washhouse at nil ?
—Not as a rule.
Where, then, did yon see. Gourde Auburn
do his washing?—ln the bathroom.
THE 2s. LOAN.
Cecil Roy IVhite (who had his right atm
in a sling because of an accident) said to
Air. Lavau that he had been employed a;
Hunt's Biscuit Factory, Hast Perth, for
about two years, but was :ii present in-
capacitated. lip knew accused Dy s»gar
ami to speak to. He met him only on liio
tram. Dp to March 31 last lie had resided
at Osbornc Park. Then bo removed to 35
Mclrcsc-sfrect, Lecderville. He remem-
bered being at the East Perth Picture Gar-
dens on the night of Friday, April -1. The
pictures there were over on that night
somewhere about 10.30. Witness, no;
having a watch, could not speak more -deft;
pitchy. Ho saw George Auburn one night,
but lie eoukl not say what, night-it Was.'
Ho was in town on the Tuesday, Wednes-
day. Thursday, and Friday (April 4V
nights, hut could not say what time it
was when he got home —about 11. o’clock,
he thought. He stayed at the East Perth
Pictures until they were over, .and then
took a young lady to Edward-strcet, and
stayed about 10 minutes. ; Then lie wont
across aud caught a tram at the corner of
Beaufort and Newcastle streets. He re-
membered ho had to wait a few minutes.
Out of the four nights in town iie only saw
George Auburn on one night, lint did not 1
know which one. The night lie did see '
him was one when witness got off the tram
at Melrose-strcet —two streets past Yin-
cent-street, going in the direction of Bit.
Hawthorn. ' As witness was getting off
the car Auburn asked him for the loan of
2s, which he gave him. On this night
witness boarded the tram at the comer of
Beaufort and Newcastle trtret?. Auburn
was not then on the tram, and he had no t
idea where he did get on. On other occa-
sions when. Auburn boarded'.tha train with
him it was at the corner of Beaufort and
Newcastle streets. When Auburn used to 1
get on the car he frequently saw him with
pies and soft drinks.
, The Court adjourned at 4' p.m;
TO-DAY’S PROCEEDINGS. I
Upon resumption of the trial this morn-
ing Cecil White was again placed in' the
witness boy.
A PICTURE PROGRAMME., -
Mr. Lavan; Since last night Mr. Parker
and Mr. Haynes have seen their way to
admit • that- the programme at the East
Perth Picture Gardens on the night of Fri-
day, April 4, was as shown in this'news-
paper ( Qmmlcd in), the uieturcs being
“Alias the Night Wind,” “Potash and
PcrlmuUer,” and “The Pirate.”
. The witness, continuing his evidence in
chief, said that on the night of Friday,
April 4, the accused did not get on the
tram at his usual comer, and the first wit-
ness saw of him was when accused .got out
of the tram. The number .of. the tram was
“15.” : Some time later witness gave a
statement to the police.
Mr. Haynes . (to witness); When were
Vqu last at any pictures ?—Last Saturday
What.pictures -were shown? , (The wit-
ness-paused.) —It was not last - Saturday;
.it was one day this week at the Palladium
and Richard Barthchnes was the cator.
How many pictures were shown ?—Three
pictures. ,• ■ _ ’
. Were yon at the pictures-on-Saturday
night last?—No.
What night were yon at the pictures this
week?—l will think in a 'minute.' (The
witness again paused.)—Wednesday night
I. think it waa.,,
Gan you swear it was’Wednesday night?
—lt might have been. (Another ’ pause.)
No, it was Tuesday night. - - • " _
That is the third shot von hare had at
your last night ai the pictures?—Well, 1
am out every night of the week, and it
takes some, guessing. , ' ■ : ■
Give us the names of the'pictures you
saw on Tuesday night ?-—I could not ex-
actly recollect. ' There was Richard Bar-
thclmes. One picture was' a gazette of the
South-West and the group settlements.
Can you give the name of any of the
pictures?—There was a comedy.
I want the name of the comedy ?—I can-
not give it. ... . ~,
On the Saturday night what were the
names of the pictures? (Witness hesitated
and finally gave no reply.)
How many pictures were there.?—Three;
I cannot tell you the name of the. picture,'
but the actor was Michael O’Halloran..
But it is the name of the pifeture I am.
asking for? —I was half asleep-iii tliere-
Half asleep on Tuesday night too, I
suppose?—No, it waa different, then.
, Saturday night-I-was by
mvself. - -• . ,• ;
That’s what sent yon to sleep. ' When
were vou first called upon to remember the
Hast Perth programme?—On the.day De-
tectives Doyle and Kennedy came,to ..see
me.- ■■,
Did yon recollect itf—Yes. •
Did you give them the same three pic-
tures as you tell ns now?—They did not
ask me. 'I could have. .. . -
When, was this, after the murder?—
Yes, about April 20 or 21. ,
THE NIGHT OF THE MURDER.
You say you got home about 11 o’clock
that evening. How far is vour house from
the tram?; —Not a minute's walk.
Would it take yon abopt 20 minutes to
get home?—lt all depends on whether 1
went straight home.
Did you go straight home?—No,' .it
would take me about a half-hour.
Do you know that the last tram leaves
for Osborne Part about a quarter to 12
from Mt. Hawthorn?—About, that..
And there is a tram which links up with
that?—Yes, the “16” tram from Perth.
The tram that would arrive'before that
would get there 5 or 6. minutes previous-
ly"—Yes. ' . :
■: The car prior to the final ear to Os-
borne Park would get to vour corner about
1.1.35 p.m. ?—Somewhere about that. ■
NOT ON THAT. CAR.
•Then von certain, 1 v were not on that car
that night ?—I coSlu’t have been by tho
time I got home.
Yon could not? —I could not say. I.did
not have a watch with me.
But yon got home, about 11. You • told
us that ?—-As. far as 1 can remember, ...
Again 1 put it to yon, vou could n>»
have that car (11.35) ?—No.'
Therefore, if Anburn was on that par-,
ticular car that particular night, he could
Dot have-got 2s from you?—No, not if I
was pot on it. _ _ ■
; Did you.,notice pies and a bottle in Au-
burn’s possession this night?—No. it was
dark, and the lights were -out in the back
of the car.
When did vou first give a to
anyone on behalf of the defence?—About-
the beginning of June. .
DID NOT WORRY HOT.
Prior to that you were not sent for. on
behalf of the defence or approached . by
them?—No.


Then the matter did not worry ' you
much?—lt did not seem to.
You saw Mr. Lavan’s advertisement ask-
ing persons who knew anything about the
niaj,ter to go to his office 'i—Yes.
And you also read the evidence given at
the inquest?—Yes. ,
(His Honor here opened a hew evidence
book, placing the filled one on his left.) '
Yon read Aubnm’s statements to - the
police ?—Yes. _ ; :
Yon then realised the importance of the
evidence you could give?—Yes.; ,'v •
His Honor: Why did ydir not respond to
the advertisement? —Because I- had al-
ready given a statement to"the detectives.
Mr. Haynes: Did you see in Auburn’s
statement the words “I cannot think of
.anvone who saw mb on. that night.”
Before the witness' could answer this
question Mr. Lavan rose, to object.
Mr. Haynes: Later on in that state-
ment Auburn says ‘‘Cecil White will know
whether I was wearing an overcoat or
not?” —I do not know. It was dark.
A VOICE IN THE DARK.
Then how did yon know it was Auburn?
—1 knew bis voice.
A voice in the. dark. (Laughter.) Au-
burn was alongside yon on the back of the
car? —He was not alongside me. 1 was
Only there for half a minute.
And you did not notice whether he had
an overcoat on or not?—lt never entered
‘my mind,
T want to know what entered your eye.
(Laughter.) Was it-so dark in the back of
the car,that yon conld not see that much?
—-I'did not trouble to look. "
Gould you have seen if you had looked?
—Yes, if I had done so.
But the light was coming put from thein-.
side of the, car? —I did not take any ho-'-
dice. ■ ■ ■ ;
His Honor: Some.men get blamed foe not
noticing what clothes their wives are wear-
ing. (Laughter.)
“I CANNOT SAY.” '
Mr-Haynes; It was a hot .night t—l do
not remember. '
It was the' night'yon went to the pic-
tures when you lent him the money ?—I
cannot say. It was one'night' between the'
Ist and 4th of April. '
I take it yon have never fold aaypnc
else a different story to this?—-No.
How often did you see Auburn before
the night of the murder ?—Pretty well
every night when I lived at Osborne Park.
After that I saw him only, once.
You have never on any other- occasion
lent him money?—No.
Cecil White, continuing:—
STATEMENT TO POLICE.
Your memory regarding the incident
would be. better a fortnight after the mur-
der than it is now? —That would depend
bn what I would remember.
‘ You made no secret about wbat yo>u knew
of the matter? —No. ... 0
And you told everyone the tsaaie/vhipg I ‘
—Yes. ,
I now produce the statement you made
to the police. Is this your signature at the
foot of the page?—Yes.
Now hand it back to me. It. was wad
over to you before you signed it?—-Yes.
Gordon read it to me. I did not read it
myself.
Was it correct? —So far as I remember,
but not in inspect of a couple of dates. I
was mixed up as to the time I left the
Park to go to Melrose-street. It could not
have been the 7th of April. It was also
a mistake when I said I had lent Auburn
the money a week or a fortnight before the
murder. . _
The statement is dated April 24 last. You
say: “I reside at 5 Melrose-fitrect, Leb<t-
erviße. I remember April 4, 1924 ?—I
did remember it then. _ .
You continue: “I was at the East Perth
pictures with my girl”?—Yes.
The statement goes on: “I got home
about U P-m.” is that correct?—So far
as I can tell you that is correct. _
The statement continues “1 did not sec
Auburn that night at any time’'?—As far
af I knew then. The detectives came
round and asked me, but I was not to
know where I had keen.
Have you ever gone to the detectives and ;
altered vour statement on that point? —j
No. ” ~ . . 1
Then yonr statement savs “I know An- J
burn. I used to live at the Park, and wo
used to go home together. I shifted .to
Leedcrville about March 7 last.?’ Is that
right?—Yes.
LAST SAW AUBURN.
Referring to Auburn; you say “Last saw
him about two weeks before the murder”?
—That is as fay as I could remember then.
I will,tell yon how I came to make the
mistake.
Your recollection when you were ap-
proached was that yon had not seen Au-
burn for about two weeks before the mur-
der?—That is so.
Have von ever gone to the detectives
and told them that that information was
incorrect? —No.
You knew_vou had made the statement
like that? —Yes.
Would you have come here and given
the evidence you gave yesterday, if yon
knew of this statement? You _ remember
that yon went home with vour eiri on that
Friday night and that yon did not see
Auburn that night?—Not as far as I knew.
I found it out afterwards.
How long afterwards was it yon found
out that the statement as to your not
having met Auburn on the night of Fri-
day, April 4, was incorrect i— When I
got home I found I had made a mistake
in the shifting.
Didn’t the detectives say to you “Think
and see whether vou saw Anburn at any
time that night?”*—Yes.
You did sec him that , night?—Yes. -.
"I WAS FLABBERGASTED.”
Yonr statement goes on “He borrowed
two shillings from me that night when I
was getting into the tram at Melrose-
street.” Yon- were not bustled about
vour statement to the police?—l was bus-
tied when they came down- I was flabber-
gasted. • ~
That' word has been used before in this
case. What flabbergasted yon?—When the
police game down unexpectedly and asked
where I had been.
Does anybody unexpected by you flabber-
gast you?—l was not expecting the police
down.
Do you mean that you were flabbergast-
ed on only one point?—l had been puzzling
mv brains as ta what I did that night
Mr. Lavan: Was it before you shifted
to Osborne Park, or after you shifted to
Osborne Park that yon lent Auburn the
2s? —Before.
You were in town each night of April up
to April 4? —Yes.
Where did he catch his tram T—Every
night, exccot the night I lent him 2s. at
the corner of Newcastle and Beaufort
streets.
THE 2s LOAN.
In answer to further questions by Mr.
Lavan, the witness said it conld have been
either the Tuesday, "Wednesday, Thursday or
Friday night when' he loaned Auburn' the
2s. Two weeks before the murder he was
living at Osborne Park and it was after he
removed from there that he loaned the
amount. In bis statement to the detec-
tives he confused the time of''Auburn’s ar-
rest with that of the murder. Witness
simply guessed the time the pictures came
out that night. ' A member of the staff of
Lavan and Walsh visited him and he then
went in to see Mr. Lavan. When the de-
tectives interviewed him he had not pre-
pared himself to discuss dates or anything
else. ' ■
In reply to his Honor the witness said he
had not been to Melrose-street any time
before he shifted there. Melrose-street
was two streets pas the Lccderville Hotel.
He did not see Auburn board the tram at
the corner o*. Beaufort and Newcastle


streets op any to that on'*
which he loaned him the money.
What rent did yon par aj; Melrose-'
street ? —£l a week. After four weeks I
moved to 266 Oxford-street, where I pay :
Us a week. : i
MOTHER OF THE ACCUSED.
Elizabeth Auburn, mother of the accus-
ed, was then called. On mounting the i
witness stand she displayed consideraole
emotion and was promptly handed a glass ‘
of water by the usher. During the course'
of her evidence, she repeatedly glanced .
towards her son in the dock. She told
her story in an undertone, and each sen-
tence was repeated by Mr. Lavan for the
benefit of the jury.
The witness said she remembered her son
George going to Wagin, and when he came
back. After his return on tho Monday
he was doing something to a motor bicy-
cle just before lunch, and as he had not
finished tho job she put his dinner aside for
him., She did not see him again until tea
time. Between that date and his arrest
she had seen him riding a motor bicycle
a couple of times. She stated that her
son had suffered from a bad am for about
18 months, and soinatimes the blood from
the wound had run down the am as far
as his wrist. His sleeves were generally
rolled up, and he had no coat on when this
happened. On one occasion when he was
coming from the parlor into the bar she
knbck**% into him, causing him to hank into
the door. _ The collision caused him to
suffer considerably. On another occasion
she found him in the washhouse with his
am bleeding, and bandaged it up. He
often washed his own clothes, generally in
the bathroom, but sometimes in the wash-
house.
Witness had seen his suit on the line, but
had not actually sccfi him wash it. She
toojc tne suit off the line and took it in-
side because she would not leave it out all
night. She had also seen him clean and
ipress his suits very often, almost every
, other day. He used to treat his am with
i Zam-Buk Slid boracic lint, and she also ap-
plied those remedies to it..
THE SUPPER HABIT.
She knew that he used to eat something
in hia room at night, because she found
the remains of the food in the room at
times, and because at other times he placed
the debris outside the room. She had also
found in his room half-empty bottles and
empty_ bottles. The hotel did not stock
limejuiee and soda.
MOTOR WORK,
George did a lot of work in connection
with motor ears. When a maid was em-
ployed at the hotel, witness did not do
George’s room: but when there was no
maid, witness did his room, and then saw
motor toools under the bed. She bad never
seen any of those tools wrapped up. George
used to wash silk shirts and other things
in the bathroom; he did practically all of
them except his underclothing.
THE WAGIN TRIP.
. ®? r Saturday morning when he went
“ Wagin Mfits Coombes served the break-
last. George was at that time dressed in
the _ coat and pants of his grey suit. She
noticed nothing peculiar about George
that moraing. She saw him in bed at half-
past 6 that morning, and there was nothing
whatever unusual about Min. Her bed-
room was the first at the top of the stairs.
Mr. Auburn’s bedroom was the second,
then came the other son’s and then
George s. To go to bed George had to
pass her room. She remembered his com-
mg home on the night before he went awav.
to Wagin. She heard him come in that
night about 12 o’clock.
r ■^ r - Parker: Do you know what time
George came home on the Sunday night
k® returned from Wagin?—No.
-What is the particular work you have
frequently seen him do on motor oars and
motor cycles?—l could not quite tell you
■what he was doing.
Did he have his coat off, so as not to
dirty it among the machinery?— Xos. - .
The washing of shirts and collars and so
on which he used to do is very light work
on his arms?—-Yes.
And that work never affected his right
arm?—No. / ,
Neither did the work on the motor ears
and motor cycles?—-Yes, the work on the
motor cars did.
Trra ARM BLED.
How did that work affect the arm?—l
could not tell you, but it made the arm
bleed. .
Did you see the arm bleed when _he was
working on motors? —Yea, I. saw H bleed
three times. Once in the motor house.
When was that? —I couldn’t tell you the
date. ■. - ...
Did yon do anything for the arm on that
occasion? —No, except bandage it up.
The bleeding did not interfere with his
work ?—For a time it gave him great pain.
Did it interfere with his work? —Itkrn’t
think so. • “ .
nr PAW.
What used he to do when he was in
great pain?—Swing his arm about.
Swing it backwards and forwards, or
right round over his head?—-Right round.
How often have yon seen him do that? —
I cannot say.
Once, or twice, or three tunes, or many
times? —I couldn’t tell yon.
Have yon ever seen him grab his arm?—
Yes. ■, t
For what reason?— T 'e cause of the pain.
JOHNSTON’S MOTOR BIKE.
As regards the motor bicycle that is in
Court, have you ever seen it before, and
if so, where?—l think I hare seen it be-
fore. It looks like one that was in the
yard, but I would not be sure.
Have you ever seen George riding that
machine?—l couldn’t tell you whether that
is the one, but I have seen him riding a
bicycle.
You have told us yon saw him riding a
bicycle twice between April 4 and the data
of his arrest. Where did yon see him
riding it? —Past the front of tho hotel, or
not exactly the front.
How long did he remain away on the
first occasion? —I couldn’t tell you.
Then you don’t know whether he re-
mained just round about the hotel?—l
couldn’t say.
Either on the first or second occasion f
I cannot tell you.
When did you first sec the blood running
down past his wrist?—l couldn’t give the
date. 1
Was it six months ago f—Not so long ago
as that.
Was it within three months? —I could
not be quite sure.
All you can say is that yon saw it
within six months of the present date, or
within this, year?—Yes.
• Was it one of the occasions 'on which
he bumped his arm on the door?—Yes.
What did you do for his arm on that oc-
casion ?—Nothing.
Did you do anything at all for it that'
dayf—l am not quite sure.
On the second occasion that you saw
blood running down his arm to his wrist
was it within the past three months ?
Yes.
What caused it?—He bumped it while in
the parlor.
Did you do anything for it?—That night
before bo went out I bandaged it.
Did ho or you do anything for it imme-
diately?—He just wiped it.
And went on with his work?—Yes.
Did he swing his arm around on that oc-
casion? —He always did when he hurt it.
And he did on that occasion?—Yes.
SPLASHING BLOOD.
Did he on that occasion splash any
blood about when he swung his arm?—l
couldn’t say.
You say you , saw the suit hanging to
dry after ho had washed it. Do yon re-
member when that was?—No.


He tells us he washed the salt in Janu-
ary and again - in March —which do you
refer to?—lt would be about March. '
Do you know what became of the'suit
after it was put on the line a second day?
—No.
Have you seen him pressing his suit? at
all since then?—Yea.
How many bottles did yon find in the
morning?—There was an accumulation
there.
What were the remains of his supper tot?
refer to? —Sometimes fish and chips and
sometimes meat pies. He always had the
same. • ,
When he got home at night I*suppose
there would bo something for him to eat
if he wanted it?—Yes, but it would be
cold.
If on the night of the 12th when the de-
tectives came out, you remember the occa-
sion— ? (Witness broke down and tearfully
answered “I do.” The _witness continued
to weep for the remainder, of her evi-
dence.)
Dp .you know whether he could have
gut sowething to eat that night or not? —I
do not know whether he could.
To Mr. La van the witness said that not-
withstanding what George could have got
at home ho always brought supper with
him. .
“GOOD-BYE GEORGE.”
As tho witness left the box she waved
her hand and muttered “Good-bye,
George.” The accused acknowledged his
mother with a bow.
THE WALK TO LUBBER VELDE.
James Outmore, clerk in the employ of
La van and Walsh, said that acting on in-
structions ho walked from the corner of
Beaufort and Newcastle streets, along
Beanfort-street over the bridge, along Bar-
rack-street to Hay-street, along
to William-street, down William-street to
Mnrray-street, west /along Murray-street to
Qeorge-street, down Georg e-street to the
Federal Hotel, through Marquis-street, un-
der the subway, along Railway-parade to
Oxford-street, and down Oxford-street to
theh Leedemlie Hotel. The time occupied
was 65 minutes., Witness walked at a
fair , average pace. ■ He took no
intermediate times on that occasion.
On another occasion ho walked the same
route at the same gait, and ti took him 38
minutes to reach the subway.
1 Mr. Parker: What time of day did you
make .these walks? —On the first occasion
in the morning, and the second at 7.30 p.ru-
How many lights were' there On the sub-
way f—l did not notice.
Did you eat a couple of pies while you
walked along. (Laughter.);—No.
Did you also pick up an overcoat, look
at it, dust it. and then go on with it? —
No.
His Honor: It cannot be said there is
any great value in this evidence. Probably
if every member of the jury walked the
distance each would-do it in a different
time.
Mr. Parker: Was your watch correct?—
I will guarantee it.
How long did it take you to walk the
distance i»u the second occasion ?—Fifty
minutes.
Mr. La van: What, was the weather like
on the second occasion t—lf was wet That
caused me to increase my pace.
His Honor: Most people will get out of
the.wet if they can. ...
“NOT A OIRCnJS.”
Mr. Parker and Mr. Haynes here inter-
polated some remarks.’
Mr. Levan: I would call counsel’s atten-
tion to the fact that this is a murder trial
and not a circus.
A MILKMAN'S STORM.
Charles Gobbey, milkman, residing at 35
Melrose-strcet, Luiderville, in reply to Mr.
La van, said he remembered the morning of
April 5. He was delivering milk to his
customers then. ,He knew ■■ Frogmore-
Street,- now Stanford-street, on_ the west
aide of Oxford-street, and running paral-
lei to ii. Btanford-street fan into Vin-
cent and Melrose streets. He was 'in
SUaford-street, at 3.30 a.m., and noticed
the reflection of motor lights from Vin-
cent-street from the direction of the foot-
ball ground. It was a dark morning-
To His Honor:, The morning was about
one of the darkest, we hare had... There
was no moon. '
To Mr. Dayan, the witness said that bis
nephew Horace Thompson, just turned 11
years, who lived with, him; was with him
cn the round. As a rule the boy went on
the cart Saturdays and Sundays. Wit-
ness was delivering milk in Stanford-
read. and meantime the boy was sent to
serve some customers in Yin ccnt-s tree t,
and also a customer in Regent-street, The
bev on his return spoke to witness. Wit-
ness thep- went straight down Stanford-
road and served a two-storeyed shop at tho
coiner of Oxford and Vincent streets.
MOTOR-OAR IN V3NOENT-STBEET.
When he left Staoford-road, coming to
to Yincent-street, he noticed a motor-car
standing about 120 to 125 yards down Vin-
cent-street from Oxford-street, with lights
on. The car was on tho same side as tho
oval Eventually he came to the car and
Passed it. There was nothing to interrupt
his view of Yincent-street. The lights of
thp motor ear went out before ho crossed
Oxford-street After serving < the two-
storeyed shop, he served a private house
two doors down from Yinccnt-strcet to-
wards the motor-car. When ho came to
the car with his horse and cart, the horse
would not pass the motor-ear. It was the
horse’s first time in a morning run. He
got ost and led the horse past
OAR 348 L
Witness looked at the ear. It was a
grey color with a yellow hood, and the
number was 3481 in black letters and
white number plate. There were two spare
tires strapped to the back of the ear. Wit-
ness’s. reason for looking at it was that
he thought it might belong to the health
inspector. The car was standing opposite
Cbinnery’s private house. As he walked
past with his horse a man walked from
the ear to the footpath and stood under
the shop verandah. Witness chained tho
wheel of his cart. and went to serve a
customer down past the car, and when he
returned the pony bad turned and got on
the footpath.
A STRANGE MAN-
The man was dressed in a grey felt hat, !
turned down all round, a dark .overcoat,
and”light,colored trousers, not as dark as
the overcoat. He did not see the man’s
coat. The man then walked over to the
motor car. Witness then proceeded up the
hill and served a couple of customers, tprn- •
cd down Loftus-street into 1 Carr-strcct, ’
served six. customers, proceeded past the ;
Leederviile Hotel, up Oxford-street. As j
he passed the Leederviile Hotel he saw the |
same man standing at the corner. He could I
not identify the man. On the same day
he made a report to the officer in charge
;of the Leederviile police station. He rang
(up the station from his brother’s place in
■ North Perth. At the station he also- saw
Detective Gee, .and later on Detectives
Doyle and Kennedy, to, whom ho made a
statement. The ~ lights were .in use.
and the engine running, before ho
got to the ear. He hoard the
noise of the engine, and there was also
another noise, but he could not say what
it was. '
Mr. Parker; Did you sec the car move?
—No. ”
You fold the detectives that whoever the
man was he had a heavy overcoat on? —A
dark overcoat.'
Mr. Parker (reading from detective’s
note-book): “It was a heavy overcoat with
hat pulled down all round, and he wore
grey trousers.” Did you sign that?—Yes,
that is the one.
Was it read' over to you before you
signed it? — Yes.
, . Is it correct? —Yes. -


STATEMENT DISPUTED.
, V Mr. Parker (again quoting): “I saw a
'man stand under the verandah and he had
.a heavy overcoat on, a light felt hat and
; grey trousers. 'lt was a heavy overcoat,
with his hat pulled down all round and
[grey trousers”?—lt was not said to my
knowledge. ■
. Did you,ever say, "I could not say it
wag George Auburn that was there, nor can
I say-it was not him?”—That is correct.
And did yon say. “I know George Au-
burn by sight ”?—That is correct.
Mr. Lavan: How often had you seen
, George Auburn before ?—Two or three
times, - ■ ■ .
1 Could you recognise again the man you
.!saw? —No. ■ -
THOUGHT I* WAS THE INSPECTOR’S
1 OAR.
’ A titter ran , around the gallery whta a
small boy, aged about 12 years, stepped
into the witness-box, and announced his
name as “Horace Thompson,” a nephew
of the last witness. Before he was sworn
his Honor asked him if he went to school,
if he understood what he was doing, and
if. he would tell the truth. In his clear,
young voice, the boy replied in the affirma-
tive to all questions. -
In response to questions by Mr. Lavan,
the witness said he was in the habit of
going, out with his uncle to deliver milk
every Saturday and Sunday morning. On
a Saturday morning—be could 'not remem-
ber the date—he was., serving- a wine shop
with milk in Yincent-street, and saw a
'motor car coming down the hilL His
unde was serving milk in Stanfqrd-road,
so he went baek to his uncle to tell Mm.
He had tbonght it was the inspector’s car.
(Load laughter.) He and his uncle then
proceeded on their way, and witness served
a two-storied house just opposite the Post
Office.
The horse would not pass the motor ear,
and the uncle had to get out and Lead it
past. His uncle noticed the motor ear,
and looked at the number, and then west
on to serve another customer. When
witness saw the motor car come down tie
hill, and just moving, the lights were
pretty good- Before witness and Ms
uncle got up to the ear the lights went oat
and the engine was turned off. Witness
saw a man standing up against the window
of the shop near by. . That was the first
time he saw the man.. . He would not
know the man again. .He did not see the
man’s face. ..
Mr. Parker: Do yon.remember two gen-
tlemen seeing you some, time, ago and get-
ting a statement from yon, in wMch yon
said “When first I saw a motor car in Vin-
cent-street, it was near the Oval entrance
‘with the headlights lit?”—Yes.
I The motor car which you saw coming
; down Yincent-street could nave gone round
. into Oxford-street while you were in SLan-
j ford-road ?—Yes.
j Was the mo ior car which you saw bs-
I fore your uncle saw it, travelling fast ,or
slow? —Only going slowly. \
How far were you away from it?—l
couldn’t tell you.
A long way, I suppose, and it was a dark
night?—Yes.
Did you see the car stop ?—I saw it stop
all right
When you came back from Stanford-
road was the car still moving?—Yes, just
going slowly. _ .
When you came hack with your uncle
I was the car moving?—No, it had stopped
'then.
' You do not know' whether it was the
same motor or not? —No.
You told the detectives. “I saw the car
: in Yincent-street, near the Oval entrance,
with a dull headlight”? What do you
: mean by dull headlights?—That the lights
were not very strong.'
Did yon or your unde serve the wine
saloon that morning?—l did.
Did you tell the police that while your
unde was serving the wine saloon the
lights were put out?—No. ~
'■■■' Tell'»« if this is your signature (hand-
ing the witness a pocket-book) ?—Yes, but
it is not my writing, (Laughter.)
Ho read it over to yon. Did he ask yon
if it was all right?—No. -
Is it all right?—Yes,
THE LIGHTS WERE PUT OUT.
Do yon remember this, "While ray uncle
i was in serving the wine saloon the lights
j were pnt out?” Did yaur uncle serve the
| saloon?—No.
I How many times have yon been. ; there
j with your uncle t—Since I was about 9,
; Have you seen motor-cars before?—Yea.
‘ Often?—Yes.
r Do you remember telling the police it
j Was a voung man who had a dark overcoat
on* —Yea. .
You could see that?—Yes.
What sort of hat did be have?—A grey
felt.,
Re-examined, the witness said he did not
' see the man’s face or, his hair.
A CRICKET PITCH.
To his Honor, the witness said the disr
tanoe he had,to walk back to the cart was
not the length of a cricket pitch.
You saw the lights of the ear go out
when you were near Stott’s. . Would that
be on the cast or the . west side of the
street?—On the south side. (Laughter.)
It was on the Perth side of the street.
Did you see any difference between the
lights of the car yon. saw moving and .those
of the car you saw standing?—No, they
looked the same. In each case one light
was dim and the other was stronger.
When did you meet your undo, when you
went back to him after seeing the car?—
Jnst around the corner of Stanford-read.
You told the detective that you and your
uncle met at the comer of Progmore and
Yincent streets, then went to the wine sa-
loon,- where your unde supplies milk?—
My unde did not go with me to the wine
saloon-'
PUNCTUATION.
Mr, Lavan: The statement your Honor
has is a copy of the original, and the
punctuation may not be in accord with the
punctuation of the statement as given.
The notebook containing the boy’s state-
ment, as given to the detective, was then
handed to his Honor, who said that after
comparing it with the typewritten copy,
he could well understand the boy’s answer.
His Honor said the words, “Where my
uncle supplies milk” did not refer to the
Urns when the milk was supplied.
His Honor: You first saw the car before
seeing your unde?—Yes. ' :
And after you got in to the cart with
your unde and were coming. back going up
to Oxford-street, you saw the lights again?
—Yes.
When you were going back with your un-
de and you saw this car standing, how far
was it, could you say, from where it was
when you first saw it and when it was mov-
ing?—lt was a good way from the comer
of the reserve.
Have yon any idea how far the cor had
moved?—(No reply.)
There is a hill there. Is it a steep hill?
'—Not very steep. -
When yon first saw the car and it was
moving, was the car on the top of the hill
or the middle or the bottom?; —On the
middle of the Hill.
Are you sure of that? —Yes,-'
And where was the car stop^jed—at the
middle, or at the bottom of the hill? —At
the bottom of the hill where we passed it
DR. MOSS AND AUBURN’S ARM.
.Matthew Kasner Moss, medical practi-
tioner, Perth, was examined by Mr. Lav-
an. He said that at counsel’s request bo
had examined George Auburn’s right arm
during (he progress of the triaL He had
noticed ou the outside of that arm a large
overgrown red. scar about three or three
and a half inches long. If that scar were
abraded or sustained a knock, say, against
a door, it would bleed. ! The amount of
bleeding would depend on the condition of
Auburn’s, blood, and the amount of acti-


vi ty, and whether the smaller oiooa vessels
were opened. ' The wound could bleed to
some extent. It might bleed'a tablespoons
ful with the greatest of ease. If Auburn
had his shirt sleeves rolled up at the time
of getting a knock on the wound, the blood
would run down on to his nand or on to the
ground. Witness bad_ experimented on his
own am with material of the same_yia-
cosity as blood, and, had found that i,
tablespoonful would run down from his arm
into hia hand. ...
Two medical men crave expert'opinions
for the defence at the trial of George Wil-
liam An bum in tho Criminal Court yester-
day afternoon after this paper went to
pi ess. Thev were both closely cross-exam-
ined by Mr. H. Parker, for the Crown.
Dr. Kasner Moss was under cross-exam-
ination for nearly three-quarters of an
hour. ,
To Mr. Parker:. If he got the am knocked
against a door or someone cannoned into
him he would feel pain and possibly ha
might feel rick. If a man having a pain
in or a Weeding arm swung it, it would
have the effect on the hat produced. Wit-
ness had experimented with a hat himself.
Mr. Parker said he supposed that Mr.
Lnvan would put .in the hat produced by
witness. .
Mr. Lavan: Ton can.
Mr. Parker; Most decidedly. I will.
THEORISING.
Continuing, witness said he examined
the motor car and he also read the post-
mortem examination. It the person who
sai alongside the driver of the car was
the person who dealt with O’Neil, witness
would have expected blood spots to hs on
the front and left-hand side of the hat of
the man who committed the murder.
His Honor remarked that it would be
impossible for anyone to say in, what direc-:
tiqg the blood would splash, because it de-
pended on the force and direction of the
blew.
Witness told Mr. Lavan that he saw
blood on the hood of the car. Having ex-
amined the car, he concluded that if the
nan was alongside the driver he would ex-
pect more blood than was on the hat.
Mr. Parker: Have yon examined the
hood carefully just above the driving seat?
—Yes.
You know the ridge pole.’ Did yon look
fust behind there? There is a spurt of
blood which looks as though an artery had
been cut?—Yes.
Describe how an artery appears when
cut. Is it not like a very fine hose spray?
—A very, very small one would be like
that.
You have seen the post-mortem examina-
tion result, and I suppose there are many
of those injuries which could have broken
a very small artery ?—Yes. The spots on
the hood were not from a small capillary
or artery. They are larger spots.
Do yon say the spots on the hood were
similar to the ones on the hat as regards
size ?—They arc larger.
EXAMINING THE OAR.
I will ask yon to come down and have
another look at the hood, and I will put
the safue question later to see if yon hold
to that oninion?—l measured them Ba
being about a quarter of an inch diameter.
That is what I want to point out. You
haven’t seen them all ■.
His Honor granted permission for wit-
ness to make a further examination, and
witness, Mr. Walsh, and Jdr. Parker left
the Court.
AN EXPERIMENT.
After inspecting the ear, witness in-
fo* med Mr. Parker that the spots above
where the driver would sit were not a
quarter of an inch across, bat were simi-
lar, to the spots on the hat.
His Honor: That is, the doctor's hai,
I presume.
Mr- Parker; Yes; it was used for the
experiment made. To witness: Could not
.spots that size on the hood be caused by
the breaking o£ a small artery?—Yes.
If the blood spurted on to the car would
not some of it be likely to come down
upon the crown of the hat worn by a man
sitting close by?—That part which did not
hit the ear would come down upon the
crown of the hat worn by the man sitting
on the left of the driver.
You would expect to find some blood on
'the hat of that man?—Yes
And some on the brm ot the hat under-
neath? —Some could hit the hat under the
brim if the person struck leaned inwards.


was
broken, would you not expect to find spots
of blood and not large o”es?— Yes.
AUBURN’S INJURED ARM.
The witness was then cross-examined,
particularly with regard to the wound or
scar on Auburn’s right am.
Mr. ParEer: You saw the scar on Au-
burn’s am?—Yes. ■ . , ~
Is it hard to the touch?—Not very hard.
Is it • to a certain extent calloused?
No: that kind of scar is frequently any-
thing hot calloused. , ,
■ In expressing an opinion upon sued
matters, you arc guided ■ only by wha-
your patients tell you?—l am guided by
my experience of such scars. At an
ever*;. I do not know what any pain is to
anyone eks but myself. (Laughter.)
You do not know whether this particu-
lar scar is calloused or not?—No. .
You have never seen this scar bleed?
SWINGING THE ARM.
Would it allav pain on that arm to
swing it around and around overones-
head if one got the arm knocked?—inat is
a thing ! frequently do when I am hurt.
I don’t know whether it will allay An-
burn’s pain, but I know I have tone
through those movements myself.
Have yon ever seen that movement gone
through by anyone who had a pain on .the
upper arm? —No. .
Or gone through for the purpose o£, al-
laying bleeding on the upper arm? Would ,
not that movement increase the bleeding
rather than allay it?—Very possibly. j
His Honor: Is it not very often a ease ;
of violent exercise and violent words, Mr. j
Parker? (Laughter.) |
AN ATTACK OP FAINTNESS.
Mr. Parker (to witness): Would fish,and.
chips be a good thing for a person who is
feeling faint? (Laughter, and the accused
smiled broadly.) Have you _ever heard of
a person feeling faint, eating fish and
chips?—lt is rather an unusual method of
getting over faintness. ■ _
What is usually the first thing wanted '
by a patient who is feeling faint? —To lie
down.
Yes, and a drink, isn’t itt—Yes.
You would not expect a person wbo is
feeling faint to-have fish and chips-within,
say, ten minutes or a quarter of an hour
of having to be helped to a gate?—Yes,
that is possible. A faint feeling very
soon disappears- ,: . . . .
Even when caused by pain ?—The pain
soon goes. _
And the faintness goes equally quickly?
—As a rule. ’ . .
Do you think that muscular action would
affect that,scar as you saw it? —I don’t
think so.
»lIJ lift #
Mr. Lavan: Did you at all oxammo Au-
burn for a break in the right forearm? —
No. •
There was a suggestion made by Mr.
Layan and opposed by Mr. Parker that the
witness should there" and then examine the
accused’s right forearm. The suggestion
was not adopted by hia Honor.
BLOODSTAINS.
Mr. Lavan: As - regards the motor car
which you examined just now outside the
Court, if the blood flew up to the roof of
j the car, what sort of stains would you ex-
I pect to find on the passenger’s, hat?—
Larger stains. ! V
In answer to Mr. Lavan, the witness said
there was blood on the suitcase produced-
He would not express an opinion as to what
quantity of blood would be found on the
| hat if the suitcase was, in the back of the
car on the left hand side and on top of
[some petrol cases, taking as a basis the
i quantity, on the suit case,
i Mr. Parker: Especially if the corpse was
I thrown in the back of the car.
Mr. Lavan; There is no evidence of that.
His Honor: No.
Mr. Parker: The floor of the car speaks
for itself. ~ , . _ •
&‘I
Mr. Lavan: The evidence is thaf the suit
case was on top of the petrol cases and
there was no blood on that.
. Dr. Moss, at the request of Mr. Lavan,
examined the scar on accused’s wrist, and
said, it might slightly interfere, with the
muscular action.
ANOTHER DOCTOR’S OPINIONS.
Alexander Juett, medical practitioner,
said he had examined Auburn’s am. and
found there a hypertrophic scar. If it
were sufficiently jarred it would bleed free-
ly. If accused had his coat off and his
sleeves rolled up, the blood would roll down
and be on the hand. If the am bled and
ran down in that manner, and he swung his
arm witness would expect to find fine spots
of blood on the hat.
If a man with . an am like that was
knocked into a door, so that it struck the
sore, part, he would expect him to feel
pain. Wtiness had examined the car, and
had seen the bloodstains upon the hood.
There were stains on the hood to the left
of the lining of about a quarter of an
inch in diameter. He would expect to seo
stains on the hat of a man seated in the
car about as big as those appearing on
the hood.
His Honor: How can the witness pos-
sibly say how the blood could have spurt-
ed? You have not asked the witness how
the blood spurts could have been caused,
Mr. Lavan: If the jury do not want to
hear this evidence I will sit down.
The foreman said it was not their desire
to hear more upon that ppint.
Mr- Parker (to witness): If a'small cap-
-1 Alary were burst, would you expect the
blood to come out in fine spurts?—A small
capillary would not spurt at aIL
Would you get a fine spurt from an
artery?—From a very small artery. ~
...And if the man committed-this deed
were sitting on the left of the driver, and
broke a small artery, wouldn’t you expect
to find blood on top of the hat and under-
meath the brim of the hat. Especially if
the bipod spurt reached the roof?—Yes,
If a large spurt struck the roof, would
it not disintegrate, and come down in
• small - spots?—Not from an absorbent sur-
face.
BLOOD ON TEE CLOTHES.
If the murderer did sit on the left of
the driver, wonld you or wouldn’t yon ex-
pect to find blood on his Clothes?—l would.
Have you ever had any experience' in
> swinging arms to see where the blood flies?
| —Yes..
Have you swung your arm right around
because of the blood, or when the blood
has run down your, arm into the hand? —
No. That is not the natural movement.
I agree with you. What is the , natural
movement?—A flick.
The swing right around would be a most
unnatural movement?—l could not say it
would be an unnatural movement.
If you got a sufficiently hard bump on
nn'old wound on the upper arm to make it
bleed would it or would it not relieve the
bleeding to swing the arm right around?—
That is an involuntary movement.
Is it a natural involuntary movement to
swing your arm right round ?I 1 could not
say.
- Do you mean to say you are giving cx-
: pert evidence and don’t know which is a
- voluntary movement and which is an in-
voluntary movement? Would that be a
natural movement? —A natural movement
is an involuntary movement.
When do you think this involuntary
movement, as yon describe it, would take
place?—Being due to pain, it would take
place during pain. Any time during a
spasm of pain.
If the. man got his arm bumped to such
an extent as to make it bleed, when would
pain be greatest?—The arm would be pain-
ful over a long period.
When would the first pain occur?—lm-
mediately after the injury.
Then would you expect this voluntary
movement a half-hour afterwards?—Quite
possible. ■


i FAUST AND FAINTNESS.
Would you expect it when he was in the
■act of fainting or feeling faint ? —lt de-
pends on the pain at the time.
Feeling faint, would you expect him to
swing his arm around his head?—At any
time during the spasm of pain.
Yon say this wound might bleed freely?
—Yes.
If it did apd he had his coat and shirt
on, would you expect to find blood on his
coat and shirt?—lt would depend on the
tightness of the coat and shirt.
And the lining of the coat?—Yea, but
less there.
And as he pulled off his coat would not
there bo blood somewhere near the hole?
In fact, a smattering all over the sleeve
inside?—Yes; if it went through to it.
If it went down to the band, so as to
cause him to swing it, would you not ex-
pect to find it in the lining?—lt depends
on the looseness of the sleeve.
In the case of the ordinary shirt, would
it not get into the ordinary coat? —Very
little of iL
In the case of a silk shirt?—lt depends
on the amount of blood pouring out.
You say this would bleed freely, and the
accused tells us it ran to the palm of his
hand. Would that be bleeding freely?—
Yes.
Then in those circumstances would you
not expect to find it on the coat?—A small
quantity* - , , • ;.
And if he had his hand in his pocket it
would be there too f—Yes.
And on anything he grasped?—Yes.
Did you sec the spots directly, over the
head of the driver of the car ?—Not those
immediately over it.
Mr. Lavan: Would you expect the stains
on the left-hand side to be larger or smaller
than those on the bat?—Larger.-
Will any small artery make a spray of
bjood when cut? —Yea
If blood was on a-man's hand, it would
depend on whether it was dry or not as
to whether it came off when he put bis
hand in his pocket?—Yes.
In the case of Auburn, if his arm bled
on to his coat, where would yon expect to
find the blood?—On that part of the epafi
opposite the wound.
Would a man whose arm was Weeding
bo expected to feel faint at the time?—
Yes.
REBUTTAL EVIDENCE.
His Honor ; Do you expect to finish with
your witnesses on Monday, Mr. Lavan?
Mr. Lavan: Yes.
His Honor: Perhaps,on Monday morn-
ing I could hear the argument as to re-
buttal evidence.
Mr. Parker: Yes.
Mr. Lavan: I hope to be finished calling
my witnesses on Monday afternoon.
The Court adjourned until Monday. •
The fourth week of the trial of Georgs
William Auburp was catered upon this
morning at the Supreme Court before Mr.
Justice Draper and a jury.
The accused is charged with the wilful
murder of a taxi motor driver, John
George O’Neil, at Claremont, on April 4
last.
Mr. Hubert Parker, and with him Mr.
A. G. Haynes, are acting for the prose-
cution, while Mr. M. G. Lavan and with
him Mr. F. J. Walsh are defending the
acensed.
■ The Court, as hitherto, was crowded with
•peetators.
FREDERICK MOIE’S STORY.
Frederick Moir -was the first witness
celled bv Mr. Lavan. Ho stated he was a
ma*Bher of the. firm ,of Peter .and Moir,
Tlnmbere. Murfay-strcet, Perth, and that
ho himself resided in Woodrovd-stveet,
Ml. Lawler. Miss Sadler was his sister-
in-law, and had resided at his bouse up to
the time she went to Wooroloo. He also
V-.t t-nown'■.George Auburn for over 12
months, and during that time had fre-
quently seen him at his (witness’s) house.
THE WAGIN TRIP.
For some three weeks prior to April 5,
vvtneas had Enowu of the arrangement by
Auburn to late a party by motor to Wa-
si.-j.’ He had not known what car they
were going in.- the arrangements haring
brer, left to Auburn. Had be known they
vt-re going in a'hired car at Auburn’s
expense, .he- would not hare agreed'-to
make the trip. The first time he knew
they were going in Singe’s car was on the
aiUrnooo of April 5, when Auburn drove
up to his house in ML Lawler.
THE FRIDAY EVENING.
On Friday evening, April 4. Auburn
c.vlied at the house about 7 o'clock and
left shortly after T. 30. witness letting him
; out. Auburn had no parcel with him when
fervent. The relations between Miss
b'kdlhr;and Auburn were ' not-very warm
Thai night. Accused had asked her to go
t-j town with him. but she Kad refused.
MURDER NOT DISCUSSED.
After the car had called for the party
on the Saturday afternoon at ML Lawley,
they all drove to the Osborne Park Hotel,
where Auburn picked up his hag and then
tvt vcef.ded .U)" Wagin. To his knowledge,
the 'murder was not discussed, either going
to or coming from that town.
AT QUARTERMAINE’S FARM.
At Quqrtemaiue’s farm, on the way
down, witness went with Quartermaine to
a shed to get some petrol for the car.
binge was thru standing at the back of
the car near the petrol tank. Auburn was
not,with witness and Quartemaine.'While
witness and Quartermaine were walking to
the shed and back to the ear, the murder
was not discussed, nor was there any men-
tion, of it at the car between witness. Singe
and Quartermaine. About 1 o’clock on
-Sunday morning, witness spoke of the mur-
der for the first time to Quartermaine. The
car fed then gone to Wagin. The murder
was not discussed at dinner, dr after din-
ner on the Sunday in Auburn’s presence.
Alter dinner, Singe, Quartermaine, witness
and. he thought, Miss Sadler sat for soma
minutes in the dining-room, and while they
were there there was no discussion about
the murder.
BACK FROM WAGIN.
They arrived back in Perth from Wagin
on thc Sunday, and on the following Mon-
day, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday
adghts, witness saw Auburn at Woodroyd-
irtreet. On two of' the nights Auburn
took Miss Sadler out. Auburn did not
leave before U o’clock on any of those
nights.


AUBURN’S ABM BLEEDS.
' "Witness had seen Anburn’s arm in a bad
state several times when it was bleeding.
Jio had seen it bleeding at least four
times. On the first occasion -witness saw
it bleeding. Auburn was at their home
when they were living in Grosvenor-road,
where they resided until March 22 last.
Auburn came there and was holding his
arm. ■ He asked witness to help him take
his coat off,’and when that was done wit-
ness saw that Auburn’s shirt sleeve was
-soaked with blood. There was bloody on
hi s wrist and on the left hand which had
been bolding the am. Witness took him
to the bathroom, and after having auowed
the water to run bn the arm, bandaged it
Min, On Sunday, at tea tune. Auburn
asked to be excused from the table, and
■went V the bathroom, witness following
him. When witness got there Auburn bad
his coat off, his shirt sleeve rolled up. and
the water was running on ms arm, wmeu
was bleeding. . ,
'Witness did .not bandage it on that occa-
sion. Witness had seen the arm bleeding
' at o*ther times, but not to the same extent.
PIECES OF PIPE.
In connection with his trade as plumber,
he frequently brought from bis work ar-
ticles such as pieces of pipe fittings, bome-
times they would be wrapped up; at others
unwrapped. "Inquiries had been made of
witness by Mr. Walsh about number plates.
It was about three weeks or a month ago.
CROSS-EXAMINATION.
. '•Mr. Parker; You gave/evidence at the
'inquest ? —That is right.
1 And you were then bound over to appear
and give evidence for the Crown, if and
subpoenaed!—l vras not notified.
- ■ho you saw Mr. Walsh?—Yes.
It. was a month ago. Do you mean from
now or when the case started? A month
ifoifi now.' ' , ' •
That is, a week before the case started?
—Yes.
• When was the first occasion you saw
Lavan and Walsh of anyone for the de-
fence?—That was the first-occasion.
So that you were asked to give evidence
before you knew anything about what
Quartermaine would say?—Yes, long be-
lore.
The conversations that took place on the
trip,you were not asked to recall to your
mind until a month ago ? —I think that is
Wrong. , , ,
Why?—l could not have been asked
about the conversations with Quartermaine
until he gave his evidence here.
Bnt you decided to give evidence on
other matter a week previous?—Yes. 1
And you didnt recall to your mind any
conversations that took place at Wagin
until Quartermaine earae forward?—l
didn’t think it nefeessary.
So you east your mind back two and a
half month's?—Yes.
AFTER DINNER AT WAGIN.
What did vou discuss when smoking
after dinner at Wagin?—We listened to
Qnaxtemaine discussing farms and farm-
jfeg’ from the time Quartermaine came
there and what had occurred.
Well, he was in reminiscent mood?—
Yes, and Mr. Singe told a little story.
Anything else? —No, that was all.
Do you mean to say you can east your
mind back two and a half months and tell
the whole of a casual conversation?—Not
the whole of it.
' You wouldn’t pretend to! —Oh, fio. ■
i- SuH yon pretend to tell the whole of the
conversation that took place when; you ar-
rived at Quaptermfiine’s early on. Sunday
morning ?—No. '
DISCUSSING THE MURDER.
When you heard of the murder outside
the hotel, did it create any impression in
your mind at that time? —Not very much.
Yon passed it off as an every-day occur-
rence?—No.
So that 1 don’t suppose you know? whe-
ther the murder -was discussed in your
presence?—l’m not sure it wasn't. /
Perhaps you were not worrying -about it
—an every-day occurrence? —I base said!
am not sure it was discussed.
Except the one occasion ?—Y -when I
mentioned it to Quartermaine and. the. rest
’of the family. /■ ..
■ So that it .didn’t go in one ear'and oat
the other?—l didn’t say it did.
And you di.d think it news because you
told Quartermaine? —Yes. ,
Even Quartermaine could not barer been
interested or any of the others because you
say it -was not mentioned again?—(Not 80
far as 1 noticed.
Ton couldn’t sircar they wero’s I.’inter-
ested?—No.
Will you say definitely that Singe, Quar-
termaine, and Auburn could not hare said
something without you hearing it ?—lt was
within hearing distance. >
• I didn’t suggest you weren’t Were
you watching them all the time, or did you
talk to the, womenfolk? —1 did talk to
Mrs, Quartermaine shortly aft£r arrival.
Do you suggest it would have been jm-
( possible for Quartermaine, Singe, and Au-
burn to have bad a few words? —It might
have been possible. . ■
If they did you don’t know what they
dismissed?—No.
You do not suggest that Quartermaine
aid not speak to Singe or Auburn?—No.
As a fact, when Auburn arrived atvour
house on April 4, you did not see r him
come in?—No.
You even didn’t know what color suit
he wore?—No.
.So yon do not know if he had any parcel
with him?—Not when be came in.
Or when ho went, out?—He had -none. -
Will yon swear that?—l will.
A STATEMENT VARIED. -
You made a statement to the poiicc on
April 15. I suppose your memory was
S°°d then; it hasn’t, improved.?—Na
~ That is your signature (showing witness
the detective’s note-book)? —Yes.
•It is dated April 15, prior to,his arrest?
:—Yes. ; ' ■■
Do yon see there the, words "I doT not
finow whether he made anv arrangement
- to come back and sleep. ~I did not see
any parcel with him. bnt he may have had
one with him unknown to me”; is that
correct? —It is here.
Is it-correct?— He did not have a parcel.
Is that correct?—So far as I know ~
Mis Honor (after examining the pocket
book containing the statement); There is
not much material difference.
AUBURN'S PARCEL.
Mr. Parker: He does not know the color
ot Auburn s suit, but on April 15 he said
to l hc .P ol! , c . 0 ' may have had a parcel
.with him. (Ip witness): Does this re-
ter to Auburn’s coming in or is it gmn?
put, of your House?—lt seems to refer to
his coming in.
1 -swear that?—l do not remember
i which I was talking about.
Have you any idea whether he had a
parcel with him or not?—He had no par-
cel. 1 went on the verandah with him
and we were both talking, and he was’ ;
pointing te certain things, using both
hands, and I was doing the same. 1
< , c ?° / ou remember saying at the inquest, i
bo far as I know he had no parcel with 1
him when he left”?—l did not use those
particular words. You asked me what •
parcels he had when he went away, and I
said “None.” :
There seems to he some .doubt as to the
point I It would appear so from the do-
position. ,
And six weeks later yon are definite in
the matter?—Yes.
Are yon definite about the suit Auburn
was wegnng that night ?—I do not know
what suit he wore.
—No What kh,d ° f hatl or he


tlouid'he’not have gesticulated with his
hand and have had a hat and a parcel in
them.?—He may have, hot I have never
seen him with a parcel except when he
brought a bottle of cool drink np to the
house. ■
DIRTY OLD OVERCOATS.
He is not the type of fellow to carry
parcels?—No.
Or to pick np dirty old overcoats?—l
know nothing about that.
How have these bottles been wrapped
up?—Sometimes not at aIL
Where did he get them?—At a little
shop near the comer of Beaufort-street
and Grosvenor-road.
At what time did he arrive at yoar home
with such bottles ?—During the evening,
bnt I cannot remember the time.
How often did he do this?—-On six or
seven occasions.
When was the first and when the last
time?—l cannot say.
Mr. La van: This is wasting time.
His Honor: It may or may not be so.
CARRYING BOTTLES.
Mr. Parker: Have you even seen Auburn
in town with a bottle in his possession?—
No. .
He is not the typo of man to carry
bottles about ?—No.
Or carry meat pies about in parcels. Is
he a very hungry person?—Not unusually
You made application to see Auburn in
gaol after the inquest?—No.
Application was made on your behalf?—
That may be so. •
Who made it? —I do not know unless it
was Mr. Auburn, sen.
Are you a great friend of the Auburn
family?—l know Mr. Auburn.
What were you to see the accused about*
—I have no idea.
When did he first tell yon about finding
the overcoat?—l do not remember that he
did tell me. I think I mentioned it to him
on Monday, April 14. I had heard a ru-
mor about it.
Did he tell you about the spot along
Westana-road? —No.
"When did Auburn leave your place on
Saturday to get the car to ffd to Wagin?— 7
He arrived at our place a little after 11
in the morning, and left between 1 and 2
in the afternoon.
On the Friday evening Miss Sadler was
busy in the kitchen? —She was doing some-
thing there.
PIECES OP PIPING.
When did you last take a fitting home?
—That was just after we moved to Wood-
royd-street, at the end of March.
What else have you taken home?—
Short pieces of piping.
Do you work in your good clothes? —I
put on my working clothes.
What size pieces of piping do you take
home? , About a foot long?—All sizes. I
did take a short piece home, because I in-
tended to fix up a towel bracket in the
bathroom. It is not fixed yet. -.
Was that on April 4?—No.
-When else was it you took home a small
piece of piping about that length?—l have
taken them home on lots of occasions.
But when?—l cannot give the dates.
Do you say that when you are in work-
ing clothes von wrap up a piece of piping
to take it home? —I do sometimes.
Why? —Sometimes I slip the piping in
the clip for the pump on mv motor bicycle.
■ And-you wrap it up to do that?—Some-
times. *
Did you on April 4 take a piece home?
—Not as far as I remember.
You remember on the Friday night when
Auburn left, one of bis .last remarks was
that he would be back later on? r —His re-
mark was that he would probably be back
later on.
On that night?—Yes.
On the Tuesday night after the trip,
were you there all the time Auburn was
ac vour house? —Most of the time.
Do vou remember that von told the
police that you next saw him oh the Tues-
day, and the murder was not discussed?—
tt.jras not discnssed.
Will voti swear it was not ?—I may not
have been there.
And the same applies to Wagin?—Yes.
AUBURN’S BLEEDING ARM.
When his : arm was bleeding you sav it
ran down into his hand. Did it drop
down? —I do not say it dropped. It was
on his hand and'wrist. > .
• There was- a fair amount of blood? —
Yes.
On the other occasions there was. a fair
an-cunt?—Yes.
Was it on his oo;if ?—lt most have been
cm the- cuff of his coat, because I got it
on my thumb. .
When was that first occasion?—Some
time before Christmas.
. Since Christmas when have yen seen
it ?—I cannot say if that Sunday was be-
fore or after Christmas. . ■ :
■ When was tho*xtext occasion? —It is im-
possible for me to fix tire date.
Was it at Grosvenorr-road? —Yea,
Then.it was before March? —Yea.
SWINGING THE ARM.
Dp you say that when his arm was bleed-
ing” so profusely it would stop when he
put it under winter? —He used to Swing
it. and put it in water.
Did he throw it all over the place ?■=-
He. must have done. 1
Did it drop big blobs?—l cannot say.
That, is on two occasions. When wire
tbt othfg two? —The other two must have
been after that. . ■ ■
1 Can you say what caused it to bleed
when it. ran down to his wrist? —It must
have been something ’ that happened out-
side our house.
Was he in a car «M-No, he ‘was walking.
And on the second occasion? —We were
sitting at the table.
How long was ho away from the table?
I doubt if he came back.
" You do not know' what caused it to
bleed? —No.
. He stopped that with cold water? —Yes.
Did he wave'bis arm about on that oc-
casion? —That was' the occasion.
Did he wave it ‘on the first oc-
casion? —I cannot remember.
.. What did he do on the other two occa-
sions? —He took his coat off - and dabbed
something on his am.
And waved" it about?—Yes;
I mav .be wrong, but .woulcl not that in-
crease the bleeding?—That is what I
thought.
Mr. Parker; So do I."
RE-EXAMINATION.
Re-examined by Mr. Lavap, witness said
he first knew that be was not to be called
for the prosecution when he was told by
Mr. Walsh that his name was pot on the
list. It was when Mr. Quartennaine _gstf©
his evidence that witness' saw it was al-
leged that Singe and Quartermaine got- the
petrol. After they got the petrol Auburn
was not at the car.' In witness’ opinion
Auburn could not have had a parcel, such
as that described, about his clothing. ' He
did not have a parcel in his hands or un-
der his arms. Witness did not go to the
gaol to see the accused. Thera would be
piping at the house, between March 22 and
April 4, and it had not been used up to
the present time. Auburn had frequently
said be‘ would stay the night, hiiL’did not
do so.
OSBORNE PARK TEAM TIMES.
E. Austin, a tram conductor, pro-
duced the current time table for the .Os-
borne Park rente. The journey from the
Palace ,Hotel , comer to Mt. Hawthorn ter-
minus occupied 23 minutes, and to the
Leederville Hotel U minutes, and to the
com of Beaufort and Newcastle streets
eight minutes. Mt. Hawthorn cars were
numbered 15 and those to Osfaome Park
were No. 16.
Cross-examined, witness said those times
were sectional. Mid varied at rush periods
owing to tho extra time taken for people


to get on and oflL They only varied about n
a minute or so. The trip from Walcott: to
Murray street took about 10 minutes. The
fare from Palace Hotel to Neweastle-street .
was 2d. At rush periods the trams 15 and
16 were about filled when they reached
Trou chefs corner. People leaving the
pictures and o£her mostly
caught the LeederviHe trams at the earner .
of William and Hay streets. Witness i
would not say that a lot of nassengersleft
the car at the end of the 2d section Qfew-
castle-street).
PASSENGERS WITHOUT FAEES.
If a person gets in a tram without money
it is not customary to put him off, but tfi
take his name and address.
To Mr. Lavan; It was very seldom any-
one bparded a ear without having enough
money' for his fare. -
His Honor: That is because of the pros-
perity of the place. • <
Witness, continuing, said that Trouchet’s.
corner would tap the people coming from
the Grand Pictures.
DEFENCE EVIDENCE CLOSED.
Mr. fjavan: That is the case, your Honor.
AEGUMENT ABOUT REBUTTAL EVI-
DENCE.
Preparatory to listening to the arguments
of counsel as to the right -of the Crown to
call rebuttal evidence, his -Honor, said to
the jury: “You are discharged in custody
until 2 o’clock this afternoon;’’ The jury
then left the- Court. • ■
His Honor; Mr. Parker desires that his
application to call further witnesses should
be made in the absence of the jury.
Mr. Lavan: I, too, think that is desir-
able. •
Mr. Parker: With reference to the ques-
tion of Press reports of the argument, I
submit that if the newspapers desire it,
they should be permitted to publish the ar-
gument only after a decision has been ar-
rived at in this case; and the jury dis-
missed. This-is undoubtedly a matter of
public importance; ■
His. Honor: There is no harm in the
Press stating that - after argument leave
was given to the Crown or otherwise to
call certain evidence.
Mr. Parker: After this jury has. bten
discharged. •
Mr. Lavan: In the course of argument,
Mr. Parker must tell your Honor what evi-
dence he proposes to call, and he thinks' no
harm can be done if that is published after
this trial. Suppose the jury disagree. In
that event I can see a great deal of barm
being done in connection with the second
trial. If a definite decision is arrived at
one way or the other, it will be all right,
but the publication of an outline of the
evidence of the Crown, as is proposed now,
might convey to a new jury something
which would not be evidence. I presume
they would read the newspapers.
His Honor: At present I think the Press
ought not to publish anything more than
the fact that after argument a certain de-
cision was arrived at.
Mr. Lavan: I see no harm in that.
His Honor: Not at this stage.
Mr. Parker then proceeded to state his
reasons why the Crown should be permitted
to call further evidence. It was indicated
that argument on this question wpuld not
occupy more than , half an hour. Mr.
Parker opened his remarks at 12.10 p.m.,
They had spoiren a nmnoer oi times, tt u-
ctss saw Allen on the Tuesday following ;
the murder, shortly after 2 o’clock. Allen.
was seated in his sidecar, and witness at
th> time - was waiting for a business ac-
auaintanee. Allen asked witness -what he
thought of the murdejf. Witness express-
ed the view that it was “a-shocking . tra-
gedy.” ■ :
CAE IN EOE-STEEET.
Allen answered: “Oh, I saw that car
(O’Neil’s) on the Friday night ll
or 31.30.” Allen said that at the time
he saw the car he (Allen) was passing ■
down Roe-ktrect with a passenger and not-
iced a car in front of one of the houses.
Either he (Allen) or his passenger thought
it was his brother’s car, and he stopped
his motorcycle. They then examined the
number and found it was 3481. He was
sure it was not the cay he originally
thought it was, but he immediately recog-
nised it as O’Neil’s Bniek Six. Allen_ also
told him that he had reported the incident
to the police.
QUESTION OF MEMORY.
Mr. Lavan: Were the number and name
of O’Neil’s car reported in the Press prior
to that conversation with Allen?—They
may have been. " ' ;
You do not remember whether they were
or not?—l knew O’Neil's car was reported.;
Was the number of the car published?;
—I could not swear to it. ■ .!
So your memory is not as good as you:
think. You seem to have an exceptional I
memory, have you?—-I would not like to,
say so. • . ..
Have you a good memory?—l should say
so, yes.
It wonld.be over two months from the "
time when that conversation took place.
When did you first jog your memoQrT—;
When I saw the report of Allen’s evidence.!
Within the last two or three days?—Yes.
: : What did you do then? Go to the
police, or did they corns to you'?—No. -
What happened?—l indicated to Mr.
Haynes or his clerk that it was hot correct.
Do you pretend that after a lapse of two
months you can give conversations you had
with people?—ln this case, yes. i
Only for this particular case? If you i
had a conversation on a business matter I
two months ago could you give it accur-
ately?—l shgnldihope to do so.
Would you?— That would bo a matter of
opinion.
You remember this conversation word
for word?—l can produce someone else
who
You can remember every word after that
period?—Yes.
You said it was 2.5 when you met him?—
I said about 2.5,
You arc pretty activate about this?—
What I have said is correct,
Do you remember saying to Mr. Haynes
when he asked you how long after (he mur-
der “the murder was on a Friday, wasn’t
it”?—No.
Will you swear you did not say this in
this Conrt?—Yes.
Tiie trial of George Anbum was re-
sumed at 2^o.this. afternoon, when. Mr.
Justice Draper delivered reserved judg-
ment . following upon the argument :, of
counsel as to the admissibility of certain
rebuttal evidence sought to be called by f
the Crown. His Honor announced that
he had decided to allow Mr. Parker to call,!
acme of the witnesses mentioned by him. .
to give evidence regarding certain aspects
of thecase only. The jury then returned .
to their.box in the Court.
EVIDENCE OP REBUTTAL. |
Clifford A. B. Lloyd, merchant and :
importer, said he had. known the motor-
cycle taxi-driver Allen about four yews.
• » « . * ** rrii
1 <*
HfTw far is Hill view-road, where you
live, from where Allen lives?—About a
quarter of a mile.
You say that be knows you. Does he
know-yon as Mr. Clifford Lloyd?—He may
do.
Will you swear he does?—l cannot.
Did ho say anything more than what yog
have told us?—Relative to this?
Yes?—No, nothing morgv
If a man were sitting on a motor cvcle i
waiting for a passenger for 20 minutes
with a car in front of him, would you not
expect he would sec the number?—l should
think so.
A CONSTABLE’S EVIDENCE.
Constable Richard Henry Hickson said
$ he was attached to
the C.I.D, He knew Allen, whom he spoke


to on the day after the murder snout'i or
1.30 a.m. on the 'Economic corner, when
they had a general conversation.
3401 OF 3841.
Abont BJ2O p.m. that day. at the same
place, witness saw him again, and asked:
“Did yon see a car in Roe-street, last night
or this morning?’’ He answered that
he did, and said he was not sure whether it
was 3401 or 3841.
A BOW DT ROE-STREET.
Allen had told witness this was about
12.35 a.m., just poor to seeing witness.
The car had been outside 226 Roe-strait.
The taxi driver also stated that “ Aunty, ’’
the occupant of the house, would know
who the two men were, because one of them
had kicked her dog, and when she. had
remonstrated the other man had grabbed
her by the throat as if .to throttle her.
Allen had told witness both the name and
address of his passenger. ' Witness reported
the' conversation to Dek-Sgts. Purdue and
Doyla
To *£3. Lavan, witness said he was sore
Allen Pad given him the two numbers he
had mentioned.
ANOTHER CONSTABLE’S STORY.
Alfred Henry Parker, a plainclothes po-
lice constable, examined by Mr. Haynes,
said he had been attached to the CJ.D. for
three years. He had known Alien, the
taxi-driver, for somethin? like seven years.
Witness had an interview with him on the
rank on Monday morning, April 7, con-
cerning the report that he had seen car
No. 3461 in Roe-street on the Saturday
morning. Allen said he had seen a car
outside. 226 Roe-street, but thought the
number was 308 L He was sure there was
a 3 in it, and an 81 at the end, and there-
fore thought it must have been O’Neil’s
car
Witness reported the conversation to
Detective Purdue. He saw Allen again
on Monday night, when ho told him he had
to see Mr. La van,. and supposed it was
' about the car in Roe-street. Allen said
I he thought he would remember Auburn
again and that Auburn had asked him once
to go to the East with him. Allen said he
did not want to be dragged into the case
when witness told'him be could only say
what he thought about seeing the car that
night.
RELUCTANT TO GIVE EVIDENCE.
Mr. Lavan: When you had the second
conversation with him, he knew you were
a constable?—Yes.
And he made no secret of the fact
that he was coming in to see me abont
the car?—No. ,
He seemed to be reluctant to give evi-
dence? —He did.
The first time yon spoke to him did you
mention car 3481 to him, or did you sim-
ply ask him if he remembered the num-
ber?—l asked him whether he was right
that he had seen car 3481 in Roe-street.
You are carrying your, memory a long
wav back, yon know?—l remember it all
right. ,
Did he say anything about thinking the
number was 3481? —He thought that as he
had seen the 3 and the 81 at the end, it
must have been the ear.
CAE NO. 3081.
It is peculiar that he told Hickson
next dav ho thought it was 3081 or 3481?
—He told me 3081.
And that he thought it must hsvo bora
O’Neil’s ear? —Yes, on account of seeing
the 3 and SI.
At that time the owner and the number
of tho ear was announced in the papers.
Did he not sav that, in view of that, he
thought it wa«. 34817—Having seen the
“3” and the .ST,’ r he thought it might
be, '
PISH AND CHIPS.
Miss Ena Golding (re-called) said that
she first took over the business in Oxford-
street about the middle of March. Ac-
cused was a visitor at the shop then, and
came in often up to the night of the mur-
der. In consequence of what she had
been told by the previous occupier of the
shop, she kept cool drinks on the ice for
certain customers, including accused, who
had lime and soda. He would take it
away with him. She conld not say whe-
ther accused had a parcel when he came
into the shop on April 4.
Mr. Laran; Yon" are busy at that hour?
—Only on Friday and Saturday nights
Can von give me the date yon took over?
—About the 10th to the 14th March.
May it have been a little earlier?—l do
not think so.
After this lapse of time it wonld be hard
for you to remember about parcels?—Tes.
I cannot remember. He might have
brought one every night, for all I know.
Can yon say how many nights he came
in?—-Ko. it would be more than one. I
think about three or four, but that is only
a guess.
Did ever consume the drinks in the
shoo?—No.
| What did he hare on the night of April
I 4?—Fish and chips.
THE WAGIN TRIP.
Charles Henry George, motor-ear owner,
said that on;April s ; he was on St; George’s
Terrace rank. ; About 2 o’clock Anbnm
to Wagin by car.
' Spirited interest -was taken in the trial
of George William Auburn by the public
to-day. This was caused no doubt by the
knowledge that the addresses of counsel
would be commenced, in which the story
of the crime from the Crown’s viewpoint
»nd the story of the alibi set up in defence
would bo reiterated and elaborated upon.
To-day is the sixteenth day of the trial,
and it is anticipated that the addresses
and summing-up will occupy until Thurs-
day. The remaining days of the trial,
therefore, will be of increasing interest
Counsel and jury during the past few
days have been exhibiting' signs of weari-
ness, but to-day, possibly with the know-
ledge that the ease was drawing to a close,
they appeared to be recuperated to some
extent.
The accused is charged with the wilful
murder of John George O’Neil, feed motor
driver, on April 4, at Claremont.
Mr. H. Parker rad Mr. A. Q. Haynes ap-
pear for the Crown, while Mr. M. G. Lavan
and Mr. J. F. Walsh represent Auburn.
The remainder of the evidence of rebut-
tal was given this morning.
no money; no trip.
WiHiam Charles McKinley, motor taxi
proprietor, St. George’s Terrace rank, said
that on Saturday, April 5, he saw the ao-
cased about 2 pan. Accused spoke to him.
Witness was by himself on the rank at the
(ime accused came up to him. He had not
known accused previously. Auburn men-
tioned his name, and said his father kept
the Osborne Park Hotel. He asked wit-
ness the price of a trip to Wagin, and wit-
ness quoted £2O. Accused said he was go-
ing to Wagin to see his girl’s sister, who
was very iIL He wanted to go right
away. Witness asked for a deposit
cost of the trip or for some security. Ac-
cused said he could not give him anything
at the time, but would give Him a cheque
on Wednesday morning. Witness replied
that he could not take accused without
either the money or else security. Before
accused came up to witness he saw him
speak to Bert Moody and Charlie George.
As witness had to go away on a short job,
accused said he would go away and try to
get the cash and would be back at 3
o'clock. Upon returning from the short
job at ten minutes to 3, witness waited for
about an hour, but the accused did not
come along. Witness had made his first
signed statement on this matter to t|vo
detectives who came to sec him on the Sat-
urday after the murder.
Mr. Lavan: What was the statement yon
told ns you made to the detectives?—lt
was not a statement. They just came j
along the., rank and asked if anyone had
been inquiring about a trip to the South- I


J n/&v-
Then yon say,, yon told fJbcm about this
incident?—Yes.
Giving the name and everything else? —
Ves.
Ton are on Bt. George’s Terrace rank,
O’Neil was not on that rank?—No.
Can you suggest why the detectives
should come along that rank asking if any-
one bad been inquiring abont a trip to the
South-West? —Chaps come along to all
ranks.
O’Neil was on the Marray-street rank.
Can you tell me why they should go in-
quiring on your rank?—They went along
all ranks. J
How do you know. Did yon see them 7
—I heard abont it.
From that date up to this morning have
you ever been asked to remember this con-
versation ?—No.
Do you pretend that your statement as
to that conversation is accurate after a
lapse of three months?—Yes.
I presume there are numerous people
coming to yon on the rank from time to
time and asking about various trips?—
Yes.
Can you always remember three months
a iter wards what they say to you?—On a
big thing like that, yon do.
You hare had other trips into the coun-
try. Take one in the country three _or
four months ago. Can you remember what
was said ?—Yes, I could. I
You are a marvel. When were von
first asked about this conversation?—This
morning.
Who asked yon?—Mr. Parker.
After further questioning, it was dis-
closed that the witness meant Mr. Haynes,
and not Mr. Parker.
Mr. Lavan: Do you mean to suggest you
do not know My. Haynes from Mr. Par-
ker?—No.
His Honor: They’re like twins. (Laugh-
ter.)
Mr. Lavan: Who was present when the
conversation on the rank took place?—
George Craik, Charlie George, and Berl
Moody, and another fellow named James.
The five of you were together?—That’s
when the detectives came np.
I am speaking of the time when ho tried ‘
to engage you ?—Nobody was present then,
You saw him talking before that vo
whom? —To Charlie George and Bert
Moody.
Were they together or separate?—At
separate places.
Would you be surprised to know one of
them says, they were both together?—
They might have been at one time.
His Honor said that his notes did not
contain this statement.
Mr. Lavan; George and Moody were not
together?—Ho fas as I epuld see.
Re-examined by Mr. Haynes, wit-
ness said he was not approached until this
morning to give evidence in the case. It
was while he was waiting for Auburn to
return that the detectives spoke to him.
Their inquiries were in connection with I
rhe murder and in asking the question whe-
ther anyone had been inquiring about a
trip to the South-West, they referred to =
that date (April 5). j
THE PIE SHOP.
John Roberts, stereotyper, employed by
the “West Australian” Newspaper Com-
pany, and residing at 176 Ncwcastle-street,
said he relumed to Perth after a holiday
in the Eastern States, on April 16. He
was a customer at the shop situated at the
corner of Beaufort and Newcastle streets.
He went to the shop abont. 3 o’clock on
Wednesday afternoon, April 16, £ad had
a conversation with Miss Johnson. She
said to him: “What do you think of the
murder.?”' He replied that he only knew
wbat be bad read in the Eastern States
Press. '
ONLY NIGHT AUBURN MISSED. ,
On fbe following day he called again
about 5.20 in the afternoon with a copy of
“The DMly News” in his hand. He said
to Miss Johnson; “I see there has bejp an
errest in the murder ease.” She replied,
if it is the young fellow.' I think it
is' be came into the shop every’ night for
mouths. A funny thing, that was the
only night he missed coming into the shop.”
Witness supposed she meant AfuiJ 4. A
little while ago he read a report of Mr.
La van’s opening address, wherein he rc-
■ f erred to a lady’ who kept a shop at the
corner of Newcastle and Beaufort streets.
■ On that afternoon witness again went to
the shop, and said to Miss Johnson as a
bit of a joke. “You left me in a fine pickle.
Four reporters have been to ray room. I
thought you told me Auburn was not in the
shop on the night of the murder.” ■ She
replied, “No, it could not have been me.
It must have been my sister.” Witness,
had never discussed the matter with Mrs.
Luyer.
Sir. Lavan: You swear that on the last
occasion Miss Johnson said “It could not
hav-4 been me; it must have been nry sis-
ter”?—Yes.
Do you -know they arc not sisters?—l
know now.
Then why should she say that?—She said
it distinctly. I understood they were sisr
tore until the lady told me they were not a
few days ago.
Is it not an extraordinary thing she
should say “my sister”?—They msj be
sisters-in-law.
You said to her;“l thought you told me
Auburn was not in on the night of the
murder”?—Naturally I would sav that.
Then yon have some doubt about rtf—
No. When I went home that night I jaid
to my wife
You cannot say what you said to your
wife. Did you say to Miss Johnson “Did
yon give me to understand that April 4
was the first night ho missed coming i*
hero”?—Yes. , 1
Then yon were not dear abont it?—l
might have said: “You said,” but I was
pot thinking about what had transpired a
month ago.
Did 1 not put it to yon that this implied
a doubt on your part as to the conversa-
tion? —I have no doubt about it.
Bat you had a doubt about the.conver-
sation?—For a moment.
Do yon say that owing to tlm being a
month back it raised % doubt in your mind?
.—Yes. ’ ,
THREE MONTHS AGO.
It is three months now. ■ How is it, if
yon had a doubt at that time, you are cer-
tain now? Don’t give me any conversation.
—When I got home from the shop I asked
my wife what I had said
_ His Honor: Yon must not give conversa-
tions with other people Well, I new
what the lady said, anyway.
Mr. Lavan: Yon have admitted yew wen*
in doubt when yon saw her, and now you
say yon are sure? —Yea.
What you say she said is “A funny
thing that was the only night he did
not'come into the shop”; bat she did not
say what night she was referring to? —
Quite so.
It might have been the Saturday ragatt
—Yes, or the Sunday night.
Do you go into the shop very often?—
Very often, '
Did you, after having this last ©onversa-
tiou with Miss Johnson, go there to find
out whether it was with Mrs. Layer you
had the conversation ?—No.
THOROUGHLY RESPECTABLE.
v Are you sure you didn’t go bach for that
purpose?—No. '
For (he purpose of seeing which of them
you had been talking fo?—I have never had j
any conversation with Mrs. Luyer about ■
this ease. Never a word.
They are both decent women T—As far
as I know.
Thoroughly respectable, decent women?
•—Yes.
Miss Johnson has sworn “I did not say
‘Yes, we know that boy well, if it is the
one we think it is.’ I did not say that the
night of the murder was the first night he
had missed coming in for a long (time”? ,
~T\ s k® sMd that that was the only i
night the young fellow had missed.


- BOUBLV SURE.
Did she say the night of the murder!—
■lf yon will allow me, I will tell yon why I
am doubly sure she said it.
, Did she say that the night of the murder
was the first night he had missed coming
in for. a long tune? —Sbe said nothing of
the sort. She said it was a funny thing
that that was the only night he had missed
I for months.
But she did not say "the night of the
murder"?—No. I told you that before.
When you spoke to her the second lime,
.didn’t she tell yon that you were mistaken
as to the conversation, and that she had
. had no snch conversation with you ?—She
| said she had never had any conversation
1 with me ahopt the murder at all.
The second time she had no conversation
t with you about the murder?—She said,
"It could not have been me. It must
: have been my sister."
If Miss Johnson says that she did not
• have that conversation which you allege
I took place can you suggest any reason why
j she should tell such an untruth ?—I don’t
) see any reason.
> Would not the incident be clearer in her
memory than in yours?—Not necessarily.
NO DOUBT WHATEVER.
Mr. Haynes: Have you any doubt what-
’ ever that von had a conversation with Miss
Johnson about the murder?—No Jount at
all. '
If she says she had no conversation with
you about the murder, will you contradict
her?—Certainly.
* When she said that that was the only
, night be had not been in, what were you
discussing?—The murder.
Have you ever had any conversation with
Mrs. Luvcr about this matter at any rime?
. —No. - ■ ■'
• Would there be any possibility cf your
mistaking the two women ? —There is no
■ doubt whatever. You can pick them out
‘easily, /
You say she said "My sister.” Had
either of them ever referred to the other
in that way before?'—No, lut un to the
ether day I thought they were -isters.
"DRYBLOWER’S STORY.
Edward Greenslade Murphy, journalist,
examined by Mr. Haynes, said be
was known as "Dryblower.” He knew
the shop at the corner ox Newcastle and
Beaufort streets kept by two ladies. Ho
k-ad been going to that shop frequently for
.•ibouf four years, which period included the
time these ladies were in it. Tic- knew the
name of only one of the ladies. He re-
membered Auburn’s name appearing in the
Press in connection with the arrest. Ft
was a Thursday evening. The date was
April 17. He went in to the shop to use
the telephone. This was about half-past
7. Both ladies wore present, and one of
them was reading "The Daily New;,” while
sitting at a marble table, and the other was
leaning over the counter. Ho thought it
was the taller of the two who was leaning ;
over the counter.
"A TERRIBLE THING.”
He conversed with both. The fall one,
who was behind the counter, said, "Isn’t
this a terrible thing about young Au-
burn?” - . _ ■
. His Honor; Was the lady tall and thin?
—No, strong looking rather. (Laughter.)
Witness asked, "Do you know him?” and
the reply was "Yes, do von?” Witness
said ho did not, but he must have known,
him when he was a little bov, because be
lived near his (Auburn’s) father’s hotel.'
"A GENTLEMANLY YOUNG FEL-
LOW.”
. Witness asked what -Auburn was like,
and the woman "A well-behaved,
gentlemanly-looking young fellow, very
well mannered and nicely spoken." She
added that he used to see his young lady
home and then come to the shop. He met
a lot of young fellows there about the
same age as himself, and they sat and had
a chat. Then he went away to his tram.
She also told witness that he came in
nearly every night.
NOT FOR A LONG TIME.
Witness asked her how long it was since
she had seen him, and she replied ‘'Not for
a long tune.” Both the women took part
in the conversation, and the word “we”
was used very frequently. When witness
read the report of Mr. Lavan’s opening ad-
dress, he telephoned Mr. Haynes.
Mr. Lavan: You have seen the evidence
of all the witnesses ?—No, I didn't read
this morning’s paper.
Saturday’s papers?—No, I did not. I was
seeing my boys away to the North-West.
Ton have been going to the shop for
some time and know the ladies pretty,well?
—No.
Yon knew them by going into the shop?
—Exactly, but I would not know them in
the street.
"DECENT, RESPECTABLE WOMEN.”
They are decent, respectable women?—l
beßeyc so.
Yon would not go in if they were nut?—
I simply went in to use the ’phone.
But if they weren’t decent, respectable
women yon would not?—l don’t -follow
you.
If they were not decent, respectable wo-
men you would not go into their shop?—
How am I to know when I go in to use the
’phone if they are decent women ? (Laugh-
ter.)
That is not a reply to my question. But
it doesn’t matter. You are a pretty busy
man? —Fairly.
And you are a man who has thousands
of conversations with people daring a
year?—l would not say so.
Perhaps more than any man in Perth?—
No.
A LONELY MAN.
You do not think so? Well, they are
numerous, anyway?—Well, I am "more
alone than any other journalist in Perth,
I write in a house by myself.
But yon are well known. As well
known as the town clock?—All, yes.
Yonr memory was first directed to this
incident when you saw my opening ad-
dress in the newspaper. You hadn’t both-
ered about it till then?—You mean I didn’t
bother about ringing Mr. Haynes.
It would be an incident that wonM pass
from your memory. You didn’t think
they would be called as witnesses until you
saw my address?—All I knew was that
they mentioned AAiburn.
That is not the question. This was an
incident such as would pass from your
mind until something occurred to revive
it?—lt would.
Did it pass out of your mind until yon
read my address?—No, because the very
fact of a young man being connected with
such a tragedy fastened it in my mind.
But the important point was that she
said be was not in there for a long time.
The night of the murder was the 4th.
Didn’t she say for some time?—For a long
time.
Well.’there is some difference between
the 4th and the 17th?—Any child could
reckon how much-.
EVIDENCE IN MURDER OASES.
I suppose they could, too. Have you
ever given evidence in a murder case be-
fore? —Yes.
It seems to be a specialty ?—Yes.
Have you in any other cases 7 —Two mur-
der cases.
Ah, I see. Any others except murder
eases?—Yes, others.
Tell me any others beside murder eases?
—A man driving a cow through the streets,
and he was fined £lO. I gave, evidence.
(Laughter.) .
E. G. Murphy ("Dryblower”), further
cposs-examineci.
Mr. Lavan: Who, for the man?—No, for
the Crown. > • •
Any other?—l have justified character.
Oh, yes. • Can you remember any other
eases f- r Nownswer.y;'


'/7/py-
.All'right, this; is. thd third. Now you i
told ,us you were on special work that 5
week. ’ Pretty busy,'l suppose ? What'
was the special wort ?—'That night it was '
my verse. •
“Verse mid worse. ,f When would it go
in?—Next morning.
_ And it did?—Yes, on the Friday. I take
it down early in the morning myself.
Did you take it down?—lf it was in the
paper, I would have.
Arid if you took it down it would be
published?—Yes.
There are intervals when you do not ap-
ycar,' such as last 'Sunday, for instance?
—Yea.
" Yon told mo you remembered accurately
the details of the conversation?—Yes, be-!
cause it was about such a terrible thin?. ,
There was nothin? very important in her
saying she had not seen him for a Ion?
time! —I wanted to find out if he had
changed, and said, “What docs ho look,
like now; have von seen him lately?”
Can you su??est any reason why she,
should tell a. lie? —No;, that does not
trouble me.
LOOKING FOR “COPY.”
' Mr. Haynes: As a journalist, what arc
you always looking for? —Copy.
Were you not down here every day last
week?—Yes, I was sitting at the back of,
the Court. •
You gave evidence in another murder,
case ? —Yes.
Did the accused get off? —Yes. I hap-
pened to be in one case because I gave the
woman the cartridges with which she shut.
(Loud laughter.) ,
Haro you any doubt that one of the.
ladies in the shop told yon he had not been!
in for a long time?—No; both could hear
what was said.
A POLICE CONSTABLE’S EVIDENCE.
Why?—l was worried over the boys and
the North-West,
Is it only worry?—l could not set my
mind on it.
Are you sure!—l am certain.
And these occasions are only on account
of worry?—l have little worry in my life.
But there are; spasmodic occasions when
the column is not written by you ? —I have
missed.
Asy special reasons' for that? —I got
tired and would not work.
“A TRIP TO WYNDHAM,”
Alexander Dupcmzcl, police constable,
stationed in Perth, in reply to Mr. Haynes,,
said that up to April G, he had been a
police recruit. Ho knew the shop at the
corner of Newcastle and Beaufort street.
He was there on May 22 last in plain ■
clothes. Mrs. Luyer asked him whiit he
thought about the murder, but he replied
he did not know much about it. She then
went on to say, , “He was in
the shop on the night of April 4.”
She said he came in about 10 pan. . She
also said he came in an hour earlier than:
usual for some pics, which therefore were
not ready for him, and so he took them
cold. She said she thought that unusual.
Witness knew Miss Johnson by sight. Mrs.
Luyer said that Miss Johnson was out
visiting on that night, and that Miss John-
son, came in after Auburn had gone. Mrs.
Luyer also told me that Miss Johnson ask-
ed her on that night whether Auburn came
in for his pies. Mrs. Luyer said she re-
plied to Miss Johnson, “Yes, ho came in
an hour earlier to-night, and. he took the
pics cold.” He did not report' that con-
versation.
Mr. Lavan: In fact, I put it to you that
the conversation seemed of so little im-
portance at the time that you took no no-
tice of it?—That’s right. ’
How long afterwards were.yon asked to
remember it? —About a month afterwards.
Was it after I had opened my case to the
jury and had detailed the evidence which
was going to be given by these two ladies ?
—No.
Was it not after? —No.
Not a trip to Wyndham?—l have never
been there.
Oh, but yon know the joke abont the
trips to Wyndham. You do “celebrate”
sometimes. ,As a fact, on that Sunday
the “verse and worse” was not written by
you?—l said if it went in.
I put it to. yon frankly, are there any
times when there are special reasons you
do not have that column in?—l have miss-
ed now and then. '
Do you not miss because of “celebrat-.
mg” unduly?—Well, I have missed.
Willybu swear you did not jpiss your
column that week for that reason? —I will
swear it was not on account of Ujat.
Well, what was the reason?—l cannot
remember. ' . .
Do you swear that for this reason you
did not mission this Sunday?—Yes.
What were you worried about ?—My boys
were going away to the Nor’-West for the
first time.
IRISH WHISKY.
I have heard of men bejng full of worry
out of a bottle?—Yes. but I do not drinK
Irish whisky. (Laughter.)
Mrs. Luyer has sworn she has never
spoken to you in her life?—l say she has.
She says she was not present at any
conversation between yon and Miss John-
son?—How did she know I had any con-
versation at which she was not presenti
It was suggested to her?—l sax she is
wrong.
CALL IT WHAT YOU LEgJI.
Then you say she is committing perjury?
—Call it what you like. (Laughter.)
Did you have two conversations in the :
shop about the murder?—Yes. i
What was the other conversation abont? '
—lt was when I gave her the paper with I
the “eyes” in it.
It is suggested you gave that to Mrs. I
Luyef were both in the shop. She I
said, “Have you a ‘Sunday Times?’ ” and I
I gave her a copy. As I went put of the i
door, one of them said,' “Is that paper for
us?” and I replied that it was. She
then said, “We ought to take a ticket in [
Tattjs for having something given, to ns.” :
Will , you swear that the conversation j
yon allege to have, had with Miss Johnson 1
was not on the Sunday morning?—l said
it was on Thursday night.
Yon said you were doing special work
on that night?—l said I would be doing it.
That is how yon fixed it. One of the
ladies also said that Anbum was spoken |
of as being a nice, quietly spoken young |
man, and that he used to sit there at night |
and have a drink? —She showed me where :
he used to sit. ;
She said she did not say, “I have not j
seen him for a long time?” —That does j
not concern me.
It. is. now two and a half months since |
the incident?—What about it?
Was it before? —Yes.
Was it during this trial?—Yes.
You see, it was not known that these
ladies were going to be called as withgages
for Auburn? —No. . .
At any rate, when do you say the con-
versation took place? —On May 22. .
Mrs. Luyer and Miss Johnson ■ are tho*
roughly decent, respectable ■ women ?—Yes.
AS A “PIMP.”
Do you know that Mrs. Luyer denies
ever having had such a conversation with
you?—Yes. . " . .
She denies the conversation point-blanK,
and says she was afraid of you? Yes.
Mr. Haynes: You are at the wrong man,
Mr. Lavan. ' ‘ ■
His Honor: No, Mr. Haynes,
Mr. Lavan: lam not at the wrong man.
J He was pointed out to her as a pimp.
His Honor: I am quite certain that the
witness did not use the word pimp.
Mr. Lavan: I have it here on paper.
His Honor: It must have bpen suggest-
ed to her by somebody.
Mr. Lavan: I beg your pardon, sir. No-
thing of the kind. She was asked by Mr.
Haynes: “Did you know he was a police
recruit and therefore a member of the
force?” She replied: “I thought he was
a pimp.” It will be a matter for.comment


//T/W'
to the ■jury. " '(’lo' »» uirero; r- l ou said you
had .this conversation with her, and there
was nothing to fix it in your mind. Yon
never reported it. Yet you pretend to re-
member all about it now? —Yes.
A CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE.
Mr. Haynes: Have you any doubt what-
ever that the conversation took place?—
None whatever.
Is your acquaintance with these ladies
casual? —Yes. I have seen them about
three times.
You are definite that yon were only in
the shop on one occasion before, that be-
in- May 22?—Yes ’
Did you open the conversation about .the
murder, or did Mrs. Layer?—She asked me
about the murder first.
Mr. Lavan: How often have yon been in
the shop since? —Once. One day when 1
was in uniform. I cannot exactly remem-
ber the date. I can find out.
Do you remember whether it was since
I opened my case to the jury?—(The wit-
ness paused.) Before.
You are not sure?—(No answer).
Mr. Haynes: Was it before Mr. Lavan’g
ease was opened?—Before.
Mr. Lavan: Was it during this trial?—
Yes.
MISS JOHNSON WAS OUT.
Robert Williams, police constable, sta-
tioned at Perth, told Mr. Haynes that in
April last he was in the training ®ehool as
a recruit for the police force. He knew
Miss Johnson well, and also knew .Mrs.
Layer. He was in the shop one night in
April, after the arrest of the accused. It
was the Tuesday after Easter Monday,
either April 22 or 23c He got there about
half-past 10. He was in plain clothes,
and he walked with Miss Johnson to Con-
stable Bannon’s. By arrangement he
waited outside, and then accompanied Miss
Johnson back; He was on friendly terms
with" her. Coming back he had a conver-
sation with her about the murder. She
told him that Mrs. Luyer saw Auburn on
the night of the murder, that he came in
earlier than usual to get two pics, and that
on this particular night be could not wait
for his pies to be warmed, ann said he
would take them cold. Witness was in
the shop again a day or two later, at about
11 p.m. Both the ladies were present. He
asked Mrs. Luyer. “Did you say you saw
Auburn on the night of the ronrder?” She
replied, “Yes, I remember it quite well,’’
She also said that Miss Johnson was out
at the time. Miss Johnson she said came
in later, and after she had been in a while
she (Miss Johnson) asked Mrs. Luyer,
“Has not George been in yet?” Mrs.
Luyer replied. “He came in earlier than
usual, and would not wait for his pics to
get hot.” Miss Johnson heard what was
said, biit made no comment.
Mr. Lavan: When did you first'know you
would give evidence in this case? —I did
not know it at all. I reported what I'
knew to the police.
Why, yon have been hanging about here
for days!—Yes. 1 •
When were you first notified you would
be called? —Last Sunday week.
After reading my report in the Press,
you made the report?—Yes.
Did yon go down to Mrs. Layer and stay
until a late hour, knowing they were my
witnesses?—l went there.
NOT TO PUMP TEEM.
How long were yon there?—Until about
1 a.m. /
1 put it lo you straight, that you went
there lo pump them?—l (lid not.
They were ray .witnesses, and vou went
there to pump them? —I deny that. They
wore my friends.
Did you make your report immediately?
—I made it ou the Sunda3 - .
They were your friends. Well, just listen
to what Mrs. Luver has to say about you:.
“I know a Mr. Williams. I have seen
him a few times. I did know he was a
police recruit. If Mr. Williams said Miss
Johnson said that with regard to his con-
versation it is a deliberate He.” That is
what she said?—Yes.’ •
Can you tell me any reason why she
should say that about a good friend like
you ?—No. ■
kou~ did not know what was in her
mind?—Miss Johnson asked me if I had
reported it.
Miss Johuson is a girl you would have
us believe is ou friendly terms with yon.
There wrpi no one to contradict your story
about going to Hannon’s?—No.
Well, just listen to what Miss. Johnson
has to say. (Mr. Lavan quoted' a further
extract.) Now, do you still say she dis-
cussed the murder with you?—Yes.
Is it not a tact that, every time you saw
her you tried to discuss thk matter?—
She told me Mrs. Lqver saw Auburn on
the night of the murder.
fcihe says she refused lo discuss the mur-
der with you at all?—I don’t know what
she said.
Mr. Lavan, after reading a further ex-
tract, asked if ho wanted them to
believe this was a tissue of lies.
Witness: It is wrong.
She is a decent girl, isn’t she?—To the
best of my knowledge.
But you know her so well? —I have seen
the. girl about 30 or 40 times.
You go there a lot and stayed there on
this famous morning until 1 a.m.?—Yes.
Will you tell me why she should come
in and perjure herself against you that
way?—l don’t know.
Why should she say that you canstantly
tried to discuss the and thaf she
would pot discuss it with you, and that you
weren’t to he trusted?—l don’t know.
How long have you been in the force?
I have been connected with fhc polios for
six mouths.
ON AFFECTIONATE TEEMS.
Mr. Haynes; Were you on affectionate
terms with —Yes.
Yet yon are a person who was not 'to be
trusted. Did you stay there late at night
freouently?—Yes. ■
How many times after 12 o’clock?—
About five or six.
Who would you be there with till that
hour?—Miss Johnson.
Did she ever give any indication of be-
ing unable to trust'you"—She said she had
been informed not to trust me and I told
her to prove it for herself.
Did you go there that night to pump
her? —No.
: Purely as a matter of friendship?—Yes.
What did you tell her when she asked
if you had reported the conversation to
.the police?—l said I had not done so. She
told me not to say I had been there that
night; that is last Saturday week.
AUBURN ON THE TRAM.
Norman MacKenzie, recalled, said he
was driving tie tram to Osborne Park on
the night of April 4. Accused travelled
out to Osborne Park on that night. On
other occasions witness had seen him with
bottles under his arm, but bad not seen
him with one that night. If there had
been a bottle under accused’s arm witness
was sure he would have, noticed it, be-
cause he walked as far as the hotel witn
him, and he had both his hands in his poc-
kets.
Mr. Lavan: You could not remember
whether the accused had his overcoat but-
toned or opened ?—That is so.
You were not taking much notice of him?
—Not a great deal.
Did he not practically every night take
home some bottle or parcel?—Yes.
Might he not have been doing so that
night without your noticing it?—He could
not have been carrying anything without
my noticing it.
Will you,swear he had no bottle that
night?—l swear I did not see one, hat 1
do not know what he had under his coat.
NO BOTTLE VISIBLE.
William Patrick Leen, recalled, said he
was travelling on the back of the tram
on the night of April 4 when Auburn
boarded it. Witness was standing facing
the centre of the car, and accused practi-
cally brushed against him as he got on.


There was sufficient light on the. back plat-
form by. Accused may have been
carrying a bottle, but if so it was not visi-
ble. He might have had the bottle in one
of his pockets. I could not have helped
seeing it if it was visible. He had no
bottle under his arm that night so far as
witness knew.
Mr. Dayan: Will you admit the possibili-
ty of his having had a bottle under his arm
without your having seen it, as he was
standing in the far corner where there
would not be too much light?—There is a
glass on the back of the tram, you know.
For the of argument, assume that
the overcoat was open, could he not then
hayp had a bottle under his left arm with-
out your seeing it?—Then I' would have
seen it when he was getting on.
When were you first asked about this
parcel?—Two or three days ago.
Will you swear on your oath that Au-
burn did not have a bottle on this occa-
sion? —It could have been there without
my seeing it.
There was nothing that particularly di-
rected your nttention to Auburn that
night; you did not see whether the over-
coat was open or closed, and therefore you
didn’t take much notice of Auburn?—l
didn't.
Then might he not have had a bottle un-
der his arm?—There is a possibility.
Mr. Parker: Have you ever seen a man
carry a bottle up right under his arm?—
I don’t think I have.
If Auburn had been carrying the bottle
crossways would you have seen it?—l
would certainly have seen it when he was
getting on the tram.
You specially watched Auburn because
he was wearing an overcoat on a hot
night 7
Mr. Lavan: That is not re-examination.
Mr. Parker: The accused said he was
carrying the bottle under his
arm with his hand on it, by
the neck. Was he in such an atti-
tude at all on the tram?—l don’t know.
Did yon see him hold the neck of the
bottle?—No.
MR. LAVAN OBJECTS.
Mr. Lavan objected.
His Honor: Wait a moment.
Mr. Lavan: Surely I have the right to
object?
llis .Honor: You have, but you can wait
and give other people a chance.
Mr. Lavan: Well, your Honor '
His Honor; Sit down!
Mr. Lavan; May I make an objection?
His Honor: Presently you can.
" Sir. Parker (to witness); If the accused
had been standing that way, would you
have seen the parcel?
His Honor: Mr. Lavan, do you object to
that? .
Mr. Lavan; The question was not put
that way before, and your Honor would not
listen to mo.
His Honor: Both yon and Mr. Parker go
on disregarding me while I am taking down
answers to' questions. . It has happened
right through this case.
A MATTER OF COURTESY.
Mr. Lavan: The only time for me to ob-
ject to a question which is improper is before
the question is answered. I jumped up to
'do that, and I am sorry to say that your
Honor did not treat me with the courtesy
that lam entitled to as a member of the
Bar. The Bar is entitled to courtesy and
consideration, the same as the Bench is.
His Honor: You are entitled to courtesy,.
• and you always get it.
Ultimately Mr. Justice Draper decided
that Mr. Packer's question to the witness
was one for the jury to answer.
Mr. Lavan said that immediately before
that the witness said he did not know whe-
ther he (Auburn) held a bottle by the
neck under hia arm.
■.Mr. Parker asked leave to put this ques-
tion to the witness to find if he. had.
■ Witness said he did not see Auburn
holding the neck of a bottle. ;
;;;Mr. Davan: Did. yon Say beforehand that
'you did not know?
'Witness said he did not recollect ha via};
said that distinctly.
His Honor: Anyway, my note is: “I did
not sec him holding the neck of a bottle.
The Court adjourned for lunch. -
COUNSEL’S ADDRESS.
MR. LAVAN FOR THE DEFENCE
Mr. La van directed his attention to the
~ address to the jury immediately after the
luncheon adjournment.
After outlining the charge against the
accused, lie said he felt there was no need
for him to impress upon the jury the seri-
ous nature of the charge they l{sd to try,
and the very grave .issue involved. This
was no ordinary ease. A man’s life was
in their hands. It devolved upon the
Crown to prove to their entire satisfaction
the charge against the accused before they
could find him guilty. This proof must
not be by theory, by suggestion, by innuen-
do, or by suspicion. It must bo ,
Proof Absolute and Convincing,
and leaving no doubts in their minds upon
the question. If they had the slightest
reasonable doubt they were bound bv law
and their oaths to give the accused the
benefit of it. It was the proud boast of
Britishers that their administration of jus-
tice was the purest of the world, and that
every roan who found himself in the crimi-
nal dock was presumed to be innocent until
he was proved to be guilty. In other
words, the Crown must prove affirmatively,
without a shadow of reasonable doubt, that
it was the accused’s hand, and his alone,
that took the life of that unfortunate man,
John George O’NtSl. It was equally a
proposition of British taw that if there
Any Re.ason.able Doubt
in the minds of the jury, or if the Crown
had failed to convince ftan, they were
bound to give, the accused the benefit of
such # doubt
This was no ordinary case of murder.
There had been a brutal and most callous
crime. There was no question here as to
the degree of crime. It was not a ques-
tion of murder, or manslaughter. _ There
was no question of sanity or insanity. The
whole question they had to try was one of
wilful murder, or nothing, jhere was'no
intermediate course for them. The crime
was of such a nature that the person con-
victed of it was very unlikely to have any
mercy extended to him. He felt in no un-
measured degree a great, serious, and
Terrible Responsibility
resting upon his shoulders. Ever since
the accused had been arrestedj and fol-
lowing the inquest and the preparation of
the case, he and hs colleague, Mr. Walsh,
had undergone a burden that God knew'he
hoped he would never have to_ undergo
again. Both he and his colleague, so to
speak, had the life of this man in their,
hands. Members of the jury would un-
derstand the anxiety of counsel, and that
for the accused it was a matter of
life or Death.
One question, improperly asked, or one
question left unasked, might make all the
difference in the world. For that
reason they could imagine the grave
and serious responsibility and con-
tinual anxiety which he and his colleague
had endured. If that anxiety was so
great with them, how much more must it be
j with the jury. For the reason that after
j he had finished his address he could say,
thank God that he had done his best ac-
cording to the poor ability given to him.
The burden then shifted from his shoul-
ders on theirs, for it was their voice that
said at the finish either that the aecusea
left the Court a free man, or went to a
Horrible and Degrading Death
on the scaffold.
The case had occupied a period of nearly
four weeks, and he would say had brought
a great deal of anxiety to the jury, yet


'hi**'
'they tad gfvgiT'it andjits mmtnarious de-
tails the greatest attention. Something
over 70 .witnesses had been called, and he
could imagine how trying it must have
been, and what their responsibilities were,
in having-to sit and listen to its ramifica-
tions. Tor that reason, perhaps, it was
more difficult to them. While he was
fighting and working, the time, although
the anxiety still persisted, did not press so
heavily, but the jury had to try and assi-
milate the evidence and the important is-
sues they had to decide. He thanked
.them for the close attention they had
given.
It was a matter of regret to him, and no
doubt to everyone, that the case had occu-
pied so much time, for they were cut off
For Nearly Four .Weeks
from business, home, family, and amuse-
ment. He was confident they would try
and bring to bear upon this most difficult
and important case, all the intelligence
and every thought they ;could give to it,
and above all things, faring to bear on it
their sense of justice, fair play, and
righteousness in the highest degree.'' He
said with the greatest confidence that he
had over experienced a case which
had lasted so long, or caused so
much public comment and anxiety.
Unhappily, in many instances, some of them
to their own knowledge had heard unfair
and unprejudiced rumor and comment. He
begged of them to eliminate from their
mind everything they had heard and read
outside of the Court. Rumor was always
described as a lying jade, hut rumors had
been cast broadcast through the country
ever since the arrest of the accused. The
Tongue of tie Slanderer
and the gossip monger had been a power in
the land and the most shocking statements
had been made of Auburn and honorable
men in the State. It seemed indescribable
that some people could stTTrt these awful
rumors. The minds of some of them must
be dirtier than the filthiest sewer they could
imagine. Not alone was the tongue of
the slanderer and gossip monger busy, but,
ho was sorry to say, a section of the Press
in this State had not been altogether fair.
The Press was a great power log gopd or
for evil, and fortunately, taking it as a
whole, the Press had exercised its power
for good, but they would find the irre-
sponsible journalist, the man who dipped
Jus pen in gail, the man who was
ready, for the purpose of selling his paper
or making some excitement, to listen to the
filthy rumors, and publishing them openly.
Fortunately, they were few and far be-
tween, and he was indebted to the great
majority of the Press for the fair attitude
they had taken to the accused man. Spine
of them had appealed for British fair play
-and justice, and that was all he askea.
, Ho did nto want the jury to think he in-
sinuated they were
Eiassad or Prejudiced,
but the human mind was vcry . receptive,
and it was difficult when they heard rumors
going about, some of the most ridiculous
nature, to keep them out of their minds.
In one paper in this State “this unfor-
tunate boy” was absolutely tried and con-
demned, bqt the offender luui had to pay
the penalty for doing it. He vised the
jury to shut out of their minds those
scandalous rumors, and to judge the ac-
cused on the evidence given, without fear,
fa'. — . or affection towards any man.
V ■ chain of evidence which nearly SO
witnesses had attempted to forge must be
a continuous and a strong chain, a chain
without flaw or weak link. The jury ’s
duty would be in every way to test the
strength of the chain.’ Throughout this
ease there was
Not One Tittle
of direct evidence upon which the accused
could be convicted. The whole ease was
one of circumstantial evidence only. Some
descriptions of circumstantial evidence
might be regarded as vciy convincing and
very complete, but the circumstantial evi-
dence here was not of that class, or even
within miles of that class. The most dan-
gerous evidence upon which a man could
be convicted was cirspmslantial evidence
of the kind brought forward in the pre-
sent case. No doubt Sir. Parker would
tell the jury that circumstantial evidence
was convincing evidence. He (Mr. Lavan)
denied that contention, since it amounted
to a declaration that the human intellect
was infallible. Members of the jury must
have known or heard of improper cases
of conviction on
Circumstantial Evidence,
even cases where men had lost their lives
owing to circumstantial evidence, and Had
afterwards been proved innocent. Where
a case pf circumstantial evidence depend-
ed upon the linking together of isolated
pieces of testimony,-such evidence was the
most dangerous evidence upon which a
man could be convicted. Circumstantial
evidence must be quite inconsistent with
the innocence of the accused person, and
.such as to render it impossible, in the
minds of the jury, that anyone except the
prisoner had committed the crime.
The present ease presented
Many Extraordinary Features, \
but there were two features which he
wanted them particularly to remember.
Firstly, there was not a scrap of evidence
of any kind whatever that.in all his life
the accused ever knew or ever saw or ever
spoke with the murdered man. That was
a feature of the utmost import-
ance. He - was never known even to
j have spoken with John George' o’Neil.
1 O’Neil, as they knew, was a man who
plied his calling on a public rank. They
would remember the witness who gave evi-
dence about the identification of the body
saying there were always about four men.
on that rank. Was it not extraordinary,
then, that if Auburn did go to employ
O’Neil that there was not a single witness
saw him speak to O’Neill He (counsel)
would show from other sources that it was
not Auburn who engaged the unfortunate
man. The second point was the
Entire Absence of Any Motive
that would appeal to any man outside the
four walls of an asylum. Mr. Parker had
told them, and he was right, that it was
not necessary to prove a motive. That
was so. There were very few crimes that
required any mol ivo to be proved by the
Crown. A roan stole, or a man committed
a wrong offence in respect to women, a
man sets lire to his house or someone else’s,
and in a thousand-and-one cases it was not
necessary to prove motive. He did suomst
"that, while it was strictly not necessary
i for the. Crown to prove any motive, they
I as 12 sensible men would ask themselves
jin that case where life had' been taken
j what on earth was the imotive to suggest
j for this crime. Mr. Parker, however, said
i that he would supply a motive.
| Mr. Parker: No., I said the jury would
see it.
Mr. Lavan'said Mr. Parker had said it
was not necessary to supply a motive, but
that they would see one. Counsel did not
know whether he was dense, but he failed
to see any motive that would appeal to
children of 10 years of age. The Crown
said that this unfortunate lad —he was only
a boy—wilfully, brutally, deliberately and
Callously Murdered O’NeiL
jHe said fearlessly that there was not a
I scrap of - evidence to support that
I charge,. There would be plenty
of theory and suspicion, but
I there was not a scrap of evidence
to justify them taking away his liberty or
his life. The only motive there could nave
been was that Auburn was unfinancial,
that he wanted a car to go to Wagin, and
because he was unfinancial and unable to
get a car that he most brutally and foully
i murdered a man. Did they ever hear
such rubbish in their lives. They knew
that there was not a day in the week when
cars were not stolen in the streets of Perth,
and taken away for a day, two or three
days. If any one of the jurv felt inclin-
ed to take a car they might not bo able to
do so. They might not know the modus
operand!, but there were unfortunately a
lot of people who did. Auburn had had


’ Four Years wf.th Wintertottom’a.
Could anybody ask them to believe that
Auburn, who wanted to go away for one
day to Wagin. not to Broome, or Marble
Bar, wanted the car for 24 hours, was go-
ing to take a man out and brutally murder
him 1 ? He could have gone out and taken
a car off any of the ranks without hither
or difficulty. He ventured to say that was
the only motive Mr. Parker could surest.
He said it would not appeal to any twelve
men
Outside an Asylum.'
The cost of the car to Wagin had been
quoted by one man at, counsel thought,
£l7, and by another at £l9.
Would anyone dare to say that, for the
sake of a one-day trip to Wagin, at a
maximum cost of £l9, the accused would
have committed murder? Auburn • had
been able to have a car, and could have
got the money from his father. His fa-
ther had paid money for him at other
times, and said he was prepared to give
him a cheque for £2l on his birthday, but
the boy would not take it then. The
father also said his son could have had
money at any time he liked, , The fact was
Auburn Did Get Credit.
The jury must remember that he could
have taken a car off the streets of Ppyth,
.that he could have got credit on the other
hand, and that he could have got the
money from his father. Bearing these
things in mind, were they going to believe
that the boy sitting in the dock deliberate-
ly, brutally, and callously took O’Neil out
and battered him to death for the purpose
of obtaining a car for a 24-hour trip to
Wagin? It
Made a Man’s Blood 801 l
to think that such a suggestion should be
made by anyone. There was not a scrap
of evidence that the accuesd knew O’Neil.
There was an entire absence of any motive
that would appeal to the veriest schoolboy.
The jury would spree that a man would
have to be something more than human if
he attempted to deal with the mass of evi-
dence in the case.
Ho would try to put before them, how-
ever, all its salient features. They had
been in the Court a long while, , and he had
no desire to waste their time. They must
recognise the responsibility which rested
upon him, and bear with him if he detain-
ed them longer than they wished. That
would not be his desire,, and he would
thank God, for his own part, when the case
was over; but he had a duty to perform,
and would carry it out as speedily and care-
fully as possible. After he had reviewed
the evidence; and made his comments upon
. it. He wonld give the jury a resume of the
points, which he was satisfied would show
conclusively that tbs
Crown Had Entirely Palled
to prove its case, and that the accused was
entitled to their verdict. Ho was not a
superman, and did not pretend to be able
to deal with every bit of the evidence,
every jotting of ah “i” and crossing or
a “t.” Moreover, they had heard
it for themselves, and were the judges of it.
His Honor’s authority on the question of
: the law was absolntc, tut on all questions
of fact the jury were the sole judges. They
.were not bound to accept the fqgts from
.anyone.
The history of the case really dated back
,to three weeks prior to the murder. Au-
burn, who was a friend of the Moirs, had
.arranged with them that there should be a
Motor Trip to Wag'n,
and the date fixed was April 5. It was
only to be a one day trip, aad it had not
been denied that Auburn said he would
borrow a car. _ The reasons wore clear
enough. It might not bo a thing which
the , jury would do, but they could not all
judge other people by their own standard.
Auburn knew the Moirs would, object to
going to Wagin at his expense, if they
knew he was intending to hire a car. In
‘ order to put them off he told them three
; weeks before the murder he intnded to
. Borrow a Car.
.This was born out by Miss Sadler and
ft was important,to remember,_that
the constitution of the party had been nxea
a week before April 5. lit was to consist
of Mr. and Mrs. _Morr, Auburri "the two
Misses Quigley, Miss Sadler and three chil*
dreu. There , were no ■ less . than
six adults and three children, exclusive of
any driver who might be • there.
He wanted to use that for this reason; in
the early stages of his. opening he thought
he convinced the jury Auburn was not the
man who ordered O’Neil’s ear. They
knew the car was ordered on the Thursday.
He had already shown that O’Neil was on
the rank, and not a soul saw Auburn speak
to him. One of the most
i Convincing Pieces of Proof 1
that it_was possible to get that the hirer
was not Auburn would bo explained. The
jury wonld remember that O’Neil, when
■ getting ready, had the two dicky seats re-
-1 moved from his car. That was’not done
without reason, and as Mr. M‘Callum (his
father-in-law) had stated, the car in that
condition would only hold four people ana
, the driver. If Auburn, knowing a week
: before that there were to be six adults and
j three children making, the trip, engaged
■ this man’s car, why. were those seats taken
| out? Whoever engaged O'Neil must have
stated that only four were making the trip.
Was it not clear that it was not Auburn
whoever engaged O’Neil?
. It was abundantly clear that the car was
ordered by somebody for a long journey.
They would recall the evidence given as
to the preparation. Everything done was
such as to suggest
An Extended Journey.
Was it ever in the contemplation of Au-
burn or the Moirs and Miss Sadler that
they were to be away for more than 24
hours? Did it not appeal to the jury’s
reason and intelligence that for those rea-
sons Auburn could not have been the man
'who hired the car? Hp would proceed to
discuss the week of the murder. It was
1 unchallenged that on the Monday, Tues-
day, Wednesday and Thursday Auburn was
at Moirs, and that it was between 11 and
11.30 when he left on those nights, and it
was bis practice to 'get his pies at tho
comer shop and catch the tram. Those
four nights were very important. When
they examined the evidence of Cecil White
they would realise this, because counsel
would convince them absolutely that
Cecil White was oh the tram
which Auburn boarded on-the night of
April 4, and that it was that night and
none other that he
Loaned Him the 2s.
He would give his reasons, which were un-
assailable and unanswerable. Cecil White
was an hopest witness, who would not say
for him (Mr. Lavan) or anyone else that it
was that Friday night he loaned me
money. He said he shifted from Osborne
Park to Melrose -street on March 31. He
did not come into town that night. He
went in to town on the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, ox
4th, and only on one of those nights, did
he see Auburn. The night le did he loan-
ed him 2s, as he alighted at Melrpse-strcet.
Every night with one exception, and that
was that night. White said he picked Au-
burn - at Buyer’s corner. The first he
saw of him was when ho came out of tho
car to the back. Was it not plain that
if Auburn was at Moir’s on those four
nights and caught the late tram, he would
have had to board it at that corner. Tho
jury know the shopkeener said he was
there and caught his tram there except ou
this Friday night, and White said the only
night be loancid him the money, he was not
at that corner.


* After our last edition vent to press Sof-
ter day Hr. Lavan continued his address, in
defence of George Auburn in the O’Neil
murder trial. Mr. Lavan said;—
The jury would remember that in reply
No a question from his Honor, White said
[.that he had. got off the tram at Melrose-
f Street only on one night thta week, and
I lad never got off the tram at Melroso-
fAtrete on any other occasion. Therefore
r'yt must have been that Friday. If the
(Jury believed that, and he would ask them
“■to believe it, he would bo able to show that
h*. great many of the suspicions of the
1 "Crown were
I Smashed to Surithcregns.
f .White, Eke am honest witness, had eorrect-
-1 pd a mistake he had made when giving a
* statement to the detectives. Next, as to
the fist given by Anbum of people on the
'tram. An burp mentioned the name of
fjcesn, Eddy Sen, M'Kemrie, and Jack Qar-
•diner —ah four absolutely accurate —and he
also game the name of Cecil White. Would
Auburn be right in four instances and then
.wrong in one?
The next point of importance was the
(question of
The Number Platep.
No doubt a great deal would be heard of
those number plates from Mr. Parker, who
passed a remark to his Honor that they
were of great importance. It was not de-
nied that nnmber plates were ordered.
[Whether they were ordered on the Thurs-
day or the Wednesday was immaterial to
the case. Op the evidence of Mr. Nelson
and Miss Place, Auburn was wrong in say-
. ing that they were not ordered on the
'Thursday. The jury, who had seen the car
of Mr. Auburn, sen., would agree tftat un-
doubtedly one of the plates on the car would
tear one’s clothes. The father, who had
been in the witness box and who sedmed
Au Honorable Man,
declared that the boy had said he would
pive him (the father) a new set of plates.
The Crown would place a guilty constrnc-
Ajon on the ordering of the plates. Mr.
1 Stamsay, who was called in the lower Court
Jby the Crown, was not called here, was a
■ friend of the father's for many years, and
.Fjp d known the son since he was a boy.
Euless George Auburn was stark mad
■would he, wanting number plates for an
am proper purpose, go and order them fpow
Ramsay, a man who had known him since
childhood? There was no secrecy or con-
cealment of any kind in the matter. Ram-
gay referred him to the well-known firm of
Abbott and Rich. Auburn said to them,
•“Let me have the plates as soon as you
earn” —which was'common in the .case of
people ordering plates.
The number plates bore the number of
Jxis father’s car. Would the jury accept,
(even for one moment, the suggestion which
would be made to them that this boy had
Sn his mind on that Thursday an intention
$o murder somebodv in order
r .To Get Possession of a Cart
And, similarly, regarding the further sng-
’ jscstion that he was so low, so devoid of all
sense, of decency, as to order plates with
ijfcis father’s number, when, if he wanted to
fet duplicate plates, for an’improper act,
e.could have got them made to ms rtonn-
' eel's) number or to the number of a mem-
I per of the jury.
1 Then it would bo suggested to the jury
\ Shat, for the sake of one trip to Wagin,
(..Auburn got these nnmber plates to assist
;7him in the commission of a most awful and
: brutal crime- Ho was only to be away for
1?0 hours. It was not as if ho were going
-away for three weeks or a month- The
suggestion of the Crown would be that for
<h« sake of that, practically one-day trip,
; fOxe number plates were obtained Where
i eon Id there be surer detection? The ear
had to come back to Perth within 30 hears.
'On the Thursday night Auburn was at the
theatre with Miss Sadler. He made no
secret of the number plates. He asked her
that night at the theatre to call next day
at Abbott and Rich’s and obtain the num-
berplates. She stated in evidence that An-
num had said something about working at
Fremantle, but in cross-examination she
y ould not stand np to that.
The Thing waa Absurd,
because she must have known that Anburn
lad no work to do at Fremantle; he was
arcing her every night. Anbnrn says he
never said that, but he admits having
epoken to her about the plates and having
asked her to get'them next day, as he did
Hot think ho would be in town. He asks
fccr to bring them up next night, and says
that he would come up with the ear ana
fifty.
This question of the car, this talk of bor-
rowing a car. was camouflage, because Au-
burn knew that the party would not come
if he told them he was going to hire a ear.
On the Friday afternoon he had come into
town with his father. Aubnm was pressed
hy Mr. Parker as to why ho did not get the
plates himself that afternoon, and hia
reply was that he thought Hiss
Sadler might have called and got them.
He wanted to point ont that Auburn would
hare gone and got them himself if they
were wanted for an improper purpose. Did
they think be would have told Miss Sad-
ler?.. Did (bey
Think He Was Had?
There Would have been no concealment,
because she got them and charged them to
(George Auburn, jun., Osborne Park,
That! finished Thursday, and they now
game to •
_ Friday, the Important Day.
Lot him point out that on that day O’Neil
left home on the Friday about 7.20 to
keep his appointment with his passengers.
He (Mr. Lavan) had before impressed
them that the two dickey seats were taken
out of the car. They did not know the
place or f?me of the appointment. Au-
burn was up at North Perth until 7.40,
and as he had pointed out to them, O’Neil
had left prepared for a joux-ney of seve-
re] days’ duration. If ho (counsel) bad
one regret it was because that woman—
-Ihat is, the wife of O’Neil—had to be put
in the witness box. He was sure-that she
had from all those present in Court the
deepest sympathy. _ He was sorry she was
put in the box, as it was entirely unneces-
sary. The evidence of the garage owner
and of her father, Mr. McCall urn, was suf-
ficient to establish that he was going away
on a journey that would take several days.
Auburn was home nearly all day on the
Friday. He left home, he told them at
6J5, arriving at Heir’s at 7 or a little af-
ter. Ho told the police in the first state-
dent with which counsel would deal later
en that he left home at 6.45. That was
obviously wrong, because if it were so he
Druid not be at Moxr’s at 7. That showed
that he, like everybody else, was not
Reliable About Times,
tend he (counsel) would show that in other
Snstances too. When he came into the
louse Moir was in the bathroom. Auburn
threw bis bat on the baby’s chair, went to
Miss Sadler in the kitchen, hod remained
there according to her until 7.40.
Evidence was songht to be produced to
jraggeet that he brought into the home of
t these people, his friends, the lethal in-
strument with which he- wait going to com-
mit a murder. He took with him for every-
body to see
An. Iron Far!
The Crown was not content with that,
but had the effrontery to suggest about a
parcel under tbe bed. After he came back
from Wagin, after taking it to Moir’s, he
obligingly puts it under the bed for the
housemaid to find. It was theory and
theory onlv. Miss Sadler said she coxud
not sav that he brought anything in, and
he asked the jury to believe that, because
it was incredible that a man would bring
to the house of his friends the weapon with
which Jhe intended to


Commit a CaUmra- Mnrdcx.
Ha and Miss Sadler -were not very good
friends that night. It -was sworn to by
three witnesses. Miss Sadler for the Crown,
Anbum and Fred Heir, that on that night
Auburn wanted her to go into town with
him, and she refused. He asked the jury
to remember that. The statement was
not contradicted or even challenged by the
Crown. Let the jury ask themselves the
qnestion, would he hare brought that
weapon and planned to do that deliberate
murder? A foal would not beligye such a
thing. Was ha going to taka this girl to
town to assist him or watch him while he
committed the murder? |le (Mr. La van)
Viewed This Admission
by Miss Sadler as one of the most import-
ant features of the ease, and again he
asked the jury to bear it in mind.. Miss
Sadler said she was not sure that she gave
Auburn the number plates. She got them
on the Friday and took them home. Fred
Moir was positive that Auburn went away
without any parcel with him. Auburn
could not have hidden a bar of iron or
number plates in his pocket* They must
have been seen if he had tap'll. It must*
therefore, be evident that be left the num-
ber plates at Mpir’s that night.
Auburn did not return for the plates and
there did not appear to be any hurry about
them. He spent most of the following
week with the detectives, and was arrested
and had been in prison since the Wednes-
day following. It was true he was at
Miss Sadler’s on the Sunday night for a
moment or so, and that ha whs also there
op Monday and Tuesday for a little while.
On the Wednesday Miss Sadler
Went to Wooroloo.
Auburn says he forgot to inquire about
the plates. Had he been going to use
them for an improper purpose, would, he
have ordered them from Ramsay, who was
well known to his father, or from Abbott
and Rich, who also were well known?
Would ho have let Miss Sadler know about
them? Would he have not kept them to
or even have gone to the length
of stealing plates? It would be idle to
suggest that the plates were obtained for
any improper purpose in view of the short
duration of the trip, and all the circum-
stances.
Miss Sadler was a Crown witness. On
one occasion only was she allowed to he
Treated as Hostile.
She was asked about the conversation be-'
tween herself and Auburn, on the telephone
from Wooroloo. She was not quite clear
about it. Hie Honor alloyvcd Mr. Haynes
to pnt the depositions in her hand?, and
to ask if it wqa not the evidence she gave
in the Coroner’s Court, At once she bad
said “Tea.” She eonld not be expected
to keep all those things in her mind, and
his Honor properly allowed Mi - . Haynes
on that one point to treat her a.s hostile.
She was, however, a Crown witness, and
Mr. Parker must accept her evidence. She
said the suit of clothes Auburn was dress-
ed in that night was the suit he was wear-
ing in the dock on that day. She also
said he had another bine suit he had not
worn for some time, and the other suit had
_ The Jigger Boston
off it. The only other suit that eonld
haye had a jigger button off was the wash-
ed suit, because the old coat never had a
jigger button at all. There was not one
scrap of evidence, shape or make, that the
suit of clothes Anbnrn was wearing that
night wan the washed suit. It wag a very
important point, and bo challenged the
Crown Prosecutor to point his finger to
any snch evidenced They would have plenty
of theory and suspicion, but he had yet to
learn that under onr system of justice any
man eonld be convicted on theory, .sus-
picion, or innuendo.
Auburn left the Moira* at approximate-
ly 7AO, and they had been told it would
take him abont 10 minutes to reach town.
Auburn said he went
[ To tbo Grand Picturfeg Alone,
Counsel asked the jury, in the absence of
.-any evidence to the contrary, to accept
! that statement, At continuous picture
sho'sys a person 'could enter and leave in
- ir j dark, and he asked the jury if they
had not been to picture shows where they
had seen no one they knew. Anbnrn said
Jie left when the part of the picture which
was showing when be entered was again
reached. Counsel bad not called a single
witness who saw him at the theatre that
night. He had asked the jury if it had
been their experience at night to, go to a
place of amusement, and so fpx as they
could, remember not seeing anyone of their
acquaintance. Had counsel been fortu-
nate enough to secure any person who
would come forward and swear they saw
Auburn at the theatre that night.'what
. would have happened? It wopld have
been told them unquestionably that the
evidence was “rigged.”. The jury saw the
. way the
Two Decent Women
who had been honest and open
enough to come forward 'in the
defence of Auburn had been treated.-
They had the two thimbles and the pea
over again. If they bad produced a wit--
ness who saw him he would be branded as
a liar, whereas as they did not bring one
forward they considered that be could not'
have been at the theatre.
If Auburn wished to put np a false de-
fence could it be suggested that there was
not someone in this town who could have
been prevailed npon to come forward and
say they saw him there that night, An-
bnrn left the theatre and. went to Mrs.
Layer’s shop. They saw those two women
in the box. Counsel did not care
A. Snap of the Fingers
for the evidence of the twe police recruits
and of Mr. Murphy—-the gentleman who
was a specialist in giving evidence in mur-
der cases. Tho jury, who had seen the
two ladies, were just as good judges of hu-
man nature as anybody else in the Court.
Those two witnesses were not spared in
cross-examination. The Grown spared no-:
body on the side of the defence in this
case. The defending side was in quite a
different position, fighting for a man’s
life. Counsel left the judgment of these
two women to the jury’s good common
sense. There would not be a man amongst
the jury but would jmplrcitly believe the
evidence of the two women, police recruits
and Mr. Murphy notwithstanding. -What
on earth would be the object of the two
women in coming forward and committing
perjury? Even the witnesses against
them had to admit that they wore decent,
honest, upright women, . They knew
George Auburn well, because he was an.
everyday customer, over the counter. The
two women
Unsolicited and Unsought,
of their own free will, in the interests of
justice and humanity, came to him (Mr.
. LaVan) when they saw his advertisement;
and so they to|d him their story. , Could
it be suggested that the two women would
commit perjury without fee or reward?
I In one instance the Grown Prosecutor had
i snccrjngly remarked that a certain wit-
, ness for the defence would get nis witness
fees,
Mx. Paxkerr I hope he> will.
Mr- Invan said that was a cheap sneer.
Any witnesses he had subpoenaed would
receive their fees if he had to pay them
out of his fee. But there was ,
No £5OO Reward
.hanging at the end of a string for the
i witnesses for the defence. It was unpar-
’ donable for anybody, and especially one
who held the position of Crown Prosecutor,
■ to suggest that because a witness was to
get witness’ fees and witness’ fees only,
he or she would come into Court and com-
mit perjury for the sake of
A Casual Boy. v
i The two women had known George Auburn,
■ for not more than one month prior to the ■
i All honor to them for honestly.


coming lorward to state what they knew. :
TThey were brave women, knowing what-
they would have to face here. They were
noble women, who did their duty without
hope of gain. What was their evidence? ,
That on every- night since they took pos-
session of the shop, early in March, George
Auburn came in and got his two pies on
order and a bottle of lime juice and soda;
that ha came in every night between 11
and half-past; that ho used to wait there
and catch his tram at the corner. Obvi-
ously the corner would be the place where
he would go. Cecil White had sworn that
every time, without exception, when . George
Auburn got on at that corner with him.
Auburn had bis piee and his bottle. Bo
there could be no question about that.
This Friday night, however. Auburn
came in at 10 o’clock for tho first and
- only time. Mrs. buyer passed a remark
to him. She said hero that she was taken
by surprise, that she thought the night had
. slipped on her when Auburn came in. So
• naturally she says she looked at the clock,
wondering what on earth had gone wrong,
[wondering whether she bad allowed the
: time to slip. Auburn had two pies on
order, to be put on at 11 o’clock for heat-
ing up. Naturally, when Mrs. Luyer saw
’ him walk in for his order, she wondered
■ what had happened; and, therefore, she,
. looked at the clock, and noted that it was
Ten Minutes Past 10,
the dock being generally 10 minutes fast,
though not more. There (could be no
doubt about that being fixed from memory.
Mss Johnson was there; Miss
Johnson had sworn. Counsel would
deal later with the evidence of the
recruits who had come into Court
to endeavor to sidetrack that issue. Mrs.
Luyer said “You arc early to-night,
George;” and be passed some remark she
could not remember. She had to give him
hia pies cold. She also gave him his bot-
tle of lime fruit juice and them he went
, away. So far as Mrs, Luyer and Miss
‘ Johnson were concerned, that was the end
of it all. They heard of the murder next
day. Anbum did not come in on this
Saturdav night for his usual order, nor
on Sunday, nor or several days subsequent
to Sunday, The two ladies wondered at
(this and said “Why, George was not in
lest night. What is fie matter? Did wo
offend him about anything?” As he con-
tinued not to come in, they kept discussing
the matter. Them could not be any doubt
about it. It was not
! An Admissible Mistake
! tbat the last night Anbnrn was in that
shop at 10 o’clock was the night of Fri-
day, April 4. That evidence was of ex-
treme importance—one of the most valu-
able pieces of evidence in the whole ease.
Unhappily there was no evidence in
this case to point to what time the murder
took plaee. The police found the body
floating in the water at half-past 10 on
■ Saturday momimr. Unfortunately, a
‘ doctor was not immediately sent for, as
there should have been; and the doctors
did net see the bodv until many hours
afterwards. , As a fact, they did not see
H until Sunday at tho morgue. The omis-
sion was most regrettable, seeing that
human life was at stake. Had the doc-
tors seen the body shortly after it was
found, they might have been able to deter-
' mine on medical grounds how long it was
■ since the man bad been killed. They might
(hove been able to determine that from
! rigor mortis or other indications. How-
|evcr. they did not get the chance.. But
jlet the jurv call to'mind
J Mr. Tracy’s Evidence.
He said that from 20 to half-past 10 he
was passing the King’s Park gates at Bo-
fctby-road, when he saw a ear coining to-
wards him. It was being steered errati-
cally, and he, though he could not see who
was in it, took particular notice of it. It
was common ground that it was O’Neil’s
car. The Crown recognised the import-
anee. of tho evidence regarding Layer’s
[shop, and tried to Freak it down. If
. Anbum .. was in that car —and he would
I have been if he committed the murden—
he could not have been in Layer's shop.
It -was the Crown’s theory that that ear
was tearing l home from the murder, and
that it was abandoned in Vincent-street
at 11.5 p.m. It could not have gone out
again and be back at 11.5 pan. The
( Crown worked on this theory: that the
murder was committed before 10.30, If
it was, whoever committed it was in the
car. There could he no question about
that It was as plain as that two and two
made four that Auburn was not and could
not have been in the car which admittedly
Tracy saw passing King’s Park gates at
10.25. When counsel came to deal with
the theory with regard to the ear being
abandonee! in_ Vincent-street at 11, to
11.15, he promised the mry to
Shatter the Whole Argument
of the Crown to pieces. Furthermore, he
would snv that by a detective or somebody
working up the case, the evidence of Gob-
ble and the bov. Skilkin, and Banks—-evi-
dence given to the police—had been with-
held until the defence located it. Whv
should it be? For the reason that it did
not fit the bilk
The theory put to the. jury would bo
that Anbum did not walk out that night,
as he alleged, the reason put forward
being that he bought tho goods at Gol-
ding’s later on. Ho told them that him-
self, and that was the reason they would
treat, it as a fairv story and all bun-
kum. The Crown went further. They
wanted the jury to swallow this; That Au-
burn abandoned the ear at 11.15, walked
to the tram line, and got on to a car, of all
places (when he could have gone out into
the bush), and put an 'overcoat on him-
self to hide his bloodstained clothing. That
had been the suggestion right through.
He CMr. LavanV would show what the
change of front might, he. The Crown
asked-the jury to sav that Auburn boarder]
two trams that night, saturated with his
victim’s blood. The ridiculous part of it
all was that he', was alleged to have got
ont of the tram, gone into a fully lighted
Mop, bought fish and chips, the while ho
was .
Died With the Blood
of his victim. Did thev ever hear of,
or read in anv detective vans or Dcad-
wcod Dick storv anv such thcorv upon
which to take the life of a man who was
their brother and his?
Tbe Court adjourned at 4 o’clock.
MR. UVAN RESUMES.
Resuming this morning, Mr. Lavan said
that, leaving Auburn out for the moment,
tbe evidence of Miss Sadler and of Mr.
Moir was clear-on the point that Anbum
was not definite, when leaving the
house on that Friday night, whether he
would return. According to Mr. Moir,
Auburn had on previous occasions been
asked to stay and had declined to do so.
With regard to the suit Auburn was
wearing on the night of the murder. Miss
Sadler .said it was the suit now worn bv
him in the dock. The other blue suit,
she said, he had been wearing for the last
three weeks, and she spoke .about
I ' A Link Button
being missing from that suit for some
time before she last saw Auburn wearing
it. To Mr. Haynes, in examination in
chief, she said something about having
stated to him that that batten’ was miss-
ing, and she said to him here, “Why
haven’t you asked mb about the button?
I told you all about it in the Crown. Law
Department?” That button had never
been brought out in examination, and coun-
sel ventured to think that if the button
had not been brought opt in cross-exam-
ination, it would not have been brought
out at all.
If there were witnesses en the side of
the prosecution, and on that of the de-
fence -


Whp Deserve Belief.
.thev "were Miss Sadler, Mrs- I«yer, the
milkman Qobbv and that intelligent boy
who was with him. The Crown saw the
extreme value of the evidence of Mrs.
Luyer and Mias Johnson. If the evidence
with regard to Auburn being in their shop
at 10 o’clock on the night of Friday, April
4. was accepted by the jury—-and he ven-
tured to say it would be and roust be —
then the whole Crown case fell to pieces-
[f Auburn engaged that ear and was in.
the murder, he would undoubtedly bare
been in the car at. 25 minutes past 10-
If the car came back to town, then it
could not go out again, do what was al-
leged and be back in Vincent-street at any-
thing from five minutes to a quarter past
11. . And that was the Crown's theory. •
l lt wonld he interesting to see how the
Crown wonld now try to shift its ground
recarding that phase.
The first witness in rebuttal was Mr.
Murphy, known generally as
“Dryblowcr.” •
Counsel thought he could safclv leave
“Dryblqwer” to the jury, ("Laughter.)
Murphy made a specialty of giving evi-
dence'in murder eases, and counsel could
suggest nothing more or less than that
Murphy was actuated by a desire for no-
toriety'.. a longing for limelight. The al-
leged conversation happened as far back
as April 17, according to Mr. Murphy-
Murphy had the impertinence to go into
the witness-box and tell the jury that after
a lapse of three months he could remem-
ber the details of the conversation* Lot
the :iury ask themselves as mem of the
world, whether they wonldl mall the de-
tails of a conversation three months old,
Murphy alleged that he had discussed tha
murder with both Miss Johnson and Mm
Luyer, and that Miss Johnson had said
Anhurp, had not been in for a long time.
It had
Never Been Challenged,
at all events not in this Court, that Au-
burn was in there at anv rate no to the
Thursday night. What did ‘‘ a long tune
mean? ' Mrs. Luyer swore she had never
spoken to Mr. Murphy in her life.. Counsel
would leave Mrs. Luyer to the jury who
had seen her in th© box as to she
was to bo believed. Admittedly there was
a conversation with Miss Johnson, but that
conversation had been added to. Murphy
said both,ladies took part in the discus-
sion.
A very small matter often threw a ray
of light which enabled one to arrive at the
truth. Mr. Arthur Haynes had tried to
cover up a certain statement of Murphys.
Mr. Haynes was an adept at covering up
sneh matters. Murphy’s statement was
that he had been on special work on that
Thursday. Wednesday was tha day of
the arrest, and tha alleged conversation
waa alleged to have taken place on the soft,
eccding Thursday. Counsel put it to Mur-
phy that he was
Pretty Busy That Week,
and asked him what waa the specdal work.
Murphy replied that on that night it was
his “Verse and Worse”
then asked Murphy; “Would yon bring
that matter to the office the next morning
—Friday—and would it be published on tha
Sunday?” Murphy answered “Yesij if it
went in at aIL” One saw Murphy m the
paper .week after week with hia tr £«n»
and Worse,” except during in ferrate which
occurred when he was not there. Mr.
Haynes tried to smother this up, but he
(Mr. Lavan) put the paper in Murphy %
hand and the paper showed that the “Verso
and Worse” column was pot written by
Murphy that week. Murphy had had to
admit as much.
Mr. Parker: It was not in at all-
Mr. Lavan said that the jury would
draw their own conclusions, The “Vera*
and Worse” column was not in lust Run-
day, and again the jury would draw their-
own conclusions. Murphy’* explanation
as regards missing his column last Sunday
was that ho was worried because his buy*
were, going away to the North-West. Mur-
phy boasted that ho had been twice on tne
winning side in murder eases. It was to
bo hoped that in this instance he wpnld
experience a change.
Next, there was the
Evidence of Mr; Roberta
that he had called in at the shop on Tbwr-a
day, April 17. That was over two and a
half months ago. (Counsel quoted at
length from “The Daily News” report of
witness’ evidence.) Roberts had seen hi*
(Mr. Lavan’s) opening speech in the pjper.
His evidence was that he went back to the
shop and said to Mrs. Luyer: “I thought
you told me Auburn was not in the shop or
the night of the murder?” Her reply,
according to Roberts, was “No, it could not
have been me; it must have been my sis-
ter.” The jury knew that these two
ladies were not sisters. Mr. Haynes seem-
ed to have got tangled up. on that particu-
lar point; probably he got this misinfor-
mation from the proof of Roberts’ evi-
denec. The two ladies not being sisters,
why would Mrs. Luyer say “No, it must
have been my sjster”?
Roberts was not sure of the conversation
which had taken place about a month back.
The jury would remember that that fur-
ther conversation he had with her was
after she had given her sworn evidence in
that Court, and she had denied she had
bad a conversation with him. She said it
must have been Mm Luyor. He also said
that Miss Johnston and Mrs. Luyer were
Eospotahle ‘Women.
She told him, Roberts said, that it could not
have been her that conversed with him,
but her sister. Counsel did not think that
either of them referred to the other as
sister before that occasion, and why should
she call Mrs. Luyer her sister when she
was not?
Referring to the two constables, Mr.
Lavan said Duperouzcl had said that Mrs.
.Luyer told him Auburn was ia the shop
for pies on April 4, and that he came earlier
than usual. According to him, Mrs.
Luyer said Miss Johnson was out, and did
not come in until after Anbnrn had gone.
It was startling bow the two conversations
with constables, one in May and the other
in April, were
Word for Ward
■the same. Counsel suggested they, had
been rehearsed. The jury had seen Miss
Johnson in the box. Did they think she
.was n woman who would perjure her sonl
for the sake of a boy who was merely a
customer? She said she denied Duperonz-
cl’s evidence, and that she knew him as,a
police recruit and would have nothing to
do with him because she was told he was
a “pimp.”
The Startling Unanimity
of the two constables gas amazing, and
they (the jury) would remember that the
alleged conversation with Duperouzel was
after both Mrs. Luyer and Miss Johnson
had made statements to him (Mr. Lavan).
Was it likely, then, that Mrs. Luyer would
say that Miss Johnson was not there when
she knew that she (Miss Johnson) had
given him (Mr. Lavan) a statement? Wil-
liams said he walked along with Mrs.
Layer, and she told Auburn was in to get
his pies on the night of the murder. Later
ho was in the shop, and asked Mrs. Luver
if she saw Auburn, and she told.him Miss
Johnson was not there, and had come in
afterwards and. asked if he (Auburn) ; had
Leeu in. _ _
:. He said that Miss Johnson told him th 9
h**eh in that night and obtained
•his. pies cold. There was.-a: startling re-
semblance between the statement of the
two recruits. That particular Witness
asked the jury to infer that Miss Johnson
remained silent when Mr®. Luyer said she
was not in. Without hesitation he (Mr.
Lavan) asked the jury to believe those
two decent women. The recruit also stat-
ed that Miss Johnson had told him
Not to Toll Anyone
he had seen her on that Saturday night.
He (Mr. Lavan) asked the jury not to be-
;liey« that. Miss Johnson had told him


djllft'
(Mv. Lavan) what Had occurred, and was
■ it likely she would tell the constable some-
- thing 'altogether different? The matter
could safely be left to the judgment of the
jury.
Auburn left Mrs. Layer's shop a little
after 30 p,m. on the night of April'4, and
walked to Trouchet’s corner. He was no{
certain about the times because, as he said,
the detectives worked them out for him.
At about that hour the trams would bo
picking up (be flow of people from the
Grand Pictures. There was a tram to Os-
borne Park that left the Palace Hotel cor-
ner at nine minutes past ten. That would
reach the Beairfort-street bridge about tive
minutes later. As he walked over the
bridge he found he had only 3d left. He
walked up Barrack-street, along Hay-street,
and then into Murray-strcet, {q_scc if he
could find anyone who could lend him some
.money. He had with him two pies and n
bottle of soft drink. Cecil White said
that Auburn always had pies and a bottle
with him when he went home in the tram.
Auburp consumed the pies as ho went
along. When he reached the subway he
Saw an Overcoat
tying, there. He picked it up; examined
it, and dusted it. The only evidence with
regard to the overcoat was that when it
left O’Neil’s home it was thrown on the
back of the seat behind the driver. He
(Mr. Lavan) pat it to the jury that thg
overcoat was never in the ear at the time
of or after the murder. The coat had been
lost ogt of the ear before O’Neil bad been
battered to death. The ear was a sham-
bles. If the coat had been in it at the
time of the murder -how was it that T)r
Atkinson could only find on it one tiny spot
of blood on the sleeve; that might hays got
There in a thousand and one ways? Could
Any member of the jury say he hrd never
had a spot, of blood on his clothes from
shaving or in any other way?
Dr. Atkinson’s evidence showed that tha
only human blood or the only blood at all op
the coat was a spot on the sleevo. It was
impossible to suggest that tha coat could
have been in the car at the time of the
murder, or after it, without it being heav-
ily stained with human blood. It was not
known where the coat was at the time of
the murder. Mr, Parker had put it to the
.jury that the man sitting behind the driver
would have been covered with blood. If
the coat had been in the ear. and remained
where it had been originally placed, how
could it have escaped in that way? Surely
Mr. Parker would not have the temerity
to say that a man who was .going to com-
mit a murder would first say “I wiH put.
the coat on one side,” and would then
Kill HSs Man,
and place the coat in some spot where it
would not be covered with blood. Did not
that show that the coat was not in the
Cara, and could not have been there at tha
time of the murder? If the coat was lost,
why should not Auburn find it? Why, if
anyone found it, should he not find it after
it was lost out of the ear, and before the
murder? Unquestionably it had bean lost
before the murder was committed. Auburn
said he did not know whether he put the
coat on or not.
i- Mr. Lavan continued his address to the
jury in defence of Auburn. He said:—
While Anbum was in Oxford-street, he
was bumped into by two men and his arm
was hurt Was that am unlikely story?
Parties frequently meet, hesitate, and a
collision ensues. ' ■ The jur- had ample evi-
dence of the clearest land, both scientific
and otherwise, that Auburn would suffer
from his arm under such conditions, and
would become faint, and further, that the
blood would trickle down as far as his
hand. He boarded the tram at the Lecd-
erville Hotel corner. -Leen said he was
bn the tram, and he thought it was about
31 o’clock.
Leen was one of the witnesses called in
rebuttal. When Auburn got on the tram he
stood with his back to the body
of tiie car. Leen did not uo-
tice ' whether his coat was but-
toned or open. He did not even remem-
ber whether he got on at the Leederviile
Hotel or higher up, nor, what was a common
fact in this, case, that be alighted before
the tram got to the terminus, so that he
.could enter the shop. Yet the Crown asked
the jury to believe Leen could tell them
whether on that night Auburn was ;
Carrying a Bc-tcie 1
or not. It was utterly absurd to suggest
ihst Leen could do so/ ~, , .
. Before Auburn left the car he got the
2s. from Cacil White.
Counsel would deal with the evidence of
White once-and for all. White told them
that when he was getting off the tram Au-
burn was standing in a corner. That was
.exactly where Leen also said he was stand-
ing. White, counsel thought, the jury
,would accept as an honest witness. He
shifted from Osborne Park on March 31.
When be made his statement to the detec-
tives he said it was the 7th, but he ex-
plained that mistake and those as to his
dates. He said he Lad counted back from
We date of Auburn’s arrest, instead of the
tragedy. White did not pretend to know
what night he loaned the money. He came
into town on the J.st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th night
of April, and it was one of those nights
he loaned the 2s. It was important to
remember that White said that on the
night he made the loan Auburn did not get
on at , the corner of Beaufort and New-
castle streets. Every night, according to
White.-that he travelled, with Aubuni, ex-
cept that one night, he (Auburn) .did get
~n at that comer. It had been proved
conclusively, it fact ]t was not questioned,
(hat on the Monday,"Tuesday, Wednesday,
end Thursday, Auburn was at Moirs, and
came down to that corner, got his pies, and
caught the tram. Therefore it must have
been ,
That Friday Night
when "White saw him on the tram. It could
riot have been any other. The
• Jury Would Remember
that White-told, the detectives he_ was
home that night at 11 o’clock, basing his
.calculation oh the fact that the pictures
finished at 10.30. At 10.45 they were told
both by witnesses for the prosecution and
defence that the East Perth pictures'end-
ed. It would take two or three minutes
for a. person to get out of he theatre, and
While said it took him five minutes to go
home with his girl. There was 10 minutes
spent at tlit? gate, five minutes to get to the
corner of Beau fort ami Newcastle streets,
and he said he waited five minutes for the
tram. Po'jghly. on those figures,
Jt would be 11.13
when -be caiirht the car. From that cor-
ner the cir took -eight - minutes to got to
flie hotel, -and so it would be about 1 U.‘F3
when he got off tire tram. Auburn had to
get off later on and walk to Miss Golding’s
shop. ■ Miss Golding estimated the time
at. 11.30. Did it not absolutely fit in?
The jury would remember that Auburn
told the police it was 11.30 when he went
" Under the subway, but obviously that was
Wrong, because he could not have been on
Leon’s tram if it.was that time. It took
Auburn about 20 minutes to walk from the -
subway to the Leederviile Hotel. If it j
was 31.30" when‘he’was at the subway it!
Would be 11.50 when he reached the hotel,
end the last car left for Osborn? Park at
11.50 from a terminus which was a long
way off.
The Crown snid he was wearing an .•
Overcoat on a Hot Night.
Counsel would make the Crown - a present
of that, but ihc suggestion he would deal
with presently." \ man carrying a fairly
heart- 'overcoat might put it'on in prefer-
ence’to continuing the carrying.
The suggestion which would be made was
that 'the whole story about the 3d was non-
sense", that the motor car stopped in Tin-
cent-street between H .and 11.15,-that An-
jyjl ra ws'ked down and picked up the tram
it "tha • Leederviile. JJot el,. -and that-ho was


waiting the ovueoat In order to cover rip
■ Hood•*!antedhcs. • Pure suggestion
only, ( but the suggestion that would be
rnade. . .First of all, if the motor ear was
there atdl.lo or 1.1.15, did the jury think
Auburn would have walked down to the
Leedcrville. Hotel- corner ami pick-
ed up his tramcar there, and got
on it, and afterwards got on a second tram-
car? If he v. as the man who did the mur-
der. and was sitting beside the driver, his
hair and -hi# face and every bit of him
•would, be bloodstained. Pet the .jury bear
Xti mind the spatters oi blood on the.roof
' *f- the, cur, right over the driver's head,,
and ail over the left-hand side, and the
blood on the tree in Westana-road at a
height of Sft. Whjy the murderer would
bo , j
Smothered with Brood.
But the jury were asked to believe that
this cold-blooded horrible murderer was
idiot enough calmly fo walk down to the
Lcedervilh' hotel corner and get on a tram
there... and quietly and calmlv get off that
tram and walk into, a fullv lighted shop
and make liis. purchases there and pay for
them. ■ Mils'"Golding told.the jury there
was , not a .scrap of difference in the man.
He was’wearing an overcoat, certainly, but
there was not a scrap of difference in him-
self. .Lot the jury take the case of the
most hardened murderer, oven Charles
Peace himself, of immortal memory; and
consider would such, a man do a thing like
that? in the circumstances alleged by
the Crown, would Auburn have gone down
to the Leedcrville Hotel comer at all f.He
could have got av.giy without, taking a tram
at.all. Ho could have got back to Os-
borne Park by going around if
he liked, through the bush.; It was in. evi-
dence that Auburn ~ot on the tram with
M'.Kcnsie. Mr. Parker had tried to make
a great point of where Auburn stood on the
tram. He.stood, on the front platform,
Mr, Parker suggested, and did so because
it was dark there.
f Mr.:Parke;- I am not suggesting it any
more;
Mr. Lavan said Auburn stood with Mc-
Kenzie where he stood every night, invari-
ably, and M‘ Kendo noticed nothing Avypng,
nothing unusual about Idm, except that he
was ycaring an overcoat. M‘Kenxie was
also called in rebuttal, and then said that
Auburn frequently—indeed, practically
every night—brought home
Bottlas and Farotita.
M*Kenzie would not swear that An hum
did not have a parcel with him that night-
M'Kenzie only said ho had not noticed a
parcel. If a man. was bringing home par-
cels £vcry' night, a considerable
period, could it be expected that iPKenzie
would remember whether the man had a
parcel on any particular night—after a
lapse of three months? The matter could
only have been brought to M'Kenzie’a me-
mory since the evidence was given in thia
case. As M’Kenzie bgd said, it was a very
hard question for him to answer. The jury
had sworn evidence from a Crown witness
that the
Suit Auburn Was Wearing
on that night was the suit he had beet
wearing and was now wearing in the dock.
The suit he wore during the inquest, and,
in fact, right through the piece.
Now, going back to Vincent-street for a
moment.. He wished to deal with the evi-
dence that the ear came to Yin-
cent-street at about 11-15, and was sub-
sequently seen there at midnight. Tie
jury would remember the boy Edward
Collins, a boy of 14 years. As a witness,
Collins was certainly a strange contrast to
the little boy of ll years whom the de-
fence had called—a strange contrast in
ccmt of intelligence. Edward Collins said
ho was at the pictures on that Friday
night, and Mr. Parker did not forget to
pm it into the boy’s month that it was
the night of the children’s pictures at the
Leedcrville Oval. The bov also said that
he had been Ovinp* up a bike with some-
body whose name and address he gave and
that at ten" minutcsto 11 ho went across
the street and went straight to bed. Par-
ents, of, boys would, know that it did not
take a youngster long to whip out of. his
clcthes and go to bed. Collins further
stated that at about
A Quarter to Eleven,
after going to bed, he heard a motor ear
come' along making a noise. No one had
been able to get from the boy exactly
what that noise.was. People who lived
on motor routes heard all sorts of noises
from ears.
His Honor; The witness said it was a
burring noise. ■
Mr. Lavan said that was so, but one dil
not know what the boy meant by “burr-
ing”; and there was other evidence that
the noise would be a horrible grating one.
The boy said the car stopped after pass-
ing his house. Obviously ho could not say
where it stopped. He tried to say whero
it stopped, but quite plainly he could not
Next, the bov went to sleep. Counsel
wished to be fair to the boy, and. would
admit- that the -bov might have, thought
he heard this noise a quarter of an hour
after going to bed. Boys who were about
all day, and who were pretty tired at
night* would go to sleep and wake up again
without knowing that they had been to
sleep at aIL . Therefore, the jury could
not place
Tha Slightest Reliance
on the boy with regard to time. Further,
they could not place any reliance on tha
bov. Ho said ho saw the motor car out-
side Ghiimcry's next morning. _ Granted:
but the bov. could not say that it was the
same car as he heard passing the night
before. It he went to sleep a car might
pull up, and -go on again. Now, to show
how reliable ibis boy was: In cross-ex-
amination he said his mother had read an
account of the murder out of the paper to
him the next morning. That was what the
boy said first of all, and Mr. Parker did
his best to dear the matter up. But
oiic thing which could not be cleared up
was ’ that the boy swore his mother read
the murder out of the paper to him on the
next day, Saturday, at 12 noon. Why an
account of the murder had not been pub-
lished fi.cn! But the boy had no doubt
about it; he was not shaken on it. Mr.
Parker had/been
.In Desperate Straits
to try to gore the boy’s evidence, but it
was no good. Counsel (Mr. Lavan) ask-
ed the bov “When did you give your state-
ment to the police ?” The boy was equal-
Iv positive that he gave the statement at
11 o’clock the nest morning to Constable
lh-ysdalc, but the jnrv knew that the car
was never seen by Drysoalc until 12 noon
on Saturday. .
What earthiv reliance could they place
cu evidence of that kind? Yet it was on
evidence of that, kind that the jury were
asked to take this man’s life away. This
was not s case of; pilfering or petty steal-
ing.' but. a case of human life ov death.
Now let them take the brother. The bro-
ther said b.e was coming home at 12 o’clock
or ten minutes to 12. Further, be said.
•‘1 saw a
Oar Outside Chinneiy’s.
I did not look at it.” The brother did
net know the color, and did not see the
number or anything else. Ho merely
happened to see that a car was there.
Ho went to bed, and nest mor-
ning he save a car in the
same place. It wonld be remember-
e-i that Mr. Chinncrv said he found
the car 1 there at about 4.30 a.m.
Very probably that was right, but counsel
would show where Collins was wrong. Col-
lins said that he came home at midnight,
or ten minutes to 12. He would not, say
it was tbo same car as he saw there on the
previous night. With regard to tho time
at which he had seen the car the previous
night, be said lie had heard the clock
strike,, and he explained the margin of 10
minutes by saying that the dock was some-
times fast and sometimes slow, and that
his mother, told him on the following even


trig the clock was fast. But Cbiiibs coiim
give no -reason why. he asked hii mother
about the .accuracy of the clock on the
Saturday night rather than on the Friday
night,.since ho went to town on both nights,
and he said he asked his mother the ques-
tion on the Saturday night because he
wanted to go into Perth. Every time
—counsel put Collins in a difficulty he tried
to wriggle out, but only got himself deeper
in the mire.
■ Was the motor "car there at the time al-
leged? In opposition to that view, four
witnesses had been called. Mr. Banks,
Mr. Shilken, Mr. Gobby, and that very in-
telligent boy.. Messrs. Banks and Shilken
undoubtedly went the whole length of Ox-
ford-sti-eet that night, and went along Vin-
■cent-street
Without Seeing a Motor Oar.
_\inecnt-street was not a thoroughfare in
which there would be much motor traffic
at that time of night. It was a narrow
road, a ribbon road, with a lot of sand on
each side. The Crown evidence was that
the motor was two feet out on the metal,
and that there Was only room for two mo-
tors abreast. These two men swore posi-
tively; and could there be a doubt of their
honesty? ' What earthly interest had they
in this case? They told the police about
this matter. before they came to him (Mr.
Lavan), and told him. Their evidence
was that there was no car standing there
as alleged, and that if it had been there as
- alleged, they must have seen it.
Again, let the jury consider the evidence
of Gobby and the boy. Let them take the
evidence of Gobby, who was in Stanford-
road, and the boy was. in Vincent-street
The boy saw a car coming down the hill,
not stationary, and thinking it was an in-
spector, he ran back to tell Gobby. ■ Iml
mediately they got up on to the cart. Mr.
Parker suggested that car had gone along
Oxford-street then, but did thqy think
there were two cars? They went on serv-
ing milk until they came np to the car -
• which had its lights out—-a
Trick Employed by Inspectors.
Gobby looked at the car, and its number,
and there was no' doubt that it was
O’Neil’s car. He (counsel) had said yes-
terday, and he said again to-day, without
making any references to Mr.
Parker and Mr. Haynes, whom
the jury knew did not collect the
evidence, that the evidence of Banks
Shilken, Gobby, and the boy was known to
- the detectives and suppressed, because it
pid Not Fit In
with the scheme or theory. The theory
was that Auburn, red-handed after the
murder, got out of the car at 'II.IS and
walked to the Leederville Hotel. They
say that the story about the threepence
was not “dinkum." If they believed
White, was it not clear that Auburn had
no money? Counsel asked them to believe
the ear did not come there until 3.30 ojb.
Ho wpuld venture a prophecy. It was
a shock to the prosecution to find that
Gobby was to be called. Mr. Parker will
probably suggest to you that Auburn came
back there again. Gobby gave the de-
tectives a description of the man; it was I
somebody with a grey suit, overcoat, and
felt hat, but the jury knew there were!
thousands like that in the streets of Perth
every day. They could not say it was or
it was not Auburn. Until these two gave
I evidence it was not contained in Mr. Park-
er’s theory, for while Auburn was subject-'
cd to a vigorous cross-examination he was
never questioned about coming out again
after he had gone home. The car, was
travelling down the hill—the boy saw it
moving—and Mr. Parker’s case was that
it was disabled. Counsel waited with
wonder to see what the suggestion would
be. Would they say he came back, drove
it away, and brought it back, wonderful to
relate, to the same place, for it was seen,
the evidence said.
In Front of Chimmy's
the night before?
That night Auburn went home with
M'Kenzie, whom he told he felt “crook,"
and the suggestion" wonld be,of eonrse, that
he felt “crook" after what he had done.
Would he have gone in the Leederville and
Mount Hawthorn trams and into a fully-
lighted Shop to buy fish and ehipsf He
said he was “crook" on account of bump-
ing his arm. The most innocent things
were made to take the appearance df guilt.
On the morning Auburn told
McKenzie about the
Finding of the Overcoat.
Mr. Parker had asked every witness if
Auburn had told them about this, and
some of them replied in the negative. What
a flimsy incident on which to hang a man.
There was no secret about Auburn finding
the coat; many people knew about it.
McKenzie also said Auburn had told him
how he had injured his arm through falling
down stairs. When he (Mr. Lavan) had
referred McKenzie to his depositions,
wherein he said “I think Auburn said the
wound was caused by his having slipped
down some stairs,” it was shown that he
could not swear it was then this re-
mark was passed. The jury had. seen
Mm Auburn in tho Box.
He (Mr. Lavan) deeply regretted having
had to call her, for she was clearly broken-
hearted over the matter. She saw her son
in bed early on Saturday morning, and ho
was just the same as he had over been. The
Grown asked the jury to believe that in
bed that morning there lay a brutal _nrur-
rerer. Auburn was downstairs reading a
- paper before breakfast. Was there any-
thing suspicious about that? Ho was dress-
ed in a grey suit. About 11 o’clock that
morning he went to town with his father.
No attempt was made by him to engage a
- car on the Friday night.
j There may be some conflict of opinion
as to Auburn’s intentions on the Satur-
day with respect to
The Wagin Trip,
J The jury must bear in mind that Auburn
was in the witness box for three days un-
der a most merciless and unrelenting cross?
examination. Because in such circum-
stances he made some mistakes, was he to
be thought a liar? Would any member of
the jury have liked to have been in his
place, and to be subjected to such an or-
deal? How would they have gone through
it, without making any mistake? Miss
Sadler stated that Auburn had said some-
thing about the car breaking down. Au-
burn denied that. Was it to be inferred
that he spoke of the car in Yincent-street ?
He said he had not been able to arrange
for a ear. That was camouflage, for he
did not want his friends to know that he
would have to hire a car. Then Miss Sadler
: said she spoke to him about wearing hia
prey suit, but she subsequently denied that
had occurred, and stated that the blue
suit was not mentioned. There was evi-
-1 dence that Auburn had endeavored to en-
gage a car before going to Singe. It was
■not satisfactory evidence. Auburn had not
denied speaking to the various chauffeurs.
The Crown suggestion was that
He V/as Unfinancial.
and because, of that he committed the mur-
der in order to get hold of the car. As
a matter of fact he did get credit from
Binge.. He could have acquired any one of
a hundred cars in Perth the night before
merely by taking one. The party called
at the Osborne Park -Hotel for the over-
coat. , .
/ Miss Badler had no recollection of the
murder being mentioned on the trip hi
the presence of Auburn, and Moir said the
same thing. Singe was an extraordinary
witness, called by the Crown to prove the
conversations about the murder. Mr. Par-
ker had told the jury he would prove the
murder had been discussed in Auburn’s
presence at Armadale, outside the Wagin
Hospital, and at Qaartermaine’s. Mr. Par-
k\r must have been instructed on the point,
otherwise he would not have dared to say
that. Singe said the murder was not men-
tioned at Armadale or outside the Osborne
Park Hotel. There was no doubt he built
up his evidence in the Court At the in-
quest he W3,s asked if it was discussed. He


7/^V -
said lie first heard about it on the Satur-
day rooming, and that in Auburn's pre-
sence it was mentioned
At Qnartemaine’s Farm.
At the trial he said it was dis-
cussed at the dinner table when the whole
party was present, but Quartermaine gives
him the lie direct. Singe said Anbum was
never nearer than five or six yards when
the murder was: discussed, but Quar-
termaino said he was not there
at all during the conversation.
■ They heard Singe say ■ Aubnrn said it
was a dastardly thing. Did they see how
hopelessly confused he became abont that?
Not a single other person in the car said
that occurred. They would remember the
hopeless confusion he was in as to when
he was to be paid for the car —hopeless
confusion, and a hopeless witness to put
in the box.
Quartermaine. the
Garrulous Old Gentleman
who was brought up from Wagin post haste
because Singe failed them, said the murder
was ’ discussed after dinner when the
■ ladies had gone, and on the previous night
at the garage, when he was there with Au-
burn and Singe. Singe never said a word
about that, and Moir told them, and so did
Anbum, that, it was Moir who went for the
petrol, and not Auburn at all._ Miss Quig-
ley said it was oucq discussed in Auburn’s
, presence. Counsel would not say she was
dishonest, but there was a big party there.
: He pointed out to her that she did npt say
it at the inquest, and now she casts her
mind back three months. Counsel sug-
gested it was
An Honest Mistake.
He wondered whether Mr, Parker would
he rash enough to make the suggestion
. that the coat was deliberately left at Wa-
• gin. Aubnru took it out and put it in the
; car openly. He thought wheu he reached
t Quartermaine’s. it was in,the car, thinking
i, Sing° had put it there; That was purely
accidental. Anbum, had ho chosen, could
have lost itanywherc. Dropped it out of
the ear, or got rid of it in a thousand other
ways. Whajt was easier for him when he
got homo that or the following night or
morning tp’destroy it. You could bum a
coat, but not a body, because the bones
would bo left.
Accused returned to Perth, and the only
incident of importance on the Sunday night
was the trip to Cottesloc, and the meeting
with Holmes, with whom he had the mer-
est casual conversation. When Holmes
asked him abont the murder ha replied:
“What Moriter?*’
and Holmes gave him particulars. Crisp
spoke to him shortly afterwards, and Au-
burn told him he only knew what Holmes
had told him- Counsel asked the jury to
believe that was so. What object would
be served by asking Holmes that question
l if he bad known of the murder. On
j Monday Anbum , came to town and saw
i Blackmore. Blackmon? was sgeutlcman of
whom counsel would say something when
;he dealt with bis evidence,' There was
some, conversation abont the trip to WaguL
Blackmore stated that Anbum told him
previously be was getting a Dodge car,
and at this meeting that Auburn said ho
could not get it and had to get Singe’s.
However; Auburn said, and counsel aaked
them to believe him, that the question or
a Dodge car was never discussed with
Blackmore. A week before the trip Au-
burn knew there were to bo six adults and
three children, wen with him driving.
What on earth would be the value of a
Dodge car for such a trip T One might as
well have brought
A Baby’s Perambulator
for such a trip.
Anbum got home before lunch. John-
son, he saitL, had spoken to him some time
previously to the effect that he j&oold bring
m the motor bicycle for repairs. It was
common ground that the motor cycle was
frequently brought in to him to fix. Au-
burn said he took the machine to the yard,
and was fixing it before lunch. That, was
, hprne out positively by his father aqd mo-
■ thcr, whom' counsel asKCd tne jury to be-
lieve. The mother did not see any more of
him till tea time. It would hare been
easy for her to have said she saw her son
riding away. in the direction of Perth.
Auburn, sen., told them that on the previ-
ous PWday . . :
Johnson Brought the Bicycle
and that they spoke together. The de-
j fence was not allowed to haye the conrer-
■ sation disclosed unfortunately, but in con-
sequence of it tho bicycle was taken over
to Eddy's yard. When Anbum returned
on the Monday his father said he saw him
with the machine and (jusequently ride*
away towards Perth, which would bring'
him to Thomas-etrcct in a straight run.
The' Crown tried, but failed lamentably, to
prove the bicycle was not there on April
7. It was one of tbrir sheet
anchors that be could not have seen the
Westana-road spot because the story about
the bicycle was sheer nonsense, but it was
absolutely proved that he had the bicycle
there and did ride away on it; another of
the Crown’s theories shattered.
Auburn said he went for a ride around
Westaaa-rcad,
and be told thorn what happened to the
bicycle going up the bilk It got over-
heated, he removed the belt, making it
easier to posh, and coasted down tho hill
to the flat. Then he said he got oft, fixed
tho belt, and sat down on account ol
fatigue after pushing the bicycle. They
would bear in mind that pushing the
bicycle on another occasion made him dis-
tressed, James haring said so. Auburn
said he saw the tracks, and this was four
days before tho detectives were there, and
they would be more clear. Ho also saw
the broken-down trees, oil on the leaves,
and the drag marks. Was it impossible
that he did that? Counsel had
Shattered the Theory
about bis not having tho bicycle. Although
Auburn was tilling people of the finding
of the overcoat, bo did not tell anyone of
tho discovery of the drag marks until be
mentioned it to the detectives on the fol-
lowing Friday, his reason bring that he
did not consider it of any importance. In
Monday night’s paper he said he read that
they were looking for the overcoat belong-
ing to the deceased, and ho went straight
to the detective office—this man whom it
might be suggested was trying to lose tho
coat down at Wagin- They would recall
the evidence of Marie Coombes, housemaid
at the hotel at that time.
On the following day he came to Perth.
In the lower Court he said 9.5. Tho tram
left Osborne Park at 9.45, and that would
pet him in abont 10 o’clock. At any rata,
it must have been Tuesday she was refer-
ring to. She said that she saw him wash-
ing some dark material, but she could not
say it was cjothes that were lying in the
water. He wanted the jury to remember,
and never forget, that there was not a
scrap of evidence that that
Allegedly Washed Suit
was worn by him on the night of the
murder. The evidence was that he was
.wearing the . one he was wearing in the
Court.
Let them .visualise the position. The
bathroom door was wide open. He knew
lhat the housemaid was upstairs at that
time. _ To counsel’s questioning she replied
that if she wished to do so she could have
gone in as many times as she wished. Was
it likely, if be wanted to wash ont
stains caused by a diabolical deed,
that he would do it when he knew . the
servant was on duty ?- He could have done
it in secrecv on the night of the murder;
on the Saturday before he went to Wagin;
or on the Sunday or Monday when ho
was home. She said that ho told her not
,to bother about the bathroom as he want-
ed to wash some clothes, and that he said
he got some mud on them on the way to
Wagin. Dark material in the bath, and
he told her he got them, splashed with
mud when she knew he had grey clothea/
iOn day! They would remember;


[that Sstea "Kbi* "ST questioli r-
In.tliat Const, she rapped ont “I said in
the- Lower Court that 1_ only thought he :
void .that,” Counsel said. “Did yon ask,
;thf Coroner to correct it?”: “No.”
.‘‘Wasn’t your evidence read over to yon 4 ,
by .“Yes.” ■ “And vopi
swore it was correctf” “Yes.” “And
.yon never asked .him to amend it?”
“JTo.” Counsel then asked the witness
Have yon been' discussing l this matter
with anyone spice the Coroner’s inquiry?”
“No.” Counsel said “Just think. Any
detectives?” She replied “No,
Only Mr. Parker”
Kc (Jttx. Lavan) had not throughout this
case east, nor did he intend to cast, the
slightest reflection on Mr. Parker. No
doubt what happened was this. Mr. Par-
ker had a perfect right to see his wit-
nesses at all times during the case just
as he (Mr. Lavan). but undoubtedly this
witness went to the Crown Law Depart-
ment, and her evidence was gone through
with her.
. Mr. Parker:, That was not done.
His Honor: Mr. Lavan, the mistake is
that von stated to the iurv that it was
done, whereas you should say to the fur?
“I suggest this was,done.”
Mr. Lavan said he was making no sug,
gestion whatever against his learned
- friend, but he did suggest that either the
detectives or somebodv ■ else toot the wit-
ness through her statement. It was all
nonsense for her to tell; the jury that sho
remembered the thing in the bos, and did
not correct it when her evidence was read
"over to her. She had been building her
evidence since the previous hearing." She
krew he was wearing that grev suit
"in the_ morning, because she served
him with his • breakfast. The jury were
asked to believe that, whereas Auburn
’ might have
Washed His Blood-stained Suit
in the washhouse, or in the dead of night,
he chose to wash it in the bathroom, with
the door wide open, and Miss Coombes able
to come into the bathroom at anv time
Auburn knowing, as the girl admitted, rhat
she was on duty at the time! AVitii re-
gard to Miss Coombes, the Crown; was put-
ting up 3 ridiculous case. She gave evi-
denes that’at least a week after Auburn’s
- * e turn from Wagin she, while brushing un-
der the bed,
Brnshed An Irim Bar
from beneath it, the suggestion being that
this was the iron bar he was supposed to
have brought to Moir’s to kill O’Neil with,
“iat this bar was put by Auburn un-
der the bed a week or more after the xnur-
dcrl The girl, moreover, admitted An.
burn knew that she used to do bi« room
every day, and sweep it out every day.
Auburn was in the hands of the detectives
all that week, and the detectives were
searekm#' and yet the jury were asked to
believe that Auburn put the iron bar un-
der the bed for Miss Coombes to find!
What dM tho jury think of such a sug-
gestion in a ease of where a man’s life
was at stake?
On the night of the next day. Auburn
was out in the car with Miss Sadler, and
. discussed i tho murder with her. There
was. nothing in that, because th<
Murder Waa Being Discussed
everywhere, and also because Auburn had
by that time told the detectives about the
coat. Miss Sadler was asked did Auburn
tell her about the coat, and she said “No.”
There was nothing in that either, because
Auburn had told the detectives about the
coat on the Monday night, and had told
ArKenzie about it on the Tuesday morn-
ing. Moreover, during that trip to Cot-'
tesloe he asked Miss Quigley for Ailport’s
address at Wagin, and she told him it. On
the Wednesday, Auburn went in to see De-
tective-Sergeant Purdue. Apparently Au-
burn met James some time on Wednesday,
and then told him about tho coat There
was another person Auburn told on thfc
■Wednesday._ But the jury were told
It Waa Suspicions *
that Aubnm did not tell the girls about
the boat oh Tuesday night. Then there
wa(s /the supposed Conversation between
Blackmore and James and Auburn at the
Economic corner. In that conversation
'i there was nothing much beyond this, that
I an entirely new witness named Hearn was
| called, a witness whom Blackmere did not
support. Hearn said that the converse •
fcion was to the effect that Auburn had
been down to-the police station, and had
told them about the coat, and that he bad
shown the coat to Singe on the next day,
bat that he could not remember what
Singe’s reply was.
Singe did see the coat on the next day.
Auburn saw Pnrdue then. Purdue denied
this, but in view of the circumstances, the
jury should believe it. Auburn said he
went in that day and inquired if tlie coat
had come for the purpose of identification;
and he said further that be told Purdue on
that day whered Alport lived at Wagin,
that he could be found at Malcolm’s. No-
thing more turned on the Wednesday. On
tho Thursday Auburn told York of the
overcoat. Counsel did not recollect whe-
ther York said he had seen Auburn be-
fore during that week. However, Auburn
told York where he had found the eoat,
bat _ '
Did Not Mention Westana-road
to York- Neither did he mention Westana-
troad to James, TMaekmore, and Beam
when they were standing together. That
fact bore ont Auburn’s statement that he
did not think the Westana-road matter of
importance uptil he went down with tho
police to show where he had found the
tut*., and that he then told them about
Westana-road. It was a remarkable fact
that upon hia return from Wagin he told
his friends and the police the same con-
sistent story about tho finding of the over-
coat and the reason why he walked home.
There had never been any variation of it.
On Friday at 2 pun. Auburn called at
tho detective office and went' with Det-
Doyle and Kennedy
To the Solway.
On the way there he told them the first
time about seeing tho tracks of Westana-
road. He had not mentioned the matter
to his friends, because he did not think it
was of any importance at the time. Sub-
. sequently the detectives accompanied him
to Westana-road. There waa one impor-
tant feature about this. When the car was
going down Purdue pulled it up on tho side
of the bill. Auburn said, “This is not
the place. It is further down.” He then
pulled up the police ear exactly where he
had seem the tracks. Surely the jury might
see that in order to do this Auburn must
have seen the tracks during the day time
and not at night time, O’Neil’s car had
left home at 7.20 to keep an appointment,
- and the theory of the Crown was that tho
'murder was committed between that faipe
and 11 pjn. In tho
Excitement of a Murder
the murderer would not see much. He
(Mr. Lavan) suggested that Auburn was
only able to take the detectives to the ex-
act spot because he had scon it in the day
time. The jury had tho old gag that Pur-
duo placed before them, namely, that mur-
derers go back to tho tracks of their vic-
tim. The jury could see for themselves
- how Detective Purdue had gone for him
(counsel), and could imagine what he
would be like with a hoy of 21 on his
- hands. ■ . _
Would a murderer- take a posse of po-
lice with him and show them the spot
.where he 1 had don© the deed,, ’Chat was
part of the insidious system which was
being worked by the detectives. He (Mr.
Lavan) had said to Detective Purdue,
“Were not the tracks apparent from
the road?” but he had denied that.
He (Mr. La van) had then said to him,
“Did you ever say they were apparent?”
and he denied that. Witness was then
'confronted with counsel’s note on the sub-
ject, supported as it was by the two news-
papers- ~ I? Y as . : . _ . , -


•„ . A Singular Coincidence
that his note and the report in the two
agreed on that point. • Tie
asked the jury. to disbelieve the detective
pwhcn ho said he did not say that in the
Coroner's Court. Detectives Doyle and
Purdue said Auburn had stated to them,
''This is whore _it was dragged in, and
this was where it wasHraggcd out." Au-
burn denied that. 1 The tracks were there
for every one to see, and it was apparent
that someone had been dragged in and out
again. The finding of piece of spotlight
mirror had been referred to, Tho police
motor car driver himself said he could not
suggest that it was any other part of the
motor car than part of the spotlight. Mr.
Parker would say that the Crown did not
know where the spotlight was broken but
because Auburn agreed withtho detective
that it was a piece of spotlight mirror it
was claimed that he must have Known the
mirror was broken at that spot. He was*
taken back to the detective office at 6.30.
Tho Crown, it was apparent, were
making frantic efforts to fasten
Suspicion on Auburn;
suspicion on which a cat,-much less a
human being, could not be hanged. The
'finding of the spot they would say was
suspicions. ‘ Counsel would prove the spot
must have been seen in the daytime. If
accused had done the murder —keeping out
of mind Purdue’s suggestion as to murder-
ers going back on their tracks —would he
have taken a posse of detectives out there?
It was impossible to think a mau would
do anything of. the kind. The Crown
Made Frantic Efforts
to prove he did not have the bicycle on
April 7, so as to destroy all. chance of his
having ridden out there, and they failed
miserably. Doyle’s evidence did not need
much comment. Ho was merely the se-
cond string to Purdue's bow.
Purdue was the Boss,
the man in charge, the man who
would get til the kudos if any-
thing arose.. Auburn said. Doyle
made a remark about getting it off his
chest and to think of his father and mo-
ther. Counsel could not recall the exact
words. Dovle wanted them to believe
that practically he did not speak to Au-
burn at all. Counsel granted that he did
not speak as much as Purdue; in fact,
'Auburn said he was not as communica-
tive. But it was idle to - snggc?t_ that in-
vestigating a big murder like this, with
kudos awaiting those who brought the
murderer to justice, that ,he was standing
by with shut mouth.
Doyle admits that Auburn was kept
' there for three hours whoa they returned
item Wcstana-road. They knew Auburn
did not have a bit to eat or drink’from 2
in the afternoon until 2 ajm, when be
was taken home, although, be said that at ,
Wes tana-road, and returning from the !
hotel he did ask for something. Mr. f Parker <
asked him could ho not have got it. for
himself at the hotel, or why Ms parents
could not have giypn him something.
Imagine how fit his unfortunate mother
and father were to get food for him.
. Mr. Parker denied he suggested this.
. Proceeding, Mr. Lavan said that Doyle ,
was not present when Purfue kept Auburn ■
jin his room for three hours. Doyle had j
nothing to do with tho taking 'of the
statement, a statement which took three I
hours. Imagine itl Three hours in the |
taking of a statement which counsel guar-
anteed he or. anyone could take in 20 _or
30 minutes! What did the jury think
was going on?
Auburn Was CMnawma.
towards Miss Sadler. He would nod say
she told a lie. He said she was mis-
taken, and he also said all along he did
not want to say anything against the de-
tectives H« would not do it, but counsel
would put the facta to the jury, and they
could draw their own conclusions.
; When Auburn was asked about
The ThirdDcgroe,
jho said ho thought it was "knocking you
.. about." There were many more simple
forms. Keeping him from 3 pun. to 2
am. without a bite to oat or a drink—
they could draw their own conclusions.
Purdue said he could have had it if he had
asked. • It would have been only com-
... mon humanity for Purdue to have asked
him if ho wanted anything. He was taken
home, and then iho suit was found bv
Doyle, lying quite openly on the chair.
Doyle noticed that a link button was miss-
ing, and when he pointed it out to An-
— bum while Purdue produced a button
from his pocket. Auburn said it had been
off for some time, and that the clothes had
been washed about a fortnight before.
They would remember that Mrs. Auburn
and Miss Forrest had given evidence about
the washing of a bhto suit, onee in Janu-
ary and onee in March. Auburn had said
it was washed twice and the washing in
-March, the jury would see, would fit iu
with what he had told the detectives.
After the luncheon adjournment, Mr.
Lavan continued his address to the jury.
He said that during tho trial. Detective
Purdue made a statement he had never
made before. At the commencement of
his cross-examination he had adopted a
very pugnacious attitude towards him (Mr.
Lavan). The jury could imagine how he
would treat a boy of 2L The detective
said that Auburn remarked to him before
going home that night.
"Put Me Inside and I Will Admit Every-
thing.’’
Counsel did not hesitate to class that as
a lie on its face. If Auburn had made
that statement, would not Purdue have
said, "Come inside and tell us every-
thing?" He (Mr. Lavan) had taxed the
detective with not giving that evidence iu
tho Coroner's Court, and his answer had
been, "I consulted the Grown Prosecutor,
and I was advised by him it was not ad-
missible.” Every bit of conversation with
the accused was admissible, and this hit.
of conversation would have been, most im-
portant if it had taken place. The de-
tective, however, tried to shield himself
behind the Crown Prosecutor, and cover
himself up. The statement leant either
that Mr. Parker did not know- the first
principles of his business, or Detective
Purdue Was Telling a Lie,
He (Mr. Lavan), however, was perfectly
sore that Mr. Parker did knew hia busi-
ness, and that such evidence would have
been admissible. On the face of it the
story was a fabrication.
Then there was the visit to the Osborne
Park Hotel. Auburn had told the dotec-
-1 tives about the link button, before it was
produced. It was apparent that tho but-
ton had been off on more than one oeca-
sion. There was no evidence that Auburn
had worn that suit on the night of the
murder, but there was positive evidence
that he did not do so. When Mr. Black-
more was told by Auburn about the link
button, he said "I have not seen hiru wear-
ing that coat for some months.” It was
also clear from Miss Sadler’s evidence
that the suit from, which the button was
missing had not been worn by Auburn on
the night in question. The Crown had
not brought forward a scintilla of evidence
to show that be bad been wearing it that
night. Tho jury could not convict a man
on. suggestion. After leaving the hotel,
Auburn returned with the detectives and
spent another two hours, with them:be-
fore going to Dr. Barker. , A short' state-
ment was taken from him, and before it
was written, many questions must have
been asked. From 2 o’clock that after-
noon until 2 in the morning. Auburn was
continually with the police under examina-
tion
Without a Bits to Sat.
There wore inaccuracies in tho stateineut
furnished by the accused to the police.
There were also omissions from it, and
some of the times were wrong. Two im-
portant omissions were in Auburn’s favor.


<O/7/^
'; There was" the omission that he had been at
Miss Sadler’s on Friday night, from aftei
,7 until after 7.30. It was common ground
.that he was there. There was also the
omission that he was at Mrs. Layer’s that
night at 10 o’clock. Could it be imagin-
ed that everything a boy of 21 would say
in such circumstances could be accurate.
After being two hours with Purdue,
Auburn was examined by Dr. Barker, who
told them the result of the examination.
I>r. Barker
said that when ho saw the wound, which
had recently abraidod, it was 1 a-to. He
said it would just drip blood, but he said
ho would not deny that the bk>od would
run into his hand, but told Mn Packer he
.would he surprised. On the other hand
, they had the evidence of two doctors, that
it was not a keloid, and that the Wood
would run down into his hand. In addi-
tion to the skilled evidence, there was that
of people who had seen it. Auburn denied
the conversation that he had with Pnrdue
at the back of the car. • He was asked to
return the next day, and did so. , When
.he saw Blackmore on tho Saturday, Black-
more, whom Mr. Parker elicited, was a
friend of Auburn’s—if ho was a friend
God Save Counsel •
from his friends. Blackmore said that
various matters were discussed, such as
..the link button and the search of the room,
bnt they should remember that Blackmore
;tried to shuttle out of it. Auburn only
had the three blue suits, the one he was
now wearing, the washed suit, and the old
suit, which never had a link button. When
he told this, Blackmore said, “Why, I
haven’t seen you wearing that suit for ,a
’Long time,” meaning the one with the but-
ton missing. The jury saw the pains he
Went to.
i Blackmore told counsel that without
, being asked by anyone, he want specially
•to the Crown Law Department after tho
inquest to examinct the suit. Did the jury
believe, firstly, that he went without being
asked, and secondly, if ho did, was it the
act of a friend? They were faced with
the position 'that that suit could not have
been the suit he was wearing that night,
;sc the link button theory was absolutely
.gone, because of the evidence of Miss Sad-
ler and Auburn, and Blackmore’s state-
ment that the button had been , missing
■some time. Blackmore went on to
say that Auburn told him it
-was while he was out in Singe’s
■car he
Discovered the Spot.
This was capable of easy explanation. At
the time they were talking about various
trips, and the jury could imagine bow easy
it would be for Blackmore to get astray on
that point. Only tho previous night Au-
:bnrn told the detectives that he found the
'tracks while out on tho bicycle. Was it
common sense to suggest that the follow-
ing day be would tell Blackmore something
entirely different?
On the Saturday Anbum was again with
f Purdue from 2 until 7 pan. Did the jury
remember Purdue blurting oat that he was
treating him ' « .
As an Accomplice,
and his Honor clearing up theh point.
When Auburn said to Purdue, “Do yon
think I would have brought the coat , m
if I were the guilty man?” —counsel also
asked would he have been likely toy-what
did Pnrdue reply: “Ah, it was being ad-
vertised for. ’ ’ Then Auburn' asked wgald
he have told them of the finding ot the
tracks if ho were the guilty man. Purdue
said Something about murderers going back
on • their tracks. He asked the jury to use
common sense. Did the jury think that ac.
cased got fair treatment. What else did
Purdne do?. He
BaconsSractoi the Crime
for him, made a sketch, and put Auburn
in the front seat, others in,the" back. .Ha
pointed out where Auburn “would be—a man
with a knowledge of machinery. He put
him in front. Then he went oat , dud
reappeared with the £5OO proclamation.
Hr. Parker might eaD that what he UK- ;.
•He (Mr. Lavan) wood hot put a' came on
it, but would leave it to the jurv. fins;
'■were undisputed facts, lien Purdie said
l Aubnrn asked to be allowed to go a
, until Monday morning, when he would gbs
“Satisfaction, to you. but not to me.’
i Counsel suggested that if Auburn Imd j : ; d
j that, Purdue would never have allowed
flo go away, but would have demanded
isfaction on the spot. . What Anhui .■ ■ <
been trying to yapress upon Purdue. suJ
whri Purdue .would not accept, waa Uui
Auburn had already told all he knew.
■ On the Saturday night Auburn met Pru < v
Crisp, and had a conversation with' lam
about the murder. ' Crisp told Auburn be
ought.to advertise for someone ou the tn>m
who knew hiraT Then Crisp added some-
thing new, saying “Doesn’t the eonOuetoc
know yojit” But in his .‘deter-, rt to the
i police on the Saturday Auburn l.vid given
the names of people on the tram—M‘ Ken-
rie. Cecil White, Leen, and Eddy, sen. Mr.
Crisp’s statement might represent his, hon-
est idea, but why should Auburn have taken
that attitude ? Op the Saturday. Cecil
James said Auburn was distressed with
pushing a bicycle a little way. They came
into town and met Monson. Monaon snot
Auburn told him of hia visits to the police
and about getting
Huddled Up a Bit,
whereupon Monson said that if Auburn got
muddled it was no use him .making ethte-
nants to the police. Monson advised him
not to go to the police any more, and that
was good advice, but Auburn did not not
go to the police because he bad no more to
tell them. Admittedly Miss Sadler was
rung up ai, Wooroloo by Auburn. • There
was a conflict of evidence between' Auburn
and Miss Sadler'at this point, but Miss
Sadler’s memory was very -unreliable.
Whereas Miss Sadler said she was told over
the telephone that if anybody came up to
see her she was not to tell them anything.
Auburn said that he told her “If anyone
come? up to see you tell them the truth,
and yon must not tell them anything else.”
At '5 o’clock he went to the detectives and
gave the short statement, in which he said
he could not tell them any more. On the
Wednesday . ;
He Was Arrested.
That finished the details. ■ There were
other witnesses called who were said to
fee experts. The Acting Government Bac-
teriologist (Dr. Atkinson) examined the
ccat and trousers by applying the benza-
line test. He admitted that the test
Would give results for other things, be-
sides bipod, and-was not a test for human
blood., ' He said he could not swear that
there wag a stain of blood of any kind,
much less human blood, on those clothes,
bo far as the jury weroi-coneerned, they
Were ip the position on the Crown evidence
that there was no evidence before them
that there was any blood on the clothes.
Dr. Atkinson said he could not apply the
benzaline : test because he
Could Hot Find Blood.
He was asked by Mr. Parker if the clothes
bad been washed within a month, would
that affect the haemin crystals, and he
said it would, but they still had the fact
that' there was no evidence of the presence
of blood ——
Hia Honor: Yon are not quite right
there, Mr. Lavan.
Mr. Lavan: I think so. ■
His Honor: I have what he said. I took
a verbatim note of it. He said “I cannot
swear there is blood on the coat or trou-
sers, but in mv opinion there is.”
Mr. Lavan; In his opinion, yes, but he
could not swear. : ■
His Honor: He b an expert.
Mr. Lavan: But he could not swear.
His Honor: I am, only pointing it out
t to von.
Mr. Lavan said the. point was that ha
had applied the benzaline test, and cot a
' result, but as be (counsel) had pointed
out and the doctor had admitted, the ben-
zalinc test- would_give results for varimls
other things. He could not say there
was Wood of any kind on those, clothes.


*77/2^
end the same applied to the inside lining
of the overcoat, and there was no sugges-
tion of that having been washed. 1 He
formed the smear and a snot of somethin!!
that might-or might not have been blood,
end he - conld not swear that it was blood
for the : same- reason- that other
things would produce the same result.
There were a few : small spots on the hat
about the: sire of a pencil point. Dr. At-
kinson had stated he had found blood upon
it. Auburn used to swing his am about
when he was in pain, and the wound was
bleeding.
•S/7/W-
After our report of the proceedbgs 5n £
the O’Neil minder trial closed yesterday,
Mr. Lavan concluded his address In de-
fence of (Jcorgo Auburn, and Mr. Parker
opened his edmmary bn behalf of the
Crown. ■
Drs. Moss and Juett said that-if a man
with-a bleeding ami swung ids hand and
his hat happened to be within reach, spots
of blood of the nature found on the hat
would be sure to "get there. It was the
duty of the jury, if there were two con-
structions to be put upon the matter, to
put the innocent construction upon it. 1
Mr. - Parker had suggested the murder
was
A One-Man Job.
O’Neil moat have received a -terrible blow'
on the back of the bead while sitting in-
the ear, because of. the Sow of blood on
the driver’s seat. The theory of the Crown
was that the body was then pnt into the
back of the car. Such a blow must have
been struck by the murderer in a certain
position. (Mr. Lavan illustrated to the
jury .what he meant by that.) That being
so, blood would have had to spurt on the
left hand side and on-the top of the .- ■
Hat of the Murderer,
There wps- a spray of blood over the top
of the driver’s seat.- The suit case in the
baek • of the . car was also coveted with
blood. It was evident that the hat of
the man who committed.this .murder must
have had far more blood upon it (ban had
been found upon Auburn’s’ hat. At all
events it was • 1
Too DangorcTß to Speculate
on a theory regarding blood stains. Sev-
eral tailors had given evidence concerning
the cloth on the button matching the suit
of the accused. Mr. Berry said he had
examined the coat and the button with a
magnifying glass. When he gave evidence
at the inquest he had not used a magnify-
ing glass, and vet ho expressed the same
opinion. He said the wool on the shank
was of the same material as that'of-the'
coat, mid that the piece of material fitted
the hole in. the coat ‘‘very-nicely,” Mr.
Ctcrcteko, however, said he would, not fay.,
to make the two things fit; Buttons and' 1
sliank buttons were common things; and
yet the jury were asked to take away the
accused’s liberty on the theory of a shank
button. ' On the other hand, Ctcrcteko said
if a dozen rolls of blue serge were put be-
fore him he could hot say' if the shank
came from any of them. What ■ a thing
was'human life to speculate on! They were
Not Throwing Dice
for this man’s death. The evidence was
clear. The button had been off a long j
time, and the suggestion was that the but-
ton found in the car was: that off the coat-,1
and that the coat was subsequently wash- :
ed. Every witness said that the washing
would make a difference to the size of the:
hole. Then bow could Berry say the but-
ton fitted the hole, if it was the button?
’ Thgxe were only two or three more points
counsel would discuss, and anything be
might have overlooked would- be a pure
oversight, and not dona by design, lucre
was one point which might be discussed
before dealing with a summary. It had
been pointed out that it was perfectly clear
that the very bad wound on the back of
O’Neil’s head was caused while he wits at
the wheel. If it had been dope out of
the car, and the body pitched into the
back—imagine one man doing all that—jt
would he absurd. Undoubtedly it was
Done tin the Car.
Would then a man who wanted to murder
another to get possession of his car for
the purpose suggested here, of taking peo-
ple to the country, have indicted injuries
of that kind in the car? It would have
been easy and l far more likely that he
would get him out of the ear on some pre-
text and kill him.
The position -would be that the man who
murdered O ’Neil did not want the ear for
any drive. There must have been - .


Some other jH.otr;ye.
because if one took people out the follow-
ing day in a blood-saturated car, would it
not be noticed? , Yet that was the only
motive suggested, (hat ho killed, this man
in the car in order that he might take peo-
ple away, next day. Did it not strike ;
the jury, that it was not an ordinary, but j
an extraordinary .murder, extraordinarily j
brutal and callous, and terrible to contem-
plate? Did it. pot strike-them ps a .'j
■ ; A Murder of Revenge i
—-it had been proved the motive was not j
robbery—rather ..than, that of a man who’'
was trying to get the car for a 25
trjn the following day? j
The suggestion was horrible that such a '
foul, brutal, and deliberate murder would !
be done by that boy because three weeks
previously he had arranged to take a party ;
of friends into the country. It was almost
incredible that such a suggestion should be
made by anybody, but that would be the
suggestion of the Crown. ' The
Crown Had Entirely Failed
to prove the guilt of_ the accused, and the 1
Crown must prove his guilt by no specu- -
lative theories or suggestions, but by clear
and undoubted evidence that left no shadow
of reasonable doubt in the minds of the
jury. , The Crown ease was built up on j
circumstantial evidence, theory ,and sus-
picion.
Counsel had blown tb pieces the theory
about Auburn leaving the ear at ILIS
aid walking down to the tram and enter-
ing a lighted shop—this man with his
hands, metaphorically. red with the blood
of his victim! No one in that lighted shop
saw any difference in him. Had not the.
Crown's point as to the washing of the
clothes been blown to pieces? Then there
Tho Tran Bar
—again a ridiculous suggestion, which had
been tom to shreds. The button—were the
jury going -to attach'*smy importance to ]
that? Counsel would not have bothered j
with expert''evidence as to the button but ’
for the fact of having to meet expert
evidence led by the Crown. Let the jury
j remember the" evidence of Miss Sadler and ■
the evidence of Mr. Blackmore. Then
there was the .
w.eiy ev mu
Fir-ding of the Tracks.
How did the Crown attempt to deal with
'that? Pv.’showing that Auburn did not
have .a _bi, vcle on that day. That conten-
tion failed. , M'hat on earth would the
Crown say now? The iurv bad seen'George
Auburn in ihe box. Mr. Parker had re-
marked upon his coolness. Counsel had
pointed out to the jury that there were
many people who suffered _ inwardly with-
out giving any outward sign. This boy
had undergone an ordeal which even coun-
sel, a legal practitioner of many years’
. standing, would-dread to undergo—three
days .under examination and cross-exam-
ination. George Auburn had made mis-
takes, but, when tho whi ie of his evi-
dence was reviewed, on what points had
Mr. Parker shaken him? The matter of
Lis finances and the matter > of the drives.
Thcro was a little variation as to his
going iirto the bar on that Saturday, morn-
ing and arranging matters with . Ms
father, but counsel
Challenged Mr. Parker
to show that.on any material point Au-
burn had said one word which was wrong
or even put of place. Auburn had been in
prison since Anri! 16, and even if he had
a heart of flint, he must be suffering, no
matter bpw calm outwardly, with this
dreadful charge'hanging over him. Mr.
Parker ‘.'hopped into” Auburn with-his
verv .first question; “Do von think,O’Neil
was murdered f. When do you think he was
murdered?” Mr. Parker chopped and
changed about with lightning rapidity
from one subject to another, in order to
try and catch Auburn- Was there a man
on the face of the earth who, undergoing
what that youth bad undergone, would
not make mistakes ? Not one member, of
the jury, if in the witness-box for such a
length of time, hut wduld contradict him-
self or make mistakes.
Counsel had dealt with most of the wit-
nesses as he went along, and did not thuri*
it would he fair of him to keep the jury
much longer. He would briefly pot to the
miy the ~
Points of the Defence.
Firstly, there was not the slightest evi-
dence that "Auburn ever knew O’Neil or
ever spoke to hhm There was the entire
absence of any motive that would appeal
to a child. Whoever hired that car hired
it for a party of not more than four, be-
cause the “dicky” seats were token out.
Auburn knew that his party would con-
sist of more than four. Then there was
The Overcoat.
If that had been in the car it must hare
been heavily stained with blood, while
_ actually there wins only ono tiny spot on
!it Counsel had blown to pieces the ‘Vra-
, criit-strect theory, while he thought they
g would baEere that Auburn got money from
Cecil White. They would -also, he thought,
believe that the ear was not there when
the Crown said it was, and that it cams
there at 3AO arm. Regarding the
Wishing of Clothes,
j was. there not an abundance of evidence
that Auburn always washed clothes, in-
j etnuding suits.,. The piece; of iron bar he
J hr.d dealt with. The want of money, as
His Honor had pointed out,’ was not , a
crime. Auburn couid hare stolen 50 cars
if he wanted to. He (counsel) had over-
looked Allen’s evidence about the ■ ear
being in Roe-street at 12.45, but, despite
all said against it, he asked them to be-
lieve it.
The strain upon him and bis colleague
was very' great, but he thought that he
had kept his . promise, not to ask one un-
necessary question or utter one unneces-
sary word. A man’s brain was in a whirl
with the multitude of facts in this core-,
which involved the life or death of a
voung man. ' •
: They- must be convinced, before they con-
victed the accused, that the Crown _ had
conclusively proved that ho had committed
the murder. There-must, be
No Boom for Mistake.
If there was an reasonable doubt in their
minds they must give him the benefit of it.
He (MS*. Lavan) submitted with confidence
that the Corwn had entirely failed
prove its case. From the bottom of his
heart he wanted them to try and arrive
at a definite conclusion one way; or the
. other. There had been a terrible expense
to the Crown and to the prisoner, but the
Crown had a great 1 deal more money . to
play with than had the prisoner. It could
afford further trials if they were needed*
but it would bo nothing less than a cala-
mity if there was a disagreement in the
! case end another jury and the prisoner
I and counsel had to endure what had been
I endured during the ,past four weeks. He
I therefore begged the jury from the bottom
j of his heart to try and arrive at ,
A Definite Oondnston. ? '■
Ho had no desire to sway the jury from
the path :of duty, or ask them to violate
their oaths.. All he required of them was
to give the case fair and earnest considera-
tion. He knew from tho manner in which
they had followed it they would do that.
It was not for counsel to prove the inho-
j cence of the accused, but for the Crdwn
I to prove his guilt. , When die resumed -his
seat he would be able to thank God that
he had done his duty, and the terrible re-
sponsibility would pass from Mm to tho
shoulders of the jury. On circumstantial
evidence an innooent man had been hanged
before to-day, and it behoved the jury to'bo
careful that another man did not have the
same fate. Ho hoped they would bo ; guid-
cd in ' ■ • _
j Their Grave Duty,
; and that Ho 'Who saw and knew the se-
crets of all hearts would guide them in that
I terrible moment when they had to make a
' final decision,.as to whether the aeeuesd
would walk from the dock a free man, or
cm to a horrible’ or, ignominious doom. :
! Mr Lavan ■'resumed his scat at Ala.


'fa
MR. PARKER’S ADDRESS.
Mr. Parker, in' addressing the jury, said
that he offered no apology for the time
the case had taken. 1 His sole desire was
that right and justice should be done, that
the whole of the,evidence should be fairly
weighed in the scale, and that everything
and anything that told’in favor of the ac-
cused should have duo consideration, Tt
was suggested that with & view to sheet-
ing home wrongfully the crime upon the
accused counsel had been brought m from
outside. In England the invariable prac-
tice was for the Attorney-General, the
senior at the Bar, to take tho case on be-
half of the prosecution. Mr. Parker here
quoted instances where many counsel hid
been brought in from outside by (he Ciown
to assist the prosecution.;, Notwithstanding
the practice that existed elsewhere, this
I unfair comment had been made. Ho would
endeavor to say nothing to excite the feel-
ings of the jury or ,
DLstOTb Their Judgment.
• Of course the Crown must prove its ease.
Ho undertoo kto do that, and if the jury
had any doubt about the guilt of the ac-
cused he. would remind them that every
person who took part in the commission of
a deed of murder was as guiltyas the ac-
tual person who committed it. If the ac-
cused himself did not strike the blow but
stood by while it was done he wag equally
guilty.
•His Honor:,He must have been the as-
sistant in the common object,
Mr. Parker: Yes. A most horrible, bru-
tal, and atrocious murder had , been com-
mitted. As it was all.that, anything in the
way of sympathy, mpst bo left onfc of the
case. Either 7 ‘ the ; . accused commit-
ted the mnrder or he did no£’
Mr Lavan had dwelt at some length bn
the extraordinarily anxious time he had
had. Perhaps. he had. But if they re-
membered on May 13, as far back as that
Mi. Lavan had, as be claimed, a
Complete And Absolute Alibi
given him unsolicited, except for a news-
paper advertisement, and confirmed on
May 15, so why the anxiety if he believed
iti that story?; Mr. Parker would show
that he cannot have believ-.-d that story,
heteo. his anxiety. He irvitsd the jury
do test the case in its weakest links. ,The
Crown case could be te.-ted for its weak-
eft links, and he ventured (c suggest, they
would not find one.
It was suggested that the whole of the
evidence - was basal on suspicion and the-
ory. As regarded that, he did not propose
In any way td'deal with snspicMm . .and
theory. He could readily understand that
tho Crown, halving no interest in securing
a verdict in this charge, it did net con-
cern, him (Mr. Parker) or Mr. Haynes no
mere than ariy member of (he , public what
that verdict was, God help any man it
the Crown-was expected to prove! every
charge! It would be an atrocious Stale of
affairs, hut it was his duty, representing
the Crown, which in turn represented the
public, to.see that the jofy, who -
Had a Double Duty,
beth to the accused and the public* to per-
form, thoroughly appreciated the facts of
the evidence. That was all. Mr. Bay an
at some, length him for having
relied, on a lot of suspicion, theory and
suggestion; in fact, the substance of his
speech had been that, but in respect to the
facts of the ease he had not said a great
deal Mr. Lavan was right'in telling
them that, but he claimed that Mr. Lavan
was only wrong in having blamed him for
having relied on probabilities, because he
had not done anything of the sort yet.
Suggestions, Theories, and Suspicions
were as feathers, and the farts were as
lead. He would endeavor to prove them
to the jury*; He would call attention- to.,
rim - leading facts and om it probabiatica.
The first of these was in connection with
the button found irithc car— the button of
‘the accused. It was quite proper that they
'should appreciate "the foil force' of the
inquiries on this point. If it was the :»c-
-cwsod’s button and was worn that night,
what followed ? Auburn was in the car
that night with O’Neil, and, as far as that
Dart of the case is concerned, it proved it
as conclusively as if he was seen there bv
a dozen witnesses. Far better, probably,
than if there had been eye-witnesses, be-
cause there then might be raised the
doubt as to identification. But in this case
! they had the actual button in the actual
ear. Rw
Button Could Not Lie.
The ear oonld not lie. It had not been
suggested it had not been found in the
ear. The question solely was whether it
was the button of, the accused- '
Ho listened to the, remarks: of Mr. Lavas
with a great deal of interest. He (Mr.
Parker) wanted to know if Mr. Lavan
would suggest any theory in this matter of
tbs button, but defending counsel did not
apnarcutly fed himself ahle,-tp propound
any story in that respect It could never
bo suggested that the accused could he
innocent if that was his button; yet Mr.
Lavan never pnt forward theory, sugges-
tion or possibility. He simply
Went Bald-headed
to the effect that Auburn was not there.
He (Mr. Parker) would be glad of any sug-
gestion to the effect that the accused had
been there innocently and not connected
with the murder, but Mr. Lavan’s experi-
ence told him it was idle to make any sug-
gestion, or that it was impossible it could
have been explained to the jury. He knew
that the only course he could pursue was
to deny or raise a doubt in the jgry’s mind
as" to that button, found in the c?j, being
the accused’s button. He knew it was
impossible.
Accused gave the detectives an account
of his movements on
The Night of Friday.
Thera was nothing more momentous to Trim
at that time if.he had been innocent than
to have told the truth before his arrest,
or even at the inquest. Had he told the
truth, it would hare been a complete an-
swer, but, he. never mentioned until he
reached this Court of the journey to the
meat pie shop that evening. They had
the argument before them that in the fact
that, - ho made this statement lay the
strongest test of his innocence, but Mr.
Parker thought it could be looked at from
the other viewpoint, that while it-was con-
sistent with his’ innocence, it was equally
Consistent with his guilt.. They remember-
ed his statement: “Do you" think T would
do so and so if I was a guilty man?” made
to allay suspicion. It was urged that such
behavior spoke trumpet-tongned in favor
of _tbe accused’s innocence, and that no
guilty man woud inculpate himself, and,
further, that only an innocent man would
make statements which would be available
and useful : to the Crown in his prosecution.
But a groat deal depended upon what the
accused
Thought the Detectives Knew,
and what ho thought they would find out,
and also what he thought he would be able
to blind them witli.; It was accused’s in-
tention-to throw suspicion off hiriiself. ,
■ Counsel had said at the very start that
this was a case of- circumstantial evidence.
In practically all cases pf murder the evi-
.denee was circumstantial. Wc never
.found a man publicly and deliberate!}’ fir-
ling a shot ate another man, or openly, hit-
,ting another over the head, except in a
'street fight; arid then it was a question of
manslaughter. But mnrder was usually a
secret crime. Circumstantial evidence
Varied infinitely in reference to strength,
in reference to variety, character,,, cog-
ency and dependence oif one upon another
of the whole of tho circumstanccs. Cir-
cumstantial evidence had been described as
' a network of facts, cast aroihid the accus-
ed man. Tho network might he as light as
gossamer- and as unsubstantial as the air
itself, vanishing at a touch. It might he
that, though strong in parts,, it left great
rents and gaps through which the accused


( was entitled to pass with safety. That was
: <vhcre the links were broken. If one link
was broken, the accused was entitled to go
free. But the net might he so close, so
stringent, so coherent in its texture, that
no effort on the part of the accused could
break through it. That was the ease he
(Mr. Parker) was going to put to the jury.
Circumstantial evidence might be nothing
or it might be, as in this case, absolutely,
convincing. In this case there were a
Variety of Oifcmnstancoe,
all pointing in the same direction, convinc-
ing in proportion to the number and varie-
ty of' those circumstances ai»d their inde-
pendence of each other. Although each
separate pjee of evidence, standing by it-
self, might admit of an nnocgnt interpreta-
tion, yet the cumulative effect of such evi-
dence might be overwhelming truth of the
guilt of the accused. There was the fact
that the deceased, man O’Neil had been
murdered. That was not denied. Then
there was the fact that" Q’NcQ left home
some where about .7.20 on the Friday even-
ing to go for a trip, into tho country. That,
again, was not .denied. 'There wag,the fact
that O’Neil’s ear was seen at 10.25 p.m. by
Mr. Tracey, tire advertising agent, at the
Bokeby-road entrance to the Park, practic-
ally. That was not denied. At 7 an.
on April 5 tho deceased was found in the
water, found with his head smashed in in
the most, brutal and shocking manner.
The deceased’s car was found somewhere
about mid-day on the Saturday.
It was covered with blood, broken down,
and with a certain amount of blood and
sand in tho car and in the gears. There
was the fact of '■
The Jigger Button
being found in the car. That was not de-
nied.
There was the fact of the accused ordor-
ing number plates to bo got ready as
quickly as possible, and of his asking Miss
Sadler to caff forrtbefiv and of Miss Sad-
ler.caffing. These things'were not denied.
The number on the. plates was “P 38,” ad-
mittedly the number of the ear belonging
to accused’s father. The trip to Wagin
was arranged about March 14, and it was
also arranged that the party should start
on Saturday morning, April's, somewhere
about 6.30. Those things were not denied.
Auburn did not turn up with the car un-
til 3.30 p.ra. on Saturday. It was also ad-
mitted thafjthe accused said he was get-
ting the ■
Loan of a Car
from Mr," Ford of Winterbottom’s. The
accused admitted that this was aii abso-
lute straight-out lie, told merely to load
the people he was going to take for a trip
to think that he was hot hiring a car. It
was common Knowledge that hired cars
had black letters on white, while private
cars had white letters on black.
His Honor: There is no evidence of
that
Mr. Parker said it was the. law. The jury
could bring their, knowledge of every-day
affairs to bear. •
■ His Honor: The jury should not do that,
but , should decide according to ;the evi-
dence.- • '■ ■ - -
. ".Mr. 'Parker said that, .knowing '■ those
facts, which he would prove by produeing.a '
copy of the Traffic Act, the party for Wa-
gin. when the accused came up with a hired
~cr, must have seen at- pace that it was a
hired car. Furthermore, there wag the dif-
ference in . ■ ■'■ -
Tho Number Plates.
Why this extraordinary lie? It was only
one* of many-lies that he would have to
quote in the course of his address. O’Nc}!
had arranged to go for a trip into the
country. He had his suit case packed; Mr,
Lavan had rather tackled hini Parker:) -
yesterday for. calling the i widow;Mrs:
O’NeiL It; was: iieceEsary’fp crill > tljg'
widow, because 1 Mr. Lavan-‘disputed '' tho
fact that O’Neil was going away on a trip
into tie country. Counsel could not quote
conversations —it would not be .right to da
that—-and therefore the prosecution had to
'gettho widow,’to fell the jury what' tbe de-
ceased had in : Jua bag,, .since thevnuinbcr
of changes would, short' i’cjS-as going AWgy
,£or some,days. ..O’Neil’sf ■ over-
hauled, extra, petrol rtvas koeimcd, two new
tyres wore put. on in and thrsc oW
ones were, pnt on the, had
arrnngcdUo go that -feelf-samerirngfet, just
after 8 that evening - , to Moir's with the
car and
Stay the Night.
Mr. Mohr said that the last, words the
accused uttered when ho.left, VI will
see you later; I may bo'hac^^ii-jSi^ht.’’
Mr, Moip, did ’not expect tho but
'the accused c-ertniMyimMhf 'Alr. iMoir to
expect him; and also he certainly' intended
Miss Sadler him, whsh f&e said
he would be hack .with, the car that even-
ing hi order that tife party might start
early on the Saturday morning. Accused
did arrange to leave town at GL3O aan.
Saturday. Accused had admitted that he
arranged to stay at Moir’s that night that
he Itad said he would do so. Accused add-
ed that ire never really intended to do ,'SCL'
Further, he said -that he. never made any
arrangement at all to get any car until; 820
on the Gatnrdav aftcraoon, when he en-
gaged Singe, The accused had told the
Court that deliberately. Counsel (Mr. Par-
ker) had ■ asked him clearly and distinct.-
ly “Will y«n swear that Singe was the
first?” Tim distinct and definite answer
was ’’Yea, he was; there was no one else.”
Even Mr. Lavan had had to admit that that
was wrong. Mr. Lavan said it was a mis-
take made because of a close and
Searching Cross-examination.
A' Crown Prosecutor’s duty was to delve
into stories and ascertain the truth, for or
against. If the accused had said there
i were others it would have been all right.
, But why did the, accused stick, to that
1 story? He had told it ,_to :the police, and.
he was determined to stick to it here. He
did not know the prosecution knew that ho:
had been to other taxi-drivers. ■
By means which he (Mr. Parksr)wss
1 not at liberty to state, the prosecution as-,
certained that these other four had
been approached by the accused. The jury
had heard their evidence. Plainly, the ac-
cused went along in great straits to get a
car. To one driver who wished to charge
£l6 lOs for the ; trip he offered a, cheque
for £2O and two new motor tyres when he
got into the country. The young motor
man George had shown wisdom in refus-
ing that offer, because it was known that
Singe had not yet got his money. Did not
George’s statement taffy,with Singe’s evi-
dence? Who had ever heard of a motor-
"-car driver saying,
“Pay Me at the Hod of the Month”
and refusing the money on that particular
day when he went out? All that Auburn
had told the jury was that he never had'
the slightest intention of getting a c ai.
evehtim the Friday night.' -
Although tie accused came in on the Sat-
urday morning some time after U o’clock
'with his father, as soon as he came in he
rushed out again to see Miss Sadler. The
admitted that if ho had said to his./
'father -“l’m going .to, Moir’s” it would v
not hare been five minutes out of ths fa-
ther’s way to take him there, and
eused would have got there at least
minutes earlier. But accused was in such
a hurry to got to Moir’s .that ho did not
go the nearest way to catch a tram, which
would bo at Moir’s Chambers on the cor-
ner of. St, George’s Terraco .and Barrack-,
afreet; The accused went to
ami on at, Saturday morning ’Hay-stfeet
_ was not an easy thoroughfare to get along.
' He said he arranged with his father to
have the morning off on Saturday, Coun-
sel was not going to say. liat his.
Father Was-a- Perjurer, , :£
but he was unable to stick to one story*.
'and says that two or three days before ms,
eon asked for the morning off, and that ius
son told him three or four days before that
he was going - to Wagin- Ho (counsel) .
suggested that nether was true, but he :
realised the position of the father, and
. was not going to. blackguard him. , .


Wien his Honor took his place on tho
Eench this morning, he inquired of Mr,
! Xavan if he coold tell the name of the last
fitness who appeared on the first day when
■the defence was opened. Mr. Lav an re-
iplied that, unfortunately, he had not his
.notes with him in the Court, and was un-
' «hle from memory to supply the informa-
■tion.
His Honor (with a smile): 1 hope, Mr.
Xavan, yon will not want yonrnotesagarn.
ME. PARKHE CONTINUES.
The Crown Prosecutor {Mr. Hubert Pax-
to was* to .stan tarty, on J
; J^rTw y +i m °^ lns N- for must' rensem- *'
to™ Misses Quigley had their
breakiast at 0.15 am. .Miss Sadler even
why ° f I ° B^ S Wm up t 0
. Ho Had Not Turned Up,
and, lie went Uiere and admits having i
; apologised. He had told so many-lies,
. why not one or two more? Perhaps this
was a lie, too. Why apologise if ho did i
not intend to go back that night? Coun- 1
sel suggested he did apologise because he
. intended to.go back. Miss Sadler sam be
told her the car Lad broken down, and
mentioned some particular part which she
could not remember. If her evidence had
been contacted, she would have known* -
the name of the part, but , she could not'■
say what it was. She said he toid her
something had broken, and that he had
..torn his -clothes repairing it. Accused
said that;was a11..1ie5... 11 o was wearing
the bine suit the previous"evening, and the
grey suit on the Saturday.,
Miss Sadler was the accused's girl, and
they were on affectionate terms. Hao
.they not
Kissed Each Other
when she went to the gaol to see him?
Not until she was asked by his Honor, did
.she admit that accused told her he-had torn!
his clothes on the previous night when re-
pairing the car. He (Mr. Parker) did
not blame Miss Sadler for not wishing to
give damaging evidence against the ac-
cused; but could it be imagined she would
fabricate evidence against himf On the
Friday night she and the Moir’s expect-
ed to go to Wagin on Saturday. Accused .
all along asked them to wait until that day.
He bad given the party to believe that he
would borrow a car for the trip. He had
a Buick Six in mind.
His Honor: Ora Willjs-Ehight. ■ > r ' ;
Mr. Parker: Yes; but bis.first intention
had been to get a Buiek Six. That was
the make of O’Neil’s car. 'Yet,* ho said
that all.through ho. intended to get Singe’s.
Cadillac car. Would any reasonable man ■
wait until Friday night to hire a car for
a trip he had arranged throe weeks before,
for the next day? His excuse was a
flimsy one. He found Miss Sadler busy
in the kitchen on Friday evening. Ho,had ,
fksked: her to go to town, but he knew she-* -
;was doing work she could not leave, and *
that he was quite , ' **■'/. 1
Safe in 'Asking Her.-
He said he intended then to explain about ‘
hiring the car. On the Saturday he toll, ]
the party ho had hired a car. No oni
objected, or offered to pay half the cost ’
of the lure. No one demurred about the !
cost to Auburn." Could it be a pleasure
trip to leave Perth about 4 o’clock in the
afternoon and go.some 140 miles info the
country with three children and sis adults
in the ear, arriving abonteT a.m., without ;
a meal on the way or any arrangepicnt to
stop for a picnic? What* Pltaspre coaM "C
there be? Why was it ' ; ~~
A Rush Trip?
Because the accused, did not turn up at
6.30 as arranged, ■ ami he could not get a
caf until 3.30 ‘bn' the Saturday. .He yeuf
over the ranks —they knew .of four drivers ■
•he approached—and he Iteidly got Singe by 7
’phone. It was suggested that accused
was very annoyed with Miss Sadler be-,,;'
cause she' 7 would not come : with,,
him, but he knew she could not leave. Tie;
went put himtalf, saying he would be tact,.
and he -apologised next day-for not~hav-''
! Turned rip. Mr. Lavan admitted tho
drivers were approaohediand. fufihorawre, >.
they' would not take the- accused.; ■- -How- -i
ever,- as 'soon-as Sifigb was .engaged;, it, be-
came . . ■• *
A Matter of Haste. ■
It. was averted .accused!. .cuuld!;, IfidsUg,
-Save stolen a car in the streets. The,
jury should remember be wanted the ear in
the daylight, it had to be driven through
■the streets of the city and Mt. Lawley toj
Psborne Park, then through Armadale and
hnch places. The case of the man Parker*
VMch bad been alluded to was the only,
(one he (Mr. Parker) knew of where a-
tetolcn car had been retained for any*
- length of time.' Cars '■when- stolen in tins!
{ knanner were abandoned next day. . If the
' accused had stolen a ear on this occasion!
"J She owner would have been alive to tell j
the police, and if he had put false plates i
; ten it the best ones would be his father’s,'
“ ’ because his father must stick by Ms son!
,to any extent. If pulled up ho could give 1
oxs name of Auburn, and - the number, and i
been allowed to proceed. No suspicion j
would arise, because inquiries would show j
it was Auburn’s car. The evidence point- j
ed to the accused being in i
Desperate Need of a Car. j
He certainly was on the Saturday after- ■
Soon. If the car had not broken dowif '
and had P3B on it, and the body disposed
«f, or had sunk in the river instead of
Boating, no inquiries would have been made '
for O’Neil for some days, because he had
gone away for an 11 days’ trip. On the
following day P3B would be removed from
O’Neil’s car, and the ear left anywhere,
no suspicion would have been created for
some days after, and nothing more heard
«rf it. Usually thing;! went wrong in some
«rav, and murderers made "mistakes.
The Court adjourned until next day.
TO-DAY'S PROCEEDINGS.
. Jeer) continued his address to the jury. He
(Baid that when the Court rose the day be-
fore, he was referring to the hiring of a
motor car. The story the accused had
told the police was that he went into town
with his father, and, remained there until
he hired a car from Singe, and then pro-
ceeded to Miss Sadler’s house. At the
inquest it was shown that he first went to
Jliss Sadler. He had said that himself
for ho knew the police were aware of taat
He said he went to Miss Sadler, then came
straight into town and
Hired Singe’s Car.
fTh e' questions that were put to the accused
were clear, and he had stuck to that story.
He bad Singe in mind-all the time. He
knew the police had no other evidence, and
he had built up his story on that. Mr.
Xavan had to admit, following upon trie
conclusive evidence of the four taxi driv-
ers, that he had first tried to hire a car
elsewhere. If the accused was going to
He deliberately to, the police, and after it
1 yhen ho heard the evidence at the inquest,
could he be expected to tell the truth m
other, matters. It could not be a case of
bad memory, or his being flabbergasted. It
had not entered his mind that trie police
could get other evidence to cause 'him to
jttlter his story,
Mr. Parker said he would show the jury
jtecy could not believe his story in regard
jto the material parts of the case. Ac-
cused had said what he did
To Blind trie Detectives.
He had toid the jury about getting Singe's
ear to blind them. If he was going to at-
tempt to blind them on one point, why not
pn another? He must have realised the
importance of the effect his story would
have on the minds of the jury when they
haw hq was in dire straits to get a car. He
stated in the Court that he had caught a
tram at 6.15 on the Friday evening, and
Jhad arrived at Moir’a about 7 o’clock. The
tram he would have caught would have
Reached the stopping place near Mohr's at
four minutes past 7. It would take him
Jive 05 six minutes to reach the house. If
the rest of his story was true, he reached
Jhuyer’s shop about 10 o’clock, a quarter
of an hour or so before trie pictures were
finished. He must, therefore have left


‘ tnc'TJietures 20 minutes berore tney were
wycr. . On the times given he reached the
toieture show about 20 minutes before the
interval. Mr. Porker said he was not
pfing to ask the jury to convict accused
pa the score of time.
If he reached the pictures at 7.30, he
Jmist have left Moir’s 15 minutes or 20
families earlier in order to do so. This J
Jwas one of the j
' Many Inaccuracies j
?n the statement of the accused. He in- [
formed the detectives that ho caught the
6.45 tram, reached town at 7.25, and went.
to the pictures. _ He built up that story i
ewer the 3d business, and to account for i
not being seen that night He said ho
(had come out of the pictures at the end
tof the programme at IOJS or 10.25 pan,
He; made that statement before he was!
*MlsbbergastccL” He said nothing about i
(going to Miss Sadler’s or Mrs. Layer's
(shop. He did not mention those matters
that he said later were immaterial, but
(stated that on tb j previous evening he had
gone to the pictures with his girl. Why
(should he omit the most important pait of
Jus story about what he did that night?
He said that after the pictures he walked
(around the block to see if he could find
fenyone he knew, then went straight home
yia Marquis-street under the subway. He
(also walked across Thomas-street bridge.
(Why should a man wearing a heavy over-
boat choose to go up a steep hill rather
than take the easier route along the flat?
Why did he tell such ridiculous stories to
Ibe police? Again to blind them, hood-
wink then, put them off their guard. On
[April 11 there was no cine, and the murder
faas the talk of the place. The accused
paw
The Net Getting Around Him
fe little bit, over the overcoat and he told
(this story.
further, he rang up Miss Sadler at Woo-
Jroloo, not as an innocent man would do,
paying, “The police are worrying me over
this murder, and I am being suspected, and
the detectives will probably come up to see
Von, because you went to Wagin with me.
Tell them everything.” Had anyone evei
an innocent man ringing up his
eirl simply to tell her to tell the truth?
[The accused said he rang up Miss Sadler
jfco tell her to say that he was there from 7
po 7.30. That was not very important, be-
ta use if he was there from 7 to 7.30, he
Could Still Commit the Murder *
fefterwards. Miss Sadler said, on the eon- j
jtrary, that he rang her up saying “Tell j
phem nothing.” - The accused said in his i
(evidence that the telephone was bad at tha j
Perth end, but Miss Sadler had sworn that
*he could hear quite distinctly. And
should the accused ring her up?
A matter which perhaps was
1 The Most Important in the Case
(regarding the defence was the story of the
plibi. He vas not going to suggest that
[Mrs. Buyer '-nd Miss Sadler came to the
Court and committed absolute and delibe-
rate perjury, but he would suggest that
they had made a mistake and a serious one,
Hspericnce of women folk showed that
[when they went along telling a story, they
feventnally believed it, and that nothing in
(this world would ever get them to admit
that they were wrong. That was what
(bad happened here. These women told
the story eventually to Mr, Lavan, at the
time fully believing it. But the instance
|o. which they were referring was of
A Different'Date And Time.
" If the accused had gone to that shop,
Jben he must have known when he left
Sere that he had only 3d in his pocket,
tecanse, under cross-examination, he said
(hat when he left the shop he thought his
feoney had gone around to the back of his
E-aisteoat. Counsel (Mr. Parker) asked
im to have a look at the waistcoat and
ihow how the money could get around to
the. back., Then-accused said, “No, 4in.
feway.” When the accused j>ut his fin-
£CTB in his pocket he would feel the weight
f o f the money, and know it was there, and
not at the back of his waistcoat So thai
j story of his must be wrong. _ .
What a Remarkable Thing
that he had in that waistcoat pocket a shil-
ling, a penny, and a threepenny bit—that
ho had those coins in a pocket in -which
there -was a huge hole, which was not worn
but tom. Coins of three different sizes
remained in the accused’s waistcoat pocket,
but all the rest of the money slipped out!
Could the jury possibly believe tha tstory.
Counsel sincerely trusted that his some-
what lengthy cross-examination of the ac-
cused had not been unfair, but it was his
duty to delve into the story and test the
truth of it by testing the story right
through. Would the accused’s story stand
that test? It should not bo forgotten
that at that time he had dipped seven times
into his pocket. Only at the seventh time
on the railway bridge did he discover that
lie had only 3d left in his pocket. Pre-
suming his story to be true up to that time,
had the jury ever known of a person walk-
ing along to catch a tram, fully confident
that he had something like a pound cn him,
ten shilling? in silver and ten shillings n
a note, and carryng a bottle in one hand
and two meat pies in the other, stopping
at some distance from where the tram
started to feel in his pocket for 3d, to
See If He Had His Tram Fare?
If he had been on the tram and had then
discovered he had only 3d, there might
be something in it. But what per-
son with his hands full of parcels
would stop to look for his tram fare be-
fore he got on the tram, if he know full
well that he had about a pound’s worth
of money on him. Counsel suggested that
that waistcoat pocket had been tom, and
Deliberately Tom.
It was accused’s habit to go Soto tMc
shoo after he had teen his girl home from 1
the theatre, or after he left Ida girl’s place
at night. Miss Sadler had swum that he
used to leave her place in time to catch
the last tram. .Mrs. Layer and Miss John-
son said that*on this occasion he came in
one hour before his usual time. If so,ii
was half-past ten, and
Hot Ten o'CfoeSb,
However, they said it was ten o*ifioeik; and
they farther said that they looked at the
clock; or, if Miss Johnson did not look
at the clock she saw Mrs. Layer look at
'it, she said. Presume it was IQ o’clock;
why on earth should the accused, whose
constant habit it was to catch the last
tram, and who was in no huzrv, because
he walked all the way round, not wait for
three minutes to have his pica heated?
h/ot having the pies heated was essential,
because if he had had the pics heated it
would be an ordinary everyday occurrence,
and the two witnesses would never be
able to fir the data So the pies wens not
heated, and that did fir the date—the date
on which the pies were not heated.
How else did they fir the date? Be-
cause bliss Johnson visited Mrs, Bannon’a
on that data. Mrs. Bannon’s was a place
Miss Johnson used to visit turn or three
times a week. There was an occasion she
said when she came in five minutes before
Auburn arrayed, and it was on that date
alone she fired April 4 and the hwt day
that he ever went there,
Mr. La van: That is not fn the evidence.
The evidence fgjhat she heard of the
murder the next day, and that on the next
ffieming, Sunday, she discussed with Mrs.
Buyer the fact that Auburn had not been
in on the Saturday night.
Mr. Parker said he must candidly admit
he did not remember that. However, the
fury were the judges, Mrs. Lover and
Miss Johnson said they had not recalled
the matter to their minds at all until Au-
burn's Barest, which toed: place on April
16, some 12 days later. Counsel would
prove conclusively that Auburn
Had Changed Hia Custom
about three weeks before April 4. Hera
was another circumstance; If Auburn was
such a regular customer and was in there
on the night of Pnday, April 4, yet on
I his return from Wagin, having left Wagin
I about 3 and having Jmd no food


■6n the way' and the Metre having given
him no food, and although he stood outside
the shop and' talked to two of his friends
on that Sunday, why did he not so Into
the shop then? He had chanced his cus-
tom before then. However, that did not
get away from the circumstance of his-not
having been able to
Wait Three Mhiutea
to get his niea heated.
Had the jury ever known of a pieshop
where there were only two pies hot at 10
o’clock, and where those two hot pies were
kept for a special customer? A hot pie
shop usually kept its pies hot all the time,
or else it would have no custom, espe-
cially at 10 pjtl, just about tho time the
pictures usually oame out. Mrs. Layer
and Miss Johnson never told one word of
this story. They would not tell it to Mr.
Williams, who rat then* until X o’clock
to the pmrnfng, and who admittedly was
cn affectionate .terms with one of the wit-
nesses —no harm in that. They would not
tell him because he was
A Police “Pima"! _
and sxnnbrfy with regard to DnperuzeL
Why on earth should they have refused
to djsx-rrgi the matter with those two if it
was true? Why never come to light with
it? Wiry never tell the police? Why
never tell anyone? Why was Jim ac-
cused unable to tefl this matter to his
counsel? Why on earth could not the
accused have told the police of it?
The accused, did not tell his counsel ana
his counsel knew nothing of it until he
put the advertisement in the newspapers
on the evening of May 12. These women
saw tho advertisement on the mornmg or
Tuesday, May'Ll, and one of them imme-
diately went in and saw Mr. Lavan. Did
not that strike the jurv as extraordinary?
It Was Very Funny, Too,
that Miss Johnson did not go in even
then, but waited until the 15th to do bo,
knowing full well that this .nice clean,
well-spoken young fellow was m Teonardy
of his life and that one word of that
i story could make him a free man at once,
because their story could have been in-
vestigated, and if it was found correct,
•obviously the accused was not the mur-
derer, and the man who <hd commit
the murder could he searched tor.
Mr. Murphy had'been
' Tackled and Abused,
because he told them he was a regular
visitor to the shop to use the telephone.
Mrs. Layer said she had never spoken to
I him in her life, but Miss Johnson, whenhe
walked in, roared with laughter. Obvi-
ously he was an old friend.
Mr. Lavan: There was a general ont-
Mr. Parker said he (Murphy) told them
he went in there four or five times a wt*k
to use the telephone. He knew them by
sight, but not by names.. It was suggest-
ed he was a professional witness desmng
publicity. Why would he want publicity?
Everybody „
Knew Drybhrwar.
A journalist wanted publicity only in his
paper, and he got that. . Yet it was sug-
gested that, to get publicity, he committed
perjury. It t was mentioned that he had
given evidence in other cases. He (coun-
sel) would point out that on the other oc-
casions the jury had believed him.. He
said that he went into the shop, and that
they described Auburn to him. During Mr.
Haynes’ cross-examination the description
he gave was admitted to be absolutely cor-
rect Thev told Murphy that he (Auburn)
had not been in for a long time, anddhat
tallied with the change of custom to Gold-
in-’s. How, too, could Mr. Murphy know
about him seeing hh girl home if they
had not told him? He also said that Au-
burn used to sit there and meet his
friends. Admittedly, that was what he
did. Why did he not do that when he
knew he _ „
Had Only Threepence?
The names of the people conducting the
shop were not disclosed, even in Mr. Lav-
an’s opening address, ,When Auburn waa
asked ke was disinclined to mention names.
Mr ■ - . T told them the location of
the slio,. ;iid I wanted to avoid
Morbid Sightseers.
Mr. Parker: Why then give the exact lo-
cation? That gave the morbid sigiitseeis
the opportunity of going to sec it.
They would remember that Mrs. Layer
said she told Mr. Lavan about the inci-
dent eight or nine days after the'arrest,
while it was actually 27 days after the
arrest and some 39 days after the happen-
ing. She could not remember the day
sho first raw to the papers that she was ti>
be called as a witness; yet she
Could Eemember Everything
about the accused at the pieshop, looking
at the dock, etc. Miss Johnson admit-
ted she read everything in the papers.
The witness Roberts would have no object
to coming forward to tell lies, yet he had
told them that Anbum had not been in the
shop that night, as was his usual custom.
The two ladies at the pie shop fixed the. in-
cident because of Miss Johnson’s arrival
about. 11 o’clock. ' They had heard also
in evidence, that Anbum was supposed to
have come in an hour earlier but could, not
wait to have his pies heated.
Then take Auburn’s story of
The Tram. Bid® Home.
Auburn had stated that he went, to Troo-
chet’s Comer automatically to catch a
tram, because he went there every Friday
and Saturday evening. How extraordinarily
- automatic that was, particularly when they
remembered that he went to one of the
worst places to board a tram at that hour
.of the night, when the people from the
various entertainments boarded the ears
for their homes. Everyone was aware
that the cars .filled up rapidly, and were
full by the time they got to Trouehet’s
Corner, whereas at Newcastle-strcet, ac-
• cording to the evidence they had heard, two
or three passengers usually left the tram.
Anbum did not take advantage of that, but
had gone back with his parcels to Xrpu-
ebet’s Comer to board the tram there. Mcntr
had told them that Auburn was not a ip an
who cared to walk about with parcels, yet
tins was tho story he told them. Person-
ally, ho did not think tho jury would be-
lieve it. Then again, if the story that
he had only 3d was true, why on earth did
ha not board a tram and go to Moir’s,
where ho was expected, where a bed was
waiting tor him, and where ho could have
explained that he could not or had not se-
cured a car ? Anbum had told tho Moira
pud Miss Sadler
So Many Tim
that one or more Ees
would not make any difference
Had ho. done so, he would have avoided the
possibility of walking such a long distance
to the Osborne Park Hotel. Bather than
do that, ha had told the Court that he
walked around the block to find someone
ho knew from whom he could borrow 2d.
We.havn been told that Auburn was in the
habit of catching the last tram home every
evening, and surely he must have realised
that the walk from the ML Hawthorn ter-
minus, to which ho could have proceeded,
to Osborne Park was much shorter than
the walk he decided to take. Anbum bad
told tho Court that usually the same people
travelled on the late cars every mghL It
was common knowledge that if one board-
ed a tramcar without a fare, one was not
nut off, but simply had to give his name
end address to the conductor. The ac-
cused was known to the conductor, and
surely the motorinan
Would Have Lent Him 2d!
Again, Anbum could have paid tho addi-
tional fare when he peached the Osborne
Pali Hotel. Tho probabilities were that
ho could hove borrowed the money from
any number of people who most have tra-
velled by those late ears. Yet he pre-
ferred to take the long walk from Wii-
lism-street to the LeedervQlo Hotel? He
suggested that in that respect alone
• « a m,


Aumrm'JTßwry waslncredlbte.
. As a matter of fact, Auburn did bap-
tow 2s from a Tnnn on the tram after going
a very short distance, vet he admitted that
he did not know that man very well. The
distance was so short that it wonld take a
little less time to rob a, man end so get
the money
His Honor? It might be quicker to do
that than borrow from some people.
(Laughton)
Mr. Parker said that that was possibhr
so. The fact remained that Lccn, who had
I been standing alongside Auburn, had not
1 been cross-examined on that point
!by Mr. Lavan, and he (Mr. Parker)
! had not been in a position to ask the qnes-
! torn, himself beeanse he did not Jmow of
the incident. Anbnm knew_the necessity
for explaining his movement on the night
of April 4. Despite that he had made not
one inquiry os to the identity of the .girl
who sold him the ticket at the Qrand Thea=
- tre that night. No one had come forward
to say that Anbnm had been seen at the.
theatre that evening. It wonld be almost
impossible fpr a person to attencTthe thea-
tre withont b<yng seen by someone, par-
ticularly as Anbnm he had sat
throughout the interval. Even in response
to the advertisement no one haJ.eome for-
ward to give the.necessary information..
Another Extraardinaxy Feature .
related to the bumping incident at West
, Perth. According to Auburn’s story he
: had bumped into two men, and the bump
t had been so severe that, he had been pear-
[ ly knocked down and his arm had started
| bleeding as the result of it. In such a
j dark place when a person was brnnpgjl so
■ heavily he would, naturally think of gafofc-.
ting, and the incident would have impress-
ed itself on the individual’s memory. Des-
pite the advertisement that hacUbeen in-
serted neither of the two men Had come
forward with information on the point. The
story about Layer’s had not been mention-
ed by Anbnm to anyone who had discuss-
ed with him the necessity for fixing his
whereabouts on the night in question by
some such incident Then as to the meat
pira, could the Jury imagine anyone on
such a hot sultry night walking such a
long distance and eating two cold meat
pies without a drink. One would have
thought that an individual in that posi-
tion wonld have preferred to have thjvjwn
away the meat pies and have a drink from
the bottle he rais carrying, A man would
be nearly
., „ , Dying of Thirst
after all toat But rather than have a
drink, he bought fish and chips, and had
ms drink later. Could any person eat
two cold pies, right off the reel, without
having some liquid to wash them down?
At toe Esplanade Gardens that night there
had been a boxing contest, and the weather
was so warm that people took their coals
oft, and yet Auburn put on a big overcoat.
On the one night in his life, when he wish-
ed to be seen, he could not find anyone who
had seen him during the earlier hours.
Where was he? He claimed toat he was
at toe pictures, and round the block, but
no one had seen him, unless it had been at
Layer’s shop. The people at toe shop
were the only ones accused bad not men-
tioned to his counsel. Could the jury be-
lieve the suggestion that Cecil White had
seen accused on the night of the 4th April,
and toat this had been
Kept Back For Two Mentha
before anyone was told? Would a man
in accused’s position withhold from the
detectives his complete get out? He was
with them on many occasions before his
arrest, and it must have occurred to his
mind, if it was a faet, that he had a com-
plete get out. But he could not remember
it until the women concerned came*to light.
His defence had begun then. If accused
had been asked so many questions by the
detectives, it was
Strange He Could Net Remember
where he was on the Friday night. At
the inquest he did not tell the Coroner.
Mr. Lavan:, No evidence was called for
, the defence at tne inquest,' and there was
not a line of cross-examination.
Mr. Parker: At the end of the inquest
the accused was asked if he desired to give
anv evidence, but he gave none.
His Honor: Is that unusual?
Mr. Lavan: This is very unfair.
Mr. Parker: True, an accused person
very often does not give evidence in the
Lower Court If any member of the jury
were arrested on a charge of murder and
had a. complete get out, would not he dis-
close it at ogee?
Mr. Lavan: I say this is all very unfair.
: No less than 55 witnesses were called at
the inquest, and the accused was the last
,man of these. Acting on my advice, be
- did not give evidence. I told the Coroner
ha would not do so at that juncture.
His Honor: That ia what b usually done.
- Mr. Parker, continuing, asked if it was
unfair to say if a man had a complete get
out he would keep it up hmsteeve.lt was
a duty cast upon him (Me. Parker) to soov
these obvious things. The women at the
shop had not come forward to get accused
_ of gaol until the advertisement ap-
m fact, saidahe was
determined to „ _
Keep Out of the Caee,
fVrryt, she knew “that nicely spoken <>ynug
fellow'’ might be convicted. The
Golding. Leen, and Eddy, were not asked
in emss-exammation abom the accused
carrying any bottle. Leen, who was stand-
ing alongside him on the back the tram,
he must have seen the bottle rf ao-
cased had one with him. Anbnm had told
-the police ho was kn ? c | a^. oycr 5*
home, but st the tnal he «**ntted he
hadn’t been quite knocked over. The mv
cased did not know whether, as s result of
the bottle, had ahiftedor not
when it was under his arm. ito IJUn.
- Parker) suggested that the story told, by
Mrs. Luyer and Miss Johnson showed that
tew were mistaken as, to the date when
thev saw hfm in the shop. Why tdionld
a San go to Miss on four
n ;<Arht a week for a fortnight or three
Sffi prior to April 4, and the&zeia
I bottle off the ke, and every other get
another bottle at Mrs. s 2^"
A hana Anbnm did get cold pies the last time
be wmt toMrs. Iyer’s, but thatconldnot
have been April 4. Auburn said he was
Off Odor That Week,
but he had been twice to toe theatre, and
on Friday night had,
Sadler to go to town with him-
on the night of April 4. he walked aU toat
way home, and ate two pies, withont even
-the jury believe that story?
The accused got to see him honw
that night because be was off color, and
yet immediately afterwards had fish and
chips. Would it not be quite a natural
thing for a person who had
Doits a Horrible Deed
to get someone to see him hornet Might
not that person be somewhat overcome
with remorse, or with the realisation od
what he had done? If toe accused had
done this deed, probably he would be
hungry and would cat the fish and chips.
Mrs. Layer and Miss Johnson said it
was incredible to them that the accused
should have done this horrible deed, -they
Btm thought it incredible. When human
_ brings thought a thing incredible they
went on thinking so, and as a result became
convinced of it.
Mr. Lavan; -The two lames said neither
that it was credible nor that It was to-
said the two witnesses had
got it into their minds that the accused
could not have done the deed because he
was such a decent young fellow, and be-
cause “he was in here that night.’’ They
must have talked about it among them-
selves and convinced each other. Nothing
would ■ tijsla
Shift Out of a Woman’s Head
such a belief so formed And toat was
what had happened in this case. The ac-
cused never told one wprd of this .story,to


the detectives, and yet now, three mourns
later, could tell the jury in detail where
and how he carried the bottle. However,
he could not tell the jury whether or not
he wore the overcoat. "Which of the two
things would one remember first, whether
one wore the overcoat -or whether one car-
ried the bottle?
In starting off, the accused had been very
emphatic that he had an indifferent me-
mory. _ An indifferent memory center cover
a multitude of sins, but the accused had
an extraordinary memory when it came to
matters of vital importance to himself.
Let the jury consider
The Extraordinary Story
about the finding of the overcoat. The
accused said it had apparently fallen from
a ear coming rram Marquis-street and
goiffif to Oxford-etrest. Why on earth
should the accused pick the car as coming
from Marquis-street and going to Oxford-
street? The only persons who would know
the direction of the ear would be its
driver; and anyone else in the car. There
was so doubt that the overcoat was
Dropped After the Murder,
beesn9& although Mr. Lavan said there
Was only a little blood on it, the mark of
l blood was two or three inches long. There
i might or there might not be sma» specks
j of blood on the other part of the overcoat,
specks not visible to the naked eye or even
: With the aid of an ordinary microscope.
The accused found the overcoat near a
Chinese garden, in a party of the city
where very few people would pick up a
discarded garment The overcoat was
most unsuitable for this climate. Yet the
accused picked it up, dusted it, and then
Wore it on this dreadfully hot night- Was
the accused, firstly, a person likely to pick
I bp a coatj and, secondly, a person EMdy to'
i wear a discarded coat picked up near a
Chinese garden? The coat was double-
breasted, and in spite of that it hardly
fitted the accused. It would be almost
Impossible, or at all events most uncom-
fortable, for the accused to wear the coat
and drive a motor car. Counsel would :
suggest to the jury later
Why A censed Wore "the Coat
on that night.
If the story told by. Mrs. Layer and "Mrss r
Johnson was true; would not one expect
them to relieve the anxiety of the accused’s
parents by ringing them up and telling
them what they, the two witnesses, knew?
Necessarily the parents would be most
anxious.
r And then, within 60 yards or so of where ’
the motor ear was subsequently found
abandoned, the accused got on a tram car. :
The evidence of the boy Collins was that
the car was abandoned between U and
LLIS p.m.; and it was somewhere about
H-30 p,m. that the accused got on the
tramcar at a spot practically as near to
the abandoned motor ear as he could. The
jury might ask, “Why on earth did the ac-
cused tell all this story about the over-
coat?” The explanation was that the ac-
cused found himself
Jtn a Very Awkward Position
regarding the, coat. Let the jury presume
for a moment that the accused committed
the murder; if he did, he would be covered
with blood, must have blood on him. It
was quite true that he could then walk
home. Apparently, however, ho was not
inclined to walk home. He got Into a
tram, and he put on the overcoat to cover
his suit. AH those in the tram had seen
, the coat. Next day the accused took the
coat to Wagin. If one took an overcoat
to Wagin sad left it on the rail of the
manger in the stable of a country hotel,
would one ever expect to see that coat
again? One wonld be very fortunate if one
did see it again. There were many discus- >
sions about the eoat, but all those discus-
sions were forced on the accused.
Auburn did not, as might have been ex-
pected, say it was only an old coat which
he had picked up and did not want. When
; he got back he saw in the papers that an
overcoat was misting. He knew'that when
that news got to Wagin, and the coat was
round, a report would be received that a
.coat vas there. It would
Bo Wins Traced Bads
eventually to him. So he went to the po-
lice, and now asks if they thought he
would come to them if he were a guilty
man. Purdue told him about the advertis-
ing, and said it was a matter of who got in
first. Accused said b ' •
. , “I Get You."
difficult” 566
■ There may or may not have been bloou
on his hands. He kept them in his poc-
kets. However, he could have easily
washed them at the Leedcrville Oval, where
there were plenty of taps, or he could have
washed them at the river when the
Corpse was Put in the Water.
They would xemember that he said there
was blood on his hands, but it came from
Iris arm. That was in ease of accidents—
in case anyone did see him.
With regard to the loan of two shillings
the jury would remember that White made
a statement to the police in which he said
he got home at 11 o’clock, a statement
which he repeated in that Court. If that
were ao he could not have met Auburp,
because Auburn did not catch a tram until
after U. It would be somewhere about
IX2O when Auburn got there. So it could
not have been that night that he saw Au-
burn.
White was not asked, the jury would re-
member, about the bottle, though, be would
surely have known. It was obvious why
be was not asked. He had said that on
that night it was dark on the bask of the
tram, while Lem said it was light enough
to read. Again, it could not hare been
She Night of the 4th.
Evidently this was an occasion when, for
some reason or other, there was no light
on the back of the tram. How modi cre-
dence could they place on White’s story,
when he told the police he did not see Au-
burn, and came to that Court and said it
might have been any of four nights? Ac-
cused had told the police that be saw White
that night, but said not a word about bor-
rowing two shillings! He did not mention
it, although he said in that statement that
he only had threepence. Auburn could not
have told his solicitors either, because
White was not interviewed until June. Bad
be told his solicitors they would naturally
have got him early while
Bis Memory was Green.
White had told the Court that he remem-
bered the accused bringing bottles home
nightly until the evening when he lent
Auburn the 2a. In Ms first statement to
the police he mentioned the matter, and
that was a fortnight before the April 4.
That tallied with the faet that Auburn
Transferred Ms Custom
to the Goldings from the Lowers. And
that went to prove the contention, because
it would not bo necessary for Auburn to
get a bottle of soft drink at Layers, and
then get another from Goldings. The jury
would probably remember White’s en-
deavor to explain the change in his evi-
dence. He said that when the detectives
went out to see Mm he was flabbergasted.
Evidently he would have them believe that
he was not flabbergasted when he wen.
to the soKcitor’s office two and a half
months later on, at which time Ms memory
would be stale.
Various suggestions had been made as to
how all the statements were taken from
the accused. Why should
These Extraordinary Methods
ever have entered the head of counsel for
the defence The jury would probably
draw their own conclusions. The police
stooped to oil the most horrible methods
that and they were the only ones
that did that! That was the suggestion,
and he would leave it at that. Whrte had
told them that he always saw Auburn get
on the car at the Newcastle-street corner,
but the accused had told them that on two


mgnts m the week he ooaroeo tne ear at
Tronehet’s corner. It was quite possible
that two friends who were in the habit of
catching cars at a certain street could get
on without one or other of them being
aware that his friend was also aboard.
However, White said he had not seen
Auburn on the night in question until he
was getting off. Undoubtedly White did
; lend Auburn 2s. in the circumstances, but
most decidedly it was not on the night of
April 4.
Did it not strike the jury as extraordin-
ary that, notwithstanding all the details
• published about the murder case, the person
who found the first, clue kept the informa-
tion to himself until he told some of his
friends, and became the, centre of a small
admiring gronpf He was not at all proud
of the feat,_ although he could feel justifi-
ably proud in having beaten the detectives
by finding the first clue. On the Tuesday
evening, when he was in companr with the
three girls, the murder had been discussed,
but th* \ discovery was not mentioned.
Moir’s evidence was to the effect that he 1
did not remember the
Murder being Discussed
i on the Tuesday evening, although eveiyoo'-'
; else admitted it was discussed. Moir
stated he did not learn anything of the
murder from the accused. He also stated
that nothing was spoken a rout it at Wagin
or during the trip. Yet all the others who
were there knew it was discussed on the
I way to Wagin. Why should the witness
Quartern:aine come forward and make such
an extraordinary mistake regarding Moir
and accused in relation to the petrol?
Quartermaine admitted that there might
; have been some conversation bqtween the
accused, Quartermaine and afctgp that he
had not heard. Although QSjfrteimaine
was cmphatie_on those points, Soir could
not' say whether the accused had on a
black or grey suit during Friday night,
whether he had a hat on, and so on, yet he
could swear that he had no parcel with
him- .He suggested that Moir would swear
anything in favor of the accused.
The murder must have been discussed.
They did not have
A Murder Every Day,
1 yet this particular mnrder, according to 1
some of the evidence, had not been dis-
cussed. Would the jury accept that sug-
gestion? When the accused was the only
man who had heard nothing of the murder,
yet he was the one man in the world who
was to be arrested for the crime.
His Honor: What importance do you {
attach to the discussion on the trip?
Mr. Parker: After Auburn came back
to Perth, when Holmes met bfm, he said,
,r What do you think of the murder?”
Auburn replied, “What murder? " Would -
1 that not be the attitude of the person who
committed the crime ? Such . a person
would endeavor to throw off suspicion, and
know nothing about the murder. It would
have been all right if Auburn had said that .
he had beard of it on the trip to Wagin, :
but that was one of the mistakes Auburn \
made. Obviously he should have made such
an admission. It is only through mistakes :
that people make that crimes are sheeted
home, and this is one of them. • If any
one of the jury had found any of the miss-
ing articles, the first thing he would have
done would have been to tell the police, and
speak of it to Ms friends. Not so the ao- -
cuscd, however.
Proceeding, Mr. Parker asked the jury,
in view of the evidence, if they believed
that Anbum did not know of the murder ,
in these dremnstanees; he must have done
so. As a motor mechanic, the mnrder
must have been a matter of interest to him.
As to the ;
Hiring of the Car.
fee Court had heard the accused's version
of Ms Wages, andthat of his father. Ob-
viously Auburn did not receive any wages
in the ordinary way, and he (Mr- Parker)
did noth blame the accused's father for the
evidence he had given on that point, for,
naturally, everyone realised the extraordin-
ary circumstances, and one’s sympathy
went out to him. Auburn had said that
he had earned £6O in three
months, vet he could pay £2O for a carl
And he offered one of the motor men a
... £2O cheque on the Wednesday and a new
pair of tyres at a cost of £%>- Although
he could do all this he walked 5J miles
home, because he missed the last tram.
He had stated he could get £2OO or £3OO
from his father, but what had the father
said? The number plates had not been
paid for and
Singe’s Bill
had not been met. The father had had to
pay many of his son's debts. The accus-
ed said Singe did not want his money for
a month. He (Mr. Parker) contended
that the number .plates had been obtained
for the sole purpose of putting on the
car that was to. take the party to Wagin.
Mr. Parker, Crown Prosecutor, proceed-
ing said: —
If the accused had intended to get a car
by foul means, .and wished to disguise th*
fact, the best way to do so would have
been to change the number plates. It haa
been suggested that he would not go to
Ramsay for the plates, but ho, in fact, wa*
the very man accused would go to. Ham-
say had already painted the “P 33”platea
for Auburn, senr., and there would havo
been nothing suspicious about accused
going to him for a new set of plates.
Ramsay, however, could not do the work,
and it had to bo done by Abbott and Rich.
Moreover, it was Ramsay who had made
the old plates, which were classed as being
so rough and unsuitable. Seeing that
accused wanted new plates to give his
father, was it likely he would give him
plr.tes like the old ones? He had asked
Miss Sadler to call for them on the Fri-
day.
The Plates Had Hover Been Pound,
nor had they been asked for. He {Mr.
Parker) contended that they were destroy-
ed or thrown away on the night of April
4, when the ear broke down. They could
have been the lake at Lceder-
rille or disposed of in other ways. _
Mi’. Lavan; Mr. Parker has nothing to
justify that statement There is not a
word to support it
His Honor: There is no evidence that
the plates were seen after they got to Miss
Sadler's. ...
Mr. Parker: The accused said he did
pot look for them and the father had not
known of them. Miss Sadler said she gave
them to the accused, but did not know if
he took them away.
His Honor: The evidence is that the ac-
cused had no parcel when ho left Moir's.
Mr. Parker: Miss Sadler was in the
kitchen when he left and if the plates had
been at Moir's thev must have been found
there. If found they would have been
produced.
Continuing, Mr. Parker said it was
clear they had been done away with. They
were, of course, useless with a broken-
down car. The father’s car needed head-
lights, reflectors and other things, and did
not need new plates. Why did not ac-
cused give him new reflectors or new
glasses for the lamps? Nelson had not
been asked to make the plates different
from those already on Auburn, senr., cam.
The car had been in Mr. Auburn’s posses-
sion for some years, and no attempt had
been made to file the corner of the plates,
on the ground that thev tore one’s clothes.
The accused had never tom his clothes
upon them. Mr. Havan had asked why
accused should take O'Neil’s ear when the
dicky seats were out of it. It was only
a matter of moving a few screws in order
to take out the scats. There was no sug-
gestion that O’Neil had been asked to take
out the seats. He would require to shift
them in order to make room for luggage.
There was no suggestion, either, that the
person


Who Ordered O’Neil’s Car ' ' r ' ' '
was seen bv anyone. Was it stranue, there-
fore, that accused was not seen if he or-
dered it* Whoever engaged O’Neil did so
when no one was about, or by telephone.
The accused had ordered Singe’s car;
on the telephone. f
If the accused had been after O’Neil’s ear,!
and all had /one ■well,' and the body had j
sunk, and the trip to Wagin had been made |
with the false number plates on, ana the
party had come back all well, and the car {
had suddenly disappeared, then for some'
days afterwards
No One Would Know Anything.
Whoever the murderer was, his only mo»
five could have been to get possession <<f
that car. There was no evidence at all of-
any motive of revenge, or of O'Neil hav-
ing an enemy in the world. If it was a
matter of revenge, would not the murderer
simply kill his victim and leave the car and
the victim together? Why should a mur-
derer from revenge worry to take the vic-
tim from the spot where he was to Craw-
ley, to near the deep-water hole, and throw
him into the river, and then drive the car
to Vincent-street? Plainly, the murder-
er’s object was to get the car.
Unfortunately for the Culprit,
tho car broke down. Motive mattered no-
thing if the jury were satisfied aa to
facts. They coold see a motive, nndoubt-
edly a most inadequate motive; but not long
ago, in a case in which Mr. Lavan had ap-
peared, a msin suffered the penalty for
killing his victim for a matter of £2O.
Mr. Lavan; I can quote a case in Engl-
- where a man was executed on circum-
stantial evidence, and • the real murderer
was discovered 12 years after the execu-
Mr. Parker said he would take Mr.
Lavan’s word for that; The jury should
test even- link in the chain of this story,
hut motive was not a link. Murders were,
in fact, committed for the most inadequate
motives —sometimes for no motive at all.
It was true there were miscarriages of jus-
tice, but that was simply because no 12 •’
jurvmen in the British Empire were n-
falible. '
Let the jury' consider all the evidence
carefully and see if they conld find any
straw’at all which the accused eouM j
clutch. They could find nothing of the i
kind. Let them consider the Westana-t
road incident. First, there was the motor
cycle on which he said he found the spot.'
Johnston stated that it was between the
Bth and 10th that he spoke about the cycle.
It was on the 7th the accused found the
spot. It was after that ho took the motor
cycle along, and it was on the Sunday that
the accused was on a push bicycle. The
next day Johnston eamo to Court and said
“Mr. Parker had me flabbergasted.”
It was Curious
how often that word “flabbergasted” oc-
curred.
Mr. Lavan objected that counsel could
not comment adversely on the evidence of
one of his oyn witnesses unless he had
been allowed to treat that witness as hos-
tile. •
Mr. Parker said he would produce an
authority entitling him to act as he pro-
posed. Meantime he would leave John-
ston’s evidence. Accused had stated dis-
tinctly that it was on April 7 he got the
cycle from under bags that bad been put
over it. The father and mother said
it was on April 4. Let the jury assume for
tho moment that the accused had the cycle
in working order on the 7th. He told the
detectives that he "was riding Johnston’s
or Jackson’s cycle. On another date, he
told Blackmore that he discovered the spot
by passing it in Singe’s car. When he
told Blackmore tlpat, he was getting into
difficulties,
Into Bather Deep Water;
and a person could not always slick to the
same story, especially if it was not true.
He told the detectives that on Johnson’s
cycle he got halt-way tip tne hill and then I
it stopped, and he pushed it up to the top
of the hill. Mr. Lavan had asked the jury
to believe that the accused was in such a ■
bad state of health that be could not push
his cycle across the backyard of the hotel.
Mr. Lavan: It was one of your own wit-
nesses said that.
/Mr. Parker, continuing, said the accus-
ed did not wait for the cycle to cool, did
not put the belt on and let it run down,
thns air-cooling the engine, but took the
belt off and coasted down. The accused
said thch bicycle coasted down just aa well
as any properly trimmed cycle running
free, and it stopped on this not very steep
hill in the absolute hollow, instead of stop-
ping on the flat or a little way up the rise
on the other side as the ease might be.
Then the accused told the detectives he
pot the
Cycle Down on the Stand.
The cycle had been produced, and it had
no stand. *
Later the accused remembered that cir-
cumstance, and said he laid the cycle down
just off tho road. He said ho stayed there
for 20 minutes, and did not go off the road,
but walked along near tho side of the road,'
and from there he saw trees broken down
and some oil and some tracks that were not
tho slightest bit suspicious. In fact they
were just the ordinary every-dav things
one would expect to find on any* suburban
roads where people went out of an evening
and pulled up. : Then he went home, and
there he found in the. pulley of the cycle
a leaf. Could one keep the leaf in the pul-
ley of the cycle, even if it were
'Stuck There With Gum
all the way from Westana-road to Osborne
Park, a distance of several miles? Again,
bow on earth would the leaf get into the
cycle.first of all, seeing that the cycle was
right in tho sand? Where was the leaf to
come from ? That very night the accused
went to the detective office and told the;
detectives about the coat, bat did not men- f
tion Westana-road. • i
On the Uth when ho began to sec tilings
were
A Little Bit Different;
when he was being taken off with two or
three detectives to the snbwav, he thought,
“I had better do something further now.”
So he told the detectives of Westana-road.
Subsequently he said to Purdue, “Do you
think L would have told yon of Westana-
road if I was in. it?” Purdue replied,
“ Well, you know, people do go back to the
scenes of their crimes.” Auburn replied
j “Yes, I get you.” He agreed entirely with
Purdue. However, he did not mention Wes-
i tana-road at all on the Monday. He men-
tioned it on the Friday.- He told the jury
that he did not enter into any discussion
with the detectives. If a member of the
jury had found the spot and taken the d,e-
I teetives to it would not that
Juryman be Chipping In
! and having more to say than the detee-
■ tives? He guaranteed that the juryman
, would not. keep quiet. _
i Mr. Lavan: The evidence was that the
accused tried to talk to Doyle and that
Doyle refused.
Mr. Parker said the accused said he kept
aloof and did not enter into any discus-
sion. But as soon as a piece of mirror was
found, he immediately said “Out of the
spotlight,” and that piece of mirror did
in fact come out of the spotlight. The de-
tectives searched the place and did not find
the blood until they pulled down one of the
trees underneath which the blood, was. The
murderer, whoever he was, had been "back
to that place in the meantime and had re-
moved the balance of the mirror and
Covered Up the Blood.
No doubt the accused did go back to that
spot, but undoubtedly not under the cir-
cumstances stated by him. Driving along
to that spot at Westana-road Detcctive-Sgt,
Purdue suggested pulling up at one dip,
and the accused said. “Ob, no; it is farther
on.” The accused had been there only 20
j minutes, and had seen nothing suspicious,
| nothing to keep his mind on the spot. Yet l


| when tne detectives wanted tOpulTup, he
j said that the spot was further on.
1 The accused was emphatic about the
(exact spot. The murderer did go back
there, for no further pieces of mirror
were found there, and it was curious that
.Aubum was able to point out the spot at
once. Aubum said he told the police
because he
Dreamt’ of the Deaf
on the cycle. How on earth would that
have_anythine to do with the finding of
the spot at Westana-road. It could have
got there in a hundred and one ways, and
it was improbable that it got there the
way he said it did. Yet counsel had no
dcubt that he went to the police in
Consequence of a Dream.
On the road to the subway ho told Doyle
that he would show them a spot on Wes-
tsna-road, and later was quite anxious
about it, .asking “Aren’t you going
there?” He showed the detectives where
there were tracks in and out. Why should
the
i Detectives Commit Perjury?
They had no reason to do so. They knew
’. before they _came to Court that there would
bo suggestions of tier jury and. “third
degree.” All they did was to report what
they saw and what the 1 accused said.
Was it not strange that, the accused
should bring in an overcoat and say “It
may be O’Neil’s,” when, actually, it was;
and to say that the Westana-road spot
may be ■
The Scene of the Murder,
when actually it was? , As he (Mr. Par-
ker) had said in his opening address, there
I was only one person in the world who
knew where that spot was and that person
I was the man who
1 Committed the Deed.
,On the Sunday when James went out,
j the motor cycle was not working. Why
1 should Auburn get a push bicycle to jp
along tho plank road? At first he said it
was a bad road for motor cycles, but later
he admitted it was a plank road. Why
should a plank road be .good for push
bicycles, but bad for motor cycles? Why
did Auburn go out? The motor cycle
would not go now._
Mr. Lavan; I objectl There is no evi-
dence about that 1
His Honor: There is some evidence of
what Johnson said on the 13th.,
. Mr. Parker said the jury could believe
or disbelieve witnesses as they liked. Was
it not peculiar that Auburn should go to
such an
Out-of-the-way Place as Westana-road
to try The motor cycle? If the cycle
broke down, look at tha long walk back!
If he desired to test the cycle, would it
not have been better to have ridden it
poupd the streets of Osborne Park, North
Perth or some similar locality? The story
was ridiculous. #
-. Mr. Lavan: I object to Mr. Parker’s
statement that tho motor cycle will not go
new. It was taken awav and we ffo -not
: know who has been tinkering with it since
' April 16.
Mr. Parker; Of course yon do not. The
rurv can look at the cycle themselves. It
is true there is a sparking plug there, and
how" it got there, goodness knows; there
i? no evidence on that point. Proceeding
he said that if any of the jury possessed
anv knowledge of _ motor cycles, the
cvcle could be examined.
ME. PARKER RESUMES.
; Proceeding after luncheon, Mr. Parker
asked if the jury believed Mrs. Luyer and
Miss Johnson, or Murphy, Roberts, and
the two police constables. If they believed
the two women they must think that the
four men committed
Absolute and Deliberate Perjury.
Those men could not have put their heads
together as suggested, for they'would then
have told the same-'story. The story of
the police was certainly similar in each
case, but that of Murphy and Roberts were
different.” It would bo ah extraordinary;
thing that four persons could deliberately
commit perjury in order to have the aecus-i
ed convicted of the crime. It was far mors
likely that the
Two Women Were Mistaken
in their evidence.
The' motor ear in question was heard]
making a peculiar noise at the "spot close
by where it was subsequently found. The
boy who heard it thought it was between
21 and 1115 that the car passed, and that i
it stopped near the lamp-post outside
where he lived. As a fact the car was
found on. the opposite side of the street.
Jnst before midnight the boy’s brother
saw the car there, and it was there the next
morning at the side of the road. Qobbey,
the milkman, and his nephew also saw it
in the early hours of the morning. Mr.
Lavan had criticised the action of the
Crown in not calling the last mentioned as
witnesses. They could not at that time
have assisted the Crown. It was a dark
night, and it was hard to say that they
could have stated how far the car had
gone before it stopped. When Qobbey saw,
the car
There Were Ho Lights
on it If the Crown had brought those
witnesses to prove that the accused was
there with the car, the first question Mr.
Lavan would have put up would have been,
“Could it not have been a man attempting
to steal the cart” Obviously that conld
have been so. At 4 o’clock and at other
times that morning the car was seen there.
The spot where the ear was found was on
the rout© from Crawley to Osborne PajJ.
If the man seen had been the accused the
spot would, no doubt, be somewhere near
where he would go. The accused had been
asked if there was not a steep hul in Lot-
tns-strect ■where it joined Yincent-stroe%
and be had replied that there was, and
that some cars would_ have to change gears
on account of the hill.
' The evidence of the motor mechanics
showed that the injuries to the car could
have bean caused in a hundred-and-one
different ways. From Loftus-street to
where the ear stopped was practically all
down hill, and it might be that the car
broke down when endeavoring to turn a
corner or negotiate the hill. It was im-
portant to remember that by proceeding up
Loftus-street The occupant of the car would
take one way to Osborne Park, and thus
avoid the glare of the trams along the
main street. He had been further asked
why the Crown had not called
Shilken and Banka.
The police interviewed Banka, but before
they could sec Shilken, Banks had taken
Shilken to Mr. Lavan’s office. When the
police saw him, he said he could not swear
as to the position of the car. Neither
conld Banks swear to it. ShlEten wen*
on to say that at the end of May he went j
over the same road, and it was not till then I
that ho knew the spot where the car had I
stopped- It was suggested that if the car
had been left two feet on the road, as]
stated, it must have been seen, but the boy i
Thompson had indicated that tho car had j
been shifted, and it was apparent that an
attempt had been made to get the ear to >
start. That would account for him not
seeing it, or, if ho saw it, not remembering
The defence bad produced evidence tliat
The Car had Murad.
How did that advance the case any fur-
ther? The witness Gobbey said that he
knew Auburn by sight, and the fact had
been emphasised that the accused wore
, grey trousers on the Saturday morning in
! the bar. Tho person that Gobboy and
‘ Thompson saw had a grey hat on, and also
a heavy overcoat. In addition, the boy
said that the man he saw by the car was a
young m-.n. What was more Hkelv than
! that the person who committed the" crime
| would go , back to the scene for
lone or other of the reasons he


3jl fa
had inchoated. The trousers, the
hat and the overcoat, .together with
tup statement that the person was a
voting man tallied with the accused. What
was more likely than that the murderer
should go back to the car to endeavor to
extricate it, take it awav and clean it.
• Then there was the discovery of
The Button.
Would not a guilty person go back to try
and find it, once bo ascertained ho had
lest the button? As to the reason why
be had not discovered it there, the jury
would remember, the description of the
csr. and the articles contained in it, the
blood that was spilt there, and so on. It
was a dark night and the guiltv person
would not be inclined to strike matches
in bis search for the button. In these
circumstances it would be very easy to
miss it.
! Auburn had stated that the jigger but-
ton had come off some time previouslv
“ when ho was in the driver’s seat of a car.
lie was probably in the front of the car.
and if he had lost a button previously it
; was quite possible that he would not
■ think of searching in the back of the car
for it but would search in the front por-
tion. Then the question of the
Number Plates Had Never Been Disposed
I Of.
j It was possible that, after abandpning the
csr at about 11 pan.. the accused would
I not like to he found tinkering with it,
ip a street like Vincent-strcet, for natu-
rally people would come along and offer
assistance which might have led to the
discovery of the blood. Tho accused per-
j son would probably remember the plates
;and go back, for-them. Had the plates
been left in the car the number “P. 38”
would have guicklv led to the identity of
the owner being ascertained, and the whole
■ thing would have come to light. The
j plates represented a most important fea-
. tore to be disposed of, but they had not
been .found vet. A murderer would change
his.clothes, for he would not come back,
..to the same place in the clothes in which i
he committed the murder.
i It might be asked, ‘‘Why did he wear
■the overcoat?” The answer to that was
that ,he .would put on the coat because
there was blood in the car, and the
Wearing o’f the Coat
would prevent his clothes from being
stained ..by . that blood. Evenhad-ho been
, seen pear the car the coat would riot have
1 connected . him with the crime,, because,
afhrt from one small spot on it, there
j.was no blood on.it. It had also been sug- )
. ertsted that if the story were, correct about
the coat, the a raised would endeavor to
destroy it bv burning it. How long would
if fake to bum a coat of that de-
scription, and what sort of fire would
if require to achieve that object?
It,was not nearly so easy a matter as one
might think, especially if one was anxious
about it; in fact, it was extraordinarily
difficult. The coat was a woollen coat, and
woo! merely frizzled up. How was such
.a coat to be
Burnt at Midnight in Secrecy?
The thing was impossible.
Dr. Atkinson was severely and minutely
.cross-examined by Mr. Lavan,-whose rea-
son was easy to see, as to whether the
doctor had iri fact carried out the tests ac-/
cording to the scientific methods. Quito
obviously, Mr. Lavan desired to show that
Dr. Atkinson could not prove one thing
or the other. But Dr. Atkinson said tliat
with regard to the suit there' was blood,
because the benzaline test had an
Immediate Reaction for Blood,
and because that reaction occurred in con-
nection with the spots on the trousers and
the coat. .Although the accused told the
: police that thera was no blood on the suit
when he -washed it, he now told the .piry
: that he washed it twice, and that once
there had been blood on it. Moreover,
water was the best solvent for blood. The
suggestion was that there was an extraor-
dinary amount of_ blood, on the coat fiom
accused’s arm. Regarding tne ear, silent-
ly to the left of the drivers’ seat there
had been a considerable
Quantity of Blood.
On the back of accused’s coat there was a
big blob of blood exactly where one would
expect to find it, if he got that blob when
he took the wheel. .
There was no signs of blood anywhere in
the sleeve of the coat, whereas if accused’s
arm had bled ho must have got some blood
on the sleeve when pulling his arm put.
There was absolutely no explanation what-
ever regarding the blood on the back ox the
coat.
Mr. La van; There was no blood on the
back of the coat.
Mr. Parker said that he had just pointed
it out. in Dr. Atkinson’s opinion that
was blood. Accused said he went home
that night, and did not go out again, until
the next morning. Mr. Lavan asked why
ho (Mr. .Parker) had not cross-examined
as to that. Why waste time? . How
could such an assertion be disproved? Ob-
viously Auburn would merely repeat it.
Mr. and Mrs. Auburn were both asked,
for an obvious reason, whether the accus-
ed would not have to pass thdia room in
order to go to bed. They said yes, and
that he came in that night at the usual
time.
His Honor: The mother said .that.
Mr. Parker, said he was assuming that tho
father said it to. Ho f wah
quite prepared to assume that if the father
and mother had been asked, did the accused
stay in bed all that night, they would have
replied yes.
Mr. Lavan: Such a suggestion as that
he came out again has never J>een made
during all these months. ■
Mr. Parker asked what did it matter
whether Auburn came out again or not?
His Honor; It is purely theory on your
part, Mr. Parker. There is no evidence
whatever.
Mr. Lavan: The description of grey trou-
sers and a heavy coat and a grey hat
Would Pit Me..
His Honor: I take it the description was
not meant to identfy anybody.
Mr. Parker: I quite agree, but it could
have been the accused, and he could have
come out. j
Counsel asked what young man could
not get out without being noticed at 3
o’clock in tho morning, if he wanted to?
He would point out to the jujv Jtiiat Mr.
Lav.ajj had said that if Auburn had eo
desired be could have washed the suit in
\ the bathroom that night. If be could
, wash clothes without being noticed, eoo|d
he not get out without being noticed?
Referring to the bleeding of the arm,,Mr.
Parker said that he had asked the accused,
after he (accused) had said that his arm
bled when he was working, if the Old coal
produced
Had Any Blood On It.
;He said it had been to the cleaners. Coun-
sel had shown it to the jury, and it was a
mass of grease. He (counsel) would sav
that the arm did not bleed nearly as much
as it was said to have bled. The medical
evidence to an extent'supported that. Dr-
Moss had said that it would bleed if given
a knock; so would his or the jury V—it
all depended on the degree of seventy of
the knock. They would remember that
there were
Etevea Tiny Spots of Blood ■
on the hat, which, it was suggested, were
caused by his swinging hi earn, Neither
Miss Forrest nor the mother had ever seen
blood in his room. Let the jury compare
the blood spots on the car with the spots
on accused’s hat and see if they could not
understand how they got on the hat
It was strange that accused’s bat should
have spots of blood on it corresponding
largely with £Be spots on the motor car. If
the blood had come upon the hat through
the accused swinging his arm the spots
would have
Appeared in Blobs,
and not in the form in which they then
appeared. The overcoat might have been
anywhere in the car. The evidence of one


a/y/'jv-
'witness was that whea’the car left O’Neil’s
house the overcoat had been thrown over
the baek of the seat on the left of the dri-
ver. Had it been in that position when
the murder was committed there 'would
have been no blond upon it, because it
would have been protected by the man who
committed the murder. The coat might
• have been in many parts of the car with-
out getting blood upon it. There was no
blood on the petrol ease, and it might have
been Under that. After the Wes tana-road
j incident, the accused said to the detec-
j tives, “Do not take me to Osborne Park.
|lt will kill my mother. Put me inside, and
j I will admit everything.” >f
' It Might Appear Strange' l
that the detectives did not put-t* -burn in-
-1 side. At that time Dct.-Sg) s '' Purdue
thought he was only an acconr ’,«e.
His Honor: Are you sure or-that?
Mr. Parker; I thought he sail so.
Mr. Lavan: Your Honor ashed him what
, he meant by that. _
Mr. Parker:,He certainly treated him as
I an accomplice,
j His. Honor: He did say that,
j Mr. Lavan: And Mr. Parker very quick-
! ly seined upon it.
Mr. Parker said that at that time there
, was little or no evidence against the ac-
: ensed. He certainly had handled the coat
i and the Westana-road spot had been found
jby him. The detectives had the button,
j bnt did not know where it wood fit Had
they put accused inside he could have gpno
back on everything he had said. He had
gone back on a great deal of what he had
said already. The detectives did not
know that evidence as to the washing of
I the clothes, the plates, and the iron bar
j would be forthcoming. They were after
The Real Culprit.' '
Mr.. Lavan: The matter about the ac-
. complice was heard on the Saturday when
Detective-Sergeant Purdue was tccotv
strncting the crime. ■
After our report of the trial of George
Auburn on the charge of having murdered
Jehu closed yesterday, Mr. Parker,
the Crown Prosecutor, continued his ad-
dress. He said:—
Mr. Parker; I am speaking of the Fri-
day night preceding, when he still thought
that. At that stage Sgt, x Purdue still
thought that Auburn was an accomplice.
Mr. Lavan had refereed to the £5OO bait
displayed on the police poster., That pos-
ter, however,, holds out that reward and a
pardon to any accomplice not being the
ferson who actually committed the offence,
here was the reason why the detectives
did not put Auburn inside*that night. It,
was true that an accomplice seldom if ever
pare the real person away, so that if the
accused had admitted everything, but the
real murderer was not secured, his
Month Would Have Been dosed.
Bss Honor: Set. Purdue gave a reason
for not taking that remark seriously.
Mr. Parker: That refereed to another
remark later on. However, Purdue asked ■
Auburn' if, when he said “Put me inside
and I will admit everything,” he meant it,
hut Auburn did not answer. Purdue then,
told him. not to say things he did not mean,
and again Auburn did not answer. - Pur-
due’s actions were quite fair, and he did!
not put Auburn inside. Had ho done so 1
there would have been a fearful outcry
about the “third degree,” and the terrible
Jncthods of the police. At that stage there;
were no grounds upon which Auburn could:
have been arrested.
Later on. they went out to the hotel and
found the suit, which was not cut about,
as it was now, but was intact and recently
iWaahed. Mrs. Auburn had said that the,
suit had been washed in March, and had
only been on. the line for one day. The 1
•ceased said it had taken one and a W? 1
weeks to dry, /That was an extraordinary!
state of affairs, seeing it would not lake
weeks to dry in the middle of winter. The'
evidence, was that Auburn was accustomed t
to pressing his clothes every second day i
or so, yet that particular suit remained ;
impressed for days. Why was that? It i
was because he knew that it would be use- ‘
Jess for an amateur to try and press a
. suit in those conditions and make it fit
for him to wear. Auburn had explained
the reason for washing the suit variously to
different persons. He had said
had washed a dyed waistcoat with some
silk shirts. Would that have happened?
(What he possibly did was to wash the
suit under the tap and then leave it to
soak. As to the evidence regarding the
loss of the button, Miss Sadler said she
had seen him in the suit about two or
three weeks before, but was the accused
, the sort of man who would go about with-
out buttons on his garments? It was cu-
rious that that particular suit should
Suddenly Become So Dirty.
Mias Sadler said that the suit he was
wearing seemed tb be new, like the one
be was wearing on Friday night. He did
not suggest that Miss Sadler had commit-
ted perjury, but how could she say that,
seeing that the accused had had the suit
pressed twice since that time.
Mr. Lavan: You cannot comment on and
criticise your own witness,
Mr. Parker : Certainly I can. If 1 could
not impeach "the credit of my own wit-
nesses it would be impossible to ever put
the facts before a jury. -
His Honor: Bnt it is not very usual
Mr. Parker: The Chief Justice said tW
5t was right for the Crown to do this, be-
cause they very often had to call witnesses
Who did not swear exactly to the evidence
they were supposed to give. Yon cannot
call witnesses to disprove your own wit-
nesses’ evidence, but you may criticise
them. ■
Mr. Lavan: The most elementary autho-
rities say you cannot criticise your own
witnesses.
Mr. Parker: That is not so, but yon can-
not call evidence in rebuttal.
His Honor: What do yon object to Mr
T O * * .
Lavan?.,


Mr, Lavan; The statement that Miss
Sadler said it was the suit he was wear-
ing. _ ■
His Honor: Miss Sadler said that .the
suit he has on was very much like the
one he had on that night, and that most
ho perfectly obvious from the facts. Do
not forget that the accused has had hia
teuits cleaned and pressed twice, and it
is natural that the suit would look like, a
new one.
Mr. Parker said that it was very diffi-
cult to tell the difference between the
suits because the accused was always clean-
ing and pressing them. The accused claim-
ed that they were of a different cut,
hut the fact remained that they
were made by the same people.
Thus there would not be much difference
in the cut. Fancy soaking a dyed waist-
coat —not washing it, but soaking it! Ac-
cused said he wore these two suits alter-
nately, and that up to three months ago
they were quite good. Yet he also stated
that he always wore the suit which the jury
had seen when cleaning cars, and that he
never wore the “old coat,” which was
unite as good as the one he now had on.
The accused’a whole wardrobe was in Court
except the grey suit, and there was
No Sign of Blood
bn any of his suite except the one as to
which Dr. Atkinson had given evidence.
Neither did examination of the inside of
the waistcoat sleeve show any blood, of
which there must have been signs if ac-
cused’s arm had bled as alleged. There
would have been marks of blood from the
drawing-off of the - waistcoat. Unques-
tionably the accused’s hat, which wa? m
Court, was the hat he wore on that Fri-
day night, because admittedly it was the
only hat he had got. There was the se-
quence of facts, that the accused had a
* Suit Covered with Blood,
adn a hat covered with human blood. ..No
doubt the person who committed the crime
would have exactly the same.
Regarding the link button, accused told
the police that he had sewn the button on,
and in cross-examination he would not
swear that he did not sew the link button
on away from the back of the other button,
and not immediately behind the other but-
ton. Looking at the hole in the coat, one
could see for oneself that the button, when
sewn, on away from the back of the other
button, was not sewn on through the can-
vas, but only through the material, and of
course would easily pull away._ A curious
thing about the hole was that it had what
was called a tail, and that the piece, of
material on the link button had the tail to
correspond. It would be
Very Wonderful to Find
another button puled off another coat to
fit that hole.
(At this stags there was some diseus-
jjpon between counsel and his Honor as to
,sie ecect of the expert evidence given fey
gSw master tailors who were called.)
Mr. Parker next dealt with the evidence
- of the witness Allen, the motor cycle taxi-
driver. He had said that he saw
Oar No. 3481
In Roe-street about 12.25 a.m. •_ Yet he
had told other witnesses, including Mr.
Lloyd and the two constables Parker and
Hickson, that he was not sure whether It
was 3081 or 3481. Why should he re-
member the number? He sat behind the
ear for 20 minutes, and although the tyres
were affixed to it in a very, crude way he
eould not say how they-were fixed. Wfeen_
ATloti spoke to Mr. Lloyd he said he knew
what the number was, and that ** ,' waa
O’Neil’s car. In giving evidence, how-
ever, the witness said he did not know
O’Neil or anything about him. The jury j
must _ ~ i
Judge the Value of .Such Evidence
for themselves. The jury saw the two
policemen who said what had occurred
with Allen. Did they not look honest,
and truthful, and had they been shaken
in their testimony? What mdneement
could they or Mr. Lloyd have had for giv-
| ing false evidence? Those witnesses were
only" available tothe- Crown atier Alien
had Erven his evidence. The accused waa
a mechanic,. and had taught people to
drive. , He was able to control a car in an
emergency. „ He would be able to take a
ear off , the road and stop it almost at once.
Undoubtedly the person who committed the
murder yvas one who knew how to control
a ear. , Mr. Lavan
Had Blackguarded the Detectives
up hill and down dale, and in every way.
He had said that Detective-Sergeant Pur-
due had' adopted a pugnacious attitude as
soon as he had been asked & question. The
detective did not oonsid&r that certain
testimony was evidence, and said that he
(Mr. Ptcfeer) had instructed him accord-
ingly. He (counsel) had conducted the
inquiry the inquest, agd it rested with,
him as t bringing forward what evidence
was avail: da. Qobbey, Shilken, Banks, and
others hat., not been brought forward by
the Crown- Detectives were not allowed
to get a man in and offer him any induce-
ment, such as a reward, for him to speak.
He (Mr. Parker) took sole responsibili-
ty for not adducing that particu-
ular evidence. Mr. Larvan adduced it and
then blackguarded the detectives for not
doing so.
Mr. Lavan; He spat it eat in anger. I
Mr. Parker; Who did all the yelling,
burking, and so on ? Who got angry? Do-
tec tive-Sergt. Purdue was tackled by Mr.
Lavan, and in the witness-box
stated' he had no complaint against the
detectives., ’
His Honor: He did wot pot & in that
way.
Mr. Parker- In effect he said that. The
accused realised that if he had complained
be (Mr, Parker) would have taken him
all through his statements, practically all
the contents of which he had
Repeated To His Friends.
The accused could not point to anything he
had ' told the detectives he had not »»id
outside. Fancy complaining that m-rnnmd
eculd not get anything to eatl Hie was
in his own home and only had to ask fox
it. If the detectives had been offered a
meal at 10 pm. would they have refused
it? The police wore always readv for a
meal, he thought. (Laughton) It was
suggested the accused had been subjected
Ito an extraordinary gruelling. The detec-
tives themselves had eaten nothing dmiiy
those hours. It was seven days after the
crime, and the pnhlio ware becoming rest-
less Perhaps some people were 1
Making Rather Nasty Suggestions
about “duds” in the poiiea force.
Mr. Lavan; We do not know
Mr. Parker: Mr. Lavan does not agree,
Mr. Lavan: Not in thin ease.
Mr. Parker said the detectives were anx-
ious and were getting on with the work 1
without delay. Thw accused himself had f
not complained—was counsel justified, l
in blackguarding the detectives?
It was grossly unfair to tackle a man in
his profession when he eould not answer
back. He (Mr._ Parker) felt it keenly
That sort of thing happened time and
again. He asked the jury not to judge the
j accused in, the light of the attack upon the
detectives by his counsel. Put to take the
1 facts jts printed to them,
i He took tfio opportunity of emph«S«»ny
protesting against the
Constant Blackguarding
;of detectives every time they came into
Court._ In this instance the detectives
had given the accused every opportunity
to make his position dear. If tho offl-'
' cials had acted unfairly or even in on or-
dinary way. they would probably have run
him in straight away; on the contrary,
they let him go. What complaint could
; there be about that conduct? On the fol-
: lowing Monday Auburn saw Munson and
j after that he did not say a word. He
Rang Up His Girl
and tpld her not to speak. Subsequently
he went to the detectives and told them
he would not say anything further. The
detectives even then let him go, sod for’
that they had been blackguarded. If any-
’ • V- l-?- .« '■» ‘<» •* «• . !


one was 10 do macKgoarueo, ix was nun*
self (Me. Parker), because the detectives
were not the sola arbiters of when a man
was to be arrested, and that was the post*
tion in this particular instance. Ser-
geant
Fnrdao Had Sam Sawnrely Grit: sed
beeanse he said that the tracks were not
apparent. What the sergeant did say was
that the tracks were apparent after they
had been pointed oat. Yet Mr. Levan
had blackguarded Purdue for his state-
ment on that point. He had asked the ac-
cused if he had not had to use banksia nuts
to get a line, and he had admitted that he
bad done so. If was obvious that anything
was apparent once it had beep pointed out.
Why should the detectives invent the
statement that the track went “in here
of iron. Miss Sadler had definitely stated
and out there”? Then there was the bar
that when sbe asked Auburn what the bar
was for he had replied
“To Hit Yon Over The Head.” !
She went to pick up the iron bar, think-
ing it was “The Daily News” rolled up,
and it was so heavy she thought the par-
cel contained iron. In cross-examination
Miss Sadler was naturally anxious to do'
something to assist the accused, and die 1
said the parcel might have contained wood.'
She had stated before that she thought:
it was iron, because of the weight, and the
evidence showed that it had been left in
the baby’s chair. Would the jury accept
Moir’s statement that he often brought
short lengths of piping home, and left
them on the baby’s chair for two or three
days at a*time? Moir admitted he had not
taken homo any piping on April 4, and
therefore it must have been taken home
on April 3, and left in the baby’s chair
that night. Why should Mias Sadler
Concoct Her Story? ■
If lengths of piping were taken honm, as
Moir suggested, why were they not pro-
duced? The reason was obvious that if
seme such exhibit were brought forward,
he would bo permitted to recall a witness
to ascertain if the exhibit were anything
like the iron bar. That would have finish-
ed the matter. Like the number plates,
however, the bar could not be found. Thev
P-ere the two things they would most like
to see. yet they were missing, despite the
fact that they were available on the Fri-
day night. Neither had those articles been
looked for.
Regarding the Proclamation '
placed before the accused bv the detectives,
Auburn had asked about the word “Ad-
vised” in the proclamation, wherein it
was set out that the Governor would be
advised to errant a pardon to an accom-
plice other than the person who actually
committed the crime.
Mr. Lavan; Aubur* never said that he
did not like the word advised. There is
pr» such evidence. , _ „. _ .
Hi, Honor: Mv recollection was that he
asked about the word “advised.”
Mr. Lavaix: Later he said there was a
conversation about it. ,
Mr. Barker; Why discuss the word
“advised” if it did not crop up? Why
worry about looking it up in the diction-
ary it Auburn were an innocent man!
Proceeding, he said that at that time the
detectives still thought Auburn was an ac-
complice, and they wanted the rear cul-
prit. Was il not extraordinary when
they thought of the ‘
Odds Against an Innocent person
finding the overcoat and the spot at Wcat-
ana-roadl Let the jury work it oat on
a population basis 1 ... ,
Bo far his (Mr. Parker’s)
to the jury were to a great extent dueet
evidence: The _..
Strong OjJonnßrtantMl xmeaem
amounted almost to demonstration. AU
the direct evidence as to the coat and the
mot pointed to one thing, that the accused
■was the person- Now, aa to the probatoU-
ties of the case pat up for the defence, Mr.
I tjavan had failed entirely to grapple with
the strong facts. It was in vain for Mr,
Lavan to attempt to grapple with them;
they were too strong for any advocate.
However, accused’s counsel had endeavored
to divert the jury’s attention from the
probabilities of the case- Probabilities,
suggestions,- theories, sospirions, and im-
probabilities were -worth coarideratian. But
they were worth nothing against the facte.
Mr. Laron had attempted to show that it
was highly improbable the accused, would
commit tins murder. The Crown agreed
with that view. It Vss highly improbable
that any such murder should be committed,
and highly improbable that any man at
; any number of men. should coo unit such a
i murder. .
If there was any occasion when a man
might consider himself perfect safe, it was
surely when he was travelling m ms own
motor car in the mstropoJuL as O’Neal haa
been apparently doing. Thin was, MHV
marked by Mr. Imran, a roost _____
TjyfcraorrtfnarrTly Brutal SIA BODUb
! jßnrder;
and then was no difficulty in showingthat
it was in the highest degree nnprobabte
that a man or any number of men should
contemplate such a crime. But unques-
tionably the crime was committed, and
there was no doubt that, after it had been
committed, the car was taken and was
abandoned. Mr. Laron had suggested
the murder was for revenge; bat if it
had been for revenge, the murderer would
not have gone away in the ear; he would
have abandoned the deceased and lie ear
cogethea land would have got away na
quickly as possible. . .
Thera were a number at circumstances
which applied equally to the murderer and
to the accused. Some of them were eon-
-1 siderably stronger than others, but nevwv
! t>».lpga all pointing in the cam direction.
; Those circumstances were*—
(1) Murderer had blue serge suit on
night of murder beeanse.. at material on
■bank. - : . .
Bo did “A.” w ...
(2) “Jl” had suit with jteet batten on
tb«t night. _
So had “A." (Both his Him suits
i—
; minus jigger button.
-So did “A.” ... .
(4) Murderer's coat buttons womd bo of
a certain make, the holes -of which arc bev-
elled (or countersunk).
So were “-A’a.” __ .
(6) had Ks jigger button af-
fixed without being sown efa. the canvas.
So bad “A,” ■ ~ .
(sa) The murderer’s button polled out
with material adhering of a . tnsogriar
shape, or with a tail.
Bo did “A’c” _
(6) The murderer would appear to nve
out Leederville way (because car being
taken in that direction).
“A” lives out that way.
(7) Murderer, after ear breaking down,
would probably board a tram near Yinceat-
street.
“A” boarded tram at next corner,
(8) Murderer’s plans would miscarry ww-
ing to O’Neil's car breaking dojra.
"AV’ arrangements for next mOTping
miscarry.
(9) Murderer would board a car shortly
after 1115 (because car broke down at
that time).
“A” gets on carat about 3X30.
(10) Murderer would go to keep aa ap-
pointment with O’Neil, arriving in town
between 7 and 8 pm. (as O’Neil left homo
about 7.20 pm.).
“A” left Moir’s about ?, aad would
arrive in town round about 7.40.
£11) Murderer would be one badly in
need of a car.
“A” badly wanted a car next day, aad
bad difficulty in getting a ear.
(12) Murderer would be going on a. corns.
trv trip (remember O’Neil’s tyres and pet-
rol). , • .
“A” was going on a country trip.
(13) Murderer was going to pet a ear;
got it, and it brph®
Mim Sadler, “A told bee be- was at-
-1 tending to »,«* that broke down.


0-4) Murderer would ’be a ear driver
with full knowledge of how tocontrol sad
stop a car in emergency.
So is “A.”
(14a) Murderer would conceal the fleet
that ho was going to get a ear from the
rank.
So did ‘■‘A." Ho told a lie to the
Moira. Bight up. txQ his pis™ miscarried
ho was getting the loan of a car.
(35) Murderer would presumably have
no money to get a car.
“A” conld not find the money next day.
(Iff) Murderer would get blood splashed
all oyer his clothes.
“A” admits he had washed his clothes
on account of blood.
(17) Murderer on taking driver's seat
would get blood stains on his back.
So there is on “A’s” coat,
(18) Murderer would have blood all
over his hat, including the top.
So did "A.”
(19) Murderer would change Ida clothes
next day.
So did “A.”
(20) Murderer would wash. Ids clothes
soon hfter.
So did “A.” ’
(21) Murderer would have to have some
crook number plates especially as O’Neil's
were taxi plates of a special design (black
upon a white ground).
“A” had some ready.
(23) Murderer would hay® some weapon
ready.
“A” had aa iron bar that night.
(23) Murderer got away with O'Neil’s
overcoat, and would have it that night.
“A" had his overcoat that night.
(24) Murderer would know the scene of
the murder.
.“A” was able to find it within 60 hours.
(25) Murderer would no doubt be un-
strung after such a terribly brutal murder.
“A” had to ask M'Kenrie to accom-
pany him to the hotel, as he was f«el™g
crook.
(26) Murderer would be a mSh of a cold,
cool, cynical, and calculating nature. ’
They had seen Auburn in the box. Did
they think him of that nature?
(27) Murderer would avoid ffiseusahig
the murder. *
“A” avoided discussing it as far as
possible on the Wagin trip, and had asked
Holmes “What murder 1 ?”
(28) Murderer would be unable to find
anyone who had seep him between 8 and
10 p.m..
So was “A.’
“There are 30 circumstances,” conclud-
ed Mr. Parker, “which apply equally to
the murderer and the accused (5a and 14a
make up the 30). The evidence is entire-
ly circumstantial, but circumstantial evi-
dence when derived from
Admitted Facta
—and there were many in this case—-is
most reliable, because, if invented, it would
not fit in with the facts. The law does
not demand that you act on certainties;
you must act upon the evidence. The law
asks for no more or no less. If you have
I any reasonable doubt ia your minds the
accused is entitled to go free. Ask ypur-
! selves what is the eamalatjy® effect on your
! minds of the many varied and indepen-
dent pieces of evidence* aB pointing In cue
direction, and tending
To Implicate the Accused
and the accused alone. If yon think there :
has been reasonable proof of the accused’s
guilt, the law demands that yen give ypnr
verdict, with cmnag^aadregardlfssof its
tonsequenCeS,
THE SUMMING UP.
On resuming this morning, his Honor
prefaced his summing up withthesc words:
"I hope the rase wall tbrtch to-day, _ I£
not, I wiU at to-morrow,"
Addressing the junr, his Honor then
said: —I have no doubt, gentlemen of the
jury; that in considering the evidence given
;ia this ease you win pay regard to your
oaths, and listen to nothing, and hearken
to nothing, beyond the evidence you have
heard in this Court The acgpsed is
charged with the wilful murder of Joint
George O’Neil in the State of Western
Australia. On the quest km of law, I
would inform yon that any person who nn-
lawfully kills another is _ guilty of a crime
called wilful murder, with certain excep-
tions that do not arise in this ease; and a
person who unlawfully Ells another, in-
tending to cause his death, is guilty of wxl-
; ful murder. Mr. Lavau himself has com-
! merited upon the awful injuries the un-
fortunate man O'Neil referred, injuries that
he stated clearly indicated an act of re-
veage. Theta can be so doubt, J think,
in your minds that O'Neil was
‘Unlawfully Silled,
and that the person who killed him intend-
ed to cause hie death. That seem* to be
beyond dispute- It is not necessary for
yon to come to the conclusion that the
cosed inflicted the ipjnriM that caused ffls
death of O'Neil. If he was aiding another
person with the common object of killing
O'Neil he is guilty of nmrdpe. I merely
mention this, because Hr. Parker put it
forward to you that tnis case has not gone
on the assumption of any third person ba-
, ing present, but that the accused is the
person who killed O'Neil. It will be
necessary, 1 regret, for mo to go through
a good deal .of the evidence. X will bo aa
short as possible. It is now the end of
the fourth week since the ease commenced.
It may be that some important detail of
j the evidence brought before you, and con-
I neeted with important issues in the esse,,
has been overlooked. I shall endeavor,
therefore, to bring before you any matter
: that may have been forgotten, Yon must
recollect also, in listening to my remarks,
that it i?
My Duty to Assist Yon.
If I express an opinion, as I may inad-
-1 vertently do, it is not my opinion that mate
’ tera. If yon have a different opinion, that
. is the opiinan which shonM guide yon. And
yon must always recollect that you are
the sole judges of the facts in this case. I
may point out facts to yog, and I may
point put evidence, but it is your province
alone to decide what facts ore true in thp
various views which have been placed be-
fore you by counsel.
On the morning of .April S a workman
named Julian going to his work discovered
near Crawley Bay, on the Perth-Premantle-
xoad,
The Body of a Kan
lying in the water. It was about 7 ao.
He reported to the police, and Police Con-
stable Banoear cams upon the scene. It
may be desirable to remind you of what
he states he saw. Hie body was clothed
except for the hat, and the cost, and the
'coat Was wrapped round both feet of the,
body, np towards the knees. The con-
stable examined the body, and he has de-
scribed to yon the injuries, which Dr. Mc-
Kenzie has also described in his evidence.
A sum of only 7s 3d was found on the body,
found in one of the trousers pockets, and
the hip pocket was turned inside out-
The constable saw marks leading ’ back
from flic shore towards the Crdwley-road
as if some object had been dragged along.
He followed them for about 70 yards to
the road, and he noticed some
Blood Upon the Tracfcs,
and especially on the tram rails,. He raid
the Mood was very visible on each of the
rails There was a drag mark ending in
what is known as the Crawley-road, the
road winch goes to the University, and
there the constable noticed some motor oar
tracks, and some of these tracks wen very
clearly shown as being the tracks of new
tyres. He followed those tracks back to
about 15 yards in the direction of Crawley,
towards Crawley Point. There, ho said,
they finally turned round and came back to-
wards the
The body was taken from there by ffie
police to the morgue, and it was identified
by a taxi driver named Cooper. There


yam be no doubt about tbo jqentrtlcartion. i
Two pocket handkerchiefs were found upon
the body, one being marked “John O'Neil”
and the other “J. O'N.” There is no
doubt that the body discovered in Crawley
Bay was the body of Jolm'O'NSl,
Hr. M'Kcnzie saw the body on the Sun-
day morning. . Here there, may be a slight j
error in the evidence,- which, however, is j
only of importance for this purpose, that |
in the coarse of Sunday morning Dr. Mc-
Kenzie could not give any opinion as to
when rigor mortis had set In. 80, as far
.as the doctor's evidence is concerned, yon
cannot fix by medical evidence the-time
Whm the Murder Took Place,
. The woxmda have been described by Dr.
M'Kcnzdo. A report has been put a, one
of the exhibits, and sworn to by the doctor
in the box; and from flat report yon can
gather what was the nature of the wounds.
The brain was terribly battered about.
There was a terrible wound somewhere" on
the back left-hand side, through which, if
I recollect rightly, the brain could be sera:
and all those wounds, with the exception of
one which I shall mention a little later;
could, according to the doctor's evidence,
. have been caused by an instrument like a
cold chisel, or a big iron bolt with a square
but on the end of it—some heavy instru-
ment, not necessarily very heavy; the doc-
; tor describes it as an instrument of some
i weight, and struck with sufficient force to
| inflict the wounds which were seen. The
; doctor said that all the wounds except the
] one on the forehead could have bear in-
j dieted by an instrument of that nature.
1 The wound upon the forehead, he said,
was one which might have been caused by
O'Neil’s face coming in contact with the
Jagged edges of the car. But that wound
Was not a serious one, and wo do not know
when it happened. It may have been be-
fore O’Neil’s death or after His death. It
was not the wound which caused his death.
With the exception of that wound, all the
wounds on the head, which
. Almost Battered the Hoad to Pieces,
could have been caused, according to Dr.
M'Kenric, by an instrument of the nature
I have mentioned to yon.
It is almost unnecessary to say. Dr. Mc-
Kenzie told you, that those wounds could
not have been self-inflicted, and I think
there can be no doubt in the mind of any-
body that O’Neil was unlawfully killed
and wilfully murdered. The question you
have to decide is, who is the murderer? As
regards the tracks where the motor car
turned to fee_ water in which the body was
found Detective-Sergeant Purdue gave evi-
dence to the effect tha the car had turned
round to face the Fremantlc-road
again before the body was taken out.
In indicating the tracks he mentioned one
pair of tracks as being those of now tyres,
and the other pair as being those of well-
worn tyres,'and the reason he said that the
ear had been turned before the bodv was
taken out of it was that the
Blood Stains on the Car
were on the right-hand side of the mud-
guard. Had the car not been turned they
should have appeared on the other side.
It is common ground in this case that the
number of O'Neil’s car is 3481. .
Oh the evening of April 4 O’Neil made
his preparations. Thcvwere prenaratb is
not lor the taking of a short trip, but a ,
trip of ,»mo considerable length, or, at any
.rate, duration. He had the car overbanl-
! cd and the tank was filled. The old- tyres
I on ths back wheels were taken off and put
"on the front wheels, while on the back ■
wheels two new tyres were fitted. That .
corresponded with the evidence of fee de--
'lectives in regard to the nature of the
tracks discovered down at Cia-wley. Then
there were various things put in the car—' I
a spare jack, a spare tin oi tebaacating oil, j
Mud a tm of petrol. The ear was over- -
hauled generally. On that afternoon, at,
about o o’clock, a nwa named M‘ Cattas,
father-in-law fee O’Neil, saw D’NeH mak-
ing his preparations fear the trip, and as-
. sisted him to making them. He afeu gave
evidenc© as to tfee prepaaratipn- Qoggla*
were taken; boS- that goggles would I**
used by O'Neil -about the city or even o»
a abort trip} they -were for ns© oa a lon#
trip. Then O’Neil took a suit-case, shar-
ia# materials and everything to indicate
that
Tbs 'Unfortunate Man
was going on a trip wMeh would occupy
several days.
Now there is on® point about SE'Cal-
hon's evidence, a fact that has been dis-
cussed const cbrrahlv in this ease. M f Cal-
lam told us that O'Neil took an overcoat
wife tern. That coat has been
in this Court as bis epat, and 51 •' CsdhmT
tzya it was ever the back of the seat, oa
the left-hand aide of O'Neil the doves,
Jdr. lyrran has argued that the only-
place ■where human blood baa been proved
to exist on that ©oat is on the enfL There
mar he other stains on the eoat which look
Etc blood, hut are not blood. Mr, Lavaira
is that if that cost wa» where
It was when O'Neil left, on the left-hand
aide of the driver, over the back of the
seat, it utsst have been covered with Mood.
That may or may not bo correct. Yon
must bear in mind that the prohaMßtaw
are that fbe
Person Who Committed rise Jffnx flat ,
would have been on the left-hand side oi
the driver. But the coat ntay not have
remained in the position in ■which it was
when O’Neil took on his pasaeaget
O'Neil most have had . a passenger, and
the passenger, getting into the ear. Bright
have thought it would be more comfort-
able for him, or more convenient, if the
coat was pot in the back of the can. I
mention this incidentally to show that _ I
do not think -you can give very much in-
dication from the coat merely because it
is not covered in blood. We do not know
where the coat was; it is possible, although
it may be improbable, that it remained
where it was put when O’Neil started. _
O'Neil left home at 7.20 on the evening
cf April 4. The next we hear of that car
is from a™n named Tracy. Tracy had
been in town on a motor cycle. He left
town at about 10 o'clock that night. The
time,-as indeed all the times in this ease,
is estimated. Between lOJIS and 1030
pun, according’ to his evidence, Tracy
was going home towards Nedlands. Wheat
he had got down the Nedlands road about
100 yards, beyond the Subiaeo entrance to
the park, he was on his left-hand side,
and there was a ear coming up on the
« iig6t-hand side, which is the
' side for a car coming up. When this car
was about 35 yards Irom Tracy the car
swerved across to the left-hand side, which
was its proper side. _ Tracy was rather
indignant with the driver of the car that
h * should have been on ■ the righthand
side. He was a Jittle annoyed at it, and
lie called out to the driver and noted the
nqmbear of the car which he saw was
* Car 3481.
Bo Che first actual knowledge we have _of
this ear from the time it left O'Neil’s
place st 7.20 pun. was at 100 yards beyond
the Subiaeo entrance to the * park,
and between 10J.5 and 1030 run.
It was probably nearer 10.15 than 1030.
Nothing more is heard of that car, ac-
cording to the_ evidence of the Growp—and
it is not at ail certain it was the car then
—until about midnight. There was a boy
named Edwin Collins —yon saw him ip the
j box and probably came to the conclusion
I that he quite understood what he was say-
-1 ing and what he was doing—who lives in
Tin Cent-street, and he told you that on that
night he was over at _ the picture show
• doing something to a bicycle in the office
of that picture show building which is
i close to the Leedervillc reserve. He told
you that he looked at the clock in the
office and it was then 1030 pun. He says
that he went across to his home on the
other side of the street, got into bed, and
about 15 minutes later —of course that is
only an estimate, as it could'only he when
he was lying in bed—-ho


7/^V'
tiga-OBii. tarhad. off -flight jiaghte. afe Tth*.
i 1 bettey-strect, Aftor ©hag along Kiawinat-
l<sy-sttaet h» dsoppH hiepaartner near the
- lake on. it® vest m» of Ymceat-stoe*t.-Alt-
ter be &ft town. that night he rajmmhee-
ed meeting a cap—a Ford—on, Kaatasy-
parade. He snail that ia. Kim&tfriey^towfe
. be also just another feed cae, mid
! this was stationary. Thaa ws» to show
- that he had observed certah* ears. Efe
then went on and crossed Oxfiaedetzackasui .
proceeded down Yiacsnt-stcftet gr* l '' n TC aaat- 1
' tie says there was j
Ho Car ia Vtocaatojcrcet
stationary, This was jast after ha hmji
~ passed Oxford-street, He said there was-
no ear there at aIL Shilkea. was. the only
man with, him when he crossed 'Vincond-
. street, and he gives- evidence to the same
effect. He said it was about IAiS to I2JO I
! ’ Heard a motor uar. 4 —= -
His attention was drawn to it because the
car made’ a peculiar noise and ho describes
it as a “barring noise.” You may at-
tach some importance to his description
of it, but it ia not easy to describe the
noise of a car, and the noise has already
been described by various witnesses in vari-
ous ways. Anyhow, the boy says that he
heard the car about 15 minutes after he
had got into bed, and that would be rough-
ly about 11.15 p.m. He also said that be
heard the car stop, but he did not see it.
From what he heard, however, he gathered
that the ear had stopped somewhere close
to the house where he lives and quite close
to where it was ultimately discovered. He
said: “It stopped not far from l our place.
The next_mornm<r between 8 and 9 o’clock
I was going up Vincent-strect, and I saw
n motor car in front of Chinnery’s in the
sand. Chinnery’s is three or four houses
from our place. When the car stopped it
seemed to be near the lamp-post near the
school. The car was just across from the
lamp-post in the morning.” He did not
see the number of the ear, and his evidence
, amounts to this, that about 11.15 pun. he
heard a car
, ia the morning whisa they crossed Oxford-1
j streak There waa a» car in. Yxsesart-streat. j
jat aIL Be waa very ds& cafe that there j
i was ao atatkaaay car Sam, Be sad they
■ had the cb. that night. Later on. Jut j
. gives edorccs. Oksl they went talking, if
; toes® two witoeags* are
1 sadif th*y did sat miss map caw wMtt they!
I were taHamg—it llwy I
i had lights on. fimT own ear—it ia. strong'
| evidence that at- asy rate, the cue what! .
1 yemng CoHiaa, heard was sot o*2Se3*a- car.i
It is for you to say
Whether You Better ’Bsem ‘WKnasna, ■
You have heard their croEB-esaosxaatiaßq; it*
| is for you. to say whether yea believe them'
, when they say positively that when, they 1
passed that spot there was, so esc, Yew*
may have some idea that when you are «f 4
ting in the front scat of a car with the !
that is driving, and yon are talking 1 , yon do'
not see very much; curt it ia for yen to eay i
whether you believe the evidence of these 1
two witnesses as to that particular occa-
sion. Yon must also reeoiket that there i
Making a Peculiar Noise,
which he describes as burring, and that
car stopped somewhere about where he
saw it next morning but that he did not
seo the number of the ear at night or in
the morning.
Mr. La van: He said he could not say jt
was the same car.
His Honor; He did not see the car tbs
night before at aIL His brother, Herbert
Charles Collins, lives in the same house
with him and got home at 10 minutes to 13
that night. He said that he noticed a rap-
tor ear between the Leedervillc Picture
HaD and Oxford-street. It was at the pic-
ture hall that the youngster said he saw
the clock at 10.60 p.m. that night. This
witness said: ‘‘There were no lights on the
car. It was
was no reason why at that time in the :
rooming they should be on the look-out for |
a stationary ear without lights. They sacw *
one at the top of Kimherlay-atreefc, Yoo
also hare a witness called by the defence
named. .Allen. You. saw him in {be box
and you may bbv* '
Hotteed Hw Ksbthix
Tins is perhaps typical of a certain dam
of witness. Ai any whatever you
think of his evidence, he can hardly he de-
scribed aa a careful witness, I took down
three consecutive answers given by him. in
grossrexamrnatiqn. One want “I may have
discussed the matter with the constable.**
The next was “I may not have done so,”
The third waa “I did not.” These three
eonaeeutrre answers do not show very great
cure on the pari of the witness. lie says
be remembers the 4th of April, Then®!
moming at a quarter to 1 he wars in Boo-
strecL He was waiting ins a passenger,
1 and noticed a ear in front at kn facing
I towards Beasfart-fitreet. It had its lighto
lon. The car was -
In Front of Chmneiy’s Place.
The two off-side wheels were on the road,
and two on the sand. The ear faced west, i
No one was in it so far as I conld see.” *
All that witness has to say to identify the <
ear is that it had no lights—that does not >
amount to much —but that the car he saw
on that night had two wheels on the ma- i
cadamised road and the other two wheels 1
on the sand- It may have been of impor-
tance, because other witnesses have spoken
to the ear being in the same position. That
is the only evidence which that witness
gives you about the car when ho saw it at
about 10 minutes to 12 that evening. He
goes on to say; “I saw the ear in the same
place next morning at 6110.” Ho also said:
“There was a brake bar on the car hang-
ing down from Hie car.” The reference
to the brake bar is of importance, because
it
Tallies With the Description
the police gave of the car later on.
Chinnery, a butcher, who lives in Vin-
ccnt-street, said that on the morning of
April 5 be put his head out of the window
at 4 a.m. to call his brother-in-law, and he
then saw a car standing ia front of his
house. He left home about 20 minutes to 5.
He looked at the car and struck a match.
He saw that the number of the car was
3481. One front door on the left side was
open and the hood was up. He saw the
police in the afternoon. It was not until 4
o’clock in the morning that Chinnery saw
the car 3481. The question is whether the
car No. 3481 was that which young Collins
Ed.sm.
That ia, O*Neo*s car. He bad eeen no
one in it. Certain eoqyersatkms were that,
put to him in eross-eaaminatiqn as to whe-
ther he had said something else to a police
constable. He denied that. Two police
constables were subsequently called.
Then also be was asked why he bad not
come forward and given tins information
before. His answer was, “Although I
knew that my evidence would establish
Auburn’s innocence, I decided I was not
going to coma into the ease.” Hie admits
that be knows perfectly well hecan prea
evidence which will move the innoeecee
of a man who is in danger of his life and
he calmly says "I decided I would not
come into- the case.” That does not show
a particularly
heard about & qßeaSies-p*& Jit- flbtt aigSt-
Two witnesses.
Books and
woes- called by the Banka. .£» a,
caterer. He had a job that night at St.-
Qeocga’e Hall aad-finished at midnight, J&
then motored home vritb bas jfMxtwesj ones
of the staff, «mi a -ferfumd. Eta west. un>
Hsy-steeet to Axon-etrest, Sahiaco.. Sfe
then tamed to . the right amt csoesed thw
bH<tea by the gt. Joto «£ God.
and dsoppsd a passeagar there. Jfe then,
went aiieag ggf £gf ea the Leesondlie sto-
High Gzao> of XEoraSky,
or at what is duo from one man to iot-
■ other who is in danger of bis life. Now,
’ Lloyd was one of the constables who spoke
to him. I
; Mr. Lavan: He wss« merrfumt, SSx; wot
j a constable. 1
I His HouprgTes, he was a merdiaat and i
I a JJ*. He says that he saw Alien on
| Tuesday, April 8, about five nmmtes past j
j 2, and that he said to Allen, “Whs* do 1


’ vdc think of the nraroeri" fflt that AT-
; len said, “I saw that ear on Friday be-
tween 11 and 3130 pan.” He was refer-
ring to O'Neil’s ear. So he told this
witness that he saw it between U and
11.30, and the evidence ho gave in chief
was that he saw it at about a Quarter to
one. He told Lloyd he was passing down
Eoo-street and noticed a ear in front of
a certain house there, and either he, Al-
len, or Ms passenger thought it was his
brother's car. He stopped his motor cycle
and had a look a* the number of the ear,
and saw it was 3481 —which is O'Neil's
number. He tells Lloyd not only a differ-
ent time when he was passing down there
and stopped his motor cycle to have a look
; at the car, but says he was looking at the
: car with his hands like this < folded),
: looking straight at the car for 20 min-
utes, with the light on it, and so saw the
number! He may have been telling the
troth, but, as I said before, he docs not
«etm to bo very careful what he says.
. Police-constable Hickson saw Allen at
the Economic corner at 8.20 p.m. on the
Saturday. The constable said he asked
Allen whether he saw a ear in Roc-street
“last night or early this morning." Al-
ien said “Yes." Hickson then asked him
“Was it 3481?" Allen said he was not
sure whether it was 3481 or 3081, That
comes from a man who told one witness
be stopped Ms motor Cycle’ to take the
number of the ear, and also said be sat for
20 minutes looking at the car. Now he
tdls Hickson he was not sure whether the
number was 3481 or 30SL Hickson'went
on, “Allen said that this was about 12235
not 12.45."
Then Constable Parker was called, and
ho told ns that he saw Allen, I think, on
Monday, April 7. Parker told Allen it
had been reported that he (Alien) had
seen ear 3481 on the night. Allen
them said he saw a car outside 236 Boe-
stroct, tint thought the number was 308 L
He was sure there was a 3, and 81 at the
end, and therefore thought it must have
been O'Neil’s ear. Ho was
Not Sura About the Nought.
Then Constable Parker told him he could
1 say what he thought about the car, and
I Allen said he did not want to be dragged
! into the matter.
It may mean that Allen saw a ear there
at a quarter to one, as he says; but you,
gentlemen, have seen the evidence, and
you have heard what the police constables
say about it, and it is for you to judge
whether you think Allen's evidence is wor-
thy of taking into consideration or not.
You may discard it, but of course if you
believe Allen's evidence it is quite clear
that the car which young Collins heard
stop outside the house was not O’Neil’s
car.
However, the matter docs not rest with
Allen's evidence. Two 'other witnesses
were called —a milkman, who was going his
rounds on the morning of Saturday, April
5. and his. young nephew, whom he _ had
with him. This boy was. in the habit of
going round with his uncle on Saturday
morning; and yon must Save gathered from
Ms evidence that, besides being a very use-
ful assistant, the boy was
A Very Useful Watchdog.
The milkman savs he remembers the morn-
ing of April 5 when lie went on. his rounds,
which included Stan ford-road, on the west
side of Oxford-street. Stanford-road runs
parallel with Oxford-street about 100
yards distant from Oxford-street. The
milkman said that while he was in Stan-
ford-road he saw motor lights
from Vincent-street in the direction of the
football ground. He was in Stanford-road
at the time, according to the ffrafaaoa,
Yon- have a, plan- showing that he was-alioun
160 yards west from Oxford-et. It J' 33
while these, he says, that he saw the wnee-
tien- <st motor lights. He did not see the
fasht itself, but the reflection of it-
mint may be of some importance, because
fit may be; tilfat you will think that the re-
I flaatioa of- motor-car lights would be more
i ujceiy to attract Mr ' attention if Uu» car
'teas moving, especially if travelling at all
; List, Anyhow, lie saw it coming aim*
' Vinccnt-str-eet from the direction of th*
I football ground- He said it wan a fairly
| (fade meyaing, with. no moon- , Jut fha
| tune the youngster was not with, him* bal
f was down the road in Vfacent-street serv-
ing at a wine saloon, And as the boy told
©a afterwards fa ccass-exami nation, tliis
was about the length of a erfdeev pitas
from 8 tMiford-road.
| Mr.. Havana Not quite so long.
His Honor s Not quite so long, ' He was
cfown Vincent-street, and the boyy thanking
Cke Eghfa belonged to the car of the milk
inspector, promptly
| Ban. Bade tathe TOfcmaa,
1 Btv doubt to warn klin. When, the
1 jeiias him, tie milkman says the boy «mn
I knelt to the corner of Vincent and Oxford
I streets. And then the milkman noticed
the motor car with fbn lights on. standing
shout 109 yards down, from Oxford-scree*
fa Vfaceat-styeet. Thun he says ho no-
ticed these fights, as soon a» he turned, out
of Stanford-road fata Vfacent-Rtrcst, H*
Take* ijjeuA fawn Vfacaat-sfcrast, ami. before
i Bie crossed Oxford-street the light wreat
jest. He also- Says he heard fflet-engine
of the «*r ©jmKug, aad that when, the
fig&to wenf crot the engine stopped, - H*
■ served some customers in
on the- cast safe of Oxford-street. Bun
his hOnas becoming restive, woehfcraot pros
lh» motur «st r which, was standing there.
Tins waff about 4= ofateck ia the moraine.
JE& got oat acad led the horse past the em,
and Icaoked at the <ar, a grev car wjti a
s«®bw hood sod msadtered 34SL He also
®r?s there were two- tyres strapped on the
bask. ic l had a foofr," he says, “hrmraw
I it might be the ©Dk inspector.
‘ xfey gencraUr pat «uat their Kghta, Tfre
I car was right opposite CMruiery’s. . AsJ
’walked the hotae past the motor a man.
walked from the motor car over to the
footpath and stood under the shop yraara-
dai, next hut cum to drinneiy’s.” Ufa
i then charred the wheel of Ms own cart and
■ sarved a. customer, and wiuai he came out
he found the pony bad turned on to the
footpath. -Buying regard to what waa
(•discovered fa that motor ear, the quantity
of blood in it might have had something
to do •with tin horse refusing to go past.
Those who know horses know that many
:«£ them.
| DoNdtXlke the Saadi of Blood,
i Efe goes- oil to stay that the mam was wwor-
Mg a grey left hat, turned down all round,
and a dark overcoat. Later on he said ft
Wa» a heavy overcoat. The man tad a
grey feit hat turned fawn all round. it
anybody did not want to be identified
j°at the way he would wear Ms hat.
_ The man ware a dark, heavy orcrccmt'aad
Eght trotesers, but the milkman says J»
. wmld not ldea. He went on Ms
i Toond tip Vufccent-strxicft scone more
customers, and then turned back on Ms
i pest the Leedervilie Hotel, There
j he noticed fhe game man. as he had seso
i before near the motor ear. Who that
i Jf®** "*** there fa nothing to showy beeaosff
: toe desgriptron of » fight felt hat. a dark
heavy overcoat, .and light trousers ought
: at night time be applied to many
m this Court; it fa not a very dfattnetrvf
j description.
Young Horace Thompson gfring Ms evi-
i ounce said that fa Yinccnt-strcet he' was
j serving a wine shop when be saw a motor
ear coming fawn the hill near TYorflrfag-
[ tonfafaop. The limits were on. Jfo
thought it was the mspeetor’s car. Be
confirms the evidence a bent the horse
being restive and about the Tights going
out He tells us when he first saw the
ear it was moving. He did not see it stop-
He then went hack and told Ms uncle. It
; Was afterwards that he saw that the car
! had stepped. __ I asked Mm some questions
about fhe position fa wMch the car was.
Some pf you who may hare looked at a
motor car on a dark night with the lights


* Hr 9 '
on, and coming- etraipht at you, a touple
of yards away; I think that in those cir-
enmstanees
Yon Will Probably Admit
tha* xt is difficult to say whether the cai
vras moving or not. But this boy speaks
of the ear when it was moving as being
about half-way down the hill—l do not
know whether yon have seen the spot—
alongside the football ground. Of course,
it is very much easier when the car is
coming down hill straight at -you to notice
the movement of the car than it would be
if yon and the car were on the one level.
He then wept on to say that the car step-
ped some distance from where he had first
seen it moving.
His Evidence is Important.
If the ear was there about 11.30 that night
Anbum could have been in the car, and
j yet caught the tram at the Leederville
! Hotel corner, which he told us was about
40 yards away. If, however, the car was
not there that night, and did not
Get There Till 4 am.,
then, having regard to what is known o'"
Anbum’s movements subsequent to If!
o’clock, there is no justification for assum-
ing he was in the car if it did not get then-
till 4 am. However, that is a matter ic -
you, gentlemen. I will deal with the point
later. Constable Drysdale gave evidenc-
es to the condition in which he found tnc
ear at the corner of Vincent-street on the
Saturday rooming. It is unnecessary for
roe to tell you about the condition of the
car, for yon have already heard about it
from counsel. _ If the ear were in the con-
dition as described by Mr. Lavan, it woul<?
have been, to use his words,
A Shambles.
Yon have an important piece of evidence
in the course of his statement, however, in
1 that in the back part of the car on the
floor about 4 inches from the door a link
: button is found. The constable told you
| that there were bushes and green leaves
1 hanging in the front part of the car as if
it had been through bushes. He also told
. yon that he found the car standing outside
Chinnery’s. He also said there was a
button he found in the back part of the
ear about four inches from the right hand
'• door, heavily stained with blood. He gave
that button to Inspector Condon, and by
means of other witnesses that button ulti-
tnately reached the Government analyst,
and the hands of expert officers who have
been called to give evidence. The button
was also produced hero. Tiie ear was
In a Damaged Condition.
,It would not go forward. The person who
"had got the car to proceed to that point
had evidently been compelled reluctantly, to
go no further. Had it gone baekwardis it
would have run down hill, but as a means
Conveyance for Escape
"it was utterly useless. You have heard
the evidence of the material damage to the
car. It was ultimately taken from the
i spot at Chinnery’s and found its way to
i the police yards. You, gentlemen, have
; inspected the car. • I do not propose to
; say anything about the movements of
O’Neil’s car. I have put forward the
main facts that have been brought forward
in evidence concerning it. It will M
necessary for you now to consider
The Movements of the Accused.
- He used to visit Miss Sadler, who ha's bees
called as a witness. She lived with her
brother-in-law, Mr. Moir, and his wife, in
Mt. Lawley. The accused was aiesuitomed
to visiting her, often taking her out, and
taking he r home, via Bnlwer-street. You
must have been convinced from what yon
have heard that his visits to Miss Sadler
must have been frequent, perhaps every
night in the week when he could get off.
The accused was a man who had no fixed
employment, and depended for his liveli-
hood upon the money which hia father
gives him. His father has told you that
fee keeps Mm working at the hotel oecause
if ho did not do so he .would have to em-
ploy someone else. In fact. Auburn has
been in receipt of no fixed salary to .the
ordinary sense as -would be the case "ox ah’
employe. You must haye been convinced j
from the evidence you have hearc in
Court that Auburn received money from
his father, which may have borne some pro-
portion to £4 15s, from which was deduct-
ed board money. But the fact remains
that it was practically an unfixed amount. J
Auburn was in the habit of attending ,
picture shows. Some weeks before April,
4, we have been told that ■ ;
A Trip to "Wagin * ' _
had been arranged, in wliich arrangement,
the accused, not a man of means, was to
take Miss Sadler, Mr. and Mrs. Moir, and,
their three children, and the two Missj
Quigley’s, down to Wagin. We wore told;
that the trip was arranged three weeks
before, and Saturday morning was fixed
for it. According to the evidence of the
Misses Quigley it was fixed for a week be-
forehand. That is common ground. Au- ’
bum had told Miss Sadler that ho pro-
posed to borrow a oar to take them down
from a man named Ford, at Winter-bot-
tom’s, where the accused was previously
employed. Miss Sadler tells ua that the .
ear proposed was at first a Buick Six, and i
later a W:|»rt-lvn‘ight was mentioned. It;
May Be Only a Coincidence, j
but a Buick Six happened to be the class ’
of car that O’Neil had. There is no evi-
dencc, however, that Auburn at any time
knew O’Neil, or had anything to do with
him. Some days before April 5, a telegram
was received from Wagin, where Miss Sad-
lers sister was. She was not in good health.
The telegram was to the effect that the
sister was seriously ill, and Miss Sadler in-
tended to go to her immediately by train
as soon as she got it. Auburn, however,
■persuaded her not to do bo. He said, <f l£
your sister is no worse, why not wait until
Saturday when we are all going down t”
They waited. Accused at this time, early
in the week, had made no arrangement
about the car. Now we come to the ques-
tion about which yon have heard a lot.
You will perhaps
Think it Significant
though it is entirely a matter for you to
say. The accused says that in order to
make a present to his father, who rather
ridicules the idea of a present, he got some
plates for his motor car number P3B. That
Is the number of the single-seater owned
by accused’s father. These plates were
obtained by Miss Sadler on the Thursday
at the request of the accused, She took
them home with her, and that is tho last
that has been seen or heard of them, . If
the plates axe of any consequence.
It Does Seem Curious
that the defence should not have produc-
ed them now. Mr. Parker suggests that
as they are not produced, and they had
something to do with the case, they had
been got rid of. He suggests that they
are at the bottom of Monger’s Lake. They
may have had something to do with the
case. The theory is that this was a pre-
meditated crime. Tho suggestion is—al-
though there is no evidence of it-—that the
accused had all along made up his mind
to go in O’Neil’s car, and take it for a
tour somewhere around the South-West.
He was going to get the ear whether O ’Neil
was in it or not, so it is suggested- In
order to disguise bis movements he does
certain things. There may be some reason
in this, but for the life of me ,
I Cannot Understand
why-anyone who is about to commit a crime
should choose as tho number for the false
plate the number of his father’s car. Mr.
Parker has laid stress upon it, and you
may be able to see it, hut it is beyond my
comprehension. Obviously the number of
a plate if found on a car would give some
clue as to the person connected with the
car, Mr. Parker suggests that the per-
son who was at that car at 4 o’clock in the
morning should come back and take these
plates, amongst other things, away and get
rid of them. The suggestion is that this
person is the accused.


f Why Get Bid of Them? ' ]
Because the number of the plates •will cor- '
respond -with the number of his father's
ear, and bring the matter straight back to
him. It may be you can see some sense
in the Crown theory, but I cannot under- 1
stand why, if you axe going to falsify num-
ber plates, you should deliberately select I
a number whiph will have some effect ini
bringing home the crime. I have express- ’
ed_ my opinion upon this, but it is your
opinion that should gnide you.
Mr. Parker: I suggested that after the
trip to Wagin the number plates would be,
removed from the car. the plates destroyed
and the carlißandoned. I did not suggest’
that the number plates were at the time On
O'Neil's car, ■
His Honor: The suggestion is that the
plates would be pnt on the car in the coun-
try in place of the real plates, and that
later on they would be got rid of,
This, Too, eb Dangerous.
If there were a hue and cry as to-who had
stolen, say, O’Neil’s car, and a descrip-
tion of the car were given, a Buick Six,
colored' so and so, and a police constable
saw a ear answering to the description and
bearing a plate number P3B, if he thought
there was anything about it to suggest it
was the missing car, he would at once in-
quire to whom the number P3B belonged.
It is for you to express an opinion on the
facts, ana not for me, hut at present I
cannot see the connection.
Mr. Parker: I suggest that if O'Neil’s
body had not been found by anyone, no one
.would know his car was missing.
His Honor: It is plain that any number
chosen near home for a false number to be
pnt on a car might in the long run prove a
source of serious danger to any person
about to commit a crime. It was arrang-
ed to make the trip to Wagin on the Sat-
urday. According to Miss Sadler, on
the Thursday night tho accused
said to her he would be up the nert
night •at Moir's at 7.45 p.m.
EVENTS OF APRIL 5.
The next thing which is brought forward ;
is that at about 10.30 on the morning of
Saturday Miss Sadler rang him up. He
had net come back on the Friday night as ,
she expected, and she rang him up. She j
says, “I rang hiuf up about half-past 10
on Saturday morning at tho Osborno Park
Hotel. I asked him where he had got |o
the night before. Ho said nothing. He
said he jxould explain when he came. I
went out to do some shopping, and I got
back home about half-past 12. Accused
was there. lie said he was sorry he could
not keep his appointment last night.”
That, of course, refers to his going back to
Mrs. Moir’s on tho evening of Friday,
April 4. “He said there was something
the matter with tho car. Ho referred to
some part. He said
He Would Hire a Car.
I told him ho had better not waste his
maney on ears, but had better see my mar-
ried sister, and if she would go I would
go. Ho went to see my maxned sister.”
That conversation, of course, is denied by
the accused; but that is the account Miss
Sadler has given of it, and she has stuck to
it.
Then on this particular occasion the
accused was wearing a grey suit Miss
Sadler says: “He had a grey suit on. I
said something to him about the difference
in tho suits. I never liked him in his grey
suit As far as I know, he had three spits;
th# grey, and two navy blue suits, and one
had a button off.” I will deal with that
later. Miss Sadler never had atjy know-
ledge of the old suit of which you have
heard. She told us Auburn used to wear
th« grey suit occasionally. There would be
no need particularly to remember his
wearing a grey suit but that he wore a
gray suit on that day is not in dispute.
Up to this time you will note
Nothing Has Been Said
about the hiring of a car. He also told
hex ho would bring a car with him. He
was asked to stay at the place so that the
party could leave early i n the morning. As
yon know, the Miss Quigleys also expected
him early in the morning.
Then there is evidence as to what took
place on the Friday night. ■ Tho accused
came to Moir’s that night, and ho was
there not very long; but when he loft co
did not promise to come back to sleep. I
think that from the evidence we must come
to the conclusion that this was left
Bather Indefinite;
he might be back. Up to this time he had
made no arrangement whatever about the
car —right np to this time; and they were
to start early on tho Saturday morning;
and he did not come hack that night. He
says that on this particular evening—for
some reason which wo do.not know —he and
Miss Sadler were not very friendly; that
they differed about something,
Probably About Nothing,
and the accused went on to say, “The
night before I asked Miss Sadler to come
down town with me while I arranged for a
car. 1 intended to go to the St, George’s
Terrace rank. It would take a very few
minutes to get a car, and I intended to go
for a walk round town.” Ho- also says,
“I intended on the Friday night”—which
is somewhat in contrast to what happened
on the Saturday—“to have a car from
Singe first. I decided I would wait until
Saturday morning, when Miss Sadler said
aho 'would not come down town with me.
I then decided I would wait until Saturday
morning to make arrangejjjpnts about the
car. I thought I would wait until the
morning. It was an act of .petty spite.”
Then he goes on to say that on tho. Satur-
day morning he was delayed until about
II o’clock. At any rate, he left
Miss Sadler on the Friday even-
ing about 7,40, or between half-
past; 7 and 20 minutes to 8.
The accused says that if Miss Sadler had
gone down with him on tha Friday night,
he would have persuaded her to agree, and
,he would have hired the car then. She
would not go down, and that is the reason
why he did not hire the ear lt is
rather an extraordinary thing, a trip hav-
ing been arranged three weeks before, and
a week before, when Miss Sadler suggest-
ed to go down and see her.sick sister at
once by train, Auburn having persuaded
her to wait until Saturday, that nothing
should have been done to secure a car for
the trip. It is an
Astonishing Fact,
' The accused gives as his explanation of
not getting the car on the Friday night
that he had had a slight quarrel with Miss
Sadler, and that in order to inflict a cer-
tain amount of vexation upon her he to
tally ignored the Moir’s and their child-
ren, who were looking forward to the trip,
totally ignored tho Miss Quigley’s, whom
he had asked to go with him, and
Worse Than That
totally ignored the sick sister, who conld
not help herself, whom Miss Sadler wanted
1 to go and see by train immediately, he hav-
! ing persuaded Miss Sadler to wait until
; the Saturday for tho ear._ It is a most
: extraordinary thing. It is a most extra-
< ordinary fact,
; Mr. La van: There is some Evidence of
a telegram, your Honor, after she was
back.
His Honor: Whether she was back or
not, he promised to take Miss Sadler down
to see her sick sister, and whether the rea-
son given about the condition of the car
on the Friday night'is true or not. ,before
you' can believe what h« tells us, on that
point, you will have to consider first, whe-
ther he is as
Heartless and Disregardless
of tha feelings of others, of women, one of
whom the p?t)fcsses to bo exceptionally
fond of. as would be logically concluded
from his attitude.
The accused tells up \hat on the Satur-
day morning he came into town with his
father. Miss Sadler Xjid previously
rung him np, and he had said he would
come in and explain. He comes into town
with his father to somewnere hear Poy 'a.
He told yon that on the previous night
he was going to get Singe scar. He comes
to Foy’s. but does not go straight to Singe,


4^7/^
Does not arrange for the car then, bnf
. out to Miss Sadler’s, This ’ after
what' he told yon, that he arranged for
Binge’s car on the telephone. But he
would have you believe that it is the
simplest thing in the world to hire a cal
at any time. Yet if we followed the evi-
dence, we know that be went to four men
on the rank that day, George, Craik,
Moody, and M'Kinley, and you heard their
evidence. You will probably
Oome to the Conclusion
that none of those four men was willing
to take on tlfe job. It is not difficult to
Understand, for it that at some
time not very long before, the father of the
accused had advertised that he would not
be responsible fo r his son’s debts. He said
that he had paid £l5O worth of his debts.
The accused would have you believe that
he had certain money which he could draw
from his father. _ But you must be satis-
fied from the evidence that there was no-
thing at all he had to draw; there might
be something he had to recoup, but no-
thing he had to draw, or
Had tihe Bight to Draw.
His father told us that the accused had
1 a birthday present of £23, which he could
get at any time, and for which the father
had drawn a blank cheque. The father
says the son knew he could get that sum
when he wanted it. I am going to ask
you to consider that statement. The ac-
cused has given you all sorts of sugges-
tions that he had been able to draw from
his father at any time. But it never en-
tered his head that there was a birthday
present of £2l which he could get from
his father whenever ho wanted it. That
i was brought forward by the father; the
sou did not mention it. It is
A Peculiar Circumstance.
When the_ accused came to engage Singe
for the trip. Singe does not seem to have
objected to taking him. Singe had known
the accused’s father for a good number
of years. I think ho told me the accus-
ed’s father had been at the Cleopatra Ho-
tel, Fremantle, and at the Bedford Hotel.
Perth, before going to the Osborne Park
Hotel. It must be obvious, I think, that
the accused’s father has had some 20
years’, experience as a publican in various
hotels. Singe had known Auburn, senr.,
for a long time. According to Singe’s
account the accused told Singe that he
would pav him on their return from
i Wagin. The accused has a different im-
pression, holding that Singe said ho coulJ
pay at the end of the month. Singe is
positive thsjt the itrangement was that he
. should be paid on return, -as he says ac-
cused suggested. Accused wants yon to
believe that he was io pav Singe at, the
i end of the month. Why should it be at
i the end of the month, seeing that the ac-
i cased was not in tho receipt of a monthly
| pay ? Under tho circumstances, you have
I to consider which was telling the truth—
Singe or the accused. Which is the more
probable story? It is entirely a matter
for you. The party left Perth about 4
p.m. We have had a great deal of evi-
dence about
Conversations on the Murder,
which were held on that Wagin trip. The
party undoubtedly were aware of the
murder—-1 am not referring to tho ac-
cused. With the. exception of the accus-
ed, the whole of the party were aware of
the murder when they were at the Os-
borne Park Hotel that Saturday afternoon
when the accused was getting his bag and
his coat.. It mav seem strange that ac-
eordingTb the evidence of the accused, Of
Miss Sadler, and of Moir, the murder was
never discussed on that trip. _ On tho
other hand, Qndrtennaine and Singe say
that the murder was discussed in all its
bearings.
You may think it would be, a strange
thing when such a horrible thing as this
murder had happened, and when all _ tho
party knew of it except the accused, if it
was not discussed in these circumstances.
Some witnesses swear positively it was dis-
,cussed in the hearing of the accused; Miss
Sadler, the accused and Moir' say it was
not. The question is. what is the import-
ance of it? It certainly would have a
bearing on the credibility of the accused,
but beyond that I do not know it has much
Bearing on the Crime
that has been committed.
You may think, of course, that if the
accused had had something to do with this
crime he would not be likely to say a word
about it to anyone, but Mr. Parser tas
pointed out that the importance of It Is
that it was not until he got back to Perth
from the Wagin trip, and when ho met
Holmes, that, according to the account
: given by the accused, hq never heard any-
thing about it. Holmes states that it was
on Sunday, April 6, that he saw the ac-
cused at the corner of Newcastle and
Beaufort streets between 3.0 and 33. He
told us that he said to the accused. “What
do you think of the murder, Georger?” The
accused replied> “What murder ?” Holmes
then said, “A taxi-driver had hi* bead
bashed in, and the body was found down
.at Crawley. ’’ Auburn then said ha had
just got back from the Wagin trip, and
that that was the first he had heard of the
murder. TJiat is the importance that
Mr. Parker attaches to this conversation-
Of course, it is possible that Auburn did
not hear of the murder, but you have beard
the circumstances, and it is tor yon t*v«ay
whether you believe the accused or net- 3
could quite understand that if the accused
had anything to do with the murder" he
would probably say that ho knew npthjag
about it. That may or may not bo the ex-
planation of the matter. That is far you
to take into consideration-
The next point of importance- that"' we
have to consider is
The Evening of April'l7,
On the afternoon of that day a-notice ap-
peared in the Stop Press column of “The
Daily News** which indicated that O’Neji’s
overcoat and a small cushion from bis
motor car were ' missing. The accused's
account is that he saw the notification m
the paper that evening. He said, “Dn
Monday night I went to Woodroyd-etrect
to see Miss Sadler. She had an engage-
ment in town. I went to the detective
office, and saw Miss Sadler afterwards. I
had seen in the paper about the missing
overcoat belonging to O’Neil. I saw De-
tective Purdijf) . I told him that 1 had
found a coat in the West Perth subway.
I said X had seen the advertisement in the
paper and asked for a description or the
coat.” You will remember, gentlemen,
that .
No Description, of tho Coat
appeared in the paper. Auburn further
said that when he received the description
he told the detectives that he thought he
had the coat that was wanted. Continu-
ing, Anbum stated, “He asked where it
was. I told him I had left it at Wagin
on the Sunday. He asked if I could ob-
tain it, and I said it would probably come
down in two or thre days* time,
and that if it did not coma
down in that time I wilt write for it. I
did.net say that I would wire for it. What
Purdue said about my finding the coat is
correct.”
Sergeant Purdue’s account Ss somewhat
different. Purdno said, “Op Monday, art
about 8 p.m., I saw the accused at the
detective office. I did not know him at
all. He told me his name. Ho said, f I
believe you are looking for a coat.’ I said
‘Yes.’ He asked me what it was Eke. I
told him I was not sure, hut I would ask
the inspector. He said, f I think
I have the coatywa are looking for.’
The detective then said; “1 found opt the
description and told the accused.” The
description was that it was a heavy, dark
green, English striped coat, worn about
the neck. The accused said; “That is
it.” Tho detective then asked him when
he could bring it_in. He replied: “That


fhlw-
is the trouble. 1 was down at wagm «ma
left it there.” The detective asked him
when ho it up, and he said he
would wire for it- He stated he had found
it on Friday night walking under the West
Perth sub-way, that he had picked it up,
looked at it in the light, and, seeing no one
about, he had taken it home with him. He
' also told_ the detective he had been at the
Grand picture show, and said: “To tell
you the truth, I had only 3d left, and had
to walk that way to catch the tram at the
Leedervillee comer, so as to get to -ill.
Hawthorn. ’ ’
He also said—and this is rather • ejgnlS-
cant—“he thought it had fallen oat of a
motor car coming from the direction of
Marquis-street, and going up towards the
street that joins Oxford-street” Accord-
ing to Detective-Sergeant Purdue, before
the accused had been given a description of
the coat, he said he thought the one he had
Was the one the detective wanted, and he
also made the statement about the motor
car coming from Marquis-street. How the
accused _ could have come to that conclu-
sion it is difficult to say. Of course, if
he had known the way the car did go it
''would be easy enough, but why he should
suggest, not only that the car came foom
the direction of Marquis-street, but also
that it was going up towards Oxford-
street, it is difficult to follow. If you
look at the map you will find that the sub-
way under the West Perth railway leads
to many places besides Oxford-street,
Why Oxford-street 2 -t*
Mr. La van; The evidence was that the
coat was found in the north-west corner of
the subway.
His Honor; True! Why should Oxford-
street be mentioned? Between the sub-
way and the Thomas-street bridge there is
another street branching off to the right
When you first get to the subway going
north, and coming from Marquis-street, you
find Hallway-parade runs parallel to the
line up to the Thomas-strect bridge. On
the other side, less than half-way up to
the bridge, Havelock-street comes in, and
that leads into Loftus-street. Loftus-
treet, it is suggested,* is a flat road.
Mr. Parker; I said that Havelock-street
runs on the flat.
His Honor: There are several roads lead-
ing off. Why Oxford-street should have
been particularly mentioned is a matter
for you to say.
There May Be Nothing In It
, It is difficult to know why Oxford-street
should have been mentioned by the accus-
ed. On iffie Thursday night the accused
made a trip to Claremont in Singe’s car
with the two Misses Quigley and Miss Sad-
ler. It was on. that occasion he asked for
Allport’s address. Allport is the man
with whom it had been arranged to send
up the coat in the course of a day or two
by a car that was coming up. Nothing
of much importance seems to have occurred
after that until we get to the evening of
Friday, the 11th. On that evening the
accused by appointment went to tho detec-
tive office to show where O'Neil’s coat
had been found. He had t old
them on the Monday about it,
At this time, although Auburn had not
written or wired for it, the police had the
coat in their possession. Mr. Parker at-
taches some importance to the coat being
left behind. It is entirely a matter for
you to consider. No particular care seems
to have been taken of the coat, and the ac-
cused does not seem to have
Attached Much importance to It.
I believe it was taken out of the car at
tho hotel. It was ultimately found in a
manger. How it got there no one knows.
When the accused was reminded of it by
Miss Quigley, who said it was not in the
car, he does not seem to have taken much
notice of it. One does not see how it
could have been of great intrinsic value to
anyone. Accused accordingly went with
Dots. Doyle and Kennedy; to tho West
Perth subway, and showed them where he
had found the coat. On the way ho
TUEyiWitn Important Statement.' ' f ' ■
to Sgt. Doyle. He said, “On Monday af- i
ternoon when I was down on the road be- ,
! tween Claremont and Nedlands I saw tne
tracks of where a motor ear had bumped .
into the bnsh and broken down some_scrub,
and also tracks where something had been
i dragged into the bush and dragged out.
xus Honor, proceeding, said Auburn said
to Detective Doyle; “1 will show yon these
tracks if you like.” Sergeant Doyle
said, “We will see about it.” The
accused denies the . part of the , state-
ment that, something had been dragged in
and .dragged out,; ...
Accused then gives his account, of the
finding of the spot. (His Honor read the
evidence given by the accused regarding
hfe journey to Wostana-road, concluding:
“While there ! noticed a broken tree, also
some motor tracks parallel with the road,
some small * scrub broken down, some of
the leaves of the scrub being covered with
oil. In towards the bush there were two
distinct tracks. I stayed there about ten
minutes till the bike got cool, and then
went along the road to Nedlands, and then
straight home.” The question of (he bi-
cycle I will deal with subsequently.
On the return-to the police station they
all went out to see the
Spot in Westana-road.
What happened there has been pointed ont
over and over again, and I do not propose
to repeat it. There is the evidence about
the accused saying that there were tracks
where a body was dragged in and where
it was dragged out. The accused denies
that statement. Whether it is material is
for. you to say. No doubt there were djag
marks there, and blood there, and hair
there, and broken glass there. JJndoubtedly
something important had happened at that
spof. . - ■
The only way in which you gentlemen of
the jiffy are connected with it is
The Curious Coincidence
that the accused should be the man. not
only to find the coat, but also to find the
spot where, it is suggested, the murder was
committed. .
Then the parties returned to the police
station and a statement was taken from
the accused- That statement is of con-
siderable importance. It becomes impor-
tant not only for what the accused said
in it, but from some of the explanations
he has given since. (His Son or read
the statement in estenso.) You
note that ho says: “When I ar-
rived in the city on the evening of j
the ,4th I went straight to tho Grand Pip- !
tnres.” .Here you have a statement given : 1
to the police, not mentioning the fact that
he had gone to Miss Sadler’s place first.
He says nothing, whatever about his inter-
view with Miss Sadler on the evening of
the 4th. ' Of course, he may have regard-
ed as ‘the city” when he got ont at the
Town HalL He stated further that he
remained at the Grand Pictures until the
finish of the programme, at 10J.5 or 10.25.
Those times, he says, are mostly ,
Estimates of the Detectives. !
He goes on. “I was alone in the pictures :
all the evening, and saw no one I knew that
I can remember. When I left the pic-
tures I walked round the block once, round
Hay-street and William-street. ’'' There
is an account, given by him to tho police of ■
his movements op that night, and he does
not say one syllable about the visit to the
shop at the corner, of Newcastle and Beau-
fort streets, which is nut forward as a
most important picks oi evidence by his
counsel to show that he could not have
committed the murder.
Not One Syllable!
His statement continues, “I then walked
straight out to Marquis-street, en route to
Oxford-street, Leederville, after walking
round the block” Not a word about his
coming back to the corner of Newcastle
and Beaufort streets, and finding, vtren bo
gets on the bridge, that he has nr/%ioney,
and then coming back to Trouc/ t’s cor-
ner to get on the tram. Not. a syllable l
of all that! He- says further, ’’When 1
passing through the, West. Perth subway I I


v/;Ay-
picfccd up an overcoat, about li3o. I
have since ascertained it belonged to the
late Jack O’Neil.” In the box he did not
seem to know that at tho time he made the
statement he knew whether he carried tho
coat or not. "I picked up the coat, and
dusted it, and had a look at it under the
light close by. I took the coat home. I
carried it.” There he says he carried the
coat. , , _, ,
room. It is necessary to remind you o£
the,'evidence here. Sergt. Doyle says
"Late at night I went with Purdue and
the accused to the Osborne Park Hotel, and
had a conversation with Auburn, sonr.
Then J’urdue and I and the accused went
to the accused’s room upstairs. On the
back of a chair covered by other clothing
I found the clothing produced.”
Mr. Lavan: That was the washed suit.
His Honor: Yes. Sergt, Doyle continued,
"1 noticed that it looked as if it had
been recently washed, but not pressed. T
said to the accused, holding np the cloth-
ing. . _
‘‘When I got near the Leederville Hotel,
in Oxford-street, by tho Chinese Gardens,
I was walking on the footpath on the east
side, and two men were coming in an op-
posite direction. I went to get onto!
their road,, and went to the same side as
they, did, j
And They Bumped Mo. ;
They knocked me over. ’ ’ He subsequent- |
ly explained that he meant they knocked j
him to one side, when it was pointed out I
that he had under his arm a bottle which i
would probably have got broken. ‘‘They :
knocked me over, causing a wound in my
right arm to be broken open, a wound
which for some time has been breaking
open and giving me trouble. This bump
caused the wound to bleed, and the blood
ran right down to the palm of my hand.
I continued to walk, and caught my tram :
at the Osborne Park terminus.
It was about 11.45 when I caught the
tram, and I got home about 12 midnight.
‘‘ Themotorman of the Osborne Park tram
helped me up to the gate. My arm was
paining me.-, I did not tell thetram dnver
that I bad found the coat. On the Sato- "
day morning I drove with my father to
the city. I stopped in town and engaged
Billy Singe’s taxi and afterwards
Went Up To My Girl’s Place
at Mt. Lawley.” He also says, referring
to the finding of the spot at Westana-
read. "1 pat rty bike on the stand,” Tho ,
bicycle‘has not got a stand. Then he I
tells how he sat near a ti-tree and how ho
had a look at the tracks and the oil
smears. He says he left soon after-
wards, and did not think any more about
it at all until he got home, ind saw a leaf
in thfe bolt of the bicycle. After that he
did not give it another thought until he
dicamed about if that night
After receiving that statement Sergt.
Pcrdne decided to take the accused to his
heme. The statement was taken about
6.30 in, the afternoon. They were some
time in taking it and it was about 9
o’flock when thor started for the Osborne
Park Hotel. Sergt Pur die told the ac-
cused thev would have to go out and make
A Search of His‘Room.
Natnrallv the accused did not want to go
home and be there while they searched his
room, but also naturally the police decided
to-take him with them. After the room
had been searched, the officers brought tin
accused back to the station, where he made
nnbther statement, but between these state-
ments there occurred conversations about •
which a great deal had been said.
Bergt. Purdue states that the accused
said ‘‘Put me inside and
I Will Admit Everything.”
Serof. Purdue said to accused, ‘‘Do you
mean what you say?” Accused made no
answer. Seigt Purdue said, ‘‘lf you do
not mean what you say. don t say it.
That evidence, lam inclined to think,
would not have been brought out at all ;
but for something that occurred in cross-
examination, Even . sapnosing that accus- ;
ed did, -say it esactlv as Sergt. Purdue i
savs be did. I do. not think it should he ■
taken too. seriouslv against the accused.
Sftr’fi* Purdue’s reluctance.to take the ans-
wer rather indicates that the-police db* !
not attach very much importance to it-
At all events, that is the way it appears
to me. Even if the police do not attach ,
much importance to it, that is no reason
why you should not do so You saw
the way the answer was brought out, and
you heard Sergt. Purdue’s ev i? e^ ce i .
is for you to judge what the effect of. that
answer is. Auburn denies it; fays
He Never Said IV ■ . . ,
It was after that they went to toe hotel
and/the search was made. of Auburn 3 |
•men Did Yon Wash This?’
Ho said ‘About two weeks ago.’ ”
I asked him why. He said that it had
got dirty when he was working on a moton
car. * I asked him how he washed it. He
said that he first washed it with petrol, _then
with cold water and salt. I then pointed
out a little .
Hole at the Back of a Button.
and Auburn said ‘There used to be a link
1 button on there, but I lost it about six
months ago. I cut a hole in the coat when
'I saw the link was oS.’ Sergeant Purdue
: then produced the link button and placed
it on the coat and the accused said ‘They
.are alike all right.’ ”
! Sergeant Purdue confirms that interview
_ generally, and then dealing with the but-'
ton said that when Sergeant Doyle was in-
i dieating to him by signs that the back of
the coat showed that there was something
missing, and when the accused saw that
his attention teas being drawn to it, he
told them that there used to be a link but-
ton on the coat there, that he had made it
himself, and that it had been lost for about
sis months. • Purdue said that he took out
a link button that he had in an envelope
in his pocket, and that ho said to the ac-
- cused ‘‘l have a ■
Link Button Here, aud it Has Blood Oa It.
I invited him to examine it on the coat.”
The accused said it was like the one that
was missing, Purdue further stated that
he took possession of the clothing and
three vests, and they returned to the
police station. When they returned to
the station at approximately between 10.30
and 11 p.m.
Auburn Cautioned
for the first time, and another statement
was taken from him. ,
Proceeding, his Honor dealt with Au-
burn’s statement that was taken on that
occasion, and pointed out'that the accus-
ed had signed it and that it commenced
with a statement that he had been cau-
tioned, that he need not answer any ques-
tions put to him pr say anything. Later,
in Court, his Honor said Auburn had sworn
that he had not been cautioned at that
time. He signed the statement which con-
tained the admission that ho had been cau-
tioned, and yet in the box ho denied that
he had been cautioned. In his statement
Auburn said that the coat' and trousers
found in his room at Osborne Park were
his property, and had been washed bv him
about two weeks before by the use of pet-
rol, eold water and soap. In the box
the accused said that that was a mistake,
and that they had been
Washed Three or Pour Weeks Before.
In his statement Auburn further said
that the coat he had washed originally had
a link button. It had become loose, and
had been sewn on by himself two or three
times. The Tint, however, had been miss-
ing for six months. He further said that
tho button that had been on the coat was
of the same kind as had been shown to
him. Ho further said in his statement that
he had washed tho clothes because he
thought he might make some use of them
.{ and might use them when he went out in
i, motor cars. In the witness boxx the ac-
I cused had said that that statement should
J have read to the effect that ho had washed
the clothes that he might use them when
working on the motor car. There was a
great difference between the two state-
ments.
' Mr. Lecn, of Trouchct’s, had boarded the
car going towards Mt. Lawley on the Fri-
“ •*, ‘ * _ . . -


day night, apa tn© accused said that ho
got on that'onar shout 11.45. He said
that Cecil jV idle, roiently of Osborne Park,
had been on the saine tram and that Mc-
Kenzie was the driver of the Osborne Park
car that night. When'Auburn was in the
box. he said that ho gave that in-
formation to the detectives be-
cause . he , had been asked if any-
one sa w him on the < tram that night.
Auburn also said that ho could not think
of anyone, else who saw him that night.
Auburn might been referring only to
the tram ride, but according, to the state-
ments in court during the proceedings he
must have seen several other peopjp or
been seen by them, some of them being im-
portant witnesses. Then Auburn went on
to say in his statement that there had been
No Blood Stain
on his clothes before he washed them. • Ha
stated later in court that that statement
was incorrect.
PUS W*l,U4-*OVVt
Mr. Lavan: Ko, air. You will remem-
ber, he said there were two washes.
Mr. Parker: Onc.in January and one in
March.
His Honor: Did not he say that state-
ment was incorrect t
Mr. Parker: Yes. - He stated that it had
been twisted and turned.
His Honor: The note I have says: “The
statement that there was no blood stain on
my clothes was not correct.” I do not
see the bearing' 6f it, but it is for the jury
to say. I wish the jury, however, to know
what Auburn | Said. Auburn proceeded in
his statement 3 u :o say that when ho lost the
button ho cr‘'the link off. At the same
time he " ,r ''
HSid Cut the Material,
and so on.; He said that he meant to use
the clothes when he was cleaning up the
car or attending to some mechanical work.
He also said; he would use it when riding a
pash bike. Then' Auburn went bn to say
that he did not remember trying to put on
the overcoat in the subway at West Perth,
but that he was not sure whether ho got
iv on or not. He said that Cecil White
would know if he bad been wearing the
overcoat, and further said that he got off
the tram at Anzac-road and went to the
fish shop which Mrs. Eddy used to keep.
Then he said ho went to Osborne Park
by No. 16 car. The statement concluded
by a reference to Auburn having
Read Over the Statement, '
and to its having been true.
He now says No. 16, is wrong. I do not
attach any importance to that.
Mr. Lavan: It is obviously wrong.
His Honor: Some considerable time was
taken' up in getting that statement. Ap-
parently the accused signed it about 12.30.
The detectives then took him to Ur. uant-
or’s, arriving there about I o'clock. Ac-
cused sayftithot after they had seen Dr.
Barker, Detective-Sergeant Purdue, took
| him about 15ft. away from the back of, the
"car, and said to him if he had any thing, on
his mind he should' ; .
G«* 14 °ff Pretty Quick.
■He also _said to accused if he bad any
j friends in this they would drop hint Ac-
-1 cased asked how he stood as regards him-
-1 self, and he says the detective informed
him he was going to think it ore# until
the- morning. _ When the accused; asked,
him to explain his position the detective,
according to Auburn, gave no answer. Ac-
cused then said, “This is not the.only oc-
I casion you have given me the same ad-
vice”; that is,, about getting it off - his
, chest, and he also says that Detective
j Doyle told him not to he a fooL He states
further that Detective Purdue asked him
whether he had told everything he knew,
and the accused had replied “Yes.” This,
was repeated two or three times, and the
accused says they took him home about 2
o’clock.
His Honor at a quarter to A adjourned!
the Court until E p.m.
Resuming at 2 o’clock his Honor said; .
I was dealing' with the statement cohcern-
mg the events of April 11—Friday—when
1 1 1 the accused was in tne company at the do-;
teetives ' .
Far About ■l2 Soars.
Mr. Lavan has suggested ,to you that the
inconsistencies ana inaccuracies contained
in this statement arc due' to the fact that
the accused was for a long period under
constant questioning by the detectives. Mr.
Lavan has gone out of his way
To Abus© tha Detectives
for the course they took. Let us look at
the facts. The accused was not under
cross-examination, ; constant questioning,
for 12 hours. Ho was no doubt at differ-
ent periods during the 12 hours question-
ed by the police, and closely questioned.
It was the duty of the police in the cir-
cumstances to question bun closely. The.
suggestion made by Mr. Lavan is that the
police abused the powers they had, and got j
the accused to answer questions ineor- 1
rectly that are now produced against him.,
It is on
Rare Occasions
that counsel for the defence contradicts a
deliberate statement made by his client in
the box. Det.-Sgt. Purdue says: “While
the accused was making the statement his
demeanor 1 was quiet and normal, and he
showed no signs of distress, nor did he ap-
pear flurried. ’ ’ Det, Doyle said the accus-
ed was not distressed at any time while
being examined. I will come to the state-
ment of the accused presently. He had a
conversation with York, who said, “It must
be pretty awkward having detectives ques-
tioning you all the time.,” Auburn said
“Yes,”
“Ton Are In the Mire.”
There is very great difference between a
matter being awkward and one being flur-
ried, and assenting to a statement one did
hot mean; Monson says the accused told
him he had made several statements to
the police and they had got him muddled.
Do the statements show that they are mud-
dled? Do the contents indicate that there
is any sign of exhaustion on the part of
the accused at the time.ho gave them?
They are , not statements that are suddenly
made; they were
Discussed at Length.
They were read over to the accused, and
he signed them. Look at Auburn's . own
evidence. “I cannot say I was flabbergast-
ed by being with the police from 6 to 9
pun. on Friday. My memory was quite
clear. Very little pressure was put on
me.” That is Auburn’s own statement.
He goes on, “I have lio complaint to make
,up to the time I went to the hotel. On
my way back to -the police station I asked
for something to eat. This was about 10
o’clock. They said, ‘'You will get that
soon enough/ I was not allowed out of
the detectives’ hands at the botch” As to
the second statement that 1 have read he
said, “1 gave the second statement volun-
tarily but they twisted it.” As to how
they twisted it you must think for your-
selves. I have read the statements and
the variations he made afterwards. Again
.ho said, “I saw Monson. L-did not tell
' Monson I was flabbergasted.” He also
said “I think I was upset.” 1; Again he
says, ‘There was nothing ux the
two previous statements I want-
ed to correct, on • the Monday.”'
He docs not complain of the statements
at all. What he docs complain of, or at all
events mentions, is that when he had been
out at Westana-road and they left about
6 o’clock he wanted, to know
- Something About Tea,
and {hey told him he would get that later..
Ho had. no food, and in this Court here ho
rather complains that they did not give him'
any food after they had been at the botch
X daresay food would have- been an advan-
tage to h inland it might have been given
to him? but {'do not think the absence of
food shows in any way that the statements
were not deliberately made. The accused
does not really make any serious sugges-
tion that the statements should bo correct-
ed, beyond pointing out the various things
to which I have alluded....
It is suggested _-that_ he could have got


f/7/^
food at the hotei. Well, in the circum-
stances, which yon thoroughly understand,
I think you can readily supply a reason
why the question of food at the hotel was
overlooked both by the accused and by
everyone else concerned. Still, Mr, Lavan
Made Strong Comments
on the police regarding this matter: and
it is for you to judge whether those com-
ments are justified, having regard to what
the accused has said, and whatohappened
during the 12 hours. It is quite unneces-
sary for me to-defend the police, and I
make these remarks only so that you can
appreciate what has been done in this case--
The .police, of course, have to do their duty
for the protection of the public; Whilst
Det.-Sgt. Purdue is held up to you as ask-
ing questions impressively I would remirfd
you of what I quoted to you before about
the conversation in which the accused said,
“Put me inside and I’ll confess' every-
thing,” and : ;"
Scrgt. Purdue’s Obvious Reluctance
to take advantage of that when it was said.
Further, yon must recollect, that that state-
ment was not brought out in esaminition-
in-chief, but in cross-examination bjf Mr.
Lavan. • . ■ ■■ ' ■
Jdr. Lavan disputed this, and sard the
statement was brought out in .rc-ciamina-
'loHis Honor: On April 11 the police took
the accused back home, and he was to come
in again on the Saturday morning. ,He
called at the detective office, at 2 o’clock on
the Saturday, he says, and was .kept there
until half-past 7, Purdue being with him
all the time questioning him..- _ No state-
ment was taken on .teat occasion. The
accused has said here, “I did? say to Pur-
due, ‘lf I were a guilty man. would I have
told you anything about the coat?’ I said
also, ‘lf I were a guilty man would I have
shown you the trucks?’ Purdue said ‘No;
but sometimes people return ,to the
Scenes of Their Crimes.’ ”
Then there was a long conversation be-
tween the two of them as to how the crime
was committed, and hypothetical cases were
nut. No doubt Det.-Sgt. Purdue was en-
. deavoring to get something out of the ac-
cused that would help him against the ac-
cused. : ,
On the Monday there occurred a conver-
sation about his being told he could
Go and Have his Tea,
when he did not seem' to understand. _ The
upshot of that conversation was that the
•- accused was rather pleased that he was al-
lowed to go back to get his tern .On Mon-
day, April, 14, Auburn made another state-
meijt. Yon will recollect that' this is the
statement which was made in pursuance of
a promise that if he was allowed to go
- home he would come back and give satisfac-
tion to the detectives as- regards the enroe-
The,detectives say he, said he would give
- satisfaction “to you”—meaning the de-
tectives—hut not to. ‘ himself lue
accused’s version is quite _different— that
he would come back and give satisfaction
both to the. detectives and to himself. It
is for you to judge. ’
On the Monday when he came into tho
detective o%c : he was.tbers for some time.
He had previously seen Monson, who ad-
vised him to make no more statements to
the detectives., After .waiting some con-
siderable time, he says, he went out at a
Jittle after 5, having been there since 2
o’clock. Purdue arrived at 7 o’clock, and
then the third statement was taken from
tho accused, (His Honor read the state-
ment, the effect of which was that the ac-
cused had no more information to give to
the police.) •
That was after the, interview with Mon-
son,'and it was also after a telephone mes-
sage that the' accused had given to Miss
Sadler at Wooroloo on the - same day. You
have heard what that telephone message
was. The accused’s version differs from
that of Miss Sadler. Accused says he re-
members telling her “If you say that, it
is all yon need sav. ” Miss Sadler says
he. told her on the telephone she was to
Say Nothing to Anyway
who came up. Perhaps too /much import-
ance need not be attached " lo cither of
those statements. It is for you to say.
If a man had got himself under the
suspicion of the police, and they_ were ques-
tioning him." obviously with a view to see-
ing whether or not he was guilty, l.do
not think there is anything unreasonable
in that man. telling a young girl of 18,
who might not be too discreet or too ac-
curate in what she said, to be careful in
what she says. That it was a telephone
message putting Miss Sadler on her guard
dees not necessarily imply that the accus-
ed is guilty. However, you have the con-
versation for what it is worth.
On April 16 accused was arrested. Up
to thiss -point you have some extraordinary
circumstances and von have
The Extraordinary Coincidence
that the man who found the coat found
also the alleged soot at which the murder
was committed, along Wes tana-road. In
this, as 'in most murder cases, the guilt
of" the accused depends upon inferences
which you have to draw from the _ facts
Moved in the case—that is, from circum-
stantial evidence. Naturally, all crimes
ere committed
• As Secretly As Possible,
murder , especially so, having regard to the
Density of death which is involved. I will
direct vou later in re—iect to the prin-
ciples von should apply to the facts of the
case being circumstantial evidence. _ •
But, in considering this question, it will
be of great importance tea. yon pay at-
tention to some of the leadin' ingredients
in'the case,, snch as the clothes the accus-
ed was wearing on the night of the mur-
der, tee button found in O’Neil’s car on
the subsequent day, the blood, human or
, otherwise, found or apparently found on
(the clothes of tho accused—l will deal
! with the question of bloodstains later—-,
the truth or the untruth of tho explana-
tions given by the accused as to how he
discovered the coat and thc_ spot. There
are many other matters which I need not
go into in detail, but which you will re-
alise become of importance when you ar*
considering the case and have to give
; “Guilty” or “Not Guilty”/
. upon circumstantial evidence. .'
It is common ground that Aububn had a
■ giev suit, two blue serge suits, and ■ an
■ other old blue bit which does not com*,
.into the case at all, except, perhaps, te*
•the purpose of considering credibility. _ Ht,
had an old hat which does not come into
the case and he had no overcoat; the onl>
overcoat he had was the one he says he
picked up in the .subway. /He had an-
other hat which he always wore and which
is the hat produced in Cqnrt upon which
Dr.‘ Atkinson, the Government Bacteriolo-
gist, swears there are g
Trapes of Human Blood.
I Gn the night of April? 4, when the
cused went to see. Mis?-Sadler, he wore a
blue serge suit and his usual hat. Ms,
Lavan has,relied upon the evidence or
Miss Sadler as saying that the suit tho
accused is now wearing m teat dock was
the suit that, he had on when he went to
-see her on the everting of April 4. _
Mr. Lavan: The. evidence of Miss, sea-
ler and of Blackmore.
, His Honor: ? You are thinking
'of the missing . button. 1 wJI
deal with tee missing button se-
parately. Just now I.®* 0 speakin?
of tho suit. Miss Sadler in cross-exami-
nation referred’to the suit worn by tee ac-
cused in the dock: She said, Tho suit
the accused his on is very much like tec
suit he had on on the Friday night. The
other blue suit he has is not as new-looK-
injr as the one he. had on on the iriday
night and now. I have,not seen,the other
blue suit fdr some time. The link button
was on the’ old suit.”. She docs say there
that the accused
i Wore the Same Suit
on the Friday night as he is wearing in
tee. dockj but in the circumstances that is


I not positive evidence oh that particular
I.point, for in .her previous answer sne said,
V'The suit the accused has on is very much
■ like th? o°e he wore on the Friday night.”
Of course, he has two blue suits, which, for
the sake of classification, were
[ Fit to Wear in Public.
Naturally, when he went to sec her. he did
not {rat on the suit which was dirtiest in
app&wance. And wo know that accused
had had one suit ’cleaned twice since hi'
. arrest, once before the inquest and again
before his trial.
Mr. Lavan: It was pressed up, but I do
not. know that it was cleaned.
; His Honor: I have it definitely. There
fe no doubt abont that. Naturally waat
| Miss Sadler recollects of the accused’s suit
i--is that he was wearing a bine suit, and I
)’ have no doubt it was the more respectable
lof the two. I should think that a suit
I Cleaned Twice for Special Occasions
during the last two months would be quite
, as respctcable in appearance as the suit he
wore on-the night of April 4. So tfiero
(is very little to be got from that point.
■ Then we have been told that the two suits
(were purchased at the same time in’ Mel-
bourne; both were of blue serge; both had
‘(link buttons, but that there .was some dd
ferencc in' the cut, which difference, how-
ever, has not been pointed out to us. The
question yon have to decide regarding the
blue suit is not as to whether the suit
ihc is wearing in the dock is the same as
he had 1 on on the Friday night, but relates
The Massing Link Button.
Dealing with the link button, as there
are some very important considerations re-
lating to this, I will read some evidence on
, that point. Miss Sadler said that tt*
button was off one of the blue coats. She
had seen that that was so several times
when Aubxrn had been up at
their place ' during the last three
months. It is quite obvious that
she was not referring to the evidence on
June 11, but to something later on. She
said - in another portion of her evidence
that she had not seen the other blue suit
for some time, but that the
Button Had Been Off
the old suit. She said that she had seen
the link button off the coat during the last
three months, and within two or three
months ‘ before April 4. She swore that
she had seen him wearing the old suit with
the button off within two or three months
before April 4. Sho further said, “I saw
him wearing a suit with a button off about
three weeks before April 4. Ido not re-
member. I think it was three weeks be-
fore, but I do not remember the dates,
lam not sure.- I. noticed a button off
' three or four times, ’and I did not, offer
to sewit on for him.”_ There is nothing
'in that. You will notice from Miss Sad-
ler’s evidence that it is quite obvious she
Could Not Fix 1«e Time,
but she knew she had seen the button off
several times, and within ■ a period of
months. You must take her evidence on
: that point for what it is worth. There is
1 this to be said for her. It ■ would h&ve
t been rather surprising if Miss Sadler had
fixed a definite date when she saw the but-
ton off ufilcss something very particular
had drawn her attention, to it, and fixed
the date in her memory.
Mr. Lavan: The most .we can take is that
it was some time before April 4.
Hi* Honor: That is the effect of it. I
have already pointed out to you the evi-
dence of Sergeant Doyle and Purdue as
regards the button they put on the washed
suit at the hotel on which occasion accused
said, “It looks like it.” That is.a non-
committal remark, and there is nothing
much in that. You can see it for your-
selves. I have read what the accused said
to Doyle, and ho also mentioned the mat-
ter to James, who said that Auburn had
told him that the detectives had searched
his room and found a suit he had worn
some time previously. Auburn, he said,
told him that the suit had a button off,
and that the detectives had a similar but-
ton to the one that had been on the suit.
Auburn told him he bad lost the button a
good time previously, and said that a good
many fellows wore jigger buttons, and that
he did not think that should
Connect Him With the Murder.
Auburn also told York what had happen-
ed, and that the detectives when they look-
ed round his room at Osborne Park, found
a coat which he had had for some time, and
that one of the detectives had taken a
jigger button from his pocket and tried
it on the coat, York said that the ac-
cused had told hup. that the button bad
been off for soSje two months, and also
that the button the detectives had corre-
sponded with his own. _
- Mr. tavan: In the depositions he said
it had been off for a {rood few months, and
it had been lost for a (rood time.


*ll.
In the O’Neil murder trial yesterday,
~- te s report dosed, his Honor, iir.:
Justice Hraoer, continued his summing up."
He said:—
Auburn Mid, ‘-At the inquest I said the
button had been off a good few
months. He said be did not
remember when ho lost the but-
ton, it waS so long ago. Mr. Black-
more deals with the button. Ido not
know that you are going to get much as-
sistance from him, because he was 1 ■
Obviously Confusing Urn Suits
of the accused.. Auburn said to him,
‘ They found a button missing, and also
produced a button corresponding with the
other buttons on the coat.” Blaekmore {
said, “I, have not seen you weariiig that !
coat for three or four months. I i
thought it was the old serge coat with the
shine down the back he was referring to.
I have identified the coat, and it was not j
the coat I understood George to mean.” I
That was the old suit. Mr, La van at- J
taches a good .deal of importance to that j
evidence. It must be obvious to you that j
there is some mistake about the suit. 1
_ - Mr. Lavan: I attach this importance to
it, in that he referred'to a suit with the
link button off, a suit Auburn had not worn
for some months.
| His Honor: The only result of that is
that the coat from which tho link button
is off was not the old suit which the wit-
ness, when he gave his evidence, was re-
ferring to. He got ‘confused in the suits.
I do not suppose anyone had seen the old
suit for some time. It had no link but-
ton. Auburn says, “There was a suit
which Had been washed, and which had a
link button missing. The button had oeen
missing about five months. Half the
shank was left on the coat. I cut it off
with a pair of scissors. In doing that I
cut it too close, and cut off a bit of the
material” .
Yon Will See tho Button,
and may possibly come to some conclusion
as to whether this is. the button or nok
Further, he said ho told Blaekmore “The
detectives found a suit which had been'
washed in my room. I described the suit
to him. He said, ‘I have not seen you
wearing the suit for some time.’ ” The ;
evidence of the button is important At
any rate it points to this, that the button
may have been off practically any time
np to five or sis months before, and it
may have been sewn on again. What you
have to decide hero is not whether there .
was a button off tho coat at any time'dur-
ing the past five or six months before the.
crime, but whether at the time in question
the link button
Was On or Not.
If. the link button was on the coat which
Auburn was wearing on the night of the-
murder, and subsequently the clothes he.
was wearing on the night of the murder,
were washed, and this link button was off,
and yon come to that conclusion, then the,
identification of tho button found in the
car with the suit, would be very strong
evidence to . show the connection of the ac-
cused with the murder. '
This is Only a Hypothesis.
lam not saying it is true. It, therefore,-
becomes important to you to satisfy your-
selves that the button was on the suit the
accused was wearing at the tim? of the
crime, and that it was lost by him in the
car. Ton might p rhaps have had some
information from-someone who could have
i sworn as to when the button was off. The
I people most likely ta when the button
- was off would bo those who bad seen him.
frequently. Miss .Sadler cannot give a
definite date. Those at tho hotel might, ;
perhaps, have done so. T only say, per- I
haps, because both Mr. and Mrs. Auburn
have been called, and they have _
Not Said a Word About It.
The two domestics were called, a Miss For-
rest and a Miss Coojpbes. True, they
were only there for six weeks each. _ They
i have not said a word about it, I only
; mention this, to show that apparently no
! evidence can be called to indicate the exac.
[ date when the button was' Efonc, Yon
I must draw your own from that.-
The ' fact of the button being oil would t
not strike many people. • The only person l
who really gives us any evidence of it is-.
Miss Sadler,’and wc have what the accus-
ed himself Says. Now we come to ■ !
The Evidence of the Tailors. ]
First! will read you what tho accused says
further on this subject: “The button first
came oil about three months after I first ,
got the suit. I sewed it on again. They
both came off. One was loose; I pulled it
off. The neat time I sewed it on the same
way. The third occasion the jigger button
pulled off tho end of the link. I cut the
link off and cut a bit of serge off. The
outside button then got loose and came off."
I put two or three threads through it. I;
cannot say where the jigger button is. !■
think it came off when I was working on
a car somewhere. The
Jigger Button
was rather tight; when I bent down it
would pull off. It might have como off
some other way. This is the most pro-,
bablo. My usual habit is to,wear my coat;
buttoned up. It is four or five months
since I finally lost the jigger button. I
worked on cars after losing the jigger but-
ton, and wore the suit out. When working
on cars after I' lost the jigger button I
| fastened the outside button to make ' it
tighter. The outside button is not pulled
off. I never sewed the jigger button any-
where except behind the fixed button. Af-
faf looking at exhibit N (the washed suit)
Thrill hot deny that I may have sewn.the
jigger button elsewhere than behind the
fixed button- I have sewn on buttons at
least on two occasions, and perhaps more.”
Now, we como to deal with four wit-
nesses who were called as _ experts in this
connection. No doubt a tailor can give an
expert opinion *as to what a ■ cloth is like,
and the origin of cloth; and the texture of
cloth which a layman could not give. But
I think that
As to Questions of Eyesight |
and of what a person has seen, a + ailor w j-
no better than yon yourselves arc when i
you are examining the cloth. It would per-)
haps be safer to take the evidence of these
tailors, except perhaps on texture of cloth j
and things of that kind, with reference to 1
what they actually saw or actually did,: 1
and not with reference to what their opin-
ions were. I don’t know that it is neces-
sary to say any more about their opinions.
His Honor read the evidence of Mr,
Berry, master tailor; which included. the
following: “The sewing on the shank of
tho button is the work of an amateur. The 1
piece of wool at the end of the shank is, m
my opinion, of the same material as the-
coat. When I. originally examined the
button, the material at the end of the shank
fitted the hole in the coat very. nicely.”-
His Honor proceeded: Air, Berry .is'
speaking of the time when .he first saw the
button; but when you bear in mind that
the button has been handled and'examined
by various witnesses at different times,,
and also treated bv the Government Bac-
teriologist. von will recognise -that it j
Would be Strange Indeed
if the shank and the material were not in.•
pome way altered. When considering this
yon have to consider all those-facts. Mr.
Berry says that when he,-first saw' the raa-
terial at the end of the shank it fitted the
hole in the • coat nicely. _ I don’t know '
whether you would expect it , to fit exactly. |
Wben a button is tom out of a coat- it:
mav or may not fit the hole in the material. 1
Unless you. see it torn out, you cannot j
swear definitely. Yon can only come to a
conclusion after considering ail the pro-
cesses through which the button has been-
Mr. Berry went on to say:, ‘‘ I examined
it with a. magnifying .glass.,. Where the
hole is, a tailor would.not have,, sewn it
on. ft was sewn on to the cioth only, and
not through on to the canvas. There
have been at least three sewiugs-on. The
corresponding jigger, button has been
j - Sewn On' by an Amateur.
( There'are signs of where the cloth has beeit
j cut. In my opinion the shank has been
I pulled, out, because the wool on the end of


the'shank llts~scT closely into Hio bole, ana
because ibe wool on the end of the shank
is the same as the cloth in the coat. The
hole in the coat also looka’as if the shank
had been pulled out. The button is a com-
mon type of button on a dark suit. The
shank button, and the V :ton on the out- ~
side, are two different butt.ins. The sow-
ing of the outside button fnd the sewing
of tho shank button are quite different. The
outside button .seems sewn by an amateur.'
The threads through the shank button
were first sewn on by a tailor."'
Ho says that the cloth in the coat is quite
ordinary everyday serge, and that the wool
in the
, ' Shank of the Button
would match any other ordinary everyday
serge ot the same color, that you very sel-
dom get two serges of exastly the same
color, notwithstanding which the shades of
blue in blue serge are not difficult for a
tailor to distinguish. Be says that m.his
opinion the wool in the shank still fits. On
such a point you must
Disregard His Opinion,
and form your own opinion. Then he
points out that if you wash the serge in
water it would have some effect on the
size of the hole, and also the jigger but-
tons are very common, and do not last very
long. Then he says that the outside but-
ton is an odd button, and he goes on to
say that the serge in the shank button and
the serge of the suit agree in shade.
Gtercteko gave similar evidence. Ho ex-
amined the jigger button and the coat, and
found the button a little frayed since first
he saw it. He says there is a small piece
of serge adhering to the end of the shank.
That he compared tho shank button with,
the hole in the coat through a magnifying
glass, and that it appeared to him the but- 1
ton had been palled out of the coat. He
says he fitted it in the hole, and that ,
. It Pitted Exactly.
Tno wool in the shank, he says, is the same
as the material in the coat. Ho says
there are thousands of pieces of serge of •
exactly the same blue. He found that
the outside button was not sewn on by a
tailor, but that the jigger button was sown
on correctly. The face we s poorly sews
on, and the neck of the but; m was a very
poor jobi ,He said it was, of no use try- ■
ing to fit it now, that some of the strands
had worked down oyter the cloth. Wash-
ing, he said, would unravel tho SBigo. He
added that there were many shades of
serge approximating . tho one shade, and
that sometimes it was impossible to tell the
difference. He told ns the button was in.
common use- 1
Mr. Lavan: What he did say yaa, ‘Ts
there a man on the face of the earth who
conld swear to that little piece of ma-
terial?,”
His Honon l told yon before, Mr. Lavan, j
that a tailor is not an expert on evidence.
It is of no use saying that they could not
swear it, because they have sworn it It
is
Tor the Jury to Ssy
whether they believe the evidence.
Mr. Parker: There was some mention
about a “tail” on it.
His Honor: I have no note of that The:
next witness on this point was Ewan. He'
said he had' examined tho coat and the .
button, and compared the materia} on the
shank with the coat. He conld not say
whether tho material on the shank came
from the coaV He compared it with
several different pieces of serge, and. found
it might have come from any one of them.
He says the outside button was sewn oa‘
Very amateurishly, and that tho inside but-,
ton .was sewn as a tailor would sew it. In-
digo serges, he says, when placed togettief,
are very different, that both buttons are
common in the trade, and that jigger but-
tons are very fashionable. He would no*
swear that the garments produced—that is |
tho washed suit and the bundle of serge— i
were the ..same. He could not say whe- j
ther tho jigger button and outside but- :
ton belonged to the suit; the difference was j
very slight. Woollands, another expert,,
could not say whether the material ip the
Iraftoh came from the material in the coat. -
So you have two witnesses on the one side •
saying the button does come from the coat,
and two others who declare they cannot;
say. Ido not know. what assistance you .
are to get from them. It is for yon to _
use your own eyesight and judgment, and
Pay No . Attention
to those expert tailors, except when they
are giving their opinion on such things as
the texture of cloth. This question of
whether the button came from the coat, is,
of course, of the greatest importance in
the case.
The_ nest matter of importance to con-
sider is the ' T
Washing of tho Clothes.
You will recollect, of course, that the po-'
lice found a washed suit, which has been
produced in court, in the bedroom of the.
accused. Marie Coombes gave evidence
regarding certain garments being washed. |
She told us that she was at the Osborne l
Park Hotel for about six weeks and left;
a week after Easter, about April 25. She
was there, roughly speaking, three weeks'
before and three weeks after April 4 That .
is of importance when considering her evi- r
dence. She said; ‘‘l nsed to clean out
the room of tho accused shortly after 9
o’clock. I heard of tho Crawley affair. I
saw clothes hanging on the back of a chair.
I only saw them once. The accused slept
in the room, but went away once early in
April ■
After tho Crawley Affair.
He was only away one night. One morn-
ing I .went, to get a jug of water out of
the bathroom,, and saw that he had been :
washing. It was on a Monday or a Tues-
day.” Mr. Lavan has claimed that it was
•on Tnesday, because on that day the accus-
ed went in to see Blackmore.
. Mr. Lavan; No,, on Monday morning
early.
Ills;Honor: On Monday the.accused went
in to see Blackmore early, and Blackmore i
fixed the visit at about 10.30, but later said I
that it, was nearer 10 than half -past. , J
Mr; Lavan; In.the lower Court I point-
ed out that he had said it was half-past 9. j
His Honor: Miss Coombes said that it!
was either on ,thc Monday or the Tues-
dayi / She said there were some dark clothes _
lying.in some clean water in the bath. She’
said: “He told me not to bother about the
bathroom, as he had some washing to do;
he said he had been away' to the South- ■,
West and got his clothes splashed with
mud.” ■ Later on she said that he asked
her for a clqth to mop up. Then ,in :
cross-examination she said: ‘‘l never saw
him Washing clothes, ” She also told us.
that she was only in the room in the morn-
• ings and afternoons, and that at other,
j times her duties kept her downstairs. Fur-
tiler on, she said: “He often asked me to
bring the electric iron upstairs to him be-
cause
Ho Had to Do Some Ironing.
I got it for him on several occasions. I
never' saw him hang his washing on the
line.” Later on she said: “When I was
in the bathroom I saw some dark material.
Auburn was upstairs at the time. I saw.
him come out of tho bathroom.” Sgt.
Doyle had also told them that late on the
night when they inspected the hotel they
went upstairs with the accused, and on the
back of a chair covered by_ other clothing
he had found the washed suit. He told the.’
Court that it looked as though it had been
recently washed but not pressed. Doyla
stated: “I said to the, accused, ‘When did
you wash this?’ Ho said ‘About two
weeks ago.’ I asked him why. • Ho said
he thought the suit got dirty working-on
the motor car. I.asked him how he .washed
them and ho said, ‘First with petrol and
then with cold water.’ ” Miss Forrest was
also called. She was at the hotel for,
about six weeks in January and February.
She speaks of his
Washing in tho Bathroom,
and said that he had washed a soiled coat
and pants about three weeks from Jiinu-
ary 5. She did not give the exaet date.


She said she never saw any bloom m ms
room or splashed on the floor, or anything
of that kind. You have, heard the sugges-
tion by the Crown that'the suit that mad
been washed, and of which the police had
taken possession, was washed after April t
4 and was washed in order to get ria of 1
blood stains which would be the natural
result of.’a murder. The evidence is that
Marie Coombes on Monday or Tuesday af-
ter the Wagin trip saw some dark material
or clothes being washed in the bathrpom,
and that is as far as she can go.
The explanation given by the accused was
that when he washed one-suit about a fort-
night before April 4, he had done so be-
cause it got dirty in connection with a mo-
tor car. He washed another suit earlier
in the year, in January or February, be-
cause that had bloodstains which he says j
gof there from blood from his arm when 1
he was carrying a cylinder. In judging
whether .these clothes were washed on Mon-
day or Tuesday after April 4,
It Becomes Important
to consider what Miss Coombes Bays was
tin. reason given , for the washing being ,
done by the accused. She says the accus-
ed told her he had been away to the South-
West, and got his clothes splashed with
mud. The accused denies that. He says
he said nothing of the kind. Yon saw Miss
Coombes in th > box. Yon saw how she
gave her evid meo. Did she strike yon as
one who ha ; invented it ? Why shonld
she invent a statement that the clothes
had got splashed with mud on a trip to
the South-West f Why should her imagina-
tion run in that direction? The'accused
denies it, but if yon believe her, it has s
Very strong bearing on the case, as to the
Identity of the Clothes
that were washed. Assuming that ho had i
said it, was there any mnd? Miss Sadler ■
cays it was not wet going down to Wagin ;
on the Saturday, and she did not get
splashed with mud. It is quite true she
was well protected, , sitting behind the |
driver’s screen. . She also says there was \
no mud cither on the way to, or returning -
from Wagin. She is referring to mnd
generally,, and not to being splashed. An-
other witness says it was starting* to rain |
about 3.30 on Sa.tnrday, and that at one !
creek coming back there was about three
yards of water to go through- The accus-
ed says he did not make the statement at-
tributed to him by Marie Coombes. If ha
made that statement, and he gave
A False Excuse,
von wnwA draw your own conclusions as to
, what the clothes were that hack recently
1 been washed. Now wo com® to- the blood*
I do not want to *o all throne* Dr. At-
kmson’s evidence. This has been done at
considerable length by counsel, and yon
have heard about the various tests. Dr.
Atkinson says he cannot swear there is
blood on the coat and trousers. That a
in accordance with the infallible testa
‘ for the presence of human blood, or blood.
He cannot swear there is blood, but he says
that in his Opinion there is blood on the
clothes. What his opinion on that subject,
U worth is for you,to say. He does, how-
ever, swear that there is not only blood,
But Human Blood
on the cuff of the overcoat, and also on the
hat. The question is how did the blood
get on the hat? That is the hat the ae-
ensed was wearing, and there is human
blood on it. Yon have seen the hat; and
you have seen the car. lam referring
to the blood above the scats of the car. X
gather from what has been said there are,
many small spots of blood on the hood,
like the small spots on the hat, spots that
might have been caused not by a drop of
blood, but practically by almost a spray of,
blood- Two doctors were called for the de-
fence. You have heard their evidence,
and I do; not propose to go through it
They admitted that . „ :
If Small Arteries Were Out, .
the spots would not be such as would come
from a big-artery. . A verv tinv artery 01
blood would spurt, and that might cause
them- If yon accept that explanation,’
tlwn yon have to consider the serious ques-
tion of comparing the spots of human ;
blood on the hat with what yon have seen
on the hoo'd of the motor car. There is
uo doubt there is human blood there. The;
question is
How Did the Blood Get There?
What explanation is put forward by the,
accused? The accused has a bad ana..
There,is abundant evidence in this Court-
from several -witnesses their'when the arm ;
is knocked, on several occasions the blood ,
has trickled down it as far as the palm of.
the hand. ; 'You have the evidence of Mr.
and Mrs. Auburn. T think of Eddy, and
one or two others on the point. It was
suggested that the blood would _ trickle
down to the hand in the way described. It
was suggested by the Crown that
th“ blood would not run down. ,
You have, however, heard _ the vari-
ous witnesses, and there is no rea-
son to think otherwise. According
to Miss Forrest, there was no trace 01
blood in the bedroom of the accused.
His explanation is that he would throw
his hat down in the bedroom—-perhaps up-
side down, or sideways, or any way, or
elsewhere —and that when his arm got Irart j
and used to bleed, thus causing him a good i
deal of pain, he would swing his arm over i
his shoulder, or flick it. or make some other !
movement -with it He i
. Accounts for the Blood .1
being on his hat by putting forward the
view that when he was swinging his arm!
as it bled, or when he was flicking his arm,
the blood got on to the hat in that way,
This is not a question of
Expert Evidence;
you will have to decide it for yourselves.
You will have to consider ' whether the
movements which have been indicated by,
thq accused sprinkled the blood on the'
hat in the same manner as small spots and-
specks of blood were sprinkled on the hood
of the car by the cutting of very small
arteries. It may be that the blood from
the arm instead of being sprinkled in small 1
specks like that, would go in
Larger Spots
and fewer spots. However, it is entirely I
for you to sav. .If the blood w&re ini
any way congealed it. could not spray ; and.
as vou know, blood congeals verv quickly.
Now I come to another incident, the in- ;
cident of tne
Mysterious Parcel,
You may , attach importance to it. (jr vou
mav not: the matter is for you to consider.'
Miss Sadler says, “On Friday night (Anril
4), I saw a parcel under .his (aecnsfed’s) '
hat It was about 2ft long. He had
a lot of paper round it. It was about as
thick as a v'er when the ruler was put in.
It was tied in two places. I picked it up.
I though it was a lump of iron, from the
weight. It might have, been wood, I
asked accused what he had it for, and he
said, ‘To knock yon on the head with.’/
That was said jocularly, of course. Miss
Sadler did not see the accused when he
left, but he says he did not take any
parcel away with him, and' Mr. Moir says
ho did not see accused take any parcel
away. Accused may have had the parcel
about his clothes; but if you have a par-
ed 2ft. long, or even 13in. long, which
consists of a lump of iron, or .is as
weighty as iron, 1 think that if you put
a parcel in your pocket there will be some
indication, if only by the dragging of your
coat, to show that' something is . her
taken away; and Mr. Moir saw notnu ;•
Mf. Moir says that ho sometimes tabes
home fittings and pieces, of pipe, but tne-o
18 No Evidance , ~ ,
to identify them with this parcel which
Miss Sadler; says she saw under the hat.
The parcel has disappeared, and the only
time you have any suggestion- as to its
continued existence is at Some days alter
April 4; I am not sure it was not a week
after. . A ,
Mr. Lavan; More than a -week.
Hia Honor; Say ten days aftoj> when


Miss Coombes, in sweeping accusers room.
with a 'broom, struck somethin- heavy nn-.
der the bed. aomctnmg that rolled over,,
bui it does seem unlikely that li this par-
cel was used to commit the crime, the ac-
cused would _ __
- Leave It There
for a week or ten days. . There is no-’
thing really to connect this parcel with,
the crime. All you have heard of is the’
existence of the parcel brought by the ac-
cused oh the evening of April 4, when he
saw Miss Sadler. After that, it has ap-
patently ceased to exist. It
Would be Very Unwise
I think,'to draw any inference' against
the accused from that matter. I have
pointed ont the extraordinary coincidence
of the one man finding not only-the coat,
but also the spot where the murder appar-
ently was committed.
After considering that coincidence, you
will have to decide, how did accused find'
tho spot, and is the account which he gave
the police about finding the. spot on the
Monday afternoon while he was ridin*
Johnson’s bicycle correct or not? Or is
it correct that he told Blackmore, as Black-
moro swears, that he found the spot when
riding in Singe’s cart We know from
Singe’s evidence that Singe’s car
Did Not Go
to : that spot. The explanation put for-
ward of his finding the spot is that he was
riding Johnson’s bicycle, and it jyill be
necessary to refer to the evidence of this,
ns it is undoubtedly very important in the '
case. Johnson was called—the last wit-
ness on June 17, and his examination had
not. concluded when the Court rose.' Re
said he was 15 years old, and lived at Os-
borne Park. He had_ known the accused fon
about 18 months. His evidence continues,
‘‘l Lave the use of a motor Bicycle belong-
ing to my uncle, a Quadrant. I Lave
conversed with the accused about the bike. 1
I gave it to him to repair on several oc-
casions. The last occasion was between
April 8 and 10. P ’ According to accused’s
statement it was on April 7 v that he found
the spot in Westana-road. Johnson may
or
Kay Not he Correct ~,
m (he date. One can hardly expect the:
fbat age to be exact.
1 told than I wanted him. to fix it up. I
took the bicycle to the hotel, but Auburn
xras not there, so I took it along to Eddy’s
shopand left it in his shop. I spoke to
Auburn the Monday before, or the Mon-
day week before, three or four days any-
way lam not sure. *1 next saw Anburn
Sunday, April 13. He came to see me
tod came on a posh bike. He said to mo,
‘What have you done to the bike?' I
told him the oil had got into the engines
md that I had left the bike at Eddy’s.
He said he did not know anything about
it” Now, if that is true, if on April 13
he told the boy he did not know anything
about the bicycle when the boy told him
he had left It at Eddy’s, it Is difficult to
believe that the accused had
Got the Btoycsa At All
at (bat. time, that is, up to April 13. ■ U
Auburn on tho 13th told Johnston he did
not know anything about the bicycle at
that time, it is difficult to understand how
on the 7th he was riding that bicycle down
the Westana-road., It is for you to say
whether or not you believed Johnston when
be made that statement __ Then Johnston
goes on: ‘‘He said he did.not know any-
thing about it, but would go and do it un.
The , bike was at my house from April 1,
and a long time before that, months before,
until I took it to Eddy’s. Nobody used it
when it was at my pjace.” He went out
of the witness box that night, and next
morning you may or may not have noticed
a difference in his manner. He was sitll
under examination jn chief, tod this is
what he said: ‘‘l left tho bicycle at Eddy’s
: shop between the Bth and 10th- Prior to
i the Bth or 10th the bicycle had not been
used for nine months. I took it to Eddy's
in a cart. .1 got the bike back on the
Wednesday after George was arrested. I
took the belt off and pushed it back. I
got it from alongside the picket fence.
Eddy came along and toot ont the sparking
plr». Auburn has been.to, my place only;
once, on the 13th. I live from one and a -
half to two miles from the hotel. I
left , the bicycle for repairs at the hotel,•
sometimes at Eddy’s. I used to go to -
Osborne Park nearly every day. The bicy-'
ele was down there between the Bth and'
10th. Ido hot know how long it had'
been there. It may have been taken down
before several days- lam cot sure of
my dates. I have not cot an excellent ;■
memory.” .1 warn you at this stage that
in dealing with evidence of that kind, you;
conld hardly expect him to be certain as to
his dates. Continuing, ho said in his 1
\statcment that it was on this occasion that"
he took it as far as Anburn’s. He said
that Auburn’s father had spoken to him,
and in consequence he tookff the bicycle to
Eddy’s shop. He left it there, and on
the 16th George spoke to him. It was
about the second Sunday after ho had
brought it He said that he told Auburn,
that he had
Loft the Oil Taps Turned On.
and that it ran into the engine, and he
had drained it off from the bottom, and
taken the car for repairs. This conver-
sation, he said, was all that had taken
place. That was his evidence,. and it was ,
quite possible he did take the bicycle down,
between the Bth and 10th, which were the
dates he fixed in his examination in chief.
It is for yon to decide whether the accused
used Johnston’s bicycle on this day as stat-
ed- Auburn said in referring to the bicy-
cle that he know Charlie Johnston, who
had a motor'bicycle. It had been many
times at his place, and it had been there
on Friday, April 4. He saw Johnston in.
the back yard and they spoke, subsequently
to vhich Johnston took the bicycle in the
direction of Eddy’s, store.. He said that
on the Monday after the Wagin trip he
saw George working on the motor bicycle
outside the kitchen door before lunch, and
that he saw him on tho bicycle
between 2 and 3 in the afternoon, going
towards Pcfth.. Mrs. Auburn also refers
to it and mentioned the bicycle being re-
paired outside the kitchen. She also said
she saW the accused riding the-bicycle on
a subsequent .date. Auburn, sen., referr-
red to the: 4th, but Ido not know how he
fixed the date. It is not clear.
Mr. Lavan: He said it was tho day be-
fore George went away. ,
His Honor; He fixed the date that way.
It is for you-to decide on tho evidence ten-
dered whether tho accused did have John-
ston’s bicycle ready-and able to be ridden
on April 7, and was able to make the
visit to Westana-road. So far I have to
put before you the case as far as I can in
sequence as ’regards facts. Besides the
probabilities and
. The Extraordinary Comddenoea
which seem to exist in this case —I am now
referring to the conflict of testimony—an
independent defence is set up by counsel
■for the accused to show that on the night
of April 4 it was impossible for the ac-
cused to have committed the crime, because
■ during the time it would have been poe-
i siblo for the murder to have been commit-
ted Auburn was in another place. We know
that O’Neil left his home about 7.20, ap-
parently upon a long trio to the country.
His car was next seen near the Sabiaco
gates of the Park at about 10JL5, and a
car, whether O’Neil’s or not, was heard
close to Vineent-street at about 1U.5. Whe-
ther that car was O’Neil’s or not It Is very
hard to say. because that cannot be deter-
mined definitely by anyone who saw it at
that time. ' No one identified it them.’ A
car was there at about 12 o’clock, and a
car was ■■■there next morning, because we
have heard the evidence given oy uollina
that’it-was in tho same position.
Mr. Lavan; He does not say it was tha
same car.
His Honor: A car was m the Same place.
That car is seen and identified by number
by. Chinhcry at abou ? 4 - 30 a - m - H tha
ear was there _ihat night, then rr


c ify/p-tt-.
. _ ~'' Woald Net be Inconsistent
with the accused having committed the'
murder, assuming that he did not after-
wards account for his time on that even-
ing. There is a difficulty there as regard*
the movement of the car, and it will be for
you to decide whether the car was seen
moving at all about 4 a.m. by the milkman,
add that car was undoubtedly the car that
Chihncry saw in the morning. Assume
that the car got there at 11.30 p.m*, and
that,another car was seen moving at tho
spot about 4 o’clock in the morning.
Mr. Lavan; O’Neil’s car. :
His Honor: Yes. It was apparently
seen coming down the hill in the early
hours of the morning. It may have been
someone who was connected with the car,
and who had gone back to it after 11.30
p.m.,.and tried to get, it away. ' The car
might happen to have been moving foe
that reason. It may be that it wonld gn
down hill and would not go np. If thta n
so,, there is 1 -
No Evidence to Connect the Accused
with it. There is nothing to show that the
accused was tho person who was with the
car in the early morning. So far as the
evidence goes he went back home, reaenmg
there about midnight. His mother heard
him come in, and she saw him in bid at 6
o’clock in the morning.
Mr, Parker: At 7 o’clock in the morn-
mg.
His Honor: It docs not make mueft dif-
ference. His own statement is that he did
not come out again. He was seen on the
verandah reading the newspaper at 8
o’clock. If it was O’Neil’s car coming
back and coming for the first time to Vin-
cent-streek at 4 o’clock in the _ morning
there docs not seem to bo anything at all
to connect tho accused directly with tho
car. You are then thrown back to con-
sidering the extraordinary coincidence.
There is another aspect of the matter. Au-
burn’s account of the evening is that ha~
left Miss Sadler’s at half-past 7, ami
went to the pictures by himself. He says
when he got there-he saw
A Little Pvt at the End
of one of the pictures. It was a continu-
ous picture show. I think he said he was
there about, ten minutes before the end of
one of the pictures. He then staved there
until he had got back to the same phtoe
in the picture, so that he saw it all. Ho
did not wait after that. He probably
left the pictures about , ten minutes before
the ordinary closing time. If that is so,
he got out about five minntes past 10 or
quarter-past 10.- You cannot put it later
than quarter-past 10. : It is verv difficult
to fix the time. Miss Johnson tells you it
is about a seven minutes’ walk from there
to Newcastlc-street. Therefore, about
seven minutes after he got out of the pic-
tures, a little after 10, he got to the shop.
Tho Extraordinary Part Of It
is this: It is an incident which, when ho
was giving his movements to the police,
he never said a word about; and he never
said a word about it to others until his at-;
tention was drawn to it —Mr. Crisp, for
instance.;
Mr, Lavan: Ho never said a word about
Moirs, either, in auv of tho statements.
His Honor: No; he said nothing about
Moirs or about going to Miss Sadler that,
night. Well, he might have done that be-
cause before half-past seven is not the ma-
terial time to account for. perhaps. Mi’s.
Luyer was called, nod said she had known
the accused from March 5 last. She and
Miss Johnson took over the business then,
and accused was a customer who used to
come in every night, and get two hot pies ,
and a bottle of limejuice. She says she .
used to put the pies on to heat at 11
o’clock. He came in any time after 11.
On the night of April 4 he came in much
earlier than usual—about 10 minutes past ‘
10 by tho clock. She believed the clock
-CT-as ten minutes fast, which would make it ,
I about 10 o'clock. He got two cold pica |
and a bottle of limejuice and _soda. _ The j
mes were not ready for him. fche- said to
him, “You are early to-night, George. )
He paid for them. He only got cold pies j
on one other occasion. On all Other occa-
sions he got hot pies. The other
when he cot cold pies is not mentioned in
her evidence.- 1 ■ .. ~ ■ .
i Mr. Lavan: She had forgotten the other
'occasion, Sir. • . . ~ , ■ _
His Honor: Then he went straight awsv,
ro he was <mlv there for two or three
minntes. Mrs. Lnver says: “He nearly
always came alone.” She goes on to ;
that she realised the importance of this j
evidence: “As soon as Mr. Auburn vras ■
arrested. I saw this mlhe paper on the
evening of April 16. I knew it wiM »
tsblish an alibi. I thought at tho tana
he Could Not Have Been tho Murderer. :
I knew it was April 4he came in, bo-
esuse Miss Johnson was out visiting, and
she had just come into the stop about five
minutes before. I did not look at the
clock.” That presumably refers to the
time of Miss Johnson’s return. On the
Saturday night she was on duty, and she;
trld me Mr. Auburn did not come m. i
have always remembered the date he came
to* She went on to say she had given
her first statement in writing teMr. Lavan
on May 13. She said she thought her evi-
dCn E'tablj3h the Accused’s Innocence,
that they bad intended to keep ’ i jto them-
selves. and onlv if need be to me for-,
ward later, as they did. She said people
were always saving whv did she not go
arc? tell Mr. Lavan what she knew. it,
Jres not until after the inquest that she
Went to Mr. Lavan’s office. She then goes- ;
oa/ to say she always wrapped the-bottle
in paper, end that he paid Is Id. She had
eten Mr. Lavan’s advertisement in the.
tewsv.per, and it might be one or two
davs afterwards when she went in. She
Baid that Miss Johnson went out every se-
et.nd night, but she, the witness, did not
know where she went. She had gone over
the evidence either in “The Daily News <
er in the “West Australian.” Auburn, she
said, usually caught the last tram, some-
times a tram a little earlier. On the night
in Question he was wearing a waistcoat,
but did not unbutton his coat which was
buttoned. According to the witness he
coufd reasonably expect to find a mend
in the shoo at about 11 pm-. She knew
him very well, and he had asked her to
call him by his ’ Christian name. She said
she would readily let him have the pies
without payment, and would have loaned
him his fare. She had, she said, - on
ant or two occasions ‘
Let Him Have His Order,
«r,d he had paid on the next day. v ,
Mr. Lavan: I think she said he had
Hu overcoat that night. . , .
His Honor: There is no suggestion that;
he was wearing an overcVat. However, 1*
did not make a note; of that. 1 am afraid-
-1 shall not be able to finish to-mght, so 1
will adjourn until 9.45 to-morrow. morn-
ing
TO-DAY’S PROCEEDINGS.
Before continuing his summing up to-
day. His Honor said to Mr, Lavan: Thera
are one or two things X want to clear up,
but they are not of very much conse-
quence. When you interrupted me yes-
terday about the suits, I cannot help
thinking there was some misunderstanding.
What was your objection)! 1 .did not note
it at the time, because I was addressing,
the jury. . 1
' Mr. Lavan: It had to do with the evi-
dence as to the two washings. When ; it,
came to the question of the button, I,
pointed out that Miss Sadler stated that
the other blue suit had tho link button
missing at some indefinite period, and
that Blackmore also said, “Why, that suit ;
with the link button missing, I have not
seen him wearing for some time.”
His Honor: That is not tho point It
Was about two suits, and one being dean


red Detore tao inquest, and again before
tins triaL
Mr., Lavan: It tree as to -whether they
wire cleaned or pressed up in order to
make them look more presentable.
Mr. Parker: The evidence is that the
suits wore cleaned and pressed.
Mr. Lavan: 1 was not quite clear myself.
I -will not say anything that is inaccur-
ate.
~ His Honor: Unfortunately, I hare miss-
ed that point in my index and cannot find
ii't It does not, however, matter much,
because the Tory have heard the evidence,
(Summing up resumed.)
Continuing his summing up to the jury,
bis Honor said: When the Court adjourn-
ed yesterday afternoon we were dealing
with the evidence of Mrs. Layer. This
is. of course, important on the question a*
to whether on the evening of April 4 the
accused was in the shop about 10 o’clock,
for that would practically have prevented
him—:
It Is For You To Say—
from having had anything to do with the
murder. If he was there at 10 o’clock on
that evening he could not possibly have
been in the motor car. The important por-
tion of the evidence is whether this occur-
red on that date, the 4th, or not. Mrs.
Luver fixed the date because she says Miss
Johnson came in shortly before Auburn
did.
' Mr. Lavan: There were other ezremuh
stances.
His Honor: Yes, but the jury heard the
evidence. This, however, was the principal.
I do not propose to go through all the cir-
cumstances. There were also two other
witnesses, two policemen, called. Their
evidence is not very long. One of them,
Diiperuzel, says he wqj at the shop on
22 in plain clothes, and that Mrs.
Luyer sapke to him. He says “She asked
tele
What I Thought About the Murder.”
She said doubt referring to the ac-
eused—was in the shop on the night of
April 4 He came in about 10j an hour
serlier. than usual, for somd hot pies.
They were not ready for him and he took
them cold. She said Miss Johnson was
,i3ut visiting on that night, and came in
after Auburn had gone. She said Miss
Johnson asked her after she (Miss John-
son) came in, whether Auburn had been
in on that night. _ She said she replied,
“Yes, _he came in an hour earlier.”
She said' that when asked to remember the
conversation a month later during the triaL
Constable Williams also gave evidence, say-
ing he knew Mrs. Luyer and Miss Johnson,
and was in the shop on April 22 or 23
about 10.30 p.m. in plain clothes. He went
■with Miss Johnson to Constable Bannon’s;
he was escorting her there. Coming back
he had a conversation with Miss Johnson
about the murder, and she said that Mrs.
Luyer saw Auburn on the night of the
murder, that he came into the shop earlier
than nsnal, and that she gave him two pies.
This particular night he would not, wait
for his pies to be warmed, but said’ he
would take them cold. The constable goes
»n to say that he was at the shop a day or
two later, about 11 o’clock, when both
Mrs. Lnver and Miss Johnson were , there.
He asked Mrs. Luyer: “Did yon say yon
jaw Auburn on the night of the murder?”
She said, “Yes, I remember quite well;
Miss Johnson was out at the time, and she
tame in later, and after she came back she.
asked me, ‘Hasn’t George
Been In Yot?’ ”
Mrs. Luyer replied “He came in earlier
than usual and would not wait for his pies
to be warmed.” Miss Johnson made no
remark. The constable further went on
io say that he knew Miss Johnson said she
had been told not to trust him. ‘Hs also
stated that he had no doubt whatever about
ihe conversation.
Mr. Lavan: I would point out that two
months elapsed before the constable gave
his evidencei.
' His Honor: That is «x Yon hare there
% conversation detailed by those two eon-:
(tables, which contradicts Mrs," Layer on a
- Most Material Point.
Of coarse, there are other drcnmstances
abont the calling, for the two cold pies,
but it must be obvious that if the con-
stables are correct in what they say, Mrs.
Luyer is quite wrong. She says that she
remembered it and that Miss Johnson came
in shortly before Auburn left. - The con-
stables say she said Miss Johnson came in
afterwards.
Now I come to Miss Johnson’ evidence.
She carries on the shop with Mrs. Luyer;
she had known Auburn since March 5. Ha
always came in between 11 and 11.30 every
night. He had a standing order for two
pies and a bottle of lime juice and soda,
Two pie« were put on to heat for him about
H pm. On the Friday he came in very
early, “jnst after I (Miss Johnson) walk-
ed into file shop ” He got the same order,
the pies cold. Mrs. Luyer said, “Yon are
early to-night, George,” as she saw him
coming into the room. She looked at the
clock; it was ten minutes past ten here.
Our clock is a few minutes fast. I re-
mained in the shop until Mrs. Luyer got
the parcel ready. Auburn then left. It
yas April 4 Auburn did not come in the
next night. I remarked on this to Mrs.
Layer on the Sunday morning.
He Had No Overcoat,
and -was in a navy blue suit, I heard of
the murder on Saturday about 2 pm. I
first gave a statement to Mr. Lavan on
May 15. Mrs. Luyer saw Mr. Lavan first.
■ I saw him two days afterwards.” The
witness was not quite definite as to that,
lut it was very soon afterwards. Then
ehe stated that she had read Mrs. Layer’s
evidence in the paper “feis morning. ” In
gross-examination she said: “After George
was arrested I realised the importance of
this evidence.” He was arrested on April
15. “I saw the paper produced of April
15. I recognised the importance more so
after the inquest. I know the evidence
would establish an alibL My evidence
would prove he was in oar shop about 10
o'clock in the evening. When the first
announcement of the murder came out, I
thought it was late at night. I did not
communicate with the authorities because
1 did not like to be drawn in. I did not
know until after the inquest that he had
not stated himself that he was in our shop,
that evening. I always knew the day of
the arrest. _ It takes about three minutes
to make a pie hot. He has never been in
since April 4 I did not sec any change.
It is,abont seven minutes’ walk from the
Grand pictures to our shop.”
Miss Johnson also, it is alleged by fits
Crown,
Made Contradictory Statements
to Mr. Roberts and Mr. Murphy. Mr.
Roberts says he is a stereotyper an the
“West Australian” newspaper, and that
he lives close by. He returned from the I
East on April 16, from a holiday trip. “H;
was a Wednesday. Igo into the shop at
the comer of Beaufort and Newcastle
streets.” There are two ladies there.”
He says ho saw those two ladies in the box
giving their evidence. He states that about
2 o’clock he went into the shop. Miss
Johnson was there, and said to him, “What
do you think of the murder?” Mr. Ro-
berts replied “1 only know what I have'
read in the newspapers in the East” Mr.
Roberts’ evidence continues: “I saw her
the next day at the shop about 5120 pm.
She had ‘The Daily News’ in her band. I
Bind, ‘1 see there has been an'arrest in the
murder case.’ She said'‘Yes; if it is the
young fellow 1 think it is, ha came to the
shop every night but this. It is a funny
thing that it is the only night he missed
coming into the shop for months.’
I left the shop and went home.”
Later on he saw her and said to her, “1
thought yon told me Auburn was not in the
shop on the night of the murder?” She
said, “No, it eould not have been me, it
must have been my sister.” The witness
added that the only person he saw iij the
shop was' Miss Johnson, and that he had
never spoken to the other lady. He re-
peated to her, “I. thought you gave mo to


Understand, that the night of April 4 was
the first night Auburn missed coming tfl
the shop?” The witness said that'though
at an earlier period there had been some
doubt about the conversation, he then had
No Doubt Whatever,
adding that he went into the shop pretty,
often. ' He was confident that Miss John*
son said “the night of April 4 was the onli
night that Auburn had not been in,” and
he was equally confident he had never had
a conversation with Mrs. Luyer concerning
the murder. He was sure he could not
have mistaken the two women. The re-
ference to Mrs. Luyer as heiiV sister to
Miss Johnson may strike you as somewhat
strange, for, of course, they are not sis-,
ters; but there seems to have been some
impression in the neighborhood that they
were sisters, because Murphy also thought
they were sisters. Murphy, when in the
box, said he had been going.frequently to
the shop for about four years. He said
he was in the shop the day. after April 17,
having gone in to use the ’phone at about
7.30 in the evening. Both women were
there, one reading “The Daily News,” the
other leaning over the counter. The one
behind the counter, the tall one, said, “Is
not this a terrible thing about young Au-
burn.” On Murphy asking did she know
him, she replied, “Yes,” whereupon Mur-
phy asked what he was like. She said,
“He is a well-behaved, gentlemanly, clean
looking yonng fellow, . •
Very Weil Mannered,
and nicely spoken. He used to see Us
yonng ladw, "and then come in here and
have a chat. He meets a lot of yonng
boys here abont the same ago as himself.”
Murphy asked how long it was since she
had last seen him. and she said, “Not for
a long time.” Ido not know what she
meant by a long time; it is entirely for
you to say. This conversation is denied
by both ladies. In cross-examination,
Murphy said it had passed out of his mind
until he read Mr. Lavan’s address. Mur-
phy was emphatic in saying that one of the
ladies declared that Aubnrn had not been
in for a long time, and that the other lady
could not have gyoided hearing what was
said. It is for you to say what credit
you will give to those conversations. You
have seen the witnesses in the box, and
you have to”~ask yourselves whether the
evidence given by them was satisfactory.
If yon believe the two lodies, that Auburn
was in the shop that night at abont 10
o’clock—it is entirely for you to say—l
think you must come to the conclusion that
if he were there at 10 o’clock he could not
have had anything to do with the car at
that time. You may think be may have
been in the car before that time, but if
you do that, you have to consider the other
explanation which has been given, and de-
cide what credit to attach to it. A curi-
ous thing happened in connection with
this. The chemist’s assistant at Trou-
ehet’s says that on April 13 Auburn came
into Trouehet’s shop at abont a quarter
past 7 in the evening, and asked the wit-
ness for a reference in regard to his char-
acter. This is what the witness sayu, “I
asked what he wanted it for. He asked
had I ever
Seen Him Drank.
I said no, and again asked, whafne wanted
it for. He said, ’To tell you the train, I
am suspected in the murder case,’ I said,
George, you must know where you were 03
the Friday night. He said, ’That is the
worst part of it. I was at the Grand
Theatre on my own,’ I said, ‘Surely
someone must have seen you there.’ He
said he didn’t think so. 1-naid, ‘Perhaps
there was some incident yrtu cap call to
memory during the night in the theatre.
Advertise fof the person and clear your-
self.’ . I asked him if there was anybody
in the tram whex he went home, but he
said he did not think so. I said ‘The Os-
borne Park man must know you.’ He
said he did not think so,” Then later,
under cross-examination, the witness said,
“Auburn said bij did not really take that
much notice of the people at the picture
show whom he knew, or whether he knew
them, or on the tram. When Auburn said
Be coma not remember; lie may
referring to the people in_ the theatre. I
am positive he said he did not think the
Osborne Park conductor would know him.”
With all this detail of evidence, it most
be clear to yon that Anbnm wqs aware
of the necessity for calling to mind the
• people whom he met that evening, and of
recalling instances which would prove
where ho was that night. Yet,
notwithstanding that we did not have
a syllable mentioned to us about the visit
to the shop at the corner of Newcastle and
Beaufort streets before the proceedings In
this Court. The point was not mentioned
at the inquest, but he was not bounu Vo
disclose the incident, even if the informa-
tion'had been available. It is
Customary for Accused Persons
to reserve their defence, but the fact re-
mains that apparently nothing occurred to
the accused regarding the necessity for
saying something about his visit to the
shop. I come now to another incident On
the right of April 4 thq accused has told
ns that he came into town by tram. Ha
paid his tram fare; he paid for pies, and
he also paid Is Id for his seat at the pic-
ture theatre. He said that after ho had
been to the pie shop he walked down the
street to catch a tramcar at Trouehet’s
comer. His object in
Catching the Cat
at that comer was, he suggested, so that
he wotild be able to get a seat. Why he
should be better able to get a seat at that
comer rather than at the Newcastle-street
comer it is for you to say. If ho had de-
sired to get a seat I should say the best
place to go to would be the point from
where the car started. That is a matter
for you to .judge. Auburn further torn ns
‘ that when he was on the railway bridge
he discovered that he had only 3d in his
pocket, although he thought he had 23s when
he left home. He thought he had put a
10s note in the pocket of his waistcoat on
one side and the cash in the waistcoat
pocket on the other side. As has been
pointed out, during the course of the night
Auburn must have put his hand into his
waistcoat pocket on .several occasions, but 1
he tells us it was only when he got on the
railway bridge that ho realised he had 3d
only left in his pocket. When he relum-
ed home he told us ho found the money
l in his room. It is for you to say whether
•you believe that statement, _ Then we
have the evidence of the witness Cecil
White. You know the story told to the
police by Auburn to the effect that ho went
to the Leederville Hotel to catch a car
because he had only 3d left. He tells us
that he walked to the Leederville Hotel
eomer, and that he boarded a car there,
the number of which might have been 15
or 10. He told us ho saw Cecil White
when ho was getting o& the car. We were
also told that Cecil White was on the back
platform. . .
Mr. La van: No, Cecil White was msid:
the car. .
His Honor: Yes, that is right. White was
inside the car. Auburn said in his evi-
dence that he was on the back platform,
and when White was getting oil he lent him
2s. Then he went on to say that he got oil
at Anzac-road, at the hotel opposite where
Golding’s refreshment shop is, Cecil
White therefore becomes
An Important Witness.
It is not denied that Auburn paid some-
thing for refreshments when he got to
Golding’s shon, and he must have got
money from some person daring the jour-
ney out. Had he not done so he could not
possibly have paid for the refreshment at
Golding’s shop, if his statement were cor-
rect. Cedi White says that the car, prior
to the one catching the Osborne Park car
at ML Hawthorn, will get to Melrose-
street at 1L35 p.m, but White told us he
was not on that ear. Auburn does not
gay ho was on the 11-S5 car, but on the
H. 45. White says that he thinks he was
home in MeErose-street at 11 o’clock on
that_Friday night, but could not swear to


S]ljn-
it. He told us that one night he stayed to
the end of the Bast Perth picture show,
and Mr. M'Crae, a film manager, who had
dealings with the East Perth pictures, said
that the show would come at about 10.45
p.m. White sat to the end of
the picture show, and then he saw a
vcung lady home to Edward-street, which
was about five minutes’ walk distant He
says bo talked to her about ten minutes
at the gate. He did not have a watch,
but he then walked to catch a tram at
Newcastle-strcet, where he had to wait
several minutes before a ear came along.
Wo have not been told the distance from
Edward-street to Neweastle-strect
Mr. Lavan: I think he told us that it
was about five minutes’ walk from Ed-
ward-street to Newcastle-street.
His Honor; The jury can see a plan of
the streets for themselves and judge the
distance. We were told the trams
along every six minutes, and While says
it was a No. 15 tram that he caught.
Then he save it took him half an hour
to get home, bN that if he left the pictures
at 10.45, ho wo\.i reach home at 11.15,
which was
Before Auburn vvs On the Tram.
I must warn von, however, that whenever
witnesses give estimates of times,' if you
are to tie them dofm to minutes, it be-
comes somewhat dangerous. You must take
the evidence as it is presented to you.
First of all. White said he got home about
11. o’clock; he then said it took him about
half an hour to get homeland that he
might have got there at a quarter past 1L
It is, however, for you to say. Then he
mads a statement to the police in which
he says he is a biscuit maker, and resides
at 5 Melrose-street, Leederville. He re-
members April 4. He was at the East
Perth pictures with his girl, and got home
at 11 o’clock. He says “I did not see
Auburn that night at any time.” He said
he knew Auburn, and that'they used to
hve at the Park and go home together.
He said he shifted to Leederville about
March 11, but that date was
altered. , The last time he saw Auburn
he ’says,, was about two weeks before the
murder, and that ho had borrowed Us trorn
him that night while he (the witness j
was getting o 2 the tram at Melrose-street.
Ha
Hoes Not Dispute
that he lent Auburn 2s, and that he lent
it when he was getting p 2 the car at Mel-
rose-street Then he said, under cross-
examination, that he lent the accused the
2a after he bad moved to Melrose-street.
He produced his rent book. In reply to a
question put to him by me, he said he had
no recollection of getting o 2 the tram at
Melrose-street before March 3L That is
the day he moved there, according to the
rent book- He also savs that the accus-
ed caught the tram at Newcastle-street
every night
Except the Night _
when he lent him the 2s. It is for you to
say, on the evidence, whether that
2s was lent on April 4 or not If
it was not lent to the . accused on
the night of April 4, it is obvious he
had no money with which to pay the
Goldings, and his statement to the
police about walking around under _ the
subway and the finding of the coat, is
Open to Very Grave Suspicion,
because the reason he gave for making that
journey and having only 3d left would be
proved to be false. I cannot give the .evi-
dence to you any more definitely than this.
You saw Cecil White and heard what he
said, and it is for you to come to a decision
in the circumstances.
Mr. Lavan; I would point ont that the
witness did not attempt to. fix, the dates.
His Honor; No. He says he lent Au-
burn 2s on the night when- accused did not
get on the car at the comer of Newcastle
and Beaufort streets.
; Mr. Parker; He says he did not see him.
His Honor: We now have the accused on
the last tram going to Mt. Hawthorn, on
his waj to_Osbome Park on the night, of
April 4. He says ne went into Bliss Gold-
ing’s fish shop. He got some fish and
chips, and about a shilling was paid. He
walked to the Mt. Hawthorn terminus. This
is about a quarter of a mile. He said he
had to wait for some time for the Osborne
Park tram, and mentions two persons he
saw. Ho said he walked on to the front
platform next to the driver. It was
quite usual for him to do this. “When I
got to the hotel,’’ he continues, “I asked ;
M’Kcnrie to go with me as far as the back
Rate. _ „
I Was Not Too Good.
I had not been too well that week. My
arm had broken out. Sometimes it breaks
open and sometmcs gets very irritable.
Sometimes it causes me pain, M'Kenzie
came with me. I went inside the gate. I
have to pass my father’s and mother’s
room, and
Hid Not Leave Homo.”
One of the Miss-Goldings was called. She
said she conducted a fish and chip shop
and soft drink shop at 360 Oxford-street,
and that accused was a customer of the
shop, and that he came in very often. He
generally came in for a cool drink. Her
sister had joned her in the business. She
said she saw the accused at about 11.30 to
11.45, and that he came into the shop and
bought fish and chips. She said she saw
him get a parcel of fish and chips from
her sister, but She did not know how much
was paid. He wore a good felt hat, and it
did not look as if it_ had any knocking
about. She thought it was a dark grey.
Her sister was called, and she only said he
paid something. She did not think it was
less than Is. She said he wore an over-
coat and a felt hat. One of the Miss Gold-
ings was recalled.
This Evidence Had Not Coxae Out Before.
She said “We kept cool drink on the ice
for him. We did this for certain cus-
tomers, and he was one of them. He used-
to take it away with him.” According to
that witness he used to have cool drink put
on the ice for him regularly, and take it
away with him. If you look at the ac-
cused’s evidence you will find he said,
“When I got the soft drink at the
Goldings, I used to drink it there. ’ ’
Mrs. Auburn gave evidence about empty
bottles and scraps of food in the bedroom
of the accused, and certain witnesses have
given evidence as regards the habit of the
accused to carry home bottles.
Mr. Lavan: Cecil White, sir.
His Honor: Yes, and lucre were oth-
ers. McKenzie, when he was recalled,
said: “1 have seen him (Auburn) with a j
bottle wrapped np on the tram, but I did
not see him with one on the night of April |
4. On the way up to the hotel he did not j
have a parcel; both his hands were in his i
pockets, and nothing was under his arm. j
He brought home bottles and parcels with 1
him practically every night. He had not I
a bottle showing that night, not on the j
outside of the coat,” Leen says, referring
to the night of April 4: “He may have
been carrying a bottle, but it was not via-
ble. I could not help seeing it if it was
viable. I would not see a bottle under his
arm. I did not see him holding the neck
of a bottle.”
Mr. Lavan: Is that the rebuttal, sir?
HJs Honor: Yes.
Mr. Lavan: If your Honor will look at
the cross-examination, you will find—: —
His Honor: I shall not go further into
that evidence, Mr. Lavan.
I Do Not Give Everything.
I only direct the jury’s attention to cer-
tain parts of the evidence. The gentlemen
of the jury understand that I do not give
everything. The suggestion was that the
aceased always carried home a bottle of
goft drink and constantly carried home sup-
per. Of course, this is important as re-
gards the evidence that he visited the shops
in Oxford-street and at the comer of New-
castle and Beaufort streets. But when
you take the evidence altogether it seems
th*t apparently the accused
Had Two Suppara That Night;
I he got two cold pies, according to his states


tnent, at the corner of Newcastle" 'and
Beaufort streets, and he also got fito and
chips when he patched Golding's. He
says that _ this is in accordance with his
usual habit, and his usual habit apparent-
ly is to get a bottle of llmejuice and soda
at the comer of New castle-street, and Miss
.Golding says ho was also one of her regular
customers for whom she had soft drinks
on the ice, Miss Golding’s shop being a
little further along in Oxford-street. It
only shows, gentlemen, how you must ex-
amine the probabilities of the accused’s
story. The accused got homo at 12 o’clock
that night. There is no evidence that he
left the hotel again that night, and'he de-
nies that he did leave it.
Gentlemen, I do not profess to have told
yon all tho evidence. It would be impos-
sible for me to do so. I have, however, en-
deavored to direct your attention to certain
portions of the evidence which appear to
me to be important. Whether or not they
are important to yon is another question.
I am only too pleased to assist you.
Now in this, as in most murder eases, the
guilt or the innocence of the accused de-
pends upon circumstantial evidence. As
I pointed oat to you, that is inevitable in
Crimea of a Secret Nature.
Enron Aiderson, in a ease, tfie Queen
against Marsh, which was decided about
1830, and has not been questioned since,
told the jury that ip,dealing with the ease
in which a maa was charged with murder
and the charge was entirely supported by
circumstantial evidence, as in this ease,
that before they could find the prisoner
guilty they must not only be
satisfied that the etrenmstances
were consistent with his having
committed' the act, but must also
be satisfied that the facts were such as to
be inconsistent with any other rational
conclusion than that the prisoner was the
guilty person. Baron .Aiderson pointed
out to the jury the __
Proneness of the Human Wind
to look for,' and often to slightly distort,
the facts in order to establish such a pro-
position- “Again, a single circumstance
which is inconsistent with such a conclu-
sion is of more, importance than all the
rest, inasmuch as it destroys the hypothe-
sis of guilt.’’ I might leave you with
those,last few words, asking you to apply
them to this case. But to dealing with a
case of wilful murder, where circumstantial
evidence is the only evidence of guilt,
Baron Aiderson’s words amount to this:
That first of all, you must satisfy your-
selves that the circumstances are consis-
tent with the accused having committed
the crime, and that then v -i must also bo
•atisfied that those circumsLances are con-
sistent with no other rational conclusion
which would negative the guilt of the ac-
cused. You must be satisfied not only
.that the coircumstances arc consistent with
the accused being the guilty person, but
that they are not consistent with any other
rational conclusion. You have here a
chain of facts which, if you believe certain
evidence, amount to a
Most Extraordinary Sequence
of coincidences. The first is the finding
of the coat, followed by the finding of the
spot where it is alleged the murder was
committed. You have to satisfy your-
selves whether the account given by the
accused that he found that spot when rid-
ing on Johnston’s bicycle is correct or ndt
If that account is not correct, then the ex-
traordinary coincidence remains, that he
was the """ to find both the coat and the
spot. If you believe that he found the
spot when riding Johnston’s bicycle, then
there is no extraordinary coincidence. "We
next come to the button found in the car
of the deceased on the morning of April 5,
a button corresponding with the buttons
worn not only by the accused, but also by
many other people who wear lime outtous
on blue serge. Still you have the circum-
stance that the button was found, and the
further circumstance that on April 11, a
week after the murder, when the detec-
tives visited the Osborne Park Hotel, they
found to the accused’s room a suit that
f had been washed but not pressed, and that
from that suit a similar button is missing,
if you come to the conclusion that tho suit
had been washed since April 4, and that
the button missing is the one found in the
i car, I need not tell you that that would
be
Very Strong Circumstantial Evidence.
But before you decide upon that you have
to consider whether thin missing button
had been missing for some time before the
I murder. Then you have to satisfy your-
i selves from the evidence, which is some-
| what conflicting to respect of the clothes
i which were being washed, which Miss
Coombea saw being washed ou the Monday
ior Tuesday after the murder. You must
1 satisfy yourselves whether those clothes
were the clothes worn by Auburn on the
night of April 4, and whether they were
being washed to remove bloodstains which
had got on them during the murder. You
have to consider that to conjunction with
the other circumstances. Then there is the
blood on toe hat. Accused has given his
explanation as to how that blood got on
toe hat If you believe him, of course,
that coincidence is explained. In consider-
ing a case of this kind,
Depending on Circumstantial Evidence,
there may be one or more particular in-
stances which you t think have been proved,
and which are of great value if inconsist-
ent with the other evidence, as showing
! that your conclusions from toe circumstan-
tial evidence alone cannot be correct The
best example I can give you as illustrat-
ing my meaning is toe interest attached to
the evidence of the milkman and toe
veungster Thompson. If the car which
Thompson says he saw moving at about 4
o'clock on toe morning of April 5 was
O’Neil’s car—and there seenm to be very
little doubt about that—and if you come
to toe conclusion that the car was then
first arriving on the scene, that fact
would be unite inconsistent with any
conclusion you might have come <to on toe
extraordinary coincidences in this case-
' You might think that the coincidences in
• ( regard to toe blood, the washed clothing,
the finding of the coat, and of the snot,
and other things, vou might think on those
things von were convinced that the accus-
ed was" guilty. But supposing you had
come to that conclusion, and then came to
consider this evident about to* «*r first
arriving on the scene at 4 o’clock on the
Saturday morning, and if you wo* sat-
isfied that toe (Car first got then
at 4 o’clock, . that would _ nul-
lify aS toe other conclusions
you hail come to on toe evidence
That, I think, is pointed out by toe passage
I have read. 1 merely wish to make a few
more observations. A great deal has been
said about motive during the progress of
this case. It is not necessary for too
Crown to prove the motive, and I most re-
mind you to** motives for crimes are bard
to discern. The absence of motive is not
conclusive as regards the accused’s inno-
cence. It has little bearing upon it in that
respect, but a reasonable motive put for-
ward would undoubtedly have been _of
value to you when considering tho effect
of circumstantial evidence.
The Motive Suggested
in this ease is perhaps a little difficult to
imagine—that a sane man would, for tho
sake of obtaining a motor ear to take some
people down to Wagin, have gone to tne
limit of deliberately planning to kill a man
and steal his motor -car. It is hard to
follow a motive of that description. One
would have, thought a motor ear could be
obtained in much more easy circumstances.
Moreover, the detection of the crime, either
for theft or murder, would probably in-
evitably follow. I only mention that
point to yon because it
I Does Not Seem to Ms 1
tie motive advanced by the Crown m
Hri« case will be of much assistance to
you in considering the value of the cir-
cumstantial evidence. You have heard the
evidence, and I think that already you .will


slit**
probably" have considered that aspect
There is nothing more that I have to add.
Yon have had a trying task, and one to
which, I fed sure, yon have given yonr
beet attention. Ton will take the evidence
as yon have heard it in this Court, and
yen may bear in mind some of the evi-
dence I have pointed out to yon. Tour
attention has been directed to that evi-
dence for yonr guidance. After consider-
ing everything, if yon oorae to the eon-
elnsion that there is say reasonable donbt
about the molt of the accused, it is yonr
bonnden dnty, as yon are aware, to bring
in a verdict of not gnilty. If yon have no
reasonable donbt about the guilt of the ac-
cused it is equally yonr duty to bring in
a verdict of guilty. Gentlemen, wiQ yon
now consider yonr verdict 1
THE JURY RETIRES.
The jury retired at 11 ajn.
ME. PARKER'S FINAL WORD.
Mr. Parker, addressing Ida Honor after
the jury had retired, directed his atten-
tion to the fact that be had mentioned to
the jury in the course <A his summing up
that if they believed the evidence that the
car arrived in Vinccnt-street for the first
time at 3AO am, it would nullify _ every-
thing else connecting the accused with the
crime. He did not think it was his Honor’s
intention to tell the jury that- His Honor
would, probably remember that in tthe
course of his (Mr- Parker’s) remarks to the
jury he had not pressed the point Pre-
suming, for the sake of argument that the
car had arrived for the first time at that
spot at 3AO a-TiL, it could still be that the
accused had abandoned tho car at some
other place because it had broken down and
for someone else to have removed it- It
might have been that somebody else came
along and took the ear and drove it to that
spot, arriving there for the first time at
3AO am. In those dreumstanees the
evidence on that point would not nullify
the evidence that had been tendered.
Bin Honor; I carefully considered the
facts regarding the motor car, and I direct-
ed the jury as I intended to. _ It is for
the jury to say what they believe.
Mr. Parker: I felt it my duty to point
this out to yonr Honor. .... .
His Honor: Quite bo, but I do not think
it necessary or advisable to bring the
jury back.
Mr. Parker; Tour direction was that tf
they believed Thompson that meant nulli-
fying everything else.
Hjs Honor: I hope I left that to the
lll Ariaing out of an application by Mr. Lavan
for firing the time of the Court’s adjourn-
ment, hia Honor conferred with counsel m
his chambers.
REQUEST PROM THE JURY.
Quarter of an hour after the jury had
retired they sent out word that they wish-
ed to have before them the various exhibits
that had been produced during the hearing
of the ease. His Honor’s associate, Mr.
Craven, accordingly prepared them, with
the exception of tho mass of sheoak scrub
that had been lying on the floor of the
Court for a month. Lielndcd in the ex-
hibits were several bundles of clothing be-
longing to tho accused, hia hatand the ex-
perimental hat belonging to Dr. Moss, as
well as the Quadrant motor-cycle that ac-
cused was riding at the time he stated he
found tho “suspicions spot” along tho
Westana-road- _ . .
At 115 the Court adjourned for lunch,
the jury then having been out of Court for
just over two hours.
The jury returned at 2-23 pm-
His Honor called the two counsel to the
Bench, and allowed them to read a slip of
to the jury, he said; ‘‘This is
the question you hav esent up. 1. non i
understand it. ”
NOT UNDERSTOOD.
The Foreman said they did not under-
stand a re£erencc_of his Honor in Ms sum-
ming up. Sis Honor had said that if
they believed a certain thin?, the chain of
evidence became broken; that is, if they'
■were satisfied that the witness saw the car
coming down the road on the morning of
April 5.
CAB MOVEMENTS.
His Honor; 1 said the first time. - You,
must recollect that the, evidence is that.
Auburn, the accused, was on the last tram,
and that he got home at the Osborne Park *
Hotel at midnight. He says he did not ’
leave again. It is for you to say whether;
you believe that or not. Mrs. Auburn
says that she heard, the accused'come in
at midnight, and that she saw him in bed
at 6.30 next morning; She aJso says that
he was quite normal. That is the evi-
dence you have as regards his movements.
A car got to Vinccnt-street between a
quarter and half past H, according to the
11-vear-old hoy. If that was the car :
(O’Neil’s) that would fit in with the sub-j
sequent movements of the accused. catch* i
ing the last car to Osborne Park. If von
believe that tho little boy of 11 years saw
the car moving about 4 a.m. that does not ■
necessarily connect it, but if you come to !
the conclusion that that car which the boy
saw moving up to the spot for the first time :
then that is inconsistent with the reensed
being in the car. You missed, I think, the
words “the first time.” Is that the ans-
wer to your question t Nobody saw the
car on that night to examine it. Ton can
only presume the condition of> the car, if it
was the car. at a quarter-past U, by what
was subsequently discovered. • The only
evidence is that of the boy who heard a
burring noise.
Mr. Parker handed to his Honor a paper
on which both he and Mr. Lavan had ;
written.
JURY AGAIN RETIRES.
The jury then again retired.
CEOWN COUNSEL’S CONTENTION.
Mr. Parker said his Honor had pointed
out at the latter end of the summing up
that if they b iieved the boy Thompson,
that the car was coming down the roan
for the first time at 3.30, this completely
broke the chain of evidence, and that they
could discard everything else.
His Honor: I don’t think I said that-
Mr. Parker said that was the effect,
which was conveyed to him. That was
why he pointed it out afterwards. Loftus-
Btreet joined Vincent-street and, there-
fore, as he pointed out, the accused might
possibly have abandoned the car on the
MU, higher up in Vincert-etreet, _ and this
person who came along at 3AO might have
succeeded in getting it to go down the.
MIL In that case the evidence of Col-
lins would not be correct. Except for
those two boys (lie evidence of the chain
would still be complete.
His Honor: Ilf ou do that you will hare
to shut out some evidence and assume
something else.
Mr, Parker: What evidence will be shut
out? It confirms Banks and Shilken.
Mr. Lavan: It is not right to put in
supposition evidence. .....
Mr. Parker said it did not matter where
the car was abandoned; but it was pecu-
liar that the car was abandoned at Vin-
cent-etreet within 60. yards of where tho
accused got on the tram- He (Auburn)
might have abandoned it; at Crawley and
walked.
STREET PLAN PRODUCED.
A plan of the Vinccnt-street locality
was produced. ’
Mr. Parker said that where Loftus-strcot
joined Vincent-street there; was a hill,
and the accused, in his evidence said that
going up Loftus-street towards Vincent-
street ears freunentlv had. to change gears.
The injure to the car might have been
caused while negotiating the hill
MATTER OF SPECULATION.
Mr. Lavan: Mr. Parker desires on a
matter of speculation to invalidate" the
case. . . ' ■'


Mr. Parker: Nothin? of the sort.
Mr. Lavan: He said the car was aban-
dor ed puts! do Cbinnery’s between 11 and
11J-5- We cannot afford to speculate here.
His Honor quoted a section of the boy
Collins’ evidence, in which the witness
said, “I saw the car in front of Chin-
nery’s.' The car stopped. It would bo
near the lamp post near the school.”
_ Mr. Parker: Suppose the boy Thompson
did see the car coming down the hill, and
that when he saw the cay stop that was tho
first occasion it did stop, that would not
, interfere with all the other, chain of cir-
cumstances, because It. was - possible for it
to have been moved from the top of Lof •
tus-street.
NOTHING MORE TO TELL THE JURY.
Concluding, Mr. Parker, said:—‘‘Ton
still say that if the car was there at 3.30
a.m. for the first time,, the whole of the
rest of the'chain has gone by the board!”
His Honor; I have not told them that.
Mr. Lavan: His Honor did not.
' Mr. Parker; That was conveyed to the
jury, but I do not say that is what your
Honor meant. But that is why tho jury
asked that question. v , •
Mr. Lavan: Tour . Honor Has already
summed up twice to the jury on the qnea
tion, and ! think your direction was .quite
right It is purely theory on the part ol
the Crown.
His Honor : I do not think I can tell the
jury any more, \
His Honor and counsel • then left ' the
Court, tho incident closing at 10 minutes
to 3.
FATE OF GEORGE AUBURN.
JURY’S RECOMMENDATION
FOR MERCY.
EXECUTIVE COUNCIL TO CON-
SIDER. ;
PREMIER'S STATEMENT.
The Minister for Justice (Mr. J, C.
Willcock) was ,in Collie to-day, and in his
absence the Premier (Mr. P. Collier) was
questioned regarding the recommendation
of the jury for merey in the .ease of George
Auburn, who on Saturday, was found guilty
of tho wilful murder of John George
O'Neil.
Mr. Collier said he did not anticipate
that the papers which will have to be pre-
pared in connection with the case would
be ready for some days, but that as soon
as they had been prepared there would not
be any delay on the part of the Govern-
ment and the Executive Council in dealing
with them. If necessary a special meeting
would be called for the purpose. ’
It is generally believed that the sentence
will be commuted to one of imprisonment
for life.
O’NEIL- MURDER *R!AC. ;j %
AUBURN FOUND OUH.TY. J*
THE JURY’S VERDICT. )
STRONG RECOMMENDATION TO
MERCY.
The jury returned into Court at 5,48 p.m.,
and m answer to the Associate’s ques-
i] o n’-u e ,,^ aa announced a verdict of
Guilty, with a strong recommendation
to merey.
PRISONER DOES NOT SPEAK.
The Associate then addressed the pri-
soner: ‘Geo. Wm. Auburn, you have been
convicted of wilful murder. Have yon
anything to say why sentence of death
tolaw?” be passed upon you according
The prisoner, as the Associate rose to
make these remarks, got up from the chair
on which he had sat for so many weeks
and days during the trial, and passed td
the rail nearest the Judge. Apart from
« flushing of the face, he showed no emo-
non, and made no reply to the Question
put to him by the Associate.
SENTENCE OF DEATH.
His Honor then put on the black cap,
and, addressing the prisoner, said: “The ■
jury have found you guilty of the crime
the wilful murder of one John George
O Neil. It is my duty to pass sentence
upon you in accordance with the law: that
is, that you be returned to your former
custody, and at the time and place to be i
'appointed by the Governor, you be I
banged by the neck until you are dead.”
With a firm step the prisoner turned and
•descended to the vault below.
“OH, MY GOD!”
Tho only dramatic note struck . during
those few tense minutes was whien the
foreman of the jury, having announced the
verdict, Mr. Auburn, seur., who had a seat
in the gallery, ejaculated in his distress:
“Oh, my God!” - t
The recommendation of the jury id
mercy on account of the prisoner’s youth
will doubtless be taken into consideration
fey. the authorities.
MONUAT, JULT 7. 1924.
TOPICS OF THE DAY.
THE O’NEIL MURDER.
J\lter a prolonged trial a jury, on Sat-
urday. last, found George Auburn, junior,'
guilty of wilfully murdering , a taxi owner
named John O’Neil. As no one saw the
crime committed the evidence adduced was
purely circumstantial, but, in tho annals
of crime, "it is doubtful whether a stronger
and more complete chain. has ever been
woven around an accused person. As. wit-
ness after witness gave his or her. testi-
mony, it became obvious that not only was
the deed a cruel one, but that it was pre-
meditated, planned and carried into effect
by a designing and utterly callous and
brutal person. There was motive of coarse,
but, strange to say, it was such as not to;
warrant, so dastardly an act. The Grown;'
Prosecutor, in an able address to the jury.
i concluded by advancing thirty points com-
j mon to the murderer (whoever he might
be) and to the accused. Even these might
have been added to on a more complete ■
analysis of the evidence, but fewer would *
have sufficed to satisfy any reasoning mind
that Auburn, and he alonei was the person
rightfully arraigned. The facta are sim-
ple. Auburn, some two weeks before tbs
murder, had promised’“his girl” and a I
party of others that ho would take them a
motor trip to ,Wagin, which is in the
south-western portion of this State. Know-
ing the financial position of the accused,
not one of the party would listen to his
hiring a car for the purpose, and he ac-
cordingly represented to them that he was
about to borrow one, and that it would be
a “Buicfc Six.” Obviously, to redeem hia
promise* he had to make arrangements to
obtain a car-—loaned to : him and not hired,
—and it was to be of a particular make.


Being a motor mechanic and knowing most
■ 'of the taxi drivers on the ranks, he evi-
; dently had in mind a small man, the owner
: of a ‘Bnick Sir.” It was this man’s, car
he decided to possess himself of. So that-
■ fit the right moment he would be able to
find this car—it must bo so presumed—-he
engaged O’Neil to meet him at an appoint
ed place to take a party to the South-West,
starting at an unusual hour of the night-
O'Neil and, Auburn did not know, one
another. The accused in the box said he
had never seen the murdered man in his
' life. None of those who knew him would
undertake such a journey without the cash,
but evidently, O’Neil, in his innocence,
agreed to do so. The trip having been ar-
, ranged for Saturday, April 5, starting
• early in the morning, the accused on the
preceding Friday evening journeyed to the
spot where O’Neil was to meet him. Having
premeditated his course of action, he had
, a bar—probably a piece of iron pipe—
, wrapped in paper which was seen by “his
girl” before he left her on his mission, and
he had secured new number plates to re-
place those on the car which ho had de-
termined to possess liimself of.- That
night O’Neil was foully murdered, his head
1 Laving been belabored and smashed to
, pieces with some such instrument as a bar
t or pipe, at a lonely and sparsely populated
I spot in a remote suburb. Auburn did not
return on that night, as he had promised to
do. His party were up early on the follow-
ing morning, and had breakfast at 6JLS
a.m_ so as to be ready to start. But
Auburn did not appear. “His girl” rang
him up and.asked the reason, to which he
replied that the car he had obtained had
broken down, and he was getting another.
O’Neil’s car was subsequently found in the
i direction of the accused’s residence broken
down. Later - on Auburn .went to town
and hired a car from a driver named Singe
who took him and his party to Wagin, By
this time the news of -the murder had
spread widely. It was discussed bn the
trip, it was further spoken about in Au-
burn’s presence at, Wagin. The accused,
however, declared that he had never heard
a word about it until Ms return to Perth
on tho following Curiously he
took to Wagin with'him the murdered
man’s overcoat, and left, it there in the
stable of the hotel. Ho swore that he had
found this coat under a Perth ' subway
when on his way home on the night of the
murder. Ho was seen washing his suit of
clothes and accounted for Ms act by stat-
ing that he had got mud on it during the
trip, whereas, according to the evidence,
there was no mud on the journey. On
his hat, and clothing blood stains were
found. These he accounted for by stat-
ing that his.arm had been damaged and
was bleeding, and that ho had swung it and
spattered the blood around, some of which
might have lodged on his clothing. The
injury to Ms arm was caused, he said, by
bis-bumping into"two persons wMlst on Ms
way home, but neither of them could be
,‘found to give evidence. On the admitted-
ly hot and sultry -night of the murder he
Was seen wearing, the murdered : man’s
heavy - overcoat (tight fitting for Auburn)
buttoned up whilst on Ms way home. He
obviously did tMs for the purpose
of covering up the blood stains on
the clothes which he subsequently washed.
Thc 'cciii belonging'to r these'clothes had
had a jigger button, but' it had been
■wrenched off. A similar button, blood be-
spattered, was found in the murdered
man’s car, and, strangely enough, the ma-
terial left on the coat and on the button
fitted one another.' The accused not only
found O’Neal’s overcoat, but he was also
able. to. point out to the police the lonely
spot where the murder was committed, not-
withstanding that others had constantly
passed by and had seen nothing. Besides
these main- facts there were a host of
others, to, say nothing of the contradic-
tions. In regard to- the latter, the accus-
: fed,- in order to holster up his story,' was
forced to deny, in- many particulars, the
evidence given by his own “girl,” and
many others. ■
The defence set up was in the nature
of an alibi, which largely depended upon
the testimony of two women -who declared
that the accused had bought pies from them
at a time when he could not have commit-
ted the .deed- .The rebutting evidence
called by the |Crown, however, shattered
the alibi, for. it showed that the ladies
must have been mistaken as to the night.-
With such material only to work upon,
Mr. Layan put forward a splendid, al-
though specious, case to the jury. As
an advocate he proved himself - to bo of
-the first, rank, hut his task was hopeless
from the outset. His client had already
woven his own tope. The acts and state-
ments of the accused, together with tha evi-
dence of independent witnesses, afforded
Mr. Parker an opportunity of presenting
his case in manner deadly to the accused,
and his concluding thirty points were so
convincing and beyond challenge-that the
jury was left no option to find other than
they did. Indeed, two of these points
alone were sufficient to set all doubt at
rest as to who was the murderer. Put
in q. slightly different form, the first wonld
be:—.
(1). Who was the particular man having
a motive to possess himself (other than by
hiring) of a car of the particular Euiek
Six. type, on the particular night of April
4, when O’Neil was murdered?” To this
there is but one answer—Auburn.
(2) Who was the man found wearing
the murdered man’s overcoat within two
hours of the murder, and who " was
the man able to point out ‘ ■ the.
obscure spot where the deed -was commit-
ted? Again only one answer—Auburn.
The answers to these questions set up a
prima facie case wMch called upon the ac-
cused to account' for Ms whereabouts and
' his actions on that fatal night. Although
well and extensively known, he was un-
able to offer any satisfactory explanation.'
; That Ankara had a patient and a, fair
trial will not be denied- Indeed, Mr. Jus-
tice Draper, in his address to the juiy,
stressed every possible point in favor of
the accused. In several instances his re-
marks had a tendency to influence the jury
against the obvious. For instance, he
told them that the fact that Anbnra bad
procured new number plates having his
father’s registered numbers thereon was
favorable to the accused, because by using
them he would be courting detection. Of
course, the very opposite is tho case, and
: tjjg accused showed more criminal astutc-
; ness than his Honor, With all and sun-


7/;/^
i dry looking out for stolen cars, Auburn,
! in charge of a car with some other num-
ber plates, would at once call forth chal-
lenge, but with bis father’s numbers no
notice would be taken. In some other re-
spects also (notably his direction on the
evidence of the boy Thompson), ; his
i Honor strained the evidence in
favor of the accused, but on the whole
the charge to the jury was as impartial as
it was lengthy. Before relegating the re-
cent trial to the archives of history, there
is one further matter which needs to be
i referred to. When this dastardly murder
j was committed there was a cry for the
j arrest of the- culprit—sympathy went out
to the dead man and his family in fnll
: force. The police entered upon their
task without a clue. Baffled for days
and days in their attempts to satisfy the
public, they had the odium of incapacity
■ heaped'.upon them.' Working night and
day, they at last discovered the culprit and
brought him to justice. No sooner, how-
ever, had their efforts been rewarded, than
the sympathy for the dead ms.n and his
family was cast aside by many, and all
concern was for the accused. The police
in their turn, instead of receiving the
commendation they undoubtedly deserved,
had abuse and invective heaped upon them.
It was charged against them (hat they had
applied to the accused youth the “third
degree”'—they had subjected him to the
tortures of the rack—in' order to extort
from him admissions adverse to himself. Of-
I course, nothing of the kind occurred. An-
j bum was his own accuser, from the out-'
i set. He was the volunteer, and not the
[ pressed man. When the mass of evidence
j adduced is carefully analysed, the intelli-
; gent and persistent Work of Detectives Pur-
' due and Doyle and their assistants be-
' comes apparent., From the outset they
were faced with a most difficult task, and.
jfrdm nothing they were able to forgo a
chain so complete and strong in all its
links that the perpetrator of one of the
most heartless and callous crimes known
to history was unable to escape from its
meshes, notwithstanding the great skill of
the expert he employed to bring about his
release. '
fjyh*
A LEAD PIPE SECTION.
FOUND AT WESTANA ROAD.
NEAR SCENE OF O’NEIL
MURDER.
HAS IT ANY SIGNIFICANCE ?
On. Saturday at midday, “a mental
case” at the Old Men’s Home set out on
a stroll in the bush, which surrounds the
institution, and walked to a spot at West-
ana-road, close to where the indications
were that John O’Neil, the taxi-driver, was
battered to death. Very soon afterwards
he hurried to the Master of the Home (Mr.
A. C.- Bust) to inform him that he had
found a weapon in the bush, about 100
yards from the roadway, on the opposite
side of Westaaa-road to the scene of the
O’Neil murder, and a little towards the
Home.
At first little significance was attached
to the man’s story, but as he said ho did
not touch the piping, because he wished to
tell Mr. Eust'of, his find, and get his ad-
vice, he. was asked to go and bring it in.
This he_ did, and retumed'with a piece of
lead piping, soldered at one end, with the
appearance. Sir. Bust said to-day, of hay-
ing been well weather-worn™
Immediately Mr. Bust saw the possible
importance of the find, he communicated
with the police, and the weapon is now in
their hands.
A representative of “The Daily News”
while seeking hnformation this morning
regarding the piping, met Inspector Con-
don, of the, CJ.D„ in a tram, and noticed
that he was carrying what looked like a
bar wrapped up in paper. Mr. Condon
undid the paper and displayed a piece of
lead piping about loin, in length, by ap-
reximately three-quarters of an inch in
diameter. The piping was hollow,
but had been filled up with lead at one
It is fairly pliable and can he bent in the
hands, bnt fcy reason of its loaded end
would make a dangerous weapon if anyone
wanted to do violence with iL
Having been found in West ana-road it
is only .natural that the section of lead pip-
ing will be considered in eonnection with
the murder of O’Neil. However, while it
is, of course, possible that it was used in
the murder, there may be quite another ex-
planation for its being found in the neigh-
borhood. Doubtless the police will have the
piping carefully examined and inquire
otherwise regarding it.


qhl*H-
, LEAD PIPE SECTION.
TO BE EXAMINED.
IS rr THE WEAPON ?
ynteo. questioned this morning, Inspector
B. Cbndon, of the CiD n said be was not
yet in a position to express an opinion as
to the likelihood of the lead piping found
at Westana-road proving to be the weapon
which brought about the death of John
George O’Neil. While it is agreed that
neb an instrument would cause severe
injuries, and, if used with violence, bring
about the death of a victim, there seems to
be same doubt as to whether it would bat-
tar the head to sqeh an extent as that of
Ifca unfortunate John O’Neil was battered.
‘ Having inspected the piping with only
{fee naked eye, and having submitted it to
no tests, it is well-nigh impossible- to say
whether it is stained, but, even were it the
weapon used by the murderer, this would
fas understandable. It was on April 4
(fast the murder. was committed, so that if
it were thrown away on that night. it
toonld have been in the open for three
months, and most necessarily be affected
fay nun, sand, and wind. However, it is
to be examined by Dr. Atkinson, and It is
more than likely that if it was the weapon
Used by O’Neil’st murderer there will be
left on it traces of blood sufficient for the
doctor to cany out the various tests. As
Dr. Atkinson is at present out of town it
Is probable that the result of his examina-
tion will not be known for a conple of
days..
irll Hi*.
THE O’NEIL MURDER.
/THE LEAD PIPE SECTION.
; i NOT CONNECTED WITH
| ' MURDER.
jPET.-SGT. PURDUE’S OPINION.
■From a report which reached Inspector
Coodon at the CXD. to-day from Detec-.
taro-Sergeant Purdue, any suspicion that;
the lead bar which was found near the;
iseene of the murder of John O’Neil at Dal-
keith could have been connected with his
death was completely dispelled. '
The detective-sergeant paid a visit to
Dalkeith, and after full investigation he
reports that the spot where the lead pipe:
was picked up is actually 300 yards ' ;
the 'Nedlands side of the spot where the;
murder was committed, and 30 yards from;
IWestana-road. •: It was practically estab-
lished by the evidence that the car went
from the spot towards Claremont, so that
the bar would have been discarded before,
the murder was committed.
. Apart altogether from this, Detective-
Sergeant Purdue discovered that at the
flace where the bar was found the Cottes-
oe-Perth telephone line passes through,
and at this particular place the wires are
transferred from the polls to the under-
ground, and copper wires are connected by
Sexes, and the current is thus conducted
down the pole into lead pipes, and 1 then
into iron pipes underground. The lead
pipes arc the same size and description as
the section found by the old man from the
Home., The piece was nicked up 12 yards
from the pole, and. is probably a section
•that was not required by the workmen.
Detective-Sergeant Purdue also consid-
ers that O’Neil’s injuries could not have
been caused bV the piece of piping that
w as. found. Further, as has been stated,
It was inferred in the evidence -that the
ra v came from Nedlands. Detcctive-Scr-
jgcant Purdue concludes his report by say-
ing that, to his mind, the piping could not
have been in any way associated with the
murder.-






i- /
/-> s
