

0 MCARRON. BIRO & CO.. 47« COLL INS STREET.




:ss?
. A9 e " ,




Z~7 9 S 9
THE AUSTRALIAN
IRRIGATION COLONIES.
MILDUEA. EENMAEK.
CHAPPBY BROTHERS LIMITED, MELBOURNE.
VICTORIAN WATER SUPPLY.
Extracts from the Fourth Annual Report presented to Parliament ly
the Secretary for Water Supply.
MILDURA IRRIGATION COLONY.
The control exercised by this department over the Mildura
Irrigation Colony is limited to its being satisfied that the condition
specified in the agreement between the Government and the Messrs.
Chafiey relating to the amount of expenditure upon improvements by.
the latter is fully complied with. No Crown grant can issue for any
portion of the land set apart for the colony until a certificate is
furnished by this department that a sum of £5 has been so expended for
each acre of land to be granted. Up to the end of June last certificates
for £183,385 have been given, while the issue of Crown grants has been
requested for an area of only 13,236 acres. An application for a
further grant for an area of 2819 acres is now with the Lands Depart-
ment, accompanied by the requisite certificate. Reference to the report
of the Mildura colony, published herewith as ApperilHx No. 8, and the
Chief Engineer’s notes of an official visit to the colony, Appendix No.
35, will show what gratifying and substantial progress has been effected
by a most praiseworthy display of energy on the partial the founders,
and by the adoption of a system of settlement and cultivation well
worthy of imitation throughout Victoria.


Appendix No. 8
MILDURA CHAFFEY IRRIGATION COLONY.
The creation of an irrigation colony at Mildura is the outcome of the
visit of the President of the Victorian Royal Commission to California
in 1885, when Messrs. Chaffey, the leading exponents of irrigation in
Southern California, were invited to visit Victoria, with the object of
founding in this colony a similar settlement to those which they had been
largely instrumental in establishing in California.
After protracted negotiations between the Government and the two
gentlemen named, an Act was passed by the Legislature whereby 250,000
acres of land situate in the north-western portion of Victoria were set
apart for the enterprise. Active operations were commenced by Chaffey
Brothers Limited on the Ist October, 1887, since which date the new
settlement has made wonderful progress ; some account of the phenomenal
development will, therefore, be of interest. It may be well to state at
the outset some of the conditions upon which the company obtained the
land and water concessions. The license to occupy the area named for a
term of years was first granted, with the right of acquiring a free grant
of the land set apart by compliance with certain conditions as to
expenditure upon the land. The minimum expenditure stipulated for
by the Government was .£35,000 within the first five years. As
evidence of the energy and good faith of the Messrs. Chaffey, it may be
stated that the total expenditure to the 30tb June last, certified by the
Government auditors, amounted to no less than £183,835 ; the company
has therefore expended in three years more than five times the amount
required to be laid out during five years.
A population of approximately 3000 is settled now at Mildura,
including about 350 school children. Several public buildings have
been erected, including Post and Telegraph Office, Custom-house, and
State-school with accommodation for 220 children. It is reasonable to
assume that if the population increases at the present rate a second
school of similar capacity will be needed long before it can be erected.
Mildura was created a separate shire in March last, and the settlers
now enjoy the privilege of local government. It is intended to proceed
with the erection of a shire hall and court of sessions, mechanics’
institute, and hospital. One of the most important conditions in
connection with the concession is the agreement of the Messrs. Chaffey
to build and endow an agricultural college. The endowment consists of
one-fifteenth of the whole area of land. The establishment of such a
college, where settlers may acquire a thorough technical education in the
science and art of horticulture and agriculture, must prove a most
important factor in assuring success to those settlers who are interested
in such industries. A commodious and handsome coffee palace has been
established some months, and it has already been found necessary to
enlarge the building. No less than 52 stores and places of business are
already being successfully carried on.
A block of 25,000 acres was first surveyed and cut up into 10-acre
blocks, and a township (Mildui’a) consisting of 1000 acres was laid out.
To meet the increasing demand for land, an additional area of 12,000


acres is now being surveyed and cut up into 10-acre allotments. About
10,000 acres have been sold up to the present, 4500 acres of which are
under cultivation, a large proportion being planted with vines and fruit
trees. The suitability of the climate and soil for all fruits under
irrigated culture is now placed beyond the I’egion of question by the
satisfactory returns which have been obtained in many instances from
the first season’s planting. Several tons of beautiful Gordo Blanco
grapes have been produced from a small vineyard, one of the first planted
at Mildura, only some twenty-two months since; these have been
converted into table raisins of excellent quality, and are readily
marketable in quantity at Is. per lb. They were harvested in the sun,
with but little trouble or expense, thus demonstrating that the dry and
sunny climate makes fruit-preserving by the sun’s heat a certain,
effective, and inexpensive process. A. further area is being got under
cultivation as quickly as possible, but despite the powerful steam
ploughing plants employed it has been found impossible to keep pace
with the demands of the settlers.
The irrigation works and machinery remain to be described. Four
pumping stations have been erected, containing the finest pumping
machinery ever designed ; the aggregate horse-power of the engines is
2000 indicated. These are housed in substantial brick buildings, with
highly finished interiors. For the first time, it is believed, in engineering
history, direct acting triple-expansion engines of the latest modern type
have been used for driving immense centrifugal pumps. The largest
engine is a triple-expansion, 4-cylinder, of 850 indicated horse-power,
capable of driving six 20-inch centrifugal pumps, raising 60,000 gallons
per minute 35 feet high. A similar pumping plant of the triple-
expansion type, with three cylinders, 500 horse-power, capable of raising
40,000 gallons per minute, with two other pumping engines, each of
200 indicated horse-power, of the compound semi-portable type, supply
the shorter irrigation channels. A fifth pumping plant, capable of
raising the enormous volume of 650 tons of water per minute, will
shortly be erected for the purpose of filling an immense inland lake or
“ billabong,” from whence the main supply for the irrigation channels is
drawn. Usually the billabong is filled by the flooding of the river, but
it has been thought advisable to provide machinery capable of filling it
in the event of failure of the ordinary floods. The channel to the
billabong is 100 feet wide and 4 feet deep. The main irrigation channel
is 25 feet wide at the bottom, 4 feet deep, and miles in length. At
a higher level another channel with a width of 15 feet at the bottom,
and 4 feet deep, has been made for a length of 25 miles, and of
distributary channels about 30 miles are completed; 37 miles of
additional main channelling are now in course of construction.
AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY.
This constitutes a most important feature in the settlement. Four
specially-designed steam ploughs of 20 horse-power nominal, and two of
12 horse-power, enable the company to plough on an average 30 acres
per day to a depth of 18 inches, by cross cultivation. The ground is
thus ploughed twice over. Three traction engines, specially designed for
the purpose, are employed in clearing the mallee scrub, and by the aid


of these powerful and ingenious machines a large area of scrub can be
cleared in an incredibly short space of time. The machinery generally
has been designed by Mr. George Chaffey, and reflects the greatest credit
upon his engineering skill.
Complete engineering works, comprising turning and fitting shops,
carpenter’s and blacksmith’s shops, with a foundry and boiler-making
department, employ about 50 men in active work. A timber yard and
saw-mill, fitted with the latest and best modern appliances procurable, is
now being established by the company, and will furnish work for about
25 additional men. A steel light-draught stern-wheel steamer, capable
of travelling in low water on the river, has just been launched, and will
have accommodation for about 100 passengers. Six passenger and
freight steamers constantly run to Mildura, connecting with Melbourne
and Adelaide.
Appendix No. 35.
NOTES OF AN OFFICIAL VISIT TO MILDURA.
By Mr. Stuart Murray, Chief Engineer of Water Supply.
The progress of the Mildm-a and Renmark irrigation colonies must
be a subject of ever-present interest to all who have at heart the future
well-being of Australia. Especially interesting is it to the Minister and
Officers of the Water Supply department, who are charged with the
administration of the Irrigation and Water Conservation Acts in
Victoria. The construction of extensive and costly works for the
conservation and distribution of water to the agriculturists in the arid
districts, and the general introduction of artificial watering as an aid to
tillage, involve grave responsibilities. Upon the success of these
experiments will depend, in great measure, the form settlement will
assume in the great river valleys of southern and eastern Australia, and
in the extensive plains that border them. The profitable production of
fruit and wine, and other high-priced and easily portable products, seems
to offer a solution of certain problems, common to all the Australian
colonies, more hopeful than any other that has yet been offered. The
application of water to agriculture is the one known means whereby the
profitable production can be successfully accomplished in these plains
and valleys. It is just fifteen months since Mr. Deakin paid his last
visit to Mildura; but the growth of fifteen months, in the soil and
climate of the Murray River colonies, when it has been stimulated bv
the judicious use of water, is something very different from the growth
of a like period in the milder and cooler districts of the coast. It is
necessary, also, that some inspection should be made in connection with
certification ot the accounts of expenditure; and it is at least
desirable that the officers should keep themselves posted up as to the
latest and most successful methods and appliances of irrigation. So it
was resolved to pay another visit to the settlement, and for the purpose
to take advantage of this, the most pleasant season of the year in these
latitudes, the party left Melbourne by the early morning train on
aturday, 13th September, 1890, reaching Swan Hill, the river terminus


of the recent extension of the Kerang line, a little before six in the
evening. From Swan Hill to Mildura the journey was continued down
the river by one of the boats of the Murray River Steam Navigation
Company. The Ellen is a rather large side-wheel steamer, of the
ordinary type of river boats used on the Murray and Darling, and has
accommodation for about forty saloon passengers. Her list was neaidy
full, most of the travellers being apparently of the better class of people
from the agricultural districts, and many of them probably intending
settlers at Mildura. The mails were put on board at half-past eight,
the boat was immediately swung into the stream, and commenced to
steam' down the river. There was no moon, so that it was too dark to
discern much of the channel, or of the country adjacent to its banks;
but by the strong glare thrown by the head lights of the boat it could
be seen that the river was in flood, and the water far out over the
timbered flats. In the morning the extent of the flooding could be
better seen; and, where the timber was sufficiently open to admit of a
view, the width of water surface seemed in places to be a mile or more.
The river channel itself was distinguishable by the absence of trees, and
by the close fringe of red gums bordering it on each side. The ordinary
width of the channel here is probably 350 or 400 feet. In its present
condition of flood the river water is heavily charged with earthy matter,
much of which is deposited in the creeks, anabranches, and lagoons, and
on the submerged flats, thus affording a telling illustration of the process
by means of which these vast Riverine plains have been built up out of
the material torn from the hills. It sets one thinking, too, of what the
effect may be of applying this silt-laden water to land under tillage, and
of the recuperative power it will exercise on fields and plantations that
would otherwise be exhausted by continuous cropping. The junction of
the Murrumbidgee was passed about three o’clock on Sunday afternoon.
The channel of this river is much smaller than that of the Murray, and,
in the present flooded state of the country, it was hardly distinguishable
among the network of lagoons and anabranches.
THE COUNTRY PASSED THROUGH.
From this point the channel of the Murray becomes sensibly wider,
increasing to an average of probably not less than 450 feet; while the
flooded flats, which at first were almost continuous on both sides, now
appear at less frequent intervals. The river, in short, is better defined,
and there is less waste of water by evaporation and percolation from the
spill over. Euston was passed a little after Sunday midnight, and by
Monday morning the character of the country adjacent to the banks had
undergone considerable change. The flats broken up by water-courses
were replaced by gently rolling downs, with occasional low sand ridges
clothed with native pine ; or, where flats did occur, they were mostly
elevated a few feet above the surface of water in the river, and so
available for cultivation. On the New South Wales side of the river
agricultural settlements begin to form a feature in the landscape; com-
fortable looking farm-houses are passed at every few miles, with green
fields, generally irrigated by water pumped from the river, the motive
power being supplied by windmills, with alternative horse-works
available in case of emergency. Notwithstanding the heat and dryness


of the climate, the people who were seen at the stations, where the boat
stopped to take in fuel, and especially the children, were of a good type,
robust, healthy, and well-nourished, though evincing a tendency to
develop sinew rather than flesh. There has not yet been shown any
reason to anticipate that the European races will deteriorate by trans-
plantation to this Riverine country. The Mildura landing place was
reached a little before five o’clock on Monday afternoon, after a pleasant
run from Swan Hill of less than forty-five hours in all, during five of
which, however, between' Saturday night and Sunday morning, the boat
had to lie at moorings, it being considered unsafe to go on in the dark,
on account of the overhanging timber by which this part of the river is
obstructed. Travelling by these river boats is exceedingly comfortable;
and, if slower than by rail, is certainly much less fatiguing; One cun
read and write with some degree of satisfaction, so that time does not
hang heavily on the hands. During the day the scenery along the river
banks is sufficiently interesting to those to whom it is novel ; to that
large class of persons to whom natural scenery seems ever new it is, of
course, a subject of perennial interest. At night the saloon and state-
rooms are well lit by electric lamps, and the passengers amuse themselves
in the way that to each seems agreeable, lounge in groups about the
saloon deck in the night air, mild even at this season of the year, or
promenade on the upper deck. The fare on board the boats is as good as
a healthy appetite need desire, and the attendance sufficient for those
who are not exacting or fastidious ; and so the time passes pleasantly
enough. At Mildura there was seen, in process of being built for the
Murray River Steam Navigation Company, a large boat to be called
the Pearl. She is a stern-wheel steamer, with three tiers of saloon
decks, and will be, as to her capacity, among the largest, if not
absolutely the largest, boat on the river. But she is so constructed,
and the superficial area of her displacement is so great, that it is
anticipated her draught with a full load will not exceed 20 inches.
The short period of daylight remaining on Monday evening was devoted
to a brief examination of Mildura township and its moi’e immediate
surroundings. The whole of Tuesday, and up to one o’clock of
Wednesday, were occupied in driving over, in examining, and making
notes of the agricultural and horticultural settlement. The results of
the examination will be better understood in the form of a connected
and condensed description than in that of a narrative of progress.
THE WORK DONE BY MESSRS. CHAPFEY.
The agreement between the Government and the Messrs. Chafiey
sets out that they are to obtain the fee-simple of two blocks, each of
25.000 acres, by their expending thereon a sum of not less than £5 per
acre ; and that the Government may concede to them a further area of
200.000 acres by their expending a sum equal to £1 per acre, and
paj ing £1 pei’ acre purchase-money. To date the company have
expended at Mildura a sum of £183,000, as shown by vouchers
submitted to the Water Supply Department, and they have obtained
Ciown giants for 13,200 acres, and are now applying for further grants
for 2800, all forming part of the first of the two 25,000-acre blocks
befoie lefened to. Of the land granted to them, they have sold


Men employed by the Messrs. Chaffey
... 300
Contractors and their employes
... 100
Resident agricultural settlers
... 950
Shopkeepers and business people ...
... 450
Women, mostly married
... 600
Children of school age
... 420
Other children
... 200
Sundries, unclassified
... 130
Total
... 3,150
(exclusive of the township of Mildura) 10,500 acres in agricultural and
horticultural lots. Of the sold area, 6500 acres have been cleared and
brought under tillage, whereof 6000 acres have been, or are in process
of being, planted with vines or fruit trees, and 500 acres are under
forage or grain crops. The most extensive plantations are of raisin
vines, next to which come oranges and lemons. There are also
considerable areas under apricots and peaches, figs, and some olives.
As yet, not more than 50 acres have been planted with wine grapes.
The plantations are, of course, too young .yet to have yielded any
returns of commercial value, but it is anticipated that during the
forthcoming summer they will give 10 tons of marketable raisins, and
4000 or 5000 gallons of wine, besides a quantity of green fruit that will
be consumed locally. The entire present population of the Mildura
settlement numbers, as nearly as could be ascertained, somewhat over
3000 persons, who may be described as follows :
Of these, about 750 are resident within the township; the remaining
2400 are scattered throughout the rural district.
THE POPULATION
differs considerably in character from that to be found in any other
country district in Victoria, its most striking feature being a new
element that seems everywhere prevalent. The large proportion of
men whose appearance, language, manners, and even dress, denote their
origin as being from the wealthier class of society is indeed surprising.
And let it not be supposed that these men evince any disinclination for
hard work. Many of them were to be seen employed on their
allotments, and not a few in the day-labour gangs, content to earn from
6s. 6d. to Bs. per day while their own trees were growing, and doing as
hard and as honest a day’s work as any navvy or farm labourer in the
country. The settlers of this class are almost all young men. Some of
them are Victorians, and a few from the adjoining colonies ; but many,
probably the majority, have emigrated to Mildura direct from Great
Britain; so that we have here represented many of the well-known
public schools and colleges of England and Scotland. The Mildura
settlement has recently been created a shire under the provisions of the
Local Government Act; and the annual ratable value of the property
within the municipality is £30,000 —a fact which, to those who have
been connected with local government business, will convey more
information than a volume of statistics. The


PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS
in tlie township are of brick, several of two stories; others are of wood
or of galvanised iron. The architectural features, as well as the
sux-roundings of the place, are much superior to those of the ordinary
bush township, and are quite equal to the better portions of provincial
towns. Among the more important public buildings may be mentioned
the Post and Telegraph Office, the Custom House, the State School, the
Assembly Hall, the Wesleyan Church ; and among private buildings,
the offices of Chaffey and Co. Limited, the Coffee Palace (with
accommodation for forty guests), the store and residence of Messrs.
Williams and Co., in Deakin Avenue, Messrs. Neville’s store, and the
foundry and workshops of the company. In course of erection near
the landing place are extensive joinery works for the manufacture of
fruit cases, and cool stores for the safe bestowal of fresh fruit and other
pex-ishable products awaiting transport. The
WATER SUPPLY
to the township is provided by a powerful steam-pumping plant, erected
on the river bank just below the landing place ; and it is distributed
through wrought-iron pipes laid along each street, the tappings for the
services being made through solid wrought-iron collax - s, which are
riveted on at frequent intervals. It has been suggested that a brick
tower and wrought-iron service tank should be erected on an elevated
site in the town, so as to provide a constant and uniform pressure in
the stx-eet mains, and to obviate the necessity for keeping the pumps
running during the night* The needs of the irrigators are supplied
from a system of open earthen channels, diffeiing in no x-espect from
those now existing in many of the water trust districts of the colony,
and which are themselves supplied from the Murray by pumps, the
raising of the water to the higher levels being in three separate lifts.
The station for the fix-st lift is at a point on the river known as Psyche
Bend, about five miles by road above the township. Here the water is
to be thrown into the head of a lagoon, which, being separated fx-om the
river by a substantial embankment, will form a convenient reservoir.
The woxks at this station had made considerable progress prior to Mr,
Deakin’s former visit to Mildura, fifteen months ago. Little has been
done to them since, the floods of the past two winters having been
sufficient to fill the lagoon without the aid of pumping, and the sites of
the engine beds and woxks being at the px-esent moment submerged to
such a depth that even coffer-damming would be a work of some
difficulty. The lift from the summer level of the Murray to the top
water level of the lagoon is 24 feet; but, although the water surface
frequently falls below summer level, and so remains for several months
during some dry seasons, the actual lift will rarely be so great, because
the water surface ixx the lagoon will not, as a rule, be maintained at its
full height. In fact, the pumps at the next station are designed to lift
from as low as 15 feet above summer level—that is 9 feet below the
top water sux-face of the lagoon, Jhe next, ox - No. 3 pumping station,
is on the lagoon, and aboxxt two miles nearer to the township than
Psyche Bend. The plant, which has just been completed, is a vexy


powerful and perfect one. It consists of four 20-inch centrifugal
pumps, driven by a triple-expansion four-cylindered engine, of 1000
indicated horse-power, and supplied with steam by two pairs of
multitubular steel boilers, each 3 feet 6 inches by 14 feet. The housing
is of brick-work, both substantial and ornamental, finished internally
and externally in a style not generally seen in engine-houses; and the
boiler house has room for another pair of multitubular boilers, which
will make, with those in position, six in all. The rising main that
delivers the water from the lagoon into the 50-feet channel—that is the
channel whose water surface is 50 feet above the summer level of the
xiver—is 48 inches diameter, of wrought riveted boiler plate. This
plant having just been finished, and not yet at work, the service is
being performed temporarily by a 20-inch centrifugal pump,.driven by
a Tangye engine. The next pumping station is at a place known as
Nichol’s Point, about a mile above the township; and here the water
is raised from the 50-feet into the 70-feet and 85-feet channels, the
latter being probably the highest level main that will be constructed on
the settlement. The pumping machinery at this station has been
completed some time, and the party had an opportunity of seeing it at
work. It consists of two 20-inch Allen’s centrifugal pumps, driven by
a triple-expansion engine of 450 indicated horse-power, supplied with
steam from a pair of multitubular steam boilers of the same pattern as
those at the station on the lagoon. These boilers are capable of
! working up to a pressure of 160 lbs. of steam. The whole of the plant
is housed in substantial and elegant brick buildings, the walls plastered
inside and ornamented with painted dados, and the ceilings lined with
varnished pine. The designs of some of the machinery, notably of the
four-cylindered engine at the No. 3 station, and the arrangement of the
whole of the plant, is the work of Mr. George Chafifey. Several novel
features have been introduced, which, it is claimed, conduce to economy
of fuel and general efficiency. As to the workmanship and execution
generally, suffice it to say that better was never turned out. Basins,
lined with cement concrete and fitted with cast-iron sluice-gates, are
constructed on the channels at the inlets and outlets of the suction and
delivery-pipes. The three lines of main channel above referred to—the
50-feet, the 70-feet, and the 85-feet levels—have already been
constructed to a total aggregate length of seventy miles, and there are
connected with them 140 miles of distributary channels. Extensions
are being pushed rapidly forward, to provide for the service of the
further areas of land that are being constantly laid out and prepared
for settlement. The pumping plant at the three stations referred to,
with the three lines of main channel 1 and their dependent system of
distributaries, will, when completed, provide for the irrigation of the
whole of the lands of one 25,000-acre block. All the allotments at
present under tillage are supplied from these channels, the extensions
keeping pace with the progress of settlement, excepting only the estate
of Lord Ranfurly’s party. This property is situated down the river,
some miles below Mildura township, and is supplied by a separate
pumping plant, of one 8-inch centrifugal, driven by a small steam-
engine. It has also a separate system of channels, which are lined
throughout with cement concrete, to avoid waste of water by soakage,


and fitted at short intervals with iron outlets to the service ditches,
closed by plugs that can be readily removed and replaced by hand.
The
CLEARING AND BREAKING-UP OF LAND
in preparation for planting is, for the most part, carried out by the firm
at contract rates, though a few of the settlers have elected to clear and
break up their own. The firm also arrange to provide young trees for
those who choose to buy from them, and, in some cases, do the planting
as well. There are, however, several private nurseries already
established at the settlement; so that the Messrs. Chaffey have not a
monopoly, and the prices of stock are likely to be kept down by
competition to reasonable limits. Powerful traction engines are
employed in the work of clearing, and the great bulbous roots of the
mallee, after being slightly loosened from the ground by the pick and
shovel, have a steel wire cable passed round them, and are torn bodily
from the earth by sheer force. They are then cut up into convenient
pieces for fuel for the engines. Roots of as much as half a ton weight,
and even more, are thus disposed of without apparent difficulty. For
the breaking-up of the ground, cultivators, which are in effect simply
gigantic scarifiers, with a steering wheel and hand gear, and a seat for
the driver, are employed. The tines of these machines tear up the soil,
without, however, turning it over, to a depth of 18 inches. In the
preparation of land for planting, it is twice scarified by the cultivator,
the second working being at right angles to the first. The implement
is drawn across the field by traction-engines, one placed at each side,
and connected to it by steel wire ropes, running on winding drums.
Each pair of traction-engines and cultivator can get over 10 acres per
day, scarifying it twice to 18 inches depth—that is, twenty acres per
day once worked. There are at present eight powerful traction-engines
and two of those huge cultivators employed in the work of clearing
and breaking-up. After the second cultivation the surface of the land
is graded—that is, reduced to a series of uniform slopes. This is
accomplished by removing the earth from the high places and
depositing it in the hollows,* scoops being employed for the purpose.
The finishing touches are given with an implement known as the
*buck-scraper, which leaves the land as smooth almost as the surface of a
bowling green. The buck-scraper now in use at Mildura, it may be
mentioned by way of parenthesis, differs considerably from that of
which the pattern was sent from California by Mr. Derry, when he
accompanied Mr. Deakin on his visit to America. The old
buck-scraper, which is now in common use in the colony, is in effect a
beam with a cutting edge, with a projecting arm behind for regulating the
angle of the cut. The improved scraper, on the other hand, is a scoop with
a cutting edge in front, the blade being horizontal when the scoop is in its
normal position. Those seen in use were 7 feet long, 2 feet wide,
including the cutter, and 8 inches deep at the back, the bed being
perfectly flat. They have a short projecting arm behind, by means of
which the driver regulates the depth of cut, causes the scoop to tip and
deposit its load where required, spread it out with any required degree
of thinness, and smooth it down to a fine, compact surface. These


scrapers were usually drawn by four horses. The final operations
consist in picking up and burning off the sticks and roots torn up and
left on the surface by the cultivators, and reducing the land to a fine
tilth by means of the disc harrows. To aid in the operations of grading
and finishing a little water is used. It helps the eye to determine the
lay of the surface, and it mellows the soil, and renders it more amenable
to treatment. This description applies to the preparation of land for
planting with fruit trees or vines. The preparation for lucerne, hay
crops, or pastures, is similarly performed, except that the surface, instead
of being laid out in a succession of slopes, is divided into level, or nearly
level, terraces, separated by shallow ditches with low embankments,
called checks. The irrigation of young vines and fruit-trees is performed
by drawing a light plough furrow down each side of each row of trees
or vines, running the water down the farrows from the service channel,
and checking it where necessary with the spade or hoe, so that it soaks
into the roots of each plant. After each watering, when the ground
has sufficiently dried, the whole of the surface is lightly stirred by a
horse hoe or small scarifier, an operation which restrains evaporation
from the soil, and checks the growth of weeds. Great importance is
attached to the cultivation of the ground after watering. It is even
said that, if the subsoil be well saturated in the winter, established
plantations, where the roots have got well down, may be pulled through
a severe summer by means of frequent cultivation alone. No exact
information could be obtained as to the actual quantity of water used, or
expected to be used, on any given area of land.
THE DISTRIBUTARY CHANNELS,
however, are designed so as to be able to carry a volume of 60 cubic
feet of water per minute, for twenty-four hours once in each month, for
every 10 acres commanded by them. If the channels are kept constantly
running, with a full supply, this would be equivalent to 24-inch acres
per month for every 10-acre block, the inch-acre being a volume equal to
a depth of 1 inch over an area of 1 acre. Or, to put it in another way,
it would be equal to a gross depth of 12 inches over all the land
commanded during a full summer season of five months. In practice
this might mean a net depth of 10 inches applied to the land, in the
same time, after allowing for inevitable waste in conveyance and
distribution. Besides the more practical business of cultivating fruit
and other crops for sale, many of the settlers have devoted considerable
attention to the adornment of their dwellings and homesteads. There
Avere hardly to be seen any such miserable erections of weatherboards
and galvanised iron as everywhere disfigure the northern plains, even in
districts that have been settled for fifteen or eighteen years. On the
contrary, most of the houses had some pretensions to merit, from an
architectural point of view; while several might fairly be described as
artistic in design and surroundings. Flower gardens were frequent, and
a few of the better homesteads were surrounded by infant shrubberies,
in which in a few years they will be completely embowered.
In an official report on the condition and progress of the Mildura
settlement, presented by the Chief Engineer of Water Supply about two


years and a-half ago, attention was called to what then seemed the
necessity for reserving strips of land for
THE GROWTH OF TIMBER,
both for climatic reasons, and to maintain a supply of fuel. It was
suggested in that report that a reservation for these purposes of about
1 acre in 16 of the total handed over would probably prove sufficient.
The Messrs. Chaffey now explain that there are numerous strips, ridges,
and low dunes lying above the level of the channels, which could not be
economically supplied with water. These amount in the aggregate to
more than one-si«teenth of the total area. It is stated to be the
intention to have them permanently set apart for timber plantations;
and if this be so, the difficulty pointed out will be satisfactorily
disposed of. Another question that will demand early and serious
attention is that of
SANITATION.
The water supply for the town is pumped from the river at a point
immediately below where the boats lie when delivering or taking in
cargo. During the two days that the Ellen lay at the Mildura landing,
there were two others of considerable size also moored there, with their
crews on board, and boats are at all times coming and going. This may
not give rise to any trouble while the river is in flood, but it is likely
soon to prove otherwise when it is low, unless proper steps be taken.
When the town shall have grown sufficiently to warrant such a course,
probably the best way will be to subject the water intended for its supply
to precipitation by lime. Experience in Europe has shown this to be a
very efficient means of purifying water intended for human consumption.
Dr. Katz s analysis of that supplied from the Coliban system confirms
the results of this experience. The method is, moreover, one that
involves comparatively little cost, and- is simple and easy of application.
Regulations might, however, be framed with a view to minimise the
pollution of the river by boats lying at the wharves. The agricultural
settlers would do well to provide themselves with house tanks, when
they might collect from their roofs sufficient rain-water to meet demands
for drinking; the water from the channels being used for cleansing, and
foi all such purposes as involve boiling and the consequent destruction
ot dangerous germs. Other sanitary measures will readily suggest
themselves that could be easily given effect to in a country where the
soil is generally dry and sandy, and where lime can be procured almost
anywhere, at shallow depths, for the mere labour of dioxin** and
burning. s
THE QUANTITY OF WATER AVAILABLE.
1 he fear that has been expressed in some quarters that the waters of
the Murray Diver would be depleted by the withdrawal of the volumes
required for the use of the irrigation settlements is one that does not
seem likely to be soon realised. The surface of the water in the river
at Miidura is at present 22 feet above the ordinary summer level. The
mean width of the river channel is not less than 400 feet, and the mean


depth of this width above summer level not less than 16 feet. There
are, therefore, in every mile of the river channel, in round numbers,
34,000,000 cubic feet of water over and above the summer level; that
is, in every mile, 7000 inch-acres of surplus or flood water, after making
the most liberal allowance for loss by percolation, evaporation, and
waste in the using. The distance by the river from Mildura to Swan
Hill is about 460 miles ; so that the volume of flood water at any
moment in this section of the river alone, in its present state, is equal to
2,820,000 effective inch-acres. Tlie area of that entire block set apart
for settlement at Mildura is 250,000 acres, whereof probably 200,000
will be the maximum at any time irrigated. The block of flood water in
the section referred to, therefore, would be equal to putting a depth of
14 inches of water over the entire irrigable surface of the Mildux-a
settlement. But the mean current of the river is not less than one and
a-half miles per hour, so that the block of 460 miles would be renewed
by displacement every thirteen days. That is to say, in
THE PRESENT CONDITION OF THE RIVER,
the flood water in this length alone would be sufficient to put 14 inches
of water over the whole Mildura settlement rather oftener than once a
fortnight, while a total depth of 10 inches in an entire summer is the
maximum proposed to be used. The river has been in high flood for
the past three or four months, and is likely to remain pretty high for
some months yet to come. It was also in a still higher condition of
flood during the whole of the winter of 1889. Reflection on these facts
shoxxld convince the most sceptical that we ai’e very far fi'om having
mortgaged the available water of the Murray. On the contrary, it
should enable us to see that, to permit these vast volumes of fertilising
fluid to pass on'unused to the ocean, instead of turning them to account
for the sustenance and delectation of man, is to commit a crime.
Another reflection that forces itself upon one, when looking at the
progress of the irrigation settlements on the Murray River and elsewhere
in Victoria, is the opportunity here offered to the disinherited of fortune,
and those who have been worsted in the struggle to establish a tooting
for themselves, or have wearied of maintaining the fight, to commence
life afresh under new and promising conditions. To make a start here
does not demand any great amount of capital, especially it the settler
be willing and able to labour with his own hands. He can buy land on
credit by the payment of a very moderate deposit. He may also obtain
employment at fair wages, the balance of which, after providing for his
own maintenance, he may invest in the clearing, cultivation, and
planting of his land. Or if he has enough money to buy, prepare, and
plant his selection, and to keep him until his trees begin to bear a
marketable crop, he may at once assume the position of an owner of the
most valuable kind of property, without encumbrances. The party left
Mildura again by the steamer Ellen, at one o’clock on Wednesday after-
noon, and arrived at Swan Hill before ten on Friday night. Progress
is necessarily somewhat slower up the stream than down. Melbourne
was xeached at 4.30 on Saturday aftexmoon, after a vei'y agi’eeable and
instructive trip.


IRRIGATION COMPETITIONS.
It is a matter for congratulation that the entries of irrigated farms
for last season for the prizes offered by the Department, though limited
to two from each district, selected by local bodies, were in excess of any
previous year. The prizes were :
Class I.—For the best irrigated farm, first prize, £3O; second
prize, £2O.
Class 2.—For the best irrigated orchard, garden, or vineyard,
first prize, £5O ; second prize, £25.
Class 3.—For the best variety of irrigated crops, first prize,
£5O; second prize, £25.
Aggregate value of prizes, £2OO. The conditions of the competitions
are given in Appendices Nos. 13, 14, and 15.
Ist. In the class for irrigated gardens, orchards, or vineyards, the
judges awarded the first prize of £5O to Mr. A. Monnington, of Mildura,
whose irrigated orchard seemed to them to admirably fulfil all the
conditions of a complete system of successful fruit culture with irrigation.
So impressed were the judges with the perfection of this orchard and
the system of irrigation obtaining therein, that they furnished a detailed
statement which is reproduced as Appendix No. 16, and will be found
both interesting and instructive.
3rd. In the third class for best variety of irrigated ci’ops a second
prize only was awarded, and this to Mr. C. L. M'Guirk, of Mildura.
Appendix No. 16.
ORCHARD OF MR. A. MONNINGTON, MILDURA.
This orchard is 20 acres in extent, and is planted—6 acres of orange
trees, 4 acres of apricot trees, acres of peach trees, acres of tig
trees, and 5 acres of raisin-grape vines. The trees and vines, which
were planted the season before last (twenty mouths ago), have made
remarkably rapid progress ; in many cases the growth of new wood for
the season is 8 feet in length, and the trees present a thoroughly healthy
and proportionate appearance. Some of the Muscat Gordo Blanco vines
produced a few well-tormed bunches of grapes this season. These grapes
have been made into excellent raisins.
PREPARATION OF THE SOIL,
The soil, which is a deep sandy loam of reddish colour, was cleared
ol mallee blue bush, and afterwards cultivated to a depth of from 14 to
18 inches by Messrs. Chaffey Brothers, a steam cultivator being used
lor the purpose. In addition to being thoroughly cultivated, the surface
was evenly graded so as to facilitate the economical distribution of the
water used in irrigation.
The site is a gently-sloping one, the fall being about 1 inch to the
chain.


PLANTING.
The next step was to lay out the land for planting. Holes were dug
24 feet apart upon the septuple system, and 2 feet in depth, 2 feet in
diameter and round. They were then filled in and the trees planted,
care being taken not to cover the stem above the nursery mark.
The vines were planted 10 feet apart each way.
IRRIGATION,
A head ditch, supplied from the company’s channel, is carried along
the highest boundary of the orchard.
The head ditch is 18 inches deep, and 12 inches wide at the bottom.
The water is let out by means of sluice boxes, inches square, and
placed one opposite each row of trees or vines.
From the sluice boxes, which are made of galvanised iron, the water
is then run in furrows, 5 inches deep, along each side of every row of
trees or vines. These furrows are about 18 inches distant from the
trees, and the water is not allowed to flow over the surface. Five or six
sluices are opened at a time, and one man attends to the irrigation,
managing about 5 acres a day. The irrigation season began early in
September, and the last watering was applied towards the beginning of
April, the intervals between the waterings and the quantity applied
being regulated by the weather. The orchard was irrigated in all five
times, the quantity of water applied in the hottest season being about
45,000 gallons per acre, and during the cooler periods about 33,000
gallons per acre.
DRAINAGE.
At the foot of the orchard a drainage channel is provided. This
drain empties into a supply channel lower down, so that the surplus
water is utilised in irrigating other orchards.
This drainage channel has very little water, as the irrigator is
careful not to put on a greater quantity than the soil is able to absorb
and retain.
CULTIVATION.
On the third day after an irrigation, the furrows which have been
used in distributing the water are filled in by the plough, and the soil
in which they were formed is worked with a five-tined scarifier. Then
the whole orchard is scarified twice, the last being crosswise. This
cultivation is carried out after every irrigation, and also after every
shower of rain, the object being to keep the surface soil in a loose
friable condition, for the purpose of checking evaporation and retaining
the moisture for the benefit of the trees and vines.
The judges were very much impressed with the thoroughness and
completeness with which all the work of this orchard was carried out,
and especially with the surface cultivation ; not only was there an
entire absence of weeds, but the soil was in a perfect state of cultiva-
tion.


Report of Mr. Stuart Murray , Chief Engineer of Water Supply ,
reprinted from the “ Age,” §th December, 1890.
VISIT OF THE MINISTER OF WATER SUPPLY TO
MILDURA.
Taking advantage of the holidays, the Minister of Water Supply,
Mr. Graham, last week visited the irrigation colony at 'Mildura,
accompanied by Mr, Meakin, Secretary for Water Supply; Mr. Stuart
Murray, Chief Engineer of Victorian Water Supply; Mr. Pratt,
M.L.C., and Messrs. C. Young, Forrest, Taverner, and T. Smith,
M.L.A.’s. The trip proved thoroughly enjoyable, and enabled those
who saw Mildura for the first time to note the extraordinary change
effected in the course of a couple of years in a barren and inhospitable
looking piece of country. The party also visited the Renmark settle-
ment, in South Australian territory. Mr. Stuart Murray supplies notes
of the trip, from which the following is extracted :—“ Mildura has been
so often and so fully described, and from the point of view of so many
different classes of observei-s, that no good purpose will be served by
describing it here. It will be more pei’tinent to institute a bi’ief
comparison between the appearance of the place now and on the occasion
of former visits, and thence to infer, if we may, what is likely to be the
rate of futux-e progress, whether the settlement will prove permanent,
and how far and in what way it may be expected to contribute to the
trade and x’esources of the colony as a whole. There ax - e now not less
than 6000 acres of planted land in the settlement, besides a further area
of several hundred acres of maize, lucerne, and other forage plants.
The growth of the plantations, which consist chiefly of vines for raisins,
oranges and lemons, apricots, peaches and figs, and wine gi’apes, has been
such as to put beyond any shadow of question the capabilities of the soil
under the treatment pursued for that class of produce. Raisin vines
that have been in the ground less than two years, and that are therefore
less than three years from the knife, are bearing fruit; not a few isolated
bunches, but in a vineyard of 10 or 12 acx’es —a very well kept one, no
• doubt—evex-y vine had a load of cei’tainly not less than 20 lb, of ripening
grapes. Apricots, figs, oranges, and lemons were also in bearing, and as
the two first-named fruits were already ripe, their quality was capable
of demonstration. In short, of the adaptability of the soil and climate,
a sufficient supply of seasonable moisture being assumed, for the culture
of frxxits of the kinds indicated above, there is no longer any question
whatever. The questions that do still x’emain, and that may prove
much mox’e difficult to answer, are—Will the growth of fruit on small
holdings by intense cultux-e, involving as it must not, perhaps, the
heaviest kind of physical labour, bxxt incessant attention, watchfulness,
and care on the part of the cultivate!’, prove sufficiently attx’active to
young men of the right stamp] Will tfie industries arising out of this
class of agriculture, the dx-ying, preserving, and packing of fruit, the
manufacture and manipulation of wine and oil, and the trade arising
thereout, induce men of Anglo-Saxoxx race to transplant themselves to
the hot dry climate of the Murray Valley, and there to set up their
permanent abode ? Above all, can such products as may be grown and


manufactured at Mildura be transported thence to the markets of the
world at such prices as will pay the grower, the manufacturer, and the
shipper, and leave a margin of profit to the merchant 1 The first
question cannot be answered by reference to the condition of the agri-
culturists in the other dry districts of the colony. There the lot of the
ordinary selector, settled on 320 acres of land, on which he grows wheat
at 3s. per bushel, and grazes a few dairy cows and a small flock of sheep,
is not a very inviting one. But it is not comparable to that of the
Mildura fruit grower ; there is no parity between their cases at all. A
juster comparison might be made with the small vignerons and small
fruit groovers, of whom there are now a good many scattered throughout
the colony. The chief difference between these and the Mildura settlers
is that the former, being generally isolated, or settled in small communi-
ties, are compelled to rely each on his own individual efforts for the
preparation of his produce for market, and its disposal to the public.
The latter, on the other hand, being units of a comparatively large
community, all of whose members are engaged in the same or cognate
industries, have their interest cared for by the communal organisation.
The case may be illustrated thus :—lt is difficult for a small and
struggling farmer to successfully initiate wine or raisin growing on 20
or 25 acres of his farm, because, when the wine is made, or the raisins
are dried, he must cast about for a customer; and very likely, in the
earlier and harder years of his labours, sacrifice his goods for less than
their fair value, and for the simple reason that he and his produce are
unknown in the market. The communal settler, on the other hand, if
he may be so designated, has his business interests cared for from the
first, and at a minimum of cost to himself. In fact, if the produce be of
good marketable quality, the lapse of a few years will witness the advent
of competing buyers, from rival merchants, outbidding each other for his
wares. It will pay the merchant to send a buyer where he can get
several thousand pounds worth of goods in one line. It will not pay to
keep a man travelling about the country buying up the produce of small
isolated patches. Fruit and wine are successfully grown on small
holdings, and at prices satisfactory to the producer, over extensive areas
in Western America, the cultivators being men of Anglo-Saxon origin.
They have been successfully grown for centuries in the countries of
Southern Europe. There seems no good reason why their production
should not prove sufficiently remunerative to induce our rising genera-
tion of agriculturists to embark in it here. As to the second question,
if the first be answered in the affirmative, the reply to it seems to follow
almost as a matter of course. No doubt there are a number of special
discomforts attaching to town life in these northern districts, chiefly due
to climate. It goes without saying that Ballarat is a pleasanter place to
live in than Echuca, or even Sandhurst. But there is no inevitable or
insuperable reason that it should be so. The fact is that our people have
not yet begun to study the problem of making life pleasant under such
conditions as prevail here, not that these conditions are in themselves
inimical to health and comfort. The climate of Sandhurst, Echuca, or
Mildura is not less favourable than that of Marseilles, Milan, or
Florence \ and these latter stand high in repute amongst the cities of
Europe, They are the homes of wealthy, gay, and luxurious communi-


ties, and they have each in their time made large contributions to the
science, literature, art, and statesmanship of the civilised world. As to
the more practical issue—Will the trade pay? It may be assumed
without hesitation that, if the grower can live, the manufacturer and
the trader will prosper. It is ever so. The answer to our third
question is to a great extent involved in the answers to the other
two. It ought to be quite clear, however, that such expedients as
protective duties cannot afford any permanent, substantial support to
industries of this character. A limited market may, for a limited time,
be found locally ; and while this lasts duties on competing imported
goods may afford some protection to the local producer. But if enter-
prises like that at Mildura are to be even moderately successful, a wider
market than this colony affords must be found in a very few years. This
will probably be at first in the dry pastoral districts of northern and
central Australia; and it is not to be expected that the wool-growers
there will burden themselves with customs duties for the sake of
vignerons and fruit-growers in the valley of the Murray or the Goulburn.
Before a generation has passed away even the Australian market may
prove too narrow, and then our Mildura settlers must face the
competition of the whole world. This is inevitable, and it is well that
it should be realised in time. Payment of special water rates is incident
to the ownership of land in irrigation trust districts. Interest on the
capital invested in machinery, weirs, and channels, and the cost of their
supervision and maintenance, have to be provided out of the profits of
the cultivator. The desire to escape payment of these rates by the
constituents of some of the water trusts created under the Act of 1881
has led to what might also be termed repudiation on the part of a few
of them. Trust commissioners, to avoid the odium attaching to striking
a rate, have ignored the necessity of providing the interest due on
Government loans; they have even in some cases expended loan capital
on maintenance and current management. The Board of Land and
Works has in consequence been constrained to exercise its powers as
mortgagee, namely, to foreclose and recoup itself by levying on the
ratepayers. Fears have been expressed in some quarters that the
Irrigation Trusts will, should they find themselves in financial straits,
adopt a like course, and that then we may expect to see a combination
among these bodies to bring pressure to bear on the Government to
forego its interest altogether. It is needless to say, should such a state of
affairs ever arise, one immediate effect would be to put an end absolutely
and for ever to loans from the Government to corporations. At
Mildura, all purchasers of land become ipso facto shareholders in the
Mildura Irrigation Company, with a pro rata right of property in the
works, and a right to a supply of water therefrom j and with
corresponding obligations in respect of payment of water rates. These
rights and obligations run with the titles to the land, so that purchasers,
whether from the Messrs. Chaffey direct, or at second hand, acquire
rights to water along with their allotments, and at the same time
undertake obligations to pay the rates levied by the company. The
Mildura Irrigation Company has just levied its first general rate of 6s.
pei acie on all purchased lands, whether irrigated or not. The. quantity
of water actually used on planted lands has been about 12 inches depth


per annum, but considerably less than half the lands sold are as yet
planted and watered. Hence the rate will amount to more than Is. per
inch per acre of water actually supplied—probably to Is. 3d. or Is. 4d.
per inch per acre. Such a rate, while it would justly be deemed a heavy
one on land used for ordinary farm crops, it is confidently expected will
be paid without reluctance, and will not prove oppressive for the special
cultures popular here. Repudiation of the obligation to pay is out of
the question. There is no interest or loan capital to be met, the works
being the property of the land owners themselves, and to repudiate the
necessity to provide for maintenance and management would simply
mean to ‘ render the cultivation of their own properties impossible.
Whatever, therefore, may be the financial trouble of Mildura,
repudiation of the obligation to pay water rates is not likely to be
among them.
Extracts reprinted Jrom the “Age,” Melbourne , \§th December, 1889.
A TRIP ON THE MURRAY RIVER.
By David Christie Murray.
Mildura, as most Australian people know by this time, is the scene of
one of the most interesting experiments of modern times, though the
scheme involved is passing rapidly out of the experimental stage into
the region of accomplished fact. In a few years’ time the district will
be the garden of the world, though but yesterday, so to say, it was
nothing but a barren and scarcely accessible desert. The dense mallee
scrub, as yet unconquered, lies all about the settlement still, but such
wonders of progress have already been made that after a week’s
investigation of the district one is tempted to entertain hopes which
would have seemed extravagant beforehand.
A busy colony, as the clang of metal on metal from the engineering
work shops on the wharf testifies immediately to the ear of the new
arrival. A colony of sturdy sun-browned folks, busy, prosperous,
assured and hopeful looking. The offices of the local journal, hastily
run up in corrugated iron, stand on the improvised wharf, and hold an
atmosphere, as I presently discover, like that of a half-cooled oven. The
weather out of doors is fiery, but the heat has something exhilarating in
it, so that your spirits, as well as the mercury in the thermometer, grow
expansive. I set out almost immediately in the society of the editor of
the Mildura newspaper to have a first general look at things, and
embarked in one of the crankest laudcraft, so I am disposed to fancy,
that ever ran on wheels. It was strong enough for anything, and safe
enough for any kind of travel possible to a wheeled vehicle, but I never
experienced anything like its motion, and I fervently trust that I never
may again. Some of the roads are at present in a rather rudimentary
state, and the trap, or buggy, or whatever it deserved to be called, was


so hung on springs as to allow of its pitching with the utmost freedom
in every conceivable direction. It was like being in a miniature storm,
at sea. Agreeable, and even exhilarating possibly for those who like it,
but mightily discomposing to the uninitiated. I told my conductor
when the journey was over that many parts of my body had grown so
tender in the course of it that they might have been eaten with a spoon.
Through the vast property which has been made over by the
Victorian Government to the irrigation colony an avenue forty-five miles
in length has been driven. The avenue is of an ample and, indeed, noble
width, and will by-and-by boast four separate lines of trees, which will
afford complete arches of shade to either side of it. It is a curious thing
that even here, where all interests in public works might be supposed
t« be identical, the cheerful larrikin has been found to amuse himself
by uprooting the young plants or destroying the fences by which they
are protected. In the main, one would say, the population of such a
place should be as orderly and law abiding as any in the world. On
each side of the avenue for considerable distances the forest land has
been entirely cleared. The rich chocolate loam has been subjected to
the last process which makes it fit for cultivation. Great areas are
already under fruit and vine, and the irrigation system is already so far
complete that nearly 400 square miles of country is already blessed
with a permanent, sufficient, and well regulated water supply. At first
sight the country looks flat, but it possesses enough variety of surface to
afford the irrigating engineer the different levels necessary for his
purpose. All the slightly marked ridges of the land have been taken
advantage of, and thus the construction of elevated canals with their
costly embankments has been avoided. My conductor, an absolute
enthusiast with respect to the capacities of the district, showed me some
amazing instances of the rapidity of growth in this rich soil. Vines
have begun to bear in their second year. Shoots of fruit trees planted at
the end of September stand already from 2 to 3 feet high. The virgin
soil, 30 feet deep, asks nothing but water in this sub-tropic climate to
become fit to grow almost anything. The lands already planted have
been laid out by the help of the theodolite, and the growing trees stand
in perfect parallelograms, so that the cultured spaces have a prim and
orderly look, in curious contrast with the yet unbroken wilds which
stand so near.
We emerged upon an open glade a mile or more in length, where the
trees had all been felled.and where the logs and roots were slowly
smouldering in scores of thousands of piles. Every here and there as we
drove, a ring of spinifex would catch fire at one of these smouldering
heaps, and would shoot up an extraordinary fierce and sudden flame.
The desolation of the forest itself was nothing to that of this narrow
in the midst of it, scarred with axe and fire, and made hideous by
the first of that series of transformations which leaves it in the end the
smiling fruitful home of man. Away at the far end of the smoking
ridge a stump extractor was at work, and we stood a while to watch it.
There were no big growths here, and the engine met no foemen worthy
of its steel wire traction rope. The rope, which has a breaking strain
of I forget how many hundred tons, was looped under any projecting
knob in a tree stump, the word was passed, the sturdily anchored engine


clanked for a second or two, and before the steel wire seemed fairly
taut the stump and its roots came out without even a pretence of
x-eluctance. I had hoped to see a real tussle between man and nature,
between the dead force of inertia and that steam-breathing thing of
steel. But the man-built monster was only toying with his work that
day, and did nothing that a hundred men might not have done by a
united effort. It seemed something of a pity to think of the countless
thousands of tons of excellent firewood that had been and would be
burnt to waste in the clearing of the land; but as things exist at
present the cost of transport is so infinitely above the value of the
timber that there is nothing for it but to make the sacrifice.
The next step in the clearing of the land is to pass the scarifier over
it, a process which clears it of every rooted weed and leaves it absolutely
bare of life. Then comes the plough, and the country is fit for culture.
It looks all simple and easy enough on paper, and is indeed performed
with an astonishing rapidity. But I have seen in my travels no more
inspiring and truly majestic spectacle than this of the subjugation of
waste nature to the needs of man. He is quite an old-fashioned
philosopher by this time who said that the man who caused two blades
of grass to grow where only one had grown before was a benefactor of
his kind. What of the sturdy thinkers and workers who, in the space
of a mere year or two, have changed great tracts of worthless desert
into fruitful gardens'? It delights me more than anything else in the
world to think that the old British blood tells here as it has told
everywhere. The originators of this scheme are Canadians born,
offshoots of the mother country in another clime.
I had a half-formed idea of turning fruit grower myself, and sitting
down under my own vine and fig tree, but reflecting that on the whole
I would rather see London and Paris again, I resigned it, and bade the
pleasant place adieu. We came steaming back to Morgan through the
same placid charms of river scenery of which I have already given so
faint and vague a pictui’e, and on the way a rousing adventure befell us,
for we ran full tilt into the trading boat Queen and stove in her bows,
insomuch that she had to put into the bank for the repair of damages.
There was no great harm done, but one or two of the passengers of the
injured craft got into a prodigious pother and flutter of excitement, and
we were found in talk for an hour or two. Then at Morgan we said
good-bye to the beautiful river, and ran down by rail to sunny Adelaide,
and after a pleasant day or two with pleasant folk there, got back to
Melbourne.
And so endeth the history of a new chum’s travels in Australia.
The new chum himself sails for other climes within an hour or two of
the time at which these lines will come into the readers’ hands. He
carries away a thousand pleasant memories, has met countless kindnesses
and good services, and acknowledging them with a thankful heart,
promises in all honesty never to forget them until the day comes when
he can no longer remember anything.


Extracts reprinted from the <l South Australian Register ,” Adelaide,
lith May, 1890.
THE MURRAY IRRIGATION COLONIES.
By our Special Correspondent.
Many attractive localities in Australia are known to pleasure-seekers,
but for those who are anxious to add recreation and amusement to the
delight of entrancing river scenery, with its ever-varying attractiveness,
what can excel the Lower Murray % A few days ago I left Adelaide by
the midday train for Morgan. At Dry Creek I met an old acquaintance
who was travelling on business. We had an unique experience of railway
station accommodation, the recital of which may not be without interest
to the Railway Commissioners. At Gawler inquiries were made for
refreshments of various kinds, but we were told that all were—sold out.
My friend then asked for a railway time-table. “All gone,” sir, was the
reply. He went, too, making sotto voce remarks as he retired. At
Kapunda he assured me that his railway travelling for the day must
cease. He left me to seek at the nearest hostelry the refreshment he
had been unable to obtain at the stations en route. Morgan was
reached by a ravenous lot of men, who had been for several hours the
sport of refreshment-room management. It was not long before the
welcome table of the comfortable steamer Ruby attracted a very genial
lot of fellows, who, under the care of that excellent host, Captain Miers,
soon forgot their troubles. It is but fair to at once state that the
culinary provision made by the River Murray Navigation Company is
all that a traveller needs. We were many miles from the famous high
wharf at Morgan ere we left that groaning table and sought the well-lit
deck. The illuminant was not kerosene, so unkind to railway passengers;
nor gas, with its uncertain yellow glimmer; nor was it gasoline, or any
such makeshift system; but here “upon our vessel’s deck” shone the
exquisite electric light, unaffected by the strong head wind, its
incandescent lustre enjoyed by every one. Before all glared out a
powerful arc light, which lit up the water for many yards ahead, and
shone upon the banks on both sides. Most of the passengers were
bound for Chaffey Brothers’ irrigation colonies at Renraark and Mildura.
Two, however, were sportsmen of the true old style. They had hired a
boat at Morgan which quietly towed astern. For their various wants
they had made ample provision, as they had a comfortable tent, cooking
utensils, two splendid breechloading guns, plenty of ammunition, and
sundry creature comforts. At Thurk Station they left us, intending to
shoot and fish, and drift their way down to Morgan in about a fort-
night, camping at night on the river bank. Our wish, as they cast
adrift, that they might have a good time was, we subsequently learnt,
realised by them to the full.
THE RIVER MURRAY.
To me the noble old River Murray was a perfect revelation of
beauty. Its tortuous course, turgid stream, quiet billabongs, and useful
backwaters all have their special uses, and in several cases are not


devoid of charm. To the sportsman, too, what a wealth of excitement
is to be found here. Drifting down the stream you surprise rabbits
galore —for bunny the übiquitous is here; overhead is a flock of sulphur-
crested cockatoes, whose screech is defiant if not tuneful ; slowly
rounding a bend you rouse a mob of wild ducks within such easy range
that it is your own fault if you do not have a rare supper of game ;
while, if so minded—and what good sportsman would not be—you may
stealthily paddle up a backwater and obtain a full bag of black duck,
widgeon, and bustard. But to the artist, whose eye is ever open to the
beautiful in Nature, how can I convey an adequate conception of the
delightful sylvan scenery afforded by the ever-changing contour of the
stream 1 *
AT RENMARK.
In about thirty-six hours after leaving Morgan we made fast to
Renmark Wharf. The bank here is some 20 feet above the present
flood level. There should be no fear of this colony being flooded out.
Some of our party who had left the steamer at Overland Corner and
had driven to Renmark now rejoined us, and were full of what they
had seen during their drive through the settlement. They had met and
talked to selectors, had ascertained what opinions were held as to the
prospects, and had made minute inspections of the soil, and the results
which even a few months’ work had produced. Subsequently I had an
opportunity of verifying all that they told me. lo Messrs. Murcell and
Needham my thanks are due for their courteous assistance. Under the
careful and practical guidance of Mr. Charles Chaffey I saw what the
colony has done, and was able to form a pretty fair opinion of its
capacity. A piece of stubble land was shown to me from which three
crops of hay had been grown in twelve months. Renmark does not
strike one as containing exceptional soil. In some places it is of
alluvial formation, while it is mostly of a light sandy character. In the
latter case it has a bias towards binding hard after being irrigated,
which proves the existence of clay. And herein to my mind is one of
its best features. It is easy enough to reduce capillary attraction to a
minimum by keeping the surface broken, but it the soil be only sandy
the drainage is too rapid. There is a Bay of Biscay variety in the colour
of the soil; especially is this the case with the subsoil. At times the
uprooted stumps reveal a calcai'eous stratum below rich chocolate
alluvium; elsewhere the subsoil is stiff red clay, while there are patches
of laud where the red sand is over a yard in depth. The indigenous
growth is box, pine, light mallee, and bluebush. In no case is the land
heavily timbered. Our Yorke’s Peninsula farmers, who have so
thoroughly proved the utility of the stumpjumper, would ridicule the
idea of such country being considered timbered. May I commend the
stumpjumping implements of this colony to the attention of the Riverine
irrigationists 1 Mr. Charles Chaffey took me to his nursery patch of
ten acres. A neat house, almost aesthetic in external appearance,
stands in the centre of the lot. It is built of native pine, unbarked.
Where the ends are sawn to assist the nailing they look all the better
for the coat of varnish they have received. Generally the style of
architecture is pretty and unique. To hear that this small piece of
ground contained several thousand pounds worth of stock did not


surprise me. But it fairly astonished me to know that the healthy
vines, olives, and fruit trees were the result of work done on the land
since September last. From olive truncheons laid down then, a bushy
growth, in many instances 40 inches high, had resulted. Thousands of
Muscatel vine cuttings (Gordo Blanco, for raisin-making) were here,
their long shoots trailing upon the ground in every direction. They had
been topped several times since Christmas to allow free passage for the
cultivator. Despite that I measured the nearest cane, and found it to
be 85 inches in length—one season’s growth ! The gardener at the
Denmark office told me that he planted a vine cutting last spring which
sent out a cane 8 feet 6 inches long. These are just samples of what the
colony can do. Without in any way disparaging Mildura I must admit
my preference for Denmark. For soil, situation, and nearness to market
it has a decided advantage over its rival. As regards soil, lam upheld
in my view by M. De Flamare, who, as the avant courier of a number
of French vignerons, is now at Denmark. He thinks so highly of the
place that there is every reason to expect the settlement of several of
his countrymen there. They will bring not only the requisite skill
which long years of experience have imparted, but capital to put their
knowledge to practical use. M, De Flamare holds the opinion that the
soil is of so fine a quality as to be proof against phylloxera. He is
particularly pleased with the site and climate of our “ colony,” and has
induced Chaffey Brothers to reserve a large number of blocks for his
friends.
AT MILDURA,
During a river trip one meets with a great variety of people, but at
every turn—and these are legion—the praises of Mildura are sounded.
As a corollary, too, considerable vicarious glory is accorded to the
Victorian Government. And deservedly so. The anti-climax is the
consequent comparison with Denmark, and the uncomplimentary
references to the South Australian Government. Still more deservedly
so. Mildura is a surprise, a delightful vision. Three winters have not
passed since it was open for selection, but the well-grown vineyards and
orchards leave no room to doubt the interesting facts which are readily
supplied by residents in the town and by owners of horticultural blocks
in the suburbs. True, Mildura streets are not all macadamised, nor are
the alignments of the footpaths kerbed ; but the roadways are formed,
and in the busy parts of the town pedestrians are able to tread upon
gravelled footwalks. Business is brisk, too, and the air of sturdy
independence shown by all you meet is well allied to a feeling of strong
confidence in the prospect. It cannot be that these settlers are making
money from their selections just yet. That will come, however, in due
time. Undoubtedly they are living upon their capital, and apparently
are quite content. The population now numbers about 1700, and there
are over 700 landowners. There is not a grumbler in the district. At
least I did not meet one, and Press men usually come across that
class. Chaffiey’s office is a substantial stone structure, surrounded
by a pretty garden. Here are well-kept plots of buffalo-grass
and beds of flowers whose blossoms bear eloquent testimony to the
value of irrigation. At the back is a small nursery where plants
and trees are raised from seed ; and very healthy they look. All


the employes vie with each other in showing the greatest attention
to visitors. After all it is but a business spirit with a Yankee backbone.
I was driven all over the place with others in a four-horse buggy, and
had my incessant questionings thoroughly satisfied. Messrs. E. F,
Cooke and C. Miller are masters in the art of description, as all
travellers who have been in their company readily admit. We were
taken to Izard’s garden, some three miles out in the pine country. Ten
acres are cultivated, and all the fruit trees and vines are healthy and
vigorous. This is one of the many gardens planted last September. So
phenomenal was the growth that a rule was applied in several instances,
with the following results :—An apricot tree, 5 feet 6 inches ] a fig tree,
5 feet; one-year-old rooted vines when planted, bearing fruit. There
were also tomatoes, strawberry plants, and kitchen vegetables, all
indicating by their freshness that the best results follow the junction of
soil, water, and labour. At the back of the house laid a heap of
corncobs, a sort of test crop, but a gratifying proof of what the land will
yield. On our way out we passed gangs of men engaged in the various
forms of labour incidental to the transformation of forest and scrub into
garden patches. In one place the stump-grubbers had cleared the earth
from the mallee roots on a stretch of land and made it ready for the
traction engine, which, with its attenuated tail of wire rope, was tugging
away vigorously and successfully at a succession of stumps on a newly-
selected lot. The Chafieys are ready to do all the work at so much per
acre, according to the labour required in clearing land. They will also
fence and plant it, and see that it is properly irrigated. This plan ot
settling suits some residents, who engage at day-work with an employer
and utilise their spare time on their blocks. Truly, the Chafieys seem
to have made provision for every emergency.
Extracts reprinted from the “Argus,” Melbourne, 19 tli May , 1890.
THE PARLIAMENTARY TRIP TO MILDURA.
Speech by the Commissioner of Customs.
The Parliamentary party reached here shortly after midday. Ihe
steamer, owing to the lowness of the Murray, was unable to come nearer
than about fourteen miles distant from the wharf. The party were
therefore brought on in conveyances. Rain has fallen almost without
intermission since we left Renmark, and it has not yet ceased. A
hurried inspection of the pumping works and a portion of the settlement
was made, the impression created on the visitors being a most favourable
one.
The visitors were entertained at a banquet this evening, at which
the president of the shire, Mr. Henry Williams, presided. He proposed
the toast of “ The Ministry,” and said that the Government had treated
Mildura well, and the inhabitants felt that they had its sympathy even
when they had not obtained all they desired.


Mr. Patterson, who on rising was received witli loud cheers, said
that it gave him great pleasure to be present and to have had the
opportunity of visiting a settlement which had commenced to make a
name for itself, and already given evidence of the intelligence and
enterprise of its founders. (Hear, hear.) At the time the scheme of
founding the colony was first introduced to the Legislative Assembly it
was felt by some of the members—himself amongst the number—that
the scheme was wanting in precision, that the agreement should be
clearly defined, and that the land should not be granted until substantial
guarantees were given that the basis of settlement should be established
in firm and unmistakable terms, and the action taken by those members
resulted in a manner which was more satisfactory to the State and to the
settlers themselves. It was felt—and rightly, too —that the scheme was
one of great magnitude, which was starting not out of pure philanthropy
or from mere patriotic motives. The moving principle, in short, was
dollars. The whole idea was that those persons who came to live at
Mildura should be able to make money and to establish the only thing
worth contending for—comfortable and happy homes. (Cheers.) It
was a scheme for the actual material benefit of all those who joined. It
was universally felt that such a basis was not only a reasonable and
proper one, but, indeed, the only basis upon which success is built, and
the more it was treated from that point of view the better it would be
for everyone. One great fact in connection with the settlement which
was more impressing than any other was that it had been, and would
continue to be, the means of introducing to Victoria a class of persons
who, besides being of industrious habits, brought capital with them.
(Hear, hear.) That class of men was wanted, and it was gratifying to
find that that class was being attracted to the settlement. The
occupation, too, was of the most attractive description, but he would not
attempt to lecture them upon the subject of land, of which they knew a
great deal more than he did, or attempt to teach them how to manage
their own business. There was one subject, however, from his point of
view of the future which lay before these great colonies, in the direction
of which Mildura had made the first considerable steps. The party had
been brought to Mildura by a wonderful circumbendibus. Doubtless
there was some deep and dark ulterior motive in taking the party the
long way round. Certainly, the party had been impressed with the
necessity of securing some better communication with Melbourne if
Victoria was to reap the full benefit of settlement in the distant future,
(Cheers.) Observing that the settlement had accomplished so much by
private enterprise he would not be surprised to hear of the Mildurians
proposing to make a railway for themselves. They would probably
reply to this suggestion, that if the policy of our colony would only
permit of it they would gladly do so. On this subject, speaking for
himself alone, and without indicating what the Government as a whole
might deem to be the best policy, he doubted whether, considering the
demands for railway communication from every part of Victoria, for
straight, cross, and diagonal lines, and, taking into account our
developing resources, the variety and extent of which would grow day
by day owing to the inevitable march of population, any Government
would be able to say much longer, in reply to applications for railway


lines., “ We can’t give you what you ask at present, and we are not able
to authorise you to make railways for yourselves.” He firmly believed
that we were approaching a time when such a position would be found
utterly indefensible, more especially as it was seriously felt that both
the matter of construction and management of our railways had become
a question of increasing anxiety to our overprudential financial critics, and
he would not deny that the railway system promised to expand beyond
the bounds of economic government control. If all the wants of our
people were to be supplied as they should be, most undoubtedly i-ailways
would have to be extensively constructed, increasing in an equal ratio
with our growth and industrial expansion. This was a feature to regard
with pleasure rather than dismay. The multiplication of our railways
meant the vast increase of our wealth by the more speedy development
of our great resources. (Applause.) After the era of the squatter and
the gold-digger we had arrived at a transition state; trades and
manufactures had been established and agriculture had increased, but we
wanted a great deal more yet. There was no population in the fullest
sense of the word. In travelling through Australia one could not fail to
be impressed deeply by the absence of people. More people were wanted
to the square mile, and this was where the value of Mildura was
becoming apparent. The settlers here were solving the problem which
politicians were afraid to tackle. Now that our I'esources were being
proclaimed, population of the best sort would find its way to the colonies,
and the advantages would be great, for we had much to learn. Some of
the best cultivated land passed through by the visiting party in South
Australia was in the possession of Germans. In the simple matter of
vegetables we were largely dependent upon John Chinaman ; from the
Italian we had to learn how to grow fruits ; and from the French how
to produce grapes and make wines. The resources of the colonies were
great, but in order to develop them we must be prepared to take a lesson
from every nation and people, and not fancy that because we have learnt
the ABC we know the whole alphabet of a country’s pi’ogress. We
had to learn how to grow and what to grow; how to pack and to cure;
how to transport our produce, and to what markets. There were two
ways of getting rid of produce—one was to send it away at great
expense and loss to a distant market, and the other to induce respectable
men and women from the overcrowded parts of Europe to come and
partake with its of our abundance. (Cheers.) The subject of federation
was one that was said to be in the air, but it affected the people ot
Australia in a very practical manner indeed. Standing, as Mildura did,
upon the very verge of two or three separate jurisdictions, it might be
made to feel what are the barbarisms of borderism. It did seem a rank
absurdity that near this spot, almost within a stone’s throw of each
other, were living three different communities, all speaking the same
language, citizens of the same nation, and yet to all intents and purposes
separate communities, with varying laws, and with the tendency which
all small communities had to squabble and fight, reducing harmony as
time rolled on, until they degenerated into hostile camps. Was it
worthy, for instance, of a great statesman to higgle about the rights of
a neighbour to a few buckets of water taken from the mighty stream
which passes Mildura 1 (Laughter and applause.) He could not think


that it was so. It was to be hoped that the time was not far distant
when we should see this imaginary barrier obliterated in peace, and a
grand united people living in harmony, rejoicing in its strength, and year
bv year widening the foundations and increasing the superstructure of a
mighty nation. (Cheers.) If we wished to make this continent the
settled home of a numerous and prosperous people we must live at peace
one with another, and be ever ready to learn the lessons which those of
other nations could teach us. The progress of this settlement was equal
to the most sanguine expectations. He found that the imports of the
district last year were £19,000, and the exports £20,000. Mildura in
this respect was setting a good example, the exports being in excess of
the imports. Whether the designs of the people upon his Parliamentary"
friends were successful or not, he could say that the progress of the
settlement was watched with interest and goodwill throughout Victoria,
and all hoped that the inhabitants might reap the fullest benefits from
their pioneering enterprise, and that the result would be to them wealth
beyond the dreams of avarice. (Cheers.) If this blessing was secui'ed
to them it would benefit not only Victoria, but the whole of Australasia.
In strengthening Australia we were widening the borders of the grand
old British name, and at the same time riveting the ties that bound us
to the Empire. (Loud cheers.)
Dr. Le Fevre, who spoke subsequently, said that the importance of the
place was such, and its promise so great, that ere long the Government
would be forced to build a railroad for them. This remark was received
with tremendous cheering.
There was a long list of speakers. Lord Eanfurly proposed the
health of Messrs. Chaffey Bros, in a highly eulogistic speech, and Mr,
Geo. Chaffey responded, and gave an interesting account of his connection
with irrigation colonies in America and the colonies. His reception by
the large audience was most enthusiastic, and was an evidence that most
cordial relations exist between the company and the settlers. This
would not be the case if the obligations entered into by the company
were not generously as well as honestly fulfilled. In going amongst
the settlers one obtains abundant evidence that this is the case, and it is
a most hopeful feature in connection with the future of the settlement.
Mr. Levien, one of the directors of the company, was also very
cordially received. He explained how it came about that he, after being
a severe critic of the Government proposal for the establishment of the
settlement, had thrown in his lot with the company. The explanation
simply was that he visited the irrigation colonies established by the
Messrs. Ohaffey in America, and he was convinced that the system carried
out there so successfully could be established in Victoria with even
greater results.
To attempt a report of all the speeches would be wearisome. There
were addresses from ten members of Parliament, and from local and
neighbouring municipal representatives. There was about four hours’
solid talking, and on the whole the audience showed considerable
forbearance.
There were over two hundred and fifty persons present upon the
invitation of the shire council and the company, and an opportunity was
afforded of seeing the class of men who have settled here. There is a


large proportion of young men, and there are none who are old. If the
place does not succeed it will not be owing to any want of energy,
enthusiasm, or intelligence on the part of the settlers. That they
recognise that something more than muscle is required for successful
tillage was evidenced in the mottoes at the head of the hall —“ Aqua et
nous ” (water and brains). The motto is a good one, and, though
mistakes will be made here as elsewhere, if it is followed out they will
be few and easily rectified, and will not entail disaster. A clause in the
Irrigation Act makes Mildura a temperance settlement, and not only are
spirit licenses forbidden, but even the wine which the district is to
produce in such quantities in the future may not be sold here. The
restriction is by no means popular here, and it may be safely said that if
local option prevailed it would not long exist. There have been several
convictions for sly grog-selling, and it is still carried on, whilst a large
bottle business is conducted across the river. The class of people who
have settled here are not likely to give way to unrestrained drinking;
neither, on the other hand, do they believe in compulsory abstinence.
Before the banquet was concluded last night the Commissioner of
Customs was constrained to express the opinion that Mildura was a real
live place. If there was a somewhat exuberant indulgence, it may be
taken as a protest against undue restraint. People do say that some
sort of protest is entered at every r-ace meeting or other gathering.
It has been a source of great disappointment that so little time was
afforded to carry out the real object of the visit, and inspect the settle-
ment, and it was further unfortunate that the brief inspection afforded
should have to be made in the midst of pouring rain. It requires a
strong imagination to conjure up a picture of drought and dust whilst
standing under an umbrella in about six inches of soft mud. As it was
well expressed by one of the party, the most urgent need of the place at
the moment appeared to be drainage; but, in spite of all disadvantages,
a great deal was seen, and the favourable impression created upon all
minds was undoubted. Coming in through the back of the settlement the
first holding seen was that of Lord Ranfurly, and before the gate had been
passed the most sceptical members of the party were converts to the
irrigation doctrine. We had been travelling for ten or twelve miles
through country so utterly barren of vegetation that even the rabbits
were dying off, often having eaten the bark off the trees and every green
thing within their reach. Nothing could be mox-e desolate, dreary, or
hopeless in appearance. Then, in an instant, with only a wire fence
intervening between it and the inhospitable desert, we saw rich fair
lands, laid out in the foreground with rows of orange trees, giving
evidence of most healthy, vigorous growth, and in the distance could be
seen trees of larger growth and of different shades. A fine avenue, with
ornamental trees on either hand, led away to a pretty little cottage in
one end of the large orangery, to which a gang of men were at work, the
whole presenting the embodiment of industry, fertility, beauty, and
rural felicity. The contrast was striking and effective. Our stay was
not longer than a couple of minutes, but as privileged visitors we trooped
through the fences and in amongst the young trees, examined the
distributing channel, noticed in what gentle and regular grade the land
lay, ready for water almost without any effort expended in preparing it,


and we pronounced it good. Indeed, we have seen other holdings with
larger and more wondrous growth, but none more impressive than this
which surprised us almost in the heart of the mallee desolation. Shortly
after this we saw the town, with its large buildings and its broad
avenues, all the result of a couple of years’ work, and were quite
prepared to acknowledge the wonder of the transformation, which the
two-year old identities of the place never weary of describing.
The party leaves at 11 o’clock this (Saturday) morning. A small
steamer has been chartered to convey us through the shallows of the
stream to where the Ellen awaits us.
Only half the settlement has been seen, but the weather does not
invite a longer stay.
Extracts reprinted from “ The Argus,” Melbourne, 20 th May , 1890.
THE PARLIAMENTARY TRIP TO MILDHRA.
Though the inspection of the Mildura settlement by the Parlia-
mentary party was made under very unfavourable circumstances as
regards weather, it was yet a tolerably complete one, and afforded a good
idea of the extent to which the settlement has progressed. There are
now upwards of 2900 acres under cultivation. Between 8000 and 9000
acres have been disposed of, and the pumping plant and irrigation
channels are far in advance of the settlement. The total power of the
engines used in pumping is 2048-horse power. The main pumping
station is on a large billabong, which at flood time is filled from the
Murray, This billabong is 10 miles long, and of considerable width, and
it stores an immense quantity of water. Though this water really comes
from the Murray, it would for the most part run to waste were it not
conserved by the Messrs. Chaffey, so that the river suffers nothing by the
loss of so much as is impounded. At low water the Murray is 25 feet
below the level of the impounded water, and the latter supply is
increased as required by pumps working on a steamer in the river.
From the billabong the water is raised into a channel 50 feet above the
Murray. It flows along this a distance of about three miles to another
pumping station, where it is raised 75 feet, 85 feet, and 86 feet to the
channels, which are high enough to command all the land in the grant,
except a few acres near the pumping station. Water can be pumped
into any of these channels at the rate of 20,000 gallons per minute, which
is sufficient for the irrigation of 25,000 acres of land. There are two
smaller pumping stations on the Murray, but there was no time to visit
these. The wliole of the powerful machinery has been erected under the
supervision of Mr. Peter M'Laren, the resident engineer, and it works
as smoothly and noiselessly as a sewing-machine.
Passing from the machinery department, a hasty inspection was made
of some of the irrigated properties. A plot which may be regarded as
typical of what has been accomplished here is that of Mr. Izard. This
gentleman bought 20 acres of scrub land, and nine months ago this land


was in its natural state. Ten acres of it have since that time been
cleared, graded, planted, and irrigated, and now it forms a lovely little
homestead. There are vines which look as if they had been in the
ground two years. The figs and apricots are equally flourishing. Near
the small and tasteful cottage a patch is devoted to vegetables, and the
other 10 acres are cleared, and will be planted next season. Near this
place we see a traction-engine standing, which is used to tear up the
scrub and pine trees by the roots. The engines are the property of the
company, which either performs the work of clearing and planting at so
much per acre or does the clearing and grading, merely charging the
settler with the expenses. With these powerful engines the work is
very rapidly performed, and a few days are sufficient to transform a
piece of mallee scrub or pine and box land into a clear section ready
for ploughing. The ploughing is done to a depth of 18 inches, by
steam ploughs, and the settlers live in a very primitive style whilst
their clearing and planting is being done. Most of them are content
with a rude hut or small canvas tent. The important thing after the
land has been purchased is to get it planted, so that it may begin to
yield a return as speedily as possible, and after this is done a home is
thought of. Where land is so valuable none must be wasted, and it
would never do for a settler to keep adding building to building as his
i-equirements grow, as is done by the squatters. He must build once
and for all, and whatever has been put up as a temporary shelter must
be entirely removed.
In our drive round we pass the holding of Mr. Call, son of Mr.
F. Call, P.M., of Melbourne. There is a fine vineyard laid out here,
and a neat little cottage. On the opposite side of the road is a very
pretty plantation, the property of Mr. Crossthwaite Here a small field
of lucerne is shown, which looks very strong and healthy, and yields a
good crop every month. Next, in the gathering darkness, Mr. Morn-
ington’s orchard is passed, which recently won the first prize offered by
the Chief Secretary for the best irrigated orchard. No time was afforded
for inspecting this orchard, so that whatever favourable impressions the
visitors formed were not gathered from what would naturally be looked
upon as the show place of the settlement.
The town of Mildura is not fully seen until next morning. It has
been built by persons who have an eye to the future. The buildings
are large and well constructed, the coffee palace and the store of Messrs.
Williams and Yule standing out as prominent landmarks. Deakin-
avenue. the main street, is not largely built upon as yet, but a neat post-
office is being erected, and land is reserved for municipal offices. The
office of the company has been built and furnished in a very tasteful
style. There are large workshops near the river, with a saw-mill near
at hand, and generally the place has an air of briskness and prosperity.
Of course all this enterprise is of a speculative character. So far
the place has not been built \ipon what has come out of the land, but on
what it is hoped will be got from it. The important questions are—
Will the settlement pay 1 Is the basis of operations sound'? and are
the expectations of the settlers reasonable 1 In conversing with the
settlers one finds that they, at least, have no misgivings. Those who
buy their land right out have to expend from £45 to £6O per acre


before they can expect a return. This is taken from the statements of
the settlers themselves, and they then proceed to show that, working on
that basis of expenditure, the results will yield not only an adequate,
but an abundant return. So far, they say, the place has surpassed
their most sanguine expectations, and they do not fear that it will
disappoint them in the future.
The company invited several gentlemen who are experts in fruit and
vine growing, and the opinions of these gentlemen, which are appended,
will be accepted by the general public as of great weight. Mr. Charles
Draper, of Hazelglen, is well known as one of the largest fruit growers
in Victoria. He has 160 acres devoted to fruit alone, and has been
engaged in that pursuit for the last twenty-eight years. He is a member
of the Royal Horticultural Society of London, and of the Horticultural
Society of Victoria. He states that he went to Mildura expecting to
find that the reports regarding it had been much exaggerated, but he
found that it far exceeded his expectations, and he is thoroughly satisfied
that it has a great future before it. The soil is rich, of great depth, and
easily worked. The surface forms, when properly worked, a fine mulch,
which modifies the effect of the sun’s rays and enables the ground to
retain the moisture. At the same time the land is all well drained, and
will require no artificial means to carry off the water for the growth of
sub-tropical fruits, such as grapes, apricots, peaches, oranges, lemons,
figs, and walnuts. Generally, the place could not be bettered, and
prunes and pears might also be tried there. The fruit will grow
quickly, and should be of first-class quality. The land is well graded,
and suited for irrigation, but the growers will have to be careful in the
use of water, and learn to put it on only when wanted. For all
canned fruits a market at payable prices will be readily found, as well as
for such fresh fruits as can be got to the market in good condition.
Olives will grow luxuriantly, and should prove a very payable crop, and
some of the fruits proper to cooler climates might be tried. There are
certain to be mistakes made at the first both in selecting and growing
the fruits, and he would therefore strongly advocate the establishment
of an experimental plantation, on which the growth of new and old
varieties might be carried out on a small scale, so that the settlers might
learn both what to cultivate and what to avoid, and also the best method
of culture. The land will ultimately require manuring, but this is not
a matter of immediate urgency, and is not likely to prove a difficulty
in the near future on account of the depth and fertility of the soil. The
question upon which he has the greatest apprehension is in regard to the
smallness of the areas taken up. The holding should be large enough
to enable the grower to combine dairying, or the growth of root crops,
with the primary business of fruit and wine production, and this would
afford a standbye in case of the failure, or partial failure, of the fruit crop,
and would also provide manure for the land. The rapid and healthy
growth of young trees and vines surpassed everything in his experience.
He is confident that Mildura will develop into a large and important
settlement.
Mr, Thomas Hardy, of Bankside, is well known as one of the largest
wine growers in South Australia, and his experience extends over many
years. He expresses himself as highly pleased with what he saw, his


expectations Laving been largely exceeded. A large variety of fruits
can be produced to perfection at Mildura, but for the production of
raisins and currants its advantages are unequalled, and it will soon
take a foremost place in that trade. Mr. Hardy has 100 acres devoted
to currant vines, so that his opinion on this point should be of great
value. The special advantage of Mildura is that the raisins and
currant grapes will ripen a month earlier than they do near Adelaide,
and this, combined with the heat of the climate and the absence of
rain at that period of the year, will be of great advantage in drying,
enabling it to be accomplished without the aid of artificial heat. The
soil is well adapted for vine-growing generally, but more especially
for the currant vine. There need be no fear of over-production in
this article, seeing that it will take a crop of 10,000 acres to supply the
present consumption of Australia, and this is always necessary.
Mr. G. P. Mills, of Melbourne, has carried on for years the largest
wholesale fruit-importing business in the colony. He considers that
the young trees at Mildura are remarkably healthy, and the soil every-
thing that could be desired for orchards. The place gives promise of
a very large production of fruit, which, judging from the results
obtained from the irrigated lands about Adelaide, is likely to be of a
very superior quality, and may be expected to bring the highest prices
in the market. An average price of 7s. to Bs. per case may be ex-
pected in Melbourne for Mildura oranges. All the fruit grown there
will ripen about a month earlier than the New South Wales crop, and
therefore will have the command of the market for that period.
Peaches arrive at perfection there in the month of December, and at
that time will be readily bought up at high prices. Fruit from Mil-
dura can be landed in Melbourne at Is. a case less than from Sydney,
and even via Swan Hill should be conveyed at a less price than from
Sydney, as it will avoid the duty and wharfage, which amounts to Is. a
case. The grower might safely calculate upon a net return of ss. per
case, which should yield a magnificent profit. Allowing three cases to
the tree and eighty trees to the acre, there would be a return of £6O per
acre, and there is not the slightest prospect of the market being over-
supplied. There are occasional gluts in the season, when lower prices
have to be accepted, but this is usually owing to a large supply of
inferior or badly-handled fruit, and a fall of from Is. to Is. 6d. per case
always ensues. A speedy clearance at this price would leave an ample
margin for the grower. The New South Wales Government gives
every possible facility for the export of fruit by cheap conveyance on the
railways,and the carriage of empty cases is free. The Victorian Govern-
ment may fairly be asked to grant the same facilities, A great deal of
the success of the place will depend on the fruit being placed on the
market with the maximum of speed and the minimum of handling. The
New South Wales special trains are put on to suit the requirements of
the growers. Supposing a shipload of fruit arrived at Swan Hill just
after the train had left, it might do it a very great injury to remain six
or eight hours waiting for the next train. Arrangements would in New
South Wales be made to despatch the fruit at once by special train, and
the same thing will have to be done in Victoria. The production of figs
will, in the opinion of Mr. Mills, prove to be a specialty at Mildura.


All the conditions are favourable, and the growth of the trees which
have been planted is simply marvellous. Experience will be required in
properly preserving and packing the fruit, but when this is well and
economically done, an article not excelled by any that comes to the
market may be expected, and there will be a great demand for it.
Apricots are largely planted, and for canning purposes this fruit should
prove thoroughly remunerative; £24 a ton would be readily procurable
for them for canning or jam-making. Like the other gentlemen quoted,
Mr. Mills is assured of the future success of the place. Three or four
years at the present rate of progress will transform it, so that those who
see it now Avould hardly recognise it. The progress of the past has been
great, but it is likely to be exceeded in the future.
{Reprintedfrom the “Daily Telegraph ,” Melbourne, 31 si May, 1890.)
THE MILDURA IRRIGATION COLONY.
The terms “ Chaffey Brothers” and “ Mil dura” are now household
words throughout Australasia. The firm of Chaffey Brothers has long
since acquired a world-wide reputation as practical irrigationists.
Public confidence in their ability to demonstrate by visible results the
immense profits that are to be made by the intelligent application of
water to the soil, combined with the cultivation of that class of products
for which there is always a great demand, is abundantly testified by the
steady stream of settlers that are daily finding their way to Mildura, and
who, under the guidance of this enterprising American firm, are estab-
lishing homes for themselves on a scale that gives every promise of this
“ new province” of Victoria becoming in a very few years a dense and
prosperous settlement. Regarding the province of Mildura itself, until
the Chaffey Brothers suggested the idea of its irrigation and colonisation,
but a very small percentage of our population had the remotest idea of
its exact locality or of the character and formation of the soil in that
part of Victoria. Indeed, it is quite probable that were it not for the
proposals submitted to the Victorian Government some two years and
a-half ago by the Chaffey Brothers this rich and fertile territory would
have remained in an unproductive condition for the next hundred years.
Notwithstanding the astonishing progress that has been made in the
development of irrigation and a high-class system of cultivation at
Mildura, it is surprising what a small percentage of Victorian people
have the slightest conception of the magnitude which this rapidly-
growing settlement has already assumed, the very name of the mallee
country having been so long associated with droughts and rabbits, and
the soil, owing to the low average rainfall, being looked upon as unfitted
for profitable cultivation, most people fail to understand how it can be
possible that so great a change has been brought about in so short a
time. Not having seen Mildura, it could hardly be expected that
credence would be given to all that is talked of and written about this


irrigation colony, for even visitors who for the first time make their
appearance at the settlement invariably express themselves as being
unable to properly realise the unexpected and almost magical transfor-
mation that presents itself on every side. In order to get anything like
a grasp of the progress of settlement and the substantial and permanent}
character of the works and general improvements at the settlement, it is
absolutely necessary that a personal inspection should be made of the
irrigation colony. Seeing is believing, and to every inquirer for infor-
mation regarding the prospects of Mildura as a field for investment,
the one stereotyped reply of the Chaffey Brothers has been “ Come
and see.”
It was a happy thought, therefore, that suggested itself to the
Chaffey Brothers and the councillors of the shire of Mildura when those
two bodies decided upon issuing joint invitations to the whole of the
members of both Houses of the Victorian Parliament, and a number of
other prominent gentlemen, to visit Mildura. The majority of those
invited were, unfortunately, owing to the near approach of the opening
of Parliament and pressure of private business, unable to accept the
invitation, but withal some sixty to seventy gentlemen—over twenty
members of Parliament—formed the Parliamentary party that recently
paid a visit of inspection to the Chaffey Brothers’ irrigation colonies at
Mildura and Renmark. Singularly enough, amongst the whole of the
visitors there was not one who had any previous local knowledge of
Mildura. It can be imagined, therefore, that amongst the crowd
sceptical views to a more or less extent were held by many as to the
probable success of this irrigation settlement, and while en route opinions
to that effect found expression. Some, of course, were enthusiastic
supporters of the Chaffey Brothers and of the advantages of irrigation
generally, while a good few, on the other hand, decided to suspend
judgment until they had seen for themselves. The Parliamentary party
left Spencer-street by the Adelaide express on the afternoon of the 12th
inst., and proceeded by rail ma Adelaide to Morgan, a small town on the
Murray River, 120 miles north of the South Australian capital. At
Morgan the visitors went on board the steamer Ellen , one of the Chaffey
Brothers’ river boats, the remainder of the journey to Mildura being by
steamer up the Murray River*. Renmark (240 miles by river from
Morgan), the Chaffey Brothers’ irrigation colony in South Australia,
was passed late on the 14th, and Mildura (450 miles by river from
Morgan), reached early on the 16th. The return journey was commenced
at noon on the 17th, Morgan reached at midday on the 19th, Adelaide
passed through at 3.30 the same afternoon, and Melbourne arrived at at
nine a.m. on the 20th inst. The journey via Adelaide and Morgan is a
very roundabout way of getting to Mildura. The usual route is rail to
Swan Hill, 210 miles from Melbourne, and steamer thence down the
Murray 325 miles to Mildura. By this route the journey from Melbourne
to Mildura can be accomplished within thirty-six hours. Owing to the
dry summer experienced in the districts drained by the upper Murray
and its affluents, the river below Echuca is at present not more than 4
feet above summer level, and is consequently too low for large river-
steamers ; hence, therefore, the reason why the Adelaide route had to
be selected. Notwithstanding that the route was rather a circumlocutory


one, the trip proved most enjoyable, as there was much to interest as
well as instruct on the journey. Between Adelaide and Morgan a fine
stretch of rich, agricultural country was passed through, the continuous
gentle undulations giving to the surroundings a most pleasing and
attractive appearance. One of the surprises of the trip awaited the
party at Morgan, where the visitors for the first time beheld the broad,
deep, and placid waters of the Lower Murray. It will hardly be
credited that of the large number of visitors constituting the party, and
consisting as it did of old colonists and Australian natives in the prime
of life, very few could boast of having any previous knowledge of the
magnificent stream they were gliding along. The Murray is a river
that every Australian may well be proud of, but how few Australians
have any idea of the magnitude of this great internal waterway. The
Australian “ Father of Waters” is a river of which young Australia
ought to be exceedingly proud. In many places it broadens out to a
width of 300 yards, and where it sweeps round some of the bends it
must be nearer 500 yards in width. There are some splendid long and
straight reaches, which alone form a sight well worth the journey to see.
In places, on the other hand, the river becomes very tortuous, wonder-
fully tortuous, in its course, winding in and out, and in many cases
doubling back, so that you have to travel several miles without getting
any nearer, as regards direct distance, the end of your journey. Horse-
shoe bends alternate with charming stretches of water, the river
meanwhile maintaining its uniform width. There is hardly any
current perceptible, but the water withal moves along in deep and silent
majesty at from four to five miles an hour. Until the Chaffeys came
along the Lower Murray was unknown to 99 per cent, of the Victorian
people. In the River Murray Victoria possesses a joint ownership in a
property whose value it is impossible to over-estimate. But it is only
since the Chaffey Brothers appeared on the scene that the colonies
commenced to realise the great and permanent value of our Australian
rivers. Without the necessary skill and enterprise the whole of the
water which for so many years has been running to waste would still be
finding its way to the sea. Enterprise, backed up by skill and
experience, is what converts water into streams of gold. We had the
river, but lacked the knowledge to utilise the water to advantage.
What we set small value upon the Chaffey Brothers regarded as the
very heart’s blood of the Australian nation. The possession of Mildura
means an enormous fortune to the Chaffey Brothers, but unlike most
business transactions, their gains are not our losses. Their gains must
necessarily be Victoria’s gains, for it is impossible for them to succeed
in this great undertaking without a similar result also attending the
efforts of every industrious settler who becomes a purchaser at Mildura,
Enough has been said for the present of the River Murray, From
what has already been stated, it will be gathered that the supply of
water in that stream for irrigation purposes is practically illimitable.
The system of raising and diverting the water from the river across the
adjacent country is one that our readers will be anxious to learn some-
thing about. The scheme of water supply for the Mildura irrigation
colony is a pumping one, and is the largest and most complete of its kind
in the world.


The property held by the Chaffey Brothers at Mildura will be
operated upon in sections. The first section, or first survey, as it is
termed, contains 25,000 acres, and it is upon this area that the firm is
at present concenti-ating the whole of its efforts. To supply this amount
of land with sufficient water for irrigation and domestic supply purposes,
pumps possessing a total pumping capacity of 200,000 gallons of water
per minute, have been obtained. For the distributing of the water
large channels have been cut, each channel supplying water to all lands
below its own particular level. In speaking of the different channels it
will have to be borne in mind that all the figures of the levels are
calculated from the summer level of the water in the River Murray.
As the water in the Murray falls to and remains at summer level
for not more than three months in the year, it will be seen, when
speaking of the levels of the channels, and the height the water has to be
pumped to, that in proportion to the height of the water in the river
above summer level, so in proportion will the “ lift” from the stream to
the channels be correspondingly reduced. There are five of these main
channels, which are known as the 30 feet, 30 feet No. 2, 50 feet, 70
feet, and 85 feet respectively.
There are also five large pumping stations. Before describing the
pumps it will be necessary to explain that the bulk of the water required
for irrigation will be drawn not from the Murray River itself, but from
a large “ billabong” that leaves the Murray, and after pursuing a
circuitous route for a distance of about twelve miles, joins the stream
again at a point not more in a direct line than six miles from its off-take.
The billabong for its whole length being within the Mildura colony
furnishes a great natural reservoir, the value of which cannot be over-
estimated. It has an average width of 150 yards, by an average depth
when full of about 30 feet. The water in the billabong rises and falls
with the level of the water in the Murray, but as this reservoir has now
been “ locked” at both ends, its waters can at any time be stored up
according as their requirements may demand. The point where this
“ billabong” rejoins the Murray is known as Psyche Bend. Here a
large pumping station is now in course of erection. This pumping
station will be utilised for the purpose of filling the billabong from the
Murray River, but as its services will only require to be brought into
requisition during exceptionally dry seasons, this plant will seldom have
to be used. Nevertheless, the Chaffey Brothers regard its presence as
necessary to the success of their scheme, for with the knowledge of a
regular supply of water being thus guaranteed right through even the
longest and driest of summers, such a result cannot but give increased
confidence in the future of Mildura, both amongst present landholders
and all intending settlers. The engine at Psyche Bend will be a triple
expansion one of 1000 h.p. indicated, driving four 40-inch pumps. The
pumps have been so arranged that one, two, three, or four can be used
as required. The lift from the Murray into the channel connecting
the river with the billabong will vary from 20 feet to nil, according to
the level of the water in the river. Each of the pumps will have a
pumping capacity of 30,000 gallons per minute, so that should the whole
four require at any time to be worked together, their united pumping
capacity will be equivalent to 120,000 gallons per minute.


The next in order of the pumping stations is the one on the
billabong, which lifts the water from that reservoir into the 30 feet
channel. The engine is 1000 horse-power indicated, driving four pumps
having a united capacity of 40,000 gallons a minute. These pumps can
also be either worked all together or separately, and have been so
arranged that with an alteration of the valve, the water can be discharged
into either the 30 feet or the 50 feet channel.
At Nicholls Point, a site on the 50 feet channel, we find the next
pumping station, where the water is lifted from the 50 feet channel into
the 70 and 85 feet channels, the engines and pumps being of the same
strength and capacity as those raising the water from the billabong into
the 30 feet and 50 feet channels.
The pumping station at the town of Mildura raises the water direct
from the Murray. A 200 horse-power engine drives a double-acting
Blake pump, which lifts 1500 gallons a minute to a height of 78 feet
into a main running along Deakin Avenue, the full length of the town
boundary, the surplus water finding its way into their 70-feet channel
at its intersection with Deakin Avenue. The town supply is at present
obtained from this main ; but the erection of a large water-tower, from
whence the water will be laid on to every dwelling, will shortly be
carried out.
At the old Mildura homestead is the fifth pumping station, where a
200 horse-power engine, driving pumps possessing a pumping capacity of
10,000 gallons a minute, raises the water into 30 feet channel No. 2.
The total pumping capacity of the five pumping stations as described
will, it will be noticed, be equal to 200,000 gallons per minute. The
pumping capacity is, of course, far and away in excess of present
requirements; in fact, were the whole of the first survey (25,000 acres,
or less avenues, &c., 23,000 acres) planted, and in readiness for irriga-
tion, the amount of water that will even then be required will not prove
a heavy strain on the existing pumping plants. As already stated, the
total pumping capacity that will be relied on to supply water for the
first survey will be 200,000 gallons per minute. As the pumps at
Psyche Bend, however, can only be regarded as a stand-by, to be called
into requisition in the event of a season threatening to prove dry, we
must only calculate upon a regular supply of 80,000 gallons per
minute that can be available for direct irrigation purposes. Roughly
speaking, 25,000 gallons of water is equivalent to an inch of rain on an
acre of land. Pumps lifting 80,000 gallons of water per minute will
deliver 4,800,000 gallons per hour, or 115,200,000 gallons in a day of
twenty-four hours. By figuring this out it will be seen that pumps
delivering 80,000 gallons per minute will furnish sufficient water to
apply 1-inch in depth of the liquid to over 4500 acres of land every
twenty-four hours.
The main channels might be more fitly termed canals, as they all
have a bottom width of 25 feet by a depth of 4 feet. Over sixty miles
of main channels have been constructed, and an additional ten miles are
at present in the contractor’s hands. This, of course, does not include
the subsidiary channels which tap the main channels here and there, and
convey the water to the various holdings. The main channels are
always carried out by contract, the cost per mile averaging about £SOO.


The 50 feet channel has a length of seven miles, and is completed. The
30 feet channel is twelve miles, and the 70 feet channel twenty-five miles
long. Both of these channels continue to be extended as rapidly as
settlement advances.
Few people have any idea of the enormous outlay that has already
been incurred at Mildura by the Chaffey Brotheis. The cost of the
main and subsidiary channels, inclusive of contracts now in progress,
falls very little short of <£50,000, while the expenditure that was neces-
sary in the purchase and fitting up of the different pumping stations has
amounted to close upon £35,000. The large pumping station at Psyche
Bend, when completed, will mean an additional outlay of about £15,000,
so that the total expenditure in connection with the construction of
channels and the purchase and fitting up of pumping appliances may
reasonably be put down at close upon £lOO,OOO sterling.
The progress of development at Mildura must be actually seen in
order to give one a correct realisation of the character and magnitude of
the improvements the Chaffey Brothers are carrying out. Personal
inspection will alone carry full conviction. Even the most sceptical,
after a visit to Mildura, willingly admit their previous ignorance. The
strength and permanent character of all the improvements is what first
takes the visitors most by surprise. It would seem as if money had
been no object with the Chaffey Brothers in the execution of their work.
Strength, permanency, and general neatness and excellence of finish are
everywhere noticeable. Whatever work the firm has put its imprint
upon is intended to last not for a day, but for generations. There is a
general consensus of opinion on this point.
Having now dealt with the system of raising the water, and
explained the cost and method of its distribution, the question of the
water rights that have been obtained by the Chaffey Brothers from the
Victorian Government, and how those rights will compare with other
water rights, both in Victoria and California, will be discussed in my
next article on Mildura.
Reprinted from the Leader, Melbourne, 7th June, 1890.
MILDURA.
By Our Own Reporter,
During the recent Parliamentary trip to Mildura, among the guests
of Messrs. Chaffey were several fruit-growers and vine-growers of this
colony and South Australia. The views of some of these gentlemen as
to the present condition of Mildura and its future prospects will no
doubt be read with interest, and are appended herewith. We may
preface them by stating that the gentlemen mentioned are quite
enthusiastic about what they saw in Mildura and the wonderful work
done by the Messrs. Chaffey, in turning in a few years a wilderness into
a smiling garden.
Mr. Chas. Draper, of Charnwood, Arthur’s Creek, Yan Yan, who is
well known as one of the most successful orchardists in Victoria, states


that he accepted the invitation of Messrs. Chaffey in order to see for
himself what the possible future of Mildura would be. To use his own
words he was “ perfectly astonished” at what he saw. The opinion he
had formed of Mildura was nothing like the reality. He could not
imagine, even from the reports that had reached him, that the settlement
was such a fine place for fruit-growers. After a careful examination of
the land he found it could not possibly be better for sub-tropical fruit-
growing, such as grapes, figs, apricots, lemons, and oranges, particularly,
and all fruits for canning and drying. He thought that pears and
apples might be tried advantageously for canning, also that walnuts,
chestnuts, and such like, and olives might be grown for shelter as well
as for profit. He recommends the establishment of an experimental
garden for all fruits, so as to educate the settlers and prevent mistakes
and loss of money in cultivating products which may turn out unsuitable
for the soil and climatic conditions. He inspected with great interest
the machinery, irrigation system, and grading carried out, and thinks it
perfect. What has been done is something wonderful, and the growth
extraordinary. It would be to the interests of settlers if they had, in
addition to their holdings, an area of land where they could keep cows
for dairying, as in case of the fruit crops failing through any cause they
would have something to fall back upon. In the matter of soil, he
can’t give it too much praise, as the land could not possibly be better*.
As to the settlers themselves, he thinks they are the right sort of men
and quite enthusiasts. Mr. Izard’s orchard struck him as particularly
fine. The land was purchased only fifteen months ago, since when it
had been cleared, and nine months ago laid down in rooted plants. He
was so astonished at the growth that he had brought down shoots to
show his friends. The rods of young vines were as much as 8 feet long
before they were topped, and a second crop of fruit was on some of
them. The growth of apricots was wonderful. He saw a nice patch of
scarlet runners, strawberries, peas, and cauliflowers with very fine heads.
He was very pleased with Lord Ranfurly’s estate, where everything was
in perfect order. The soil was a free reddish loam, and the lemons,
oranges, and other fruit trees in splendid condition. Mr. Draper,
in conclusion, states he is so satisfied with Mildura that he will be very
pleased to give any person inquiring from him his opinion of the
settlement.
With regard to Mr. Draper’s suggestion that each settler at Mildura
should have an additional area of land for dairying purposes, so that he
could have something to fall back upon in case the fruit crops failed, I
mentioned it to Mr. George Chaffey, He says that in all his Californian
experience he has never known a failure on any fruit crops. The land
in Mildura was far too valuable for dairying purposes. What they
relied on solely was that with the different kinds of fruits cultivated, if
one did happen to fail the others would not.
Mr. Thomas Hardy, of Bankside vineyard, Adelaide, whose name is
a household word amongst Australian vignerons, stated his views as
follows : —He was agreeably surprised to find the land at Mildura of
much better quality than he had expected. A portion of the Mallee
country was vex*y well adapted for vine and fruit growing when supplied
with sufficient water. He thought that the growth of raisins and


currants, and especially tlie former, would be carried on at Mildura at a
greater advantage than in any other part of Australia, from the fact of
the grape ripening a month earlier than in the neighbourhood of
Adelaide and thus allowing the hottest month of the year to be utilised
for drying the fruit. Land with a limestone bottom, he thought, would
be found very suitable for currant vines. He was very gratified with
the growth of vines and trees and their healthy appearance. This
growth was surprising to those who had not before seen the effects of
irrigation. He had seen the results of irrigation in California, the
south of Europe, and also in South Australia. Mildura compared well
with any of these. The land was very suitable for oranges and lemons,
especially the pine ridges. With regard to wine-making, Sherry, he
thought, could be made in Mildura better than in any other part of
Australia he knew of. The soil and climate were somewhat similar to
the neighbourhood of Xeres in Spain, the famous sherry country. There
was no doubt in his mind as to the success of the Mildura settlement.
The example set by Messrs. Chaffey at Mildura and Renmark could not
be over estimated. It would, he was convinced, lead to millions of
acres on the Murray River being settled, and that at no distant date.
Mr. Robert Caughey, late of Mount Prior Vineyard, Rutherglen,
found that far greater progress had been made with the settlement than
he had anticipated. He was very pleased with the soil and the system
of irrigation adopted, and looked upon the cultivation as better than
anything he had seen in the colonies. The settlers, too, were a fine
class, and appeared thoroughly pleased with their land. As far as the
results were concerned, it was too early yet to speak of them. The
settlement was a live one, and would become an immense thing. It
would take a considerable time to fully develop, but, as far as it had
gone, it seemed to promise all that the promoters had represented.
Mr. G-. P. Mills, one of the largest fruit exporters of Victoria, is also
convinced of the success of the settlement. He thinks that oranges can
be brought from Mildura to Melbourne at a less freight than from
Sydney, and as the Mildura oranges will ripen a month earlier than the
Sydney fruit, the former will ha.ve a great sale and a large demand will
aidse for them. It is not too much to expect that ss. per case profit
will be realised by Mildura fruit-growers, and this will be a handsome
return. Altogether, in his own mind, the settlers of Mildura have a
splendid future before them in the export of canned and dried fruit, as
well as of green fruit.
Extracts reprinted Jrom the “ Age Melbourn e, 14 th June , 1890.
TWENTY-FOUR HOURS IN MILDURA
By St. Clair.
I know of no more delightful winter trip than that to the irrigation
colony of Mildura. Owing to the lowness of the River Murray, for the
present floods had not yet commenced, we abandoned the idea of the
Swan Hill route, and instead trained it to Adelaide, then to Morgan, at


which latter place we stepped on board a river steamer and started np
the Murray. For three days and nights we steamed np Australia’s
greatest river, for the darkness made no difi'erence to us, thanks to a
powerful electric light on the bow of the good ship Ellen, which
illuminated the waterway quite sufficiently to allow the vessel to proceed
at her usual rate of speed. The days passed quickly enough—too
quickly for some of us—to whom the ever-changing scenery and
splendid cloud and foliage effects mirrored in the glassy surface of the
water was an ever-increasing delight. Then at night, if tired of strolling
the decks, we adjourned to the saloon and amused ourselves with music,
cards, or conversation. Fancy in the interior of Australia, river
steamers possessing a saloon 80 feet long, handsomely appointed and
brilliantly lighted by electricity !
Unfortunately, two days after leaving Morgan heavy rain fell, and
continued with but little cessation until we arrived at our destination.
The Ellen was of too deep a draught to go right up to Mildura in the
low state of the river, so we had to disembark a good way below,
and drive across country about thirteen miles. After a seven miles’
drive we reached the boundary of the Mildura settlement, which was
marked off by a rabbit-proof fence. A mile or so after passing the
boundary we came upon Lord Ranfurly’s property, a block of 150 acres,
with a good frontage to the Murray River. A halt was at once ordered,
and without as much as saying “ by your leave” we stormed the gate,
and were soon busily inspecting the fine orchard. What a healthy
growth there was there. Planted some eighteen months ago, the trees
looked wonderfully developed, and elicited the warm admiration of the
orchard experts we had brought with us. Long straight lines of orange,
lemon, fig, apricot, and peach trees we noticed springing fresh and green
out of the weedless red loam. A fine avenue of young pepper trees led
up to a substantial homestead, which, however, we did not visit, as our
time was limited. Everything seemed in perfect order, and how
different to the deserted country we had just passed through. Lord
Ranfurly’s estate lies some distance from the settled portion of Mildura,
and is irrigated just now by a special pumping plant, drawing supplies
from the Murray, but in time will be connected with the main system.
Before we left every one of the party looked jauntily down on an
orange or lemon blossom in his buttonhole. Shortly after resuming our
journey the weather again broke and we drove up to the Mildura Coffee,
Palace in a perfect deluge.
From the wide balcony which runs round three sides of the coffee
palace a capital view of the township of Mildura is obtained. In front,
at the foot of a high bank, almost within a stone’s throw, runs the
Murray, and we can trace its course both to the right and left for some
distance. The large engineering works established by Messrs. Chaffey
are below us, right on the bank of the river • and further up are Risbey’s
saw mills and a boat building yard, with a steamer on the slips almost
ready for launching. To the left we see numerous buildings, some of a
substantial nature and others of a more makeshift character. Evidently
this is the centre of the town. Walking to the corresponding side of the
balcony, we overlook the offices of Messrs. Chaffey Limited. The word
“ offices” gives you a wrong idea of the place. One generally associates


an office with a desk, a counter, a three-legged stool, and—bare walls.
Now, the offices of the firm are conducted in one of the prettiest brick
cottages imaginable, verandahed all round, and lying in the midst of a
beautiful garden filled with choice plants, and kept in perfect trim.
Even at this late period of the year many of the flowers are in blossom,
and a casual glance enables you to discern roses and chrysanthemums,
amongst others, in full bearing. An oleander tree, still in its infancy,
flourishes in one corner, a mass of pink blossoms, while in the centre a
bronze fountain sends out a circle of jetty spray, which at present,
however, owing to the moist state of the atmosphere, savoured of
superfluity. A hedge of one of the cypress class about a foot high
bounds the garden, and will in time replace the rabbit-proof fence which
encircles the whole. When one reflects that about two years ago this
place was to all intents a wilderness, the transformation seems little short
of conjuring. Deakin Avenue, with its four rows of young trees, runs
up from the river, and stretches away out of sight, a noble thoroughfare.
Not far off is the new post office, just approaching completion, and
almost opposite is an imposing two-story brick building—Mr. Williams’s
store and dwelling-house. Amongst the other buildings worthy of
mention I must not forget the coffee palace in which we are. It is
different from our Melbourne coffee palaces in that it does not aspire to
reach the heavens. It is of brick, two stories high, and an ornament to
the place. There are numerous other buildings, the names of which I
have forgotten, but enough has been written to show that Mildura is a
real live town. It was unfortunate we visited it in the midst of a
rainfall, for getting about the newly-formed streets was not pleasant
work, and the mud showed an affinity which there was no resisting.
Rain or no rain, however, we were determined to see the place, and
accordingly sallied forth in buggies and were driven round. In the few
hours of daylight left to us we could not expect to see all that was to be
seen, but still we did wonders. We drove beside one of the broad
irrigation channels, alighting at Nicholls Point and the billabong
pumping stations, and inspecting the magnificent machinery. The steam
engine employed at the latter station for pumping from the billabong
into the 50-feet channel is 1000 horse power, and the pump will throw
40,000 gallons per minute. At Nicholls Point the steam engine is 450
horse power, and the capacity of the pump is 20,000 gallons per minute.
Here the water is taken from the 50-feet channel and lifted into the
70-feet and 80-feet channels, this latter being the highest channel in the
settlement. We were surprised at the great size of the channels, up the
biggest of which one might pull in a whale boat. The channels we
found were not cemented, except at the points where pumping operations
were carried on. Everything appeared to have been carried out
regardless of expense. We passed orchard after orchard, and admired
the fresh healthy trees, with their green leaves strikingly thrown out
against the bare earth. The holdings were nearly all small, running
between 10 acres and 20 acres. Vines, oranges, and lemons appeared
the favourite trees, although many other sorts were to be met with.
Before I left Melbourne I was shown some raisins made from Mildura
grapes, the products of vines which were planted as shoots only the
season before. Some well-known vignerons were with me at the time,


and were very sceptical. They could not credit the statement of grapes
from first season cuttings. I wish ray friends had been with us at
Mildura, and they could have satisfied their doubts without difficulty.
Mr. Skene’s nursery garden produced the raisins, and we passed it on
our road. Most of the settlers are building very nice houses, and this
is a healthy sign. They are determined to make a home in Mildura.
Cheek by jowl with thick mallee scrub, was a holding cleared and
planted. What a contrast! It made us realise the gigantic nature of
the enterprise of Messrs. Chaffey and the splendid example they have
set to the whole of the colonies. We passed through some buloke
country, the soil of which—a chocolate loam—is considered about the
best in the settlement. In the midst of this country, a great part of
which is now cleared and ready for planting, we came across Mr. Izard’s
orchard, a veritable Garden of Eden. The owner, who was a coal
merchant of Geelong, only purchased his 10 acres fifteen months ago
and had it laid down with rooted plants nine months since. One could
scarcely credit this. Vines, oranges, lemons, apricots, figs, and other
fruit trees were showing an astonishing growth. Pumpkins and
melons littered the ground, and strawberries, tomatoes, &c., flourished
luxuriantly. The house, the newness of which was apparent, was
almost lost in a mass of foliage. The experts with us were in ecstacies.
We would fain have lingered here, but the sun was getting low, and we
were five miles from the town, so we drove away reluctantly, full of
wonderment, splashing our way through the soft earth.
In the morning I interviewed some of the settlers, and found one and
all quite enthusiastic about their prospects. Success, according to them,
was assured, and many were writing down to their friends advising
them to come up to Mildura. One of those I conversed with was a
Drysdale man. He told me he had been struggling for years with
agriculture with but poor results. He had now found his way to
Mildura, and had taken up a holding for onion-growing. So certain
was he of the future of the place that he was now selling his own land at
Drysdale, and had persuaded twenty of his neighbours to do the same
and settle at Mildura. Many others I met had the same tale to tell.
Some three years ago Mildura station was a sheep run, and gave
employment to two or three men at the most. To-day it is a thriving
settlement, with 2000 of a population. Some 9000 acres have been
cleared and divided amongst the 900 settlers, whose numbers are
increasing week by week. What the population of Mildura will be in
another decade it is not easy to estimate, but, according to its present
growth and great prospects, it will certainly soon rank amongst the
principal centres of population in ictoria. This season the companv
have entered into contracts to plough 1200 acres of new laud, and this
is in addition to what the settlei's are ploughing for themselves.
Enough has been written to show that, given a market for its
px-oduce, Mildura will in a few yeax-s be the centre of one of the most
prosperous communities of Australia. We had many fruit experts with
us, and those best qualified to judge state there will be no difficulty in
finding a market tor gi'een fruit, and as for the canning and diving
industry that is bound to be successful. Even now, without the railway
from Swan Hill to Mildura, ox - anges and such fruit can be landed in


Melbourne at a less cost than Sydney fruit. My authority for this is
Mr. G. P. Mills, a well-known fruit exporter of Melbourne, Messrs.
Chaffey Limited are making arrangements for purchasing the product of
the settlers and forwarding it to market for sale every season. Mr. Wm,
Chaffey, who is at present in California, is bringing out the very best
appliances for raisin-making and fruit tinning and canning, and has also
engaged the services of an expert to take the management of these
industries. Truly Mildura is entitled to the prefix “ marvellous.”
Reprinted from the Weekly Times , Melbourne, 14 th June , 1890.
THE MILDURA IRRIGATION COLONY,
Magnitude of the Mildura Water-Right.
[by our agricultural reporter.]
Upon the extent and permanency of its water-right depends the
success of an irrigation colony. Water has been truthfully described as
“ the mother of the vine, the nurse and foundation of fecundity, and the
adorner and refresher of the world.” Without water, land at Mildura
would only be adapted for wheat-growing and the grazing of sheep.
With an abundant supply of moisture, on the other hand, combined
with the intelligent application of the water, it is possible to develop the
latent fertility of the soil to an incredible degree. The four great
elements that will go to make the Mildura irrigation colony the success
its enterprising promoters so confidently predict for it are moisture, soil,
heat, and finally a market for the enormous quantity of produce that is
bound to follow as the inevitable outcome of intense cultivation. The
soil at Mildura is all that the most experienced fruit-grower could desire.
Regarding heat, as every irrigator knows, heat and moisture mean a
rapid tropical growth. The even temperature of the climate on the
Lower Murray proves exceptionally favourable to vegetation of all
kinds. The great question that interests every intending purchaser of
land at Mildura is that of water supply. In my first article on Mildura
the system of raising the water from the Murray, and the pumping
capacity that has been provided for the irrigating of the first survey, was
fully explained. What the public will now be most anxious to ascertain
is the extent of the water-right the firm of Chaffey Brothers Limited
have acquired from the Victorian Government, and how much water per
acre that right will entitle landholders to when every acre in the whole
Mildura settlement has to be provided for. It is claimed that the
Mildura water-right is the most ample, and the most secure and perma-
nent, that any irrigation scheme in the world can boast of. The value
of a water-right does not appear to be properly undefstood by the
majority of people, neither do the public seem to have obtained a grasp
of the magnitude of the water privileges that have been obtained for
Mildura. Under an agreement dated 31st May, 1887, Messrs. George


During the Month of—
January
Cubic Feet per Minute.
30,000
February
24,000
M arch
20.000
April
24'000
May
30,000
June...
40,000
Jnly
48,000
August
48,000
September
60,000
October
60,000
November ...
60,000
December
40,000
and W. B. Chaffey obtained authority from the Victorian Government to
enter upon 250,000 acre« of land for the purpose of forming an irrigation
settlement, with the right, on fulfilment of certain conditions, to acquire
the fee simple of the whole or any part of that area. A right to take
from the Murray River sufficient water for the irrigation of that area
was embodied in the agreement under express condition that every acre
of Mildnra lands sold by the Chaffey Brothers would carry with it a
perpetual easement—a proportionate share in such water-right. By the
agreement of 31st May, 1887, the proprietors of Mildura possess a clear
title to the ownership of Murray waters to the following extent: —
These figures represent the maximum quantities which the Mildura
settlement can claim for the irrigation of the whole area of 250,000
acres. The amount that actually can be taken is regulated by the
number of acres under irrigation culture on the following scale :
Acres.
January one cubic foot per minute for every 8
February „ „ „ 10
March „ „ „ 12
April „ „ 10
Ma y >» „ „ 8
June „ „ „ 6
Juiy „ „ „ 5
August „ „ „ 4
September „ ~ ~ 4
October ~ ~ ~ 4
November „ „ „ 4
December „ „ „ 6
Figured out, this allows to each acre under irrigated culture a total
supply of 88,488 cubic feet, which is equivalent to a rainfall of over
24 inches per acre per annum. Without even being supplemented by
the moderate annual rainfall experienced at Mildura, it is quite certain
that this quantity of water, when once the soil has been brought into a
high pitch of cultivation, will not be required for cultural purposes.
At first glance it might seem doubtful that the volume of water
passing down the Murray River would prove sufficiently large to supply
the great quantity of water that will be required for irrigation purposes


at Mildura. That the natural flow of the Murray, however, is sufficiently
ample for all purposes may be gathered from the report of Mr. E.
Checchi, C.E., an officer of the Victorian Water Supply department,
who took a series of gaugings of the Murray at Mildura, extending over
several months. The minimum flow of the Murray during that period
over which the gaugings extended occurred in April 1889, when the
river was lower than it had been for many years. The lowest discharge
recorded was 132,000 cubic feet per minute, so that as the average of the
Mildura water-right, although very large in proportion to the area of
land to be irrigated, does not exceed 40,000 cubic feet a minute all the
year round, it will be seen that there is not the remotest possibility of
the pumping operations ever being likely to be brought to a standstill
through want of water.
The water right, by an agreement dated 30th November, 1887, has
been transferred from Messrs. George and W. B. Chaffey to Chaffey
Brothers Limited, together with all other rights, privileges, licenses,
and authorities obtained from the Government under the agreement
previously mentioned. The next stage is the control of the water right,
which in reality is of far more value than the land. In California, no
matter what capital value is set upon unimproved land, the moment it
can be shown that water can be made available for irrigation its value
is calculated to have increased five-fold, even before cultivation and
planting commences. As every purchaser of land, therefore, at Mildura
obtains an interest in this water right proportionate to the area of land
he holds, it is interesting to narrate the method by which rights and
interests are secured. For the purpose of apportioning the water right,
and conveying it to purchasers of Mildura lands, an organisation called
the Mildura Irrigation Company has been formed. Tinder agreement
dated 25th January, 1889, the firm of Chaffey Brothers Limited vested
the water right in this company, and handed over to it the management,
control, and supervision of all waterworks in connection with the
Mildura scheme. All pumping machinery and appliances, dams,
channels, reservoirs, sluices, pipes, and other means for raising and
conserving water, and for carrying a sufficient supply for irrigation
purposes to the highest point of each block of 10 acres, are provided by
the firm of Chaffey Brothers Limited, and handed over in working
order, free of cost, to the Irrigation Company, This means that the
works are handed over to the people who own the land, each owner
securing an interest in such works in proportion to his acreage. This
will be explained by a few words as to the constitution of the Mildura
Irrigation Company. There are 250,000 shares in this company,
corresponding to the number of acres comprehended in the scheme.
Every acre represents one share in the Mildura Irrigation Company,
and the acre and the share go together. When anyone buys land
from Chaffey Brothers Limited he receives a paid-up share in the
Mildura Irrigation Company for each and every acre transferred to
him. He must sign an agreement, which is attached to the title, that
he will transfer none of such land unless to persons willing to also take
shares in the Mildura Irrigation Company. These shares must go with
the land, however conveyed, whether by sale, deed of gift, mortgage,
assignment, or execution under process of law. Every precaution that


legal knowledge and ingenuity can devise is taken to incorporate the
water-right, which is represented by these shares, with the transfer of
the land. Any failure or neglect on the part of the proprietary firm in
this respect would be regarded as a distinct violation of the agreement
with the Government. When all the land is sold the entire water-right
will have been conveyed with it to the various purchasers. As
each system of works is completed and set in going order, it is
handed over by Chaffey Brothers Limited, and the after expenses of
maintenance and working are borne by the Mildura Irrigation Com-
pany. The affairs of this company are managed by a board of directors,
elected by the shareholders ( i.e ., landholders), who will levy an annual
charge on each owner of land for the purpose of raising the funds neces-
sary for maintenance and working expenses. Up to the present time
water has been supplied to the settlers without charge, and the annual
rate has not yet been fixed. It is expected, however, that it will not
exceed 6s. per acre.
Reprinted from “ The Argus,” Melbourne, 21th September, 1890. Sub-
leader on the report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply.
The report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply on the Mildura
irrigation colony gives a very satisfactory record of progress. The
politicians who condemned the agreement in such exceedingly bitter
terms must now be prepared to acknowledge that their vaticinations of
evil were without reasonable cause, and that in this respect they must
be numbered among those who prophesy falsely. The experiment is
fraught with the most hopeful consequences to the country, for t;he
experiment at Mildura will encourage similar efforts in other districts,
and will hasten forward the time when Victoria can establish her claim
to the title given by Sir Thos. Mitchell to this portion of the continent
of Australia Felix. The enthusiasm generated in the Chief Secretary
by his inspection of the results of irrigation in the United States is in
the way of being justified by local experience, and even doubters will
begin to believe that his poetic descriptions of intense culture have a
surer foundation than the imaginary palace on the Lake of Como. The
work done at Mildura shows that the Chaffeys have been better than
their word. Under the terms of the agreement entered into with the
Government, they undertook to expend £IO,OOO during the first twelve
months, and £35,000 during the first five years. Up to the present
time over £IBO,OOO has been expended, and 6500 acres have now been
cleared and brought under tillage, whereof 6000 acres have been, or are
in process of being, planted with vines or fruit trees, and 500 acres are
under forage or grain crops. Where only four years ago there was
scarcely a soul beyond a solitary shepherd, there is now a thriving
settlement, with a population of over 3000 rapidly increasing, of which
nearly 1000 count as resident agricultural settlers. There is no
exaggeration in the hope that before the end of the decade Mildura will
become one of the, most flourishing districts of the colony. Not the


least satisfactory feature of Mr. Stuart Murray’s report is his exposure
of the groundlessness of the fear entertained in some quarters that
Mildura is excessively depleting the waters of the Murray River. Both
in New South Wales and South Australia this view has been expressed,
but the slightest consideration of the figures adduced ought to convince
the most sceptical that we are doing nothing more than turning to
profitable account some portion of the vast volumes of fertilising fluid
which would otherwise pass on unused to the ocean. The present
volume of flood water in the river from Mildura to Swan Hill would be
sufficient to put 14 inches of water over the whole Mildura settlement
rather oftener than once a fortnight, while a total depth of 10 inches in
an entire summer is the maximum proposed to be used. The statement
of this fact should relieve Victoria from the charge of any intent of
completely exhausting the stream.
Reprinted from “ The Age,” Melbourne, 23 rd September, 1890. Leading
article upon the report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply.
Considering that the Mildura irrigation colony counts only three
years from its commencement, general satisfaction must be felt at its
progressive condition, as witnessed by the Minister and officials of the
Water Supply department, who have just concluded their second visit of
inspection. In July of last year the cleared land at the settlement
amounted to 2300 acres, of which 1750 acres had been cultivated. Mr.
Stuart Murray, chief engineer of Water Supply, who, at Mr. Deakin’s
request, has drawn up the present report, states that 6500 acres have
now been cleared and brought under tillage, whereof 6000 acres have
been, or are in process of being, planted with vines or fruit trees, and
500 acres are under forage or grain crops. The population of the
district numbers about 3150, of which nearly 1000 count as resident
agricultural settlers. Under the terms of the agreement entered into
with the Government, Messrs. Chaffey Brothers undertook to expend
£IO,OOO during the first twelve months, and £35,000 during the first
five years. Mr. Murray reports tlmt the company carrying on the
business under Messrs. Chaffey’s superintendence has already expended
£183,000, as shown by vouchers submitted to the Water Supply depart-
ment. This proves conclusively how successfully the scheme is working.
A further proof is afforded by the fact that in the Mildura settlement,
which has recently been created a shire under the Local Government
Act, the annual ratable value of the property within the municipality is
£30,000. The growth of orchards cannot of course be forced, and some
years must necessarily elapse before a substantial return for outlay can
be obtained. Raisin vines constitute the most extensive plantations,
and these during the approaching summer, it is anticipated, will yield
some 10 tons of marketable raisins, as promise of what may be expected
from them in the future. Only 50 acres as yet have been devoted to
wine grapes, from which some 4000 or 5000 gallons of wine are likely
to be obtained this season. The work of general cultivation is evidently


going on as rapidly as could be desired, and Mildura bids fair to become
by the end of this decade one of the most flourishing districts of the
colony.
Mr. Murray has devoted a portion of his report to showing what
slight demands upon the waters of the Murray will be made in conse-
quence of this magnificent undertaking. The river is at present 22 feet
above summer level. Taking an average for the extent between Swan
Hill and Mildura of 16 feet above summer level, the volume of flood
water at one moment, in this section, would be equal to 1 inch over
2,820,000 acres. The entire block set apart for settlement at Mildura
is 250,000 acres, of which probably not more than 200,000 will be
brought under cultivation. The static block of flood water would there-
fore serve to give a depth of 14 inches over the entire irrigable surface
of the ultimate Mildura settlement. The mean current of the river is,
however, not less than one and a-half miles per hour, so that the
quantity contained in the 460 miles from Swan Hill to Mildura would
be renewed by displacement every thirteen days. The wLole of the
flood water would thus give more than 14 inches per fortnight for the
Mildura area, while the maximum total proposed to be taken is 10 inches
per annum. “ Reflection on these facts,” Mr. Murray well observes,
“ should convince the most sceptical that we are very far from having
mortgaged the available water of the Murray. On the contrary, it
should enable us to see that to permit these vast volumes of fertilising
fluid to pass on unused to the ocean, instead of turning them to account
for the sustenance and delectation of man, is to commit a crime.” Let
us hope that a perusal of this report may satisfy the New South Wales
authorities that Victoria is not intent on completely exhausting the
stream over which they claim exclusive jurisdiction, and that there is
nothing to prevent them planting an irrigation colony on their own side
of it whenever they are ready to begin.
Reprinted from the “ Queenslander ,” Brisbane, 4 th, 1 Ith, 18th, 25th
October and ls£ November , 1890.
IRRIGATION COLONY OF MILDURA.
By “Jethro Tull.”
The success or otherwise of the very interesting experiment at irri-
gation colonisation now being carried on at Mildura, River Murray, by
the Messrs. Chafiey Brothers Limited, is of as much importance to
Queensland as to the sister colonies of Australia. Though Queensland
is more favoured in the matter of rainfall than any of the group, the
partial distribution and extreme irregularity of the downpour very
unequally counterbalance the long months of absolute rainlessness. It
is not to be wondered at, therefore, that prior to this last favourable year
the subject of irrigation was acknowledged to be of vital importance,
and it is as well that the interest then aroused should not be allowed to
die an apathetic death. It is well known that there is a strong party in


Queensland which is anxious to get the Messrs. Chaffey to extend their
operations thereto. It is only a few months since the late Minister for
Lands (Mr. Hume Black) visited Mildura and personally interviewed
the Messrs. Chaffey. Mr. Francis Kates also went to Victoria with the
express object of inducing these enterprising Canadians to visit Queens-
land. lam sorry to say Mr. George Chaffey informed me that, notwith-
standing his desire to see Queensland, it would be impossible for him to
do so, for he had quite enough work on hand for a long time to come.
The Chaffey scheme of colonisation is but superficially understood
even in Victoria, and not at all in Queensland. Indeed, I confess that,
notwithstanding my long connection with the agricultural department
of the Queenslander , I failed to appreciate the great work they were
doing in the advancement of Australia until I visited their settlement at
Mildura. Even in Melbourne I found some who told me it was a
“ Yankee swindle,” and my prejudices were inclined to be antagonistic
rather than favourable to a scheme which, after thorough personal
investigation, I unhesitatingly pronounce to be the grandest experiment
in co-operative agricultural colonisation the world has yet witnessed.
The lines the Chaffey Brothers run their settlement on can be followed
on a gigantic scale by any colonial Government, or on a less extensive
scale by the union of capitalists in a company, or by the owner of large
estates with more land than money, or by the union of the owners of
sugar plantations who now are hampered in their relations with labour.
Briefly explained, these lines are : The subdivision of large estates into
small ones. The extension of the time payment system to enable holders
to make these small estates freeholds. The application of the firm’s
capital to irrigation works, and thus enabling the settler to obtain the
greatest possible product his land will yield. Also paternal care and
foresight during the early years of the settler’s struggles, showing him
what crops to grow, how to grow them, how to market them, and where
to find markets. And in doing all this to make a money profit for
themselves, an honorarium no one will grudge if they are successful
in turning this wilderness of dry mallee land into a thriving settlement
of comfortable homes. The true working out of the Chaffey lines,
however, would be by a co-operative ownership, in which every settler
would participate in the profits pro rata to his interest in the land.
There is no reason why thoughtful, clever, energetic men should not,
if enthusiastic, carry out a similar irrigation scheme in Queensland, for
there are immense areas of level land to choose from, and an abundant
rainfall if only its waters were conserved. I shall therefore confine the
subject matter of this paper to an explanation of the terms and conditions
upon which the Messrs. Chaffey dispose of their land, leaving the more
interesting descriptive account of the settlement of Mildura as I saw it
through Queensland spectacles for future papers.
The total area which the Chaffey Brothers Limited Company can
eventually claim from the Victorian Government under conditions agreed
to by special Act of Parliament is 250,000 acres. Mildura proper
consists of 50,000 acres, one half of which, embraced in a semicircle ot
which the town is the centre and the radius five miles, has been the first
portion operated upon. The town is situated on the bank of the River
Murray. The town lots are one-eighth acre in extent; the cash price tor


them was £25 per lot, and they are now all sold, and can only be
purchased secondhand and at a high premium. A block changed hands
during my visit for £235. A zone of villa blocks surrounds the town ;
these are acres each, and the cash price was £IOO. All are now sold,
and so rapid has been the growth of the town that purchasers are cutting
them up into town lots. Next come the exterior zones of 10-acre
horticultural blocks extending five miles in evexy direction south of the
town. No land liable to flood, and no land not irrigable is sold, and this
leaves about 23,000 acres available, all of which is now disposed of, so
great lately has been the demand for the blocks. The surveying staff,
however, is again hard at work, and another surrounding zone a mile deep
will be available immediately. The terms upon which these horticultural
10-acre blocks are sold are £2O per acre cash, less per cent, discount;
or £1 per acre to be paid on application, and the balance to be paid upon
the building-society principle by monthly instalments extending over a
maximum term of ten years if desired. The majority of the lots have
been taken on this time-payment system. Let me explain for the benefit
of any sugar-planters who may be cogitating such a subdivision of their
estates more clearly how this works ;—For each 10-acre allotment the
purchaser pays £lO deposit. Ten years’ interest at the rate of 5 per cent,
is added to the balance of the purchase-money (£190), and the total is
divided into 120 instalments of £2 7s. 6d. per month. Title certificates
are issued for all lands purchased, whether upon the cash or the time-
payment system. In this latter case the company requires a mortgage as
security, but the purchaser has thus in his title a negotiable security, and
is placed in a better position to finance for the improvement of his land
if he wishes to do so. The title certificates cost £2 2s. for one or more
lots up to the value of £SO, with an additional ss. stamp duty for every
additional £SO value of land to be conveyed. The rights to the control
of each purchaser’s proportion of water are secured in this way : —Every
purchaser has issued to him at the time of allotment of his block one
fully paid-up share in the Mildura Irrigation Company Limited for each
acre held by him. Each share entitles the holder to one vote in the
control of the management of the irrigation works. The works are
managed by a board of directors, who from time to time are elected by
the shareholders. Thus it will be seen that, though Messrs. Chaffey
Brothers’ interest is all paramount at first, it gradually weakens till they
are out of it altogether, and the community work entirely on their own
bottom. In time there will be several of these irrigation companies, each
managing its own district. The Messrs. Chaffey undertake to construct
a channel to the highest corner of every 10-acre block, and to deliver
thereto sufficient water to irrigate all the land below that level. It should
be noted that they do not say the highest portion of every block, but the
highest corner, so that if a purchaser buys a block with a hill in the
centre he must, if he desires to irrigate this hill, do so at his own expense.
Such hills are very few, and are all pointed out prior to a purchaser
choosing his land. The pumping works and distributing channels are all
provided by the Messrs. Chaffey ; their efficiency, after being turned
over to the settlers, is to be maintained by a yearly water x'ate levied b\ r
authority of the irrigation company, of which all are members. There
ax’e no charges for interest on the cost of machinery, its erection, build-


ings, or on the channel construction ; and it is estimated that 6s. per
acre per year will keep all efficient, besides gradually working up a
sinking fund pending the wearing out of the machinery.
Anxious as I am, after visiting Mildura and studying its working,
that the sugar-planters should be able to formulate some similar system
of co-operative action to enable the industry to survive the withdrawal
of kanaka labour, I would point out that the weak point in the Chaffey
scheme was—Would they fulfil their obligations? Would the pumping
machinery be strong, efficient, and durable? Would the channels be
properly secured ? In other words, faith in the organisers of a similar
scheme is an absolute requisite to success, and it must have required
great faith indeed on the part of the first settlers in Mildura, who pur-
chased blocks prior to any improvements being effected. Now, however,
the intending settler sees all in working order, and every obligation
more than fulfilled, so far as the present stage of the settlement has
advanced. The sugar-planters, therefore, now stand at the advanced
point which it has taken the Chaffeys three years to attain, for they
have their land freehold ; they have their fields cleared and under crop,
and they have machinery equally sufficient and as superior for its pur-
pose as the magnificent pumping plant at Mildura ; moreover, they have
the advantage of being able to show the crop growing, and to state the
exact returns it will give. Therefore, such a scheme, if properly placed
before the world, probably would meet with confidence, because based
upon actual fact, and no faith whatever would be required by the intending
settler.
At Mildura no person can take more than 80 acres or less than 10
acres of horticultural land. Partners may join and take 10 acres
between them, or their maximum, 80 acres each. No conditions are
attached to the sale except the obligations to the Water Trust and its
consequent rates. Residence is not necessary, nor even is occupation ;
the owner can leave his land unimproved if he desires. Fencing even is
not compulsory unless adjoining neighbors wish it, then the half of an
efficient orchard fence (that is, a rabbit-proof one) must be shared. The
10-acre blocks are all surveyed in rectangles, 660 links frontage and 1515
deep. The recognised fence consists of cypress pine posts, 5 feet 8 inches
long, placed 20 inches in the ground, and 10 feet apart; on to this is
strained wire netting, inches mesh, 3 feet wide, sunk 6 inches in the
ground, and above this are strained two, three, or four wires, plain or
barbed, at the option of the settler. The non-resident landowner can, if
he so desires, have his block fenced, cleared, ploughed, and planted, and
looked after for one or two years, by making arrangements with the
company to that effect. A great many blocks are thus attended to, and
I can bear testimony to the neatness and thorough order in which they
are kept.
No. 2.
My credentials as representative of the Queenslander secured for me
a cordial reception from the Chaffey officials as I stepped ashore at
Mildura from the pretty little steamship Ruby , nor must I forget to
mention the hearty shake of the hand given by Mr. N. B. Mackay, who
runs the Mildura Cultivator, to a fellow-pressman hailing even from


far-off “ Bananaland.” Cook’s excursion programme provided for forty-
eight hours’ sojourn at Mildura, and I had intended returning at that
time, but I soon discovered that a proper comprehension of the workings
of this model settlement could not be got in so short a period, and I
arranged for a further stay of seven days. My object was, by personal
inspection of the orchards and by conversation with the settlers, to get
the general opinion of the community, independent of any Cbaffey
influence, on the merits and prospects of the settlement. Mentioning
this to the representatives of Messrs. Chaffey, they replied that they had
nothing to fear from the most argus-eyed newspaper man provided he
was a practical farmer, which they understood I professed to be, for my
conclusions could not but be favourable. The only report that might
possibly injure the scheme would come from the pen of a writer who had
no practical acquaintance with horticulture, and so could not grasp the
merits of the system of culture they were instituting. They would
therefore place every means at my disposal to enable me to see all that
was to be seen on the settlement, but would use no efforts to in any way
bias my conclusions.
The first impression of Mildura, as viewed from the high deck of the
steamer when she turns round the bend of the grand old Murray, is that
the town is prettily situated. The fine coffee palace has a commanding
position on the highest portion of the river bank, and it is the first
feature that catches the eye : then there are the neat office buildings of
the company and the new Custom-house, all built of brick. In the dis-
tance can be seen the large mansion of Mr, W. B. Chaffey, fast nearing
completion ; in the immediate foreground are several neat cottages and
the extensive engineering works of the firm; and then at the river’s
edge, nestling among the fine old red gum trees, are half a dozen steam-
ships and barges. These vessels especially gave an air of life and thrift
to the place as I saw it. Stepping from the steamboat and walking up
the high bank the stranger cannot but be struck with the signs of pro-
gress the place is making for in all directions, and covering an area of
probably a square mile, can be seen buildings scattered about. Some of
these are of brick and substantial; others are of wood and ornamental;
and others of that nondescript nature so characteristic of a new gold-
diggings rush. The town is laid out on the rectangular plan. The
streets leading south, and which extend right out to the horticultural
blocks, are termed avenues, and bear names; the streets crossing these
are called streets, and are numbered on the American plan and not
named. Deakin Avenue is the main street of the town; it is three
chains wide, and extends five miles in one straight line. It is planted
on each side with a double row of Moreton Bay figs and sugar gums and
kurrajongs, and down the centre is a space reserved for a tram line.
The other avenues and streets are two chains or a chain and a-half wide.
A fine avenue has been laid out to follow the contour of the high land on
the river bank, and this is the only exception to the rule—that all
avenues shall run nearly north and south. Town residents are supplied
with water by a steam pump allotted for this purpose, and which forces
the river water through a reticulation of underground pipes, which are
extended from street to street as the town increases. This pump also
supplies water for the irrigation of town and suburban gardens, this


water being conveyed along surface channels perhaps 1 foot deep and
2 feet or 3 feet wide. At the present stage of the town’s development
these channels are by no means attractive, for they partake too much of the
nature of a drain, and, as they cross and recross the streets in various
directions, the stranger pedestrian is pretty certain, if he walk out at
night-time, to step into them. This, however, will soon be remedied,
for before two months the town will be lighted by electricity. Mildura
is also just now made into a shire of its own, and the construction
of the streets, the channelling, drains, and footpaths will now be
attended to.
The chief points of the Mildura scheme about which I wished to feel
satisfied in order that the lesson of this system of capitalist colonisation
might be fairly placed before your l eaders, and so experience be gathered
useful if any similar scheme should be mooted in Queensland, were
Whether the Messrs. Chaffey were fulfilling their engagements with the
Victorian Government and with the settlers'? Was the water supply
sufficient to irrigate the 250,000 acres contemplated 1 ? Would the
porosity of this sandy mallee soil be so great as to cause the distributing
channels to be a failure, and would the water be got to trickle down a
single plough furrow the whole length of a 10-acre block of sandy soil
almost level on its surface *? Had the Messrs. Chaffey, in their ignorance
of Australian soils, not overrated the natural fertility of these sandy
ridges which for centuries had produced only a vegetation of the most
stunted of eucalyptus, of saltbush, and a miserable attempt at grasses 1
Respecting the first point, the Chaffey agreement with the Victorian
Government provides that capital to the amount of £5 per acre must be
spent on the two blocks of 25,000 acres each which constitute the front-
age to the Murray River, and when that has been done they can claim
200,000 acres of back country by a payment of £1 per acre and an
expenditure of another £1 per acre. Knowing as I well do this Lower
Murray country (for I was for seven years a resident there during its
palmiest squatting days) to be naturally the most arid and barren in the
whole of Victoria, and to be inferior.to any portion of the vast territory of
Queensland (except, perhaps, the extreme south-west corner) I consider
the Victorian Governmenthad far the best of the bargain with the Messrs.
Chaffey; and lam the more impressed that only absolute certainty of
results, a certainty gained from experience in running irrigation colonies
in California, could have induced these enterprising capitalists to risk so
much and agree to such crushing terms. Well, it is a bare three years
since the agreement was signed, yet the official statement shows that no
less than £183,000 has been expended up to this present date. This is
exclusive of the expenditure by the settlers themselves in forming their
homesteads. This amount (£183,000) has been spent upon the one
block, and before the second block of 25,000 acres can be realised upon,
a duplication of the enormous pumping engines and the miles of canals
and distributing channels will have to be effected, so it is self-evident
that there is no attempt on the company’s part to dodge the Government
agreement, and it is self-evident, too, that the colony of Victoria will
stand to gain much and lose nothing by encouraging as she has done this
gigantic irrigation settlement. Could not Queensland follow suit, and so
raise herself out of her state of chronic annual deficits ?


On the second point my ten days’ sojourn thoroughly satisfied me that
the Messrs. Chaffey were acting as fairly in their dealings with the
settlers as with the Government. There were some grumblers, but
these, with one exception, were town residents, and as the town has
now municipal powers, the community can, for the future, manage their
civic matters themselves. By-the-bye, the ratable value of the shire of
Mildura has risen in three years from nil to no less than £30,000 ! The
water is being taken to the highest corner of every 10-acre block. That
is the main point to the settler, for if not complied with he must collapse.
As to whether sufficient water is so conveyed I had no opportunity for
ocular demonstration, for irrigating was not going on during my visit,
but those settlers who irrigated last year told me they had plenty. In
regard to the question of the irrigation works as planned by the com-
pany being equal to what they are expected to do, anyone who inspects
the gigantic pumps already erected, and travels along the miles of canals
full of water, must admit that there will bo no deficiency of water supply.
The wisdom of Mr. Chaffey in working out this Mildura scheme is well
exemplified in the fact that in choosing a site for his operations he
secured a large anabranch or old channel of the Murray, and as wide as
the Murray itself, which runs for some ten miles along the frontage of
the property. This large lagoon is at present full to the brim with the
waters of the river which is now in flood, and this water has been
impounded by damming up both ends. Calculations prove that the water
in this lagoon alone would suffice for the whole settlement for three
months in the dry season. The present level of this water is 24 feet
above summer level of the Murray. In order to raise this water to the
first distributing canal, one of the most powerful pumping plants in the
world has been erected. It is constructed by that well known
engineering firm, the Messrs. Tangye, from designs by Mr. George
Chaffey, and is a most beautifully finished and massive piece of
machinery. Its prime cost in England was £SOOO, It consists of four
20-inch centrifugal pumps, driven by a triple-expansion foui’-cylindered
engine of 1000 indicated horse power, and is supplied with steam by two
pairs of multitubular boilers, and there is provision for a third pair to be
erected. At present only two of the four centrifugal pumps are attached,
the othex-s not being yet required. The vertical diameter of these cen-
trifugals was forcibly presented to me, as I stood beside them and found
they exceeded my own height of 6 feet. Mr, Richard Tangye, the
senior partner of his firm, visited Mildura expressly to first start this
pump ; it worked smoothly and magnificently, throwing 40,000 gallons
a minute easily, and is capable of being increased to 60,000 gallons per
minute if worked to its full designed capacity. I was told by the com-
pany’s engineer that when all four pumps are attached fully 140,000
gallons per minute can be raised the required height if desired. In
order to fill the lagoon or anabranch, an exact duplicate of this enor-
mous pump is being erected on the bank of the Murray. From this it
will be seen that there is no attempt on the part of the Messrs. Chaffey
to slum their engineering; on the contrary, they have taken especial
pains to have it so strong and efficient that the cost for repairs will be
very trifling for very many years to come. The main distributing
canals are three in number, they are at the respective heights of 50 feet,


70 feet, and 85 feet above summer level of tbe river. These channels
are 15 feet wide at the bottom, with sides at a slope of two to one.
They are supposed to convey a stream of water 3 feet deep. The
aggregate length of these main channels is 70 miles, and of the distribut-
ing channels connected with them no less than 140 miles have been
constructed. The water is pumped from the lagoon by the powerful
pump above described into the 50-feet channel; thence it is re-pumped
by another powerful engine into the 70-feet and 85-feet channels.
These channels follow the contour levels of the country, and therefore
twist and wind round themselves in all directions. In many places
cuttings have to be made 12 or more feet deep, in other places the
channel has to be raised with earth, or if the hollow to be crossed is too
deep a gigantic flume of corrugated iron supported on stout piles is
constructed. Certainly to the practical mind of Mr. George Chaffey a
difficulty is looked upon simply as an object that can and must be over-
come, and money is never grudged to accomplish the desired end. It is
a significant fact worth noting by future irrigationists that though the
Messrs. Chaffey hail from California (by birth they are Canadians), all
the heavy machinery they require is not made in American workshops,
but in those of England ; the pumps, the engines, the boilers, and the
stationary machinery in the workshops, also the steam ploughs, traction
engines, and other strong implements, are none of them the fragile
affairs so often turned out by our trans-Pacific cousins, but good sub-
stantial English or Australian work. From the details given above it
will be seen that the Messrs. Chaffey have fulfilled faithfully their main
obligations to the settlers, as well as to the Government ; and their
minor obligations, as fathers of the settlement not yet able to run with-
out paternal wisdom, they are also carrying out. I have dwelt
particularly on these facts, for these points may constitute the weakness
of any similar scheme promulgated in Queensland ] but the faithfulness
shown by the Messrs. Chaffey proves the fallacy of the too popular
notion that the capitalist who propounds a vast scheme of expenditure
out of which he expects to make a fortune necessarily means to swindle
the public.
No. 3.
In this paper I purpose writing of the cultural operations carried on
at Mildura, and this will necessarily carry with it the answers to the
queries propounded in my last article as to whether such sandy soil
could be made retentive enough to permit of the channels delivering
sufficient water to irrigate so lai’ge an area, or to trickle down a mere
plough furrow in the orchard, and also as to whether the Messrs. Chaffey
had not overrated the inherent fertility of this poor-soil country.
The whole of this sandy mallee and saltbush country, which is the
characteristic feature of millions of acres in New South Wales, South
Australia, and Victoria, in my opinion is simply the detritus of the
desert sandstone formation of Queensland, washed down by ocean force,
and thus spread over these level lands. Its nature varies from a red-
coloured sandy loam, several feet deep, and upon which the cypress pine
and the mallee grow, to a light-coloured, more clayey, or cementing soil,
which, in the old squatting days, grew to perfection the various saline


bushes and herbs that made the saltbush plains of Australia so famous
for their stock-fattening properties. Limestone in the form of nodules
underlies or is mixed moi’e or less with the whole of these soils, but is in
greater abundance generally, and is nearer the surface on the saltbush
plains. The fertility of all sandy soils is largely due to their mechanical
condition; they are “ hungry,” as the gardener so graphically terms it,
but if only this want is supplied by abundance of manure, then, if the
climate is moist, they will grow anything. The soils of these pine and
mallee ridges possess this favourable mechanical condition to an extreme
degree, so they never “ cake ” after rain or irrigation; the soil on the
saltbush plains and flats certainly does cake or cement after even a
moderate shower of rain, and therefore in my opinion is not suitable for
growing citrus fruits. The abundant quantities of free lime, of gypsum,
chlorine, and magnesia self apparent in all these soils are at once a great
store of fertility, and they are only waiting the application of water and
aeration to make them available for plant growth. If there is any
deficiency of potash, phosphoric acid, or iron, these can easily be supplied
as top dressings. Vegetable matter is by no means abundant, at least
not to the eyes of a Queenslander, accustomed to see humus feet deep, as
in our scrubs and river banks, and I venture to say that after two or
three years' cultivation the application of nitrogenous manux’es would
have a marvellous effect on the Mildura orchards.
The settlers at Mildura are a heterogeneous lot, and the majority of
them know nothing whatever about the occupation they have entered
upon—namely, fruit-growing by the aid of irrigation; nevertheless I
have every faith in their ultimate success. For these reasons : Mildura
is attracting to it an extra large proportionate share of the energy,
industry, and intellect of all the colonies, and even of Britain, and these
men are not too proud to be taught. As teachers they have among them
already some horticulturists of acknowledged skill, whose example they
can and do follow, for I came across Mr. William Clarson, F.L.S. (so
well known personally even in Queensland, and also by his valuable
horticultural handbooks of Australian practice and experience), Mr.
Alex, B. Skene, Mr, W. Sturm, and Mr. James, all of whom have
orchards, and have thrown in their lot with Mildura. The Messrs.
Chaffey, too, promulgate the first principles of culture—that is, “ a
primary deep stirring of soil and sxxbsoil, and subsequent constant
aeration by frequent hox - se-hoeing of the surface, especially after the
application of watex\” It is open to the Mildura settler to do all the
initiatory work of his own land himself, or if he like he can engage the
services of the firm to do it for him. So rapidly and efficiently do the
company do this work that the greater number of the settler’s prefer to
employ them, but it is impossible for the firm to undertake all the work,
so px-ivate contractors now have a large share of it. The first thing to
be done is the clearing. When the allotment is on saltbush country
this work is easy enough, and the cost including burning is from 7s. to
10s. per acre. Mallee and pine covered blocks vary in the density of
the timber growth, and cost from £2 to £5 per aci’e to clear. Fencing
has to be rabbit-proof, and this involves the expense of wire netting ;
the cost of the class of fence usually erected rxxns from £SO to £55 per


mile; adjoining neighbours each pay half, or they can agree to do
without subdivision fences.
The clearing off of the mallee scrub is an interesting job as done by
the Chaffey Company. A steam plough engine is utilised as the power,
and it does the work rapidly and efficiently, far more so than any of
the many “forest devils” I have seen at work. The Queensland
selector of a scrub farm must not imagine mallee scrub to be anything
like the scrub jungles he is accustomed to. No engine yet made would
be equal to pulling out by the roots the buttressed roots of the scrub
trees of Queensland until Time has placed his decaying hand upon them.
Mallee scrub contains nothing but mallee, and in appearance mallee is
something like dwarf brigalow. It is a eucalyptus that grows without
any main stem, and I cannot bring it more forcibly before the mind of
a person who has never seen it than by telling him to imagine a fine
old branching gum tree submerged by flood waters to a height
surpassing all the main branches, then the unsubmerged top of 20ft.
would exactly represent a clump of mallee. These clumps may be close
together, or more generally from 6ft. to 20ft. apart, or even more, yet
the branches will meet at the top. It is shallow-rooted, and the soil
being sandy, stump-pulling is by no means hard work; indeed, it is
child’s play compared with pulling out the deep tap-rooted trees that
grow on the red clay soils of Queensland. The steam engine tears this
mallee out easily and rapidly in this way: The engine trots
up to the desired spot and is anchored to the strongest
clump ; then a steel wire rope is payed out until it embraces several
clumps of mallee and the end brought back to the winding drum.
Steam being turned on, the tightening of the rope drags down one clump
after another, pulling the roots fairly out of the ground, and to a certain
extent gathering them into a heap. As a rule the branches are first cut
off the mallee, leaving stumps the usual height; also, experience proves
that it saves time, trouble, and money for men to previously dig a
shallow trench round each clump, thus severing numerous minor roots.
The Chaffey Company have no fewer than nine steam traction engines
constantly at work on the settlement. Of these six are used for steam
cultivation, and the three for general traction work and for scrub-
pulling. I saw one of these smaller engines trotting along the main road
on its way to do some scrub-pulling, and its speed was fully 10 miles per
hour ;in fact, it beat my buggy horse in the spurt we had. The steam
plough engines were made specially for the company by Fowler and Co.
and by Maclaren and Co., Leeds. They are more massive and stronger
than any I have seen on the Queensland sugar estates, and embody the
very latest improvements in this class of mechanicism. Messrs. Chaffey
do not believe in turning all the surface soil under and bringing the crude
subsoil to the top, therefore they do not run the plough at all, but instead
scarify and cross-scarify to a depth of 14 inches to 18 inches. On this
light soil this work is no trouble at all to these engines, and the imple-
ment is rattled along at the rate of six miles an hour. A 10-acre block
is usually completed both ways in the one day. The chai’ge for this job
is 255. per acre. Mallee roots are at times encountered, but they are as
nothing to the roots of the giant gums which so often play havoc with
the steam-drawn cultivator on our sugar lands. Harrowing is not done


when the block is for horticultural purposes, for in truth the soil is
sufficiently pulverised to permit of the next operation, which is grading.
This operation I had never seen practised. It consists of levelling
the surface and making a uniform slope from the irrigating ditch to the
lowest portion of the land. Its advisableness is so self-evident that I
wish to make a special note about it for the benefit of the future irriga-
tionists of Queensland, more particularly for those who have level lands
to irrigate, such land as is found in the Yandilla district. This grading
fills up all little depressions such as are commonly seen on “ crabhole ”
land, with the soil skimmed from the nearest little px-otuberance, and it
is through this absence of all inequalities and the uniform slope of the
field that the irrigation water is able gradually to trickle down a single
shallow plough furrow even from one end of a 10-acre block to the
other and lower side. The cost, difficulty, and necessity for grading
vary with the contour of the block. In some cases that I noticed I con-
sidered it decidedly injurious to the higher portions of the field, for too
much good surface soil must be taken from these spots to fill a corres-
ponding depression. Still, I can see it is absolutely necessary if perfect
irrigation is required. It is worth remembering that once done it is
done for ever; also, it is only possible to do it before the trees are
planted. Through constant practice the Chaffey employes have become
wonderfully expert at the work, so much so, that when they leave the
field it has that uniform, smooth, level slope which the gardener aims at
when making a lawn, tennis court, or a bowling green. The implement
used is a wooden scoop 6 feet or 8 feet wide by 2 feet broad, with a
back board some 6 inches or 8 inches high; the front edge of this shallow
platform (for really the implement is nothing more) is shod with an iron
or steel lip, and a strong, broad lever projects from behind. Four
horses, harnessed abreast, are attached to it. The man driving gets so
skilful that he skims off the top of any protruding hillock, and just as
deftly causes the soil either to be spilled evenly in transitu or to be
dumped into a hollow, when by his jumping on to the inverted platform
the very heap just discharged is also evenly spread. Of course there is
a head grader, whose duty it is to take the levels of the field and mark
out the hills and hollows.
Grading and fencing being finished, then marking out the positions
for the trees is done. On this point I intend to write a special paper,
with diagrams, to supplement those on “Accurate Ox’chard Planting”
which lately appeared in the Queenslander, for the ease, rapidity, and
accuracy with which this is done at Mildura is astonishing. Suffice now
to say that among the whole of the orchards and vineyards of the settle-
ment not one crooked row can he found, axxd, I firmly believe, not even
one tx-ee out of line. Each settler seems to vie with his xxeighbour in
this xespect, and even whexx they do this marking out themselves to try
and emulate the extreme accuxacy of the example blocks as laid out by
the Chaffey workmen and the skilled private contractor. Accustomed
as I am to see the “ higgledy-piggedly ” planting of Queensland orchards,
the extreme exactness of the Mildura trees was a pleasure indeed.
Recognising that an ox-chard investment brings in no return whatever
for a few years, the Messrs. Chaffey undertake for £5 a year to duly
cultivate, irrigate, prune the trees, and generally supervise any holdixxgs


left to their care. This has caused many persons to take up blocks who
prefer to be absentees, at any rate until the trees begin to bear. Some
of these non-residents are wealthy townsfolk, others are working men,
who thus have the opportunity of continuing to earn wages elsewhere ;
then there are also many of the townsmen of Mildura who have their
block but cannot spare the time for personal work on the orchard ; and,
again, many of the Chaffey workmen and officials have their block, but
are unable to give personal attention to it ; thus the company have
their hands full of orders, and employ a large staff of men and horses in
this caretaking alone. There are private firms, too, who undertake this
management of the young orchards during their unproductive stage. I
must say that the company well fulfil their engagement in this respect,
for the neatest and cleanest orchards were almost always those under
their care, and not those under individual management.
No. 4.
The area of horticultural land planted up to date at Mildura is about
3600 acres. It is a safe assumption to say that by this time next year 7000
acres will actually be under fruit crops. The principal fruits to be
grown are oranges, lemons, grapes, apricots, peaches, pears, plums, figs,
and olives. This extra demand for Mildura has taxed the resources of
the Adelaide, Melbourne, and Sydney nurseries to such an extent that
they are virtually cleaned out of the sorts I’equired. Large consignments
have also been received by the Chaffey Company from California. The
skilled horticulturists on the settlement do not, however, intend to let
this demand slip from the district, and they already have large numbers
of young stock in their nursery beds. If the Chaffey scheme is ever
carried out in its entirety, and the whole 250,000 acres turned into
orchards, the future demand for nursery stock will simply be enormous.
The area under cereal crops for hay, and not irrigated, is 400 acres;
these fields all look well, thanks to a good season. The hay grown will
all be consumed on the settlement, and much more will be required, for
there is no good grazing -ground attached to the settlement, and every
settler will have to hand-feed his working horses. Very few of the
settlers have turned their attention to dairying, and milk is at a pre-
mium, and selling for Bd. per quart retail and 6d. wholesale. It is
evident that, through the blocks being so small, dairying will have to be
carried on by the stall-feeding system. As the dairyman will have an
abundant supply of water and of manure he should experience very little
difficulty in growing plenty of fodder. Lucerne grows well in this sandy
soil when irrigated; the best crops I saw were those sown in drills, thus
enabling the water to trickle down each row, also enabling the horse-
hoe to be freely used. lam convinced that if this drill system of
growing lucerne were practised by Queensland farmers they would
harvest twice the weight of their present crops, and suffer far
less during the periods of drought. Many young orange trees
that I saw did not come up to a Queensland standard of thrift
and well-doing; they were almost leafless, and what leaves were to be
seen had that yellow tinge indicative of something being wrong. Ihe
leaflessness was caused, I am told, by grasshoppers, which came in
millions last autumn. It is possible this grasshopper plague may be one


of the drawbacks to the settlement, for, years ago, I have known every
leaf eaten off every scrub and tree in the gardens in Southern Riverina,
excepting only the castor-oil plant. Against this, however, I would
place the fact that during the seven years 1 lived in the mallee country
of the Lower Murray there was no serious visitation of grasshoppers.
The yellow look of the leaves is caused by planting in an unsuitable soil,
that of the saltbush flats. This soil cakes hard after rain or irrigation.
On the contrary, the soil on the pine and mallee ridges is a sandy loam
of great depth, open and porous. All the orange and lemon trees
planted on this kind of land looked the very picture of health. On the
soils where the orange is not doing so well, the vines, apricot, peach, and
pear trees show every evidence of extreme thrift and of early productive
powers. The young growth made through last summer’s irrigation is
astonishing; it is a healthy growth, too, sturdy and well ripened, and
covered with blossom buds to the very base, not “ leggy” and drawn up,
as is so commonly seen in the peach trees growing under the semi-
tropical conditions of Queensland. The growth of the grape vines was
still more surprising; it was all that could be desired. Undoubtedly
these limestone soils in this hot sunny climate will, if not overdone as to
irrigation, produce a large yield of good, but probably strong wine.
The tendency of the soil and climate to force early productiveness is
shown in the fact that several tons of beautiful Gordo Blanco grapes
were produced last summer from a small vineyard planted only twenty-
one months previously. These grapes were converted into table raisins
of excellent quality, and readily sold at Is. per lb. They were dried in
the sun at little trouble and expense. The Zante currant grape also
fruited in its second year, and excellent currants were made. The
apricot crop will probably be a very good one this coming season, so
that, with them and the peaches, grapes, and currants, the Mildura
settlers can fairly congratulate themselves upon their returns having
commenced to come in,
A general air of thrift, industry, and orderliness pervades the settle-
ment. The cottages of those who have been there the longest are neat
and comfortable looking ; many are even elegant in design and orna-
mentation, but these belong generally to that class of moneyed and
educated settlers so prevalent on the settlement. All the cottages on
the planted blocks have some flowers growing around about them. A
great number of the blocks are in the preparatory stage, and on these
the first dwelling-house is either a tent or a small box of a one-roomed
affair, for much of the pioneering is done by men in their bachelorhood,
or, if married, who do not care to bring their families until things are
straightened up a bit. Indeed, the female sex is in a very great
minority as compared with the stronger sex, even in the town itself;
nevertheless, between 300 and 400 children muster daily at the State
school. In the neat little garden in front of the Chaffey Company’s
office were growing a very numerous assortment of flowering annuals
and biennials; these all looked particularly healthy, and are clear proof
of what ca,n be done with the Mildura soil as far as floriculture is con-
cerned. Of course manure and water are essentials. The pansies are
particularly fine, and I was astonished when told that they had never
ceased profuse blooming all through the last hot summer. The lawns


are of buffalo grass, wbicb I find is at borne in cool Victoria just as
much as it is in tropical Queensland.
In Mr. Smith’s fruit shop in the town I saw some excellent oranges
and lemons. Stepping in to inquire about them I was informed that
they were grown at Wentworth, a few miles lower down the Murray,
and were from trees about twenty years old, yet still thrifty, fruitful,
and healthy. In thinness of skin, sweetness, and juiciness they were
equal to the very best I hare ever seen in coastal Queensland, and far
superior to those grown on the Darling Downs. There was not a
speck of scale on them, and though they had been cased for four weeks
and lying in the shop, they were firm and sound. 1 consider this a
tolerably safe inference that the dry climate of the Lower Murray is
eminently suitable for growing superior oranges, and that such oranges
probably can safely be exported to Europe. Mildura has the honour of
having last summer carried off two of the three prizes offered by the
Victorian Government for efficient irrigation culture. The first prize of
£SO was awarded to Mr. Monnington for the best irrigated orchard,
and the first prize for the best variety of irrigated crops was secured by
Mr. M‘Quirk, and tbe judges remarked that these “were not distinc-
tively different or generally superior to many others at Mildura, but
were typical instances of the system of culture practised there.” The
method of irrigation recommended by the Messrs. Chaffey is not that of
flooding the whole surface, nor even the forming of a shallow basin in
the soil around the tree, but is simply that of allowing the water to find
its way slowly down a single plough furrow drawn on either side of the
line of trees, and as close to the tree as the horse can without injury to
the trees be guided. As the trees grow older year by year this furrow
will get further and further off, until finally it is midway between the
two rows. If the block is only of a gentle slope, as most of them are,
the water, I was told, sometimes takes eight hours to run across a 10-
acre block, so it may be imagined how great a soakage the soil obtains.
Of course the water is allowed to run down many furrows at the same
time, or the job would nevef"be done. There is a head ditch along the
high side of the block, and this is kept just full by means of a common
box trap fixed into the distributing canal. The irrigator then cuts with
a spade a nick in his head ditch just opposite the furrows down which
the water is required. Some of the more wealthy settlers have fixed
into their head ditches at these furrow-junctions small sheet-iron drains
3 inches x 3 inches x 12 inches, with a lifting slide at one end, and thus
are enabled to let out the exact quantity of water required, and the side
of the head ditch is therefore never broken or disturbed.
One of the most pleasing features of the irrigation colony of Ontario,
U.S., so successfully established by the Brothers Chaffey, was the Agri-
cultural College instituted by them. When they first entered into
negotiations with the Victorian Government for the running of Mildura
they expressed their intention of including in their scheme the building,
establishing, and endowment of a similar college, and a clause to this
effect was accordingly inserted in their agreement. This college has
lately been commenced. The endowment, if I remember rightly, is
15,000 acres. That it will be a practical success, and much sought after
by the young folk of the colony, is the general opinion of all in Mildura.


The cost of extensive irrigation by pumping, as compared with that
system in which the water runs by natural gravitation from some
distant reservoir, is one of those debatable questions which will be
decided at Mildura for the first time in the world’s history. Many
people antagonistic to the Chaffey colony asserted that this cost would
swamp the undertaking, even if machinery sufficiently powerful could
be obtained. At first thought this appears probable, and especially so
to any one who has had experience with irrigation by gravitation, and
is familiar with the immense quantity of water required. The primary
cost and the maintenance of gravitation irrigation vary, of course, with
the locality ; if the reservoir is far off, then miles of canals have to be
cut and to be kept in repair, in addition to the actual distributing canals
on the settlement. At Mildura the water is pumped direct into these
distributing canals. Messrs. Chaffey’s experience in California was
entirely with gravitation irrigation, so they were desirous of ascertaining
the actual cost of raising water by the specially designed machinery they
have erected. In July last they obtained the services of an indepen-
dent expert from England to undertake a series of critical tests on this
point, and the result was gratifying in the highest degree. It was
found that the system of pumping by this machinery was the most
economical on record ; and I was told by one of the company’s engineers
that the cost of keeping the machinery in order, of pumping, and the
interest on the cost of the machinery, &c., was considerably less than
the amount required to pay interest on the mountain reservoirs
supplying Riverside, Ontario, and other irrigation colonies in California.
Applying this experience to the possibilities of establishing an irrigation
settlement on the level lands of interior Queensland, then it is encou-
raging, for the immense supply of water required could only be obtained
there by damming long reaches of the almost level running western
rivers and pumping it therefrom. Nevertheless, Ido not see that it is
discouraging to an irrigation scheme being carried out by gravitation in
such country as the Darling Downs, where, on the head waters of the
Condamine and tributary creeks, the reservoirs would be comparatively
close to the farms, and where no serious difficulties in the way of canal
cutting would be encountered. As an instance of how much water a
river can hold within its banks, the report just issued by Mr. Stuart
Murray, the chief engineer of Water Supply, Victoria, on the quantity
of water available for Mildm'a, is interesting and instructive. The
river Murray is now in flood. The surface of the water at Mildura is
22ft. above summer level, and the mean width of the channel he esti-
mates at not less than 400 ft., and the mean depth of this width above
summer level at not less than 16ft. I consider these estimates as a long
way below the volume of water in the Murray when I saw it, but they
will serve as a basis of calculation as to what a river can supply. Taking
the distance from Mildura to Swan Hill at 460 miles (this is wrong, the
distance being only 325 miles), then in that mileage of the river for
every mile of its length there are 34,000,000 cubic feet of water, over
and above the summer level. Working this out, he calculates that in
the whole of this mileage there would be sufficient to irrigate to a depth
of 14in. the whole irrigable surface of Mildura—say 200,000 acres.


The Messrs. Chaffey consider lOin, ample to apply to the land during
the entire summer. This volume of water is moved down the Murray
every fourteen days; the river has now been in flood for four
months, and is likely to be so for two or three months to come, so
an idea can be formed of the immense volume of this life-giving
fertilising flood, which is allowed annually to run to waste in this one
river of Australia.
The question of where a market is to be found for all the fruit that
can be grown on this 250,000 acres of irrigated land at Mildura is one
often propounded. This question widens considerably, too, when it is
considered that presuming the Chaffey scheme is proving successful,
then, long before their 250,000 acres are planted, their example will be
followed by others, and probably several settlements of an equal, or
less, or greater area will be similarly under way in Victoria, New South
Wales, and South Australia, if not in Queensland. Where on the earth
can people be found to eat the fruit 1 more especially as there is such a
run on fruit culture all the world over, I confess to not feeling able to
grasp this problem in its entirety, yet I do not like to be pessimistic
and say this produce can never be consumed, for surely it is an axiom
of Nature that the more good food the earth produces the better it must
be for the living creatures upon it. The Mildura fruit-growers recog-
nise that they must look to the whole world for a market, and they are
preparing accordingly. The grapes will be made into raisins, currants,
and into wine; the apricots, peaches, and plums will be dried, canned
and bottled; the figs will be dried and boxed; the olives will be
preserved, and made into oil; the oranges and lemons will be exported
to Europe, and the inferior ones made into wine, or the essential oils
extracted, &c.; and so on with all the fruit grown. They are a grand
co-operative community, working together for their mutual benefit.
There is no jealousy at new comers ; no fear is felt that the more
wealthy owner of say a 40-acre orchai’d will swamp his less wealthy
neighbour on 10 acres alongside. All seem to know that the more
there are in the swim the better—that as individual producers they are
weak, but as a collective body they are all powerful, for they can
arrange for cheap freights in a fast vessel, because they can give that
vessel a whole cargo ; they can employ merchants and agents at lower
commissions, because their transactions are large; they can save many
rents, cartages, and middle profits, and they can adopt wholesale methods
of advertising their goods and disposing of them. They know, too, that
their produce must be of the best quality, and that it must be evenly
graded before offered for sale; that it must be got up in a most attrac-
tive form, and they are prepared to do this, for they have already
formed a Fruit-growers’ Union, and every orchard owner of necessity
will be a member of it.
Just here comes in the advantage of a little paternal government on
the part of the Messrs. Chaffey, for the above paragraphs express the
gist of their counsel to all who purpose settling at Mildura. But the
company say, “ We are not going to let you have the trouble of finding
out all these methods of marketing entirely by yourselves. You are
welcome to our experience, which is considerable, so we are engaging the
best expert in California to come and show you how to can and oottle


your fruits, another who can instruct you in drying them ; we are
erecting a refrigerating storehouse for the keeping of the fruit; we
have on the ground all the latest wood-working machinery for the
making of the fruit boxes, casks, and cases, and soon shall have this
joinery erected.”
All this looks like monopoly, and I found an undercurrent of
opinion among the town residents decidedly antagonistic to what was
termed the “ Chaffey monopoly of all industries.” The reply to this,
gathered from conversations from time to time with the firm’s represen-
tatives, was, if I understand aright, to the following effect: —That the
company have no intention of being ultimate monopolists, their wish is
to encourage the residents in all individual and collective effort, but they
have no idea of letting the settlement suffer through want of knowledge
or want of the latest appliances, therefore for a time they must be
monopolists, for they are practically the guiding hand of a population
entering upon an occupation in which they have no skill. The firm will
have quite enough to do to develop the 225,000 acres of land still
untouched without troubling to monopolise all the various industries of
the community. For instance, if any one would care to invest in a first-
class steam cultivating plant, and would bring it to Mildura and take
contracts with the settlers to break up their blocks, the firm would
welcome him, although he would be competing with their own workmen,
because it would enable them to more rapidly extend their operations.
The Mildura scheme is too gigantic to enable monopoly to flourish, but if
it was smaller—say confined to 25,000 acres —it would be quite within
the grasp of one firm, and this is a point worth remembering when other-
imitation irrigation settlements are being initiated, as they doubtless
soon will be. I would mention that there are no 15s. or <£l per week
wages men at Mildura; it is all 65., 75., Bs., and 9s. per day. The
nomadic class commonly seen in bush townships and on squatting
stations are not represented in the settlement. At first they were
numerous, but at the time of the Mildura “strike” they were quietly
got rid of, and the work now is all done by local residents.
Looking at the Lower Murray district with the eyes of a Queensland
pastoralist, I class it as the most wretchedly inferior of all grazing
country. I knew it intimately when it was in its prime, and I see it
now that it has been gi-azed over for fifty years ; 30 acres would not
keep a sheep ! Mildura station was one of the largest squatting runs in
the district, yet it supported probably not more than a dozen souls the
year round. It originally belonged to Messrs. Phelps and Jamieson,
who sold it some twenty-five years ago, just when experience was demon-
strating that even in wild-dog and scrubby country sheep'could be kept
at large instead of being shepherded. It was then fenced in, and 80,000
sheep kept on it for years, then again the owner wisely sold. The new
purchaser expected to do tha same as his predecessor, and keep per-
manently 80,000 sheep, but the cream had been skimmed by over-
stocking, and the rabbits had come. It fell into the hands of a banking
institution, and remained on their hands unwittingly. Mr. William
Paterson was the manager. One day, about four years agq, at a neigh-
bouring township, a quiet middle-aged gentleman came up to Mr.
Paterson, and without giving his name stated that he was on his way


to Mildura, and would like to stay a few days. He was mistaken by
the manager for the “ drummer” of an Adelaide firm who had sent up a
case of execrable whisky, so he was told “he might save himself the
trouble, for he was nob wanted.” Half-an-hour afterwai'ds the stranger
quietly came up again, said his name was Chaffey—George Chaffey—
and handed a letter from the manager of the bank, which simplv
intimated the bearer was a “probable buyer of the station.” The
station manager felt awkward, decidedly awkward, but apologised and
explained, and the “probable buyer” laughingly admitted that a case
of had whisky was amply deserving of a rough reception. At sundown
the pretty homestead was reached, and the evening spent over good
whisky, by the manager talking “ sheep” and descanting upon the
superior grazing capabilities of the run, and by the probable buyer in
quietly listening. It transpired during the evening that the new comer
was a new chum to the colony, was new to squatting, and had the
money. “ What a godsend,” thought the manager ; “it shall not be
my fault if I don’t shove the old worn-out run on to him.” Next day
the horses were got up, and the inspection, which could not possibly be
done under several days, commenced. The manager took the lead, and
did the talking; the lead was over the saltbush plains and through the
straggling open mallee, and the new chum was told of the exceeding
fattening quality of all saltbushes, and how open mallee was equally as
good as the plains; he was told that the absence of grass was nothing,
for that after the slightest rain numerous saline herbs grew, all eagerly
relished by sheep. The belts of dense mallee and pine ridges, where
not a blade of grass was to be found, were carefully avoided, and the
ride home was along the river flats, where, under the huge red gums
and the stunted box, flooded grass was long and plentiful; and the
manager thought he had made an impression. Next day the new chum
began to assert himself; he had kept to the river, inquired as to how
low it fell in the summer, how long it kept in flood; examined the
cliffs, and looked at the subsoil, and at the subsoil exposed in any rain
gullies; was greatly pleased with the long anabranch or “ billabong;”
how deep was it 1 how was it filled ? did it retain the water 1 &c., &c.
The dense mallee belts avoided the previous day were not only visited
but critically examined as to soil and subsoil; so were the pine-
covered sandhills. “Would he not go and see the sheep'?”
suggested the station manager. “No. I suppose they are what-
you say they are ; but how high do you think this ridge is above
the river 1 That distant pine scrub must be higher. Let us go and see
it,” was the strange reply of the stranger. The pretty garden, too, at
the home station came in for careful examination, every tree and shrub
noted, and particular pleasure expressed at the orange and lemons and
the vines. Conversation slacked somewhat that evening. The manager
was completely nonplussed; he had said his say, and had got a rank new
chum to- say it to, but what was the good when his man did not care
whether the points of the station were good or bad. He was asked,
“ Whether there was a theodolite on the station 1 ?” “ Yes.” “Is it in
order 1 ?” “Yes. We use it to run the boundary lines. You will find
them quite correct.” “ I should like to take it with us to-morrow,” was
the quiet reply of the green new chum. The manager said nothing, but


thought a deal, as he went to his room to bed. Next day the theodolite
was taken, but not to the boundary line. Oh ! no, only to the river
bank, and the height above water noted ; then the height of the saltbush
flats and rises, and these heights marked down in a pocket-book; then
this, that, and the other mallee and pine ridges had their levels taken,
till at noon a halt was made for lunch and the whisky brought out.
The station manager felt himself worked up to “ ropeable ” condition.
He could stand this tomfoolery sort of inspection no longer. This man
is no squatter, but a fool, and what is the use of wasting time
over him ? So out it came. “Look here, Mr. Chaffey, you are a
mystery to me. Who are you ? What do you want? Are you a bond
fide buyer? You seem to care nothing about the quality of the salt-
bushes or herbs, never even look at the grass, and will not go to see the
sheep, but instead keep poking about the river bank and taking the
levels of those barren mallee ridges. What is your game ? I have been
trying to pump you these three days. lam sick of this useless work.”
Then the quiet new chum smiled, and quietly replied, “ Mr. Paterson,
you are not the only one who has considered me a mystery during this
visit down the Murray and my inspection of several stations ; all have
tried to pump me, and ineffectually, but I will tell you. I like the
place, and shall buy it.” “Why, you have not even seen the sheep?”
“No, they do not matter.” “ Good heavens !” exclaimed the manager
aloud, and to himself he thought, “ What a greenhorn! ” Then the
quiet man slowly unfolded the gigantic schemes that were working in
his brain. Told of the irrigation colonies he had successfully organised
in California. How he had come to Australia to duplicate these on a
still larger scale, and how he contemplated irrigating 250,000 acres of
the Mildura run ! The station manager was as one thunderstruck.
“Greenhorn,” indeed, he thought, why, lam the “greenhorn.” But
they were kindred spirits after all, for the manager had been doing some
experimental irrigation on 200 acres of natural grasses, and the mystery
being no longer a mystery a fellow-friendship ensued which continues to
this day, for Mr. Wm. Paterson is head manager of the'station, and
principal representative of the Messrs. Chaffey during their absence from
Mildura.
The above is the substance of the history of Mr. George Chaffey’s
first visit to Mildura as told me by Mr. Paterson when riding out with
him over the orchards and vineyards, I only regret that I cannot
repeat the story as graphically as it was given to me.
In the main street of Mildura is the commodious store of Messrs.
Williams and Yule. It is also the residence of Mr. K. Williams, J.P.,
the senior partner, one of the oldest residents in the Lower Murray
district, and one of the very first who invested in the Mildura allotments
and threw in his lot with the Chaffey settlement. His store is two
stories high, and on the roof an observatoi’y platform has been erected.
I had the pleasure of attending one of Mrs. Williams’ hospitable “even
ings at home,” and was invited to return next morning and view the
settlement from the vantage point of this elevated platform. It was
worth the trouble; not indeed for the view of the town, for no one can,
by the greatest stretch of imagination, call that beautiful, it being still
in the “ hobbledehoy ” stage of rapid growth, and the buildings, with a


few exceptions, are primitive indeed. But the town is interesting for
all that. Mr. Williams, who was alongside of me, said, that, three
years ago, where his store stands, and where all the many dwellings we
could, see extending half a mile in all directions were now, was then
dense mallee scrub. It is now a centre of evident industry. “It was
his pleasure,” he said, “to come up on to this platform daily and note
the progress of the settlement. Look around,” he continued, “ and see
that now the scrub is almost as a fringe on the horizon ; every day
I note clump after clump being felled and the view getting more
extended ; it is simply astonishing with what x'apidity the country is
being subdued.” And indeed it is. For before me, and in a semicircle
of three miles radius around me, was what appeared from our elevated
station a plain of young orchards and cultivation fields. The absence of
all timber made more apparent the straightness of the dividing fences,
which are numerous through the smallness of the blocks, and the
extreme accuracy of the rows of young fruit trees. This gave a chess-
board like appearance to the scene quite novel to the eye—a
similitude increased by the cottages of the settlers dotted about here
and there like the pieces on this board of mimic battle. In the
field before me the battle was no mimic one ; nor was it one of man
against man. No, indeed; it was one of industry and intelligence
fighting against the stern laws of Nature ; a battle between man and an
arid climate, between water and the desert sand ! Having that
gardener’s faculty of glancing into futurity, a power obtained through
a knowledge of what a baby tree can grow into when mature, I allowed
ray thoughts to wander forward ten and twenty years. How changed is
the scene ! The battlefield is still there and greatly extended, but all
signs of combat have ended.. Everywhere is peace and beauty. The
woods have reappeared, but it is a forest of utility; the air is redolent
with the perfume of the flowers of fruits. It is the spring season of the
year, and the varied shades of colour are pleasing to the eye, for in
place of the sombre hue of the mallee there is the bright green of the
vineyards, the snow-white bloom of the myriad pear trees, and the pink
flowers of the peach ; there are innumerable orange groves, among the
deep glossy green of whose foliage still linger a few of the golden
globes of the garnered crop—those gilded earrings of the Goddess
of Plenty !
Descending from the platform, and walking along the avenue, I
exchanged “ good day” with a comfortable-looking middle-aged gentle-
man, whose phrenological development showed easy power of mind, as
if there was a reserve force not yet drawn upon, and a consciousness of
this force; and a self-confidence and determination to accomplish
anything. This man was George Chaffey—the master mind who is
causing this wilderness to blossom like the rose, and to support in
comfort —amounting almost to affluence—a population of thousands,
where only a half score were barely able to subsist before. He will
need no marble monument to testify to what his genius did on earth,
for his monument will be Mildura with its thousands of prosperous
settlers.


Reprinted from “ The Queenslander ,” Brisbane, 18 th October, 1890.
If we neglect irrigation the community will long and frequently feel
the evil effects of that neglect. We cannot intercept the penalty if we
perpetuate the fault. But if the leak be stopped the loss will also be
prevented. Very opportunely come the interesting descriptions of Mil-
dura which are now being presented in these pages. It is safe to affirm
that these articles will come as a revelation to most Queenslanders,
and that the facts and figures marshalled by “ Jethro Tull ” will set our
farmers and fruit-growers longing for even a faint semblance of the con-
ditions under which the Adams and Eves of the Victorian Paradise
exist. Given plenty of water and it seems that a grand success can be
made of agricultural operations upon any well-drained soils. Of both
necessaries this colony has enough and to spare. About 100 inches of
rain fell during the year ending June last upon thousands of square
miles of land—and promptly ran off again. At Mildura the “ana-
branch” of the Murray where the settlement has been made would at
once have been filled from this surplus water, and three months’ supply
for the whole district thus impounded. The Chaffey phenomenon
should certainly supply our Government with a sort of rough plan for
their agricultural aims, and it should be seriously considered whether
such a scheme could not be successfully carried out on some of the
Crown lands of the colony. There can be no lack of spots in Queens-
land where immense,supplies of water might be preserved without
insuperable engineering difficulties, and where the necessary machinery
and reticulation would at once provide an irrigation trust, an. experi-
mental farm, and an agricultural college within the four corners of the
main undertaking. To sugar-planters and fruit-growers the measure of
good to be thus achieved should be incalculable; indeed, the sugar
industry may yet be permanently revived by an intelligent grasp and
application of the principles illustrated by the rapid conversion of a
patch of ragged mallee scrub into a well-drilled, well-groomed, wealthy
shire. Is it not possible for a sugar company or syndicate to take the
initiative in this matter, cut up its estate into small blocks, and metayer
or lease the subdivisions under agreement as to regular irrigation 1 ? The
Chaffeys have already given Australia a valuable lesson, but very few
will profit thereby if the example is not made practical use of.
Reprinted from u The Mildura Cultivator ,” Mildura, ith October, 1890.
MILDURA VISITED BY MR. R. SPEIGHT
(Formerly of the Midland Railway, London).
Perhaps there is no man who has yet visited Mildura better qualified
to give an opinion as to the prospects of the settlement than Mr.
Richard Speight, Chief Commissioner for Victorian Railways, formerly
connected with the Midland Railway, England. His duties carry him
to every part of the colony at frequent intervals, and besides the
experience gained in this way, he has visited the chief industrial centres


of the world. The nature of his work is such that the progress of each
district becomes his study, and consequently he is eminently fitted to
compare one place with another, and to judge of the capabilities of a
locality. He has just paid a second visit to the settlement, and this is
what he says about it:—“ I think the work done and the general
progress made since I was here in November, 1888, simply wonderful.
I have been driving over the settlement for the best part of two days,
and have seen something to astonish me at every turn. Now I have to
go back without having seen half of the place. What pleases me most
are the evidences on all sides of genuine settlement. There has been, I
can see, a good slice of land taken up for speculative purposes, but the
bulk of the area sold seems to be in the hands of men who are going
vigorously to work, spending their money in making their holdings
valuable and reproductive. As for the works carried out by the Messrs.
Chaffey, I cannot speak too highly of them. When I was here before I
saw much to admire, but I confess I took away a very inadequate idea
of the design and scope of the scheme. Now that I have seen the
results of nearly two years’ additional work, I am able to appreciate the
ability and foresight of the promoters. Everything, it is evident, has
been thought out carefully beforehand, and a definite plan has been
adhered to from the start. The various detached works that I witnessed
before have fitted in exactly where they are required, and the complete-
ness of the scheme which the Chaflfey Brothers had in their mind is now
apparent to me.”
“ What do you think of Mildura’s chances of success commercially 1”
“ I haven’t the slightest misgiving about it. With the start it has
made, and the enormous advantages offering, I don’t see any possibility
of failure. The best proof of my confidence lies in the fact that I am
sending two of my sons here to go in for fruit-raising. I don’t know of
any better field opening, or I would not take that step. My paramount
duty is to provide for the members of my family, and I take a strictly
business view of Mildura when I invest my money in it for that purpose.
There is no sentiment about that, of course.”
“About our railway, Mr. Speight. Can you tell us anything 1” “I
may say this. If I were a private speculator I should be glad to go
into a company for the purpose of making the line by private enterprise.
The Mildura colony is growing every day, and in two or three years
there will be an immense trade. That Mildura will be a success
whether it gets the railway or not is to my mind certain.”
Reprinted from “ The Sydney Morning Herald,” Sydney, 18 th, 25 th
October, ls£, B th November, 1890.
THE PIONEER IRRIGATION COLONY.
By F. W. W.
To the Chief Secretary of Victoria fairly belongs the distinction of
being the Australian politician who has the strongest and most accurate
grasp of the immense possibilities of production which await the full
economic utilisation of the continent’s x'ainfall, and who has the legis-


lative and administrative courage of his opinions. He is, and for years
has been, an enthusiastic irrigationist, and, like other enthusiasts, finds
much to complain of in the ignorance and apathy of the people around
him, A community generally moves slowly in a new direction, but
owing in no small degree to the alert intelligence and untiring zeal of
Mr. Deakin, Victoria has already moved further, and is now moving
faster, in the matter of irrigation than all the rest of Australia reckoned
together. This fact is a serious censure upon New South Wales. Not-
withstanding her obvious backwardness in comparison with, say, the
Western States of America, Victoria has a long lead in the development
of what will in the not distant future be truthfully regarded as one of
Australia’s greatest industrial resources, namely, the conservation of
water which now flows to the ocean or is lost by evaporation and
percolation, and its scientific application to naturally arid country. The
irrigable lands of New South Wales are much vaster in extent than
those of Victoria, but beyond a general inquiry conducted by a Royal
Commission some years ago, a considerable amount of survey work, and
a few experiments mostly of an insignificent character undertaken by
private individuals, nothing has been done to advance the cause of
irrigation in the mother colony. For actual enterprise calculated upon
a scale large enough to ultimately demonstrate the wealth which exists
in our inland water supplies, we must look to what is now being done
on the southern side of the Murray by the State and by an already
famous private proprietary. It is not intended in this series of papers
to describe or discuss what has been accomplished and is being attempted
under the Victorian Irrigation Act and kindred measures. That is a
work which has been and still is attended by manifold difficulty, and of
necessity can only make slow progress, though the result of each succes-
sive season further assures and brightens its future ; but it is in its nature
quite different, and may be here separated from, the tremendous task
which the Messrs. Chaffey and those associated with them have set
themselves at Mildura, the pioneer irrigation “ colony” of Australia.
That task is nothing less than an endeavour to transform a space of
250,000 acres of hitherto almost totally unproductive desert into a vast
and wonderfully productive garden. There is a dramatic boldness about
the choice of location. We begin to lay the foundations of an enduring
respect for the brothers Chaffey the moment we begin to realise this.
Mildura, as the reader knows, is situate at the extreme north-west
corner of Victoria—in other words, it is opposite the extreme south-west
corner of New South Wales. It is just as far from the market and
shipping facilities of the Victorian metropolis as it could be placed, and
it is about 120 miles from the nearest railway terminus. Although
only separated from New South Wales by the Murray, to reach it from
Sydney by the most comfortable and inexpensive route I travelled as
far and spent as much time as if I had made a voyage to New Zealand
and back again. Yet when one tries to comprehend the gradually
unfolding plans of the founders of the settlement he feels that the choice
of situation was no mere caprice of com-age. All Victoria was diligently
searched before remote Mildura was decided upon as the scene of the
initial experiment of its kind in irrigation. The previous reputation of
this block of mallee and blue bush counted for nothing in the thoughts


of men who held the secret of profitable occupation. What they sought
for was a sure and ample water supply, particular qualities of soil, and
special climatic conditions. These they found at Mildura, and the dis-
advantage of remoteness, a perpetual tax upon the “ colony,” was boldly
and cheerfully accepted.
Five years ago there was not the faintest anticipation in the mind of
any prophetic Australian of such a picture of sanguine and energetic
and expanding settlement as is presented on the Mildura frontage of the
Murray to-day. That picture is a new and marvellous thing under our
sun. It was so recently as in the early months of 1886 that there arose
the loud and bitter cry of the pastoralists in the Western Division of
New South Wales against the cruel severity, the ignorantly-originated
harshness of the Land Act of 1884. Loudest and bitterest of all was
the wail of the South-western squatters. By them the historic drought
of 1883-4 was felt in all the force of its terrible destructiveness. The
present writer remembers listening patiently on several occasions to the
tale of the sorrows of, among others, the late Mr. Brooke, senior pro-
prietor of Tapio. The burden of his representations was that so heavily
lay the curse of a scanty and irregular rainfall upon the South-western
territory that the greater portion of it was almost worthless, and that
unless the pressure of the law, just then brought into full operation,
were lifted, much of the country would have to be abandoned, and would
become a breeding-ground for rabbits and other vermin. The state
should be thankful, he urged, if capitalists were found willing to risk
the experiences of occupation under the tempting conditions of a long
tenure and a nominal rent. Tapio, he contended, was a fair sample of
the mallee-afflicted properties. A subsequent journey on the part of the
present writer seemed to amply confirm Mr. Brooke’s gloomy descriptions
and prognostications. Tapio to-day is rented at less than Id. and
Mildura is selling at £2O per acre; and Tapio and Mildura are
naturally one territory, divided only by the Murray. To stand on the
Mildura bank in 1890, watching the busy movements of the young
irrigation “ colony,” and then to remember what Mr. Brooke had said
about the dismal prospects of’Tapio, just across the river, in 1886, gave
one a vivid feeling of the industrial and social changes which follow
upon the adoption of a vigorous irrigation policy. A barren and
inhospitable region, in which sheep had perished of starvation by scores
or hundreds of thousands, will soon, thanks to the intelligently-directed
use of the waters of the Murray, support in a high degree of the comforts
of civilisation the densest agricultural community in Australia.
When Mr, Deakin was urging the Victorian Assembly in the session
of 1886 to pass the bill which covered the agreement subsequently made
with the Messrs. Chaffey, he explained that the Surveyor-General, the
highest authority that could be quoted, valued the Mildura frontages at
acre, and the back blocks of the holding at 2s. 6d, This was the
maximum estimate, and was confirmed by the Surveyor-General’s
predecessor in office. As a matter of fact, the then rent of the land was
one penny for fourteen acres, or a capital value of 2d, per acre! That
is to say, when the lease was submitted to public auction the pastoralists’
competitive bid for it was 1-14 d. per acre. And that was not the worst.
Mr. Deakin added that “ this particular land had been the means of


ruining the last two or three holders, who had carried on pastoral
pursuits there, and the last bank which advanced money on the station
from which the block was cut out was perfectly willing to take 2s. 6d.
in the pound on the advance it had made.” These figures contrast
sharply with those of the bargain made with the Messrs. Chaffey. The
agreement stipulates that 50,000 acres are to be granted to the irriga-
tionists upon proof of an expenditure in improvements amounting to £5
per acre. Beyond that the firm has the right to take up 200,000 acres
upon payment of <£l per acre purchase money, and proof of an expendi-
ture of £1 per acre in impi’ovements. Taking the whole 260,000 acres
into consideration, the Yictorian Treasury will receive 17s. fid. per acre
as purchase money. “ Then don’t you think,” interjected Mr. Gaunson
to Mr. Deakin, in the Victorian Assembly, “ you are swindling the
Messrs. Chaffey 1 ?” “To be perfectly frank,” the Chief Secretary replied,
he confessed he had some suspicions of the sort.” And then he pro-
ceeded in this strain :
“ Enthusiastic as he was supposed to be as to the possibilities of
irrigation, he confessed that he would be very sorry to have a single
farthing in the Messrs. Chaffey’s undertaking. He did not pretend to
be a competent critic of the possibilities of irrigation settlement, but he
could only say that, from the irrigation settlements he had seen and
closely criticised in America, brilliant as the results were in favoured
localities, he did not see anything in the circumstances of the mallee to
justify the expectation that irrigation in it would realise the much more
handsome returns which this agreement necessarily implied. The terms
of the agreement between the Messrs. Chaffey and the Government
were far more stringent than the most unfavourable conditions he
saw imposed upon any syndicate in America, and the successes
in America, brilliant as they were, would require to be sur-
passed in the mallee if the agreement was to be made profitable to
the Messrs. Chaffey.”
Mildura was too much then for the faith of even Mr, Deakin, who
had only the previous year personally inspected the irrigation successes
in the Western States of America. The bold ventui’e into the mallee
scrub amazed him. But there is no resisting the evidence afforded by
the result of the three years’ work there. I do not doubt that Mr.
Deakin now would be glad if he had many farthings invested in the
enterprise.
Let these results be stated in a broad, brief way. The first surveyor
went upon the land in October, 1887. In the three years £200,000
has been expended in improvements and grants of 16.000 acres obtained.
The guaranteed minimum was to spend £IO,OOO during the first twelve
months, £35,000 during the first five years, £140,000 during the second
five years, £75,000 during the third five years, and £50,000 during the
fourth five years—a total of £300,000 in twenty years. So that in
spending £200,000 in the first three years the Messrs. Chaffey have far
exceeded the guaranteed minimum of progress. The settlers, it is
reckoned, have already improved their holdings to the extent of about
another £IOO,OOO. About 11,000 acres have been sold to resident or
intending settlers, and of the sold area something like 6500 have been
brought under cultivation. I have the authority of Mr. George Chaffey


Men employed by the Messrs. Chaffey
... 300
Contractors and their employes
... 100
Resident agricultural settlers
... 950
Shopkeepers and business people ...
... 450
Women, mostly married
... 600
Children of school age
... 420
Other children
... 200
Sundries, unclassified
... 130
Total...
... 3150
for saying that in none of the famous irrigation “colonies” of California
was half that area brought under tillage in the same period from the
initiation of the settlement. Considering the remoteness of Mildura
from any dense population, with the consequent difficulty and expense
of the transit of machinery, &c., this is a very remarkable achievement,
A month ago Mr. Stuart Murray, the Chief Engineer of Water Supply,
paid an official visit to Mildura, and the following is his estimate of the
population :
Pumping plant at three stations has been erected of sufficient power to
supply water for irrigating a 25,000-acre block of the estate, and 70
miles of main channels and 140 miles of distributing channels have been
constructed.
At this point it is worth while to note the difference between the
State revenue from Mildura under pastoral and agricultural occupation.
It has been stated that the Messrs. Chaffey have secured the fee simple
of 16,000 acres. The balance of the 250,000 is held under pastoral
lease, and the total rent does not amount to <£lso per annum ! The
wool from Mildura has always been shipped from Adelaide, so that the
Victorian railways have not benefited thereby. In addition to the rent
the only source of State revenue was taxation, and, that on the few
persons employed on 250,000 acres in territory with an average annual
rainfall of about 8 inches, could hardly have exceeded £IOO a year.
Against this £250 of direct revenue from pastoral occupation place the
probable revenue from the irrigation “ colony ” next year. The Presi-
dent of the Shire Council of Mildura, Mr. Williams (the promptitude
with which local government has been set up is a lesson to us in New
South Wales), told me he regarded Mr. Stuart Murray’s estimate of
population as excessive. But, as population is steadily increasing—land
is being sold now at the rate of about 600 acres per month (indeed, 30 10-
acre blocks were sold last week) —we shall be within the mark if we put
down the mean population next year at 3000. According to Hay ter,
the Customs revenue of Victoria for 1888-9 was rather over £2 19s. per
head. Suppose we take Customs and stamps at £3 at Mildura. (This
is an under-estimate, as the population is chiefly composed of adults, who
of course are larger consumers of dutiable goods than children, and as
the Messrs. Chaffey are constantly importing machinery of a costly kind
upon which ad valorem duty of 25 per cent, or more has to be paid.)
Here we have £9OOO. Then there is the railway revenue. Mr. W. B.
Chaffey, the partner resident at Mildura, calculates that next year about
6000 tons of goods will be received at Echuca or Swan Hill from Mel-


bourne for conveyance to Milckira by river. The average rate by rail is
£2 10s. per ton. Suppose we say 5000 tons. Here is a revenue of
£\ 2,500. The passenger fares will probably bring the total State
revenue to close upon £25,000, from which has to be deducted the pro-
portion of railway working expenses, and in this connection it should be
remembered that the lines used were either built or in course of con-
struction before Mildura “ colony” was thought of.
But we now see only the beginning of things. It is an open secret
that the Messrs. Chaffey have set their hearts upon developing this
“ colony ” into the largest and finest agricultural settlement of its kind
in the world. This ambition is worthy of receiving more than
momentary notice. It is calculated that about 200,000 acres out of the
250,000 are capable of intense culture by means of irrigation. This
estimate is a result of a scientific examination of the soil and a careful
taking of levels. Now, in the most successful irrigation “ colonies” of
California the population averages about one soul to the acre. Suppose,
then, that in the course of time—it is admitted that it would take many
years to convert 200,000 acres of mallee scrub and blue bush plains into
thriving homesteads—the whole irrigable area is brought under profit-
able cultivation, what will be the population of Mildura 1 If only half
the highest measure reached in California is attained to at Mildura the
completely developed settlement will show a population of 100,000. I
am unable to see why, when the present desert has been transformed
into a garden, this amount of resident human life should not be sustained
by it. And where in Agricultural Australia as it exists now could we
find anything approximating to this final and permanent density of
settlement 1 Should this consummation of the enterprise be arrived at
—and I repeat that there is nothing unreasonable in the attitude of mind
which looks for it; 'the Brothers ChafFey keep it steadily in view—the
Mildura contribution to the Customs revenue will be about £300,000
per annum. And to that will have to be added an enormous con-
tribution to the railway revenue. The only guide to probable
traffic when the orchards arrive at full bearing condition is the actual
experience of California. The Mildura Shire Council puts the case
in this way:—
Statistics are almost unobtainable here, the only record of any value
to which we are able to obtain access is the Riverside Press Annual, and
from it we gather that the acreage of Riverside under irrigation is 6000.
The population is 6000. The orange crop for the previous year
(exported) was 1400 car loads, the raisin crop was 260,661 boxes, or
300 car loads ; if we admit that oranges and raisins were two-thirds of
the Riverside products and allow half this amount for other fruits,
lemons, peaches, apricots, apples, pears, &c., of which large quantities
are grown, and throw in all farm and dairy produce into the bargain,
this gives us a total of 2350 car loads, exported from 6000 acres of
irrigated land. The cars are double-bogie cars, each carrying from
25,000 to 32,000 pounds, or more than double the quantity carried by
an ordinary Victorian railway truck ; consequently, if 6000 acres only
are successfully cultivated at Mildura it will need a trip a day for
thirteen railway trucks running every day throughout the year to
remove the orchard, garden, and farm produce.


It is not necessary to endorse this estimate before predictingan immense
traffic between Mildura and the coast markets and shipping ports. The
proportion of fruit sent away in its fresh state is likely to be less than
at Riverside, but the output of 200,000 acres of land under intense
culture, attended by the most favourable conditions, is certain to very
sensibly augment the Victorian revenue. The sanction of Parliament
to the construction within the next two or three years of a line joining
Mildura to one of the nearest of the existing termini is confidently antici-
pated. Such a line will ultimately become one of the best paying railways
in A ustralia. It is not too much to say, indeed, that if the Chaffeys’ plans
do not break down, and their courage does not fail them, if not less than
100,000 people are yet prosperously settled upon the irrigable 200,000
acres at Mildura, the direct annual State revenue from the “ colony ”
will average not less than half a million sterling. The probabilities are
that it will be much more. And that will be reasonable compensation
for the concessions made in regard to the use of the surplus waters of
the Murray. “ The Chaffeys,” said a Murray River squatter to me on
the trip from Mildura to Swan Hill, “ have got the grandest water right
in the world, but they are making a splendid use of it, and they will
deserve all the wealth they may yet derive from it.” Victoria will gain
a new province in exchange for a water right.
If it be said that looking to the complete development of the colony
is looking rather far ahead, it may be added here, on the authority of
Mr, George Chaffey, that a very moderate estimate of the probable area
under cultivation in 1897—ten years from the starting date—is 30,000
acres So far as my information goes, that is larger than the area of the
largest of the Californian irrigation “colonies” to-day. It is only by
this comparison with what has been done in California that the richness
of Mildura’s promise can be understood and appreciated.
The original intention of the founders of Mildura “ colony” was to
devote the best of the irrigable lands to vineyards and fruit farms, and
the remainder to grain and grazing farms. It is already probable that,
for the most satisfactory of reasons, this intention will be departed from.
The brothers Chaffey are pretty well convinced that all the irrigable
lands are good enough for intense culture. In the memorandum of
terms and conditions of sale issued by the company the price of fruit
lands is set down at £2O per acre, and that of those appropriated to
cereal and grazing farms at £ls. Up to the present time, however, not
an acre of the latter class has been sold ; indeed, none has been offered
for sale. The explanation is, that the whole influence of the company’s
administration of the estate will be given in favour of the raising of
high as against low-priced products. The wisdom of this decision
cannot be reasonably questioned. “ Recent investigation”—l quote
from a document issued a few months ago by the Californian State
Board of Trade—“ showed that in 1888 the fruit and wine crop yielded
25,000,000 dol. on an acreage of 240,000. Barley, oats, corn, rye, and
wheat yielded 49,000,000 dol. on an acreage of 2,560,000. The wine
and fruits yielded 104 dol. per acre, while the grain crops yielded
19 dol. per acre, and the fruit acreage included trees not yet in bearing.
This approximates only, and does not give the full results of fruit-
growing.” Similar quotations from American publications bearing the


impress of authority could be multiplied. Until, then, we hear some-
thing to the contrary from the founders, we may regard Mildura as a
gigantic enterprise in intense culture. Not that no lands whatever will
be set apart for grain-growing and dairy-farming, but the area of such
lands will be limited by the requirements of the community itself.
In accordance with the desire to settle as dense a population upon
Mildura as the development of events may render possible, the fruit
lands have been divided into 10-acre blocks, and the maximum extent
of individual purchase has been fixed at 80 acres. Of course, this
provision is operative only as between the company and the purchaser.
There is no legal bar to one man buying another out and thus enlarging
his own holding. A measure of this aggregation is sure to take place,
but it is to be hoped that the great majority of purchasers will at once
or ultimately become residents, too much in love with their possessions
and surroundings to lightly part with them. The last report issued by
the company conveys the important fact that an “ absence of the purely
speculative spirit on the part of investors in land is shown by the
general eagerness for the cultivation of their holdings, and the estab-
lishment of homes.” It is to be hoped that this absence will never-
become inconspicuous. Perhaps, however, that is a vain thing to look
for. A percentage of every colonial community is anxious to live upon
increases of value which other people’s industry and expenditure have
built up, but it is gratifying to know that local public opinion at
Mildura sets strongly against that ignoble method of gathering wealth.
Californian experience suggests that a good many Mildura blocks will be
secured by prosperous citizens of Melbourne anxious to possess country
homes in which their families may spend several months of the year, and
to which they themselves may retire, if they so wish, in the evening of
life. I understand that this class of intending settler promises to
become a rather numerous one at Mildura. In California many a city
merchant or professional man finds that the net profits of the vineyard
or fruit farm pay all the expenses of a delightful country retreat, and
ensure a residential provision for old age.
It has already been stated that what the founders of Mildura
“ colony” believed they had secured in their choice of location was a
sure and ample supply of water, particular qualities of soil, and special
conditions of climate. Into the vexed question of the equitable
distribution of the waters of the Murray between the colonies which lay
claim to them Ido not propose to enter. It is enough here to merely
mention that when that distribution is determined, whether before or
soon after a Federal Parliament and Executive have been established,
Mildux-a will be able to show possession of a preferent right to a certain
defined proportion of Victoria’s share of the waters. And though the
demands of 200,000 acres of land devoted to intense culture, but on
which the winter rains fall scantily and the summer sun beats fiercely,
are enormous, they do not bulk formidably against the total volume of
the Murray. In an official memorandum issued less than a month ago,
Mr. Stuart Murray, Chief Engineer of Water Supply in Victoria, put
the case in these terms :
“ The fear that has been expressed in some quarters that
the waters of the Murray River would be depleted by the


withdrawal of the volumes required for the use of the irrigation
settlements is one that does not seem likely to be soon
realised. The surface of water in the river at Mildura is at present
22 feet above the ordinary summer level. The mean width of the river
channel is not less than 400 feet, and the mean depth of this width
above summer level not less than 16 feet. There are therefore in every
mile of the i-iver channel, in round numbers, 34,000,000 cubic feet of
water over and above the summer level; that is in every mile, 7000 inch-
acres of surplus or flood water, after making the most liberal allowance for
loss by percolation, evaporation, and waste in the using’. The distance
by the river from Mildura to Swan Hill is about 460 miles ; so that the
volume of flood water at any moment in this section of the river alone,
in its present state, is equal to 2,820,000 effective inch-acres. The area
of the entire block set apart for settlement at Mildura is 250,000 acres,
whereof probably 200,000 will be the maximum at any time irrigated.
The block of flood water in the section referred to, therefore, would be
equal to putting a depth of 14in. of water over the entire irrigable
surface of the Mildura settlement. But the mean current of the river
is not less than one and a-half miles per hour, so that the block of 460
miles would be renewed by displacement every thirteen days. That is
to say, in the present condition of the river, the flood water in this
length alone would be sufficient to put 14in. of water over the whole
Mildura settlement rather oftener than once a fortnight, while a total
depth of lOin. in an entire summer is the maximum proposed to be
used. The river has been in high flood for the past three or four
months, and is likely to remain pretty high for some months yet to
come. It was also in a still higher condition of flood during the whole
of the winter of 1869. Reflection on these facts should convince the
most sceptical that we are very far from having mortgaged the available
water of the Murray. On the contrary, it should enable us to see that,
to permit these vast volumes of fertilising fluid to pass on unused to the
ocean, instead of turning them to account for the sustenance and
delectation of man, is to commit a crime.”
Mr. Murray has fallen into error in stating the distance by river
between Mildura and Swan Hill at 460 miles —the real distance is 325
miles—but this error, while it slightly weakens, does not destroy his
argument. That substantially remains as a convincing refutation of the
fears that the capacity of the Murray will be overtaxed when the full
demands of Mildura come into operation. Very few persons indeed
have an adequate conception of the Murray river. It is more than a
channel whereby the surplus waters of its vast watershed are conveyed
to the ocean. It is in itself a magnificent storage reservoir of over a
thousand miles in length. Its possibilities as a wealth-producer are
almost incalculable. Mr. Stuart Murray is right, Mildura should—and
will—“ enable us to see that to permit these vast volumes of fertilising
fluid to pass on unused to the ocean, instead of turning them to account
for the sustenance and delectation of man, is to commit a crime.” The
quality of the water is a matter that should not be passed over. Mr.
A. N. Pearson, Government Agricultural Chemist in Victoria, has been
conducting, during the last two or three years, an elaborate investiga-
tion into the values of Victorian irrigation waters. So far as it has


gone —it is still incomplete—it is of an encouraging character. Murray
waters at Mildura distribute no deleterious element over the soil, while
the use of lOin. of it during the summer months would add about a
shilling’s worth of fertilising matter in sediment and in solution to each
acre. That is not much, but the more important consideration is that
there is nothing in the waters which is destructive to vegetation.
Turning now to the Mildura soil, the evidence as to its fertility and
its adaptability to the irrigation method of culture is entirely satisfac-
tory. Most visitors to Mildura have come into contact with the bright
and courteous editor of the Mildura Cultivator , Mr. B. N. M‘Kay, and
will readily accept him as an honest and competent witness of facts.
In 1889 this gentleman stated before the Victorian Boyal Commission
on Vegetable Products that he had passed through twenty years’
experience as a farmer in North Victoria, and proceeded as follows :
“ Having been a resident at Mildura for over twenty months, I have
had abundant opportunity of noticing the capabilities of mallee soil, and
I give it as my unqualified opinion that, with sufficient irrigation, it is
ahead of any other land in the colony of Victoria for all-round produc
tiveness. The mallee country, judging by actual results obtained in
this settlement, is just a vast forcing bed, with all the conditions filled,
A rich, free soil, a long summer, and a mild winter are what we find
here, and it only needs the intelligent application of the water to
develop the latent fertility of the soil. The vine, the olive, the orange,
the peach, the nectarine, the pear, the fig, and the apricot all seem to
have found a congenial home here. Not only are their rapidity and
luxuriance of growth unexampled, but they mature and come into
bearing at an age when, according to all horticultural canons, they
should have barely recovered from the shock of ti'ansplanting.” Con-
firmatory evidence of this favourable view of Mildura soil exists in
abundance. Mr. George Chaffey assures me that in no part of California
that he is acquainted with is there so much good soil within an area of
equal extent as may be found in the 250,000 acres of Mildura.
As to climatic conditions, those of Mildura are alleged to be as nearly
perfect as could reasonably be desired. The amount of rainfall is an
immaterial consideration where plenty of irrigation water is available
on cheap terms. In those months when the fruit is ripening, or being
prepared by sun-drying for the market, the less there is of it the better.
None at all is best of all at that time. Only let it be possible to apply
water to the roots of a vine or fruit tree jnst when and how and to what
extent is thought to be necessary, and it does not matter how warm and
dry is the air to which the fruit is exposed. The extremes of summer
heat at Mildura do not exceed those in Southern California. Fresno
would satisfy the toughest Queenslander. On the other hand, a hot, dry
atmosphere undoubtedly hastens production, and is alleged to improve
the quality of the fruit. This is a question for experts to deal with ;
but I may venture to set down here an opinion expressed by Mr. George
Chaflfey in the course of a conversation on the future markets for the
irrigation products of Australia. The particular matter we were talking
about was the possibility of securing the colossal market which would
be opened to our orange-growers in Europe, provided the difficulty of
conveying the fruit in good condition could be surmounted, and the


advantage of the reversal of the seasons thus secured. Mr, Chaffey said
he believed that with proper packing and other manageable conditions
the Parramatta orange could be carried safely; but he was absolutely
sure of the Mildura orange. The one, he explained, is grown in a
humid climate, and its frequent fate is to perish by rotting; the other
is grown in a dry atmosphere, and its natural end is to perish by drying
up, a process which begins late and goes on slowly, Mr. Chaffey
confidently anticipates that the Mildura orange will become one of the
most marketable table delicacies of Europe.
A brief glance at the means and methods employed to convert a
piece of mallee waste into a profitable orchard is necessary to a compre-
hensive idea of the pioneer irrigation “ colony.” When travelling four
years ago through the New South Wales country opposite Mildura, I
was told that the soil of the mallee belt was of excellent quality, but the
expense of grubbing was simply prohibitive of any agricultural use
being made of it. I write from memory, but I think the minimum cost
was stated at £lO per acre. In the course of the evidence already
referred to, the means adopted at Mildura were thus described by Mr.
N. B. M‘Kay
“A well-established bull mallee is a problem to the ordinary
grubbing contractor. The butt is a great flattened bulb of curly timber,
sometime eight or ten feet through. It is set firmly into the soil, and
even if all the roots were cut off, the tree would stand in its place just
the same, as the upper growth is very insignificant compared with the
base. Chopping a mallee out is an obvious impossibility, and as the
wood is full of moisture it would be an endless task to attempt burning
it out. Dynamite and rackarock have proved equally useless. Before,
or rather behind, the traction engine the difficulty disappears. Eor the
rapid removal of timber from land there is nothing equal to it. The
only preliminary trouble lies in obtaining rope and tackle sufficiently
strong to enable the power of the engines to be exerted. The cable used
for hauling out the mallee stumps at Mildura is a steel wire rope having
a breaking strain of 100 tons, and the shackles and anchoring gear are
correspondingly stout. The first operation is to cut down all the trees,
leaving the stumps about two or three feet high. The trunks and
branches are chopped up for firewood, and the leaves and litter are
raked up into heaps and burned. The traction engine, with an atten-
dant gang of a dozen men, then comes on the scene. The front end of
the engine is then moored up to a stump, and the hind wheels are choked
up with heavy billets of wood carried for the purpose. The main axle
carries a revolving drum, on which is wound the steel cable before referred
to. The engine being securely fastened forward, the cable is unwound from
the drum, and is then carried back to a stump, and the running noose
at the end is dropped over it. Then the drum is set in motion, and
when the rope straightens the stump starts up out of its resting place
and hurries towards the engine. It must come.”
Breaking up the ground is the next process. Cultivators, which
have been described as gigantic scarifiers,” tear up the soil to a depth of
from 16 inches to 20 inches without turning it over. The cultivator is
worked by two traction engines, and is passed through the ground twice,
the second time at right angles to the first. By this implement the soil


is well broken, and the air let into it the required depth. One set of
machinery will easily treat a 10-acre block in a day. Mr. T. K. Dow,
the well-known agricultural editor of the Australasian , in a paper read
before the Irrigation Conference, which was held in Melbourne under the
presidency of Mi*. Deakin, in March last, thus referred to the Mildura
system :
“It is necessaxy to distinguish between ploughing and cultivation.
The terms do not mean the same thing. It is possible to cultivate with-
out ploughing, and ploughed groxxnd is not always fully cultivated. In
recommending deep cultivation, therefoi’e, I do not necessarily speak in
favour of deep ploughing. It is well known that in many cases the
deep ploughing of new ground gives for a time unsatisfactory results.
The soil tux-ned up by the process is frequently either of infexdor quality
or requires a year or two of exposure to the sun and air before it becomes
productive. In other cases deep ploughing gives satisfactory results,
but deep cultivation without deep ploughing is recommended under all
circumstances. It is sometimes undesirable to turn up soil from a con-
siderable depth so as to bury the surface soil and place inferior soil on
the top, but it is always advantageous to cultivate deep. The object is to
provide a deep layer of cultivated soil for the support of plant life.”
Next, though often an interval of weeks or months is allowed, the
land is graded—that is, the surface is “ reduced to a series of uniform
slopes” to facilitate the even and certain use of the watex-. Then all is
ready for planting opei’ations. All through the purely agricultural work
the best authenticated methods of California are pretty closely followed.
One of these methods is sure to gain the special attention of Australian
visitors to that wonderful State. I refer to sux-face cultivation, Mr.
T. K. Dow explains and justifies it as follows :
“ The frequent stirring of the sux-face is as necessary as deep cultiva-
tion. It is necessaxy not only to provide a deep bed of cultivated soil
for the purpose of taking in a good supply of moisture, but also to keep
the surface in a fit condition to retain it. Soil in the condition of a
loose tilth consists of small particles, and these particles are surrounded
by air spaces. A surface soil of this sort is a covering which checks
evapox'ation. After a shower of rain or an irrigation, a thin crust ox-
skin is formed, and this consists of a system of minute tube-like holes
leading from the moist soil beneath to the outer air. The crust or skin
is nature’s medium for carrying on the process of evaporation.
Cultivation breaks up this medium of evaporation, and puts
in its place a covering of pulverised soil. When everything is dry, an
uncultivated soil is well-nigh as hard as a bxdck. An empty sack is
sometimes found in a field, it has lain there since harvest time, and
when it is lifted the ground beneath it is quite moist. A plank or a
heap of straw, on being removed, is in the same way found to have kept
the ground moist. Why is not the whole of the field as moist as the
covered spots ? The cause is evidently the covering. The ceaseless pro-
cess of evaporation has been going on in the field, but the sack, plank,
or straw has checked its operation on the covered portion. We cannot
cover the whole field with a sack, but by cultivation we can form a
covering that will almost equally well check evaporation.”


The result to the eye at Mildura is a charmingly clean and weedless
appearance on the part of the young orchards. Each property looks as
if it were, as indeed it is, well looked after.
Of the net result of the great Mildura experiment, so far as time has
yet disclosed it, it is impossible for visitors, whether initiated or unin-
itiated into the mysteries of vegetable growth, to speak otherwise than
in words of siucerest admiration. “No injury,” says the company’s last
report, “ has been sustained from blight or insect pests, and everywhere
the trees and vines appear in perfect health.” That simple and univers-
ally understood expression, “ perfect health,” says everything. It springs
unbidden to every visitor’s lips. Last season the first prize (£5O)
offered by the Government for the best irrigated garden orchard or vine-
yard in Victoria was awarded to Mr. A. Monnington, of Mildura, and
“ so impressed were the judges with the perfection of this orchard and
the system of irrigation obtaining therein that they furnished a detailed
statement ” of their views,
Tlie Monnington orchard is one of those which have been planted
and have been cared for by the company, that is to say, under the
personal supervision of Mr. W. B. Chaffey and his staff of imported
assistants. It is a typical plantation, differing only in an inappreciable
degree to the eyes of the non-expert from other plantations of its age.
In view of this, one is warranted in saying that Mildura is a menace to
Central Cumberland. It is a menace, indeed, to every slovenly orchard
in Australia.
Reserving the commercial prospects of the “ colony growing into
existence on the southern bank of the Murray for future discussion, and
speaking now wholly of its agricultural promise, I see no reason why it
should not rival the best and beat the average of similar enterprises in
the Western States of America. I should hesitate to give this merely
as my own opinion. I give it as that of men competent to form a tiue
comparative judgment. And if this be not an exaggerated estimate,
Mildura in the mallee belt will take rank with the best of “ cases
created and sustained by irrigation.”
Will it pay 1
That is the question of questions affecting Mildura. At the outset it
may be noted that the success of the proprietary venture is inextricably
interwoven with the success of the individual enterprise of the settleis
The Brothers Chaffey and those joined with them in the founding of the
“ colony” cannot make a huge profit at the cost of disaster to the men
whom they have led into the mallee scrub. Before the settlement has
reached such dimensions as to return the company s outlay and a fortune
besides, the question of the profitableness of intense culture under irri-
gation will have been answered decisively. Should it be answered in
the negative the progress of the undertaking will be at once arrested.
The basis of the company’s operations is one which involves the com-
mercial interests of the owner of every properly cared for vineyard or
orchard. No attempt is being made to obtain a return of the outlay
before Mildura produce has been tested in the markets. Work has been
planned on massive lines, and is being carried on in a bold and confident
temper. The expenditure can only be justified by the success of the
experiment. Should intense culture at Mildura turn out a failure the


heaviest losses will fall upon the promoters. That is how it ought to be
in all such ventures.
Speaking to an audience of Victorian irrigationists a few months ago,
Mr. Deakin said : “We must fall back upon what for a little while
must be the mainstay of our confidence, and that is, that in Western
America—a new country like our own, with labour as dear as it is here,
and markets in many places nearly as difficult to reach—our countrymen
find irrigation to be the most profitable of agricultural investments. In
all the States of the Union which I had the opportunity of visiting five
years ago, irrigation has not receded by one acre ; but in every State of
the Union, no matter what the price of labour or conditions of the
market, its area has inci’eased in a more rapid ratio year after year. If
we are to confess that we are unable to make irrigation a success in
Australia, we must first confess that our colonists are altogether inferior
to their relatives who left the mother country at the same time as
they did, and started under the same conditions in Western America.
We have as our bedrock of confidence the conviction that irrigation is as
certain to succeed in Victoria as in Colorado or California. On this
faith we rest.” In trying to form a reasonable estimate of the commer-
cial prospects of Mildura let us take Mr. Deakin’s advice and fall back
upon the achievements of irrigation in Western America. With this
purpose in view I propose to set down a number of facts and opinions
derived from authoritative sources. One of these is, “ Irrigation in the
United States, by R. J. Hinton, Special Agent in charge of Artesian
Wells Investigation, 1890, Department of Agriculture.” This is an
elaborate report prepared by order of the United States Senate Special
Committee on Irrigation and Reclamation of Arid Lands, and wherever
possible the information contained in it is brought down to so late a
date as June last. A second is a report on the fruit industry of Cali-
fornia, by General Chipman. This document was adopted, and pub-
lished by the Board of Trade of that State in November last. A third
is a series of editorial articles which appeared early in the present year
in Bradstreet’s, the well-known New York commercial journal.
According to Hinton, at a cost of 50,000,000 dollars a territory now
valued at 250,000,000 dollars has already been reclaimed in the Western
States. A considerable amount of valuable experience has of necessity
been accumulated in the attempt to put this large area of arid land to
profitable uses. But the limit of irrigation enterprise is still far distant.
The United States Senate Committee predict that at least 100,000,000
acres of land will ultimately be brought under cultivation by irrigation,
and make this broad assertion:—“ Irrigation requires unremitting
attention and high cultivation, and with such attention and cultivation
it is calculated that at any given period of ten years irrigated land will
produce from three to five times as much as land cultivated by rainfall.”
The aridity of the American lands dependent upon irrigation for profit-
able occupation, says Mr. West, the irrigation expert sent by the Vic-
torian Government to the States, and who returned to Australia by the
Alameda a few days ago, is such as few colonists have a true conception
of. “You would have,” he writes, “to go right out to the Barrier
Ranges country and strip it of its salt bush to find a counterpart of
much of Southern California in its natural condition, and of the whole of


Fresh fruits
... 8,141,500
,. 53,741,670
Dried fruits
412,480 ..
,. 19,759,140
Kaisins ...
661,660
.. 16,884,570
Canned fruits ...
... 6,707,650 .,
.. 39,281,340
Utah and Colorado. The soils, too, are in places largely impregnated
with ‘alkalis/ which rise to the surface with irrigation and kill off
vegetation, and ‘ hardpan’ causes serious saturation in others. In Utah
and Colorado one is surprised to find, with all their elaborate and costly
systems of irrigation, the farmers growing only such low-priced products
as cereals, lucerne, and potatoes.” This is a necessity imposed upon
them by the high average elevation of the agricultui'al lands above the
sea level. What amazed Mr. West in America was not the profitable-
ness of irrigation in the case of the high-priced products of California,
but the prosperous condition of the settlers in Colorado, who by this
system of culture could only raise low-priced products. And it may here
be mentioned that the Victorian expert has returned to Australia with a
conviction that wonderful as have been the achievements of irrigation in.
Western America, there is no reason why they should not be excelled in
this continent. He is of opinion that upon the whole the balance of
natural advantages is with us.
It is, however, in California, and especially in the facts relating to
the development of the fruit industry of the State, that we must look
for guidance as to the probable commercial future of Mildura and any
other settlements of a similar character which may be started hereafter.
The Brothers Chaffey came to Australia as Californian irrigationists,
and Mildura was founded in imitation, though not slavishly so, of the
Californian irrigation “ colonies.” The experience gained in that State
is of necessity at present the mainstay of the confidence of the Mildura
settlers. Speaking broadly, there is no denying the encouraging
character of the experience. “ Throughout the whole of the irrigating
States,” says Mr. West, “ but more particularly in California, where
most of the pioneering had to be done, though the ultimate results have
been great and far-reaching in their effects, there are not wanting
evidences that these havexmly be attained at the cost of great hardship
and suffering in the earlier stages of the enterprises which have made
the desert to become so productive.” But whatever these disasters were,
the splendid position in which fruit-farming and wine-growing stands in
Southern California to-day is dependent upon irrigation.
General Chipman estimates that there are now about 20,000,000
fruit trees growing in the State, and expresses himself as satisfied that
the number will be doubled within the next five years. Ihe extraordi-
narily rapid growth of the industry is, indeed, the most convincing
testimony as to its profitableness. Here are some figures which show
the shipments by rail of fruit to the East in the years 1880 and 1888.
The figures are of pounds weight:—
1880. 1888.
To these figures must be added the home consumption of a population
with an average for the period of about a million, and the shipments by
sea. During the same period the production of wine rose from
10,200,000 to 17,000,000 gallons. There is no resisting the significance


of these statements of fact. Unfortunately, none of the documents in
my possession gives the production of irrigated and non-irrigated lands
separately. In North and Central California, where there is a tolerable
rainfall, irrigation has not yet been attempted on a large scale, but in
Southern California it is the mainstay of the enterprise.
The counties of Los Angelos and Orange, says Hinton, have a popu-
lation of 150,000. “ Without irrigation not one quarter of this number
would be living there; and this in spite of the fact that those two
counties produce more than one-half of the State almost altogether with-
out irrigation; that there ai’eneaidy 90,000 acres that require no irrigation.
In the two counties the land now irrigated is about 150,000 acres, and
sustains a population of 113,000. Ten years ago the population only
slightly exceeded 30,000. Visitors to Southern California carry away a
delightful recollection of Passadena, “ the crown of the San Gabriel
Valley.” Fifteen years ago Passadena land might be purchased for 7
dollars per acre; seven years afterwards it was sold in large quantities
at from 500 dollars to 1000 dollars per acre. “ This,” says Hinton,
“ was for orchards—not city lots—orchards made possible only by a
supply of moisture for the roots of the trees during the long arid season
of the year. So with the whole of the great foothill region along the
base of the Sierra Madre range, from Tejunga and Crescenda Canada on
the west through Altadena, Sierra Madre, Lamanda Park, Santa. Anita,
Monzovia, Duarte, Ayusa, &c., on to Redlands, over the San Gorgonia
Pass into the desert at Indio, and again at Riverside and Arlington, and
places too numerous to mention. The growth has been proportionate
to the extent to which irrigation has been carried. This region was
almost worthless even for grazing purposes, and as incapable of sustain-
ing a population as the great Mojave Desert itself. Now visit it, and
you will find it the most charming region, and the most valuable land
in all California, or, for that matter, in the United States.”
Fresno County, in the San Joaquin Valley, is often quoted as one of
the most remarkable illustrations of the profitableness of irrigation in an
otherwise sterile region. Quarter of a century ago it was generally
known as the Fresno Desert. In 1870’ the assessed value of the town-
ship of Fresno was 25,500 dollars; now it is about 9,000,000 dollars.
Irrigation has made the difference. Hinton quotes a well-known real estate
operator in Fresno as testifying that “ men who will work can settle on
irrigated land, pay their 10 per cent, interest, improve the land, and
pay for it at prices ranging from 50 dollars to 125 dollars per acre
inside of four years; and that, too, on land that could not be sold for
more than 1 dollar to 5 dollars per acre, according to location, before
the irrigation system was started. The great industry of Fresno is the
production of table-raisins. No less an area than 40,000 acres has been
planted with raisin grapes, and the community is admitted to be one of
the most prosperous even in California. Thousands are living in com-
fort where scores would have starved twenty years ago.
Concerning Riverside, the most beautiful, as it is the most famous,
and perhaps the most successful, of the irrigation colonies, Bradstreet’s
publishes the following information :
“ At Riverside, the leading orange town, the owner of an orchard of
seven acres of twenty-year-old seedlings avers that last year the net


profit therefrom was 1000 dollars an acre, and this year 1200 dollars.
Groves twenty years old, however, are scarce ; few even are ten years of
age. Of gross profits, another grower says that his budded trees
yielded the third year in the orchard l - 50 dollars to the tree; the
fourth year, 3 dollars to the tree, or from 300 dollars to 375 dollars to
the acre ; eight-year-old buds 10 dollars per tree, and nine-year old buds
15 dollars per tree, or 1125 per acre, counting the fruit worth only one
dollar per box on the tree. A third man reports 40 acres of oranges
planted eight years ago, and yielding this year a net income of 12,300
dollars, and another 25 acres of oranges and lemons ten years old that
net 500 dollars an acre. For Riverside, as a whole, the following state-
ment was made before an official committee a year ago : —‘ Riverside has
3000 acres of orange orchard, a portion of which is yielding good crops, a
portion of which is yielding partial crops, and a portion is not in bearing
at all. These 3000 acres this year produced 1000 carloads of oranges
and lemons, worth on the track an average of 750 dollars a carload, o
750,000 dollars—about 250 dollars an acre. This is not picking out
sample orchards, but averaging all the orchards, whether bearing
or not.’
“ An apparently trustworthy circular published at Riverside says that
‘ the orange crop last year averaged over 200 dollars per acre for all
bearing orchards in the valley, young and old, being 220 dollars each
for 287,000 bearing orange trees in Riverside.’ The maximum annual
cost of caring for a grove five years old is stated at 25 cents a tree.
The same publication asserts that ‘ there are hundreds of acres in and
around Riverside whose net income, over all cost of cultivation, is more
than 300 dollars per acre each year, many orchards whose net yield is
over 500 dollars per acre, and at least one orchard (the oldest) whose
annual product is 1000 dollars per acre.’ These are doubtless the best
figures that could be presented, and not average statements for all the
towns which raise, or try to raise, oranges.
“ Real estate, in view of such returns, of course sometimes commands
fabulous prices. A choice grove is on the market at Riverside, for
which 3000 dollars per acre is the price asked, and 2000 dollars per
acre would be called an undervaluation. At Pomona, where there are,
all told, 1900 acres of oranges, 200 acres of lemons, 1600 acres of peaches
and apricots, and 1400 acres of prunes and nectarines, besides other-
fruits, the very best land in the valley for orange culture is worth 200
dollars per acre as a minimum price. Good land further from the centre
of the city is held at 100 dollar's to 150 dollars per acre, according to its
location.”
The Riverside orange crop this year realised 1,000,000 dollars, and
the raisin crop 500,000. Other fruits are profitably grown in large
quantities. This “ colony, it should be borne in mind, has only 6000
acres planted, but the returns are sufficient to support in the happiest
circumstances 6000 people.”
Bradstreet's estimates that an orange orchard under fair conditions,
costing (say) 2000 dollars for 10 acres, with ample water-right, and
another thousand dollars for a thousand trees, will slightly more than
pay expenses the fourth year, yield a good living the fifth, and assure a
competence thereafter. At Pomona, the “ colony” next to Ontario, this


year’s crop gave an average of considerably over 300 dollars per acre.
Prices this season, however, owing to special circumstances, have been
exceptionally high in the East, and the high profit quoted must be
looked at in the light of that fact.
Men cannot resist the evidence of their own senses. Let the most
obstinately-prejudiced anti-irrigationist in Australia spend a few weeks in
Southern California, and he will come back an enthusiastic irrigationist.
One glimpse of Passadena or Ontario or Pomona or Riverside may be
warranted to convince the most stupid agriculturist this country may at
present be afflicted with. In the presence of these marvellous plantations
and thriving communities a man cannot doubt, and does not argue ; all
he can do is believe and wonder.
So much for the experience of Western America, which for some
time to come must continue to be the mainstay of Mildura’s hopes.
Now, let us try to see how far Mildura is likely to repeat what has been
achieved in California.
We assume that intense culture is as practicable at Mildura as at
Fresno or Riverside. The same fruits can be produced, and of equal
quality. As we have said, the difference between the settlements, if
any, is pretty certain to be in favour of Australia. All the conditions
of production, including methods of tillage, &c., at Mildura, are at least
up to the California average. This narrows the comparison to one of
markets. And here we at once note a vast apparent difference. The
United States provide their fruit-growers with an immense and favour-
able home market. The American nation, numbering close upon
70,000,000, regards fruit in the household as a daily necessity rather
than as an occasional luxury. It is almost always on the table. Only
the poorest classes in a country not terribly stricken with poverty do
without it. The Commissioner of Agriculture’s estimate of the farm
value of the fruits (excluding wines) grown in the United States in 1888
was 175,000,000 dollars. Only 1,000,000 dollars worth of this total
was exported to foreign markets. In addition to this enormous con-
sumption of domestic produce about 100,000,000 dollars was spent on
foreign-grown fruits. So that the domestic producer is still at years’
distance from overfilling the home market. Not that the foreign
market is a matter of indifference to the American fruit-grower. It
cannot possibly be that. It is only a question of time when it will be
a necessity to deal with a large surplus. Even now the foreign market
is vigilantly watched. Experimental shipments are being made to
Europe ; but for the present and for some while to come it is perfectly
true that the Americans eat almost all the fruit they grow.
It may now be taken for granted that apples and oranges can be so
packed and carried as to survive the perils of the voyage to London.
There is little doubt that it will soon be possible to add grapes to the
list. Of the Muscat of Alexandria, a variety easily grown in Australia,
New York imports from 140,000 to 250,000 barrels each season from
Spain. But oranges may be placed on the markets of Europe when
they are bare of that fruit, whatever may be the result of shipping
grapes from our vineyards. The thing to wonder at is that the orange-
growers of Central Cumberland have not long ere this taken full advan-
tage of their opportunity, and it is a curious fact that we owe to a bank


manager, Mr, C. Beresford Cairnea, of Parramatta, the zeal and intelli-
gence and pertinacity which are demonstrating the profitableness of an
export trade in our most popular fruit. Mr. Cairnes’s last effort in this
direction may be referred to as throwing light on Mildura’s chance. Six
cases of oranges from the orchard of Mr. Mobbs were forwarded by Mr.
Cairnes to the manager of the Bank of New South Wales in London.
They were despatched early in August. Upon receipt of the advices of
shipment, the manager of the London bank wrote :—“ We have seen
Mr. J, Solomon, of 60, Piccadilly, who has perhaps the best retail fruit
business in London, and he has kindly promised to deal with the fruit,
and take special measures for bringing it prominently forward. The
price will of course depend upon the condition, as to which he is to
report generally and favour us with any practical hints for future guid-
ance.” It is a significant commentary on the apathy of the Central
Cumberland growers that Mr. Solomon had quite given up the idea of
any consignments coming to him direct. When the fruit arrived, the
London manager wrote :—“ The cases were opened at Mr. Solomon’s in
the presence of one of our officers, when it was found that a considerable
proportion of the oranges were bad. Mr. Solomon appeared disap-
pointed with the quality, and said he would have preferred fruit of the
navel description, carefully selected, and delivered here a month ago. I
enclose his letter on the subject. The Brazilian oranges to which he
refers have been selling at four for one shilling.” In his report Mr.
Solomon wrote: ‘‘Oranges, to be remunerative, should have been in London
at least a month earlier, when they would certainly have realised double
the amount they now can, as there are plenty of oranges coming almost
every week from Brazil of a far superior quality, size, and appearance ;
but a month earlier the Axxstralian oranges would have met such a
scarce market that they would have sold at a far higher price. Your
oranges should be sorted, and only the best sent, or at least they should
be graded, and the cases marked accordingly, as is the custom with all
oranges sent from Spain. These oranges were of a rough and what is
called second quality. I feel confident oranges from Australia would
pay well to send, but they must be received in London the first week in
August. The price of these is credited to you at 12s. 6d. per case,”
Mr, Solomon evidently thought 12s. 6d. a poor price, but one grower in
Central Cumberland buried 2000 cases in his orchard this season because
the fruit was virtually worthless in the Sydney market. If the best of
them had been carefully packed for the London market they would have
yielded a very handsome sum to the grower. The Chaffeys have already
imported the very best packing appliances from America, and it may be
confidently predicted that they will have no insuperable difficulty in
getting the Mildura orange into the markets of Europe. The reversal
of the seasons will prove an enormous advantage to Australian
orchardists. Even America is likely to be a big customer. A gentle-
man in San Francisco, writing by the Alameda on 20th September, says;
—“ If the Sydney lemons had been in our mai’ket for the past three
months, they would have brought 10 dollars (<£2) a case. There has
been a great scarcity of them. Lemons always sell well.” Mr. Goodsell,
the best authority on imported fruit in New York, assured Mr. West
the other day that it was fully expected Australia would supply the


American markets during those months when it was bare of home
produce. The ready sale which really good Australian wine meets with
in Europe need not here be dwelt upon. As to the dried and canned
goods, there is no reason for fearing that we shall be unable to meet the
world in open competition. That, anyhow, is the belief which is
sustaining the experts who are conducting the Mildura enterprise.
Labour is dearer in Australia than in most other parts of the world
where intense culture is carried on, but the amount of it that a man who
farms fifteen acres of land, which probably will be the average of the
Mildura holdings, has to pay for does not present a formidable appear-
ance in the year’s accounts. But nothing will avert disaster if the
farmer be incompetent or slovenly in his methods. “ The average
results,” says Elwood Cooper, one of the highest horticultural authorities
in California, “ from the different orchards of careful, intelligent, and
industrious fruit-growers, are what we hold out as possible for every
new cultivator who embarks in the business.”
Bishop Barry is credited with having said, before he left Australia,
that he could conceive of no nobler act of philanthropy on the part of
men of wealth than the establishment of small but permanent communi-
ties in the back country. Back country in Australia is nearly
always dry country. Permanent communities in a dry country,
which in this connection we may take to mean country with
a small and fitful rainfall, can only be established by the
aid of irrigation. At least the only exceptions to this rule are the
townships—most of them starved or starving—which are dependent
upon the irregular fortunes of the pastoral industry. But it may
reasonably be questioned whether philanthropy will ever lay the founda-
tions of one of Bishop Barry’s desirable communities. Robust settle-
ment is seldom built on charity. A basis of business is much more
satisfactory. But business does not necessarily exclude generous
feeling or patriotic purpose. Business often supplies sentiment with
opportunity. I have talked with the Chaffeys, and lam convinced that
they hope to get a good many dollars out of their irrigation enterprises,
but I am equally convinced that they have a soul that reaches far
beyond dollars. Mildura is intended to pay its promoters, and pay
them well ; but it is intended to do more than that. The Chaffeys are
sure, strong men, full of the knowledge which is power for their work,
patient in their faith, able to plan and then wait for the fulfilment of
their ideas. But an irrigation “ colony” is more to them than a com-
mercial project. When the last commercial word has been said about
it, the last word has not been said. A settlement like Mildura appeals
to the nature of a man like Bishop Barry; it also appeals to the
Chaffeys in the same way. To bring into existence a community like
Ontario or Riverside is to create a new centre of human comfort and
happiness. And the Chaffeys will live honourably in Australian
history. Long after most of the politicians of their day have been
forgotten they will be held in kindly memory.
It may be boldly claimed on behalf of successful irrigation enter-
prises of the Mildura type that they are considerable aids in building
up a civilised nation in such a country as Australia. For proof of this
we may look once more to California. “The best,” we are told, “of


the irrigator’s work in California is that close-built and prosperous
communities have been developed very rapidly.” Again: “In most
parts of the United States the tendency of population is towards the
city. Not only does the farmer’s boy leave the country to seek out the
coveted clerkship, but the farmer himself, arrived at a comfortable
affluence, is often disposed to move into town, either on the pretext of
giving the children a better schooling, or that he may engage in trade,
or because the farm labours and cares are too arduous for his years. In
California the movement is in the opposite direction. People go from
the city to the country. Some of them, possessed of wealth, education,
and refinement, seek the country for the delights nowhere else to be
found, surrounding themselves with all the elegancies of a city home.”
Let us hear how the Californian communities looked to Australian eyes.
“ I found,” writes Mr. West, “ at all of the irrigation settlements I have
yet visited, that not the least gain to the State are the elevating ten-
dencies of the work the people are engaged in. This is shown in a very
striking way by the manner in which they beautify their home sur-
roundings. It is hard to realise in driving out amongst the orchards and
vineyards that you are on the ground where the bread and butter of the
community is obtained, and not in the residence area of a wealthy city.
Every road on both sides is lined with ornamental trees. The houses
and outbuildings are of much prettier designs than ours. It is no
wonder that life amid such surroundings is attracting the best brains of
young California, and that while their large cities are not growing with
the phenomenal growth of ours, they are creating a taste for rural life in
the younger men and women which, by-and-by, cannot fail to make for
good in the development of their national life.” I can add my personal
testimony to that of my Victorian friend. Nowhere in Australia have
I seen such pleasant pictures of agricultural settlement as I looked upon
in Southern California. We have nothing like them. It is difficult, as
Mr. West hints, to resist the impression that you see before you the
splendid suburb of a great commercial city. So closely located is the
population that each “ colony” has a system of horse-tramways to supply
the convenience of inter-communication. Numerous public and semi-
public buildings in the central townships attest the presence of the
higher elements of civilisation. At night these centres are ablaze with
electric lights. The picked character of the settlers is proved by the
comparative absence of crime and rowdyism, which, indeed, are almost
unknown. There is a pervasive air of industry and respectability.
There is no poverty in the sharp, distressful sense of the term. A man
who is able and willing to work hard, and who lives honestly, is not
only surrounded with comfort, but is also in a position to contemplate
his future without fear.
Ontario, the “ colony” founded by the Chaffeys in California, was in
many respects admittedly superior to some of the older settlements of
the same class in that State. It was that superiority which attracted
and fascinated Mr. Deakin in 1885, and was thus the first cause of the
Chaffeys coming to Australia. And we may not unreasonably look to
Mildura for evidence of a desire to reproduce and excel the charms of
Ontario. The artistic feeling is an irrepressible one. Given a larger
opportunity in Australia than it had in California, and it will be sure


to assert itself vigorously. Ontario is to Mildura as an infant to a
giant, and if the former has compelled visitors to admiration we may be
sure that the latter will not fail to do so.
Already Mildura is on the way to reproduce and excel the Califor-
nian model. It is intended that in place of the mallee scrub and blue-
bush plains there shall grow up one of the most interesting and intelli-
gent agricultural communities in Australia, prospering in a settlement
which shall be a thing of beauty forever. All the building sites in the
township, priced by the company at £2O each, have long ago been sold,
and some of them are now obtaining second sales at from £5O to £l5O.
But sites have been reserved for public purposes. A post-office and a
State school have already been erected, and their architectural character
is worthy of their location. A hospital and a free library are soon to follow.
The company have arranged to light the town by electricity for twelve
months, and then hand over the plant to the shire council at cost. A
system recently perfected in America will be introduced. The plant,
providing for 30 lights of 2000 candle power each, has been ordered.
The great majority of the settlers are contenting themselves with tem-
porary residences. This is a sensible policy; commodious and
artistically-designed houses will follow when the orchards and vineyards
return a steadily-increasing profit. In a few cases, chiefly those of
well-to-do Melbourne folk, either seeking a quiet and pleasant country
retreat for themselves or to make a handsome provision for their sons,
the homesteads are of a permanent character ; and Mr. W. B. Chaffey
is building a place for himself which will be an example of wisely
expended wealth. But most of the dwellings are necessarily of a make-
shift sort, the means and energy of the people being concentrated on
the cultivation of their holdings. These will average about 15 acres
each, and holdings of this size, with all the labour to which, directly or
indirectly, they give occasion, will bring about a density of population
such as will afford ample scope for social intercourse and the other
constituents of a highly civilised life. The avenues, running at right
angles with the river, and the streets, running parallel with the river,
will ultimately show long lines of rich tree growth. Deakin-avenue,
extending from the river to the back of the settlement, a length of
eighteen miles, will probably be the pride of Mildura. Riverside folk
are as proud of Magnolia-avenue as Sydney folk are of their harbour.
The harbour is wholly a work of nature ; the avenue is a work of
human intelligence co-operating with natural forces. Magnolia-avenue
runs through Riverside for a length of seven miles, and is one of the
most beautiful drives in the world. I believe the Chaffeys have it in
their mind to develop Deakin-avenue of Mildura into a rival of
Magnolia-avenue of Riverside. It is three chains wide, and has two
18 feet footways, two 60 feet carriage-roads, and a central avenue
intended to enclose a tramway. Several lines of handsome trees will
abundantly supply the beauty and shade which are desired. Of course
it must take years to bring even the first half-dozen miles of the avenue
to perfection. But we have no need to wait before we can understand
and appreciate the Chaffeys’ broad purpose. That is to build up a
settlement so rich in attractiveness as not to be forsaken by fruitgrowers
when they attain to a comfortable independence.


One of the future institutions of Mildura is worthy of especial
mention. At Ontario the Chaffeys devoted land to the value of more
than £20,000 to the establishment of an agricultural college, which is
now in full operation. At Mildura they have devoted one-fifteenth of
the whole irrigable area to a similar purpose. Every fifteenth block is
reserved as an endowment for the college. If Mildura should fulfil its
promise, this educational institution will probably become one of the
most wealthy and famous of its kind in the Southern World. In
addition to professorial assistance the students will have around them a
vast object lesson in intense culture. Scientific agriculture will be
expounded under the happiest of conceivable conditions.
Upon landing at Mildura —and, by the way, the wharfage is
miserably inadequate, if it may be accurately described as wharfage at
all —one of the visitor’s earliest and most favourable impressions is that
of the very high average character of the settlers. Not in any other
agricultural settlement in Australia is it possible to see such a fine lot of
young fellows as come down to meet their friends should the boat
arrive after the day’s work is done. And that first impression is
extended and strengthened with a wider and more accurate knowledge
of Mildura. A considerable proportion of the farmers are young men
of good family and high education. All the British universities are
represented. Many a young man has been sent to Mildura to qualify
as an agriculturist instead of qualifying for one of the already over-
crowded professions. Some of the best known names in Melbourne are
to be met with in Mildura. The money which has to be spent in
qualifying a briefless barrister or a patientless doctor will, with the young
fellow’s hard work added, provide a permanent home and income in the
irrigation “ colony.” The country gentleman in such cases will have a
long advantage over the city gentleman. What is the prospect before
the average clerk in a bank, an insurance office, or a State department
in comparison with that which rewards the young owner and worker
upon a2oor 30 acre orchai'd or vineyard at Mildura 1 The one is a
mere drudge all his days, everlastingly engaged in the cruel task of
reconciling his social status to his salary; the other, if industrious,
intelligent, and ambitious, is always his own master, and soon takes up
the pleasant position of a well-to-do member of a well-to-do community.
Refei’ence has already been made to the fact that in California the
movement of the finest class of young citizens is not from the country
to the metropolis, but from the metropolis to the country. When I
was in that state, in June last, it was complained that San Francisco
had not kept pace with the general growth of the State. Would it not
be a sign of healthy growth if Sydney and Melbourne were unable to
keep pace with the growth of country settlement in New South Wales
and Victoria 1
These young fellows at Mildura take the “ collar” well. They have,
I was repeatedly assured, plenty of true British “grit.’ Their trained
intelligence enables them to learn quickly, and they do not shirk
manual toil. So far they have given an excellent account of themselves.
As a rule settlers of this class are not without capital—enough to
purchase the land and discharge the cost of clearing, breaking, and
planting. Some of them, however, have to go out in the “ gangs f


that is, the men employed by the company in carrying out the large
amount of work involved in the development of the “ colony.” I asked
Mr. W. B. Chaffey whether an intelligent, industrious (so-called)
working man who had enough money to pay his deposit, and for the cost
of clearing and breaking his land, could get along afterwards IHe
replied that there was now in the settlement a sprinkling of such men,
who were managing to get through their difficulties very well indeed.
They work in the “ gangs,” and in spare time on their plantations. But
the majority of Mildura people have not to depend altogether on their
own resources of physical strength. All are hopeful. “ I don’t think
there is one dissatisfied man here,” said Mr, W. B. Chaffey. “If you
searched the world through I don’t think you could find two men more
capable of carrying out the Mildura settlement than the Chaffeys,” said
Mr. Williams, the president of the Shire Council, and the principal
opponent of the Chaffeys in matters of local administration. “ The
rapidity with which the land has been settled, and the achievements of
the Messrs. Chaffey is pushing on the construction of the necessary
channels and waterworks to h’rigate the country, are something that I,
who am thought to be sanguine in these matters, never expected to see,”
said Mr. Deakin, the other day. Three years’ better work has never-
been done in the establishment of any enterprise in Australia.
If I have any regret about Mildura, any adverse criticism to make,
it is that instead of concentrating their effort upon one gigantic estate at
the extreme north-west corner of Victoria the Chaffeys and their
co-workers did not divide their energy between half a dozen settlements
situate at different points in the course of the Murray. Mildura will
become a centre of civilisation. It will be death to the semi-savagery
of back-block life for a hundred miles around. It will help to make
much more than its own territory habitable. But it is only a question
of time when other Milduras will be started. Said Mr. George Chaffey
a couple of years ago : “ There are a million and a-half acres of vine-
yards and fruit gardens in California now, and fruit is a better price
than when the first acre was watered. I expect to see a million and a-
half acres tilled on the Murray before I die, and have not the slightest
doubt about the max-ket.” Let us hope that the irrigation “ colonies,”
which in the future may draw their life from the Murray, will not all
be located on the southern bank of the Murray. Let us hope that the
present criminal waste of water in various parts of New South Wales
will soon cease. It has not been my purpose in these papers to enter
upon a discussion of the immense possibilities of irrigation enterprise in
the mother colony. But hundreds of thousands of families could be
prosperously settled if an irrigation policy were brought to bear upon
our dry country. We have abundance of soil that will grow anything,
and millions of tons of water of which no fertilising use is made.
Victoria is the best part of ten years ahead of us in State irrigation
works, and nearly hall that time ahead of us in the creation of a dense
settlement like those which are the glory of Southern California. How
long is the stupid policy of wasteful inactivity to be continued 1 WLen
are we to make the new departure in agriculture ?
I began these papers by quoting a passage from the address delivered
by Mr. Deakin at the Irrigation Conference held in Melbourne in


March last. I conclude them by quoting another passage from the same
admirable deliverance;—
“ What stimulates and strengthens us most is not the prospect of
material prosperity which irrigation promises, excellent as that is, but T
feel sure that those who espouse the cause most ardently, and you
yourselves, when you adopt it and make it your own, will support
it, chiefly because you believe that in introducing irrigation you are
aiding in the enfranchisement and elevation of the agricultural popula-
tion. That is an aim worth striving for indeed, to place the agriculture
of this country in a position to employ trained intelligence in its work,
and to have that intelligence fairly remunerated for its exertions ; to
see the present regime under which the farmer lives in comparative
idleness at certain times of the year, and at other times toils in com-
parative slavery, supplanted by a regime in which there is an even, not
excessive, need for labour all the year round. The isolation of the
cultivator and his family will then be removed, and with it many of
the disadvantages of life in the bush. We shall then see the current of
population flowing back from the towns to the country. The preference
will be given to rural employment by men who, exercising a wise
judgment, sufcceed in obtaining in the country the social and intellectual
advantages of town life, and obtain them without those injurious
influences which unfortunately appear where masses of men are con-
gregated together. It is this aspiration —than which I know none
higher in politics—of having our agriculturists raised above the con-
tingencies of climate, and enabled to win the fair reward of their labour
in all seasons, which gives dignity to the irrigation cause. Beyond the
magnificent prospect which opens out to us of material wealth for the
individual, and national wealth for the community, we have this higher
aim of adding to those higher treasures of the State the manliness and
independence of its citizens.
Reprinted Jrom the Argus, Melbourne, \3th, 20th, 27 th December , 1890,
and 3rd January, 1891.
MILDUBA REVISITED
By Telemachus.
After two years ! I saw it first after one year. Who cares to
remember it as it was in the days before this ‘‘ experiment”—the one
house and the few huts by the river, and the desolate, drought-stricken,
heart-breaking wilderness all around? And, save and except this
one redeemed spot, all around still! We will try to forget all that for
a time; we will look around on the rising Australia in the freshness of
the early morning. A wonderfully beautiful morning, clear and—
though very near December - —cold. The whistle sounds sharp and loud
by the rivex*, ’tis a call to everybody to rise and to labour. And a good


call to come out in the broad balcony of the great new coffee palace and
look around. At the river first, the mighty, beneficent, long-neglected
deity of all this land ; a shining steely blue in the morning ; a crescent,
whose convex is to the colony, seen along four or five miles, ending
apparently then in the gum forest, but only turning, as we know, to
enfold other areas, embracing in turn the shore of either colony. The
box flats are still green, but on the high banks the native grass is white,
and the red sand is driving. A broad red road runs along the fore foot
of the colony here, all too close before this great new coffee palace, next
to which—a bright and happy contrast —is seen the garden-enclosed
offices of “ the company, 5 ’ A flower garden set all about, a broad
verandahed cottage, before which, centred in a perfect lawn, a fountain
plashes, musical and cool. A garden of innumerable flowers—of stock,
and phlox, and pink, and pansy, and rose, and lily, and verbena, and
poppy, and oleander, and all varieties of fuchsias, and geraniums, blazing
beds of mingled colours beside the dark-green grass, and within, the
forming cypress walls. It is the eye of beauty of the settlement, and
fashioned so with wise intent.
About this little office, at 9 o s clock in the morning, there is a pe-
culiar muster. It is like a bush wedding ; it is like a bush funeral; it
is not like either. It is not, indeed, like anything one has ever seen
in the bush before—starts for race-meetings, and hunts, and man-fights,
and dog-fights included. There is a muster of near a dozen traps, four-
horse and three-horse and two-horse, providing accommodation enough
for all the passengers by the steamer and the dozen odd folks who have
arrived at the place by other means. And when all are seated the usual
bi-weekly procession begins; for, under escort of a member or repre-
sentative of the firm all these people are driven out and about over the
whole settlement. They are regarded as possible buyers, and it is not
proposed to ask any of them to buy without full inspection. Up they
tumble, therefore, a queer nondescript party ; mature men of means,
and smart youths of ambition from the city, farmers of the old sort,
with the seal of much hardship set visibly on them. Visitors from the
Old World, young farmers from England, and tea-planters from Ceylon,
with one or two veteran squatters from the other side, curious to have a
look at the new fight with the old wilderness whose malignant powers
drove so many of them back ruined and despairing.
And what go they out for to see 1 Let us face inland; face Victoria,
as it may be said, from the river. First, one is impressed by a vast
space of cleared country, bounded inland by the mallee fringe, an arc
whose chord is about five miles in length. All within this may be
described as the won area. It has been won from the wilderness.
And wherefore 1 First, we may say, for the well-disposed dwellings of
men. Permanent prosperity only comes from the establishment of
comfortable homes, and homes radiate naturally from a centre. Un-
naturally and viciously they too often focus on a centre, pouring in,
compressing, polluting, grinding down a fair and good humanity to
veriest devil 5 s dust and grains and seed of shame. May it never be so
in our Mildura. And, indeed, it never will. It is otherwise ordered
from the beginning. And yet there needs must be a town here, for
here must abide permanently the administrative officers of the great


undertaking; here must be factories and schools and colleges ; here
stores and banks and shops, with all the homes all their managers and
attendants will require. Already, it may be said, such a town is begun,
strongly, vigourously begun. And well begun, also 1 We will see.
While all those others go on their drive about the country, we will look
a little about the town—the town of three years’ growth. And when
we begin to speak of its magnitude, do not seek to compare it with any
digging townships. This place is established on planting, not digging.
It is the making, and not the sack of a world. Mining work is all of
exhaustion. Irrigation is all replenishment. Rarely, also, does the
digger regard himself as an established man, while every settler on an
irrigation block must be regarded as “come to stay.”
You see at a glance that the projectors of the colony have come to
stay. Their offices are solid-built, ample, and in every way adapted to
the exigencies of the climate. Moreover, there is a residence, nearly
complete, for Mr. W. B. Chaffey, which suggests Toorak, and puts
everything hitherto raised on back block holdings, or even Murray or
Murrumbidgee freeholds, utterly in the shade. It is a stately brick
mansion, built so as to make life enjoyable, and surrounded with garden
grounds, which in a year’s time will blaze with flowers. In an acre of
perfect lawn a fountain will plash coolly and musically, and all around
will be miles of orchard and vineyard abloom. Not far away also are
the solid foundations of the Agricultural College, which should next
year be well advanced. The post-office is neat enough also, though squat
in appearance, and the school is not large enough by half. The
Wesleyans have builded for themselves a very neat church. Why the
elder churches lag one knows not. They find a preaching-place in the
public hall. They ought to be establishing for themselves permanent
homes. One thinks, with regret in this connection, of the pleasure our
old friend Bishop Moorhouse would have had in witnessing this
fulfilment of his prophecy, of how he would have gloried in it, and how
his trumpet tones would have rung through Australia and the world
after a visit in this third year of progress. But Anglicanism has no
church here as yet, only a kindly but very sickly pastor making zealous
but necessarily ineffective efforts to do a strong man’s duty.
And as to provision for the natural man. First there is the coffee
palace, a substantial brick building with accommodation for forty-five
folks, shortly to be doubled. And hither and thither round about a
good many boarding-houses of varying grades. They are architecturally
peculiar, perhaps, but still have more of the elements of permanency
than the old hash-house of the diggings. Stores and shops are also
numerous enough, and the most notable amongst them—that of Messrs.
Williams and Yule—is a fine substantial two-story brick building.
When the settlement was in its earliest infancy, Mr. Williams brought
down his stores and stacked them on the river bank. ’Twas something
like burning the boats; but he has every reason to be satisfied with the
ship, having in those few brief years grown to a position of competency.
He was alone in the beginning, but there are many worthy competitors
now—a half-dozen well-stocked general stores, and shops of all sorts,
from the barber’s to the doctor’s. If there is lack of any sort, ’tis of
good town dwellings. So far, say the settlers, we have been too busy to


make any provision of this sort. All our energies and all our efforts
have been expended in other ways. And yet the one or two who have
built wink contentedly when asked about returns. It will not take
them many years to get all their capital back in rent. It would not
take any enterprising builder, with capital, long to literally build
himself up a competency. For scoi’es of people want houses. Every-
thing is taken immediately the foundations are in, and matrimonial
business increases at an unprecedented rate. Building must go on, and
those who pioneer in that way will not be amongst the least fortunate
of the Mil dura settlers.
Now let us move abroad a little out of the township, away from the
river, and amongst the working pioneers of the colony. Mr. M‘Kay,
proprietor and editor of the Cultivator newspaper, and a pioneer
irrigationist and fruitgrower in Victoria, volunteers to be my guide. I
started on a somewhat similar excursion two years ago in company with
Mr. W. B. Chaffey. That was a bad year. The iron hand of the
drought seemed to have gripped everything, and to have squeezed out
all the sap of life. The plains were bare as the ocean beach, and hot as
rocks that have roasted all day long in the sun. Dead carts were coming
in with the reeking hides of perished sheep; and the bullocks of the
channel contractors were long, lank, and thin, and exceeding pitiful to
behold. A few of the very earliest settlers were clamouring for water,
and the pumps were not yet fixed. It was a dreary drive, and a very
strong faith was required to realise the splendid future which was even
then dawning.
We start now from the verandah of our coffee palace, and we drive
away past the new brick Custom-house, the clatter and bang and whirr
and roar of the great machinery shops sounding just below. We pass
the villa sites—all sold, though not yet tilled or occupied—and enter
immediately on a series of orchards and vineyards and orangeries and
gardens. There is the lemon patch of the Rev. R. Johnson Smith, of
Wentworth. Then, amongst its trees and flowers, Mr. Appelby’s neat
adobe house. Next, well tilled and luxurious, the 25-acre vineyard of
the late Mr, Eric Farquharson, A sad association this. There are some
amongst us who followed that gallant young rider to his grave not long
ago. There are many who knew him as a bright and genial companion
and enterprising colonist, and who hoped to have him as a neighbour
through all the colony’s development. Further along is Messrs. Irving
and Beecher’s plantation of apricots, oranges and vines—24 acres in all—
and beyond a neat gate and fence, the newly-established home of Mr.
F. G-. Hodges, which we needs must visit.
Mr. Hodges has already a home well worthy of the name. No hut
or square-built cottage on a half-grubbed paddock, but a dainty little
house built all of the native pine, with verandahs on three sides, and
quaint fantastic gables here and there, with a tower above the roof
reached by an outside staircase, on the top of which is a cool airy
smoking-room, from which is a view of some thousands of acres of fast
forming plantations. Within, this dainty place is tastefully lined with
polished pine, and furnished and ordered in a fashion that indicates
unmistakably the presence of the wise housewife. It is indeed a
comfortable home, most pleasantly situated and surrounded. And what


is going to support it] We walk through the grounds with Mr. Hodges.
“And first,” says he, “let me explain to you that not one tree you see
x’ound about here was planted before October last year. You see here
but fourteen months’ growth.”
Fourteen months’ growth ! We are amongst the vines now. Four-
teen months’ growth ! Are we dreaming ] Let us pause for a moment.
Let us look carefully at one of these vines, and we will certainly choose
one of the best. It is a good stout bush, not staked after the fashion of
our ordinary Victorian vineyards, but growing from a stalk cut almost
close to the ground. It has in all nine shoots; they average 2 feet 6
inches in length, and we count on them twenty-one bunches of grapes.
There is no mistake whatever about it. We verify the date of the
planting. In mid-October 1889 that particular vine was planted. In
November 1890 it gives promise to yield fully 20 lbs. of ripe fruit. It
is the best of a dozen; others have 7, 10, 13, and 16 bunches; but the
whole area is in bearing, and will this year yield more profit than will
pay for the whole cost of tilling the soil and harvesting the crop.
Beyond the grapes are apricots and peaches of the same age, and showing
the same phenomenal growth. They will not bear much fruit this
year, indeed it is not desirable that they should. Let them make their
summer and autumn’s growth of wood, and next year we may look for a
substantial crop. Prunes and oranges beyond the peaches look also well.
Not quite so well, perhaps, as grapes and apricots. The prunes are
naturally of a slower growth, and the oranges do not make much head-
way till they get a good grip of the soil, and become inured to the
sometimes nipping or scorching winds. Another year, however, will
bring them into profit also. Immediately about the house a varied
orchard is set, fruit trees of all sorts, with almonds and olives amongst
them, and for beauty’s and shelter’s sake pine and currajung, and palm
and cypress, a buffalo lawn within, and some chains of marginal flower
beds. Outhouses, stables, elevated water tanks for house supply, are all
well ordered as can be. And all by-and-by will be covered with many
varieties of creepers.
“ And you intend to live here, Mr. Hodges, and see no difficulty in
the way of living well out of the returns of your land 1”
“I do intend to live here, and maybe to die here,” is the reply. “I
worked long at my business in Melbourne, and found my health
decaying, and fortune increasing at a by no means fabulous X’ate. I
have made my investment here, and for evexy acre I plant properly and
till pei’fectly I expect to net at least £2O per annum. I see nothing to
prevent me doing so. I have px'oved the soil and the system, I have
studied our home markets and the markets of the world, and I do not
believe that our supply will ever ovex’take the demand.”
As Mr. Hodges says, so say they all, as we shall see by-and-by.
A turn up the road brings us to a broad area of x - aisin vines iix their
first year, and a gentleman walking in a paddock beyond halloas us
back, for we are di’iving into a cul de sac, and must needs tuxui about to
the main road agaixx, for we would dx’ive to the residency of Mr. Alex.
Crossthwaite, J.P., who had just pitched his tent whefi I came here
two years ago, Octobex - , 1888, not a mallee root grubbed, not a sod
turned then. We had taken a glimpse at the steam cultivators tearing


up Mr. Call’s block opposite ; we came round a pretty dense clump of
mallee, and there was Mr. Crosstbwaite at his tent door.
“ This is the place. This is Mr. Crossthwaite’s.”
“ Nonsense, it must be another Mr. Crossthwaite.”
“ There is but one, I assure you.”
Do you ask why this incredulity 1 Then I will briefly explain.
There is clearing and planting far around now on every side. There is
a broad luxuriant orchard and vineyard close before. There is a neat
verandahed cottage, surrounded with flowers. There is a lucerne
paddock, with a rank green growth full two feet high, and a stack of
oaten hay on a patch of stubble scarce an acre in extent. There is a rose
hedge about the garden with innumerable blooms. And there is a
gentleman working with a horse-hoe amongst the fruit trees.
We walk down through the trees and discover Mr. Crossthwaite,
sure enough, working away as every other gentleman on this settlement
works, full of industry and health and contentment and hope. His
grapes are in bearing ; he will make a good return from them. His
apricots and peaches will supply him this year with more truit than he
can use. His cows and his horses are rolling fat, and all fed from the
patch of lucerne, while the haystack will provide all that is necessary
for tlie winter. Now, surely this is grand development, magnificent
return, and its comfort and beauty and profit must needs increase with
every year.
Good-bye, Mr. Crossthwaite; we will leave you at your healthy
labour, and just across the road look in on Messrs. Call and Sharland,
both busv amongst their trees. Mr. Call is a son of our old Melbourne
P, M., who retired so recently after a long life of laborious service. He
came to Mildura here in the early days, and made the healthy and
honourable resolve to turn his back on the city, and make a place for
himself with the labour of his own hands. He has a mate, Mr. Sharland,
architect and settler, and the two are working hard, lightly enough clad
in flannels, but grimy and hot, as can be imagined. They are cleaning
around the stems of the house orchard trees, and one must needs look
curiously at the light and useful tools they use. No heavy mattocks or
grubbing hoes or cumbersome blacksmith-made articles, but neat, light,
artistic things, keen in the blades as razors, cutting through everything
with the least possible expenditure of energy, and causing none of that
terrible lassitude which stamps the ordinary labourer working with the
ordinary Australian tool after the ordinary Australian day’s work.
Make work easy, agreeable, as well as profitable. That seems to be one
of the salutary mottoes of Mildura, and it should be adopted throughout
the land. For so begins the golden age whereof the poet speaks—
“ When gold and gems adorn the plough,
To peaceful arts shall envy bow.”
One of the most hopeful signs of the times, indeed, is the enlistment
of some of the best of the young men in Australia in this new enterprise.
Every gate in Melbourne, we know, is thronged with suitors. Every
market of medicine and law and commerce and civil service absolutely
overflows. Hundreds rush for every city billet, and when it is won it
affords the barest exigencies of genteel life, while here a hundred pounds
.• -1 'M 1


for a start, and three or four years of hard, but by no means killing or
heart-breaking labour, will ensure permanent competency; enough to
live, to marry, to settle on, and useful and pleasant occupation for a
good and industrious life. But let no man imagine that there is any
room for idlers or sharks of any sort. Neither the one nor the other
would be tolerated. The genius of the settlement from the first is
towards industry, but it is admitted that industry from the first should
have its fair complement of enjoyment in life, and ultimately its proper
reward of permanent success.
So move we on once more, and now, without indicating any particu-
lar road or locality, I should like to say that in the drive we passed two
or three places where mistakes had been made—the allotments of wrong-
headed or unteachable or fearfully conceited folks, who would carry out
their own ideas; who did not believe in perfect culture; who would
make haste towards great results; and who are now left stranded in
bogs or deserts of failure or despair. You may see a 20-acre paddock of
wheat all crab-holes and sand hummocks, on which inches of water have
been poured to waste, and which has not returned half as much as Mr.
Crossthwaite’s perfectly-tilled two acres. You may see also orchards
languishing, sick as the neglected trees about Brighton, or through some
of the sub-divisions of the shire of Moorabbin—all the results of mis-
management or laziness, or too much haste. Success here depends solely
on constant, persistent, resolute effort following effective teaching. And
there are lots of competent teachers in the settlement. The Cultivator is
always teaching, the Messrs. Chaffey are always willing to give advice,
and, indeed, every patch they till for absentee settlers is in itself a
lesson, and all so easy to learn.
Mr. Monnington’s plantation is perhaps the best of these contract-
worked blocks. It took the champion prize for the best irrigated
orchard in Victoria last year, though I think it may have to yield the
palm to Mr. Hodges’ in the next competition. For always on the spot
and always busy, Mr. Hodges puts on those finishing touches which are
lacking even in the most faithful and efficient contract work.
Mr. Jamieson is the next settler at home. And Mr. Jamieson is a
settler of a first-class sort. Young, strong, athletic, with means, educa-
tion, and knowledge of the world, he brings to Mildura all. the elements
of success, and, according to good Scotch instincts, settles down to work
steadily towards competency. Forty acres have been secured by Mr.
Jamieson, and on them he is working himself and employing labour, and
fashioning and perfecting a little estate which in a few years’ time will
both delight and astonish all visitors. Regarding the life of his beasts
first, Mr. Jamieson has built a thoroughly good stable. Appreciating
the necessity and blessedness of pure water in such a climate, he has put
down a concrete tank, and connected it by a filter bed with the irrigation
channel. It is a very simple and cheap process, and it secures an
abundant supply of cool and pure water. The water is raised to a couple
of tanks by a pump, and immediately beneath the tanks, forming the
stand, in fact, is a capacious bathroom. The dwelling-houses are small,
just lean-to places which will be set up behind the home of the future.
For everything here points to tlie establishment of a home. The garden
is already planted, the vines are creeping along the trellises; another


year or two and here will be as fairly surrounded a house as you shall
find in broad Australia. Ask Mr. Jamieson if he is content with his
prospects here, and the answer is a deep and genial “ Aye,” which might
perhaps in merry moments be supplemented with “ An’ what for no !”
Mr. H. A. Isard’s example is perhaps more instructive than that of
Mr. Jamieson, for Mr. Isard had spent many and many a year of labour
on the bleak Tragowel Plains. He had been industrious, thrifty, enter-
prising, but yet the exceeding difficulties of cultivation, and the tardiness
with which any system of irrigation was introduced, marred or stultified
his best efforts. He came to look at Mildura two years ago, and he can
almost sit under the shade of his own fig-tree now. Incredible as it may
seem, there are in Mr. Isard’s garden fig-trees, planted only eighteen
months, whose crowns of foliage are now full 4 feet broad and 4 feet
from the ground. You can see at a glance, moreover, that Mr, Isard is
a good farmer. Fences, gates, roadways, all trim and well ordered, and
every scrap of refuse thrown into a pit, where, without any offence, it is
transferred speedily into valuable manure. Mr. Isard lives “out on
Seventeenth-street.” So they describe things here, Americanising them-
selves very fast, Ido not know exactly what street we are “ on” here
at Mr. Jamieson’s, It may be Second or Forty-second. Nor do I
altogether approve of the fashion of numbering streets this way. It is
convenient, perhaps, but if some scheme of naturally associated ideas had
been carried out it would have been just as easy to find the road, and
far more pleasant to the ear. And where the habit of properly naming
streets prevails, what a chance is there to mollify any turbulent or
cantankerous councillor or critic of public affairs. “ Oh, give him a
street and quieten him.” Many a one in other towns has been quietened
in that way.
Following this street by Mr. Jamieson’s we should come on to a
little colony of tea planters, or, rather, perhaps of ex-tea planters,
emigres from Ceylon, who have all taken up considerable blocks, and are
busy with clearing and preparation for planting; and four miles farther
along lie the broad plantations of Lord Ranfurly, in fine condition now,
but not showing quite the growth which might have been expected, for
last year, in the absence of Lord Ranfurly, a little neglect, or very
foolish thrift of necessary labour, permitted the weeds to get up and the
trees to receive a check, and practically a year to be lost. The whole of
the plantations were then turned over to the care of the company, and
now all the broad area is as finely tilled as a Portarlington onion-field,
and almost without a weed. Next year it will make a brave show, and
may be expected to yield a very considerable profit.
We drive home by Deakin-avenue, the main channel of the settle-
ment, and far on the hill we pass the vineyard of Mr, Murray, a
gentleman of fortune, very well known in our Western district, who is
growing the grape with intent to make wine. “ Wine,” says Mr.
Murray, “ must become a main staple of the land, and I will be the
pioneer of wine-making here.” A good many acres of Mr. Murray’s
grapes are already in bearing, and he has built a cellar to deal with the
year’s crop. I shall expect in a very few years to see vineyards about
Mr. Murray’s cellars broad and luxurious, and far more prolific than
any in the famous Rutherglen district, and see no reason whatever why


they should not return as noble revenues. And next there is the block
lately sold by Mr. Gordon to Mr. J. Desailly, one of that well-known
old squatting family whose history is almost contemporaneous with that
of Australian pastoral development. Mr. Gordon was one of the
pioneers of the settlement, and has already reaped some harvest. He
came down with the Messrs. Chaffey in the earliest days, put his
shoulders manfully to the hardest and roughest work of pioneering, took
up a block of land, cleared and planted it, eventually became general
superintendent of the work of the settlement, and now very lately has
taken as a wife a daughter of our chief Railway Commissioner, and
returns to Mildura to take up his old work, invest his very considerable
gains in the old way, and, in association with two or three kinsfolk and
acquaintances, to develop a great fruit-growing estate. He laid the
foundation of competency by three years of work here. He settles
down now with an absolute assurance of adequate income, and an
insurance against any contingencies of life available within three years.
It is open to any other young men of energy and pluck to go out and do
likewise.
We have arrived here on the outskirt of the town by a quarter past
five, while it is yet mellow afternoon. The day has been warm, and far
away to westward lies a great cloud-bank, which betokens a storm-burst
later on. And near and far now along all the roads of the settlement
from the clearings and the plantations we see men and horses returning
from their labour. Hundreds of them—the company alone employs
300 horses—all making into the stable, for the day’s work is elided.
Ended! Yes, friend farmer, whose ploughmen will be toiliflg and
moiling for two hours yet, whose horses will be munching their
provender while the man is eating his supper by the light of a candle
on a summer’s night. It is absolutely true, it is the way of the settle-
ment. These folks, who certainly cannot be accused of encouraging
laziness, or of being satisfied with any half-task in any day, consider
that ’twixt the hours of seven and five, man and horse can do their
duty. The man has attended to his beasts, and finished his own supper
by six, and has, as is his right, two hours of good daylight to use as he
deems best for his own profit or pleasure. The ploughman if he chooses
can dress himself decently, go down to the village into the athletic or
concert room, play his game at billiards or draughts, or take a walk
with the girl of his heart (why not 1), and get back to his bed by ten,
feeling better and more manly and hopeful, that his day has had a
pleasant and reasonable ending. Or, if determined to make his way in
life, he can put in two hour's’ work on his 10-acre block, and so prepare
for the time, not very remote, when he can confidently take a wife to
himself and quit the service of any master but himself for ever. The
wages paid to these men is about 7s. per day. They pay their own
cook and provide their own victuals, after the fashion of shearers, and
the cost per week averages about 125., so that at least 30s. a week
remains as wages. Is it a matter for surprise that there are a fine set of
labourers in Mildura, smart, capable, steady, rattling along with their
work through the day as if they had heart in it, and whistling cheerily
as they come in to tea, knowing that pleasure and opportunity are
ahead of them 1


Be it remembered, also, that there is no publicbouse or drinking
saloon for their impoverishment or demoralisation. The company is
strong on this point. You may argue against it in the abstract, if yon
will, as an infringement of natural liberty and an attempt at sumptuary
legislation, but the fact stands that many a score of men in Mildura
now are well-to-do and thriving, small capitalists, or actual or prospective
landholders, who, if publichouses had been permitted, would have been
down in the dregs of poverty and misery, or humping their swags back
through the mallee. Liquor, of course, is obtainable in Mildura. There
is, indeed, a club for those who desire and are qualified for such
accommodation. But no drinking bars. I thought maybe the work-
men of the settlement would resent this, and be disposed to ask angrily,
“Why should the ‘swells’ have their club while the ‘poor man’ is
denied his beer]” But having sounded some half-dozen of them, I
began to understand that such notions were altogether wrong. These
men one and all said they had no desire to be led into temptation.
Remove the prohibition and there would be a dozen drinking-bars in
Mildura within a month, and “ where would we be then ]”
It is an oldish man who makes me that reply. Many an old spree
has seamed and scarred his face, but his eye is bright and his hand is
steady now. He has an account with the bank and an interest in the
colony. Open a bar, and within three months all he is possessed of will
be signed over to the publican, and the most of his next week’s screw
mortgaged on the slate. And he is one of a hundred of his class, which
is by no means confined to the men who labour only with their hands.
Evening finds me the guest of my old friend, Mr. M‘Laren,
engineer-in-chief of the colony, settled down here in a good house,
tastefully built of the mallee pine, and surrounded by a garden in which
all manner of trees and flowers flourish after the fashion of Mildura.
The night is sultry, and there is a hush in the air which forebodes a
storm. About nine it comes, the old familiar duststorm. The black
cloud suddenly leaping half across the sky, the red dust whirling, driv-
ing, blinding, choking, penetrating everywhere, lightning flickering,
thunder growling, and all the trees by the river roaring. It is like a
last desperate onset of the old defeated malignant genius of the land. A
mad, deafening charge. But even as those fierce but silly and petulant
attacks of other sort in other places which are still occasionally made, it
passes over and with very little harm. Midnight sees the full moon
riding calm and clear in mid-heaven, and the town of enterprise and
labour is all asleep.
One asks, of course, what do you think about the locusts in Mildura]
And the answer is, “ Don’t care to figure on locusts till they come.”
There is another invasion, however, which already attracts a little
attention. It is of “ school maims.” “ Preserve us !” says a douce and
thoughtful Scotch settler; “no mortal man can see the end of it.”
And indeed that is very true, and may apply to his own case as to
others. The disguise of the school marm may be very safe and conve-
nient for the sort of army he dreads. “What business,” say hundreds
of eligible young women, “ have hundreds of young men with means
and prospects to be forming for themselves, even temporarily, a bachelor
colony out there] Up, guards, and at them ! and without delay,”


And so they come on, and there are about as many kindergartens in
Mil dura now as in Melbourne, and several more talked about whenever
the necessary house accommodation can be obtained. May the good
women reap the fitting reward of their enterprise. And I must admit
that they work well. Fancy a good lady almost fresh from the city
meeting one at the coffee palace. Her home is not there, she has a tent
pitched two miles away on her own ten-acre block. She may not,
perhaps, go on with the school teaching. Is not her life lonely,
dangerous 1 Oh, no, she has good neighbours close by, and 11 Mildura
is not like other places, you see; there are no loafers or drunken men
here.”
There is a world of assurance to the feminine mind in that state-
ment, and encouragement, I suppose, comes from another otherwise
made. It was a substantial, mature housewife who was speaking.
Was she content with all her circumstances 1 “ Indeed, I ought to be.
I brought five daughters down two years ago, and I have married three
already, and have not much doubt about the other two.”
The man who does not loaf, and who does accumulate substance,
thinks naturally of matrimony, but against the loafers and the wasters
they will have to keep watch, even on Mildura. I remember one
morning standing by our verandah while the muster was forming about
the offices, and two fellows, who, unless their looks belied them, were
real bad, “ loafed along,” A detective would have “ set” them forth-
with. To my surprise, when a representative of the firm arrived, to
these two creatures appeared a clergyman. He took them in and
introduced them, beseeching for them, doubtless, some favour or
employment. It was like a petty introduction of the “ General ”
Booth business. It should be fought against, resisted at every point.
The seed-bed of new life is no place for the matured weeds of the old
wilderness, which surely is broad enough, if only slightly worked, for
the purgation and reform of them all. It is really a mean and dirty
business, whether projected on great or on small lines, the gathering up
your own vermin and refuse, and casting it deliberately into your
neighbour’s gai'den. Particularly into the garden where it is evident
much care has been taken to prevent any accumulation of any human
pests. For here Jet me take opportunity to say, this new place has
kept itself very clear of every pest of that sort. Being no public-
houses there are no bar loafers. Everybody knows the accumu-
lations and varieties of that sort which gather like crows to the carrion
wherever the bar and the saloon opens, and idling and spending begins.
The bell-bottomed heavy jowls, with a pack of greasy cards always at
hand, and as keen an eye for a subject who is “ fit,” as the doctor for
some evidently smitten man in the time of a great epidemic. They are
unknown so far j they would indeed be lost if left without occupation.
Look into billiard-room, boarding-house, coffee-house, in the daytime,
all are empty. If you yourself chance to have an idle half-day you may
find it drag heavily. You stroll even into the club, but it is all vacant,
the bar closed, probably nothing but an orderly vacuity anywhere
around. Where are all the merry party of the night before, you may
ask. Where 1 You may find them as some few appeared in my article
of last week. They are working on their selections ; they are prospecting


for new blocks; they are in the offices, the stores, the engineering shops.
They are out surveying, they are anywhere but in the way of an idle
man.
Let us get to the machinery. In the hum of machinery is the true
voice of modern progress, and hope rises rapidly here when so many
tones of that sort meet one along the river’s bank. The pumps come
first, perhaps. Water on Mildura has, for some areas, to be lifted a full
80 ft. Eighty feet up to a channel which embraces 25,000 acres. It is
no mean stream which will suffice there. Calculations, indeed, showed
that a quantity would be required up to 150,000 gallons per minute.
It fell to Mr. George Chaffey to devise machinery for this work. He
was not satisfied with any pumping plant he had seen. He deemed it
possible, indeed, to use the highest class triple-expansion engines to work
his pumps, and thereby secure an economy and directness of action not
hitherto obtained. The idea was pooh-poohed in certain quarters;
failure was predicted even by professional critics in the old world. But
the results may be seen now in the great engine-house on Psyche bend.
A brick building, high, roomy, sufficiently ornate in exterior
architecture, the roof within lined and polished in style that recalls the
ceiling of a cathedral aisle, and, set central on solid concrete foundations,
such machinery as one is familiar with in the hold of an ocean liner.
Triple expansion compound engines 1000 h.p. Bright on all their
polished surfaces as the works of a watch, moving with that rhythmic,
pulse-like action which always suggests stupendous and perfectly
regulated power. Lifting the water from the river well and sending it
thundering along two gigantic tubes to the valve on the main channel.
And up then it comes, bubbling and foaming and tumbling and surging
and chafing impetuously the concrete walls, till at length in steadied
volume it rolls away down the channel and around the land, the actual
benediction of nature raised, distributed, rendered available to all ;
doing for the first time the work which, through all ages, has been
reserved and dedicated to the coming Australian men.
It is great work—cheering, heartening, satisfying; one desipes to
have a share in it; to be with it, in fact, as in sympathy. And see now,
conveniently situated each on its garden plot, the new, well-built brick
cottages of the engineers. ISTo huts or tents : their day is done. Men’s
homes are being fashioned here.
Truly it is marvellous to think that some ten such plants as this may
be working on Mildura in as many years, each one feeding its own area,
and then by no means draining the grand old river. For, taking the
lowest gaugings, in the month of April, when all the floods have reached
the sea, and pumping out the full quantity required for irrigating the
whole '250,000 acres, it is still estimated that more than 130,000 cubic
feet of visible water per minute would still be rolling by.
To any man who has seen much of thirsty Australia, there is
strange fascination in this outpouring of waters. It is, indeed, the big
thing of the place. But it is by no means alone. What work has
gone to the making of all these great new rivers, eighty miles already
of main channels ? And what to the grubbing, clearing, cultivating of
all the lands 1 You may see a few of the implements without much
travel, for they are ranged now for repairs at the sheds —five of them,


and there are nine in all on the place, of 20-horse power; traction-
engines, huge, somewhat uncouth, but very determined-looking
monsters, with broad-barred wheels and winding drums attached.
What will they do 1 Anything that may be required. “ Jump up and
have a ride if you like,” says Mr. M‘Laren, master of all machinery;
and up and away we go. This engine, with chaff-cutters and waggons
attached, is going out to reduce a haystack. Turn the crank, and with
puff and snort and roar up the bank we go and along the main avenue.
The scared horses of a riding party snort with terror, and make frantic
efforts to bolt. The horses, like the people, have much to learn as to
the really effective tools for subduing this wilderness. Alongside the
haystack halts this giant, and in half an hour one of the biggest chaff-
cutters in Australia is set, and with the lightest possible head of steam
doing its work with speed and efficiency. A mile further out another
is grubbing, “ yanking” out box and mallee clumps in wholesale
fashion. On the hill another is attached to a pump, getting another
25-feet elevation for the township water supply, and three pair more will,
in a week or two, be working as many steam ploughs and cultivators.
Yet Mr. Chaffey tells me they must, by-and-bye, obtain a travelling
monster greater than any of these. They cannot depend on bullocks,
horses, or manual labour for channel-making, and already it is deemed that
something is on the stocks which will answer. Not to be explained in
detail, of course, but practically, a very powerful traction engine driving
a cutting and excavating tool ahead —“ a cutting tool that can be driven
right in and then swung from side to side something in the same way as
the helm of a ship, shifting tons of earth at a stroke.” There is no
making headway without such tools; bullocks, horses, men are all too
tedious, and as we know well it is miserable working with them in a
Mildura summer. Steam-power alone is adequate and fit to be employed.
Night and day when necessary the steam cultivators work with changing
shifts of men, never wearied and never wearying, for the work of
attending on them requires little beyond watchfulness.
Truly it seems a good and pleasant thing to see them thus about the
land. They are somewhat to the broad wilderness of Australia as the
Queen’s couriers on the ocean—emblems of power, of might, of dominion,
of victories achieved, and of constant effective control.
Nor free of surprise and admiration can the visitor be who first
makes a tour of the workshops. Ranged along by the river are the
engineers’ and blacksmiths’ shops, the foundry, and machine wood-cutting
establishment. A new steel steamer, built and engined on the place, is
just afloat, boilers and pumping machinery are being manufactured
within. Coach, carriage, and dray building are going on, and in the
carpenters’ shop everything required for the building or finishing of a
house is turned out with scarce a direct human effort. Circular and
hand and fret saws whirling, mortising and planing machines banging
and grinding away, mouldings, sashes, doors, window-frames turned out
by the scere under the watchful eye of the superintendent, assisted by
a half-dozen apprentices and workmen. And here and in the engineering
shop below almost every workman is a landholder on the estate, while
every apprentice is the son of a settler. Hence the prospect of any strike
in the future is remote.


And now Lave I succeeded in drawing any fair picture of this new
colony, this experiment in which all good and properly-instructed
Australians glory, but against which some ill-controlled or ill-conditioned
tongues still wag in envy or spleen? Do you recognise the new life on
the old river in its many varied aspects ? The men and the women by
hundreds and by thousands already settled. The young blood of Victoria
and the good blood of England, the gentlemen who have already had
some scorching in Australian suns, or who have stood the fire in India or
Ceylon, the enterprising Victorian settlers awearied of the old methods,
the self-respecting working men, the skilled craftsmen and artisans, all
labouring and living together. There are 3500 in all, nearly as we can
form an estimate, and there will be 13,000 before three years more have
passed. Does it not seem to you big development—something out on
the skirts of Victoria—which is worthy of most serious attention, even
in the heart of Melbourne 1
The answer is generally “Yes. It is new, it is strange, it is
bewildering, but withal there is something in it we do not understand.
What crops will you grow, and what will you do with them when they
are grown?” Incredulity, absolute incapability to grasp any but
unfamiliar facts underlie such queries as these. The man who asks you
what will you do with your fruit will quote instances from New South
Wales, from Parramatta, where last year, in some orangeries, thousands
of cases of fruit were left to rot on the ground; or from old districts in
Victoria, where apple and pear trees are permitted to run riot and go to
ruin, becaiise their fruit will not pay for the gathering. You may
answer him that at that very same time another gentleman sent home
oranges poorly graded, and of a rough and secondary kind, and yet
obtained a return from them of 12s. 9d. a case. And, at that very same
time, Brazilian oranges of good varieties and well graded were selling at
3s. and 4s. a dozen. Nor need you go to countries which import fruit
for evidence in this sort. In September of last year, lemons in San
Erancisco were selling at 10 dollars a case. They use more lemons of
course than are used in Australia. It is not long ago that a very intel-
ligent travelling lady remarked to me, “You might almost gauge the
civilisation of a people by its consumption of lemons,” and I think she
said something of its barbarity by the beer and whisky duties. But let
that pass. Bradstreet is a leading American authority, and this is the
latest official Bradstreet on the value of orangeries in latest formed
irrigation settlements :
“ At Riverside, the leading orange town, the owner of an orchard of
7 acres of twenty-year-old seedlings avers that last year the net profit
therefrom was 1000 dollars an acre, and this year 1200 dollars. Groves
twenty years old, however, are scarce ; few even are ten years of age.
Of gross profits, another grower says that his budded trees yielded the
third year in the orchard 1.50 dollars to the tree; the fourth year, 3
dollars to the ti’ee, or from 300 dollars to 375 dollars to the acre ; eight-
year-old buds, 10 dollars per tree; and nine-year-old buds 15 dollars per
tree, or 1125 dollars per acre, counting the fruit worth only 1 dollar per
box on the tree. A third man reports 40 acres of oranges planted eight
years ago, and yielding this year a net income of 12,300 dollars, and
another 25 acres of oranges and lemons ten years old that net 500 dollars


an acre. For Riverside, as a whole, the following statement was made
before an official committee a year ago;— ‘ Riverside has 3000 acres of
orange orchard, a portion of which is yielding good crops, a portion of
which is yielding partial crops, and a portion is not in bearing at all.
These 3000 acres this year produced 1000 carloads of oranges and
lemons, worth on the track an average of 750 dollars a caidoad, or
750,000 dollars—about 250 dollars an acre. This is not picking out
sample orchards, but averaging all the orchards, whether bearing
or not.’ ”
The dollars are misleading at times to English folk, but it is easy to
divide them by five, and so arrive at intelligible totals. Nor need you
stick to any one particular authority. R. J. Hinton is special agent of
the United States in charge of the irrigation department of the bureau
of agriculture, and he states officially with respect to the irrigation
colonies of California that at a cost of 50,000,000 dollars a territory
worth 250,000,000 dollars has already been reclaimed in California.
“ Still,” ’tis urged, “these are all foreign items ; tell us what we can do
at home.” The answer is—What we are doing now 1 We are paying over
£900,000 a year for imported products, which can all be produced and
manufactured on such colonies as Mildura, which require no protective
duties or legislative coddling, but are content in the strength of their
own resource and enterprise, to meet and beat the world. Would you
go a little into particulars? It would take 10,000 acres of Zante
currants to supply the present demand, and at least a similar area of
raisins. What then of olives, of figs, of castor oil, of prunes, and, beyond
and above all our great staple which is to be, wine?
And as to the immediate realisation I have questioned the founders
of this colony closely enough ; have asked them, will you buy, undertake
to buy, and have received always the answer, “ Yes; now and for years
to come we will take all the raisin grapes any settler can grow,
simply ripe on the trees, and pay for them at the rate of
Id. a pound in that condition.” And that price, as every
proprietor of a well-tilled vineyard knows, will give him far more than
£2O an acre clear profit. But, after all, the old Didymus sentiment
dominates mankind generally. They will not believe till they see, feel,
taste, touch, share the profits, or grudge them to others whose
enterprise has not been fettered by an unreasoning infidelity. The
time will come —I think, indeed, is now at hand—for some of the
pioneers. Their troubles will end, and their life-long competency begin
with the present year. And with them remains but one urgent
question—What of our road to market, our way back to our own
people, kinsfolk, and acquaintances ? There is the river way, we know
—so full, so broad, so grand in the flood time, I must needs refer to it
yet once again—but as to a railway, will it ever be made ? I think the
reasonable, the absolute answer is, it should be set about and at once.
The potentialities of Mildura are far greater than those of Broken Hill,
yet did Adelaide regret straining every nerve to reach that centre ?
The probabilities are that Mildura alone, in its full development, will
support a population of 25,000 souls. Is not that enough for a head,
without considering the more or less remunerative tail stretching right
across the plains to Swan Hill, or Donald, or Warracknabeal ? Indeed,


the end of that whole matter seems reached in the reply of Chaffey
Brothers Limited themselves to the question, What about a railway 1
It is, in brief—“ It is a work that must be done, and it will certainly
be a paying work. We only ask the Government either to set about it
at once, or to leave us a free hand. We will raise the necessary money
ourselves ; we will make the line ourselves ; and on reasonable terms,
to be arranged beforehand, we will hand it over to the State at any
time that we may be required to do so.” Now, this is a very straight
and explicit statement, and it is not made at random. That railway
must be made; who will see to it 1
The following statement of actual working plant and staff on
Mildura has been supplied by Chaffey Brothers Limited : —1 engine,
1000 h.p. actual, to raise 120,000 gallons per minute, 10 feet average ;
1 engine, 1000 h.p. actual, to raise 40,000 gallons 40 feet high, built by
Tangye, Birmingham, triple expansion engine of most modern design ;
1 engine, 500 h.p., to raise 20,000 gallons 40 feet high, built by Allen,
of London; 1 engine, 200 h.p., to raise 10,000 gallons per minute
30 feet high, by M'Laren, of Leeds ; 1 engine, 200 h.p., to raise 2000
gallons per minute 100 feet high, for township supply; this engine
drives the machine shop and wood-working machinery as well, will also
drive electric light machinery; 2 engines, 150 h.p. each, to raise
10,000 gallons 20 feet, built by Tangye; 2 sets ploughing engines, by
M'Laren, of Leeds; 1 set do., by Fowler, of Leeds, capable of
scarifying 10 acres per day each set; 4 traction-engines, of 12 h.p. each,
for clearing and stumping land ; machine shop and foundry and boiler
yard, capable of doing all repairs, employing fifty men; wood-working
plant, turning out all sorts of joinery and carpentry, employing thirty
men. This machinery is the best known, and built by Fay and Co., of
Cincinnati, Ohio. Total number of men employed, 500; number of
horses, 300.
The Argus, 3rd January , 1891.
MILDURA IiEYISITED.
By Telemachus.
DOWN THE RIYER TO RENMARK.
The time has come to say good-bye to Mildura. The old Gem,
refitted, and made a habitable and comfortable boat, lies alongside the
bank. Cargo in, steam up, and the steam-pipe sounding for all to be
aboard. It is after dark when she gets out into the stream, and makes
her brief run down to Wentworth. Customs must needs be attended to
at Wentworth, and as Customs will not be hurried, or put in an
appearance before official time in the morning, we are left roasting at
the pier till ten o’clock is past; and it is a roasting country about
Wentworth,


The poor old town is in a sad condition of languishment or decay.
Many of its more enterprising folks are shifting up stream to Mildura ;
its newspaper man is gone; it presents closed windows frequently along
the streets. Its time is past, and its hope of regeneration is small.
There was a time, old residents tell us, when Wentworth used to buzz
with life, and roar occasionally with mirth of the wild old colonial sort.
It is past and over now. Victoria has laid the foundations of the city
to be on the river, and poor old Wentworth will never rise again. A
few bales of wool and bundles of sheep and rabbit skins are trundled
aboard, and three shearers or station hands, in the middle of a shocking
bad drunk, are stowed away on the top of them. There are
something like two men and a boy on the pier as we steam away.
We are on the Darling River now, having made the turn about the
point at which the rivers junction through the night. The waters are
paler than those of the Murray, milky almost in appearance, holding so
much fine silt in suspension. As we come to the meeting of the waters
this difference is very plain. Away on the farther bank stream the
Murray waters are dark blue and clear, and the turgid current of the
Darling breaks on them as grey clouds on blue sky. Mile after mile
we may trace the two streams slowly mingling, till at length, looking
out from an hour’s reading or conversation, all before and all around is
seen to be of one unvarying tint. It is brown in the fierce sunshine,
the colour of the “ bright brown blade” of the old ballad. And the
same tremendous river. Its banks beyond gunshot on either side, mile
after mile, indeed, no banks discernible; flood waters rippling away
over leagues of lowland, making lakes, filling far-penetrating creeks,
lagoons, and anabranches, most of which will be drained absolutely dry
before this autumn closes. Hot, parched, bai’ren-looking are the banks
where clear of the floods. Save the river, indeed, there seems nothing
desirable or lovable in all the land. The glorious river, rolling in silent
grandeur through majestic solitude to the sea, even as Captain Sturt
found it but sixty years ago. In 1830, only sixty years ago, the first
white man looked to right and to left, marvelling mightily what might
be ahead as his oars struck lazily in the current, and the little boat
glided on from point to point.
Hour after hour we ride along at a by no means tardy pace, for the
current is strong, and with us, and the Gem would make a good ten
knots on still water. On and on and on. Noon brings us to a station,
and a bale or two of wool, with a passenger, are put on board.
Afternoon to a wooding-up station, and the usual delay takes place
while the logs are passed in. Evening to another pleasant little
riverside home, a perfect oasis in the wilderness. A vineyard and a
garden, wherein are all manner of fruit trees and blushing shrubs, and
in its midst a house which seems to have been built by a man who had
a fair idea of the reasonable requirements of life. Pomegranates and
oleanders blossom together on the water’s edge, figs spread their broad
shade beyond, and pale lance-like bamboos shoot up beside the dark,
bending willows.
Night comes, and we are at the boundary of the two colonies, and
there is a brief delay while the Customs officer goes down to board a
hawking boat making up stream. The night seems hot almost as the


day, and when we lay-to for a spell to take in wood or cargo, the
mosquitoes come in and stay with us, and by no means further the
diligent attempts to sleep.
We are all glad to see the morning dawn, and look out with interest
for the roofs of Renmark, which now should not be far ahead. At six
o’clock the whistle sounds ; we are coming round the last bend ; we
shall be at the Renmark wharf in ten minutes. And there we are, and,
turning a glance ashore, are a little disappointed, not remembering a
remark made at Mildura, “ Renmark is in South Australia, you know,
not in Victoria, and that makes a difference.” There has not been such
development here as at the up-river colony. We do not see the same
signs of life and progress ashore, albeit there would be quite enough to
wonder at if Mildura had not previously been seen. Pumping plant,
machine shops, stone-built offices, stores, and dwelling-houses; men
with the look of trained mechanics turning out to work, overseers
and surveyors properly dressed for the day, and ready to set out on its
labours.
Arrangements are made here, as at Mildm-a, to show visitors all
that the settlement contains. A count of heads is made, and when
breakfast is over a splendidly-horsed four-in-hand trap is ready.
I think some of the party learned that day for the first time what a
real roasting in true Australian sunshine means. The thermometer,
fully exposed to the sunshine, registered 154 deg., and we were under it
all, and without any cover save our hats. But if you do not lie down
to it there is something bracing in the Australian heat, something which
breeds or conserves the true Arab fire in the horses, and makes stockmen
hard as nails and true as steel. Something, as we shall see also by-and-
bye, which will produce a wonderful grace of life, of luxurious and
beautiful home surroundings,
A better man than the young Australian who steered us never
handled reins, and before the drive was over he needed all his strength
and skill. The horses were full of corn and fire, two of the four anxious
for a bolt at any moment; the roads were rough, cut up, or altogether
xxnmade, and frequently there was something to be done in the way of
shaving stumps and missing boughs. Perhaps it was a matter of grace
that we all returned in safety—we had a good clergyman on board.
Certainly a story of the old days, told through the journey, seemed apt
to our own experiences. It was of Cabbage-tree Ned and the coaching
into Ballarat in the ’fifties. Ned found himself within ten miles of the
camp with one passenger left, “Do you think we shall ever get there?”
asked this one. “ I shall get there and the mails,” replied Ned ; “as to
you, well that depends on the strength of your moorings.”
And now, here is a pretty thing to meet, with four wild horses and
a three-chain road full of stumps, stump-holes, and 2-feet-deep ruts. It
is a proper thing to be there, of course, for it is a very capable road-
making apparatus, nought less than a steam ploughing plant set to road-
making, breaking up great farrows, and supplying material to be used
in forming the crown of the road. The horses go past it with a wild
rush, and are swung around on to a narrow bridge across a broad
channel with wonderful judgment and strength of wrist, and just a
little, perhaps, of the element of luck. And then away we go towards


the pumping plant and the settlers’ blocks, and out and about the few
homesteads where gardens and orchards have already begun to make a
show.
There is in Renmark, however, but one really instructive and con-
vincing show, that is, the 20-acre patch of Zante currants, which I saw
planted in October 1888, exactly two years and two months ago. The land
was just ploughed then ; the vines were scarcely distinguishable twigs
about the size of lead pencils stuck about the land. Workmen with long-
handled shovels were guiding the water into the channels beside them.
And now we halt at a fence, beyond which is seen a dense
mass of dark green foliage, with 6-feet pine posts running in lines along
every row. Two wires are run through the posts, the one 3 feet, the
other about 4 feet 6 inches from the ground, and all along the lowermost
of these the vines are trained, their long luxuriant shoots already
reaching up to clasp the next support. On the top of each post a
bracket will be fixed, something—to use a ghastly simile —like the
projecting beam of a gallows. And next year’s growth will cover all
the wires and the posts and the beams, giving the greatest possible
bearing surface, affording shelter against all winds, yet getting abundant
sunshine. The growth here is at least as remarkable as at Mildura.
Those lead pencil-like twigs of two years ago are stout stocks now, thick
as a Roman’s spear-shaft, and countless bunches of the dark small-
berried grape are seen beneath the leaves. Twenty pounds an acre
would not buy this year’s crop. That is the fact which strikes home,
which indicates victory accomplished. And about next year it is
difficult to speak without provoking doubt and criticism. Next year-
will certainly see the green walls of foliage, the perfected beauty, and
the full profit.
Imagine, then, the pleasure of a morning or an evening walk through
such a “paddock” as this. More profit in it than in any 1000 and
some 10,000-acre blocks of pasture land. Permanent also, a never-
failing source of health and wealth and enjoyment, unless—with some-
what of a bodeful sound comes the admission—unless the locusts come.
The locusts, the locusts ! The menace or the plague of them is over half
Australia now. They are indeed actually here, present now. Pale
grey flakes they seem, drifting out of the blue, flitting across
the country’s face. Not thick like a snow storm, but rather as
the ash flakes driven on the wind from some great fire. Incompre-
hensible as ominous creatures ! Kick any green weed on the ground, and
a score will flit out, and yet they have left the rank foliage of the vines
untouched. Everything is in readiness for them if they do begin.
Boilers, with fires laid, Paris green ready for the mixing, spray pumps
for its distribution. There is not indeed the slightest idea of surrender
or despair. They “ figure” here that “ God Almighty didn’t make man
in his own image to be eaten out by a bug of any size.” And in that
faith they will continue to work, and at need, to fight.
Another of the shows at Renmark is the homestead of Mr, C.
Chaffey, manager of the colony, and a younger brother of the original
members of the firm. He has expended at least £IO,OOO in buildings
and improvements on a hundred-acre block. The house is well suited to
the climate and the country, built on the outerwalls of unhewn pine


verandahed all round about, with bi’oad corridors for ventilation, and
large, cool, well-shaded rooms. Immediately round about is the garden,
only just forming; the cypress wind-breaks in, and making good
growth. Hundreds also of the Mexican fan-palms set, and ornamental
and blossoming shrubs of every variety. They are reared from seeds or
cuttings on the place. At the rear of the house is a great bush house,
or shed rather, rudely built, and lightly thatched with boughs, in
which are tens of thousands of seedlings and cuttings preparing for the
gardens and the fields. Each is set in a small tin, manufactured on the
spot. It resembles a jam tin without either top or bottom, and with an
unsoldered seam. The curl given to the metal is just sufficient to keep
the earth about the forming roots, and when planting time comes it is
opened easily, en veloppe , and the root ball encased in earth is planted
without danger or difficulty. Elevated tanks, bathrooms, every means
of cleanliness, health, and comfort are found in the offices here. A high-
roofed-stable, shelter sheds for the milch cows, the poultry, and the pigs;
and in every corner of the stockyard, securely fenced, a broad-leaved fig
set, whose foliage in a few years will half overshadow the whole area
enclosed. And all around are the vineyard and the orchard blocks.
Raisins and currants, olives, figs, lemons, oranges, the water trickling
in the furrows beside them, or the workmen busy with the horse-hoes and
light ploughs.
Can you imagine ten years to have passed here, and think of an
approach through cypress walls full 10 feet high, through avenues of
tall fan-palms, with pink of oleander, and red pomegranate blooms
perfuming and starring the dark foliage above, with flower beds all
ablaze on velvet turf, and far and near the rustle of innumerable leaves 1
It is not a dream within a dream, though such it was, indeed, ten years
ago, when some of us roamed this country and saw that same great river
and this arid land, with its wretched life, and said, surely the good God
had not ordained that things should remain everlastingly thus.
A drive beyond this fast forming home takes us to a point on the
lagoon which almost intersects Renmark, and which, in seasons when
the river is low, will afford a valuable reserve supply of water. Coach,
horses and passengers cross here, and drive out by another irrigation
channel to the light-red sandhill country, a good deal of which is now
opened and being rapidly taken up. It is capital country for irrigation;
the water is brought to it with less labour than to most of the Mildura
land, the elevation being generally under 30 feet. Little on it now but
a few sheep, the rabbits, the crows, and some few settlers, pioneers of
the army to come, who have already pitched their tents and begun to
clear the land.
Little doubt their numbers will increase fast, for Renmark is by no
means dead or dull. Many of the best of the South Australian folks are
coming up to investigate, and not a few of them express their intention
to settle. The advantages of the settlement are at least equal to those
of Mildura. The bulk of the land is similar, the water lift is less, the
water-way to Morgan is always open, and Adelaide is but 150 miles
away by the nearest possible railway route. Adelaide, like Melbourne,
should look to the new colony and nurse its development with a constant
and jealous care.


Reprinted from the Argus, Melbourne , 6th December, 1890. Leading
article on the report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply.
The very practical and vigorously-written notes on Mildura by Mr.
Stuart Murray, engineer of Water Supply, will be read with interest.
They confirm what has previously been written by our contributor,
“ Telemachus,” upon the settlement, and point to a development which
promises to be surprising. It is well that from time to time official and
expert judgment should be passed upon the operations pursued in the
“ colony,” in order that everyone who cares to concern himself about the
matter may have trustworthy infbrmation. It is well, also, that we
should be told of the success of the movement in order that, by casting
back to the time when the proposed concession to the Messrs. Chaffey
Brothers was before Parliament, we may the better estimate the quality
of the criticism passed upon the scheme. The suggestions and direct
statements then made as to the “ fraud” about to be perpetrated were,
it is true, discounted at their proper value, having regard to the moral
altitude to which the critics had attained. They now read very
strangely in the light of what Mr. Murray and other responsible officers,
together with several capable and impartial observers, have described.
If there were any “fraud,” indeed, it seems to have been in establishing
the settlement so far away from the centre of population as to make it
very difficult of access. But that was a “ fraud” due to circumstances
over which neither of the contracting parties had control, and which
will ultimately prove, probably, to be a blessing in disguise. It will be,
or it should be, the means of making habitable and productive what was
thought to be the most barren quarter of Victoria. The favourable predic-
tions indulged in when the agreement was pending have, so far, been
more than realised, and to-day Mildura is populated by three thousand
enterprising, industrious, and frugal people, who form the nucleus of
what promises to be a highly organised and attractive community. The
visitor sees in the work already done the foundations of a “colony”
which should soon reach the forward state of development already
noticeable in the Californian “ colonies,” where rural life is made pleasant
and profitable to a degree undreamt of by the pioneers of settlement.
Mr. Murray asks some pertinent questions involving the future of
Mildura, and answers them in such a way as to give assurance of the
ultimate success of the venture. As he in effect says, the issue depends
upon whether or not the soil is suited to the growth of the products
cultivated, whether or not the colony will attract men of the right
stamp, and whether or not the produce can be disposed of at a sufficient
profit. He seems to have found no reason to fear that the issue will be
a failure. For support of the reasoning he employs, which is sound,
it is desirable to look to the success achieved in the “colonies” in
California. In that State some of the most profitable settlements of the
Mildura pattern have been established upon soil which would be valueless
but for irrigation, but which, when watered, yields rich returns. These
settlements, too, have drawn men from all parts of the republic, who
have brought not merely a determination to succeed, but the wherewithal
—capital and skill. Mildura should become to Autralia what Los


Angelos is to the United States, and if there is any desire to know more
about that favoured district than has already been written in our columns,
an article in the last number of Harper’s Magazine, headed “The Winter
of Our Content,” by Charles Dudley Warner, is recommended for perusal.
The climate of Mildura appears to be very similar to the climate of
Southern California. As to the likelihood of the settlers being able to
sell their produce at a sufficiently large profit, much need not now be
said. The prospects are as bright as could be desired in that respect.
Indeed, what has been done justifies the suggestion that the Government
should seriously think of extending the principle upon which the
concession was made to the Messrs. Chaffey to other suitable parts of the
colony. It was not intended that those gentlemen should have a
monopoly of consideration. The great value of their enterprise, so far
as the whole community was concerned, lay in the fact that what was to
be done at Mildura would be an object lesson for the rest of the colony.
Reprinted from the South Australian Register, Adelaide, Bth January,
1891. Leading article on the report of the Chief Engineer of
Victorian Water Supply.
The degree of progress which has been made at the Denmark
irrigation colony is somewhat disappointing when compared with the
advanced position of the sister settlement at Mildura. There is not a
great deal of difference in the age of the two “ colonies” on the Murray,
but that on the Victorian side has left the other far behind. It is,
however, satisfactory to know that the prospects of Denmark are good.
The promoters are introducing some skilled vignerons from Europe, who
will bring both capital and experience to bear in the cultivation of vines,
and from their operations not only Denmark, but other parts of the
colony, will, no doubt, be able to learn some profitable lessons. The
Chaffey irrigation settlements were recently visited by a Parliamentary
party from Melbourne, including the Minister of Water Supply, Mr.
Graham, and several officers of his department. One result of the trip
is the production of a report on Mildura by Mr. Stuart Murray, the
chief engineer of water supply, who takes an exceedingly hopeful view
of the future of the settlement. When the fact is borne in mind that
the site of the “colony” was accounted to be the barrenest spot in
Victoria the change which has been wrought in its appearance during
the last few years is certainly astonishing. There are now no less than
3000 settlers at Mildura. Mr. Murray tells us that the planted laud
has an area of at least 6000 acres, irrespective of some hundreds of acres
under lucerne, maize, and other forage plants. The plantations, which
consist chiefly of vines for raisins, oranges and lemons, apricots,
peaches and figs, and wine grapes, are in a flourishing condition. There
is therefore no longer any room for doubt, if ever any were felt, as to
the perfect adaptability of the soil and climate for the production of the
varieties of fruits that have been planted. Given seasonable supplies of
water, the soil will produce almost anything, and its suitability for
intense culture may be now regarded as demonstrated by experiment.


There is no reason, so far as soil and climate are concerned, why
Mildura should not become in time as prosperous as the most thriving
irrigation settlements in the Western States of America, In California
some of the most profitable of these settlements have been established
on arid lands which, without irrigation, would be utterly worthless.
The best of the dry lands, when artificially watered, are of enormously
greater value than naturally fertile regions in a moister climate. But
the future of Mildura depends on a satisfactory answer to other questions
than that of the suitability of its soil for the industries to be carried on.
Will the settlement attract men of the right stamp, ready to engage in
the growth of fruits on small holdings by intense culture—a process
that requires incessant attention, watchfulness, and care to secure the
desired results 1 Will the industries springing from this form of
agriculture —the drying, preserving, and packing of fruits, the manufac-
ture and manipulation of wine and oil, and the resulting trade, induce
“ men of Anglo-Saxon race to transplant themselves to the hot dry
climate of the Murray Valley, and there to set up their permanent
abode 1 ?” Mr. Murray is inclined to answer these questions in the
affirmative. He points out that the lot of the irrigationists is much to
be preferred to that of the ordinary selector in a dry district. Life on a
farm of 320 acres, where the farmer grows wheat at 3s. a bushel, and
grazes a few dairy cows and a small flock of sheep, is far from inviting
at the best. But there is no sort of comparison between the isolation
and precarious pursuits of the selector, and the communal life of the
fruitgrower, who form a large community engaged in virtually the same
industries, and having their interests cared for by the communal
organisation. Mr. Murray dilates on the advantages secured to the
producers by the concentration of their industry in one spot. If, as he
says, fruit and wine are successfully grown on small holdings over
extensive areas in Western America, why should not their production
here prove sufficiently remunerative to induce the rising generation of
agriculturists to embark in it 1 The discomforts of climate of course
count for something at such a place as Mildura, but they are not
unendurable, and admit of being greatly mitigated. Mr. Murray
remarks very truly that Australians have hardly begun to study the
problem how to make life pleasant under climatic conditions which,
however uncomfortable they may be, are certainly not unfavourable to
health. Mildura, he appears to think, would be no worse a place to
live in than such cities as Milan or Florence if it had attained to the
same high stage of social development.
After all, the really vital question is whether the products of the
irrigated areas can be disposed of at a profit. Though Mr. Murray is
satisfied that they can be, he realises that with the expansion of the
industry the local market will be found too limited, and in a few years
the producer will have to look to the other colonies for a wider market,
which will probably be at first in the dry pastoral districts of Northern
and Central Australia. So sanguine is Mr. Murray of the extension of
irrigation operations at Mildura that* he expects that in a generation
even the Australian market will be found too narrow, and an export
trade will have to be established. The success which has thus far
attended the Mildura experiment is highly encouraging, and as showing


what can be accomplished by private enterprise contrasts noticeably with
the somewhat unsatisfactory position of the irrigation trusts in Victoria
assisted by Government funds. How important the whole question is
held to be may be judged from the appointment of an irrigation expert,
Mr. J. West, who was despatched to America to study the most
approved methods of irrigation in the Western States, and has supplied
several valuable reports.
Extracts reprinted from the u Argus,” Melbourne, ISth January, 1891;
further comments on the Report of the Chief Engineer of Water
Supply. ______
The remarkable and entirely satisfactory growth of the irrigation
colony, Mildura, established by Messrs. Chaffey Brothers on the banks
of the Murray, is regarded as one of the most hopeful developments in
Victoria in late years. Recently the settlement was visited by Mr.
Graham, Minister of Water Supply, and Mr. Stuart Murray, Chief
Engineer of Water Supply. The last-named gentleman has furnished a
report on the settlement, which is of a most encouraging character.
Mr. Murray states that “ there are now not less than 6000 acres of
planted land in the settlement, besides a further area of several
hundreds of acres of maize, lucerne, and other forage plants. The
growth of the plantations, which consists chiefly of vines for raisins,
oranges and lemons, apricots, peaches, and figs, and wine grapes, ha
been such as to put beyond any shadow of question the capabilities o
the soil under the treatment pursued for that class of produce. Raisin
vines that have been in the ground less than two years, and that are there-
fore less than three years from the knife, are bearing fruit; not a few
isolated bunches, but in a vineyard of 10 or 12 acres—a very well-kept
one, no doubt—every vine had a load of certainly not less than 20 lbs.
of ripening grapes. Apricots, figs, oranges, and lemons were also in
bearing; and as the two first-named fruits were already ripe, their
quality was capable of demonstration. In short, of the adaptability of
the soil and climate, a sufficient supply of seasonable moisture being
assumed, for the culture of fruits of the kinds indicated above, there is
no longer any question whatever.” Mr. Murray concludes that the
colony will continue to attract young men of the right stamp, and that
the products of the place can be produced and conveyed to the markets
of the world at a profitable rate.
Reprinted from “ The Argus," Melbourne , 2nd March, 1891.
CHAFFEY BROS. LIMITED.
The Progress of Mildura and Renmark.
The sixth half-yearly meeting of Chaffey Bros. Limited was held on
Saturday morning, Mr. J. F. Levien, M.L.A., the .chairman of directors,
presiding.


The directors submitted their sixth half-yearly progress report, which
was as follows :
“ In submitting their sixth half-yearly report, the directors have
pleasure in being able to furnish a most encouraging record of the
progress of these colonies. The steady influx of population previously
reported has been fully maintained, the enhanced value of property and
the substantial returns which have been secured by the earlier settlers
have inspired much confidence, and induced many to become residents
and investors. The sale of land for the. past six months has been sub-
stantially in advance of any like period. The area disposed of now
exceeds 11,000 acres, and is, for the most part, being rapidly brought
into a state of productiveness. The opinions formed by experienced
horticulturists with regard to the early returns from vines and fruit
trees have been fully realised. Heavy crops of grapes have been gathered
from vines planted but two seasons. The fact that 4000 raisin trays
are at this age of the colonies required for handling the present season’s
crop is speaking evidence of the productiveness of the early plantations.
Some instances worthy of note are recorded : —‘ Mr. C. L. M‘Guirk,
whose holding won the Victorian Government prize for the “ best
variety of irrigated crops,” cut this season 25 lbs. of raisin grapes from
a single vine planted as a cutting in August 1888.’ In Mr, S. Murray’s
official report to the Government, dated 6th December, 1890, he says :
‘ Raisin vines that had been in the ground less than two years, and that
are therefore less than three years from the knife, are bearing fruit;
not a few isolated bunches, but in a vineyard of 10 or 12 acres—a very
well-kept one, no doubt—every vine had a load of certainly not less than
20 lbs. of ripening grapes. Apricots, figs, oranges, and lemons were
also in bearing, and as the two first-named fruits were already ripe,
their quality was capable of demonstration.’ The Zante currant vine is
thriving magnificently; the fruit is of excellent quality, and vines but
three years planted are heavily laden with beautifully developed
bunches. The condition of the various plantations both at Renmark
and Mildura is in every respect satisfactory. No injury has been
sustained from blight or insect pests, and everywhere the trees and vines
appear in perfect health. The dried fruits produced are uniformly of
excellent quality; the currants arid raisins have been declared superior
to the imported, and the apricots have been pronounced equal to the
finest French; they were harvested in the sun with but little trouble or
expense, thus demonstrating that the clear, dry, sunny climate or
Mildura and Renmark makes fruit-preserving by the natural heat of the
sun a certain and effective process. As anticipated, a great advance in
the value of land has followed these demonstrations of the productiveness
of the soil. Offers of £75 and £IOO per acre have been refused for lots
planted but twelve months since, and, while many properties have
changed hands, holders generally are disinclined to sell, notwithstanding
the very tempting offers which have been made. In town lands an even
greater rise in values has taken place. Business sites originally sold by
the company for £2O are now saleable at from £4O to £2OO each ; and,
in view of the great demand for building lots, further subdivisions have
been made in the proximity to the town, and are now available. The
company has received many orders to px-epare, plant, and cultivate the


holdings of absentees and others for the coming season. In this
connection it may be remarked that the nurseries at Mildura established
by the company are now showing good results. Most of the vines and
young stock required by settlers can now be procured on the spot, thus
saving the cost, delay, and risk of transit. The rapid march of settle-
ment has necessitated a corresponding extension of the irrigation works.
The main channels now extend for a length of nearly 90 miles, and the
subsidiary channels 140 miles. Weirs and sluices have been put in
where required, and several miles of fluming have been constructed.
Main pipes for the reticulation of about 10 miles have also been put
down. Further important channels and works have been handed over
to the Mildura Irrigation Company Limited, and the arrangements for
the distribution of water (under the superintendence of Mr. Kjellburg) has
given general satisfaction. Since the date of last report the company’s
cold storage works have been opened. The planing mills have been
completed, and are in full work ; the wood-working machinery is of the
most modern and effective type obtainable, and will be employed almost
exclusively in the manufacture of the necessary appliances for drying
and packing fruit. These can all now be procured locally at a reason-
able cost, which will assist materially to develop the industry of
handling the raw products and preparing them for export. The
difficulties which arose with respect to timber reserves, and the
reservation of lands for public purposes generally, have been satis-
factorily solved by the passing of an Act of Parliament which will
enable the company to set apart such land as may from time to time be
necessary for forest reserves, firewood supply, shelter belts, commonage,
roads, parks, gardens, or other public purposes without any large
sacrifice of the privileges originally granted to the company (compensa-
tion lands being granted by the state), and an enormous public
advantage is anticipated from this measure. The Act also removes a
restriction which had ceased to be of any effect as a safeguard to the
Government in enforcing the observance of the agreement with the
company, while it hampered its operations considerably. The enormous
expenditure in so short a time by the company, as certified to by the
Government auditor, viz., £226,000, upon the ‘irrigation works and
substantial improvements’ at Mildura, being some £200,000 in excess
of the company’s obligation under the agreement, at once established in
the eyes of Parliament the vastness of the scheme and the necessity for
legislation in the direction sought. Evidence on the various lines of
railway proposed is now being taken by the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Railways. It is expected that that body will visit
Mildura before the next session, when the claims of the town and
district for railway communication will be placed before it. The avail-
able steamer accommodation this summer has but inadequately sufficed
for the river traffic to the colonies. The Murray Navigation Company
is, we are glad to find, making every effort to keep pace with the
increasing requirements. The new steel steamer Pearl, taken over from
the company, and which will accommodate a large number of
passengers, has however, just been completed, and will commence
running next week. This boat is superior to any river vessel
in Australia, and will be much appreciated by travellers. In


the towns building operations have proceeded with much vigour.
New places of business and residences have sprung up in all directions,
and the municipal values have greatly increased. At Mildura an
excellent system of sanitation has been adopted, and the efforts to
preserve the health of the inhabitants are worthy of every commendation.
It is gratifying that the report of the local health officer, submitted to
the Department of Health on the 14th ult., recorded the death rate at
Mildura for 1890 at 4.4 per 1000 only, perhaps the lowest in the
world. This testimony bears out the opinions of leading medical
authorities with regard to the advantages of the irrigation colonies as a
health resort. The building of the Chaffey College of Agriculture is
being pushed on. The contract for the erection of a local hospital at
Mildura has been let, and tenders are being called for the erection of
the public institute, public library, and horticultural museum. The
school accommodation at Mildura is quite inadequate to meet the wants
of the rapidly-increasing population, and the Government, in order to
carry out the Education Act, must erect additional schools without
delay. Two or three sites are at the present time under consideration.
The Horticultural Society and the Fruit-growers’ Association are being
well supported, and both bodies have greatly assisted the objects of the
settlers. The annual show of fruits and general products will be held
on the 10th March, when visitors will be afforded practical proof of the
wonderful resources of the colonies. The plans of subdivision for
Renmark Crown grants have now passed the Titles Office of South
Australia, and transfers of the lands of that colony will proceed without
delay. Sir Samuel Davenport, K.C.M.G., and Walter Reynell, Esq.
(managing director of Elder, Smith and Co. Limited) were recently
appointed local directors for South Australia, where transfers of the
lands for Renmark colony will be made. The directors can with every
confidence congratulate the shareholders upon the accession of these
gentlemen to the directorate. During the past half-year the colonies
were visited by many gentlemen of influence. Among these were His
Excellency the Earl of Kintore, the Hons, J. Graham and C. Young,
Minister and ex-Minister of Water Supply and Agriculture for Victoria,
Sir Samuel Davenport, K.C.M.G., and several Ministers of the Crown
and members of the Parliaments from adjoining colonies. Their opinions
have been published in the daily press and otherwise, and are highly
favourable as to the future success of the colonies and the manner in
which the work of colonisation is being carried out by the company.”
In addition to their report the directors submitted a balance-sheet.
This showed the authorised capital of the company to be £2,000,000, of
which £756,830 had been subscribed, as follows : —Paid-up upon 66,783
shares of £lO each, £458,436 7s. 9d.; reserve liability of shareholders,
£200,000; called, but not due (including £6O ss. arrears), £8393 12s.
3d.; reserve fund, £90,000. The profits for the company’s business for
the half-year, together with the balance carried forward from last
statement, amounted to £35,015 18s., of which it was proposed to add
to the reserve fund a further £25,000, bringing it up to £90,000, and
to carry forward the balance.
The Chairman, in moving the adoption of the report and balance-
sheet, stated that in order to remove a misapprehension which appeared


to exist, he desired to point out that the company’s operations 'were
confined exclusively to the colonies of Renmark in South Australia and
Mildura in Victoria. He thought it well to mention this, as he knew
that there was confusion in the public mind upon the point, and that
the company had at times been placed at a disadvantage thereby. The
balance-sheet and statement of accounts showed that the company’s
business was in a very satisfactory state. The net profit for the past
half-year amounted to £26,892 11s. lid., or more than per cent,
per annum upon the paid-up capital of the company, which now stands
at £458,436 7s. 9d. The directors proposed, however, before paying
any dividends, to still further sh-engthen the reserve fund, and to that
end proposed to add the sum of £25,000, increasing it to £90,000, or
making it equivalent to one-fifth of the paid-up capital. Ample
provision has been made in the accounts for writing off the cost of the
irrigation works in respect of land sold, and £11,500 had been appro-
priated for that purpose. The progress report submitted indicated the
great strides which the colonies were making. Their population, now
numbered by thousands, had within itself the elements of future success,
and the directors, who at first stood alone, were now supported in then-
vast undertaking by thousands of earnest workers. The company’s land
sales had been considerable, and the business of the company generally
had been profitable. He congratulated the shareholders upon the
accession to the directorate of Mr. Walter Reynell and Sir Samuel
Davenport as directors in South Australia. They would bring to the
board a large and valuable experience, of a character which he was
confident would greatly advance the company’s interests.
Mr. J. R. Buxton seconded the adoption of the report.
The Chairman, in answer to questions, stated that the directors had
increased the capital of the company by 2200 shares, which had been
subscribed for out of an issue which had been authorised by the directors
under the powers accorded to them by the articles of association. The
shares were issued at par, less 5 per cent, discount for cash. The
directors had made the issue with a view of increasing the shareholders’
reserve fund. At the same time it was proposed to call up only £1 on
the shares. The authorised issue was 20,000, and it was quite probable
that the remainder of the issue would be offered to the public through
the press.
Mr. R. Wallen pointed out that the company had plenty of use fin-
al 1 the capital it could obtain.
The motion was then unanimously carried, and the meeting termin-
ated with the re-election of the company’s auditors.
MARVELLOUS MILDURA.
The “ Herald,” 2nd March, 1891.
Within three years the most sanguine prophecies concerning Mildura
have been more than fulfilled. The results of irrigation have indeed
surpassed even the expectations of the promoters, since they did not
expect, and could not have expected to accelerate the processes of nature


to the extent which has been achieved. Certainly nothing in their
Californian experiences, nor in those of any other irrigationists in the
world, could have prepared them for being able to gather 20 lbs. of
grapes per vine from vines which had been but twenty months in the
ground. Nor could any one have imagined that within three years
raisins of excellent quality, and dried apricots, pronounced to be superior
to those brought from well accustomed France, would be actually in the
market. The facts, however, are incontrovertible. Lands which were
thought to be too highly priced at £2O per acre are now not to be
bought by those who offer £IOO, Town lots that were sold at £2O each
have gone up in some cases to £2OO, and the settlement has shown
itself capable of supporting a family on every allotment. As there are
250,000 acres in the cession, that means that there will be a population
of over 100,000 in Mildura by the time the last allotment is sold, and in
ten years thereafter double the number. But these are not the wonders
that make Mildura marvellous. These are merely wonders in their way.
We have seen marvellous growth in Australia often enough. What
makes Mildura marvellous is that it points a new path to prosperity.
It accomplishes a task long supposed to be impossible. There has been
nothing done in Mildura which cannot be done in many, if not all, parts
of the colony where there is sunshine and water that is within reach.
All that has been done at Mildura can be done in many other places.
That is the reason why Mildura is marvellous. It has performed the
very task for which we depend upon tips and touters and all sorts of
guides to fortune-making. It has taught us what a lot we may do for
ourselves, and what grand capabilities reside in this, our abiding place.
It has shown that with the expenditure of a modest capital, allied with
fair business skill, great results may be achieved, and it has afforded a
lesson to all who meditate similar proceedings. Capitalists will take
comfort in the profit of per cent, per annum, with far better prospects
in future, shown by the operations of the company. Settlers will under-
stand that a comparatively liberal outlay for the purchase money of land
will be fully compensated by the water right which goes through, and
with it, and the whole community will be encouraged by the knowledge
that a new and profitable industry, capable of absolutely indefinite
extension, has been added to its resources.
Reprinted Jrom The Mildura Cultivator, 18 ih March, 1891.
MILDUEA AND ITS INDUSTRIES
Lecture by Mr. G-. W. Knight, F.R.H.S,
About 200 settlers gathered in the Langtree Ave. Hall on Saturday
evening, at the invitation of the Mildura Horticultural Society, to hear
Mr. G. W. Knight, F.R.H.S., England, give his views on the settlement
and its industries. The chair was occupied by Mr. N. B. M‘Kay, vice-
president of the society.


In his opening remarks the Chairman said they were met to-night to
hear the opinions and listen to the advice of a cultural authority
whose reputation extended even beyond the boundaries of Australia.
Mr. Knight would give his views without reservation, and while his
hearers would doubtless be told many pleasant things, they might also
expect to hear some of their methods sharply criticised. From his
personal knowledge of Mr. Knight, he could assure the audience that the
lecturer’s sympathies were entirely with the settlement, and if he
pointed out any faults it would not be done in a captious spirit, but for
the purpose of doing the settlers some benefit. Mr. Knight was not
only a horticulturist, but an engineer who had had a very long expe-
rience in hydraulic works, and he was, therefore, by habit and training
eminently qualified to give an authoritative opinion on the scheme the
Mildura people were embarked in. He then introduced Mr. Knight to
the audience.
Mr. Knight, who was received with hearty applause, commenced by
remarking that everything and everybody he bad seen at Mildura gave
unmistakeable evidence of the persistent energy and enterprise of the
Anglo-Saxon race. He had come to the settlement with a certain
amount of prejudice. He had been unable to understand how the
scheme could be expected to succeed when the basis of operation was so
far removed from the centres of population. He had to confess that this
prejudice had been entirely dissipated since his arrival. He found that
it was in contemplation to place the products of Mildura on the world’s
markets, and this being the case, the question of a hundred miles or so,
more or less, made no difference. The Mildura orchardists would be in
as good a position, so far as the European market was concerned, as the
people of Sandhurst or Melbourne would be. In many respects they
would have the advantage over the producers, because the special
knowledge and experience of the people who had made fruitgrowing such
a stupendous success in California was placed at their disposal. That
was an advantage that could not be over-estimated. At the same time,
while allowing all credit to the enterprise, intelligence and knowledge of
the Americans, he intended to show later on that it was not necessary to
follow the United States in everything, particularly with regard to the
vine and its cultivation.
The scheme as a whole had been wonderfully conceived, and it was
being admirably carried out. It had a great national bearing, as it
would attract population to the colonies, and that was what was most
wanted, in spite of all that labour agitators and trades’ unions said to
the contrary. There were in the continent of Australia 2,944,628
square miles, and the total population amounted to 2,918,890, or some-
thing more than three-quarters of a man to the square mile. Now, the
position at present was that this three-quarters of a man was in a state
of intense alarm lest he should be crowded out by the introduction of a
few thousand people. This fraction of a man declared that he could
not live if anybody else ventured to trespass on his square mile of
territory. It was a rank absurdity which should be thoroughly exposed.
The population of the whole world was 1,485,151,000, and there were
52,511,004 square miles on the earth’s surface, thus giving an average of
28.3 persons to the square mile. In the United States the population


averaged 16 persons to the square mile, and it was not yet considered
that there were more than sufficient to develop its vast territory.
There were 23 towns there with populations ranging from 100,000 to
1,300,000 souls, while in Victoria, outside of the metropolis, there were
but four towns worthy of the name—Ballarat with 40,753, Sandhurst
36,020, Geelong 20,984, and Castlemaine with 8900. The concentration
of population in a few centres was a great evil, and such schemes as
Mildura were destined to mitigate it. Thus in Victoria, with its
population of 1,090,869, there were clustered in Melbourne and its
suburbs no fewer than 419,490 people, or a matter of 15 persons to the
acre. Paris had 121 persons to the acre, and London had gathered
within its boundaries a seething crowd of 4,766,661, or nearly twice the
population of the continent of Australia. The disparity in the distribu-
tion of the world’s population was manifest, and it was by developing
the waste territories and coaxing folks away from the crowded centres
that the problem of finding a remedy was to be solved.
Before going into details with regard to the Mildura scheme the
lecturer glanced briefly at the proportions the fruit industry had
attained to under similar methods in California. The returns from that
state for 1890 were just to hand. The output of wine was 18,200,000
gallons; of raisins, 40,000,000 lbs.; dried wine grapes, 9,000,000 lbs.;
prunes, 15,000,000 lbs.; and the green fruits shipped East were
105,000,000 lbs. In 1880, ten years before, the returns were :—Dried
fruits, 590,000 lbs.; green fruits, 5,180,000 lbs. There were also 4000
carloads, or 1,144,000 boxes of oranges sent out of the State. Real
estate values had gone up from 10s. or 12s. per acre to £SO and upwards
for unimproved land, whilst soil suitable for orange-raising sold readily,
with a water-right, at prices ranging from <£6o to £IOO per acre.
While on the subject of California he would refer to a return he had
obtained recently, and which would be of present interest to his hearers.
Three owners of raisin vineyards situated adjacent to each other had
each sold the season’s product in a different way, and the results could
be compared. The first disposed of his crop on the vines, and his
retiu-n was £3O per acre. The second sold his raisins in the sweat-
boxes, and his return was £57 per acre. The third did his own drying
and packing, and sold his raisins in the boxes, and his crop brought him
in £B2 per acre. The fact that these returns could be obtained, with
the low prices ruling in the United States, should be most encouraging
to the settlers who were embarking in the raisin industry at Mildura.
The Australian consumption was a very considerable one, and good
prices were obtainable. Taking the latest statistics available, Victoria’s
consumption alone of dried fruits rose to £24,987 per annum; raisins,
to £38,400 ; currants, to £69,729 ; opium, to £41,651. Opium, by the
way, would be a most profitable industry at Mildura. There was a
good demand for the drug, its culture was very simple, and the price
was high. That Mildura had a most suitable climate for its cultivation
he was assured.
Mr. Knight wished it to be understood that in regard to the vine
and to wine making Australia had been ahead of California all along.
Over sixty years ago Mr. Jas. Bushby, of N.S.W., took Australian wine
home to England both in bulk and bottle, and two years afterwards (in


January, 1832) lie brought the wines of Australia under the notice of
Lord Goodierich, His Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Mr. Bushby also obtained 437 varieties of vines from Montpelier, in
France, 133 from the Luxembourg collection, and a large number of
raisin grapes from Cadiz and Malaga, in Spain. These were sent out
during 1832 by the English Government to Sydney, and not ten of the
cuttings died in transport. In the year 1860 Baron F. von Mueller, the
Government botanist, also imported a large number of vines from the
Luxembourg collection (which numbers upwards of 3000 varieties), and
the people of Victoria are indebted to him for the introduction of some
of the best kinds. Since that time the number of new varieties has
been largely increased by private importations. The lecturer claimed
that Australia was entitled to the credit of everything as it now stood
in connection with the vine, and he would not acknowledge any teaching
by any American upon the subject of viticulture. Both in kinds and
quality of vines and wines the Australians were far in advance of Cali-
fornia and of any other State in the Union.
With regard to the system of water supply which had been estab-
lished at Mildura, Mr, Knight said that the Chaffey Brothers had
given something superior to anything in Australia. As an engineer,
he had been delighted with the substantial and efficient character of the
waterworks, and he congratulated the people of Mildura on their good
fortune. The cultivation of the soil as carried out by the promoters
was better done and more cheaply done than it could be accomplished
in any other part of the Australian continent. He only wished that
his patch of 200 acres or so could be placed in their hands and worked
according to Mildura methods and charges. He had to acknowledge
that the land at Mildura was all of splendid quality—not only the pine
ridges, mallee lands, and bluebush country —but also the alluvial flats
on the frontage, which would be found abundantly fertile. The price of
£2O per acre he had considered excessive, but that was before he saw
Mildura. He could assure the settlers of Mildura that the soil, water
supply, expense of cultivation, and even the legislation of the country,
were entirely in their favour as compared with other cultural centres.
The duties on orchard, vineyard, and garden products, were of a highly
protective character. On wine the duty was 6s. per gallon; on fresh
fruits, Is. 6d. per bushel ; on dried and canned fruits, 2d. and 3d. per
lb. respectively. Imported candied peel was taxed to the extent of 2d.
per lb., and opium to 20s. per lb. All these duties were a protection
against outside competition, and he could see that the fruit industry at
Mildura was destined to be a stupendous and prosperous one.


Extract from the, “Argus,” 6th, 7 th, and Bth April, 1891.
THE GOVERNOR’S VISIT TO MILDURA.
His Excellency the Governor, the Earl of Hopetoun, and party
arrived by the steamer Ruby at half-past 2 o’clock this afternoon after a
very pleasant passage up the Murray from Morgan. The party con-
sisted of Mr. M‘Lean, Minister of Lands ; Mr. Graham, Minister of
Water Supply ; Mr. Meakin, secretary of Water Supply ; Mr. Taverner,
member for the district; Mr. Lascelles, Mr. Oallan, M.P. of Queens-
land ; and Captain Wallington, the Governor’s private secretary.
The lively strains of the local brass band were the first sounds to
greet the approaching visitors, and these were shortly followed by three
ringing cheers from the hundreds assembled on the river bank as the
steamer was made fast. His Excellency was received on landing by Mr.
George Chafiey, Mr. Waddingham, and the members of the shire council,
the president (Mr. Henry Williams) presenting an illuminated address
of welcome, which was duly read by the shire secretary.
His Excellency said in reply : —Mr. President and Gentlemen, —I
desire to thank you very heartily for the address which you have just
presented to me on behalf of the residents of the Shire of Miidura. I
have long looked forward to the opportunity of seeing the settlement
which has so recently sprung into existence, and which appears to be
growing in importance day by day. I congratulate you upon the
healthiness of the district and the fertility of the soil. Allow me to
thank you in all sincerity for the kind allusions you have made to Lady
Hopetoun, and for the cordial reception you have given me to-day.
Immediately after the address and reply the visitors were conveyed
in two four-horse drags, accompanied by numerous horsemen and many
carriages and vehicles of all descriptions, loaded with residents, to the
site of the Chaffey Agricultural College, situated about two miles along
Deakin-avenue, the foundation stone of which was to be laid by the
Governor.
Mr. George Chafiey said :—lt gives me great pleasure to welcome
your Excellency to Miidura to lay the corner stone of this institution.
I trust your visit will be pleasant, and that it will not be the last one,
I now beg to hand you this trowel, and have the honour to request
your Excellency to lay the corner stone of the Chafiey College ot
Agriculture.
His Excellency said :—Before laying the foundation stone I desire
to thank you and the people of Miidura very heartily for the warm
reception given me. I have long looked forward to this visit, because I
believe Miidura will prove a most valuable addition to the colony.
There is no doubt in my mind that irrigation is going to play a most
important part in the future of Victoria. Compared with its neighbours
its area is small, and, in order to maintain its position, we must make
the best use of every rood of land, and this can only be effectually
accomplished by irrigation. Irrigation, however, is not merely the
putting water on to the land. It is a science in itself, and the colony
generally, as well as the people of Miidura, will years hence have cause


to be thankful to the Chaffeys for their forethought and liberal and wise
policy in founding this college of agriculture.
The stone, which was a large block of marble brought from the
Kapunda quarry, was then “ well and truly laid ” by His Excellency.
After the ceremony Lord Hopetoun and party were driven over a part
of the settlement previous to returning to the coffee palace, where pre-
parations were in progress for the banquet to be given later on in the
evening.
A banquet to the Governor, tendered by the various public bodies
of Mildura, took place at the Coffee Palace on Saturday night, and
proved an agreeable entertainment in every respect.
His Excellency, in returning thanks for the toast of “ The Governor,”
proposed by the chairman (Mr. George Chaffey), and for what he was
pleased to term the brilliant hospitality accorded to him, said that it was
only another proof, if any were needed, of the kindly good feeling
shown towards him by the people of Victoria ever since he had come
amongst them. Referring to Mildura as a fruit-growing irrigation
colony, he said that he believed it was the beginning of a very great
industry, which would not only benefit the shareholders of the company
and the settlers, but, to take a broader view, would prove of vast
importance to the colony at large. It was difficult to believe that the
smiling, well-cultivated lands, over a portion of which he had driven
that afternoon, were the same that three years ago were absolutely
worthless—country at which even the squatters turned up their noses.
But there were the soil, the water, and the sunshine, only waiting the
master mind to bring about the happy combination leading to the pros-
perous results he saw around him ; and the best proof of the success
assured was that the very men who had been most sceptical now
admitted their mistake. As to finding a market for their products,
there were no reasonable grounds for fear on that score, for there would
be plenty of demand in Australia alone for a long time to come, as the
population was multiplying rapidly. The young people were becoming
increasingly fond of fruit, and the conviction was daily gaining ground
of its absolute necessity as an article of daily diet in this climate. But,
apart from local needs, there was the market of the world, and there
was no call for keen competition with others, Australia being in the
happy position of being able to supply fruit in abundance to Europe and
America at a time of year when they could not be produced there for
love or money. Then there was the question of water, and there
appeared to be a little jealousy on the part of their neighbours on the
other side of the Murray on that point, but from what he had seen of
the vast volume of the Murray as he came along it seemed to him that
the quantity required for irrigation purposes would be comparatively
infinitesimal, at any rate for some year’s to come, and then, if the ques-
tion arose, it might be solved by making use of the numerous large
lagoons as storage reservoirs to conserve.the millions of gallons of water
running seawards to waste, and he congratulated the Messrs. Chaffey on
their having already made this method a leading feature of their system.
His Excellency concluded by wishing peace, progress, and prosperity to
Mildura, and by expressing a hope of being able to make another visit
to it at some future time.


Mr. A, M‘Lean, Minister for Agriculture, in responding to the toast
of “The Ministry and Parliament of Victoria,” said that, as far as he
could gauge public opinion, he believed the people were disposed to accord
to the present Ministry a fair and impartial trial. Speaking of Mildura,
he was pleased to say that he had never been one of the doubters,
having supported the scheme first. Still, he was astonished
at the progress made, which was little less than marvellous. It was all
due to its promoters, and, without a doubt, this successful result would
add very greatly to the prosperity of the colony. And not only was
Victoria indebted to them but all Australia, and he hoped the managers
who had shown such rare skill and energy would further exercise
sufficient care in the curing and handling of the produce as to establish
a high reputation for Australian fruits and wines. He was favourable
to extending railway facilities to the district, not necessarily by con-
structing a costly high-speed railway, but one that could be strengthened
as the traffic warranted. Mr. M‘Lean then spoke in most favourable
terms of the event of the day—the laying of the foundation stone of the
Chaffey Agricultural College, dwelling upon the fact that inasmuch as
the land was the most valuable heritage of the people, its perfect and
scientific culture was an imperative necessity.
Mr. G. Graham, Minister of Water Supply, also responded to the
toast. .Referring to the irrigation trusts, he confessed his disappoint-
ment at their present condition, and remarked that if the money had
been expended half as well as that in Mildura had been it would have
been much better for the country. With regard to the mallee country,
he believed that the whole of it would ultimately be taken up by the
settlers and become thickly populated, and that some provision would
have to be made to carry the water on to what are now called the
“ back blocks.” He had instructed the engineers of the department to
furnish information for the purpose of bringing this matter before
Parliament. liVith regard to railway communication, he said that from
what he had seen of the character of the country and its capability of
supporting a large population, he must admit that Mr. Taverner had not
exaggerated the claims of the district, and he thought the country would
be justified in extending the railway to Mildura.
Mr. Taverner, in his response to the toast, said he believed from the
information which had come before him as a member of the Railway
Commission that a line of railway sufficient for their purpose could be
laid down at an expense of £2500 a mile, and that the enhanced value
of the state lands passed through would more than recoup the cost.
The only other formal toast, “ Our Visitors,” having been spoken to
by Mr. Lascelles and Mr. W. Callan, the gathering was brought to a
close with a cordial vote of thanks to the chairman, proposed by His
Excellency.
Sunday was observed as a day of complete rest, His Excellency the
Governor simply attending divine service at the Presbyterian Church in
the morning and visiting Lord Ranfurly’s place, “ Old Mildura,’ during
the afternoon. On Monday, however, His Excellency was in the saddle
from about 10 a.m. till past 6 p.m., with the exception of an interval
for lunch, seeing as much of the settlement as could be viewed within
that short space of time. Previous to setting out, a visit was made by


the Yice-regal and Ministerial party to the engineering works, the
planing and moulding mills, foundry, and other workshops of the
Chaffey Company, and special interest was taken by Lord Hopetoun
and Messrs. M‘Lean and Graham, Minister of Lands and Water Supply,
in the process of preparing raisins for market by means of the raisin-
stemmer, grader, and presser, the machinery of which was set in motion
for their inspection. In the afternoon particular pains were taken by
Mr. Chaffey to afford the party opportunities of witnessing the various
salient points of the Chaffey system of clearing, cultivating, and irriga-
tion. As the planting season does not begin for another six weeks, that
work could not be seen, but the method of employing water in irrigating
the plantations was shown in operation, and afterwards an inspection of
the big pumping plant erected at King’s billabong was made. Very
few stoppages were made on the return journey, the town being reached
shortly after sunset, the visitors being enthusiastic on the subject of the
country and the new methods adopted for bringing forth its vast store
of wealth.
His Excellency the Governor took his departure at half-past 10 this
morning on horseback for Kulkyne Station, accompanied in a buggy by
Mr. George Chaffey, Mr. M‘Lean, and Mr. Lascelles, as also by Mr.
Peter M'Laren on horseback. The party, with the exception of Mr,
Chaffey, will spend the night at the station, and will next morning
strike out across the mallee country towards Dimboola, passing the
night at a camp arranged by Mr. Lascelles at a place called Yellanjip.
Thence next day they will proceed to Lake Corrong, where two days
will be spent with Mr, Lascelles at his station, and afterwards on to
Jeparit and Dimboola, reaching the latter town on Monday morning,
and so by rail to Melbourne. The other division of the party left by
special coach for Swan Hill at half-past 8 this morning.
Extract from the “ Argus," 13 th April, 1891.
The Minister of Lands is in favour of the construction of a railway
from Warracknabeal to Mildura, Peturning from his visit to the
irrigation colony last week he passed through the mallee country lying
between the two places, and observed that there was a large area that
was suitable for settlement. With the exception of 20 miles the country
might be put to profitable use. The line would not only open up good
agricultural land, but provide ready means of communication with
Mildura, and tap the Darling Piver trade, which at present goes to
Adelaide by way of Morgan.


T ENTS
Official Reports of the Victorian Water Supply Department .. .. 1
A Trip on the River Murray, by David Christie Murray;. .. .. 19
The Murray Irrigation Colonies, reprinted from the South Australian
Regis ter, Adelaide .. .. .. .. .. .^22
The Parliamentary Trip to Mildura, reprinted from the Argus,
Melbourne .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 25
The Mildura Irrigation Colony, reprinted from the Daily Telegraph,
Melbourne .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Mildura, reprinted from the Leader, Melbourne .. .. .. 39
m J p tt • T\T.'l .1 * £ i.l A ~ A 1
Twenty-four Hours in Mildura, reprinted from the Age, Melbourne .. 41
The Mildura Irrigation Colony—Magnitude of the Mildura Water
Right, Weekly Times, Melbourne .. .. .. .. .. 45
The Report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply (Leading Article),
reprinted from the Argus, Melbourne .. .. .. .. ..48
The Report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply (Leading Article),
reprinted from the Age, Melbourne .. .. .. . • .. 49
Irrigation Colony of Mildura, reprinted from the Queenslander, Brisbane 50
Mildura Visited by Mr. R. Speight, Chief Commissioner Victorian
Railways, the Mildura Cultivator .. .. .. .. • • .. 70
The Pioneer Irrigation Colony, reprinted from the Sydney Morning
Herald, Sydney 71
Mildura Revisited, reprinted from the Argus, Melbourne .. .. 95
Report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply (Leading Article), \ 115
reprinted from the Argus .. .. .. .. •. .. i HB
Report of the Chief Engineer of Water Supply (Leading Article), re-
printed from the South A ustralian Register .. .. .. .. 116
The Progress of Mildura and Eenmark, reprinted from the Argus .. 118
Marvellous Mildura, reprinted from the Herald, Melbourne .. .. 122
Mildura and Its Industries, Lecture by Mr G. W. Knight, F.R.H.S. .. 123
The Governor’s Visit to Mildura, Reprinted from the Argus .. .. 127


1508
01808014
MELBOURNE
M‘CARRON, BIRD AND CO. PRINTERS,
479 COLLINS STREET




