

toe?
K,ek,IC3»OU£ PAH£
ha* 10
H'i 1-
The Church’s Work in
r , Western Australia.
THE object I set before myself in writing this paper is to
obtain help from Home for the work of the Church in
the Diocese of Perth—help that I believe we are
justified in asking.
I am told that people say “ Why does Western Australia
require help when it is a country in which gold is found ? ”
And, over and over again, I have been asked, “ Why cannot
the West Australians pay for the support of their own Clergy? ”
It is necessary, so it seems to me, that I should remove some
of the misconceptions that certainly exist with regard to my
Diocese.
One answer to such questions as the above, is to be found
in the appeal of the Australian Bishops, who, knowing the
state of the case, generously set aside their own needs, to bring
before the public the absolute necessity, in the Diocese of Perth,
for help at the present time.
Consider what the work of a new clergyman is: I send
him to a new gold-fields’ town, which has, perhaps, been in
existence for six months. What does he find ? About 500 or
1,000 people living in iron houses, hessian shanties, or under
canvas. There is no church, no school, no parsonage; nothing
but a piece of ground given by the Government. At first all
that he can do is to hold the services in any building that he
can get. Then he has to try to build a church, or a school, and


a little hut for himself, at the same time asking for subscriptions
to his own stipend. How can you expect the miners, many of
whom have been neglected and in whose hearts must, first of
all, be stirred up the religious sense, to provide all these things
at once ? They must be taught first; afterwards they will give.
There are, besides the gold-fields, vast pastoral and agri-
cultural districts in my diocese. Some of the parishes in these
districts are the size of large English counties. It is impossible
for a few settlers, scattered over a large area, most of them
with small means, to pay the whole of their Vicar’s stipend, and
for the building and up-keep of churches and parsonages.
When I went out in 1894 I found a population of 100,000
people cared for by about 25 clergy. The size of the Diocese
might be represented by the following countries all put together:
Austro-Hungary, Gt. Britain and Ireland, France, Germany,
Italy, Greece, Switzerland, Servia, and Montenegro. It was
enough to strike terror into the heart of a new comer to con-
template the waste of time in getting from one place to another.
In 1896 I travelled 21,000 miles; which includes 2,000 miles
to confirm two persons.
A great difficulty arose from the sudden influx of popula-
tion. Fifty years ago there were 4,000 people in the Colony ;
about six years ago there were 50,000 ; now there are 160,000..
At one time people arrived at the rate of 1,000 a week. New
towns on the gold-fields sprung up like magic. Where, but a
few months before, the foot of man had never trod, a reef
would be found, and a town of 500 or 1,000 inhabitants be
formed. At once a clergyman should have been sent there;,
and requests without end kept on coming, “Please send us a
clergyman.” What could I do? We had no money with
which to pay more clergy; and there were no clergy to send.
After a time we did manage to send a few men; and with
splendid results. In 1896 the annual Government grant of
£2,000 was withdrawn, and ,£20,000 was given in compensation.
When the latter sum was invested, it was found that we should
have ,£BOO a year less than when we were in receipt of the
annual grant.


The present position of the Church in the Colony is, that
we have the Church fully organized, with a synod and body of
trustees incorporated by act of Parliament. We have about 35
clergy and a number of lay readers. The capital of the Dio-
cesan Sustentation and Endowment Fund is ,£9,000, besides
about 3,000 acres of glebe. The income of the See of Perth
from funded property and donations is about ,£BOO. We
receive help from the friends in England of my Diocese, from
the S.P.G., S.P.C.K., and Colonial and Continental Society;
and I do not know what the Diocese would do without this
help.
I want, at once, about 12 clergy. They must be full
of the missionary spirit, well educated, full of zeal and
manliness, willing to devote themselves, without fear of man
or fever, to the work—not coming out for the sake of health
only, or because they think the life will be more free and
interesting, but knowing that the work is hard and full
of trials, are yet willing to endure hardness as good soldiers
of Jesus Christ.
Then, in addition to the men, I want money wherewith
to pay them. Our present resources barely maintain our
present staff of clergy —a staff of clergy woefully too small
for the work of this great harvest field. The people that
come to the gold-fields come to make money, not because
they have it. The majority of the men that come here
leave their wives and families in the other Colonies, and
send away money every week for their support.
We have now, in the Perth Diocese, the very grandest
opportunity that ' has ever been given to the Anglican
Church. Half the people before the great influx belonged
to us; of those people that have lately come, very many
belong to us, and very few are otherwise than well affected
towards us. If only we had the men and means to send a
new man to every place as it was formed, we should retain
our own people, and gather in numbers of others, who would
be only too delighted to come if they saw us really in
earnest.


‘•There is a tide in the aftairs of men which, taken at the flood, leads on to victory.”
Such a tide is passing over Western Australia now.
Will you not come forward to help us to ride upon that flood
to victory for God ?
C.O.L. PERTH, Bishop.
Clergy wishing to offer themselves for this work should
write to the Bishop’s Commissaries ; The Rev. J. G.
Deed, D.D., The Vicarage, Nuneaton, and The Rev. W.
W. D. Firth, The Vicarage, Patricroft, Manchester.
Contributions will be thankfully received and acknow-
ledged by,
Miss J. E. Maurice,
Hon. Organizing Secretary,
214, Portsdown Road,
London, W.
Cheques should be crossed, Parr’s and Alliance Bank.


y y
t/ . £/*
csu^
fUrC. yy*~
iuryit £r 'd
An/tf $-*-
y, yy /*<yc- #U-*~ 6s£ry't<
Jisru*. / jfaLt.
OTY \S A/yT~-£-^.
ft c cr-u-y
y t *-
c*~*( <~ 6U
■J «*. AU<. A <A
Jf /£- <-
& %* / y
/is/Zru) yt*~t. £ X6*~A y*^
~£AsL~j </t~ S *-
/ .








I I
Please give one Penny to the Diocese of
Perth Clergy Stipends Fund. This card, when
filled, to be sent to, Miss J. E. Maurice, 214,
Portsdown Road, London, W.
