

The
KIWI STORY




THE KIWI STORY


William Ramsay, the founder
Born 1867 : Died 1914
(From a bronze plaque in the Company’s Melbourne Office)


The
KIWI STORY
THE HOUSE OF RAMSAY, 1905-1951




Foreword
Today in all corners of the world the
use of an Australian household product
is a part of daily life essential to
the proper care of footwear. Without fanfare or flourish, this un-
assuming product has quietly won acceptance by people of many
nations during the forty-six years of its existence. How did this come
about? Was its invention a stroke of luck or brilliance? Did it rise
above the others in its field because of some magic formula, super
merchandising methods, or was it rather the gentle persistence of
quality?
This story —the story of Kiwi Polish—is presented in this brochure
at an interesting point in its history and in the industrial history of the
Commonwealth, the year 1951 marking the Centenary of Responsible
Government in Victoria, and the Golden Jubilee of Federation.




The Early
Beginnings
Melbourne in 1878 was a prosperous col-
onial city of 300,000 souls. Its wide bay
was always packed with sailing ships,
plying between the colony and the Mother Country. Back to the
British Isles came fascinating tales of gold discovery, fortunes made
on the land, and descriptions of Melbourne’s wide and busy streets.
Families came in their thousands, crowding the rapidly rising city,
seeking a new life, fame and fortune.
Amongst these arrived a family of Ramsays from Glasgow, on the
Loch Snnart on a dismal June day in 1878.
John Ramsay, a religious, resourceful Scot of merchant stock, found
a house in Prahran for his large family of sons, and set about establish-
ing himself in business as agent for T. Semple, a bookseller, of Glasgow.


During his first few years in the colony, he found Melbourne in a
very sound condition, with evidences of prosperity on every hand.
British capital was pouring in for investment, and money was easily
earned. To keep pace with the swarms of immigrants, in every direc-
tion, builders, financed by numerous land and building societies, were
building on blocks purchased at rapidly rising prices. Suburban land
rose steadily in value, and the whole community, in a contagious spirit
of speculation, entered into an era known as "the land boom.”
John Ramsay, with his son William, established the real estate
business of John Ramsay and Son, and William, recognising the oppor-
tunities created by the hundreds of companies that were springing
up, operated as a public accountant. The boom, with its semblance
of prosperity, continued through the eighties, with the favourable
seasons, the recurring surpluses in revenue, and the buoyant optimism
inspiring confidence. The Ramsay fortunes fared well—so well that
John Ramsay built Clydebank, a stately home at Essendon. His fourth
son, Hugh, was at this time showing great artistic talent, which later
resulted in his being recognised as one of Australia’s leading portrait
painters.
The inevitable bursting of the bubble came in 1891, causing
consternation and dismay throughout the community. By the middle
of the following year, 21 leading financial institutions, holding deposits
to the extent of £11,000,000, had closed their doors. Fortunately, the
Ramsays had built up a solid business as auctioneers and property
agents. This helped them to weather the storm through the remaining
years of the Nineteenth Century. It also brought them into touch with
many manufacturers, who were introducing new products which were
appearing in hundreds —a few to survive, the majority to fade away
unheralded and unsung.


William, an active, methodical young man, bought every book he
could lay his hands on, studied basic processes and explored the require-
ments of the rapidly changing age. At the age of 31, he visited New
Zealand where, at Oamaru, he married Annie Elizabeth Meek, the
daughter of an old friend of his father, on January 2, 1901 —the day
after the Federation of the Commonwealth of Australia. Returning to
Melbourne with his bride, William pursued his interest in manufacturing,
and through this interest, became associated with a man named Hamil-
ton McKellan. They formed the firm of McKellan and Ramsay in
April, 1901, and established a modest factory in Bouverie Street, Carlton,
where they produced a wide assortment of products—disinfectant pow-
der, stove polish, cleanser, boot cream, etc.
From their own experience they knew that the cleaning of family
boots and shoes was a laborious business. Most people were still using
paper-wrapped stick blackings, which were made from an endless


variety of quite empiric materials, including soaps, glue, gelatine, oils,
gum arabic, sulphuric acid, tallow, fish, stearine, lamp black, bone
black, molasses, sugar and beer. An early method of treating footwear,
which had been long maintained in England, was to give the leather
a thorough cleaning with diluted white-of-egg, and follow with a
direct application of beeswax, well boned in, but so far, there was no
commercial application of this process.
In 1904, by which time the firm had progressed sufficiently to
move to premises at 576-8 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, they made
an improved boot cream, which first reached the market in September
of that year. But this product still left much to be desired. Following
the development of boot polish abroad, it became evident that the
most modern polishes were of the solvent type, with beeswax and
paraffin wax as the main solid components, dilution being effected with
gum spirits of turpentine.


Birth of a
Product
OF ALL THE products manufactured dur-
ing these early years by McKellan and
Ramsay—and there were many, ranging
from fire-kindlers to antiseptic sawdust—the one on which they concen-
trated most was the boot cream, for they realised that a product with a
daily application by the bulk of the people was the one most likely
to succeed. Experimenting along these lines, they produced, in April,
1905, Mirror Polish, which became moderately successful.
The following year, 1906, marked a most important event in the
history of the enterprise, for it was in this year that they perfected
a new polish— to which William Ramsay gave the name of Kiwi.
The trade mark, the credit for which was largely due to his wife,
came from New Zealand, where, during his visit in 1900, he had noticed
the quaint, wingless birds, with their crisp, glossy plumage. It looked
well on the small, round tin, and the name was easy to say, attractive
to look at. There was also the timely association with the Kiwi, New
Zealand’s national emblem, a name which was to win honour and
glory the world over in the First and Second World wars.
The first tin of Kiwi polish was sold on October 13, 1906, and
the sales had amounted to 86 gross by the end of the year.
However, the picture was not as rosy as he had at first imagined,
for during the following two years only 46 gross were sold. There were
already 14 other brands of shoe polish on the market, and Britain was
exporting well-established brands. As yet, though, there was no polish
which could put the colour back into tan shoes after they had been
faded by the weather and hard wearing. Retailers had made repeated
requests for a polish that would restore the colour of footwear that had


become faded by the sunlight in their windows. In 1908, the famous
Kiwi Dark Tan was produced. It proved a great advancement on
other polishes, because it polished, preserved and restored the colour to
dark tan shoes. It contained ingredients which nourished the leather
and kept it supple, and was water-resistant and unaffected by climate.
The new polish made its appearance on June 29 of that year.
Other colours, Light Tan, Brown and Ox Blood, followed shortly after.
The special feature of the Kiwi preparations was that, while producing
an excellent and lasting polish, they also stained the leather to which
they were applied, in varying shades, from light tan to reddish brown.
A light tan boot or shoe upper could thus be turned into a dark shade;
brown footwear, briskly rubbed, could be made to look like new, and
worn leather bags and saddlery could be vastly improved in appearance.
In addition, Kiwi added to its growing list of products its black polish,
and a special patent leather polish. Realising that other manufacturers
would emulate his achievements if possible, William Ramsay took precau-
tions to conceal the formula of the Kiwi colour polishes, and hastened
to spread distribution as quickly as possible. On a trip to Sydney
in 1909, he obtained an order for 100 gross.
Mr. C. Neville, who joined the Company at the same time as the
new Kiwi polish appeared (and is still with the Company) recalls the
intense production effort required by the small staff to keep pace with
orders. The premises consisted of two rooms, each about 20 feet by 25
feet, and a small shed at the rear of the building. But despite the produc-
tion difficulties, they lost no opportunity to increase sales, even selling it
in the streets of Melbourne on Friday nights. During those early years
of struggle and experimentation, the path had not been smooth for
the McKellan and Ramsay partnership, and it was ultimately dissolved,
McKellan to join an opposition company and Ramsay to persist with
the Kiwi brand.


By the end of 1910, Kiwi distribution had been extended to all
States of the Commonwealth, except Western Australia, and to New
Zealand (under the Mirror trade mark). From this year’s sales of
703 gross, the following year saw an undreamt-of rise to 2,323 gross.
Looking ahead, Ramsay had leased larger premises at 683 Elizabeth
Street. He purchased and occupied this property in 1911, trading as
the Kiwi Polish Company. Mr. H. D. Charters joined the staff in 1912
to help cope with the expanding production. (He is still with the
Company as factory manager.) Methods were introduced to further
improve Kiwi’s quality, sales continued to multiply, and at the end
of the third year since its introduction of stain polishes, Kiwi had become
one of Australia’s leading brands.


World-wide
Expansion
illiam ramsay had al-
ways stressed that the
United Kingdom was a
market for Kiwi, and his father sailed in 1912, arriving at Southampton
in June to explore the possibilities. Small quantities of polish had already
been shipped to his cousin—another William Ramsay—in Motherwell,
Scotland, who was then a sales executive with a firm of corn merchants.
Premises were obtained at 17 and 18 Verulam Street, London (off Gray’s
Inn Road), employing a staff of three.
With a sufficient indication of its potentialities, both in Great
Britain and on the Continent, William Ramsay—Kiwi’s founder —
followed a year later to explore the European market. Hampered by
a severe cold, he arranged to exhibit Kiwi at the International Horse
Show in Glasgow during the year, and to advertise in the Shoe and
Leather Journal. A feature of this advertising was the listing of Kiwi
distributors and leading hotels throughout Great Britain, where the
polish was obtainable. Despite its higher price and the severe competi-
tion of well-established British brands, Kiwi soon made headway, both
in Britain and on the Continent, recording sales totalling 6,000 gross
in 1913, almost equalling the total Australian sales for the same period.
Shortly after his return to Australia in 1914, William Ramsay was
struck down after a brief illness. He died at the age of 47, leaving a


daughter and two sons. He thus enjoyed a brief six years of Kiwi’s
incredible rise to success. The real fruits of his labour were yet to
follow. The business in Australia was carried on by the Company’s old
employees, headed by John Ramsay and William’s widow, while brother
James took over in London. Another brother, Jack, later Sir John,
renowned Tasmanian surgeon, was appointed a director.
War had come by this, and with it a new demand for Kiwi. Millions
of men under arms meant millions of tan boots to be polished, and
millions of pairs of leggings to be kept spick and span. The Australian
Light Horse, with their renowned plumage, their glittering bandoliers
and leggings, were walking advertisements for Kiwi polish. By 1915
the problems of production and co-ordination had become so great
that steps were taken to place the scattered interests on a solid basis.
Big increases in plant, and new methods of production were applied
to supply the growing demand from the forces in the field and the
people at home, and at the same time maintain the peace-time quality
of the product. The Australian and British Companies were amalga-
mated to form the Kiwi Polish Company Proprietary Limited, registered
in January, 1916, with John Ramsay as its Chairman of Directors, Mr.
W. H. Roddick as Managing Director, and Mr. S. C. Birtchnell as
Secretary. James Ramsay, on his return from England, became joint
Managing Director, and Mr. J. W. H. G. Thompson later became secre-
tary of the company. William Ramsay, of Motherwell, was persuaded
to come to London and manage the English branch, which, a few months
later, moved to 715 Fulham Road, Fulham. By 1917 the British Army
was placing big orders for Kiwi Polish, one order alone totalling 10,000
gross. American forces followed suit, and big orders were filled.
Wherever Allied troops fought—in France and the Middle East—their


demand for Kiwi was insistent. James Ramsay, brother of the London
manager, was now directing sales of the English factory.
Only ten years after its first appearance in Melbourne, thirty million
tins of Kiwi polish had been sold.
In the immediate post-war era, the consistent quality of the polish
continued to assert itself to such an extent that additional factories
had to be built or existing ones enlarged accordingly. In Melbourne
and London bigger factories became necessary. A large, modern factory
was built in Burnley Street, Richmond, to replace the cramped factory
in Elizabeth Street; and at Finchley, Kiwi’s English headquarters were
purchased.
Between 1914 and 1924 Kiwi had built its distribution to reach
over fifty countries, including Germany, Belgium, France, Switzerland,
Austria, China, Russia and South America; in fact, it can be said that
from then on the sun has never set on Kiwi.


The Second
Generation
The twenties saw many changes at the
helm of Ramsay House. John Ramsay
died in 1924, just three years after his
grandson, John, elder son of the founder, had entered the company.
Thomas, the younger son, followed in 1926, entering the company as a
consulting chemist. John became managing director in November,
1928.
As if to challenge the perspicacity of the second generation Ramsays,
the world-wide depression of the early thirties caused the only decline in
sales figures of Kiwi in the history of the Company. Other factors arose,
too, to make the way a difficult one. Macadamised roads and better street
drainage meant that footwear stayed clean longer. Shoes took the place
of boots. The motor car was hastening the last feeble finale of horse-
drawn transport, eliminating the need for saddle equipment and many
other leather goods which Kiwi had polished for two decades. Further,
tariffs put heavy restraint on the export business, and, with the
depression, scarcity of money brought in heavy sales resistance. Through
the thirties, other factors made production more costly and quality hard
to maintain, but steps were taken to combat these effects. Production
was streamlined by new machines and scientific methods. Laboratory
control of raw materials was introduced to ensure consistent quality
and to minimise loss. Methods of controlling temperature and weigh-
ing and checking systems were introduced. Quality checks were made
on the fit and printing of Kiwi’s five-colour tins. New accounting
systems were used, so that statistics could be immediately available on
stocks, costs and sales all over the world.
Tariff barriers in New Zealand and France presented serious prob-
lems, but Kiwi solved them by opening a branch factory in Auckland,
and by entering into a manufacturing agreement in France. The polish


was manufactured temporarily in Paris pending the establishment of
premises at Rouen which were opened in 1934. During this year the
New Zealand factory at Auckland (using the Kiwi trade mark) was
opened by John Ramsay, and later taken over by Harry Ramsay, who
had joined Kiwi in 1922, and who, at the present time, is the Company’s
Australian manager. In 1957, another factory was opened—in Warsaw,
Poland. Sales across the world had begun to mount again. From the
Melbourne plant, large shipments went to the Malay States and China.
A back door approach to the American market began with the sale
of the polish to American Marines stationed at Shanghai during the
China Incident, and the new, almost unsolicited, increase in the U.S.
was sufficient to allot the East Coast sales to London and the West
Coast sales to Melbourne.


World War II
nce again, war engulfed
the world and ravaged
its peoples. As with all
companies manufacturing essential military supplies, Kiwi’s production
suffered increasing labour and supply difficulties as the demand rose.
With millions of disciplined men under arms, equipment-cleaning
habits became more widespread than ever before, and Kiwi had to
push its distribution over a vast area, while still attempting to keep
its name on the civilian market.
The extension achieved by the firm meant that some war damage
was inevitable. When the Germans swept into Poland, the Warsaw
branch was completely destroyed by fire. Efforts were made to
arrange for the evacuation of Rudolf Kulik, the manager, and his family,
whose home had been bombed out, but the curtain of Nazi occupation
closed on this tragic chapter. After a desperate letter from one of
his friends, dated March 19, 1940, no further word was heard until
1946, when it was confirmed that the Kulik family had all died during
the German occupation of Warsaw.
The French associate company had also been under Nazi occupation.
The last letter received from Rouen was dated June 6, 1940, just
seven days before the occupation of Paris, but the manager, Mr. R. D.
Mann, and his wife, had succeeded in making their escapes by different
routes to England. Mann arrived by destroyer from Bordeaux on June
17, a few days after his wife.
It was three-and-a-half years later when, on Saturday, January 19,
1944, bombers of the Luftwaffe made a raid on the area including the


Ealing factory. A stick of 17 incendiaries straddled the target. One
bomb landed squarely on the Kiwi factory, embedding itself three feet
in the concrete floor —without exploding! Two others fell harmlessly
at either end of the factory. Only very slight damage was done, and
there were no casualties. The bombs were later removed by a British
disposals squad. A later interrogation of the German pilot disclosed
that the factory’s escape from destruction was due to the fact that
for some reason he had deliberately unarmed his stick of bombs.
The Rouen factory had since been pressed into service under German
direction, and was making polish for Nazi jackboots. However, in mid-
-1944, during the retreat of the Germans from Falaise, after the mass
break-through of the U.S. troops in the South of France, the remnants
of a German division were attempting to cross the Seine at Rouen. All
bridges had been destroyed, and the Nazis were using hurriedly assembled
pontoons. An R.A.F. squadron of heavy bombers caught them un-
prepared, and wiped them out, almost to a man. During this raid,
the Kiwi factory was severely damaged by 500 lb. fragmentation bombs.
Rouen was liberated on August 30, 1944. Although the factory has
since been completely renovated, it still shows grim marks of war, one
inside wall being completely embedded with powdered glass blasted from
the windows.
During the war, Kiwi tins were seen in many strange places.
"Time” correspondent, Walter Graeber, wrote from Tobruk in 1942
old tins of British-made Kiwi Polish lay side by side with
empty bottles of Chianti. ...”
"Smith’s Weekly” published a story of an alleged remark by a
Bronx G. 1., who, on arrival in Darwin on a U.S. transport, informed
his buddies: "Ain’t youse guys ever hoid o’ dis place? Dis is Australia—
where dey makes de boot polish wid de boid on it!”


Further
Expansion
he year 1946 saw the
retirement of William
.Ramsay from the
managership of the English branch and the appointment of Mr. C. M.
Duncan of South Australia as his successor. During the same year,
wide plans for development were made. New machines were designed,
new products introduced, new laboratory methods of testing raw
materials developed. Under the joint directorship of John and Tom
Ramsay, the sons of the founder, the post-war business has flourished.
In 1947 steps were taken to establish a factory in the United States,
where there was already a substantial market supplied from England
and Australia. Kiwi’s U.S. factory opened on March 15, 1948, at Phila-
delphia. It is now earning valuable dollars for Australia.
Canada, another oyster, has opened up and the Kiwi is now a
familiar trade mark throughout the entire English and French-speaking
world.
From Ramsay House, Kiwi’s headquarters in Melbourne, the immense
family of factories, branches, sub-branches and distributors around the
world is administered. The two Ramsay brothers travel extensively
by air, totalling about 100,000 miles a year, to solve the multitude of
problems that arise from month to month —production difficulties here,
supply problems there, political complications brought about by the
constantly changing frontiers between the free and the "closed off”


world, slumps, strikes, sales boosts, advertising, public relations —and
always insistence on the one demanding requirement of its founder,
William Ramsay—quality, quality, quality . . .
From Kiwi’s five factories, the five-colour tins with the quaint Kiwi
trade mark roll out to the world’s markets—to all the continents —to the
American, British and French Empires.


The Kiwi
The New Zealand flightless bird of the genus Apteryx, more commonly
known as the Kiwi, is confined entirely to New Zealand, and is now almost
extinct. It is one of the most remarkable birds in the world, from the
naturalist’s point of view, and vies in this respect with the Australian platypus.
Over a century ago it was to be found in great numbers in the mountainous
regions, but it was hunted intensively by the Maoris, both for food, and also
for the making of mats, which they highly prized. Consequently, the Kiwi to-day is
extremely rare in its native state, and is rigidly protected by the New Zealand
Government. At the Haukes Bay Acclimatisation Farm ("Green Meadows"),
natural history was made in recent years when the Curator, Mr. F. D. Robson,
was successful in breeding the first Kiwi in captivity.
The following is a general description of the bird, its habitat and habits-.
The Kiwi is approximately the size of a domestic fowl, with rudimentary
wings, which are completely concealed by the plumage. The feathers have a
stiff, rough appearance. W'. L. Butler, Sc.D., in his "A History of the Birds
of New Zealand,” says, inter alia, of the Kiwi-.
"The Kiwi is in some measure compensated for the absence of wings by its
swiftness of foot. When running it makes wide strides, and carries the body
in an oblique position, with the neck stretched to its full extent and inclined
forward. In the twilight it moves about cautiously and as noiselessly as a
rat. to which, indeed, at this time, it bears some outward resemblance. In a
quiescent posture, the body generally assumes a rotund appearance: and it some-
times. but only rarely, supports itself by resting the point' of its hill on the
ground. . . . When provoked it erects the body, and. raising the foot to the
breast, strikes downwards with considerable force and rapidity, thus using its
sharp and powerful claws as weapons of defence. . . . White hunting for its
food, the bird makes a continual sniffing sound through the nostrils, which are
placed at the extremity of the upper mandible. ... It is interesting to watch
the bird in a state of freedom, foraging for worms, u-hich constitute its principal
food-, it moves about with a stow action of the body; and the long, flexible bill
is driven into the soft ground, generally home to the very root, and is withdrawn
with a worm held at the extreme tip of the mandibles. On getting the worm
fairly out of the ground, it throws up its head with a jerk and swallows it whole."
Dense, damp forests are the natural haunts of the Kiu-i. for only in the
soft ground of such places can it use its long, sensitive bill to obtain food. It
sleeps all day in burrows or other cavities, and only at night docs it become
active, emitting a shrill, short whistle. It is from this sound that the Maori name
Kiwi is derived.
One of the most extraordinary things about the Kiwi is the size of the egg
it lays, considering that the bird itself is no; bigger than the ordinary domestic
fowl, and is frequently smaller, Buller .refers to an egg measuring 5.3 inches
in length by 3.1 inches in breadth, and a weight of eleven ounces is not
uncommon. The male bird invariably sits on the egg to hatch it, and during
the incubation period loses up to half its own weight. The chick early develops
a voracious appetite, and at the age of one month, when weighing approximately
three-quarters of a pound, will consume double that weight of worms daily.
The Kiwi takes about six years to reach maturity, and the average life-span
of the bird is thirty years.


This book has been written and designed by Burton Graham
and Associates from information compiled by F. X. Doyle
from authentic records kept by the Kiwi Polish Company
Ply. Ltd.; illustrated by William Marlin & Haughton


