

MG&'
•vW ' 1K|I - < 'i
# mf&F lr^
■Rp^
JP f ipF aL II w
fjtfjEgBtkk -f" '^Mf
JPjJplflj * 'C/^ ; I Btfef /
9
JH9H9H
SB
M •" -^SB/t^mKMm* * JH 1
' mM \!r -
%9y ? g -«;/
LeysKOK
DERNIERE
HEORE"


COLLECTIOIVVL^
{(( RATIONAL LIBRARY J|)
\\ CANBERRA JJJJ
W R T VL
I
]
-
'
■ - % |H
I




■
HE Human Species probably gains more pleasure
from sentimentality than from any other emo-
tion, for the heart.of Man yearns above all
things for the companionship of his fellows.
His greatest joy is the possession of a friend, and his
happiest moments are those spent among his pals, or, as
they say in the A. I. F., his cobbers. It is just because
the time has arrived to part from so many ol these
friends that we turn to anything which will stand .in our
eyes as a symbol of Remembrance. We grasp at each
semblance of a souvenir, not on account ol the vulgar
intrinsic value of the thing, but lor the shadowy recol-
leclions it will prompt in the imagination down the long
road of the Future. And what better agent exists for the
stimulation ol sentiment than the exchange of yarns, the
telling of jokes, the writing of poetry, and the comedy ol
sketching, all gathered in a great ensemble under the
cover of a Regimental Magazine ? There we have before
us the peculiar characteristics of the comrades we know.
There, also, we behold them in all their moods. Every
word, rising with sincerity from the heart, opens tor us
a way down to the heart. It is the key which turns the
lock in the door of the magic cave ol Friendship, so
richly stacked with the jewels of Sacrifice and the pure
gold of Good Intentions.
So it is, that without the absurdity of any ambitious
pretence, and with a true recognition of its purpose, the
" Derniere Ileure " A. I. F., springs into being. Through
its pages will be seen much to interest and not a little of
that graphic eloquence of language which will create in
our minds many a picture of those affecting hours which
can NEVER return.
To all the staff of the Australian Section in Rouen,
and its ex-personnel in London GREEIINGS! that
they may meet with the Good Luck and the Success
which is their desert, is the wish of the Committee, who
hope, at the same time, that this little book will be worth
a place among the cherished reflections of Tomorrow.
THE EDITOR.


/ \
The tvorld's great age begins anew,
The golden years return,
The earth does like a snake renew
Her Winter weeds outworn.
Heaven smiles, and faiths and empires gleam
Like wrecks of a dissolving dream.
SHELLEY.
THE HOMECOMING !


" INCOMPARABLE SOLDIERS "
Marshal Foch's Message to the Australians
The following letter, enclosing Marshal Foch's message to the Australian troops
has been received : " Cher Monsieur : Sur la demande qui lui en avait ete faite, le Marechal
FOCII a fait, tout recemmcnt, une declaration sur les troupes australiennes.
Je ne crois pouvoir mieux faire que de vous remettre une copie de ce message,
dont les termes me semblent repondre au desir expnime par M. Millard.
Veuillez agreer, Monsieur, l'expression de mes sentiments distingues
This note was signed " C. SUPIER
" Chef de cabinet du Marechal FOCH "
C'est avec un magnifique entrain que les troupes australiennes sont venues soutenir
Ja cause des Allies.
Depuis le commencement jusqu'a la tin, elles se sont distinguees par leurs qualites
d'endurance et d'audace.
Par leur initiative, leur esprit combatif, leur magnifique ardeur elles se sont montrees
des troupes de choc de premier ordre.
Aux heures graves de 1918, avec leurs camarades d'Angleterre, d'Amerique et de France,
elles ont tenu t&te a la ruee ennemie. Elles l'ont arretee, brisee et, a 1 heure fixee, iefoulee loin en
arriere.
Je suis heureux de dire a l'Australie le souvenir inoubliable que nous garderons de ses
incomparables soldats.
The Australian troops have upheld the cause of the Allies with magnificent dash.
From start to finish they distinguished themselves by their qualities of endurance and boldness.
By their initiative, their fighting spirit, their magnificent ardour, they proved themselves to be
shock troops of the first order.
In the grave hours of 1918 with their British, American, and French comrades, they barred the
enemy rush. They stopped it, they broke it, and at the appointed hour drove it far backwards.
I am happy to express to Australia the undying memory which we shall cherish of her incompa-
rable soldiers.
f 9. W V W


% -— ' .
By
GENERAL SIR W. R. BIRDWOOD,
G. C. M.G., K. C.8., K. C.S.I, C.1.E., D.5.0., A. D. G.
" This brief foreword must serve a dual purpose.
It ushers into the world the " Derniere Heure the latest
A.l. F. publication, and wishes it all success due to the skill
and energy involved in its production. It enables me also to pay a tribute to a band ol
loyal workers who unostentatiously and faithfully have done their share in making the A. I. h .
glorious. An Army is a great machine, and a complicated one. Many ol its parts are hidden
away and the onlooker knows naught of them, or their functions. Ihe Australian Section,
3rd. Echelon G. H. Q., is one of many such parts and it has fulfilled its important functions
with a devotion and a zeal which are most praiseworthy. I hey it was who manipulated the
demand and transfer of the thousands of reinforcements which went to fill the unbroken but
depleted ranks which stood between the Germans and their goal. They it was who recorded
all that happened to every man; and who strove so faithfully to enlighten the dear folk at
home who needed news of the valiant sons of Australia. Many of the members of the Section
had, before transfer there, borne the heat and burden of the day in fighting formations.
Others, by reason of their special qualities and experience, were perforce detailed to tjic
work against their inclination. Both can look back upon honest effort and take their lull
share in the victory towards which they have contributed. All honour to the men whose
duty lay where glory did not often pass but who fulfilled that duty lor duty s sake.
I wish the " Derniere Heure " all success and hope that it will be the means of
providing a pleasant souvenir, not only to the men of the Australian Section 3rd Echelon,
who originated it, but to the whole A.'l. F.


RUE DU HALLAGE, ROUEN


THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
SENDS A SPECIAL MESSAGE
The Prime Minister of Australia, the Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes P. C., who has earned the
admiration of the A. I. F. by his strong and brilliant fight in the national interests of the
Commonwealth at the Peace Conference has sent the following special message for publication in
the columns of this magazine :
" I am very pleased to have the opportunity to send a brief message to the Australian troops
for publication in your souvenir. Most useful work has been done for the A. I. F. by the issue of
these regimental papers. Their quality has been excellent; and they have been, to my own knowledge,
greatly appreciated by all ranks, and they have reflected as perhaps no other literary and artistic
work during the War has done, the brimming spirits and distinctive humour of our men. They will
be a valuable contribution, not only to the historical records of the war, but to Australian literature
as a whole.
The Australian troops will go home with the consciousness of a great task nobly done. They
have done nobly for the world and nobly for Australia. In competition with the fighting men of nearly
all nations they have excelled. Inspired by the great ideal of freedom, they have won for the
Australian arms renown of a lustre not surpassed by the fighting men of any nation in any age.
Nothing Australia can do for them on their return will repay them for their devotion and
sacrifice and constant valour. But they have at least this assurance : the Government of which I am
the Prime Minister recognises its duty to the A. I. F., and will, with the assured and full support of
the Australian people do everything in its power to give every man on his return a prompt, business-
like and generous deal. The principle of demobilisation is based upon " First to come, first to go ,
and I have strongly expressed the opinion that exceptions to this rule on the ground of some men
being indispensable should be as few as possible.
The rate of return depends upon the shipping available, but I have urged the British
shipping controller to do his utmost to speed up the departure of the Australians. Special steps have
been taken to insure that the travelling arrangements for the men shall be as comfortable as possible.
Everything must and will be done to give a fresh and satisfactory start in life to those who
have by their deeds so greatly enriched our Australian heritage. "


OF SWEET
MEMORIES
|E have more memories stored up than we yet realise little cameos of happenings
that will come back to us with increased vividness when once more we find
ourselves in the quiet of our homes.
France will reveal herself to us through the eyes of our miuds in a better way,
perhaps, than we see her in these days of our actual presence.
Those towns which we know so well, and the people whom we have met, are still
unclassified in the recesses of our hearts. All the things we have seen, acquaintances we
have made, will some day no doubt be visualised with increased delight. Memory is gentle ;
it softens our judgment and picks rather the pleasant than the unpleasant episodes of our
lives for its storehouse. How many of those chance meetings we have experienced and
forgotten for the moment will stimulate the process of imagination and give pleasure in the
merest recollection of them?
And the impression of the silhouette of an ancient cathedral, and the picture of the
purity and charm of a 16th Century house shall Ihese be allowed to fade?
One is inclined, then, to soliliquise, and endeavour, as it were, to steal from the
future some of the joys of retrospection. What happiness it will he to " get together with
a few good cobbers 011 a golden Aussie beach with the breeze of the Pacific to sharpen one's
wits, recall the days that have passed, and think calmly of the friends " over there . Elusive
faces will pass before us the faces seen passing through French towns; fisher folk,
peasants, work people; the phalaxy of brilliant Parisian types ; the characteristics of the
cafes and their habitues.
Lurid music halls, family operettc, and the sedate Opera, who has not been to
them? The departures and arrivals in wet and shine, daytime and dusk; Picardy villages,
Flanders hamlets, Normandy towns... and PARIS, Brittany and the incomparable Cole
d'Azur... What a wealth of Memories !
Our lasting heritage, this joy of Remembrance is our legacy from the Oreat
Adventure. It has made it worth while after a 11... perhaps.
Oil-


STTAT THE
When I am done with this blasted war,
I'll go where the bul-bul sings,
And sit at ease, under suitable trees
Discoursing of scandalous things.
For men will tell how the bullets sang,
And how good blood ran red,
But I ivill relate in contemplative state
Of how the Generals fed.
WRITTEN BY AN UNKNOWN ANZAC ON GALI.IPOLI AND CONTRI-
BUTED BY MAJOR PRIOR Aust. Bakeries, ROUEN.
I will buy me a mug that shall hold a quart,
And charge it with foaming ale
Which I'll frequently quaff, and as constantly scoff
At any heroic tale.
Of heaps of tins that I saw on the beach;
Asparagus, chicken and tongue,
Of beautiful beds - how round their heads
Immaculate network hung.
Oh I F will tell of portly men
In dugouts with soft settees,
Of bottles and corks that I saw in my walks,
By the shrines of our bold 0. Cs.
And I shall laugh at the tales of war
As I leer at my tankard's brim,
For my soul shall find peace
When the babblings cease
And the glamour of war's grown dim.
A WINTER DIARY
(Without apologies to the Daily Mail)
There is rain in the air this morning also snow, and more than a touch of ice. The icicles
are falling from the roofs and the trees, much to the joy of the passers-by.
A dog that has had an argument with a tram fills the air with his mournful wailing ; and a
motorcar, in a laudable attempt to bail out a mud hole, produces similar noises from my cobber
who testifies that all the mud in Rouen has been transferred to his eyes and his right ear. 1 also make
a few remarks sotto voce.
A hang-over thirst (result of last night's debate in the Recreation Room) forces my eyes in
the direction of the Rourse, which is tightly " fermied " to me at this hour of the morning. The
white-aproned garcon, dry and warm in the odour of coffee and rhum, grins sympathetically and
gesticulates something about " Mauvais temps ".
There is only one thing to say and I say it : " the War.
E. T. A. K.
I .* lEE
HHw, .#sBBHBsiE® MR


HHnL : J|^h99
OWW
x — y ff\E
Aft D "
Written by
LIEUT.-GENERAL SIR J. IVIONASH, G. C. M. G., K. C. 8., V. D
" The War has ended in a glorious Victory tor our Arms and for our Cause ; and
now the time has come for us to take stock, and to set our losses against our gains. The
cost to Australia, in blood and treasure has been great, tar greater than our people could
once have believed itself to be capable of bearing. So also have the sacrifices and the effort
of the men and women of the A. I. F. been more than could have been foreseen by any one
of them.
What then is there on the other side of the account ? There may not, perhaps, alter
all be much to show in the way of material benefit or tangible result, whether in the
immediate present or the more remote future.
But what of the moral and spiritual gains? Here, at any rate, there is much that
we can count; for Australia has achieved, by her record, an exalted nationhood, and an
enhanced confidence in herself and her people. So also the men of the A. Lb. have passed
through the fiery crucible of experience ; they have learned comradeship, loyalty to a cause,
devotion to duty, pride in their country, and the power that lies in collective resolution to
endure and to achieve.
That experience is the glorious heritage of the A.I.F. 1 he appeal to the prestige ol
Australia was one that never failed throughout the war, nor will it ever tail ii the men
remain true to that heritage. Let every man resolve to be for the rest ot his days faithful lo
this tradition, won fairly by him and by the comrades who have fallen. In this, more than
in any other way, shall Australia gain something, and withal no small thing, in return lor the
price which she has paid.
London.
17-3-19.


MONTAUBAN 1917
TO A FRENCH MAID
I could not understand thy speech, nor couldst thou mine
Thou couldst not understand my message, not could I thine,
Save only love's true message, spoken silently,
Divine.
And So there was no utterance of useless phrases, dear,
No sacred secret utterances that other folk might hear;
And only God looked down and smiled so lovingly
And near.
H. T,


■■■ I Ill ——
llli >
':■ .,-. ■
: ' ■' YY ,^Y/Y-' :,Y.' Y -; -
i'-mY; sv. Y : Y :
' .
■ '■
, "
0 , % /
IFrom the Minister for the Australian Navy
SIR JOSEPH COOK'S FINE WORDS
You ask me for a Message in your souvenir number
to the A. I. F. The appropriate message surely is one of
thanks - profound and grateful - for all they have done
and suffered through four and a half long, weary years of
fearful fighting. They have borne themselves at the front
so that their fame has gone out unto all the earth.
In the future days of peace so hardly won, whenever
and wherever this world tragedy is spoken of, there
will be for certain a recital of the valour and intre-
pidity and chivalry of the Australian soldiers. Their
record is already written in the book of the Worlds
memory and today we hold our heads high at the Peace
Conference as we both hear and tell of the deeds of " our
boys ".
And so 1 come back to the first sentence of this
brief message and in the language of Shakespeare say
" Thanks, and thanks and again thanks " and a speedy return home to the land of sunshine, made
safe.and secure by their heroism and endurance.
Paris, 20 march, 1919,
BOISGUILL AUME
Wandering through the woods one summer's' day,
Dreaming of ... well, dreaming, anyway;
An exile dreams for ever and for aye
Of all he's lost;
I have been tempest tossed
About the world till I am very grey;
1 saw the spreading beech-tree bright and green,
The noble oak, and under and between
I saw the little primrose, and the sheen
Of clinging moss.
And then my loss
Did seem the lighter ; and it rolled away.
My bruised heart was healed that summer's day.
H. T.


Jgl!l
GMr
The War is over. The hour to return home has arrived.
Our days of test and suffering are at an end and we are
alive to feel the joy of it all ! That is the miracle. From the edge
of the fleeting storm clouds of a shattering war glow the warm
lights and colours of Future Peace, opening to poor human
eyes so weary with sorrow a superb prospect of quiet and
happiness. Like the Past which is already dead, those years of
up-hill struggle, so full of hate and cruelty, are fading into the
realm of Memory. They are ever softening under the touch of
Time. There is a danger of forgetting when it should be a duty
to remember, but if we must submit to the healing influences
of Nature, let us at least call to mind the men who died the
men whom we leave behind.
They did their job when each dirty detail seemed hopeless
and futile when every hour was the last of life for a
comrade somewhere near. They helped to fill the ranks which
fought for a world's salvation. They endured the maddening
tortures to which modern science condemns all soldiers in
the name of Civilization. And at the appointed hour a bullet,
or a shell, found them out, one by one ; or worse, they were
eaten up by the devouring fumes of poison gas. Their reward ?
If there is any honour to be earned on the Earth, it was their's, but most human souls crave
for something more than that. (Too often is honour a mere empty expression thrown at the deserving
because it costs nothing to say). That " something more " is Remembrance the most precious and
abiding tribute Man can pay to the services of his fellows.
I repeat, they did their job without a growl that the end should come as it did. War is war.
All have the chance of surviving or of crossing the River of Eternal Silence. Their luck was
out or was Destiny at the foot of it ? One cannot judge. One cannot decide. There is only the
great FACT of the dead to face. It is unnecessary to look beyond that.
So, in days to come, when in the hours of comfort and content we brood upon the nightmare
which once rocked Society with horror, we can imagine them out there in their shallow graves. We
can picture the forests of tiny crosses on the fields where our mates sank down to rest, and it shall
do us good.
We will be belter men ; perhaps-
J. R. W. T.
CORNER OF AN AUSTRALIAN CEMETERY


Pit
MORE AUSSIE CHEEK
LTHOUGH our hats have achieved a considerable amount of fame in the recent unpleasantness,
some of the French people have not yet tumbled to our badges of rank.
A cobber of mine, whose rank is substantive Private, was once asked by a Madam if
he was a Captain. The reason of the question proved to be the 3 blue chevrons; and
our rank chevrons are equally mistaken for service stripes.
While on leave in Monte Carlo, I met an Aussie who had lived in France for nine years. He
welcomed me to his bosom, and, one afternoon, procured a couple of tickets for a Concert in the
Casino Theatre. No ordinary Digger is allowed to enter that infamous place after 10 a. m. as the
atmosphere and language of the gamblers who don't win may tarnish his morals. Star artists can
always march in; they have no morals.
I wanted badly to see that show so we decided to walk through the magic portals as though
we owned the place. In front of the door a portly, gold-laced commissaire was doing an impersonation
of a tigress defending her young, and me he spied from afar.
" Pardon, Sir ", he grated in my ear " You are a soldier and not allowed to enter '. I gave him
a pitying smile and swung the full weight of my 3 bars and a crown before his eyes " Regard this
crown " 1 said, " I am a Major
He gave me such a magnificent salute that I paused to hear the 21 guns boom, but as the
gunners were having afternoon tea, I returned his salute with a quite-forgive-your-mistake air and
galloped in.
Fourteen Yanks, who had been trying to buy themselves in with filthy francs, got their teeth
badly sunburnt.
RIC TOC.
WOULD IT BE POSSIBLE ?
" What is wanted ", suggest a Daily Mail writer, " is a training centre for middle-aged
women.
But how is it proposed to get any women to admit that they ARE middle-aged ?
ANOTHER STRIKE
A statement recently appeared in an English paper to the effect that lift-boys Were contem-
plating a strike. Well, all this magazine has to say on the matter is that they are people who
certainly have more than their share of ups and downs in life.


- w UN) TE— jf
THE
SURVIVAL
OF THE
FITTEST
20 YEAPS AFTER
'AND NOT AN AUSSIE
IN SIGMT"
NICK "TAKE. IT BILL THERE'S ONLY ROOM FOR ONE OF US."
IT WOULD BE RATHER FUNNY, CONSIDERING
LITTLE MARY : " Dad, Will I go to Heaven when I die ? ''
RETURNED ANZAC : " Certainly, my lovely child, if you are a good girl. "
LITTLE MARY : " And will, Charley Chaplin go too ? "
RETURNED ANZAC : " I'don't see why he shouldn't if he behaves himself. "
LITTLE MARY :;That will be nice. But, I say, won'tlGod laugh when He sees him coming ? "


CE Has /ITrR/3CTED
TRifILM BY WjER
BY /YBR,
IGLORIOUS
What can explain that love for France which fills the heart of the
average Australian ? Is it the fact that lie is merely fascinated by the natural
loveliness of the most beautiful country in the World ? Is it because he
has helped to defend her village and homes? Or is it because so many mates
must lie forever under the shadow and the protection of the tricolour.? No, it is scarcely an affection
springing from such sources. It is more spontaneous, more natural, perhaps. One would say, rather,
that it was the direct result of an intense admiration for a people who have endured the cruellest
suffering imaginable with a fortitude of iron. If a great respect can eventually generate a deeper
emotion, then there is no difficulty in unravelling the secret. Who has seen the ruin and desolation
of the battle zone without being moved ? Who has not pitied those poor dishevelled men, women,
and children who tied from their homes before the advance of the Prussian hordes, and were to be
overtaken on the road tramping along with a few wretcheld belongings? Who has not raged at the
futile murdering raids which so delighted the Air Huns ? But, above all, who has not been proud of
association with a people which could offer its body to the shooting of the enemy in front, and the
stabs of treachery behind, and yet fight on without loss of heart ? Away for ever with the fallacy
that the French lacked morale in defence ! Verdun is the answer they can give, and Verdun lives for
ever in the Memory of Man. There never was such courage and sacrifice. There has never been a
concentration of purpose so relentless. No other army in history has been called upon to face a
Verdun, and at the same time defend hundred of miles of open front against the'greatest military
despotism of Time. And probably no force will ever be expected to perform such a miracle in the
future.
France endured enough in the first year of the War to stamp hope from the bravest soul, but
until the last shot was tired, she had never lost faith in her destiny. She continued the struggle,
bleeding as no nation has ever bled before, and did not complain.
And finally, in the Allies' darkest hour, when Victory seemed further off than ever, and the
clouds of pessimism were settling heavily upon the public mood, a great wisdom placed the command
of the combined armies in the hands of one of her brilliant sons. From the moment of Foch's appoint-
ment the tide began to turn. With Napoleonic genius Jie led his incomparable forces to their goal,
and a few months saw the German leaders at his feet, pictures of fallen pride and arrogance st upi fled
by their own humiliation.
Years hence, when our children are weighing the causes of Victory in the balance, they will
no doubt decide that the stupendous result was as much due to the unconquerable spirit of France
as to the more material aids.
It is that spirit which has won the Australian heart that spirit which cannot be defined, but
which exists as a burning fire in the psychology of the French. Paris could not be the Queen of Cities
if that spirit was non-existent. France could not be France without it. It compensates for much
if there is room for compensation in the principles of character - and will only be lost when the
people themselves give up their national ideals. And is that conceivable ?
/
The hour is far distant when it will be possible to change human nature
Let us hop#, for the glory of France, that it will never dawn I
J. R. W. T.


<U.
Jj- iuJl- (\ma/ujua, (/L
CM
£»"} (j.LI
Y S§JXJT^ (TL TRFCLRILH ..
0&/ L FJL ILUN LL #/jd (J UL~ }0 IJL (JULR,
JvuA-Mxtf
Aj£uuA f CTM&LRLGWRX AJYYHJ&JR
M. Henri de Regnier, who is one of the World poets of the day, and a member of the French
Academy, perhaps the most exclusive association of cultured, intellectual men which exists, has done
this paper, and indirectly the A I.F. a great honour by writing for this page lines in praise of the
fighters of Australia. So that our readers may have this little gem from the pen of so distinguished a
man in its original form, we insert it exactly as it was received. A translation, at best, is almost inva-
riably ineffectual and unjust.
EDITOR.


rag iM HH iw hb BM MB ' Ml BB BB) BB BBI flB BB
JllmfflnMm
THE CITY OF MIRACLES a
fiy cJ.W. DONNELLY
II est toujours difficile de consoler une
douleur que Ton ne connait pas...
Alex. DUMAS fils.
Donnez a tous l'esperance et la paix.
L'Abbe PERREYVE.
! The centre of the largest pilgrimage in the world ! What ineffaceable impressions
are left by a visit to this rendez-vous for the sick, the suffering, the incurable, and, above
all, the believers in miracles, who come from all parts of the civilised world.
But Lourdes is also one of the best centres for excursions and would be hard to
heat as a holiday resort, because, apart from its own situation, there are easily accessible
picturesque valleys running right to the heart of the Pyrenees chain. In the middle of summer one
can be taken by a combination of electric railway, motor car, and horse or donkey, to a snow clad
peak on the Spanish Border ; there and back, in a single day's journey.
Lourdes is a small place of about 8000 people, and is admirably situated on a high position at
the entrance to the grand massives of the Pyrenees. It is divided by the " Gave de Pau ", a beautiful
mountain stream, at the point
where the torrent leaves the Ar-
geles. The town is interesting
because there isn't anything
exactly like it anywhere else in
the world. On one side of the
"Gave" is the old market town
with its history dating back to
before the Christian era, and its
ancient feudal castle built on a
rock overlooking the district.
Owing to its commanding posi-
tion, this castle was besieged by
the Goths, the Franks, and by
Charlemagne in 778, and the hun-
dred years' war saw it taken


by the English ! There [are a few
shops and a number of hotels in
the old town but there is no com-
merce to speak of. On the other
side of the Gave is quite a new
towns of churches, monasteries,
hotels and shops but shops,
mark you, which sell nothing else
but religious souvenirs and objects
of art, from small gaudy metal
crosses to fairly large plaques
inset in marble. This new town
has sprung up within the last 30
odd years.
The first object of the tou
rist, as well as of the pilgrim, is the
immense circuit, partly enclosed in a curl of the mountain stream, where are found the churches
and the Miraculous Grotto. In front of the churches, or " Basilique Stretches the " Esplanade des
processions ", admirably designed for the display of the large crowds attracted by the pilgrimages.
The Esplanade is studded with statuary, and is framed like an oil painting by two gracefully curved
rampes which lead to the platform of the Basilique.
I was advised that on Sunday, Bth September, there would be an afternoon service, and a
night .procession. It was a glorious day, with brilliant sunshine, but just comfortably warm, as the
icy cold gurgling mountain stream tempered the heat of the day, and one could not but feel the nerve-
soothing calm of this place, so much favoured by nature. I made my way, slowly, along the esplanade
to the ramp, and was much impressed by the air of earnestness and.seriousness, and, in many cases,
the signs of illness, in the faces of the people I passed. There was nothing to excel in beauty or in
fashion. Certainly there were very few " grand " people, and although some of those present must
have been tourists like myself, they seemed to be absorbed in the atmosphere of the place. Along the
route people were selling long thin wafers of incense, and all Lourdes seemed to be impregnated
with the odour. 1 took my place on the ramp overlooking the esplanade, which in half an hour was
lined by sight-seers standing three or four deep. Stretcher bearers were busy carrying the sick to
their appointed places where they could hear and join in the service. They were of all ages,
including many young people, but the majority were under middle-age. All were gathered here for
the miracle, for surely a miracle only could give them health again. Health! see an assembly like
this, and have it brought home to you what that means.
Suddenly, the sound of singing is heard the service has commenced at the Grotto, and is
now leaving in processional form for the Basilique, via the Esplanade. Nothing is spared in the wa>
of " effect ". The procession comes slowly down the esplanade, and one can see that the " military
of all the Allies are well represented by soldier pilgrims on leave. Their varied uniforms lend
colour to the procession, rendered still more spectacular by each party carrying its national flag.
To-day, the British have the place of honour, and a private of the 2nd Australian Pioneer Battalion
is leading on the right a lonely Aussie, but looking as the boys always do, quite as if it were
for him an everyday proceeding. The Aussie was much remarked upon, and admired, as the proces-
sion gradually approached the place of miracles. The impression produced during the service is
indescribable. Everyone joined in the singing and very many were in tears. The earnestness of
the assembled people, heightened by their attitude of arms outstretched in prayer, the solemnity
of the service, the misery of the attitude of appeal of the cripples and sick, the suppressed excitement
in universal expectation that to-day one might see a miracle performed by Divine providence, and
the humility, the absolute humility of the conductors of. the service and of the assembled people,
were such that I was deeply affected.
One cau understand how people suffering from nervous diseases, or in some cases imaginary
ones, could be so wrought upon by the impressive service and surroundings as to be suddenly cured,
but 1 have not heard of a case of a lost limb or an eye having been restored.


A few years back, however
there was the authentic case of a
girl, 11 years of age, who had been
afflicted since birth. Her poor legs
wasted to badly-shaped bones and
withered skin, and her " child-
hood's happy hours" (?) were
passed in a bath chair. One day, at
the service, she told her attendant,
that she could feel the blood pulsa-
ting through her legs. By the end
of the day she was able to walk!
Now, she is a comely, happy, young
maiden. How fine ! I was told of
another individual whose frail
body was held together in walls of plaster of Paris, and upon whose, mind the expectation of
a cure had such effect as to make him actually think he was cured. He insisted upon his
attendant removing the plaster only to secure an inevitable relapse, and hasten his death.
Nevertheless the appeal from the throats of thousands of people, as the head of the procession
rests in front of each stretcher and benediction is pronounced, the appeal of the assembled people
for each case: " Oh Saviour one word from You and we shall be cured!!" uttered with
penetrating anguish, strikes a very deep note. One cannot but realise tbe force of the fact that hope,
if hope alone, lives strongly in the hearts of the doomed! Can you imagine the full heart of the
incurable who has the hope that to-day he may be the one selected for a miraculous cure? And his
feelings afterwards when he is passed by, and realises that to-day for him is just like so many past days
of agony and misery ? I had just come from Biarritz, and would be in Paris in a few days. Just think
that many of the incurable awaiting a miracle at Lourdes were in those places probably not twelve
months before, seeking how to enjoy life to the maximum!
The afternoon service over, 1 sauntered slowly towards the entrance to the Basilique, and my
thoughts were suddenly arrested by a notice which read : " Veillez sur votre porte-monnaie ".
My hand immediately touched the pocket where reposed my money, and assured me I was still in
funds. A bit of a fright, though !It takes very little consideration, however, to believe what a harvest
thieves could reap amongst the class of people in Lourdes, unless the pilgrims were put ontheirguard
at every opportunity. I may mention here the feeling of trust which exists in the town. I purchased
a book valued 4 fr. 50' cents. in a shop, but had nothing less than a 100 francs note. The lady said
she had no change, but that I could call again and pay. I explained I was leaving that day, and she
replied in that gase I could leave the money at the Hotel when paying my bill and she would get it
later. The shop was some distance away but on paying my bill the hotel people promised to keep the
amount until called for.
Good gracious! What has happened? The crowd is surging wildly in the direction of the
Grotto. There is intense excitement, and news flies from mouth to mouth that a miraculous cure has
taken place! With much difficulty 1 obtained a view of a man of about 30 years of age in civilian attire
who was walking from the Grotto to the medical room where all claims to cures are carefully examined
and recorded by a special professional staff. I was told that this man had lost the use of his legs and
was present in a bath chair at the service that afternoon, from which he was wheeled to the grotto
to drink at the fountain. Immediately after drinking the water he felt be was able to walk, and did so!
There is a church in Rome where it is part of the ceremony of saying prayers to climb on
your knees up a flight of stairs. The stairs are of marble and are quite worn through by the inces-
sant traffic. Just imagine the faith held by tbese people! And when I was there the steps had been
covered with wood, and the wood in its turn showed signs of requiring renewal. There is another
church in Rome where people go and kiss the feet of a statue of the Virgin, in order to obtain, in
the case of women, as a rule a male child or a certain man in marriage, and in the case of men, mostly
that they may obtain wealth and success. But offerings of gifts are necessary and the walls of the latter
church are literally covered with various golden ornaments, jewels, officers'epaulettes, &c., But
neither of these churches is equal to Lourdes in expression of human sentiment and belief.


The churches of the Basilique are the Rosary built in 1889 a byzantine luxury in marble
and, crowning, it, the admirable Basilique itself, built by Durand, in the Xllth century style.
The walls of the churches in Lourdes are covered with votive offerings from the faithful, and
with marble tablets, silk banners, and flags, brought by pilgrims from all countries. Here are
displayed countless objects of extraordinary diversity, some very costly, others of almost childish
simplicity, yet all bearing the most touching evidence of confidence and gratitude. All are
inscribed with messages, which generally contain " merci " for cures effected, but some also
convey grateful thanks for the re-union of families, and for the safe return home of relatives and
friends. There is evidence that many little differences between husband and wife, and even
between lovers, were settled happily as a result of a-pilgrimage. So the belief in Lourdes touches
many aspects of human nature. Many of the banners had later messages of thanks and gratitude
written with pencil and ink on them, evidently by poor people, and some of the silk banners were
so written upon by latecomers that
the original message was defaced.
To the right, off the head
of the Esplanade under the Basi-
lique, and facing the stream, is the
famous miraculous Grotto, where
the apparition was seen. Here
are stacked some hundreds of
crutches &c. left by people who
had been cured. There is also a
beautiful statue of the Virgin, in
white marble, by Eabisch, and it
is here that Mass is celebrated du-
ring the pilgrimages. There is a
fountain in the grotto which sup-
plies about 20 gallons of water per
minute, and bears the inscription —" Go and drinlc at the fountain and balhe'yourself there It is recor-
ded that the fountain was not known before the advent of the apparition. Alongside are many water
taps for the use of the pilgrims and baths have also been constructed for the sick who seek a cure.
On my return to the ramp I saw the Bishop coming up the steps, followed by a crowd of
people who were grasping his hand and kissing the ring thereon. Many people knelt in front of him
for his blessing.
You will recall the story of the Irishman on the wrecked ship, who, when warned by the
captain that the ship would sink in a few minutes and to say his prayers, pleaded he had forgotten,
and that upon the captain insisting, he proceeded to take up a collection as being the only religious
act he remembered? The collection is not often overlooked, is it? But a remarkable thing about
Lourdes is that I did not once see a collection plate go round. That is not to say, of course, there
were not many convenient receptacles where one could deposit a coin !
After an early dinner, I again took up a position on the ramp for the night procession, which,
starting from the grotto, came into view in a few minutes. Over 4000 people, each one with a lighted
candle, very impressively approached and formed up. en masse, in front of the Basilique, only to
start off again after a short service, to climb the hill-side where are placed colossal groups
in bronze representing the " Stations of the Cross ". They reach, after 20 minutes, the cross of calvary
on the summit of the hill. It was an imposing spectacle to see by the light of its candles the
long serpentine of people climbing the winding palhs of the hill, and the sound of the singing
wafted back on the cool evening breeze had quite a weird effect, under the circumstances.
On retracing my steps towards the hotel, I coujdsee people kneeling in front of the statues
in prayer every corner in the area being occupied by people praying. Whatever one's beliefs, and
whatever his outlook on life as a result of hard experience, he must surely have a little understanding
with these pilgrims, some with their hearts full for the absent, and others making their appeals to
the Deity as being the only hope of saving their suffering loved ones.


And the history is :
Bernadette Soubirous, a
poor, but honest and religious,
young shepherdess, daughter of a
miller of Lourdes, whilst tending
her sheep at the place where the
Grotto is to-day saw, many times,
in the year 1858, the apparition
of the Virgin. The aspect of the
Virgin was of the sweetness of
youth and beauty. She was dressed
in a gown, and had a snow white
veil, with a blue sash over-all,
and her bare feet were adorned
with roses of gold. She spoke
several times to Bernadette, exhor-
ted her to pray and kiss the ground, commanded her to tell the priests they must erect a chapel on
that spot, for the people to come there, in procession, and to drink at the fountain then created.
Immediately thereafter commenced the miraculous cures and visitors became larger in numbers
every day, until the matter was taken up by the Roman Catholic authorities and declared to be
authentic and a miracle.
That is the history.
Who among you has not heard of Mecca with its famous pilgrimage? Well, the number of
pilgrims who visited Lourdes just before the war was over 600,000 annually, and these came from
all over the world individually and in parties, on foot and otherwise. Special trains were run for
the faithful of a Parish and of a region in France. A special train of sick people left Paris for Lourdes
every August.
For the faithful Lourdes is a saintly town.
I should not forget to add that Bernadette died in 1879 at the age of 35 years
TOJ !
Jk any a day in the long ago,
%
s I thought of the girls I used to know,
reams of the future could not foresee,
&
ach charm of yours in store for me.
E? >
ove you gave me in form divine,
ach passion'd caress linked my soul to thine,
jfL nto my heart you came, and into my brain,
J!% ever to leave me tranquil again
n chained in romance, I must repine for life's hasard forbids you shall ever be mine.
JACQUES.


A portrait of the only " dinkum " who remained
faithful to his Australian girl.
THE DINKUM DIGGER
ACHIEVES A REPUTATION
'ERHAPS Australians on furlough
eye as average troops do now
there is quite enough distinction
do not present such a variety of types to the
a-days under similar circumstances, but still,
in their ranks to arouse curiosity. For instance,
there is the dinkum digger. He is a species of comparatively recent origin and
is noted chiefly for his unrivalled impudence, his cool, calculating scorn of everybody and
all things, and his inordinate passion for expressive, nay, STRONG language. His imagination
rises to superlative levels. It i.s awe-inspiring. It has an exclusive grandeur. 1 have known
dinkum diggers to labour under the impression that they were poets when they were merely
sundowners, and sundowners when they were merely poets ! Very tew Australians who
proudly profess their claim to the letters D. D., have been poor in this world's goods.
Sometimes they own six selections, and two or three stations, but never do they admit to the
possession of less than a Bandicoot Plantation or a Wallaby barm. The envy excited in my
breast when I listen to a count of the droves and herds belonging even to the most
impecunious and modest of diggers could only be compared in volume to the contempt
which I entertain for the extraordinary individual from Australia who confesses with brazen
indifference that he is a clerk, a butcher, or a grocer. A clerk, a butcher, a grocer, forsooth !
I feel that he is not worthy to represent our great nation that he is too puny to live. He
may be truthful. Possibly he has never told a fib in his life, but then, he isn't romantic.
People on this side of the world dole on anything which is uncommon even if it is a
human being. They expect men who wear broad-brimmed hats, ravishing tunics, sensational
breeches, flashing leggings, borrowed boots and tremendous light-reflecting spurs to use
their imagination. The dinkum digger is in duty bound to recall all the riches ot his native
land, and to consider them his own special property when addressing the various admiring
groups who surround him.
There was once a suspicion abroad that the Irish left most others high and dry
where " stories " were concerned, but that was before Europe had the privilege of meeting
the Aussies. NOW, the D. D. reigns supreme the King of Romance and monarch of all that
he can induce other people to believe he surveys.
J. R. W. T.
23


LIEUT-GENERAL SIR C.8.8. WHITE, K.C.M.G., C. 8., D.5.0., A. D. C.,
CHIEF OF STAFF, A. I. F.
SENDS A MESSAGE
" The Editors of the ' Derniere Heure ' have asked me if, through the medium
of the Magazine, I would like to say a few words to my comrades of the A. I. F., I take the
opportunity gladly.
1 must first congratulate our friends of the Australian Section 3rd Echelon, upon
their energy and enterprise. 1 hope that the ' Derniere Heure ' will be a great success and
a cherished souvenir. The light of the 3rd Echelon has been well hidden under its bushel,
but it has been burning none the less brightly ! I often wonder if we, whose lives have been
spent on the stage, as it were, of war, fully realise the devotion of those who have been
forced to renounce all chance of glory in doing the work that lies behind the scenes. Their
work is none the less essential because it is not ever prominently before us. The efficiency
of its execution has, however, been evident to those who knew what was going on and
there in the darkness the same good Australian qualities were being displayed; courage,
steadfastness, faithfulness.
And now let me say a word to the men of Australia. You are going home ! It seems
almost too good to be true. I wish you a pleasant journey. 1 know you are sure of a warm
reception. I believe I am right in saying that this war has made us think more of Australia
than ever. We know her to be worthy of the sons who fought and died for her. Well, then,
let us go back determined to put Australia's interests before everything else. Let us make
sure that Australia shall be a great country. We can only do that by asking ourselves how
our every act will affect Australia. We must labour hard and honestly - just as we did in
the A. I. F. so that her increased production will enable her to repair the war damage.
The " Square Deal will ensure to us the reasonable reward for our labours.
We owe it to the fellows who have died so gallantly that our country shall be free
and honest and Godfearing. We will be true to that trust in a spirit of fellowship and union. "
THERE'S NOTHING NEW
The Editor said fhis word is law
And he rides us with bit and spur J,
That there's nothing new to inspire a poet
Is what I've at last found out.
" You must sit you down and write me a poem
A wonderful, new, original poem
Though my temper's gone and my nerves are worn,
And the floor is littered with paper torn
Fit for the " Derniere Heure ".
I've nothing to write about !
KEN.
HARKING BACK
Who says there is no humour in official minutes ? What about THIS ?
I remember, in Egypt, (and this is true and no Cliestie) the Head of the Cairo Police sent in a
list of abouri6 reported members of the A. I. F. with the recommendation that " they vere not fit to
be at large in a civilized country and should therefore be returned to Australia. " Voila !
J. W. D.


The staff of the Aust. Sect., G.H.Q., 3rd. Echelon
REMEMBER
ux territiles joun de baiaUle,
n Grand Soldat fut noire ami.
ous le feu bravant la mitraille
ans trembler, faced I'ennemi,
I resta... sanglant et muraille
t la France lui dit: Merci I
UNE FRANQAISE.
25


of leading article from the ROUEN
<< WHITE STAR "
Translation
"The old year is dead. It has been memorable, and
will always be notable to the world in general as the one
which ended the Great War. But for us, Rouennais, it will
be chiefly remembered as the one which marked the
beginning of our emancipation, which the year 1919 will
complete.
Our readers will recall the arrival in this devoted City
in 1916 of hordes of wild men from the Antipodes, AUSTRALIANS, who quickly too up
commanding positions in our midst and dug themselves in. Our files of that period show
that we felt and expressed some concern, and we would have continued to warn our readers
but for the iniquitous regulations of the Censor, who in all instances prohibited publication.
Now that these are removed we are in a position to lift the veil.
Our City was surrounded, on one side being the 3rd Echelon with the Australian
Bakeries close by, while on the opposite side the New Zealanders (closely related lo these
savages) took up their position. Midway, but some distance from the City, the Ist A. O. .
entrenched on our racecourse, which sacrilege will no doubt meet with its just due. From
these positions our citizens were assailed night and day. It was thought at first, c 11c y y
Cafes, petty tradesmen etc. that this invasion would he a benefit. But alas ! such has not cen
the case. These soldiers (they dislike-the term) are paid the salaries of Cabinet Ministers and
have a way of demanding where others ask, and to protect themselves, our business people
were compelled to raise their prices to these men, and for this we have been unjustly called
robbers. We ask our readers lo bear this fact in mind. We have been called robbers by■those
in whose language the word " Pinch " is freely used, and who gaily take " Pint Pots
and other items for souvenirs.
But this is nothing to the state of chaos now existing in our social life. Our women
have' been taught the insidious doctrine of equality of sexes, with the result that in most
homes, man, if he rules at all, rules on sufferance. At one time our maidens would not think
of nor would they be allowed to walk in the streets with men, much less visit places o
amusement with them. Now all is changed. The writer on a recent evening made a tour ol
our streets and theatres, and everywhere an Australian was seen, he was accompanied by
one of our young women, and in some cases sad to say, by married ones. Such is the depra-
vity of a once well-ordered City. And our men must look on and endure, because where they
have objected, in a civil and gentlemanly manner to this wholesale appropriation, they have
been despitefully used. . . .
Our male citizens wear a harassed look caused chiefly by dissensions ,n their homes.
Our Municipal Authorities are concerned by the number of our young women who have
already left Rouen for the barbarous country these men come from, and the number be leve


to be going in the future, unless drastic steps are taken to prevent it. Our Gendarmes, once
the pride of the City, are now scarcely ever in evidence, and skulk up bveways with turtive
looks to right and left. These officers who would face any number of Apaches, are loath to
face even one Australian, because of the spirit of camaraderie known to exist amongst these
camouflaged devils, who will even take up an unjust quarrel for a friend, and are therefore
delighted to join in a battle with the police, Civil or Military. But, readers take heart. As we
have said our emancipation is at hand.
In November a large number of Australians left by boat from Rouen, receiving an
enthusiastic farewell, we were so pleased to get rid of them. Many of the bakers have left,
and more are leaving in the near future, while the Ist. A. G. 11. has ceased to exist 111 this
City. The remnant of the 3rd Echelon, a hardened band of sinners, is located beyond the Gare
du Nord and all citizens should avoid that quarter of the City if possible. Remember that the
more innocent they look the more they are to be dreaded. Beware of them. They are disper-
sing fortunately week by week, and when the last has gone we will be able to take strong
measures with our recalcitrant women and restore our City to what it was before the War,
and so win back our self respect. So let us all say " Hail to the New Year " and pray to our
Ecclesiastical Authorities to make the day when the last Australian leaves us a day of thanks-
giving and prayer ".
OWED TO WINE (Without Apologies)
Venus made Aussies, frail as a bubble
Cupid made Love, love made trouble
Bacchus made the Vine. Was it a sin
For A ussies to make wine to drown trouble in ?
MILL.
AUSSIE
Through the heat of the day and the scorching battle-blast,
Bearing his burden in the face of the foe
A great soldier stood, tried, and without fear, steadfast
Proved himself our friend; and Lo!
France gave him thanks. FRENCH LADY.


PROOF POSITIVE
G. 0. : '
You say your sister sent you this telegram asking you to come to her wedding ?
Pte. SCRUB : " Yessir
C. 0. : " But what proof have you that she IS your sister? "
Pte. SCRUB : " The proof is that I am her brother. "
TOLDTONOTI WITNESS
On the march back from rest, one of our senior officers discovered that he had forgotten his
gas-respirator. A junior immediately rushed away to an adjoining camp and in the absence of the
owner arrested what he thought was the brother of the missing mask. Now the senior was very keen
on respirators, and was at the moment looking for a victim. A few yards further on he saw a subaltern
in shirtsleeves leaning lazily against his dugout and watching the troops going forward. The senior
rushed up to him and demanded :
" Where is your gas respirator ?"~
" In the dugout, sir " was the reply.
•' Find it at once and put it on. "
The discomforted sub. reappeared after a few minutes to report that the wretched thing had
disappeared.
" I don't believe you had one. " roared the senior, " and I doubt whether you know how to put
one on. Here, I'll test you. Take mine and I'll time you. "
Handing the " respirator " to the sub who hurriedly placed it over his neck, the sceptic
shouted " GO ! "
The nervous young chap dived his hand into the bag and dragged forth two pairs of used
socks and a copy of the " BULLETIN " !!


MLU " j^H
'N I
f " m JP s
®^^^^SSRw. 1 iummmmmmrn
' *" s »!; ■ jBp
|
Major J. W. DONNELLY 0.8. E.,
formerly of the clerical Staff, De-
partment of Defence, Melbourne,
joined the A. I. F. on 16th Sept. 1914,
and sailed on service overseas with
the First divisional Headquarters,
with which unit he served until
December 28 of the same year,
when he was translerred to the
Ist. Anzac Headquarters, Egypt.
He was later appointed D. A. A. G.
on the Staff of A. 1. F. Headquarters.
In that post he served both in Egypt
and at Administrative Headquar-
ters, London until finally he took
up the appointment of D.A.A.G.
with the Australian Section, 3rd.
Echelon G. H. Q. on 1-9-1916.
Later, on the departure of the
Record portion of the Section for
London, Major Donnelly became
Officer Commanding and D.A.A.G.
which positions he is still holding.
It may also be stated that he was
President of the Court of Enquiry
which decided the fate of the men
reported " missing " during the
Gallipoli Campaign.
Under the D,e mobili z a t i on
Scheme, a complete group of units
has been placed under the Austra-
lian Section, and the staff is doing
equally, if not more arduous and
important work than ever.
Created an Officer of the most
excellent Order of the British
Empire, (Military Division) the
Major has also enjoyed the distinc-
tion of having been four times
mentioned in Despatches for his
services in Egypt and France.
THE D.A.A.G.


GEORgy PILAR-
C'dtait par un glorieux matin bleu. lis etaient la une vingtaine de jeunes hommei en, kha
tous coifKs du cb.peau australien si celebre en France. Trois officers, une vingtaine dsoda
lui du llaut de lur imposant « motor oar » admiraient le paysage ensoleille ; les palm.ers brillant
et la mer faite d'un seul saphir dont le ciel aurait pris le reflet. La lourde voiture venait de saiiete
comme un puissant animal qui reprend baleine tout palpitant de sa ■ course; et
et charmes regardaient ce coin de France oil fleurit le mimosa qui leur rappelait leur p a'" e -
Autour d'eux I on s'arrlitait: des soldats franfais leur jetaient gaiement un Good Morning
Hnnt 1m rordialite excusait le mauvais accGnt anglais.
Deshonimes des femmes les admiraient en passant : " Quels beaux gardens 1 disaient
les uns
" Moi " i'aime leur chapeau disaient les autres . ,
V Us sont tout de mStne un peu la Vive FAustralie ! " cna une petite femme de tout
8011 C<BU • Cigarettes, plese » disaient les gamins en sautant autour de I'automobile. Et les Australians
ravis de l'accueil, souriant a tout le monde, jetaient des cigarettes aux petits et cnaient
Joouer !
Dante deja elleprenait son Man...
leur jeta toute l'immense gerbe
lerent en poussifcre doree sur les
femme leur envoyait un baiser
Mais la voiture allait repartir, trepi
lorsqu'une jeune femme s'approchant rieuse
de mimosa qu'elle portait. Les fleurs s'eparpil
vaillants "Aussies
lf.ts.-y-* mosa d'or


EXPECTATION
fve seen Nice. I've been at Monte,
And in hectic Gay Paree ;
Put my thoughts go always roaming
Back to where I'll soon be homing.
Yes, my thoughts turn back to Sydney
Where she sparkles by the sea.
Oh, the golden beach at Bondi
With the combers breaking white ;
Oh, the bays within the Harbour
On a scented Summer's night
When the ferries look like glow-worms:
Ami the lights, like fireflies, dance.
Oh, I'm going back to Aussie
From this shellshocked land of France.
And I'm going to hear the milkman.
As he clatters down the street.
The music on the " Drunk s Tram
And the " Pirate's " cheerful bleat.
Oh, the waving grass on South Head
When the sudden " Busters " blow,
And the Kiosk down at Manly
Where the ice-cream flappers grow.
There are paper boys in Pitt Street
With each his special cry.
And there's lager cool in Bel field's
When the days are hot and dry.
I ache to see it all again
And I might as well confess
That I badly want to " Parlez "
To a blue-eyed Diggeress.
Fve seen Nice. I've been at Monte
And in hectic Gay Paree,
But my thoughts go always roaming
Back to where I'll soon be homing.
Yes, my thoughts turn back to Sydney
Where she sparkles by the sea.
RIC TOC.
THE ADJUTANT'S INDEX
Having the necessity to turn up the subject "Blankets", I, being a mere ordinary sort of
.1 I t ' Ann thP letter "B" but without s.uccess. The matter being of some importance, and
the "act that the index was a complete one, I placed the whole question in the hands
°f Sh erlock Holmes. sai( , that great man - and the stupidity of some people surprises
me " This statement he made with a glance at me. He then proceeded with tins modest and most
obvious deduction : "Blankets are, of course, associated with sleepers, which are, as sou kn ,
- h- '"e following entry:
" RAILWAY ™AINS c folding of Page '
sahJ 1 the 6 d'etectiv'eas he departed to keep an appointment with his friend Watson at Steplianes Cafh.


99a 9 9 9 9 999 999 99a '
• 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 A ..39=9^9^0^^
••a f 9 ®® A
9 9 99 9 9 9 9 ~ ®
@ <§*($($ (§)
_ "CtYSfAONk -W»A>Te_
n r 5 -
9 9 9 <9 9999 9 9 J» 9 Z
@99 9 999 999 9 9 9 9 9 99* 99*
Tournaments sometimes, joustings often. Noknight everdealt more heavily with his opponent
than do some of our players with the balls; it is consolation to realise that they are impe.rvious to
the maltreatment that is constantly their lot.
At any time our players are interesting, not only for their play, but as character studies.
Sam Robb with his spring action stroke and his spider legs, not explained away by atavism.
The spring works well except when in need of lubrication, but the legs love fox-trots
and musical billiards, which is a game something like musical chairs with more
kisses than anything else.
Mr. It obbins (of the artistic pose), ever charms the eye by his symetrical
attitudes when attempting a fine shot.
Willmott Esquire has a most bovine disregard for consequences and causes
considerable astonishment to himself occasionally when he scores.
Dextrous, mathematically-sure Cunningham, by his last treatise on angles,
has ensured for himself world renown, and his performances are certainly as weird
and wonderful as the designs on his blotter.
Disher the silent, the player of unknown skill, has been the cause of big
arguments in the billiard room. One of our short-sighted members insisted the other
e\ening whilst Disher was playing, that there were
three white balls on the table and, it was only
after great difficulty and by ocular demonstration
that the myopical member was convinced that the
third ball was the pate of our worthy friend
White, the wandering Bohemian, has at
all times been artistically inconsistent. On rare
occasions he has dazzled the onlookers by the
brilliance of his play, whilst on other days
he has failed completely to even wake
up the scorer.
Smith of the smiles has
some uncanny influence
over inanimate subjects.
Composition balls seem to
obey his slightest wish. It's
the only way one can ex-
plain his continued sue-
cess billiards is not the
answer. He is now on the
threshold of fame, and the
prize will enable him to
taste of the delights of the
Elysian Fields, Paris.
Kennedy, (thecanny Scot),
with his nonchalant air and
compressed excitement, saw
the promised land and an
" immortal's " wreath
snatched from him by the wizardry of Smith.


t—JL jl, .
W
Picken prides himself on Parisian perfection, but at no time has he shown it in his play,
except of course that he can always beat tlie champions when not playing them in a tournament.
Millard of the mystic mien, the inscrutable enigma of our billiard world, is more discussed
than any of Wilson's 14 points. Is he a player or only just a big bluff ?
Stewart, the shrewd selector, the hard-hearted handicapper, has a soft spot for... well,
never mind who. He adopts prize-ring tactics in all his
games, stops to unravel his bit of chewing gum, and
chaffs his opponent. I am given to understand that
he is endeavouring to perfect a new grip for billiard
cues a finger and thumb grip.
Kenny, the cute cueist, has on many an occasion
shown brilliant form, but has a tendency to treat the cue
as a walking stick, which is rather detrimental to good
shooting. I predict a great future for this player when the
height of billiard tables is raised.
Finney, the freshman, whose free manner has
endeared him to all, is fast becoming a potential cham-
pion. Freedom from official duty has enabled him to
r-*—
' . / .
' i /
/ ' ✓ \
/'' o'' /
/ / \
O
If' ' " —LzJ
" Designs on his blotter
progress considerably. The " dark horse ", if I may use the term, and who may any day surprise
the world by retiring on his laurels.
Green, the glorious, the wonder man of the day, from humble pretensions to the champion
of all is no mean record. His absolute sang-froid is astonishing. He has been known to stop in
the middle of a break to put chalk on his cue !
L. P.
Good-bye, dear land of France, good-bye,
Must I then never see thee more ?
Oh, that I might clear this misty eye
To gaze on thy receeding shore :
Methinks 'twould ease my soul of pain
To see thy beauty once again.
Thy coastline fades, no more I hear
The tinkling church bell on the breeze
And but thy hallowed memory near
To pilot me across the seas :
Each throbbing pulse of engine part
Finds echoing harmony in my heart.
Adieu! dear land of France, adieu!
I said good-bye, but surely time
May bridge the gulf 'twixt me and you,
And reach me in my southern clime :
The span of wistful remembrance
Forever joins my soul to France.
H. T.


iH
GREEp
WHAT HAPPENED TO BILL
ERTAINLY he was unprepossessing. Jerome K. Jerome would without doubt have
g° ne go far as to call Bill Sommers an UNFORTUNATE-looking man, and pro-
bably he would have been right. It was not that Sommers was repulsive. On the
contrary, his ugliness seemed to be of the type which attracted, and invited confi-
dence especially the confidence of the village mesdemoiselles. All " A " Company turned
green with envy when it contemplated the wonderful successes attained by Bill, and each
new conquest made by that gentleman aroused the most awe-inspiring fury. Matters came to
a head at last and there was a secret meeting of the angry Diggers during the temporary
absence of the hated monopoliser of fair favours It was decided amidst a tremendous demons-
tration of enthusiam, to have a shattering revenge, and at one blow remove for ever a rival
from the path. But how ? Then, Percy le Grange, the beau of the assembly, who was a dag
at female impersonation hit upon a delicate plan of campaign. It was not a clean sort of plan.
Neither was it a nice, kind sort of plan. Let us be content to give it the simple unassuming
designation of - plan. As a matter of fact, Percy invariably voiced the ideas of the Company,
for he really possessed quite a respectable supply of brain power (which was remarkable consi-
dering his name). However, he had no sooner explained the subtlety of his project than the
boys saw the point or said they did and ordered him to carry on
Thus it happened that in the cool of the following evening, as the sun was sinking
over a certain Flanders Plain, and the rumble of the guns in the far distance reminded the
" resting " troops that there was still a war on, Bill Sommers spied a young maid of
ravishing beauty gasping along with a bucket of water in her hand. Naturally, his instinct
of gallantry led him to her side without waste of time. Saluting her, he murmured :
" Voulez-vous permittay me to carry votre I'eau, mamselle ? " (Bill always preferred to speak
French!.
" Merci beaucoup, Monsieur ", replied the village belle as she set down the pail
and brushed back the fleeting curls from her forehead.
" Vous etes fatiguee Vous Stes trop petite, ma cherie, pour this kind of bloomin'
job ", continued the knight.
" Mais non, Monsieur
" Mais oui ".
Passing his left arm neatly round the slender waist, and grabbing the load in his
right paw he sauntered off with sweet companion down the cobbled road.
And they talked. And they laughed. And they were very pleased with each other.
Of course, their conversation was not superlatively facile. Bill spoke French, but then you


§■')
H
see, it wasn't always the French of France. Itmighthave been the French of New Guinea or
of Borneo, or even of Timbuctoo, but it wasn't the French of France. Nevertheless, when it
is a case of mutual admiration, the language of the tongue is not the important fact. One's
eyes can express all that is necessary with adequate effect when the subject of love is under
discussion, at least, so it is said.
In the end, an appointment was made for the next night at a rendez-vous near the
village pump. Lovers are punctual as a rule. In that respect they are an improvement on the
Rouen trams. Bill arrived on the spot in a state of happy anticipation, as it were. But alas !
It was only to find a digger waiting for him a good-ldoking Digger, it is true, but what
compensation was THAT ? Especially when the said Digger turned out to be Private Percy
le Grange ?
And besides, what was he waiting for at such a place and at such a time ?
" Bonsoir, ma cherie ", chirped Percy in a voice which startled our Bill out of his
senses.
It was the voice of the maidenly vision ol his new little sweetheart ! A horrible
suspicion clutched at his vitals (WHY do horrible suspicions grasp at one's vitals?).
" Vous etes fSche avec moi, n'est ce pas ? " purred the merciless Percy.
" What's the game ? " demanded the other, very white.
" How about carrying my rifle and pack up the street a bit ? "
" Garry your rifle and pack ? DON'T make me laugh ! "
" But you carried a bucket of water for me last night ".
" For YOU ! My God ! For You ? "
And then, from behind houses and wagons sprang •' A " Company, shrieking with
fiendish laughter and pointing at the cowering victim of their vengeance. He wanted to fade
away to nothing. He prayed for the earth to swallow him up for ever. He closed his ears to
the explanations of the coup which fifty mouths were shouting for his benefit He felt a
thousand times more insignificant than the merest grain of dust.
They left him there in the moonlight ALONE.
And Percy returned his charming wig and costume to the lockers of the divisional
Concert Party with the consciousness of having done his duty.
J. R. W. T.


/
L'ENTENTE CORDIALE
AUSSIE. Voulez-vous promenade avec moi cesoir?
MARIE. Je ne sais pas, what you say ? I know not who you are.
Ma mere 'as tell me nevaire avec soldat, au revoir!
AUSSIE. Oh, stay but one moment, 'struth, what's the French for " carry on
With the good work ? " S'pose it's cane fairy-an.
It would give me beaucoup plaisir. oh my pretty Marian
Just to see you to your maison; I should like to meet maman.
What! you laugh, ma petite cherie ? straight, that's dinkum, no gamon.
MARIE Bien! we promenade a leetle, just a very leetle way.
Monsieur soldat speek good frangais, toujours promenading, eh ?
AUSSIE What about your tres bon anglais, you can parlez very well ?
S'pose you know another blighter
MARIE. Blighter? comment, what est-elle?
She is not the nom you give to Angleterre across the sea ?
AUSSIE. Non, it is the name for someone who is luckier than me.
MARIE. Do you in Australie souvent promenade, monsieur, at night?
'Ave you ever kissed anozer, when the moon is beaucoup bright ?
Oh, monsieur, I nevaire said... vous etes un tres mauvais sujet.
AUSSIE. Never mind, ma petite. There, encore to kiss the tears away.
In Australia, strike me pink, 1 never kissed another girl
En frangais, fiancee jamais, jamais in this bloomin' world !
MARIE. Are you hlesse, monsieur soldat ? Do you parti tout de suite ?
AUSSIE. Not on your life; I stay at Rouen, avec vous, ma ch6re petite.
MARIE. You will be mon mari ? n!est-ce pas ? here we at the maison are.
I must to ask ma maman. Oh, what ees your nom ? la, la.
AUSSIE. It's Belgium Billjim, and an Anzac; 'struth, if Birdy saw me now.
Well I've gone the dizzy limit. Hope I aint a silly cow.
H. T.
DEMOBILISATION TREMORS
CERTAINTY.
GUTZER ! THE BOAT-ROLL SMILE.


IN DEFENCE OF PESSIMISM
AN APPEAL TO REASON AND HEART
Mr. Editor,
I have been much distressed of late to not'e the wave of optimism which is sweeping
over the Earth, It is quite time to call a halt, for I have no hesitation in asserting that the state of
the world today is one which warrants the most acuta and universal pessimism. In fact, I could
not imagine a worse condition of affairs. On one hand we see the ravages of Bolshevism. On another
we view the prospect of extensive starvation and.ruin. In many lands industrial unrest threatens
to engulf the Future in a sea of Chaos. The Australians are not yet home, and don't seem as though
they will be for quite a while.
Now, I ask you, my dear sir, if these facts are a basis for irresponsible and excessive
tranquility of mind ? And yet people are laughing and dancing and jazzing (mark the distinction)
and theatre-going - in short, enjoying themselves thoroughly. Really, the scenes of unalloyed joy
"which surround one daily are a reflection upon propriety. Even the mess of which I am a member,
does not break into open revolution when it is asked by a tyranical cook to digest " Maconachie "
straight. On the contrary, it jests upon the subject, and merely leaves its plates untouched.
Oh, if men could only realise the pure and reasoned happiness of legitimate pessimism ! If
they could only imagine its soulful comfort. Think for a moment of the advantages. One need never
have an unpleasant surprise, for if one persists in expecting the worst, the realisation of such
expectations can never be surprising, and if, by chance, things go well and don't seem so bad after
all, picture to yourself the amazement the burst of happiness which takes possession of the heart!
To my mind, the cult of unadulterated pessimism is worthy of the support of ALL people of
common sense and dignity.
Therefore, sir, I write to your powerful journal in the hope that these lines will help to
restore the cloak of misery to the shoulders of the race, and make them "decently wretched in spirit
and mind. Four years of war were insufficient, it seems, to destroy light-heartedness. Very-well, we
will see what four years of Peace will do.
Yours in misery,
JIMMIE JOHiNSON.
/'. S. It may be advisable to admit that part of my military experience embraced the duties
of mortuary attendant in one of our hospitals, and that those days were full of joy to me. I was able
to brood in a suitable atmosphere upon the futility of life.
A SENSE OF VALUES
Cod Fishers from the Normandy coast make trips to Newfoundland whihh frequently last
from 12 to 15 months. One good old salt left his little maison and his "'cinq gosses " many moons
ago for the long trail to St. Johns with just the same old nonchalance which his kind have. "The
women and kids can look after themselves " he said. As a matter of fact, the women generally do
but sometimes they are looked after. In this case it was by an Anglais. Mr. Normandy sailor in due
course came back to his wife to discover the interesting detail that in his absence a cuckoo had
called and left a little stranger!! It was such a fine little chap, however, that his natural philosophy
of fatalism buffered the shock to a wonderful extent. He went along to the old estaminet and
inquired the whys and wherefores. The village gossips were only too happy to give particulars
but they nearly died of chagrin when, between a sip. at his cafe " avec " and a pull at his pipe the
husband said : " Cela ne fait rien. Les Anglais sont de bons marins " 1 (It doesn't matter. The English
are good sailors!)


ALL OVER A PREAMBLE
THAT ACK-ACK-ACK FORM
An innocent junior was recently called before his 0. C.
" Mr. Blank. "
" Sir? "
" Take this telegram " (handing him an Army pink in the NEW form) " and ring up Major
Dash, Signals Officer. Tell him there is nothing in the PREAMBLE, and ask him if he will kindly
say what should be in it, AND WHY IT IS NOT THERE
The innocent one buzzed off and immediately attacked the nearest telephone.
" Is that the 0. C. Signals? " he asked with great sweetness.
Yes " snapped someone from the other end.
" Colonel Nobody's compliments, sir. He received a telegram this morning on the new Army
form from General Bondel, dated 24-2-19, numbered 23 in the top corner by the date stamp prefix Z
but there is nothing in the Preamble. Could you please tell him what should be there, and why it was
not inserted ? "
" Oh! I don't know anything about it. You don't for a moment suppose I see all the
telegrams passing through my Office? But er, I'll look up the matter for you.
" And you will let Colonel Nobody know ? '
" Of course, certainly. "
" Thank you, Major. Much obliged. "
And the scene changes to the Signals Office, where all is commotion. " Hang thai Colonel!
Hang everybody! " growled the Head Se-rang as he put down the receiver. " What does he mean,
anyhow ? " Not receiving an answer, since nobody in particular had been addressed, the unhappy
officer yelled at the top of his voice " Where is this Preamble? "
Most of the staff heard, and at once prepared for squalls except Sergeant Binks, the
Orderly Room Clerk and O.Cs Factotum, who had enjoyed the inestimable privilege of having served
as a " regular " before the War, and who was only ruffled by questions which might affect his pay
and allowances. Not even the early-morning quips of the W. A. A. Cs on the staff moved his measured
" British Army, sir " importance.
" Sergeant Binks, the O.C. wants you at once, " piped the youngest of the-ladies present,
who had overheard with much satisfaction, and expected a lot of fun from, the telephone
conversation.
" Sergeant Binks. "
•" Yessir ? "
" Colonel Nobody has just inquired why the telegram from General Bondel sent to him
through this office this morning has nothing in the PREAMBLE. "
" Beg pardon, sir. Did you mention perambulator? "
" No, you idiot, the preamble ".
" Oh ! the pre.am... of course. Now I understand. I'll soon find THAT out for you, sir " said
the hypocrite as he departed from the presence without the remotest idea of what he was in search of.
He called Corporal Sly, who was always on the look out to help the sergeant, whose good
word might bring promotion.
" Corporal, the 0 C. says there is nothing in the perambulator, I mean, of course,
in the PRAM of this telegram. Where is it ? " And he searched madly up and down the
paper with his eyes. " Ah ! This is the word ". He spelled for the corporal's edification the mysterious
letters, and told him without more ado " to find out ".
The Corporal's intellect did not prove adequate, so he consulted the brainy element of the
staff. All for nothing, however. Nobody knew anything about preambles, and didn't want to, either.
" Sergeant Binks, have you found out the answer for me ? " called the 0. C.


*> Hp jPyggjMflH 4 J**
iw
u No sir. " replied the sergeant as lie hurried in.
" Then send the operator to me. "
Operator Corporal J. Jones then reported, with the result that the Innocent Junior at the
other end of the line received the following reply : "
" The Major's compliments, sir. There should be the letter " Z " in the preamble. It was put
in the prefix column by mistake. "
And when the Innocent told the Colonel, that worthy blustered " WHAT! I thought they
would at least have something interesting in that PREAMBLE, especially as someone warned me to
be most careful to use the new forms. "
And so one more of the little incidents which keep the Army behind the Army working
overtime passed over, and one more Colonel went to bed with the consciousness of having earned
his pay
J. P. B.
MISS DOROTHY BRUNTON
Miss Dorothy Brunton, who has been a special friend to the Boys of the A. I. F., sent us the
above charming photograph of herself so that our readers might know that she has not forgotten
them. She sends her Love " To all her Brother Aussies. "


ENCYCLOPAEDIA ECHELON]A
AUSTRALIA
A small Island situated in close proximity to the Continent of Tasmania. Since 1914 it has
exported large numbers of high grade diggers to Europe, where they have more than held their own
with all OTHER brands. The 1918 class goods, however, were of poor quality and have been facetiously
termed Rainbows on account of shipments arriving on this side of the World AFTER THE GREAT
STORM.
IRELAND
A small Island noted chiefly for its good Government, and its peaceable and law-abiding
people. It is nominally a part of the British Empire, but locally there is some diversity of opinion
on the point. Policemen are grown in large quantities and exported to all parts of the world.
FRANCE
A portion of Europe where the birth rate is one of the highest in the world. Its capital,
Rouen, has a magnificent climate, and the small village of Paris, well-known for its piety, is within
easy distance therefrom. This village is the Mecca of the Pilgrims of Ihe Christian \\ orld. r I he
French are Royalists, and, unlike the rest of Europe, their, country has never had a Revolution.
History, however, records some unfortunate accidents to a few ot the later monarchs. Ihe nation
has produced great explorers such as Napoleon, who discovered parts of Europe previously unknown
by the French; and Foch, who recently found the Rhine, the whereabouts of which had been in
doubt. Wine is made in small quantities for Church Festivals only, and ECHELONS have been grown
with success in the Northern Provinces. The country is chiefly distinguished, however, lor the
production of dainty goods, known to the outside world as Mademoiselle, and a small but increasing
export trade in this line has been opened up with Australia and other foreign lands.
MILL.
SUBTLETIES
The ecstacy of an ordinary private in the Army can only he compared to the transports of
happiness whicti swell iuthe heart of a man condemned toaperiod of hard, WITHOLI IHEOPIION.
But even a private is better off than a lance-corporal.
THAT is why no sane Digger would be a one-stripe artist if he could be, say, a mere colonel.
And it probably accounts for the fact that 90 perc.ent of the A. I. F. are convinced that indi-
vidually they possess qualifications more than equal to the task of " running a division or an
army or two.
It has been stated, however, by certain unenthusiastic members of the Force that they
would prefer even the patchiest civilian suit to the most gorgeous and lurid tabs ever issued. One
wonders
Because, after all, there are worse ports in a storm than a uniform and (ahem !) far less
comfortable " homes " than Army Offices.
One would, moreover, scarcely be rash in asserting that a goodly number of true-born
Australians are ALREADY commencing to reflect upon that question in a mood which is most
obviously serious. With a certain proportion of persons the subject is even the Source of much painful
guessing.
LASTLY, are billets really so unattractive as we are led to believe ? And are they as lonely as
several of our more notorious comrades insist ?
SKINNY LIZ


Miss Ivy Shilling writes to the Editor'*
as follows : " Give those wonderful Aussie
Boys my love and sincere good wishes, and
tell them I hope soon to be with them in dear
old Aussie again. I wish your souvenir num-
ber every success. "
The Eclair Twins send just this line :
" To our boys. A happy time, and a safe voyage
to the land of sunshine ! "
From some Aussies in London
If Australia has been to the fore on the Field
of Battle, she has certainly not fallen behind.in other
forms of activity. Just now, in London, our stage
favourites are leading the way at several of the best
theatres, and have created a very good impression.
A few who delight large audiences nightly are :
Oscar Asche, W. S. Percy, Rosina Buckman, Madge
Titheradge, Dorothy Brunton, Ivy Shilling, The
'Eclair Twins, and Daphne Pollard.


£HN5WE!R5 -ro
STAFF KENNY. Your " Life in Cologne " reluctantly declined. This is a moral Journal and
is not printed on Asbestos. Privately though, we envy you.
SAM ROBB. " Pints that down old Shannon flow " evokes our admiration, but in this
weather. Really! Sam.
STEWEY. Joke re old Tom only suitable for Rec. Room. Sorry.
LIEUT. B. Poem " Precedence Rolls " marched into basket for Early Repatriation.
W. 0. COP. " Beauties of Abancourt " not in our line. Note you intend to spend your
next leave there. What is the attraction ?
STAFF KENNEDY. —We agree with sentiments in " Free trade with Paris but to make it a
success requires hard work. We are toojired.
CAPT. G . Tools and how to use them " decently interred in No. 3 block. There were no
flowers, by request.
Vic ROBBINS. Your " Reformed Rake " shows improvement. Keep on trying
DISH. " Army cooks I have met " rouses our wrath. You appear to spend a lot of time
around culinary departments.
SNUSH. " Hayward's legacy" poor stuff. You are on a par with a swimmer who only knows
the breast stroke.
SMITHY. Verses on Nice are nice, but they are like the climate there. Out.
TOMMY COLE. No room for " Three fair maids of France ". We like your moderation.
JOE SHEPHERD. " Where, oh where has my little dog gone " ? Don't know, suggest asking
the Major's bulldog.
CYRIL. " Satellites of Apollo " not in our line ; they once fleeced the prophet Samuel.
WINK. " Bonnie Scotland " too sentimental for this paper. We agree their lassies are Bra'.
SGT. GREEN. Article on " French wines " shows lack of knowledge. Study the works of
Professor Hogg.
J. R. W. T. " Nurses I know " passed to Padre for second reading - . He wants your address.
JOE WILLMOTT. Treatise on " Washing up " too profane.
TITCH SEAGER. Manuscript on "Gardening" burnt in Office fire midst the applause of
the staff.
W.,0. LUKER. Your 9 a. m. sketch " Calling the roll " caused the art editor and the rest of
the staff many tears.
Mc G. HOGG. Here it is :
« The boy stood on his sister's neck
He was fat, and she was thin,
Seems a really stupid whim
Why didn't she stand on him ? »
Aren't you ashamed of yourself?
SUTTIE. Sketch of a Parisienne in pyjamas leaves this paper cold. We are married.


MAL. - " You know very well, Isabel Even the concierge knows, Mick.
p ICK Story ofGeorge and the noise he made in the house " only suitable for Y. M. C. A.
paper. At the same time we agree that George should do as he likes in his own home. Everybody
should.
" C. L. W. " Your illustrated tale of" The Girl wot jilted her Soldier Boy " miscues.
This paper cannot conceive a soldier of the saintly type you depict. At all events,
autobiographies are never welcome in our columns.
L. M., R. 0. 8., AND OTHERS. The name should be spelt WILMOTT and not WILLNOT.
We believe that the person mentioned can clain to be the originator of that famous phrase " A Bass's
Straight " between Tassy and Aussie wouldn't do anybody any harm.
L. C. P. Yes, we understand that the Australian Section will remain but we are asked by
the authorities to say that applications for non-military employment, or to stay with friends at
Rouen will not be entertained.
PAST AND GONE
The days that are past and gone,
Sweet memories will be
To Aussies who worked in Rouen
At Echelon Number Three.
For there we all had lots of fun
A happy band were we,
Who, when our daily work was done,
Knew how to have a spree.
For some to Alice's would stray
On football to discourse;
Whilst others to their friends would say
" Let's go round to the Bourse. "
A FEW had girls and would be found
Along the shady country lanes
( Wherever Aussies go they're bound
To get on very wery well with JanesJ.
Some said those fatal words " I will "
And a blushing bride each one had led
From out old Rouen's Hotel de Ville
fThe place where folks are wed. —y
We left the old spot with regret,
'Twas home away from home
And never will the boys forget
When far across the foam
The many friends they left behind
In that old Norman town,
Who to the Aussies were most kind.
And never turned them down.
PIONEER.


A
A FOWL INCIDENT
COLOSSAL CHEEK
One of the pronounced traits in the psychology of the average Australian is an abnormal
sense of " cheek and perhaps the most telling example of unadulterated impudence occurred in
an English village where a mounted section of the A. I. F. was resting for dinner. If one had not
been privileged to see the event in broad daylight, the whole affair would have been beyond belief.
A certain driver noticed in front of a house a group of chooks " pecking at elusive grubs in
the sunlight, and immediately a foul desire entered into his heart. Without waste of time, he grasped
a whip, mounted a horse, and rode the hens down before they had realised the situation. A smart
flick of the whip beheaded the fattest of the birds. He jumped off his mount, gathered the bleeding
corpse up by the legs, and walked to the owner's front door. In response to his knocking a man
opened to him, and you can imagine that the poor soul almost fainted at the sight presented to his
gaze. Before he could recover, the Digger had asked him for some pepper and salt !
Whether the whole episode possessed all the elements of nightmare for the outraged house
holder, or whether he thought that such colossal hide deserved a rich reward, I do not know, but the-
fact remains that the ravager secured both the salt AND the pepper, and was allowed to depart intact.
If there is on Jrecord an instance of brass more brazen than this, I will well, I will not
believe a word of it
DINKUM.
TASSY OH ! HO !
MORE FACTS ABOUT THE SPEC
My cobber, who is a dinkumtassikidigger and barely that tells me that he would
like to see Australia. He intends to go to that country for his long leave. No France, Italy, or troubled
bogs of Killarney for him, thank you. He said that he had not yet decided what to do with his
gratuity, but suggested the idea of a new A. I. F. Form (the colour of fresh money) to aid people to
come to a decision on that question.
When the last Aussie mail arrived, my cobber was heard to exclaim (among OTHER things)
" NO LETTERS AGAIN! "
" What State do you come from ? " someone asked.
" Tassy, of course" proudly answered the disconsolate one.
" Ah, that, accounts for it. " Said the other " The postman out there enlisted six months ago ! "
I have frequently been bored by his sentimental murmurings regarding the glorious hours
spent in the''waiting " trams at Hobart, and by a lurid description of the snoozes which he had
enjoyed whilst the Hobart-Launceston express stopped at a wayside station to permit the travelling
dentist to-make a few extractions in the village.
Those of you who are acquainted with the Rouen Trams and the French Expresses which
shunt across the Rue Lyons la Foret will sympathise with me.
I asked my cobber what he was going to do after the war. (The liquid coloured form, please).
He said he hoped to be reinstated a prisoner in the Launceston gaol. To revive me he went on to
explain that it was only necessary to don the « Arrows » once a month when the Inspector came
from Hobart. The rest of the time he put in as a member of the local Fire Brigade and as a
Policeman.
J. W. D.


Example :
-
Name :
(What one is known by).
Permanent address prior to enlistment:
(See that not more than six men give the same address.
Public homes, such as penitentiaries, prisons, etc., are
not addresses. They are places.)
Proposed address after demobilisation :
The accommodation of the " Australia " or " Menzies "
is 3.000, so don't overcrowd.
Date of birth:
No advantage to state that you are over 60. Pensions
( \
Department will take into consideration that you are due
-
for old age pension.
Single
Dependants :
Real dependants are not recognised by the Department,
Married,
such as brewers, barkeeps and manicurists.
Widower,
Wife :
Only one name allowed here.
Children :
"Souvenirs de guerre" are not allowed for in Public
Estimates.
Name & address of former employer:
Owners of horses whose heads you might have held are
not in this category.
Demobilisation Dementia
• Pte. X. was admitted to Netley Hospital after submitting demobilisation forms to Department
of Demobilisation filled in as follows, together with explanatory notes :
APPLICATION FOR A CIVILIAN PASTIME
NOTE. Prepare A. I. F. Form 989 for Pte. J. Sooner who wishes to take up a course of
instruction in intensive snail production at Macon in the Cote d'Or Department, France.
A. 1. F. FORM. 989 (solution of above problem).
Take his given knowledge of trigonometry and botany and as to whether he has at any time
been a telegraph boy, deduct from this his capacity for taming reptiles and as to whether he is
likely to produce a snail worthy of Australia's best traditions, and his application will receive un-
snail-like consideration.
STAGNATION FORM (A. 1. F. Form 5 7 3).
NOTE. To fill in this form the utmost frankness is necessary. Please divulge the most
carefully guarded secrets, as the department only wants the knowledge for the purpose of clogging
the machinery. The information does not pass through more than a 100 offices.
it is exceedingly useful to be "fay ", in other words a clairvoyant, as much of the information
requested can only be obtained by peering into the future.
If prevented by physical disablement from This-sliould only be filled in if you will not be able to
carrying on former occupation : bold up posts.
Are you a member of a trade union : Masonic Lodges, Y. M. G. As. are not Trade Unions.
If early return to Australia desired if so, Give valid reasons for wishing to stay in France,
state why: otherwise they will send you away before you get to like
the country.
STATE ; (Note). Tasmania is a State.


EDUCATION SERVICE
Occupation before the war :
(Note). Remittance men and "shrewdies" need not fill
•
this in.
Intended future occupation :
(Note). Frenzied finance is not permissible in Australia.
Education standard reached, degrees, diplo-
(Note). Graduation is Sanskrit, Hebrew and English
mas, etc. :
need not be mentioned.
Special course of training required :
(Note). Subjects that would be of national use only are
permissible, such as, raising loans, intensive hop pro-
duction, by-products of the sugar industry, i. e. rlium, etc.
MEDICAL MYSTERY (A. 1. F. Form 909.)
(Example as to how this should be completed).
PICK.
Prepare A. I. F, Form 909 for Brig-General. A. B. Seaman (G. S. 0. 1.) taking due care that all
allowances are made for depreciation caused by the hardships of the campaign. Special stress must
be laid on the fact that the life of a G. S. 0. is an exceedingly strenuous one physically and that at
no ti.me is he entirely free from the deleterious effects of brain waves, in spite of the fact that masks
are provided to ward off'any such contingency.
(As to filling of particulars J.
Usual regimental particulars can generally be filled in correctly. All G. S. Os know their
own names.
Item 6 (as to former trade or occupation is to be left blank.)
Item 7 (date of enlistment). They are all originals, put them down as August 1914 enlistments.
Description. All G. S. Os are fine, handsome, soldier-like men, otherwise they don't get the
uniform.
Statement of Case. Hard cases. Disabilities caused by too close an application to their duty,
attending reviews, carrying decorations, and signing their names.
Opinion of Medical Board. Disability attributable to services in the Empire's wars. Climate
during occupation of capitals. Constitutionally unfitted for any other occupation. Degree of
disablement at present existing (for general labour market) 100.
A SLIGHT DIFFERENCE
Inexperienced Digger (of the recent type) : What is the difference between a 12 inch gun and
a pea-rille, mate ?
Jaded Anzac (who has reason to know) CThe real difference is only brought home by the
bursting ol a 12 inch shell within reach of you, old son.


A CLOSE SHAVE
AN AUSSIE'S CARRYINGS ON
After an indefinite number of beers, and at least five glasses of forbidden fruit, in a well-
known cafe at Havre, tbe Digger suddenly conceived tbe idea of having a shave. An outsider would
have agreed that there was some foundation for this conception. Nearly quarter of an inch
of it, in fact.
Labouring under a misapprehension easily understood under the circumstances, our hero
tramped into the Regimental Dental Hut, and, squatting in the best and most commodious chair,
exclaimed lustily : " Shave, please. "
The dental Officer, a rather intelligent fellow, grasped the situation and motioned to Private
Jones, who had barely concluded the operation of clearing his own delicate chin of a superfluous
growth, to lather the new customer. More or less dazed, Pte. Jones complied.
"Now then, you go over to the next department for the razor" remarked the sage tooth-
destroyer, as he indicated the true barber's institution opposite.
Well accustomed to the vagaries of military custom, the Digger merely grunted, staggered
out, and let forth certain lurid truths concerning A. I. F. Administration which would have grieved
the delicate ear of the G. 0. C.
" What's the matter with you?" asked the tonsorial artist, gaping at the frothy apparition
as it entered his sanctum.
" I want a shave, of course, you dope ! What the devil do you think I've got the
soap on for ? "
" Who sent you here like THAT ? "
" Those fools in the other department, " replied the massive brute as he once more sank
into a chair.
" WELL, I'll be —1 " gasped the barber as he searched for his bluntest razor
And who will say these tame remarks were not justified?
ROUEN
I have seen Rouen weeping, cold and grey,
Her cobbled streets with water coursing down
Like some old woman's wrinkled face
Bathed in the tears of sorrow, or of grace;
Her form enshrouded in a widow's gown,
Mourning her absent mate. Another day,
I have seen Rouen smiling, ivarm and gay,
Like maiden waiting her betrothed knight,
His devoir finished, hast'ning to return
His queen of love and beauty to discern
And claim her for his-own the victor's right,
The conquerer's prize for skill on jousting day.
Encircled by the gentle hills around,
And threaded by the silvery noble Seine
That flows for ever to the restless sea.
An old-word city, rich in history;
The spirit of the Maid you still retain
In eyrie monuments on Catherine's Mound
DRAWN BY L.-O. HITCHCOCK


Australian Section G.H.Q., 3rd Echelon, Trance
A Roll of the Officers, N.C.Os, and men, who marched into New Section, Rouen
(53, rue de Lyons-la-Foret) on 13-11-18
Major
Capt.
Lieut.
Donnelly
Guinn
J.W.
F.A.S.
J.P.
Bradford
2584 S/S. BarUett J.V
1674 W.O. Morris
2550 Pte. Marshman
31187 Cpl. Mayne
6034 Cpl. Manson
939 Sgt. Milner x
6373 Pte. Moore
4619 Pte. Newman
7959 Pte. O'Connell
1618 S/S. Picken
3893 Sgt. Pooley
6380 Cpl. Renwick
1285 Sgt. Robbins
2398 Cpl. Robb
G.L.
C.C.
G. A.
H.
6047 Pte. Boxall F.
3 W.O. Copperthwaite W.C.
148 S/S. Cosgriff E.
A.E.
A.J.
J.
564 Sgt. Cole T.J.
2525 Cpl. Graike C.H.
2635 Cpl. Cunningham N.M.
6882 Cpl. Feenan JR.
J.
L.
4425 Cpl. Francis P.
W.O
E.L.
8065 Pte. Frewin G.H.
15020 Cpl. Giddins E.F.
3107 S/S. Gill G.R.
V.C.
S.
F.
W.
V.H.
W.R
A.
F.G.
J.H.
W.
J.
A.
L.E.
3104 Sgt.* Green R.A.
3455 Pte. Seager
4598 Cpl. Shannon
2423 Sgt. Smith
2385 Cpl. Soutar
10668 Sgt. Stewart
17621 Pte. Hall T.C.
2914 Sgt. Hayward E.
1721 Cpl. Hogg G.McG.
5838 Pte. Holdorf L.W.
839 Cpl. Hudson F.C.
348 Sgt. Taylor "
5878 S/S. Kenny J.H.
382 Sgt. Taylor
13076 Pte. Thirkell
2170 Sgt. Willmott
2429 Cpl. Williamson
2789 Sgt. Winkler
7601 S/S. Kennedy E.T.
6537 Pte. Lidsey A.W.
4538 R.QM.S. Luker A.R.
4272 Pte. McGill A.R.
6308 Sgt. Millard L.
N.C.Os. and men who joined the Section after 13th November 1918
4039 Pte. Baker
22021 Spr. Campbell
10675 Cpl. Disher
1741 Pte. Duncan
22315 Spr. Finney
21418 Cpl. Gibbs
261 Pte. Lambert
48 Pte. Marchant
2095 Cpl. Moloney
22209 Cpl. Moore
18728 Pte. Porter
G.L.
L.J.
C.R.
A.
E.G.
M.H.
T.E.
W.J.
C.E.
A.A.
3226 Cpl. Shepherd
4938 Cpl. Sinclair
7786 Cpl. Snushall
1601 Cpl. Suttie
4892 Pte. Taylor
1672 Cpl. Taylor
21140 Cpl. Watts
3160 Cpl. White '
3638 Pte. White
2435 N Pte. Wilson
V.J.
L.
C.W.
T.E.
V.E.
J.R.W.
A.J.B.
C.L.
S.P.
A.E.


E.
C.H.
G.H.
G.R.
T.C.
E
L YV.
A. W.
W.O.
H.
N "
Members who have marched out for Australia
2550 Pte. Marshman
31187 Cpl. Mayne
G G.
C. A.
A.E.
A.J.
G.L.
J:
v.c.
w.
F.G.
J.H.
A.
2584 S/S. Bartlett
6047 Pte. Bo.xall
J.V.
148 S/S. Cosgriff
2525 Gpl. Craike
8065 Pte. Frewin
3107 S/S. Gill
17621 Pte. Hall
2914 Sgt. Hayward
5838 Pte. Holdorf
6537 Pte. Lidsey
3893 Sgt. Pooley
6034 Cpl. Manson
939 Sgt. Milner
6373 Pte. Moore
1674 W.O. Morris
7959 Pte. O'Connell
1285 Sgt. Robbins
4598 • Cpl. Shannon
348 Sgt. Taylor
382 Sgt. Taylor
2429 Cpl. Williamson
And those who have Marched out to H.Q., A.I.F.
6882 Cpl. Feenan
4425 Cpl. Francis
J.R.
P.
839 Cpl. Hudson
6380 Cpl. Renwick
F.C.
E.L.
4272 Pte. McGill
18728 Pte. Porter
13076 Pte. Thirkell
15020 Cpl. Giddings
A.R. Died on 17-11-19
A. A. Marched out to rejoint unit.
W. Marched out to Base Depot, Havre.
E.F. Transferred tojßaselDepot, Havre.
QUITE "A PROPOS"
He was English quite English, you know, (as the B. D. V. Advertisement says), and he had
an intimate knowledge of those "wild men from Borneo Well, if not from Borneo, at least just
below it Horrible men, anyway. However, one tine day, he met a nic e quiet Australian (surely
an exception) to whom he confided his dislike of Aussies generally and in particular. " They have
been more nuisance in France than any other troops , he asserted and was going to enlarge upon
the subject when the Dinkum murmured softly " to the Huns ? Oh, yes, ot course .


KENDALL.
IS.
II
I ULKfe VlHftT
HS ft I N'T
JLJ_ ILJLXJ,
<5^
SIGHS FROM LONDON
You welcomed us rainily Rouen city,
The day that we came to you, travel-worn;
Yet those drops were but your impulsive pity
A nd swift at your tears our love was born.
England has taken us, chilled us throughly
And we turn from her kindness in cold despair.
For of all strange cities we've loved YOU truly.
This stately London's too big to care I
Our loves and our good companions call us.
Our eyes are wet, and our hearts are sore.
The little feet of our loves recall us
To wander the rue Grand Pont once more.
We sigh for your brasseries, warm, well-lighted;
Your game, with its pocketless sport we played.
We watched you at dominoes, all excited,
Winning or losing, but half afraid.
Streliski, we thank you for mirth-filled even's,
For your gift to amuse, and your quaint grimace.
And the moon leaning near from the magic heavens
Used to silver the night-stilled Market Place.
We think of the tunes that the Omnia gave us
" Washington Pest " as the film unrolled.
" Put on your Tata " and oh ! Lord save us I
Anything English and ten years old.
We blamed your faults. There was sometimes tension.
You got our money by easy arts.
But we pai'd no price for your comprehension
And, old Rouen, you have kept our Hearts. .
Little; FIFTSS PFIW9EI\
ft WIQ SOME SticKe OF Paikt
*5 ft DlftEft
VJ-5
CR'TFRffrK THEftTRe
OON


In all the tumb.le and horror of war, the A.I.F. has had at least one staunch friend and
helper a friend who was not afraid to help even in the front line under fire of the enemy. We
refer, naturally, to the Australian Young Men's Christian Association, which, after all, has surely
established itself as a composite part of the Army. That the Diggers have appreciated the services
the great services of the organisation would be a truth mildly stated. A feeling of gratitude
exists which can only arise in the hearts of men who have learned to look with affection upon a
legion of pals which has sacrificed much in money, position, and comfort, to serve the physical and
spiritual needs of the thousands of Australians who were fighting, for their country.
The great secret of the wonderful success which the Y.M.C. A. has attained with the soldiers
lies in the fact that it has not neglected the mere bodily wants of those whom it came to serve.
Perhaps most things, even spiritual, depend for their proper development upon a normal condition
in our physiological make-up. No man with an empty stomach, a tired, aching head, and exhausted
limbs, wishes for any little attention to his soul at the moment, and yet there are religious sects,
and professions, which have adopted the false tactics of offering a bible when a crust should have
been given - with a result manifestly disastrous to the principles of the Christian Faith. In all
senses of the word, the Young Men's Christian Association is modern in its ideas of doing good.
Without cant, it appeals in practice and theory to every instinct of decency and reverence (and the
term is used in its wider significance) within the human heart. It forces respect by a pure example.
It generates piety, and belief in Higher Things, by a policy of frankness, tact, and sound common
sense.
The Digger who has been through the grinding mill of battle will never forget the luxury of
the steaming coffee, and the eatables, and the cigarettes which were ready for him at those front-line
canteens on his way from the filth and blood of the trenches. These small things meant new life to
him they were priceless. Is " appreciation the word to mark the acknowledgment of such
thoughtfulness ? Time after time the ramshackle depots have been blown to pieces by shells when
their devoted attendants were carrying on their splendid work. No, " appreciation is not the term,
for it fails utterly to embrace the sentiments of the boys who have known what it was to be refreshed
at a moment when life seemed a very dreary business indeed, and their morale was not of the
highest. j. i
And then, too, away from the fighting area, we have seen those warm and commodious huts
with the red triangle over the open doors inviting the bored and camp-stricken chaps hanging about
the parades to go inside to read, write, and be entertained. There were daily services for those who
desired to attend them, concerts, cinema shows, lectures, whist-drives, and many other diversions
to occupy the minds of those who were only too apt to be melancholy and morose. It is not good to
brood too much when there is a war on, and when the Future throws ominous shadows across the
path of life.
In days to come, it will be safe to say - and say with ringing sincerity that the strangling
bonds of a military existence extending over four years of merciless turmoil and cruelty were made
more bearable, and sometimes comfortable, by the practical kindness and the efficiency in organi-
sation of " the good old Y. M. ". I D w T
J. R. W. T.


Some Aussie Units
THE AUSTRALIAN BAKERIES
Perhaps the most important of the units which compose " the Army behind the Army '' are
the Bakeries in this case, the Australian Bakeries. There are five of them. The first left Australia
on the 22-12-14, and it was followed by the Second on. 30th Nov. 1915, and the Third in about the
middle of 1916. The Fourth and Fifth Bakeries were formed in Egypt during March 1916. All have
done excellent work and have earned the admiration of those who knew the vast extent of their
labours. As an example of the usual resourcefulness which characterised their conduct, it may be
stated that on Imbros Island, the First Bakery finding it utterly impossible to procure wood for
their fires, used leaves and small bushes gathered from the hill-sides to bake thei-r bread.
The Fourth Bakery was the first to use machinery, and with the other four units was turning
out 210000 rations per day in France, and these were forwarded by train from Rouen to the front.
Major J. G. Prior who recently returned to Australia commanded the Bakeries for several months
and was the pioneer and originator of the whole organisation and has now been succeeded by
Captain E. Isaachsen.
\
The A. E. M. M. and B. Company
One of the most interesting units of the A.1.F., or, for that matter of any army, is the
Australian Electrical Mechanical Mining and Boring Company, under the command of Major
R. V. Morse D.S.O. It has rendered very great services to the soldiers and civilians in the war areas,
and not only has it won the admiration and gratitude of all who have benefited by its technical skill,
but it has demonstrated that so far as ingenuity and engineering knowledge were concerned
Australians could hold their own with the distinction which marked their lives in every branch
of military art. Their work embraced the whole area of the British Front, and the character of their
labours varied to suit the ever-changing phases of battle. While it was necessary to mine extensively,
the unit did all the power work, using for the purpose, to an almost exclusive degree, electricity.
The Wombat Boring Machine, designed by Captain Hunter, and brought from Australia, was utilised
in the trenches to assist the advance of infantry, to supply water for the front-line troops, for,
testing strata, and for bringing about an effective ventilation system for dugouts. Deep well boring
was also carried on very largely. Upon the need for mining having ceased the unit devoted its
efforts towards lighting, ventilating, and pumping the forward dugout system. Since the Armistice
assistance has been given to the local authorities of villages and towns in the forward area to
maintain and re-establish water and lighting systems.
THE THIRD C. C. S.
The Third C. C. S. has enjoyed the distinction of being the only Australian Medical Unit to
be stationed in Germany. It was sent to Euskirchen, a little town not far from the University City of
Bonn. After arduous and distinguished service with the Second British Army, this hospital now
finds itself a separate body and is continuing to deal with the inevitable casualties in sick and
injured which occur among the troops occupying the surrounding sector. In company with other
formations of the A: I. F., the 3rd. C. C. S. will shortly leave for England, and the chapter of its work
will be nearing its end.


Australian Veterinary Hospital
The liorse was ever the friend of man, but never did he aid his masters so effectively as in
the war which has just ended. So valuable was the help given by these poor dumb beasts that it is
•doubtful whether the result could have been what it was without them. Thousands died on the field
of battle. Many had to be destroyed after suffering from wounds and privation.
The Army realised the importance of the horse, and took steps that there should be properly
established hospitals wherein sickness and injury each animal could be nursed back to strength
and duty. One of the most comprehensive of these " institutions " to use a true, though perhaps
an un-military expression - was the AUSTRALIAN VETERINARY HOSPITAL, which was established
near Calais under the command of Lt. Col. Whitfeld D. S. 0. It had capacity for 1250 " patients ", and
was manned by 500 men. It boasts of having " passed through " at least 25000 animals in the
eighteen months of its service, and this is the more creditable since the staff was exclusively com-
posed of " B " Class soldiers who were subjected to medical examination once a month and moved
out to their units as they became fit enough to be classed " A ". In this manner no fewer than 1811
men passed through the hospital.
If the care of the troops who became through no fault of their own, casualties, then the care
of the faithful and willing mokes who fell by the way was not the less essential, apd those whose
duty it was to tend the " friends of man " in their trouble were doing very privileged and noble
work.
CHAGRIN D'AMOUR
Le cafard, d tout prendre, qu'est-ce ?
Un souvenir emu doux comme une caresse,
Un trop timide dveu qu'on voudrait confirmer,
Le futur conjugue du joli verbe aimer,
C'est un livre en fleurs dont on serait Tabeillc,
C'est un bruit de baisers qui bourdonne a I'oreille,
Un coeur qu'on croyait mort, qui a ressuscite
Et pour une ame soeur, tendrement palpite,
C'est le regret amcr d'avoir gdche sa vie,
Love-grief ? why 'tis but a caress;
A too timid avowal, leaving fulfilment desired;
A touching remembrance by love's phantoms inspired
Love in the future, unproved tenderness;
It is a poem of flowers in which bees would sing;
A sound of kisses that to ears sweetly ring;
A heart believed dead is revived from its death,
And a sister soul greets in a paean of breath
Giving song. ' Tis the pain of wrecked lives to obtain
A glimpse of love's happiness and not gain
De n'avoir pas compris toute la poesie
D'un bonheur fugitif qu'on n'a point savoure.
On aime toujours mieux quand on est separe,
C'est un ardent desir que I'absence exaspere,
Une soif d'infini que ricn ne desaltere
C'est la chanson d'amour, c'est Teternclle chanson.
Du cafard au baiser il n'y a qu'un frisson,
Aught but sorrow! To feel only the pain
Of poetry. To live in solitude the rest of their years
■ Amidst prosperity that brings nought but tears :
It is an ardent desire that absence provokes,
A thirst for eternity that but adds to our yokes :
It is the epic of love, the eternal world-song;
Love-grief, and the chill of its kiss surely wrong,
Love-grief! What good to protest?
Le cafard, a quoi bon protester!
Le cafard, voyez-vous, c'est le besoin d'aimer.
M. 11.
Love-grief, See you, is the yearning for love.
M. H.
ONE AGAINST US
SKITING ANZAC : « Talk about hospitality, why, in Australia, when the old swaggies come up to the
door they just have to ask for a feed, and they get it ».
ENGLISH MISS : « Did 1 hear you say they had to ASK ? In England now, we should offer the poor
men something to eat ».




OIL ACROSS THE WATERS
"It has now been definitely announced by the Minister for Works says a Sydney daily
paper "that the North Shore Bridge will be commenced some day. The non-borrowing N. S. W.
Government anticipates that by that time the Sinking fund will be able to meet the necessary
expenditure
" The outlook for the prickly pear industry was never better. The Government is doing
everything possible to maintain this great State asset, and large areas of land have been set
aside for our returning soldiers, who deserve the best we can give them . I bus the Queensland
Minister for Lands in a speech at Toowoomba.
A Sydney cable reports that as a result of bounteous rains, a bumper rabbit crop is expected,
and in anticipation of large orders, Agricultural machinery firms are working night ancl day on the
production of the necessary harvesting implements.
" Two-up " which has, in common with other sports, been languishing during the War, has
not only attained its former eminence as a result of the return of the A. I. F., but seriously
threatens Racing and Church-going ". This from an Adelaide journal of high standing.
We extract the following from the columns of a Hobart morning paper usually well-
informed : " A rumour is current in political circles that Mr. Pearce intends asking Parliament to
appoint a Royal Commision of Returned soldiers to inquire into the Work of the Defence Department
during the war. Interesting revelations can no doubt be expected.
" A meeting of-Professors will be held shortly, probably at the Melbourne University, to
consider the important question of the admissibility of the WORD which is most popular with the
A. I. F., in the New School Dictionary ". Gable item.
A Brisbane daily states that during the recent Bolshevik disturbances, the plans of the new
Brisbane Town Hall were stolen, probably by the Sovietists who are strid to contemplate the erection
of commodious headquarters on One Tree Hill.
" Remarkable scenes of enthusiasm have been witnessed in all the States when members of
the Australian Provost Corps disembarked from the transports "slates the Collie Mail. "These men,
who faced the unspeakable dangers of the English areas with unflinching courage should never be
forgotten by their comrades ".
A well-known Melbourne Sporting paper states that Mr. Jack Wren, being convinced of the
futility of Senator Millen, Minister,of Repatriation, has offered to equip and finance schools for
Punters, in which returning Anzacs can be trained for a nominal fee with the prospect of gradua-
ting to his Pony Courses throughout Australia.
The Federal Government Gazette advertises for a Chief Commissioner for Railways, insisting
that experience on Light or Broad Guage Operating Coys, is necessary. Applications from R. T. Os
will not be considered.
A cable has been received by this journal to the effect that there will shortly be a vacancy for
a cocked hat, as the G. G. speaks of departing. This being a job of essential snobbishness and one
which depends upon one's consummate skill in turning sentences, no Digger need apply.
" THE POSTMASTER GENERAL'S NIGHTMARE ", was the heading in the Canberra paper
recently for the following paragraph : "Mr. Webster, it appears, during one of his customary sleeps,
dreamed that he had ordered the issue of Aussie stamps which featured the old Roo. He is said to have
awakened suffering from shock. No wonder, for the idea of being original or making use of anything
distinctly Australian would naturally be repugnant to the majority of the Government ".
Our Melbourne correspondent cables that May Day celebrations passed off quietly throughout
the Commonwealth except in that City, where the Bank Clerks' Union "turned out on the River Bank
in large numbers. Their speakers referred warmly to the war profiteering of the Haberdasheries and
instanced the exorbitant prices of Fancy Sox. It was unanimously decided that until the cost ol these
things became normal all members would wear celluloid collars and discontinue the use of Boston
Garters.
L. M.


XDERNI£M\ JC^TC)
/ • HEURE • \ 4C LY
t PRESIDENT SGT.L.M.LLARA /
/ LITERARY EDITOR CPL.J.R.W.TAYLOR \
J ART EDITOR CPL. LEYSHONWHITE \ /
I TREASURER CPL.V. J.SHEPHERD ' Y§L^
I BUSINESS MANAGER L.PICKEN \
A TWL! AUSTRALIAN SECTION, / XLHDLF
\ /X. ® G - H -Q-.3I?ECHE.LON Y y\
Nos Adieux a Rouen
Autant notre arrivee fut un jour de joie, autant notre depart sera un jour de tristesse.
Quel est l'Australien qui pourra oublier l'accueil regu dans la vieille cite normande, si liere
de ses monuments et de ses traditions ?
L'accueil qui nous fut fait, fut un accueil plein de franchise et nous disons meme plein
d'affection. £i nous osions, nous ajouterions que cette affection fut meme quelquefois... debor-
dante, mais dans ce cas, elle fut passagere. A cote de celle-ci qui ne fut pas dedaignee par nombre
d'entre nous, que de bonnes amities nous avons rencoutrees, que de foyers nous ont accueillis
comme des freres separes, heureux de se rencontrer apres une longue absence. Qu i 1 nous etait doux
apres une promenade dans les vieilles rues, apres une visite aux vieux monuments et, en particulier,
aux edifices religieux, plusieurs fois seculaires, de nous faire expliquer les beautes que nous avions
contemplees et les souvenirs d'histoire qu'ils rappelaient. Les foyers qui s'ouvraient pour nous,
etrangers de langage et souvent de religion, et pour nous faire une large place, nous consolaient et
nous emp6chaient d'oublier, ceux que nous avions quittes et que bientdt nous reverrons.
Aussi, est-ce avec tristesse que nous quitterons la ville aux multiples clochers et aux collines
enchanteresses au pied desquelles coule un fleuve majestueux et imposant ce port grandiose oil
dans un jour angoissant nous avions debarque en hate pour apporter a nos freres de France, si
eprouves, l'appui de nos bras.
0 Rouen, les enfants d'Australie qui ont sejourne dans tes murs ne t'oublieront jamais,
lis s'eSt cree entre toi et eux des liens que le temps ne pourra que resserrer, car tu leur as fait aimer
la douce France.
0 Rouen, adieu! Non au revoir!!
0 France, puisse le saug que nous avons verse pour toi servir a te faire plus grande et te
faire plus belle. C'est le vceu que nous formons tous et que nous demandons au Tres-Haut de realiser
non pas demain, mais aujourd'hui!
J.R. W.T.


;
v
v " « • I
\ / -V
%
*
I - • '
u .
*
r


SgetSMflffe, -£•$**
JL Imp. L. WOLF
y|/ Rouen
