

THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 1. WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 23, 1859. Price Id.
The launching of a newspaper is always a nervous affair : in fact the launching
of the Leviathan (commonly called the Great Eastern) was npthing to it.
Oftentimes the crystal billows which, in the fond eye of the Editor, illuminated
by the rising sun, seem one bath of brightest gold, and which he hopes will
bear up the ponderous machine, suddenly fade, vanish, disappear, like the
desert mirage ; and the structure, rapidly descending, buries itself in arid sand,
or oftener still in blackest mud. Who will not w'eep on board the “Marco
Polo ” if such a fate befall the “ Marco Polo Record”?
But a truce to figures, which the Editor only uses to shew how he can write ;
and therefore, kind reader, let us come at once to facts.
It is a fact that there are at least hundreds of people on board this good
ship who can read and be wise; therefore let them read this periodical. It is
a fact also that many of these can write, and the Editor suspects that of these,
some can write well; therefore let them write for this newspaper. It is a fact
that reading, writing, and arithmetic, comprehend (in the estimation of many)
the sum total of human knowledge. The arithmetic he proposes to leave till
all get to Melbourne, where we shall have enough of it; but for the display of
the other two, here’s the opportunity ; therefore the Editor feels assured he
shall not want contributions produced in kindly feeling and with literary
ability. But he wishes it to be distinctly understood by his kind friends and
collaborateurs that he retains the power, without personal offence, of curtailing
or rejecting altogether the papers sent to him, and no manuscript can, in any
case, be returned.
The Editor rejoices in having already secured a promise of kind assistance
from several, and feels sure that this number will weekly increase, and hethere-
fore launches boldly upon the sea of opinion, and sings in the language of the
old poet, — “ Go leetle book, thyself present,
As child whose parent is unkent;
Look out, and see what thou canst see,
Come back, and tell what they say of me.” X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —In undertaking the duty you have now done, allow me to wish
you every success, which will much depend on the kindly feeling of all classes
of the passengers, who I trust will assist with their pens in any way they
think will be most acceptable to their fellow passengers.
Our progress as yet has not been what I would wish, but now we are doing
well, and will soon be in the region of the N. E. trades.
I will send you a weekly abstract of our progress, and again wishing you
all success, I remain yours faithfully,
D. H. Johnston, Commander.
our ship’s log.
Feb. 6th. —Left Liverpool in tow of steam tug “ Retriever.”
n jth. —Strong breeze S. W-, in tow of “Retriever.”
„ 8th. —Tuskar N, E., tug broke both hawsers and left the ship ; position
at noon, Saltees W. 6 miles.
„ 9th. —Strong breeze from S. W., beating to windward under reefed topsails.
,, 10tA.— Fresh gale from S.W. with severe hail squalls. Lat. 51° 20* N.,
long 6° 30' W.
M 11 th. Stiff gale from S.W. to W-S.W. Ship under low sail making no
progress.
„ 12 th. —First part of this day blowing hard from S.W.; latter, moderate
and calm. Lat. 50° 52' N., long. 6° 10' W.
,, 13 th. —Calms and light airs from the N. W. All sail set. Lat. 49° 32'
N., long. 8° 10* W.
„ 14 th. —First part light airs; latter, fresh steady breeze from N.ff. Ship
going 9 knots. Distance 164 miles. Lat. 46° 55' N., long. 8° 55' W.
,, \5th.— Moderate breezes and calms. All sail set. Cloudy weather.
No observations.
„ \6th.— Variable light airs and calms. Distance in two days 149 miles.
Lat. 44° 31' N., long. 9° 44' W.
„ 17 th. —First part calm ; latter, light airs, E. N. E. Distance 60 miles.
Lat. 43° 44' N., long. 10° 25' W.
„ 18 th. —Moderate steady breezo, E. N. E. A barque in company.
Distance, 185 miles. Lat. 41° 9' N., long. 12° 45' W.
,, \9th.— Cloudy weather with light northerly wind. Distance 136 miles.
Lat. 39° 10' N , long. 14° 10' W.
Feb. 20th. —Signalised a Swedish brig bound to Dordt, asked to be reported.
Nearly calm all day. Distance, 20 miles. Lat. 38° 52' N , long. 14° 25' W.
,, 21 st. —First part, light airs ; latter, fresh breeze, S. S. E. Ship going
10 knots. Passed two barques standing the same way. Distance, 147 miles.
Lat. 37° 10' N., long. 16° 40' W.
„ 22nd. —Lat. 34° 35' N-, long. 19° 38' W. Distance 221 miles.
The positions are given at noon each day.—Ed.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Ship “ Marco I olo,” Feb. 22nd. 1859.
Dear Sir, —You will be happy to hear of the very satisfactory state of health
throughout the ship, and as we are fast approaching the Tropics, I would re-
mind the passengers of that which is so essential to their own welfare and
comfort, viz.,—a strict attention to cleanliness, both personally and locally.
Trusting that my next report may be as favourable, believe me to remain,
Yours faithfully,
George J. Wood, Surgeon.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —Enclosed I send you a statistical statement of the number of
passengers in each cabin, and also the number of officers and crew on board,
together with a list of provisions on board for their use,
1 remain, yours truly,
David E, Williams, Purser.
NUMBER OF PASSENGERS.
Saloon .... 16
Second Class .... 29*
Intermediate .... 46*
Steerage .... 152*
244*
Officers, Crew, &c. ... 67
Total number of Souls . . 311*
PROVISIONS.
Beef, 12,160 lbs. Pork, 8,600 lbs. Biscuits, 19,600 lbs. Preserved Meats,
4,975 lbs. Preserved Soups, 975 lbs. Flour, 16,156 lbs. Peas, 7,000 lbs. Rice,
2,593 lbs. Preserved Potatoes, 2,632 lbs. Oatmeal, 4,720 lbs. Salt Fish, 150 lbs.
Jam, 450 lbs. Raisins, 2,881 lbs. Suet, 1,725 lbs. Lard, 225 lbs. Tea, 901 lbs.
Coffee, 547 lbs. Moist Sugar, 5,569 lbs. Loaf Sugar, 1,038 lbs. Cheese, 562 lbs.
Butter, 2,079 lbs. Pickles, 181 gallons. Vinegar, 260 gallons. Salt, 560 lbs.
Pepper, 80 lbs. Treacle, 464 lbs. Lime Juice, 173 gallons,
David E. WiLLiAMS,Pwr4er.
On hoard the “Marco Polo," lying becalmed in Biscay Bay, 16*A Feb., 1859‘
To Capt. D. H. Johnston, commanding the above ship.
Sir, —Will you permit me, through the.columns of the “ Marco Polo Record,”
to offer a few remarks on the behaviour of your powerful ally (Commodore
Wind) in the prosecution of the tedious voyage which lies before us, and in so
doing I feel persuaded 1 shall only be expressing the opinion of all on board.
I regret to say, Sir, that it has been anything but staunch, having on the con-
trary, been distinguished by shuffling, blustering, and uncourteousness; occa-
sioning much annoyance to yourself and officers, and great discomfort to your
passengers. Having a stake in the present voyage, I have been induced to
watch closely his movements from the beginning. I need not remind you,
Sir, that when you and your amiable lady came on board, he was in his berth,
and had not even the courtesy to rise and welcome you, a behaviour I am
happy to say, not imitated by your passengers. From withholding his co-
operation at the moment of starting, he placed you under the humiliating ne-
cessity of having recourse to the aid of a common “tug” to drag your noble
ship out to sea; and when he did condescend to get up, it was only to show his
ill humour; for, in defiance of all etiquette, he went directon board the “ tug ”
and commenced blustering with it in a most unhandsome and unseamanlike man-
ner, thereby impeding our progress and rendering the movements of the ship
anything but agreeable to those in her. He followed up this spiteful conductby
dealing a variety of stunning blows on the not over sensitive head and sides of
that craft, until she, feeling disgusted at such undeserved treatment, “cut her


stick,” or rather your hawsers, Sir, leaving you to your own resources. Not
satisfied with insulting you in this way, he must needs add injury to the offence,
by urging one of his unmannerly crew, a monster wave, to carry away one of
your life boats, by which act he has, as your ally, laid himself under a most
serious charge, which you may yet, Sir, see the expediency of preferring against
him at the proper time and place. You will recollect, Sir, that after this un-
faithful and I may say cowardly treatment, he gave you and your officers con-
tinual occupation in tacking, baffling your exertions at every point, until having
exhausted his spite and ill humour, and possibly for the first time, recollecting
there were ladies on board, he suddenly relented, and gave us a specimen of
his powers in a right royal breeze, bringing us to our present becalmed position,
I cannot close my letter, Sir, without recording my (I may say our) admi-
ration of your great patience and dignified demeanour under the trying and
unmerited behaviour of your ally; as well as of your and your officers’ unre-
mitting exertions to conciliate his good will and win him back to his fidelity.
I sincerely trust, Sir, that he has been touched by it, and that it will be re-
warded by his future steady co-operation with you to the end of the voyage.
Believe me, Sir, yours very faithfully, W. P.
P.S.—A nautical friend of mine, willing to find some excuse for the shuffling
and unmannerly conduct of your ally, hints at the possibility of his having
“made a night of it” on shore previously to his coming on board, and that it
must be attributed to a violent fit of spleen or indigestion, as in the main he
is not a bad fellow, although given to blustering; nevertheless, Sir, I take the
liberty to suggest the propriety that strict orders be given to your chief officer
to keep a sharp look out on his movements. W. P.
A MAN OVERBOARD.
We hardly expected when we undertook the anticipated pleasure of editing
this Journal, that one of our earliest duties would prove one of our most pain-
ful. But He “whose ways are not as our ways” has thought fit suddenly to
call away one of our small number from amongst us. On the morning of
Thursday, February 17th, a young man of the name of Henry James Lowther,
a passenger in the intermediate cabin, was standing on the forecastle about
7.45 a.m., when, either from the sail sweeping him off, or from a sudden lurch
of the vessel, he fell overboard. The ship was sailing as it is estimated, at that
moment, about 6 or 7 knotsanhour. The life buoy was immediately flung out,
the vessel stopped, and the boat lowered, but in vain. It is supposed that in
his fall the deceased must have struck his head against the side and so been
stunned, for he is reported to have been a good swimmer, and his cap being
picked up near the buoy, there is no other way of accounting for his rapid
disappearance. Little is known of the previous life of the deceased; he had
been a sailor, but was now embarked as an emigrant, apparently without any
relatives or intimate friends on board. From the contents of his box it was
discovered that he had a sister in England to whom, of course, due notice will
be given of the painful event upon our arrival at Melbourne.
While we learn to bow with reverence to the decrees of Him who doeth all
things after the counsel of His own will, and before whom we all stand con-
victed of death, hoping only for a resurrection to life through Christ, let us all
learn from this sad calamity, how soon, how suddenly, our stewardship may
he closed, our accounts made up, our day gone, our voyage concluded, and
our port of bliss or woe reached for ever - . May God extend His merciful pro-
tection to all remaining in this ship, now and always. X.
A HOMEWARD BOUND.
. Saturday, Feb. 19 th.
Tins day we spoke a Norwegian brig, homeward bound, from Egina in
Greece to Dordt in Holland. Though we passed close to her, yet from our
having so recently left England, we did not hold any lengthened conversation
with her; she however undertook to give notice of our position to Lloyds’
agent at the port to which she was bound, who will duly report it to London,
and it will be inserted among the shipping intelligence in the London pa-
pers; hence our friends will know that our ship has arrived in safety to such a
latitude and longitude, on such a day.
Some of our friends may not be aware of the simple method by which such
conversations are held at sea. To explain it fully would require much more
space than we have; suffice it to say there are ten different flags, each of which
is numbered in a book ; it is plain therefore by these ten flags any number may
be written, up to 9,876,543,210; rejecting therefore alf those numbers which
have the same numerals in them twice over, and which therefore would require
two flags bearing the same number in the book, there yet remain very many
numbers, to each of which is affixed a word, a name, a question, an answer,
a phrase or request; these being noted in the book, and both parties being
provided with copies, when the flags are run up, the numbers are referred to
and the message read. X.
. CHALYBEATE WATERS.
We beg respectfully to call the attention of our friends and subscribers to
the unexampled liberality of-the owners of this noble line of Packets. It is
well known people passing into the Tropics are liable to sunstroke. It is well
known that sunstroke frequently induces nervous disease, and for nervous disease
chalybeate waters are very good. Messrs. Baines and Co. have therefore been
careful to provide an ample supply of them, stronger than those of Tunbridge
Wells or the Tewit Spring at Harrogate. As the sun began to show his face the
stewards very properly brought this valuable mineral water under the notice
of the saloon passengers on several recent mornings. We have not yet had an
opportunity of analysing it, but by the exercise of our critical power we opine
it consists of the following-proportions in 100 grains,—
Sesqui-carbonate of iron (rust) . . , 19.82 grs.
Organic matter 2.12 „
W ater 78.06 ,,
100 grains
A regulated supply may be obtained from the stewards on application. X.
AMUSEMENTS.
During the past week quoits have been in great demand, players brisk. In
the evenings several attempts have been made in the concert line on the poop,
and, we are happy to say, in most cases successful; however, we must hope
before long to have a better musical arrangement —good enough to present an
attraction nearly equal to the Royal Turkish Divan, No. 1, Midship-square, at
present the rendezvous of the wit and talent of the “ Marco Polo,” and where
a delighted audience are nightly regaled with smoke, as well as songs, glees,
and recitations from various popular authors.
Chess has been in moderate demand; but as players are equal, no great vic-
tory has been gained, but before arrival in Melbourne we hope to have a
champion worthy of the belt.
We cannot close our report, without expressing the great pleasure we re-
ceived in listening to the concerts held nightly on the quarter deck, where
some of the voices may fairly be said to be first class; and we sincerely hope
to have a continuance of them during the voyage, and request that the per-
formers will eive due notice, through our paper, of the hour of commencement.
E- W. P.
poets’ corner.
LIFE.
And its scattered petals lie broken and dead;
And the noble forest trees fall with a sound
Which is heard o’er the din that reigns around;
And none would know that this spot, I ween,
Was so lately a calm and lovely scene.
Calmly and silently
Again flows the river to the sea,
Reflecting in its bosom bright
A softer, purer, chaster light;
For the moon like a gem is set
In heaven’s lovely coronet,
And a mournful light o’er the river is shed,
As though it wept for its flowrets dead.
Pause, and think; may not this be
Emblem of thy life and thee? D. G.
SUJbcrtttfcmcnteL
CHALLENGE.— Two gentlemen (whose names can he ascertained on ap-
plication to the editor) challenge any other two saloon passengers to play
quoits, on the poop; game to be 300; two quoits each.
CHALLENGE.— Four of the steerage passengers to play the game of quoits
against four of the second or intermediate passengers, on any day they
wish to name. James H. Monogh, John Story.
CTOLKN, early in the week, from its owner, Mr. Ankers, third mate, on
k} board the “ Marco Polo,” a nearly new Jacket. It was of real English
manufacture, both as regards quality and make, and was double twilled, and
dved in the piece. It was none of Hymn's slops, and was without a particle of
Manchester shoddy, and lined throughout. The thief is requested to return it
immediately. A
The rascal who stole my beautiful jacket,
May he rest uneasy on his midnight pillow,
And his grinders with toothache from morn to night rack it,
While sailing across the wild roaring billow. H. G. A,
WANTED, a professional Barber. Apply, stating name and address, to the
steward of the chief cabin. .
WANTED, for the publication of this journal, a few quires of Foolscap Paper,
Any person possessing the same will find a purchaser at the office of
the publisher of the “Record, Mr. E. Jacobs.
DIVINE SERVICE.
On Sunday, divine service, according to the Church of England, was held on
the upper deck, at 10.30 a.m.; the Rev. M. Barker, one of the passengers, offi-
ciating. It was attended by a good proportion of the passengers, both cabin
and steerage, and such of the crew who could be spared from their duties. The
discourse was from Gen i. 10. In the evening, at 6.15 p.m., the same gentle-
man held a Bible reading, with prayer, &c., in the second cabin, from John xv.
1 — 11; the cabin was quite filled. And again evening divine service was held
in the' saloon at 8 p.m., with a discourse from 1 Cor. ix. 24—27. The Rev.
Mr. Lordan, R.C.P., also held a service at the same hour, for those passengers
on board who were of the Roman Catholic persuasion. X«
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
While we request the real names of the writers, as a guarantee that no im-
proper remarks are made, and that the statements contained in the communi-
cations are correct, our ordinary practice will be merely to insert the initials of
the name, or such soubriquet as the writer may choose, and in no case will the
name be published contrary to his or her wishes.
All contributions must be original, except those marked as quotations.
Calmly and silently
Glides the river to the sea,
And ever and anon a sparkle bright
Sheds o’er its waters a golden light;
And many a flowret by the stream
Lists to its murmurs as in a dream,
As it ruffles the leaves of the long reed grass,
Which bend as the tiny wavelets pass.
A moment: a change is o’er the stream,
It glances no more in the sun s bright beam—
No more the flowers and buds so fair
Gracefully bend to the coming air.
But the thunders war, and the lightnings flash,
And the river sweeps on with a fearful dash —
Each flower has snapped its slender head,


THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No> 2. ' WEDNESDAY, MARCH 2, 1859. . Price Id.
Life is oftentimes compared to a voyage, and we have already had experience
how accurate is the emblem. How many—nay, most—pass the beginning of
their life as if gliding down a tranquil river, surrounded on every side by the
signs of peace and plenty ; hut soon the shores of home recede, and their
beauty becomes dim and distant —head winds baffle the course, and toss the
vessel to and fro. Soon comes a calm, then again it is rough, and then a fa-
vouring breeze for a little while, and then again a calm. Now we would have
young voyagers learn from the “ Marco Polo. Battling with the winds, the
good ship won her way; never giving in or going back, always nearer her
final destination, and even in calm lying with sails set, couched, as it were, on
the waters, ready to spring forward at the first favourable breath of air. Now
it is said a newspaper is not the place for theology, neither are we going
to give it; nor for sermonizing, therefore we will not sermonize; yet it will
not be useless for us to remember, now we are starting for a new world, that
the laws of Providence are from the same Lawgiver as the laws of Nature.
There is no such thing as Fortune; it was a lie of the ancient Greeks and
Romans. That “every one that seeketh findeth,” and that “ whatsoever a
man soweth that shall he also reap,” are true proverbs, confirmed by continual
experience, as surely as they are inscribed in Holy Writ. Therefore, let our
young voyagers beware that they lose not a mast, nor spring a leak, nor kin*
die a deadly fire in their bosoms at the beginning of their voyage, lest, alas!
they sink shipwrecks in the ocean of this world. X.
We are exceedingly pleased with an advertisement which has appeared in
the ship, announcing the approaching birth of newspaper. Under-
taking the editorship of the present one solely with a view to the amusement
and gratification of our fellow passengers, we are much and sincerely gratified
at finding our efforts so thoroughly successful, that they have resolved to have
another. We feel assured the new editor will not be displeased, when we say
we hail his advent with brotherly affection, feeling towards him exactly as the
first-born feels towards baby No. 2 in every well-regulated family. It. is tine
we shall be no longer the favourite, but still, so much the better for us. We
wish the “Herald” every success; and though we doubt not he will be born
quite strong enough to walk without our help, yet should he be at any time
fallen into misfortune, we shall be most happy to extend any gentle assistance.
Similar assistance, if we require it, we have no doubt he will extend to us
also. ___ X -
My dear Mr Editor,— The love of gambling—not to say gambolling—
has been expressing itself in various ways on board ship this past week, as it
too frequently does. Pitch and toss, cards, betting, &c., have been olleiing
their various facilities; but in no manner has this hurtful passion developed
itself so fully as in that species of chance play called the “raffle,” and which
is, I dare say, too well known to your readers to need description. Raffles of
all kinds have been held, and for all objects, from rings and brooches down to
cabbage-tree hats, top boots, and white ducks. Ihe excitement, however,
reached its culminating point on Saturday, when, according to advertisement,
a monster pie awaited its death throw on the capstan. 1 he raffle was accom-
panied with unusual demonstrations, the highest throw being equalled by two
other competitors. Now the result hovered between Saloon and Second Ca-
bin. The anxiety was intense, but it was not long continued; “ Second Cabin
has won!” was shouted at all hands, and the pie was carried below in tri-
umphal procession, to await its doom. As I take for granted that your paper
is pre-RaJfleite in its tendency, I think that you, Mr. Editor, will sympathise
with those who had a finger in this pie, for the reasons I am about to add. It
was schemed and carried out for the express purpose of allaying the dangerous
fever for such investments, and accordingly, I need not say it was a hoax a
hoax as complete and happy as could have been desired; but that, as the poet
says “ ’Tis the old story, ever the blind world knows not its angels of deliver-
ance ;” so in this case, there have not been wanting ignoble detractors, seeking
to bring the authors of the scheme under censure. This is the more discredit-
able, when we learn that it is from feminine grace and wit that this most ex-
cellent lesson has proceeded, and against whom all the ill-tempered abuse has
been so thoughtlessly directed. How Jack—usually so polite to the fair sex
could have forgotten himself so far I cannot imagine, but I am informed that
he thought himself wronged by his not receiving his share of the profit from
the ladies; and in return, in some few cases, I regret to say, has paid for the
apparent neglect by heartless, ungallant persecution. I shall just take space
to say, that the idea of money profit being contemplated from the transaction
is simply absurd. No idea of the sort could or would have suggested the
scheme of a pie raffle, even in the most mercenary; that it has not done so in
this case is quite clear, for “when the pie was opened,” lo! there was nobody
within but a tin dish turned upside down, and covered sparingly over with jam.
“ Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus. ’’Never has the proverb received
a better illustration. Of course, to-day the money was duly returned to the
subscribers, and I think that the thanks of the ship are due to the amiable
young ladies by whom we are the decided gainers of both a joke and a moral.
I am, my dear Mr. Editor, yours sincerely,
J/m Foretop.
P.S.—I understand that the pie has found a lasting repose at the bottom of
the sea, whither, let us hope, all the bad feeling it has occasioned may follow
and remain. J. F.
Remarls on the above.
We most heartily and thoroughly agree with our correspondent as far as he
refers to gambling. Many persons seem to think that if the amount of the
stake or wager be small, there is no harm in gambling; nay, they will maintain
that it is not gambling, unless it be for a large amount. But the principle is
wholly wrong. Covetousness in every form is expressly forbidden by the mo-
ral law of God. “ Thou shalt not covet anything that is thy neighbour’s.”
No matter whether it is a penny or a pound, a pair of gloves or a thousand
guineas, each party desires to get that which is his neighbour’s without giving
him any equivalent. Some deceive themselves by pretending that the stake is
not the object of their desire. Then why do they not play for nutshells or
straws? They would then at least avoid the appearance of evil. But tha
whole excuse is absurd. We had prepared a few remarks on the subject, but
postponed them because we expected, or rather hoped, that the practice would
die out of itself. Should any of our readers be disposed to pursue the subject,
the columns of this journal are open to their remarks, as we desire free discus-
sion, provided always that it be conducted temperately and with propriety.— Ed.
AMUSEMENTS.
( From, our own Correspondent).
Quoits still continue the favourite game.
The challenge in the “ Record ” of the 23rd was accepted by Messrs. Hills
and E. Jacobs, and the match was played on Thursday in the presence of a
numerous assembly of the rank, beauty, and fashion of the “ Marco Polo.”
The playing commenced at 10.30, and after a well contested game, lasting an
hour, ended in favour of the challengers, Messrs. McAlpine and Price, the
scores being 301 to 263.
Refreshments were served by Messrs. Gunter* in their usual recherche style,
and iced champagnef was pronounced by connoisseurs to be first class!!!!
Chess is in good demand, and seems likely to become a favorite game during
the hot weather.
We are sorry not to be able to report that any arrangements have been
made in regard to the evening amusements, but hope in the next “ Record ”
to give a programme that will suit all, and be the means of keeping us more
together. E. W. P.
Dear Sir, — I have seen, for the last week past, that many of our fellow Sa-
loon passengers have experienced a want of amusement of an evening. If this
should continue, I fear it will tend to destroy that sociable feeling which I
think should exist amongst us. Would you, therefore, allow me to suggest
that we resolve ourselves into a committee of the “whole house,” on Wednes-
day evening, March 2nd, at eight o’clock, and then proceed to select a few
gentlemen from our number, who would take upon themselves the duty of ca-
tering for the general amusement? I, for one, should be very sorry that the
kindly feeling one towards another, which has existed up to tbe present time,
should be interrupted in any way; and it is this feeling alone which has
prompted me to offer the above suggestion. If this should meet your views,
perhaps you would be good enough to arrange the meeting, and I have no
doubt our esteemed captain would kindly consent to take the chair.
I am, dear Sir, yours truly, R. H.
To the Editor of the “ Marco Polo Record.”
We should deem it a favour if some of our friends in the Second and Inter-
mediate Cabins would oblige us with an account of their amusements. If we
may judge from what we occasionally hear, they must be as happy as kings
and queens. We beg to suggest the formation of a Choral Society, not from
any particular Cabin, but composed of all those who are gifted with a good
voice and an ear for music. Alas! we are not among the number, but we are
certain there are many in the ship who are. Any other suggestions on the
subject we shall be most happy to receive. . X.
STATISTICS OF THE SHIP “ MARCO POLO.”
As some misunderstanding has arisen respecting the use of the term 31H
souls, as if some passenger had only half a soul—a conclusion which we beg
to state is entirely erroneous—we subjoin a somewhat more detailed account
of the number, &c., of the passengers on board ship. An adult in this list
• Query, Grunter?— Ed, t Query, Bla«k Beer?— £d.


means a person above twelve years old, a child one under twelve years and
above twelve months old. Children under twelve months are not enumerated.
First Cabin.
Male Adults 11l
Female 21
Male Children.. 3)
Female ~ 3 J
19
Second Cabin.
Male Adults 191 „ Q
Female 10)
Male Children - 11 ,
Female „ 0/
30
First Cabin 19
Second Cabin 30
Intermediate Cabin 48
S.’eeerage Cabin 162
Passengers 259
In addition to these, there appear to have been entered seven infants, of which
one has since died. Adding the officers and crew, &c., it would appear that
the total population of the “ Marco Polo ” at this moment is:—
Passengers ..... 265
Officers and crew, &c. . . . .67
332
The disastrous death of H. J. Lowther, which it was our painful duty to re-
cord in our last; and the fact that by the Emigration Act children under
twelve are reckoned only as “ half souls ” —though in truth the arrangement is
solelj with regard to the stowage and victualling of their bodies—and that in-
fants under one year old are reckoned to have neither souls nor bodies; will
account for the apparent discrepancy between the present enumeration and
that published last week.
We perceive that twenty-seven of our fellow passengers are Italians, some of
whom, we are informed, have fought side by side, in the Foreign Legion, with
our own heroic soldiers in the glorious yet sanguinary campaign in the Crimea.
We should have thought that this fact, and that they are strangers amongst
strangers, would have secured to them kindness from brave British manly
hearts Yet we regret to have heard reports—which we trust have been ex-
aggerated—that they have been treated by some with unprovoked mockery
and insult. Persons mutually unacquainted with each other’s language are
almost certain to misunderstand those practical jokes which afford such amuse-
ment to others. We appeal, therefore, to the manliness and good sense of our
fellow passengers that, for the honour of our country and name, these fo-
reigners—who have come to seek in a British colony that freedom and protec-
tion which they cannot obtain in their own fertile but oppressed country —may
be treated with kindness and courtesy. We feel confident that such will in fu-
ture be the case. X.
ORIGINAL RIDDLE.
What game is that, the playing at which makes a man very unselfish? R.H.
STARTLING PHENOMENON,
Dees your mother (or father) know you’re out?
On Monday afternoon last, p'ebruary 28th, 1859, a coat, a waistcoat, and a
pair of continuations, were seen walking on the poop of the “Marco Polo,”
without their owner. Nobody speaking to them, or noticing them in any way
whatsoever, they hung themselves on the belaying pins of the rnizen mast.
During the evening their unhapp)' carcases were taken away and decently
buried. S. K.
PASSAGE TO MELBOURNE.
We find, by reference to some newspapers written on board the “Champion
of the Seas ” and “James Baines,” both packets of this Black Ball Line, that
the former vessel made the voyage from Melbourne to Liverpool, in the year
1855, in eighty-nine days, having sailed during her whole course 15,070 miles.
The greatest amount performed in one day of twenty-four hours, in this voy-
age, was 370 miles, and the least fourteen miles, and for three days there was
apparently no sensible progress to record—an event which, we regret to say,
has happened already to us. The “ James Baines ” made the voyage in 1856,
from Liverpool to Melbourne, in seventy-five days. Her course during that
period was 13,994 miles. 'I he greatest run in one day being 380 miles, and
the least fifty-three miles. We can hardly hope, considering the adverse
and light winds we have met with hitherto, to make the passage so successfully
as the latter ship. Yet we thought these particulars might be interesting to
our readers. We have now (Tuesday, March 1st) been twenty-three days at
sea, by which time the “ James Baines ” had got into lat. 8° 18' N., while we
are only in hit. 23° 10' N., long. 25° 44' W.—three or four days behind.
The “ Horizon ” made the voyage from Liverpool to Melbourne in ninety-two
days, starting on 7th Sept, and arriving on Dec. 8th. This was in 1857.
The “Eastern City,” under our present commander, Captain Johnston,
started from Liverpool on May 10th, 1857, arriving at Melbourne on August
9th, having made a run of ninety-two days. To-day we are a little in advance
of the point reached by the “ Eastern City ” in the same time. The “ Com-
modore Perry” (one of the Black Ball Line) made, in 1857, a very tedious
voyage, her total course being no less than 17,292 miles, sailed in 128 days.
X.
buried.
Intermediate Cabin.
Male Adults 251 ..
Female ,, 20J 45
Male Children 21 ,
Female ,, 1 / 3
48
Steerage Cabin.
Male Adults 1241 ,.,
Female ,, 21 j 140
Male Children 91
Female ,, ., 8) *'
162
POETS* CORNER.
There shall be no more cloud,
N6 more tempestuous sea ;
No darkening mist shall shroud
The pure soul’s liberty.
Then from the earth shall spring
An offering to the Lord,
And all the hills shall ring
With echoes of his word. S. K.
There shall be no more war;
Strife from the earth shall cease
W’hen our bright morning star
Shall shed his rays of peace.
There shall be no more tears,
Sorrow and sin shall flee;
There shall be no more fears,
And weeping shall not be.
FEBRUARY 27tH, 1859.
Divine service was performed, according to the rites of the Church of
England, on Sunday last, at 10.30 a.m., with a discourse from Luke viii.
4, 5, by the Rev. Mr. Barker, on the main deck, and again in the saloon
at 7.45 p.m.; also, a Bible reading, with prayer, &c., in the second cabin, at
6.15 f.m. We are authorised to state that, weather and other circumstances
permitting, divine service will be held at the same hours on each Sunday du-
ring the voyage. The Rev. D. Lordan, R.C.P., also held a service at the same
hour, for those in the ship of the Roman Catholic persuasion. X.
DEATH.
On Thursday afternoon, February 22nd, 1859, in the steerage of the “ Marco
Polo,” of diarrhoea, Agnes, daughter of Daniel and Ann McNeil, aged eleven
months. She was buried according to the rites of the Roman Catholic Church,
6.30 p.m. the same day. X.
&tJbcrti.scments.
WANTED, a professional Hairdresser, Apply, stating name and address,
to the steward of the chief cabin.
FOUND, a Photographic Portrait. The owner, on bringing proof of his
ownership, can obtain the same by application to the chief steward of
the ship, or to the publisher of this paper.
(C / 1 HALLANGE ” [literatim et veibatim ] “A Steerage Passenger is open
\J to eat Burgue* with any person on board the Marco Polo wich eats
the most in the least time for the sum of one Pound £1.0.0. Apply No.
30 Room Steerage.”
WANTED (with reference to the above challenge), a person thoroughly
acquainted with the pigs’ language, to act as interpreter to the pig-stye,
it being manifestly unjust to deny the hogs the favourable opportunity of
winning the above wager. _ X.
ADVERTISER is a young gentleman of most prepossessing appearance,
independent fortune, and amiable disposition; though not out of his
teens, is endowed with a fair amount of good sense and judgment and feeling.
He thinks that a single life should rather be avoided, and now wishes to pro-
cure a partner for life. Beauty is not the first object, and would, in a measure,
be overlooked, so as he becomes a possessor of a tolerable quantity of good
current “ tin.” As good temper is the second object, none need apply unless
they are blessed with such. For further particulars address P. Q. L. I R.
WANTED, with reference to the above, a “ queer shaver,” seeing there is
no beard to shave. Apply to P. Q. L. I. R. X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sir, — In again addressing you, 1 regret to state I am not at all satis-
fied with our last week's run. We have had a great many onlms and light
winds; but now we have entered the tropic of Cancer, and fairly got hold of a
steady trade wind, we may look forward to a more satisfactory log next week.
I would wish, through your columns, to impress on those of the passengers
who, I am sorry to hear, have been annoying the foreigners, of the danger they
run by so doing, and trust I shall hear nothing further of it.
I am glad to find the ’tween decks are now kept pretty clean, and hope they
will continue so, more especially in this warm climate, for the health of all
on board, I would also recommend salt water baths in the morning, which
can always be had from the hose before six o’clock.
Enclosing our log for the past week,
I remain, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
Is* March , 1859. D. H. Johnston, Commander.
OUR LOG.
Tuesday, Feb. 22nd.— Steady breeze, S.S.E.; fine weather. All sails set. Dis-
tance 221 miles. Lat. 34° 35' N., long. 19° 38' W.
23rd. —Cloudy and squally, wind S. to S.W. Tacked ship. Distance 156
miles. Lat. 33 5 21' N., long. 21° 50' W. Temperature in shade, 67°.
24*A.—Calms and light S.W. airs all day. Distance 28 miles. Lat. 32° S3'
N., long. 21° 48' W. Temperature, 70°.
2 5th. —Another day of calms. Saw a brig. Distance 14 miles. Lat. 32°
40' N., long. 21° 42' W. Temperature, 70°; water, 62°.
26th. —Light steady wind at S.E. Set all stu’nsails. Distance 115 miles.
Lat. 30° 55' N„ long. 22° 36' W. Temperature, 70°; water, 62°.
27th. —Steady breeze, S.S.E.; clear weather and smooth water. Distance 180
miles. Lat. 28° 24' N., long. 24* 30' W, Temperature, 71°; water, 67°. This
day abreast of Teneriffe.
28 th. —Light breeze from S.E, to E., the first of the trade winds. Distance
121 miles. Lat. 26° 29' N., long. 25° 12' W. Temperature, 74°; water, 68°.
This week’s run has been .... 835 miles.
Previous to this week . . . . 1155 „
Total . . 1990 „
• Alias, Fsriidce.


Ship “Marco Polo” March Isl, 1859.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sir, — I have much pleasure in informing you that the sanitary con-
dition of the ship is as favourable as it was last week, though I regret being
obliged to report the death of an infant.
Through your medium, I wish to recommend the passengers to take advan-
tage of every opportunity of enjoying fresh air on deck during the approaching
warm weather. With best wishes,
Believe me to remain yours sincerely,
Geo. J. Wood.
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 3. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 9, 1859. Price Id.
THE “HERALD,” SATURDAY, MARCH 5TH, 1859.
We were exceedingly gratified with the appearance of the “Herald” this
morning, and have to thank the editor and publisher, on behalf of the saloon
passengers, for their courtesy in sending a copy of the same. We will not be
discourteous in return, in not noticing the various observations which have
been made in it on the “ Record.” We entirely reciprocate the feelings of the
editor, in announcing the fact of no opposition existing between the two jour-
nals. On the contrary, knowing by experience the tedium and ennui of a long
sea voyage, we are also aware that nothing tends so rapidly to dissipate them
as healthy intellectual exercise and employment, and next to these harmless
amusement. We are aware also that employment, even amounting to labour,
is one of Heaven’s antidotes against the curse of evil, to which, alas! all feel
themselves too prone. We are, therefore, very much pleased at finding our
fellow passengers enter heartily into the fun of journalizing, and no effort of
ours shall be wanting to keep the game up as long as we can. Shipboard
journals differ from others, at least in this respect, that they are labours of love,
not profit. We augur well of the feelings of our fellow passengers, that they
enter so thoroughly into the happy task of pleasing each other. Soon we shall
be dispersed—whither, who knows? Most probably never again to meet, till
the Grand Convention of all the scions of Adam’s race. We rejoice to hope
that none of us sailing in this ship will have to look back on these short two
or three months, and wish even one word unsaid that they have spoken, or
one word unwrit that they have written. We beg here to tender our thanks
to those gentlemen who so kindly labour as the copyists of this journal, not-
withstanding the slip of the pen to which “ Enquirer ” directs attention. (We
trust he will give them and us credit for having learnt our spelling books when
we were children ) And we remind our fellow passengers that the usefulness
of these journals mainly consists in the genial exercise ot their own powers in
tlrem, and that this exercise is far better promoted by their putting their
thoughts to paper than by receiving them from others. ' We are not of those
who believe in the paucity of thought—original thought—in the human race;
still less do we believe in the want of it in the British race. The very appre-
ciation of thought indicates a power of thought. Therefore, even if we found
ourselves equal to the task of arresting, every week, all the attention of our
fellow passengers, we would not on this occasion endeavour so to do, but rather
encourage their contributions. “In all labour there is profit, but the talk of
the lips tendeth only to penury,” X.
CHALYBEATE WATERS.
Not to ride a jest to death, or keep the ball up when the game is done, we
beg to inform the readers of the “ Record ” and “ Herald ” that the only
“chalybeate waters” on board are those in the iron tanks at the bottom of the
ship; the waters from which, having spent some weeks in seclusion, a few
days ago blushed ruby, or rather rusty red, at being suddenly introduced to
what our cotemporary is pleased to call the “ aristocracy of the ship.” We
should be sorry if we have misunderstood the “ Herald,” but surely he cannot
mean to imply that the other passengers have not a regulated supply (not of
chalybeate, but) of the best water the ship can afford. If such should, by any
accident, be the case, we are sure that, by a proper representation being made
in the proper quarter, it would be immediately remedied. X,
READINGS FROM POPULAR AUTHORS.
We beg to call the attention of our readers to the suggestion of the editor
of the “ Herald,” to have stated readings in the various cabins. We think it
a most rational and feasible plan, provided that two difficulties be first over-
come, viz., to get books in which many can be interested, and to get readers
who can so read as to interest the many. X,
The humble petition of Jeannie and Polly,
To his Imperial Majesty Neptune, King of the Blue Waves, Lord of the Coral
Islands, &c., &c., &c.,
Humbly showeth—
That your petitioners are the peaceable subjects of your Majesty’s most noble ally,
Victoria, Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, &c , &c.:
That on the 25th day of February last, your petitioners were passing over a portion
of your Majesty’s dominions, when a robber, one of your Majesty’s subjects, whose
name your petitioners are informed is “ Trade Wind,” whose personal appearance is to
> your petitioners unknown did violently snatch, tear, and carry away from your peti-
tioners two hats, trimmed with valuable blue ribbons, and convey them away “Trade
Wind ” alone knows where:
That the said robbery has caused great discomforture and disconsolation of mind to
your humble petitioners:
Your petitioners therefore entreat your Majesty to cause the restoration of the said
hats. For which your petitioners will ever humbly pray. Jeannie, Polly. X.
AMUSEMENTS.
On Wednesday night, at eight o’clock, a meeting of’ the saloon passengers took
place, Captain Johnston in the chair. The first resolution proposed by Captain
Johnston, and seconded by the Rev. Mr. Barker, was: 1 lhat a committee ot three
gentlemen be appointed, to arrange the amusements of the saloon passengers.” Car-
ried nem. con.
Pioposed by Mr. McAlpin; seconded by the Rev. Mr. Barkerlhat Messrs.
Parker, Hills, and Price compose the committee.” Carried nem. con.
Proposed by Mr. E. Jacobs, and seconded by Mr. Leishman : —“ That the thanks
of the meeting be given to Captain Johnston, for his kindness in taking the chair.
Carried with great applause.
The chairman then declared the meeting adjourned.
A large number of the fair sex graced the meeting with their presence.
On Thursday morning, at ten o’clock, the committtee held their first meeting, when
it was decided “that as Captain Johnston had kindly allowed the piano to be brought
into’the saloon, music would be the first amusement in the evening. After which, the
committee will arrange the partners for the various games.” The committee also
made arrangements for games on deck.
On Thursday evening, the committee’s new arrangements came into force, and, we
are happy to say. with the best results. The evening commenced with music, Mrs.
Hills kindly undertaking the accompaniments, and also favouring us with some songs.
A great improvement was visible in the gentlemen singers After the music ended,
games of all kinds were played and the night passed off with great satisfaction to all.
On Friday evening, a still greater improvement in the music After various games
I having been played in the s-loon, the heat became so great that all were glad to get on
the poop, where we were just in time to hear some first rate songs from Messrs. Mor-
gan and Burgess and other gentlemen, to whom we owe our best thanks lor their
kindness.
On Saturday the same amusements were repeated, with great success.
Three grand matches of quoits have been played this week, On the 4th, one be-
tween Messrs. McAlpin and Wood against Messrs. Williams and Leishman, ending in
favour of the latter gentlemen, the scores being 303, 282.
On the 5th two grand matches were played, the first between Messrs. Hills and
Leishman against Messrs.' McAlpin and Price, ending in a close run. and gained hy
Messrs. McAlpin and Price, the scores being 300, 288. The second was a return
match between Messrs. Williams and Leishman against Messrs. McAlpin and Wood,
ending in favour of the latter gentlemen; scores, 302, 278.
An arrangement has been entered into amongst the chess players, in order to dis-
cover the champion; each player to play three games with all players, and whoever
wins the most will be elected champion. E. W. P.
HOMEWARD BOUND.
On Sunday morning, March 6th, about 9 a m., a ship suddenly hove in sight,
having been previously hidden by the haze. She proved to be the “ Kooria
Mooria,” of Glasgow, homeward bound to Liverpool from Bombay. She was
eighty days from the latter port. She was estimated by some on board to be
about 1000 tons burden. As on the poop only one or two gentlemen and one
lady could be discerned, it is supposed she carried no passengers. As she
passed within hail she presented a very fine appearance; and we may flatter
ourselves that the “ Marco Polo,” being a larger ship, did not present one less
fine in their eyes. We may congratulate our fellow passengers lhat our friends
in England will know, most probably within twenty days, of our safe arrival
within five degrees north of the line. As we were then going at the rate of
eight knots an hour, it was not deemed advisable to stop the ship in order to
send letters home. They will report us “All well.” X.
A SHARK.
On Sunday afternoon last, a shark was observed swimming slowly on the lee
side of the ship. It was the first that has been distinctly seen during our voy-
age. Immediate preparations were made for catching the adversary, but being


very young, he did not seem to appreciate the honour of being introduced on
board this noble ship, and so loitering behind, lost his opportunity and a piece
of fat pork besides.
With respect to the above small incident, we regret that by some accident
the cry of “a man overboard ” was raised. We have no doubt but the person,
whoever it was, who first used it had the firmest belief that such was the case,
and his so doing was dictated by the best desire to aid a human being in dis-
tress ; yet, great caution should be used in raising these alarms, for not unfre-
quently, in the rush and inevitable confusion, the accidental mistake becomes
a sad calamity. X.
DIMENSIONS OF OUR SHIP.
We have been furnished, through the kindness of Captain Johnstone, and
Mr, Sharpe, the chief officer of the ship, with the following particulars, which
may prove interesting— Ed.
“Marco Polo,” built by Wright, of St. John’s, New Brunswick, in 1851,
spreads 5,545 yards of canvas, and has carried out 5,653 passengers to Mel-
bourne. This is her tenth voyage to Australia. X.
DIVINE SERVICE.
On Sunday last, morning divine service was held on the main deck, at 10.30
A M., and evening divine service on the poop deck, at 8 p.m. ; the Rev. M.
Barker officiating both times. The discourse in the morning was from Luke
xvii. 32, and that in the evening from Heb. xi. 8—10. Also, a Bible reading,
with prayer, &c., was held in the second cabin, at 6.15 p.m., by the same gen-
tleman, from 2 Cor. v. The Rev. D. Lordan, R.C.P., held divine service also
at the same hour in the morning, for those on board of the Roman Catholic
persuasion. X.
fttobcrttgenuntg,
FOUND, a Photographic Portrait. The owner, on bringing proof of his ownership,
can obtain the same by application to the chief steward of the ship, or to the
publisher of this paper.
DEATH.
March 2nd, of diarrhoea, Daniel McNeil, aged six years, son of Daniel and
Ann McNeil. The funeral took place the same evening at 6.30 p.m., according
to the rites of the Roman Catholic Church ; the Rev. D. Lordan, R.C.P., offi-
ciating.
Copied from the Cambridge Chronicle of January 29, 1859.
Tasmanian Emigration. —The “Hobart Town Mercury” of Nov. 12, 1858,
says:—“ The wages female servants at present demand and receive here (from £18 to
£30 per annum) place their services beyond the reach of many who would otherwise
employ them.” An agency has been established in London for promoting female
emigration to Tasmania, and is conducted by Mr. Thomas B. Parker, a gentleman
well known in connexion with the late Family Colonization Society. We have no he-
sitation in recommending it as a perfectly trustworthy affair to such of our female
readers as may be disposed to try their future fortunes in Tasmania.
THE MELBOURNE LABOUR MARKET.
We copy the following statement from the “Melbourne Argus” of Nov. 15:—
The market still continues overstocked with every class of labour. There has been an
improved demand during the past week for thorough domestic servants, both male and
female, as well as for farm labourers ; but not sufficient to afford any general relief to the
market, which is just now very heavily supplied with both mechanical and rough labour
of every description. Numbers of tradesmen and skilled workmen are unable to obtain
employment at their several callings, and are betaking themselves to the gold fields,
in all cases where their means admit, to mine for themselves, and in others, to labour
for hire for those possessed of the necessary capital.
Copied from the Liverpool Mercury of this year,
Australian Emigration from Liverpool. —The emigration returns so far
as the port of Liverpool is concerned, for the year 1858, shew a decline of nearly fifty
per cent, as compared with 1857: the numbers are. for 1857 155,652; for 1858,
80,722. This falling off has chiefly been to the United States and Canada. To
Australian ports 117 ships were dispatched, the tonnage being 129,361 tons, in 1858
against 149 ships, 169,515 tons in 1857. The whole number of passengers carried
out from Liverpool to the Australian colonies in 1858 (exclusive of cabin passengers)
was 21,172. 3 he following scale represents the number of ships and passengers by
each of the leading firms: —White Star Line, 29 ships. 35,424 tons. 6,724 passengers ;
Black Ball Line, 21 ships, 26,220 tons, 6,338 passengers; Mersey Line, 13 ships,
17,752 tons, 3,006 passengers; Eagle Line, 10 ships, 17,999. tons, 2,176 passengers;
Liverpool Line, 4 ships, 4,531 tons, 512 passengers. It will be seen from the above
statistics, which have been carefully compiled from the government returns, that
Messrs H. T. Wilson and Chambers, owners of the White Star Line, have had by far
the largest share of the Liverpool Australian trade.
Mr. Editor, 8, 3, ’59.
Sir, —Would you kindly insert this conundrum in your paper, and oblige
yours, &c., G. F, C.
When is a man of fishy extiaction?
Will our correspondent kindly furnish us/ privately, with the solution, as the rule
is in all such matters? — Ed.
ANSWER TO THE RIDDLE IN OUR LAST NUMBER.
Quoits; because it makes us indifferent to the number “ one,” 11. H.
POETS* CORNER.
WISH AND ANSWER.
■WISH.
O for some sweet and still sequestered spot.
Where peace and truth shall aye together dwell,
Where the gay world’s great pomp and swell
Its quiet vexeth not.
And there should live a chosen, holy band,
Whose gentle amity should never cease,
For there the golden wings of peace
Should hover o’er the land.
[ven above
There night should cease; a light from hea-
Should dwell within each fragrant leafy bower;
Should bathe each tree, each herb, each flower;
The light, the joy of love.
ANSWER.
Go, restless, wander over earth and sea
Then pitch thy tent upon the loveliest land;
Lo! grief and comfort, hand in hand,
Shall enter it with thee.
Here night succeedeth day—so joy and woe
Succeed each other in this waiting time;
A painless life, a changeless clime,
Is not for man below.
If peaceful rest below to man were given,
The soul would rest upon this lower earth;
But sorrows nurse it from its birth,
To bring it up for heaven. X.
SONG COMPOSED IN THE DARK, ON BOARD THE “MARCO POLO,’ ON THURSDAY
EVENING, MARCH 3rd, 1859.
Hark ! hark! the dogs bark,
The cats are beginning to caterwaul,
The sheep are baaing beneath the boats,
The cows are lowing by the main mast tall.
Each rat squeaks, each goose screams,
Each duck quacks, each cock crows,
Each bird sings as well as he can,
Each pig grunts through his handsome nose.
The “ Marco Polo ” like Noah s ark,
Containeth beasts, clean and unclean ;
But what aileth the “ blessed animals,”
That they kick up such a horrid din ? S. K-
8 th March, 1859.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sir, — Since I wrote you last, I am glad to say we have made good pro-
gress, having had a good trade wind. However, we have now lost that, and are now
in the region of the “doldrums,” or equatorial calms. I do not anticipate any long
delay at this season of the year, but hope soon to get the S.E. trades, when the most te-
dious part of our passage will be past. Enclosing you a more satisfactory log this
week, I remain yours faithfully,
D. H. Johnston, Commander.
LOG.
Tuesday, March IsL—First of the trade winds; steady breeze at E. all day. Dis-
tance 202 miles Lat. 23° 10' N., long. 25° 44' W. Temp, of air, 75 Q ; water, 68°.
2nd. —Fine steady trade at E. Distance 232 miles. Lat. 19 Q 18' N., long. 26° 4'
W. Temperature, 74°; water, 68°.
3rd.— Clear pleasant weather, and steady trade, E.N.E. Distance 232 miles. Lat.
15° 45' N., long. 26° 20' W. Temperature, 76°; water, 72°.
4 th. —Same as yesterday. Distance 217 miles. Lat. 12° 8'N., long. 26° 22'W.
Temperature, 78°; water. 73°.
5th. —Trade falling light at N.E. Distance 158 miles. Lat. 9 Q 31' N., long. 26 a
7'W. Temperature, 80°; water, 76°.
6th. —Light trades at N.E. to N.N.E. Spoke the ship“Kooria Mooria” from
Bombay, who promised to report ns. Distance 140 miles. Lat. 7° 13' N., long.
25° 44' W. Temperature. 83°; water, 78°.
7 th. —About the last of the trades; wind shifting several points. Distance 118
miles. Lat. 5° 15' N„ long. 25° 4 'it W. Temperature, 85 Q ; water, 80 Q .
This week’s run has been , . . . 1281 miles.
Previous to this week 1990 „
3271 „ *
Tuesday, March 8 th, 1859.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE “ MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —You will be pleased to hear that the general health of the ship re-
mains in the same satisfactory state as it was at my last report; and this, I think, I
may attribute to the willingness of the passengers to assist in maintaining cleanliness
below—a fact which I should like to notice throughout the voyage. Trusting that my
hopes may be realized, Believe me to remain yours sincerely,
Geo. J. Wood, Surgeon.
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 4. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 16, 1859. Price Id.
We have ascertained that at least 168 of our fellow passengers are under
twenty-five years of age. Indeed, it was naturally to be expected that below that
age would be the time ordinarily chosen for emigration to a colony. It requires
the elasticity and hopefulness and fieslmass of youth, aye, and some of its
restlessness also, to induce men—except under the pressure of poverty—to
break up home, and depart oftentimes without knowing exactly whither.
Now, to those advanced to middle age we should not presume to address the
remarks we are about to make. Many of these—though acknowledged to
be truths —would seem to them truisms, which they have already learnt by
hard and severe experience. But the revelation of to-day is the truism of


to-morrow; while the amount of suffering and guilt that may be averted hy
previously thinking on and adapting these truisms to our practice, is incalculable.
One of these is ; “ Providence never changes its laws.” Do any of our young
readers suppose that vice and virtue have not the same wages and rewards in
the southern hemisphere as in the northern? that there is one God governing
in old England, and another God ruling in new Australia? Surely they do
not. Yet, to judge by the heedless way in which many, steady enough at
home, rush into money-grasping, gambling, drunkenness, licentiousness, idle-
ness, and debt, would lead one to suppose that they knew not that these roads
led to a common goal—death. We have classed debt amongst these roads, for
when heedlessly and unnecessarily incurred, it is simply cheating and theft.
In England, most young men acknowledge “the love of money is the root of
all evil.” Yet, in Australia, thousands will profess the love of gold, of which
money is made, is the root of all good. Far be it from us to discourage ear-
nestness in labour, but let it be from duty, not avarice. The passion of duty
will never become too strong. We know that many of our readers may ex-
claim, Do you suppose that we are capable of such things ? To this we will
not reply by lamenting the weakness of human nature, &c , but we would
ask, Do none of our readers now on shipboard miss the genial influences of
home ? Do none of them feel, as it were, the defensive walls of their morality
cracking and giving way even under minor temptations? We are not speak-
ing to the vitiated, but to the pure. When you see the gambler or the
drunkard —when you hear the curse or the oath—when you perceive the smo-
thered flames of licentiousness—does not some invisible spirit whisper, What
harm? And if this temptation be so strong at the beginning of the journey
of life, what, if it be not overcome, will be its strength at the middle and end?
We believe that, with Englishmen at least, the earlier influences of holy home
are, next to those of religion, the strongest safeguards to rectitude and purity.
Indeed, religion itself teaches that many are travelling to a home of which
the great God is the Father, whose eldest Son is our own Brother, whose at-
tendants are the angels, and whose time is eternity. Are we not justified in
calling a pure home a miniature heaven upon earth? Our young friends
are going to form for themselves such homes in a new land. Let not the
devils of drunkenness, levity, licentiousness, avarice, gambling, debt, and
strife dwell with them there. If all young emigrants were thus to act, the fu-
ture of Australia would be bright indeed. Most cordially do we re-echo the
motto on its coat of arms, “ Advance Australia,” and thus do we endeavour
to advance it. “For righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is the shame of
any people.” . X.
DECIMAL COINAGE.
It may not be unacceptable to some of our readers, that we should write a
few words, such as our limited space will allow, on the above subject, and
first with regard to the word “decimal.” All the nations of Europe and
most other civilized nations adopt the decimal system of notation, that is to
say, when they have reckoned ten they begin again, adding the first ten and
so on. There have been however, other systems which still are used to a
limited extent, for instance, that by sevens, eights, twelves, fifteens and scores,
and the writer believes (though in the absence of books of reference he is
not confident) by fifties and hundreds. The decimal notation is, however, by
far the most common, and its origin is sufficiently simple ; there are ten
fingers on the two hands, and a child’s counting by its fingers is almost an
instinctive operation; similarly with the much rarer “eight” system which
has the like origin, only leaving out the thumbs. Also in the “score ” system
we must suppose the scholar sitting on the ground and counting by his fingers
and his toes, as do several eastern nations. But the origin of the
twelve, fifteen, fifty, and hundred systems we have never heard satisfactorily
given, and indeed these latter have always been exceedingly limited in their
use. We see what appears to be a relic of the twelve system in the names
of our early numbers, where we introduce after ten two new names, eleven
and twelve, and then go on, thirteen (that is three-ten) fourteen (four-ten) &c..
&c. up to twenty, which is twen-ten or twain-ten, &c., &c. If the words
were regular in their formation they would be one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, one-ten, two-ten, (or wun-teen too-teen) thirteen, &c.,
&c.; the only other thing noticeable in our system is, that though we regularly
give a new name to ten hundred, a thousand, yet we give no new name to
ten thousand, nor till we arrive at a thousand thousands do we call it a million,
after which a million millions is called a billion, and a million million millions
a trillion, and so on ; this is all we need say at present respecting the decimal
system. Respecting coinage it is almost unnecessary to state that the value
of money is wholly, or nearly wholly, arbitrary; it is wealth only when it re-
presents other wealth. The late Sir Robert Peel is said to have puzzled the
House of Commons by challenging any of its members to give a correct answer
to the apparently very simple question “ what is a pound ? ” Doubtless many
of our readers would be ready with an answer, but the question would then
arise, would it be a correct one? Nevertheless acts of parliament have fixed
that a certain quantity of an alloy of gold with a small quantity of copper,
shall represent, when stamped into a coin at the Queen’s mint, this mysterious
thing; this coin, so stamped, is called a sovereign, or more frequently by the
name of that which it represents, a “ pound,” and this is the standard of our
monetary system. In addition to this coin there are at present in lawful cir-
culation in the British Islands, of gold, the half-sovereign, or ten shilling
piece; of silver the orown, the half-crown, the florin, the shilling, the sixpence,
(formerly called a “ tester ”) the fourpenny piece or groat, and the threepenny
piece; of copper, the penny, the half-penny, the farthing or (fourth-thing)
and the half-farthing; this last coin, though of rather pretty appearance, has
already become rare, only a few having been issued. Many other coins how-
ever are in circulation in the colonies and dependencies of Great Britain and
particularly in India. But it is plain that only one of these, the florin, has a
decimal relation to the pound, the standard of value, and even this is rendered
of still less value by the fact of our nowhere reckoning (except in India, where
a florin is called a rupee) by florins, but by shillings (half-florins) pence and
farthings, whose relation to the pound is expressed by 2 ' g , 5 . Now the ob-
vious ease with which calculations in money matters could be performed if
each denomination was one tenth of the other, has led many to propose a
more complete system on this basis. Among many we will only mention that
which appears to be most feasible and that causing the least disarrangement
of the present plan. It is that two other coins, one a tenth and the other a
hundredth of a florin, to be called cent and mil, be added to the coinage, and
the other coins gradually withdrawn from circulation, or, at all events not used
as denomination ; thus, instead of having four denominations, pounds, shillings,
pence, and farthings, we should then have pounds, florins, cents, and mils.
We shall pursue this subject on a future occasion. X.
THE DOLDRUMS.
As we have now got into the region of the South East trade wind, perhaps
some of our readers would like to know something of the cause of this phe-
nomenon of calms and variables through which we have just passed.
The principal causes of wind are : —1 ; the expansion of air by means of the
heatdeveloped by the sun’s rays; this air becoming lighter rises, and the coltl air
rushes in a stream to supply its place. 2; the condensation of this heated air,causing
it to become heavier and sink, and so making a downward current. 3: the
motion of the earth from west to east, producing a current from east to west.
The globe which we inhabit, and which from its principal part we commonly
call the “ earth,” is we know, composed of three portions ; a solid part (th«
earth proper); a liquid part (the ocean, seas, &c.); an aeriform part (the air
or atmosphere, clouds, &c.); in the diurnal revolution of the whole round its
axis these three acquire a different momentum or force of motion. The liquid
has less momentum than the solid, and the aeriform than the liquid. Conse-
quently the air and the waters have a constant tendency to lag behind the
earth, and the air to lag behind the water, while the earth whirls from west to
east. There is therefore produced both in the air and ocean a stream from east
to west; or, perhaps, to speak more correctly, the earth slips beneath the waters,
and the waters beneath the air; producing the same apparent motion as in the
case when we say the sun rises and moves across the heavens; when, in truth,
the earth is pirouetting, and the sun stands still, and looks on, enjoying “otium
cum dignitate.” 4; the attraction of the sun and moon producing regular
tides in the air, in like manner as tides are produced in the sea. 5 ; a current
of air rubbing either against another current, moving at a different speed, or in
a different direction, or against still air, or against water or earth, or meeting
another current, or striking against relatively still air, or water, or earth, and
being thus turned into a whirlpool of air; such are most storms, all cyclones,
typhoons, hurricanes, &c., &c.
There are other causes besides these, some of them very imperfectly under-
stood, and many probably unknown and unsuspected, yet we believe we have
mentioned the principal. Not to detain our readers too long we would merely
add that the first and third of these causes, principally, combine to produce on
certain parts of the liquid surfaceof the glohe what are commonly called the trade
winds, so denominated from the advantages arising to commerce from them.
These great currents prevail, to speak roughly , all within the range both of the
Northern and Southern tropics, moving in the former from the Nor h and
in the latter from the South East towards the equator or line, but at both ex-
tremities it is often scarcely perceptible on the surface of the ocean. Our
readers will remember we first perceived the N, E. trades in lat. 30° 12' N.,
but why did we lose them for six days after we got into lat, 5° 8' N.? The
increasing power of the sun expands the air rapidly, causing the current on
both sides to rise from the surface of the sea, and leaves us rolling about on
that surface in the “ doldrums.” How this region of light and variable winds
got this expressive name we cannot tell, but this is their appellation. Air is
capable of holding a certain quantity of water in solution; while thus dissolved
the air and water are both transparent and invisible. The hotter or rather the
more expanded the air is, the more water it can hold thus dissolved; when,
therefore, the heated air cools, it gives out the water, which then is seen in the
form of, what has been rightly called “ water dust,” that is, very small particles
of water, either solid like drops of rain or hollow like bubbles; these collecting
together form clouds, fogs, steam, haze, &c., according to their different de-
grees of condensation. The trade winds rise from the surface to the upper
air, and in cooling themselves (as the nature of air is in high quarters) give
out the moisture they can no longer carry, in the form of clouds, and rain,
which we have seen and felt so abundantly the last few days; also the two
great currents meeting aloft form eddies which occasionally descend on the sea
of “doldrums,” either as grand tempests, or as those sweet baby storms called
“ squalls.” Hitherto we have happily escaped the notice of these young
reprohates, who, in their misdirected frolic, smash sails, spars, and masts, in
wild confusion. We have now fairly entered the dominions of one of their
sober minded parents; in a few days however the case will be a little different,
till which time we bid farewell to our readers. X.
CAUTION.
It having come to my knowledge that some of the passengers have been in the
habit of giving the crew liquors; this is to give notice that if such proceedings are
not discontinued at once , the bar will be closed for the remainder of the passage.
(Signed) D. H. Johnston, Commander,


AMUSEMENTS.
Owing to the great heat of the weather, indoor amusements have been heavy, but
in spite of the sun being almost perpendicular, quoits have been in good demand ; a
match was played on Thursday between Captain Johnston and Dr. Wood against
Messrs. McAlpin and Price, the latter gentlemen winning.
The scores were .... 309, 300. 105, 90.
The race for the chess championship goes on well, and we can already guess the
victor’s name.
CROSSING THE LINE.
On Wednesday evening, as we were getting near the equator, His Most
Gracious Majesty, King Neptune, honoured the “ Marco Polo ” with a visit, in
order to ascertain what number of his children were on board, and to request
the captain to make preparations for the usual ceremony of initiation on the
day of crossing the line. His Majesty was only accompanied by H. M. Amphi-
trite, who, we are happy to say, looked in excellent health. After expressing
his satisfaction at the state of the ship he took his departure over the stern,
and for an hour after we could observe him basking in the moonlight.
On Friday, at 4 p.m., H. M. arrived over the bow, attended by his illustrious
consort and one of his hopefuls, whose name we cannot give, as His Majesty
did not introduce him. His suite consisted of his secretary, doctor, barber, and
triton, as well as numerous sea peelers. After all were onboard, H. M. proceeded
to visit the captain and saloon passengers. The ceremony then began ; a sail
was triced up on the starboard gangway and filled with water, Neptune then
proceeded in state to his station in midships, his secretary then read the list of
candidates for the honour of being initiated, which list consisted of those of
the crew who had not before entered Neptune’s dominions. The first on the
list was then brought forward and seated blindfold in the "august presence,”
the doctor then proceeded to examine the state of his health, and in most cases
ordered pills and cold bath. Great difficulty was found in inducing the
neophytes to swallow the pills, a strong suspicion being on their minds that
they were made by Mr. Holloway; however all went through the shaving with
great firmness, after which the bandage was removed and the neophyte thrown
into the sail, where two bears (sent expressly from the North Pole) executed
the doctor’s orders, that the bath should be properly taken, at the same time
water from a hose was played from above on the head to act as a “ douche ”
bath; the neophyte then scrambled out as well he could and was then pro-
claimed a true son of Neptune. After all were initiated the audience were
favoured with an impartial distribution of water from the hose; His Majesty
then declared the ceremony over, and after wishing us a safe and pleasant
passage to Melbourne, departed in greatstate over the bow. We need scarcely
say that Amphitrite was attired with great taste, crinoline not yet having been
introduced at the bottom of the sea. The evening concluded with songs and
great merriment in all parts of the ship. E. W. P.
Neptune favoured the captain, the captain favoured us with the following
list of ships which H. M. avers crossed the line only a little time ago.
Cormoron, for Calcutta; John, Rio de Janerio; Charles Buck, Bombay; Sera-
phina, Pernambuco; Marion More, Calcutta; Blackwater, Melbourne; Sapphire,
Sydney. Ed.
poets’ corner.
THE SHAMROCK.
[We have been favoured by a lady on board with the following unpublished poem,
by Charlotte Elizabeth (Mrs. Phelan).
From the region of zephyrs, the Emerald Isle,
The land of my birth, in my freshness I come
To awaken this long cherished morn with a smile,
And breathe o’er thy spirit the whispers of home-
O, welcome the stranger from Erin’s green sod!
I sprang where the bones of my fathers repose;
I grow where the free step in infancy trod,
Ere the world threw around thee its wiles and its woes.
But sprightlier themes
Enliven the dreams
My dew dropping leaflets unfold to impart.
To loftiest emotion
Of i atriot devotion
I wake the full chord of an Irishman's heart.
The rose is expanding her petals of pride
And points to the laurels o’erarching her tree;
The hardy burr-thistle stands rooted beside
And sternly demands “ who dare meddle wi’ me? ”
And bright are the garlands they jointly display
In death fields of victory gallantly got;
But let the fair sisters their trophies array
And shew us a wreath where the shamrock is not.
By sea and by land,
With bullet and brand.
My sons have directed the storm bolt of war;
'I he banner ye boast
Ne er waved o’er an host
Unfanned by the accents of “Erin gd Bragh.”
Erin ma vourneen ! dark is the night;
Beep thy forebodings and gloomy thy fears ;
And oh! there are bosoms with savage delight
Who laugh at thy ’plainings and scoff at thy tears.
But, Erin ma vourneen, bright are the names
Who twine with the heart-veins thy fate on their breast; i
An,d scorned be the lot of the dastard who shames
To plant, as a trophy, this leaf in his crest!
Thrice trebled disgrace
His honour deface
Who shrinks from proclaiming the land of his birth.
Though lowly its stem,
This emerald gem.
Mates with the proudest that shadow the earth.
. This poem was written by Charlotte Elizabeth, on receiving a shamrock from Ireland on
Patricks Day, 182?.
THE MINSTREL TO HIS HARP.
Once more I take my harp ; harp sweet of sound,
Whose strains can make the dead in soul to live.
Wilt thou refuse to make my heart to bound ?
Wilt thou refuse thy gentle strains to give?
Alas my hand that trembles now with woe,
Is mazed amongst thy sweet and solemn strings;
And but a soft confused sound below,
Unto my touch responsive music brings.
Hast thou too lost thy friendship’s ancient fire?
Hast thou too left my withering heart to die?
Harp of my heart, once hadst thou no desire
To sleep in silence, and thy master by.
Doth thy soul dwell within the lonely grave,
Where sleeps my life, my joy, my own desire?
There silent sleeps the loved, the good, the brave, —■
Then thou too may’st be silent, much loved lyre. X.
RIDDLES.
ANSWER TO THE ONE IN OUR LAST,
When his father is a good old soul (sole) and his mother common place (plaice).
[We think we have heard this before. Ed.]
Name the queen of all the roses. R. H.
HOMEWARD BOUND.
On Tuesday morning, March 15th, at 9. 30. a.m., the "Jean Goujon ” of
Bordeaux, P’rench merchant ship, passed us homeward. As the wind was
favourable for both ships there was no opportunity for lengthened communi-
cation. She asked of us the longitude, which we gave her. It is hoped that
she will duly report us at the port to which she is going, when the communi-
cation will be duly sent to Lloyds’ in London, where it will appear in the
metropolitan papers.
DIVINE SERVICE.
Divine service was celebrated on the main deck at 10. 30. A.M., on Sunday
last, by the Rev. M. Barker, the discourse being from Matt. iv. 1. 2 ; and again
in the evening at 7. 30. P.M., on the poop deck, the discourse being from Matt,
iv. 7, 8.
The Rev. D. Lordan, R.C. P., held a service at 10. 30., for those on board
of the Roman Catholic persuasion. X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sin, —Although my report of our progress this past week is small, still we
may congratulate ourselves in getting through the “ doldrums ” with so little rain and
calms, very much less of both than I have frequently had. We have now got a strong
S. E. trade (well to the eastward) which is likely to hold, so we may calculate on now
doing good; we may soon consider we are half passage, not in distance, but in time,
as the winds are always more favourable in the Southern hemisphere.
I regret we had no good opportunity for sending letters home ; but the next best,
we will be several times reported “all well.” As usual enclosing our log,
I remain, yours faithfully,
15th March, 1859, D. H. Johnston, Commander.
OCR LOG.
Tuesday , 8th March. —Lost the N. E. trades. Much lightning with heavy rains.
Light variable winds; distance 90 miles. Lat. 3° 45'N., long. 25° 40'W. Tem-
perature 80°; water 80°.
fyh. —Light variable winds, generally easterly; thunder, lightning, and heavy rain.
A number of vessels in company, having been so for some days. Distance, 96 miles.
Lat. 2° 9' N., long. 25° 40' W. Temperature, 76°; water, 80°.
10/A.—First part light breeze S. E. ; latter calm. Very warm weather and clear.
Distance, 43 miles. Lat. 1° 26' N., long. 25° 44' W. Temperature, 85°; water, 81°.
I \th.— First part westerly airs and calm ; latter steady light breeze at north with
rain. Distance, 53 miles. Lat. D. R. 0° 33'N. Temperature, 76°; water, 80°.
12 th —The whole of this day nearly calm. Distance, 17 miles. Lat. 0° 16' N.,
long. 26° 5' W. Temperature, 84 <> , water, 81°.
13/A. —Six p.m., took the S. E. trades in a squall; soon fell light, but continued
from the Eastward, Distance, 98 miles. Lat. 1° 21' S., long. 25° 20' W. Tem-
perature, 84°; water, 81°.
\Ath. —Very light trades from S. E. to E. S. E,; current setting to the Westward.
Distance. 94 miles, Lat. 2° 48' S., long. 25° 57' W. Temperature, 84°; water, 82°.
Distance this week 431 miles.
Previous to this week ....... 3271 ,,
Total 3702
TO THE EDITOR OF THE " MARCO POLO RECORD.”
Dear Sir—I think I may congratulate the passengers not only on the state ofthe
health throughout the ship, but likewise that the most trying portion of the passage
is over, and we may now look forward to a more tolerable temperature than we have
been favoured with during the last week. I remain, Yours sincerely,
Geo. J. Wood, Surgeon.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
U No Hoo must know that we cannot encourage duelling, <
We cannot admit the notice of auction, as it was anonymous; and we also ascer-
tained that the use of the name of the person mentioned was unauthorized. Hoaxes
lead to so many quarrels that we cannot knowingly be accessory to one.
P. and R. H. are postponed through want of space. Ed.


THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 5. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 23, 1859. Price Id.
The future of Australia, What is it ? Who amongst her sons or among those
intending to adopt her as their mother country, is gifted with the spirit of
prophecy? The prophet (or would-be prophet) who foretells smooth things,
is invariably, now-a-days, accounted true. If we were boldly to state that in
yon vast island was shrouded the embryo of a mighty empire, whose populous-
ness was to exceed that of the domain of mighty Rome, and whose political
and philosophical intellect should rival that of ancient Greece, many would
accept the pleasing delusion, and secretly plume themselves on being, if not
the founders, yet at least the supports, of such a glorious fabric. For national,
is but a form of personal pride. It is a delicate flattery to say that a man is
one of a society which is celebrated for the nobility of its members. A man
may humbly reply, he is very unworthy of that honour; still, who wishes
to be taken at his word? But we cannot, with truth, use this flattery. We
believe the future of Australia is as yet unformed. To say that the physical
conditions of a great empire are to be there found, is to say a very small thing.
Much greater opportunities have been showered, by the hand of God, on other
countries; but in vain. Where are the great empires, wealthy, warlike, and
civilized, which once were seated on the banks of the Euphrates and the
Tigris? There the plain of Shinar brought forth by handfuls, so that Hero-
dotus states an ordinary harvest was 100, and a good harvest was 300 fold. Yet
Mesopotamia is now a desert. If, as some pretend, the physical condition
and geography of a country, formed the character of its inhabitants, we
should augur ill of the future of Australia, for the aborigines, those that lived
there in all probability for centuries before we came, were amongst the lowest
of mankind. “ But you forget,” say some, “ the energy, intellect, and civili-
zation of Englishmen.” Now, about civilization, we will say a few words
shortly. But in industry were not the Egyptians our equals ? Where are
they? Are Englishmen superior in intellect to the Athenians? Yet what
now are they ? In energy we will back a Tartar against even our far famed
countrymen. Do our readers think a Tartar (for instance a slave-dealing
Toorkoman), the “ ne plus ultra” of a man? Energy, intellect, industry, go
but little way towards the formation of great empires, without the addition of
one other quality, and that one which seems negative, unselfishness. Humanity
always loves humanity ; if, therefore, a man will not love and seek the good
of his neighbour, he ends in intensely loving himself. If this ever prevails
exclusively, the nation is lost; it is resolved into independent molecules, it is
a herd of men, not a kingdom. It is this love of self which, under the name
of want of public spirit, is now ruining the Turkish empire ; once so powerful,
as to be the terror of Europe. There is no doubt the countries on which that
empire is seated, are most highly endowed with natural advantages, but of
what avail are they, against the luxury and self-seeking of their inhabitants ?
This fatal moral disease has, alas, shown itself much in the United States
(which are the same nation as ourselves, though under a different polity), and
has led many to entertain sinister forebodings concerning the future of that
great republic. If. therefore, Australia is to be peopled with self seekers—
whether this evil passion take the form of luxury, or licentiousness, or pleasure-
seeking—or the more specious but equally deadly form of intense pursuit of
commercial wealth, by all or by any means, to the decay of public spirit, and
the death of patriotism, that great island can never rise from being, politically,
a small dependency. It cannot advance in real civilization. Civilization con-
sists in each individual animal man becoming transformed into a “ civis,” a
citizen, a member of a body of men, in which he considers the welfare and
interest of each other member to be w holly his own. Then the strength of each
individual, whether physical, intellectual, or moral, is multiplied by the
strength of every other. Such civilization exists in a perfect form in heaven,
and there only. After even imperfect forms of civilization there aiise, through
the operation of the laws of the God of Nature, the fruits of material wealth, se-
curity, and general happiness. The human mind, being freed from distraction, is
enabled, rapidly, to accumulate stores of every kind. These, by the common
metonomy of giving to the necessary effect the name of the cause, are fre-
quently termed civilization, but they are only its invariable results. Oh that
our readers may thus become the civilizers of Australia. Every man that
seeks not his own, that does right simply because it is right, is a blessing to
all around him. All his abilities and opportunities are brought into a common
stock, and belong to those about him as much as to himself, and, according to
a strict law of moral retribution, he receives from each as much again But
the lascivious, or the grasping self-seeker, is the dead wood of the tree; while
the vicious man is the fungus which, if possible, ought to be quickly cut
away. X.
POLITICAL QUESTIONS.
We see many on board who will shortly be called upon to exercise political
privileges. They will also have to exercise them in a smaller community
where individuality is not so completely lost as in populous England. Many,
who have originally gone out, as most of us are going out, have already achieved
distinction, and risen to much political power in the colonies, and why should
not some of our fellow passengers do the same ? We propose to issue, from time to
time, certain political questions (if it please our readers) for discussion in the pages
of this Journal —questions which we hope will be investigated without acrimony,
as free men discourse with free men. We beg to premise, that, notwithstand-
ing a great and good lady is now our Queen (and God grant she may long be
so), ladies have nothing to do with these politics. Every woman is a Queen
in her own home. There is her kingdom. There she is to reign supreme
(provided always she makes her husband comfortable). Her political rights
are, manifestly, to keep the house and household in order. Every living being
within them should look up to her for food and comfort. So, ladies, don’t
trouble yourselves about the following questions: —
1. Has every man a right inherent in him to share in the government of
the country in which he dwells ?
2. If so, why ought not this t» he extended to children, and even to babes?
3. If, by reason of their infirmity, this is denied to children and babes, why
should the exercise of it be permitted to childish and infirm men?
4. If denied to children and infirm men, wherein does the government of
such a country differ from an aristocracy ?
5. But if an aristocracy (that is, the government of the country by the best
men in it) be the right mode of government, why should not the government
be intrusted to the very best man, and the government thus become a
monarchy or autocracy ?
Our readers will distinctly understand that we are not by any means advo-
cating any of these premises or conclusions, but we wish them to exercise their
ingenuity in detecting and exposing these sophisms. X.
PHENOMENON.
On Wednesday, March 10, 1859, during heavy rain, a gentleman clothed
from head to foot in water proof, was reposing on a hen coop on the poop of
the “ Marco Polo,” when, although it was a calm, a heavy sea struck him in
the face. The gentleman has no doubt of the fact, as the water was salt. He
intends to send an account to the British Association. P.
ORIGINAL KIDDLE.
What fish does a dog resemble ? G, J. W.
CONUNDRUMS not ORIGINAL.
When are pewter pots like bad legislation?
Why is a man in gaol like a leaky boat?
What part of speech is kissing ?
Why is a certain hat called a wide-awake?
If you were at the North Pole freezing, what animal would you wish to be ?
When are two giggling girls like the wings of a chicken ?
What is the difference between a hen with a wing, and a hen without a wing ?
Why is an umbrella that is lost, as good as new, if you get it back again ?
Why is a melancholy man like the root of your tongue ?
Why is a young lady like a Bill of Exchange?
TO THE EDITOR OP THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —In order to remove any unpleasant feeling about some games
of Quoits being reported, and others not, I beg to state that it would be im-
possible to report every game that may be played. But as a rule, I will send
an account of all games of 300 or more. And I also request that when I am
not present, an account of the game may be given me, in order to be inserted
in the “ Record.” Hoping this may meet your views,
I remain, yours faithfully,
E. W. P.
AMUSEMENTS-
We are happy to give the same satisfactory account of the amusement de-
partment as last week. The weather still continues too warm for music in the
saloon, but we hope soon to be able to renew it.
Quoits
Monday, Messrs. Hills and Leishman played Messrs. McAlpine and Price,
the former gentlemen winning. Scores, 315 —254.
On Tuesday the same gentlemen played Messrs. McAlpine and Price.
Winning scores, 301 —256; this game makes the rub. Won by Messrs.
McAlpine and Price.
On Thursday, Messrs. Hills and Wood played Messrs. McAlpine and Price,
the latter gentlemen winning. Scores, 303 -270.


On Friday, Messrs. E. Jacobs and Wood played Messrs. McAlpine and
Price, the latter winning. Scores, 311—286.
In the evening Captain Johnston and Dr. Wood played Messrs. McAlpine
and Price, the latter winning, Scores, 308 —115. E. W. P.
Patrick’s day.
On the 1 7th, the Sons of Erin celebrated the Saint’s Day, and through
Captain Johnston’s kindness, were enabled to drown their shamrocks. Owing
to the bad supply of blackthorn on board, the evening passed off without a
“ rookawn.” E. W. P.
LEARNED PROFESSIONS.
In Great Britain the three learned professions are those of divinity, law, and
physic. To these ought to be added those who devote themselves to literary
and philosophical pursuits. As, however, these latter did not, in the census
of 1851, describe themselves as “literate” and “ philosophers,” we have
no means of ascertaining what their numbers are. In theory all these fol-
lowers of learned professions, are supposed to give their services gratis, and
the emolument to be only the thankful acknowledgments of benefits received
or services rendered. Till lately, even general medical practitioners were not
allowed to charge for their attendance and advice, but only to make as large
a profit as they could on their drugs. This was not found beneficial to their
patients, and so the law was altered. As medical men are to attend to the
diseases of the bodies of men, and the lawyers are supposed to be able to
counsel and direct regarding the laws of the country, and right between man
and man, so divines are appointed for spiritual and moral disease, and are
required to be able to counsel and direct with regard to the laws of heaven,
and right from man to God.
In 1851, the numbers were singularly equal; the predominance being in
favour of divinity, only in consequence of dissenting ministers being included.
The numbers were :—
Legal Profession 16,367
Medical 17,491
Clerical— Of the Church of England . . 17,621
,, Not of the Church of England 10,738
28,359 X.
EXTRACTS.
Seamen are offering very numerous in Australia,and there isnopresentprospect
of an advance in wages, which continue as follows :—viz., for India or China
and back, £4; China, India, West Coast of America and England, £4;
England direct, £4; and Coasting Voyages, £4 10s. per month. ( Sunderland
Herald, Jan. 14, 1859.)
A Calm at Sea. —It is the negation of motion, almost of life. Yet even at
such moments there is a pulse in the sea which throbs, and pants, and heaves
under the influence of the attracting luminary above. ( Monmouthshire Beacon,
Jan. 22, 1859.)
From the most accurate returns that can be attained, the number of wrecks
in 1854 was 1,826; in 1855, 1,799; in 1856, 1,959; in 1857, 2,002; and in
1858, 1,887. ( Sunderland Herald, Jan. 14, 1859.)
poets’ corner.
OUR CAPTAIN’S FOUR EXCUSES FOR SMOKING.
(1) When calms set in, or adverse wind
Blows in our captain’s teeth,
To soothe his nerves, and ease his mind.
He smokes his “ pipe of grief.”
(2) When o’ the “ doldrums” he gains the start,
And “ squalls’ ” no more annoy,
To show that he is light of heart,
He smokes his “ pipe of joy.”
(3) In wintry blasts, and cutting hail,
In nipping frosts, and blinding snows,
When stiff is every rope and sail,
He smokes a pipe “ to warm his nose.”
(4) But as his good ship nears the land,
And storm and tempest cease,
When grief dies out, and joys expand,
He smokes his “pipe of peace.” Q.
DIVINE SERVICE.
Divine Service was celebrated on Sunday last, at 10.30 a.m., on the main |
deck, the Bev. M. Barker officiating. The discourse was from Heb. xii. 1(5,
17. And again in the evening, at 7.30 p.m., on the poop deck, by the same
gentleman. The discourse was from Matt. vii. 7.
The Rev I). Lordan, R.C.P., also held a service at 10.30 a.m., for those on
board who are of the Homan Catholic persuasion. X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir.—From my letter last week no doubt you and all your readers
would be expecting a good week’s run. However, from some cause, which I
am not philosopher enough to explain, we have been completely done out of
the trade winds, having only had them for one day. According to the usual
laws of the trades, we ought to have had them for some eight degrees to the
southward of the point where we are at present. We must now bear in mind
the words of the song, “ a good time coming.”
I remain, Dear Sir, yours faithfully,
D. H. Johnston, Commander.
Marco Polo, 22 nd March, 1859.
OUR LOG.
Tuesday, March \5th. —First part very light airs. Latter, steady trade*.
Passed the French barque “ Jean Goujon.” Distance 144 miles. Lat. 5° 9'
S., long. 26° 25'W. Temp. 84° ; water 80°.
„ „ 16*A,—Steady trade all day. Ship making 9 knots per
hour. Distance 216 miles. Lat. 8° 29' S., long. 27° 46' W. Temp. 83°; water 80°.
,, „ 17 th. —First part steady trade, S, E. Latter very light at
East. Distance 174 miles. Lat. 11° 7' S., long. 29° 2' W. Temp. 84°; water 80°.
,, ., 18iA—Very light breeze from S, E. to E. Clear weather
and smooth water. Distance 151 miles. Lat. 13° 26' S., long. 30° 3' W.
Temp. 82°; water 79° 5'.
,, „ 1 9th. —Again very light winds at East to S. E. All stu’n-
sails set. Very poor winds for this place. Distance 139 miles. Lat. 15*
42' S., long. 30° VV, Temp. 84°; water 81°.
„ ,, 20th. — Light airs from N. E, to East. Calm at times. I
see no prospect of recovering the trade winds. Passed a Prussian barque.
We have the consolation of knowing that if the wind is bad for us, it is worse
for him. Distance 70 miles. Lat. 16° 52' S., long. 30° 22' W, Temp. 86°;
water 80°.
„ „ 21 st. —Old thing over again. Calms and light airs. Dist-
ance 95 miles. Lat. 18° 26' S., long. 29° 51' W. Temp. 82°; water 80°.
This week’s run . . . 989 miles
Previous to this week . . 3702 „
Total . . 4691 miles
Ship “ Marro Polo,” March 22, 1859.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —I am happy to inform you that though I have several visitors
at the surgery, the majority of the cases are merely the result of the extreme
heat we have experienced lately.
Trusting that we may have a speedy relief from it,
Believe me to remain, yours sincerely,
George J. Wood, Surgeon,
PROOF OF A HELPLESS OLD BACHELOR.
“ I always know a helpless old bachelor (says a clever lady) by looking at
the corners of his pocket handkerchief. If I notice on them any little piece of
red, blue, or yellow worsted, such as washerwomen run in to identify the
property of each separate customer, I know at once that he has no one at
home to mark his linen, and that he must be a poor, pitiful, misanthropical,
friendless, helpless, old bachelor.”— Punch's Almanack for 1859.
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. (>. WEDNESDAY, MARCH 30, 1859. Price Id.
In the leading articles of all the Sea Newspapers which, through the kind-
ness of the captain and officers of the ship, we have perused, there is one pain-
ful uniformity. All cry out in different modes and tones, “ What shall the
Editor write about?” If he writes about trifles, nis readers are indignant,
“ How childish.” If about serious matters, “ How dull.” One of our pre-
decessors was so hard driven as to write most wise remarks about the weather.
And yet it is to be supposed that most of his readers knew beforehand what
the weather was, as well as he. We have learnt to sympathize with these
brother editors ana never more deeply than at the present moment, If we
could venture on an evil wish against any human being, we would say to our
worst enemy, “ May’st thou write a Newspaper on board an Emigrant Ship.”
Shall we write about Melbourne ? All our readers know as much and more
about it than we do. About the “ Southern Cross”? We have not yet been
able to see it among the stars. Shall we descend to the “ Marco Polo ”? We
have pumped the lazy thing dry. Shall we give the scandal of the ship, or
rather of the ship’s passengers ? Alas this is a fertile and abundant subject.
But we advise every one who meets with the dirty thing to throw it (the
scandal, not the scandal-monger) overboard. O that tongues could be washed


and holy-stoned daily, and made only as clean as the decks, though we have
heard that some parts of these are not so clean as they might be. Will any of
our readers give us a subject to write upon which shall neither be too heavy
nor too light, dull nor scandalous, which shall please everybody and offend
none; which shall instruct, amuse, &c., &c. Then we will write an article
which shall be everything everybody cun wish, and say everything which any
body can imagine. Till then our readers must content themselves with such
articles as these, for in the never-to-be-forgotten words of tbe renowned Hob-
son, they must, we deeply regret it, yet still they must, “ take this or none.”
X.
decimIl coinage.
No. II.
In resuming our remarks on this subject, we will now consider some of the
objections which have been made to the scheme. Some of these are sufficiently
futile, but others deserve more serious attention.
1. It has been objected that the name “ cent ” and “ mil ” are inapplicable,
the one being already used in the United States for a coin of different value
than the one proposed, and the other whether pronounced as “ mile,” or
“ mill,” or “ meal,” or “ mail,” has all these sounds forestalled and appro-
priated to other things. This is a very trifling objection. If it be considered
of any importance,the names may bechanged, as, for instance, into “ centieth,”
and “ milleth.” It is easy to invent names, and the roughest names become
smooth by use.
2. The next is the loss which the state would incur by the immense recoin-
age required. To this it is answered, that the loss must come sooner or later;
that it is not proposed that the complete decimalization should be made at one
blow, or all the coins, now in circulation, should be withdrawn by one procla-
mation. Indeed the difficulties attending such a proceeding would render it
impossible so to do. The old coins would circulate in spite of their illegality,
till there was a sufficiency of new pieces to supply their place. It is only
proposed to accelerate the process now going on, by which every year new
coins are issued, and old melted down. With regard to the loss arising from
light coin, it is argued, that to neglect it now, on account of the expense, is
as foolish as it would be for a man having money ready at hand, to allow his
debts to accumulate at interest, a mode of proceeding evidently absurd, but
which, we regret to say, is a very common folly among men. While on this
subject, we may remark, by the way, that the question, Who ought to bear the
loss on light coin, the last holder or the state (that is the people in general) ?
has been much agitated. On the side of the last holder it has been argued that
it is unjust. For instance, if a man has a light half crown, it is not right to
give him, when it is recalled, say only the value of 2s. 4d. for it, seeing he
may only have had it in his possession a few hours, and, therefore, has not
worn away the silver that is wanting. On the part of the state, it is replied,
that this rule (of making the last holder the loser) is of great value in checking
the circulation of light coin, which check is a great advantage to the public at
large. Also that this rule, to be equal, ought to be extended to the involuntary
possessor of forged bank notes, and base coin, an extension which would,
manifestly, be a ruinous public policy. We have no doubt that this answer is
valid as far as regards political economy, still as tradesmen practically can
scarcely be expected, in the hurry of business, to weigh every penny an I six-
pence they receive, it looks rather hard wisdom. Perhaps a distinction might
he made between the different coins, and while the loss on the gold, and some
of the least worn silver coins might fall on the last holder, the loss on the
copper, and the most worn silver (for this once), might be borne by the state.
It is very difficult to ascertain what the sum total of the loss would be, but
there can be no doubt that it would be enormous. In other words the real value
of the money circulating is very far from what it pretends to be. It can’t be
helped. Money, like men, gets old and worn out.
We now come to what is by far the most formidable objection of all. Indeed
by many well-informed persons it is considered decisive against the whole
scheme. It is the enormous disarrangement of all mercantile accounts and
transactions which the proposed change in denominations would occasion.
Remembering the magnitude of British commerce, amounting to I know not how
many millions annually,this is really a difficulty. Time is of immense value, and,
however eager our fellow passengers may be to kill it, men engaged in com-
merce have seldom any such desire ; and if they have, to turn all their
accounts into the new denominations, the loss of time and labour would be
most injurious to the country. To show this, we call our readers’ attention to
the fact, that to express any number of pence which is not a multiple of six,
and any number of farthings which is not a multiple of 24 in “ cents ” or
« m ils,” a fraction of a “ mil ” must be used. Now fractions are nasty tilings
to calculate. Still, if they were neglected, some one (either buyer or seller)
must lose by it. And though you may say, “ it is but a chip of copper,” yet
thousands of these chips, falling through, would make a big hole in a rich
purse. I be proverb, says, * lake care of the pence, and the pounds
will take care of themselves.” And many a London merchant would say,
“ Take care of the filings of your coppers, and you’ll die a rich man.” Not
that we see much good in men dying rich, at least to themselves; but this is
by the way. We will consider what we think may be an answer to this last
difficulty in a future number. X.
POLITICAL QUESTIONS.
Our gentle readers, with the most genuine and unmistakeable humility, seem
inclined to leave the political questions, which we proposed for discussion,
alone, for we have not, up to the present, received any answer to them. Per-
haps they may say they are not interested in them. Well, in a few months,
unless they “ go to the dogs " in Australia, they will have the responsibility
of politics thrust upon them, whether they like it or not. If they neglect the
responsibility, the government of that fine country will gradually fall into
the hands of charlatans, impostors, and scoundrels. But we trust this will
never be the case. And if our readers have never thought of the principles of
government, they will be at the mercy of any bad man who has. For if well-
intentioned men have undefined ideas on such matters, bad men will assuredly
step in to deceive and bewilder them, and thus they are made “ cats’paws.”
It was the disposition of well-intentioned men to rest satisfied with these good
intentions, that caused Talleyrand’s wicked saying, “ Every man of good inten-
tions ought to be hanged.” meaning that such persons, without knowledge
and wisdom often produce incredible mischief. Of course the first step in
good government is for a man to govern himself. No one can govern others,
who is himself ungovernable. But we cannot but suppose all our readers to
have attained some measure of this. Men always have it. We cannot but
assume that our readers are not entirely, or greatly overcome by the weight
of sensuality, or the insanity of anger. And thus having conquered in a de-
gree one “ self,” they are ready and able to conquer other “selves ” also. And
now for the sophisms propounded in our last number: —
ANSWER TO QUESTION I.
The sophism of tbe first question consists in the obscurity of the phrase “ in-
herent rights.” A man is bdrn into the world, and he has at that time a right
only to that whichhe then possesses, and of whichnoone may deprive him without
a breach of the laws of morality. This may be, in most cases, summed up in
one word, “ life.” We are not aware of any right which can be strictly said to
be “ inherent ” in all men, but this. No man has a right to deprive the babe of
life. Even this right has been denied. For instance, by the ancient Roman
law, parents, or, at all events, the father, having giving the babe life, was
considered to have the right to deprive it of the same, audit appears that there
was some such idea among the ancient orientals also. The superior morality of
Christianity inculcating that every individual man belongs to God, has put
out this idea, and infanticide is now rightly reckoned a most hideous kind of
murder. Besides this sole inherent right, a man may be born to transmitted
rights, such as to an estate, or a kingdom. These rights, are strictly speaking,
not inherent, but acquired: yet they become, in a certain sense, inherent,
because no one can lawfully deprive him of them, except on his violation of
the conditions, expressed or implied, under which the right was acquired. So
then no one has a right to a share in the government of a country in which he is
born or subsequently dwells, except that right be transmitted, as, for instance, in
the case of a prince; or acquired, <>n certain conditions, as in the case of the
elective franchise. But some may ask, “ has not man an inherent right to self-
government?” If he were a solitary individual, a Robinson Crusoe, on a
desert island, it might be that he had. But in civilized countries society is the
individual, and the single person, but a fragment, or rather a component part
of it. So it is each society or nation which has a right to self-government.
Not the most violent political theorist would dare to say that every babe has
a right to govern itself. Yet what is it but a very young man ? It has a de-
cided self-will, and a power of choosing and of thinking itself wise. And who
shall fix the period at which this foolish very young man shall become wise ?
In truth, the mere fact of men banding together to make laws and regulations,
evidences that they have acquired a consciousness that they are, to a certain
extent, unable to govern themselves. And if they are unable, it is manifest
they have no inherent right to do it. The sophism in the first question being
disposed of, the rest founded upon it (No. 2, &c.), fall to the ground. Autocracy,
monarchy, aristocracy, democracy, or republicanism, or a mixture of all, or
any of them, are all lawful forms of a national government, the expediency of
which must be determined by each nation. What we principally desire to
impress upon our readers is, that the elective franchise, which most of them
will soon have, is not an “ inherent right,” but a trust, under certain condi-
tions, imposed upon them by those who have acquired a right so to do, and
which trust they are bound to exercise for the good, not of one individual,
nor of many, but of the whole colony and empire in which is its sphere of
operation. X.
ISLAND OF TRINIDAD.
On Tuesday, the 23rd, at early dawn, we sighted the island of Trinidad,
belonging to the Brazilian Government, and formerly to the Portuguese. We
passed it at the distance of 30 miles to the East. As a full account appeared
in our contemporary, the Herald, we need scarce add anything,except that the
latitute of Trinidad is 20° 30'S., and its long, is 29° 19'W. Its only inhabitant*
are wild goats, and wild pigs, both the descendants of the departed colony.
The Martin Vas Rocks, latitude20° 29' S., long. 28° 51' W., which wc passed
within four miles, appeared to be seven in number, seven at least were seen
successively as we sailed past them. The highest was estimated to be about
300 feet high. On one part (the N. Eastern) of the principal rock there
seemed to be basaltic columns, similar to those of Staffa in the Hebrides, but
inclinedata considerable angle. Ontwo of the rocks (the principal and extreme
northern) there appeared signs of guano, yet the telescope did not discover
any of those clouds of oceanic birds which usually cover the rocks and islands
of the South Atlantic. If there were birds, they treated us with the most
supercilious contempt. Only one gull came out to see, and we suppose when he
wentbackhe was called fool, for his pains. However, there is no accounting for
tastes. The birds, as one of our fellow passengers remarked, ought to be well ac-


quainted, by this time, with this noble ship, this being the nineteenth time of
her passing through these seas. But the “ Marco Polo ” is now a battered
beauty; only some half dozen Cape hens persist in their admiration of her ;
good luck to them for their tender hearts. An albatross came, hut soon
turned up bis nose and departed. What can be the reason ? X.
AMUSEMENTS.
QUOITS.
Monday , Messrs. Hills and Wood played Messrs. E. and M. Jacobs; the
former gentlemen winning. Scores, 302, 186.
Messrs. Wood and Leishman played Messrs. McAlpine and Price; the
latter winning. Scores, 208, 321.
Tuesday, Messrs. Wood and Leishman played Messrs McAlpine and Price ;
the former winning. Scores 300, 231.
Wednesday , Messrs. Wood and Leishman played Messrs. McAlpine and
Price; the latter winning. Scores, 1st game, 214, 308; 2nd, 229, 305.
Saturday, Messrs. Hills and Wood played two games with Messrs. M'Alpine
and Price; the latter winning in both cases. Game 500. Scores, 1st game,
492, 503 : 2nd, 339, 503.
CHESS.
A number of well-contested games have been played this week, and the
fight for the championship is drawing to a close. On Tuesday evening the
Rev. M. Barker challenged Messrs. Hills, Parker, and Leishman, and after u
hard contested game, the challenger came off victorious. E. W. P.
ANSWER TO RIDDLE IN OUR NUMBER OF THE 16tH INSTANT.
The Rose of the watering pot. Because it rains (reigns) over all.
ANSWERS TO RIDDLE AND CONUNDRUMS IN OUR LAST.
A Bonito. (Bone eater.)
When they are half and half measures.
Because he wants bailing out.
Conjunction.
Because it never has a nap.
A little (h) otter.
When they have a merry thought between them.
The mere matter of a pinion (opinion).
Because it is recovered.
Because he is down in the mouth.
Because when she comes to maturity she ought to be settled.
A celebrated cook who died recently, has had his epitaph written by some
cockney—
_ (“ Peace to his (h)ashes.”)
(From a Provincial Newspaper.)
Tuesday, March 29, 1859.
Mr. Sharpe, the chief officer of the ship, has kindly shown us a specimen
of a flight of insects, which were observed early this morning. They came
apparently from the Eastern Coast of South America. They were of the dragon
fly species, but distinct from that with which we are all so well acquainted in
England, it seems to be a species known in Australia, The only curiosity
in the matter is the immense distance which they were blown. The dragon
fly is a land insect, and this one must have been driven by the moderate wind
which we are now enjoying, from the land, at a distance of more than 1200
miles, as we ascertained by reference to the captain’s chart. X.
DIVINE SERVICE.
' Divine Service was held on the main deck on Sunday last, at 10.30 a.m.
The Rev. M. Barker officiating The discourse was from Luke xi. 23. The
weather heinsr unfavourable for holding service in the open air. In the evening
the same gentleman held a Bible reading (from I Cor. xv. 1—17), with prayer,
&c., in the second cabin, at 6 15 p in.; and evening Divine Service was held
in the saloon at 7 30 p m. The discourse being from Eph. v. 1 —17.
The Kev I). Lordan, R.C.P.,held a service at 10.30 a.m., for those on board
of the Roman Catholic persuasion. X.
poet’s corner.
SPRING.
none are so dark, but‘hat still we may find,
E'en “ a dark cloud can wear a bright lining
behind.”
Then onward! press onward! through joys or
through tears, ling fears,
Keep not back thy bright hopes with dark doubt-
Though one hope may fade,yet another will rise,
And the future may give thee what most thou
would'st prize.
Then waste not thy life time in useless regret,
Thy wrongs, and thy sorrows, forgive and forget.
These flowers are as bright as last Spring
bloomed before,
And life may for thee have bright flowers yet
in store. D. G.
To the Editor of the “ Record
Dear Sir, — I am glad to inform you that we have now, I hope, got clear of all
calms, and light winds, and may expect to have strong westerly winds, at least we
ought to have them, but bad luck can’t stick to us forever, and I have no doubt your
readers will agiee with me in thinking we have had our share.
I cannot flatter you by saying you will have as pleasant weather as you have had,
but we can put up with a good deal, if we make satisfactory runs. We have still time
to make a reasonably good passage, but I am afraid not a quick one, Tiusting you
will excuse this brief letter, I remain, yours truly,
D, H, Johnston, Commander.
OUR LOCK
Tuesday , March 22nd—Calms and light airs from N. E. to N. W, with heavy
clouds and rain. No observation. Temp. 82°; water 80°.
„ ,, 23rd—Calms and light variable airs all the day. Heavy rain.
Passed Trinidad. Distance, two days, 140 miles. Latitude 20° 38' S., long. 20° 45' W.
„ „ 24lh—First part steady northerly winds with rain. Latter part
clear weather, with S. E. wind. No observation. Temp. 79°; water 79°.
,, „ 25lh —Fresh bteeze, S. E. to E, S. E throughout. Heavy head
sea. Ship plunging a good deal. Distance, 2 days, 324 miles, liat. 23° 53' S.,
long. 29° 38' W. Temp. 77°; water 78°.
„ „ 26th—Light breeze. S. E. all day. Clear pleasant weather.
Distance 109 miles. Lat. 27° 87' S.. long. 3 0° 14' W. Temp. 80°; water 76°.
„ „ 27th —Moderate breeze and fine weather. Smooth water. Wind,
S.E. to E. Distance 198 miles. Lat. 30° 55' S„ long. 30° 20' W. Temp. 74°; water 72*.
„ ,, 28th—Fresh breeze and cloudy. Wind veering to N. E. Distance
230 miles. Lat. 34° 25' S., long. 28° 27' VV. Temp. 70°; water 67°.
Distance this week 1001 miles
Previous to this week 4691 „
Total 5692 miles
To the Editor of the “ Record."
Dear Sir, —The continuance of good health throughout the ship will, I have no
doubt, be a source of gratification to you, and the passengers. Trusting that next
week I shall be able to make the same report,
Believe me to remain, yours sincerely,
March 29, 1859 George P, Wood, Surgeon.
The lovely soring blossoms shine out once more,
I n all the fresh sweetness they ever wore,
And lonely and sad th< ugh our hearts n ay be,
Yet a welcome they have, lovely spring-time, for
thee,
Yet thy blossoms are like life's fair hopes, which
alas !
More quickly than even Spring flow'rets must
pass,
And the changeful light of thy sunbeams’ play,
Is like joys which in life chase our tears away.
For few are the days in this world of ours,
O’er which no dark shadow or cloud ever lours ;
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 7. WEDNESDAY, APRIL 6, 1859. Price Id.
Ever since the commercial panic at the close of 1857, the British Press has
teemed with protests against the morality of the present system of modern
trading. With our necessarily limited circulation, and period of existence,
we would scarcely have alluded to these matters, were it not that we are
passing to a land where the temptations to the same evils are much greater
than in happy Old England. The remarks we make must necessarily be very
general. Ihey will refer to principles of action with which many of our
readers may be well acquainted, but of which some may be ignorant, and of
which we may all be usefully reminded.
We use the term “ trade ”in its most extended sense, as the exchange of
those things which the Divine Providence has variously bestowed upon different
individuals—not only material substances, whether manufactured or not, but
also the various gifts of situation, strength, intellect, and knowledge, which
God has freely distributed to individual men. In this sense even an infant
trades with its mother in smiles and endearments—it is all it has to give—
and its mother is willing enough to purchase these with great expense and
trouble. It was an instance of the extent to which men will heedlessly swallow
ignorant dogmas that, when the French Encyclopoedists first promulgated the
monstrous absurdity, “ God has made all men equal,” it was received by vast
multitudes whose daily and hourly experience testified the contrary. In fact
the very opposite is the truth. God has made no two individuals of the human
race equal. If any one thinks that He has, let him produce those two indi-
viduals whom he deems so. Weigh all the circumstances, gifts, opportunities,
and possessions of them both, and much, very much, will be found wanting in
each which belongs to the other. Yet some think this difference is the work
of man. Far from it. When there were but two individuals of the human


28°. Thus year by year the cliff, pressed by the immense mass behind it,
I advances, till at last it floats. Now the winds, and storms, and tides, begin
i to have more power, and vast portions are broken off. Soon the currents
sweep them away, and each starts forth to see the world, abold andindependent
iceberg. But quickly the same sun that first raised its substance from the sea
into the clouds, dissolves that same substance into the same sea, butnot before
the great and glorious creature has wandered many a hundred miles from its
cheerless home. This is the parentage, conception, and birth of these for-
midable enemies, whose distant acquaintance is better appreciated by mariners,
than by nearer and dearer familiarities. X.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE “ RECORD.
“ A subject, a subject, my Editorship for a subject.”
Dear Sir, —As your faithful but inefficient “ Sub.,” and anxious to comply
with the earnest request of your readers in general, contained in your last
interesting “ leader,” I have been doing my utmost to furnish you with a
subject combining the several qualities therein enumerated, and I think I have
discovered such an one. It was presented to me whilst taking my promenade
on the deck the other evening, in musing mood, thinking, amongst other
things, that the “ Marco Polo,” with her stately masts and square-set sails,
bore some resemblance to a church (a strange conceit no doubt), when a
lustrous star fixed my attention, and the bright idea (a reflection of the star
perhaps) flashed into my mind, “ here is a subject for our Editor; he has
already interested and instructed us on the influences of the sun and moon,
on the winds and waves, let us ask him to write us an article on the “stars
Therefore do I offer you this subject, dear sir, as one “ which shall neither
be too heavy nor too light ; dull nor scandalous; which shall please etfery
[sensible] body and offend none; which shall instruct, amuse, &c.;” and which,
beyond these attributes, embraces those of a truly sublime and divine nature.
Begging you will have the kindness to enlighten your readers on this hea-
venly theme, Believe me to be your faithful “ Sub.,” W. P.
We will consider the challenge which our valued coadjutor has given us,
though it by no means comes up to our conditions. What! the “ stars ” not
“ too heavy ” for us. Does he know how many billions of tons the smallest
of them weigh? Not “ too light ’’collectively, when he, himself, declares, a
solitary unit of that great army to be “lustrous.” We presume he means us
to confine ourselves to the stars of heaven, for if we extended them to the
stars of the earth, it would he “ scandalous ;” if to the stars of the “ Marco
Polo,” decidedly “ dull.” We will not object to the alteration he has made in
our offer, because, of course, all our readers are “ sensible.” Yet we almost
think we hear some of our readers exclaim, “ Who cares for the stars ?” Yet,
gentle reader, a star is a very good thing in its way, as, perhaps, we may at
some time or other show. X.
POLITICAL QUESTIONS.
No. II.
As education is one of the themes on which political economists delight to
dwell, we propose a few questions on the subject, it is one which we have
little doubt will force itself upon our readers in their adopted land.
Question 1. Is the education of the child, youth, or man, the duty of the
state, or of the parent, or of both conjointly?
2. If by education is meant the “ educing ” or “drawing out” of those
powers which are latent in the man, is not this sufficiently accomplished by
the current events of life ?
3. If the state and the parents of the children are jointly responsible, what
are the bounds of and distinctions between their respective duties? X.
AMUSEMENTS.
Quoits have been the favourite game during the day for the past week, and several
very good matches (not grand) have been played. On Tuesday Messrs. Hills and
Leishman played Messrs. McAlpine and Price, and came off victorious. Scores,
301. 275.
Wednesday, Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. M. Jacobs and Leishman,
the former winning Scores. 308. 200.
Thursday. Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. Wood and Leishman, the
former winning Scores 306. 280.
Friday, Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. E. Jacobs and Leishman, the
former winning. Scores 305. 60.
Messrs. McAlpine and Price also played Messrs. Wood and Leishman, and came
off victorious. Scores. 310, 167.
Saturday, three matches were played. 1st, Messrs. McAlpine and Price played
Messrs. Hills and Leishman, and after a close contest, ended in a drawn game.
Scores, 301, 302. 2nd, Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. Wood and
Leishman, the former winning. Scores, 302, 112. 3rd, Messrs. Hills and Price played
Messrs. Woods and Leishman. the former winning. Scores 301, 273.
We are happy to say that the evenings’amusements passed off with the same success
as usual. In the next “ Record ” we hope to give the name of the winner of the chess
championship, as well as an abstract of all the games played.
1 ST APRIL.
All Fool’s Day was, as usual, a general holiday for the “ Imbeciles,” and there was
a great demand for pins and paper, especially if the latter was inscribed with the well
known motto of the order, “ April Fool.” • E. W. P
RIDDLES not ORIGINAL.
Why is a lady making a morning call, like a letter of the alphabet in an easy
position ?
race, and they both perfect, one was subordinate to and derived from the other.
She a help meet for him, and he a helpmate for her. And this principle of
mutual dependance, arising from inequality, is carried out in all the relations
of life. Yet there was no necessity that it should be thus. It is worthy of
remark that the lower we go in the scale of created life, the more independent
each individual is of the others of its species ; while man, the highest of all,
is the most mutually dependent of all.
Trade is a divine institution, not indeed specially, as if it needed a revela-
tion, but as arising from the divinely constituted necessities of humanity. Its
basis is love —not self-love, but neighbourly love. So fearfully, however, has
man’s perversity run counter to God’s purpose, that it sounds almost ironical
to state that a tradesman ought to trade through love to his neighbour. If we
had stated that the basis of trade is pure selfishness, we should have found
many more believers. Yet it is not so with regard to legitimate trade. In it
each person has something which his neighbour has not, and which is more
valuable to his neighbour than to himself. He exchanges and receives that
which is of less value to his neighbour, and of more value to himself, and thus
both are benefited. Some may ask, “ Who trades on such a principle ?” All
we can answer is, all trade conducted on other principles is unlawful and un-
just. We will now confine our attention to the exchange of material commo-
dities. The gold digger may lawfully seek for those treasures which God has
hidden in the Australian soil. The sheep master may exchange his super-
abundance of wool for whatever he desires, whether he takes money for it, as
is usual, or otherwise. But neither the gold digger nor the merchant has a
right 1o risk that which God has given him on a chance, as gamblers do, in
the hope of obtaining as much from his neighbour, that is, without giving
an} thing more valuable to him in exchange. If attempted, this is covetousness.
If "achieved, theft. Work this principle out into details, and it will be found
entirely to negative all those practices which the common sense of mankind
considers as frauds, and which the feeling of danger leads them unhesitatingly
to condemn. May, it condemns many practices that men, while engaged in
business, often think most lawful, till they suffer the evil of them in their own
persons For instance, many will justify themselves when they use knowledge
which they have acquired, to obtain commodities from another person at a
lower rate than he would, had the seller known its real value. These often
take as much pleasure in thus snaring one of their fellow men, as in entrapping
a wild animal.
Our space will not allow us to go into more detail, though we may recur to
the subject another time. X.
icebergs, &c.
We have now entered the Antarctic Sea, which, as far as it has been explored
seems to consist <of a comparatively narrow belt of water, surrounding an
almost unknown continent. On the edge of this, is an almost continuous band
of ice. In summer time, however, and at particular spots, the land is ap-
proachable, and has been duly investigated and taken possession of by our
ships in the name of Queen Victoria. Not that several portions of it were
unknown previous to the present reign, but the continuity of the various parts
was not well ascertained. Even now it can only be stated that most probohly
they form but one vast island or continent, for though it has, we believe, been
circumnavigated, the land, for considerable distances, was out of sight. It may
fairly be stated that the British Empire is seated on both the Poles, for British
North America extends theoretically to the northern axis of the earth, and
Victoria land to the southern. In the Borean regions, indeed, Denmark, our
ancient but decayed rival, still disputes the honour for the northern boundary.
Greenland, which, in name, belongs to her, has not, we believe, been
distinctly ascertained, although there is little doubt it is an island. Indeed
the continent of America terminates towards the north, in a mass of islands,
of which Greenland seems to be the largest. In the absence of books
of reference, we are notable to give any accurate account of the great continent
which now lies due south of us, about 13 or 1400 miles distant. As far as our
memory serves us, wherever it has been approached, the shore has presented a
very lofty appearance. Hence we reasonably conjecture the existence of very
high land in the interior. One of its mountains, Mount Erebus, in the part
called Victoria Land, an active volcano,has been measured, we believe, by Sir
James Ross, and is between 12 and 13000 feet high. The highest of the Scotch
mountains is but a little over 4000 feet, and none of the English, Welsh, or
Irish hills, reach that altitude. It is in these mountains that the icebergs are
born and cradled. They are, in fact, the broken off ends of “ ice rivers.”
Our readers have all, many times, heard of glaciers. In very cold regions,
the snow accumulates in deep mountain vallies. I’his snow has its surface
partially melted by the sun’s rays, or even by a passing summer shower. The
ice-cold water percolates through the lower unlimited mass, transforms it into
porous ice, differing in density according to the degree of cold and pressure
to which it has been subjected. It has been discovered by direct experiment,
as well as proved by the phenomena of glaciers, that ice, however much
frozen, is by no means an inflexible solid. So the great mass slowly winds its
way down the valley at a rate which has been observed to vary from one to
200 or 300 yards in the year. In hot and temperate countries, as it descends
into the warmer regions, it melts, and becomes the source of a river. But
in these high latitudes it proceeds slowly and majestically to the sea, into
whose waters it advances, a mighty cliff of ice. Our readers will observe,
that the glacier is formed of fresh water frozen. Now the freezing point of
sea water being zero, is 32° below that of fresh. So the glacier is scarcely
affected by the temperature of the sea, which seldom on those shores is above


If cheese comes after meat, what comes after cheese ?
Why is a whirlpool like a donkey ?
Why is the letter G like matrimony ?
What is the difference between the sun and bread ?
When is a shrimp most like a leopard ?
What is the difference between a butcher and young lady?
Why is crinoline like an obstinate man ?
Why are ladies like bells?
What letter is that which is invisible yet never out of sight ?
EXTRACTS.
Important to Spoons. —If two spoons are filled, there are two spoonsful ; if the
same spoon is filled twice, there are two spoonfuls ; a distinction which we should
think spoons in general will be able to comprehend.
A few nights ago, Mr. Jones, who had been out taking his glass and pipe, on going
home late, borrowed an umbrella, and, when his wife’s tongue was loosened, he sat up
in bed, and suddenly spread out the parapluie. “ What are you going to do with that
thing ?” said she. “ Why, dear, I expect a very heavy storm to-night, and came
prepared.” In less than two minutes Mrs Jones was fast asleep.
When Canning’s health was drunk at the Ministers’ Blackwall dinner, he replied,
* Gentlemen, this is a fish dinner ; so, after sincerely thanking you for your good wishes,
I do not see that we can do better than follow the example of the fishes, who drink a
good deal, but never speak.”
A rascally bachelor says:—“The friendship of two women is always a plot
against a third.”
DIVINE SERVICE.
Morning divine service was celebrated last Sunday at 10.30. a.m., in the
second cabin, it being impossible, from the state of the weather, to hold it on
deck as usual. The Rev. M. Barker officiated. The discourse was from
Ps. xcv. The same gentleman also held a Bible reading, with prayers, &c., in
the second cabin, at 6.15 p.m., from 2 Cor. xv. 17 —28 ; and also evening divine
service in the after saloon at 7-30 p.m. The discourse was from Heb. ix. 1, 2.
The Rev. D. Lordau, R.C.P., held divine service at 10.30 a.m., for those
on board of the Roman Catholic persuasion. X.
£U*i)rrtt0rm?nt0.
LOST, a copy of Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. Whoever will bring it to the steward
of the second cabin, will be much thanked.
WANTED, a few good Jokes, comprehensible and genuine, and warranted under
sixty days old. Apply to the Editor of this Journal, Gilded Saloon.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir, — No doubt my letter this week will be a novelty to you, as there is no
grumbling about the winds, I am perfectly satisfied with our run, and trust we may
continue to do as well. We have also been particularly favoured with fine weather ;
very agreeable to the passengers, as they are able to come on deck for fresh air.
Enclosing our log, I remain, dear sir, yours very truly,
5th April, 1859. D. H. Johnston, Commander.
OUR LOG.
Tuesday, 29 th March —Increasing breeze from N. W., with fine weather. All stu’n-
sails set. Distance 170 miles Lat. 36° 6' S., long. 25° 42' W. Temp. 68°; water 66°.
30?A,—Fresh breeze from N. W., veering to N. N. E. Cloudy weather and passing
squalls. Distance 215 miles. Lat. 37° 31' S., long. 21° 39' W. Temp. 66°; water 6l*.
31*L—Fresh breeze from North to N. W. all this day. Distance 232 miles, Lat.
38° 57' S.. long. 17° 6' W.
la< April — Fresh breeze N. W., fine clear weather. All sails set. Distance 248
miles. Lat 40° 10' S., long. 12° 3' W. Temp. 61°; water 58°.
2nd, — Rather less wind this day. Cloudy during the day. Clear at night. Distance
206 miles. Lat 40° 42' S., long. 7° 44 W. Temp. 58°; water 56°.
3rd. —Fresh breeze N. N. W. to W. N. W. Cloudy, with some rain. Distance
218 miles. Lat. D. R. 41° 23' S., long. D. R. 3° O' W. Temp. 58°; water 56°.
4<A.—Fresh breeze. Cloudy, with rain at times. Distance 226 miles. Lat. D. R
42° 4' S., long, D. R. 2° 0' E. Temp. 56°; water 53°.
Distance this week 1509 miles
Previous to this 5692 „
Total .... 7201 miles
TQ THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD,”
Dear Sir,— I am happy in being able to state that my duties continue very light,
and this 1 trust, may be the case to the close of our voyage.
Strict attention to keeping the feet dry, taking brisk exercise, and warm clothing,
will be found the best prevention against taking cold, which otherwise is so liable to
occur after the change of temperature we have experienced.
Believe me to remain, yours sincerely,
George J. Wood, Surgeon.
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 8. WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 1859. Price Id.
It is in no spirit of. shifting our responsibility to other men’s shoulders, but
through desiring the improvement of this paper, that we urge our readers to
send us more contributions. If they were so to do, the whole character and tone
of this Journal would rise. As for saying they cannot write, it is mere laziness.
It is impossible that any number of educated persons can be unable to express
their thoughts on paper. But we fancy they fear criticism. For our part we
invite it. It is in the friendly collision of various minds that truth is elicited.
Surely all that has appeared in the “Record,” has not been so coincident
with all the thoughts of our readers that there is no room for discussion. If
it be not, let us discuss those matters. We have also imagined that possibly
many might be willing to contribute, if they were not met by the question,
“ What shall I write about?” Coleridge, tbe poet, was once travelling by coach
in the West of England. There was but one passenger inside with him.
Coleridge, as was his wont, entered into conversation, but found his fellow
traveller was as stupid a person as ever he had come across. He tried him first
on one subject, and then on another, but he knew nothing. He was as heavy as
a block. At length the irritated poet exclaimed, “ Sir, 1 have always hitherto
found that every person I have met was able to give some useful information,
and to converse intelligibly on some subject or other. I have tried you for the
last two hours, but 1 cannot find that you know or understand anything. Now,
sir, what is your subject?” “ Try me on leather, sir,” replied the other
triumphantly, “ and I'm your man,” and the worthy leather seller forthwith
initiated the poet into the mysteries of his craft. So we say to each of our
readers, “ What is your subject?” It is a moral certainty that each one has
some useful and interesting knowledge which others have not. Many have
travelled much. Amongst the various countries which we have ascertained
(through their conversation), some of those in this ship have seen, we can
mention the Arctic regions, North America, the Southern Stales, the West
India Islands, Demerara, the Brazils, the Falkland Isles, Australia, the Cape,
China, the East Indies, the Eastern Archipelago, Aden, the Red Sea, the
Mediterranean, and the countries adjacent, the Black Sea, the Crimea, France,
Germany, &c. They cannot have seen these countries with their eyes shut,
and if their eyes were open, no inconsiderable amount of knowledge must have
leaked in. Let us have the benefit of it. Also their various callings and
professions must have given them much science in their own lines, which
others cannot have, except they instruct them. Every person knows much,
and is able to do much, which others know not, and are not able to do. If they
be very hard up, indeed, fora subject, let them tell their dreams, day dreams,
or night dreams, just as they like, and we will tell them the interpretation of
them. For though dreams show but little outside a man, they tell much of
what is within him. We are ashamed to keep three-fourths of the Paper for
ourselves. But whatever‘is done, let it be done at once, for this Journal
ceases when once we get to Melbourne, which we have good hope will be in
the course of three or four weeks, and then all chance of writing in the
“ Marco Polo Record” will be gone for ever. X.
DECIMAL COINAGE.
No. III.
We now present our readers, in conclusion,with seven tables. The first, show-
ing the relative value of the proposed new denominations among themselves.
The second, the value of the old denominations expressed in the new. The
third, the value of the new denominations expressed in the old. The fourth,
the value of the farthings up to four ; and the fifth, the value of the pence up
twelve, expressed in the new denominations. The sixth, the value of the
mils up to ten, in pence and farthings. The seventh, the value of the cents,
up to ten, expressed in shillings, pence, and farthings. We think the fifth,
sixth, and seventh tables fairly show the difficulty, “ Who in the bustle of
business is to stay to calculate all these fractions of mils?” To this it may
be replied, that the difficulty is more imaginary than real. For it is not every
mercantile transaction that needs to be thus translated from the present to the
proposed denominations, but only the result when it comes to cash transac-
tions. If people (merchants and bankers for instance) chose for convenience
sake, or through habit, to continue their calculations in the old denominations,
there is neither necessity nor power to prevent them. Only if they chose
this, when they paid or received money, they would have to translate their
accounts into the new denominations. Moreover this would be but temporary,
till new account books be procured, and new interest tables, &c., be calculated.
We do not think this inconvenience, however great it may appear in the
eyes of those subjected, or rather who fear being subjected to it (and they


make the most of it), ought to be weighed against the public benefit. It may
be said that we, not Being overburdened with money, have little sympathy
with those who are. It is possible, certainly, that our sympathies rather lean
the other way. But while it is right that the rich should have justice, as well
as the poor, we also remember thatno beneficial alteration has been ever made
without much opposition, partially through ignorance,partially through self-in-
terest. And also that it is a maxim that the temporary inconvenience of the
few of any society, however great, is not to be balanced against the per-
manent benefit of the many, however small it be. X.
Table III.
New Denomination. Old Denomination.
One pound= one pound.
One florin = two shillings.
One cent = two-pence, I farthing and f of
a farthing.
One mil = || of a farthing.
Table I.
10 mils= 1 cent.
100 mils= 10 cents= 1 florin.
1000 mils=100 cents=I0 florins=one
pound.
Table II.
Old Denomination. New Denomination.
One pound = one pound.
One shilling = five cents.
One penny = 4 mils and g of a mil.
One farthing = 1 mil of a mil.
Table V.
Pence in Cents and Mils, &c.
1 = 0 : 4g
2 = 0 : 8*
3=l : 2i
4=l : 6f
5 = 2 : 0|
6 = 2:5
7= 2 :
8 = 3 : 3f
9 = 3': 7*
10 = 4 : If
11 = 4 : 51
12 = 5 : 0
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —In your leading article in the “ Record ” of April 6th, there is
an expression, which, as far as 1 can understand, states that the gambler,
when successful, is a “ thief.” I beg that you will kindly define the word
« gambler.” On referring to the dictionary, 1 find the word “ gambler ” to
be a “ cheating gamester.” Now if that be right, he certainly comes under
the denomination of a thief. But surely he who plays a game of chance, for
small sums of money, cannot in any sense of the word, be called a thief, un-
less some fraud be perpetrated. In a former “ Record,” an article stated,
that if money was not the object, why not play for nuts? Well, we will say
that nuts are to be the stake. What difference can there be whether you win
a dozen nuts or a penny? 1 now speak only of those who play for small sums
for amusement, not gain. Of those who play for gain, I cannot speak, never
having done so myself. I remain, dear sir, yours faithfully, M. L.
We are much obliged to M. L. for giving us an opportunity of recurring to
the above subject, and explaining our meaning. The passage to which we
imagine he refers, is this, “ Gambling, if attempted, is covetousness; if
achieved, theft.” In answer to his observations, we would first remark, that
it may possibly have escaped his memory, that whole nations have, and still
do justify the most barefaced thefts. The Bedouins will say, “ God has given
the desert to the sons of Ishmael, and to others, rich lands. When the
stranger comes to the desert, he is the field of the Bedouin.” The Chinese
think lying a necessary part of business. The Hindoos have a proverb,
“ without the lie, no business flourishes.” The ancient Spartans, whose nobility
of soul has been so much bepraised, held that no theft was disgraceful, if not
discovered. There even now exists, in civilized France, a not inconsiderable
body of men, who hold that “ property is robbery.” We mention these
instances, to show, that the commonness of the action can by no means be ad-
duced to show its lawfulness. Yet it is a frequent delusion, that what so many
do, cannot be very much amiss. What is gambling? We will take the in-
stance which appears the most innocent. A bets something, say sixpence, to B,
that some event will take place before a certain time, and B bets the same
sum to A. Now A desires to win the bet, and B desires the same. In plain
language A desires to get B’s sixpence without giving B anything in return,
and B desires A’s sixpence in the like manner. If A wins the bet, he gains
sixpence, without B gaining anything but disappointment and vexation. The
sixpence that was in B’s pocket goes into A’s, sorely against B’s will, for B
desired to make it a shilling by the abstraction of A’s sixpence, in which he
fails. Now what is theft, if this be not? Our correspondent seems to make
no distinction between B’s desire to make the bet, and his willingness to lose
it. If B desires to lose the bet, then we at once own A may lawfully receive
it, for it is B’s gift on a condition. But how can A and B be said to love each
his neighbour as himself, when both desire to obtain that for himself which his
neighbour desires for himself I But, it may he said, when two persons in a
game or trial of skill, agree to deposit certain sums to be given to the most
skilful, or„ the winner of the game, they partake of the nature of a prize.
Certainly, when these two persons do not attempt or desire to win ; for then
it is their gift to the most skilful, and the game, &c., is played to ascertain
who that is. If one person gives a prize, and enters himself as a competitor
for it, it is nothing unlawful, for it is his own ; and it is only the desire of ob-
taining that which God has given to another, without an equivalent rendered,
that is the fault. One of the most subtle excuses for gambling which we have
ever heard was, that the equivalent rendered was the pleasurable excitement
which both parties enjoyed in the hope of winning the bet or wager. But
this will not stand. For this pleasurable excitement, proceeding from secret
covetousness, is itself unlawful, and it is manifestly wrong to give unlawful
pleasure. If this excuse were lawful, then all the horrible pandering to illicit
lust that obtains in our great and rich cities would be a justifiable mode of
making money. Such an idea as this we are convinced never crossed the mind
of any in this ship. M. L., we think, makes a mistake of memory, when he
speaks about the “ nuts.” As he puts it, we acknowledge the justice of his
remark. There is no difference in this matter between a pennyworth of nuts
and a pennyworth of copper. But we think we said “ nutshells,” a prover-
bial expression for worthless and undesirable refuse (though, it is true, we have
seen a person eat nutshells on board this vessel, yet this was generally con-
sidered a slight eccentricity). M. L. asks us to define the word “ gambler.”
A gambler is a man who gambles. The class of acts which we term gambling,
are sufficiently plain from what we have already said. Of course the original
sense was one who plays a game ; but in its restricted and special sense, it
means a man who plays a game for the purpose of winning a stake or bet from
a neighbour, without giving him an equivalent. The word “ gambling ” is
also commonly applied to those who do any act in order to obtain money or
property from their neighbours without an equivalent rendered, but which
cannot be brought under the name of fraud. This is generally dependant on
some chance or unknown contingency. Thus we speak of gambling in the
funds, or railway stocks, or in so called trading transactions. X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Sir, —Having heard that some of the passengers were prohibited from
partaking of the evening’s amusement (Judge and Jury) which took place in
the second cabin on the 6th instant, the second cabin passengers beg to
mention that it was done entirely without their sanction, and that they were
entirely ignorant of the fact, until the proceedings had terminated.
Yours truly (on behalf of the Court),
(Signed) J. Burgess, Jun.
We cannot help thinking there must he a mistake with respect to this
supposed prohibition. We have inquired of some who did not attend, and
they state that it was not in consequence of anything of that kind, but on ac-
count of the apparent fulness of the room when they came to the hatchway.
We have also the authority of Captain Johnston to state, that he gave no such
prohibition. X.
On board the “ Marco Polo ” there are 41 Scotch, 72 Irish, 104 English,
and 28 Italians. Total 245. The difference between this and our former
enumerations arises from the three deaths which have occurred, and the
infants on board. X.
AMUSEMENTS.
Quoits still continue to be the favourite game. On Tuesday Messrs. McAlpine
and Price played Messrs. Wood and Leishmau, the former winning. Scores 311, 201,
Wednesday, Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. Hills and Leishman, the
former winning. Scores 304, 239.
Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. Wood and E. Jacobs, the former
winning. Scores 303, 184.
Messrs. Wood and Price played Messrs, Williams and M. Jacobs, the former
winning. Scores 311, 284.
Thursday, Messrs. McAlpine and Price played a game of 500 with Messrs. Wood
and Leishman, and after a well contested struggle, the former gentlemen came off
victorious. Scores 501, 457.
Friday, Messrs. Leishman and Price played Captain Johnston and Mr. McAlpine,
the former winning. Scores 308, 171.
Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Captain Johnston and Dr. Wood, the former
winning. Scores 321, 118. The former then played Messrs. Williams and Leish-
raan, and came off victorious. Scores 301, 237. In the evening the rank, beauty,
and fashion of the “ Marco Polo ” assembled to witness a splendid match between
Mesdames Johnston and Hills against Miss Hamilton and Mr. Parker; at first the
game was well contested, but soon Mesdames Johnston and Hills proved themselves
to be the superior players, and came off victorious. Scores being 217, 139.
Saturday, Messrs. Wood and Price played Messrs. McAlpine and Williams, the
former winning. Scores 302, 288.
Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. Williams and Leishman, the former
winning. Scores 305, 207.
CHESS.
Owing to the indisposition of one of the competitors for the championship, we must
defer until next week giving the name of the successful candidate, as well as an ab-
stract of the games, E. W. P.
Table IV.
Farthings in Mils.
1 = 1 A
2 = 2
3 = 3 |
_4 =
Table VI.
Mils in Pence and Farthings.
1=0: Og
2 = 0 : Ig
3 = 0 : 2|§
4 = 0 : Sg
5 = 1 : 0|
6=l ; lg
7=l : m
8= 1 :
9 = 2 : Og
10 = 2 : If
Table VII.
Cents inShilgs.Pence&Farthgs.
1 = o : 2 : If
2 = 0 : 4 : 3|
3 = 0 ; 7 : 0|
4 = 0 : 9 ; 2§
5 = I : 0 : 0
6 = 1 ; 2 : 12
7 = 1 : 4 : 8J
8 = 1 : 7 : 0$
9 = 1 : 9 : 2§
10 = 2 : 0 : 0


DIVINE SERVICE.
Morning divine service was held on Sunday last in the after saloon, at 10 30 a.m.,
the Rev. M. Barker otficiating. The discourse was from Psalm xc. A Bible
reading, &c., was held in the intermediate cabin by the same gentleman, at 6.15 p.m.
Discourse (1 Cor. xv.) ; and also evening divine service at 8.15 p.m., in the after
saloon, Discourse (Heb. ix 11 —14).
The Rev. D. Lordan, R.C.P., held a service at 1 0.30 a.m., for those on board of the
Roman Catholic persuasion.
ANSWERS TO RIDDLES IN OUR LAST.
V- sitting (visiting).*
A mouse.
Because it is an eddy (a-neddy).
Because it is the end of courting.
The sun rises in the east, but bread rises with the yeast in it.
When he is (s) potted.
The former kills to dress, while the latter dresses to kill.
Because it often stands out about trifles.
Because you never find out their metal until you have given them a ring.
The letter I.
poets’ corner.
‘‘I’LL HAVE NONE OF HER.”
We know a youth of Scotch descent,
Quite up to snuff, and no bad scholar,
Who lived in peace, and calm content,
In a small town, we’ll call it D—r!
There he had hoped his days to end.
Unruffled by the cares of life,
In “ single blessedness” his hours to spend,
Exempt from that “ great .bore ’ —a wile 1
It was his pride, in open day,
To boast him free from woman s wiles,
To slight her power, disown her sway,
Deride the influence of her smiles.
To show her that he prized far more
Than those sweet smiles (egregious noddy).
IMPORTANT QUESTION.
A seeker after knowledge would feel grateful for the meaning of the following
over-ridden expressions:—
“ Squevat.” “ It won’t wash.”
Should they turn out to be specimens of the inventive genius of the gentleman who
drags them into his conversation on every possible occasion, the writer of the pre-
sent ventures to recommend the disuse of them until his arrival in Australia, where
“ slang ” is duly appreciated. An Enquirer.
&Ubcvti!Stmrms.
PUBLIC NOTICE.—The *• Marco Polo” Assizes will take place in the second
cabin, on Wednesday next, the 13th inst., when all classes of passengers are re-
spectfully invited, as far as the accommodation will permit.
* Through mistake, this was placed among non-original riddles, whereas it has never before
been published.—tin.
Beyond her charms, he did adore.
His dear old pipe and whiskey toddy.
Vain boast, he little dreamt, poor wight,
The mighty force of woman’s power,
How keen her malice, dire her spite,
Man s lofty thoughts and pride to lower.
And soon her wrath, in folly slighted,
Was poured on his devoted head,
His peace destroyed, his pleasures bligh ed,
And pipe and glass in ashes laid.
He fled in haste his native shores,
Bowed down with shame, and spirit broke,
To seek a land where woman’s laws
Shall not forbid “ a quiet smoke.” Q.
N.B.— The Court will open at half-past seven in the evening. “ God save the
Queen.”
j^OST. —A Gold Shirt Stud. If found, please return to the Captain.
VCOPY of Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. Whoever will bring it to the Chief
Steward, will be much thanked.
WE repeat our notice of a Photographic Portrait having been found. In case the
owner does not apply for it before the end of our voyage, we shall leave it in
the hands of the Captain. Ed.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir,— I am so vny short of a subject to write about, that I really hope that
I may not have many more letters to send you. No doubt you will wish to receive
as few. Should we still continue to have as favourable winds, our wishes will be in a
fair way of being realized. We have, as you will see by the Log, made fair progress
this week, and we still enjoy very fine weather, much better than we usually have in
these latitudes. I do not like to hazard a guess about the end of the passage, but
should say three weeks were ample time for us.
I remain, dear Sir, yours truly, D. H. Johnston, Commander,
OUR LOG.
Tuesday , 5lh April.— Steady breeze from N. W. Cloudy weather. AP sail set.
Distance 204 miles, Lat. 42° 10' S., long. 6° 34' E. Temp. 54°; water 53°.
6th. —Wind this day from N. E. to N. W. Moderate first part; latter fresh.
Distance 200 miles. Lat. 42° 20' S., long. I 1° 2' E. Temp. 56°; water 56*.
7th.— Wind N. W. to W. Fine breeze, and clear pleasant weather. Distance 217
miles. Lat. 42° 36' S., long. 15° 54' E. Temp. 54°; water 52°.
8th.— First part wind veering southerly, and falling light. Calm. Wind again
N.N. E. Distance 146 miles. Lat 42° 50'S., long 19° 12' E. Temp. 56°; water 57°.
9th. —Wind from North to N. W.. and W. S. W, Fine weather. Distance 226
rniLs. Lat. 43° 13' S.. long, 24° 20' E. Temp, 56°; water 53°.
10f^—Wind again veering southerly. Fell light, and afterwards sprung up at
N.E. Distance 148 miles. Lat. 43° 19' S., long. 27° 43' E. Temp. 52°; water 40°.
1 1th,— Increasing breeze N. E., veeiing northerly. Strong breeze all night, with
thick cloudy weather. Took top-gallant sails in for the first time since we left the
channel. Distance 260 miles Lat, 44® 18' S,, long. 33° 32' E. Temp. 54*; water 49*.
Distance this week 1401 miles
Previous to this week .... 7201 „
Total . . , 8602 miles
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ MARCO POLO.”
Dear Sir, —My communication this week must necessarily be short, as the
sanitary condition of the ship remains as satisfactory as at my last report, and the beau-
tiful weather we enjoy at present justifies us in looking forward to a contiuuance of
the same. Believe me to remain, yours sincere’y,
April 12th, 1859. George J. Wood, Surgeon.
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 9. WEDNESDAY, APRIL 20, 1859. Price Id.
All of us have observed the instinct of gregarious animals in destroying
those of their number who are weak and sickly. The most gentle and the most
savage brutes alike destroy those of their number whom accident and circum-
stance have rendered incapable of defending themselves. Thus nature has
provided against the perpetuation of the race by enfeebled individuals.
A similar economy has, by some, been supposed to exist amongst men.
And certain it is, that some races seemed doomed gradually to disappear
before certain others. We speak of the fact merely. They do so dis-
appear. Hence some have argued, “ they ought to disappear. Therefore
we ought to make them disappear. It is a law of nature, and nature’s
laws ought to he obeyed.” Now there is a little sophistry in this ar-
gument. We will apply it to another instance. It is another law of nature
that if I shoot you through the heart you shall die. Nature’s laws ought
to be obeyed Therefore 1 ought to shoot you through the heart. Who
does not see, at a glance, that the obedience to nature’s laws lies in the re-
sult, not in the action producing it? Yet we have heard it with reference to
another crime, gravely argued by persons, otherwise of good sense and in-
tegrity, that since the “ nigger ” is decidedly inferior in average mental and
moral powers to the civilized white man (a fact which we by no means deny),
therefore it is lawful to enslave him, and right he should he held in slavery.
Really such remarks scarcely deserve an answer, We will apply it to a pa-
rallel case. I meet an infant. It is decidedly my inferior in strength, &c.
Therefore, according to the above rule, I may lawfully do what I please with
it; brain it; shoot it; drown it; burn it; or anything. We are almost
ashamed to reply to such an argument. It is the very quintessence of wicked-
ness, cowardice, and cruelty. Who does not know in their heart that superior
strength, and wisdom and power of any kind, are given to us by the Almighty
for the comfort and protection of the weak, not for their oppression and de-
struction ? There is one universal and most just law of the Divine Providence
in this matter. “ As ye do, so shall it be done to you.” “ If any oppress,
they shall he oppressed.” “ He that takes the sword must perish with the
sword.” For our motive in making these remarks, we refer our readers to
another column in this number, where are detailed atrocities committed on
the unhappy blacks of A ustralia (one of the most degraded races of humanity)
by those who we suppose are still Englishmen, and who we also suppose were
once named Christians. Doubtless when we come to know more of the matter,
we shall hear much of the wickedness of the blacks. But how does the
wickedness of the blacks justify or excuse that of the whites? It might, in-
deed, justify the execution, after due trial, and guilt proved, of the evil doer;
but how does it excuse the cutting off of his wife and children and others
connected with him? This is heathen and Chinese justice only, and, without
a doubt, by the law of God, is truly murder. It may be stated that this is in
a state of war. But be it remembered by assuming the sovereignty of the
country we have deprived ourselves of this answer, poor and doubtful as it is.
No state has a right to make war upon its own subjects so as to confound the
innocent and guilty. Such conduct is an abdication both of its duty and its
privileges. Who now would justify the massacre of Glencoe? We make
these remarks, our leaders will remember, solely on the authority of this
newspaper paragraph. We hope, for the honour of our country and name,
that it will be found to be exaggerated and false in some of its statements.
Yet we confess to misgivings, for there lies hidden in the breasts of all men
much of the nature of a wild beast. And men, when removed from righteous


influences, often seem to Use all distinction between right and wrong, and
commit crimes from which, a few months before, they would have shrunk
with horror. We cannot bring our mind to imagine any of our readers ever
being guilty of such things. Yet still these murderers of women and children
were one time, doubtless, as pure minded and as courageous as any of them.
The miserable apostate, Francis Spira, said, in his dying moments, “ Man
knows the beginning of sin, hut who hounds the ends thereof? X,
EXTERMINATION OF THB NATIVES IN AUSTRALIA.
A special correspondent of the Melbourne Weekly Argus [5 th Nov.), writing
from the Fitzroy diggings, says, . , , »
<« At Ramsay’s I first saw some of the aborigines of the Titzroy district, a
considerable number of them, chiefly young boys, being about the place.
They were favourable specimens of the Australian black fellow, and indeed,
belong to a far finer and more warlike race than the unfortunate people now
rapidly becoming extinct in the south. Those that I saw were, 1 believe, to
some extent attached to the station. Indeed otherwise they would hardly have
ventured near it; for, without knowing anything of the system pursued by Mr.
Ramsay and his men, I am unfortunately safe in saying that the ordinary re-
lation between the black and white races in this part of Australia is that of war
to the knife. The atrocities of this warfare on both sides are perfectly horrible,
and I do not believe the government makes any effort to stop the slaughter
of the aborigines. A native police force is, indeed, actively engaged, but ex-
clusively against the blacks, who are shot down by their blood-thirsty brethren
at every opportunity. I believe tbe blacks retaliate whenever they can, and
never lose a chance of murdering white man, woman, or child, insomuch that
I learned upon very good authority, that of the first settlers of this district,
about one fifth fell in two years. The actual number of blacks killed it is
impossible to estimate. They are being killed officially by police, and unoffi-
cially by settlers and diggers every day, nor are women and children by any
means universally spared when murders are being avenged by the whites. One
case of peculiar atrocity on both sides occurred not long since, if I may believe
the facts as they are told to me, at different times, by credible persons. The
owner of a station on the Dawson was away from home, when the blacks at-
tacked his house and killed every one in it except one young boy, who
managed to conceal himself. There were women in the family, and their
murder was preceded by other horrors. That the head of the family should
have been driven half mad by these things is not to be wondered at, but I was
shocked to find many apparently humane men more or less palliating the vow
he took, and kept, to shoot every black he encountered in the district. How
many dozen of lives he has to answer for he knows best. On one occasion he
came upon a small party, consisting almost exclusively of women with children
in their arms —of women so far civilized as to be able to appeal to him in
broken English against the deed he was about to do. He had two revolvers
with him, and kept his vow to the Utter. Of course I tell all this upon hearsay,
and therefore, I have foreborne to mention names, but the circumstance
seemed to be perfectly well-known in the district. One gentleman, to whom I
was subsequently speaking upon the subject-a gentleman deservedly enjoying
a large measure of public respect, and who I am sure, would be much more
scrupulous than the majority of white men here-had no more to say on the
subject than, * Well, of course, it is impossible to justify what did,
and it’s a very good thing that he has left the district. This same gentleman
told me that if he fell ir. with a strange party of blacks in the bush he should
ride straight at them with his revolver, and shoot right and left; and this not
in any vengeful or blood-thirsty spirit, but because the state of warfare between
the races is so virulent, that if he showed hesitation without attacking them,
they would be sure to attack him, and thus it would become a mere point of
tactics to strike the first blow. I have heard other men, kindly and good-na-
tured in ordinary relations, make use of such expressions as, 1 should think
no more of shooting a black than a crow.’ ”
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD,
Dear Sir,— In my last, I asked you to define the word “ gambler.” I now
ask vou for a definition of the word “ thief,” and also a proof of your statement
that a gambler is a thief. That a thief is “ one who steals,” I know ; but what
is stealing? Even if a man plays for the sake of money, I don t see how he
can be called “ one who steals.” My idea of stealing is, either taking some-
thing from a person without his knowledge, as a pickpocket does, or by force
or intimidation as a highwayman does Now a man who plays games for
money does neither. His opponent stakes an equal sum. and the winner takes
all Call it covetousness if you will, but I don’t see how you can prove it
theft Bv vour own definition of the original sense, a gambler means “ one
who nlavs a game.” On that principle nearly all men are gamblers ; and as
for its “ restricted and special sense,” all have an equal right to put their own
construction on it. My definition of a gambler is a man who makes it the
business of his life, and plays solely for gam, as they do in the gambling
houses on the continent, where, every year, numbers are ruined. But surely
you cannot compare that to playing a game for small sums of money where the
intrinsic value of thestake,beingso small, cannot be anobjec of consideration to
either party ; though, I admit, that there are somemthis world who would covet
the thousandth part of a farthing (if there was such acorn); such men should
never play. But again, every one who plays a game stakes something, be it
money P “nutshells,” or reputation, and, therefore, both parties are guilty of
gambling for one or the other. Many persons place a far greater value on
reputation for excelling in a game than they would for winning money, and 1
have seen persons get far more excited over a game played for reputation, than
if there was a money stake on it.
I remain, Dear Sir, yours faithfully, M. L.
We have great pleasure in answering the queries and remarks of M. L.
A thief is “ one who deprives another of that which belongs to him, not
being authorized by the laws of morality, which are the laws of God, so to
do.” The definition of M, L. certainly includes some, but not all kinds of
stealing. When we stated that the original meaning of the word “ gambler ”
was “ he that plays a game,” we thought it unnecessary to add that the word
had wholly lost its original meaning, and was used in the restricted and
special sense we gave it. Many words in the English language, and other
tongues, have thus lost their original signification ; e. g., “ Candidate ” origi-
nally meant “ one who is clothed in white,” or “ a whitened person,” but no
one ever uses it in tbat, but in a “ restricted and special sense. Ihe meaning
of words is governed by the usage of the society among which they are used.
For instance, “ port the helm ” would mean, literally and originally, “ carry
the helm,” which is absurd. On shipboard, and in nautical society, it has a
clear and definite sense, very different, and quite rational. So we allow, in
some circles, the word “ gambler ” may be restricted as M. L. defines it ;
but in arguing the moral question, the word is rightly used, so as to include
all who violate the same moral principle, though less flagrantly. With regard
to the guilt of individuals, we did not compare that of one with another. It is
not out business. There is scarcely a fault that does not admit of many de-
grees. The Bible says, “ He that hateth his brother is a murderer ” (1 John
iii. 15); yet surely not necessarily such a murderer as the Italian, of whom it
is related, that when his victim begged for mercy, he promised him his life if
he would deny and blaspheme the Saviour, and then instantly stabbed him to
the heart, saying, “ he rejoiced that he destroyed at one blow, both body and
Our correspondent, in the last two sentences of his letter, touches upon
another important matter, viz., that of ambition of excelling; a passion which
shows itself both in very small and very great affairs, both in winning a trifling
game, and in conquering a kingdom. We have no space to say all that we
would wish on that subject. But surely M. L. perceives the weak point in his
argument. There is a lawful ambition, and there is an unlaivful ambition. If
in any case the desire of excelling is unlawful, as he seems to allow it to be,
surely two blacks cannot make a white, nor one error justify another. We
cannot see anything in our correspondents letters which touches on the real
essential point, viz., that the loser is deprived of his property against his will,
and without the sanction of the law of God. To say that there are many other
thefts beside, and many worse thefts than this, may be true, but has nothing
really to do with the matter. X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Sir,— May I take the liberty to ask if you can, through the medium of your
Paper, give us some account of “ Marco Polo, the ancient voyager or tra-
veller. I believe it will be interesting to your readers, and
I am, respectfully Sir, A Second Cabin Passenger.
We are sorry that we are unable to comply with our correspondent s request,
owing to want of books of reference. We make this acknowledgment with a
blush,for weare aware that itis required of editorsto be walking Encyclopaedias.
Ours, however, is only an amateur editorship. Our correspondent has fairly
caught us; there is no mistake about that. All we can inform him about the
worthy who first bore the name of this ship is, that he was a Venetian tra-
veller of the thirteenth century, who went overland to Persia, India, libet,
China, and, we believe, Japan; but of this we are not certain. A fellow pas-
senger has informed us that he was made governor of some province in the
Chinese empire by the then emperor. He remained absent many years, but
we cannot at this moment tell anything more respecting him. Neither do
any of the books, to which we'have present access, give any further information.
We have never read any of his works except as quoted by other writers. We be-
lieve, however, they are extant both in the original, and tianslated into Eng-
lish.’The main cause of his celebrity is, that his is the earliest modern account
of those countries.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir,—As I cannot mistake my identity with the “ doggerel ” which
appeared in your last number, signed “ Q. permit me through the columns
of your valuable paper to denounce the sentiment of them as libellous in the
extreme ; and, were it necessary, I could bear out the assertion by the pro-
duction of conclusive proofs (in the shape of love tokens), that 1 am no woman
hater,” however fond 1 may be of my “ glass,” to say nothing of my “ dear
old pipe.” But then, sir, “ do we love woman less because we love ‘ toddy ’
more” ? Moreover, does she not set us the example in her devotion to the
n glass”? although I must own it to be with this slight qualification, that the
u gi ag3 ” to which she is addicted, reflects her lovely face, whereas, in the other
case, the face reflects the glass. Excuse this poor play upon words, sir, but I
wish to show this Q. in a corner (why don't he come out of it?) that I am
“ up to snuff,” and can perpetrate a bad joke as well as he.


Pardon this digression, sir, and now to prove once and for ever that I am
not the barbarian these wretched lines would make me out to be, I confidently
appeal to th e fair sex on board the “ Marco Polo ” to vindicate my character,
(I say it in all modesty) for genuine, unobtrusive courtesy to their order, which
must ever take precedence in their esteem of the acquired acts of bowing and
scraping, and the saying of those empty nothings which make up what is called
“ politeness.” These may form part of the education of my friend Q., but not
of the schooling of him who has the presumption to subscribe himself,
Dear Sir, yours sincerely, “ Squevat.”
South Australia. — Fresh discoveries of copper mines are reported by our cor-
respondent, one of which is described as “ a splendid mine, the specimen extraordi-
narily rich, and the supply large.” Another, at Bundaleer, in the north of the colony,
about 30 miles from the Burra Burra, is said to be equally valuable, and the lode
increasing in size and richness. The assays made at Adelaide on specimens sent
down gave 50 to 55 per cent, of metal from'ore only 7 feet from the surface. Mining
labour was becoming more abundant in the colony, by the return of miners from the
goldfields of Victoria, and the arrival of fresh bands from England, so that the riches
of various mines in the northern districts would soon be fully developed. “ I have
seen,” continues our correspondent, ” an official report made formerly to the local
government respecting mineral explorations in the north, to which 1 can now only
briefly allude, in which, at various points, it is stated that ‘ the ground south of the
River Wakefield consists principally of white clay, similar to that which is found at
Kapunda (Bagot’s) Mine, and at the Burra Burra. The whole neighbourhood north
and south of the Kapunda is of a nature congenial to metallic richness. With respect
to the mineral discoveries on the North Rhine, the lode is of good quality, and consists
of green and blue carbonates of copper, oxides of iron, and quartz. On the Reedy
Creek Mine, about 20 miles further north, 1 discovered a large lode of copper and
iron, running in a north and south direction, and cropping out at surface.’ At
Chambers’ Mine large quantities of malachite were being produced, and green and
blue carbonates, of which about 50 tons had been shipped for England.” These
statements show that, although copper mining in South Australia has been pursued
already to great results, the colony is in its infancy with respect to her produce of
copper ore; and when the various places mentioned are opened up, there are good
probabilities of other Burra Burras being found to exist; and from which mine, we
find by the present advices, the quantity is as large and the quality as rich as hereto-
fore.—Mining Journal of December 18.
Letters from Melbourne mention that the Patent'Slip has been opened, and had
been found to work most satisfactorily, but it was not of sufficient power, it was to be
feared, for the largest class of vessels.
Died, on board the” Marco Polo,” on the 14th inst., after acute suffering,
produced by violent sore throat, A. Pig, aged 6 months, only sou of G. Pig,
Esq., of Sty Hall, Maindeckshire. O.
horrible murder ! ! !
It is our painful task to report, that on the 14th inst, in broad daylight, a wilful
and premeditated murder was committed on board the “ Marco Polo,” on the body of
an inoffensive child of our old acquaintance “ Mother Carey.” The perpetrators of
this horrid crime are George Stone and Jacob Iron. They accomplished the deed by
forcing the poor innocent to swallow a dose of prussic acid. The most revolting fea-
ture in the case is the voluntary admission by the prisoner Stone, that it was his
intention to have preserved the skin of their victim, and to have had it stuffed on its
arrival in Australia, with the object of including it in a collection of natural curiosities.
We need not say that these demons in human shape will be given up to justice imme-
diately the ship reaches Melbourne.
The body underwent a post mortem examination by the celebrated surgeon Dr. G.
Wood, and we await his communication of the result for publication. O.
AMUSEMENTS.
QUOITS.
Tuesday, Messrs. McAlpine and Price played Messrs. Wood and Leishman, the
former winning. Scores 302, 292. A second game (500) came off between the same
gentlemen, Messrs. McAlpine and Price winning. Scores 507, 323.
On Friday Miss Hamilton challenged Mr. Price, and after a well contested game,
the challenger came off victorious. Scores 305, 257. "
We hope that Mr. Price, for the future, will not boast so much of his quoit playing, ’
CHESS.
We are happy to be able to give the name of the successful candidate for the chess
championship. The Rev. Mr. Barker won by three games. The list is as follows :—
1. The Rev. Mr. Barker . 19 games
2. Dr. Wood 16 „
, / Mr. Parker . ... 10 „
\ Mr. Price .... 10 „
4. Mr. Leishtnan ... 9 games
5. Mr. Hills .... 8 „
6. Mr. E. Jacobs ... 7 „
7. Mr. R 5 „
E. W. P.
ORIGINAL RIDDLES APROPOS OF THE “ MARCO POLO.”
Why is she like a body of voters before a general election 1
Why is she like Home?
When may it be said that she gambles ?
Why is she like the railway share market?
Why is she like the New Adelphi Theatre ?
What is that which is preserved yet lost ?
What letter in the alphabet resembles a question ?
Which is the worst of jokes?
1 What village near Brighton resembles a decayed church dignitary ?
y What organ in the body does a sugar loaf resemble ?
■, What vocalist would you call by the name of a patriarch 1
i ■
1 DIVINE SERVICE.
On Sunday last, morning divine service was held in the intermediate cabin at
t 10.30 a.m, Discourse Matt. xxvi. 34. And in the same cabin at 6.15 p m. a Bible
reading, with prayer, &c., from 1 Cor. xv. 39—50. And evening divine service in
the after saloon at 8 p.m. Discourse Heb. v, 1—3. The Rev, M. Barker officiating
at all three.
The Rev. D. Lordan, R C.P., held a service at 10.30 a.m. for those on board of the
Roman Catholic persuasion. X.
poets’ corner.
(Not original, but very select.)
THE BITER BIT.
The sun is in the sky, mother, the flowers are springing fair,
i And the melody of wood 1 and birds is stirring in the air,
The river smiling to the sky, glides onward to the sea.
And happiness is everywhere, oh! mother but with me!
They are going to the church, mother, I hear the marriage bell.
It rises o’er the upland, it haunts me like a knell;
He leads her on his arm. mother, he cheers her faltering step.
And she clings closely to his side, —she does, the demirep.
They arecrossing by the stile, mother, where we sooft have stood', . t
The stile beside the thorn, at the corner of the wood,
The boughs that oft have echoed back the words that won my ear,
Now bend their blossoms o er him, as he leads his bridal fere.
He will pass beside the stream,mother where first my hand he pressed
By the meadow where with quivering lip his passion he confessed,
And down the hedgerows, where we’ve strayed, again and yet again.
Yet he will not think of me, mother, his broken hearted Jane !
He said that I was proud, mother, he said I looked for gold,
He said, I did not love him, that my words were few and cold,
He said, I kept him off and on, in hopes of higher game.
And it may be that I did, mother, but who has’nt done the same?
I did not know my heart, mother, I know it now too late,
1 thought that I without a pang, could wed some nobler mate.
But no nobler suitor sought me, and he has gone elsewhere,
And my heart is gone, and I am left to wither in despair.
You may lay me in my bed, mother, my heart is throbbing sore,
And mother, prithee let the sheets be duly aired before,
And if you would do pleasure to your poor desponding child.
Draw me a pot vf beer, mother, and, mother, draw it mild! A. H.
ANSWER TO CORRESPONDENTS.
We thank “ a would-be reformer” for his letter, but we trust there is no present
necessity for the club law he mentions. We are heartily glad to hear of the result of
the plan, and trust it may be permanent. This good result was to us unexpected, and
therefore the more agreeable. We hope that when the club is dissolved by our arrival
at Melbourne, the lesson will not be forgotten. X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —I am glad to have it in my power again to report favourable winds and-
weather. By the log, you will see we have made much more this, than last week.
Should we have a continuance of this wind (and I see no reason to doubt it) we shall,
after all, make a very favourable passage, much better than I at one time expected. I
am really surprised at the fine weather we have; and I now trust as we are getting
near the end of the voyage, it will continue. No doubt all on board wish the same.
Enclosing our log for the past week,
I remain, Dear Sir, yours truly, D. H. Johnston, Commander.
LOG.
Tuesday 12 th Sprit. —Wind West to N. W. by North. Moderate and fine. Distance
208 miles. Lat. 44° 16' S., long, 38° 20' E. Temp. 53°; water 50°.
13 th. —Fresh breeze throughout, from N. to N. W. Passed several patches of sea
weed. Distance 240 miles. Lat. 44° 10' S., long. 43° 55' E. Temp. 47°; water 46°
14/A.— First part wind fresh at West, latter N. W. Water discoloured, and passed
sea weed. Many birds. Distance 222 miles. Lat, 43° 55' S., long. 49° 3' E. Temp.
47°; water 47°.
15th —Less wind this day. Steady at N. W. Stu’nsails on both sides. Distance
185 miles. Lat. 43° 55' S., long. 53° 20' E. Temp. 49° ; water 48°.
1 6th. —Wind N. W. to North. Clear weather. Distance 218 miles. Lat 44°
12' S., long. 58° 22' E. Temp, 59° ; water 58°,
nth. — Steady northerly wind. Smooth water, and fine mild weather throughout.
Distance 238 miles. Lat. 44° 18' S., long 63° 52' E, Temp. 60°; water 58°.
18f/i. —First part, fresh breeze North. Latter, wind shifted to W. S. W. Got cold
weather again. Distance 260 miles. Lat. 44° 8' S., long. 69° 54' E. Temp. 50°;
water 56°.
Distance this week ........ 1569 miles.
Previous to this week 8602 ,, ,
Total 10,171
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.” ;
“ Small by degrees, and beautifully less.”
Dear Sir, —Having no alteration to make in my report, I can only apologize for
the continued monotony of my communications, which perhaps is preferable to any
variation. Believe me to remain, yours sincerely, George J. Wood, Surgeon.
18
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.


THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 10. - WEDNESDAY, APRIL 27, 1859. Price Id.
“ Out, out, brief candle.”
The short day of the “ Marco Polo Record ” is well nigh o’er. We regret
to announce symptoms of a fatal character have appeared. Not so long lived
as a butterfly (perhaps not so beauteous), its babyhood yet unpast, it dies not
of inanition, but change of air and circumstances. That which so often pro-
longs the life of the invalid, has proved deadly to its delicate constitution. It
is proposed to embalm its frail and beloved corpse, and to carry' it back to
England, there to be laid in the tomb of forgetfulness, to sleep in the land of
its forefathers. As it is not likely that it will live longer than this week (though
of course it is impossible to say), all those kind and pitying friends who pur-
pose assisting at its funeral, and bearing their share in the expense of its
“ wake,” are respectfully requested to intimate the same to one of its afflicted
parents, Mr. Parker, or to its affectionate and faithful attendant and nurse,
Mr. E. Jacobs (the state of the other parent’s mind not permitting attention
to this business), at their earliest convenience. X.
FACTS ABOUT THE STARS.
We will now attempt to redeem onr pledge given in a late number, and
prepare a short paper on the above subject. Any scientific notice would be
out ot place in this Journal, even if we were able to give it, for which, how-
ever, we do not feel competent. In the absence of books of reference, we will
not burden our readers with distances, measurements, and motions (the omis-
sion of which our readers will scarcely regret), but simply endeavour to give a
general notion of the origin and nature of the stellar system, and its probable
relation to man. The origin is comprehensively given in the book of Revela-
tion, God “ made the stars also,” and this sums up the amount of human
knowledge as to their beginning. Not one particle of information relating to
that has been added by the wit and science of man. When, how, from what, and
wherefore these things were made, man knows not. These are enveloped in
utter darkness. The record in Genesis states the fact, but gives no note of
time The word “ star ” is used frequently to include all the heavenly bodies
beyond this globe, and thus considered, they divide themselves into eight
classes. (1) Meteors, (2) Satellites, (3) Planetoids, (4) Planets, (5) Comets,
(0) Suns, (7) Stars (properly so called), (S) Nebulae. Of the first class those
which are commonly called shooting stars, are familiar examples. For the
second, take the moon as a specimen. Of the third, we cannot distinctly see
any without the aid of the telescope. In the fourth class this globe itself is
one, and we may see another magnificent instance in the planet Jupiter, which
has appeared gloriously almost every evening during the whole of our voyage.
None have forgotten the beautiful stranger of the fifth class that appeared in
England in September and October last. The sixth is unique, our own splendid
luminary. The seventh, to the number, as it is said, of eighteen millions and
more, lie scattered all around, like golden dust, thrown from God’s treasury
in profusion. Of the eighth and most mysterious denomination, we have two
■fine specimens now risible to the naked eye. If our readers, on clear nights,
will look towards the S. W., they will 'See two white fleecy clouds which
scarcely change their positions, and which look like wreaths ot vapour, but
which a little attentive observation will show, cannot be such, for when there
is no moon to illuminate them, then they shine most bright. Ihese are “ the
Magellanic clouds,” two magnificent nebulae which have deeply engaged the
attention of astronomers ever since their first discovery. But what point have
all these in common ? None but this, that they are all bodies either solid,
■liquid, or gaseous, or a mixture of all these natures, moving about according to
fixed laws, in almost infinitely varied directions, no two, as far as is known,
having the same track. We say all moving. For though, in order to describe
the motions of some, astronomers are obliged to assume others as fixed points
(as for instance in order to describe the motions of the planets we assume the
sun to be fixed),..yet it• is not really so. Indeed, it may fairly be doubted,
whether any particle of matter can be strictly said to be fixed. Our readers
will clearly see this when they consider that space by itself is nothing—it is a
mere quality of matter; and motion in space is but a change in the mutual
relation of two masses of matter one to the other. But to return. The causes
of these motions are utterly unknown. Sir Isaac Newton deemed them to be
originated by the direct hand of God, without any intermediate or dependent
agency. Laplace endeavoured to account for some of them by the power of
gravitation and the principles of condensation of gaseous bodies, but failed, for
subsequent discoveries have shown his theory to be impossible. As far as has
been ascertained, none of these motions are straight, all are curved, most of
them “ orbits,” that is, curves returning into themselves at fixed points. Of
these heavenly bodies, the nebulae, stars, the sun, and meteors, shine by a light
emitted from their own substance, while all the rest are seen by reflected light
alone. Meteors are invisible till they reach our atmosphere, where the friction
of the air causes them to burn and shine. Some comets have been supposed
to have a small degree of light emitted from themselves, but it is mostly by
reflected light that they become visible to us. The planetoids and the meteors
are supposed to be fragments of a large planet which, it has been conjectured,
has been broken to fragments by some internal convulsion ; but this is, ot
course, only hypothetical. More than fifty planetoids have been discovered,
and the number known is continually being added to. Our limits warn us to
conclude this very cursory notice. It remains that we make a few equally
cursory remarks on their relations to man. In ancient times, before the secret
was known how these glorious creations were suspended in the dark ether, men
dreamed a beautiful dream, that each was the abode of a great spirit, subser-
vient, indeed, to the Lord of all, yet a separate and voluntary being. Soon
men began to worship these beings, and at length the glorious palace of each
began to be confounded with its supposed king, and thus the idolatry of the
stars began, called from some of its earliest cultivators, “ Sabseism;” one of
the first, if not the very first form of that crime of idolatry which has since
depraved such masses of the human race. When other false gods pushed this
dream from its seat in the minds of men, a dim recollection of it survived, and
the stars were supposed to exercise some mysterious influence over human
affairs. This recollection even Christianity was not able, wholly, to eradicate,
and hence arose the science (falsely so called) of astrology, a remnant of which,
alas, exists even to the present day. Many of our readers well know that there
are persons even in England who profess to tell the fortunes of people by the
stars. But our readers may exclaim, “ What are the stars to us? are they
only pretty playthings as far as we are concerned, to be gazed and wondered
at? A jeweller’s shop, or a show of fireworks, would give us equal or greater
pleasure.” Amongst their minor uses (we are speaking of stars properly so
called) their value in navigation is most apparent, and very great. Yet their
highest present utility is to stand as majestic witnesses of the power, wisdom,
and goodness of God. “ Night unto night showeth knowledge.” Yet we may
have a deeper personal interest in them than even this. Many theologians,
coupling together the frequent statements of Holy Writ, that the abode of the
Creator is, peculiarly, “ the heavens,” and that one saying of Jesus, “ In my
Father’s house are many mansions, I go to prepare a place for you, have
thought it not unlikely that these glorious lights are among the “ many man-
sions”” referred to. With this thought we take our leave of the reader..
Happy, indeed, would be his lot, who, in a glorious body that can know neither
fatigue, nor pain, nor death, could roam over the countless chambers of this
wondrous palace of the Great King, and as he passed from one golden room
to another, could view the boundless riches of the Deity, and truly call them
all “ His own.”
ANSW'ERS TO RIDDLES IN OUR LAST, APROPOS OF THE “ MARCO POLO.
Why is she like a body of voters before a general election ? —Because she is
well canvassed.
Why is she like Rome ?—Because she has a Pope in her (qy. poop).
When may it be said that she gambles?—When she plays at pitch and toss.
Why is she like the Railway Share Market?—Because she is well “ rigged,”
Why is she like the New Adelphi Theatre ?—Because she has no second price.
What is that which is preserved yet lost?—Messrs. J b’s piece of pre-’
served beef.
What letter in the alphabet resembles a question?—Y (why ?).
Which is the worst of jokes?—The condemned cell (sell).
What village near Brighton resembles a decayed church dignitary?—
Rottendean.
What organ in the body does a sugar loaf resemble?—A sweet bread.
What vocalist would you call by the name of a Patriarch ?—A. Braham
(Abraham). .
ORIGINAL RIDDLES.
What part of the Marco Polo is like a young lady with any quantity of
Smalltalk?— A Wind-Lass.
What bay in England was like the weather on Sunday ?—Morecambe’s
(more calms).
If you saw a beautiful girl in the stocks, what town in Ireland would you
say she was like?—Belle-fast (Belfast).
If a “ nigger ” considered himselt unjustly condemned in an English Court
of Law, what judge’s name would he invoke?—Justice Wightman (White-man).
What vehicle does an eruption on a pretty young woman’s face resemble ?—
A Hansom’s cab (Handsome scab).
• What corps in H. M. Service least resembles the Geysers?—The Coldstream.
ORIGINAL CHARADES.
M y first is a bird. My second is part of a gate. My whole is on board the
Marco Polo.— Crowbar.


My first is an invitation. My second a command. And without my whole.
you would never get safe to land.— Com (e) pass.
My first is a thing that doth bite. My second is Lord of Creation. My whole
is a well known gentleman.— Leishman (Leech man).
My first you would like to be in. My second you would never like to do.
My whole you are all very glad to see.—Park er (r) (Parker),
My first you can never hit My second is part of a pig. My third we all
very much dread. My fourth is leader of fashion. My whole would name a
town in Scotland.—Miss Ham-il (I) ton (Miss Hamilton).
In the beginning my first was created. In every town my second is situated.
On board ot the Marco Polo my whole is at present located.—Wood-house
(Mr. Woodhouse).
My first is a bird of plumage gay. Of my second you are all in possession.
My third marks the time of day. And my whole you oft hear in discussion.
—Pol-i-tics.
The two Sailors.— Captain Jones relates a “ good story” of the conduct of
two of the Naval Brigade, on sentry duty at Allahabad:—“ One who was on
sentry on the main works of the fort by moonlight, looking over the parapet,
saw another man who was sentry on the ravelin, or some outwork. Now Jack,
though he could tell the head from the stern of a ship, and perhaps a horse,
had not passed a competitive examination before his admission into the ser-
vice, and no doubt his education in fortification and engineering had been
sadly neglected, and therefore he was not aware that the outwork was part of
the fortification which he was so vigilantly guarding, and seeing a man walk
up and down outside of what he considered the fort, and of course his head
being full of spies, lurking Sepoys, &e , &c., challenged him. The sentry on
the outer work not imagining that it was he who was the subject of his mess-
mate’s anxious inquiries, held his peace,-upon which Jack in the fort let drive
at Jack in the outwork. The outwork Jack, a little taken aback by the musket
ball whizzing near his head, sang out, ‘ Hallo! that’s your game is it, my buck ?
Here’s let drive at you then !’ and immediately returned the fire. On their
being relieved and taken to the guardhouse, ail that passed between them was,
* Well, I’m blowed, Jack, but we are mortal bad shots, we are.’ ” —“ A Winter
Campaign in India,” by Captain Oliver Jones, R.N.
EDUCATION.
Our space will not allow us to go at large into the question which we pre-
sented to our readers in our seventh number, and which we hoped would have
drawn forth some annotations from our correspondents.
We would remark first, that the ambiguity ef the word “ education ” is one
great cause of the varying opinions on the subject. Men are scarcely agreed
as to the object, and, therefore, cannot be unanimous as to the mode of attain-
ing it. Strictly speaking, it is the “ educing ” or “ drawing out by exercise ”
of those powers which are mainly latent in every babe. This is effected not
merely by purposed instruction, which is commonly called education, but by
every event of the child’s life. It is, however, found practically that this
latter, which every savage receives, is not sufficient for the requirements of
civilized life. Special instruction, under special instructors, is found needful,
and it is disputed whether the state or the parents should support these special
instructors, schoolmasters, and schools, and determine the nature and extent
of their instructions. There are only a few socialists in England (and we be-
lieve this sect of them is rapidly decreasing) who advocate the community
doing this entirely, e. y., making the boy who is to be a tailor, a tailor; a
sailor, a sailor; a nailer, a nailer; and so on. We, therefore, dismiss the
first branch of the question at once, as scarcely deserving an argument
(though it cannot be denied but that such an education, if we may trust Plu-
tarch, was carried on to a great extent, and with a certain degree of success, by
the small state of ancient Sparta), and pass to the second clause. Is it the
duty of the parents? We answer unhesitatingly in the affirmative, and ex-
clusively theirs, so far as they can perform it. Theirs the authority, and
theirs the responsibility. The main reason of this is, that the parents have
given life to the child, and have thrown the responsibility of life upon it, and
therefore, by the ordinary rules of justice, are bound in a mutual responsi-
bility to do all in their power to enable it to discharge the same. There are
other reasons, but we scarcely consider it necessary to add them, as we deem
this conclusive. The next part of the question virtually is, “ Can the parents,
lawfully, claim aid from the state in the discharge of their responsibility, and
so cause it to share, in a degree, with their responsibility and authority ?” We
must remember the very nature of the advantages arising from the state
community is protection and help to the weak. It is an association in
which every individual gives up a portion of his own liberty in return for the
strength and assistance of those around him. We, therefore, think that the
parents have a right to claim from the state assistance if they be unable to dis-
charge their duly, but not unless. Still this assistance ought to be rendered
only when and as far as there is an impossibility of the parents educating the
child. It is a wise maxim that the state should interfere as little as possible,
consistent with the general good, with the authority of the individual; thus
leaving a due sense of responsibility on him. This is especially the principle
in free states, where the liberty of the subject is guarded from all unnecessary
restriction. Still we think it no wrongful stipulation that the child be taught
according to the religion of the state, and in a prescribed form. For it is in
the light of a bargain, and both parties may enter into such stipulations as they
•hoose. The stale is not bound more than the individual, But if the state
compels the parents to resign the child to it (that is to instructors approved
and paid by it), then, as the parents do not willingly or wilfully decline their
responsibility, they have no right to be deprived of the authority to dictate (not
to the conscience of the child but) to the state what religion it shall be taught.
These remarks, briefly, give our opinion on the subject. X.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —As this will probably be the last number of the “ Record,” I
wish to say that both my former letters were written, not with any ill feeling,
but simply to draw forth argument. In a former number you invited criti-
cisms, and you also say, “ it is in friendly collision of various minds that truth
is elicited.” Now I trust you know that M. L. is not a thief, although he has
played for small sums at various games. Thanking you for your kindness in
answering my questions, and for the great labour and trouble you have had in
conducting a sea newspaper.
Believe me, Dear Sir, yours faithfully, M. L.
We most cordially reciprocate M. L.’s thanks for the course he has pursued’
indeed we should have much rejoiced had all our other readers done the
same. Ed.
“ PORT THE HELM.”
With reference to the above expression, which we quoted in our last as an
illustration, we have been favoured by a fellow passenger with the following"
explanation. The sides of the ship, as every body knows, used to be
called “ larboard ” and “ starboard.” It was objected that when orders were
given to put the helm larboard or starboard, the similarity of the name caused
serious mistakes and accidents. On the larboard side it was customary in the
navy (though it is not so now) to have an entry port, exclusively used by the
captain or admiral, hence called, par excellence, “ the port.” In consequence,
when it was thought advisable to change the name, the larboard was called
the port side of the ship. Also in our remarks on “ Icebergs,” we said we had
reached the Antarctic Sea. By some geographers, however, this is only
reckoned as far northward as the Antarctic Circle, but by others, at far as
lat. 40°, which latter nomenclature we adopted. X.
AMUSEMENTS.
Owing to the inclemency of the weather during the past week, no quoits
have been played, but chess, whist, backgammon, drafts, &c., have been in
great demand, and the evenings have passed off with pleasure to all. Alba-
tross fishing has proved a source of great amusement to the younger part of
the passengers, who seem to have taken a great fancy to ornithology, and
evidently intend to send home some rare specimens to the British Museum.
E. W. P.
DIVINE SERVICE.
On Easter Sunday, April 24th, morning divine service was held in the in-
termediate cabin at 10.30 a.m. Discourse Rom. v. 8, 9; and at C.15 p.m. a
Bible reading, with prayer, in the same. Discourse 1 Cor. xv. 50—58. And
evening divine service was held in the after saloon at 8 p.m. Discourse Col.
iii. 1 —11. The Rev. M. Barker officiating on each occasion.
The Rev. D. Lordan, R.C.P., also held a service at 10.30 a.m. for those on
board of the Roman Catholic persuasion. X.
poets’ corner.
THE LIGHTHOUSE.
As thou, to watching weary eyes,
That strain to catch the distant shore;
While stormy floods, from angry skies,
With stormier waves commingled roar.
Beam on then, good and holy light,
Like heaven s pure truth, whose ray divine
Will guide the soul thro' darker night,
To where th’ Eternal day-beams shine.
Anok.
Proud object of a nation’s care,
More than a nation thou dost guard!
Based on the rock, but reared in air.
By night and day thou keepest ward.
The sanctuary-lamp of old,
Was not so grateful to the sight,
When from its mask grotesque and bold.
It streamed out on the murky night,
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ RECORD.”
Sir, —Perhaps a few particulars of the birthplace of the celebrated John
Bunyan may not be uninteresting to some of your readers, and you may rely
on their being authentic. It was at a village called Elstow (not “ Elston,”
as I have seen in several books), that Bunyan first saw the light. This village
is situated about a mile from the town of Bedford, and contains about five
hundred inhabitants, who support themselves mainly by agricultural pursuits,
and the manufacture of lace, for which latter the county of Bedfordshire is
noted. Approaching the village (which consists of one long street) from Bed-
ford, the attention is arrested by a small cottage on the right hand. This
cottage occupies the ground on which the house stood tenanted by Bunyan’s
parents, and in which he was born, The original house has been pulled down
some time since; but, 1 believe, its downfall was only anticipated, as it would
have tumbled of itself if left alone, so no charge of vandalism can be brought
against the good people of Elstow. A little further on, by turning to the
right, you arrive at a spacious green, in the centre of w hich stands, w hat time
has left of an ancient cross. Not far from this, is a large barn, and this pos-
sesses peculiar interest, as having been the very place ill which Bunyan had
used to spend his Sundays in dancing and singing. It is now put to a far


etter use, for on Sundays, instead of the sounds of revelry and obscenity,
he voices of children may now be heard singing the praises of their Maker.
On the left of this barn stands the church, a most ancient structure, and
which has this singular peculiarity, the steeple is not contiguous to the body
of the church, but is some feet distant from it. This steeple, the readers of
Bunyan’s life will remark as being the place from which he shrank when pur-
sued by the terrors of a guilty conscience. Close to the church are the re-
mains of what was once a flourishing priory, but which, I have no doubt, even
in Bunyan’s time, was mouldering into decay. The only thing of importance
about Elstow, beyond being the birthplace of Bunyan, is in its being only a
mile, or so, from Cardington, where the equally celebrated John Howard
spent a good deal of his life previous to setting out on his voyage of philan-
thropy. It has few advantages of natural scenery to recommend it, but still
so long as the name of Bunyan shall be remembered, equally will Elstow be in
recollection, as having been the scene of the early trials, and temptations, and
struggles, of one of the greatest champions of Christianity. In the neighbour-
ing town of Bedford, was, till very recently, the very chapel in which Bunyan
had used to preach. It has since given place to a large and spacious edifice,
appropriately called, “ Bunyan’s Chapel.” In the vestry is preserved, with
pious veneration, an old fashioned, worm eaten chair, which, though not in-
trinsically worth anything, yet hundreds of pounds have been refused for it on
account of its having been the property of Bunyan, and in which, I dare say,
he has many a time rested his weary limbs when fatigued by preaching, and
his many labours The jail where the Pilgrim’s Progress was composed, has
long since been swept away, but I believe it was somewhere near the river
Ouse. The present jail is some distance farther in the town. Bunyan was
buried in Bunhill Fields, not a great way from the grave of Dr, Watts. A
square tomb, with a simple inscription, marks his last resting place. Perhaps
the above dottings may be acceptable to some of your readers, and
24 April, 1859. I remain, Sir, yours obediently, Bedfordiensis.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —A short time ago I wrote you, saying we had nothing to grumble
at. I am sorry to say that is not the case this week, as we have only too much
reason to regret the delay, so near the end of the passage. We have now
got a breeze, and although we cannot make up all lost time, still we may do
something towards it. Some of my friend*, quoting Coleridge’s Ancient
Mariner, seem to think killing an albatross was the cause of the calms, but
if we may credit a sailor » popular superstition, the death of “Mother Carey’s
Chicken ” had more to do with it. Enclosing a very poor log,
I remain, yours faithfully,
D. H. Johnston, Commander.
OUR LOG.
Tuesday , 19 th April.— Fresh breeze, S.W. to S.S.W. Squally. All sail.
Distance ’260 miles. Lat. 43° 49'S., long. 75° 56' E, Temp. 49°; waterSl 0 .
20 th. —Fresh breeze, veering southerly. Stormy puffs at times. Distance
253 miles, Lat. 42° 58' S., long. 81° 35' E. Temp. 49°; water 54°.
2\st. —Strong breeze. Heavy head sea. Ship by the head. In all small
sails, and reefed topsails. Distance 186 miles. Lat. 41° 34' S., long. 85°
15' E. Temp. 49°; water 55°.
22nd. —Fresh gale, South to S.S.E. High sea. Ship under low canvass.
No observation.
23rd. —Moderate. Made sail, and wore to S.W. Latter part of the day
calm. Lat. 40° 50' S., long. 87° 16' E. Temp. 52°.
24th. —Light variableairs, andcalms. No observation. Temp.58°; water 56°.
25th. — Nearly calm all day, or very light airs, all round the compass.
Distance 170 miles. Lat. 41° 10' S., long. 89° E.
Distance this week 869 miles
Previous to this week 10,171 „
Total . . . 11.040 „
—
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “RECORD.”
Dear Sir, —Since my last report the number of visitors at the surgery has
increased, but the reason is simply from the coughs and colds which are now
so prevalent on board. Looking forward to a speedy termination of our
voyage, Believe me to remain, yours sincerely,
April 26th, 1859, George J. Wood, Surgeon.
THE MARCO POLO RECORD.
No. 11. THURSDAY, MAY 12, 1859. Price Id.
Farewill. How varied are the feelings with which men pronounce that
word. Sometimes how painful; oftentimes how secretly joyous. It is with
mingled joy and regret we write it now to our readers. Joy because God
has well nigh brought us to our journey’s end in peace; regret that the little
community, the “ Marco Polo Village,” will soon be broken up, and dispersed
like dust, none knows whither. An emigrant ship is a peculiar compound, a
rare study of multiform human nature. In it, as Shakespeare once upon a
time did sing,— “ Black spirits and white,
Brown spirits and gray,
Mingle, mingle, mingle,
They that mingle may.’’
But soon decomposition commences, each particle flies off, and becomes almost
a nonentity amongst the whirl of spiritual atoms that form this world. As soon
as the ship reaches the port, the dream dissolves, and as Sir Walter Scott
would have sung,—
“ Some to the East, some to the West,
Some to the Northward flew;
And still as the Minstrel chanted his rhyme,
More darksome the cavern grew.” f
Sir Walter calls this ship a cavern ; the Swan of Avon calls it a witch s pot.
Which do our readers think the most appropriate simile ? But be it a cavern,
or be it a pot, we shall soon have nothing more to do with it, but to remember
the days happy and unhappy, black and white, the days of all colours, that we
have gone through in it, and on it. We shall remember (who can forget?)
the delightful tossing to and fro in sight of land, which we endured in the Irish
Channel. Then when we had got out of its jaws (or as the sailors irreverently
call them its “ chops ”), when we all (or some at least) were preparing for
horrible sea sickness, how the wind befooled us, and left us, even in the Bay of
Biscay and would not come back, like Fido of the mam deck (good old Fido)
when the captain affectionately whistled for it. We shall recollect (and a most
instructive recollection it is) how the two trade winds (pretty sisters) quarrelled
about us, as hard as they could quarrel, and when we had bestowed much praise
on the first,and received abundant favours in return, the South Last sulked and
lilted us All winds are jilts. Let no man trust them. We shall remember
that when we got among the “ brave westerly's” they did not seem to under-
stand which way we wanted to go, whether to Africa, or India, or Van Dieman s
Land We shall remember the horrible fright the barometer gave us, by going
mad committing suicide, and after inquest, and post mortem, duly made and
had ’getting up again all right, and as jolly as ever. Such a thing could never
happen except at sea. We shall remember the “ doldrums” too, and the sweet
songs we sung then, and how astonished the flying fish were at the noise. Who
can forget the two big whales and the little shark, and the dolphin that would
not be caught as well as the one that was? And the porppises too that for a
whole fine afternoon shook their insolent tails in our faces. But we grow too
sentimental. All these, and many other recollections, will crowd in our minds.
Alas that sadder and more serious thoughts should come amongst these trifles.
We must remember (none ought to forget) that three times death, whom we
left revelling in cities, has found us out upon the ocean, et let us thank the
Preserver of Life that but three of us have been taken. Perhaps some may
have sadder recollections than even this; shadows of words spoken that cannot
he recalled, however much repentance may be sent after them ; of deeds done
which cannot be undone, which have, as it were, wandered from us, again to
meet us at some unknown place, and in some unknown time, with all their
accumulated retribution upon them. Yes, none of us will leave this ship
exactly as rich, or as exactly as poor as we entered it. Three months’ deeds
have been added to our account, good or bad. The debt must at last be dis-
charged, and we must receive the balance. But we not pursue the sub-
ject, for we sat down not to write an homily, but to wind up the temporal
concerns of this Paper. So now, readers and contributors all, may ye fare-
well. May ye, one and all, get as rich as ye can desire; as famous as ye can
wish; as much beloved as you can imagine ; and as happy as ye can be.
Only we hope that those riches will be true ; that fame, that which cometh
from God ; that love, which holy beings alone give ; and the happiness, that
which is heavenly and eternal. “ Farewell,” you see, is a large word, but the
old, good natured, homely English “ good bye,” is better still. But before we
sav it, we must thank you all; thank you for bearing with a dull paper, and
many a heavy joke. Still dull and heavy as it is, you know it was given with
a hearty good will, and with a hearty good will you received it. Specially our
best thanks are due to our valued co-editor, Mr. Parker, and to Mr. E. Jacobs,
for kindly and laboriously making the copies of our paper; also to Miss
Hamilton and Dr. Wood for occasional assistance in the chirographical de-
partment. And to our contributors, also, the captain and doctor; and to Mr.
Price, our special reporter on amusements; and all others whose initials, or
« n0 ro d e plume,” have graced these pages. Goon bye, that is, God be with
ye all, in prosperity and adversity; in shade and light. Good bye, and so
departs the shade of the “ Marco Polo Record ” Newspaper. X.


TO CAPTAIN D. H. JOHNSTON, OP THE GOOD SHIP “ MARCO POLO.”
Dear Sir, —It is now some seven weeks since I had the pleasure of address-
ing you on the conduct of your “ great ally,” Commodore Wind. We were
then lying becalmed in.Biscay Bay, where he had left us for a brief season,
after having filled our sails with a right glorious and continuous breeze of
some days’ duration. We are now, thanks to your skill, and to his subsequent,
and on the whole, satisfactory co-operation, brought within a few hours’ sail
of our destination. Whilst we are anxious, at this interesting moment, to ex-
press our thanks to you, sir, for j our unceasing solicitude for the comfort and
safety of all on board, we would not omit to record our grateful sense of his
(your ally’s) gentle treatment of us, from the moment we escaped from the jaws
of that nasty channel, and as it regards his blustering and inconsistent
behaviout there, we are heartily willing to forgive, and do forgive him all the
discomfort it occasioned us, and I think, sir, you will participate in the senti-
ment, seeing that he has justified you in smoking no end of pipes of joy,”
and through his valuable aid you may now take up the “ pipe of peace
the which you may live to smoke for many years to come, and your amiable
partner to enjoy its fragrance, without a “ pipe of grief” to intervene, is the
sincere wish of him who, in bidding you both farewell, writes himself,
Y ours most truly, W. P.
POETS’ CORNER.
THE LOSS IRREPARABLE!
Oh ! what shall we do, my dear brother Ted ?
1'hat fine piece of beef we so carefully stored—
With other good things, as polonies and bread—
Has slipped from my hand, and gone overboard.
Oh! do not lament it, dear brother of mine.
Of sausage and cake we are not yet bereft ;
Let us pass by our loss of those twelve p unds of prime.
And still keep our feast on what we have left.
Let’s bo grateful and glad that our case is no harder—
Those polonies had well nigh dropped into the deep ;
Then what would have been the sad state of our larder ?—
The bare thought alone almost makes me weep!
But cheer up, my dear brother—a truce to your grief—
What may sink in the Sea by no means Is lost;
Though our feast becomes meagre from loss of the beef,
Think how many poor fishes will dine at our cost.
It is all very well, dear brother of mine,
To bid me cheer up; but what do you think ?
Gur coil of polonies, although cured in good brine,
Smell very offensive, nay, actually s...k.
They cannot be.eaten, that s pretty well clear.
So our feast is a fast, if I’m not mistaken, ,
For dry cakes and ch ese are but very poor cheer,
Entre nous, I could relish e en a rasher of bacon. Q.
25th April, 1859.
STANZAS.
Do you recall one autumn night,
We stood by the sea side,
And marked a little vessel tost,
Upon the foaming tide !
The shoals were rough, the winds were high,
Wil i was the billow s roar,
The little vessel reeled—yet still
Steered for and gained the shore.
And thus my heart—however light
You deemed that heart to be—
By all the storm and change of life,
Cannot be turned from thee, H.
DIVINE SERVICE.
On Sunday last, morning divine service was held in the intermediate cabin,
at 10.30 a.m.; discourse, 1 John ii. 12, 13. Also, a Bible reading, with
prayer, &c., in the same cabin at 6.15 p.m. ; discourse, exposition of the Epistle
of Jude. Evening divine service was held in the after saloon at 8 p m. ; dis-
course, Jude 20, 21. The Rev. M. Barker officiated on all three occasions.
The Rev. D. Lordan, R C.P., also held a service at 10.30 a.m., for those on
board of the Roman Catholic persuasion. X.
Off Cape O'way, May 12, 1859.
TO CAPTAIN D. H. JOHNSTON, COMMANDER OF THE SHIP “MARCO POLO.”
Dear Sir, —As we are now within a few hours’ sail of Melbourne, it be-
comes our pleasing task to testify our unanimous sentiments of regard and
esteem for you, and to thank you for your uniform courtesy and unremitting
attention to our comfort.
The passage has not been made in so short a time as you and we could have
wished, hut this is to he attributed to head winds at starting, and to a succes
sion of most unusual calms and light airs, where strong and favourable breezes
are always expected to prevail.
We have sincerely sympathized with you under these trying circumstances ;
circumstances, however, which have evinced to us the skill and energy for
which you deservedly have the reputation.
We beg to convey, through you, our thanks to the officers under your command,
specially to Mr. Sharpe, chief officer; to Mr. G. J. Wood, medical officer ;
and to Mr D. E. Williams, purser.
in conclusion, permit us to add, that we have felt the presence of Mrs. John-
ston on board to be a great and agreeable acquisition to our society, and heartily
wishing you both many years of happiness and prosperity,
We are, dear Sir, yours most sincerely,
_ ...
(Signed)
Matthias Barker,
E. W. Price,
Daniel Lordan,
Wm. Parker,
Robt, Hills,
H. R. McAlpine,
Wm. Woodhouse,
Edward Jacobs,
M. Jacobs,
A. Leishman,
• Anne Hills,
W. N. Hills,
M. Hamilton,
J. Muir,
Annie L. Hills,
1
I
j Saloon
r Passengers.
I
J
TO THE LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OP THE FIRST CABIN,
Ship ** Marco Polo," May 12, 1859.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —It is with much pleasure that I have received
your address. I wish I could congratulate you, and you me, on the speed of
our passage, but it is better late than never, and it is best to look on the bright
side of all matters. On behalf of Mrs. Johnston and myself, I beg to thank you
for ail you have kindly said and done. Should any one of you not find Australia
agreeable, and wish yourself back in Old England, I shall have great pleasure
in taking you there again.
I have also the pleasure of conveying to you the thanks of the officers of the
ship for the kind expressions you have used with regard to them, and wishing
you, as heartily as you wish me, all happiness and prosperity in the land we
have just sighted, and as much gold and other good things as you can desire to
have, 1 remain, Ladies and Gentlemen, yours very faithfully,
(Signed) D. H. Johnston, Commander.
Off Cape Otway-, May 12, 1859.
(to THE REV M BARKER, M.A., EDITOR OF THE “ MARCO POLO RECORD.”)
Dear Sir,— The publication of the “ Marco Polo Record” having not only
contributed to lessen the tediousness of our voyage, but also to have afforded
us much interesting information on a variety of subjects, we cannot allow its
last number to be issued without tendering to you our best thanks for the la-
bour which you have bestowed upon it, and expressing our high appreciation
of the able manner and kindly spirit in which it has been conducted.
Will you kindly convey to Mr. Parker, as co-editor, and to Mr. E. Jacobs,
as publisher, our thanks for their valuable co-operation in this “ labour of love.”
Begging you will be good enough to insertion to this and the ac-
companying note, We are, dear Sir, yours most sincerely,
(Signed)
D. H Johnston, Commander,
J. Johnston,
Anne Hills,
M. Hamilton,
Daniel Lordan, .
Robt. 1 1 ills,
E. W. Price,
H. R. McAlpine,
Wm. Woodhouse,
M. Jacobs.
A. Leishman,
W. N. Hills,
J. Muir,
D. E. Williams, Purser,
George J. Wood, Surgeon.
.
1
|
j _ ,
L haloon
[ Passengers.
>
I
J
Off Cape Otway, May 12, 1859.
TO THE REV. M. BARKER, M.A., &C.
Rev. and Dear Sir, —We, the captain, officers, and saloon passengers of
the “ Marco Polo,” cannot take leave of you without expressing our deep sense
of the great interest you have taken in the spiritual welfare of all on board.
We beg, for ourselves, to thank you most sincerely for the benefit we have
derived from your labours, and wishing you all happiness and prosperity, and
a safe return to “ Old England,” We remain,
Rev. and Dear Sir, yours sincerely and obliged,
(Signed)
D. H. Johnston, Commander,
J. Johnston,
Anne Hills,
M. Hamilton,
James Sharpe,
George J. Wood, Surgeon,
R. H. Hayes,
Wm. Parker,
Robert Hills,
E. W. Price,
H. R. McAlpine,
Wm, Woodhouse,
A Leishmak,
Wm. N. Hills,
J. Muir,
D. E. Williams, Purser.
TO CAPTAIN JOHNSTON, COMMANDER OF THE SHIP “ MARCO POLO,” AND THE
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THE FIRST CABIN.
My Dear Friends,— It would be affectation in me to pretend that I have
not received much and deep gratification from the kind addresses which you
have put into my hands. It is pleasant to be thanked even when one has a
lurking consciousness of not having deserved it. With regard to the first it has
been a source of great pleasure to me to write, but a still greater to find thalt I
have given pleasure (and as you are kindly pleased to add information) to ypu.
With regard to the latter I know my own shortcomings in my ministry too well,
not to feel obliged to ask your pardon for any failings you may have perceived
in it. This you have already kindly given, and only mentioned the blessing
which God has bestowed. I have but endeavoured to do my duty and nothing
more. Yet among many pleasing recollections of the “ Marco Polo,” the most
pleasant to me will be those connected with our worshipping together, both by
ourselves and with the others in the ship. Permit me again to thank you for
these letters, this last and all your other kindnesses, and for the assistance in
my work which I have received from so many. Praying earnestly that the
Almighty Giver of Good may ever keep you in happiness and peace,
I remain, yours very sincerely and obliged, (Signed) Matthias Barker.
May 12, 1859,


ADDRESS Or THE SECOND CABIN AND INTERMEDIATE PASSENGERS TO CAPTAIN
JOHNSTON, COMMANDER OF THE “ MARCO POLO ” PASSENGER SHIP.
Sir, —We, the undersigned second cabin and intermediate passengers by the
“ Marco Polo ” on approaching the termination of our voyage, beg to congratu-
late you on the passage that we have made, and although not rapid, as many of
us anticipated, yet we feel that the delay has arisen from causes beyond the
control of human skill and ingenuity, to wit, “calms,” and fine weather,
which have made the voyage one of continued pleasure.
We can all of us conscientiously bear our united testimony to the vigilance
and anxiety evinced by yourself and officers for our safety and comfort during
the passage, as well as the uniform kindness and courteous bearing which have
been your chief characteristics to every person on board.
In conclusion, we wish yourself and officers a brilliant future, and pray the
Almighty disposer of human events to watch over you with a fatherly care, and
we nowbteg to subscribe ourselves, Yours very respectfully,
{Signed)
J. Burgis, Jun.,
Alfred Jones,
John Page,
H. M. Pope,
John MacMicham Black,
Philip David Hay,
W. J. Morgan,
John F. Harrison,
John Irvine.
Wm. Irvine,
R. Giles,
George Newport,
William Johnson,
Charles Cannon,
William Wilson.
James Boomer Mackay,
W. Miller,
Joseph Oldfield,
William Clarke,
John Williams,
James Patch,
David Melville,
Samuel Vial,
James Dewar,
Richard Hone,
Thomas Studley,
William Bodley,
Joseph Clark,
William Mitchell,
George Warr,
William Taylor,
William Wilkie,
Richard Fennessy,
Samuel Day,
Rees Hopkins,
George Carr,
Timothy Lordan,
William Rokey,
J. James.
John Brooke,
John Logme,
Bartholomew Taylor.
captain johnston’s reply to the above.
Gentlemen,— I am much gratified by the kind way in which you have
thanked me in your address, and I have also to thank you in return for having
assisted me in the maintenance of order in the ship. Without such a cordial
feeling of co-operation (as you have evinced) existing between the passengers
and commander of a vessel, no comfort, and scarce even safety can be ex-
pected during the passage. That cordial co-operation I have been happy,
gentlemen, in receiving from you, and I feel grateful to you for it. In all that
I have done, I have not performed more than my duty, and I rejoice to find
that in your estimation I have done no less. On behalf of myself and officers,
I thank you, and wishing you every prosperity and comfort in the land to
which I hope, in a short time, to have the happiness of bringing you, remain
May 10, 1859. (Signed) Gentlemen, your faithful servant, D. H. Johnston.
to the editor or the record.
. May 9, 1859,
Dear Sir, —Contrary to all my expectations, we have not yet ended our
passage. Since I last wrote you, we have had a continuation of very light
winds, in fact much more like sailing on a river than at sea. You will have
remarked that most part of the passage has been the same with two exceptions,
within the last three weeks, when we were so unfortunate as to fall in with a
head wind. We have not required to shorten sail since leaving the Irish
Channel, but having carried the royals all the time. We are now within 250
miles of Cape Otway; one day’s sail, with a favourable breeze, but from the
light baffling winds, I am afraid we must allow more time.
I remain, Dear Sir, yours truly, D. H, Johnston, Commander.
OCR LOG.
Tuesday , April 26th.— First part calm. Latter light breeze, N.W. Distance
94 miles. Lat. 41° 32', long. 91° 0' E.
27 th —Increasing breeze and squally. Wind West to S. W. Distance 240
miles. ’ Lat. 42° 4' S., long. 96° 22' E.
28th —Blowing fresh, and veering to South and S. S. E. Shortened sail.
No observation.
29 th. — Moderate again. Wind S. to S S.W. Made all sail. No observation.
30 Ik. —Steady breeze and fine weather. Wind S.W. to W. S.W. Distance
in three days, 517 miles. Lat. 41° 20' S., long. 107° 52' E.
May 1st. —Light breeze from W.S.W. to S.S.W. A ship in company. No
observations.
2nd —More light winds from S. W. to. N. W. ©istance in two days 280
miles. Lat. 42° 10' S., long 114° 2' E.
3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th. —The wind and weather have been the same. A
light breeze never veered more than two points. Distance each day about
100 miles ; in all about 818 miles. Lat. 40° 27' S., long. 131° 56'E.
8^ —Light winds from S. W. to South. Distance 150 miles. Lat. 40°
25'a!) long. 135° 6' E.
9th —Another day the same. Wind S, S. W. to S. E. E. Distance 154
miles. Lat. D. R. 40° 20' S , long. D. K. 138° 30' E.
Distance in 14 days . , . . 2253 miles.
Previous to this 11,040 ,,
Total , . 13,293 „
To Cape Otway 247 „
13,540 „
Ilf A.—Light breeze. N. E. Made King’s Island.
12th. —Made Cape Otway.
Marco Polo, May 9, 1859.
REV. MB. BARKER.
Dear Sir,—At the conclusion of our voyage, we the undersigned, beg to
return you our sincere thanks for the interest you have taken in our spiritual
welfare, and to request your acceptance of the enclosed, as a small token that
your kindness and labours have been appreciated by your hearers.
With every wish for your health and happiness,
We are, Dear Sir, yours sincerely,
(Signed)
J. MacMicham Black,
Mrs. MacMicham Black,
John Irvine,
Mr. John Irvine,
William Irvine,
Alfred Jones,
William Johnstone,
William Clarke,
Mr. Day,
Misses Anderson,
Mrs. Gordon,
Miss Scott,
J. Burgis, Jun.,
Mrs. E. Foote,
Miss Hind,
Samuel Vial,
John Williams,
J. Carr,
Mr. Oldfield,
Miss Oldfield,
Miss Wilson,
George Kendall.
THE RET. M. BARKER'S REPLY TO THE ABOVE.
Mr Dear Friends, —I feel, while receiving your kind address containing
the expression of your feelings with regard to my ministry, that I owe you
much thanks, and the more because I feel it wholly undeserved. If I have
done, in any respect, my duty in this matter, and God knows how much I
have failed in many ways, I could do nothing more than I was bound to do,
and, therefore, merit no praise or reward. But I most cordially and gratefully
receive the gift you have bestowed, and shall treasure it both as a memorial of
your kindness, and a memento of the happy hours which I have enjoyed while
ministering among you.
And that the God of Peace and Comfort, our Father in Christ Jesus, may
evermore bless and preserve you, is the earnest prayer of your sincere friend
and fellow traveller. (Signed). Matthias Barker.


