

TKe
European
War.
HOW IT BEGAN.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN NEXT?
THE BALANCE OF POWER.
THE LAW REGARDING CAPTURE
OF MERCHANT SHIPPING.
MERCHANT CRUISERS.
BULLION RESERVES.
: I
CRIT.CHLEY PARKER,
Mining Standard.
Melbourne and Sydney.


THE EUROPEAN WAR.
HOW IT BEGAN.
There are four main causes of the present out-
break of war in Europe. The first is racial
hatred; the second is the power of the Austrian
military caste, which believes it to be to its interest
to force a war ; the third is the belief of Austria
and Germany that they had the Triple Entente at
a momentary disadvantage; the fourth is that
Austria is fearful of the rise of a strong Slavic
power on its southern borders. The first and
fourth of these are closely connected, and so are
the other two; let us, then, consider these causes
as two in number, taking, firstly, the question of
racial hatreds and Austrian fear of Servia.
Austria-Hungary, it must be understood, is not a
compact nation, but rather an empire, the head
of which governs peoples of different races.
There is, in fact, an Austrian nation, but no
Austrian nationality. It consists of Austria
proper, which contains no less than 17 provinces,
each with its own separate diet, and Hungary
(which is itself divisible into two parts—Hungary
proper and Croatia —-which not only has its own
provincial diet, but also has a large measure of
autonomy, of which Hungary is constantly en-
gaged in endeavouring to rob it, with the result
that the feeling between the Croatians and Hun-
garians is the reverse of friendly) ; and finally,
there is Bosnia, which belongs to Austria and
Hungary jointly. In Austria, at the latest census,
there was a population of 28 % millions, of whom
10 millions were of German race, 6 y 2 Czech' and
Slovak, 5 millions Polish, 3 V 2 millions Ruthenian,
I J /4 millions Slovenian, % million Servian (Croa
tian), % million Italian, and *4 million Rou-
manian. This is taking language as the basis of
nationality. The same must be done in consider-
ing the constituents of the population of Hungary;
but the test is by no means fair, since the Go-
vernment endeavours to force the Magyar lan<m-
age on everybody, and counts everyone as Magyar
who can speak the language; even then, however,


we find that, out of a population of 21 millions,
Magyars number only 10 millions, Roumanians
three, Germans two, Slovenians two, Servians
(Croatians) three, and Ruthenians half. Bosnia
has a population of two millions, praetieally wholly
Servian. This gives us for the empire a popula-
tion of 51% millions, of whom 23 per cent, are
German, 20 per cent. Magyar, and 46 per
cent. Slavic (the Western Slavs numbering
17 per cent, of the total, the North-Eastern
Slavs 18, and the Southern Slavs 11). The
hatreds between these various races is some-
thing that people who have never been in the
Austrian Empire can scarcely conceive of. The
Germans are bitterly hated both by the Czechs
and by the Magyars, and also by the Italians; the
Hungarians (that is to say, the Magyars) have
aroused the bitter hatred of every race they hold
subject to them; and, as if this were not enough,
we have amongst such kindred peoples as the Poles
and the Ruthenians the same intense loathing for
one another. All this does not make for the
soundness of the Austrian Empire, but it helps
to make the attitude of that Empire under-
standable. It is always afraid of its Slavic neigh-
bours; it is afraid that the Roumanians in Transyl-
vania, weary of the shameless and dishonest tyranny
of their Magyar rulers, would welcome union with
the independent people of their own race further
south; it knows, too, that the unjustly treated
men of Servian race who live in Croatia and the
men of the same race who were, against their will,
brought into the country when Austria took pos-
session of Bosnia, look with a measure of pride and
hope to their independent brethren in Servia, al-
though there is one stumbling block here, in that
they are cut off from full communion with the
men of the Servian kingdom by the difference of
religion, since they are Roman Catholics, while
the Servian people are Orthodox, and in this region
religious hatreds are as bitter as racial animosities.
The Austrian Government is aware, too, that the
Czechs sympathise with their South Slavic brethren.
It then becomes vitally necessary for Austria that
Servia should be reduced to a position of impo-
tence, and this has been one of the principal aims
of Austrian diplomacy for the past decade.


The loyalty of the Serbo-Croat people might
perhaps have been assured by turning the dual
monarchy into a triple one; but, if an attempt to
effect this were made, Hungary would take up
arms to prevent it, and so, willy-nilly, the Govern
ment has had to repress the aspirations of the
race that is the most numerous in the dominion
of the Emperor-King.
The one amusing feature in the Austrian Em-
peror’s pronouncement of the reasons actuating
him in declaring war against Servia was his com-
plaint of Servian ingratitude for all that Austria
had done for it. What Austria has done for it is
to hold it in most complete economic subjection,
to force it to do all its trade with Austria, while
allowing it to reap the very minimum of benefit
from that trade. It has bullied and threatened
the little kingdom on every possible occasion,
and scarcely allowed it to have a soul of its own;
then, when in 1908 Servia dared to resent the
action of the Austrian Emperor in extending his
sovereignty over the provinces of Bosnia and
Herzegovenia—an action which threatened to de-
finitely shut her off from all access to the sea, and
to rob her finally of all hopes of welding the
Servian people of the Balkan Peninsula into a
compact whole—Austria took the most high-handed
action, and, with German help, deprived Servia
of Russia’s support, and brought the little kingdom
to its knees. Servia did not forgive, but she sub-
mitted with as good a grace as possible, and set
to work to repair the mischief as best she could.
She did it by entering into alliances with Bul-
garia and Greece, by participating with them in
the war against Turkey, and by reaping advantages
accruing from the dismemberment of the Turkish
Empire. This was by no means to Austria’s taste.
She had seen with great satisfaction Servia go to
war, fully expecting that her puny enemy would
be thereby reduced to a state of impotence for a
generation to come; and, when, to her disgust, the
allies proved to be successful, she engineered with
the not-too-scrupulous Ferdinand of Bulgaria, a
breach of the alliance between Servia and her
Eastern neighbour, and once again was dis-
appointed, inasmuch as, to her surprise and dis-


gust, Servia proved altogether too strong for her
supposedly much more powerful neighbour. Ever
since then, Austria, which had again succeeded
in blocking the Servian desire to obtain access to
the Adriatic, has only waited an opportunity for
striking at the realm of King Peter. But she
had to be very careful how she did it, for Russia
looked upon herself as the protectress of the
Southern Slav States, and Russia was not likely
to submit, as she submitted in 1908, to the bully-
ing of Germany. For Austria to get even with
Servia (and to get even meant to reduce Servia
to its previous economic dependence on the dual
monarchy) opportunity was necessary, and that
opportunity Austria-Hungary thought it saw when
Franz Ferinand, the heir to the Monarchy, and
his morganatic wife, were assassinated in Serajevo.
This brings us to a consideration of the other
cause of the war, the combination of the desire
for war on the part of the military caste, with the
belief that a chance had arisen for striking at
the Triple Entente when the odds were all in favour
of the dual monarchy and her allies. Here, in the
first place, was an excellent excuse. The assass-
inations were the work of the Servians; they were
believed (or it was pretended they were believed)
to have been engineered in Servia; and it is quite
possible that there has been, as Austria has so often
asserted, a strong agitation in Servian and also
in Croatian circles, for the union of all the Serb-
speaking peoples under the one flag. Austria-
Hungary was, however, strong enough to be
able to afford to take no notice of the
pro-Servian movement in Crotia, had it not
been for the fact that the authorities were quite
well aware that those movements were due, in the
main, to the oppression and injustice which the
Croatians suffered. Here, then, was a good ex-
cuse (and it was really nothing but an excuse)
for an attack on Servia; but was the moment
propitious? Was it certain that Servia would
receive no help from outside; or, if she did receive
help, would that help be sufficient to enable her to
set Austria at defiance? The Emperor’s advisers
and those in charge of affairs in Germany believed
that the time was opportune. They saw Russia


torn by serious labour troubles; they knew that
Servia liad far from recovered from the effects
of her two recent wars; they saw the United
Kingdom on the very verge of a civil war that,
being mainly religious, was bound to be one of the
bloodiest and bitterest in her entire history; and
they had noticed with delight revelations of the
unpreparedness of France for war, owing to shock-
ing mismanagement, or something worse than mis-
management, in the equipment of her men and
the equipment of her fortresses. If that was the
calculation of Germany and Austria it was not
altogether sound, for, as we have seen, the result
of the development of the crisis was a quick settle-
ment of labour troubles in Russia, and a postpone-
ment of the conflict in Ireland.
It will be noticed that it is here assumed that
Germany was entirely with Austria in the action
taken by that Power. That that was so is clearly
manifested by the attitude Germany has assumed
throughout the crisis. It is quite unreasonable
to assume that Austria would, without first con
suiting Germany, launch an ultimum against any
country when there was the likelihood of a big
European war resulting. If she did so, it is al-
most certain that Germany would decline to be
led by the nose into an adventure of which she
did not approve, and to which she had not first
given her sanction. It may be taken, therefore,
for granted that Germany was, from the first,
Austria’s partner in this crime against civilisation,
and if further proof were needed, it is afforded
by her subsequent conduct. When Great Britain
proposed joint action by herself, France, Italy,
and Germany, the only country which did not
respond favourably was Germany, the excuse she
made being the altogether absurd one that, as
Austria’s ally, she could not join in any such
effort, though France, as Russia’s ally, was quite
willing to do so. She would seem, in fact, to have
been bent on war, and to have been only beating
time to enable her to complete her preparations;
and all her talk of desire for peace was mere deceit
to prevent France and Russia and Great Britain
from taking similar action. This tendency to deceit
has always been a characteristic of Prussian dip-
-6


lomaey; and Germany, which is still governed iby
Prussia, lias inherited the tendency. The same
outrageous lying, the same attempts to deceive the
intended victim, the same unscrupulous efforts
to make the victim seem the aggressor, marked
Germany’s relations with Denmark in 1864, her
relations with Austria in 1866, and her relations
with France in 1870. In each case Germany posed
as the peace-loving country that was cruelly forced
into war for which she had not the least desire;
and we all know now how the revelations of Bis
marck and others have shown that all three of those
wars were delilierately engineered by the Prussian
Government. We have the same attempt now to
throw on Russia the blame for the present out
break of war: we have Austria taking steps that
it knows will lead to war; we have it framing its
demands on Scrvia in such a way that no self-
respecting country can possibly accede to them;
we have Russia mobilising for the protection of
Servia. from the attack on it which seems to be
imminent; and then we have Germany pretending
that Russia’s mobilisation is quite unnecessary,
regarding it as a threat of aggressive war by
Russia, and demanding a cessation of mobilisation
within 12 hours. But Russia, though she had to
submit to being browbeaten by the champion brow
heater of Europe in 1908, is not ready to submit
to-day, and therefore we have the whole of Europe
hurled into the cauldron of war.
We have spoken above about the mutual hatreds
of the various peoples in the Austrian Empire;
but also there are vast international hatreds which
have their place in helping to bring the countries
of Europe into war. For 120 years past Ger
many has always been very respectful to Russia,
except on the occasion already referred to, when
she had her at a gigantic disadvantage, in 1908;
but the two peoples have had for one another a
quite extraordinary animosity. This has not been
reflected in the relations of the two Governments,
only for the reason that Germany has ever been
afraid of Russia and of the dissatisfied Poles in
Prussian Poland. These Poles are kindred people
with the Russians, but hate them with a bitter
hatred; and small wonder, when one considers the


treatment that their country received from Mus-
covy! But, bitterly as they hate the Russians,
they hate the Prussians still more, because the
Prussian Government has not been very much better
than the Russian Government, and the Prussian
people have been infinitely more tyrannical than
the Russian people; and, moreover, there is the
memory of the gross treachery—one of the most
disgraceful pieces of treachery in all history —
whereby Prussia took part in the partition of the
old Kingdom of Poland, to which it was bound by
a defensive alliance. It has always been Prussia’s
aim to keep Russia from making friends with her
Polish subjects; and there has been a definite
understanding or something more than an under-
standing between the two countries that neither
would make any concession to its Polish subjects
without the knowledge and approval of the other.
This agreement has been all to the advantage
of Prussia, for, bad Russia won the affection of
her Polish subjects by conceding them a certain
measure of autonomy and by treating them with
fairness and justice, the Poles in German terri-
tory would have constituted a very great menace
to the Fatherland, inasmuch as their province
comes up to within easy striking distance of
Berlin.
But it is not only Germans and Russians who
hate one another; you have the inveterate hatred
between French and German, and also between
German and English. There may be people who
have been misled by the fact that a few days
ago the crowd —or what was represented as the
crowd —in Berlin gave cheers for Great Britain
outside the British Embassy. That is the sort
of thing which is very easily engineered in Ger-
many; and no doubt it was arranged for the ex-
press purpose of being telegraphed to London, in
order to strengthen the hands of the British peace
party, with the object of detaching Britain from
the Triple Entente. Similarly, we had assertions
in the German Press that the peace of Europe de-
pended upon the attitude of Great Britain, that
if she would only declare her neutrality there
would be no fear of war. This, of course, was the
veriest piece of bluff. If there was one thing
s


that made Germany hesitate to declare war upon
Russia, it was the fear that England would not be
neutral: had she been assured of her neutrality,
war would have come long ago; and also it serves
to show the German intention to cast all the
blame on England in the case of war eventuating
between the two countries. Germany has, as al-
ready intimated, a very pretty and unscrupulous
knack of putting the blame on those who are her
victims, and Germans still talk about the perfidy
of England in abandoning Prussia at the close of
the Seven Years’ War, when, as a matter of fact,
the King of Prussia had, from the very commence-
ment of that war, been endeavouring to “sell” his
allies, and was always cursing his luck that he
had never been able to succeed. There can be
little doubt that all the blame for this war will
be cast by the German historians of the future on
the shoulders of England and Russia. Impartial
historians will not be deceived by that fact, but
will see that it has been quite deliberately brought
about by Germany and Austria-Hungary-
Mining Standard , August 6.
WHAT WILL HAPPEN NEXT?
The position at time of writing (Monday, Aug.
3rd) is that Austria lias declared war against
Servia and that Germany has declared war against
Russia, because Russia was preparing to resist
Austria’s aggression against the little Balkan
State. That other countries will be drawn into
this conflict is almost as sure as that the sun
will rise; France is bound to Russia under the
terms of her alliance, and Germany realising that
fact has already taken steps that amount to a
declaration of war. She has seized some of France’s
locomotives on their entering German territory;
she has demanded with an imperativeness which is
characteristic of German methods, an answer within
18 hours to her question whether France will re-
main neutral in the war between Germany and
Russia, and she has deliberately violated the neu-
trality of Luxembourg by crossing the frontier
9 '


of that State and seizing the railway station of ite
capital. War between Germany and France jjb
therefore as certain as war between Germany and
Russia; bat war will not be confined to the five
countries /already named. Italy is an ally of
Austria and Germany, and Great Britain is a
partner with France and Russia in the Triple
Entente: but even beyond these there will be a
vast number of other countries to be involved.
Roumania is at present under Russian influence,
.and is likely to take part in the conflict ; Greece,
under the terms of her alliance with Servia, is un-
derstood to be obliged to supply troops in the case
of an attack on Servian territory; Montenegro
will probably attempt to do her little bit to help
her sister State; Turkey will probably take ad-
vantage of the opportunity to attack Greece; and
Bulgaria, although' it has declared itself neutral,
may possibly also take a hand, though probably not
till* it has seen how events are shaping. The Al-
banians are also certain to take part in the trouble,
and other small States whose neutrality is likely to
be violated, and which may, therefore, be thrown
into the conflict, are Switzerland, Luxembourg,
Denmark, Belgium, and Holland. Spain is rinder-
stood to be to some degree a member of the
Entente, and Japan and Portugal are allies of
Great Britain; and all of these may be involved
to some slight extent, though they can scarcely
affect the result of the war in any way. It is
likely, too, that China, taking advantage of Rus-
sia’s position, will endeavour to regain possession
of that part of Mongolia which has shaken off her
suzerainty. The two main questions are, however,
what will Great Britain do, and what will Italy do ?
The position as regards Italy is that, though a
member of the Triple Alliance, she is actuated
above all other things by a feeling of animosity to-
wards and distrust of Austria, and we may there-
fore be absolutely certain that she will not go to
the assistance of Austria if she can help it. A
good deal will depend, doubtless, on what she
may anticipate will be the result of the conflict.
If she come to the conclusion that the central
European States are likely to emerge victorious,
*he will not run the risk of being blamed for play-
-10


dng them false; if, however, she consider the
Entente Powers the stronger, she will probably
prefer to remain out of the struggle, more especi-
ally as she has everything to gain by doing so.
She has not long emerged from a trying campaign
in Northern Africa, and she has yet to consolidate
her newly-acquired territory there; she has, there-
fore, already announced her neutrality, on the
grounds that Austria did not consult her when
she issued an ultimatum to Servia, and that she
does not feel bound to follow Austria in what
is really a war of aggression. Her attitude may,
however, be entirely changed by the extension of
the war to include Russia and Germany, and her
attitude remains dubious; in any case, however,
even if she side with her nominal allies she will
do so with no very good grace, and that is a
matter which will materially affect her usefulness.
On the whole, we hardly anticipate that Italy
will take a very noteworthy part in the war which
is just beginning.
Great Britain’s attitude is more easy to define.
Despite her always loquacious pacifists, she is
almost certain to take an active part in the
struggle ; she can do so with reason—indeed is in
honour bound to do so—so soon as German troops
cross the French frontier; but it is likely that the
nominal cause of her entering the field of opera-
tions will be the violation of Belgian territory by
Germany—a violation which is certain to be one
of the very earliest incidents of the campaign.
There are thousands of good people, mostly those
who have not the slightest understanding of world
politics, who fail to see why England should be
drawn in; but, after all, terrible thing as war is,
there are still worse things, and a worse thing
is the loss of honour and the sense of honour,
and Great Britain will indeed be utterly shamed
if, after entering on the Entente for her own ad-
vantage, she desert her partners in their hour of
need. Not only would such action on her part
be dishonourable, but it would be foolish in the
extreme; it would mean that England would never
again find any country to enter into a defensive
agreement with her, because no country would
trust her; it would mean, probably, that, when
the adversaries of the present moment had patched
11


up their quarrels and come to terms, they would
combine against Great Britain with the object of
crushing her out of existence; so that, from
the point of view of policy, or from the point of
view of fidelity to agreements, England must take
her place by the side of her comrades. There are
many people who say that she should wait until
she 'finds France going under, and should then
come to her assistance; in other words, she should
not endeavour to put out the fire while it is a
small conflagration, but should wait until it has
got beyond control; for let it he understood that
the help that Great Britain can give on land will
be comparatively small. Of all the five great
Powers that are'certain to he engaged in this war,
Great Britain will be by long odds the most
insignificant in the fighting that has to be done
on land; nor let it he forgotten that it is on land
that the quarrel must be fought out. The Eng-
lish fleet may do great work in destroying Ger-
many’s commerce or in bottling up her fleet; but
that is all; and that will not settle the war.
People in Australia, probably the majority of people
in England, have a very absurdly exaggerated idea
as to what can be accomplished by the British
fleet. It will not be able to destroy the German
fleet, because in all probability it will not he
able to attack it. That fleet will remain in a har-
bour that the British fleet will scarcely dare to
enter—can only enter at the very gravest risk of
destruction from mines and submarines. It will
most likely establish a blockade; but that block-
ade will not crush Germany as a counter blockade
by Germany would, under different circumstances,,
crush England, because, while England cannot
feed herself, Germany can feed herself to a very
large extent. What the British will be able to do
will be to drive German commerce from the seas,
and to land a couple of hundred thousand troops
to support France; but even that will depend upon
the speed with which those troops can be mobilised,,
for Germany will act with exceeding promptitude.
If, however, the German fleet should venture into
the open, the first important news we are likely
to get is that of its destruction by the British,
naval force.
It seems to be taken for granted in the Mel-
-12


'bourne dailies that Germany will hasten to attack
Russia in full force. She will probably do nothing
of the sort ; she is more likely to pursue a defen-
sive policy on her western frontier, keeping there no
more men than are sufficient to hold back any forces
that Russia may have ready to throw across the
border. She will do this because she will reckon
that it will take Russia six or eight weeks to
mobilise a sufficiently strong force to constitute
any real menace to Germany, and meantime she
will be free to throw the great bulk of her troops
over the French frontier in the hope that she will
be able to strike a series of deadly blows at France
before Russia has been able to properly get going;
she believes, in fact, that she can knock France to
her knees before it will be necessary for her to
really pay any serious attention to Russia. It
will be found, too, that the main attack upon
France will not be directly across the French
frontier from Alsace-Lorraine, but will involve a
violation of Belgian territory. It is notorious that
the whole of the German strategic plans for an
attack on France were thrown into the melting
pot as a result of the revelation of the extreme
difficulty of reducing fortresses that was made by
the defence of Port Arthur against the Japanese.
Germany then began to understand for the first
time that she would not be able to rush across
the French territory with the speed she had an-
ticipated, because the great forts at Verdum, Toul,
and other places could not be left unconquered in
the rear. Therefore, the German strategists turned
their attention to the discovery of a new mode of
■ entering on the country they have long doomed to
extinction; and they decided that their best course
lay in the moving of troops promptly through
Belgian territory, in order to get at France where
she was not so strongly protected. This, of course,
involves a breach of faith with Belgium; but that
is not going to stand in Germany’s way. Every
railway that Germany has built recently in this
quarter has been built purely for strategic pur-
poses, to enable troops to be rushed down to the
Belgian frontier as promptly as possible. Its
railways go to that frontier, and, significantly
enough, end there. We think it will, there-
fore, be found that within the next two or three
13


days we will get word of vast masses of German:
troops being rushed across the Belgian border, and
if we do not get such word, it will be only be-
cause we are not allowed to hear what is really
being done.
If this be Germany’s policy, it stands to reason
that France’s policy will be to act on the defen-
sive; she will not endeavour to force matters, but
will be content to play the game that “Joe”
Johnston played so successfully against Sherman
in the American Civil War. If she can hold the
German armies off until Eussia is ready to strike
in force, Germany’s position may be serious; it
is quite likely, too, that France will endeavour
to detach some portion of Germany’s main army
by sending an odd corps or two across the German
frontier into Alsace-Lorraine, but these will only
be diversions, to which not too much importance
must be attached. When Britain sends a force
to France’s aid, it will almost certainly be to
the main theatre of operations in or near Belguim.
As to how long the war will last and what will
be the outcome of it, we will venture no prediction;
but we regret to say that we cannot share the cer-
tainty which so many people seem to feel that
Germany will get all the worst of it. The usual
reason for this view is that while Great Britain
will attack her at sea, she will be attacked by
land from the East by Russia and from the West
by France. This view is altogether mistaken;
Germany will not be attacked by France: on the
contrary, France is the country that will be at-
tacked; Germany’s war against France will be
offensive, and not defensive; and the members
of the Triple Entente may reckon themselves
fortunate if France do not sustain a series of
crushing defeats long before Russia is ready to
make any effective move against Germany. The
people who look to see Germany overwhelmed would
appear to be entirely ignorant of one very vital
fact and one great strategical truth. The fact
I refer to is that Russia has not sufficient strate-
gical railways running down to the German border
to be able to get her troops there in any sufficient
numbers in time to strike with force before there
is a danger of the French armies being over-
-14


whelmed; and the military principle which is over-
looked is that the country having interior lines
fights at a great advantage; that is to say, Ger-
many, lying 'between France and Russia, is not
placed like a nut between nutcrackers, but is so for-
tunately situated as to be able to rush her troops
from one frontier to another as she may require
them; and, the better to be able to do so, she has
constructed a network of railways that are of the
very first importance for the carrying out of this
intention.
One thing that the Entente Powers may hope
for, and indeed should look for eagerly, is the
participation of Roumania in the conflict; for, if
Roumania enter the field against Austria, that
Power will be very seriously hampered, both in her
offensive against Servia and in her defensive against
Russia, for the Roumanian army is for its size one
of the finest in Europe, and even in point of num-
bers is not to be sneezed at, since it amounts to
half a million of men.
1
4
As for Germany’s object, it may be taken for
granted that the main one it has in view is the
acquisition of Holland and Belgium. With the
possession of these two countries she could not
only dominate France, but would be in the posi-
tion of having a loaded pistol levelled at the head
of England. With France crushed by the in-
fliction of an enormous indemnity and practically
placed under German tutelage, England’s posi-
tion would be deplorable, and Germany would
be the greatest of world Powers. The reality of
this danger ensures England’s participation in the
war, and the seriousness of it affords, perhaps,
the strongest hope that the German wishes will not
be realised. —Mining Standard, August 6.
THE BALANCE OF POWER.
How the Principle has Worked.
The maintenance of the balance of power in
Europe, viewed as a motive of statesmanship, is
not an invention of Great Britain, as might be
imagined from the angry protests of some
Continental writers, nor is it a principle that
15


lias been sought for exclusively by Great Britain
in forming international combinations. This
principle began to be talked of among the Euro
pean States in the sixteenth century, and one of
the earliest monarchs whose agressions influenced
the adoption of the principle as a working law of
statesmanship was Charles YIII. of France. The
phrase meant, in effect, that no great alteration
in the comparative strength of the great States
of Europe should be tolerated, and that all should
combine against any power which seemed to be
establishing itself in dangerous supremacy over
the rest. At that period it came about that a
great victory won by any one power was almost
inevitably the signal for an alliance against that
power. Thus, it was that after Charles VIII. had
marched into Italy with a French army at the
request of the ruler of Milan, Ludivico, his bril-
liant victories and rapid aggrandisement speedily
united powerful enemies against him, including
Milan, Venice, and the Papacy, Ferdinand of
Spain, and the Emperor Maximilian. Charles
VIII. perceived that it might be more difficult
for him to get out of Italy than it had been to
get into it. In July, 1495, he met the army of
the allies at Fornovo, and, after a hard battle,
won through. He and his army got home to
France safely, but as soon as his troops were out
of Italy all the conquests and prestige that he had
won for France melted away, and that nation
was in much the same position territorially as
before. The principle of combination against an
ambitious conqueror has swayed the statesman
ship of Europe ever since.
RESISTANCE TO FRANCE.
This principle was especially noticeable in the
alliances which England, Holland, and Austria
repeatedly formed against the schemes of Louie
XIV. The meteoric rise of Napoleon and his
huge aggressions called all the powers of Europe
to arms against him in the name of the balance
of power, and at the great re-adjustment which
was made by the Congress of Vienna after Napo-
leon’s flnal fall, the balance of power was often
invoked to cover the jealousy which resisted claim*
to restitution of territory. One of the 'most effec-
-16


tive safeguards of the smaller States has been the
jealousy among the great Powers on the score
of extension of frontiers. The Crimean War was
undertaken by Britain and France in conjunction
with Turkey against Russia, with the object of
preserving the balance of power by preventing
Russia from aequiring a too predominant position
in Eastern Europe. Again, in 1878, the Berlin
Congress, under the presidency of Bismarck,
severely cut down the advantages that Russia had
wrested from Turkey by the Treaty of San
Stefano, which she had imposed upon the Porte
at the close of her successful war. Britain at that
time, in common with Germany, was determined
that Russia should not have Constantinople. The
Treaty of San Stefano was revised by the Treaty
©f Berlin in the interests of the preservation of
the balance of power.
During the latter half of the nineteeth century
Russia had replaced France, which was the great
aggressor in Napoleon’s time, as the Power which
threatened to upset the equilibrium of force upon
which the safety of all the other European States
depended. Germany materially assisted Britain,
with her powerful support at the Berlin Congress,
in restraining the unbridled territorial ambitions
of Russia, which thereupon turned towards Eastern
Asia, seeking, greatly to the satisfaction of Bis-
marck, to find in that remote region an outlet
for her energies—where she could not exercise
any pressure upon Germany. It was owing very
largely to the encouragement and advice of Ger-
many that Russia was lured away into that
disastrous adventure which ended in a long and en-
feebling war and complete defeat by Japan on the
plains of Manchuria and in the Strait of Tsushima.
Weakened by her unsuccessful war, which was
carried on thousands of miles from the heart of
her Empire and the base of her resources, Russia
was compelled to devote herself to the work of
regaining her strength and reorganising her
financial and military resources. During that
period Germany, which was already very strong,
grew much stronger; and the restlessness of her
foreign policy and the dangers that it caused to
the peace of the world were illustrated by adven-
-17


tures at Tangier and Algeeiras, and Agadir, and
especially in threatening Russia into acquiescence in
the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina by Austria.
It appeared that Germany was the Power which
was likely, as the head of the Triple Alliance and
the patron of Turkey, to acquire weight enough
to upset the delicate balance of power in Europe.
An all-conquering Germany, a Germany that at-
tracted to herself all the smaller nationalities
which shared with her in the Teutonic speech and
culture, a Germany intent on Weltpolitik, and
eagerly desirous of founding an oversea colonial
empire at the expense of the colonial empires of
her neighbours —that was the Germany that began
to appear more and more menacingly in the writ-
ings and speeches of some of her own repiesenta-
tive leaders of thought, notably Herr Belbrueck,
and the fire-eating General von Bernhardi.
Plainly, Germany had already dispossessed Russia
from her proud pre-eminence as the bugbear of
Europe. The “Germans menace” bulked largely
in the press of one of the great historic parties
of Great Britain. The “German bogey,” as it
was contemptuously designated, received much at-
tention in the press of the other party. The
Russian counterweight of the balance was no
longer sufficiently heavy to perform its function.
The weight of Germany pulled down the scale.
There were well-founded apprehensions that Ger-
many was about to make a forward move.
.GERMAN WELTPOLITIK.
It was at just about this stage that General
von Bernhardi came forward with a formal de-
nunciation, on behalf of Germany, of the principle
that had been the ruling idea throughout the
whole of the period that we have roughly indicated,
from the combination against Charles A r III, in
1495, to the combination against Czar Alexander
11,, in 1878, and thence onward, though the occa-
sions were less strongly marked, down to 1907,
when the ratification of an Anglo-Russian Con-
vention rounded off the Anglo-French Convention,
and, in conjunction with the Dual Alliance, estab-
lished the Triple Entente as the necessary counter-
weight to the Triple Alliance. In advancing the
arguments in favour of a “world-policy” for
18


Germany, General von Bernhard! wrote: ‘ The
essential point is for a country to have colonies
of its own, and a predominant political influence
in the spheres where its markets lie. Our German
world-policy must be guided by these con-
siderations. The exception of such political
schemes would certainly clash with many old-
fashioned notions, and vested rights of the
traditional European policy. In the place,
the principle of the balance of power in Europe,
which has since the Congress of Vienna, led an
almost sacrosanct, but entirely unjustifiable exist-
ence, must be entirely disregarded.” Here, then,
we have a leading spokesman of the powerful
military party in Germany declaring that the
principle which actuated Bismarck, and the other
plenipotentiaries at Berlin, in compelling Russia
to disgorge territory which she had appropriated
by the Treaty of San Stefano, must be disregarded.
Circumstances alter eases.
But the ink with which General von Bernhardi
had written his protest against the observance of
the principle of the balance of power was hardly
dry when the Balkan War broke out. The result
of that war was to alter the balance again, and
this time to the disadvantage of Germany, which
last the support that she counted upon receiving
from Turkey, the military power of the Turks
have been broken by the Balkan Allies at Kirk
Kilisse and Lule Burgas. The serious displace-
ment of power in favour of the Triple Entente
caused Germany to vote an expenditure of
£52,000,000 forthwith ou military increases, and
Austro-Hungary also introduced a new Army Bill,
providing for a heavily increased military organisa-
tion. This naturally provoked corresponding, and
even greater increases by Russia, which brought
her war strength from 4,200,000 men to 4,700,000
men at one stroke. France also re-introduced the
three-years’ system of service, instead of the two-
years’ system, thereby increasing the strength
of her army in any one year by one-third. Ger-
many saw her position of assured superiority
steadily slipping from her. When it was ap-
parent that Russia was growing noticeably
stronger —strong enough, in fact, to protect her-
-10


self against a repetition of the humiliation which
she sustained at the hands of Germany in 1909,
when she was compelled, by threats, to give up her
objection to the annexation of Bosnia-Herzgovina
—‘Germany remembered the principle of the
balance of power again—.the only principle, as
a matter of hard fact, that provides the nations
of Europe with the opportunity of living at peace
with each other —and a press campaign was waged
in favour of attacking Russia, and her ally, France,
before the former Power should grow strong
enough to defy attack, as she seemed likely to do
if left alone much longer. Evidently the argu
ments then adduced in favour of a “preventive
war” were not unheeded.
THE PRESENT CRISIS.
Germany’s declaration of war against Russia
is incontestably a result of the discovery that
Germany’s advantage in conjunction with her
ally, Austria, was slipping from her. Having
previously declared, through the mouth of General
von Bernhardi, that the principle of the balance
of power was old-fashioned and should be dis
regarded —when she, herself, possessed the over
whelming weight that pulled down the Teuton
scale —she has now, through the mouth of the
Kaiser, declared war upon Russia, because she
fears that Russia would otherwise soon be heavy
enough to drag down the scale on the Slav side.
While pronouncing that the principle of the
balance of power is antiquated, and must not be
heeded, Germany has launched the greatest war
that the world has ever seen, virtually in order
to redress the balance in her own favour.
Great Britain has always been careful to direct
her foreign policy in accordance with this prin
ciple, and there is little doubt that she will con
tinue to do so. It is to her interest that neithei
the German nor the Slav should attain to an
overwhelming preponderance of strength in
Europe —a preponderance which would enable the
holder to dominate all other nationalities, making
them its satellites, and destroying their liberty to
guide their own courses, and pursue their own
ideals of culture. Should- it be necessary fer
England to throw her weight on the side of
20


Russia and France in order to preserve the balance'
of power as against the German group, she will
do so because she must do so or be overwhelmed..
Hereafter if it should be necessary to join a new
group in order to curb any other Power from
attaining to the dangerous predominance that
Germany at present aspires to, then Great Britain
will do so without hesitation, and for the same
very sufficient reason. The career of Napoleon
provides an example that will last as long as the
world itself of the impossibility of maintaining
peace and extending the diverse forms of national
culture in Europe without the use of this principle
of the equilibrisation of force by means of a com-
bination of the resolute against the headstrong.—
“Daily Telegraph,” Sydney, August 3, 1914.
CAPTURE.
Enemies’ Merchantmen.
How the Law Stands.
There are many merchant ships belonging to
German or Austrian companies which are in Aus-
tralian ports or coastal waters, or on their way
to or from them. And there may be some British
or Australian steamers or schooners on their way
to German possessions in the islands, or within
reach of the German war vessels at Samoa or
elsewhere. The position of those ships if Britain
is involved in this war is as follows:
The ships of an enemy are always liable to
capture and confiscation in war time except in a
neutral port, or within three miles of a neutral
coast. It makes no difference if the ship hoists
a neutral flag.' Every ship, whether merchant
vessel or warship, is allowed to run up any flag
she likes in order to deceive the enemy, and get
away from him. A German warship may hoist
the British or Japanese flag in order to approach
as closely as she may to an Australian harbour
or to a British merchant ship, without arousing
suspicion. The onlv qualification is that she must
21


hoist her true national flag before firing the first
shot. In the same way an Australian steamer
may he endeavouring to get away from a Germaji
Government yacht off the coast of New Guinea.
She may hoist the Dutch flag, or take any other
steps to lead to the belief that she is neutral.
But the warship has always the right of searching
her and examining her papers. And these will
be the evidence of her nationality. If she proves
to be British or Australian she can be captured
and confiscated—sunk, or dealt within any other
way that is wished, there and then.
CONFISCATION.
The crew must, of course, he first removed if the
vessel is to be sunk. But if the warship prefers
to take her as a prize, and has not sufficient men
to spare for the prize crew, it can leave the ship’s
crew on board, and order her to follow it into
port on pain of being sunk by gun fire or
torpedoed if an attempt be made to escape. When
a prize reaches port the goods on board, as well
as the ship, are assumed to belong to the enemy,
unless there is evidence to prove that they belong
to a neutral owner. Such of them as belong to
the enemy’s country, whether public or private
goods, are liable to confiscation.
It is not absolutely necessary, according to in-
ternational law, that merchant ships of an enemy
if captured at sea should be adjudicated upon
by a prize court. But, as it is always just pos-
sible even in the most simple case of such a cap-
ture that neutral property may be involved, and
as the last thing that any nation wishes to do is
to make enemies of neutral Powers, it is custom-
ary to have all prizes carefully decided upon by
prize courts.
SHIPS IN PORT—SAFE.
There remains one important series of excep-
tions to this rule—the ships of an enemy which
are in our ports when war breaks out, or which
are on the high seas before they have heard of a
war.
A German ship, for example, which is in an
Australian port at a time when war breaks out
between England and Germany can be detained
there during the whole war, or she cam be com-
-22


mandeered. and compensation paid for her, or she
can be destroyed on the payment of compensation
provided care is taken to preserve her papers.
But she cannot be confiscated. The Hague Con-
vention of 1907 laid it down definitely that the
rule as to confiscation of all captured merchant
vessels of the enemy did not apply to: —
(1) Those which are found in their opponent’s
ports at the beginning of hostilities.
(2) Those which reach an opponent’s port in
ignorance that war has broken out.
(3) Those which are met on the high seas, and
which had left their last port before war was
declared, and without knowledge that it was de-
dtirGd
UNLESS PITTED FOB CRUISERS.
These ships, as has been said, can all Ibe de-
tained by the authorities, or, if compensation is
paid, used, or destroyed. But, as a matter of
fact, the practice with an enemy’s vessels lying
in port at the outbreak of war invariably is to
give them a certain number of days’ grace to
leave port if they should wish to do so —on one
condition. That condition is that they carry no
contraband or despatches, nor any naval or mili-
tary officers or men returning to serve in the
enemy’s forces; if a ship shows by her fittings that
she is intended to be converted into a cruiser,
she is liable to be detained and also confiscated.
Much controversy, however, is likely to arise over
this, and it is probable that, although such ships
would certainly be detained, they would not be
confiscated.
AN IMPORTANT EXCEPTION.
A very important point to notice is that Ger-
many and Russia have never agreed to the article
allowing ships found on the high seas in ignor-
ance of war to be detained but not confiscated.
Germany has definitely stated that this arrange-
ment would only be convenient for a Power hav-
ing a number of ports all over the world, into
which such ships could be readily taken. The only
precaution that would be open to her, she claims,
would be to sink the ships after saving their
crews. And she declines to be saddled with the
expense that would be involved in paying com-
-23


pensation. It. must be supposed, therefore, that
such ships will be liable to be sunk between
German or Russian cruisers, without compensation.
MAILS AND MAIL STEAMERS.
Postal correspondence cannot now be inter-
fered with on the seas, even if found in an
enemy’s ship. The mail steamer itself is not
exempt, although the nations agreed at The Hague
in 1907 not to interfere with mail steamers except
when absolutely necessary. At the same time,
mail steamers can be Captured and sunk or used,
but any mails found on board must be forwarded
immediately by some other means if the ship is
destroyed. It has been decided that in these days,
when all the important news will have travelled
by cables or "wireless, the capture of mails is not
worth the inconvenience to the world’s commerce
and the annoyance to neutrals which it causes.
The reason why these rules must be
obeyed by nations if they wish to avoid
trouble is that any breach of them
is apt to bring down on the breaker’s
head the whole wrath of the neutral Powers. Any
action, for example, which brought into this war
such a Power as the United States would be a
disaster of the first order to the nation which
was guilty of it. The rules as to what is allow-
able for neutral ships to do in case of war are
indeed becoming increasingly wide. What has
been said above applies entirely to hostile ships.
The rules as to neutral ships are shortly as
follows: —•
RULES FOR NEUTRALS QUITE
DIFFERENT.
A neutral ship may sail to any port carrying
any cargo without fear of molestation or confisca-
tion, except under two conditions: —
(1) If the port is on part of the enemy’s coast-
line which is effectively blockaded, and has been
proclaimed to be blockaded; and
(2) If she carries contraband of war.
There is some controversy as to what contra-
band is. Probably the Declaration of London,
although England never ratified it, would generally
hold good. This distinguishes between goods like
arms, projectiles, powder, made up for use, tents,
24


etc., on the one hand, and food, clothing, gold and
silver, railway material, fuel, which are contraband
if destined for a hostile army or navy, but not if
intended for purely civilian use. A third class
of articles cau never be contraband according to
this rule —and this includes wool, metal ores, rub-
ber, copra, and pearls. These would be liable to
seizure, of course, in an enemy’s ship, but never
in a neutral ship.
A neutral ship may always be stopped, searched,
and if she contains contraband, or if her ease is
suspicious, taken into port and made subject to
a case before a prize court. But the general rule
is that so long as a ship’s papers—her certificate
of registry, muster role of crew, shipping articles,
ship’s log, official log, bills of lading, manifest,
and charter show no grounds for suspicion, she
will be released at once.
EANSOM.
Some Powers allow their naval officers to release
captured hostile ships on promise of ransom, and
taking one hostage from her crew to ensure that
the ransom will be paid. Neither Britain nor Ger-
many allow this. —‘ ‘ Sydney Morning Herald, ’ ’
August 3, 1914.
MERCHANT CRUISERS.
Liners Armed to Meet Them.
In view of the possibility of a great European
war, it must obviously be a matter of great in-
terest to Australians to know what are the ships
possessed by the Triple Alliance —Germany, Aus-
tria, and Italy—at present in the Pacific. These
are at present practically all in far Eastern
waters, where Germany has two large cruisers of
11,400 tons and two destroyers. Germany has also
two light cruisers in the Pacific of 3400 tons, and
Italy and Austria each one light cruiser of about
4000 tons.
The British fleet in Chinese waters is far
stronger than all these put together, consisting
of one battleship, 11.M.8. “Triumph,” two large


cruisers of 14,600 tons, and one of 10,800; two
light cruisers, eight destroyers, and two sub-
marines, besides a sister battleship, H.M.S. “ Swift-
sure,” and three light cruisers in the East Indies.
CON VERTED AT SEA.
it must not be assumed, however, that Aus-
tralian waters would necessarily be free of armed
ships belonging to the Triple Alliance. There is
one class of armed ship which may appear at any
moment upon any trade route. That is the mer
chantman converted into an armed cruiser at sea —
the so-called “merchant cruiser.”
It is against the policy of Great Britain to eon
vert, or to permit the conversion of, merchant
ships into ships of war after they have left port.
The British Government has always been hostile
to this practice, because it allows a merchantman
to put into a neutral port as a non-combatant;
to take on stores and coal there as an apparently
harmless ship; and then to convert herself into
a warship the moment she is outside the three
mile limit. It is, indeed, doubtful if this prac-
tice does not come absolutely within the true
definition of privateering, which is looked upon by
the British Government as piracy. However, what-
ever the British Government’s opinion of it, it
was made quite clear by some of the great Powers
at the second Hague Conference that they con-
sidered themselves justified in doing this. Whether
Great Britain objected or not, it was clearly their
intention to mount guns on their merchant ships
on the high seas. The fact had to be faced that
in time of war a stream of harmless mercantile
traffic, conveying food across the seas, might sud-
denly find that the German ships in its midst were
converting themselves forthwith into cruisers.
THE “ARMED LINER.”
The Admiralty accordingly took the following
step: It did not allow British ships to carry guns
in their holds and to mount them on the high seas.
It did not authorise them to attack any foreign
ship whatsoever. What it did do was to mount
guns on the sterns of certain food-carrying British
ships, so that, in case at attack were made upon
them by a converted foreign merchantman, they
would have it in their power to resist with some
26


chance of success. The British ships so armed
are not “merchant cruisers/' but “armed liners,”
which is an entirely different thing-. They are not
authorised to attack other ships, and they are not
intended to defend themselves against regular
foreign warships. They are each armed only with
two 4.7 guns at the stern, so that they may have
an opportunity of successfully escaping from an
attack made upon them by any foreign merchant
cruiser.
Any deck from which a modern gun is fired
will jump or buckle to such an extent as to in-
terfere with the shooting unless it is specially
strengthened. Even the after-deck beams of the
cruiser “ Sydney ’ ’ move, iby measurement, to the
extent of 4in. when the after gun is fired over
them. The decks of these merchant ships have,
therefore, to be specially strengthened for their
two guns. This expense is undertaken by the
owners. The Admiralty for its part lends the
guns, supplies a considerable store of ammunition,
and provides for the training of those men in the
ship’s company who form the gun crews. These
are naval reservists, specially chosen and paid by
the Admiralty an extra lid. per day; or in the
case of gun-layers, 9d.
What foreign ships on the trade routes to India,
China, and Australia carry guns in their holds is
not certain, ft is known that some of the
Norddeutseher-Lloyd steamers are supplied with
guns, with a view to being turned into cruisers
in war time, and this is part of the admitted
policy of the German Government. But whether
all or any of the N.B.L. steamers trading on the
Australian route are supplied in this way is pro-
bably only known to the German authorities them
selves. It is practically certain that some of the
vessels at least trading to China and probably
certain German ships trading to South America
carry guns and ammunition.
AUSTRALIAN SHIPS SO ARMED,
As for the British ships which carry guns for
defence, there is no secret whatever, for the guns
are mounted, by the intentional policy of the Ad-
miralty, in peace time, and are always there to
be seen bv anyone who cares to look. The ships
27


so armed are food-carriers. By September of last
year it was announced that about 22 ships had
been provided with guns, 12 of which were engaged
in the Australasian trade. They were capable of
carrying between them 2,500,000 carcases of mut-
ton. The Admiralty had made a searching in-
quiry to ascertain that all the ships so armed were
owned by English companies, and not by foreign
shareholders:
Amongst the food-carriers on which guns have
been mounted are: —
S.'S. 1 ‘ Ceramic. ’ ’
1 ‘ Themistocles. ’ ’
‘ ‘ Wiltshire.» ’
‘ ‘ EuripMdes. ’ ’
i ‘ Zealandic, ’ ’
and certain other ships, chiefly belonging to the
Houlder line.
Aberdeen White Star line.
Federal line.
New Zealand Shipping Company.
Shaw, Savill, and Albion Company.
Certain food-carriers from South America and
South Africa are similarly armed —chiefly belong-
ing to the Royal Mail Steam Packet and Union
Castle lines.
THE CUNARD CRCISERS.
These liners, armed for defence, must not be
confused with the two great “ Royal Naval Re-
served merchant cruisers” of the Cunard line,
which were built with money lent by the British
Government, and receive an annual subvention
from the Admiralty—the Mauretania and Lusi-
tania —each of 31,000 gross tonnage, and
knots speed. These two ships can at any time be
requisitioned by the Admiralty for the navy, in
which case, on reporting themselves at a. naval
port, they would become ordinary members of the
British Fleet. The Cunard Company also holds
all its vessels at the disposal of the British
Government for hire or purchase. —“Sydney
Morning Herald,” August 3, 7914.


BULLION RESERVES.
Something has been said of the gold stocks in
the two groups of the great European powers.
The stock of coin in the respective banks in June
was as under:—
Triple Entente
Bank of France —gold .
Do. Silver
Bank of Eussia —gold
Do., Silver .... . .
Bank of England—prac-
tically gold
Triple Alliance.
Bank of Germany ..
Austro-Hungarian Bank,
gold
Do., silver
Bank of Italy . . ..
Coin. Notes.
£155,012,000 £236,694,000
25,664,000
159,186,000 168,375,000
7,314,000
38,682,000 28,418,000
£386,408,000 £428,487,000
£67,810,000 £91,720,000
52.453.000 87,895,000
12.277.000
48.882.000 61,002,000
£181,422,000 £240,617,000
WORLD CHAOS.
Those good people who were always
telling us that war was out of the ques-
tion in these civilised days must have had
many a rude shock within the past fort-
night. The absurd Norman Angell, famous
for his perverted methods of reasoning from
facts which he states in a way to suit his
theories, has only one ground of satisfac-
tion : the world chaos which he predicted
has come about. There are pacifists in every
country in the world; but they differ greatly
in mentality. The most logical, the most
thorough are probably the French; the most
illogical, the most ridiculous are probably
29


the English. The latter do not content them-
selves with arguing against war in the ab-
stract; they base their pacifism mainly on
a misreading of character and of history.
Their principal assertion has been that the
German people is too noble to attack any
other country, quite ignoring the fact that
Germany is ruled, not by its people, but
by its officials, who are ever prone to conquer
by the sword and to rule with it still in their
grasp. The idea of our pacifists that Eng-
land can always have peace by giving in on
every matter in dispute is probably indis-
putable; but it seems to be quite beyond
their comprehension that it would be im-
possible for England to continue to exist on
such terms. Indeed, many of them go even
further and say that it would be much better
for England to be under the domination of
a foreign power rather than go to war to
maintain her independence. With people of
that stamp it is no good arguing.
There is, unfortunately, a percentage of
that class of person in the present British
Ministry; yet, for all that, we are of opinion
that it is well that at this critical moment a
Liberal Government is in power in Great
Britain rather than a Unionist Government.
Our reason is this, that a Conservative Op-
position may be trusted to give all possible
support to a Government engaged in a war
with a foreign country, whereas a Liberal
Opposition could not be so trusted. We have
the painful example to the contrary of the
great Fox during the Napoleonic wars, and
much more recently the equally shameful
example of Llovd George (to sav nothing of
30 ‘


Redmond and Co.) during the South African
war. If we are to have war, it is well
that party considerations should be set aside;
and it seems to us that that is only possible
when the Liberals are in power.
The great personal question for us is, bow
will the war affect Australia? Probably
this country will be less disadvantaged than
any other; but still it is bound to feel the
pinch seriously enough. There will be for
one thing little or no market for our wool
dip, and that alone will mean a loss of be-
tween 30 and 40 millions sterling which
would otherwise be in circulation. Then
there are bound to be many businesses closed
up, and thousands of people thrown out of
employment. For example, those houses
(and they are numerous) whose trade is al-
most entirely with Germany will have to
close their doors; in fact, many of those
whose business is mainly with Great Britain
will scarcely he able to carry on, because the
home firms will have too many demands
on them in other directions to be able to
meet their requirements. Our big mines—
those of Broken Mill, for example—will have
to close down because they will be unable to
get their products to market, unless, indeed,
arrangements can be made for the continu-
ance of operations and the stacking of the
ore. For this to be done it is certain that
Government aid will have to be forthcoming;
and this may perhaps be looked for, since a
closing-down will mean that thousands of
men will be without any means of
employment; nor will the Governments.
State and Federal, be able, after their


manner, to afford ease by setting men
to work on jobs specially created to
give employment, for no money will
be obtainable from overseas for the finan-
cing of sucb work. Our States and our
Commonwealth, must do without borrowing
until the war is over, and probably for some
time after that; and how long the war will
last there is simply no saying. It is too
lightly assumed by many people that it will
be all over very speedily. There is _ only
one way that can happen, and that is, if all
advantages go the one way; but, if victory
in one quarter be counter-balanced by de-
feat in another, or if all the campaigns
prove more or less indecisive, it may be found
that the war will resolve itself into one of
mere exhaustion, in which case it is likely to
last for a year or two. That is a terrible
prospect; but it will be a terrible state of
affairs also if the war be decided very_
quickly, for that will almost certainly mean
the prompt crushing of France by Germany.
It is not a pleasant outlook whichever way
we regard it, for we believe we are right
in predicting that the choice is between a
quick war ending entirely to Great Britain s
disadvantage and a long-protracted war end-
ing to the disadvantage of everybody, but to
the greater disadvantage of Britain’s ene-
mies than of her friends. How terrible that
would be is already sufficiently shown by the
world-wide depression and collapse that have
followed on a mere probability of a general
European war. —Mining Standard, August
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Mining
Standard, Melbourne.
