





AUSTRALASIAN WHITE CROSS LEAGUE
The Military Problem
of Venereal Disease
An Address to Officers of the A.I.F.
:: :: :: BY :: :: ::
Dr. Richard Arthur, m.l.a.
SHIPPING NEWSPAPERS LTD., Printers. 16 Bond Street. Sydney


An Address,
DELIVERED TO THE OFFICERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
IMPERIAL FORCE
Richard Arthur, M.D., M.L.A.,
Sydney.
Yon may wonder why I should have sought to
take you away from your military duties to listen
to certain things which I have to say on subjects
which may seem irrelevant to you. as they deal with
medical, psychological and ethical matters.
I can assure you that I would not so intrude did I
not think that the matter I have in hand is one of
national and critical importance, and is well worthy
of your earnest attention. The responsibility of the
officer for the morale of the men is well recognized.
To you is handed over the raw material, and you r
with your non-commissioned officers, have to fashion
this material into the disciplined and efficient soldier.
This necessitates not only his instruction in drill, but
a constant vigilance over every phase of his life.
To him you should be not only instructor and leader,
but parent and teacher. Nothing that concerns his
physical, mental or moral welfare is alien to you.
This being so, you are at present confronted with
a tremendous problem in military efficiency by the


prevalence of venereal diseases among the recruits.
It is difficult to over-estimate the injury that is
being done to the Australian Imperial Force, both
in Australia and in Egypt, from this cause. Num-
bers of men have been either temporarily or per-
manently disabled by syphilis and gonorrhoea, and
their cost to the Commonwealth —for which no re-
turn whatever has been received—amounts to a huge
sum. And there is the further lamentable aspect
of the case that men from the backblocks of Aus-
tralia, who, had there been no war, would never have
become infected, will now return home and carry
infection far and wide, with disastrous results to
the next generation. The consideration of these
facts induced me, as I had made a study of the
subject for many years, to offer my services to
the Defence Department, with the object of giving
addresses to the recruits, and I am pleased to say
that the Honourable the Minister promptly and
gladly accepted this offer.
And, at the beginning, I wish to enlist the sym-
pathy and co-operation of the officers with my task.
Now, into this problem we want and must en-
deavour to bring some clear and logical thinking and
face the facts, not dodge them, as it is alleged to be
a British characteristic to do.
Let me state, then, the question:
Must our soldiers have sexual intercourse!
Is promiscuity, with all its attendant evils, in-
evitable ?


Let us assume that the average young man cannot
practice continence, but must have regular indul-
gence. If we postulate this—that an army is im-
possible without systematic prostitution, then the
military authorities must recognize this fact, and
seek for remedies to minimize as far as possible the
inevitable concomitant—venereal disease.
The measures proposed are directed either to the
man or to the woman. It is urged on one hand that
all soldiers should be supplied freely by the authori-
ties with so-called preventives, and should be care-
fully and systematically instructed in the use of
them They are to be given a packet containing a
condom, a tube of mercury ointment, a powder to
make an antiseptic wash, a syringe, and a leaflet of
instructions. Immediately after intercourse they are
to set about using all these things.
It is claimed that the results of this have been very
remarkable in the German and Japanese armies and
navies. Now, is it probable that similar results
would be forthcoming among our Australian
soldiers?
I venture to doubt it. They are not under the
same heavy-handed discipline as the German soldiers
are, and I believe that a large proportion of the
venereal infections among our men takes place when
they are under the influence of drink; when all
thoughts of caution have been thrown to the wind;
nor do I think that many medical men would be
willing to spend their time in giving instruction to


men individually, for to be any good it would re-
quire to be thorough.
Further, there is the more serious objection that
if the powers that be sanction and tacitly give their
approval of illicit intercourse by providing means
to carry it out with a guarantee of immunity from
physical consequences, it not only encourages men
to indulge who might otherwise refrain, but it robs
any appeal to their higher instincts of all its force,
and makes it a hypocrisy and a farce.
On the other hand, it is sometimes maintained that
it is the duty of the authorities to provide what are
called “clean women” for the use of the troops. It
has been held that, by medical inspection of prosti-
tutes. those diseased can be segregated and so pre-
vented from communicating the malady they are
suffering from.
This is a century-old controversy, but the modern
trend of expert opinion is to the effect that the
system known as “regulation” has failed in what
it was intended to do. This view has become more
and more prominent at the last two International
Conferences on the suppression of venereal disease,
and in the latest book on the subject by Abraham
Flexner, who was sent by the American Bureau of
Social Science to investigate the pioblem in Europe,
the writer, after a most exhaustive investigation,
comes to the conclusion that, as carried out in France
and Germany, regulation is of little or no value as a
hygienic measure. It is recognized that, to be effec-


tual, every city would require a large staff of medi-
cal experts, microscopists, bacteriologists, and path-
ologists, and that daily examination of the women
and of their clients would be necessary. It is ad-
mitted that even then certain cases wmuld escape
the medical scrutiny, while the whole problem of
clandestine prostitution—wherein lies the greater
danger—would remain untouched. Here again the
guarantee of a delusive immunity by the State, with
consequent slackening of moral authority, comes in
as a factor in intensifying the evil. Now, lam pre-
pared to push this argument of the unavoidable
necessity of having “clean women 77 for the troops
to its logical conclusion. If the men must have
sexual gratification, and must have untainted part-
ners, then is it not the duty of the State and Empire
to ensure that they get them? If this be admitted,
then I can see no escape from the position that vir-
gins should either come forward voluntarily or
should be conscripted for the sake of the Empire
and of the future of the world. Are we prepared to
urge our sisters or our daughters to take upon them-
selves this self-sacrificing duty, and give their virtue
for their country, as the men give their lives? It is
said that the Countess Wolaski was implored by the
leading men of Poland to make this sacrifice, in
order that Napoleon might be conciliated, and that
Japanese girls become prostitutes for a time, to help
their parents. And we should ha\e to ask not only
that they should give themselves up here, but that


they should accompany the troops to Egypt, where
even worse risks to the men are to be met with.
The mere statement of such an argument may
seem to you to be a gross and unjustifiable insult
to our womanhood, but I am simply seeking to prove
to the upholders of the “necessity for clean women 77
doctrine to what conclusion their contention can
logically be carried.
I myself am not prepared to subscribe to this
doctrine, which is one of negation and pure pessi-
mism as regards human nature. Nor do I admit
the assumption that the sex instinct cannot be con-
trolled. The claim that the impulse is irresistible
in civilized man is not true. If it were, rape and
other sexual offences would be common, and could
not be regarded as crimes.
Even in savage races promiscuity is not the rule,
and sexual intercourse is controlled by taboos. It
has been left to the German army to revert to the
sexual bestiality of the ape and the cave man, and
I only hope that I am not doing the ape an injustice
by comparing him to the Prussian officer. All
authoritative medical opinion proclaims that con-
tinence for a prolonged period is not only possible,
but that no injurious effects whatever result from
it. It is the rule for thousands of the manliest of
our young men, and in the Catholic priesthood is
found a class of men, who, I am convinced, carry
out rigorously their vows of celibacy. I would not
seek to minimize in the least the strength of the sex


instinct. It is folly to ignore the existence of this
natural impulse in every healthy, normally-eonsti-
tuted young man. But lam equally convinced that
we have reached a stage in our ethical and social
evolution when, if certain motives be called into
action, and certain agents which lessen or paralyse
the inhibitory influence of reason and social morality
be removed, the average man can, without insuper-*
able difficulty, call his passions to heel.
If this be true in times of peace, it is even more
so in war time, when a stronger case can be made
out for the necessity of self-control.
It must be admitted that, strong as the sexual in-
stinct is, it is no more strong than that other great
natural instinct, the instinct of self-preservation’
This “will to live’ 7 regulates men's actions in ordi-
nary life. They cling to life under conditions in
which it would seem that death would be welcome.
But we constantly find that this instinct of self-
preservation is dominated a higher and more
altruistic motive. Take the famous British tradition
of “Women and children first. 77 From the Birken-
head to the Titanic and the Lusitania the rule has
been that no man except the crews shall enter the
boats until all the women and children have been
provided for. Be he millionaire or pauper, man of
world renown or unknown wastrel, he subscribes
cheerfully to the last great sacrifice he is called upon


to make. Truly death is, swallowed up in victory—
the victory of the human spirit over itself!
But we have not to go so far to find an example
of this self-sacrifice. Is it not everywhere around
us in these brave Australian men who have given up
their comforts and pleasures and prospects in life,
and are prepared to face privations and suffering,
disease, disablement, and it may be death, for the
sake of an ideal? I do not say that the ideal is
always present, or that it is always conscious, but
I do believe from my heart that the great majority
of the men who enlist are influenced by motives of
patriotism and loyalty, which are of the purest
character.
Now. let us wander for a little into the bye-way
of psychology, and seek to ascertain the reasons
which prompt these men to enlist. I have attempted
to classify them as follows: —
(1) Those who join for the pure love of change
and adventure.
(2) Those who are actuated hy feelings of duty
and patriotism.
(3) Those ■whom the pressure of public opinion
or the example of others forces into the
ranks.
There are also some who join from purely ignoble
motives, but they need not be considered.
With regard to the first class, there are few, if
any, in camp in Australia at present; they heard the
“call” fifteen months ago, and it was music to their


ears! They are to-day holding trenches, with daunt-
less courage, at Anzac, or lying in hospital or under
the earth, and, for good or ill, they have passed be-
yond our reach, so we need not concern ourselves
with them.
With class two it is very different. They form, I
believe, the vast majority of those who are now pre-
paring to go to the front. They have no inherent
delight in adventure or danger; in fact, many of
them would never have, under ordinary circum-
stances, chosen the life of a soldier. Their interests
lay in altogether other directions, and no glamour
whatever attaches itself in their minds to war and
the results of war. They have read almost daily
the long casualty lists, and they have seen their
predecessors come back maimed and shattered from
the front; and they know well by now what life in
the trenches means, the hideous privations and suf-
fering it entails. So they are under no illusions to
rouse them to a white heat of enthusiasm. But in
place of this is a cold, steely determination, which
is the most lasting, and therefore the most valuable
quality in a soldier, and makes him almost invincible.
If a man, from motives of patriotism and duty, has
brought his will-power to overcome natural inclina-
tion against, or it may be inborn shrinking from dis-
comfort and danger, he is one of whom an enemy
may well be afraid.
Of the third class there are bound to be represen-
tatives in every camp. They would probablv re-


main at home were they not influenced by what is
known as the “herd instinct ” They have little
individuality, and so they take the path of least
resistence. Enlisting is, so to speak, in the air, and
so they enlist. This does not mean that they do not
make excellent soldiers, only that they are highly
amenable to public opinion in all phases of life, and
can be influenced for good or evil by comrades with
a more marked individuality. Now, the members of
both these classes have probably, iii most cases, no
very definite ideas on the subjects of sex morality.
They hold the unexpressed opinion of their age and
elass, that illicit sex intercourse is a thing to be
obtained when possible. They know little or nothing
of the risks attached to it; they have never had an
ethical aspect of the subject presented to them, and
they share the current opinion that, “having had a
woman” is an initiation into manhood. To many
they simply stand for the “ average sensual man,
on whom warnings, exhortations and appeals are
thrown away. Now, while I am prepared to admit
that this may be true of some, I must emphatically
deny that it is true of the majority. We are not
here dealing with the average man, but with one
who, by his actions, have proved that he has reached
a higher and more excellent plane of manhood.
The young man who, by deliberate choice, has
overcome the fear of hardship and possible death,
may, and in many cases will, go further, and sub-
ordinate his other natural instincts and desires to


the demands of discipline and patriotism. Lay be-
fore him clearly and frankly the dangers of illicit
intercourse, inform him of the hideous effects of
venereal disease, not only on himself, but on his
future wife and children; point out to him how
thousands of his predecessors—who were equally as
anxious as he is to strike a blow for the Empire and
for liberty and justice—have spent the time they
should have been in the trenches with their com-
rades, in detention hospitals; emphasize the igno-
miny of being returned to Australia, not to receive
the welcome and applause of their friends and ad-
mirers, but to be rushed off to a venereal compound
—there to fret out their long days in vain regret.
And, lastly, appeal also to the inherent chivalry
which lies latent, I believe, in nearly every man,
and urge him not to injure or degrade any woman
by word or deed. Ask him, were he marching
through the conquered country of an enemy, would
he feel free to act as the Germans have done in
Belgium, and ravage and outrage as he went? He
would answer indignantly that he would scorn so
to do, however often and freely the opportunity
might offer. Then put it to him, why should he
take advantage of innocent girls in his ow T n country,
or force fallen women still lower in the scale of
degradation by his own action, and he, in many
cases, will respond to the strength of the appeal.
Now, it may be replied to me that it is pure as-
sumption on my part that any good can accrue from


such warnings and appeals, and that I am deluding
myself as to the possibilities of human nature. If I
am, then I share the same delusion as Lord Kitch-
ener, who. when Commander-in-Chief in India, issued
an appeal to the army there on this subject, of which
the following is an extract: —
“It is therefore all the more necessary that those who
are serving’ their country should exert to the utmost
those powers of self-restraint with which every man
is provided, in order that he may keep his appetite in
proper control.
“Every man can, by self-control, restrain the indul-
gence of those imprudent and reckless impulses that
so often lead men astray, and he who thus resists is a
better soldier and a better man than the man of weak
will, who allows his bodily appetites to rule him and
has not the strength of character to resist temptation
and to refuse to follow any bad example he may see
before him.
“If a man becomes inefficient through venereal, it is
discreditable, and even dishonest, that by contracting
through self-indulgence a disease which he can avoid,
a man should render himself incapable of doing that
work for his country which he enlisted to do.”
And the naval and military medical witnesses
before the Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases
in England all testify that a lessening of the
amount of venereal disease in the forces has come
about as the result of warnings and appeals made
to the men.
And practically all the speakers at the discussions
on the dangers of syphilis and the question of State


control at the International Congress—most of them
men with world-wide reputations—while condemn-
ing regulation, urged the necessity of instruction,
warning and moral appeal. I say, therefore, that
this method is well worth a trial in seeking to com-
bat the plague of venereal disease in the Australian
Imperial Force. Knowledge of the existence of
syphilis and gonorrhoea, and the nature of their
consequences, should be given to all recruits., espe-
cially those lads from the country districts. But,
and I insist with all the force at my command on
this, along with the scientific information should go
the appeal to duty, patriotism and chivalry, which,
to my mind, is by far the most potent argument
with the finer types of character. I believe I am
not too optimistic in asserting that the results of
this may make us realize that there are heights in
human nature that we had not dreamed of.
To this appeal must be added another—to abstain
from intoxicants. All medical men know that drink
and venereal disease go hand-in-hand; alcohol rouses
sexual desire and lessens or abolishes self-restraint
The soldier, for the sake of efficiency, is called upon
to be an abstainer for the period of the war. He is
called to this by the example of His Majesty the
King and of Lord Kitchener. And I make bold to
say that especially is the obligation laid on all officers
to follow this example; and the elder men among
the recruits should be put on their honour to try
and keep the lads out of temptation and make the


spirit of the camp one opposed to drinking and
sexual indulgence. These men, as also the non-
commissioned officers, have great opportunities for
good, as they have also for harm. Let them set a
standard of manly and cleanly living, and the
younger men will, for the most part, conform to it,
and be proud to do so.
Finally, I would say that I do not look for im-
possibilities or miracles. Human nature is still
human nature, with all its weaknesses and back-
slidmgs. Nevertheless, some of it is being sublimated
by this fiery furnace of war, and we are justified
in making great demands and expecting great
things of those who to-day have chosen so splendidly
the path of duty.
(gi:
sg)
Reprinted from The Medical Journal of Australia ,
for The Australasian White Cross Teague,
57 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
