

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE.
SYDNEY SESSION, 1898.
The Mythology of the Efatese,
Rev. Dr. MACDONALD.
Read before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
January, ISOS.
33605 (9)
r tv . x , j ‘
ft ifej




THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE EFATESE.
By Rev. Dr. Macdonald, Efate, New Hebrides.
(Read before the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,
Friday, January 7, 1898.)
In a paper read before the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, at Hobart, Bth January, 1892, on
“ Efate, New Hebrides,” I made a few concluding remarks on
“ Mythology,” which I purpose now to expand. It will be of
interest to Polynesian scholars to compare the Efatese mythology
with that of other parts of Oceania, with a view to the solution
of problems'familiar to all such scholars. My object in this
paper is simply to set forth what the mythology of the Efatese
really is, and that without professing to deal exhaustively with
the subject.
I. MAUI-TIKITIKI AND TAMAKAIA.
The Efatese say that these were the first men, the former being
the grandfather ( tobnna ), the latter his grandchild (sulina). There
seems to be a general notion that the story about them is best
known among the Efatese of the islets to the north of Efate,
called the Shipherd group, and a rock is shown to this day on one
of these, Mai or Three Hills, to which the rope was attached by
which they drew up the islands from the sea, and which bears the
marks of the rope and of their feet. However, another version
of the story has it that the rock to which that rope was attached
is not on Mai, but on the top of a certain hill on the north side
of Efate. Not only is the site of the rock various, but the story
as told by different persons varies in particulars. Generally,
however, it is to the effect that Maui-tikitiki and Tamakaia dis-
puted as to which of them was the greater, and that Tamakaia
proved his superiority. I shall, therefore, give the story, not as
told to me by any individual, but as gathered from several
separate accounts. It may be observed by way of preliminary
that these names Maui-tikitiki and Tamakaia were obtained from
the Efatese by the first missionaries who visited the island.
Thus Mr. Gill, in his “Gems from the Coral Islands,” says : —“lt
was found that these ignorant and degraded people needed not a
Divine revelation to teach them the existence of a God. In com-
mon with all the Polynesian tribes yet visited they believe in the
existence and dominion of a God, which they call Maui-tikitiki.”
And my friend, the late Mr. Murray, in his “ Missions in Western
33665 (9)—A


Polynesia,” says, “ They worship two gods whom they call Maui-
tikitiki and Tamakaia, and to whom they trace the origin of all
things.” If Maui-tikitiki and Tamakaia are to be called “ gods,”
they are no otherwise gods than other Natemate (literally, spirits
of the dead), and it is quite erroneous to regard Maui-tikitiki as
the chief god, or object of worship of the Efatese. I hare only
found one man who knew anything about Maui-tikitiki being
worshipped ; he said that Maui-tikitiki’s grave is on Mai, and
that he had heard of fowls being sacrificed at his grave. The
Natemate were the deities of the Efatese, and their religion a
form of ancestor-worship. A general name “ Supe” (‘ the ancients
or the ancient, the ancestors or ancestor’), may be used either to
denote ancestors or ancients, considered as men in this world
(that is before they died), or as natemate dwelling in Hades (after
they died). And hence such mythological persons as Maui-tikitiki
are sometimes either individually or collectively spoken of under
this name. As this word occurs in some of the following stories,
what has just been said may suffice as to its meaning. We now
come to the story itself :—»
Efate (or Mai, as the case may be) was at the beginning the
only land in existence, and Maui-tikitiki, his wife, and grandson,
were the only human beings in existence. Maui-tikitiki used to
give Tamakaia food, but concealed from him where he got it.
He determined to watch carefully and find out for himself. At
last he discovered that Maui-tikitiki had in a carefully enclosed
place, shut in above as well as around, one banana plant and one
yam plant. There were no other plants in existence, and, of
course, no weeds. When the banana bunch was plucked off this
plant, another bunch always replaced it, and so with the yam.
A yam taken away was immediately replaced by another. Maui-
tikitiki and Tamakaia bilulu ki nafanua —that is, strove for
mastery in the world. Tamakaia said Namanau ha wora, “grass
(or vegetation), spring up,” and it did so. When Maui-tikitiki
saw these plants growing where none had been before, he began
to pluck them up, but as he went on clearing they immediately
sprang up behind him again. Tamakaia charged him with being
lazy, and said he did not want on this account to have any plants
in the land except the one banana, and the one yam. Maui-
tikitiki replied, “You will be the master of the world, if you can
cover the face of the earth with vegetation (nafurafuraTama-
kaia did so. There was then a contest between them as to which
of them should be the master of birds and fishes. Tamakaia
called a bird, and in response to his call it came to his hand.
Maui-tikitiki called it in vain. Tamakaia in like manner called
to the fishes in the sea, and they came to his hand. Maui-tikitiki
tried this also in vain. The next point of contest was as to the
drawing up of the land out of the sea. Tamakaia made a


tremendous swing of a long rope fixed to the sky. He sat in this
swing, and Maui-tikitiki swung him so that he went far out of
sight; then from the swing he cast his hook, and, as the swing
swept backwards, hauled up a land from the sea. Maui-tikitiki
then took his place in the swing, and in like manner cast his hook,
but in vain. Tamakaia hauled up all lands : when hauling up
Natonya (distant or foreign lands, as Australia, England, &c.) his
hook broke. It should have been noted that just as Maui-tikitiki
had concealed his garden from Tamakaia, so the wife of Maui-
tikitiki, in conjunction with her husband, had concealed the sea
from him at first. It was shut in, in an enclosure, and he only
discovered it by watching her when she went to bathe in it. He
opened the door of the enclosure, and the sea, let loose, rushed
out and spread all over the world as we now see it.
In another version of this story, of which the above contains
the essential points, no mention is made of the swing. Tamakaia
went out to sea, and, looking down,'saw the various lands beneath
the waters. Coming back to Maui-tikitiki he said, “Do you see
anything by which you can show your superiority over me 1” He
replied, “ No; and if you do, produce it, and you will be the
greater.”
“ Cast your hook,” said Tamakaia, “ and get me a fish.” He
caught a turtle.
“ Cook it,” said Tamakaia, “ that I may eat.” He then drew
up Tongoa from the sea, and founded it upon the bones of the
turtle.
This process was repeated for every land. When Epi was
drawn up it touched heaven. Tamakaia knocked it down, hence
the great length of that island.
“ Cast your hook,” said Tamakaia, “and get me a fish.” Maui-
tikitiki did so, and got a whale.
“ Cook it,” said Tamakaia, “ that I may eat.” He then drew
up Efate from the sea depths, and founded it upon the bones of
the whale.
“ Cast your hook,” said Tamakaia, “and get me a fish.” Maui-
tikitiki did so, and got a porpoise and a dugong. Their bones
were made by Tamakaia the foundation of Sydney (that is, of
Australia).
At this point the grey-haired heathen (it is nearly twenty years
ago) who was gravely narrating the story was interrupted by a
travelled native standing by, who said, “No Sydney; England.”
In drawing up Sydney and England [Natonya), however, so
heavy was it with hulumakau (cattle), etc., that Tamakaia’s rope
broke, and, but for that accident, there would now be overland
communication between Australia and the New Hebrides.
“ Tamakaia then got the skin of a banana, and made a boat of
it, determined to go and see England,” continued the old man.


“He went to England, and never returned. He is known there
as Jehovah. His banana-skin vessel became the white man’s
ships and boats. To this day there remain on two rocks on Mai
two marks showing the truth of all this—the mark of Tamakaia’s
rope on the rock he used as a block, and the mark of his firmly-
planted feet, where he stood when engaged in drawing all lands
into visible existence. Maui-tikitiki died, and was buried on
Mai.”
The following is given in Efate as the song of Supe (Tamakaia)
which he sang when pulling up the land from the sea :
Maui-tikitiki ko maurimai
Ku matuatna,
Kinau mitau ki tonga,
Tonga mau :
Serinmatau, serinmatau,
Serinmatau e.
This song is sung by the people of Efate now in hauling up a
heavy canoe, in dragging heavy logs, or anything heavy.
In Efate, Maui-tikitiki is said to have drawn up the lands from
the sea, and little seems to be known about Tamakaia.
11. LEI MAUI-TIKITIKI.
In the above story the wife of Maui-tikitiki is mentioned. Lei
that is, female, Maui-tikitiki, is said by the Efatese to dwell in
the sky (heaven); more particularly what we call “ the man in
the moon ” is said to be Lei Maui-tikitiki me atenina, “ Lei Maui-
tikitiki and her grandchild.”
On Efate she is regarded as having been present when the
lands were drawn up from the sea. She saw the land in a
fluctuating condition, just after it arose from the waters, and
dashed the earthenware water pots, which she was carrying,
violently upon it, with such a shock as to make it fixed and
stable. But the pots were shivered into fragments, and hence
the fragments of pottery found strewn all over Efate are called
nabura mai hi Lei Maui-tikitiki , the shells of the water-pots of
Lei Maui tikitiki.
The art of making earthenware pots, which is still preserved in
Santo, had been lost by the Efatese before the advent of Euro-
peans. But these fragments of pottery are sometimes called
nabura ki Supe , the shells of the water-pots of Supe , where Supe
may denote either Lei Maui-tikitiki or the ancients, or ancestors.
Efatese axes used to be made out of shells and called karau. Now
that European axes have come upon the scene, these, discarded,
are found in the bush, near villages, and are called karau ki Supe,
the axes of the ancients.


111. THE ADVENT OF LIGHT.
This story is told by a Mai man. There is a place on Mai
called Lim. Formerly there was no light, and a man living here
was annoyed at this, and at the consequent dampness and
muddiness that prevailed. He took a club called ta, or maltalia ,
and smote at the sky, or floor of heaven. Five times he swung
his club, and five times missed. The sixth time his blow was
effective, splitting open the sky and letting in the Sun and Light.
IV. THE SEPARATION OF THE SKY FROM THE EARTH.
In the primeval times, the sky was close to the earth. A woman
was raking the stones in her oven with a long pole. The top of
the pole came against the sky, interrupting her work. Angry,
she smote the sky with the pole, bidding it, with a loud voice,
“ Ascend !” The sky immediately began to ascend, and, not-
withstanding that she entreated it to stop, it kept on ascending
till it reached the position which it now occupies.
V. THE ADVENT OF NIGHT.
A chief of Meli had two children who were always crying, and
as the sun was always shining in that primeval time, he could get
no rest because they never went to sleep. He therefore set out
on a journey in quest of Darkness and Night. He went round
the island by way of Havannah Harbour, calling at the various
villages. When he called at a village, the people—(this part of
the narrative is sung)—asked him where he came from 1 He
replied, “ I come from the lower side of the island.” “ What
have you come in search of 1” “ I have come in search of Night
and Darkness.” He went on and on till he came near to the most
eastern point of the island, or south-eastern. Here the people
directed him to a jutting promontory, called Baulelo, as to where
he should obtain the object of his search. Provided with a
bamboo vessel, he lay in wait on this promontory, and having
seized Night-Darkness and enclosed it securely in his bamboo,
started triumphantly on his return journey. Again he called at
the various villages, and in return for the hospitality accorded
him, and at the end of the meal, sang a song of complete satis-
faction, took out from his bamboo a portion of the Night-Darkness
and covered the land with it. Then the supe, or ancestral chief,
wound up by falling into a sweet sleep.
*
VI. MAN, THE LORD OP CREATION.
In the beginning, it was still undecided whether man or some
other should be superior in the world. They tied up man as if


he were a pig, and let the pig go as if it were a man. The pig
went roaming about all day, and, caring only for itself, returned
at night with its stomach well filled. It took no thought for the
man, and cared not that he was hungry. Man tanyisi nerei
pitied man, seeing him in this evil case, and sundered the cords
by which he was bound. He, seeing how inhumanly selfish and
unfit to have authority over others the pig was, ordained that
man should be man having the lordship, and that pig should be
put in subjection, as we now see it.
VII. THE ADVENT OF DEATH.
At the first, it was not settled whether men should die {mate),
or renewing their youth perpetually be immortal ( rnulu). Some
said, “ Let us die ” ; others said, “ Let us be immortal (mulu).”
Man tanyisi nerei wished this latter to prevail ; but Pilake burst
in upon them while the deliberation was going on, and exclaimed,
“ You are deliberating about what 1 (the matter is practically
settled). I have just buried my father and my mother. Beget
offspring instead of them” (or to take their places). Man tanyisi
nerei wept, bewailing us (tanyisi nyila), so that his eyes are red
to this day. Thus was established the existing order of things in
which are set Death and Birth, the one over against the other,
and in which as one generation goeth another cometh.
There are two little birds in Efate called respectively Pilake
and Man tanyisi nerei. The word Pilake signifies to be in mortal
terror. Pilake is a dingy-looking bird, afraid of man, and keeping
at a distance from him. Man tanyisi nerei denotes, literally,
“ bird bewailing man”-—that is, loving, pitying, and weeping over,
or bewailing them involved in misery and death. Man tanyisi
nerei is a bird something like robin red-breast, venturing near the
dwellings of men. It has beautiful bright red marks under its
eyes ; these are the marks said to have been caused by “ weeping
for men.”
With respect to the word mulu in the above story it may be
remarked that the Efatese explain its meaning in this connection
in the following way:—The serpent, they say, casts its skin—that
is, it mulus. By casting its skin it, so to speak, renews its youth.
The old worn-out withered husk is slipped off and cast away, and
the animal comes forth from it as if new-born, at once delivered
from the effects of the wear and tear of time, and endowed afresh
with youthful beauty, vigour, and life. If at the dawn of the
world Man tanyisi nerei had prevailed, and the decision of the
fates had been that men should mulu, they should have never died.
The first man who buried the first dead in the beginning of the
world is called Maka Tafaki. This, however, throws little light
on the matter, as tafaki is from afaki, to bury.


VIII. HADES.
A chief of Bau was making an intamate (heathen feast), and
searched for Nabuma Nakabu to be his aure (singer, or bard) at
it. They told him that Nabuma Nakabu had gone to Tukituki,
the west point of Efate, where is the entrance to Hades. He
went to Tukituki and was told that Nabuma Nakabu had died,
and been buried, and gone to Bokas. He went down to Bokas
(the first stage of the under-world), and was told that Nabuma
Nakabu had died, and been buried there, and gone to Magapopo
(next lower stage of Hades). He went down to Magapopo, and
was told that Nabuma Nakabu had died, and been buried there,
and gone to Magaferafera. He went down to Magaferafera and
was told that Nabuma Nakabu had died, and been buried there,
and had gone to Maganaponapo. He went down to Maganapo-
napo and was told that Nabuma Nakabu had died, and been
buried there, and had gone to Matika (the lowest stage of the
under-world). He went down to Matika and inquired for Nabuma
Nakabu, and they said to him, “Behold, there are his bones at
the foot of a nalas ” (a dark-leaved plant). He went and gathered
his bones into a basket, and, reascending into the world carried
them to Bau to the Mold (the napea , or dancing and singing
ground of the intamate). The drums were beaten, and as the
(to Efatese ears) inspiriting, measured sounds thundered forth,
the bones of Nabuma Nakabu, heaped together in the basket,
burst forth into sinking !
Acccording to the Efatese every man dies six times, each time
passing down to a lower stage, till he reaches Matika, and finally
disappears.
IX. KARISIBUM AND MAKA TAFAKI.
The people of the sky perceiving that the tide was out and the
reef bare, as it is at low water, came down and took off their
wings (literally “ thin sails ” — inlailaita), which were white, and
proceeded to fish with torches along the shore. Sosoan (a bird
whose song begins at dawn) began to sing (like one at “cock-
crow”), when they immediately came together, and, having laid
down the fish they had taken, put on their wings. Then all
joined in singing, and the wind rising blew them for a time back-
wards and forwards, till ascending they went on up into the sky.
This they often repeated. One night they came down and laid
aside their wings, as usual, in order that they might fish along
the shores* A man of the country, who had been watching them,
saw where they had laid their wings, and when they were out of
sight took the wings of one and hid them in a banana stem. In
the morning, at the earliest dawn, they came together, laid down


the fish they had taken, and began to put on their wings pre-
paratory to their return ascent. All did this but one whose wings
could not be found after the most anxious search, and who was
therefore left behind. She proved to be a woman, and the man
who had stolen and hidden her wings came and took her for his
wife. They lived peaceably together and had two sons. The man
said to his wife “ Let us give them names.” The woman said
“ No, let them call each other what they please.” One day the
two youths were playing with bows and arrows, the one inside,
the other outside the house, when the one called to the other
“ Maka Tafaki,” who responded to his brother, addressing him as
“ Karisi Bum.” Thus they received their names.
By-and bye trouble arose in the hitherto peaceful household.
The man illtreated his wife, and said to her, “ You are a wicked
woman, cause of trouble and sorrow; go back to your own
country.” This made her heart sore, and she sighed for the lost
wings, that she might fly away from all this turmoil and be at rest.
One day she and her two sons were out. By accident the youths
discovered a white thing in a banana stem. It was the thing
their father had hidden there. Their mother was overjoyed.
Determined to go, she first gave to her sons some information
about her kindred, expecting that they would eventually see them.
Then, putting on her wings, she sang the appropriate song,
swinging backwards and forwards a few times while doing so, and
went swiftly into heaven. They went home and told their
father.
The two brothers grew up and became exceedingly clever and
successful men. They excelled in everything, and became richer
than any of the people of the land. They were therefore envied.
They were told that they did not belong to that country at all,
and bidden go in search of their mother’s country. Their riches
were the principal cause of this ill-will. The aborigines, no doubt,
expected to possess these by driving them away. These brothers,
however, were not to be trifled with. They did things that made
them both renowned and feared. For example, on one occasion
they “beat the winds” with a club. For this purpose they
climbed a high nieru tree (casuarina), and lay in wait for the
winds. First came Suepate (‘ sua,’ to come down from), the trade
wind, at which they aimed a terrible blow but missed.
Then came Tohelan , the east wind, which they also missed.
So with some others. Finally came Mastan, the south-west wind.
This was their last chance, and they determined to make the most
of it. On came the towering wind in all its pride ; down came the
club on its forehead with thundering crash, and it fell with a
shriek, lifeless and prone. And this is the reason that, while all
the other winds blow rude and strong, the south-west wind blows
gently, or at any rate, soon dies away.


The brothers, continually taunted with being adventurers,
longed to get way to their mother’s country. One day they were
shooting birds with arrows. An arrow went up into heaven and
stuck fast in the roots of a namanga (banyan) tree. Another
arrow sent after it stuck in the end of its shaft, and so on and so
on, until the chain of arrows reached from heaven down to the
brothers’ foreheads. They took hold of the nearest and pulled.
It was firm. They climbed up to heaven. On getting up and
climbing in over the roots of the banyan tree, they saw an old blind
woman cooking six yams. They immediately thought, “ Perhaps
this is our grandmother of whom our mother used to tell us.”
Being blind she counted the six yams by feeling them with her
hands. They went forward without making any noise, and took
one away. She again went over the yams, counting them, and
could makeoutonly five. “ Perhaps,” thought she, “my grandsons,
of whom my daughter told me, have come and taken the sixth.”
Remembering their names as they Jiad been told to her, she called
out, “MakaTafaki! Karisi Bum !” They immediately replied, “It’s
we.” Thus ended their troubles.
According to another version of £his Efatese story, the mother of
Maka Tafaki, and Karisi Bum, was called Taurere. Before leaving
her home in the world on account of the ill-treatment to which
she was subjected by her husband, she comforted her two
sons, and told them not to cry but to watch for a long rope
that should be let down from heaven till it reached the foot
of a banyan tree. They kept on watching, till one day the
rope appeared as their mother had said. One of them first
climbed up far out of sight into heaven, and shook the rope as a
signal to his brother below of his safe arrival. The other then
climbed up also. They saw their old blind grandmother and
addressed her as Lata ! She, on her part, had been forewarned by
her daughter of their coming, and being requested to entertain
them kindly, giving them sugar-cane, flesh, and yams to eat. After
eating they said to her, “ The skin of this sugar-cane is sharp for
cutting. We will cut open your eyes with it that you may see.
This the}'- did. She said, “Oh children, you have made me all
right; lam well.” When finally they resolved to go down again
to the earth they made a big kavia (woven basket), and put into
it all thingswe now see in theearth, as fowls, pigs, male and female,
and all the different kinds of food, one by one. They let down
this loaded kawa from heaven by means of a long rope. At the
end of this rope it kept swinging in the air over every land
(or all, lands), but the mountains at none of them were high
enough (V» that it might touch them). They hauled it up, and
finally lowered it down at Utanilangi, in a valley called Papalaba,
between two high mountains, so that the mountains should over-
hang the kawa and prevent it from swinging off into space. At
33665 (9)—B


Papalaba the brothers took all the things out of the kawa.
On this account (that is, because Maka Tafaki landed here),
Nakainanga hisi Maka, the tribe that begets children entitled to
the prefix name Maka (or Mako), dwell at Utanilangi.
X. LAUTUMETA.
Lautaumeta was making an intamate in heaven. There were
no animals (as pigs) for sacrifices, but only food (yams). All the
different kinds of yams were at that time in heaven. There was
only one kind in the earth then called nakabu. (But there are now
twenty-seven different kinds of yams.) Lautaumeta was looking
out for an aure to sing at his intamate, and heard that there was
one on the earth called Nabuma Nakabu. This latter was asked
to act as aure, and having consented went up to heaven to the
malel of Lautaumeta. (It should be understood that Lautaumeta,
and Nabuma Nakabu are both yams.) Maka Tafaki, and Karisi
Bum said, “ Let us beat for them the napeas” (drums.) They
did so, and Nabuma Nakabu sang. Then all the different
nakainaga nani (tribes, or kinds of yams) came and danced in
the malel, till they stumbled .and fell broken to pieces. Maka
Tafaki and Karisi Bum gathered all the broken yams into a
basket, and, when the song was ended, carried them down to the
earth.
Sydney: William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.—lB99.




hr.fr. /f! (%&nju/L
' > **sMA/zaj£s-0 "
XS,mu^f
:
>'■ 5? >V
