









INSTITVTO PORTVGVÊS DE HONGKONG
(BECCÃO DE HISTÓRiA)
THE WESTERN PIONEERS AND
THEIR DISCOVERY OF MACAO
BY
J. M. BRAGA




TO
COMMANDER ALBANO DE OLIVEIRA
GOVERNOR OF MACAO
AS A SMALL TOKEN OF
ADMIRATION AND ESTEEM




CONTENTS
Foreword 7
Antecedents and influences
Portugal’s Trade in the XVlth Century 13
Trade in Asian Waters 22
The Incubus of Spain 33
The Pioneers 37
Expanding Horizons
Early Ventures Id
Far Eastern Trade ... 53
In search op a Home
Early Relations with the Chinese 60
Uncertainties 65
Return to Kwangtung 78
Trade at the China Coast 89
Establishment of Macao
The Port of ‘A-Ma’ 102
Clearing the Seas 109
Behind the Scenes in Peking 118
Macao’s First Settlers 129
An Outpost that Grew 139
POSTSCRIPTUM 152
Notes ••• 161
Appendix A Diogo Calvo’s Letter to the King of Portugal, 16th
Jan. 1527 185
Appendix B Extract from the Tractado da China, describing trade
difficulties in 1548 187
Appendix C Extract from the Tractado da China narrating
occurrences at Fukien in 1549 190
Appendix D Letters written by Leonel de Souza in 1556 and 1563... 202
Appendix E—Jesuit account of the Portuguese expedition against
pirates at Sam Moon, 1564 211
Index & Corrigenda 215




THE WESTERN PIONEERS AND THEIR
DISCOVERY OF MACAO
FOREWORD
'P'&rJW me me ) the name of the Portuguese colony of
Macao gets into the news, and it is familiar enough to
.luHrlimri residents of South China, but how little is generally
1 ‘ known in the West of this interesting little spot! It
ranks among the most romantic of the many settlements established
by the ‘pioneers of the West’, four hundred years ago, and it has filled
an important position in the history of Europe’s relations with
China and several other places in the Far East. Yet many phases
of its activities are wrapped in a degree of obscurity; its discovery
and establishment, in particular, still provide material for specu-
lation.
Founded to fill a trade need by the men who voyaged between
Malacca and Japan, and wlio came knocking at the gates of China
and other lands in the then little know 7 n Oriental world, Macao has
occupied a fascinating role in the story of international relations.
In the annals of Christianity, especially, Macao possesses an
extraordinarily high place, and a great deal has been made of this
service. But the activities of the little community, although there
were many features which were connected with the work of evange-
lisation, hinged mainly on the position Macao occupied as the
intermediary in the carrying trade between Ear Eastern countries.
The most important circumstances that were linked with Macao’s
existence related to commerce, and there are phases in its history
which show 7 that the little colony was the distributing centre for


goods from Europe and China as well as south-western Asia, its
reputation as a missionary centre having tended to obscure its impor-
tance as a commercial centre.
The story of the activities and occupations of the individuals
who contributed to this should have its little niche in history, for
the deeds and accomplishments of ‘courts and kings’ have been sung
all through the ages, and churchmen everywhere have extolled the
services of their brethren in every clime, but the prosaic and
uncoloured doings of the Portuguese trading communities have not
had many biographers, possibly even by artful design, wteta-Faria y
Sousa felt constrained to apologise for referring to the Portuguese
voyages for some years, because ‘all that they did was in relation to
trade, a subject unbecoming a grave history’.
The early history of the Portuguese in Asia has been touched
upon in parts, at times, by the actors in that magnificent drama of
accomplishment, and the Portuguese official chroniclers Barros,
Couto, Bocarro and other contemporary historians Caatanheda,
Correa have dealt with the activities of their countrymen, includ-
ing episodes connected with the trade which their countrymen con-
ducted, while Duarte Barbosa and Tome Pires, in an earlier genera-
tion, and several voyagers, foreigners among them, -who visited the
East in later years, have left material which is of some value.
Of Macao, the Portuguese historians had little to say, just as
complete records of the history of the Portuguese Asian outposts were
not preserved, for the principal figures in the story of Portugal’s Far
Eastern empire have left little enough for their descendants to know
of what they did, how they lived, and how they kept together.
Macao shared this conspiracy of silence, but latterly through
the efforts of modern scholars, men like Montalto de Jesus, whose
Historic Macao, in spite of its defects, still holds the field, Professor
Charles Boxer, that rare investigator to whom the Portuguese owe
far more than they have ever acknowledged for his learned works on
the subject of the Portuguese in the Far East, Jordao de Freitas, the
Marques Pereira’s, Father Gervaix, Dr. Armando Cortesao, Father
Teixeira, and a few more, the picture has tended to become fairly in-
telligible.


The origin of Macao is difficult to discover, but that there was
some understanding with the Chinese need not be doubted, and it
was the logical consequence of the discoveries and experiences which
fell to the lot of the Portuguese pioneers in the course of their progress
from Europe to the Cape of Good Hope and then through the waters
of southern Asia. A mere century or so before Macao was founded,
men in Europe drew their inspiration from the metaphorical text of
the Hebrew bible and seemed to be more familiar with the form of
Heaven and Hell than of the face of the globe. During the first
forty years of their geographical explorations, the Portuguese advanced
haltingly along the coast of Africa, but in the next forty years they
improved the ships in which they sailed, explored the Atlantic Ocean,
laid down the plan which took them to India, and carried out the
enterprise from which they got such rich rewards.
In little more than half a century, under the direction of Prince
Henry, the Portuguese followed in the footsteps of the philosophers
of ancient Greece, reviving the desire for knowledge. They probed
knowledge for the benefit of their country, and achieved a great deal:
astronomy advanced with the slowly increasing audacity of the
navigators, while the practical application of mathematics was more
fully recognized as the need grew for measuring distances and time;
instruments were gradually improved as the faets on which the
physical theories of science became a little clearer; the fundamentals
of navigational science came to be observed, and fragments of
knowledge were pieced together to create it; the art of ship-
building improved, with the application of the rudder as well,
for the knowledge of the construction and equipping of ships
progressed as greater and greater needs came to be felt, so that
vessels might withstand the bufferings of Atlantic storms, and
carry goods and supplies for longer and ever longer voyages; the
art of sailing these ships and the application of nautical science to
sailing developed steadily and surely. Currents and tides and other
physical phenomena had to be studied and recorded. Maps had to
be drawn, not those with monsters and the biblical references with
which artists of the Middle Ages loved to spatter their maps, but
accurate outlines of coasts and ports, so that ships far from land
might plot their way and get unerringly to port. Did not even Co-
lumbus, about whom so much has been claimed, not hesitate to indi-
cate the ‘earthly paradise’ somewhere beyond the coasts he found?


With very little to guide them, except the earlier experiences
and scanty knowledge of a few Arab and Mediterranean sailors, and
handicapped by the superstitions of the Middle Ages, but with the help
of the rudimentary astronomy of Moorish and Jewish mathematicians,
the Portuguese developed the science of navigation. And when we
recall that this science has developed into one of the most exact of those
now known, and when we contemplate the fine optical and physical
instruments of the present day, and the marvels of such things as
radar, the correct measurement of surfaces and weights, the thorough
application of mathematics to physics, and then remember that the
early Portuguese navigators had to estimate time without a watch,
observe the heavens without a telescope, and endeavour to understand
the weather without a barometer, and yet succeeded in doing so much
and going so far, we may be willing to concede that the Portuguese
pioneer scientists and navigators of the XVth century really did
something for mankind.
In the Introduction to his The Rise of Portuguese Power in
Lidia, 1497-1550, a book which measures the Portuguese pioneers
with the yardstick of modern standards, Mr. R. S. Whitew’ay ob-
serves, nevertheless, that “at the time when this history opens, the
whole of the carrying trade of the Indian Ocean, both to the east
and to the west, was in the hands of those who dwelt on its northern
littoral. The wealth that the monopoly of this capping trade poured
through those two gates, the mouth of the Red Sea and the mouth
of the Persian Gulf, into the marts of Arabia and Persia, has tinged
the dreams of the Arabian Nights giving a definite lent to the popu-
lar conception of the East. But it did more —it supplied the sinews
of war without which the fanaticism of the Muhamedan armies
would in vain have attempted a footing in Europe. The chief im-
portance to the world at large of the discovery of the route to India
by the Cape of Good Hope lay in the blow' that this discovery
struck at Muhamedan power. It is true that Portugal and Spain
had freed themselves before Yasco da Gama sailed from the Tagus,
and it is true that for many years after the Portuguese fleets had
temporarily cleared the Indian Ocean of the Red Sea traders, the
Turkish advance hung like a nightmare over Venice and Hungary,
nevertheless the main artery had been cut when the Portuguese took
up the challenge of the Muhamedan merchants of Calicut and swept
their ships from the ocean. The effect on the history of the world of
this action has been imperishable, and Portugal can look back with


pride to the strenuous efforts of a century that culminated in the
discovery of the Cape of Good Hope by Bartholomeu Dias, and to
the pages of its history that are illuminated by the names of Albu-
querque, Duarte Pacheco, Magalha.es, and of the uncle Paulo and his
nephews, Estevao and Christovao da Gama.”
Four-and-a-half centuries have passed since that came about,
and one of the many fruits of that service to the Western world was
the setting up of Macao and its maintenance in spite of many vicis-
situdes. It was not so long before that that Machiavelli produced his
‘handbook of cunning’, and much has happened since The Prince be-
came the text-book for every ambitious ruler in Europe, when to
achieve political ends or to gratify personal ambitions, so much was
considered admissable, while the world continues to applaud the suc-
cessful, with little thought given to the means whereby success has
been achieved. In the years that followed, some parish priest or
quiet thinker might have tried to make his protest heard, but his
whisper was drowned by the babble of those who created and upheld
the oligarchies which crowded round the thrones of European kings,
while capitalism grew unrestrained.
Many years have passed since Macao was founded, and much
has happened in the world, but through the history of Macao’s
trade it is possible to trace a wonderful evolution, as changes took
place from generation to generation, and other peoples came seek-
ing a share of China’s trade. The greatest of the changes that
have taken place has been that governing men’s thoughts and out-
looks, and it has been Macao’s privilege to see and feel the reaction
of European influences on Eastern life and thought during four
hundred years. The men and women who took part in the activities
of the little colony’s life and being never gave a thought to these
changes, but it is instructive to observe, over a perspective extending
four hundred years into the past, much that is good and noble and
gentle and kind, even while selfishness and greed and bitter rivalry
flourished in so many places in the world.
In the pages of the present study no attempts are made to deal
with the history of Macao, but merely with the circumstances that
led to its establishment and a few remarks covering the very earliest
years of the little settlement’s activities.
*
* #
The notes which follow first appeared as scattered articles in a
little magazine, Benascimento, printed at Macao (1943-46), during
the War, when shut off from the rest of the world and to while away


the tedium of some idle hours, a number of friends tried to entertain
one another and others who were prepared to read their effusions, by
their contributions to that periodical. They are now published in a
modified form with much additional matter.
Some of the old Chinese and Portuguese references reproduced do
not seem to have appeared before in English, and several of the Portu-
guese texts have been quoted, therefore, at considerable length and
reprinted in full in Portuguese in the Appendices. No excuse is offered
for doing this, as it is thought that the Portuguese texts will thereby be
made accessible to many who might like to read them in the original.
Further research is needed to identify several of the place-
names, and to find other Chinese as well as Portuguese sources to
bear out those that have been got together here. In the national
archives and possibly in libraries in Portugal and Portuguese India,
it is quite likely that there is still some material bearing on this
subject, Portuguese historians owe it to their country to search
for such manuscripts. In the same way, the study of Chinese
district chronicles,or gazetteers, and the dozens of works, long since
out of print, reproducing memorials written by the Chinese officials in
the coastal areas, will probably afford considerable material for further
studies covering the early conticts of the Chinese and the Portuguese
in the XVlth century.
No excuse is offered for using the Cantonese rendering of place-
names, as in the early days the Portuguese seldom had dealings with
officials speaking the Court tongue. Confusion has possibly arisen by
the variety of dialects used by the Chinese traders with whom the
Portuguese were in touch, and, in course of time, when Chinese
scholars decide to make a study of this subject further light will be
shed on a truly fascinating phase of Chinese history.
*
# *
The writer is happy to record his thanks and indebtedness to
Mr. Loh Tsok-tseung, Principal of the Lingnam College of Canton
and Macao, for study and transcriptions of Chinese source material
and for his very great help in translating them into English, and to
the late Professor Lo Koon-wai of Lingnam University for encoura-
gement and advice. To Prof. P. de Vargas of Yenching-Harvard
University, Peiping, thanks are also offered for several valuable sugges-
tions and friendly appreciation of some aspects of the present study.


ANTECEDENTS AND INFLUENCES
Portugal's Trade in the XVlth Century.
the discovery of the sea-route to India, Portugal exported honey,
hides, wax, olive oil, figs, cork, and wines to Antwerp, receiving
cloth, silver, and copper in exchange. This improved in the XYth
century for with the extension of Portuguese navigation and the
establishment of depots in Western Africa a change took place.
Portugal was enabled to export to the rest of Europe “besides much
sugar, also malagueta, aniline, gums, ivory, wheat, and African spi-
ces from the Benin country on the coasts of Guine.”
The voyage of Yasco da Gama changed it all, for when the Port-
uguese discovered the sea-route to India they came upon a well
organized carrying trade which was flourishing in the seas of Asia.
Goa, Cochin, Ormuz, Colombo, and Malacca and other places were
flourishing centres, with the Muslims as the principal intermediaries.
The Portuguese could not secure the trade without a struggle, for
the resistance put up by the Muslims was long and bitter, but the
Portuguese ships which furnished the model copied by other Eu-
ropeans in later years proved their superiority in the combats in
Asian waters. The Portuguese emerged triumphant, thereby chang-
ing the destinies of mankind.
Some believed that strong fleets would be sufficient to maintain
Portuguese ascendency, but Affonso de Albuquerque soon realized
that without bases from which to operate, to organize administration,
to build up stocks of goods and carry on regular trade, to fit out and
repair the ships, and to refresh the sailors, for the voyages took a
terrible toll of human lives, it would not be possible to maintain their
hold in the East. Goa, Ormuz, Malacca, and many other places were
occupied and fortified, and Portugal was committed to the ot
building an empire. Within fifteen years of the date of Y ascc da
Gama's voyage the Portuguese were in virtual command of the sea
trade of Asia.
With the establishment of the Far Eastern trade on a firm basis
“Portugal was enabled to export to Flanders, through the Portuguese
factory which flourished at Antwerp, precious stones, pearls, pure
gold, spices and drugs, amber, ambergris, aloes, cotton, and other


products, as well as sugar from St. Thomas Island, and the wood
which gave its name to Brazil.” 0 But the principal trade was the
one in spices from Asia.
The attention of the Portuguese was centred upon large profits
from a small capital investment, and the spice trade, with its limited
souses, provided just such an opportunity. Spice was already an
important factor in European commerce; it was to become an even
more important one in international trade when the shiploads of
Asian goods were discharged by the Portuguese ships at Lisbon, there-
by displacing the camel loads which used to traverse the route
previously monopolised by the ‘combine’ of the Arabs, Egyptians,
and Venetians in the Eastern Mediterranean.
At one blow the economy of Europe changed. The Mediterra-
nean ceased to be the commercial centre of the Western world.
Commerce swung round from Central to Western Europe, and the
countries that look out over the Atlantic and had once felt only ‘the
backwash of trade’ began to thrive and grow in wealth from the new
interchange of the products and merchandise bought and sold in the
metropolis of the Portuguese nation.
The steadily growing volume of trade from Asia to Lisbon, in
the ships w'hich carried much larger quantities of merchandise than
was possible in the old days of the Levantine overland route, quickly
made itself felt in Europe. The great Italian and Hansa city-states
that had flourished from the days of the Crusades and had provided
the means whereby culture could find its richest expression in Italy
and the Rhine valley, were deprived of the sources of their wealth.
The flourishing cities of Venice, Genoa, Cologne, Lubeck, Rostock,
and distant Bantzig, Riga, and Novgorod felt the paralysing effects
of the reduction of trade, rapidly declining in importance. Mer-
chants from Antwerp, Hamburg, and London went to Lisbon for
the precious merchandise of Asia. The new age began to flourish
in Europe in fresh centres, for new Western powers emerged and
Spain, Holland, France, and Britain began the contest, with vary-
ing fortunes, during the three centuries that followed, for the com-
mercial supremacy of the world.
During the brief age of two centuries, the first (the XVth century)
when she was creating modern nautical science, and the second (the
XVlth century) when she explored the world, Portugal was the vir-
tual Mistress of the Seas. Lisbon might well have become the greatest


centre of European trade, for the Dutch and other traders went to
Portugal to buy the pepper, cloves, nutmegs, gingers, and other
substances that were in demand to flavour the meats of Europe.
Lisbon grew and expanded almost overnight. “The Eua Nova
dos Mercadores became a thoroughfare that was filled with bustle and
confusion. There were cloths from Flanders; carpets from Persia,
brocades from Florence; oriental jewels and diamonds and pearls. The
ships kept unloading a ceaseless stream of the products of the strangest
lands: pepper from the Malayan Archipelago; cinnamon from Ceylon;
cloves from the Moluccas; nutmeg and mace from Banda; benzoin
from Sumatra; camphor from Borneo; pearls from the Red Sea; lac
from Pegu; woods from Brazil and Asia; sugar from Madeira, the
Azores, and St. Thomas Islands; malagueta from the Guinea coast;
plumes from the Sahara; diamonds from Narsinga; rubies from Ceylon
and Pegu; gold and silver from Ethiopia, India, and Africa; clothing
and vestments from Bengal; cloth from Damao; silks from China and
Sumatra: porcelain vessels and fine brocades from the China coast;
sandalwood, honey, and wax from Timor; skins and furs; corals,
pearls, embroidery, printed cloth, tapestries, furniture, bronzes, bam-
boo-ware, lacquered glass, perfumes, and a multitude of drugs.” (®).
Goods flowed to Lisbon from almost every country in Europe:
woollens and velvets; caps and kerchiefs; Flemish clocks and
watches; Portuguese and Spanish wines; mirrors and crystal and
glassware; jewellery, curiosities, and pictures; coins and gold and
silver; swords and daggers, their hilts quaintly carved, arquebuses,
and other instruments of war; knives and scissors; metals and metal
goods of copper, iron and lead; musical instruments; ornaments of
all kinds; dried fruits, cheese, vinegar, and a host of articles. And
Portuguese ships carried them to Asia.
It was inevitable that with the sudden development of the vo-
lume of trade, capitalism in the modern sense should have begun to
make itself felt, for the influx of gold and silver, not only in Portugal
but also in places trading with Portugal, was followed by rising
prices. Speculation in produce and exchange followed. Banking took
on new significance for “there was trading in mobile values and
operations which placed financial resources at the disposal of States.
Money circulated between places without the need for moving gold
and silver from centre to centre, while men got together to establish
and manipulate prices and even to curtail production. International


bourses dealing in commodities and currency began. The foundations
of modern banking and modern industry were laid, and began to
flourish two centuries later in Europe, taking as their bases the prin-
ciples of the financial and commercial pre-capitalism of the Middle
Ages.” ( 3 ).
Had Portugal possessed the industrial resources and the capita-
listic organisation at the same time she, too, might have been a con-
tender for the economic leadership of the nations. And had the
Portuguese, from the materials at their disposal, created the industrial
enterprises which came to flourish in other lands, history would
probably have another tale to tell. But the Portuguese were not able
to arrest the influences that were at work against the economic
structure of the country. No amount of foresight could have saved
the situation without the commercial experts who built up the eco-
nomic strength of other countries. These men, the leading commer-
cial and industrial experts the Jewish bankers under whose
direction Portugal bade fair to become the business capital of Europe,
were expelled to please the whim of a Spanish princess, “as part of
the dynastic deal by which King Manoel was to marry the eldest
daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain, thereby to acquire
the reversionary right to the throne of Castille and Aragon, in return
for persecuting the most prosperous community in Portugal.” They
lost the opportunity to develop in Portugal, the arts, manufactures,
and shipping and commercial organisation based on the produce,
spices, foodstuffs, dyes, metals, and other merchandise which were
being carried by the Portuguese to Europe, from Asia and America.
In Flanders and elsewhere in Europe, the exiled Portuguese
merchants established and developed markets in “perfect oriental
pearls and gems, gold ore and refined gold, ivory, amber, spices, drugs,
musk, civet, aloes, incense, rhubarb, China-root from Asia and Africa,
raw sugar from Sao Thome, Guinea, and Morocco, wine from Ma-
deira, leather, gums, skins, and feathers from north-west Africa, salt,
wine, oil, sumach, and fruits from Portugal itself.” ( 4 )
It was as navigators, discoverers, and pioneering intermediaries
between peoples that the Portuguese must be remembered, for when
the majority of the best business men in Portugal went to other
lands, these men devoted their attention to the development of trade
and industry in their new homes, while their successors in Portugal
proved no match for those who had been driven away. In this w r ay,


the resourcefulness, the energy, and the courage cf the sons of Port-
ugal prepared the way for others to lay the foundations of the
modern economic structure of Europe. Based on the trade introduced
by the Portuguese, dynasties of bankers were established, principally
in the Netherlands and Western Germany, while new industries
were created in many countries. “The first lotteries were introduced,
and the passion for gambling, that child of the mania for speculation
which was a part of the life of the age, grew in Western Europe.” ( 5 )
For almost a century, nevertheless, the streets of Lisbon were
filled with all sorts of people, among them soldiers and sailors, some
bronzed by tropic suns and emaciated by African or Asian fevers, or
others, men of several countries, eager to go to the fascinating East,
to seek their fortunes in the far places of the world. Carolina Michaelis
de Yasconcellos catches the spirit of the times when she tells us that
“all the ambitions, all the enthusiasms, all the odiums, and all the
loves of Europe gathered in Lisbon for one short moment 1 The
new fortunes drew many thousands of adventurers who were wan-
dering, lost and homeless, through the world. They drew kings and
princes, and the ambassadors, envoys, consuls, and agents of every
nation. The nobility refurbished their old palaces, the clergy reform-
ed the church, the religious orders doubled the number of their
monasteries, and on the banks of the River Tagus there rose the
magnificent structure of the Jeromymos , on the high altar of which
King Manoel placed ‘the monstrance of Belem’, made from the gold
of Kiloa, the first precious metal to reach Portugal from the East.” O
And Camoes, the poet cf Portugal’s glories, exclaims:
So now her flag to every gale unfurl’d,
She towers the Empress of the Eastern world.
Such are the blessings sapient Kings bestow,
And from thy stream such gifts, 0 Commerce, flow.
Canto VII.
The magic of the discoveries and the mystery of the East wove
a spell over the imaginations of the Portuguese. In unceasing num-
bers Portuguese men went forth into the world. Some went in search
of glory or eternal salvation in the unending ‘Crusade’, while others
sought for fortunes in colonial adventure. As the pathfinders to the
East, Portugal’s man hoed suffered terribly, but Europe gained by


the;r experiences. Not all of them were gentlemen, but these men
were nothing worse than the product of their own rough age. From
the best of them, however, Asia gained much; they dedicated their
lives to serve the natives, at times selling all they had to set out op a
noble and unselfish undertaking. Their record must, therefore, endure
as a trply cherished memory, for with the Cross of Christ on the sails of
their ships, they ventured everywhere to fulfil a divine mission, and
in the execution of that ideal they counted not their lives dear. “No
words of ours can alter what those men did the best or the worst
of them who followed a star. They drained the cup of devotion .. •
and they reached the summit of daring. And the memory of that
will endure long after pur own lives are ended.”
Professor Aubrey Bell, that discerning student of things Port-
uguese, points out that “only half a century elapsed between the
voyage of Yasco da Gama and the death of D. Joao de Castro in
1548 and what astonishes and must ever astonish the world is the
mighty achievement of this tiny kingdom. The series of wars with
Castile, of adventures along the west coast of Africa, of battles in
Morocco, of internal troubles, might seem to justify and explain a
period of complete inactivity. Yet in the years that followed, the
Portuguese conquered not one country or one province, but a whole
world —in those little ships ‘que foram descobrir mundos e mares',
and into this brief period is crowded a bewildering array of fighters,
writers, poets, historians, administrators, men of science, to such an
extent that no brief summary of Portuguese history could ever record
their names. Large tracts of Asia, Africa, and America acknowledg-
ed Portugal’s sway, and the Kings of the East sent costly presents,
gold and spices and precious stones, to their suzerain in the West . . .
We marvel how Portugal could continue so long to sustain efforts so
many and so various. For a skilful historian the story of Portugal
in the fifteenth apd sixteenth centuries affords an epic subject more
wonderful than perhaps any in history.” ( 7 )
That explains, perhaps, how it was that Portugal practically
held the world in fee, and how it is that the spirit of Portugal’s far-
flung empire still hovers over half the w 7 orld, for Portuguese foot-
prints may still be traced along thousands of miles of shores, Portu-
gal’s brief age of glory resting not on the intelligence of her statesmen
but on the achievements of her priests, the success of her mariners,
and the deeds of a handful of heroes.


This is an interesting period in European history, when radical
changes were being made, of the transition of a continent from a
state bordering on ignorance and the entry into a period when men
began to think of progress and prosperity. Great numbers left the
soil, drawn to the cities by the mirage of easy wealth, as tales went
round of the great fortunes made by daring adventurers in the East.
Little was heard of the greater number who left their homes and
ended by leaving their bones on inhospitable shores Of at the bottom
of the sea. Men were too intent upon easily made wealth and the
enjoyment of life in its material possibilities to t limit of those who
sacrificed their lives on the altar of duty. The captains, the mis-
sionaries, the factors, who did not go seeking material gain, were
quickly forgotten by a world grown cynical to nearly everything but
the desire for riches.
The cities of Europe expanded to meet economic besides political
needs, and the greater volume of commerce drew yet more men from
the farms, for the soil no longer offered an attractive living. Then,
too, the merchants with their newly found wealth invested in land
and converted large tracts to sheep-rearing, to supply the woollen
cloth needed in overseas trade. It is estimated, furthermore, that
half the population of Portugal was carried off by the plagues that
were devastating Europe at the time. The result of all this was that,
in Portugal, energies hitherto given to the soil could not be restored,
and the real economic stability which was underm'ned when the
Jewish bankers were expelled was replaced by a deceptive luxury.
The Wealth gained from Portugal’s overseas trade had, at times,
to be poured out to buy food from other European states. The flow
of commerce which shifted the economic gravity of Europe, bringing
about a complete revolution in the commercial arrangements of the
world, was not used ti the fullest advantage by the Portuguese.
“Portuguese life underwent the most profound transformations and
all levels were upset: The fever for luxury and pleasures infected all
classes of society, reducing the moral levels and the austerity of old
usages and good custom; the passion for profits and material well-be-
ing resulted in unmeasurable ambitions with their results of dishonest
practice and improper means in all ranks of life; the influx of slave
labour led to the increase in laziness and in the reduction of manual
labour; contact with the adventurers of all races spread vices not
known before; the expeditions undertaken by the Portuguese fleets,


in which all able-bodied men took part, were followed by a great
wave of emigration which led to the stagnation of agricultural life
in Portugal; the increase in the cost of living reduced the middle
class and ruined the humble rural nobility; mercantile transact-
ions and financial operations on a bigger scale led to the rise of
the bourgeoisie; the lure of business drew many men to desert their
older callings, seduced by a life of apparent ease and profit.” ( 8 )
Venice had been the classical example for Europe, of what the
Mohammedan traders already knew, that the greatest profits came
not from production but in the carrying and distribution of goods
and in financing trade. From small beginnings the principles grew
which became the found ition of capitalism, when wealth is
concentrated in the hands of the few. Knowledge of markets,
bargaining with producers, development of shipping, shrewd selling,
profitable advances of money, in the hands of a limited number, held
together by privilege or monopoly, furnished the means whereby
great fortunes grew.
The oligarchical form of life in European courts was a well-
established idea by the time that Portugal’s eyes turned towards the
ocean in search of her destiny, so that when those distant lands
sought by Portugal were discovered, the only rule of conduct and
procedure to guide the Portuguese court was that which then flour-
ished in Europe. And when the conduct and example and the laws
of the ruling class were so strongly influenced by self-interest what
could prevent human nature from self-seeking? From that code of
social conduct divorced from humanitarianism and devoid of the
ideal of chivalry which sustained Europe in its difficult days men
drew inspiration! And though it was an age of vigour, mental
activity, and creative spirit, gross materialism took a more important
place than it had ever done in European society.
That was the European precedent for the Portuguese to follow,
when privilege and opportunism influenced men’s thoughts and
conduct. What chance had the idealist then? In conformity with
the limit d conceptions of the times, the Portuguese Crown having
established its hold over commerce proceeded to capitalize on the op-
portunities which the pioneers created. As is the case with most
monopolies, development w T as rapid. But it w r as not regulated; profits
were not made available for further development, while the policy
of the centralization of power was perpetuated a policy from


which many men, even to-day, have not been able to break away.
Given time, however, a good balance would probably have been
struck, for there were able men in Portugal and, in the East, patriots
who w r ould have done much for their country. A. new generation
might have replaced those who had been lost to Portugal when intol-
erance crept in.
“Portugal was great in those days when all Europe was shaking
off the trammels of the Middle Ages in the Renaissance, and Dom
Manoel was well suited to the spirit of the age which inspired his
contemporaries ... A change came over the Old World and there
grew T the ferment of new life as the art of printing opened the minds
of men. Then Machiavelli composed his famous definition of a ‘perfect
prince’, Luther hurled defiance at that proud Medici, Pope Leo X,
and the fiery zeal of Francis de Xavier carried the Cross to distant
eastern lands, the wonders of which were told in Portugal.” (9)
The value of trade grew and increased, but it was principally
the wealthy who benefitted, although new opportunities came for the
poor, some of whom must have profited. But education had not yet
prepared men for the sudden change, and thus it was that in spite
of the newly found wealth in Europe, the towns were always crowded,
with the landlords thinking of their rents, the officials of their pock-
ets, the poor of ‘the one chance’, and the statesmen of extending
national power.
All over the East, the Portuguese found well established old
civilizations and cultures, clearly defined modes of conduct corrupted
from earlier ideals societies well constituted to produce and distri-
bute goods, many ways of living and spending flourishing centres
of trade, materialistic peoples everywhere!
Rightly to understand all these reactions on the minds of the
Europeans who came to the East is to see correctly far into the
minds of men of the XYlth century.
Some of the more adventurous among the Portuguese succum-
bed to the love of luxury and to easily made wealth, but it is to the
ever-lasting credit of the Portuguese pioneers that though some, even
them,were tempted by the lure of gold, Portugal’s history
in the East contains episodes worthy of the brightest days of human
greatness. Nor was there ever a lack of men to follow the manly
leaders in the most trying enterprises of chivalry and daring. The


exploits of Duarte Pacheco, the Portuguese Achilles; the intrepidity
of Affonso de Albuquerque; the fearless defences of Diu and so many
other fortresses; the gallant expedition under Christovao da Grama
to Abyssinia which, in the words of Gibbon, ‘was saved by 450 Port-
uguese for Christianity’; the sacrifices of Antonio Galvao, the lay
‘apostle’ of the Spice Islands; the services of Father Francis Xavier,
of Father Nunes Barretto, and so many more of the church in Japan
‘which though destroyed by persecution, gave martyrs not inferior
in heroism to those who adorned Rome under the Caesars’ (10> ; of
the nobleman D. da Silveira who led a band of priests and
died for bis faith in the depths of South Africa; of D. Joao de Cas-
tro, that paragon of viceroys; of D. Leoniz Pereira, the courageous
defender of Malacca to mention only a few of the many stout-
hearted Portuguese who, so far from home, contributed to a story
of service and devotion crowded into the space of a few decades not
to be surpassed in the annals of any race.
Trade in Asian Waters. Unfortunately for students of Portu-
guese history, there is a great deal that is missing among the docu-
ments of Portugal. The papers and records of Prince Henry have
been lost, possibly destroyed at the burning of Sagres when Francis
Drake sacked the place. Other documents presumably of great
value are believed to have disappeared during the great Lisbon
Earthquake of 1765, when the India House collapsed and all the
papers there were lost.
We should very much like to know, for instance, how it was
that Yasco da Gama went unerringly from trading station to trading
station in Africi KTimani, Mozambique, Mombisa, Malindi—
and without delay proceeded straight across the Indian Ocean to
the Malabar Coast, to Calicut, one of the most important trading
centres of western India in tlrse days, instead of groping his way
along the coast in search of a suitable port. This procedure would
have been possible, it may be presumed, only if the Portuguese pos-
sessed prior knowledge of what they were looking for.
How else could one explain how quickly the Portuguese visited,
during the next few years, all the important centres of trade:
Calicut, Cochin, Cannanore, Goa, Ormuz, Aden, Colombo? Then,
when Albuquerque decided to build a maritime empire, how quickly
he seized all the key-ports: Ormuz in 1509; Goa in 1510; Malacca


(first visited in 1609) in 1511. Had he lived a little longer he
might have taken Aden too, although by taking Diu the Portuguese
practically nullified Aden. It is remarkable, also, how little time
was lost in sending expeditions from Malacca, when it was occupied,
to visit Pegu, Siam, Cocbinchina, and the East Indian Islands
Banka, Java, Flores, Buru, Amboina, Ceram, Banda, Lucipara,
Ternate. And in 1613 Jorge Alvares was sent to China, anchoring
at the mouth of the Canton River, off Nam-tau (isiS), near Lintin
Island, ( n ) Only really important trade centres were visited.
There is certainly a great deal in Portuguese history still to
explain. Why, again, should they have drawn up those careful
surveys of Asian trade like the exhaustive reports of Tome Pires
and Duarte Barb sa ? ( 12 )
Joao de Barros and Diogo do Couto, the chroniclers and com-
pilers of the celebrated Decadas, are known to have written geogra-
phical compendiums, but these have been lost. Antonio Bocarro,
Couto’s successor as chronicler, also compiled an encyclopaedic geo-
graphical and commercial survey early in the XYIIth century, but
only portions of this monumental work have been published in
recent years. Pedro Barretto de Rezende, Bocarro’s collaborator,
improved on his friend’s work, but his original also remains in man-
uscript.
From these sources and the works of the Portuguese chroniclers
as well as accounts left by Portuguese and foreign travellers it should
be possible to draw up a really comprehensive study of the Asiatic
world as the Portuguese found it and then of the changes that took
place during the century which followed. A few important studies
have been written in recent years covering some phases of this
period, by men like Whiteway, Crawfurd, Danvers, to mention a
few, but a complete survey of this phase of human endeavour and
activity has still to be written.
No satisfactory understanding of the trade in the Far East at
that period is possible without some knowledge of the commercial
activities when the Portuguese secured control of this region and of
the sea-borne trade of Asia, and the links between Asia and Europe
before the arrival of the Portuguese.


The dominant factor in this trade was undoubtedly the tranship-
ment of produce from*Spice Islands, via India, to Europe, and the
shipment of Indian products, principally cotton cloth, eastwards as
well as westwards from India. It is worthy of note that the trade of
South-eastern Asia became stabilized only a few decades earlier when
Malacca had become the great entrep6t of that part of the world
the great clearing-house not only of all the islands farther eastwards
but of the merchandise of China and other countries of East Asia,
and was in direct touch with ports on the Malabar coast.
Of the Malabar ports, Calicut was one of the greatest, famous for
the cotton fabric which still goes under the name of ‘calico’, and with
the other ports Goa, Onore, Barcelor, Cannanore, Cochin, and
Quilon responsible for exporting the produce of Western India
and for importing goods from all the countries that bordered the In-
dian Ocean Mozambique, Sofala, Malindi, and the island of Ma-
dagascar in Africa; Mocha in Arabia; Ormuz (the port of Persia and
the hinterland beyond); Lauribunder, Surat, and Cambay in north-
western India, and Ceylon in the south. The Coromandel coast of
eastern India, extending from Negapatam to Orissa, and Arakan,
Pegu, and Martaban, as well as Tenasserim, all traded with the
ports of Malabar.
There was a constant coming and going of ships of all sorts,
many hundreds of them, apart from the still more numerous smaller
craft, to carry goods for the needs of the many millions of people
who depended on the sea-borne trade of Southern Asia. The volume
was enormous, but most of it was essentially Asian. Only a small
fraction of trade was destined for Europe, via the Persian Gulf or
the Red Sea, and it consisted mainly of spices, principally pepper
(“the great preserver”), and some silk from China, cotton from In-
dia, and drugs from many places.
Early in the XYth century the old practice of through voyages
died out. Ships from China no longer visited the Persian Gulf.
Chinese ships carried on trade at Malacca. Between Malacca
and Malabar, Hindu or Moslem ships carried all sorts of goods,
mainly cotton cloth from India to Malacca, bringing back silk,
spices, drugs, and other merchandise. Some of the ships traded to
the east coasts of India and to Burma, and others trafficked to and


from the Malabar ports. From the west coast of India, the carrying
trade between Asia and Europe had fallen the hands of the
Mohammedans the Arabs, Egyptians, and Turks. ( 13 )
Swarms of pirates greyed upon all this traffic and without a cen-
tralized authority to curb the activities of these outlaws they cons-
tituted a real menace to trade.
It was upon such a world that Yasco da Gama set his eyes.
His voyage was only of an exploratory nature and cost the lives of
116 of the 170 men who set out from Portugal, but as a commercial
venture, from King Manoel’s point of view, it was a most successful
one. With the first-hand knowledge gained of the opportunities
connected with the Indian trade, King Manoel lost no time in des-
patching a big fleet, the first of the squadrons which were sent out
from Portugal, year after year, to capture and hold that trade. Many
of the ships never returned, some were left in India, others were
wrecked, but the majority brought quantities of Asiatic goods to Por-
tugal, mainly spices. And a new era began for mankind.
The traders in Western India, most of whom were Hindus,
might have welcomed the Portuguese as new customers, even
expecting great things from the new trade. The Moslems the
Arabs and the Egyptians —felt the danger, however. Nor were they
wrong, for the Portuguese lost no time in seeking to impede the
trade on which the Mediterranean powers had waxed rich.
It was inevitable that the Portuguese should have sought an
outlet to the East as part of a national crusade. Modern historians
see in Portugal’s expansion into Asia the logical result of the religious
repression exercised by the Moors in Iberia during close on six
hundred years. “Taking the broad view, the Portuguese irruption
into Asia was the culmination of the long struggle against the Moors
at home. From the tenth to the fifteenth century the Iberian
peninsula was the scene of three thousand seven hundred battles, so
it is computed, between its Christian tribes and the Arabian Emirs,
In the course of those unending wars the Portuguese and the
Spaniards emerged as nations.”
Mr. Collis goes on: “So lengthy a struggle, far from leaving
the Iberians exhausted, seems to have invigorated them. When the
Mohammendan power was overthrown in the Peninsula, instead of
settling down and developing their country, they found themselves


so overflowing with energy that they set sail across the oceans, to
discover the Americas and the African sea-route to the East. Mr.
Arnold Toynbee has noticed this paradox in his Study of History.
Arguing from conceptions which he calls ‘Challenge and Response’
and ‘The Stimulus of Pressures’, he declares that their tremendous
voyages, their further battles all over South America and Asia,
their vast ambitions, the fanatical courage with which they prose-
cuted their designs, were the natural response to the stimulus which
victory at home had given to their minds. And he sums up their
place in history thus, referring, of course, to both Portuguese and
Spaniards; ‘These Iberian pioneers of Western Christendom per-
formed an unparalleled service for the civilization which they repre-
sented. They expanded the horizon, and thereby potentially the do-
main, of our Western Society from an obscure corner of the Old
World until it came to embrace all the habitable land and navigable
seas on the surface of the planet. It is owing to this Iberian
energy and enterprise that Western Christendom has grown, like
the grain of mustard seed in the parable, until it has become “the
Great Society”; a tree in which all the nations of the world have
come and lodged. This latter-day Westernized World is the pecu-
liar achievement of Western Christendom’s Iberian pioneers.’ ( 14 )
“In Asia all trade to Europe was under the control of the Mos-
lem Sultans through whose kingdoms it passed. Europe’s imports
from India, China, and the Islands came overland from the Persian
Gulf and paid toll. The Turks, and Islam in general, would be
harder hit by breaking that monopoly than they w T ould be by a de-
feat in the field. That was the practical idea behind the Portuguese
attempt to find a sea-route to India and the Far East. And, of course,
while the loss of the monopoly of the eastern trade would damage
Turkish finances, its transfer to Portugal would enormously increase
the resources of that Kingdom. Though the Portuguese drive east
took the form of a struggle for a trade route, the crusading element
was so marked that the Church was able to bless what otherwise
would have been filibustering . , . the Portuguese were regarded by
the Holy See as its emissaries. Their king was given the Bull because
it would be his duty to bring all Paganism to the steps of St. Peter’s.
It is important to bear this in mind, for it explains why Goa was as
much the ecclesiastical as the mercantile capital of Portuguese
Asia.” C 5)


Against the Moslems the Portuguese waged war without quar-
ter. Nor were they left unchallenged. The Sultan of Egypt quickly
realized the danger and sent a great fleet of warships, officered by
Turks and manned by Arabs and other Moslems. His admiral met
with initial successes, and gained some Indian allies, but the superior
sailing qualities of the Portuguese ships were proved when the Port-
uguese fleet under the viceroy, D. Francisco de Almeida, over-
whelmed the enormous Moslem fleet at the Battle of Diu, in 1609.
By this victory, one of the most decisive battles of the world, the
control of the trade between India and Europe passed from Moslem
to Christian hands. The Portuguese were called upon to meet
further challenges, but the superiority of their ships, their
disciplined men at arms and better bombardiers, and their
better weapons were the deciding factors. Their determination
to maintain their hold was a moral asset which was also,
undoubtedly, a great part of the struggle. By their efforts the
supremacy of the Indian Ocean passed into Western hands, and
in course of time there followed the political changes which have di-
rected the fate of the nations. “In considering the achievement of
the Portuguese”, Professor Dodwell reminds us, “it is our duty to
recognize the important part played, having regard to the future his-
tory of India, in successfully frustrating all the attacks made on
them by the Turks.” ( 18 ) Nor were the Turks mean adversaries.
“They are powerful”, wrote Albuquerque, “they have much artille-
ry, and they know how to build ships like our own. They are well
furnished with arquebusiers and bombardiers, with master-gunners
as skilful as ours. They hate us, and long to destroy all we
possess.” ( 17 ) It is clear that these were the forces which the Port-
uguese had most to fear.
With the appointment of Affonso de Albuquerque, in succession
to D. Francisco de Almeida, the policy of the Portuguese suffered
changes. Almeida had been the protagonist of sea power. In his
view a strong navy, with possibly two or three fortified depots, would
be sufficient to guard Portugal’s share of the Indian trade. But
Albuquerque was to show that a portion of the trade that which
passed between Europe and Asia was not enough. The Portugue-
se wanted more than a share of the Asiatic trade; they wanted to
control it, not to stifle it but to direct it, as a vital part of the
Crusade against the enemies of Christendom.


Whiteway points out that Albuquerque, was “the first of all
men to grasp the idea that by the maintenance of a preponderating
sea power a small country so distant as Portugal could hope to
found an Empire in the East. His predecessor, Almeida, had, of
course recognized the necessity of supremacy at sea, but his only
aim was to divert the carrying trade of the East and West into Por-
tuguese hands , . . but Albuquerque aimed at a Portuguese domi-
nion in the East, both by colonization and conquest, sufficiently
preponderating to give that nation the command of all the trade
between the East and West . . . Such a policy as this required the
maintenance of fortresses at certain strategical points which should
be places d'armes to shelter the soldiers and protect the ships while
refitting. In addition, however, there must be arrangements to
repair the terrible wastage of life, and arrangements for the gigantic
trade which Albuquerque’s fertile brain foresaw. To meet the wast-
age he proposed colonies; and the trade would need factories . . ,
To understand Albuquerque’s proposals it is necessary to remember
that the pepper trade was a royal monopoly. It was the cause of most
of the coast wars, for the Mohammedans strove by every means to
load cargoes of pepper for the Red Sea.” ( 18 )
This plan was put into effect by Albuquerque with astonishing
rapidity, considering how small were the forces at his command and
the many difficulties he had to surmount. He proposed to have strong*’
fortresses at Aden, Diu, Ormuz, and Goa, and factories with smaller
forts at Cochin, Cannanore, Quilon, and other places. As a matter
of fact, the Portuguese built over a hundred forts and fortresses all
over the East, but Goa was the capital, the hub of a busy Oriental
world. “Golden Goa” it became. Albuquerque could not have known
that generations later malaria and dysentery would destroy it.
From Malacca, Albuquerque looked eastwards towards the
islands from which the spices came, immortalized by the deeds of
the Portuguese and sung by CamOes;
“... isles, by jealous Nature long conceal’d,
Shall to the wondering world be now revealed.
“Malacca’s castled harbour here survey
From every shore far round assembling here
The fragrant treasures of the Eastern world.


“ Beneath the purple wings of spreading morn,
Behold what isles there glistening seas adorn 1
Mid hundreds yet unnamed Ternate behold!
By day her hills in pitchy clouds inroll’d
For Lusian hands here blooms the fragrant clove
“Here Banda’s isles their fair embroidery spread
Of various fruitage azure, white or red.”
In one of his letters to the King, Albuquerque says, “The volume
of the Indian trade is enormous: silks, brocades, copper, mercury,
coral, etc. it is beyond belief.” He went about the task of control-
ling all of it for his master.
The ease with which the Portuguese captured so many import-
ant places in Asia points to the superiority they achieved in several
respects. One of the weaknesses oftiji e Eastern rulers might surely
have been their effete governments the looseness of their hold over
their subjects. Since many of them were aliens themselves, a new
overlordship by the Portuguese which seemed to promise, and in
many cases might have really have given, benefits from trade
had its attractions. The genius of Albuquerque grasped the idea
that empire and commerce were synonymous, and although he
supplied no new aim he merely pointed out a new method of attain-
ing an old object. What many of Albuquerque’s successors failed to
understand was the religious and social organization of India, and
they often unwittingly created enmity through disregard of the
susceptibilities of the natives in many places. It is surprising that
they did not offend more than they did, while many of their failures
can be attributed to excessive zeal on the part of the clergy.
A student of history who delves into the musty pages of the
past quickly recognizes what a tremendous effort went into the
preparations and the carrying out of the programme whereby the
trade of Asia was controlled. It is not proposed in the limited space
to which we are limited here to attempt a survey of the vital part
that Portugal played in taking over and maintaining all the intri-
cacies of the sea-borne trade of Asia. It would he sufficient to
recall that the pepper trade between Asia and Europe was a royal
monopoly, to which later were added other spices, also indigo, tobac


co, ginger, and cinnamon. The subjects of the King were at liberty
to import any other merchandise into Portugal, while the officers
and the crew of the King’s ships were permitted to carry goods on
which'no freight was charged but only a percentage on the value of
the merchandise in Lisbon. So long as this extra-official trade went
on the monarch prospered, although there were abuses.
The subjects of Asian rulers friendly to the Portuguese were
free, upon payment of a licence, to sail between Asiatic ports, the
fee being applied to the maintainence of the anti-piracy services
which were so necessary.
It has been estimated that by the end of the XYlth century
the total tonnage of the shipping entering and leaving the principal
ports of India alone accounted for the colossal figure, for that time,
of 345,000 tons. Of this figure 86,000 tons of shipping carried goods
to and from India and other countries: Portugal, African ports, Red
Sea ports, Ormuz, Ceylon, the Spice Islands, Pegu, Siam, Cochin-
china, while the ships for China and Japan, and the Philippines via
the .Moluccas, amounted to 6,000 tons. Ships representing 260,000
tons were engaged in the Indian coastal trade. ( 19 ) When we consider
how small were the ships in those days, we realize that the trade
which was conducted was truly enormous. This has been explained
by the fact that “the chief commercial service rendered to India by
the Portuguese was the effective policing of the coastal trade. There
were nests of pirates along the Malabar coast, who lived mainly by
depredations on the small vessels which plied in great numbers be-
tween Gujerat on the one side and Ceylon, Madras and Bengal on the
other; the Portuguese provided gunboats to convoy the fleets of these
vessels, and thereby established a degree of security on the main line
of India.” (*) There must also have been considerable illicit trade,
including a certain amount of contraband which reached the Med-
iterranean by the Red Sea.
The trade which interested other countries in Europe was
that between Portugal and India. Long before the discovery of
the sea-route to India a fairly elaborate commercial organization
had been built up in Lisbon, and the arrival of pepper in Lisbon
produced an immediate effect in Europe. Whereas in the past, pep-
per which cost about 2J to 3 cruzados (the cruzado being the equi-
valent approximately of a ducat) the arroba (about 128 lbs) in In


dia, and had been sold in Alexandria for 80 ducats, and in Venice
for 100, Lisbon offered the same article for 20 cmzados, reducing the
price later to 20 cruzados. With lower prices for pepper and other
spices and cotton cloth, everywhere in Europe, trade was greatly
stimulated. In spices alone, King Manoel received an income of
more than £85,000,000 over a period of 20 years.
But it is with the trade between India and China that we are
mainly concerned. At the beginning, the profits were reaped by those
with energy and foresight enough to risk adventuring to the China
coast, carrying goods between India and China, but principally bet-
ween Malacca and the Chinese Empire. The opening up of trade with
Japan when, owing to prohibitions by the Dragon Throne no trade
was permitted between the Chinese and the Japanese, provided a
golden opportunity for Portuguese intermediaries which increased in
value with the passing-years. At times some deserving officer would
be permitted to load a ship for the China coast, and the fortunes of
many a Portuguese family were established in this way.
At first, the Portuguese traders carried from China to Malacca,
whence a large part was transhipped to India: raw silk and silk fa-
brics, rhubarb, sugar, ginger, and drugs of all sorts, Chinaware, gold,
and a host of Chinese goods. The Portuguese took to China: cotton
goods and other merchandise from India, pepper and spices and
other produce of the East Indies, European goods from Goa, Persian
carpets and finestuffs, and a vast variety of fancy articles from all
over the world.
Historians should be able to trace in this Portugal’s contribution
to the movement of influences in the Far East as well as in Europe.
The constant contact of the Portuguese with luxury-loving Orien-
tals must have led them to try and enjoy more comfortable clothing,
made of cotton or silk, which could be changed and washed frequent-
ly, and to demand softer beds and cleaner linen. The greater ease
with which the spices and condiments of Asia flowed into Europe
through Lisbon led to the demand for more pleasantly flavoured
foods, thereby introducing greater varieties of courses at meals. The
winter diet of the richer Europeans became more varied and heal-
thier, with the greater use of vegetables and fruits, some of which
actually found their way into Europe via Portugal and Spain.


By observing the housing of different climes, the Portuguese
were able to introduce new features in residential quarters. In the
same way, furniture became better, more abundant, and more orna-
mental. Porcelain vessels, it is recorded in old Portuguese docu-
ments, were in great demand among the rich.
With the spread of knowledge, as printing became popular and
more Eastern goods appeared articles of metal, embroideries, and
other curious articles the consciousness of thinking men was stir-
red. Every man who brought back new wares contributed to the
spread of new ideas, while the botanical and medical experiments of
men like Garcia d’Orta and the scientific researches of men like
D. Joao de Castro were important contributions to the beginnings
of modern science.
The education, or rather the want of education, of the times
had not prepared men for their responsibilities which grew so quick-
ly. The men who went to the East were rough, like their contem-
poraries in Europe, and although there were brilliant exceptions to
the rule men like Albuquerque, Galvao, Belchior Carneiro, and
even hundreds of other noble-minded, God-fearing men—the major-
ity of the Europeans of those days, in Europe as well as in Ame-
rica, Africa, and Asia, were only too ready to follow the profitable
example set by their Italian predecessors.
That more men did not overstep the bounds was due possibly
to the system introduced by Albuquerque and his successors. It was
probably the best that could be thought of, whereby the Crown held
a virtual monopoly, small concessions being granted to worthy servi-
tors. Among its defects was the creation of privilege and plutocracy,
while favoured families created oligarchies, and little was done to
curb the acquisitive side of men’s characters. The natives with
whom the Portuguese traders came into contact were often people
who stood at the bottom of the social scale, and because on both
sides there was the desire to acquire wealth, which materialistic men
bad discovered to be the only Key to open the Door of Opportunity,
friendships were struck up which contributed to the creation of mu-
tual understanding and opportunities. Everywhere it was a mad
scramble for wealth. The wonder of it all was the fact that so many
Portuguese did rise above that system. The names of many Port-
uguese who were able to resist the “urge” to acquire wealth stand


out in shining letters in the annals of the Europeans in Asia, and if
we stop to consider that in much more enlightened ages in the
XVIIIth, and the XlXth, and even the XXth centuries so many
men, in Europe and America, and Asia as well, have been obsessed
by that one insane desire to amass wealth, regardless of the suffer-
ings of others, we must be prepared to admit that there was a great
deal to admire in so many of the noble-minded Portuguese pioneers.
In Portugal, the Crown helped the Church liberally, large sums
being lavished on the Church as well as State enterprises. In the
East, some of the wealthy contributed handsomely to ecclesiastical
services, and the humbler ones, too, who by fortunate trading were
able to put by some money also did not stint to the work of
clergy.
The part played by the Portuguese in this, and in the social,
intellectual, and economic repercussions of the European and
Asiatic worlds has not yet merited serious study, but there is no
escaping the fact that those services did influence the minds and
the lives of XVth and XYlth century men. The evidence is there
in the decorations and carvings of buildings in a dozen cities, in rare
hand-painted maps in a dozen museums, in the minatures and texts
of obscure documents and books in a dozen libraries, in forgotten
letters in a dozen archives. It is also to be found in curiously
wrought church and family plate and in quaint screens in Ja-
pan or in a few surviving pieces of porcelain. There it may be seen,
waiting to be dragged out and pieced together, so that the world may
be told of this feature of Portugal’s contributions to world civiliza-
tion, the arts of progress, the spread of knowledge, and how these
came to benefit mankind.
The Incubus of Spain. King Manoel of Portugal died and
was succeeded by his son, John 111. Under King
had some good ministers, and some notable viceroys ruled in India,
while honest men held positions in many of the fortresses which
had been erected by the Portuguese. The Jesuits found a home in
Portugal and helped to build a healthy structure in Portugal’s
empire.
But the seeds of destiny were growing fast in Portugal. It is
instructive to see in the intricacies of European diplomacy in the
XVth and XVlth centuries the circumstances that were to bring
many changes to Portugal. Spain it was that had been the Church’s


main support following the secession of so much of Europe to Pro-
testantism, and it is easy to understand when historians ( 21 ) state
that the Church, in its turn, gave every support to the secular aims
of the Spanish monarchy. They show that the partition of the World
was clearly designed to give the future control of the South Ameri-
can continent as well as of the Far East to Spain. Already by the
middle of the XYlth century the fate not only of the Portuguese
Empire but of the Portuguese nation had become clear. Maximi-
lian and Charles V of Spain had played their cards well, and in the
game of politics, although he did not know it, John 111 of Portugal
was worsted. As the monarch of an empire, John 111 had not the
foresight nor the capabilities required of him. Portugal suffered in
consequence.
“The Portuguese monarchy had been absorbed in the chimera
of the Spanish succession, the gentry were still attracted by the
Crusade in Asia and colonial adventure, the clergy were dependent
on Rome, the burghers were deep in trade, all were committed to
unprofitable interest... As a result, instead of Lisbon absorbing
Madrid, as the dynasty intended, Madrid absorbed Lisbon.” (**)
At his death, John, 111 was succeeded by his grandson, Sebas-
tian a minor during whose minority the regency was anything
but competent, for the myrmidons of Spain made much headway in
Portuguese political circles. The young King dreamt of conquests,
with himself as the saviour of Christendom, like some knight from
the pages of a mediaeval romance. Despite warnings and good
advice he embarked upon a mad war against the Moslems in Moroc-
co, where he and the flower of Portuguese chivalry were overwhelmed
and wiped out to a man at the battle of Alcacer-Kebir {EI Easr-el -
Kebir). The throne of Portugal was left vacant, and the aged
Cardinal Henry succeeded, only to die soon afterwards. Philip of
Spain claimed the throne as the next of kin and descended upon
Lisbon along a road trodden smooth by Spanish emissaries, expe-
riencing little difficulty in getting himself proclaimed king when he
made specious promises to the Portuguese at Thomar.
The Spanish domination was followed by the most tragic con-
sequences to the Portuguese; to the Empire in particular. The profits
of Lisbon’s trade were diverted to assist Spanish schemes against
the Protestant monarchs of Europe, while the principles and re-
straints of Spain religious, commercial, and social brought ruin
to Portuguese Asia, Africa, and America.


Spanish methods of patronage were extended to Portugal and
the Portuguese colonies, and the sycophants who fawned upon the
Court secured privileges in India, making fortunes in the East.
The plethora of gold and silver affected Portuguese economy as well,
the tax-free Spanish nobility making up for the inevitable inflation
by loading trade and industry with taxes and impositions so onerous
that “enterprise and initiative were crushed under the burden.”
The small but already growing manufactures in the Portuguese
colonies were regulated wholly for the benefit of Spain, the colonists
being compelled to purchase from Spain, often from the monopoly-
regulated establishments at prices fixed at Madrid. The monopolies,
one of the defects of the Portuguese system, were extended and
intensified.
“Portugal had become definitely wedded to Castile for sixty
years. Spain’s enemies became her enemies, and her great colonial
empire lay at their mercy. Before the end of the century the Dutch
were in the East, and battened on the possessions of the Portuguese,
... All the daring and enterprise of the Portuguese mariners came
to naught, and while their own ships w r ere used in the service of
Spain, their own overseas dominions were left unprotected.” C 2 3) The
fleets of Portugal were merged into the Great Armada which Philip
despatched in his abortive attack on England. In creating this Ar-
mada the resources of Portugal w 7 ere heavily drawn upon, and at
least one writer advances the suggestion that “whereas the Armada
were, for the most part, only the ship of the day built vastly bigger,
without expert adaptation to service conditions, their apparent
advantages of armament and armour were altogether neutralized by
the absence of seaworthiness,” and that had the Portuguese been left
to themselves, professional seamen and shipbuilders that they were,
they would never have committed such a blunder. The Spanish
commander-in-chief, furthermore, was unfamiliar with sailing con-
ditions and among the causes of the destruction of the Armada were
the tactical errors which no real sailor would have made.
When King Philip seized the vacant throne of Portugal, the
Portuguese acquired thereby all the odiums, rivalries, and disputes
religious no less than economic— which the Spaniards had invit-
ed upon themselves. The Portuguese colonies became the innocent
victims of the capitalistic and sectarian wars which raged between
the powers of Europe. To prevent the ‘heretic’ Netherlanders, who


had revolted against him, from obtaining Asian produce, on which
they had been doing a splendid trade, Philip II closed the port of
Lisbon (the centre till then of all Eastern trade) to the Hollanders
(1694). The merchants of the Netherlands, with the help of the
Jewish bankers, many of whom had been expelled from Portu-
gal, learned the secrets of Portuguese trade. It was inevitable
then that the Dutch ships should appear in Asia, in search of
the spice and other Eastern produce which they used to buy in Lis-
bon. Not satisfied with that ships of countries at enmity with Spain
raided the Portuguese sea-routes, pirating Portuguese ships. They
then attacked the colonies which the Portuguese had built up with
such great sacrifice in Africa, Asia, Oceania, and America. The
Spaniards hardly lifted a finger to defend the settlements which the
Portuguese had won with such pains and maintained with such
energy for so many years.
“A screwing up of the Inquisition at home and abroad,” goes
on Sir George Young, “was the chief practical result of the change of
government, and though every native Christian burnt at Goa and
every Jewish banker banished from Lisbon hastened the end of the
East Indian Empire ... it was, moreover, not the Portuguese State,
but the decay of the Spanish State that was the cause of the ruin of
that Empire.” ( M ) Had Spain remained the first naval, as she was a
military power, as well she might have beery had she not thrown
away and wasted the Portuguese ships of war, the struggle
for Portugal’s Eastern Empire might have been far less one-sided
than it was, and a great portion of that Empire would probably have
survived. The revenues of Portugal went straight to the Spanish
exchequer, and it is estimated that between 1684 and 1640 Portugal
was drained of one hundred millions in gold—a stupendous sum
for those days.
When Spain had so far lost command of the sea that it could no
longer protect its own possessions, including those of its dependency,
those of the Portuguese were sacrificed first, “Thus in the truce Spain
concluded with the Dutch in 1609, the line accepted by the Dutch
as the limit of their expansion was so drawn as to save the Spanish
possessions, while sacrificing the Portuguese.” All the famous Por-
guese capitals Goa, the golden , Ormuz, Malacca isolated and
unsupported and deprived of European merchanise —lost the extra-
ordinary and commercial pre-eminence they had earned when the


Portuguese had built them up as shipping centres and ports for the
richest products of the world, and which they virtually controlled
for almost a centurj 7 . The interport coastal trade in Asia which
was so carefully protected against piracy in the past was also dis-
rupted, and without naval support the colonial fortresses could not
resist the continuous assaults of the Dutch and the British.
In spite of their weakness, the remnants of the Portuguese co-
lonial squadrons were able to stand up, at times, to their attackers,
even severely trouncing the Dutch and the British on several occa-
sions. The Portuguese outposts, too, did not give in without a
struggle, several of them repelling the most determined attacks, but
sixty years of isolation is a long time, and that any of them survived
at all must be attributed, in great part, to the settlers who main-
tained them.
The Pioneers — Well might Faria y Souza be stirred to ecstasy
when he contemplated the extent of Portugal’s power in the XYlth
century, and thought of an empire that extended from Ceuta to the
Cape of Good Hope and ended on the shores of China, with a coast
line of much more than 12,000 miles. The men who achieved this
came from a tiny country on the western seaboard of Europe, and
historians still wonder how such a handful of men were able to
accomplish so much.
“When the Portuguese arrived in India they had to deal, not
with semi-savage tribes as the Spaniards and, later, the English,
found in America, but were confronted with a civilization much
older than that of Europe and with philosophical speculations whose
antiquity extended far beyond the times of the legends of ancient
Greece. The East which the Portuguese had to contend with was
far more difficult to oppose than that which the Dutch and the
English found when .they arrived a century later, and the Portuguese
crushed the power of the Turks and other Moslem peoples at a time
when the Turks threatened, like an avalanche, to sweep through the
whole of Europe. They made the way easy for the nations that fol-
lowed them into Asia, and small as Portugal was, depopulated by
plague and drained of her manhood to hold this vast empire, she
succeeded.” (*)
And what of the men who accomplished this ? A Portuguese
writer ( M ) has told us that “the majority of the people, including most
of the nobility, sought no greater pabulum than could be derived


from the romances of chivalry, or the rhymes of minstrels, to whom
they could listen entranced for hours, happy under the spell of the
gay science of these spontaneous imaginations,” And we can easily
imagine such scenes on a caravel or a nao with its freight of
Portuguese sailors and soldiers, crossing the Atlantic or the Indian
Ocean, listening entranced to the songs and stories of golden deeds
enacted by Portuguese heroes in the far places of the world. “Mari-
time conquest was in fact,” Sir George Young very properly reminds
us, “only a form of Moroccan crusade, and although the reward of
the latter was generally six foot of sand, and of the former a Pac-
tolus itself, the country as a whole favored the barren crusade rather
than the rich conquest.”
Portugal’s success was Europe’s gain, for Europe gained by
Portugal’s discoveries, but Europeans despoiled her of her Empire.
The Portuguese Empire in the East fell, but we may be permitted to
reproduce the verdict on their achievement pronounced in the Histor-
ians History of the World: “If the Portuguese had beem as skilful
speculators as they were intrepid sailors and distinguished warriors,
Henry the Navigator, Dias, Vasco da Gama, Cabral, Albuquerque,
valiant captains identified with all the glories of the A viz dynasty,
would have imitated the speculative prudence of the Dutch, their
rivals. And if, when the illustrious house of Braganza opened the
era of national liberties, the people had in their heads less of poetic
imagination, and more power of reason; if, courageous and adven-
turous as they were, they had shown themselves more positive, the
French, at first, and then the English, would never have invaded
their treasury, exploited their soil, and paralyzed their industries.
Truly a child-like nation, satisfied with little, pursuing the ideal,
economical without avarice, pure in morals, sober, generous, hospit-
able, the Portuguese have bred heroes in placp of diplomats, poets
in place of capitalists.” ( 27 ) And the soul of Portugal found expres-
sion in an epic poem the sublime verses of Camoes, and “though
the golden age of the Portuguese has departed the song that the poet
sang still burns bright immortalizing the flame of Portuguese
genius.”
The crusading spirit was dead everywhere else, but in Portugal
in the daj r s of King Sebastian it was still a factor in politics, and
“it w r as an unmixed misfortune for the nation that at this crisis in its
history it should have had the last of the crusaders for its king.” No


one will deny that in that moment of. crisis the inherent weakness of
such an extensive empire was revealed. But all the naval might of
the Netherlands and England had to hammer away for decades in
order to capture the colonial fortresses, one at a time.
The men who stood in the breach were a handful of Portuguese,
with the vastly greater numbers of those who were the sons of the
Portuguese. It was due to these that Portugal had anything left
when the Spanish yoke was thrown off and a Portuguese king was
on the throne once more.
Albuquerque in dreaming of a Portuguese empire laid down the
policy of encouraging marriages between Portuguese settlers and
native women. He even entrusted the administration of justice and
finance to native as well as Portuguese officials, and hoped to build up
a population of artisans, shipbuilders among them, clerical assistants,
and soldiers also from the sons of these Portuguese settlers. The
married men were intended to be colonists, helping the garrison when
emergencies arose.
Special privileges were conferred on this class, and “some of
these,” Professor Prestage points out, “were to distinguish themsel-
ves both in military and civil posts, and in view of the scanty popu-
lation of Portugal and the calls on it from settlements in so many
quarters of the globe, her Eastern rule could scarcely have been sup-
ported so long as it w T as in any other way.” ( ,28 ) The respect shown
for Eastern customs in everything save religion was another trait of
the Portuguese settlers, hut Albuqueroue showed now enlightened he
was by abolishing the practice of stS* as one of his first acts, in all
Portuguese possessions in India.
Christian marriage did away with concubinage, and any who
have pondered on the feelings of Oriental women will readily appre-
ciate how it was that these women clung so steadfastly to their men.
The children of these unions might have lacked the precious influen-
ces which Europeans have since taken pride in inculcating, while the
means for educating these children were wholly lacking. But the tol-
erance, generally, of the mixed races founded by the Portuguese
helped to build up a degree of loyalty to Portugal which newcomers,
in later generations, have found it difficult to understand.
Let us think for a moment, for instance, of those gallant fight-
ers who marched into the wastes of Ethiopia, under Christovao da
Gama, to help a Christian country in distress. The story of their


accomplishment reads like a fairy-tale, Ax d when the fighting ended
and Abyssinia was freed, the survivors—one hundred and fifty men,
the remnant of the five hundred who had set out on what had seem-
ed a forlorn undertaking wanted to go home. King Galawdewos
tried to dissuade them. He offered them fortunes if they would stay in
Abyssinia. He told them of a distant part of his realm where traders
from Central Africa brought gold with which to buy cotton cloth,
and he pressed treasures of gold and silver upon them. But they re-
fused the wealth he offered, nor "were they tempted by the El Dorado
which he invited them to conquer. They had not come to Abyssinia
in search of gold, but only to serve God and their King.
The one hundred and fifty set out, empty-handed, with their
banner carried before them, wending their way to Massawa, the port
by which they had entered this wild country. There they expected
to find Portuguese ships, ready to take them home. After some time
a little Portuguese foist arrived, was not room for more
than one. Miguel de Castanhoso was^choserT to return to Goa, with
urgent pleas for ships to be sent.
Castanhoso went and later, writing of his departure, he says:
“Next day, at dawn, on Sunday, February 16, 1544, I embarked,
leaving my companions greatly desirous of doing likewise. After
saying good-bye very sadly, they remained praying before a crucifix
they bore upon the flag, after which, with many tears, they mounted
their mules and rode away inland . . .
“May it please Our Lord to remember them and bring them
back in peace to Portugal,”
The new r governor of Portuguese India, one of the worst to hold
vice-regal authority there, was too busy to bother about the exiles,
and they w r ere left on the shores of the Red Sea, waiting and
watching for the ships that never came. Five of these men managed
to make their way to Goa, but the majority went slowly back along
the tortuous route they had already twice traversed, and settled down
in Abyssinia.
Nine years later ninety-three of them were still alive with their
wives and families. And the ruins of the castles and bridges they
built may still he seen, to testify to the existence of a gallant
band of men who created ‘a little bit of Portugal’ in the wilds of
Africa.


Nor was this an isolated instance. Father Sebastiao Manrique
describes the fate of a number of Portuguese taken prisoner on the
Burma coast when their ship had been wrecked. They were sent
to the mountains of Maum, inland from Arakan, hamstrung so that
they might not escape and left to their fate. At great risk, some
3'ears later, a Buddhist monk led Father Manrique to the Portuguese
prisoners in the mountains, there to minister to his countrymen,
and he stayed with them, consoling them for a time. Then he had
to leave them, and it is not likely that they ever saw any other
countrymen of theirs again.
Similar groups of prisoners or exiles were to be found in many
places in Asia and Africa. The chroniclers describe the fate of
numbers of these Portuguese in Arabia, Persia, India, China, and
elsewhere, a few of the many cases of a similar nature all over the
East. Some of the prisoners were held for ransom, and it was
considered an important act of Christian charity to subscribe or
bequeath sums of money to ransom prisoners in the hands of non-
Christians.
Many of the prisoners were kept as slaves by their captors.
The story is told of Christians attacked at Hooghly in 1632. A num-
ber of the Portuguese and native Christians escaped, but about a
hundred Portuguese with their wives and children were captured
and sent to Agra where they were made slaves. Similar occurrences
took place when Portuguese settlements were over-run, principally
by the Dutch in the XYIIth century. The Portuguese empire had
already flourished for a century in Asia, and important colonies
existed in the principal trade centres. Malacca, Jacatara (now
known as the modern Batavia), Colombo, Trincomalee, Negapatam,
Cochin w 7 ere a few among many of such places. At each of these
there was a large community of Portuguese and descendants of Port-
uguese, generally married to Asian women or women of their own
class. Among these, far from Portugal, there was nurtured an intense
longing for far-away Portugal and everything Portuguese.
How, otherwise, could one explain, generations after Portugal
had been dispossessed of her colonial establishments, when the tide
of war had receded, leaving communities, large and small, completely
stranded, far from aid or even the hope of aid, in isolated spots all
over Asia, the survival of Portuguese traits and names, and a love


for Portugal in so many lonely hearts? An ardent attachment to
distant Portugal remained, and still remains, in thousands of breasts
in dozens of isolated places in the East.
Cynics have looked down upon these descendants of the mixed
marriages which resulted when the Portuguese were cut off from
home, giving never a thought to the circumstances in which they
were brought up and their environment, or the hardships which
these men, women, and children had to endure, the descendents of
those w 7 ho were left abandoned on alien shores. We would do well
to ponder for a moment on the emptiness of heart of individuals who
lived so far aw’ay from Europe that most of them must have lost all
hope of ever seeing Portugal and loved ones there again. At the very
ends of the earth, with no such things as newspapers or books or let-
ters from ‘home’ to beguile them, they stuck to their posts through
every vicissitude, defending their homes and fighting for their flag,
in that spirit of self-sacrifice which is the very corner stone of the
Christian tradition.
The loyalty of these communities to those who have employed
them is a trait that has become well known. They have at times
shared the fate of their employers in war, while working for them,
often for a pittance, in peace. A classic example of the way in
which they stocd with their masters dates from the year 1756. The
occasion was the attack on Calcutta by Siraj-ud-daula. The British
militia consisted of about 250 men, of whom 70 w T ere Britons with
180 Portuguese (Luso-Indians) and others. The British women were
admitted into the Fort, whereupon the Luso-Indians refused to fight
unless their families were also given protection. These were there-
fore allowed “to crowd into it to the number of thousands.” All of the
women and children w 7 ere then placed on board English vessels
which sailed away, and the garrison elected Holwell, a civilian, as
commandant, the Governor of the Fort having left.
It was impossible to hold out for long, however, and the Fort
capitulated. The prisoners were thrown into a tiny room and the
tragedy known as the “Black Hole of Calcutta” followed. Holwell,
the commander, who was one of the few survivors, pays tribute to
the services of the Portuguese-Indians, and laments the death of
those among them who died of suffocation on that terrible night.


Among those who escaped from Calcutta on that occasion were
some 3,000 Luso-Indian adults and children who were landed at
Chandernagore, where the French Government and Council main-
tained them until they were able to make arrangements for
themselves.
History can testify to other occasions when groups of the descen-
dants of Portuguese settlers have stood steadfastly by those from whom
they earned their daily bread. Cut off from the land of their forefathers
they have survived nevertheless as members of a race which has left its
impress on the story of the Europeans in Asia. As a link between the
peoples of two continents, these communities have served both, giv-
ing far more than they have received, and as such they deserve
well, surely, of those who have benefitted from their efforts and their
contributions to the co-mingling of the East and the West. Had
their children —the girls as well as the boys been given proper
education and instruction there are few heights they might not have
attained. As it is some of the bravest soldiers, some of the most
earnest priests, some of the most devoted nuns in the history of the
Europeans in Asia, whose services to Portugal and Western civili-
zation are immeasurable in extent and importance, came from a
stock such as that which the Portuguese introduced in Asia.
An understanding of this possibly led Dr. E. J. Dingwall, in
his recent study of some of the social and economic forces of the
modern world, to state that “the Portuguese showed themselves in a
different light from that of the Spaniards. The Spaniards in South
America, fired by missionary zeal coupled with military ardour, tend-
ed to be imperialistic and domineering, whereas the arrivals from
Portugal preferred rather the ways of peaceful trade and a way of life
animated by the philosophy of live and let live. They were adapt-
able and easygoing; assimilation came more easily, and with it a
fading of any tendency towards dominance and superiority, which
so often disfigured the results of colonization among other peoples.
The result of these factors on the development of colonization in
Brazil w r as that intermarriage became common, for, as has been
pointed out, Portugal never caught the colour prejudice of modern
European imperialism and, retaining mediaeval tolerance, it be-
queathed to Brazil not only a capacity for assimilation, but a priceless
heritage of belief in human values based not on skin-colour, but
upon individual worth.” ( 29 )


Thus, without knowing or realizing it, those Portuguese pio-
neers and their descendants were the servitors and the protagonists
not only of Portugal but of all Europe, and in the midst of their
homes they erected their churches where they could worship God.
This may be something which, when all is said and done, counted
most of all.
Professor Boxer has pointed out that every scholar who drinks
deep of Portuguese history becomes attracted to it for life, which will
explain how Mr. K. G. Jayne has come to sum up the story of those
pioneers in a splendid passage: “There is no need to apologize over-
much. When all criticisms have been weighed and all defects dis-
counted, Portugal has a past which any nation might envy. The
annalists of the sixteenth century realized the magnitude of their
theme. There are moments when even Barros, for all his stilted rhe-
toric, and Faria y Sousa, for all his bombast and sententiousness,
catch fire and write with the march and rhythm of an epic. The
story which begins at the siege of Ceuta and ends in the disaster of
El-Kasr is, indeed, an epic of war and seafaring, of great men and
great adventures. Courage and a serene magnanimity are the funda-
mental virtues it extols. It tells us little of the rank and file, less of the
women whose destiny it was to reward victory or console in defeat.
Its interest is focussed upon the leaders courtier, crusader, mili-
tant priest, and rough sea-captain. Its hero, under many names, is
the fidalgo, the complete gentleman, dauntless, accomplished, and
gay, by birth the equal of princes, by conviction the most dutiful
servant of Church and Crown. Such a one could steer by the stars,
use a sword with deadly science, govern a province, converse in half
a dozen languages, compose a sonnet, and play a sound game of
chess. It has been said that the Benaissance came late into Portugal
and went early; but the finest bloom of the Benaissance spirit, its
ideal of many-sided activity, remained and grew. Barely has there
been a society so versatile and brilliant as that of the fidalgos. Life
has often run in a broader and deeper channel, not often with a more
sparkling current. Men ‘warmed both hands at the fire of life’; they
knew how to fight and love, laugh and die. By husbanding their
energies, and steadily devoting them to the pursuit of one end, they
might, perhaps, have achieved a larger and more durable result.
Even if a career is to be judged merely by output it is enough to


point to Albuquerque and Camoes. When the modern cult of special-
ism can produce men more ‘efficient’ its advocates will be justified
of their censure.
“Even then there will always be a few too wary or too young to
have been caught in the machine of civilization and clipped to any
standard type. For these there is good company in the pages of the
old Portuguese histories, when one may navigate the uncharted seas
with Yasco da Gama, improvise an empire with Albuquerque, or,
with Camoes, turn the din of battle and shipwreck into song.” ( 30 )


EXPANDING HORIZONS
Early Ventures —The progress of the Portuguese along the coasts
of Asia and Africa, after Yasco da Gama discovered the sea-route to
India, is such a splendid panorama of achievement, covering such a
succession of accomplishments, that one wonders how it was ever
done. Factories were set up at Cochin and Calicut in 1600, and at
Cannanore in 1501. Two years later the first Portuguese fortress in
India, that of Cochin, was erected, to be followed by that of Quilon.
In 1505 Mombasa was occupied, and forts were built at Sofala, An-
gediva, Cannanore, and Kihra, and a factory set up at Baticala. The
fortress of Socotra was taken in 1606, and forts were built in 1507 at
Zanzibar and Mozambique. A year later (in 1508) a fortress was
erected at Cannanore.
The capture of Goa was followed by the building of fortresses
there in 1511, forts being constructed also at Salcete and Bachol.
The occupation of Malacca (in 1611) led to fortresses being built there
as well, and forts were constructed in Solor, in the East Indies, at
Muscat, in Arabia, and at Surat, on the Indian coast, in 1614.
This was followed by the erection of a Portuguese fortress at Ormuz
in 1515.
Portugal came to possess the principal keys to the main channels
of commerce. In 1616 the forts of Beradanda and Negapatam, fol-
lowed two years later (1518) by that of Colombo, were built.
Portuguese supremacy was also extended to the Malay Archi-
pelago by the erection of forts at Pacee, in Sumatra, Ternate, in the
Molucccas, Tidore, and other places.
By consolidating their position, with fortresses where merchan-
dise could be stored and under whose guns ships could be protected,
the Portuguese depended no longer on factories only or seasonal
trade. The basis was being prepared for the great trading operations
which were being developed all over the East.
At the death of King Manoel in 1621, Portugal’s position was a
strong one. In Northern Africa, in the region called Mauritania there
were “eight fortresses well supplied with men and horse.” Four of
these looked out on to the Atlantic: Cabode Guc, Safim, Azamor, and


Mazagdo, and four “within the Straits of Gibraltar where the Mediter-
ranean formed a narrow channel between Spain and Barbary”: at
Ceuta, Alcdcer-Cequer, Tdngir, and Arzila. Proceeding down the
West coast of Africa there was the Castle of Arguim, to be followed
by the provinces of Cape Yerde, the City of St. Jorge da Mina, with
its fortress, and then the Island of St. Thomas, and the settlements,
at, and near, the mouth of the River Congo. The Land of the Holy
Cross, as Brazil was then called, formed part of this Empire on the
Western side of the Atlantic, and there were settlements at the
Southern end of Africa. The great fortresses on the African and
Indian sides of the Indian Ocean were part of the project to keep
the line of communications open, so necessary for the watering and
provisioning of ships, where garrisons of Portuguese men stood guard
over the trade which flourished, protecting it from pirates and enemies,
on the long route that stretched between Lisbon and the Portuguese
factories in the East. ( 31 )
The next king of Portugal was John 111, and his reign (1621-
1667) was marked by a period of further expansion. There were a few
set-backs, it is true, and some of the defects of the colonizing system
became obvious, but the Empire kept spreading. In Brazil, colonization
received considerable impetus, and, as Antonio Sergio points out, “it
was purely a matter of chance that the system did not produce good
results, for it was a policy of wise liberty which freed agriculture,
commerce, and industry from vexatious restrictions, and threw open
the colony to even foreign activities on pajment of very small differ-
ential duties. r lhe articles taxed were very few, the impest very
moderate, and individuals were free to move about’, and when it
gave place to a centralizing and monopolizing system of administra-
tion”, Lisbon stifled its progress. ( S 2) It was “an epoch of sudden and
surprising colonial and commercial expansion abroad with its direct
consequence in immense inflation at Lisbon and Oporto, and its in-
direct consequence in an artificial demand on national activities such
as they were scarcely capable of meeting and quite incapable of
maintaining. Money poured into the ports of the country and into
the pockets of the upper and middle classes, and poured out again
without developing the national resources.” ( ffi )
Nevertheless it was an age of great deeds. The voyages of dis-
covery in the preceding reign had left little that was worth exploring,
but expeditions into the interior of Africa and other places mark this


phase of Portugal’s history, and the victories over their Mohamme-
dan rivals show how strong the Portuguese were at sea. In India,
more towns and fortresses were built, notably at ('haul (1522), St.
Thomas of Meliapore (1522), Bassein (1534), Dm (1536), Cranganore
(1540), Damam (1646), Mangalore (1554). In Ceylon, also, more
towns came under Portuguese influence, and fortresses were erected
at Galle, Negumbo, Baticala , Trine omalet. In the East Indies, the
Portuguese were mere active than ever; the fortress at Ternate was
strengthened (1522), Antonio de Brito penetrated into the Celebes
(1525), expeditions proceeded to Borneo and Banda (1626), the ruler
of Bintdo accepted Portuguese suzerainty (1627), and the dispute
between Spain and Portugal over the right to the Moluccas Islands
was settled by a cash payment to the King of Spain of the sum of
360,000 gold ducats, the islands passing into the hands of the Portu-
guese (1629), while the Portuguese entrenched themselves at Maras,
sar, in the G lebes (1640), at Gilolo (1661), and other places.
It was during the reign of King John 111, too, that Japan was
discovered. Relations with China entered upon a satisfactory basis,
and Macao was founded in 1557, the year in which King John
111 died. He was succeeded by his grandson, Sebastian, who was
only three years old at the time. “In the earlier part of his reign
foes were pacified and Portugal was reaping the benefits of her for-
mer struggles... Mombassa was secured and a fort erected; more forts
were raised in Mangalore , Barielore, and Onnore (in Canara provin-
ce), in Sirian (Pegu), and in Sena and Tele on the rivers of Cuama.
And the town of Hooghly was about to be founded in Bengal. Arab
vessels were swept from the Indian Ocean, and Portuguese ships
sailed with safety in the Eastern seas, commanding all the principal
sea-routes.” ( 31 ) Forts were also erected at Surat (1669), Jafanapatum
(1560), Flores, Amboina, Cambay , Lauribunder, Chale, Jacatard, etc.
Early in the XYIIth century, Antonio Bocarro, the official chro-
nicler of the Viceroy of India, compiled his great Livro das plantas de
todas as Fortalezas, Cidades, e Povoaqoes do Estado da India Orien-
tal which still remains in manuscript. From this splendid work it
can be seen that besides the fortresses mentioned above, the Port-
uguese had forts at (Idaho, Mafard, Sibo, Borca, Soar, Corfaqdo.
Quetta, Libedia, Madd, Doha, San Gens and Danu, Trapor, Sirgam


and Maim , Agaqaim and Manor a, Asserim, Tanna, Mombaim and
Carania, Agenda, Bardez, and Chorda, Mormugdo, < 'nmbolim, Barce-
lor, Manaar, Caliture, Batecalon. (The orthography of the original
has been used here). ( 35 )
lb is an impressive list which we observe of the fortresses which
were erected by the Portuguese pioneers. The building of these forts
was difficult enough, but each fort represented not only a strong-
point, it was also the centre of trade and provided a bastion whereby
protection was given to trade. And how easy it is to say that a
fortress was built at, say, Mozambique or Colombo, just as it is easy
to say that Gca or Ormuz was captured, or that Malacca or Diu was
defended against overwhelming odds! It is more difficult to under-
stand what toil and planning went into the building of those forts.
Materials w r ere not always easy to obtain —in at least one case, for
instance, the stones which were needed for the construction of the
walls had to be carried in the little ships, all the w r ay from Portugal!
The clothes worn by these Europeans were unsuited to the
tropics, and when fortresses were built, as they sometimes were,
in the face of attacking foes, and the builders had to work with
their armour on, their hardships and afflictions must have been well-
nigh unendurable! The problems connected with obtaining supplies
of fresh food, and even water, must have been almost insurmountable,
while losses sustained among their number due to diseases, like
dysentery, cholera, malaria, and blood poisoning and anaemia when
they were wmunded, probably brought down a far greater percentage
of their numbers than they lost in battle. Losses by ship-wreck, or
fire at sea, or naval battles, and the difficulties connected with the
maintaining of the routes, due to storms, calms, and other hazards
of the sea, so that men and supplies might be furnished for the gar-
risons in all the fortresses and trade depots, must have represented a
very heavy burden on the man-power and erganizing ability of the
Portuguese. One of the greatest difficulties, surely, was the choosing
of able and honest captains for the fortresses and factories scattered
over such a wide area. Yet they did succeed in maintaining their
forts all over the East for many years.
The pages of the books written by the official chroniclers give
us some idea of the difficulties which the Portuguese pioneers had to
face, and of the way in which they succeeded in overcoming them.
We see the namemf gallant individuals, now here, now there, in do-


Zens of places in the East, and, in the face of the dangers which beset
them, it is surprising that they were able to achieve so much. In the
earlier stages we read the names of men like Bartholomeu Dias, Pedro
Alvares Cabral, Duarte Pacheco Pereira, Tristao da Cunha, Duarte
Galvao, not to mention the celebrated pro-consuls Vasco da Gama,
Dom Francisco de Almeida, and Afonso de Albuquerque. There were
great warriors like Fernao Peres de Andrade, Dom Duarte de Me-
nezes, Antdnio Galvao, Martim Afonso de Sousa, Belchior de Sousa
Tavares, Diogo Botelho, Dom Estevao da Gama and his brother
Christo vao, and so many more, and a great host of others, the exalted
as well as the lowly: navigators, factors, fcot-soldiers, bombardiers,
scriveners, shipwrights—and missicners, led by St. Francis Xavier,
who penetrated into every corner of Portugal’s far flung empire in
the East.
Even the most casual student of this period of history will con-
cede that with the scanty resources at their disposal, the Portuguese
worked miracles. The distances to be traversed, the expanses of the
seas to be guarded, the fortresses to be garrisoned, the fleets to be
manned would have taxed the powers of a country very much larger
than Portugal. With a population of not more than a million, almost
wholly given to agriculture, periodically decimated by the plagues
which devastated Europe at the time, and continuously called upon
to defend themselves against Spanish incursions, the Portuguese
created and strengthened an empire on both sides of the Atlantic, and
along the coasts of South and East Africa, on the shores of the Red
Sea and the Persian Gulf, along the Cambay and Malabar coasts of
Western India, in Ceylon, on the Coromandel coast of East India,
in the Hcoghly, on the shores of Arakan and Pegu, thence by way of
Malacca to Sumatra, Java, and several of the East India islands, to
the very edge of Australia, and had trading depots in Siam, Cochin-
china, China, and distant Japan.
Every one who probes into the story of Portugal’s empire tries
to d iscover how it was possible for this little country to accomplish so
much. To some, the superior sailing qualities of the Portuguese ships
seem to provide the answer. Others consider that the discipline of the
men and the superiority of the arms and armour used were deciding
factors, while better generalship is also given as a reason why the
Portuguese achieved such astounding victories. Astute statesmanship,
whereby the Portuguese are said to have played the native chieftains


off against one another, is also held to be an important circumstance.
Some hold that by upsetting the balance of power in India, Portugal
was drawn into Indian politics, and that the Portuguese Empire
evolved as a natural consequence.
“When we read,” observes Prof. Prestage, discussing the ac-
complishments of Afonso de Albuquerque, “of the naval and military
successes achieved by Albuquerque with a small number of ships and
a force never exceeding 4,000 Europeans, and usually of only half
that number against greatly superior forces, it is natural to enquire
how they were obtained, especially as some of his foes, like the Turks,
were excellent soldiers. The answer is to be found in the moral sup-
eriority of the white man, in the selfconfidence and reckless valour of
the conquistadores , in their armour, stouter vessels and better, though
not so numerous, artillery. In a sea fight the odds were in their fa-
vour, for their ships were built for the long and stormy voyage round
the Cape, while those of their enemies had usually been designed for
crossing the Indian Ocean with a favourable wind and for navigat-
ing the placid waters of the Red Sea and Persian Gulf. Moreover
the Portuguese were better sailors. They felt at home in a storm,
while the Turks and Levantines* who had been trained in the Medi-
terranean and relied more on galleys than on sailing-ships, suffered
severely during the monsoons. As a rule, too, the Portuguese guns
were more skilfully served. On land, though the combatants w r ere
more evenly matched, the matchlock and cross-bow, when the fight-
ing was at long range, did more execution than the bow, and at close
quarters a few knights on horse-back, by their e' ; an, the fear they
caused, and their sword-work and protective armour, could rout large
bodies of native foot soldiers. The reverses that Albuquerque met
with were due to lack of numbers, or to lack of discipline and mutual
jealousies, common Portuguese defects.
“Lastly and chiefly, Albuquerque’s successes must be attributed
to his own personality. When be became governcr of India he was
relatively an old man for that time and those climates, but his lofty
vision was accompanied by a commanding character and a tenacity
of purpose which few leaders of men have possessed in equal degree.
And though over-hasty of temper and sometimes ciuel, he sought to
repair any injustices he bad committed, kept his word to his enemies
and was respected even by Moslems, on whom he bore most hardly.
He had a talent for civil administration as w’ell as for war, while in


diplomacy he could meet Orientals with their own weapons. In the
first he devised methods some of which are still employed by the
British; in the second his achievements speak for themselves; while
in the third he turned the jealousies of rival creeds and native rulers
to his own advantage and acted on the maxim divide et impera.
“The dominion he established consisted of the over-lordship of
of the ocean, the shores of which were dotted with fortresses in
a huge semi-circle from the coast of East Africa to the Moluccas,
and his successors did but develop the policy he laid down ... and
that Portugal should have held this dominion so long against the
Mohammedan world was, in the words of Sir William Hunter, a
lasting glory to her and Christendom. With Admiral Ballard we
may say that the name of Albuquerque is still the greatest, not only
in the history of the Portuguese in the East, but in the annals of the
Indian Ocean. His captains and men also deserve to remembered,
for, to quote again from Hunter, the achievements of the Portuguese
in the East would have done credit to a great power, and when, car-
ried out by a small kingdom they read like a romance.” ( 3G )
Portugal’s success in Asia was probably due to a combination
of several causes, not the least of which must have been the courage
of the individuals who took part in the expeditions into so many
places. Above all was their great devotion to the Christian ideal.
To the Portuguese rank and file, their sacrifices were part of a na-
tional Crusade and in their efforts on behalf of their Faith, these
humble men seldom faltered. In his great epic poem Cambes tries
to explain this, and he holds that while Christianity was being be-
trayed by the peoples of Europe, in the spirit of the Portuguese was
to be found the only hope of Mother Church;
“You Portuguese are few, but fortified
Through ne’er your weakness with your will contrasting.
You, who at cost of death on every side,
Still spread the Gospel of life everlasting.
You, so diminutive that men deride
On you, before all, Heaven the lot is casting
To do great deeds for Christ your Saviour holy:
For thus doth Christ exalt the poor and lowly.
Canto VII , v. 3,


Whatever the motive and whatever the reason for their successes
in Asia, the Portuguese did turn the tide of history. For eight hun-
dred years the Christians of Europe had thrown themselves, time and
again, at the front of Islam, now advancing, then retreating, but the
fates turned against Christendom and slowfly but inexorably, before
the divided princes of Christian Europe, Islam made steady pro-
gress. By the middle of the XYth century the Turks had advanced
into the very heart of the European continent, drawing wealth at
the same time from the trade which the rulers of the Islamic nations
drove, with the help of Venice and the city states of Italy, between
Asia and the peoples of Europe.
Then, in one generation, the course of history changed, when
the Portuguese doubled the Cape of Good Hope and went into Asia.
They cut into the flank and rear of the long routes which supplied
the sinews of war for Islam. Far from home, the warriors of Por-
tugal crushed the commercial might of the mortal foes of Christen-
dom. The arteries of Islam’s commerce w T ere severed, and the trade
of the Mohammedans was diverted to enrich the Western powders
of Europe, The balance of power of the world was thereby changed
for all time.
The events which followed led to the circumstances from which
the history of the modern world took shape, when the nations of the
West emerged from the slumber of the past, and found the energy
and inspiration whereby Europe led the van of the peoples that
have developed science for the benefit of mankind. Portugal’s
contribution to that movement was a vital one, for the stimulus
which Portuguese trade gave to Western Europe was the spark
which led to the advancement of Western minds. The movement
had already begun when the Italian and Hanseatic cities throve
on the trade which flowed through their marts, but the greater
volume of trade became possible only when ships carried goods on
the all-w'ater route between the East and the West.
Far Eastern Trade. Already, long before the arrival of the
Portuguese in the Far East, there w 7 ere several places in Southern
Asia that traded with China. There were times, in the XlYth and
XYth centuries, when Chinese ships ventured as far as the Persian
Gulf, but by the end of the XYth century Chinese junks rarety
ventured west of Malacca. The laws which interdicted the move


ment of Chinese subjects and categorically forbade all dealings with
the ‘dwarf-slaves’ must have tended to reduce the volume of the fo-
reign trade of China, and meanwhile the great traffic of the Arabs
and Indians during earlier dynasties in China seems to have been
greatly reduced.
The growth of Malacca and its importance as a trading centre
may have induced Chinese junks to carry their goods there, but
the presence of pirates in Far Eastern waters must have dis-
couraged all but the boldest, so that although the Arabs, Malays,
and other peoples who had embraced Mohammedanism traded active-
ly in Malaya and among the islands now known as the East Indies
they do not seem to have been as frequent visitors to China as they
had been in earlier times. The ships that made their way to Chinese
ports were those of rulers who were tributary to China, the prin-
cipal of thase being the Siamese, the Cochinchinese, the Cambodians
the Borneans, and peoples of some of the smaller Malayan states; for
the currents of trade could not be wholly stopped.
The XYth century provided Malacca with a wonderful oppor-
tunity, and the city grew rapidly. Siam had fallen out with Malac-
ca, it is true, and the Siamese ceased trading there, but there was a
steadily growing trade with other places, and Malacca became the
clearing house for South-eastern Asia. Sir Eichard Windstedt sum-
marizes its importance just before the coming of the Portuguese, in
two short passages:
“ ... imports attracted wholesale merchants from Gujerat and
Coromandel and Java and China to open warehouses in the
port, and brought with the south-west monsoon trading ships
from India and with the north-east junks from China. Duarte
Barbosa tells how there came to the mediaeval port very fine
four-masted junks with cargoes of sugar, great store of fine raw
silk, porcelain, damasks, brocades and satins, musk and rhubarb,
silver and pearls, gilded coffers, fans and other baubles. In ex-
change for those cargoes the Chinese took away pepper, incense,
saffron, coral shaped and unshaped, vermilion, quicksilver,
opium, and drugs. Four-masted ships with rattan cables and
shrouds also came from Java, ships like no European type, and
the Javanese offered for sale finely wrought daggers and spears,
gold and the foodstuffs of which, throughout her history, Ma


lacca has always stood iu need. Gold, indeed, was so abundant,
says Tome Pires, that the leading merchants kept their accounts
in bars of gold, and the richest merchants could discharge three
or four ships and reload them from their ow n stock... to me-
diaeval Malacca resorted merchants from Cairo, Arabia, Turkey,
Armenia, Byzantium, Persia, India, Burma, Siam, Cambodia,
Champa, China, and the Malay archipelago as far away as Ce-
lebes. The merchandise exchanged at this entrepot half-way
between India and China was such Malayan produce as tin,
cloves, nutmegs, mace, pepper, musk, camphor, benzoin, sandal-
wood, honey, wax, and slaves; gold from Pahang, Sumatra, Java,
Brunei, and Cochin China; tapestries, incense, and seeds for
dyeing from Arabia; cloths from Pulicat and Cambay; Chinese
silks and brocades and porcelain; silver from Burma, Siam, and
China; rosewater, opium, pearls, quicksilver, saltpetre, copper-
wear and ironwear; gilded coffers from Canton and birds of pa-
radise to set in Turkish and Arabian turbans.” ( 37 )
The occupation of Malacca by the Portuguese and its attachment
to the scheme which the Portuguese were developing intensified its
importance, and, writing in 1515, Tome Pires predicted:
“Men cannot estimate the worth of Malacca, on account of its
greatness and profit. Malacca is a city that was made for mer-
chandise, fitter than any other in the w T orld; the end of monsoons
and the beginning of others, and the trade and commerce bet-
ween tbo different nations for a thousand leagues on every hand
must come to Malacca. Whoever is lord of Malacca has his
hand on the throat of Venice. As far as from Malacca, and
from Malacca to ('him, and from China to the Moluccas to Java,
and from Java to Malacca and Sumatra, all is in our power.*’
o
Had the Portuguese limited themselves to the commercial devel-
opment of the Far East, as the English did tw r o and three centuries
afterwards, Pires’s pious forecast might, indeed, have been fulfilled.
Hut changes bad taken place in the Far Evst during the century
that preceded the coming of the Portuguese, and their espousal of the
cause of Christian evangelization brought currents against them which
they found it most difficult to stem.


In the YlHth century A. D., tne Hindu Sailendra Empire,
algo known by the name of Sri Yijaya, embraced the whole of Ma-
laysia, and at the height of its power covered Malaya, Sumatra, parts
of Java, Borneo, the Celebes, and the Philippines, and influenced
Cambodia, Champa, and ever Formosa, as well as its native India
and Ceylon. By the Xlth century this loosely knit empire began to
crumble, and the Cholas held sway over large parts of Indonesia.
The Sailendras enjoyed a brief recovery, but in the XHlth century,
Arab traders and other Moslem converts came into their own.
The Hindu rule being Buddhist and therefore quietist could not
survive the pressure of an activist faith, and Mohammedanism
spread rapidly in South-eastern Asia.
In South-east Asia the Moslems had been proselytising with
great success in Malaysia, and Malacca had become the centre of
their activities. With the acquisition of converts came the strength-
ening of the commercial hegemony of the Moslem rulers in this part
of the Far Eastern world. But the petty rulers with loose religious
ties were often in conflict with one another, and there was no great
Moslem state to hold the warring tribes in check. Mohammedanism
replaced Hinduism as the religious and social force, for without a
central political force to bind the natives together, the olden Hindu
quickly disintegrated.
The Portuguese came into conflict, therefore with a religion that
had engaged, in the Eastern Mediterranean and in Iberia, the Christ-
ians in mortal combat. The dynamic force of Europe came from
the Christian sense of life as a struggle and even as an adventure.
The Crusades in Europe were the result of this conflict between the
two forces. To the Crusaders the struggle against Islam was a mis-
sion which it was considered a sacred duty to fulfil; the greatest
obstacle to the success of Christianity was a militant Islam. As in
Europe so also in Asia, the conflict was generally paramount,
superseding nearly every consideration, and the individual’s sacrifice
of his life was considered a worthy means of gaining eternal salvation.
The sudden appearance of a race of militant Christians who
were avowedly opposed to the Moslems and who were also bent on
spreading the Christian faith cculd not but result in conflict. ( 35 ) And
since the newcomers were also after the trade which the Moslems


controlled and from which they waxed rich it was inevitable that
there should be the bitterest hostility between them. The success of
the one could only come from the discomfiture of the other. By taking
Malacca, therefore, the Portuguese ■were able to dispossess the prin-
cipal Moslem traders there, taking their place as the carriers between
Malaysia and Europe. But the Portuguese made alow and doubtful
headway in their endeavours to convert the peoples, successful though
they were in taking aw ay the trade of the Arab and Indian Moslems.
A latent opposition existed, therefore, and it flared up into open hos-
tility from time to time: the Portuguese were not to enjoy the fruits
of trade in uninterrupted peace. Nevertheless they did succeed
in building strongpoints and were able to consolidate their position
in several places, as we have seen. ( 40 )
In earlier days the Indonesian trade was carried on in relative-
ly small craft, although there are references in old records to large
ships on occasion. These small vessels proceeded in short stages
from island to island, carried by the seasonal winds, now in one di-
rection, now in another, until the goods reached their destination at
the market of Malacca. The Portuguese ships introduced a new
procedure, however, and changed the main currents of trade. By deal-
ing direct with the producing centres, the Portuguese ships reduced
competition in the main articles of the East Indian commerce,
although there was a great deal of the intermediary trade which went
on, as in the past. With their larger ships and better organiza-
tion, the Portuguese were able to control the sources of the prin-
cipal spices and other products, and thay succeeded in cutting out
the profits of several of the middlemen. On the other hand, food
and supplies continued to flow to Malacca in native craft, as in
earlier days. Tome Pires, who witnessed the change-over at Malacca
from the old to the new and was able to observe the effects of the
methods introduced by the Portuguese, refers to a great deal of this
at length in his Snina Oriental.
In spite of Moslem rivalry, Malacca prospered, for the flow of
trade could not he stopped or diverted. The Portuguese, further-
more, must have stimulated trade, for besides the goods previously
sent from Europe to Asia, through Venice and other Italian centres,
the newcomers brought many articles of merchandise which had not
been seen in Asia before. More important still, the Portuguese were


buyers of ever larger quantities of the produce of Malaysia, and with
the greater volume of trade there came a greater interest in com-
merce by more people. As the middlemen of this trade, the
Arabs and Indians being eliminated or offering to work in con-
junction with the Portuguese, the latter were able to build up a
growing trade, and Malacca increased in importance. ( 41 )
Albuquerque showed his ability as an administrator, as he had
shown his prowess as a general, immediately after he seized Malacca.
He did not content himself with occupying the city, but he despatch-
ed emissaries to make certain that there would be a constant flow of
merchandise. He sent explorers to discover the sources of the spices
for which there was such a demand in Europe and which, the
Portuguese ascertained, the peoples of Asia were just as anxious to
buy. He made certain that there would be a regular and sufficient
supply at Malacca of the principal articles of trade for W'hich this
city had been famous in the past.
He also observed that Malacca had ceased trading with Siam,
and he investigated the possibilities of the resumption of trade with
that country. He learned that as a political entity Siam was in a
better state than all the other countries in South-eastern Asia,
exercising considerable influence over several of the states in Malaya.
He sent a representative, therefore, to Ayuthia, the capital, at that
time, of Siam and in 1.516 a treaty Avas signed between the Port-
uguese and the Siamese whereby several ports were opened to the
Portuguese traders and permission was granted to them to travel about
in Siam. The Siamese, the Portuguese found, were not Mohamme-
dans, and Avith them, therefore, the Portuguese were ready to
trade, and a long period of friendship began, the neAvcomers helping
the Siamese to cast cannon and build up their military organization.
Of China, Albuquerque does not seem to have learned much,
and the Portuguese must have been advised that the Chinese did not
admit to trade any but those Avho accepted the suzerainty of the Em-
peror of China. As the leading country in the East, politically, eco-
nomically, and socially, China had lorded it over all the peoples of
Eastern Asia and none dared challenge the ascendency exercised by
the Chinese, so that little encouragement w as given to attempts made
to visit that country. The Chinese had tried to make themselves


almost independent of the rest of the world for goods, and their
foreign trade was reduced, therefore, to very small proportions, rela-
tively, save for a few commodities which China did not produce.
The earliest Portuguese attempts to trade with China were,
therefore, probably in the nature of exploratory ventures, and were
carried out in junks. On the route to China the Portuguese visited
Patani, where some trade could be carried on, for that part of Ma-
laya was, in those days, of greater importance than it is at the present
time. Ships also visited Pulo Condore, which was a watering place
and to which native craft brought goods frbm many places, for the
treacherous calms of the Gulf of Siam must have discouraged all but
the most venturesome. The Portuguese also called at the ports of
Cambodia, Champa, and Cochinchina, all of which places w r ere tribu-
tary to China, although in theory Cochinchina became independent
in 1431. These states were no longer powerful being continuous-
ly troubled with wars and feuds, but they were the source of the
“costly sweet w r ood called calamba (Lignum aloes), which being good
was weighed against silver and gold,” also other woods and a large
variety of merchandise.


IN SEARCH OF A HOME
Early Relations with the Chinese. When Vasco da Gama
returned to Lisbon he reported on the existence, far to the East, of
the ‘Land of the Chins’, and he presented the Queen with articles of
porcelain which he had acquired at Calicut for twice their own weight
in silver. Ho also reported that this race of people had, in earlier
years, come to India from distant parts hut had ceased visiting India.
Subsequent captains confirmed the reports of the existence of such
a people, whose country was not guessed at as being that which
Marco Polo described as Cathay.
When Diogo Lopes de Sequeira left Lisbon in 1608, with
orders to visit Malacca, he was given lengthy instructions. Among
these was one which read:
item You shall ask after the Obijns, and from what part
they come, and from how far. and at what times they come to
Malacca, or to the places at which they trade, and the mer-
chandise that they bring, and how 7 many of their ships come
each year, and regarding the form and type of their ships, and
if they return in the same year, and if they have factors or
houses in Malacca, or in any other country, and if they are
wealthy merchants, and if they are weak men, or warriors, and
if they have arms or artillery , and what clothes they wear, and
if they are men of large build, and all other information con-
cerning them, and if they are Christians or heathens, or if their
country is a great one, and if they have more than one king
amongst them, and if any Moors live amongst them cr any
other people that arc not of their law or faith; and, if they are
not Christians, in what do they believe and what they adore,
and what customs they observe, and towards what part does
their country extend, and with whom do they confine.” ( 4 *)
Diogo Lopes de Sequeira reached Malacca in 150!) and saw
three or four Chinese junks, hut he returned to Portugal in 1610
w ithout securing the information required of him concerning China.


A yoar later, Afonso de Albuquerque took Malacca, and met Chi-
nese junkmasters with whom he got on famously. They helped him
to convey envoys to Siam,
The first recorded visit to China by a Portuguese is that under
the command of Jorge Alvares in 1513. He had amicable dealings
with the Chinese and took a valuable loading back to Malacca.
From a Chinese source we learn that among the goods he carried
away from China was a small quantity of tang oil , which the Portu-
guese were later to find so useful as a varnish for their ships. ( 43 )
In China, at the Tuen Moon Anchorage &), between
Liutin Island the Tamcio of the Portuguese pioneers and
the city of Nam Tau on the mainland, there were ships from
several places: from Fukien, Luzon, Borneo, Anuam, and even from
the Liu Kiu Islands. But no junks from Japan were among the
number. These had been prohibited from using Chinese ports since
1480, because of piratical depredations. So serious did these at-
tacks by Japanese pirates, or Waho, become that strict laws were
passed in the XVth and XYlth centuries forbidding all trade with
these “dwarf slaves” as they were derisively called. Eventually
Chinese were not allowed to go abroad, principally so that trade with
Japan might be stopped. It is possible, and even probable, that
Japanese craft visited some Chinese ports surreptitiously, but
among the most important Chinese officials in the coastal areas were
those whose duty it was to impede the entry of Japanese vessels into
Chinese waters. In spite of laws forbidding emigration of the Chi-
nese, some craft, mainly Fukien and Hakka junks did venture
abroad, reaching Malacca and occasionally even Sumatra, Java,
and the Philippines,
After Jorge Alvares returned to Malacca, other ships com-
manded by Portuguese visited China* sffilSn Chinese records they
were set down as Fulankis, or “Feringhees”, as the Malays and other
Mohammedans called all Europeans. Among the early ships was
one under Rafael Perestrello (1513-16), who had as factor one An-
drea Corsali. The latter wrote to Duke Giulani de Medici, descri-
bing the voyage and reporting that there was “as great profit in tak-
ing spices to China as in taking them to Portugal.” Giovanni da
Empoli, another Italian who had sought employment in Portuguese


service, also wrote from Cochin, in -India, at the same time, and re-
ferred to China and the trade which could he conducted there. 31 has
been suggested that these Italians might have been agents who were
spying on the Portuguese.
Eventually, following the practice which the Portuguese had
kept up in the course of their explorations, they decided, in the ap-
proved Venetian way, to send an envoy to China. Tom 6 Pires was
chosen for the office and lie embarked in the ship of Fernao Peres
de Andrade, who led a squadron to China in 1517. Andrade anchor-
ed at Tuen Moon (&P1) and found Duarte Coelho de A lhuquerque
there. The latter had arrived from Siam, after beating off a fleet
of pirates, and was conducting trade with the Chinese. From
Tuen Moon, the Portuguese squadron proceeded to Canton, where
Tomi Pires was set ashore, and the Chinese authorities placed a
house at his disposal, premises being also allotted to the Portuguese
where trade could be carried on.
Tome Pires was eminently suited to the task which w as assigned
to him. He was no longer young, being in bis late forties, and bad
considerable experience in the handling of men. Ho was a keen
observer, and had served in several places including Malacca where
he acquired an intimate knowledge of the products of trade, as the
Suma Oriental written by him indicates. His nomination was based
on the advice of the noblemen and captains, who held Tome Pires
in high esteem, and because “lie had been apothecary of the Prince
Dom Afonso, and was discreet and eager to learn, and because he
would know better than anyone else the drugs there were in China, ’
as Hr. Armando Cortesao quotes.
Meanwhile Jorge Masc.areuhas was despatched to discover the
Liu Kin Islands where it was erroneously reported that gold abound-
ed, hut contrary winds kept him at Chuan Chow (i£;M'l), in Fukien,
where he found trade to be so satisfactory that he completed his busi-
ness there and prepared the way for future trade, leaving the voyage
to the more distant Liu Ivin’s for some later occasion.
Many months intervened between the date of Pires’s arrival
and that on which permission was granted for him to proceed to the
Chinese ca| ital: formalities connected with the protocol of the Middle
Kingdom, in the case of a new, non-tributary state were not easy to


unravel. When Fernao Peres de Andrade left China in the autumn
of 1518, however, he heard that Word had been received that the
Emperor would be willing to receive the ‘Fulanki’ envoy. Yet it
was not until the beginning of 1520 that Fires and his entourage
left Canton for Peking. They proceeded by slow stages and, in May,
at .Nanking, they were told to go on to Peking, which was reached
two months later. In the ‘Northern Capital', Pires had to wait;
until January, 1521, before the Emperor would be prepared to return
to his capital.
Meanwhile despatches had arrived at the Chinese Court reporting
quarrels in Chinese waters between one Simao Peres dc Andrade
and the Chinese officials at Nam Tau, including an assault by Simao
de Andrade on a mandarin. The ruler of Malacca had also sent a
delegate, Tuan Muhamed, to offer tribute and complain to the ‘Son
of Heaven’ that he had been dispossessed by these Westerners
the Fulanlis , or ‘Feringbees’ who were accused of being fero-
cious and predatory. The actual documents and the Emperor’s de-
cision do not seem to have been reproduced in printed works, but
Chinese writers have referred to them.
Simao Peres de Andrade was able to leave China, but a very
bad impression remained among the officials at the mouth of the
Canton River when he sailed in September, 1520. In spite of this,
several Portuguese junks arrived in May, 1521, and were even per-
mitted to trade, but when the Emperor of China died, in the same
month, the authorities ordered all foreigners to leave Chinese waters
immediately, in accordance with Chinese custom. The Westerners
refused to leave until they bad received cargoes winch Chinese mer-
chants had promised to deliver, possibly in exchange for merchan-
dise which had been sold. The Chinese officials insisted upon com-
pliance with their regulations regardless of the allegations advanced
by the traders, and when the Portuguese still proved obdurate some
of them were thrown into prison, and the Portuguese and Siamese
junks that were still in Chinese waters were attacked by a fleet of
Chinese war-junks. Other Portuguese ships which arrived at this
juncture were also attacked, and only escaped after several Portuguese
bad been killed.
Pires and his suite were in Peking at the time when the Em-
peror died, the Court officials having also decided, meanwhile, that
the Portuguese envoy’s missive, from the Viceroy of India to the


Emperor of China, was improperly worded. They felt that it lacked
the proper degree of servility, and this was held to be an
unpardonable error. The interpreters could have been blamed for
misinforming the Court, but Pires was accused of being an im-
poster. The officials took advantage of the Emperor’s death to send
Pires back to Canton there to await a decision after the new Em-
peror should be installed. Arriving at Canton in September, 1521,
Pires found that a change had taken place in the temper of the Chi-
nese officials, and he had to cool his heels in the Southern Capital.
Before news of the changes reached India a squadron had
sailed, under Martim Alfonso de Melo Coutinho, as Captain-
major, with Vasco Fernandes Coutinho, Diogo de Melo, Pedro
Hornen, Duarte Coelho de Albuquerque, and Ambrdsio de Rego as
commanders of the other ships. The Captain-major of this fleet car-
ried a commission to conclude a treaty of peace with China, but he
was disillusioned at Malacca, where news of the unrest in Chinese
waters had already reached the ears of Jorge de Albuquerque
Captain of Malacca.
In spite of this Coutinho decided to proceed on his way, hoping
by friendly negotiation, to come to an understanding with the Chi-
nese. Arriving at the Chinese coast in 1522, Melo Coutiuho’s squa-
dron was attacked by a Chinese fleet before any explanations could
be given, but the Portuguese commanders received orders not to
return the fire. One of them w T ould not, however, accept the attacks
and exchanged shots with his attackers. This angered the Chinese
all the more. Nevertheless, Melo Coutinho avoided an engagement
and brought his fleet into the Tuen Moon Roads. Some men were
sent ashore, but they were roughly handled by the Chinese, and
were lucky to be able to get back to their boats.
Melo Coutinho decided that it would be best to leave and gave
orders to sail, but the Portuguese ships were attacked again, two
of the vessels being lost in the engagement, although in fighting
their way out to sea the Portuguese inflicted losses upon the Chinese.
The Chinese officials were in no mood for discussions, and in
consequence of all this Pires and the members of his suite were
thrown into prison at Canton, where in course of time they were
executed or died from natural causes. The presents which the
Portuguese envoy was carrying to the Emperor of China were con


fiscated by the officials at Canton. Instructions were issued, further-
more, that the Fulanlcis should not be permitted to trade in China.
(“)
This was the first of the long series of misunderstandings that
have punctuated Sino-European relations, representing the divergent
points of view between two proud civilizations, during the last four
hundred years, when due to difficulties of language, divergence of
outlooks, and conflicting customs the Westerners have experienced
difficulty in dealing with Chinese officials.
China’s trade was too valuable to give up, however. Avoiding
the ports of Kwangtung, trading ships made their way from Malacca
to engage in commerce at Chekiang and Fukien, at the invitation
of Chinese living in Malaya, and there are references in Chinese
chronicles and district annals to the presence of Fulanhi ships in
the islands off the coast of these two provinces. ( 15 )
Uncertainties. Curiously enough the Portuguese chroniclers
mention only a few of the voyages carried out by their nationals to
the China coast, after the events connected with the unsuccessful
attempt by Melo Coutinho to open up regular diplomatic relations
with China. From the isolated references that have been made,
however, some of which have been corroborated by documents in
the archives of Lisbon, it can be seen that there was probably a const-
ant coming and going of ships. Some of the voyages were fully auth-
orized, such as those granted in 1522, to Fernao Peres de Andrade,
Jorge de Albuquerque, Pero Lourcnpo de Melo, and Rafael Catanho,
respectively. History is silent for a few years, and we then find that
permission is granted: in 1533, to Manuel Godinho and to others
not named; in 1535, to Henrique Mendes de Vasconcelos; in 1538,
to Fernao Antiques; in 1543, to Jeronimo Comes; and in 1544, to
Alonso Anriques de Bepulveda, to mention only some of those who
were given the privilege of going to China. ( 46 )
Unfortunately no documents are available to give us an idea of
the nature of the trade which was conducted, but that these voyages
were extremely profitable is shown by the two or three references
mentioned by the chroniclers. Caspar Correa refers to an episode
in 1523, or the beginning of 1524, when the Raja of Cranganor
was attacked by the Samori of Calicut and asked the Portuguese to
help him. “Rafael Catanho,’’ says Correa, “who was in Cochin, and
had come from China very rich, strongly urged Horn Luis to give the


help that the King of Cranganor asked for, and offered to go to fight,
with three hundred Portuguese men, and to pay them out of his own
packet.” The same chronicler mentions that there was sent “to China
Jeronimo Gomes, a favourite of the Governor's, in a good nao laden
with pepper, with great powers as captain-majcr, that no one should
go there except whom he wished; and the same man went there and
made so much money that he talked only of a hundred thousand or
a hundred and fifty thousand cruzados, with which he w T as so filled
with pride and vanity that he used to say that Fortune had not now
the power to deprive him of his hundred thousand cruzados...” ( 47 )
Mention is also made, on the other hand, of many who lost
their all, through shipwreck, piracy, or seizure by hostile natives in
places where rulers disliked the Portuguese.
Ferguson quotes an interesting letter, referred to in Sir W. W.
Hunter’s History of British India, transcribed from the India
Office Records. This letter w 7 as written by Diogo Calvo to the King
of Portugal on 16th January, 1527 (See Appendix A). Referring
to China, Calvo states, inter alia.
“ ... You may know for certain that under the sun there is
no country so rich as China in all kinds of merchandise required
as food, and cheap, and all things needed for your supply-yards
in India, so that you need not send anything else to India but
sail-cloths, because all the rest is to be had in China, and can
come to India very cheaply, namely, yard-arms, masts, pitch,
planking, nails, lead, iron, copper, quicksilver. The other
merchandise is so valuable and so abundant that they are too
many to describe ... Please know 7 , Your Highness, for certain
that now 7 they will allow Your Highness’s merchandise to enter
China, because the five years have passed, of which I w r as told
to inform Your Highness that for five years no goods of ours
should be sent. A relative of mine who was in the Kingdom of
Siam told me that the Chinese w T ere desirous of receiving from
us pepper and black-wood and putchuck and frankincense and
ivory and saffron, and that they would now pay for everything
by weight and for money ...” ( 48 )
it can be deduced that it was not very easy to carry on trade
with China during the five years before 1627. After that date
there are evidences of commercial relations again. Montalto men-
tions that it was still possible to see, at Ningpo, in the middle


of the XlXth century, the temple near the Bridge Gate which had
been assigned, in 15'38, to the Portuguese as the ‘Welcome Strangers’
Guild-House, but Montalto fails to give ns his reference.
From Castanheda we learn that by 1533, trade in China was
on a better basis, for when Paulo da Gama was captain of Malacca
he sent Manuel Godinho to conclude peace with the Eajas of Pahang
and Patani, who had been at war with the Portuguese for fifteen
years, going on to explain that “these conventions resulted in trade
being carried on with China again, and that the Portuguese after-
wards discovered more than fifty ports better than that of Canton.”
Correa also refers to hopes of peaceful trade with China. ( 40 )
There is other evidence that the Portuguese were becoming
familiar with the China coast, for in the map of Lopo Homera
(1646), ( 50 ) to give one example, one of the several portolans drawn
up at the time, incorporating information sent to Portugal by Por-
tuguese navigators in preceding years, at least three places, other than
Tamdo (Tuen Moon) in Kwangtung, Chincheo (Cheung Chow) in
Fukien, and Liampo in Chekiang, are indicated as trading depots.
One of these, about one degree of latitude north of what appears to
be the latitude of Swatow, is shown as ‘‘Here Rut Lobo traded ,” and
another in the vicinity of what is probably Quemoy Island in shown
as “ Lailo , where trade was conducted .” It is evident from Chinese
sources, moreover, that foreign ships visited many other places,
for Fukien and Chekiang -were only too glad to take advantage of
Kwangtung’s discomfiture. Diogo do Couto tells us that in Juh,
1546, Diogo Soares despatched several Portuguese vessels to trade
in China.
At one stage the most prominent of the anchorages frequented
by the Portuguese (or the Fulanlcis as the Chinese annals called
them at the time) was that known among the Portuguese as Liampo.
off the Chekiang coast, consisting of the harbours of Sheung Yue
and Tai Mau {k%■). The Chinese have recorded that about
the year 1540. the Fu-lan-Hs with Japanese and a number of
Chinese built small bouses and huts on one of the twin islands
guarding the harbour. ( 51 ) This was a small place but considerable
confusion has arisen from the practice by modern writers of trying
to identify it with ‘Ningpo City’. Permission appears to have been
tacitly given by the Chinese local officials for the establishment of
this settlement on the islands not far from the mouth of the


Yung Biver. Frei Oaspar da Cruz stated specifically that ‘the Por-
tuguese began to winter among the islands of Liampo.” Nor does
Mendes Pinto, who is given as the principal testimony in this mat-
ter, state that the Portuguese actually lived in the City of Liampo.
He narrates that he and his friends “arrived at the gate-way of
Liampo, two islands situated three leagues from the place where,
at that time, the Portuguese carried on trade.”
The confusion which several modern writers have helped to
perpetuate seems to have arisen from the fact that in their portolans
the Portuguese used Liampo instead of Chekiang » as the name of the
province, the sound ‘N’ being in some Chinese dialects confounded
with ‘L’, while the sound ‘ng’ is represented by the nasal ‘n’ in
Portuguese. ‘Niugpo’, through its XYlth century Portuguese
equivalent of ‘Liampo’ seems to have been the name which they
gave to the province, and the attempted identification of ‘Liampo’
with the city of Ningpo led to the error which crept into history
books by foreign writers on China, about a century ago.
By about 1542, the settlement among the islands off Chekiang
province was qvite an important trading centre, and a Portuguese
ship, on its way to “Liampo" from Siam and presumably blow r n off its
course reached Japan. ( 53 ) The Portuguese discovered very quickly,
moreover, that it was extremely profitable to carry goods between
China and Japan, Portuguese trade between Malacca and
Japan w r as initiated, with the little settlement off the China coast as
the half-w r ay station, where Chinese goods could also be exchanged for
Japanese merchandise principally Silver, which the Chinese were so
anxious to obtain, as w T ell as produce from Malacca and other places,
and odds and ends from India and even Portugal.
The Chinese officials at the places where the interdicted foreign
trade was carried on seem to have made no attempts to oust the
traders from the islands near Chekiang. On the contrary there
seem to be indications in old Chinese books that they actually en-
couraged this trade. One Chinese source states, for instance, that
“the Fu-lan-Hs came here to trade with the people at the coastal
ports and sold native produce such as pepper, sapan-wood, corn, aloes-
wood and olibauum, at very reasonable prices and bought, at twice
current prices, the things they needed for food and stores, such as
rice, flour, pork, chicken, and other things.” The Poituguese ships
also supplied the Chinese with merchandise from all over the East


Indies, Malaya, and India, and besides provisions they bought silk
and silk stuffs, porcelain, seed-pearls, musk, and rhubarb, as well as
copper, and lead, paying in silver for their purchases. No amount
of official proscription could prevent such a trade.
Montalto de Jesus mentions the discovery, in the XlXth century,
of the vestiges of the old Portuguese settlement, when the ruins of
a fort of decidedly European construction were found, as w 7 ell as the
Portuguese national arms on a gate. Montalto does not give us his
sources. It would be interesting to see confirmation by contemporary
Chinese officials of what he says.
With the development of trade, piracy grew and it is more than
likely that among the pirates were ‘dwarf robbers’, that is Japanese
pirates.
Nor was this a small matter. When the Chinese Court decided,
in the XVth century, to restrict Chinese shipping to a minimum
and to reduce the size of their fleets they left gaps in their coastal
defences which freebooters, Japanese as well as Chinese, penetrated
from time to time. Laws were then promulgated prohibiting
Japanese traders from entering Chinese ports, but these laws were
not always rigidly kept, for the officials seem to have winked at a
great deal, especially in the smaller ports. From Chinese sources
it can be seen, for instance, that Japanese traders frequented the ci-
ty of Ningpo, buying silk there with impunity. The subject of this
illegal trade by Japanese merchants in Chinese ports and of their
piratical incursions does not seem to have been studied satisfactorily
by modern scholars, but it is known that Japanese ships did visit a
number of Chinese ports. The crews of these ships were not easy
to handle, they were unruly and indisciplined and in 1523 there
was a riot in Ningpo, to be followed by a serious affray in the same
city in 1530 when Chinese officials were killed. This resulted in
the laws against the Japanese being enforced with more severity.
It is likely that because of this, trade was then carried on
among the islands off the Chekiang coast, not very far from Ningpo,
for Japmese and Chinese merchants seem to have been buying and
selling goods there with alacrity, and, if Mendes Pinto can be taken
at his own word, a few Portuguese as well. For their own
protection the Chinese authorities were forced to act against the
undesirables. Chinese sources mention that a certain Chi-
nese owed money to someone living at Sheung Yue and


that Tnng and bis associates made so much trouble that the
authorities had to take steps. 0 Kiu (hr &) the Hai-tau, (Maritime
Superintendent), and Lo Tong f/’si't), Commandant, were ordered
to expel the rowdy elements. An expeditionary force of sorts was
sent to rid the place of the pirates, Japanese {i. e., “dwarf-robbers”)
being specifically mentioned as being among the Chinese. C 3) The
date is given as the 27th year of the Emperor Chia Giving (t. e., 1518).
Describing the affair, another Chinese source mentions that “the
tire in Sheung Yue destroyed over ten ‘tin fai temples’ and over
twenty huts built by the pirates, and twenty-seven ships, big and
small, abandoned by the pirates.” ( M )
Corroboration of this may be obtained from an independent
Portuguese contemporary. Frei Caspar da Cruz, who was in China
a few years after the occurrence, talked with Portuguese captives
who had been released by the Chinese. He describes the events
and the circumstances that led up to the closure of the little set-
tlement. According to the Tractado da China of Frei Caspar da
Cruz (see Appendix B), trade had been carried on with considerable
difficulty. The Portuguese were not permitted on shore and were
called ‘Fanoui’ [». e. fan-hrei “foreign devils’], that is to say
‘men of the devil’ but the Chinese who had gone abroad in contra-
vention of the laws of China to Malacca, Siam, Patani, and other
places, for no Chinese might go abroad under pain of death, and
those who sailed along the coasts of China had to secure permits
from the officials could not return to China. They relied upon the
Portuguese to maintain contact with China, furnishing them with
guides and sailing in Portuguese ships. These Chinese induced the
Portuguese to proceed to Liarapo to trade, for some of them had
relatives in that part of China. The mandarins in charge of that
area received substantial perquisites from the trade, permitting
the foreigners to bring and to carry away merchandise in large
quantities. For a long time this went on without the knowledge of
the King [*. e. Emperor] and the highranking mandarins of the pro-
vince. This proving successful, they extended their operations gra-
dually to Chincheo (Cheung Chow) and the islands of Kwangtung.
Ultimately some Portuguese were able to trade even at Nanking,
the Chinese officiils conniving at this without the Emperor getting
to hear of it. Emboldened by success, the foreign traders began to
winter in the islands of Liampo, and they were very comfortable and


free from control in their settlemt nt-there. Lawless elements among
the Chinese there began to rob and steal, leading to murders. News
of this reached the ears of the high officials and the King, and the
latter gave orders for a fleet to be equipped in Fukien to clear the
coast of all robbers, principally those at Liampo. In this way no
distinction was made between robbers and traders. Owing to contrary
winds the fleet could not make Liampo, but proceeded to Chincheo
where some Portuguese ships lay. There was some desultory can-
nonading, and the Portuguese were about to depart without completing
their ladings when the Chinese commanders, learning of this
intention, sent a secret message by night, oflering, for a consideration,
to leave them alone. A valuable present changed bands, and a great
deal of trade was conducted, the mandarins winking at the
interdicted commerce. This took place in 1548. (“)
The Portuguese official chroniclers make no mention of this
episode, and besides the reference by Frei Caspar da C ruz the only
other Portuguese contemporary to refer to it is Fernao Mendes Pinto.
This noted adventurer, drawing on his memory a quarter of a
century later, ascribes to tbis affair the date of 1542, which cannot be
correct if the Chinese records and Caspar da Cruz are to be believed
then goes on to give rein to his imagination. He magnified
the unimportant incident into a sanguinary battle which cost the
lives of 12,000 Christians, including 800 Portuguese, and the loss of
thirty-five ships and forty-two junks, a grand Portuguese city being
razed to the ground. This story has been repeated so often, beginning
when Faria y Souza put it down as true history, that it has been
accepted as a statement of fact, whereas Mendes Pinto himself did
not claim to do more than write for the entertainment of his relat-
ives and friends.
It is not impossible that Mendes Pinto magnified the incident
of 1648, or possibly that which took place at Cheung Chow a
year later, although he does mention the latter separately, into the
episode which he gives in his and which he dates 1542.
Nor should we overlook the circumstance that it is most unlikely
that a battle of the size Pinto mentions could have escaped the
attention of the Chinese officials and writers, when a relatively small
incident like that mentioned by Frei Caspar da Cruz was confirmed
and is so fully recorded annals.


From Chinese writers it can be seen that after the so-called
‘incident’ of Liampo the Portuguese are said to have procfded to
Cheung Chow in Fukien, feetdt is not clear from the Chinese
sources whether the Portuguese were in the habit of trading there
already, although the Chinese annals do refer to the Fu-lan-ki ships
in Fukien ports. For instance, the Tung-sai yeung Hati ( 57 ) relates
that “in the 26th year (i. e., 1547) of the Emperor Chia Ching a Fu-
lan-ki ship with cargoes anchored at Ng Yue and the mer-
chants of Cheung Chow and Chuan Chow ( M ) went there to trade.
Portuguese cartographers distinguished between Ghincheo and
Zaiton as early as 1629 to mean ‘Cheung Chow’ and ‘Chuan Chow’
respectively!] 0 Kiu (hr|j-), the Assistant Commissioner and Mari-
time Superindent, sent soldiers to stop the trade but nothing hap-
pened.”
‘Nothing happened’ because a discontinance of commerce meant
privation or even starvation, while encouragement and backing were
given by the Chinese gentry, who constituted a bourgeoise in the
in the coastal towns. These people were hostile to the law which
prohibited trade with the foreigners, while the meagrely paid manda-
rins of the lower ranks were even less eager to offend the gentry, so
Chang T’ien-tse readily admits. ( 69 )
The energy displayed by the Assistant Commissioner O Kiu, at
Sheung Yue ( Liampo ) and at Cheung Chow, was not, therefore, due
to excessive zeal on his pait, for trade at Fukien had gone on
unchecked for a number of years. The edicts proscribing the Fu-
lan-ki traders and interdicting trade with these Japanese were still
in force, but had become a dead letter in many of the Chinese sea-
ports. When the higher officials were keen on enforcing the laws,
traders were imprisoned and their goods taken from them, but the
weight of evidence seems to show that the Chinese officials generally
connived at the interdicted trade.
It was not, as a matter of fact, until Viceroy Chue Yuen (&**.)
took office as the Viceroy of the two coastal provinces of Fukien
and Chekiang that the settlement at Sheung-yue was closed down.
Appointed in 1547, the new viceroy was determined to enforce
the law against the surreptitious trade from which neither the
Court at Peking nor the provincial authorities derived much income
if any. One of his first acts when he took office was to cause the
publication of orders for the enforcement of the Imperial edicts


against the Japanese freebooters and that of 1522 against trade with
non-tributary foreign ships. There is ample evidence of this in
Chinese annals (“). It may be presumed that the Assistant Com-
missioner, O Kiu, felt compelled to do something and made a show
of “sending soldiers to stop the trade,” but the Viceroy not being
satisfied, it may be assumed that the expedition against Liampo,
with the ‘destruction’ of the little settlement at Sheung Yue (the
“Liampo” of the Portuguese) in Chekiang was part of the subterfuge.
The transfer of trade from Sheung Yue to Ng Yue and Yuet
Kong (/)&) must have coma to the Viceroy’s ears and warned
probably by friends, the traders (Chinese together with Japanese
associates as well as a few Portuguese) moved to Chiu On (#3-$-)
and Chau Ma Kai (jt&ifc), a little farther out.
The Viceroy seems to have taken matters into his own hands
then, and appears to have directed the organization of the campaign
against the Japanese and other foreigners in 1549, for, as reported
by Viceroy Chue Yuen himself in memorials to the Throne, it
appears that on the tw'enty-first of the second moon, a foreign ship
came and anchored at Ling Rung 0 (s’'»&), upon which Lo Tang
and 0 Kiu (fa#) gave instructions to the people of the Mui
Ling family (&/$) to post sentinels and to ambush the foreigners at
the top of the hill, and that when the foreigners attempted to attack,
the troops should ambush them. Meanwhile, the provincial troops,
under the command of Lo Tang (Jilt) fell upon the ships, capturing
two of them, with two pinnaces, and four Ma-la-cap T) boats,
( 61 ) According to Chue Yuen the total of those captured and killed
was two hundred and thirty-nine, although ©ther reports give the
figure as low as ninety-six. Ming Shan Chong (Wibj&) states that
“the people of Cheung Chow were so much afraid of the severity of
Viceroy Chue Yuen that nobody dared to trade with the Fu-lan-Jcis,
but helped the authorities to capture them or drove them way.”
Viceroy Chue’s report goes on to state that although the
majority of those taken prisoner were Chinese there were some Fu~
lan-kis too. Among those captured, according to him, were “the
son, grandson, and brother of the Sultan of Malacca, as well as the
so-called ‘dwarf-king’, the ‘first king’, and the ‘second king’, (the
three kings of the Fu-lan-Jcis), and sixteen white slaves, forty-six


black slaves, also La-tat, the ringleader, and Lei Kwong-tau, and
other Chinese.” ( 6S ) By the term ‘dwarf-king’, Viceroy Chue Yuen
•was referring to some Japanese or another.
This engagement has been called “The Battle of Chau Ma Kai ’
a tame affair, but the Viceroy was determined to make a
great show of his victory, and in order to impress the natives of Fukien
with the effectiveness of his campaign against the Japanese and other
foreign traders and their Chinese associates, ordered that four of the
prisoners should be dressed up and labelled “the Kings of Malacca”,
and cooped up in cages and sent through the towns of Fukien.
Viceroy Chue Yuen then memorialized the Throne recounting his
own zeal in stamping out illegal trade. He also ordered the decapita-
tion of many of the prisoners, “executing them at his convenience,”
adds a Chinese account.
People in Fukien seem to have been incensed over this inter-
ference with their trade and sent letters to the Court. The Peking
authorities, after investigating the reports, at the request of two of
the Metropolitan Censors, memorialized the Throne asking for an
investigation. After going into the facts, Chan Kow-tak (£s.£.•&),
the Censor, impeached the Viceroy “for acting on his own authority
in executing men without duly ascertaining the gravity of their
offence. Thereupon the Emperor despatched a high Court official,
the Supervising Censor To Yue-cheng attended by some
other important officials to investigate the affair. As a result of this
inquiry many of the charges against the Portuguese were declared
to be unfounded. Most of them were subsequently released from
captivity. Viceroy Chue and many of his subordinates were pro-
nounced guilty of unjustifiably executing ‘merchants’ and of conceal-
ing the truth from the Court.” C* 3 )
The investigators must have gone into the whole affair very
thoroughly for when their findings were presented to the Throne,
an imperial decree ordered the punishment not only of Viceroy Chue
but of O Kiu and Lo Tang as well, while many officials were
banished and others were discharged from public service. It is not
stated whether Viceroy Chue Yuen was given a hearing, but he
committed suicide rather than face execution and disgrace his
family. The punishment of the other officials was duly carried
out.


The Portuguese survivors were eventually released, provided
with necessaries and conveyed to Hangchow, being later dispersed
and sent to various places in China. When the Portuguese were
permitted to trade at Canton again, six years later, some of these
victims of Viceroy Chue Yuen’s zeal returned to their countrymen.
Among these might have been Mateus de Brito, Galeoto Pereira,
Amaro Pereira, Afonso Ramires, and others.
The names of these four prisoners have been recorded, for each
of them wrote an account of his experiences in China. Father Bal-
chior Nunes Barretto, it should be added, went to Canton in 1565,
to negotiate for the ransoming cf “Matheus de Brito and another
man” who had been in prison at Canton for some years. There is no
need to labour the point that this would only have been possible if
some agreement had been made with the Chinese for permission for
Portuguese to land in China, since St. Francis Xavier was not able
even to set foot on the mainland not more than three years earlier.
Matheus de Brito was the author of an Informaq&o da Chinn
(See Ajuda Library, Lisbon, Codex 49-IV-49, ff. 193v-197v). Galeoto
Pereira was a prisoner who after his release from a Chinese prison
wrote a “Description” of China, which w r as published at Lisbon in
Portuguese. (Prof. Ph. de Vargas states that Galeoto Pereira’s des-
cription of China contains a great deal of most interesting information
about China). Amaro Pereira’s Informagao da China is another in-
teresting account of China, but it has never been used for publication
(Ajuda Library, Codex 49-IV-50, ff. 453-463). Affonso Ramires w ? as
another prisoner who was ransomed from the Chinese. He had been
captured at Cheung Chow with other Portuguese &£ the ships
belonging to Fernao Borges and Langarote Pereira. He w’rote a
“description” of China as well. (Ajuda Library, Codex 49-IV-49,
ff. 233v-234v). ( 64 )
It is interesting to observe how closely Chapters XXIV and
XXV of Frei Caspar da Cruz’s Tractado das Cousas da China e de
Ormuz, published in 1670, agreed with the Chinese accounts of the
affair at the islands near Cheung Chow 7 , and of what followed. The
Portuguese friar managed even to obtain a copy of the Emperor’s
edict bearing on the Viceroy’s proceedings. His description of what
happened, when several Portuguese were taken prisoner, and of all


that followed, coincides in its essentials so closely with what the
Chinese accounts (published only many years later) have to say,
particularly in view of the findings of the Imperial Inve tigators,
that it merits more than passing consideration. As a matter of fact
it was based to a great extent on Galeoto Pereira’s Descripg'lo and
on Afonso Ramires’s luforrnagdo of what they experienced in China
as prisoners. Fernao Mendes Pinto’s account of the same affair if
taken at its face value tends to confuse rather than clarify the affair.
Thus, the account of this affair by Frei Caspar da Cruz. (See
Appendix C) impresses Chang Tien-tse (by no means a fr 'end of the
Portuguese) who goes on to concede “the on the whole rehable nature
of his narratives.” A summary would read somewhat as follows:
“In the following year, 1549, the Chinese fleet blockaded the
coast so closely that the Portuguese were scarcely able to obtain
provisions, much less carry on tra le, but no matter how careful-
ly guarded, owing to the numerous islands along the coast some
merchandise reached the Portuguese. But the ships could not
return to India fully laden, nor could they get rid of all the
goods. The unsold goods were left in two junks belonging to
expatriated Chinese traders, with thirty Portuguese to guard
them and to sell them in exchange for Chinese produce at some
port or other and then to return to India.
‘‘The commanders of the Chinese fleet, learning from some
merchants on of the rich prize,sent a party on land to
pretend to attack and lure the Portuguese away from their ships
while the fleet then rounded a point of land and fell upon the
Portuguese ships. Home Portuguese were killed and others were
wounded, while the Chinese belonging to the junks were cruelly
treated. Four of the Portuguese were dressed up and labelled
‘the Kings of Malacca’, and the Luthissi [i. e. high ranking
mandarin] ( M ) was very pleased and cooped them up in cages,
sending them from place to place, while the luthissi and the aitao
agreed to share the plunder. Some ninety odd Chinese were kill-
ed, among them some youths, so that these might not tell of the
value of the booty.


“The Portuguese not being able to speak Chinese were spared,
but were al-o paraded about in cages to show how great was the
victory. But the secret could not be kept, and the cruelties prac-
tised by the officials were so much talked about, since no exe-
cutii 'n could take place without the Emperor’s authority, that
it reached his ears, since some of those who were executed
had relatives in that part of the country. Some mandarins,
furthermore, who were zealous that justice had not been done
informed the Emperor that the Portuguese had come to China
as traders to buy and sell their goods, that it was false that
four of the pr soners were ‘kings’, and that a great deal of
merchandise had been t<ken from them. The Emperor was
greatly shocked and ordered that justice should be done.
“The Emperor dea' atched a Quinclioy [? Tsung Tsai iSI
i. e. Director-general] who took two other high ranking officials,
a Pouchasuti and an Anchassi [i. e. Pu-Cheng Shill
Lceutenant-governor, and An Cha Skill Judicial Com-
missioner] , charging them to be careful to see that justice should
be served in tins case, for the welfare of the Empire. These
officials emered the city of Foochow with a great show, and
commenced an inquiry at once.”
A lengthy description of the inquiry, and of the Chinese usages
and customs, then follows in Caspar da Cruz’s book, this being the
earliest account published in Europe of the method in which a
Chinese Court of Inquiry was conducted. Frei Caspar da Cruz also
reproduced a version in translation of the Emperor’s edict, in which
the Vi eroy was condemned to be conveyed to Peking in disgrace,
several officials to degredation, and others to various degrees of
punishment.
Caspar da Cruz relates that the Viceroy hanged himself, while
the Chinese accounts state that he committed suicide.
Mendes Pinto’s account of the affair at Chincheo (Cheung
Chow) is summarized by Montalto;
“After the destruction of Liampo, the Portuguese secured a
footing at Chincheo by means of heavy bribes. An official
administrator, Aires Botelho de Sousa, unprincipled and
ravenous, seized as part of the estate of a dead Armenian some


merchandise which two Chinese claimed as theirs; and on its
not being given them, they complained to the mandarins, who
thereupon forbade Chinese intercourse with the Portuguese,
cutting short their supply of provisions. Driven by hunger
they scoured the country in search of food. This ended in
scuffles which roused the whole district against them. Whilst
an army made short work of them, a fleet burned their ships;
and out of five hundred Portuguese, only some thirty escaped
a barbarous death.”
In assessing the value of Fernao Mendes Pinto’s narrative it is
necessary to sift the wheat from the chaff. There is a great basis of
truth in the PeregrinagOo, and it would certainly not be fair to dismiss
his statements as apocryphal, but discretion is needed in pronouncing
upon the book.
Return to Kwangtung. —News of the happenings on the China
coast in 1548 and 1649 must have reached Goa, and the Portuguese
authorities there must have felt that it was necessary to control the
activities of their nationals, so that irregularities practised by a.
number of the less disciplined and their association with Japanese
outlaw's might not prejudice the good name of the majority. We
find that after 1549 a “Captain-major” was appointed to take charge
of Portuguese interest* in Far Eastern (that is Chinese and Jap-
anese) waters, with authority over his own nationals. The Port-
uguese also seem to have decided that their attention might be di-
rected to trade with Kwangtung, in which they were very probably
encouraged by Kwangtung merchants and officials.
In Chinese records evidence must abound to show that when, in
1522, all foreign trade was forbidden in Kwangtung there were serious
repercussions in the provincial exchequer. There may be reason to
believe that consequent upon the quarrels between the Portuguese
and the Chinese, after the disputes involving Simao Peres de Andrade,
in 1520, and the refusal of the Portuguese merchants to leave Chinese
waters after Emperor Chang Te’s death, in 1621, the interdiction
w-as directed primarily against the Fu-lan-lis but the Imperial edict
made no distinctions and forbade all foreign trade. The economy
of Kwangtung province was upset by this measure for foreign ship-
ping proceeded in subsequent seasons, as we have seen, to the coasts
of Chekiang and Fukien, greatly to the satisfaction of the merchants
and officials of those provinces.


But the Kwangtung provincial treasury and the merchants of
of Kwangtung felt the blow at once, for the provincial authorities ex-
perienced the greatest difficulty in meeting with the requirements
of the Imperial household to keep them supplied with the annual
quota of pepper and other spices, which it was Kwangtung’s obligation
to furnish. Kwangtung obtained some supplies from Fukien and
Chekiang, from the merchandise sold by the foreign traders there,
it is true, but the prices charged by the Fukienese merchants were
out of all proportion to Kwangtung’s ideas of values, and Canton
merchants presented petitions to the Viceroy asking him to intercede
with the Throne to revoke the edict against foreign trade. At last,
Lam Foo (#S), the Viceroy and concurrently President of the
Censorate, memorialized the Throne in 1530, presenting very cogent
reasons w T hy foreign trade should be resumed. Chang T’ien-tse gives
us a good summary of the Viceroy’s Memorial :
“Lam Foo pointed out that the closing of the port of Canton
to foreigners not only was in itself undesirable as it had impo-
verished the province, but was inconsistent with the established
principles and practice of the past, and that it was absurd to
ban a profitable trade solely because of the misconduct of the
subjects of one nation who could be debarred. He saw four chief
advantages in lifting the ban: first, the imperial household would
have for its own consumption a sufficient amount of foreign
products, by which he meant ‘spices’ [the demand of the Court
for spices must have been quite considerable, for the reason given
by Wu T’ing-chu, the Provincial Treasurer, for permitting
foreign ships to come to Canton at any time they chose was that
‘he needed spices to be sent to the Court’] for the foreigners
must pay, besides their tribute-goods, customs dues in kind;
secondly, the expenses of the military operations in the pro-
vinces of Kwangtung and Kwangsi, which took place annually
and had drained the provincial treasury of Canton, could be
met with a portion of the revenue from customs dues; thirdly,
with an additional income of several tens of thousands of taels
per month which the provincial government of Canton used to
enjoy from the customs, Canton could easily sustain the costs
of her own administration as well as that of Kwangsi which was


dependent upon her; and finally, the now impoverished popula-
tion would again be better off. Against the assertion that there
would be grave dangers in resuming foreign trade, he argued
that, with the exception of the Feringhis, the foreigners had
been peace loving and compliant, as historical records could
show. While urging the reopening the port of Canton, he also
mentioned the importance in that event of guarding the Can-
tonese coast with increased vigilance.”
Viceroy Lain Foo’s memorial met with much opposition in
Pekmg, but his contentions were accepted, and foreign trade was
permitted once more, the Japanese being however excluded, and the
tu-lan- kis as well.
Meanwhile the Portuguese traders, having strengthened them-
selves in Malaya and the East Indies, were in a position to prevent
the Moslem f arriers, who had been in virtual control of a substantial
part of the trade before the coming of the Portuguese, from supplying
the Kwangtung markets, although it is known that Chinese junks
did venture South to trade, in spite of Imperial proscriptions. Since
the Portuguese trade ships were given a better welcome at Fukien
and (hekiang, fewer of their ships visited Kwangtung. It is interest-
ing, nevertheless, to learn from the Tin-Ha-Kwun-Kwok Li-ping
Shoe (“) that at that time foreign ships were
known to visit Sunning (srs), Kwong-hoi ( 67 ), Mong-tuvg
)or Lek-kam-Jcei-tam ( 68 ), Heung Shun (#«h), Long
Pak (•/&&) ( 69 j, Ho Keng (>£4£l ( 70 ), Sup-chi-moon ( 71 ), Tuen
Moon C 2), an< k Fu Tau Moon (”).
This explains how it is that the Chinese district annals show,
for instance, that Fu-lan-hi ships visited Macao in 1534 and 1535
and other occasions, to mention Macao alone. Closer study of the
annals of the various coastal districts will probably reveal that in
spite 'of the prohibitions against the Fu-lan-kis, the Chinese traders
and the humbler mandarins, if not the higher ranking officials as
well, welcomed the trade which the Portuguese ships brought. When,
therefore, Viceroy Chue Yuen of Fukien and Chekiang entered upon
his campaign (1647-1649), by which several Portuguese
traders lost their lives or were imprisoned, and quantities of goods
were lost at Cheung Chow, it was not difficult for Kwangtung to let
the Portuguese ship-masters feel that they would be quite welcome.


With the unrest prevailing in Kwangtung, consequent upon
the la k of trade, there had been a recrudescence of piracy, a
phenomenon that has been of constant occurrence in China when
trade has fallen off and the seafaring Chinese h ive not been able to
make a living, Japanese freebooters being closely associated with
them. The Portuguese had learned from bitter experience how
dangerous it was to be wrecked on the China coast, for the pirates
of this region have always shown themselves adept at dismantling
ships and removing their cargoes, while the interdiction against
foreign trade made them lawful prey when zealous officials were
searching for Japanese and others, nationals of non-iributary states,
who endeavoured to anchor in Chinese waters. But Portuguese
ships on the journey from Malacca to Japan found it necessary to
have a shelter in the China Sea. We find, therefore, that after
1549 some sort of understanding seems to have been made with the
Chinese officials whereby Portuguese ships visited Sheung Chuen
To (J -ff &), popularly known as “St. John’s Island” but also called
Shanchuan, or Sanchuang, and Long Pak Kong (-;& h s*•), the
“Lam-pac-kao” of the Portuguese. Long-Pale-Kong is the
Cantonese rendering. In Mandarin it is pronounced Lang-Pak-Kau-
Of these two places Sheung Chuen seems to have Ken the
more important at the beginning. This explains why it was that
St. Francis Xavier in attempting to enter China had to wait there
while trying to obtain permission to proceed to the Chinese mainland,
since the decree against the Fu-lan-kis was still in force. His death
there in 1552 made the island a place of veneration for many years.
But the waters around Sheung Chuen are inclined to be too rough
and the Portuguese seem to have had a greater liking for Lam Pak
Kao Island.
Mr. H. B. Morse, the authority on foreign relations with
China, goes so far as to query the existence of Lam Pak Kao. In
an written in 1921 ( 74 ), he quotes J. R. Morrison’s Chinese
Commercial Guide to the effect that “we look in vain for the
particular island which, under the name of Lampacao, was once,
for several years, the residence of Portuguese merchants.” Mr.
Morse goes on to state that he had had talks with members of the
Customs staff but that these men could shed no further light on the
subject. His failure to look up the Portuguese and Chinese records


must be held against Mr. Morse, and if he had only taken the
trouble of going no further than to look at the modern British
Admiralty Charts he would have been able to make an entirely
different statement. In those charts the island is clealy shown,
with the principal village there called Lam Puli Sui, sitmted 113°
13’ E. and 22° 2£. N. In some Chinese maps this island is called
Liu Wan San. In shape and location this island appears in old
Portuguese portolans just as it is shown in the British nautical
charts of the present day. Donald Ferguson went so far as to say,
“I feel very doubtful whether such an island as Lampacan ever
existed except in the brain of Fernao Mendes Pinto.”
The Portuguese pioneers have mentioned the place quite
clearly. St. Francis Xavier tells us that the nao of Duarte da
Gama called there in 1651, on her way to Japan. We find that
Duarte da Gama’s ship visited Lampacao again in July 1564 and
wintered there, leaving for Japan in May or June, 1565. Five
months later the same ship returned to Lampacao from Japan laden
with a very rich cargo. A ship belonging to Diogo Vaz de Aragao
also on the way back from Japan called at the same port on the same
occasion. Others visited this island also, and among those who saw
Duarte da Gama’s ship there in 1555 were Father Belchior Nunes
Barreto and the adventurer Fernao Mendes Pinto. In Mendes Pin-
to’s letter, written at Macao, he states specifically, “On the 20th
July we reached Shanchuan where Father Nunes Barreto landed
and said mass . . . We left that place on the 3rd of August and
landed at Lampacao on the same day. Lampacao is the place where
the ships transact trade.” Elsewhere in the same letter he says, “I
reached here [t. e. Macao] from Lampacao to-day [i\ e. 20th Novem-
ber, 1555] and this is the port where we are anchored. This place,
Macao, is some six leagues away [from Lampacao].” ( 7S ) Pinto’s
letters should not be confused with the fantasies which he created
for his PereyritiaQ&o.
Dr. Jordao de Freitas has pointed out that the codices in the
Ajuda Library show that besides the ships already mentioned, Port-
uguese ships at Lampacao lata in 1655 included those belonging to
Antao Pereira and Francisco Toscano, from the Sunda Islands, and
Gil de Goes, Luis de Almeida, and Diogo Pereira (also from Sunda).
( 7S ) This for the year 1555 alone.


Writing at Malacca on the 16th December, 1556, Father Luis
Frees describes Lampacao. He says that it used to be “an uninha-
bited desert island” but the Portuguese “have set up mat huts on
land.” The Portuguese who wintered there “were nearly four hun-
dred in number.” ( 7V ) Other references of a similar nature are to be
found in the Lisbon archives.
In the letter of Leonel de Sousa, the Portuguese captain who in
1554 negotiated the agreement with the Chinese whereby permission
was granted for the Portuguese to trade in South China, we read;
“the Port of Shanchuan is one of a number of islands where our
ships are to be found, but I did not want to anchor at Lampachao,
which is at the mouth of the river ... nor go to the city called Quday
[t. e. Kwong Hoi], which is five or six leagues from Lampacao.” ( 78 )
Reference to a map of the region will show that this is perfectly cor-
rect. Much as the Portuguese liked Lampacao at one time, this
island can no longer be used as a port for the silt of the West River
has been steadily filling up the whole area. The silting of these
waters during the last four hundred years is borne out by the Annals of
Heting Shan District, first published in the middle of the 18th century:
“Long Pak Kong (’/&&/S), ninety li south-west of Heung Shan, is
the place where foreign ships formerly gathered, but they cannot
do so now because the waters there have became too shallow.” ( 79 )
A sudden change such as this, from a state of almost clan-
destine trade to one of good proportions, indicates, very clearly that
restrictions were no longer in force. We have seen that when St.
Francis Xavier landed at Sheung Chuen (Shanchuan) in 1552, it
was not possible for him to proceed to Canton. Conditions in
China were of such a nature that a Portuguese trader reported: “I
put in three years on the China coast but got little benefit out of the
trade, because I found all the ports well guarded with armed ships
which would not allow trade to be carried on. A high-ranking Chi-
nese official and some Portuguese who had been imprisoned in China
advised me that if I attempted to engage in trade the coastal guards
would attack, such being the orders received from the Emperor, the
latter having been informed that clandestine trade was being carried
on. The Emperor ordered that all kinds of merchandise should be
permitted to enter China, upon payment of taxes, excepting those
from the Franks [*. e. the Fu-lan-ki] whose hearts are dirty, the


Portuguese being included among that class, and who were consid-
ered to be pirates and rebels, not being tributary to the Emperor of
China.” ( 80 )
The restoration of permission for foreign trade to be carried
on in Kwangtung had come into effect in the third decade of the
century, but the Portuguese had become the principal carriers,
for encouragement was given to them at Fukien and Chekmg.
Conditions in Kwangtung did not improve therefore to the extent
that the provincial authorities had expected. When the Portuguese
left Fukien in 1649 there must have been a great falling off of
trade in Kwangtung as well, since Chinese junks from Fukien
used to carry foreign cargoes to Canton, and the cessation of trade
in Fukien affected the commerce of Kwangtung, therefore, as
well.
The higher officials would not have dared permit trade to be
carried on openly, however much they might have wished for the
perquisites from that trade.
As early as 1647 overtures were being made for some mod-
ification in the state of things. Lam Hei-yuen an
official, is quoted as having petitioned one Yuen Kin-yue
to the effect that “the Portuguese have not invaded our borders,
have not killed our people, and have not robbed us of our property,
and the Chinese people are anxious to do business with them.
Furthermore, when they first arrived they were troubled by the
pirates who infest our coast and they drove away the pirates, who
are afraid of them. The notorious pirate Lam Chin was so fierce
at sea that the Chinese authorities could not subdue him, but the
Portuguese removed the danger for us; pirates who flourished for
twenty years were suppressed in a single day. This shows that the
Fu-lan-kis have not been pirates but, on the contrary, have protected
us against pirates; they have not harmed our people but have
benefitted the Chinese.” ( 81 ) The way was being prepared for a
change which would put this trade with the Portuguese on a legal
basis.
Writing from the port of Cochin, in Western India, on the
15th January, 1656, Leonel de Souza, one of the leading Portuguese
captains, informed Prince Luis, younger brother of King John 111
of Portugal, that he had gone to China in a merchant vessel in 1652


(See Appendix D), but had not met with much success in business
because the Portuguese, being classified as ‘Franks’, were forbidden
the use of Chinese ports. He gave orders therefore to the Portuguese
who happened to be in Chinese w T aters not to land nor to do
anything to antagonize the Chinese, and he then “entered into
negotiations to bring about peace, the Portuguese undertaking to pay
the customary taxes, all the Portuguese agreeing to this arrange-
ment. .. such not being possible earlier because the first Portuguese
were not permitted in China, and in order to come to this arrange-
ment it had to be stipulated that the Portuguese are not ’Franks’,
as the people of Malacca used to call us.” Leonel de Souza goes
on: “This arrangement for peace and payment of taxes was con-
cluded by order of the Hai Tau of the City and Country of Canton,
a high dignitary of State and Admiral of the Seas, who intervenes
in all the affairs of the Ports as well as the Fleets, who appears at
times in person vested with great authority, w 7 hen necessary. This
agreement made with him was not put down in writing nor was an
official document drawn as I had no Letters Patent, but we have
undertaken to pay twenty per cent customs tax, as is the custom,
like the Siamese from the Kingdom of Siam, w’ho frequent these
waters under licence of the Emperor of China.”
The Hai Tau informed Leonel de Souza that the matter would
be submitted to the Emperor, and that a reply would be received in
the following year, for the journey to the capital took three or four
months. He also advised the Portuguese to treat the Chinese officials
respectfully, so as to avoid a repetition of the complaint made when
the Portuguese first came to China (a reference to the violent temper
displayed by Simao Peres de Andrade in 1520), and that it would
be advisable for the Portuguese not to lose the advantages which the
outcome of Leonel de Souza’s fortunate negotiations had secured for
them.
“In this manner I concluded peace arrangements,” Leonel de
Souza’s letter continues, “and settled the affairs of the trade in China,
whereby many have engaged in business and numbers accepted the
opportunity of going safely to the City of Canton and other places,
carrying on business freely, without hindrance... All this entailed
a great deal of trouble, far more than I can explain in writing, but
there was no other way.”


The Portuguese captain also explains how he had teen helped
by a certain Simao de Almeida, who spent a great deal of money in
travelling backwards and forwards, in giving presents, and in other
ways. The letter is full of interesting observations regarding con-
ditions on the China coast at the time. He is critical of the conduct
of some of his countrymen, and he states that the Chinese officials
expressed surprise that Portuguese traders carried on trade with their
arms by their sides. He also mentions that foreign ships might only
anchor in a few specified ports in China, and no ships could enter a
Chinese port without permission. Furthermore, no Chinese was par-
rnitted to go abroad, but a number of Chinese evading the Imperial
order had gone to places like Malacca and other countries, and on
returning at times engaged in piracy on the China coast.
From his letter it is clear that it took him three years to con-
clude the negotiations which ended so satisfactorily, and he mentions
how profitable the China trade may be. Then follows a reference to
the position of the Portuguese trade in that part of the world and
some observations on a number of points connected with China and
Chinese usages, f B2 ) Concluding his letter, Leonel de Souza referred
to losses suffered by the Portuguese who ventured to China in the
years preceding the agreement which had been concluded by himself
and the Hat Tau, and he stressed the fact that by this agreement
“besides the benefits that would accrue to the Portuguese there would
be less sacrifice of so many lives occasioned by the loss of ships every
year, as this was the place where there was the greatest waste of
Portuguese lives and property. The China coast,” he adds, “is a cold
and stormy one, with great fleets on guard.”
The conclusion of the agreement was followed by positive re-
sults. Instead of being clandestine, trade became legal. By paying
the tax agreed upon, the Portuguese were free to carry on trade,
while these men who were forbidden to land in China could come
and go without hindrance, not only in the outlying ports, but even
in Canton.
“Father Nunes Barretto was much moved,” wrote Father Luis
Frees, S. J., at Malacca on Ist December, 1566, “last year when he
learned that Portuguese were permitted to go to Canton ...” f B3 )


“The ports of China are open,” wrote Father Ayres Brandao,
S. J., “which is something that has been desired for a long time.” f B4 )
“Matheus de Brito and other prisoners had been detained in
China,” wrote Father Nunes Barretto, S.J., “because there had been
a state of conflict, and whenever a nao was lost and taken by the
Chinese, the occupants were either killed or imprisoned; but all that
has been changed now because the Portuguese pay taxes.” ( K )
“Leonel de Souza has settled matters with the Chinese,” wrote
Frei Caspar da Cruz, who was at Malacca in 1554 and visited
Canton in 1556, in his Tractado das Cousas da China , “to pay their
taxes and the Chinese permit the Portuguese to carry on trade in
their ports.”
Chinese writers do not seem to have taken cognizance of this
understanding between the Chinese and the Portuguese, although
the facts speak for themselves, but there is tacit admission by Chinese
writers tha C some sort of pact was made. It is recorded that Wong
Pak, Deputy Hai Tau of Kwangtung, gave the Portuguese
permission to land and carry on trade, Macao being included among
the places where trade was authorized.
The Portuguese, in the XVlth century, made a great deal of the
help given by their nationals in the suppression of piracy, as one of
the reasons why they were so favourably treated. Chinese historians
also link the two ideas. Writing in the Old Kwangtung Tung Chi
(s£ii!L4i), quoted by later editions of the Kwangtung Tung Chi
Kwok Fai (tMK), records; “In the thirty-third year of
the Emperor Chia Ching (i i.e ., 1654) the pirates Ho-ah-pat
Cheng Chung Hing and others banded together and pro-
ceeded to Fat Tai Nai (sMli£), not far from where the foreign ships
were anchored, oS the Kwangtung coast. The Chinese outlaws
proceeded to rob villages along the coast. Thousands of rebels from
Fukien joined them, and among their number were Wong Chik
(il), Chui Chuen (-&£■), Fong Mo and others, who had
robbed rnqjy districts in Chekiang.
“Pau Chang In Commander in Chief of Kwangtung,
sent Wong Pak (>£.s&), Deputy Hai Tau, Wong Pui and
Mak Mang-yeung (.&&&), and others to capture Ah Pat and the
other infesting the seas of Kwangtung. One
hundred and forty-six of these were killed or imprisoned, many more
were drowned or burned to death, and the rest fled.”


Chinese writers who doubt the prowess of their own troops and
officials in the XYlth century have suggested that the presence of
pirate bands probably led tbe Chinese officials to solicit the assist-
ance of tbe foreigners against tbe pirates and then granted the
concessions which the Portuguese were endeavouring to obtain,
but do not resist the temptation to insinuate that there were more
personal reasons which prompted the mandarins to permit them to
trade. Chou Chin-lien suggests this, somewhat timidly, but quite
clearly, in bis Sino—Portuguese Relations ('f where he
quotes the passage give above. ( 86 )
Yuet Tai Chi Ting-Yi-chung Chuan quoted
in the Kwangtung Tung Chi ( 87 ) refers to Wong Pak, and after
mentioning that Ting Yi-chung, Criminal Judge, opposed the
presence of foreign ships in Kwangtung waters, goes on to say that
Wong Pak was unsuccessful when he tried to persuade Ting Yi-
chung to permit European ships to enter Chinese waters, but that
shortly afterwards he was promoted to the post of ‘Commissioner of
Civil Administration’, when, having the necessary powers, he was
free to do as he liked. The writer of the Kwangtung Tung Chi
clearly indicates that a high-ranking Chinese official permitted the
Portuguese ships to anchor in Chinese ports.
Whatever the circumstances, it is perfectly clear that not only
were the Portuguese permitted to trade in Chinese waters in Kwang-
tung, at Sheung Chuen, Lampacao, and Macao, but numbers visited
Canton, among them, as has been stated, Father Belchior Nunes
Barretto, who went there in October 1556. No Portuguese, after the
days of Simao Peres de Andrade (1620), would have dared go on
such a mission. Did not St. Francis Xavier fail to set foot on the
mainland of China, let alone go Canton, only three years before?
The presence of particularly dangerous piratical fleets, ‘dwarf-
robber’ ships among them, at the mouth of the Canton River about
1661-1656, when the city of Canton was menaced, is clearly referred
to in Chinese histories. It was not only at this period that the pirates
were active; from tbe very earliest days of the Portuguese in China
they had to deal with pirate attacks. Almost every Portuguese ship
had to fight Tanka (Hr|£), or Fukien {&>&), if not Japanese, pirates.
Duarte Coelho de Albuquerque, for instance, one of the early Port-
uguese traders in China, fought 35 engagements with pirates in the
Canton River Estuary on a single visit.


The late Mr. S. F. Balfour found a great deal of information on
this subject, and in his Hongkong before the British he mentions how
the Portuguese were operating successfully against the pirates in this
region. His book reveals that he consulted a number of Chinese
sources, for he refers to Chinese records, although he does not quote
them, to show that the Chinese themselves recognized the prowess
of the Portuguese against pirates. The officials in this region urged
the Government to allow the resumption of trade relations with the
Portuguese, explaining that the Portuguese were suppressing piracy
at Lo Man Shan —now known by the Portuguese name of Ladrones
Islands a clear reference to an understanding of some sort such as
Leonel del Souza’s agreement. ( 88 ) Portuguese expeditions against
bands of pirates, it might be added, had become so frequent that they
were considered matters of mere routine, and ceased to be given spe-
cial attention in the records of each voyage. This might explain why
no specific mention was made in Leonel de Souza’s letter of brushes
with pirates.
Montalto waxes eloquent over Leonel de Souza’s success and
the appreciation shown to the Portuguese for their services against
pirates. “The dark days of vicissitudes had ended,” he exclaims.
“A better era was about to dawn, when by returning a great good
for crying wrongs, by crushing the pirates who infested the China
coast, the Portuguese at last won the good graces of the most ex-
clusive and prejudiced of nations, securing among them, at Macao,
an exceptional position which, however unsatisfactory in some res-
pects, was for long envied by many an ambitious maritime power.”
Trade at the China Coast. When the Portuguese ships first
appeared off the China coast they were able to offer a great variety
of merchandise, and besides the produce of Malaysia and the goods
of India, the newcomers had wares and supplies from Europe which
must have intrigued the merchants and officials of China. They
brought quantities of silver as well, from Europe no less than from
India, and this the Chinese were happy to get.
It has been shown that Chinese intermediaries prepared the
way for this trade, and it was so profitable that many Portuguese
were prepared to risk a great deal just to make a voyage to the Chi-
na coast. ( 89 ) During the first eight years, until the summer of 1521,
the Portuguese were made very welcome, but after the Edict which
forbade trade with the Fulankis, the risks were increased many fold.


In spite of this some Portuguese did get permission, as we have
seen, to proceed to Far Eastern waters, for the trade was a profitable
one. This subject should provide material for students of Far East-
ern affairs, for the essentials of this trade are known, and the study
of Chinese district chronicles and other Chinese books will possibly
reveal information of interest to historians.
In spite of the laws which forbade the Portuguese to trade in
China some of these Westerners did venture to the China coast, at
the invitation or suggestion of Chinese and others living in Ma-
laya. The names of a few of these Portuguese have survived C 0),
the privilege being generally given to senior officers who had rend-
ered signal service to Portugal. At times favourites of the Viceroy
of Goa were also permitted to proceed on such a voyage. Besides
those who were granted permission and were properly authorized to
fit out ships, there must have been some adventurers who made their
way into Oriental waters without the knowledge of the Portuguese
authorities. Fernao Mendes Pinto, on his own admission, was one
of these, if it can be taken for granted that this part of his Peregri-
nagao was not fiction. With his companions, Portuguese, Chinese,
Malays, and others, he must have given a bad name to his fellow
nationals. ( 91 ) Leonel de Souza and Frei Caspar da Cruz also refer
to the presence in Chinese waters of Portuguese who had no business
to be there (See Appendices B and D infra).
It was the closure of Ningpo, an important market for the sale of
Chinese silk, to Japanese traders, especially after the riots in which the
Japanese were mixed up, involving the death of Chinese officials in
1530, that led to the surreptitious trade among the islands off the coast
of Chekiang province, not far from the mouth of the Yung River.
This was a trade that the Portuguese were keen on getting, and they
gathered there with the Japanese and Chinese merchants and
adventurers, at the appropriate season, buying and selling Malaysian
produce, Indian cotton goods, and European novelties, side by side
with Chinese silk which Japanese junks carried away to Japan. It
was during this period that Japan was discovered by the Portuguese,
in 1542 or 1543.
The first decade or so of the Japan trade until the Portuguese
moved from Fukien to Kwangtung was a golden opportunity for
those who had enterprise and daring enough to venture into these


dangerous waters. Not only did the typhoons and gales take a heavy
toll, but the pirates here had a bad name as the most ruthless cut-
throats on the seven seas.
Unfortunately not very much is known about the early Port-
uguese trade with Japan, although Japanese writers and a few foreign
scholars have been devoting some attention to this subject. The
volume of this trade was not great in the very early days, but it was
so profitable that “a cargo bought for 2,500 Taels had been disposed
of for twelve times that value.” ( 92 ) This extraordinary profit could
not, of course, be kept up, but it has been estimated that as soon as
the commerce settled down into a regular business the profits did not
run below 200 to 300% and possibly reached 600% at times, which
was quite a handsome return even for those days.
So little is known about this subject that no less an authority
than Professor Boxer remarks that “the modern historian may
perhaps be pardoned for wishing to exchange some score of the
countless lists of martyrs for one prosaic bill of lading of a Portuguese
nao do trato.”
The early Portuguese traders in the China seas generally sailed
in junks, but the nao and other Portuguese craft were employed at
times. After the discovery of Japan, however,'the need grew for larg-
er ships, and the nao came into its own in these waters. In a paper
read by Professor Boxer at London University, not long ago, an
excellent survey was made of some features of the early Luso-Japan-
ese trade. With his permission a few extracts ( 93 ) which have a
direct bearing on this subject are quoted:
“No exact equivalent for the word nao exists in English, but
its import is ‘great ship’ (French nef or neuf) and these naos were
usually termed Carracks by the English and Dutch, although the
Portuguese seldom or never used the Iberian equivalent Carraca to
describe their Naos. Carracks are frequently mentioned in mediaeval
documents, but the Portuguese East-Indian carracks which acquired
such fame for their stupendous she and burthens attained their
greatest celebrity in the second half of the XYlth century. The
Nao da Carreira da India or East-Indian Carrack was a large mer-
chant vessel, broad in the beam, with high poop and forecastle,
lightly gunned and an indifferent sailor.


“Up to about 1540, the nao was of less than 400 tons burthen,
but during the reign of Dom Joao 111, the nao frequently attained
800-900 tons. A typical example was the colossal Madre de Deus,
which was taken by the English off the Azores when homeward
bound from India in 1692, and which was rated by Hakluyt as a
1,000 ton ship. Experience showed that these lubberly vessels, over-
laden and over-crowded as they usually were, proved inferior in sea-
worthy qualities to ships of smaller tonnage. Accordingly the next
monarch, Dom Sebastian, promulgated a law in 1670 to the effect
that no Nao de Garreira da India should rate less than 300 or more
than 450 tons. This measure w r as apparently successful, as accord-
ing to one XVIIth century authority not a single one of these
craft suffered shipwreck during this King’s otherwise unfortunate
reign.
“The best and most eea-worthy of these ships were built in the
Indo-Portuguese yards at Goa, Cochin, and Bassein those of the
last two places being the most esteemed on account of the excellent
teak-wood of which they were constructed. The yards at Lisbon
and Porto built both carracks and galleons, but it was realized that
the pine woods of Portugal provided material inferior to that of the
teak forests of Malabar. The Lisbon government repeatedly gave
orders for the construction of ships in India in preference to Europe.
Even the Spaniards at Manila preferred India-built Portuguese ships
when they could get them, as exemplified in a report in 1619, which
states that these latter were not only incomparably cheaper than
those built in the Philippines but lasted ten times as long, owing to
the superiority of teak over all other woods for resisting worm-rot,
“The Japanese name for the Great Ship was Kurofune, or
‘Black Ship’, presumably derived from the colour of the hull, this
term being revived for Commodore Perry’s American vessels three
centuries later. The Kurofune evidently made a great impression
on the Japanese, as well they might, for they were the largest ships
afloat on the Seven Seas. It is these great ships which form a
favourite theme of the most characteristic forms of Portuguese in-
fluence on the art of Old Japan the so-called Namhan lyobu, or
‘Southern Barbarian’ Screens, to give the literal translation.”
As regards the navigation of the ships, Professor Boxer ex-
plains; “From the time that Vasco da Gama took on board Arab
pilots at Malindi in East Africa to guide him across the Indian


Ocean to the Malabar coast, the Portuguese had, wisely and inevit-
ably, relied largely on native pilots to show them the way to the
other Asiatic ports of whose existence they had heard. With the
help of Arab, Gujarati, Javanese, Malay, and finally Chinese pilots
they made their pioneer voyages from Malabar to Ceylon and the
‘Golden Chersonese’; from Malacca to the Sunda Islands, the Moluc-
cas, Siam, and Indo-Chiua; from Malacca again to Canton. Once
they had attained these enormous commercial markets and fertile
mission fields, they had neither the time nor the inclination to in-
dulge in organised voyages of discovery for its own sake, such as
had led them down the West Coast of Africa round the Cape of
Good Hope to Sofala, and to the shores of Labrador, Newfoundland,
and Brazil.
“Hence their pioneer voyages to the civilized states of Asia
were made with the help of Asiatic pilots; and their pure discoveries
were virtually limited to places like Madagascar, New Guinea, and
Korea, which they discovered (like Japan) when forced off their
proper course by stress of wind and weather. This fact does not
detract from their skill as seamen or enterprise as merchants, for
obviously they would have been foolish in the extreme to trust them-
selves and their ships to the uncharted coasts and unknown seas of the
Orient, when they could readily obtain the services of experienced
pilots in these perilous waters. Once they had been shown the way,
however, they dispensed, as a rule, with their Asiatic teachers, whose
store of nautical lore they considerably improved upon.
“An example of this fact is afforded by the numerous XYlth
century Portuguese roteiros (anglice Butters ) printed in translation
by Jan Huyghen van Linschoten. These clear and exemplary sail-
ing directions proved invaluable to their Dutch and English succes-
sors, whose own pioneer voyages to the East were made with the aid
of these translations and from which are ultimately derived the
magnificent English Admiralty Pilot Handbooks of the present
day. ( 91 )
“Nor was the influence of these Boteiros confined to European
navigators, for some of them were translated into Japanese for the
use of native pilots. One of these manuscripts dated 1622, compiled
by a Nagasaki seaman from the dictation of a Portuguese pilot
named Manuel Gongalves, survived the vicissitudes of time and was
printed in Tokyo about thirty years ago.


“Such was the esteem in which Portuguese nautical skill was
held in Japan at this time, that for some years all Japanese junks
sailing to South-East Asian ports were compelled by government
edict to carry Portuguese pilots. Thus the superior local knowledge
of Chinese and Japanese pilots was supplemented by the superior
theoretical and technical skill of the Europeans.”
Mendes Pinto describes the rejoicing among the Portuguese liv-
ing at ‘Liampo’ when the news was received by them of the discovery
of Japan. The passage is a fine piece of descriptive writing, but
until it becomes possible to establish where Mendes Pinto was report-
ing actual events and when giving rein to his imagination it would
not be safe to accept, in its entirety, his account of the discovery of
Japan and of that which followed. From Japanese sources, however,
it is clear that the year 1542, the date given by Mendes Pinto, is
approximately correct, although many authorities lend a readier ear
to the account written by Antonio Galvao than to that of Fernao
Mendes Pinto.
From all authorities, however, it is clear that of all the goods
carried by the Portuguese on their first visits to Japan there was
nothing that aroused greater interest than the firearms used by the
Europeans. Good prices were paid for the match-locks and other
weapons, and the Japanese were soon making their own imitations.
The Japanese also took to making gunpowder to be loaded in the
arquebuses and other fire-arms introduced by the Portuguese. For
many years there was a constant demand for these articles and, later,
for the cannon which the foreign traders carried to Japan.
The history of the very early Portuguese trade with Japan may
be divided into short periods: the first from its discovery in 1542 (or
1543) to the year 1649 (the latter year being that on which the Port-
uguese decided to move away from the islands off the coasts of Che-
kiang and Fukien) and the second period from 1549 to that of the
establishment of Macao (1657), during which period the Portuguese
trading depots were to be found off the coast of Kwangtung province.
Little is known about the earlier of the two periods, for the trade
in China was entirely unofficial and the dangers connected with it
were still great and although very profitable it is unlikely that more
than a very limited number of Portuguese ventured into Far Eastern
waters. The Portuguese who did make their way to the China coast
found out, however, that the Chinese laws which interdicted trade


with Japan and forbade the emigration of the Chinese put the
Chinese at a great disadvantage. “In this way,” Professor Boxer
points out, “the peculiar position arose that the Chinese could only
trade officially with their Japanese neighbours through the medium
of the Portuguese, who, in addition to being the only important
sources of supply for European and Indian goods for Japan, likewise
enjoyed a virtual monopoly of the Chinese silk export market which
was far and away the most profitable part of Sino-Japanese commerce.
The Portuguese could therefore buy in the cheapest market and sell
in the dearest. The gold and silver bullion which they carried away
from Japan in payment for their silk imports was profitably disposed
of in India and China respectively, where the relative and fluctuat-
ing value of these two precious metals enabled them to make further
profits.” ( 95 )
Hardly any names have been handed down to us of those who
visited ‘the Land of the Rising Sun’ in this period, but it seems that
Diogo Yaz de Aragao went there in a nao, that Jorge Alvares ( 96 )
was also a frequent visitor and was so familiar with the country that
he wrote a description of Japan for the guidance of St. Francis Xa-
vier, that possibly Luiz de Almeida went there, and that one Alvarez
Yaz (according to Paulo Anjiro Xavier’s first Japanese disciple)
also visited Japan.
No mention of this period of Japanese history can overlook the
fact that conditions in Japan were so favourable that St. Francis
Xavier felt drawn to proceed there, and we find this great missionary
landing there in 1549. We know nothing about the work of the
priests who preceded Francis Xavier, that is the chaplains who visited
China and Japan in Portuguese ships, and only Mendes Pinto takes
the trouble of mentioning them. But from the days of St. Francis
Xavier the pageant of Christian effort is a magnificent panorama of
sacrifice and achievement not only on the part of the missionaries,
but one that does credit to the Portuguese who assisted the mission-
aries by every means in their power. ( 97 )
The trade between Japan and China must have been too profit-
able to give up, for the Chinese no less than for the Portuguese, and
when it became expedient to cease trading among the islands off
Fukien and Chekiang, following the trouble started by Viceroy Chue
Yuen in 1648 and 1649 wherely those provinces were brought to the
eyes of the Court, arrangements were made by the Chinese officials in


Kwangtung, as we have had occasion to observe, for the continuance
of the trade among the islands off the coast of Kwangtung province.
The Chinese Court might not have had official cognizance of this
trade, but the provincial and coastal officials must have realized that
it was necessary for the currents of trade to be directed into useful
and controllable channels.
At Goa the Portuguese authorities must have felt that they, too,
had to regulate the activities of their nationals in Chinese waters,
and thus it came about that a senior Portuguese officer was appointed
annually to superintend all Portuguese ships and trade in Far
Eastern waters. The appointment of such an officer became a feature
of the Administration’s service and in each year a Captain-major
was despatched to take charge of the Japan trade, with privileges
and advantages to himself and possibly, at times, to those who
appointed him.
In theory only one Captain-major should have bsen appointed
at a time, for any one year, but this was not always the case (vide
Leonel de Souza’s letter, reproduced in Appendix D infra). Boxer
gives us succinctly a rough idea of the Captain-major’s position and
privileges:
“The right of controlling trade in the China Sea was restricted
to the Captain-major of the Voyage of China and Japan (Capi-
tao-mor da Viagem da China e Japao). This post was confer-
red annually by the King (or by the Viceroy of Portuguese
India in his name) upon a fidalgo, or gentleman, whose services
had been something out of the ordinary and who was felt to be
deserving of a particularly lucrative reward. If the Captain-
major could not make the voyage himself, he could sell his
voyage to another, who then made it with the same prerogatives.
For the duration of the voyage, he was the recognized chief of
all Portuguese ships and settlements he might meet with bet-
ween Malacca and Japan, and he was the official representative
of Portugal vis-a-vis the local Chinese and Japanese authorities.
The Captain-major was usually responsible for fitting out bis
own vessel, but in some cases the Crown provided a ship on
loan against adequate security.


“The Captain-majors of the Japan Voyage (the word ‘China’
was usually dropped as being understood) were not appointed to
a post which was unique of its kind. The trade to the Spice
Islands, Pegu, Bengal, Mozambique, and elsewhere was organ-
ized on a similar plan based on the principle of a Crown
monopoly, but the China-Japan Voyage was by far the most
lucrative during the 90 years of its existence.” ( 98 )
It seems that the privilege was officially awarded for the first
time in 1550 when Dom Fernando de Menezes was conceded the
licence to make the voyage with the rank of ‘Captain-major of the
Japan Voyage’ for the year, with jurisdiction over his fellow-
nationals in the Orient. (") He traded at the port of Shimabara,
in Japan. Duarte da Gama was also permitted to take his ship to
Japan in the same year.
In 1561 Manuel Preto’s ship was in Japan, and Duarte da
Gama’s nao visited that country for the second time, anchoring at
Funai, in the province of Bungo. In 1652 Manuel Preto went to
Yamagawa (Satsuma prjvince) and Duarte da Gama proceeded to
Kagoshima. In 1553 Duarte da Gama went to Japan for the fourth
time. In 1654 three ships sailed from Lampacao for Japan but
Duarte da Gama’s ship is believed to have been the only one of the
three to have reached its destination, although Diogo Vaz de Aragao
is also said to have visited Japan. In 1555 three ships reached
Japan, captained respectively by Duarte da Gama, Diogo Vaz de
Aragao, and Luiz de Almeida. In 1656 Dom Francisco Mascare-
nhas traded at Funai. In 1667 the privileged one w T as Francisco
Martins, who went there on behalf of Francisco Barretto (who later
became Governor of India), and it is said that one more Port-
uguese ship reached the port of Hirado. ( 10 °)
The principles of this trade were closely linked, it can be seen,
with the idea of monopoly, which was in that period of history, and
for that matter for many generations to come among the peoples of
Europe, considered to be sound economics. There is still a good deal
to learn about this trade, but no student of this subject can afford to
disregard the studies bearing on it which have been written by Pro-
fessor C. R. Boxer in recent years. ( 101 )


Into this period of history, too, come the Jesuits, who under the
aegis of the Portuguese Padroado carried out evangelical work in
Japan and in so many other places in the world that Portugal disco-
vered for the peoples of the West. With the coming of these earn-
est, learned men a new T chapter begins, for among their many con-
tributions to the spread of knowledge was the host of letters they
wrote describing their experiences and their activities in so many
places. <102)
Here and there, among their letters, we catch a glimpse of what
was going on behind the veil which was drawn across the trade of
those days. A short passage in a letter written by Father Belchior
Nunes Barretto, in 1655, for instance, refers to the presence of Port-
uguese merchants at Sheung Chuen and Lampacao. From this let-
ter we learn that
“the trade in this country is so great that there are over
thirty thousand quintals [one quintal being equal to about 128
lbs] of pepper, and a hundred thousand cruzados of silver in a
single nao just arrived from Japan all this being employed
in trade and used up in a month. This results from the per-
mission granted [a reference to Leonel de Souza’s agreement]
for merchandise to be brought from Canton to the island of
Shanchuan and the other places where trade is carried on with
the Chinese. Merchandise is bartered and goods are taken back
to Canton and elsewhere. It is stated that a similar volume of
trade is done here every year.” (103)
The value of this paragraph from the pen of a trustworthy wit-
ness is too important to disregard, and a study of other letters written
by Jesuit fathers who visited the China coast on their way to and
from Japan, might furnish more particulars of a similar nature.
An interesting reference in the passage given concerns the great
quantity of pepper mentioned by the good priest. It indicates that
the demand for pepper in China must have been relatively enormous,
considering how 7 small were the proportions of international trade at
the time, and would serve to explain how anxious the merchants and
officials in the Chinese coastal provinces must have been for the re-
sumption of trade when Kwangtung was closed to foreigners in 1621.


The difficulty had been partly overcome when trade went on at Che-
kiang and Fukien (1528-1548), but the officiousness of Viceroy Chue
Yuen upset matters and it was logical therefore that the officials in
Kwangtung should have made serious efforts to bring trade back to
their province.
Comparative exchange-rates and quotations for produce in the
middle of the XYlth century are not available, but it can be estimat-
ed that pepper was worth, at the beginning of the century, from two
to four cruzados the quintal in Malaysia (a cruzado was worth about
4s. to ss. in English currency at that time), and although figures
from Chinese sources are not accessible, for a comparative price in
China, Duarte Barbosa indicated a price of fifteen or sixteen cru-
zados the quintal on the China coast in 1519. ( 105 )
But the trade in pepper was not the most important part of the
foreign trade in China. From the Chinese point of view the sale of
their silk and other Chinese merchandise was of the very greatest
importance, the Portuguese paying in gold and silver bullion for the
goods they purchased from the Chinese. No records are available
concerning the commerce of those days, nor were any reports prepa-
red covering this traffic, like the commercial surveys of Asia com-
piled by Tome Fires and Duarte Barbosa thirty to forty years before,
in the second decade of the XYlth century. In the absence of such
information it may be safe to assume that, in the main, the mer-
chandise which was bought and sold on the China coast from 1549
to 1657 differed but little from the trade mentioned by Fires and
Barbosa in the compendiums which they prepared.
A summary of the particulars drawn up by Fires and Barbosa
for the China trade might with advantage, therefore, even at the
risk of repetition, be included here.
Fires wrote that “the chief merchandise from China is raw
white silk in large quantities, and loose coloured silks, many in quan-
tity, satins of all colours, damisks chequered, enrolados in all colours,
taffetas and other thin silk cloths called xaas, and many other kinds
of all colours, brocades; an abundance of seed pearls in various
shapes, mostly irregular, they also have some big round ones; musk
in powder and in pods, apothecary’s camphor in large quantities, aba-
rute, rhubarb, alum, saltpetre, sulphur; copper, iron, vases of copper


and fuseleira (brass ?), cast-iron kettles, bowls, basins, boxes, fans,
plenty of needles, some very fine and well made, countless copper
bracelets, porcelain bsyond count.” And Barbosa noted, furthermore,
that there came from China “plenty of good sugar; the whitest pearls;
beautiful gilded ornamental articles such as very rich boxes and other
cunning things.” Besides these goods other travellers who visited
the Far East a few years after the period of which we are treating
added that China sold all sorts of embroidery work, ginger, china-
root, civet, amber; gold-leaf and wire; quicksilver, tin, andiron pans;
flax, cotton, calin or spelter “which was much esteemed all over
Asia”; varnished work, mother-of-pearl, and tortoiseshell; a great
quantity of confectionery; many pretty gilded things, such as very
rich chests and trays of gilt wood ornamented with a thousand pret-
ty designs, cabinets, salt dishes, fans, and delicate works of ingenious
make. ( IP6 )
Besides these articles of regular trade the Portuguese bought a
hundred and one novelties with which to delight the people of
Europe. We know that the King of Portugal sent a Chinese printed
book to the Pope, as a present of the greatest rarity. The nobility
and wealthy in Portugal and other places that traded with the
Portuguese took pride in possessing curiosities from China, and
examples of these articles surviving in palaces and manor-houses in
Portugal and elsewhere in Europe must be among the finest speci-
mens in Europe at the present time. Chinese scrolls, tapestries, and
csrpets were bought, also beautifully embroidered dresses, shawls,
fsns, and other articles of personal adornment, and a host of Chinese
wares for display in Europe and India and elsewhere.
The bullion brought to China by the Portuguese came mainly
from Japan, but also from India, Portugal, and other places. On the
other hnnd the Chinese were keen on buying too, and at that time
seem to have been very anxious to get large quantities of pepper, as
pointed out by Father Belchior Nunes Barretto. This would confirm
what Pires had to say about the China trade when he recorded that
“the chief merchandise is pepper of which they will buy ten junk-
loads a yen’ if as many go there.” ( 107 ) If we remember that Leonel
de Souza had seventeen Portuguese ships under his supervision, at
one time, off the China coast, some of them from Sumatra and other
East Indian islands, the source of the pepper, and that in 1555 many


Portuguese ships, also from Sunda, were anchored at Lampacao, we
can agree that Pires and Father Barretto were correct in their
estimate of the enormous volume of the pepper trade in China at
that time.
Both Pires and Barbosa mention that by comparison with pep-
per, the commerce in other products was relatively small, but they
specify that the Chinese bought “cloves, some nutmeg, putchuck,
cutch; they buy a great deal of incense, elephants’ tusks, tin,
apothecary’s lignaloes; they buy a great deal of Borneo camphor,
red beads, white sandalwood, brazil-wood, infinite quantities of the
black wood that grows in Singapore; they buy a great many corne-
lians from Cambay, scarlet camlets, coloured woollen cloths . . .
opium, incense, coral, and cloths from Pulicate and Cambay.” They
also bought velvets, crystal, and glassware, ambergris, benzoin, frank-
incense, rattan, wormwood, saffron, “precious stones set in rings,
carkanets, tokens, ear-pendants, and bracelets.” Then there were
the costly foodstuffs they imported such as sharks’ fins, birds’ nests,
awabi, agar-agar, and other things. ( 109 )
The ships that brought these goods were Portuguese craft, or
ships of peoples with whom the Portuguese were friendly, and came
from Malacca, Sumatra, Java, Sunda, the Moluccas, Banda, Borneo,
Siam, Malayan ports, and from Japan, and other parts.
A great fortune in merchandise and bullion was therefore to be
found in Chinese waters every year, with an aggregate value of
several hundreds of thousands of taels, a truly great sum for those
times, when merchandise was relatively so cheap, the vo-
lume of international trade was generally carried on A such a small
scale. Valuable Chinese goods were carried to the same spot. There
these goods were bought and sold, and there was a great bustling and
hustling for several weeks while this trade went on. The greatest care
had to be taken lest pirates, who were so active in the Far East at
that time, shou'd plunder the goods, or waylay the Chinese ships
coming and going to and from the anchorages where these ships
gathered together. The danger had to be overcome, and we shall
see what steps were taken so that trade might be carried on in safe-
ty and made secure from the ‘bloodthirsty wolves of the sea’.


ESTABLISHMENT OF MACAO
Port of I A-Ma. Macao came into existence and into the
story of Portuguese relations with the Chinese at a particularly
fortunate period, when previous misunderstandings had been com-
posed and new friendships begun, and this little colony has had a
place in history out of all proportion to its diminutive size.
When the Portuguese began using Macao regularly, in 1656 or
so, although there is evidence that their ships visited Macao waters
about two decades earlier, they little dreamt that it would one day
rival the largest emporiums in Asia. There was little enough about
the place to indicate its future importance.
It probably first came into notice when the Portuguese reached
Malacca. At that time, however, it was referred to under its Chi-
nese came/Ho Keang {%&.) which was included in the geographical
survey (the Suma Oriental) which Tome Pires, who was factor of
Malacca at the time, drew up for submission to the King of Port-
ugal, in 1612-1515. Pires refers to this place on /. 162 of his man-
uscript :
“Alem do porto de quantom esta outro porto que se chama
oquem he amdadura p° terra De tres dias E por mar huu dia
& huua noite este he o porto dos lequjos he Dout a s nacoees
mujtos portos tern alern q sera largua cousa De comtar que ao
presemte nom fazem em noso caso somemte atee qmtom porq
esta he a chaue do Reino De chyna”.
Dr. Cortesilo translates this passage (in his excellent The Suma
Oriental of Tome Pires ) as follows :
“Beyond the port of Canton there is another port which is
called Oquem\ it is three days’ j mrney by land and a day and
night by sea. This is the port for the Lequjos and other races.
It has many other ports, which it would be a long business to
tell of, and they do not concern us at present, except up to Can-
ton (Qmtom), because this is the key to the kingdom of China.”


Without wishing to split hairs with Dr. Cortesao, the suggestion
is made that the passage should be translated and be closer to the
original, thereby making better sense, if worded;
“Besides the port of Canton there is another port which is
called Oquem; ly land it is three days’ journey, and hy sea it is
a day and a night, etc.”
On /. 162 v. of Pires’s Sum a Oriental there is another passage
which refers to the same place :
“Os lequeos chamanse guores por quallqr destes nomes . .
trata na china e em malaq a E as vezes em companhia dos chijs
as vezes por sy na chijna tratam no porto de foquem q he na
terra da chijna Junto De quamtom nauega?am De huu dia &
huua noyte...”
which Dr. Cortesao translates:
“The Lequeos are called Guores they are known by either
of these names . . . They trade in China and in Malacca, and
sometimes in company with the Chinese. Sometimes on their
own. In China they trade in the port of Foqem which is in the
land of China, near Canton a day and a night’s sail
away ...” <lo9>
It is evident, from the context, that Pires is referring to one
and the same place, Oquem (on one page) and Foquem (on the next),
and in all likelihood to the place known in the days of the Ming
Dynasty as Ho-keang in Cantonese, but Ho-keng in Hakka.
This might have even been O-keng in one of the dialects of the sea-
farers in the South China seas, and is the name used at that time
for the place which we now know as “Macao”. (The omission by
Pires of the letter H in the word Ho (*£), will not surprise those
who are conversant with Portuguese orthography of the period, i. e.
early in the XVlth century.)
Persons familiar with this region know that it would be possible
for boats to sail from Canton to Macao in a day and a night, the area
between Canton and Macao being intersected with innumerable
waterways. (Accounts by foreign traders early in the XlXth
of their passage by boat between these two places, arc


among the interesting vignettes of life in those days, conditions of
travel having changed but little during the intervening 300 years).
Travel by land in this region, on the other hand, was and still is
impeded by the dozens of channels of this West River Delta, neces-
sitating the crossing of these waterways in little ferries, travel by
night being rendered impossible.
Fires w'ould, therefore, be correct to say that, by boat, the jour-
ney from Canton to Macao would take a day and a night, while the
overland journey, by day only, w 7 ould require three days’ travelling.
Ho-Eeang (*£&) means “Oyster-shaped Mirror”, while Ho
Keang 0 or as the official documents (using the Mandarin
translation) have it, Hao Citing Ao meaning “ Bay of the Oyster-
shaped Mirror ’ was the common name for Macao, but purists prefer
Hoi Keang (%W, that is “Mirror of the Sea” to use the Canton-
ese pronunciation. These variations are linked with the famous
Bay of the Praia Grande (as it is known to-day) which used to form
such a pleasant circle, the sun sparkling on the placid waters of
which reminded some poetically inclined Chinese official of a mir-
ror. Mirrors in China are generally round, hence oyster-shaped.
O-keang (*£#;) meaning “Moat Mirror”, Ou-Moon (&M) mean-
ing “Gateway to the Sea-Mirror ißay”; Heung-shan Oil
meaning “Bay of Heung-shan”; Lin-fa-chow (&&#*!) meaning
“Island of the Lotus Flower” are some of the other Chinese names
borne by this little place, to mention only a few. Before the days of
the Mings, long before it came into the story of early Sino-Port-
uguese relations, the place was known as the Kum Tau Im-chong
meaning “Salt-pan of the Golden Grain Basket.” ( n 0)
Local legends in Macao would show that traders from Fukien,
and even the Liu Kiu Islands, began to use this port during the
Yuan Dynasty or early in the days of the Mings, and the story
attributing t) the goddess Neang Ma (•*&*s) one of the manifest-
ations of the Queen of Heaven, and patroness of seafarers in Fukien,
the saving from watery graves of the crew of a junk, dates from
this period. The grateful scanrn erected a shrine in honour of
their patroness, <n the sh re at the entrance t) the port, the name
of their goddess being affecti nately shortened to the diminutive
A-Ma. The sheltered port became known as A-Ma-Kao (“The Port
of A-Ma”), a id the Portuguese pioneers adopted it, calling their lit


tie settlement by the sonorous title of Povoagclo do Nome de Dtos de
de Amacao na China. The temple may still be seen at Macao,
changed but little, venerated by Chinese fisherfolk and the object of
poetical effusions, as tablets and other objects in the temple grounds
testify.
Writers who should know better have tried to connect the name
Macao with a rock called Ma Kau Siac which used to stand
on a little promontory, but this inconspicuous landmark occupying
an obscure part of the peninsula cannot, and could not, compare in
any respect with the famous Temple of A-ma. The very fact that
the correspondence of the Portuguese pioneers used the name
Amacao, or one of the several forms by which those writers used to
express A-Ma Kao should dispose of any other interpretation
with regard to the source from which the Portuguese settlers drew
their inspiration forja name.
Besides the original name of Povoagdo do Nome do Deos de
Amacao na China , other names like Porto do Nome de Deos, Porto
da China, and Porto de Amacao were used, and eventually, in 168 G,
after repeated requests by the citizens for a city charter, the Viceroy
conferred,on the growing settlement the official name of Cidade do
Nome de Deos na China. But the name Amacao had already
become popular among the Portuguese, the prefix A being omitted
later, the’name Macao remaining.
The Portuguese name of the little settlement was first used, so
far as [can be ascertained, when that picturesque if vainglorious
adventurer, Fernso Mendes Pinto, visited the place. He was in the
company of Father Belchior Nunes Barretto, the Jesuit Provincial,
on his way to Japan. Father Barretto had visited Canton to nego-
tiate for the release of Portuguese prisoners.
From Macao, Mendes Pinto wrote a letter to the Jesuit Supe-
rior at Goa, the earliest document known that bears the name of
“Macao”. He spelt the name, Am a mao, his letter being dated 20th
November. 1555. (Portuguese writers, in the middle of the X\ Ith
century, used such variations as Amaqua, Amachao, Amacao,
Amacuao, Amaquao, Amaquam, Machoam, Maquao, and eventually
Macao). Father Barretto wrote a letter at the same time, his missive
being dated 23rd November of the same year, his letter containing a
fine description of Canton. Unfortunately for the purposes of his


tory, neither of these letters has anything to say about Macao. ( m )
Nor do other letters written by the Jesuit priests at that time in the
Far East make any mention of Macao during the first few years of
the settlement’s existence, unless some letters bearing on the subject
never reached their destinations.
It is safe to assume that before the coming of the Portuguese,
the little peninsula now known as Macao was the home of a few
fisherfolk and little else. No records are available to describe the
place, and the Chinese annals barely mention it. The little hills
were certainly arid, sparsely covered with grass and bestrewn with
boulders, like all the islands and headlands along the coast of th is
region. The shores were muddy from the silt brought down by the
West River and deposited on the beaches, and a number of matsheds
probably clustered near the two temples which were then in exis-
tence.
The older of the two temples seems to have been that of Po
Tsai Sim Yuen more popularly called the Koon Yam
Tong that is, the Temple of the Goddess of Mercy. No
known records exist to describe the original temple, for it has suf-
fered many changes and has been very greatly enlarged during the
last four centuries, but it -was of diminutive size, that much is
known. It was at first, probably, only a little room with a tiny altar
containing a small representation of Koon Yam , and was built by the
Chinese settlers who came from the province of Fukien and made
their homes in the Mongha valley. They were the true pioneers of
Macao, being of two small families one went by the surname
of Tsum and the other Ho. These people eked out a meagre
existence from the alluvial soil which was fertile ground for the cul-
tivation of rice and other vegetable produce. (There are persons still
living in Macao who remember the tombs which the settlers erected
over the remains of their ancestors on the little hills in the vicinity
of the old village of Mongha.) The village itself has gone, but its
memory lingers in the temple around which the old cottages were
built.
The village people lad connections with the fisher-folk
who frequented the waters of the channel which leads up to the
West River, for the harbour must have been then, as now, an excel-
lent shelter in stormy weather, and was probably used by fishing


craft as well as trading junks. Lack of havens on the South China
coast would explain why the Chinese called this excellent little port
by the name of 0 Moon, in spite of the more poetic name of Ho
Keang given by the scholars.
It is not difficult to understand, therefore, why the Temple of
Koon Yam was already in existence when the Portuguese reached
the coast of China early in the sixteenth century. After the com-
ing of the Westerners more Chinese came filtering into the place, to
do business and to set up their homes outside the Portuguese city,
to trade with the Men of the Western Seas, who lived inside the
new settlement. In consequence Mongha village grew in size.
“Its shores are laved by great waves which flow in from the
ocean, and rich cargoes fill its warehouses, while merchants and
traders throng its market places, like clouds which gather in the sky.
In the midst of all this prosperity, Mongha stands. It is lovely to
behold and tranquil to the spirit, and there is little to break the si-
lence of this peaceful spot. It was settled by natives from Foochow,
who have lived in Ho Keang for generations, and who dedicated
this temple to burn incense and worship the gods.” Thus reads, in
paraphrase, a Chinese tablet in the old temple grounds, ( n 2)
At the entrance to the port, at the southern tip of the peninsula,
the other little temple which antedates the coming of the Portugue-
se, and also built by fisherfolk from Fukien, may still be seen. It was
erected early in the Ming dynasty or a little earlier, on the shores
overlooking the well-sheltered cove now known as the Inner Harbour
of Macao, and in the early days it consisted merely of a shrine in
honour of Tien Uau. When the early Portuguese traders brought
their naos and other vessels to this port, about the year 1535, accord-
ing to Chinese records, and began, in 1655, to explore its possibilities
as the site of a city, they became familiar with its popular name of
the Temple of A Ma.
The temple nestles under great boulders, half-hidden among
gnarled wind-bent banyan, or pagoda, trees, and there, in an elabor-
ately graven niche, and surrounded by Chinese votive offerings
may be seen the figure which represents the goddess Keang Ma. (■s,#!;
Among the Fukienese fisher-folk this goddess is revered as their
special patroness, and among them she is known as Ma Put Shat
In Chinese devotional works, students read her story.


A wooden model representing the junk which, so legend testifies
was saved by the goddess, is to be seen in the temple precincts, with
a tiny figure of the goddess at the helm of the boat, and bas-relief
carvings of the same junk on the rocks within the temple grounds,
are tributes by devotees to the story which the Chinese tell of how
this temple came to be founded.
Among the carved terraces and pathways which wind up the
picturesque hillside, and in the courtyards of the temple, the visitor
may also read verses and eulogistic tributes in Chinese, carved on
the stones, by which poets and students have sung the praises of
Neang Ma, that all may join in acclaiming the virtues of the famous
patroness of “the men who go down to the sea in ships.’’ And on
the day of the goddess, in the calendar cf the Buddhist festivals,
seamen and seawomen flock to the port of Macao, to make obeisance
at this shrine in the temple of A Ma.
The giant rock from which, so legend claims, Neang Ma was
caught up and carried to heaven, towers over the temple and is
suitably inscribed. In the shady terraced walks of this temple it is
still possible to look back into old China and recall the words of the
poet who ambling about in romantic dells exclaims:
“Where the grass whispers softly to answering leaves,
1 meet the sages of old,
While the surds dancing light patterns magical waves
And showers my garments with gold.” ( 113 )
There is a great deal more to say about “the Port of A-Ma”,
for its place in history is secure. Before the arrival of the Port-
uguese it w'as well known as a useful port, and after the arrival of
the p’oneers of the West its importance has become clear for all to
see. The late Mr. Wong King-ng (>£#-§-) wrote a book of ver-
ses, the On Moon ( 'hap Tsc (SUM## - ), published in 1018, in which
he touched upon a numb.r of aspects of this Port, andoTlier Chinese
writers have penned essays and verses which pay tribute to the litt-
le harbour. It cannot be said, however, that Portuguese writers
hav ■ done justice to a subject which is so closely allied with the his-
tory of the accomplishments of their countrymen in the Far East.


Clearing the Seas. —There is a Portuguese contention, first pub-
lished in 1641 in a work by Father Alvaro Semedo, to the effect that
before the year 1557, a large horde of pirates harassed the Southern
coasts of China and defying the efforts of the Chinese authorities to
suppress them, assembled at Macao, which was their stronghold. So
bold did these pirates become that they constituted a serious menace,
and the authorities committed the enterprise to the Portuguese to
exterminate the outlaws, promising to allow them to occupy Macao
as their dwelling by way of reward for their service. The Portuguese
agreed to this with great pleasure, and though greatly outnumbered,
being more skilled in warfare and better equipped and well organized,
made short work of the pirates, slaughtering the outlaws. Many
were killed or captured, and the remnants of the horde fled. The
Chinese officials kept their word and the Portuguese were allowed
to build residences at Macao, choosing the sites they wanted. ( 114 )
Father Semedo was not drawing upon a verbal tradition, how-
ever, for there are Jesuit and Portuguese documents and letters, in
manuscript, bearing very much earlier dates than Father Semedo’s
printed book, the originals or transcriptions of some of which are to
be found in the archives at Lisbon, dating from the XYlth century
and which refer to the same thing. In a Register kept at the Jesuit
College in Macao, it was stated quite clearly:
“it is certain that the Jesuit College was established after the
year 1557, the year in which the mandarins of Canton gave this
port of Macao to the Portuguese, in which to live, the Portu-
guese having first stayed at the Island of Shanchuan, and then
at Lampacao, trading there with the Chinese.” ( 115 )
in another document, written by Father Gabriel de Mattos, S. J.,
he mentions the circumstance in clearer terms:
“This land of Macao used to belong to the Emperor of China,
but is now that of the King of Portugal and of the Portuguese
who live in it. This is so because the mandarins of Canton
gave it to them and confirmed the date. The Portuguese had
traded with the Chinese at the Island of Shanchuan until the
the year 1663. They then moved to Lampacao in 1565, and
were brought to Macao in the year 1657. The mandarins gave
them this port in which to trade, and when they came to know


the Portuguese well, as peaceable and good traders, they allowed
them to trade at Canton.., The gift of this port and city w f as
confirmed to them as a reward for the great service rendered
by the Portuguese in destroying a notorious brigand who even
threatened the city of Canton. For this reason the Portuguese
were brought nearer to Canton, as the elders of the city [of
Macao] testify. Because of this service the two peoples were
brought closer together, and the high mandarins were so pleased
that by way of thanks they gave to each of the Portuguese
leaders a ‘golden chop’, with words to this effect. This was re-
corded in the books of the Kwangtung Provincial Government,
and in many documents which various mandarins sent to the
City of Macao, and mentioned on several occasions.” ( 116 )
In a representation which was sent by the elders of the City of
Macao to King Philip 111, ruler at that time of the joint kingdoms
of Spain and Portugal, in 1629, it is stated that: —
“The City of Macao, also known as the ‘City of the Name of
God’... represents to Your Majesty that whereas the residents
of the said City defeated a tyrannous Fukinese who was engaged
in piracy on the coast of China in 1657, they obtained a ‘chop’
from the puissant Emperor of China granting them the port
and the site of Macao where they now live.” ( m )
Drawing on other documents, not readily accessible to us now',
Father du Halde some years later, when preparing a history of
China, reconstituted the story:
“In the reign of the Emperor Chia Cbing, a pirate named
Chang Si-lao controlled the waters near Cant:n. He occupied
Macao and even beleaguered the provincial capital. The man-
darins asked the Portuguese to help them. The Portuguese
trading ships went into action and raised the siege. They chased
the pirates down to Macao, where the pirate-chief was killed.
The Viceroy reported the victory to the Emperor, who issued
an edict wherel y Macao was awarded to the European mer-
chants as a place in which they might settle.” ( llb )


Frei Juan de la Concepcion, writing of the Spaniards in the
Philippines, tells how Lien A-hon, the notorious pirate who gave so
much trouble in Manila and elsewhere in Luzon for a number of
years, was the leader of the survivors of Chang Si-lao’a hordes. Es-
caping from the Portuguese after his leader’s defeat off the South
China coast he harassed the Luzon coasts for a long time. ( 119 )
Montalto de Jesus goes to great lengths in his endeavours to
show that the early Portuguese contentions about the gift to them
of Macao are based on something more than mere conjecture. He
does not seem to have had access to all the quotations given above,
for he quotes Father Semedo, Father du Halde, and Frei Juan de la
Concepcion, but not the Jesuit documents. He draws upon the Vis-
count de Santarem’s Memoria sobre o estabelecimento dos Portugueses
em Macao na China , a compilation of references mainly from foreign
sources, published in 1879 by Judice Biker, and (to give Montalto’s
rendering) Martinho de Mello e Castro’s Apontamento das Noticias
enviadas pela Secretaria do Esfado de Ultramar para a Instrucqdo que
se deve informar em Goa ao Bispo de Peking sobre os negdeios relatives
ao dominio de Macao , addressed, so Montalto states, to the governor
of Macao, Bernardo Aleixo de Lemos Faria. ( 12 °) Montalto also
quotes writers like Faria y Sousa, 1666-75, Sonnerat, 1774, and
Eaynal, 1785.
Curiously enough Montalto does not use the Jesuit documents
above quoted, although he hints at the existence of important docu-
ments. He could very easily have quoted them in the second edition
of his book, published in 1926, for Dr. Jordao da Freitas had already
published study {Macau, Materias para a sua historia
no seculo 1910, Montalto having visited Portugal in 1916-24.
Montalto takes the Swedish Ljungstedt to task for ridiculing the
Portuguese point of view in the Historical Sketch of the Portuguese Set-
tlements in China , published at Boston, in 1836, unfortunately
for history, Ljungstedt’s statements with all their errors and equivo-
cations have been quoted continuously, with the result that a wholly
erroneous view regarding the establishment of Macao has been per-
petuated ever since.
In fairness is should be stated that Ljungstedt’s book was pu-
blished at Boston in 1836, after his death in Macao (1835), and it
is quite possible that others had a hand in some of the aspersions to


which Montalto, to mention only one writer, has taken exception.
The book published at Boston was based, however, on smaller editions
published at Macao in 1830 and 1833, and Montalto points out cer-
tain discrepencies between the Macao and the Boston editions of
Ljungstedt’s book. Henri Cordier, the disbinguised Orientalist, refers
to Ljungstedt’s book: “Le livre du suedois Ljungstedt para a Macao
en 183:1, puis a Boston en 1836, a pen pres le seul qui soit connu des
etrangers, fournille d’erreurs.”
Curiously enough, H. B. Morse, who has come to be considered
an authority on Chinese affairs seems to have accepted Ljungstedt’s
1836 edition without any attempt at verifying Ljungstedt’s sources,
and his International Relations of the Chinese Empire is quoted,
with the Swedish writer’s errors, the mischief begun over a century
ago being perpetuated thereby. In fairness to investigators like
Professor C. R. Boxer, it must be said that they are endeavouring
to find the truth, while writers like Latourette show an open-
minded attitude, in distinct contrast to the writers of earlier gener-
ations.
It must be admitted that no Chinese documents bearing on the
subject of the foundation of Macao have been found in recent times,
while Chinese writers have gone to great lengths to confuse the
facts of history. The facts do possibly exist in old Chinese books,
however, and it can be shown that there is a great deal to be said
for the arguments advanced by the Portuguese that they were really
permitted, if not invited, to occupy Macao.
The sinologues of Macao would be rendering an inestimable
service to the cause of the history of the little colony by searching for
such material and publishing it in Portuguese. The provision of
material such as this would do away with the publication of book
after book and reference after reference which is nothing more than
a rehash of its predecessor. The works of Professor Boxer and Dr.
Jordao de Freitas, on the other hand, containing references to man-
uscripts and books published in the XYlth and XVIIth centuries,
and careful study of articles by experts, are an indication of what
should be done in this regard.
Mr. Chang T’ien-tse accepts the Portuguese contention that
Macao was ceded to them by way of reward for valorous services
against pirates, and although in most of his book {Sino- Portuguese


Trade from 1614 to 1644, Leiden, 1934), he is extremely unfair to
the Portuguese, lie does admit that at that time (/. e. about 1554-
1657) the seas of South China were infested with pirates, and that
skirmishes bet we m the pirate fleets and government forces were of
frequent occurrence. He goes on to admit that it is very likely that
the Portuguese did help to clear the waters of South China, and
says that the failure of later Chinese historians or chroniclers to
mention this feat of the Portuguese is quite natural, because although
much has been admitted about the deplorable conditions in South
China at the time, the Chinese chroniclers do not explain how the
pirate bands were exterminated or how the evil subsided. “It is
true,” ho continues, “that the dislodging of the pirates from Macao
had more lasting significance than probably any Chinese victories,
but its importance was not recognized until a number of years later,
when the valorous deeds of the Portuguese had already been forgot-
ten by the Chinese.” ( 1W )
The fact tint Semedo and other early Jesuit chroniclers, among
the Portuguese, and even the Spanish historians of the time when
referring to the events in China, do make mention of the punitive
expeditions undertaken by the Portuguese pioneers against the pi-
rates, resulting in permission being granted for the setting up of the
new colony, is of more than ordinary significance. The agreement
which Leonel de Souza concluded with the Hai Tao must also be
accepted as a fact, so much so that Chang T’ien-tse, who is inclined,
on the whole, to be rather critical of the Portuguese point of view is
so impressed with Frei Caspar da Cruz’s history of events in China
in 1648 and 1649 that he accepts it without hesitation. The same
Chinese writer goes so far as to brush aside the Chinese version as set
forth in the 0 Moon Kae Leah (fc Pile.?-)—written some two hundred
years after the event that the captains of foreign vessels whose
goods had been soaked by sea-water askei for permission to dry them,
and then after building matsheds had gone on to build brick houses,
for, says Chang T’ien-tse, “that simple version is far too simple and
unconvincing, the Portuguese would not have thought of building
permanent residences at Macao if they felt that their stay there was
entirely dependent on the whim of a few mandarins. The influx of
the Portuguese into Macao and the rapid rise of the port show that
the new inhabitants had a sense of security based upon something
more than a mere favour.” ( m )


Another Chinese writer who is even more hostile to the Port-
uguese than Ljungstedt and Chang T’ien-tse is Mr. Chou Ching-lien.
His book, Sino-Portuguese Relations (’f published at Shang-
hai, in Chinese, contains some material from Chinese sources which
really serves to verify an old Portuguese report that has lain in Port-
uguese archives for four centuries.
He tries to twist and turn the citations he quotes, but certain
facts stick out. For instance, he refers, to a serious outbreak of pi-
racy which which took place in the forty-third year of Emperor Chia
Ching’s reign (i. e. 1664) at Sam Moon (-S.M) and Che Lam ( &«#•)
in the Tungkoon district, not so very far from Canton. He quotes
from a Memorial written by one Chan Yat-chung (££—£;) and ad-
dressed to Ng Kwei-fong (■£■&#), Commandant of the Forces (R §1
upon the success attending his efforts to wipe out Japanese
‘dwarf-robbers’, Chinese being included among the outlaws:
“In Chiu Chow there were hundreds of soldiers whose
duty it was to guard their outposts, but they threw away their
helmets and rebelled against the Government. They took to
boats and went about marauding. The matter was reported to
the Court, and the mandarins decided, after discussing the
situation, to attack the outlaws, for these men committed
depredations and robbed the people and then went elsewhere.
By reason of the failure to attack these pirates, they got bolder
and bolder and the populace of Canton began to despair ... the
people did not know how to deal with the situation and many of
the scholars and officials expressed a desire to move to some
safer place. If the pirates were not suppressed, the whole pro-
vince might have been thrown into confusion . . . ”.
The same writer referring to the same occurrence then quotes
a Memorial by Yue Tai-Yau (entitled Measures to suppress
the Outlaws from Chiang-hei Tong Chap (i£4sL^-&),
Yol. XV:
“More than ten days will be required to prepare for the attack
on the outlaws. Among the Macao boats of Heung Shan, I
have selected a number of old, well-tried ships, including some
boats belonging to Lam Wung-chung. Foreigners have offered


to help, and if the foreigners should prove successful, the foreign
leader will be handsomely rewarded, although there is no Im-
perial decree authorizing them to pay tribute. As soon as the
ships are ready they will be distributed among the Macao boats
and the Pak Sak boats of Nara-tau. I shill then appoint a
date for the boats to assemble, and an attack will be launched
against the pirates.”
The essayi goes on to describe the preparations and is followed
by another headed The Foreign Merchants should be gentle in spite of
their merits 'lt*# ■&;s#) which, after some philosophical
speculations, and a statemmt to the effect that the foreign merchants
have erected houses and built a town (evidently that of Macao), goes
on to refer to the successful outcome of the battle of Sam Moon
(.£71,). It speaks of the battle and says that the foreign arms are
victorious, for although “thousands of outlaws attack them by sea,
and thousands of bandits attack them on land, yet they advance.
The weapons used by the foreigners are good, while their heavy can-
non wrack'havoc. It is good to have them side by side with us so
that the people of Kwangtung may*benefit thereby.” ( 12a )
Confirmation of this comes from a Portuguese source. In
Father Antonio Franco’s Imagem da Virtude, (pp. 402-404) compil-
ed, in all probability, from manuscripts in the Jesuit colleges in
Portugal, there is a most interesting passage (See Appendix E)
which reads:
“ ... A little before the events of which we are about to deal,
the Chinese fighting the Japanese [we may suppose that the
pirates were Chinese as we'l as Japanese], whose corsair ships
captured many prizes in the Canton seas. At the end of the
campaign against the pirates, the mandarins neglected to pay
the stipends of the soldiers, about two thousand in number.
These men landed not far from the suburbs of Canton, sacking
those suburbs under the very eyes of the mandarins, nor did
the mandarins have troops ready to oppose them.
“After this they took and fortified a port at some distance
from Canton, arming nine junks; they then became pirates.
They block ided Canton very straightly, and not even a single
ship dared to go there. They also destroyed several places near


the coast and the inhabitants were forced to leave and go inland.
Eventually the famous emporium of Canton became almost
deserted, nor were the mandarins able to offer any resistance to
the pirates.
“Diogo Pereira, thinking that the pirates might be easily
destroyed if the Portuguese took part in the affair, despatched
a retainer of his to Canton, to offer, in his name, the services
of the Portuguese to the Commander in Chief at Canton against
the pirates. The General replied that he appreciated the offer
and would accept . . .
“Not long afterwards a high-ranking mandarin proceeded to
Macao to ask for help, in the name of the Commander in Chief.
All the Portuguese offered to take part, not only because they
wished to help, but because the pirates were a danger to them
as well, and the Portuguese had been allowed to occupy a place
in China. They also hoped that other benefits might come of
it, such as permission to send an embassy to the Emperor and
to preich Christianity in China . . .
“Three hundred Portuguese armed themselves at once, all of
them brave and determined men. They put their artillery into
Chinese junks, the better to deceive the pirates. The fleet was
divided into two squadrons, one under Captain Luis de Mello
[da Silva] and the other under Diogo Pereira, the cost of the
enterprise being borne by these two gentlemen. The Chinese
General felt that one squadron should be placed at the entrance
to the channel to prevent the escape of the pirates while the
other squadron should attick. The General felt that the battle
w’ould be faced with many difficulties and that it would take a
long time, because he judged the Portuguese by the calibre of
his own men.
“When the pirates saw the Chinese vessels approaching at a
distance they never imagined that other people [than Chinese]
were on board and they made ready to seize them, rather than
to fight. Diogo Pereira stopped at the mouth of the channel
while Luis de Mello sailed in to fetch the pirates. When the
vessels came near and the artillery began to roar, the pirates
realized their mistake and that it was with the Portuguese that


they had to reckon. They were so filled with dread that they
leaped out of their ships and started to swim, each thinking
only of escape, so great w’as their fear. Within half an hour,
without loss at all on our side, the pirates were routed.” ( 121 )
It is not a coincidence that the old Portuguese report should
have been corroborated by the remarks appearing in the Chin-hei
Tong Chap (i£|Lt£-&) reproduced above, and careful examination of
other old Chinese books dealing with South China at that period will
probably bring further confirmation. Similarly, it is quite possible
that there are more old documents in the archives of Portugal,
India, and the Vatican Library and elsewhere which -will bear out
the independent Chinese and Portuguese reports w'hich have become
available in recent years, but which earlier historians of Macao have
not looked for.
Had Montalto de Jesus, Chang T’ien-tse, and other writers on
the subject been able to consult the Portuguese and Chinese referen-
ces printed above appearing unfortunately in rather obscure pu-
blications — their versions of the early history of Macao would pro-
bably have been quite different from the views which they have ex-
pressed. There are many gaps in this narrative that have still to
be filled, it is true, but the picture is becoming clearer as more of the
old material is revealed. The references probably shed further light
on a subject that was obscured by the prevarications of w 7 rit:rs like
Ljungstedt and those who have relied on him for material in wait-
ing on the early history of Macao.
From the material mentioned above it w 7 ould appear, therefore,
that there were possibly three major engagements against pirates:
one at the time of Leonel de Souza, another in 1557 or so, and a
third in 1563-4, but farther study of sources is required to clarify
this. Such expeditions seem to have been mere matters of routine,
so far as the Portuguese settlers were concerned, which reference to
the old records of Macao should tend to confirm.
One Chinese writer of modern times tries to explain how it w 7 as
that piracy was rampant in the South China seas in those days.
Chang T’ien-tse attributes this to the Chinese law' which by forbidding
Chinese subjects from going abroad, under pain of death, encouraged
lawlessness, while an effete government w 7 as not able to maintain


discipline among officials whose venality had become a by-word.
“Probably nothing could have been a more serious blow to China’s
foreign and home trade,” he believes, “than the repeated adoption of
this measure by the government and others to repress piracy. When-
ever this law was enforced, China’s foreign trade fell into the hands
of foreigners while her home trade was also hampered through the
oppressive execution of the law by the coastal officers and mandarins
of the ports. Moreover, this measure, designed to prevent the inha-
bitants of the coast from becoming pirates, or from joining them,
never proved to be effective. As it has been shown, people of evil
intent could easily escape to the sea from most places on the long and
almost unguarded coast.” ( 125 )
The tendency of Chinese officialdom, at Peking, seems to have
been to order the withdrawal into China at the least sign of trouble,
hoping thereby to avoid contact with the world at large, but there
is a vast difference between the spirit of the law and the propensities
of a people who have a natural inclination for trading. No law
aiming at the stoppage of economic currents could be forced upon a
people so numerous, so active, and so individualistic as the Chinese.
Trade among the Chinese has invariably followed natural courses
which no government has ever succeeded in effectively controlling
or suppressing.
Behind the Scenes in Peking. The arrival of the first Euro-
peans in China by the sea route need not have created new problems,
but the Court at Peking adopted an attitude which did not serve to
facilitate matters. The Westerners who arrived were culturally dif-
ferent from anything the Chinese hai known before, and although
in the present year of grace there may be Chinese who believe that
in some respects at least Western culture might not be inferkr to
the Chinese such an opinion did not seem to prevail in the XYlth
century.
Scholars admit that there is still a great deal to learn about the
history of the Mings, for Chinese writers have tended to obscure the
facts connected with the activities of the Court of those days. The
Portuguese pioneers reached China at a time, therefore, of which not
too much is known, and in the prosecution of a study of early Sino-
Portuguese relations it should be possible to discover features which
might serve to cl irify the position filled Westerners in the
scheme of things among the Chinese. ('' 26 )


The impact of the European pioneers upon the Chinese has
generally been observed with little regard for Portuguese or Chinese
source material, but has been considered from the viewpoint of writers
whose opinions have been all too often clouded by modern prejudices.
This has been unfortunate, for the currents and influences set up at
the Court of Peking w 7 ere, as a matter of fact, reactions and move-
ments which were set into motion and clashed with Chinese usages
and inhibitions at a particularly unfortunate period in Chinese his-
tory.
There is an interesting field for speculation in this, just as there
are many features of life and customs in China at that period which
will repay study. Historians will find in this much that is of
absorbing interest: in tracing the court intrigues; in the Throne’s
abject terror of revolts; in the attempts which were made to belittle
every foreign influence a policy that guided China from the mid-
dle of the XVth century and which continued under the Manchus
with such disastrous results for China and a refusal to admit that
China had anything to benefit from dealings with the outside world;
and in the efforts made by honest statesmen to bring the Throne to
a realistic way of thinking.
The Portuguese happened to be the principal carriers in the Far
East at the time, and the increasing value of the trade in China, with
Japan buying more silk, to be able, in turn, to sell silk fabrics to
Europe, and Europe buying more and more Chinese goods of every
kind, made it essential for this rich and growing trade to be pro-
tected. The pirates of the China coast had become increasingly bold,
going so far as to capture Chinese junks and even to raid Chinese
towns. Something had therefore to be done to protect legitimate
trade, and the historian should feel safe to affirm that Macao was
founded to serve the trade of China, as the most practical solution
to the problem.
A complete catalogue of the pirate depredations in China has
yet to be compiled, but it is known that in 1552 they plundered and
raided towns at the mouth of the Yangtsze Elver, and in 1555 they
looted cities in the province of Fukien. They even threatened Nan-
king. Not even Koxinga •&#■), better known by the Chinese as
Cheng Cheng-kung (£|ss.J#), in his heyday, could have represented a
more serious menace to the coastal trade of China so disorganized


had the security of China’s coastal provinces become. So serious
did the situation seem that the Chinese officials were greatly alarm-
ed, and contingents of Chinese militia were posted along the coasts.
How effective these troops were the Chinese records do not state, but
we can take it for granted that, underpaid and ill fed as they gener-
ally were, they did not do much to abate the pirate scourge.
From the coasts of Chekiang and Fukien the great pirate fleets
moved freely into Kwangtung waters, going so far as to threaten, as
we have seen, the very security of Canton.
A situation like this could not go on indefinitely, and if the
foreign trade of China was to be maintained, something radical had
to be done. We have observed that pirates were to be found, at one
time, “not far from where the foreign ships were anchored off the
coast of Kwangtung,” and how Wong Pak tried to secure the
approval of his superiors to invite the foreigners to help in suppress-
ing the bands of freebooters. There is still a lack of source material,
however, to complete the picture.
It is known, none the less, that the pirates were routed, and it
is not disputed that this service to China was rendered by the Port-
uguese. The outlaws who escaped from the punitive expeditions
carried out by the Westerners probably fled in little bands to the
coasts of Fukien and Chekiang, the major part eventually reaching
Luzon.
Portuguese accounts of the occupation of Macao, and of the
circumstances which led up to the gift of Macao to the Portuguese,
make specific claims that are sound, for the valuable trade had to be
protected. To bring this about, the pirates had to be overcome and
broken up, and a safe port made available for the shipping that
engaged in legitimate trade.
The Portuguese traders brought gold and silver in ever increas-
ing quantities, and with this they purchased silk and a great deal
of Chinese merchandise. They sold a variety of goods of which
the people of China and even the Court stood in need.
The Court of Peking had, nevertheless, without considering the
requirements of the nation, ruled that trade with foreigners had to
cease, and that no Chinese subject might go abroad The coastal offi-
cials knew that those laws could not be enforced. If a place could be
given to these foreign tralers, therefore, to these men who were ener


getic and enterprising and courageous, who suppressed pirates and
protected the trade, a place where they could live in peace, and where
Chinese merchants could trade without infringing the Court laws,
and which could be defended by these foreigners from piracy and
assaults, China could gain greatly thereby.
A need, furthermore, existed for a place where goods could be
stored safely, where merchandise could be received in small quan-
tities from many places in China, where produce could be bought
and sold freely, not only during a few weeks, at the annual ‘fair’
which used to he held among the islands off the coast, subject to the
vagaries of wind and weather, but all the year round. If such a
place could be found, where pirates would not dare raid, all honest
men would rejoice, for the inefficiency of China’s arms against pirates
was well known to the people of China, and especially to the officials
of the i/amens in the coastal provinces. Had not Canton itself
been threatened by marauding gangs of pirates who infested the
South China seas?
So long as the laws in force prohibited all foreign trade, save
that which came from a limited number of junks, once a year, or at
even longer intervals, from places like Siam, Cambodia, Champa,
Borneo, it was not possible for the Chinese producers to sell their
silk, and to keep their filatures busy, and to receive gold and silver
which would be needed for the revenues of the government. Taxes
from imports and exports were important ones, and were the pro-
vincial officials not often anxious to make up for the ridiculously
small salaries which it was their lot to receive? It was inevitable,
therefore, for a place like Macao to be established on the China coast.
A modns-vivendi such as tin’s might not have been necessary in
the early days of the Mings, but in the century and more that had
elapsed since the strong emperors of the dynasty ruled, gnat changes
had taken place in the mood of the Chinese. The early Ming emper-
ors were not averse to dealing with distant peoples, and the remark-
able voyages of the XVth century, carried out by the Chinese under
Cheng Ho, are still hailed as splendid accomplishments carried out
by progressive elements among the Chinese.
A great many chrnges had taken place in China since those
days, however, and in course of time, the Ming officials, smug in an
intellectual superiority which they claimed to possess, sought to turn


China away from the rest of the world. Seeking justification for that
idea of China’s self-sufficiency, in cultural and intellectual attain-
ments, the officials extended the idea to other spheres, including the
material and even the political. By shutting China off from the
world at large, from other peoples, brusquely classified as ‘barbarians’
without distinction, the politicians of China thought possibly that
they were capable of “recapturing the Infinite and Unattainable of
the Sung,” for they preached “a return to the inwardness of the sages
of old.”
Thus it was that the Chinese at the Court endeavoured to
create a feeling in political life which divorced China from world
affairs. Marcel Granet observes this wffien he shows that in China
“a stage is reached of advocating the principle of government by his-
tory, and it is claimed as sufficient that everything should follow sole-
ly the virtues of tradition ilist conformity. So, at the moment when
Chinese civilization seems to arrive at a point of maturity, every-
thing co-opfrates to bring to light the reign of formalism.” ( m )
So, indeed, did scholarship bow before political dictation in Chi-
na. There w'ere scholars w T ho did not accept the dictates of Peking
officialdom, however, but they were few and far between. The great-
est of these was a genius, whose philosophical speculations shine as a
bright beacon in the darkness of conservatism which enveloped
Chinese thought. This exception was Wang Yang-ming
followed to a lesserUoy Yang Ting-ho (#£.#<»). Their
learning illumines this page of Chinese intellectual stagnation. ( 128 )
It was unfortunate for China that a stilted scholarship developed
among the literati for it created a barrier between China and rest of
the world.
There has been no lack of apologists for this Ming policy of se-
clusion, which developed in those days and which was cultivated so
assiduously. Authorities on Chinese learning have stressed this
in no uncertain terms, and modern scholars show how injurious was
this trend for China and the Chinese people. Among these scho-
lars is Professor Goodrich, and in his recent A Short History of
the Chinese People he points out that
“the ancient policy that no Chinese ship should go outside the
coastal waters was revived, and the government made the de-
fence of the coast its primary object. The result the subjects


of China that had known all the peoples of Asia -were soon for-
Irdden to leave home or to communicate with foreigners un-
questionably changed the course of history. It left China open
to raids from the nearest naval power, Japan; it lost the com-
mand of the Indian Ocean to the Arabs, and to the Portuguese
seventy-five years later; it halted commerce and cut the income
of the imperial customs. Worst of all, however, it isolated
China just when Europeans were about to penetrate every cor-
ner of the earth.” ( 129 )
And Professor Latourette points out that “the Chinese by reac-
ting against the foreign importations and innovations of the
Mongols and attempting to restore their traditional culture, nou-
rished in the process a conservatism that made later change difficult,
for the very success with which the dynasty drove out the Mongols
and re-established the cultural and administrative structure of
China’s past militated against innovations.” ( 13 °)
This is not to suggest that China under the Mings was not
great and prosperous. It was that and more, but had the national
policy been more progressive, China might, indeed, have taken the
leadership of the world, not in mere thought, as the scholars fancied
their country had done, but in fact. It is interesting to speculate
upon the turn of events if the Portuguese had reached the China
coast a century earlier, during the happy years of the progressive
Yung Lo reign (1402-1424).
In the years that followed after the Yung Lo days, however, a
change set in, for instead of solidarity, the Ming rulers brought
disaffection, and it is possible to trace, in spite of an inherent loyalty
on the part of the Chinese people, the breach that widened steadily
between the Dragon Throne and its subjects. The people had
welcomed the restoration of a Chinese dynasty, but as the years
progressed changes took place, and the Throne lost the love of the
masses. In part this was due to the constant fear and threats of
invasion from tke steppes in the north.
A strengthening of the central authority seems to have been
necessary, but in the act of strengthening the Emperor’s power
many injustices were committed. From the earliest years, the
Mings were under the shadow of the fear of rebellion, and this seems
to have preyed upon the minds of the Court. Even Hung Wu
(1368-1398) “began to smell treason at the slightest contradiction.”


Yung Lo (1402-1424) had seized the throne from his weakling
nephew, and probably feared a day of retribution. At other times
there were frequent disputes over the succession, and the Ming
rulers were never free of the fear of revolts.
In seeking to stamp out revolt, and suspicion of revolts, not
only were the highly placed sacrificed to this fear, but many of
the lowly placed were killed unnecessarily and mercilessly. The
days of the Mings were therefore “distinguished by cruelty and
bloodshed that accompanies the establishment of an absolute mon-
archy. On the slighest suspicion whole families wore slaughtered.
Executions ran into tens of thousands. The people had flocked to the
standard of the Mings because they were sweeping away the hated
foreign dominion, but it was soon realized that the oppression of
absolutism had become immeasurably worse.” ( 131 )
As a measure of self-protection, against conspiracy, Hung Wu
and Yung Lo had employed eunuchs to provide a safeguard against
over-powerful relatives and statesmen. They introduced, thereby,
a system which ate into the very structure of the Throne. Under
their strong hands the eunuchs were kept under control, and rarely
attempted to overstep the bounds, but Hsuang Tsung (1425-1435)
was ill advised when he entrusted them with important posts, in
which “they utterly failed to rise to the height of their oppor-
tunities.”
In place of useful public servants, like Cheng Ho, the leader of
the maritime expeditions which made the name of China known as
far West as the Bed Sea, the policy of giving power to eunuchs
eventually produced unmitigated scoundrels like Wang Chen (.£#.),
in the Cheng Tung reign (1436-1449); Liu Chin (!£] *i) and Chiang
Pin (**.s), in the Cheng Te reign (1605-1521); and Wei Chung-hsien
in the Wan Li reign (1572-1620), not to mention the
‘Seven Tigers’, associates of the notorious Liu Chin, and many
more.
Circumstances contributed to this state of affairs, over which
the patriots in China could do little to remedy. The Ming emper-
ors generally died young, leaving minors to inherit the Throne.
As a consequence Empress Dowagers wielded power which in
other circumstances they would not have possessed. Surrounded, as
they were, by eunuchs, these women turned to them for counsel and
guidance, with disastrous consequences for China.


A. E. Grantham points out how it was that eunuchs “forced to
overcome violent prejudices, were, like all members of a despised class,
more open than the average to the temptations of office because less
restrained by any inherited code of honour, and it becomes clear that
the chief blame for such a dangerous state of affairs lies with a
system which provided no safeguards whatsoever against abuses of
power by morally inferior men, though experience everywhere
teaches that these are precisely the type that climbs into power most
easily and clings to it most tenaciously.” ( 132 )
There were patriots who pitted themselves against the evils
by which the Throne was influenced, but it was a useless attempt by
honest men to change the course of history. The story of the
Mings, for all its brilliance and achievements, shows how weak the
government had become, for the eunuchs as a class succeeded by craft
and conspiracy where the best statesmen gave up their very lives in
futile endeavours to curb the nefarious influences wielded in those
days by the eunuchs of Peking.
In no sense was the influence of the eunuchs more mischievous
than in the system of utter dishonesty which they developed into a
fine art, and which corrupted the civil service of the country. It is
not a pretty story, this story of the flood of corruption which the
eunuchs let loose upon the Middle Kingdom, but its pages are illu-
mined with the names of honest patriots who while endeavouring to
expose the misdeeds of the scoundrels of the Forbidden City suffered
martyrdom in their efforts to bring their monarchs to a sane way of
thinking. So far did these eunuchs go that one of them, Wei
Chung-hsien got himself raised “to equal rank with Confu-
cius.”
There is a passage in Mr. Grantham’s splendid little book
Hills of Blue , that describes a typical emperor’s policies and which
sets out the situation in a few words:
“ . . , The Emperor’s military excursions added to the trials
and embarrassments of his generals. Yet even this would
not have mattered if he had not placed the whole weight of his
authority on the side of tyranny and extortion, because his wil-
fulness and vanity flared up at the slighest show of opposition
and his extravagance and that of his Court devoured untold
sums of money, which only eunuchs knew how to find.


‘Liu Chin and his seven co-Tigers, whom no sense of honour
kept back from the most mendacious servility, purred melb-
fluously round the feet of their Imperial master, while behind
his back their claws and fangs cruelly lacerated the flesh of his
defenceless people.
“It was an age of big proportions and violent contrasts. Both
in their vices and their virtues men went to extremes and Wu
Tsung’s Court (the reign of Cheng T 6, 1605-1521) bred infa-
mous blackguards like Liu Chin and Chiang Pin, and attracted
lights of such brilliancy as Yang T’ing-ho (#&#») and Wang
Shou-jen best known as Wang Ying-ming
These and others of their way of thinking pub up a long and va-
liant fight against iniquity, for which they cannot be praised
too highly, since life in high places was exceedingly dangerous
and the minimum penalty of failure was the bamboo and exile.
As to the maximum penalty, it meant prison, torture, dismem-
berment and disgrace in this world and in the next, besides death
of the supposed culprit’s entire family.” ( 133 )
Honest men could not stand by and see such a state of affairs.
Many were the petitions sent to Peking, and many were the lives
sacrificed. Among the rebellions was one led by Ch’en Hao, Prince
of Ning (%.'&)■ The leader of this revolt was a relative of the Emper-
or’s, but he was defeated by an officer who was loyal to the Throne.
It shows how great was the dissatisfaction felt in China at the
time and to what extremes men felt it was necessary to go in order
that the influences wielded by the eunuchs should be curbed for once
and all.
It was exactly at this juncture that Tome Pires was permitted
to go to Peking. Had the Emperor Wu Tsung lived, Pires’s fate
might have been different, but the Portuguese ambassador was a
victim of the consequent self-imposed policy of seclusion, for the
course of history of the next few decades was the outcome of that
policy which under Emperor Shin Tsung (whose reign title was
Chia Clung) guided the Court of Peking. This phase of history lias
yet to be studied in its proper perspective.
The easy-going days of Wu Tsung were followed by a tighten-
ing of the idea of excluding everything foreign, and a policy developed
directed primarily against the Mongols and other northern tribes,


whose pressure on China’s frontiers hardly ever ceased, but the new
regime at Peking decided to shut out all forms of contact with every
foreign people, and Pires was bundled away from Peking. He
remained in confinement at Canton, dying there in 1524.
The vast majority of Chinese scholars have, at all times, ap-
plauded the policy of the Mings in excluding foreign influences, and
have condoned much that the Ming emperors did, their sympathy
being strong for a dynasty that was truly Chinese, and not of a race
of invaders, and much Ins been hidden from those attempting to find
the truth about this period of Chinese history. But no amount of
exculpation can hide the fact that Chinese patriots were endeavouring
to draw the attention of the Throne to some of the defects which
were prevalent at the time, and mistakes in policy which were to
cost the Mings the Dragon Throne were observed by men wffiose
attempts to change the situation might have helped the Emperors
had they given ear to the promptings which these patriots were
making then.
Professor (Goodrich quotes a memorial sent to the Emperor by
Wang
“The duty of the officials would he to show the people how to
live, how to cultivate their s oil, and how to irrigate their fields.
The local government should supply the natives wish seeds, live-
stock, and agricultural implements, which should be returned,
together with one-third of the harvest. Get more farmers to
plant uncultivated land; induce more merchants to come to
trade; but take as low taxes as possible so the people can main-
tain their accustomed worship, travel as usual, and meet all
their living expenses.” ( 13i )
The implication of this is that officials were not always willing
to stand by and see the country go to ruin, but tried to point the way
to better things.
There were two currents that influenced the motives of officials.
The first of these was the desire to promote improvement, in spite of
the deficiences of the Court, the second a hope to amass wealth, by
following in the steps of the high ranking in the land.


From the tone of some of the documents sent from Kwangtung
to Peking, it is clear that some of the officials in the Southern
provinces sought to promote trade, against the policy enunciated by
the scholar-class of the day. In this attitude we see evidence of the
gulf which existed between the Court and the people. In many
instances the system promoted the growth of that individualism
whereby each person thought of himself and his personal enrichment,
but in many cases there were officials who really strove to promote
the best interests of the nation.
Eventually the Portuguese were given permission to build the
city of Macao, for it is perfectly obvious that some working arrang-
ement was made, and that the Chinese officials granted concessions
to the Portuguese. No matter what political demagogues might
have since said, no matter what irresponsible writers might have
claimed about the history of those days, and no matter what the
Court officials might have declared about the ‘self-sufficiency’ of
China, there was a need for this trade. By selling the silk and other
merchandise of China, the merchants, with the support of the more
realistic officials, were able to contribute more substantially to the
economic and fiscal stability of China than the ultra-nationalistic
theorists of the Court, who claimed be a mere stroke of the brush
to conjure up idealistic pictures which totally disregarded the real-
ities of Chinese national life. It show how wide was the breach be-
tween the scholar-class and the peasantry in those days.
If we could but read between the lines of the memorials which
were written at the time and could look behind the platitudes which
filled the pages of the official documents passing between Kwang-
tung and Peking, we would probably discover much that would ser-
ve to clarify the picture which we are endeavouring to visualize.
We would also see expressions of friendliness and goodwill towards
the Portuguese and observe that the Portuguese and the Chinese
who met at the coastal cities of South China had begun to under-
stand one another, with toasts and words of happiness and cheer.
This is obvious, for the people of China were progressive, as they
still are, and although the Court tried to bury its head, ostrich-like,
from the Westerners who came, cap in hand, seeking a friendly wel-
come, the Chinese coastal officials who were in touch with the new
influences, and kuew what the people wanted and needed, must have


felt that something had to be done, in spite of opposition in high
quarters, to promote trade with the people from the West. The
system of government in China had deteriorated into organized bu-
reaucratic corruption, it is true, and there were officials in Peking
who were only too g’ad to create opportunities for personal enrich-
ment, but there was a hard core then, as there is to-day, of honest
officialdom, that sought to promote the best interests of the country,
in spite of the failings of the Court of Peking.
Chinese scholarship is too apt to dilate upon a glorious system
of nice catch-phrases and an ideal form of government, w r hich did
not exist, forgetting that instead of a “China moulded by Confucius”
( 135 ), the government had degenerated into a system “directed by
instruments of evil.” It was a system gone wrong, and all the fine
wording of the flowery edicts and official reports of those days cannot
hide the canker which flourished at the time and which in course of
time brought the Ming dynasty to its inglorious end.
We can safely conclude, therefore, that the change which came
about and which resulted in permission for the Portuguese to set up
their city of Macao was the outcome of a plan devised by the Chinese.
Macao was the fruit of a friendship which moved two peoples to
help one another, so that the Portuguese are able to assert with con-
fidence to-day that during the four hundred years which have passed
since they were first permitted to build their homes in Macao, they
have done much to live up to the hopes which were expressed when
they began to create the city to wdiich they gave the name of ‘The
City of the Name of God of Macao.’
Macao's First Settlers. There is an old tradition among the
Portuguese to the effect that among those who visited Macao in its
early days was Luis de Camoes, the ‘Prince’ of Portuguese poets.
After leaving India lie is known to have visited the East India Is-
lands, and is then believed to have accompanied the Captain-major
of the Japan voyages to China. If this was the case, if he did not go
to Japan, w# would very probably have visited Macao or Lamp icao.
Some Portuguese writers hold that Camoes accompanied Leonel
de Souza, when this captain returned to the Far East in 1657-58,
on a voyage to Japan, and that the poet lived in Macao while Leonel
de Souza proceeded to Japan, only embarking for India in 1660, in
Manuel de ship wffiich w 7 as wrecked not far from the


mouth of the River Me-Kong. This seems to be conjecture, but
tradition has it that during his residence at Macao, Camoes held the
post of Provedor dos defundos e auzentes (Trustee for the property
of dead or absent Portuguese). This post was one which the Port-
uguese authorities found it necessary to create, in every squadron of
ships or every settlement, because of the heavy casualties suffered in
those days. Since every officer and seaman could engage in a little
trading, it was to bo expected that every man had some goods or pos-
sessions, and there had to be a responsible official to look after the
estates of those who died, a salary being paid to the person holding
this post.
It is significant that Leonel de Souza complains (see Appendix D)
that he has been deprived of this position in a certain case. He says;
“The Trusteeship for the Dead, which is always given to the captain-
majors, was taken away from me, leaving me with only the right to
trade.” This indicates that a person of some standing had displaced
him, and it is a pity that Leonel de Souza does not mention the name
of the person to whom his post was entrusted, as had it been CamOes
this would serve to allay the doubts of scholars who are still trying to
find documentary proof that the celebrated poet actually visited
China or Chinese waters at the time.
The earliest published allusion to Camoes in Macao seems to
date from the year 1613, when an edition of the Lusiadas appeared
in Lisbon. It was published by Manuel Correia and Pedro Mariz,
and in a biographical introduction it was stated that Camoes had
visited the Far East. Subsequent writers accepted this affirmation
without further comment.
In 19.11, Dr. Jordao de Freitas, the distinguished Curator at
that time of the Ajuda Library in Lisbon, published an article in
which he referred to the existence among the manuscripts in that
library, of a passage to the effect that
“280 pardaos were received as proceeds from the sale of some
land known as the ‘Rocks of Camoes’, at the fields of Patane.”
Dr. Jordao de Freitas went on to mention that this was a note
made by Joao Alvares, in the middle of the XYIIIth century, when
compiling notes at the College of St. Paul, in Macao.
Had the learned writer gone a little more carefully into this pas-
sage he would not have stated that this was nothing more than a note
written in the XVIIIth century, hut rather that it was a transcription


made in the XVlllth century, which in fact it was of an entry made
in one of the College registers dating from the early days of the
XYIIth century. The Register was one kept by the Rectors of the
College, and was begun in the year 1617, the entry to which Dr.
Jordao de Freitas made mention, being written by Father Antonio
Cardim, who was Rector for the years 1632-1636. The meaning
would have been clearer if Dr. Freitas had reproduced the passage
at greater length:
“This College owns some residential houses at the fields of
Patane near the wharf of Martins Lopes ... Father Antonio
Cardim, Rector of this College, sold these houses to Caspar Bor-
ges da Fonseca for 800 pardaos, which sum of 800 pardaos
together with 280 pardaos received as proceeds from the sale of
some land known as the Ro ks of Camoes, at the fields of Patane,
the said Rector put out at interest, eiraing 10 per cent...” ( 136 )
The entry does not prove that Cambes lived at Macao, but it
carries the tradition of Cambes’ name further back than the middle
of the XVTIIth century, in fact to the beginning of the XVIIth cent-
ury, while pardaos were no longer used in 17 50, although they were
used in Macao a century and a half earlier. It can be seen, there-
fore, that the name of the Portuguese poet was associated with the
Rocks not merely two hundred years ago, but a full three hundred
and fifty years before the present year of grace.
We do not know when the name of the spot, previously known
as the “Rocks of Camoes” was changed to “Camoes’ Grotto”, but it
was an unfortunate change, for the new name seems to have given
rise to the suggestion that the Lusiadas was actually written there,
which is an absurdity, as anyone familiar with the spot will readily
agree.
If, as has been so often mentioned, Camoes wrote part of his
great epic in Macao and lost his papers, or some of them, oil the River
Me-kong, this may serve to account, to some extent, for the omission
of reference to Macao in the Lusiadas. On the other hand, in spite
of the enthusiasms of modern admirers of Cambes, Macao could not
have been at that time of great value, from a poetic standpoint when
the poet might have lived in it. It was, then, little more than an


uninviting, sparsely wooded, tongue of land, with few houses or social
amenities, if any. That part of his travels w T ould have offered very
little material, to provoke ‘the muse of fire’.
Scholars generally take it for granted that Camoes really lived
in Macao, and was one of its pioneers, but in recent years the sug-
gestion has been put forward that real proofs of this have yet to be
produced. The mystery is likely to remain in doubt for many years
to come, for Camoes’ allusions to China are so vague and inconse-
quential that they are little more than mere references to the name.
n
Curiously enough hardly anything is known about Macao’s early
days. This is possibly explained by the fact that both Lampacao
and Shanchuan were also frequented by Portuguese ships for purposes
of trade, and at the outset, possibly, the Portuguese were somewhat
hesitant about any intensive development of Macao, although there
are proofs that construction was going on.
Thus, when Father Joao Baptista do Monte, S. J. visited
Macao in 1562, on his way to Japan, he mentions that he and his
companions were the guests at Macao of Guilherme Pereira, brother
of Diogo Pereira, and lived at his splendid house, lodged in two
spacious rooms, with a verandah, attached. On Sundays and holy
days, sermons were preached in the church to large congregations,
indicating that an edifice for use as a church already existed in 1662,
n
Similarly, Father Manuel Teixeira, S. J. writing A Macao in
1563, to his Jesuit brethren in Portugal; speaks of “the three
hundred Portuguese w T ho attended the church which the Jesuits had,
besides those w'ho attended the other church which was to be found
in Macao,” indicating that there w'ere members of another congre-
gation, besides the Jesuits, in the little colony. ( 139 )
In 1664, Father Francisco Peres mentioned “the residence of
r d^ u5 A Quinteiro in which fieco they w T ere living,” and referred to a visit
from a high-ranking from Canton, when this official ex-
pressed a desire to see tlrTchurch. ( 14 °)
From another old document we learn that in 1564 the Jesuits
had a little building for use as a rest bouse for members of their
Ord r, and that another one was built in 1565. ('") The Hospital of


the Santa Casa da Misericordia,. better known as St. Raphael’s
Hospital, dates from 1569, and so does the chapel attached to the
leprosarium which was one of the early cares of the community.
Several distinguished Portuguese figure among those who had a
hand in the founding and building of this “Farthest Bit of Portugal”:
Leonel de Sousa, Diogo Pereira and his brother Guilheme, Pedro
Barreto Rohm (friend of Camoes and of Diogo de Couto, the official
chronicler), Luiz de Almeida (who gave up a fortune and became a
missionary \ Gil de Goes, Dom Joao Pereira, Luiz de Mello da Silva,
Bishop Belchior Carneiro, Duarte Rodrigues, Pedro Yelho (friend
of St. Francis Xavier), Tristao Yaz da Veiga, and many others,
great and small.
Numbers of Chinese also gained wealth from business relations
with Macao, for there were regular shipping services between Macao
and Canton, attracted by the new trade. Canton remained the prin-
cipal centre of business, but Macao became its seaport, and was in
touch as well with various ports on the West River, principally
Shekki (capital of the district of Heung Shan), Sun Wui, Kwong
Hoi, Shiu-hing (then the vice regal centre of Kwangtung), and other
places.
It is safe to conjecture that the city of Macao grew rapidly, for
the volume of trade seems to be have been appreciable. With
the setting up of a foreign dep6t at the gateway to Canton, the mer-
chants of Kwangtung could and did buy foreign merchandise and
could sell goods to the Portuguese traders without infringing the law
which forbade dealings between the people of China and Chinese
subjects who had gone to foreign parts and who were thereby con-
sidered to be beyond the pale.
Macao was established, therfore, under splendid auspices. It
was a truly wonderful opportunity for the Portuguese traders.
They had got into the good graces of the officials at Canton,
Kwangtung’s trade flourished as never before and the provincial
exchequer benefited, and, if critics are to be believed, the officials
waxed rich on the trade. Conservative China would not welcome
these foreigners into the country just as they tried to keep out the
‘barbarians’ for so many years while carrying on trade with them at
Canton during the XVIIIth and XlXth centuries but by giving
the Portuguese settlers a useless fragment >.i land on which to build


their city, where these foreigners would not interfere with the life
and customs of China, the Westerners could bring a trade which w'as
profitable; a compromise was found, one which saved face, was net
illegal, and which brought benefits to all concerned.
And looking over the story of this old colony we observe that
the pages of its history are replete with tales of the hardy pioneers,
of Europe’s early contacts with Asian lands, when the ancestors of
the Portuguese and the Chinese who have lived in peace and har-
mony at Macao for so many years, got together and established ties
of friendship and amity from which the East and the West have
benefited to a great degree. It was truly a time of satisfaction and
goodwill when by the fruits of nautical and terrestrial discovery and
evangelical enterprise, the glory of old China and Portugal’s golden
age met and had communion from which the world has earned much
in the years that came after. It is a story which time and romance
have sanctified in a wonderful way.
Here, on the southern seaboard of China, the group of hardy
Western pioneers set up the little colony which became known as
“Macao”. Here in spite of the clash of civilizations and with only an
enduring Faith to keep themselves from faltering, they maintained,
through every vicissitude, this lonely outpost of Western life, owning
allegiance to a sovereign state in Europe, ten thousand miles away.
What such a distance meant in terms of time, when communication
was so slow, and was so hazardous, and could not be measured me-
rely in t rms of miles, it is well nigh impossible for modern minds to
conceive!
Here, in this little settlement, the priests erected their churches
and their mission headquarters, side by side with the traders who
built their warehouses and little docks and wharfs; here sailors and
others waited for favourable winds, and sailing masters built their
homes; here missionaries rested from their labours or bided their time
while persecution raged in the mission fields; here refugees from
many an Eastern land were made welcome in Catholic homes in
this tiny spot that was Portugal in the Farthest East.
Macao became truly a place of refuge, not once, nor twice, but
on many occasions, wh?n people fleeing from trial and tribulation
sought the peace and tranquillity of its shores. And it is to the


everlasting credit of the Portuguese that refuge has never been denied
those who have looked for and found sanctuary in the little city of
Macao.
The trade which the Portuguese drove in Asia had a direct
bearing on the currents which these setters set into motion in
this part of the world, and side by side with the trade which grew,
the history of the Portuguese in the East is filled with episodes of
life and activity in which commercial enterprises are mixed with
missionary endeavours and military exploits which do credit to the
name of the Europeans.
Montalto quotes authorities for the statement that the colony’s
population numbered originally some five hundred Portuguese,
increasing in 1563 to nine hundred, exclusive of children, besides
Malaccans, negroes, and other retainers, when the settlers from
Lampacao moved over to Macao. ( ua )
Several classes of Chinese came into contact with the Portu-
guese. The majority of these were merchants, but among those who
benefited most of all from their dealings with the Portuguese were
the farming communities. The Portuguese settlers needed large
quantities of vegetables and farm produce, and since they did not
eat rice and did not take easily to the vegetables indigenous to South
China, the Portuguese planted vegetable products of their own. In
this way it is very likely that the Chinese farmers of Heungshan
became familiar with several kinds of vegetable plants introduced
by including sweet-potatoes, maize, peanuts, and
and European vegetable plants, which were possibly
first planted by the Portuguese at Macao or in the fallow fields
of Heungshan.
It is reasonable to suppose that the Chinese farmers were soon
growing the same plants and supplying them to the Portuguese.
The inhabitants of Heungshan district also began, very probably,
to turn southwards, instead of proceeding to Shekki to dispose of
their produce. Close contacts were thus made between the farmers
of Heungshan and the Portuguese settlers of Macao, contacts which
have been maintained to the present day.
The student of history has only to trace the growth of the vil-
lages of Heungshan to observe how the farmers increased in numbers
in the parts of Heungshan near the Portuguese colony of Macao,


after the coming of the Portuguese. It was only after the estab-
lishment of Macao that Heungshan grew in importance, the po-
pulation increasing as the needs of the Portuguese grew and the
demand for supplies for the ships increased from year to year.
Thus it was that so many European and American vegetable
products found their way into China. To the present dayAsweet-
potatoes of Kut Tai (■£#), a village just beyond the Macao border,
rank among the most celebrated in South China, to mention only
one of the many plants evidently introduced by the Portuguse. It
is likely that beginning in the XYlth century, the sweet potato
quickly took its place as the poor man’s food among the Chinese,
spreading rapidly all over the entire country, and contributing
greatly to the relief of the food situation among the peasantry of Chi-
na. Experts declare that more food energy per unit of land comes
from the sweet potato than any other crop in China.
There is nothing surprising, therefore, in the statement made
by Julean Arnold that
“there is a mistaken idea abroad that every Chinese man,
woman, and child in China eats rice every day. As a matter
of fact, there are millions of Chinese living in Shensi, Shansi,
and northwestern China, where rice is not grown, who have
never seen or tasted rice. There are millions in the rice-produc-
ing sections who cannot afford to eat rice regularly . . . and
strictly speaking, there is reason to believe that the sw T eet po-
tato occupies an even more general place in the dietary of the
people throughout all sections of China than does rice.” ( 143 )
To the sweet potato must be added the peanut, for its oil, and
maize, in the drier parts of the country. These plants have con-
tributed very greatly to help the peasantry of China get over many
a difficult period of drought and famine.
Modern statisticians realize that hut for the additional supplies
of food grown in China, a very large percentage of which came from
newly introduced food plants, China would not have been able to
provide for the tremendous increases in population recorded in this
country during the last few centuries. From the middle of the
XYlth century to the middle of the XVIIIth century it has been
estimated that the population of the country doubled, apd from


the latter period to the middle of-the XlXth century it doubled
again, being estimated at somewhat over 400,000,000. But for
the fillip which came from the supplementary foods introduced
by the Portuguese, especially the sweet potato, the food problem
in China would have been so serious that its consequences would be
horrible to contemplate.
Nor were these the only new foods introduced by the Port-
uguese. To the present day, the countryside in the vicinity of Ma-
cao grows large quantities of tomatoes, lettuce, watercress, cabbages,
okra, mandioca, Jerusalem artichoke (to give it its modern English
name, a misnomer, for this plant is neither an artichoke nor from
Jerusalem, but from Brazil), the papaia, pineapples, custard apples,
guava, the sun-flower, etc., many of these plants being brought to
China from America. At least one of these the pineapple has
contributed somewhat to the development of industrial activities in
China. In the same way the tobacco plant has helped to build up
thriving industries among the Chinese. "
The Chinese scholar-class would not condescend to admit that
China had anything to gain from association with the Portuguese,
but the farming communities were quick to see the advantages of
adopting the food plants which the Portuguese brought and thus,
being practical and resourceful, did more for the good of their country
than the scholars in their ivory towers.
Montalto does not show how the early Portuguese taught the
Chinese to use new plants for food, but he touches upon the sub-
ject of the farms owned by the Portuguese. He states that “the co-
lony’s jurisdiction then extended over tracts of Heungshan, where
the Portuguese owned farms, upon the products of which the colony
subsisted quite independently of the Chinese.” Montalto gives us
the impression that the farms were cultivated by negroes and other
retainers belonging to the Portuguese settlers, “As recorded by
Martinho de Mello e Castro’s memorandum,” Montilto goes on, “the
Chinese attracted by the fertility of the soil, went encroaching upon
the conquered tracts of Heungshan, without the least hindrance, and
imperceptibly peopled the locality over which the mandarins at last
exercised their jurisdiction.” ( 145 ).
It is more than likely, however, that the Chinese farmers who
used to till the soil in the fields of Mongha, in Macao, remained


where they had lived before, and that not long afterwards the farmers
of Heungshan began growing the vegetables first introduced by the
Portuguese.
The Portuguese statesman who w r rote the memorandum to
which Montalto refers was probably not conversant with the topo-
graphy of Macao and Heungshan, and while it is possible that in
the middle of the XYlth century great tracts of the southern extre-
mity of Heungshan w T ere fallow land, it is very probable that there
were farmers in Macao itself and around Tsin Shan (ift Jv), the town-
ship which commands the northern entrance of the “Port of Ama.
We may safely conclude that the needs of the Portuguese communi-
ty attracted more farmers, and that it was not long before new
villages were set up, the township of Tsin Shan slowly growing in
importance. This little towm which subsequently came to be wailed,
known among the Portuguese as Casa Branca , from the white-
washed walls of the mandarin’s yamen there. (“ 6 )
All this activity had an immediate effect on the trade and pro-
duction of Heungshan. It began as a little trickle, it is true, but it
slowly gained in importance and momentum, introducing new trends
which influenced the natives of Heungshan and the other districts
contiguous to it.
Besides the friendly contacts between the Portuguese and the
Chinese merchants and traders, and happy relations through the pur-
chase of food supplies from the farming class, there must have some
social relations between the two peoples as well. Friendly feeling
came, too, from the marriages which took place between Portuguese
men and Chinese w T omen, the Church and the community being
happy to bless the unions. From time to time some Chinese embra-
ced Christianity, and as often as not adopted Portuguese surnames,
or those of some Christian saint. Eventually some of these con-
verts took to living inside the new city, but it is not likely that,
in the very early stages, there w 7 ere very many of them. At
times the Portuguese adopted Chinese children, for it was con-
si lered, in those days, an act of Christian charity to acquire non-
Christian children and bring them up as Catholics. Chinese also
took to working as servants for the newcomers, but the majority of
the retainers of the early Portuguese settlers seem, however, to
have negroes or Malays.


The Chinese generally lived in their own villages or in houses
which they built in the settlement which was set up on the outskirts
of the Portuguese city, and thus it was that the two peoples had
friendly dealings with one another. From these early associations
firm friendships were built up, which were passed on from genera-
tion to generation, and there are, we like to think, ties of amity and
goodwill which still subsist at Macao, handed down from earlier days.
An Outpost that Grew. Macao’s early years were not marked
by any extraordinary features of development. Here, far from the
direct control of the Portuguese vice-regal authorities of Goa, the
Portuguese developed their trade. By the appointment, annually, of
captain-majors, Goa secured for its appointees virtual control of the
commerce between India, Malacca, and other places with Japan,
and, to a great extent, between China and Japan, but there was a
democratic city government, set up without reference to Goa and
over which the captain-major exercised nominal jurisdiction, during
his sojourn at Macao, on his way to government fostered
local trade from which smaller profits by their trade
with China and other places in the Far East.
At Macao, an almost deserted tongue of land, of diminutive size,
the Portuguese planted the little settlement w'hich was to take root
and grow and expand, and rise to the dignity of a city within a very
few years. For close on three centuries it was the only portal
through which not only Western products but many European in-
fluences found their way into China, just as it was the principal
medium whereby China, with her magnificent culture and her enor-
mous potential resources, was eventually revealed to a steadily expand-
ing Western world. And the little Portuguese ships, which were in
those days the only means whereby men crossed the stormy oceans
from Europe to the Orient, found safe haven in the waters of Macao,
for those harbours shallow as they are by modern standards were
excellent anchorages for those times and provided a sheltered port
from the terrible tropical storms.
Before the establishment of Macao, the Portuguese voyages to
Japan were made from Malacca, but anchorages off the China coast
had to be found, at which to buy silk and, just as important, to water
and take in fresh food. “But once the trade had been placed on a
regular footing,” Boxer points out, “Goa became the starting point,


and Macao the entrepot in China where the raw and finished silks
bought in the Canton market were taken aboard on the outward
voyage.” To this port there also came junks from Malaysia, with their
freights of pepper and other spices, sandalwood, and other products
of those islands. In Macao all these goods were stored, and sold,
and to Macao, the Chinese brought the wares and produce of China.
It is safe to assume that as the business became more stabilized
the volume increased. The quantity of silk sent to Japan grew in
volume, and the merchants of Macao were soon shipping from 1,000
to 2,000 piculs of raw silk and silk fabrics in the nao and the other
ships which went to the Island Kingdom every year. They no longer
realized a profit of 200 to 300 per cent, as did the traders of Liampo,
it is true, but they were able to make a profit of 100% and even
more, so Kaempfer asserts, on the silk which they delivered. Further
profits were made on the Japanese merchandise which they carried
away from Japan.
We do not know much about the early Macao trade, for the
records of those days have not survived. Ljungstedt asserts that he
saw a mouldering manuscript in Macao Avhich mentioned that “the
Portuguese had the privilege of paying on all articles of trade bought
at Canton, and carried to Macao, 2/3 less duty than other nations...
the duty amounting to 1.2 maces per picul, for fine silk, and 8 maces
for coarse; 2 maces per picul for all other kinds of merchandise.” ( u 7)
He reckoned that the rate must therefore have been I\% for Port-
uguese purchases, against a rate of 45% for other nationals, a fair
rate for the times.
There is a fragment of a document in the Macao archives,
compiled from older documents and other sources, which touches
upon a number of features of early life in the Portuguese colony. On
the subject of the early Macao trade it states that
“the Chinese were in the habit of carrying their goods and man-
ufactured articles to the foreign traders, just as they did in the
case of those who used to frequent the coasts of south-east China
in the very early days. They continued to do so long after the
Portuguese began, in 1578, to take their ships, of from 200 to
600 and even 800 tons burthen up the river to Canton. These
big ships carried woollens from Europe, and from India, amber,
coral, ivory; also sandalwood, silver, spices, etc., etc., from the In


dies; above all they used to bring a large quantity of pepper. In
one year the export from China consisted principally of 6,300
cases of silk stuffs, each case containing 100 pieces of velvet or
damask, or 160 pieces of lighter silk fabrics; 2,000 to 2,500
“shoes” of gold (each weighing ten taels); more than 800 pounds
of ambergris; also seed-pearls and many other precious stones,
as well as sugar, porcelain, and a great variety of miscellaneous
merchandise.” ( 148 )
In the early days of Macao’s trade the procedure already esta-
blished in earlier times was, therefore, probably continued. Nor was
the nature of the merchandise in which trade was carried on great-
ly changed, for there must have been some kinds of merchandise for
which there was always a ready market. The shippers no longer
brought their pepper from Malacca, but generally made a practice of
carrying this article direct from Sunda and other East Indian marts
direct to Macao, to save the taxes collected by the Malacca Customs
on transit trade as well as perquisites for the officials there. Some
Chinese junks besides other native craft, Siamese and Luzon and other
ships, would trade direct at Chinese ports, but the facilities offered
at Macao probably drew more trade to the Portuguese colony.
In Macao itself local trade between the Portuguese and Chinese
was carried on at fairs, every few days, to which Chinese tradesmen
brought merchandise and farmers produce. When the big ships
came in the trade was, naturally, carried on on a larger scale, and
with the merchants of South China the Portuguese maintained the
best of relations.
From their contact with Macao, Chinese traders were able to
introduce or popularize many useful articles and many kinds of pro-
duce, some of which must have been entirely new to the people of
the ‘Middle Kingdom’. These must have contributed to the well
being of the Chinese, the masses no less than the rich, while the vo-
lume of trade in all sorts of Chinese merchandise quickly increased
in volume, building up new trade demands and stimulating new
channels of interchange all over the country, beginning principally
in Kwangtung and elsewhere in South China.
The members of the new Western community, in their turn,
created demands for supplies as well as provisions for their ships and
their homes. The Europeans living in Macao required bread and


cakes and other farinacious foods, non-spirituou« wines and other
beverages, fresh vegetables and fruits, furniture of European design,
as well as clothing and foot-wear different from anything seen before
in China. All this promoted livelihoods for artisans and craftsmen,
as well as tradesmen. For their ships, too, the foreigners required
biscuits and bread, smoked, salted, and preserved meats and fish,
besides fresh and preserved fruits and vegetables and other foods,
and the demand arose for supplies of such things as cordage, sails,
masts, lumber, and nails, etc., also casks and other supplies of a
similar nature.
The influence of all this on the life of the Chinese in the towns
and the countryside close to Macao could not have been small, and
besides the farmers, artisans, and craftsmen, there -were traders and
peddlers, as well as people engaged in the carrying of goods, by
water and by land, who made a living from their dealings with the
Portuguese settlers and the ships that traded at Macao.
In authority over the Portuguese settlers there was a Municipa-
lity of sorts, elected by the citizens, and ignored by the authorities at
Goa. The Portuguese officials in India exercised their authority, as
they had done in earlier times, among the traders on the China coast,
by the appointment of the Captain-major. Professor Boxer who has
been devoting some attention to this somewhat obscure subject of
the early Captain-majors at Macao, has compiled a list which shows
us that the following were the officers who held this post during the
first few years of the Colony’s existence:
1657 Francisco Martins, who went to Hirado. Another
Portuguese ship visited the-some port.
1668 Leonel de Souza who visited Hirado. Guilherme Pe-
reira took a ship to the port of Funai.
1569 Rui Barretto who visited Hirado. Guilherme Pereira
took his ship to the port of Funai again.
1560 Manuel de
either to Kagoshima or Funai.
1661 Fernao de Souza who went to Hirado, whore he was
killed with some of his men, in a quarrel. Afonso
Yaz went to the port of Satsuma, and four other
Portuguese ships visited Hirado.


1562 Pero Barreto Rolim who went to the port of Yokoseura.
1563/4 Diogo Pereira was Captain-General of the city, dis-
placing the Captain-major of the Japan Voyage for
the bienniel term of 1663/4. In 1663, Dom Pedro
de Guerra went to the port of Yokoseura, on behalf
of his brother, Dom Francisco Captain of
Malacca. In 1664, Dom Pedro de Almeida went
to Hirado with three naos.
1565 Dom Joao Pereira who took his ship to the port of
Fukuda.
1666 Simao de who went to Fukuda.
1667 Tristao Vaz de Yiega who arrived at Kuchinotsu. Two
other Portuguese ships reached Japan in the same
year.
1668 Dom Antonio de Sousa who went to Fukuda.
1669 Manuel Travessos who is said to have proceeded to
Fukuda.
1670 Manuel Travessos who went to Japan in a nao. Estevao
Leitao went to a Japanese port in a junk.
1671 Tristao Yaz de Veiga who made the port of Nagasaki,
which became thereafter the principal port in Japan
for Portuguese trade.
1572 Dom Joao de Almeida who reached Nagasaki.
1573 Dom Antonio de Vilhena, whose nao was lost in a
typhoon within sight of Amaquosa, left Macao as
Captain-major. A junk belonging to Gaspar Cor-
reia Pinto reached Nagasaki safely.
Professor Boxer provides us with interesting particulars of the acti-
vities of these officials, and biographical notes of the most important
of them. ( Hn )
With the year 1573 a new period began in Macao. The Chi-
nese officials built a Barrier Gate where they could collect taxes on
goods passing between Macao and the district of Heungshan, the trade
which had been carried on with a certain amount of freedom being
tightened up by the Chinese officials who probably felt that a good


thing could be made out of it. Subsequently in 1578, the principal
trade with the Chinese was diverted to Canton although there was
still a very great deal of local trade at Macao for the authorities at
Canton in conformity with the tendencies of the times, wanted to
have it under their direct control, just as they did there in the case
of the Co-hong, in later days, in the XVllFand XlXth centuries,
when the ships of other foreign powers were permitted to trade in
China. But these features of Macao trade and of the later foreign
trade at Canton are outside the scope of the period to which this
present study is limited.
The early Portuguese trade in China, writes Montalto, was vested
with many privileges and immunities, which no other foreign people
subsequently enjoyed. A Portuguese vessel of about 200 tons on
being measured for the first time paid about 1,800 taels as tonnage
dues, and on every subsequent arrival only one-third of that amount.
(Even Ljungstedt owns that in later days ships of no other nation
had the same advantages, having to for ships of the same ton-
quent visits). ( 150 )
With the setting up of Macao as a permanent base, where mer-
chandise could be safely stored and then loaded into the ships about
to proceed to Japan and other places, a change took place. The
authority vested in the Captain-major was evidently given with the
object of empowering him to curb attempts by the merchants of Ma-
cao and other places to intrude upon the rights of the voyages without
payment of satisfactory compensation, for it is clear from references
which Boxer has made, and which are quoted above, that besides
the vessels belonging to the Captain-major, others did send ships to
Japan.
From this we may draw the conclusion that the Captain-major,
was generally willing to sell a part of his rights to those who were
prepared to pay for the privilege, and voyages to Japan could be
made by those whose names were inscribed on rolls each year, less
favoured ones being permitted to entrust the more fortunate with
their goods on commission. Smaller merchants were thus able to
buy fractions of the rights belonging to the luckier ones, and this
contributed, no doubt, to the great interest taken by nearly everybody
in the colony in the outcome of the Japan voyages. Even the hum-
blest citizens could make little fortunes, at times.


By 1670 a single voyage was reputed to be worth 100,000 cru-
zados, a fabulous sum for the times, and the pilot aud other officers,
and even the crew, likewise, though more modestly, reaped advanta-
ges from this great trade. The consignors of the merchandise made
large profits, while enormous sums were paid to the exchequer at
Goa, as taxes, for particulars of all transactions had to be furnished
to the authorities, the Crown collecting a charge of five per cent on all
business done. Revenue was also collected for the Macao adminis-
tration, and this enabled the little colony of Macao to develop rapidly;
Macao soon became celebrated as one of the most prosperous cities in
the East. ( 151 )
Canton was also vitally interested in the trade, large sums of
money being collected for the Chinese Government, while the mer-
chants and the officials there took the keenest interest in it.
In Macao, therefore, just as in Malacca, Nagasaki, Canton,
and even in distant Goa and other centres o£ Portuguese trade,
many a man might have been seen, in those days, like the traders
immortalized in Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice:
Plucking the grass to know where sets the wind,
Peering in maps for ports, and piers, and roads
And every object that might make him fear
Misfortune to his ventures.
In the midst of all this movement of men and ships and goods,
Macao grew, its growth being as rapid as it was remarkable, so
much so that Chang T’ien-tso feels constrained to point out that
“within the space of a few decades, this obscure fishing village situated
at the head of the Heungshan promontory and the southern extrem-
ity of the estuary of the Pearl River rose to a position which over-
shadowed Canton... for the rise of Macao is a wonder of the modern
commercial history of Eastern Asia. ’ ( 152 )
The most important factor in Macao’s early prosperity, it has
been shown, was the trade between China and Japan. The Jap-
anese did not, in those times, produce raw silk to any extent —it
was only after the closure of Japan to foreign trade in 1640 that the
Japanese embarked upon the production of silk, in which they
eventually attained a commanding position, in the XXth century.


Professor Boxer, who has made a close study of the Macao-Japan
trade, quotes in his recent masterly Macau na Epoca da
from a hitherto unpublished manuscript which treats among other
subjects of the voyages made from the city of Macao. Referring to
the Japan voyages, which were by far the most important of those
linked with Macao’s trade, ho explains that the trade ships sailed from
Macao in July or August, having loaded goods from Europe, Goa,
and Malacca, hut principally raw silk or stuffs from Canton , and also
medicinal herbs and spices. From Europe the goods consisted of
novelties like paintings, glassware, mirrors, clocks, matchlocks, and
cannon. The merchandise from India was made up of cotton cloth,
drugs, and precious stones and jewellery.
Japanese ports would be reached in ten or twelve days. In
Japan no harbour or other dues were paid on the goods or ships, the
sole expenditure being the cost of the presents to the Shogun and a
few officials. These presents increased in value gradually and cost,
eventually, some 25,000 cruzados , among the presents being animals
like elephants, leopards, etc., and even Birds of Paradise from Solor,
and parrots from Brazil.
In Japan the imported goods were traded principally for much
fine silver and gold, also drugs like camphor, and curiosities such as
lacquered furniture, painted screens, kimonos, etc. After completing
their business, the Portuguese would leave in the following February
or March, reaching Macao in a fortnight at most, where a great
part of the silver would be unloaded, to be used in the purchase of
more silk for the following season, the rest being taken to Malacca or
India. ( 153 )
Here, in Macao, far from their closest European neighbours, the
community drove their trade. It was trade of the kind which the
Portuguese had learned to conduct a profitable carrying trade, the
like of which already existed in the East, but which the Portuguese
improved upon. Goa, Ormuz, Cochin, Colombo, Malacca, and all
those other places long famed in old Asian trade, were made by the
Portuguese to yield greater profits, but Macao was of Portuguese
creation, it rose from nothing to become the flourishing, rich mid-
way entrep6t between Malacca and Japan.
Macao’s great distance from Goa, the Portuguese vice-regal
court in Asia, and their trade and other preoccupations with Indian
and other Asian centres absorbing, as they did, most of the attention


and interest of the officials of evety rank in Goa, associated as they
often were in the proceeds of commercial ventures during their short
periods of office, probably diverted the attention of the leading Port-
uguese officials, in the early days, from the possibilities of Macao as
an important centre of trade. To them Macao might have been,
at the beginning at least, little more than a resting place for mission-
aries and a depot between Malacca and Japan rather than the
great potential mart, which it soon became.
In this distant outpost, the merchants were therefore left very
much to themselves, and they developed a thriving trade, princi-
pally as carriers for the peoples of other countries in the East. The
importance of the new colony was not based so much, therefore, on
goods from Europe, as on the produce of the Orient, which the Port-
uguese merchants carried in their ships, from many lands, and mar-
keted in Macao.
This colony was, as it is seen, only loosely linked with Goa. This
circumstance contributed to Macao’s strength, for the burghers had
to rely on their own resources, and the Senate which they established
was the tangible expression of their self-reliance and resourcefulness.
It was the result of their own peculiar needs, for far from the Mother-
land, the men of Macao had to depend on their ability to build up
and maintain commercial and political relations with many peoples,
and to keep open the trade routes of the whole of the Far East.
Their dependence on the sea was almost absolute, for shipping
provided their main source of wealth and their links with their fellow
nationals. Every citizen had opportunities for transacting business,
which was conducted with much acumen. Fortunes were sometimes
made and money flowed easily; and the manner in which Macao
throve shows how well the early settlers understood the problems
facing them. They had no learning of the finer points of economics
and the ‘science of money’, but they carried on trade, exchange, and
financial transactions on the lai’gest scale with astute merchants of
old civilizations in many centres of trade. 'The profits of each suc-
cessful season’s business had to be husbanded to provide for one, two,
and even three or more, lean years. Disastrous years, due to ship-
wreck or losses by piracy or other eventualities had to be faced. All
their successes meant shrewd study of sources of supply and an
understanding of the niceties of shipping, as well as of the packing,


stowage, and conservation of food and other perishable merchandise,
while their enterprises called for no small courage and patient bar-
gaining with clever merchants in the markets of dozens of places in
the East.
Many seas intervened between Portugal and Macao, yet in this
tiny particle of Portugal’s far-flung empire, the traditions which were
brought from the homeland were carefully maintained. Here, in
course of time, the community developed traits drawn from the East
as wall as those of the West, for although European national concepts
have been held to be so greatly superior, the proximity of Macao’s
settlers to China enabled them to borrow from the customs and usages
of Asian peoples as well.
As a community the people were energetic, practical, and resour-
ceful, and though selfish they were able to think of the common good.
Though self-reliant they were always ready to follow a good leader,
though materialistic they were always deeply religious, and though
excitable they could be prudent and cautious, for they quickly learned
how important it was to accommodate themselves to the wiles and
whims of native officials. In this way they have been able to serve
Portugal, for by adapting themselves and their policies to the exi-
gencies of an occasion they were able to overcome many a critical
situation which faced them during the many years that intervened
since Macao was founded and the years that followed. ( 164 )
The clothing of the individuals was unsuited to a warm and
unpleasant climate, their simplest household needs were often difficult
to obtain, and they had to adapt themselves to the use of native ma-
terials for many of their requirements. They suffered much and en-
dured much, but they “kept the flag flying.” They had little opport-
unity for cultural development and at times they were almost cut off
from all links with the homeland, but they did not give up this home
of theirs in the East. It is good for moderns, surrounded by every
comfort, to ponder a little, at times, on the inconveniences and hard-
ships which it was the lot of the Portuguese and subsequent pioneers
to go through, and we cannot estimate the harmful effects of climate
and environment on the minds and temperaments of the women
and children, cut off as they were from all ties with “home”, through
succeeding generations.


Medical science was still an unimportant study at the time in
Europe, yet the Portuguese pioneers endeavoured to learn from Asian
peoples something of their knowledge of the art of healing. From the
earliest days, the Portuguese sought for specifics and useful drugs,
as the letters of Tom 6 Pires show. Garcia de Horta demonstrated
in no uncertain manner that the Portuguese scientists in the XYlth
century carried out inquiries into diseases and studied the modes
practised by the Asians in healing them. As late as the XVIIIth
century the Portuguese were still searching for plants that could heal,
and Father Joao de Loureiro visited Cochinchina in this connection.
One result of his work was the publication of a classic, Flora Cochin-
chinensis. ( 156 )
The rules of engineering were foreign to these men, yet the
Portuguese pioneers erected cities and fortresses, and evolved new
types of residences, which, though now fast disappearing, still stand
as monuments to their sagacity and skill. The buildings they con-
structed combined the good qualities of the East and the West, and
were spacious and airy, being placed, by careful selection, to get the
coolest breezes in the tropical countries where they were erected. ( 156 )
It is interesting to observe, in all this great movement, how
Christian fervour continued with undiminisbed ardour among the
traders, for their support of the Missions never ceased. In spite, mo-
reover, of the materialism of the times, then growing so )apidly in
Europe, the Christian principles which had been such a great factor
in the early days of exploration were nob submerged. Money the
traders made, but the rich gave liberally to the Church, and also to
the poor, while they recognized the need for creating those services
without which no community can consider itself to be civilized.
And in this it was not only money they gave; they also counted it
important to serve, for it was a privilege to attain membership of the
Santa Casa da Misericordia, where by service and personal effort
men endeavoured to relieve poverty and distress, and to care for the
sick. They felt the duty to build and direct the work in institutions
where less fortunate fellow men m : ght be helped.
A hospital, built and kept going with funds subscribed by the
community, through Macao’s Santa Casa da Misericordia (Holy
House of Many) was functioning at Macao (in 1669) at a time when
few capitals of Europe could boast of such institutions. Charity was


dispensed not only in Macao but was extended to other places in the
East, as one of the finest expressions cf the civilizing influences in-
troduced by the Portuguese. ( 157 )
The example, therefore, of Macao’s pioneers who did so much,
at a time when national rivalries were rising and were being felt so
strongly in the West, should have served as a model and teen an
inspiration for those who came after them.
All this, it is necessary to understand —as well as the limit-
ations of the European mind —to arrive at a just appreciation of the
problems which the settlers of Macao had to face, to realize the diffi-
culties under which they laboured, and the environment in which
their children were brought up, in this little city which was founded
400 years ago.
Nevertheless, under the guiding spirit of a sense of Christian
duty which came from Old Portugal, and with the exhortations of
the clerics who accompanied the pioneers, some of the finest traits of
European character and conduct were transmitted to the young set-
tlers, and have been perpetuated by their descendants in Macao.
The ideal of chivalry might have been well-nigh forgotten in Europe
then, but it flourished in this solitary European outpost on the shores
of Eastern Asia, where several of their number cut themselves off
from things mundane to consecrate their lives to a great ideal.
Prominent among these was Luiz de Almeida, who made a fortune
from trade but then entered the Jesuit order and devoted his fortune
and the remaining years of his life to the care of the needy. There
were others like him, whose conduct shines as a noble example of
splendid service rendered by humble men and w’omen, w'ho, in spite
of the pernicious example of their fellows in Europe, and the growing
materialism of the times which grew so quickly and came to
flourish so greatly in the XlXth century, and from which men have
not yet emancipated themselves contributed much to the prestige
of the Europeans in this part of the world. ( 158 )
By the success of Macao’s pioneers, the East and the West found
a common mesting place, just as all Europe turned, for a time,
towards Lisbon “as the greatest city in Europe, where all the riches
of the Orient were discharged for distribution to all the world.”
Four hundred years have elapsed since Macao was founded, four
hundred years that have been crowded with world-stirring events,
and that have witnessed upheavals of many kinds, in the thought, con


duct, motives, and ideas of men. It is“a story that is rich with the
drama of human endeavour, of the good works of humble Portuguese
men; and through the corridors of Time one hears many Macao
voices, as generation succeeded generation of men and women who
lived and died there. The music of the mellow church anthemns
blends with the chanties of the working men, the clink of silver in
the counting houses merges into the din qfjjie shipyards, and the
city noises melt into the song of the sea. melocU**that
been'ringing in the ears of Macao for four hundred years, filling the
consciousness of with the knowledge that theirs is a heritage
which few others possess.
And out of the medley of sounds there emerges a song which
typifies the spirit of Old Lusitania: and w T e hear the voice, perhaps,
of some Macao trouhador singing, to the measure of a Masefield’s
verse, rapt in the contemplation of some richly laden nno,
Dipping through the tropics by the palm-green shores.
With a cargo of diamonds,
Emeralds, amethysts,
Topazes, and cinnamon, and gold moidores.


POST SCRIPTUM
No study has yet been made, so it seems, of the influences which
followed from the setting up of the Portuguese colonies and settlements
in the East, but there is no denying the fact that among those vs ith
whom they came into contact new ideas spread, and among the
peoples of Asia a curiosity was stimulated, as the natives came to
know of the goods and usages carried by the Portuguese pioneers to
so many places.
In some instances the interest taken by Asian peoples in the
new products and customs was great, in other cases no new currents
seem to have developed from the new contacts. In course of time,
however, changes in the customs and interests of even the most con-
servative of the peoples among whom the new influences spread must
have taken place. In India, fur instance, it was strong, and although
the Chinese literati tried to resist the pressure, it is obvious that
among the Chinese masses a gradual, imperceptible change came
about, for the people of the Middle Kingdom gained much from their
contacts with the “Men of the Western Seas.”
Nevertheless, one would experience Ithe greatest difficulty in
searching for information bearing on the merchandise carried by the
early Portuguese merchants, while much less is known of the details
of how the vegetable and other products grown in Macao by the
Portuguese settlers has contributed to the agricultural economy of
the Chinese. It is felt, however, that China’s greatest material
debt to the Portuguese has come from the value to China’s food
supply of the vegetable products which were introduced by the new-
comers. The principal of these were the sweet potato and maire,
but the Portuguese introduced other products as well. In such a
small thing as provision to impede the advance of an enemy, in the
days before barbed-wire was ever thought of, the Portuguese intro-
duced the thorny cactus plant, and the Chinese farmers found it of
immense value to provide effective hedges for their fields.
Ornamental trees and useful shrubs, also flowering plants, some
from great distances, made their way into China through Macao.
Medicinal herbs, for household remedies, many of them first grown


in Macao gardens, were also introduced by the Portuguese. In
course of time new specifics, among them cinchona, ipecacuanha, and
other products, found their way into China, through the Portuguese
or the Portuguese Mission among the Chinese.
Similarly, new sauces for the cuisine were made known to the
Chinese at Macao. Among these were chilli sauce and shrimp sauce.
These sauces gave rise, in course of time, to the establishment of
thriving industries in China. New foods and beverages, such as
coffee, cocoa, cheese, were used by the settlers, and must have stim-
ulated an interest among the Chinese who first tasted these things
in Macao.
Window-glass and fUnda-shell windows, a characteristic form of
architecture, and new conveniences for habitations and community
life, made their appearance, leading in turn to the adaptation of some
of these in Chinese homes, while cups and tumblers, forks and spoons
were to be found on the tables of Macao citizens. From all these
things we can see that the useful influence exerted by the Portuguese
in China must have been a continuous source of interest among the
Chinese. ( 159 )
Nor should we forget that the establishment of a big market at
Macao for the purchase of Chinese produce led to the growth of in-
dustrial activities among the Chinese. Most of these were of little
consequence in the early days, but an important example of this in-
fluence was in the production of silk, which developed into ■ such
great proportions in the districts of Heungshan and Shuntak, in
South China, as reference to the annals of these districts shouldshow.
In social life the Portuguese introduced and maintained customs
and usages which, in their turn, must have had some influence on
the Chinese with whom the Portuguese came into contact. Some
of these customs might have been adaptations of those which had
been acquired in India and Malacca, asdln the same way, in course
of time, the Portuguese adopted some Chinese usages, as the needs
of the community were influenced by circumstances during succeed-
ing generations.
The homes of the people were ever open to strangers, and the
inherent hospitality of the residents of Macao was recognized all
over the Far Eastern world. It has been seriously abused at times
by wfee- wteHs. who benefited mostly from it, through the course of


its history, and even in recent times, but as the great link between
Europe and China, for close on three centuries, it was an important
factor in international relations during all those years.
The establishment of churches all over China, and in Japan
and other places in the East, produced strong influences, and besides
the demand for new equipment for the sacred edifices and for main-
taining their services, they were the centre of the greatest single in-
fluence in Western thought and culture all through the Eastern
world. This feature of Portuguese work and effort provides matter
for whole volumes of the most absorbing interest.
Macao became the headquarters of an evangelical service which
extended over the whole of the Far East, and from small beginnings
the institutions established at Macao grew. Eventually, the Jesuit
college expanded into an important university, and from Macao
learned missionaries proceeded to many fields. Father Cardim
singp, contemporaneously, the praises of this College, and of the part
played by Macao: “It becomes the foster-mother of martyrs, the
fortress whence captains sally forth to defeat idolatry and hell, the
quiet harbour when bodies broken with toil send forth merit-laden
souls to heaven; it is the Province that bleeds in Japan or Cochin-
china, and toils gloriously in Annam or Tonkin, Hainam, Cambo-
dia, and the Laos.”
But Macao is more than that. It provides the setting for the
scholastic preparation which the priests acquired before going forth
into the Missions, for the work which lay before them. More should
be known of this work, for until recent years, the service rendered
by the good priests was lightly thought of. Little credit was given,
except by a few scholars, for the way in which these missioners from
Macao wore down the conservatism of the scholars-class in China.
In recent times, however, considerable recognition has been forth-
coming, from historians who have given thought to what the success
of the priests from Macao really meant. One of such historians is
Professor Goodrich, who interprets the service rendered by the
priests in a fine passage :
“The advent in the sixteenth century of the Europeans, par-
ticularly the men of culture, was bound to affect literary China.
Chinese thought and civilization were not static, as we have
seen; but the empire’s boundaries were limited, no great arteries


of communication ran through its domain, and its people were
forbidden to go abroad. Notwithstanding such barriers as these,
the new learning in Europe managed to penetrate China, largely
through the work of a few scholarly and devoted missionaries,
most of whom belonged to the Society of Jesus. Not content
Avith expounding the Gospel, these Jesuits brought the European
Renaissance to China through translation, personal instruction,
and original work. Broadminded and well trained as they
were, there were few better suited for the purpose. Despite
some hostility at court (Moslem astronomers naturally resented
the Jesuits’ calm assurance in their own field), these Europeans
profoundly stirred some of the most intellectual Chinese by their
teachings on ethics, mathematics, astronomy, geography, psy-
chology, logic, and applied science.” ( 16 °)
It was not only as the headquarters of the Portuguese Missions
that Macao served the people of European Christendom. Two and
a half centuries after the Catholic priests inaugurated the servi-
ces which became so important, the Protestant Missions sent
their pioneer missionaries to China. Here, again, Macao provided
the locale where the newcomers were able to prepare themselves for
their work in the Middle Kingdom. Dr. Cadbury and Miss Jones
in that splendid little book, 11 At the Point of a Lancet pay a tribute
to Macao:
“Macao’s historical importance lies in the fact that she was
the bridge to the almost hermetically sealed city of Canton.
Had Macao not belonged to a foreign country, it is safe to say
that Christianity and Western medicine Avould not have come
into China until a much later date. Because Macao had
enjoyed the benefits of medicine for two centuries, Western doc-
tors and dispensaries were permitted; Christianity was not
stamped out as a barbarian religion and foreigners were not
treated as uncivilized creatures. Canton has proved to be the
commercial gateway of China but Macao has been the back
door at which have stood Pearson, who introduced vaccination
into China, Morrison who was the first Protestant missionary
to the Chinese and the first translator of the Bible into their
language, and Col ledge, who started an ophthalmic dispensary


first in Macao and then in Canton, and who became president
of the Medical Missionary Society in Canton, the first Medical
Missionary Society in the world.
“These three men would not have been able to start their
work in Canton which was open for commerce and nothing
more. Had it not been for the benefits which the Celestial
Empire received from its trade with the East India Company,
and later with the United States, even this means of communi-
cation would have been prohibited, and China, with its popula-
tion of 350,000,000 would have kept itself free from religious
and medical invasion from the West for at least another fifty
years. But Macao provided a place where these men could
stand while they were knocking at the gate of China.” ( 161 )
Writers have begun, only in recent years, to admit the indebt-
edness of several nations to Macao, for help given in many ways,
and in this connection scholars are conceding that there was a great
deal of tolerance at Macao, during an age when the world was still
moved, in most places, by a vast degree of intolerance and self-
interest.
Nor does this exhaust the extent of Macao’s influence on the
life and customs of peoples in the Far East. In the Chinese arts,
the influence was not great, but innovations came through the de-
mand for articles like snuff bottles, new forms of porcelain vessels,
such as plates and bowls, furniture of European design to meet the
requirements of European customers, pipes for smoking tobacco, etc.,
to mention only a few of the many influences at work, as products
from Macao gained in popularity, and as Western ideas gradually
and imperceptibly wore down Chinese conservatism. ( 162 )
It was only a tiny current which was set into motion at first,
but all this change grew by degrees, and all this contribution, unre-
corded and unnoticed at the time of its introduction, has been of in-
calculable value to the Chinese, spreading its beneficent purposes,
effectively and permanently, everywhere in China. By the time
that the ships of other nations arrived and built up the trade which
grew to such gigantic proportions in the XlXth century, there were
established currents of trade in South China. Unbeknown to the
Chinese there began a slow, gradual movement of trade away from
the old trade-routes of the Chinese interior, via Canton and .Macao,
which only reached its full tide not so many years ago.


In commerce, the use of silver and other coins was popularized
to some extent by the Portuguese, and it is indisputable that they
had something to do with the development of financial and exchange
arrangements all over the East, as well as in Southern Asia and the
East Indies. Bespondencia, bonds and insurance of a kind grew
around the commercial and shipping operations of the time, and
Portuguese instruments of credit, bills of lading, and other commer-
cial documents came to circulate in the East. A code of business
conduct and practice was w 7 orked out, for the inviolability of con-
tracts and the security of property had to be clearly defined, while
the system of weights and measures between different centres was re-
corded by the Portuguese. A great many commercial terms, many
more than is generally realized, which have become common in
China and elsewhere in the Far East, owe their origin or wider
adoption to the Portuguese. ( 163 )
A philological study of dozens of languages and native dialects
would reveal the influence of the Portuguese in the foreign trade in
many Eastern lands, principally, during the XYlth and XYIIth cen-
turies. Through Macao many words entered the Chinese language,
while a lingua franca of Portuguese origin became common at the
seaports of the Eastern world, and many of the terms introduced by
the Portuguese still circulate even in places where their political
hegemony ceased long ago. ( 164 )
Defence w r orks and fortresses were influenced by Portuguese
ideas all over the Far East, and were strengthened by the new artil-
lery which the Portuguese introduced. In course of time a gun-
foundry was established at Macao, the products of which gained ce-
lebrity all over the East. Some artillery pieces were given to the
Chinese for use against foreign invaders, and many of the cannon
were sent from Macao to Portugal, being used in the defence of
Portugal. Others found their way to Portuguese fortresses in India,
Malaya, the East Indies, and other places, where their excellet qua-
lity was fully recognized. ( 165 )
At the other end of the world, the Portuguese introduced
changes too. The products of Asia, those of China among them,
gradually gained favour in the capitals of the Portuguese Empire,
spreading afterwards in the Western world. Spices were, at the be-
ginning, the principal Eastern products sought after by the Euro-
peans, but as the wealth from the new trade which developed grew


it enriched greater numbers, and the nature of the goods imported
into Europe from Asia increased in variety and value. Thus it was
that the Portuguese were ready purchasers of Chinese mer-
chandise, while offering attractive wares and goods to the Chinese
in exchange. In Lisbon, the nobility and the wealthy decked
themselves out in silks and satins, while curiosities like fans, lac-
quered-ware, jade, and porcelains became all the rage, Chinese
porcelain invoiced at Macao and consigned to Lisbon sold for its
intrinsic weight in silver, and in course of time led to the creation
of the chinaware industry in several places in Europe. Embroide-
ries, bronzes, screens, and ivories were sought after to decorate the
homes of the rich. Sedan chairs were brought into use in the streets
of Goa, introduced from Macao, and found their way, via Lisbon,
into the capitals of the West,
European gardens gained much from Chinese and other Oriental
influences, and lilies, tea-roses, jonquils, chrysanthemums, and
camelias spread in Europe from Portugal. Orange trees of Chinese
origin were successfully grown in Portugal and Brazil, being trans-
planted much later from the latter place to California, while the
little oranges carried from China to Tangir, then occupied by the Port-
uguese, are still called tangerines. Tea plantations were started in
several places—some of the tea plantations in the Azores Islands still
survive and tea as a beverage gained in popularity in Portugal,
spreading eventually to other European countries, England among
them. Other plants of economic value were taken to Portugal,
while ginger as a condiment and rhubarb and China-root, among
other plants, became important specifics. Bare essences and
perfumes were sought after, and European furniture designs and
household decorations borrowed influences from Chinese art. ( 166 )
These may have been some of the influences w'hich owe a great
deal to the existence of Macao, and since so much is taken for grant-
ed by compilers of history, and so many factors are overlooked w'hen
writing of an earlier period, it is good, at times, to ponder on cir-
cumstances which are no longer present before our eyes. Going back
to an earlier period of history, especially to one when men w'ere
breaking away from earlier traditions and laying the foundations of
newer ways, is never easy to do. And when values have shifted to
ideals and economic influences colour the thoughts of men, the task
of the student is rendered difficult indeed.


Had the ruling classes in Europe then looked at life differently
they might have made a better world, for much of the good which
has come to mankind was already taking form in the West. The
industrial activities of European peoples were slowly growing in in-
tensity, in part to meet the greater needs of the Asian trade; more
money was earned by a greater number, by artisans, shop-keepers,
and traders, mainly city people, but the principal money makers were
those who though producing nothing themselves throve on the ex-
change of goods and the financing of trade. Wealth tended to spread
out in wider circles, although it was the age of monopolies, and the
great East India Companies grew, for there were more needs, and
with greater wealth came the desire for new and strange things. As
had happened in Ancient Rome, in Byzantium, and among the tra-
ders of Italy in earlier times, however, the shrewdest made the
most money.
The stirrings in Europe could not be kept down, however,
for wealth in more bands produced a greater desire for know-
ledge and for books. Men turned, enthusiastically but unintelli-
gently, to the outside world, and although trade grew in volume from
decade to decade, the rampant nationalisms (which have brought so
many ills upon the peoples of Europe and the rest of the world) were
rising slowly, and in course of time brought fierce waves of hatred
and violence. Family alliances and the infiltration of business men
into the governing classes of nations, with their moral and intell-
ectual limitations, fed the flame of capitalism, with little to restrain
them, turning the European comity into an arena of narrow, jealous,
bickering nations, instead of spreading happiness and goodwill from
the wealth which the greater trade brought to mankind from the
interchange of goods between the East and the West.
Such a background in Europe provided the setting for the
clashes of peoples in the settlements w T hich the Europeans established
in Asia. It was inevitable then that the quarrels of the West should
be to the East, for which the people of Europe may be held
to blame. There were a few high-minded individuals in whose
hearts the torch of noble principles burned with an ardent flame,
but when gross materialism took the place of Christian charity
goodness and kindness were displaced and self-seeking rede rough-
shod over the rights of men.


The fact that stands out in regard to Macao is that it has been
maintained during a most difficult period of human relationships.
For guidance, the Portuguese settlers could not do more than fall
back on the commercial practices of their own times in Europe,
and, although they had their shortcomings, it must nevertheless be
admitted that the pioneers of Macao were able, by tact and common
sense, and in spite of every handicap of breeding and social and
religious prejudices, to keep open the gates of China while building
up trade relations of a permanent kind. Men cannot continue trad-
ing and be hostile to one another, and the mutual trust and confi-
dence that led to the establishment of Macao must have been main-
tained all through the years. For four hundred years, single-hand-
ed and with no hope of armed support in case of attack, the Port-
uguese settlers kept this tiny outpost open, from which the civiliza-
tions of the world, in the East as well as the West, have gained more
greatly than ever seems to have been admitted by those who have
tried to look into the story of Europe’s relations with the East.
And because Macao was the centre of a great coming and going
of “Argosies with portly sail,” its fame spread far and wide, and its
name was known in the bourses of the West. Not even the cele-
brated Rialto, at Yeni e, transacted a volume of trade exceeding that
wh oh as carried on at Macao. Here, in Macao, men of two
continents met and had discourse, in peace, even when no other
could be found for the purpose in the Farthest East. The
people of this little settlement take pride, therefore, in their little
home, and they have not forgotten that the founders of Macao were
the first to sail “beyond the sunset, and the bath of all the Western
stars,” in those little ships which opened the sea-route from the ends
of Europe to the little port of A-Ma, which truly became the gateway
to the fabled Orient.


NOTES
Acknowledgments. In the preparation of the present study a great many
books have been consulted, and the writer places on record his indebtedness
and grateful thanks to the authors and publishers of books from which inform-
ation has been obtained, particularly Donald Ferguson’s exhaustive study
on the early contacts between the Portuguese and the Chinese, Letters from
Portuguese Captives in Canton, Bombay, 1902; Dr. Jordao de Freitas, Macau,
Materiaes para a sua historia no seculo XVI, Lisbon, 1910: and Professor C.
R. Boxer’s learned studies on the early Japanese trade with the Portuguese.
Acknowledgment is also made to the authors and publishers of books from
which quotations have been taken, especially those set forth below.
To many persons who have expressed their views on a number of Macao
traditions thanks are also offered. To Mr. A. M. Braga, in particular, grateful
acknowledgment is made for his views on the manuscript and the following
notes, and for many suggestions.
Antecedents and influences
(1) Anselmo Braamcamp Freire, A Feitoria de Flandr/s in the authori-
tative Archivo Historico, Vol. VI, p. 373.
(2) Antonio G. Matoso, Compendia de Historia de Portugal, Lisbon 1933,
pp. 311-3, to quote only one Portuguese writer, for every Portuguese historian
who treats of this period has much the same thing to say. See especially J.
Lucio de Azevedo, Epocas de Portugal Economico, Lisbon, 1929.
(3) Francisco Antonio Correia in Gonsequencias Kcunomicas dos Descohi-
mentos, in the Anais do Instituto de Ciencias Economicas, Vol. V. pp.
66, et seg.
(4) Ludovico Guicciardini, Descrittione... di tutti Paesi Bassi, etc., Ant-
werp, 1567, p. 124.
(5) Francisco Antonio Correia op cit., p. 67
(6) Quoted by Antonio Matoso, Comp&ndio de Uistdria de Portugal, p. 383.
(7) Prof. Aubrey F. G. Bell, Portugal of the Portuguese, London, 1915,
p. 118.
(8) Antonio G. Matoso, op cit., pp. 407-408.
(9) Capt. B. Granville Baker, A Winter Holiday in Portugal, London,
1912, p. 148.
(10) Prof. Edgar Prestage, The Portuguese Pioneers, London, 1933, p. 299.
(11) See J. M. Braga, The ‘Tamdo' of the Portuguese Pioneers, in T’IEN
Sha Monthly, Shanghai, May 1939, pp. 420-432.


(12) The Suma Oriental was compiled by Tome Fires between the years
1512 and 1515, and was sent by him to Portugal, but it was lost there. It is
true that portions of an early copy got into Ramusio’s hands and were publish-
ed by him in Italian, in the middle of the XVlth century, but it was not until
only a few years ago that that learned scholar Dr. Armando Cortesao found a
copy of the lost manuscript in Paris. It was published under the auspices of the
Hakluyt Society, in London, ably translated and annotated by Dr. Cortesao
himself, The Suma Oriental of Tome Fires and the Book of Francisco Rodri-
gues, London, 1944, in two volumes. The only other important early survey
of the Far East, that of Duarte Barbosa, was printed in part, in Italian, by
Ramusio, a Portuguese edition appearing only in 1813. A critical English
edition in 2 vols., edited by M. Longworth Dames for the Hakluyt Society,
appeared in London in 1918 and 1921.
(13) In recent years scholars have devoted some attention to particulars
of the sea-trade of Southern Asia in the XVth and XVlth centuries, among
them Sir R. O. Winstedt, R. H. Major, Sir Henry Yule, Gabriel Ferrand, Paul
Pelliot, J. L. Duyvendak, W. P. Groeneveldt, and others. It must be admitted,
however, that there is still a great deal to learn about this subject. The most
comprehensive surveys of the period mentioned are still those prepared by
Tome Pires (see preceding note) and Duarte Barbosa, especially the former.
Modern editions of Varthema’s and Marco Polo’s travels are also valuable sour-
ces. With the information now available, following the appearance of Pires’s
Suma Oriental, it becomes necessary for all the ‘authorities’ on Malaysia in
the XVth and XVlth centuries to be revised.
(14) Vide D. C. Somervell’s abridgment of Arnold J. Toynbee's A Study
of History, London, 1947, pp. 124-5.
(15) Maurice Collis, The Land of the Great Image, London, 1943, pp.
13-16.
(16) Prof. H. H. Dodwell, The Cambridge History of India, Vol. V, Lon-
don, 1929, p. 27.
(17) Afonso de Albuquerque, Cartas, Edited by R. A. Bulhao Pato, Lis-
bon, 1884, Vol. I, p. 412.
(18) R. S. Whiteway, The Rise of Portuguese Power in India, London,
1899, pp. 169-171.
(19) Bal Krishna, Commercial Relations between India and England,
London, 1924, pp. 279-281.
(20) This coming from writers who are generally rather critical of the
Portuguese is praise indeed. See W. H. Moreland and A. C. Chatterjee, A
Short History of India, London, 1944, p. 202.
(21) Sir George Young, Portugal: Old and Young, Oxford, 1917, p. 135.
(22) Ibid., p, 26.
(23) Prof. Aubrey Bell, Portugal of the Portuguese, London, 1915, p. 122.
(24) Sir George Young, Portugal: Old and Young, Oxford, 1917, p. 156,


(25) See J. J. A. Campos, History of the Portuguese in Bengal, Calcutta,
1919, pp. 15-17.
(20) J. P. Oliveira Martins in Os Filhos de D. Jodo I.
(27) Historians' History of the World, Yol. X, p. 425.
(28) Prof. Edgar Prestage, The Portuguese Pioneers, London, 1933, p. 300.
(29) Dr. Eric J. Dingwall, Racial Pride and Prejudice, London, 1946,
pp. 181-2.
(30) K. G. Jayne, Vasco da Gama and his Successors, 1460-1580, London,
1910, pp. 296-7.
Expanding Horizons
(31) The Portuguese chroniclers dilate upon this phase of Portugal’s ex-
pansion, but each of the historians limits himself to a portion of the Port-
uguese achievements only. In order to collate the information set forth here
it has been necessary to pore over a large number of references scattered over a
great many pages. See Joao de Barros, Decadas da Asia, Ito IV, Lisbon, 1552,
1553, 1563, and Madrid, 1615; Diogo do Conto, Decadas da Asia, IV to XII,
Lisbon, 1602, 1612, 1614,1616,1645,1673,1736; Fernao Lopes de Castanheda,
Historia do descobrimento <£■ conquista da India pelos Portugueses, Livros, I to
VIII, Coimbra. 1551,1552,1552,1554,1554,1554,1554,1561, and The Hague,
1929, and Coimbra, 1933; Damiao de Goes, Chronica do Felicissimo Rei Dom
Emanuel, Parts I to IV, Lisbon, 1566,1566,1567,1567; D. Jeronymo Osorio,
De Rebus E/nmanuelis Regis Lusitania ? Invictissimsi Virtute et Auspicio
Gestis Libri Duodecimi , Lisbon, 1571; Caspar Correa, Lendas da India, in 4
volumes. Lisbon, 1858-60; Frei Luis de Sousa, Anna’s de EVrei D. Jodo Ter-
ceiro, Lisbon, 1844, to mention only some of the principal sources which have
been consulted for details of the activities of the Portuguese in Asia. Several
of the above have appeared in later editions, and a few have been translated
into English. Manuel de Faria y Sousa drew upon the above for his Asia
Portuguesa, in 3 vols., Lisbon, 1666, 1674, 1675, and this book in its turn
formed the basis of F. C. Danvers’ The Portuguese in India, London, 1894, in
2 vols. The more recent encyclopaedic compilations Historia de Portugal,
comemorativa do B.° centendrio da fundagao da nacionalidade, edited by
Damiao Peres, in 8 vols., Barcellos, 1928-1939, and Historia da Expansdo
Portuguesa no Mundo, Lisbon, 1937-42, in 3 vols., and Fortunate de Almeida,
Historia de Portugal, Coimbra, 1922-27, in 6 vols., contain a great deal of in-
formation from the above as well as research by Portuguese scholars covering
the activities of the Portuguese in South-east Asia, and should be consulted.
(32) Antonio Sergio, A Sketch of the History of Portugal, Lisbon, 1928, p.
96.
(33) Sir G. Young, Portugal Old'and Young, Oxford, 1917, p. 110.
(34) J. J. A. Campos, History of the Portuguese in Bengal, Calcutta, 1919,
P, 15.


(35) A complete list of the forts and strongpoints bnilt by the Portuguese
has yet to be published, and in making up the list of forts still in Portuguese
hands in the XVIIth century full use has been made of Antonio Bocarro’s
Livro das Plantas de todas as Fortalezas, Cidades, e Povoaroens do Estado da
India Oriental com as descripQoens da altura cm que estdo, e de tudo que lid
nellas, Artilharia, Presidio, gente de Armas, e Vassalos, rendimento, edespeza,
fvndos e baxas das Parras, Pegs da Terra dentro, o poder que tern, e a paz, e
guerra, que guarddo e tudo que estd dehaxo da Coroa de Espanha. Dedicado d
Serenissima Magestade del Bey Fiiippe o IV das Espanhas, o 111 de Portugal,
Bey, e Nosso Senhor. (This codex is a manuscript of 300 pp. and is illustrated
with 48 plans of Portuguese forts. It is to be found in the Evora Public Li-
brary.) See also the authorities mentioned in Note 31, supra.
(36) Prof. Edgar Prestage, The Portuguese Pioneers, London, 1933, pp'
302-3.
(37) Sir Richard 0. Wiuatedt, Malaya and its History, London, 1948, pp.
33-6 and 104.
(38) Dr. Armando Cortesao, The Suma Oriental of Tomi Pius and the
Book of Francisco Rodrigues (Hakluyt Society), London, 1944, Yol 11, pp.
286-7.
(39) Contrast the studied opposition by the Dutch East India Company
to nearly all attempts made by Dutch pastors to engage in the spread of the
Protestant Faitlj in Dutch possessions, while the refusal of the English East
India Company to countenance the efforts of Dr. Morrison and others of the
London Missionary Society to preach Christianity in China as late as the
XlXth century is well known. In the case of the Portuguese, trade was often
subordinated to the needs of the Church, and rarely indeed did trade follow
the priest, as it often did in the case of the missionaries who were sent out by
the French Court in the XVIIth and XVIIIth centuries. In fact the Church
stepped in and benefited from the services of the Portuguese merchants, even
dispossessing the latter at times.
(40) Vide supra p. 46-50.
(41) For an important contribution to the history of Malacca, up to the
time when the Portuguese took over the great Malayan port, see Tome Pires’s
Suma Oriental, so often referred to above. This XVlth century writer went
into the history of Malacca with the greatest assiduity and care, and he gives
particulars which help to fill in many gaps in the history of Malaya in the
XYth century. Pires seems to have questioned his informants very carefully,
and the result of his investigations furnishes details which are of the greatest
value to historians of Malaya. His information helps to clarify many obscure
points in this history. Modern scholars will welcome Dr. CortesSo’s edition
of Pires’s Suma Oriental, as oneAhe most important works yet written about
Malacca.


In search of a home
(42) Alguns Documentos do Archivo National da Torre do Tomho, Lis-
bon, 1892, pp. 194-5. Th* translation given here is based on Donald Fergu-
son’s. The subject of the Portuguese pioneer* has been ably dw.lt with by
Dr. Armando Cortesao in his contributions to Historict da Expansdo Porhi-
guesa no Hondo, Lisbon, 1937, Vol. 11, Chapters 10 and 11. I make no at-
tempt to include the oft-repeated description of the Liking of Malacca, to
which extensive references have been made by number of writers aff l which
is outside the scope of the present study.
(43) The Portuguese chronicler Joao de Barros seems to hcve mistaken
this for fish-oil, possibly because of its characteristic smell. See Prof. 0. R,
Boxer’s Three Historians of Portuguese Asia, in his inaugural address at King’s
College, London University, 28th October, 1947, for the authorities quoted
by him, published by the Portuguese Institute of Hongkong, 1948. For part-
iculars of Jorge Alvares’s voyage to China, see J. M. Braga’s The 'Tamao' of
the Portuguese Pioneers, and the authorities quoted therein.
(44) See Dr. Armando Cortesao’s The Suma Oriental of Tome Pires and
the Book of Francisco Rodrigues, 2 vols., published by the Hakluyt Society,
London, 1944. The best work yet published on this subject is Donald Fer-
guson’s study Letters from Portuguese Captives in Canton, published in the
Indian Antiquary, Bombay, 1902, based on a letter written by a member of
Tome Pires’ suite and a letter written by another Portuguese prisoner. Other
works treating of this subject are C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, 2nd
ed., Macao, 1926; Chang T’ien-tse, Sino-Portvguese Trade from 1614 to 1644,
Leiden, 1934; Father Henri Bernard, S. J., Anx Fortes de la Chine, Tientsin,
1933; and the article by Dr. Yano in Boletim da Sociedade Luso-Japonesa,
Tokyo, 1929, Vol. I, pp. 70-77.
(45) Duarte Barbosa is our authority for explaining that pepper could be
sent from Malacca to China at a profit of 300%. (See The Book of Duarte Bar-
bosa, edited and translated, with annotations, by M. Longworth Dames (Hak-
luyt Society), Loudon, 1921, Vol, 11, p. 215.
(46) In connection with these voyages by Portuguese to the China coast
between the years 1522 and 1553, there are references by the Portuguese
chroniclers but especially Caspar Correa, da India, Vol. 11, pp. 727
and 786; Vol. 111, pp. 439, 487, 631, and 867; Volvic and 416; Lembrangas
das cousas da India, Lisbon, 185 i, p. xvii; C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic
Macao, Macao, 1926, pp. 16, 17, 22, 25, and 26; Father Henri Bernard, S. J.,
Au.x Fortes de la Chine, Tientsin. 1933; Bento da Franca, Subsidies para a
Historia de Macau, Lisboa, 1888, pp. 20 and 29; and Donald Ferguson, Letters
from Portuguese Captives in Canton, Bombay, 1902, pp. 15, 17, 18-19, and
20-22.
(47) Caspar Correa, Lendas da India, Vol. 11, p. 786 and Vol. IV, p. 307.


(48) The original of this document is to be found in the Torre do Tombo
Archives in Lisbon, Corpo Chronologico, Parte 1, Ma?o 35, Doc. 78. The
translation given here is that from Ferguson’s Letters from Portuguese Cap-
tives in Canton.
(49) Castanheda (Fernao Lopes de), Historia do descohrimento e conquisla
da India pslos Portuguoses, Yol. VIII, ch. Ixvi, and Gaspar Correa, Lendas
da India, Yol. 111, p. 487.
(50) See Dr. A. Cortesao, Cartografia e cartdgrafos portugueses dos seculos
XVeXft, Lisbon, 1935, Yol. 11. plate xiv. See also Albert Kammerer, La
Dicouverte de la Chine par les Portugais au XVleme Siecle et la Cartographie
des Portulans, Leiden, 1944.
(51) In the Ming-shi Chue-yuen Chuen in the Tin-ha
Kwun-hvok Li-ping Shue Yol. CIX, there is a passage
which states that,
“some disloyal subjects came and went without proper passes, and en-
ticed Japanese and Portuguese traders to do business there. Among these
were Lei Kwong-tau a Fukienese, and Ilui Tung (OftfC), a na-
tive of Hap Hsien (-^’[^.^]), who built a settlement at Sheung Yue, and
were in touch with the most important merchants of Cheung Chow and
Chuan Chow”.
In the Ching Hsi Tong Series by Yue Tai-yau it is
stated that:
“years ago in Fai Chow (#JUijj and Chekiang (:sf'/■*.) there were certain
Chinese who persuaded the foreigners to frequent Sheung Yue and other
places on the Chekiang coast to trade, thereby to evade the taxes levied
by the authorities of Kwangtung.”
In the History of Yenchow Yol. 11l by Shum Mut (it® )
Deputy Criminal Judge of Hunan, Hupei, Kwangtung, and Kwangsi, there is
a passage to the effect that,
“Hui Tung and Wong Chik were travelling merchants closely connect-
ed with people who did business at Sheung Yue and other harbours, and
in touch with the natives who traded secretly with foreigners and had
dealings with them.”
Chau Sun in the Japanese Yat Lam (E) is more explicit.
He says:
“In the Kung Chi year, Hui Yat Chung (#t), Hui Yi (ty X.),
Nam (sj), Hui Sam (*f_£), Tung (#.), Hui Sei Chi (#) and
Wong Chik (,3L|i) invited the Portuguese to frequent the seas off
Chekiang and to anchor in the habour of Sheung Yue and that of
Tai Man (*.£)


(.52) Although Japan was discovered by the Portuguese as late as 1542 or
1543, the existence of this country, somewhat vaguely it is true, was already
known to the Portuguese as early as 1513-1515 (See Dr. A. Cortesao, The Sima
Oriental of Tomi Fires and the Book of Francisco Rodrigues, London, 1944, Yol.
I, p. 131). The studies by scholars, in recent years, on the discovery of Japan
by the Portuguese have shed some light on this subject. For the latest views
and summary of authorities see Father G. Schumammer, S. J., 0 Descohrimento
do Japdo pelo Portiigueses no anode 1543, a scholarly essay published in the
Axais of the Portuguese Academia de Historta, 2nd Series, Yol. I, pp.
135-172, (1946)
(53) According to the Ming-she Chue-Yuen Chenn and the
Ningpo Fu-chih where it is recorded that “Japanese raiders were
expelled.”
(54) See the Pik Yue Ohap Series which seems to indicate
that only some junks were destroyed.
(55) Frei Gaspar da Cruz, Tratado das Cousas da China ede Ormuz, Lisbon,
1570, Chap. XXIII.
(56) The Chinese writers possess the merit of recording events, although
the wording of official reports was often twisted to suit some special purpose
or point of view, but the main trend of events was not imaginary, although
gome of the details were at times trumped up. Mendes Pinto, on the other
hand, was probably enjoying himself by telling a story of hair-raising advent-
ures, which increased with the telling, to amuse the country yokels, when he
returned to Portugal, although there was a great deal of truth in the back-
ground of his tales. He undoubtedly could not resist the temptation of
‘adding to the truth’, although there is sufficient evidence to show that he
really voyaged to many places in the Far East. The confusion that has come
into his Peregrinagdo seems to have followed from his flights of imagination
with such stories as the ‘massacre of Liampo’ which is certainly a fine piece
of descriptive writing. Persons familiar with conditions in the interior of
China, even in more enlightened days, will agree that it was practically imposs-
ible for anyone to indulge in escapades such as those described by Mehde s
Pinto, e. g. the desecration of tombs royal tombs at that especially at a
time when foreigners moved about in China at their peril. Conditions on the
coast were difficult enough!
(57) Tung-sai-yeung Ban {&■&>s■%)
(58) Cheung Chow (SM'D became an important centre of trade in the XV
and XYlth centuries, especially after the official closure of the ports of
Kwangtung to foreign shipping (1522). This was the Ghincheo of the Portuguese,
and some confusion has arisen from the use of this name for the province of
Fukien as well. Writers have alleged that the Portuguese used the term
Ohincheo indifferently for Cheung Chow and Ghuan Chow. As a matter of fact
Chuan Chow (s.jHi', the celebrated Zaiton of Marco Polo, is distinctly shown
as “Zaiton” in the Portuguese maps. See Sir H. Yule and A. C. Burnell’s
Hobson-Johson, London, 1903; Encyclopaedia Britannica , 11th edition. Yol. VI


p. 231; Dr. A. Cortesao, Gartografia e eartdgrafos portugueses dos sioulos XV e
XVI, Lisbon, 11)35. The last named shows the Portuguese portulans which
furnish evidence of the distinctions indicated.
(59) Chang Tien-tse, Sina-Portuguese Trade from 1614 to 1644, Leiden,
1934, p. 70.
(CO) See the Ming Shi, Chapter 325, p. 9, and the Viceroy’s report to the
Throne, reproduced in the Pik Yut Tsap Series ■
(Cl) Ming Shi in the Section headed “ Victory in the Fukien Seas
(**«*#.«*).
(62) Other Chinese reports give more or less similar versions of this affair.
(33) Chang T'ien-tse, Sino-Portuguese Trade, p. 83 and the sources quoted
there.
(64) Mathaus de Brito was a Portuguese who was taken prisoner off the
China coast, presumably off Fukien, in 1549. Upon his release, at the instance
of Father Belchior Nunes Barretto, who went to Canton to ransom him, he
wrote an Informagdo of China. This document was sent by the Jesuit priests
at Malacca to Portugal. A transcription is to be found in the Ajuda Library,
Codex 49-IV-49, ff. 193v.-197., and another transcription in the Portuguese
“Academia Real das Ciencias”. It was from the latter transcription that
it was printed by Christovam de Magalhaes Sepulveda in Ferndo Mendes Pinto,
subsidies pc,ra a sua biographia e para o estudo da sua obra, Lisbon, 1904,
pp. 113-121.
Galeoto Pereira was a brother of the first Count of Feira, and his “Des-
cription” of China appeared, in summarized form, in Copia de unas Cartas de
algnnos padres y hermanos dela India, Japan, y Brasil alos padres y hermanos de
la misma compania, en Portugal, tresladadas de Portugues en Castellano, Foeron
recebidas el anode 1555, Lisboa por Jodo Alvares, 1555, 4.° From this Lisbon
publication it was translated and printed in Italian by Michele Tramezzino, at
Venice, in 1535. Most authorities have believed that the Italian version was
the only edition of Galeoto Pereira’s account of his adventures and description
of China, which explains why Donald Ferguson declared that the Italian
Alcune cose del paese de la China, etc. “curiously enough, was published in the
form of an abbreviated translation in Italian.” From the Italian a further
pricis, translated into English, was made by R. Willes and printed by Richard
Eden in his Historye of Travnile in the West and East Indies, London, 1577,
from which it was reprinted by Hakluyt in his Principal Navigations, 11. pp.
6S-80, and, still further abbreviated, by Parch is in Pilgrim's, 111. pp. 199-209.
Major in his Introduction to the Hikluyt Society edition of Men lonza’s Ilis-
teria delas aosas mas notables . . . del gran Beyno dela China, pp. liii-lxvi, made
extracts from Hakluyt and Purchas. It is not known whether any transcrip-
tion of Galeoto Pereira’s manuscript is to be found in Portugal.
The descriptions written by Amaro Pereira and Alfonso Ramires do not
seem to have appeared in print. Amaro Pereira’s Ivfoimagdo da China exists
in Portugal, as a transcription from the documents which used to be kept at St.


, Ut>o-
Paul’s College in Macao, (Ajuda Library, Codex 49-IV-50, If. 43?t-463). That
of Affonso Ramires is also preserved iu the same way, (Ajuda Library, Codex
49-IV-49, ff. 233v.-234v.)
The minuscripts of Galeoto Pereira and Affonso Ramires, especially the
former, were used by Frei Gaspar da Grnz, on his own admission, in his Trac-
tado das comas da China. (See Father Henri Bernard, S. J., Aux Fortes de la
Chine, Tientsin, 1933, pp. 52-71, for some comments on this subject).
One point about the mission of Father Belchior Barretto to Canton has
still to be explained. It is clear that the Portuguese prisoners were released
by Imperial order, yet why was it necessary for a ransom to be paid ?
(65) The term Luthissi used in the old Portuguese narrative is a peculiar
one. Prof, de Vargas suggests that it represents the Fnkiense equivalent of the
Cantonese Lo-ye an honorific title for high officials and still used, to
some extent, in Fukien where it is pronounced something like: Lu-tieh. The
ears of the Portuguese could very easily picked this up as Ln-thi. The suffix
ssi (-dr) meaning “man of letters” would thus give them the word Luthissi.
(66) Vol. cxx. of the T'in-Hsia Chun-kuo (A*f£Pl3b
(67) Famous in any history of Sino-Portuguese relations as the place where
an understanding was reached in 1553 whereby the Portuguese were officially
permitted to trade in the ports of Kwangtung. See J- M. Braga. 0 Primeiro
Acordo Luso-chants, Macao, 1939.
(68) Not identified.
(69) That is Long Pak Kau (&£&), better known in Portuguese records
as “Lampacao”, some twenty miles due west of Macao. The Portuguese are
known to have visited this place before 1544, or tven earlier, for purposes of
t rade. On clear days this hilly island can be seen from Macao.
(70) The Chinese name by which “Macao” was called at the time of the
Ming Dynasty, (See pages 102-104 infra.)
(71) The little anchorage just south of Macao, lying between Macao, Tai-
pa, Sin Wong Kum (j. e., D. Joao Island), and Lappa. The modern Chinese
Customs anchorage of Malauchau is near Sup Chi Moon.
(72) Better known in Portuguese records as Tamao. See J. M. Braga
The ‘Tamao’ of the Portuguese Pioneers, in Tien Sha Monthly, Shanghai. May,
1939, pp. 420 432.
(73) Fu Tan Moon lies some ten miles south-west of Macao, on the western
bank of the entrance to The Broadway- Heavy silting during the last few
centuries has detracted from Fu Tan Moon’s usefulness to shipping.
(74) Lampacao, a Mystery of the Far East in THE Journal op the North-
China Branch ok the Royal Asiatic Society, Shanghai. 1921, Vol. 111.
pp. 137-138.
(75) Letter written by Fernao Meudes Pinto, at Macao, on 20th November,
1555. It is to be found in Cartas dos Jesuitas na Asia, Codex 49-IV-49, ff. 253
et seq. in the Ajuda Library, Lisbon. It was reproduced by Christovam de
Magalhaes Sepulveda in Fernao Mendes Pinto, subsidies para a sua hiographia
e para o estudo da sua obra, Lisbon, 1904, pp. 76-82,


(76) See Jordao de Freitas, Macau, Materiaes para a sua historia no seculo
XVI, Lisbon. 1910, p. 17. The present writer is happy to express his great
indebtedness to Dr. Freitas’s excellent book for a number of the Portuguese
references contained in the present study.
(77) See Codex 49-IV-49, f. 235, in the Ajuda Library, Lisbon.
(78) J. M. Braga, 0 Primeiro Acordo Luso-Chines, Macao, 1939, p. 11.
(79) Heung Shan Hsien Chi (^»LJSM&).
(80) See Leonel de Souza’s letter of the 15th January, 1559, referred to
several times in the present study, and reproduced from Dr. Freitas’s book
(see Note 76, supra ) in Appendix D, herein.
(81) Quoted by Chou Ching-lieu in Sino-Portuguese Relations
Ch. VIII, pp. 62-63.
(82) Leonel de Souza’s letter was mentioned by a few writers, but the
text was published for the first time, presumably, by Dr. Jordao de Freitas in
1910, in his scholarly study above mentioned, and reproduced by the present
writer, with due acknowledgements to Dr. Freitas, in 0 Primeiro Acordo Luso-
-Ghinis, Macao, 1939,
(83) Codex 49-IV-54, ff 91 et seq., Ajuda Library in Lisbon.
(84) At Goa, on 19th November, 1556, see Codex 49-IV-49, f. 259, Ajuda
Library.
(85) Codex 49-IV-49, ff. 240-241, dated 23rd November, 1555, in the
Ajuda Library.
(86) Sino-Portuguese Relations ('f' by Chou Ching-lin, Chap.
VIII, p. 68.
(87) Vol. CCXLIII, Section “ Merits of Officials”.
(88) S. F. Balfour, Hong Kong before the British, Shanghai, 1941, p. 40, et
seq., (Reprinted from T'ien Ilsia Monthly)
(89) See pp. 65-78 supra.
(90) See pp. 55-67 and 75-77 supra. The names of a few other Portuguese
have not been included in the present study.
(91) In spite of attempts by several scholars to identify the places and
names mentioned by Mendes Pinto, it has not yet been possible to determine
where he was writing fact and where fiction in his celebrated Peregrinacdo.
(92) J. Murdoch and I. Yamagata, A History of Japan, Kobe, 1903, Vol.
11, p. 35, but they do not give the source of their information.
(93) Paper written by Professor C. R. Boxer entitled The Great Ship from
Amacon, which he delivered as an address at King’s College, London Univer-
sity.
(94) Boxer adds a footnote; “convincing testimony to the professional
competence of the Portuguese pilots who navigated those seas is afforded by
the following entry in the ship’s journal kept by Captain John Saris in 1613,
‘Note that wee found Jan Huighen Van Linschotens books very true, for
thereby wee directed ourselves from our setting forth from Firando’.”
(95) From Professor Boxer’s ‘Paper’, The Great Ship from Amacon, (See
Note 93, supra),


(96) This Jorge Alvares must not be confused with the Portuguese pio-
neer who visited China in 1513 and who died in China in 1521, being buried
on Tamao Island, (». e, Lintin Island). The Jorge Alvares who pioneered in
Japan took St. Francis Xavier to Japan in 1549, and in his Santa Cruz to
Shanchuan Island, in 1552. He helped to bury the great apostle, and assisted
in the removal of Xavier’s remains from Shanchuan to Malacca, in 1553.
(97) For a long time the best studies on the subject of St. Francis Xavier
and his successors as evangelists in Japan were the early books, published in
the XVTth and XVIIth centuries. These became outdated only when modern
scholars began delving into the story of the Jesuits and the other pioneer mis-
sionaries in Japan. Beginning with articles in the scholarly periodicals like
the Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan (Tokyo), Transactions and Pro-
ceedings of the Japan Society (London), and Monumenta Nipponica, not to
mention the journals printed in Japanese and other languages, modern scho-
lars have added greatly to our knowledge of the early Europeans in Japan.
A number of excellent books have appeared in the latter part of the XlXth
century and during the XXth century covering several aspects of Western
contacts with Japan. Study of archival material has been especially fruitful.
See Father G. Schuhammer, S. J., 0 Descobrimento do Japdo pelos Portugueses
no anode 1543, in Anais of the Portuguese Academia de Hlstdria, 2nd series,
Vol. I, 1946, pp. 135-172; J. Murdoch and I. Yamagata, A History of Japan,
in 3 volumes, especially Vol. II revised and edited by J. H. Longford. London,
1925-1926; G. B. Sansom, Japan: A Short Cultural History, New York, 1943;
K. S. Latourette, The Development of Japan, New York, 1938; Yasoburo Ta-
kekoshi, 'The Economic Aspects of the History of the Civilization of Japan, 3
vols.. New York, 1930. For special features of the early Portuguese contacts
with Japan, the principal works for consultation are those by Professor C. R.
Boxer (See Note 100, infra), and for reference to the best known Portuguese
sources see Father Francisco Rodrigues, S. J., Historia da Companhia de Jesus
6 vol., Porto, 1935-1942 and Antonio Lourengo Farinha, A Expansdo dafe no
Oriente, 3 vols, Lisbon, 1943-1946.
(98) See Professor C. R. Boxer’s The Great Ship from Amacon, Note 93
supra.
(99) It has been shown that this was not the first case of the appointment
of a captain-major, for Gaspar Correa mentions at least one such case in the
China seas. (See p. 66 supra). In 1550, we have the inauguration, however,
of a regular yearly official appointment, carrying with $ not a mere trading
privilege, but an official status of considerable importance.
(100) The only studies made so far on the subject of the Portuguese cap-
tain-majors of the Japan trade seem to be those by Professor Boxer. He has
gone to the Portuguese archives and Japanese scholars for source material.
Plis As Viagens de Japdo e os sens Capitdes-mores (1550-1640), Macao, 1941, is
a fine piece of work, and the sources there quoted should be noted. See also
Boxer’s Portuguese Commercial Voyages Three Hundred Years Ago (TRANSAC-
TIONS OF the Japan Society), London; Subsidies para a Historia dos Cap


tdes-gerais e Governadores de Macau, 1557-1770, Macao, 1944; Macau na Epoca
da Restauraqdo, Macao. 1942 (which although it treats in the main of the
early <lays of the XVIIth century also touches upon the earlier period as well);
The Affair of the ‘Madre de Deus London, 1929: and Subsidies para a His-
toria dos Poring urscs no Japdo, 1042-1647, Lisbon, 1927. These are some of
the more important works on this subject by this learned Orientalist.
(101) A new work by Boxer, Fidalgos in the Far East, The Hague, 1948,
has been published but is not yet available in the Orient, while an even more
important work entitled The Christian Century in Japan is in the press. The
last named book contains a host of material gathered from Portuguese sources
and archives in many parts of the world.
(102) In the XVlth and XVIIth centuries extracts from many of the letters
written by the Jesuits were printed, principally in Portugal and Italy, but the
books in which letters appeared have become so scarce that they are not acces-
sible. Nor did these extracts contain particulars of the trade that might have
been mentioned in the letters. It is necessary to go the manuscript originals or
transcriptions of these letters and Relations. One of the finest collections of
transcripts is that known as Jesuilaa na Asia, 66 folio volumes in the Ajuda
Library. (See G. R. Boxer and J. M. Braga, Alyuns Arquivos cm Portugal,
Macao, 1939). There are other important collections, in England, Portugal,
and at the Vatican.
(103) From the letter by Father Belchior Nunes Parretto, S. J., written in
the port of Macao on 23rd November, 1555, and to be found in Codex 49-IV-
-49, ff. 237-241. in the Ajuda Library, Lisbon. This letter has been reproduced
in C. Ayres Sepulveda, Frrndo Mendra Pinto, subsidies para a sea hieyraphia
e para o estudo da sua obra , Lisbon, 1904, pp. 82-90.
(104) See p. 78, infra, where the subject of the efforts by Chinese officials
to bring about the restoration of foreign trade in Kwangtung is touched upon.
It is quite obvious that there is scope for a great deal of interesting research in
this, and the examination of Chinese sources should prove fruitful to provide
material for an article of some length, to explain many points which are still
obscure.
(105) The prices given here are based on figures to be found in Dames's
The Book of Duarte Barbosa (Hakluyt Society Edition).
(106) Dr. A. Cortesao, The Sima Oriental of Tome Fires (Hakluyt Ed.),
pp. 125-6 and 517; Dames, The Book of Duarte Barbosa (Hakluyt Ed.), Vol. 11.
p. 214; The Travel* of Pietro della Valle (Hakluyt Ed.), Vol. 11, pp. 175-176:
Voyage of Jan Huygheu van Linschoien (Hakluyt Ed.), Vol. I. pp. 128-131:
Valentiju, Cud en nicuv Oest-lndien, Vol. I, p. 4. See also the summary in ]>•
Krishna, Commercial Relations between India and England, London, 1924, pp.
34-35.
(107) See Cortesao, The Suma Oriental of Tome Fires etc.
(108) See the sources mentioned in Note 106, supra.


Establishment op Macao
(109) Dr. Armando Cortesao, The Sima Oriental of Tomi Fires and the
Book of Francisco Rodrigues (Hakluyt Society), London, 1944, Vol. 11, p. 459;
Vol. 1, p. 217; Vol. 11, p. 460, and Vol. I, p. 129, respectively.
(110) No comprehensive study of the nomenclature of the various Chinese
names for Macao seems to have been prepared, although Father M. Teixeira
makes an attempt to refer to some of them in his Macau e a Sua Diocese, Vol.
I, Macao, 1940, pp. 73-77. as does L. G. Gomes, Gs Diversos Monies de Macau ,
in Renascimento, Macao, 1943, Vol. I. p, 55. There is scope for study here,
in which connection the Chinese chronicles of the district of Ileungshan and
of Macao should prove useful.
(111) See letter written by Fernao Mendes Pinto, for reference to which
see Note 75 supra, and letter written by Father Belchior Nunes Barretto, S.J.,
see Note 103, supra.
(112) See article by J. M. Braga, The Temple of the Goddess of Mercy, in
Renascimento, Macao, February, 1943, pp. 221-226.
(113) J. M. Braga’s article Macao's Temple of A-Ma, in RENASCIMENTO,
Macao, March, 1943, pp. 324-328.
(114) Father Alvaro de Semedo, S. J., Imperio de la China, Madrid, 1642,
Part 11, Chap. I, which was published by Faria y Sousa. Other editions in
other languages appeared soon afterwards. The summary given here is based
on that contained in C. A. Montalto dc Jesus, Historic Macao (2nd edition),
Macao, 1926. p. 30.
(115) Ajuda Library, Lisbon, Codex 49-IV-66, f. 46.
(116) ibid., Codex 49-V-4, f. lOv.; also Codex 49-V-5. If. 349v-350; and
Codex 49-IV-66, if. 72-72 v.
(117) ibid.. Codex 51-VIII-4. tf. 236-239, Doc. 23. as quoted by Dr. Jordao
de Freitas.
(118) Father Du Halde, Description de la Chine (Paris edition), 1735, A 01.
I, p. 234.
(119) Frei Juan de la Concepcion, Historia General de Philipinas, Manila,
1788, Vol. I. p. 457.
(120) It is not very clear how many Memoranda were drawn up for the
guidance of the Bishop of Peking. Dom Frei Alexandre de Gonvea, but it is
known that there were at least two, but possibly three. One of these was
addressed by Martinho de Mello e Castro, the Minister, to the Governor of
India, Dom Frederic© Guilherme dc Sousa, and this one has now been pu-
blished in recent years at Lisbon by the Agenda Geral das Colonies. A second
Memorandum was drawn up by the Macao Senate, submitting observations not
contained in the Minister’s memorandum, and containing an appendix. This
exists in Macao as a transcription and is to be found in the Colonial Secretariat
at Macao. It was published by Danilo Barreiros, in the Boletim Eclesidstico
da Diocese de Macau, in 1938.


From a reading of Montalto’s Historic Macao it would seem, however,
that a third memorandum was prepared, and sent by Mello e Castro to the
then Governor of Macao, Bernardo Aleixo de Lemos Faria. Montalto states
that this document was kept in the Lisbon archives, in Begisto Livro II das
Mangoes, 1793, and he told the present writer that a copy was to be found at
one time in the Macao Senate, a reproduction of which appeared in 1823, in
the Macao newspaper A Abelha da China.
lu spite of the uncertainty surrounding the identity of the Memorandum
addressed to the Bishop of Peking, it is strange that Montalto de Jesus has
been taken to task for “incorrect title and addressed" and for mistakes “in his
abridgment” of the Memorandum, as it seems that he might not have been in-
correct after all. He did attempt to check his information, and used to com-
plain that he was unsuccessful in getting a transcription from the Lisbon
archives, while all copies which existed at one time in Macao of the A Abtlha
da China (1822-1824) have disappeared.
The present writer has met with the same difficulty, and repeated requests,
through official channels, for copies of documents from the Lisbon archives
have never proved very successful. The document or documents drawn up
by Martinho de Mello e Castro are of considerable interest to Macao historians,
but to the present day no copy of the recent book published in Lisbon trans-
cribing the “Memorandum” has been supplied to the Macao Public Library, so
far as the present writer knows, and this makes comparison difficult, for Lis-
bon booksellers report that this recent publication is out of print.
(121) Chang T’ien-tse, Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514-1644, Leiden,
1934, p. 93.
(122) Ibid., pp. 91-92.
(123) Chou Chien-lien Sino-Portuguese Relations ('f
Shanghai, 1936, Chap. VIII, pp. 64-64, quoting the Ching-hei Tong Chap
*&), Vol. XV.
(124) Father Antonio Franco, S. J., Imagem da Virtude em o Noviciado da
Companhia de Jesus no Beal Collegia de Jesus de Coimbra, Coimbra. 1719, Vol.
11, pp. 402-404. See also Jordao de Freitas, Macau, Materials para a sua his-
toria no seculo XVI, Lisbon, 1910, pp.
(125) Chang T’ien-tse, Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514-1644, Leiden,
1934, p. 94. One of the most interesting cases of repercussions which followed
the introduction of legislation in China to prevent the people from trading
with the sea, dates from the second half of the XVIIth century. The name
of Koxinga, as he has been called by foreigners, or Cheng Cheng-kung (s|ss,
Ml), to give him his Chinese name, with that of Nicholas tquan, his father, oc-
cupies a prominent place in this connection. Cheng Cheng-kung is hailed today
as a hero, although he began life as a pirate, for he ended up hy supporting
the Ming cause against the Manchus. He carried on his own war against the
Manchus, and so serious did his campaign become that the Court of Peking
under the Manchus, fitted out several expeditions against him. So serious
was Cheng Cheng-kung’s threat against the new ruling house that in desper


ation the Regents at Peking, during the minority of K’ang Hsi, ordered “the
coastal inhabitants of the provinces of Shantung, Kiangnan, Chekiang, Fu-
kien, and Kwangtung to remove inland a distance of 30 to 50 li, as a means
of evading the depredations of Cheng Cheng-knng, and in hopes of cutting off
his source of supplies. The policy proved most disastrous to the people of
the coast,” causing untold sufferings and misery to millions of the Chinese
living along the coastal strip. In this way, the edicts from Peking, by disre-
garding the realities of the situation caused tremendous losses to the poorest
classes of the Chinese, without achieving any tangible results (See section by
E. Swisher in A. W. Hummel (Editor), Eminent Chinese of the Ch’ing Period,
1644-1913, Washington, 1943, Vol. I, pp. 108-110, and the authorities quoted
therein). See also C. R. Boxer, The Rise and Fall of Nicholas Iquan, Shanghai,
1941, but this picturesque figure would provide excellent material for an inte-
resting biography, because of the relative helplessness of the Mauchu court
against a sea-rover, and the failure of the Chinese officials to recognize that the
times were changing, and that they should guard their coasts, and not watch
the northern frontiers alone.
(12(3) The Ming period does not possess a big bibliography of foreign
commentaries, and the best books in foreign languages are still: Father J. A.
M. de M. Mailla, Histoire generate de la Chine, Vol. X, Paris, 1779, for
the Ming period (based on the Chinese annals and although valuable for
details suffers because of the uncritical nature of the sources); Henri
Cordier, Histoire generate de la Chine, Paris, 1920-21 (largely influenced by
de Mailla’s History); Father Leon Wieger, S. J., Textes Historiques; Histoire
politique de la Chine depuis Vorigine jusque em 1929, Tientsin. 1929; Rene
Grousset, Histoire de VExtreme-Orient, 2 volumes, Paris. 1929; F. E. A. Krause,
Geschichte Ostasiens, Gottingen, 1925, 2 volumes; Li Un-Bing, Outlines of Chi-
nese History, Shanghai, 1914; R. Montgomery Martin, China: Political, Com-
mercial, and Social, London, 1847 (although limited in scope contains some
very interesting material); S. Wells Williams, The Middle Kingdom, New York,
1883; K. S. Latourette, The Chinese: Their History and Culture, New York,
1942; and, in spite of its modest claims, a well balanced book, A. E. Grantham,
Hills of Blue, A Picture 801 l of Chinese History, London, 1927.
(127) Marcel Granet, Chinese Civilization (History of Civilization Series),
London, 1930, p. 427.
(128) Father Henri Bernard, S. J., Sagesse Chinoise et philosophic chretien-
ne, Tientsin, 1935; F. G. Henke, The Philosophy of Wang Yang-ming, London,
1916; J. K. Shyrock, The origin and Development of the State Cult of Confucius,
New York, 1932; and T. T. Wang, Wang Yang-ming, Shanghai, 1936.
(129) Prof. L. Carrington Goodrich, A Short History of the Chinese People,
London, 1948, p. 191.
(130) Prof. K. S. Latourette, The Chinese: Their History and Culture, New
York, 1938, pp. 299-300 and 302-303.
(131) Richard Wilhelm, A Short History of Chinese Civilisation, London,
1929, p. 256.


(132) A. E. Grantham, Hills of Blue: A Picture-roll of Chinese History,
London, 1927, pp. 443-444.
(133) op. cit., 453.
(134) Quoted from Report of the Librarian of Congress, Orientalia Add.,
1923-1924, p. 267. Translation attributed to M. J. Haggerty.
(135) China Moulded by Confucius, London, 1946 is the apt title of Dr.
Cheng Tien-hsi’a pleasant hook touching upon some aspects of Chinese culture
and showing how Chinese philosophy and thought have been influenced by the
teachings of the great Chinese sage, but he does not touch upon the waj" in
which Confucian thought has been used to affect the political and social life
of China and of the Chinese people.
(136) Ajuda Library, Lisbon, Codex 49-IV-66, f. 72v.
(137) Among the best known of the Portuguese writers who have accepted
the theory that Camoes really lived in Macao should be mentioned: Dr. Jor-
dan de Freitas, in Camoes era Macau and his 0 Naufrdyio de Camoes e dos Lu-
siadas, Lisbon, 1915; Dr. Brito Aranha, Camoes e os Lusiadas; Teofilo Braga,
Camoes, Epoca e Vida; to mention only the leading writers. C. A. Montalto de
Jesus, Historic Macao, devotes many pages of his history of Macao to the sub-
ject. Among those who are sceptical, holding that no satisfactory proof has
yet been produced to substantiate the tradition is Dr. L. da Cunha Gongalves,
Camoes ndo esteve em Macau, Coimbra, 1928. Professor C. R. Boxer also subs-
cribes to this view, as his Was Camoes ever in Macao?, Shanghai, 1940, shows.
(138) Ajuda Library, Lisbon. Codex 49-IY-50, f. 601.
(139) ibid., Codex 49-IV-50, ff. 592-594.
(140) ibid., Codex 49-IV-50, f. 590.
(141) Father Sebastian Gongalves, Historic dos Religiosos da Companhia de
Jesus na India, a manuscript in the Biblioteca Nacional, at Lisbon, f. 361.
quoted by Dr. Jordan de Freitas.
(142) C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, 2ndied., Macao, 1926, p. 51.
(143) Julean Arnold, Commercial Handbook of China, Yol. 11, Washington,
1920, p. 291.
(144) The subject of the vegetable products introduced by the Portuguese
has been sadly neglected by Portuguese writers, but it is an interesting one
for research. The early settlers did not trouble to record this service, and
others have been given credit for much that was done by the Portuguese
pioneers. The services of a Watt or a Laufer for South China would be needed
to trace the introduction, via Macao and the Missions of the Portuguese in Chi-
na, of how various plants of economic value entered China. Hardly anything
has been done to investigate this, and although in some cases it is possible that
plants were introduced into China in more places than one, the Portuguese
claim that Macao’s influence in this was very great. There is no other explan-
tion for the existence of all these plants in the gardens and farms of Heung-
shan near Macao, where tradition gives credit for the introduction of these
plants to the Portuguese. There are occasional references in books like J. M.


A. da Silva, Bepositorio de Nogoes de Botanica Aplicada, Hongkong, 1904, and
here and there one finds the use of a term which might show that the Port-
uguese traded in items which indicate the existence of plants, in books like:
Ta-Ssi-Yang-Kuo, Lisbon, 1899-1902, in 1 volumes; Monsr. Sebastiao Dalgado,
Glossario Luso-Asiatico, and even Sir. H. Yule and A. C. Burnell. Hobson-
Jobson, London, 190.-5. (See 6. Watt, A Dictionary of the Economic Products
of India, 10 vols., Calcutta, 1889-1896; B. Lanfer, Sino lranica, Chicago, 1929;
and Plant Migration, in Scientific MONTHLY, Vol. 28, pp. 239-251, March.
1929, for what could be done about this subject.)
There is another aspect of this link between Macao and the districts
of Heungshan and those contiguous to it. Besides promoting an interest in
new agricultural products, tho proximity of an emporium of such importance
must have expanded the vision of the Chinese who had contacts with the
Portuguese colony. Besides stimulating trade, the association of the two peo-
ples contributed to the spread of interest among the Chinese in the lands that
were over the seas. Thus it was that the Chinese looked beyond the confines
of Macao, and although it is true that the Chinese authorities prohibited
the emigration of Chinese subjects, some Chinese did go abroad in Portuguese
ships, and although there is no gainsaying the fact that the beckoning horizons
did not attract many Chinese in the earliest days, eventually the spirit of
inquisitiveness took wings, and then in the XlXth century drew countless
thousands from their native hearths to find homes and fortunes over the
face of the globe. Natives of the districts of Heungshan (or Chungshan, to
give it its post-Republican name), Sunwui, Toishan, Sunning, and other
districts, near Macao went to other lands, and their contributions to China’s
economy have benefited their own districts as well as the entire country.
(115) C. A. Montalto cle Jesus, Historic Macao, 2nd edition, Macao, 1926,
pp. 37-38 and 40. As explained in Note 120, it looks as if Montalto was quot-
ing from a copy of a Memorandum sent by Martiuho de Mello e Castro to the
then Governor of Macao, late in the XVIIIth century,
but the recent publication in Lisbon of a copy of the Lisbon Memorandum
cvould seem to indicate that the Memorandum was addressed to the Governor
of India. It is not clear, therefore, whether there were two distinct memo-
randa, which contained similar instructions in part, and variations in others,
or whether Montalto had consulted a transcription of a text which had been
tampered with.
(146) In 1573, the Chinese district authorities built a gate, called the
Barrier Gate, known among the Chinese as Kivan Chap (¥]). The Chinese
officials gave as their excuse that they wished to prevent negroes from enter-
ing the villages of the Chinese, but in point of fact the Gate was used as a
Customs station, to exact taxes for the Government and perquisites for the
officials, from Chinese farmers carrying produce into Macao and from traders
carrying merchandise into and from the Portuguese settlement. We can safely
assume that the trade with Macao grew so quickly that the Chinese officials
felt that the Gate was the only means of controlling the traffic. Several writers


have dealt with this subject, but the best is that by A. F. Marques Pereira, As
Alfdndegas Chinesas de Macau, Macao, 1870. The version by Montalto de
Jesus, Historic Macao, 2nd edition, Macao, 1926, pp. 40-42, is acceptable
enough.
(147) AndreAV Ljungstedt, Historical Sketch of the Portuguese Settlements
in China, Boston, 1836, p. 86.
(148) The document reproduces, in part, facts from Manuel de Faria y
Sousa’s Asia Portuguesa, and Father Martin Martini’s Novus atlas sinensis,
Amsterdam, 1655. A part of the original document was printed in 0 Macaista
Imparcial, Macao, Yol. I, No. 92, dated 27th April, 1837.
(149) The information set forth has been culled from Prof. C. R. Boxer’s
As Viagens de Japdo e os sens Gapitdes-mores, 1550-1640, Macao, 1941 and his
Subsidies para a Historia dos Capitdes-gerais e Governadores de Macau,
1557-1770, Macao, 1944.
(150) C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, 2nd Ed., Macao, 1926, p.
64, quoting Andrew Ljungstedt, Historical Sketch of the Portuguese Settlements
in China, Boston, 1836, p. 87.
(151) Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, Macao, 1926, p. 47, to mention
only one book which treats of the subject.
(152) Chang T’ien-tse, Sino-Portuguese Trade from 1514-1644, Leiden,
1934.
(153) Prof. C. R. Boxer, Macau na Epoca da Restauragdo, Macao, 1942,
p. 40, quoting Antonio Bocarro’s Livro das Plantas de todas as Fortelezas,
Gidades e PovoaQoes do Estado da India Oriental (manuscript in the Evora
Library, Portugal). But see also Boxer’s other works touching on the early
Portuguese trade in Japan, listed in Note No. 100 supra.
(154) The Portuguese settlers proved their adaptability in many ways.
In modern times, following the successful brow-beating of the Manchn
Government of China during nearly a century, the old policy of the Macao
Senate has come in for criticism, writers holding that too much was surren-
dered to grasping mandariudom. But as any one who gives a thought to the
attitude adopted by the officials of China in those days realizes, the mandarins
often used their positions to line their pockets, and created opportunities for
doing so. They did the same thing with the Go-Hong, at Canton, as they
imposed upon the Macao Senate, and the penalty of failure to co-operate with
them generally resulted in the entire suspension of trade, and, even more dan-
gerous, in the suspension of fresh water and food supplies. Even the English
East India Company tolerated this for upwards of a century, and Britain only
adopted another stand when the circumstances which led up to the so-called
Opium War developed. A growing bibliography of the subject of this Western
“imperialism” (as it is unfortunately called) is treated of in books like W. L.
Langer, The Diplomacy of Imperialism, 2 vols., New York, 1935; P. H. Clyde,
The Far East, New York, 1947; H. S. Quigley and G. H. Blakeslee, The Far
East, Boston, 1938; while an interesting viewpoint, set out in a popular form,


is advanced in Maurice Coilia’s The Great Within, London, 1946. The Macao
viewpoint does not seem to have been treated objectively, although Montalto
de Jesus, Historic Macao, Macao, 1926, tries to cover it, and writers who
have should know better have thrown out criticism indiscriminately without
attempting to examine the circumstances of the Macao Senate's difficult
position. An outline of the events connected with China’s dealings with
foreigners is included in H. B. Morse and H. F. Mac Nair, Far Eastern
International Relations, Boston, 1931, although this book is incorrect in a
number of instances when referring to occurrences involving the Portuguese.
(155) Dr. Cortesao’s much quoted The Suma Oriental of Tome Fires,
London, 1944, contains a great deal of information on Fires and his services in
the cause of scientific research, and show how keenly Tome Pires and others
like him, in his day, sought for drugs to cure diseases. The work of Dom Joao
do Castro as a scientist is fairly well known, and has been well brought out in
Elaine Sanceau’s D. Jodo de Castro, Porto, 1946 and the authorities quoted
there. Garcia de Horta is an outstanding figure as a physician in India, during
the XVlth century, as his Goloquios de Simples e Drogas da India attests.
The best editions of this book are Conde de Ficalho’s edition published at Lis-
bon in 1891 and 1895, in two volumes, and Sir Clements Markham’s London
edition, 1913. Father Joao de Loureiro has had a good press in botanical cir-
cles, but little is known of his good work otherwise (See J. M. Braga, Padre
Jodo de Loureiro: Missiondrio e Botdnico, Macao, 1938). The history of the
Portuguese in Asia could produce a veritable galaxy of names of men who
contributed their modicum in the field of scientific study and discovery, but
no comprehensive study of this aspect of Portuguese activity seems to have
been written, although some Portuguese writers have referred to this in recent
years.
(156) No book of any consequence seems to have been written about the
buildings, houses, fortresses, churches, and other edifices constructed by the
Portuguese pioneers, explaining how they evolved. Specimens of the types
of construction adopted may still be seen in out of the way places, and photo-
graphs of some of these appear occasionally in various publications, but the
subject has never been used for a stydy of an interesting phase of Western
expansion, although these constructions greatly influenced the architecture of
the peoples who followed the Portuguese into Asia. Meanwhile the buildings
themselves are fast disappearing, or are being so radically altered as to be no
longer recognizable as specimens of a type of architecture evolved by the
Portuguese.
(157) St. Raphael’s Hospital at Macao is merely one small feature of the
work done by Macao’s Holy House of Mercy. Several other institutions
created under the aegis of this Foundation of the Brotherhood of the Santa
Casa da Misericordia existed at Macao, and several of them still survive.
This Brotherhood was originally founded at Lisbon in 1498, by the Queen
Dowager, and thereafter, in every Portuguese possession, a similar institution
was set up, on the lines of the original in Lisbon, to dispense charity and care


for the sick and needy. There were dozens of these Brotherhoods in the Far
East and the good work done by them must have been incalculable. They
ceased to exist when the possessions of the Portuguese were taken over by
their successors, principally the Dutch and the English, or when the Port-
uguese had to withdraw, as they did in places like Japan. But, the Holy House
of Mercy at Macao still survives, and has carried on its good work for the last
three hundred and eighty years. No books seem to have been produced
covering this aspect of the good work done by the Portuguese, although there
are a few such as that by Dr. J. C. Soares, 0 Hospital da Santa Casa da Mi-
sericdrdia de Macau, Macao, 1927.
(158) The humble men and women who did so much to relieve the hard-
ships of their fellows at Macao and in all those places to which Portuguese
influence extended never attempted to publicize their work. This contrasts
with the work of those engaged, in modern times, in similar service, Nor do
we know the names of those who contributed monetary support so that the
work might be done in those old days. Books written on the work of the
early Europeans in the Far East rarely touch upon the services of those who
dedicated their lives to serve their less fortunate brethren, and never mention
the philantropy which was done in those days. A comparison between the
same services of the XXth century and those of the XVlth and XVIIth
centuries would certainly show that those of the earlier times were in a
spiritual sense truly much closer to the precepts of the Master.
POST SCRIPTUM
(159) The task of compiling a list of the sources from which to show how
great and varied were the influences exerted by the Portuguese pioneers in so
many directions has yet to be put in hand. The surface of this vast theme has
been scratched by a few isolated books, such as the recent work by Dr. Peregrino
da Costa, Medicina Portuguesa no Extrema Oriente , Bastora, 1948, to mention
only one of the many branches of this immense subject. Viscount de Lagoa
is performing a great service in bringing out his excellent compliation Gran-
des e Humildea na Epope la Portuguese i? now appearing in parts. This work
points the way to a large number of references in obscure Portuguese books
and manuscripts in Portuguese archives. His work is an expansion, in one
direction, of that splendid work by Msgr. S. R. Dalgado, Olossdrio Luso-
Asidtico, 2 vols., Coimbra, 1919 & 1921, which with its notable predecessor
Sir H. Yule and A. C. Burnell’s Hobson-Johson, London, 1903, which shed a
great deal of light on the use of words ftonnected with articles of trade, produce
merchandise, dress, etc., whereby to show that these were in use in many pla-
ces visited by the early Portuguese traders in Asia. The subject offers scope,
however, for a great deal of research by scholars, while studies of native lan-
guages provide a wealth of information in the same connection (See David
Lopes’s .4 Expansdo da Lingua Portuguesa no Orienle, Barcelos, 1936). So
far as the present writer knows, hardly anything is'contained in Chinese liter


ature about the influence of the Portuguese on the philology of China,
although Chinese scholars have long liked such a subject, but a Chinese student
was engaged on such a work, and claimed to have finished it, late in 1941. It
is not known whether the book was ever published.
Books published in Portugal in the XVlth century, now long out of print,
containing reports and despatches of officials and priests sent to Lisbon or Goa,
or manuscripts of the same, never published, lying in the Portuguese and other
archives, could also furnish useful pointers, because of their ocasional refer-
ences to the customs, clothing, and social amenities influenced by the Port-
uguese, indicating that a great deal, now taken for granted, was being influen-
ced by the trade and social contacts then being promoted by the Portuguese.
In books published at the time in Asia, such as Gracia d’Horta’s Goloquios dos
Simples e Drogas na India, Goa, 1563, and Father Duarte Sande’s De Missione
Legatorum, Macao, 1590 (the author of this book was really Father Valignano),
to mention only two, indications of a useful nature might also be found.
In the same way, the iconography of those days can be traced in the art
which developed in places like Japan, in the screens and other forms of art
practised in those days (See C. R. Boxer’s Portuguese Influence in Japanese
Screens, London, 1936), or in illustrations or vignettes produced in Europe and
even Japan, Persia, India, and China. A good example of a compilation of
such a nature would be T. Nagayama’s Album of Historical Materials connected
with Foreign Intercourse, Nagasaki, 1918.
A study of all these sources would probably shed a flood of light on this
subject, for no persistent attempt has ever been made to collect all this infor-
mation to show how important were the services rendered to the peoples of Asia
by the Portuguese pioneers and those who worked utler their aegis.
(160) Prof. L. Carrington Goodrich, A Short History of the Chinese People,
London, 1948, p. 208. A number of books by Portuguese writers have appear-
ed on the subject of the Portuguese missions in China and the Far East, among
them Father Francisco Rodrigues’s Historic da Companhia de Jesus, G volumes,
Porto, 1935-1942, and A. L. Farinha’s A Expansdo da fe no Oriente, 3 vols, Lis-
bon, 1943-1946, to mention the most recent. Studies covering limited aspects
of the work of the China mission have been written, but a really comprehensive
account of this Mission has still to be written, although the material exists in
Portugal for an excellent work to be compiled. Not long ago a good summary
in English appeared, written by A. H. Rnwbotham, Missionary and Mandarin:
The Jesuits at the Court of Pek : ng, Berkeley, 1942. Of the part played by
Macao a number of books have been written, but they are nothing more than
summaries. A recent excellent compilation provides ns with a good summary
of a great deal of scattered material covering the work of the Macao clergy
It is Father Manuel Teixeira’s Macau- e a sua Diocese, 2 vols., Macao, 1941.
(161) Dr. W. W. Cadbury and Miss M. H. Jones, At the Point of a Lancet,
Shanghai, pp, 6-7,


(162) Chinese art cannot be said to owe much to Portuguese influence,
although by purchasing large quantities of porcelain every year, the Portuguese
contributed to the economy of the country. By introducing snuff and tobacco,
however, the need arose for containers, and one feature of this was the pro-
duction by the Chinese artists of those lovely little containers known as snuff-
bottles.
Nor have the Portuguese written anything of consequence about Chinese
art, although they have some fine little collections in Portugal and Portuguese
India, and there were occasional collectors in Macao, through the centuries.
The Portuguese did, however, influence the making of furniture, and there
are good specimens in Portugal of blackwood and other old Chinese furniture,
dating from the XYlth and XVIIth centuries, made to the order of the Port-
uguese and shipped by them to Europe.
(163) Professor Boxer seems to be the only historian who has given suffi-
cient thought in recent years to a study of the various factors connected with
the trade conducted by the Portuguese pioneers in the Far East. He has even
acquired a number of original shipping documents and respondencia bonds
dating from the XYIIth century, and has written learned articles about them.
(See his Some Early Portuguese Bills of Lading, London, 1939, one of four
similar essays written by him). Other writers have hardly even mentioned
the Portuguese commercial machinery in the East. A notable exception is the
excellent study on Portuguese currencies by A. C. Teixeira de Aragao. Descrip-
qdo geral e historica das moedas cunhadas em name dos Reis, 3 vols., Lisbon,
1874-1880. An early work of this kind, drawn up in the middle of the XVltli
century, was Antonio Nunes's 0 Livro dos Pesos, Medidas, e Moedas, only pu-
blished in 1861, at Lisbon. It shows what the Portuguese were doing, however,
in the early days.
(164) Here again there is scope for a great deal of research. Msgr. Dal-
gado has gone into some aspects of this phase of the activities of the Portugue-
se, and his books cover languages of several races in India and elsewhere.
Among other Portuguese who have devoted many years to a study of this
branch of philology are Adolfo Coelho, Father Silva Rego, Abrahches Pinto,
J. J. A Campos, and others. David Lopes has also gone into this subject, and
his A Expansdo da Lingua Portuguesa no Oriente durante os siculos XVI, XVII,
e XVIII, Barcelos, 1936, covers a great deal of ground in a rough survey.
As stated above, there is reason to believe that a Chinese gentleman pre-
pared a book to show how a number of Chinese words have been derived from
articles introduced by the Portuguese during a period of over four centuries.
He carried out his studies at Macao, but owing to the Japanese war his book
does not seem to have been published. (See note n.° 159)
The influence of the Portuguese on British “colonial” words and phrases,
as it applies to the Far East can also be studied. It is lightly touched upon
in J. M. Braga’s Notes on the Lingua Franca of the East, in RENASCIMENTO,
Vol. I. pp. 404-412, Macao, 1943. The article confesses its indebtedness to Sir


H. Yule and A. C. Burnell, Hobson-Jobson; Msgr. S. R. Ualgado, Glustdrio Lu-
so-Asidtico; David Lopes, op. cit., Cunha Rivara, Grammaiica da Lingua Con-
cani; R. Gust, A Sketch of Modern Languages in the East Indies; Gomydves Via-
na, Vocabuldrio Malaio, derivado do porlugv.es; Danilo Barreiros, and others.
(165) When the Portuguese pioneers reached China they were not given
much attention by the higher officials, but one of the things brought by them
which aroused interest happened to be their artillery. A report about the
Portuguese artillery seems to have been sent to Peking, the name fu-lan-hi
being given to the cannon, so much so that afterwards, Koo Ying Tseung,
Supervisor and Acting Hai Tao. thought it necessary to explain the misnomer,
and beginning a memorial he wrote:
“Fu-lan-ki is the name of a country, not tire name of a small cannon;... ”
But the Chinese did not display the same interest as did the Japanese when
they first set eyes on the Portuguese ordnance.
It was not until the beginning of the XVIIth century that the cannon
made at Macao became really celebrated. A foundry was set up in 1625, under
Manoel Tavares Bocarro, and functioned for 20 years, turning out hundreds
of cannon, which were used all over the East, and some even sent to Portugal.
Many were also sent to the Ming Government for use against the Manchu in-
vaders. (See C. R. Boxer’s Macau na Epoca da Restanraqdo , Macao, 1939. See
also J. M. Braga’s A Celebrated Gun Foundry, in Rbnascimesto, Macao, 19L1.
Vol. I, pp. 611-616).
(166) The flood of interest which swept through Europe in the XVIIIth
century has been well called the period of Ghinoiserie, and has been covered
in a number of books, but before that there was a longer period*when Europe
was slowly taking an ever-increasing interest in Eastern things. Already in
the days of Venetian greatness there was evidence of this. After the treasu-
res of Asia began flowing to Lisbon and then to the rest of Europe, the inter-
est in these things began to spread from Portugal to the Western world. There
are evidences of this in many books and illustrations, hut a great deal of this
was never recorded. There is no disputing the fact, however, that Europe was
gradually becoming more conscious of the Far East, including China and Ja-
pan. Unfortunately little, if anything, has been written about this, but the
evidence comes into prominence from time to time when some of the precious
wares of those days come to light, in old Portuguese and Spanish mansions,
and can be seen in old books and manuscripts treating of that period.




APPENDIX A
Diogo Calvo's letter to the King of Portugal, dated 16th January,
1527:
Senhor —Despois deter dado os apontamentos a vossa al-
teza pera por eles me pergnntar as conzas da China do ale-
vamento da terra o souberam align mas pessoas por o quail
me rogaram qne se me vossa alteza perguntasse por a rique-
za da terra que nam declarase todo e me calase por qne aca-
bando hum partido com vosa alteza me faram bom partido
e vosa alteza he men rey e dens da terra, oulhe bem vossa
alteza o que fiz para que saiba certo que debaixo do sol tso
riqa terra nom ha como a china de todalas mercadorias que
pidirem pera a boca e baratas e todalas consas pera os vossos
allmasens da India que outra consas nam mandara pera eles
somente lonas por que todo ho all them na china que pode
vir pera eles mnito barato, a saber, vergas mastos bren ta-
voado pregodura chumbo fero cobre asoque e as outras mer-
cadorias sao muito ricas que sao muito pera escrever este
aviso don a vossa alteza pera que saiba ho que ha de laser e
en senhor nam deserberto de dizer a verdade a vosa alteza
por que sao soo esem emparo de senhor e sayba por certo vosa
alteza que jagora consentirao na china mercadorias de vosa
alteza por que ja sao pasados os cinco anos qne me mandou
dizer o rey que nam fosem mercadarias ate nam pasarem
cinco anos o qual me dise hum meu parente qne esteve no
Reyno de Syam qne estavao os chins desejosos de nos ontros
de pimenta e pao preto e pucho e encenso macho e marfim e
cat'ram qne todo deram agora a peso e dinheiro as mercada-
rias da china nam digo a qui por que por palavra ho direi se
for service de vosa alteza sabelo de mini, e eu senhor hey
dir catar hum irmao meu que me ficou em cantSo em arrefes
por a verdade dos purtugueses, e por eles nam quererem
obedecer aos mandados del Rey da China e quererem faser
guerra na China e matar e roubar a terra onde se fes muito
mall nesta nam digo a vosa alteza mais por que por mim o
sabera quando for ser servijo qne nesta cidade estou por
nam ter la gasalhado e mens desejos senhor sao servir vosa
alteza naquellas partes por que sey escusallas digo aserrarllas,


e nesta digo que na China valem oitenta prorolas boas hum
cruzado a troco de pimenta, fico rogando a deus por o reall
estado de vosa alteza e dezeseis de janeiro de quinhentos
vinte e sete servigo de vossa alteza—Dioguo Calvo— A
et Rey nosso senhor A margem — de dioguo Calvo que
foi a china que el Rey deve ouvir.
The above transcription is from D. Ferguson’s Letters from
Portuguese Captives in Canton , Bombay, 1902, quoting Sir W. W.
Hunter’s History vf British India, Yol. I. p. 185, copied from the
India Office transcripts. The original is preserved in the archives
of the Torre do Tombo, at Lisbon (Corpo Chronologico, Parte I,
maco 35, documento 78)


APPENDIX B
Difficulties connected with Portuguese trade in China in the year
1548, from Frei Gaspar da Cruz's Tractado em que se contam muito
por extenso as Cousas da China, etc.:
CAPiTULO:XXIII
“ . . . Porque como'andavam quiisi de guerra os Chinas
com os Portugneses, quando vinham as armadas sobre elles,
alevantavam se e sayam se ao'mar e estavam em lugareg mal
emparados dos tempos; polio que vindo as tempestades per-
diamse muitos dando aa costa, ou em algns baixos. Mas do
anode cincoenta e quatro a esta ’parte sendo capitam'moor
Leonel de Sousa natural do Algarve, e casado em Chaul, as-
sentou com os Chinas que pagariam seus direitos e que Ihes
deixassem fazer suas fazendas nos seusportos.*" E*de entam
pera ca as fazem em Cantao, que he >ho primeiro porto da
China; e alii acodem os Chinas com suas sedas e Almizcle,
que sam as fazendas principaes que na China fazem os Por-
tugueses. Alii tem portos seguros onde estam quietos sem
risco, e sem os inquietar ninguem. E assi fazem ja agora os
Chinas bem sous tratos: e agora folgam muito os grandes e
os pequenos com ha contrata?am dos Portugneses, e corre a
fama delies por toda ha China. Pello que algus principaes
da corte vieram’a Cantao soo polios ver por averem ouvido
ha fama delles. Antes do tempo sobredito, e depois do ale-
vantamento que causou Fernam Perez Dandrade, faziam se
as fazendas com muito trabalho, nam consintiam os Portu-
gueses na terra, e por odio e aborrecimento Ihe chamavam
Fancui, que quer dizer homens do diabo. Agora nam nos
comunicam debaixo de nome de Portngueses, nem este nome
foy aa corte quando assentararn pagar direitos: se nam de-
baixo de nome de Fangim, que quer dizer geute doutra
costa. Ha se de saber mais, que he ley na China que nhu
China navegue pera fora do reyno sob pena de morte, Soo
Ihe he licito navegar ao longo da costa da mesma China. E
ainda ao longo da costa, nem de hua parte pera outra na
mesma China Ihe he licitolhir sem'certidam dos Louthias


da terra donde partem: na qual se relata pera onde vay
e ho negocio a que vay, e os sinaes de sua pessoa, e ha
idade qne tem. Se nam leva esta certidam he degradado
pera as “partes fronteiras. Ho mercador qne leva fazen-
da leva certidam da fazenda que leva, e como pagou direi-
tos' della. Em cada alfandega que ha em cada provincia
paga Ihus direitos, e nam nos pagando perde ha fazenda e
degradamno-pera as partes fronteiras. Sem embargo das
sobreditas leys nam deixam algns Chinas de uavegar pera
fora da China a tratar, mas estes nam tornam mais a China.
Destes vivem algus em Malaca, outros em Siao, ontros em
Patane, e assi por diversas partes do Sul estam espalhados
algns destes que saem sem licenga. Polio que destes qne ja
vivem fora da China algus tornam em sens navios a navegar
pera ha china debaixo do emparo dos Portugueses: e quando
ham de despachar os direitos de sens navios tornam hu Por-
tngues sen amigo a quern dam algu enteresse, pera que em
seu nome Ihe despachem os direitos. Algus Chinas dese-
jando ganhar ho remedio pera sua vida, saem mny escondidos
nestes navios destes Chinas a contratar fora, e tornam mny
escondidos que ho nam saibam nem sens parentes, porque se
nam divulgue e nam incnrram na pens, que os taes tem.
Posse esta ley porque achou el Rei da China que a muita
communicagam das gentes de fora lire podia ser causa dalgus
nlevantamentos. E porque muitos Chinas com achaque de
navegarem pera fora se faziam ladroes e salteavam as terras
de longo do mar, e nem com este resgnardo deixa daver
muitos Chinas ladroes ao longo da costa do mar. Estes Chi-
nas que vivem fora da China e pera ella navegam com os Por-
tugueses, depois do escandalo de Fernarn Dandrade comega-
ram a encaminhar os Portugueses a que fossem a Liampoo fa-
zer fazenda, porque nam ha naquellas partes cidades nem vil-
las cercadas senam muitas e grandes aldeas ao longo da costa
de geute pobre, ha qual folgava mnito com os Portugueses,
porque Ihe vendiam sens mantimentos com que faziam seu
proveito. Nestas aldeas eram estes mercadores Chinas que
com os Portugueses, navegavam aparentados, e por serem
conhecidos recebiam alii por sua causa milhor os Portugueses,
e per elles negocearam com que os mercadores da terra trou-
xessem suas fazendas a vender aos Portugueses. E como estes
Chinas que andavam autre os Portugueses eram os que terga-
vam autre os Portugueses e os mercadores da terra nas com-
pras e vendas, tinham deste negocio mny grande proveito.
Os Loulhias pequenos de longo do mar recebiam tambem
muy grandes proveitos deste trato, porque recebiam gros-
sas peitas de bus e doutros polios deixarem contratar e Ihe
deixarem tlnzer e levar as fazendas. Polio que esteve
este trato antrelles mnito tempo encuberto del Rey e dos
Louthias grandes da provincia. Depois de se averem feilo


por algu tempo assi encubertamente as fazendas em Liam-
poo foram se ponco a pouco estendendo os portugueses e
comejaram a hir fazer fazenda ao Chincheo e aas ilhas de
Cantao. E tarnbem ja ontros Louthias pollas peitas ho
hiam consintindo por todas as partes, polio que chegaram
algus Portngueses com ha contratagam ate alem de Namqni,
que he ja muito longe de Cantao, sem nunca el Rey
ser sabedor deste trato. Socederam as contrata?oes de ma-
neira que os Portngueses a invernar nas ilhas de
Liampoo, e estarem nellas tanto dassento e com tanta isen-
-sam, que Ihe nao faltava mais que ter forca e pelourinho.
Os Chinas que andavam antre os Portngueses, e algus Portu-
gneses com elles, vieram se a desmandar de maneira que co-
mejaram a fazer grandes furtos e roubos, e matar algua gen-
te. Foram os males em tanto crecimento eho clamor dos
agravados foy tarn grande, que chegou nao soomente aos Lou-
thias grandes da provincia mas tarnbem ael Rei. Ho qual
mandou logo fazer hua armada muito grossa na provincia de
Fuque, pera que lan?asse todolos ladrdes da costa, principal-
mente os que andavam em Liampoo: e todos os mercadores
assi Portugueses como Chinas entravam na conta dos ladroes.
Fazendo se prestes ha armada sayo se ao longo da costa do
mar. E porque os ventos Ihe nam serviam ja pera poder ir
a Liampoo, foram se pera a banda do Chincheo, onde achan-
do navios de Portugueses comegaram a pelejar com elles, e
de nhua qualidade deixavam vir nhua fazenda aos Portugue-
ses. Estiveram assi muitos dias, pelejando aas vezes pera
verem se podiam ter remedio pera fazerem suas fazendas.
Passados muitos dias e vendo que nam tinham remedio, de-
terminaram de se hir sem ella. Ho que sabendo os capitaes
darmada mandaram Ihe de noite muy secretamente hu reca-
do, que se queriam que Ihe viesse fazenda, que Ihe mandas-
som algua cousa. Folgando muito os Portugueses com este
recado, fizeramlhe hu grosso e honrado presente, e mandaram
Iho de noite por assi serem avisados. Dalli por diante vieram
Ihe muitas fazendas, fazendo os Louthias que nam atentavam
nisso, e dessimulando com os mercadores. E, assi desta ma-
neira se fizeram as fazendas aquelle anno, que foy de quoa-
renta e oito.
The text reproduced above is from the 1937 edition of Frei
Gaspar da Cruz’s Tractado em que contam muito por extenso as,
Gousas da China com suas particularidades, e assi do Eeyno de Ormuz
published by Portucalense Editora, Barcelos, 1937, the modern
orthography used in this edition being retained.


APPENDIX C
Narrative of the affairs at Fukien in 1549, from Frei Gaspar da
Cruz's Tractado da China.
“GAPITULO XXIIII
"•••Ho anno seguinte que foy de quoarenta e nove foy
intis riguroso resgnardo na costa polios capitaes darmada, e
miyor vigilancia nos portos e entradas da China, de maneira
que nem fazendas, nem mantimentos vinhain aos Portugue-
ses: mas por mais resgnardo e vigia que ouve, coino as ilhas
ao l ingo da terra sej am rnuitas, que todas correra era corda
ao longo da China, narn poderaro as armadas ter tanta vigi-
laucia e resgnardo, que uam viessem alguas fazendas escou-
didas aos Portugueses. Mas uao foratn taulas que pudessem
acabar de carregar os navios e desbafatar as fazendas que
aviatn trazido aa China. Polio que deixada ha fazendas que
Ihes ficou por desbafatar em dous juncos Chinas dos Chinas
que andam ja fora da China desmerabrados, e tratam a som-
bra dos Portugueses: em os quaes deixaratn trinta Portugue-
ses encarregados dos navios e das fazendas, pera que elles de-
fendessem os navios e em algu porto da China onde milhor
pudessem vendesscm as fazendas que Ihe ficavam a troco das
fazendas da China, e ordenado isto se partiram caminho da
India. Como ha gente da armada dos Chinas vio que ficavam
os dous juncos soos, sendo hidos os demais navios, vieram
sobre elles, sendo induzidos por algus mercadores da terra,
que descubriram aos da armada ha muita fazenda que em
aquelles juncos ficava, e os poucos Portugueses que aviam fi-
cado pera guarda della. Armaram Ihe pois cillada, fazendo
querena algus Chinas em terra, que postos em annas faziam
que queriam cometer aos navios pera pelejarem com elles,
por quanto estavam pegados com terra, pera que provocados
os Portugueses se sayssem dos navios a pelejar com elles e
assi ficassern os navios sent defensam a armada que estava
perto pera os cometer deltas de hua ponta que ha terra fazia
ao mar. Provocados desta maneira os que estavam para de-
fensam nos navios, sendo incautos aa cillada que deveram


cuydar poder Ihe estar armada, sayram algus a pelejar com
os da terra. Ho qual vendo os da armada, que estavam vi-
giando em cillada, arremeteram muito rijo e may pres-
tes aos dous juncos, e mortos algus Portugueses que nel-
les acharam, e feridos outros tomaram os navios. Ficou
ho Capitam moor, que he ho Luthissi tarn glorioso e tarn
Contente com esta vitoria qua foy cousa de admiragam Ter
sua alegria. E logo fez muito graves crueldades em algus
Chinas que com os Portugueses tomou. Trabalhou de indn-
zir quatro Portugueses que tinham mais aparencia em snas
pessoas que os outros, que dixessem que eram Revs de Ma-
laca. Eho acabou com elles porque Ihe prometeo fazer mi-
Ihor tratamento que aos demais, e com isso os provocou. E
como achasse autre ho fato que tomou hu roupam e hua gor-
ra, e perguntando a hu de aquelles Chinas que com os Por-
tugueses foram tornados que trajo era aquelle, meteram Ihe
em cabega que era trajo de Reys de Malaca. polio qual mau-
dou logo fazer tres roupdes por aquella vitola, e tres gorras.
e desta maneira vestio a todos quartro uniformemente, pera
mostrar verdadeiro seu fingimento, e mais gloriosa sua vito-
ria. Ajuntou se a este Luthissi ha cobiga de verse Ihe podiam
hear as muitas fazendas que nos navios tomara. De maneira
que juntamente queria triunfar de Reys de Malaca, pera que
com ho povo gauhasse grande nome e gloria, e pera com el
Rey fazer Ihe grandes merces polio servifo que queria mos-
trar aver Ihe feito, e juntamente se queria ajudar das fazen-
das que tomara, pera com ellas fazer mais mostra aos povos
da China de gloriosa vitoria. E pera poder fazer isto mais
a seu Salvo, e nam ser tornado em mentira, fez grandes jus-
tigas nos Chinas que com os Portugueses tomou, e matando
algus delles determinava matar nos demais. Viudo estes
cousas a noticia do Aitao que era seu superior, estranhoulhe
muito ho que fizera, e logo Ihe mandou que mais nam matasse
a nhu dos que ficavam, mas que logo se viesse ver com.elle
trazendo consign toda ha presa assi da genie que inda era viva,
como da fazenda. Ordenando ho Luthissi seu caminho pera
hir ao Aitao como Ihe era rnandado, mandou dar quatro cadei-
ras aos quatro que pusera titolos de Reys. pera nellas com
mais honra serem levados. Eos outros Portugueses hiam tne-
tidos em capoeiras com as cabecas saydas fora metidos os pes-
cogos pelas tavoas, de maneira que nam podiam recolher as
cabegas pera dentro, mas levandoas algus feridas, assi as le-
vavara descubertas ao sol eao sereno. Assi comiam e be-
viam e alii faziam sens feitos, ho que Hies nam era pequeno
tormento e pena; e hiam assentados dentro nas capoeiras, e


eram levados aas costas de homens. Hia este Luthissi com
esta presa polla terra dentro com muito grande magestade, e
levava diante de si qnatro bandeiras estendidas, nas quaes
hiam escriptos os nomes dos quatro Reys de Malaca. E
quando entrava nas povoa?oes, entrava com grandes estron-
dos e aparatos com som de trombetas, e com pregoeiros
diante, que hiam apregoando ha gram vitoria que ouvera ho
Luthissi foao dos grandes quatro Reys de Malaca. E todos
os principaes dos lugares ho sayam a receber com grandes
festas e honras, concorrindo todos os povos a ver ha nova
vitoria. Tanto que chegou ho Luthissi com sens aparatos e
gloria aonde estava ho Aitao, depois de Ihe dar conta polio
meudo de todalas cousas passadas e de sua vitoria, manifes-
tou Ihe seu intento e concertou se com elle que dividissem
as fazendas autre si ambos, e que perseverasse ho fingimento
dos Reys de Malaca, pera que ambos recebessem del Rey
honras e merces. Isto assentado determinaram ambos pera
se isto conservar em segrado, que se levasse adiante ho que
ho Luthissi avia cotnecado, que era que fossem mortos todos
os Chinas que alii vinham cativos. E logo ho mandaram
poer tudo em etfeito, polio que mataram noventa e tantos
Chinas, antre os quaes foram mortos algus mo?os pequenos.
Deixaram toda via tres on quatro raosos e hu homem, pera
por elles (fazendo os a sua mao) fazerem certo a el Rey tudo
ho que queriam, que era fazerem dos Portugueses ladroes,
encubrirem as fazendas que tomaram. Fazendo certo tam-
bem por esses, como os quatro eram Reys de Malaca. E
os Portugueses, como nam sabiarn falar ha lingoa da terra,
nem tinham pessoa algua em aquella terra que por elles
e os favorecesse pereceriam; e elles como pode-
rosos fariam a sua boa, seguindo ho fim por elles intenta-
do. E por esta causa e por maior trinnfo da vitoria, nam
mataram os Portugueses, mas deixaram nos vivos. Nam
puderam estes Louthias fazer isto tam secreto, e tanto a
seu salvo que se nam manifestassem snas fraudulentas
malicias, e se nam estranhassern geralmente. E princi-
palmente foram por todas as partes estranhadas as mortes
e crueldades que tinham feitas, por ser cousa desacostumada
na China matar se ninguem sem autoridade del Rey, como
ja acima temos ditos. E inda no matar he a justi?a nesta
terra mny vagarosa e atentada, como tambem acima fica ma-
nifesto. Alem de tudo isto, muitos dos que mataram tinham
parentes na terra que se doeram das mortes dos seus. Polio
que assi por estes, como por algus Louthias que foram zelo-
sos da e nam quiseram dar consentimento a tamanho?


males e fraudulencias, chegou este negocioa noticia del Rey.
e Ihe foy manifestado como os Portugueses eram mercadores
que vinham a China com suas fazendas a tratar, e nam eram
ladroes, e como falsamente a quatro delles puseram titolos
de Keys, a tirn que el Rey Ihes fizesse grandes merces e hon-
ras, de como tinharn usurpado may grande copia de fazendas:
e por fim pera encubrirem estes males mataram homeus e
ineninos sem culpa, ho que sabido por el Rey foi disso muito
anojado e muy pesaroso, e logo com muita presteza e dili-
gencia mandou nisso prover com justi9a, como se podera ver
neste capitolo seguinte, que disso da larga conta.
CAPITULO XXV
“Tanto que el Rey foi enformado de todo lio sobre-
dito, logo despachou de sua corte hn Quinehay, de que
dissemos acima que quer dizer chapa dourn. e que nam se
mandam sernelhantes homens se nam a negocins muy im-
portantes. E com este mandou outros dons tamhem de
muito autoridade, dos quaes hu avia sido Ponchassi, e
outro Anchassi estes dous como enqueredores deste nego-
cio. Encomendando tambem ao Chae que aquelle anno
hia visitar ha provincia do Fuquem, e ao Ponchassi e An-
chassi da mesrna provincia, que todos ajudassem ao Quin-
chay, e aos dous enqueredores em tndo lio que Hies fosse
necessario neste negocio: encarregando a todos muito que
neste caso ho fizessem como bons servos e amigos da boa jns-
ti§a, e bom governo de sen Reyno. E como istoaconteceo em
tempo que as provincias todas eram providas de novos
officios, vieram todos os sobreditos juntos da corte, e todos
entrararn na cidade do Funcheo com muito grande aparato.
E logo em chegando todos juntos comecaram com muito
grande diligeucia e cnydado a entender no negocio a que vi-
nham, e que tanto Ihes era encomendado. Os dous que vi-
nham com ho Quinehay como enqueredores, logo se foram a
huas casas grandes que no meo tinharn hu grande pateo, e de
hua banda do pateo estavam hus grandes aponsentos e muy
galantes, e da outra banda estavam outros da mesrna manei-
ra. Cada hum dos enqueredores se meteo em hua das sobre-
ditas casas. Foram logo trazidos os presos, e foram a preset,-
tados ahum delles. Aquelle por cortesia os remeteo ao or.-
tro que inquirisse elle primeiro com muitas palavras de cot-
tesia. Ho outro Ihos tornou a mandar com mnitos agardeci-
mentos. E assi foram por vezes levados do hum ao outro,
guereudo cada hum dar ha m»o ao outro pera que comejasne


primeiro, ate que hu se deu por vencido e comegou. E co-
mo ho negocio era de mnita importancia e muito encomen-
dado, tudo ho que diziam os reos e os acusadores escreviam
estes officiaes por suas proprias maos. Tivei-am os Portugue-
ses por grande contrairo hilrh China piloto de hum dos navies
que se tomou, e hum mojo China christao, que desde menino
se criara antre os PortUguCses: porque estavam ambos feitos
da mao dos Louthias contraries, movidos por dadivas e pro-
messas; estando ja os Louthias depostos dos officios, e avidos
por delinquentes, polio qual estavam diante del Key acusados;
mas inda que estavam desta maneira, eraih tarn poderosos e
tam favorecidos, que puderarn tirar de antre os Portugueses,
e de seu poder hum mojo China que Ihes servia de lingoa,
pera que nam tendo quem os entendesse nam pudessem de-
fender sua tlo qual tornaram os Portugueses aver
aa mso por hua peti?am que Ihes fez hum China preso, que
apresentaram ads enqneredores, ha qhal vista por elles, lo-
go Iho mandaram entregar. E este mo? 6 Ihe foy causa a
elles de seu livramento: porque cOmb por elle se enten-
diam com os oficiaes da puderam mostrar mui-
to hem ser setn culpa. Enquiriam nos por csta ordem:
eram primeiro traiidos os acusados e pbrgnntados por hum
destes officiaes, lovavam nos att otttro, pera que os tornasse
a repreguntar. E antre tafato hb outro repreguntava os acusa-
dos, eram trazidos os acusadbres ao qUe primeiro pergun-
tara. E assi os acusados comb os acusadores, todos eram
perguntados per ambos os oficiais, pera depois vistos por
ambos os dltos de hus e dos outros, vissetn se se encontra
vam. E primeiro faziam as perguntas a Cada hum a parte.
Depois tornavam nos a perguntiir a todos juntos, pera que
vissetn se se contrariavam hus a outros, ou se altercavam e
se arguyam hus com outros, pera assi hirem pouco a pouco
colligindo ha verdade do caso. Nestas perguntas foram os
dous contrairos. s. ho Piloto e ho China mogo christao, e fo-
ram servidos de muitos agoutes, porque se encontravam em
alguas cousas. E mbstravam sempre os Louthias que folga-
vam de ouvir aos Portugueses em sua defeza, ho qual Ihes
foy causa de muito grande alivio. Foy Ihes tambera grande
ajnda, pera se nam encontrarem, falarem todos per hua lin-
goa. E porque os Portugueses alegaram em sua defesa, que
se quisessem saber quem elles eram, e como eram mercadores
e nam ladroes, que maudassem devassar delles ao longo da
costa do Chincheo, e que alii saberiam ha verdade, ho qual
poderiam saber dos mercadores da terra, com os quaes avia
muitbs annos que tratavam, e que tambettl de quella ageute


saberiam que nam eram Reys, porque Keys nam se abaixa-
vam tanto que viessem com tarn pouca gente a mercadejar,
e que se antes dixeram ho conti’airo, que foy por enganos do
Luthissi, e por receberem delle milhor tratamento em suas
pessoas. Tepdo esta dos portugueses, logo com
parecer do Quinchay e dos outros officiaes se partiram cami-
do Chincheo, ambps a enquerir ha verdade do que Ihe deziam
os Portugueses, nem se fiou esta enquirijam de outrem se
nam destas duaa pessoas. Tantp que estes Louthias acaba-
ram de tjrar hit devassa no Chincheo, como por ella soube-
ram ha verdade do que os Portugueses deziam, e as menti-
ras do Luthissi e do Aitao, despacharam logo hum correo
em que mandaram pper ho Luthissi e p Aitao em prisoes
a muy bom recado. Aqui se pode ver quanto poder es-
tes homens traziam, pois podiam prender tam grandes
homens, cousa que fez admirajam por toda ha terra, e de-
mam muitos aps Portugueses, que grange era sua ventura,
ppis por spa causa prendiam tam grandes homens. Polio que
dahi ppr diante todos os com e § aram a favorecer muito. Se
toda via esto devassa se tirara em Jnampop como se tirou no
Chincheo, gam deixaram os Portugueses de passar muy mal
segundo os njales que alii tinham feito eram grandes. De-
pois que os Louthias tornaram do Chincbeo, mandaram tra-
zer os Portugueses diante de si, e congplaram nos muito,
mostrando Ihes muito boa vontade e dizendo Ihes que ja sa-
biam que nam eram ladroes, mas que eram bons homens: e
tornaram outra vez a enquerir asi a elles como aos contrairos
pera verem se se contrariavam exp cousa algua do que antes
tinham dito. Nestas vam era cousa algua do que antes tinham
dito, Nestas reperguntas ho China piloto que antes muito se
avia mostrado contrairo aos Portugueses e avia side por parte
dos Louthias, vendo que ja os Louthias estavam presos, e que
ja Ihe nao podiam ser bons, e que os Portugueses eram ja fa-
vorecidos, e ha verdade se manifestava, tornou se a desdizer
de quanto tinha dito, e dixe que era verdade que os Portugue-
ses nam eram ladroes, nem Reys, se nam que eram mercado-
res e muito bons homens, e descobriou ha muita fazenda que
ho Luthissi tomara quando prendera aos Portugueses. Eque
se ate entam avia dito ho contrario, que era pollas grandes
prpmessas que Ihe fizeram os Louthias, e polios grandes me-
dos que Ihe punham se assi ho nam fizesse. Mas que pois elles
ja eram presos, e ja sabia que Ihe nam podiam fazer mal, que-
ria agora dizer ha verdade. Foy isto cousa que pos os Louthias
em grande admiracam, e como atonitos e fora de si estiveram
hum grande espajo olhando hum pera ho outro sem falarem


palavra, fi tortlando sobre si, ho mandaram atortnentat
e aijoutar may rijo pera verse se desdezia, mas sempre
perseveron na mesma confissam. Acabados de fazer todos
os exames e diligencias que erarn neste caso necessarias,
querendose ja ho Qninchay com seas companheiros hir
pera ha corte, quis primeiro ver os Portugueses e dar hua
vista de si a cidade. E foy amostra de muito grande mages-
tade ha maneira com que sayo polla cidade, porque foy
acompanhado com todos os grandes della, e com muita gente
bem armada, e com mnitas bandeiras estendidas muito lou-
yaas e com maitas trombetas e com muitos atabales, e outras
mnitas consas qne eiu semelhantes negocios casos e aparatos
se costumam. E assi acompanhado foy ate baas may nobres
e grandes casas. E depois de despedidos todos os grandes
delle, mandoa chegar os Portugueses a si, e depois de poucas
palavras os despedio: porque nao era isto pera mais que pera
os ver. Antes que se partissem estes Louthias, mandaram
aos Louthias da terra, e aos tronqueiros que todos favoreces-
sem os Portugueses e Ihe fizessem muito bom tratamento, e
Ihe mandassem dar todo ho necessario pera suas pessoas. E
mandaram a todos que pusessem seu sinal em hum papel,
pera que euquanto elles hiam aa corte e se despachavam seus
feitos, manhosamente nam fizessem falter algum. E man-
daram ter em muito bom recado ao Luthissi e ao Aitao, e
qne os nam deixassem comunicar com nenhua pessoa.
Saydos fora da cidade, recolheram-se em hum lugar pequeno,
no qual coucertaram muy bem todos os seus papeis, tirando
a limpo soo ho que era necessario: e porque eram os papeis
muitos, e avia muito que escrever, ajudaram se de tres ho-
mens. PI tirado a limpo tudo ho que haviam de levar aa
corte, queimaram todo ho demais. E porque estes tres ho-
rnens que tomaram por ajudadores nam divulgassem cousa
algua do que tinharn visto e escrito, deixaramnos encerrados
com muita vigia que ninguem pudesse falar com elles: man-
dando Ihe administrar todo ho necessario muy abundante-
mente ate que ha sen ten 9a viesse da corte e se declarasse.
Apresentados os papeis na corte, e visto tudo por el Rey
e porto dos seus officiaes, pronunciou ha da manei-
ra seguinte.
CAPITDLO XXVI
“Primeiro que ponhamos ha convem notar al-
guas cousas. Ha primeira he qne ha sentenja era muito
mais extensa e larga do que aqni esta referida e com os
Portugueses que a tinharn em seu poder ha terem encnr


tada, eu ha encurtey mais, tomando soo as principals forjas
della e cortando tudo ho mais. Ha se de notar segunda-
riamente pera que se entendam algus pontos escuros della,
que pontoos sarn as vigias do mar, e serein algus con-
denados a capacetes vermelhos, he condenarem nos por
homens darmas pera as partes fronteiras. Alem disto os di-
reitos da China, ha se de saber que se nam pagavam como
antre nos, se nam como se pagam em Siao, que he medirem
se os navios que levam fazendas aa China de popa a proa aos
covados, e segundo os covados assi tem ha paga, hu tanto por
covado, e pagar-se agora na China a tantos por cento, foy
concerto que se fez polios Portugueses com os regedores de
Cantam por aviso dos Chinas que tratam antre os mesmos
Portugueses polio que sam os direitos mais grosses do que
ouveram de ser se se pagaram polio costume da terra. Esta*
cousas avisadas, ha sentenja he ha seguinte.
“Pimpu por mandado del Key, porque Chaipuu Hnchim
Tutil sem meu mandado, nem mo fazer saber, depois de ser
tomada tanta gente ha mandon matar. Querendo eu nisso
prover com jnstija, mandey primeiro saber ha verdade por
Quinsituam meu Quinchei, ho qual levando consigo os
Louthias que mandey que me soubesse ha verdade dos Por-
tugueses, e assi do Aitao e Luthissi, os quaes me tinham en-
formado que os Portugueses eram ladroes e que vinham a
toda ha costa de minha terra a furtar e matar. E sabida ha
verdade de tudo, vieram de fazer ho que Ihes mandey. E
vistos os papeis pello meu Pimpu e polios Louthias grandes
de minha corte: e depois de bem vistos por elles me vieram
a dar conta de tudo. E assi os mandey ver por Ahimpu e
Atu Chae e por Athaylissi Chuquim, aos quaes mandey que
revissem muito bem os papeis por serem cousas de muito
peso, nas quaes eu queria prover com justija. Ho qual assi
visto por todos, foy manifesto que os Portugueses vinham ao
mar do Chincheo avia muitos annos a fazer fazenda, a qual
nam convinha que fizessem da maneira que ha faziam, se
nam nas minhas pra§as como sempre foy costume em todolos
mens portos. Estes homens de que ateqni nam soube; ja
sey que ha gente do Chincheo hia a seus navios ao mar a fa-
zer fazenda, polio que ja sey que sam mercadores e nam
ladroes como me tinham escripto que eram. Eu nam po-
nho culpa mercadores ajudarem a mercadores. mas ponha
muita culpa a mens Louthias do Chincheo: porque tanto
que chegara hu navio a meus portos, ouveram de saber
se eram mercadores, e se me queriam pagar direitos, •
querendoos pagar, escreveram me logo. Se assi ho fize


tail) nam fora feito tan to mal. On como foram tornados se
mo fizeram saber mandaraos logo soltar. E ainda que seja
costume em mens portos os navios que a elles vem me-
direm se pera pagarem os direitos: estes per serem de longe
nam era necessario mais que deixarem-lhe fazer fazenda, e
hirera se pera suas terras. Alem disto os meus pontoos que
sabiam que eram estes homens mercadores nam mo diziam,
mas tinham mo encuberto, polio qual foram causa de ser to-
mada e morta tanta gente. Eos que ficavam vivos como nam
sabiam falar olhavam pera ho ceo, e pediam de sens coragoes
justiga ao ceo (nam conhecem outro Deos supremo se nam
ho ceo.) Alem destas cousas sey que ho Aitao, eho Luthissi
tizeram tanto mal por eobiga da mnita fazenda que tomaram
aos Portugueses, e nam atentaram se os que prenderam, aos
quaes tomararn ha fazenda se eram bons ou maos. Asai mesmo
os Louthias do longo do mar sabiam que estes homens eram
mercadores e nam mo disseram. E todos como maos foram
causa de tanto mal. Soube mais polio men Quinchey que o
Aitao e Luthissi tiveram cartas pollas quaes souboram que os
Portugueses eram mercadores e nam ladrCes, e com saberem
isto nam se contentaram com os tomarem, mas escreveram
me muitas mintiras, e nam se contentaram com matar ho-
mens, mas mataram mininos, cortando a hus os pes, e a ou-
tros as mass, e por derradeiro a todos as cabegas: escrevendo
me que tomaram e mataram reys de Malaca. Ha qnal cousa
cuydando eu ser verdade me doeu ho coragam. E porque
atequi sem meu mandado se fizeram tantas cruezas daqui por
diante mando que se nam fagam. Alem disso os Portugue-
ses resistiram aa minha armada, sendo milhor deixaramse to-
mar que matanne gente. Alem disto haa muito tempo qua vem
ao mar de minha terra a fazer fazenda a maneira de ladroes e
nam como mercadores; polo qual se foram naturais como sam
estrangeiros tinham pena de mortee perdiam a fazenda, pelo
que nam sam sem culpa. 0 Tutam por cujo mandado fo-
ram mortos os que se mataram dizia que por esse feito ho
avia eu de fazer mayor, e ha gente que mandou matar depois
de nam ter cabegas, sens coragoes. s. ha alma e seu sangue
pediam justiga ao ceo. Eu vendo tamanhos males serem
feitos, meus olhos nab podiam aeabar de ver os papeis com
lagrimas, eho meu coragam tinha grande dor. Nam sey os
meus Lothias ja que tomavam esta gente porque ha nam sol-
tavam, pera que eu nam viesse saber tamanhas cruezas. No-
tay a natural clemencia del Key gentio; ha qual se provoca
ainda mais pollas piedosas leys de sua terra, que como dixe-
mos sam muy piadosas acerca das mortes dos malfeitores e


Vagarosas nellas. Segue se adiante ha sentenga. Polio qu£
vistas todas estas cousas, Fago Senfuu Louthia grande, por-
que fez ho que devia em sen cargo, e me falou verdade. Fago
tambem Louthia grande Quinchio porque me escreveo ha
verdade dos poutoos que hiam fazer fazendas aas escondidas
ao mar com os Portuguese®. Os que sam maos, eu os farey
mais baixos que os que semeam arroz. Assi mais: porque
Pachou fazia fazenda com os Portugueses, e por peitas dei-
x iva tambem hir os mereadores da terra a fazer fazenda com
os Portugueses. e com fazer estas cousas escrevia me que os
Portugueses eram ladroes e qiie vinham a minha terra soo a
furtar. E isso mesmo disse aos meus Louthias, que logo
responderam que minfia; porque ja sabiam ho contrairo. E
pom este foao e folio nomea dez Louthias. Todos vos outros
nam he nada serdes degradados pera capacetes vermelhos,
pera os quais vos condeno: mas mereceis que vos faga mais
baixos como vos faqo. Chae por tomares estes homens di-
zias que serias mayor, e sendo em se fazer tanto mal dezias
nam averes medo de mi; foao e foao, nomea nove, por tomar-
des estes homens dezieis que os faria grandes, e nam avendo
medo de mi todos mintistes, foao e foao nomea muitos. Tam-
bem sey que tomaveis peitas. Mas pois assi ho fizestes, en
vos fago baixos (privaos de dignidade de Louthias,) foao e
foao, nomea muitos. Se ho Aitao e Luthissi queriam matar
tanta gente porque Iho consentistes. Mas pois consintindo
fostes com elles a matallos, todos teudes ha mesma cul-
pa. Chifuu, e Chachifuu, tambem fuistes conformes com
as vontades do Aitao e Luthissi, e fostes com elles a matar,
assi os que tinham culpa como os que a nam tinham. Pello
que todos os sobreditos condeno a barretes vermelhos. Lupuu
tinha bom poraqao, porque qugrendo ho Tutao mandar matar
esta gente, disse que njo jßzessem pi'imeiro a saber. A este
nam farey mal, senam hem como elle merece, e mando que
fique Louthia. Sanchi fago meu Anchassi da cidade de Cansi.
Ho Antexeo mando que seja deposto de sua honra. Assao
pois sabe falar com os Portugueses, tenhi honra e ordenado,
e sera levado pera Chaquea donde he natural (este he ho
mogo com que os Portugueses se defenderam servindo de
liugoa, deram Ihe titolo de louthia e comedia). Chinque ca-
bega dos mereadores que hiam fazer fazenda com os Portu-
gueses ao mar, e os enganava, trazendo mnita fazenda aa ter-
ra, ser-lhe iia pedida e por se ha em boa arrecadaqam pera ho
comer e gasto dos Portugueses, e elle e sens quatro compa-
nheiros condeno pera barretes vermelhos e seram degrada-
dos pera onde parecer hem a meus Louthias. Aos mais culpa


dos e presos por este caso, mando a toeus Louthias que detn
a cada hu ha pena que merecer. Ao Chae mando que me
traga ca ho Tutao, para que vistas suas culpas polios grandes
de minha corte, mande fazer delle ha justiga que me hem
parecer. Este Tutao foy juntamente consintidor nos males
do Aitao e Luthissi: porque ho Luthissi e Aitao ho fizeram
participante, e Ihe deram parte dos interesses que tomaram
aos Portugueses, porque como cabega ouvesse por hem ho que
ellesfaziam: porque aa verdade elles nam se atreverara a fa-
zer ho que fizeram se elle nao dera consentimento, e inter-
viera com seu parecer. Este ouvindo o que era sentenceado
contra elle, se esforcou, dizendo que pois ho ceo ho fizera
inteiro que lire nam avia ninguem de tirar ha cabega. Os
Poutoos que ainda estam presos, seram outra vez pergunta-
dos, e logo seram despachados. Cuichu sera logo tirado de
Louthia, sem ser mais ouvido. Chibee, cabega de vintas-
seys, mando que elle e os sens sejam todos soltos, por-
que eu acho que tem muito pouca culpa. Os que deyerem
dinheiro sera logo delles arrecadado. Famichim e Tou-
micher morreram, se bem parecer a mens Louthias, e se nam
fagara ho que Ihes rnilhor parecer. Afonso de Paiva, e Pero
de Cea (estes eram Portugueses,) Antonio e Francisco (estes
eram escravos) por acharem serem culpados em materem
gente de minha armada, seram com ho Luthissi a Aitao me-
tidos no tronco, onde segundo costume de meu Reyno todos
morreram de vagar. Os mais Portugueses que sam vivos,
com todolos seus mogos, que sam por todos cincoenta e hum,
mando que sejam levados a minha cidade de Cansi, onde
mando que sejam bem tratados, pois meu coragam he tarn
bom pera elles que por sua causa castigo desta maneira ha
gente de minha terra. Eho fago assi com elles, porque he
meu costume fazer justiga a todos. Os Louthias da armada
por achar que tem pouca culpa mando que sejam soltos, uso
ho desta maneira com todos, porque vejam os mens Louthias
que tndo ho que fago, que ho fago com bom zelo. Estas
consas todas mando que sejam feitas com brevidade.”
“Ate aqui he ha sentenga. Claro se ha mostrado no pro-
cesso desta sentenga, ho bom processo e ordem de justiga que
a seu modo tem estas gentes idolatras e barbaras, e ha natu-
ral clemencia que Deos pos em hu Rey que vive sem ter
conhecimento de Deos. E quanta diligencia poe, e com
quanto peso trata negocios graves: ho bom governo que ha
nesta terra, e ha muita justiga della parece ser causa, porque
com ser ha China hu Reyno tarn grande como temos mos-
trado, he sustentado ha muito grande numero de annos em
paz sem alevantamentos, e ha sostenta Deos, porque os mi-
ni igos nella nam fagam entradas e danos, e porque comun-
mente ha sustenta em muita abundancia, prosperidade e far-
tura. Eha rigurosa justiga desta terra he causa de free das


Qiasa inclina§oes e desassossegos que ha gente della tem, q«e
com ser tam rignrosa como he, estam todavia todos os troncos
comunmente cheos de presos, com serem tantos como temos
dito. E se acerta algn anno de aver fome, he necessario, assi
polla terra dentro como ao lougo do mar continuamente aver
muitas armadas, pera refrear as solturas dos muitos ladroes
que se alevantam. Os Portngueses que t'oram livres pola
sentenga, qnando os levavarn oude el Key mandou, achavam
no caminho todo ho necessario em muita abundancia, nas
casas que dissemos acima quel rey tinha em todos os lugares
pera os Louthias quando caminham. Levavam nos em ma-
gotes sobre cadeiras de canas em costas de homens, e hiam
encarregados a Louthias pequenos, que Ihes faziam dar todo
ho que Ihes era necessario por todas as partes por onde hiam,
ate serem entregues aos Louthias da cidade de Cansi. Dalli
por diante nam tiveram del Key mais que cada mes hu foo
darroz, que he hua medida quanto hu homem pode levar aas
costas; ho mais que aviam mister cada hu ho buscava segun-
do sua industria. Depois os tornaram espalhar de dous em
dous e de tres em tres por diversas partes por atalharem que
por tempo nam se fizessem poderosos ajuntanto se a outros.
Os que foram condenados a morte, foram logo metidos no
tronco dos condenados. E ho Afonso de Paiva pode ter
maneira com que fez a saber aos Poi’tugueses livres que de
boa entrada Ihe deram logo quareuta acoutes que ho trataram
muito mal, mostrando se em Deos confortado. Os que fica-
ram soltos, poucos a poucos se vieram pera os navios dos Por-
tugueses por industria de algus Chinas que os traziara muy
escondidos movidos polos muy grosses interesses qne rece-
biam dos mercadores Poi’tugueses, que faziam suas fazendas
em Cantao.”
The text given above, like the preceding extract, is also trans-
cribed from the 1937 edition of Frei Gaspar da Cruz’s book on China,
first published in 1570. Based on an account written by one of the
Portuguese actually taken prisoner in Fukien, in 1549, Frei Gaspar
da Cruz’s account possesses the merit of giving us a contemporary
description of the events and of all that happened afterwards, as
witnessed by a Portuguese, who was himself one of the actors in the
drama recounted. In the light of the Chinese accounts of the same
events, the Portuguese prisoner’s narrative is a most valuable con-
tribution to the history of this episode.


APPENDIX D
Letter written by Leonel de Sousa, on the 15th Janury, 1556, at
Cochim , to Prince D. Luiz, brother of King John III.
“Senhor— Eu fuy a China numa embarquagao de merca-
dores, como espreni a Vossa Alteza de Malaqna o Sno de ein-
quoenta e dons, pelo Vizo Rey Dom Aft'onso me nam orde-
nar as Viages, como Vossa Alteza mandana; aonde vim enver-
nar o Margo pasado por nam poder vyr a Indya, hay soube-
moa as novas do falecimento do Primcipe qne Santa Groria
aja, qne nesas partes, e em todos nos pos muito espamto, he
trysteza, pelo qne demos muitas gragas a Noso Senhor, pera
verrnos tas altos mysteyryos qne parece servirse dasgrandes
advergidades. e nojos de Sua Alteza, e de Vosa Alteza, pera
mays perfeigao de sens Reaes Estados, e vydas em sua Santa
Grorya; pois com suas grandes e virtuozas paciemcias nos
dao tamanho emxempro, e ensina e Louvar a Deos, e a elle
emcomendo ha Real Pessoa, e Estado de Sua Alteza e de
Vossa Alteza pois em consas tao alltas na pode falar hum
tao pequeno Vasallo.
“Quanto aos negocios, e Vyagem da China toquarey em
pouquos, porque pus tres annos nella e tine muitos de que
tirey pouquo proveyto, achey os Portos todos carrados com
muyta garda, e provimento darmadas pera nos nao deyxarem
fazer fazenda, nem nola consentirem dar do que fuy logo
avizado por hum China alevantado e de purjtugqezes que la
estavam prezos, que estivesse bem aprecebido que aviam
de peleyar comigo, e que de nenhua maneira farya fazen-
da, por que o mandava asy El Rey, por ser emformado,
qne ha faziamos furtadamente, e mandava qqe todq fya gera-
cao de mercadores deixassem entrar, g p.agar direitop, se nao
aos Franges que eram homens de coragoes sujos, que s|o os
purtuguezes, e os tinhao por ladroims, e alevantados que am-
davam fora da obediencia de seu Rey.
“Como achey a terra desta maneira e com o avizo que tive
pus logo o niyJhor requado, e goarda que pud® nos Navios,
e purtuguezes que estavam jcpipygo, qqe pgm ?J#y?ptas-
sem a terra nem fizessem sem rezomes de que estavam


eSCamdelizados dos passados, sofrendo com isto alguas ne-
cessidades, e myngoa de raantimentos pot mos o 5 darem
da terra; e aprounfe a Mosso Senhor que me mandaram co-
tneter paz, e que assantase direitos como estavam em cns-
tume aseytey este requado co conselho de todos, que ho ou-
veratn por mnyto servigo de Deos, e de Sua Alteza pelo na
poderem albathgar al£ ly os qUe la hiil e ter El Rey asantado
de nos primeirbs purtuguezes de os nam consentyr na China,
e asy pera fazerem esta paz nos mudarab os Homes de Fran-
ges que noS dantes chamavao a purtuguezes de purtugal, e
Malaqua. que nam etamos da geragao dbs primeiros, e por
snas sortes, e agoyros que he muyto de gentyos que elles sao,
deziab que esta ventura me gardara Deos que pellas portas
das Cidades, e lugares ma aviam de mandar espreuer o nome.
“Esta paz* e direitos mandou cometer ho Aytao da Cidade,
o Reyno de CStao, que he officio e Denydade grande, e Esta-
do Como Almyrante do Mar, que provb em tbdolos negocios
dos Portos de Mar asy na fazenda como Armadas, em que as
Vfezed sahb em pessoa com muyto poder, quando ay ha causas
pera iso, da qual paz nio fiz Com elle pauta nem assanto pelo
ni levat por Regimento, e que aviaraos de pbgar a vinte por
Cento, como hera custnme, e pagoavam os Syames do Reyno
de Sia, que navegam na China por previlejo, e licenga
d’Elßey, nos quaes Direitbs a vymte por cento, nam consen-
ty em mays que ha dez por cento aO qnb me respondeo
que elle Os na podia abaxar, porque eram Direitos Reaes
qvte o faria saber a Elßey, que pera o ano aehariamos a
tespbsta, que aquele nam podia vir, que eram tres ou quatro
thezes de caminho aonde Elßey estava, eque por entad nam
pagassemos mais Direitos aos vinte por cento, que dametade
das fazendas que levavanios, e asy fyquariam aos dez por
Cento que dezia, e que me pedia que mandase fazer bom ga-
salhado dos Mandarys que sao como Desembargadores, que
os viessem fazer aos Navios, que nao oulhase que eram Chis
sena as devizas, e Armadas do Estado d’Elßey que traziam,
que raalemhrava que por hua descortezia que fizerao os pri-
meiros purtuguezes a hum Madarim os na consentio Elßey
mais na China, e pois minha ventura fora tao boa que se na
perdesse.
“Desta thaneira fiz paz; e os negocios na China com que
todos fizetatti suas fazendas, e proueitos seguramente foram
mbytes purtuguezes a Cidade de Camtao, e outros lugares
por bilde andaratn folgandu nlgus dias, e negociando suas
fazendas i sua vbntade sem receberem agraVo, nem pagarem


mais Direitos dos que atras digo, que mnytou pelo que es-
quonderam na fiquaram pagando mais Direitos que da
parte das fazendas. Cantao esta trinta legoas por hum Rio
dentro do Porto do Sd Ghoam que he amtre huas ylhas aon-
de estava com os Navios, porque me na quis meter em Lum-
paqud, que he na boqua do Rio, aonde me mandat'd hyr
por me na fiar tanto defies, nem nnma Cidade que chamao
Quoay, que era dahy cinquo ou seis legoas: estas duas Cida-
des sao hem amnradas, e fortes, e asy dizem, que o sao as
mais, e a de Cantao dizem, que he mnyto grande em camti-
dade, e de gramde negocio.
“Estes negocios, e paz acabei com muytostrabalhos, e custo
que os na posso esprever, que dontra maneira se nam pnde-
ram fazer pera quam desacreditados estavarn os purtuguezes
na China emcarreguei defies ha hum Sima dAlmeyda omem
onrrado, e cavaleiro, que da China tem muyta esperiencia por
navegar nefla num Navio seu ha dias; o que fez com muyta
deligencia, e dezejos de servir Sua Alteza, por alguas obriga-
qoes de seu servi9o, que fhe pus diante foi sempre omrrada-
mente. e veo, e a sua custa, e ale do que gaston, soube que
dera alguas dadivas a pessoas, e Ofeciaes do Aytao, com que
negoceou mais brebe do que ho pudera fazer sem iso, nem
eu servi a Sua Alteza como ho servi se na fora sua ajuda, e
Conselho, porque eu tinha pouquo cabedal pera suprir, mais
do que sopri, nem elle o quis de mim, e dixe sempre, que se
nisso servia a Sua Alteza, que delle queria o galardam, e nam
doutrem, e por descargo de minha conciencia 1390 esta lem-
branga a Yossa Alteza, porque se o Sua Alteza ha por seu ser-
viqo, elle, e eu receberemos muyto grande merce satisfazelo
Sua Alteza com onrra, e merce, porque nao he de Sua Alteza
por exempro dos que so acharem em partes tao remotas, que
folge de servir Sua Alteza com pessoas. e fazendas como elle
fez.
“Ao tempo da minha partida me maudou dizer o Aytao,
que se queriamos navegar na Chyna, que fosse Embaxador
de Sua Alteza pera Elßey se emforrnar por elle de nos e que
gete heramos, e a paz ficaria fixa, porque os que navegam na
China, navegam com liceng i d’Elßey, e tem Portos lirnitados
aonde am dir, e asy na pode navegar nenhum China pera
fora do Reyno, e o que navega am-no por tredo, e alevanta-
do, e logo he ponido, se o tomam, o porque abitao muytos
por Malaqua, e outros Reynos, e va roubar a costa; porque
esta gente arrecea-se muyto de forasteiros principalmente
dos purtuguezes, porque nos tem por omes buliijozos, e mal


sofridos, e a China he terra de muyta Justisa, e crnaa, e cada
hum se ade livrar per ella que na gardam liberdade a nin-
guem, e ategora fe nam acabam de decrarar comnosqno, e
determinaram, e dizem qne nos nossos Navios na parecemos
ladromes, que sao muyto carregados, mas que Mercadores
nam negoceam com as Armas na sinta, que nos elles muyto
estranhao, e asy Ihes he, muyto defezo nas Cidades, qne nin-
guem nas tras se nao os que defendem na terra, e garda dos
Ofeciaes.
“Tiveram commigo algus pontos d’onrra, hum qne veo aos
Navios, qne estava ymleito pera Aytas em que nos haviamos
hem, e sem escandalo, porque em tudo os soube relevar, e
conservarlhe sens cnstumes, e cortezias, que ha amtre elles
muyto grandes, e forara de mim muyto bem hagasalhados, e
banqueteados com alguas dadivas, que elles tomaram escon-
dido, porque tem por isso grandes penas, e sao muyto meu-
dos que apertaram comigo qne Ihe dixese se era Capitam de
Mercadores, se de Sna Alteza, e se o era de Sua Alteza, que
Ihe mostrasse o seu sinal, que elles muyto mal conheciam, e
satisfeitos disto, e asantarem que era Capitam por Sna Alteza
tiveram comigo grandes comprimentos, e cortezias, e imtei-
ramente me gardarao a jurdijao, a sy dos pnrtnguezes, como
de toda a outra geracao que estavam debaxo de minha ban-
deira dezasete vellas, que em nada quyseram emtender, e
tudo remetiam a mym, e quando queriam ir fazer as deli-
gencias, mandavam-me pedir licenga, e que mandasse hum
purtugues com elles, e foram muyto comtentes, e jatisfeitos
de mim, de que ho Aytam o toy mais, e toon muyto pola
terra, e desta maneira deixei a China de paz, e pacifiqua com
me vyr o Mercador omrrado, que andava nos requados acom-
panhado ate fora do Porto, e tomar minha derrota; praza a
Nosso Senhor que a comservem, pera qne della tirem nas
Alfandygas de Sna Alteza, e os omens muyto proveito, como
os ja comessou a receber Alfandyga dp Malaqua com mynha
vinda, que he o que senty, de que se Sua Alteza pode servir
da China, porque tem muytas Mercadorias, e boas, com que
hos omens se podem aproveitar sem cargo de suas comcien-
cias, e fazerem-se riquos, mas os Mercadores na ouveram de
ser purtuguezes, porque gardao mal a Justica, e conservam
pyor as terras, por omde amdas, que sao condi9omes com-
trayras a China, que sao pacifiqnos, e governados por Justica.
“Ho qne da China alcansei, que he Reyno muyto grande,
e tem mais de quinhentas legoas de costa, porque foram ja
JJeyuos devedidos, que agora sao de um so Rey, mas diver


soa nag lingnas, e toilos Chins; por hums bauda do Sertao a
salteanl os Turtaros, 6 por outra dizem que se mete hum
Mar mOrto, que se na navega, por onde ja vieram a China
parcios, cortam no grandea Rios de duzentas, trezentas legoas,
sao omens alvos e fornydos e os do sertao mais apageonados e
mais alluos que os da fralda do Mar, custumam Roupas cotn-
pridas e asy as Molheres, a maneira de Saios; os que mandao
sao muyto graves, e iproquetas, mandao apresuradamente
com estrondo e falao alto, sao muyto crus, e justigozos. que
todos metem ao acoute, e tormento, e trazem Menistros com-
sigo pera isso com sens estormentos, destas cruezas reprem-
dendo-os disso, me dixera que eram conformes a gente, que
era tao pervesa, que ainda nam a bastavam.
“He terra que se governa toda por Letrados, e neiles andam
as denidades e officios asy do Reyno, como do Rey, e tem
Elßey por todo o Reyno Esqnolas Geraes, e Emgeminado-
res. que amdas emgeminando os Mogos, e como sabem bem
ler, e esprever, passabmos as Esquolas aprender o sen Latim,
que he lingoa mandarim, que sao como Desembargadores, e
tem precedencias, como de Bachareis, e Leecenciados, e Dou-
tores, e a outras da Ordem do Cavalaria, e nestes anda todo o
governo, asy do Regimento da Justiga, como da Fazenda, e
outros cargos, e ha emtre elles grandes Leis e Ordenagoes, e
ha hus, que sao como Juizes, e outros Corregedores, e Rege-
dor da Justiga, que despacha com votos dontros; pom Libelos,
e tem apelagoes, e as apelagoes dos Forasteiros, principal-
mente dos purtugnezes, vao a Elßey, porque os na cativaS,
se nam prendenos por malfeitores, domde saem sentenceados
de morte, on degradados, segundo as culpas de cada hum.
“Vem da Corte todo-los annos hua Justiga Mor a prover nas
Cadeas, e dal- a pena a cada hum, que merece, estes trazem
as apelagoes dos forasteiros degpachadas por Elßey das pe-
nas, que hadaver; e por isso nam trouxe hum Mateos de Bri-
to, e outro Amaro Pyreira, que estavam em Cantao prezos,
porque eram as apelagoes em Caza d’Elßey, e mandouse-me
desculpar do Aytao, que os na podia dar sem licenga d’El
Rey, desalivionlhe as Prizoens, que sao muyto asparas, e
morrem muytos nellas, e rnandou-me dizer que na morre-
riam, que o esprevia ha Elßey; porque ho Amaro Pyreira
estava sentenciado a morte.
“X terra be toda d’Elßey, e nam ha Senhor de Titolo,
nem de Renda, que to lolos Cargos e Denidades andao nos
Letrados, que sso estes Mandaris, e precedem-se huns a ou-
tros ate chegar a Elßey, a assy n£ fiqua nenhum sem Su


pryoll, e todos tem comedias, e tengas d’Elßey, e os Gran-
des, ou Parentes d’Elßey, que nao tem Cargos, ou Deni-
dades, da-lhe el rey comedias, e apouzentaos em Luga-
res, aomde as estao comendo, e os que governao, e tem man-
dos, mudam-nos duns Reynos pera os outros, e todo o Reyno,
e Provincias estao repartidos, e tem sens Governadores e
Ofeciaes assy maiores como menores, e tudo vay por sua or-
dem.
“Ho mais deixo a Nosso Senhor, e a Vossa Alteza, que se
lembre quantos services tenho feitos nestas partes a trinta e
tantos annos, e os traballios, que levei, ha tres annos nesta
Viagem, e em paoifiquar a China, e trazer ao Estado, que a
trouxe, que verdadeiramente foram muitos, donde venho ve-
Iho, e camsado; porque tudo sa perde por nossa culpa, e aja
por seu servigo, que a merce, que me tem feita ou outra venha
a effeito, e me satisfaga como Principe tao vei’tuoso como
Yossa Alteza he, e tao cheo de jnstiga, e mo faga fazer com
Sua Alteza em minha velhice, porque com menos desgosto
busque a salvagao de minha alma, e remedio de minha vida;
porque os omens sao fraquos, e a vergonha troua os muitd,
quanto mais eu, que amdo amtre os que me viram servir, e
a quern na tenho desculpa que dar, e nam pega Nosso Senhor
comta a quern tem a culpa de trazer isto tantas vezes a memo-
ria a Vossa Alteza e a Sua Alteza, pois tao mal me gardaram, e
compriram as Provizoens e mandados de Sua Alteza pera me
tirarem mens merecimentos, e vida, e dala a ontrem, de qnem
nao receberiam mais enterece, do que de mim puderam rece-
bsr; porque venho, muito prove e na sei se me abastara pera
pagar oque trago; porque bem sabe Vossa Alteza quern sao
Mercadores, e o gasto, que averia mister em tres annos pera
os negocios, que tive, que so os de Malaqua abastao pera me
destroirem, e eu nao levei mais que a licenga, e traballios de
Capitao, sem nenhua ajnda, nem favor de cousa de Sua Alte-
za; mas ainda a Provedoria dos os outros Sem-
pra levaram, me tiraram ha mim, e somente a licenga me do-
ram, que dao a quantos la querem ir, assy os Governadores,
como Capitaes de Malaqua, he a China quern nam leva cabo-
dal, na no tras porque nam tem, se nam vender, e comprar.
“Lembro a Vossa Alteza, que pera diante delle na tenho,
se nam a Deos e sua grandeza, e vertudes, com que ha de
ver minlia justiga, e merecimentos, e fazer-me prover de cou-
sa em que na tenha duuida, ou ma mandem cumprir espres-
samente; porque me na digao como dixe Dom Affomso, que
Sua Alteza na me mandava dar Nao, que se o mandara, que


ma dera, e nam abaston ma larme ordenar as viageus pefa
me dar o favor, que levaram os que la sao Dom Francisco
Mascarenhas, e Antonio Pyreira, qne prazera a Decs, que
acabaram d’asantar a China, pbys he tudo service de Deos,
he de Sua Alteza; porque alem dos proveitos ja nam avera
tantas mortes, e perdas de Navios todolos annos como havia;
porqne hera hna das partes, aonde se gastava mnita gente, e
cabedal; porqne como a terra he muito fria, e tempestoza, e
na costa sempre amdam grandes Armadas em garda, ese na
podiam aquolher aos Poi'tos do Mar, ou de os fcoraarem nam
esqnapavao, ou de se perderem.
“Tiram tamto pola China os Governadores pera seus ohe-
gados, que descomfio tirar ja de laa proveito, se Sua Alteza
nam prove como peqo; pego a Yossa Alteza que me faga mer-
ce, e faga com Sua Alteza que ma faga de tres Viajens do Por-
to Pequeno em Navio de Sua Alteza, que per minha idade, e
trabalhos pouquo mabasta, e dezejo ter conta com minha al-
ma, e digo Porto Pequeno de Bengala, porque sao na China
dons Capitaens Mores, e dizem-me que haa ja outro e nam he
service de Vossa Alteza hirem tamtos, huns sobre os outros,
e os que la ouverem d’ir, am-se daver muito sezudamente.
“Das cousas destas partes na fago lembranga a Vossa Al-
teza, porque ha muito que sou fora, somente Malaqua he
cousa, que tern muito nome amtre todos os Reis do Sul e
China, e que satisfaz ao Estado de Vosa Alteza, e Terra
haomde he muito grande desservigo de Sua Alteza aver num-
qua Guerra, se nam muito comservada, e os Mercadores, que
pagam seus Direitos franqueados, e hem agasalhados, porque
he gramde cargo de conciencia tomarem-lhe Calioym, nem
outras mercadorias a menos precos, pois pagam seus Direitos
pera Sua Alteza, nem Capitam, nem outros ofeciaes; porque
ha y alguas tiranias, alembro a Vossa Alteza que o dAchem
se faz muito poderozo de Navios e Artelharias, Espingarda-
•
ria, e sospira por Malaqua, e ela na tern nenhua forca. Dias
de vida, e Estado de Vossa Alteza Nosso Senhor acrecente
por muitos annos. Amen. Desta Barra de Cochim aos quinze
de Janeiro de 55(5. Lionel de Sousa.”
The above letter from the Archives of the Torre do Tombo,
Lisbon (Gaveta 2, Maijo 10, No. 15, transcribed in Begisto No 6da
reforma, ff. 160-165 y.) was published for the first time by Dr. Jordao
de Freitas in the Archive Historico Portuguez, Lisbon, 1910, Vol.


VIII, from which it was reproduced in J. M. Braga’s 0 Primeiro
Acordo Lnso-Chines, Macao, 1939, which should be referred to for
annotations on a few of the names given in the letter.
*
* *
Letter written by Leonel de Souza to the Queen Dowager of
Portugal on the 11th Dec. 1563 ;
“Senhora. Hos anos pasados escreui sempre aV.A. e
fazia lembramga das que me paregia, seruigo de 8. A. e asy de
meus sernigos hem que este ano tinha os olhos no gualardao
e satizfagao deles pela lembraga que me dioguo lopez de
sousa escreueo que Y. A. tinha de me fazer merge e prouer e
desprazer de minha perdigao o que deixaria de ma fazer por
seu recolhimento e guoverno que deixou pelo que deixarei
dapomtar em allguas deste estado como soia e por nao pejar,
o tempo de sua vertuoza comteplagao hem que parege que o
deve Ja V. A. mais dacnpar que hem outros neguogios que
troua no esprito e porque esta deve de ser a Reselugilo de Y.
A. Ihe pego por sua granule e acustumada vertude que se
lebre que pasa de coremta anos que syruo 8. A. sem ter hou-
tra merge nem satizfagao mais que esta viage da China hem
que me perdi e nao houue hefeito que pedia a V. A. que me
lizese merge que houvesse por bem de a cnmprir pois da pri-
meira nao terei mais que hir nua nao de mercadores em que
me hemprestara hum tergo que trabalhar pela paz e asamto que
tomei na China pelo S. A. que samta gloria aja tamto dezejar
e mo emcomemdar pelo Jmfate dom Luis que me custou
muito de minha pobreza e dontros que dera ajuda das suas
de que se 8. A. que santa gloria seja houue por sernido se-
gumdo vi por sua carta de que hos omese as alfamdeguas de
8. A. tira muitos proueitos e de quern heu esperaria mnitas
homras e merges se vivera o que espero hem nosso senhor
e na Real vertude e muita comciemcia de V. A. que co 8. A.
me faga merge e restituir na merge que me te feito e acabar
de cumprir minha viage e gualardoar meus servigos.
“Tambem lembro a V. A. que ha pouquo que cazei com
hna filha ligitima que dese Reyno veio dum aratonio pesoa
que qua foi veador da fazemda algus anos e que fez muito
servigo a 8. A. e asi na gnera de que V T . A. seria hemformada
e asi da filha nese Reino pego a V. A. por que he molher
honrada e vertuoza que se lembre dela e que desemparada
liquaa nesta tera se eu merer que Ihe faga merge asi pelos


merecimentos do pai como dos mens e faga fazer com S. A.
duas aldeas que fora do pai tamto portamto por faiecimento
da madrasta pera seu remedio e eparo o filhos pois se a de dar
ha outre e o pai nelas tem guastado dez ou doze mil par-
daos e Jgrejas e casas e ontras benfeitorias se Hie nelas nao
coube parte como litija. Dias de vida e Real estado de V. A.
noso sor acresete por muitos anos e coserve sepre e seu samto
service amen. De Guoa a omze de dezembro de 56.3. Leonel
de Sousa”.
This letter is also in the Archives of the Torre de Tombo (Corpo
Chronologico, Parte I, Mago 106, No. 98) and was first published by
Dr. Jordan de Freitas together with the preceding letter in Archivo
Historico Portuguez.


APPENDIX E
Jesuit account of the Portuguese expedition against pirates at
Sam Moon.
“A vista destas cousas & o bom tratameto, que Diogo Pe-
reyra fes ao Mandarim, foi causa de que se voltasse mui af-
feigoado a nossas cousas Co elle [P. Francisco Peres] foi
hum Manuel Penedo pera dar calor ao negocio. Sendo ad-
mittido ao conselho dos Mandarins, Ihe perguntaram se tra-
zia o testemunho publico, que deram a outra Embaixadaa
Como respondesse, que nam, porque sendo queimada Malac?
se abrazara, derem a embayxada por finda.
“Neste raeyo tempo chegou de Sunda a Macau Luiz de
Mello de Malaca Joao Pereyra, ambos raercadores ricos, am-
bos traziao licenga Del Rey, pera navegar a Jappam, ambos
prouisam, pera que no tempo, que em Macao esperassem
mongam, tivessem o mando sobre os de Macao. Em quanto
cada hum procurou pera si o governo, esteve tudo a ponto
de aver algnma ensagoentada discordia. Metendose nisto o
o Padre Francisco Peres & o Vigario de Macao, so compos
este negocio, dandose o governo a Joao Pereira, & logo sem
nisso por duuida, Iho entregou Diogo Pereyra, como homem,
que sempre tratou rnais do hem comnm, que de particular.
Logo se escreveo ao Yiso Rey da India mandasse mais algu-
mas cousas, em especial, dons elephantes, para poder incli-
nar os Chins a admittirem a embaixada.
“Nao vindo da India consa de novo, se tinha o negocio da
embayxada por totalmente perdido, quando Deos abrio hum
caminho nam esperado, do qual a vigilancia de Diogo Pereyra
se soube aproveitar. Pouco antes tiveram os Chins guerra
com os Jappoes, que com seus navios de Corsarios faziam
muitas pi’ezas nos mares de Cantam.- Aeabada a guerra,
como os magistrados nam pagassem estipendio a dous mil
soldados, que a fizeram, saltaram em terra nos surbubios de
Cantam, & os saquearam a vista dos mandarins, que nam
tendo gente prestes, o nam pnderam remedial 1 .
“Depois disto tomando, & fortificando hum porto distante
huma jornada de Cantam. arraarara nove juncos (assim cha-
mam os Chinas a certa casta de embarcagoes,) & se fizeram


piratas. Puzeram em grandissimos apertos a Cantam, porque
hum so navio se nao atrevia air ali. Tambem destruiam os
lugares raaritimos, & a gente era obrigada a se meter pel la
terra dentro. Em fim o famoso emporio de Can tarn estava
quasi ermo, sem aver nos Mardarins valor, que pndesse en-
frear os piratas.
“Entendendo Diogo Pereyra, que facilmente podiam os
piratas ser destrnidos, se nisto metessem a mao os Portugue-
zes, mandou a Cantam hum seu criado, o qual da sua parte
prometesse ajuda dos Portugnezes contra os piratas ao Gene-
ral das armas de Cantam. Respondeu elle, que estimava
rnuito a offerta, & que a acceitava. Tornando o criado a Ma-
cao, intempestivamente rompeo este segreto; sabendo-o o
Capitam Joam Pereyra, tomou muito a mal, q Diogo Pereyra
so por sea coselho fizesse offerta das formas commuas. Com
tudo ningnem se persuadia, que a sobeiba dos Chinas se aba-
teria a confessar sua fraqueza, pedindo socorro a estrangeiros.
“0 effeito mostrou o contrario; proque pouco depois entrou
em Macau hum Mandarim principal, pedindo soccorro em
nome do general das armas. Todos os Portugnezes foram
de voto, que se Ihe nam avia de faltar, assim porque tambem
os piratas Ihes eram daninhas, como porque os Chinas tinham
os Portuguezes em suas terras; & que este service era de gran-
de memento pera effeituar muitas outras pertehgoes como
eram a da embaixada, & a de entrar a Fe Catholica, que este
foi sempre hum dos primeiros alvos, a que no Oriente se
encaminharam as importancias dos Portugnezes.
“Logo se armaram trezentos Portugnezes, homens todos
valentes, & denodados; passararn sna artelheria para os juncos
dos Chinas, pera assim enganarem melhor os piratas. Divi-
dirao-se em duas esquadras; de hua era Capitam Luis de Mel-
lo, & da outra Diogo Pereyra: toda a empreza era feita a custa
destes dous horados liomems. Pareceo ao general de Cantao,
que huma esquadra se puzesse na entrada do estreito, porque
nam pudessem fugir os piratas; & que a ontra os investisse.
Cnidava o general de Cantao, que a guerra teria muitas diffi-
cuhkdes, & que duraria tempo, porque media os Portugnezes
pellos sens Chinas.
“Vendo os piratas ao longo embarca§oes Chinas, imagina-
ram nao vir ontra gente nellas, & se prepararam mais pera a
preza, que pera a peleja. Ficon ua bocca do estreito Diogo
Pereyra; Luis de Mello os foi bnscar: chegandose de perto, &
jngando da artelharia, conheceram os piratas seu engano, &
que a cousa era com Portugnezes, Entroulhes tal medo, que


das embarcasoes se lanjaram a nadar, & cada hum so tratava
de fugir; tal foi o medo, qne Ihes entrou. Em espago de
raeya hora sem perda alguma dos nossos quasi todos foram
cativos.
“Sabendo o General de Cantao vitoria tao facilmente con-
seguida, disse, que certamente era ditoso o Rey, qne tinha
tais vassallos, & q era digno de ser Senhor de todo o mundo.
Esta boa fortuna esteve a perigo de se perder, porque pedin-
do o general de Cantam os juncos cativos, alguns nossos ti-
veram nisso difficuldades: acodio Luis de Mello, & Diogo
Pereyra, dizendo, que nam estranhasse, porquanto os Portu-
guezes tinham tal obediencia a sens Capitaes, que sem vonta-
de delles se nao atreviam a fazer cousa alguma. Estimando
o general a disculpa, disse: Pois eu por isso os pedi, porque
entedia, que vos me avieis logo de rogar, que os acceitasse.
Com a mesma agudeza, que a tem grande os Chinas, accres-
centon, que mandara dividir em duas esquadras os Portugue-
zes, alem de assim o pedir a guerra, pera experimentar, se
eram fiexiveis, & homens sem dobrez, de quern os Chinas se
pudessem fiar.
“Eicon o General notavelmente affeifoadoa Diogo Pereyra,
o qual nao perdendo ponto, nem occasiao de promover todo,
o qne convinha a gloria de Deos; Ihe pedio, patrocinasse o
negocio da embayxada. Prometeo de assim o fazer, & den
licen?a fossem Portoguezes a Cantam sobre este negocio-
Com elles foi o Padre Peres. Depois dos Portoguezes pro-
porem diante do Magistrado o q levavam encommendado a-
cerca de sens contratos, tomou a mam o Padre Francisco
Peres.
“Vendo os Mandarins sua authoridade, mostrandolhe be-
nevolencia o rnandaram ir pera junto de si, & que dissesse o
que tinha. Logo tirou hum memorial, que apprezentou, no
qual dizia: Eu sou Meslre letrado; andopello mundo ensinan-
do a Ley de Deos; d porque soube ser mui grande, d mui
florente o Reyno dos Chinas, d que nelle lid muitos Mestres
d sahios, peqo me dem licenqa pera fallnr com elles, d eles
communicar o que ensino: que se me conceda por algum
tempo morar em terra em alguma caza, assim pera isto, co-
mo porque minha idade, & achaques nam suopera estar em
a nao: tambem pera offereger a Deos Omnipolente sacrificios
pello Rey, Reyno, d Mandarins da China, o que nao temos
por costume fazer no mar.
“Lendo elles o memorial, Ihe perguntaram, de que ley era
Mestre, & que consas ensinava? Respondeo pello interpreter
Qne elle era Mestre da Ley Celestial d Divina. que ensinava


como os hornens por todo a eternidade podiom ser bemaven-
tnrados. Replicaram dies, que Ihes paregia bem o Magistra-
cies, mas que dissesse, de que mode ensinava a conseguir a-
quelle bem? Respondeo: Ensinando a adorar um so Deos,
Greador do Geo, A- terra, & de todas as cousas, & guardar
sua Ley. Logo Ihes foi repetindo os Mandamentos da Ley
de Deos.
“Ouvidos elles, comegaram os Mandarins como admirados
da grandeza, & santidade das cousas, que nelles se continham,
a olhar huns para os outros; mandaram trazer huma cabaya
de damasoo, & que a vestisse em sinal da estimagam, que el-
les faziam do sou Magisterio. Porem nao teve despacho o
que pedia respondendo, nao ser costume dos Chinas, que os
estrangeiros morassem em sen Reyno. Finalmente todo a
embayxada se rejeitou. 0 Emperador com huma carta de
enmprimentos respondeo a El-Rey de Portugal dando as cau-
sas, porque nam admittira esta embayxada, que todas para-
, vara em temores dos Chinas, por algumas desordens, que nos
annos passados tinham achado nos Portuguezes; & estes des-
manchos de alguns particulares foram os que por entam fize-
rao mal ao bem commum. Nestas andangas se deteve o Pa-
dre Peres na China athe o anno de 1565.”
This passage was reproduced by Dr. Jordao de Freitas in his
Macau, Materias para a sua Imtoria no seculo XVI, Lisbon, 1910,
pp. 32-36, being taken from Father Antonio Franco’s Imaqem da
Virtude em o noviciado da Gompanhia de Jesus no Heal Collegia de
Jesus de Coimbra, Coimbra, 1719, Yob ii, pp. 402-404.


INDEX




“Abarute” 99
A Abelha da China (Macao newspaper)
111, 174
Abrauches Pinto (J. A.) —157, 182
Abyssinia 15, 22, 39-40
Academia de Historia, Anais de 68,
95, 167, 171
Aden 22-23, 28
Afonso (Dom, Prince) 62
Africa —l6, 18, 30, 32, 36, 41, 46, 47,
50, 52; Trade with 13. 16
African ports — 22, 24, 30, 46, 47, 50,
92, 93; spices —l3
Agajaitn 49
Agar-agar —lOl
Agencia Gteral das Colonies —173
Agoada 49
Agra 41
Agriculture 47, 50, 127; in China,
135-138, 142, 152, 176-177; at Macao,
135-138, 141-142, 148, 152-153, 176-
177
Ajuda Library 130, 169
Ajuda Library, Codices 76, 83, 83, 86,
87, 98, 106,109-110,131-132,168-169,
170, 172-173, 176
Albuquerque (Afonso de) —ll, 13, 22,
27-29, 32, 38-39, 45, 60-52, 58, 61
Albuquerque, Cartas de Afonso, Lisbon,
1884 27,162
Albuquerque (Jorge de) 64, 65
Alcacer-Cequer 47
Alcacer-Kebir (El Kasr-el-Kebir) 34,
44
Alcune cose del paese de la China, sapuli
de certi Portughsi ch'ivi furon fati
schiavi; e questofu cavato d'un trata-
to che fecce Galeolo Pereira Oentil
huomo persona di molto credito il
quale sette prigione nel sudetto luogo
Tachien alcuni anni, Venice, 1565
168
Alexandria 31
Alguns Documentos do Archive Natio-
nal da Torre do Tombo, Lisbon, 1892
60, 165
Almeida (Fortunato de), Historia de
Portugal, Coimbra, 1922-27 47,163
Almeida (D. Francisco de) 27, 50
Almeida (D. Joao de) —143
Almeida (Luis de) —B2, 95, 97,133,150
Almeida (D. Pedro de) —143
Almeida (Simao de) —B6
Aloes 13, 16, 69, 68, 101
Alum 99
Alvares (Joao) —l3O
Alvares (Joao Printer), Copia de unas
Cartas de Algunos padres e herma-
nos, dela India, Japan, y Brasil alos
padres y her manos dela mismacom-
pania, en Portugal, tresladadas de
Portugues en Castellano. Lisbon, 1555
75, 168
Alvares (Jorge Ist) 23, 61,165
Alvares (Jorge 2nd) 95, 171
A-Ma— 104
A-Ma, Temple of —lO5-108, 173
Amacao —lO5
Amachao —lO5
Ama cuao —lO5
A-Ma-Kuo— 104
Amaqua 105
Amaquao —lO5
Amaquam —lO5
Amaquosa —143
Amber —l3, 16, 100, 140


Ambergris —13, 101, 141
Amboina 23, 48
America —l6, 18, 32, 36, 37, 43
American plants—l3s-137; American
ships 92
Anaemia 49
An Cha Shih 77
Andrade (Fernao Peres de) 60, 62,63,
65
Andrade (Simao Peres de) 63, 78,85,
88
Angediva 46
Aniline —l3
Anjiro (Paulo)—9s
Annam 61, 154
Anriques (Fernao) —65
Antwerp —l3, 14
Ao-men (See O Moon)
Arabia 10, 24, 41, 46, 65
Arabian navigators —lO, 48, 92, 93
Arabs 14, 25, 27.48,54,56-58,92,123;
Arab ships 48
Aragon —l6
Arakan 24, 41, 50
Aranha (Dr. Brito), Garnoes e os Lusia-
das —132.176
Archives — 12, 33, 60. 65-66, 75, 82-83,
109, 114, 117. 140, 165-166, 171-172,
174, 180-181, 185-186, 202-210
Archive Historico Portugues — 94, 161,
202-210
Arguim 47
Armada, The Great 35
Armenia, 55, 77
Armour — 49, 50
Arnold (Julean), Commercial Handbook
of China, Washington, 1920, Vol. II
—136, 176
Arquebuses —15, 94
Artillery 51, 94, 115-116, 157, 183
Artisans 39, 142, 159
Arts —l6, 166, 158, 181, 189
Arzila 47
Asia — 18, 25, 26, 29, 32, 36-37, 41, 46-
49. 50, 52, 53, 57-58, 93,101, 146, 162,
157-159
Asian produce—l 4-16, 24-29, 36, 57-58,
147-148,160.157-159 ; Ships 24,30,
48. 54, 57, 61,69, 90, 94,140; trade
14-15, 24-29, 36, 56-58,66, 68,79,98-
101, 140-141
Asiatic Society of Japan , Transactions
of— 95, 171
Asserim 49
Astronomers, Chinese —155
Atlantic Ocean 38, 47, 50
Australia 50
Awabi —lOl
Aynthia 58
Azam or 46
Azevedo (J. Liicio de) Epocas de Portu-
gal Econdmico, Lisbon, 1929, —l5,
161
Azores Islads 15,92. 158
Baker (Capt. B Granville), A Winter
Holiday in Portugal, London, 1913
—2l, 161
Balfour (S. F), Hong Kong before the Bri-
tish, Shanghai 89, 170
Ballard (Admiral) 52
Bamboo-ware —l5
Banda —l5, 23. 29, 48, 101
Banka 23
Banking —l5-17, 20
Banyan trees —lO7
“Barbarians” 122, 133, 155
Barbary Coast 47
Barbosa (Duarte) —B, 23, 54, 99-100,
162, 165
Barcelor 24, 49
Bardez 49
Barielore -48
Barreiros (Danilo) —111,157, 173, 183
Barrelto (Father Belchior Nunes) 22,
75, 82, 86, 88, 105,186; Letter written
by —B7. 98, 100, 101, 169, 172
Barretto (Francisco) 97
Barretto (Rui) —142


Barretto de Rezende (Pedro) 23
Barrier Gate near Macao {See Kwan Chap)
143, 177
Barros (Joao de) —8, 23,44; Decadas da
Asia, Lisbon, 1552-1563 and Madrid,
1615 23, 46, 163
Basins —lOO
Bassein 48, 92
Batavia 41
Batecala 49
Baticalon 46, 48
Battle of Chau Mai Kei 73-77
Battle of Sam Moon 114-117
“Bay of Heung Shan” 104
Beads —lOl
Belem, Monstrance of —l7
Bell (Prof. Aubrey F. G.), Portugal of
the Portuguese, London, 1916 18,
35, 161, 162
Bengal 15, 30, 48, 97
Benin Country —l3
Benaoim 15, 55, 101
Bernard (Father Henri), Aux Fortes de
la Chine, Tientsin, 1933, 65, 75,
165, 169; Sagesse Chinoise et philoso-
phic chretienne, Tientsin, 1935,
122,175
Beverages 13, 16, 16, 142, 153, 158
Bible —155
Bihlioteca Nacional, Lisbon 176
Biker (Judice) 111
Bills of Lading— 91, 157, 182
Bintao 48
Birds’ nests—lol
‘‘Birds of Paradise” 55, 146
Biscuits— 142
Bishop of Peking, D. Alexandre de Gou-
vea 111, 173, 174
‘‘Black Hole of Calcutta” 42
Blackwood 66, 101, 182
Blood-poisoning 49
Bloodshed —124
Bocarro (ATitdnio) —8, 23, 48; Livro das
Plantas de todas as Fortalezas, Cida-
des, e Povoaqoens do Estado da India
Oriental, etc. (Ms.) 23, 48, 164,178
Bocarro (Manuel Tavares) 183
Boletim Eclesidstico da Diocese de Macau
111, 173.
Boletim da Sociedade Luso-Japonesa,
Tokyo. 1929 65, 165
Bosks 33, 100, 107,109-110,112, 115,
117, 130-131, 140-141, 159, 163, 165-
-170, 171, 173-176, 181
Borca 48
Borges (Fernao) 75
Borges da Fonseca (Caspar) 131
Borneo 15, 48, 54, 56, 61, 101, 121
Boston 111, 112
Botanical experiments 32, 149, 179
Botelho (Diogo)—so
Botelho de Sousa (Aires) —77
Bourgeoise 20
Bourses —l6
Bowls —lOO, 156
Boxer (Prof. C. R.) —B, 44. 91. 97, 112,
139, 142, 144. 161, 171, 182 ; The Af-
fair of the Madre de Deus, London,
1929—95, 97, 171;
Alguns Arquivos em Portugal (in col-
laboration with J. M. Braga), Macao,
1939 98, 172;
The Christian Century in Japan, 97,
172;
The Fidalgos in the Far East, The Ha-
gue, 1948 97, 172 ;
The Great Ship from A macon (ad-
dress at London University) 91,
92-93, 95, 96, 170, 171
Macau nn Epoca da Bed aura quo,
Macao, 1942 95, 97, 146, 157, 172,
178,183;
Portuguese Commercial Voyages 300
Years Ago, London, 95, 97, 171;
Portuguese Influence in Japanese
Screens, London, 1936 153, 181;
The Bise and Fall of Nicholas Iquan,
Shanghai, 1941 —llB, 175;
Some Early Portuguese Bills of Lad-
ing, London, 1939 157, 182;


Subsidies para a Histdria dos Capi-
tdes-gerais e Governadores de Macau,
1557-1770, Macao, 1944 95, 97, 143,
171, 178;
Subsidies para a Histdria dos Portu-
gueses no Japdo, Lisbon, 1927 95,
97, 171;
Three Historians of Portuguese A sia
(address at London University, 28th
October, 1947), Hongkong, 1948
61, 165;
. As Viagens de Japdo e os sens Capi-
tdes-mores, 1650-1640, Macao, 1941
95, 97, 143, 171, 178;
Was Camoes ever in Macao ?, Shang -
hai, 1940 132, 176
Boxes —lOO
Braamcamp Freire (Anselmo), A Feito-
toria de Flandres 14, 161
Bracelets —lOO, 101
Braga (A.M.) —lOl
Braga (J.M.), Alguns Arquivos em Portu-
gal (in collaboration with C. R. Bo'
xer), Macao, 1939 98, 172;
A Celebrated Gun-Foundry (article in
Benascimenfo, Macao, 1943) 157,
183;
Macao’s Temple of A-Ma (article in
Benascimento, Macao, 1943) 108,
173;
Notes on the Lingua Franca of the
East (article in Benascimento, Macao,
1943) —157, 182;
Padre Jodo de Loureiro, Missiondrio
e Botdnico, Macao, 1938 149, 179;
• O Primeiro Acordo Luso-Chinis, Ma-
cao, 1939—80, 83, 86, 169, 170, 202-
210;
—The ‘Tamdo’ of the Portuguese Pioneers,
Shanghai, 1939 23, 61, 80,161,165,
169;
The Temple of the Goddess of Mercy ,
(article in Benascimento, Macao, 1943)
107,173
Braga (Teofilo), Camoes, Epoca e Vida
132, 176
Brandao (Father Ayres) 87
Brazil 43, 47, 93, 137,146, 158
Brazil-wood 14, 15, 101
Bread —l4l, 142
Britain —l4
British 37-39, 42, 91-93,156, 180
British Admiralty Charts 82
British “colonial ” words 182
Brito (Antonio de) 48
Brito (Matheus de), Informaqdo de Chi-
na 75, 87, 168
“Broadway” 169
Brocades —l5, 29, 54, 55, 99
Bronzes 15, 158
Brunei 55
Buddhist converts 56; festivals 108;
monks 41
Buildings —32, 33, 113, 129, 148-149,
153, 179
Bungo 97
Burma 24, 41, 55
Burn 23
Byzantium 55, 159
Cabbages—l 37
Cabinets —lOO
Cabo de Cue 46
Cabral (Pedro Alvares) — 38, 50
Cactus plant —152
Cadbury (Dr. W. W.) and Jones (Miss
M. H.), At the Point of a Lancet, Shang-
hai, 1935-155-156, 181
Cairo 55
Calcutta 42
Calico 24
Calicut —lO, 22, 24, 46, 60; Samori of
65
California —l5B
Calin {See Spelter)
Caliture 49
Calms 49, 59
Calvo (Diogo) 66; Letter to the King
(Appendix A) —66,185-186
Cambay 24, 48, 50, 101
Cambodia 64-56, 59, 121, 164
Cambolin 49


Camelias —158
Camlets —101
Camoes (Lni's Vaz de) 38, 45,129-132,
133; quotations from —l7, 28, 29, 52;
and Macao —129-132, 176; Rocks of
Camoes —l3O-131.
Camphor—ls, 55, 99, 146
Campos (J. J. A.) History of the Por-
tuguese in Bengal Calcutta, 1919 37,
48, 157, 163, 182
Canara— 48
Cannanore 22, 24, 46
Cannon 51, 94,116-116,146,167, 183
Canton (misnomer for Kwang-chow
#*!'!)—l2. 61, 67, 75, 79, 83, 90, 102-
106, 133, 145, 155-156, 178; Chinese
officials of— 63, 75, 79-80, 85-86,109,
114-117, 132; Portuguese visits to
61-63, 85-88,105,116, 145, 169; Priso-
ners at —63-64, 75, 87, 105,127,168-
169; Relations with Macao —lO3-105,
109-117,133,140-141,144-146; Threa-
tened by Pirates —llO, 112-118, 120-
121; Trade at —55, 79, 88, 98, 109-
110 J*j.i M.
Canton River —23, 50, 63, 88-90, 98,114-
116
Cantonese —lO3
Cape of Good Hope 9-11, 37, 51,63,
93
Cape Verde 47
Capitalism —15,20. 29-31, 32, 36, 38,
66, 91, 97, 133, 169
Caps—ls
Captain-generals—l 34
Captain-majors 64. 66, 78, 83-86, 96-
97. 129-130, 133, 139, 142-144, 171-
172, 178
Carania 49
Caravels — 38
Cardim (Father Antonio) —l3l, 154
Carkanets —lOl
Carneiro (D. Belchior) 32, 133
Carpets—ls, 31, 100
Carracks 91, 92
Carvings 33
Casa Branca —l3B
Castanheda (Fernao Lopes de) —8; His-
toria do descobrimento d conquista da
India pelos Portugueses, Coimbra,
1551-1561 46, 67. 163, 166
Castanhoso (Miguel de) 40
Castile — 16, 18, 35
Castle of Arguim 47
Castro (D. Joao de) — 18, 22, 32, 179
Catanho (Rafael) 65
Cathay 60
Celebes 48, 55, 56
Censors 74
Ceram 23
Ceuta 37. 44, 47
Ceylon 15, 24, 30, 48, 50, 56, 93
Chale 48
Champa 55, 56, 59, 121
Chan Kow-tak 74
Chan Sun (£|s#) 166
Chan Yat-chung —ll4
Chandernagore 43
Chang Si-lao 110, 111
Chang Te, Emperor—7B, 124, 126
Chang T’ien-tse, Sino-Portuguese Trade
from 1514-1644, Leiden, 1934 72,
74, 76*112-114,117-118,145,165,168,
174, 178
Chaplains 95
Charity 22, 33, 38, 41, 134, 138, 149-
150, 153-154, 159, 179
Charles V., King 34
Chan Ma Kai, Battle of 73-77
Chaul 48
Che Lam ($»#•) 114
Cheese 15, 153
Chekiang Province 65, 67-69, 72, 78-
80. 84, 87, 90, 94, 95, 98, 120, 166,
175
Chen Hao, Prince of Ning 126
Cheng Cheng-kung (s(ss, J#) —ll9, 174
Cheng Chung-hing —B7
Ch6ng Ho (*p*») 121, 124
Cheng (Dr. T’ien-hsi), China Moulded
by Confucius, London, 1946 129,
176


Cheng Tung, Emperor —124
Chests —lOO
Cheung Chow 67, 70-73, 75,
77, 80, 166, 167
Chia Ching, Emperor 70, 72, 87. 110,
114
Chiang-hei Tong Chap (iE-ilt 114
Chiang Pin (*l.s}) 124, 126
Chickens 68
China (See also Chinese) —7, 12, 15, 23,
26, 31, 37, 48, 53-55, 58-59, 60-65,
65-78,78-89.89-101,109-111,113-118,
118- 132-138, 139-141, 144, 152-
158, 164, 165-170, 172, 173-180, ISO-
-183; Coast of—ls, 23, 31, 57, 59.
65-66, 84, 90, 93-97,110-111,119-121,
128, 139-141; Coasts of Chekiang and
Fukien 67-71, 72-74, 76-78, 84,107,
119- 166-169; Coasts of Kwang-
tung —23, 61-63, 64-65, 79-83, 85-89,
98-101, 102-104, 109-111, 114-117,
133-134, 165-166, 169-171, 173-175;
Court of — 62-64, 69, 73, 74, 77, 79,
85, 95-96, 110, 118-122, 123-129, 155;
169-170, 175-176; Culture of —2l,
118-119, 121-123, 127-129, 132, 152,
153, 154-155, 156, 158, 175-176; Em-
perors of—62-64, 69-72, 74, 77-79.
83-87, 109, 116, 118, 123-127, 165,
175-176; Europe, Relations with —8,
31, 65, 61-65, 100, 123, 129, 134, 137,
140, 141-142, 146, 150, 154-155-167-
159; Food-problems of—3l, 54,66,68,
79-80, 89, 98-99, 101, 127, 134-138,
152-153,176-177,180; Government of
-62-64, 69, 73, 77, 95-96, 120-122,
126-127, 128-129, 145, 169-170, 175;
History of 53-55, 62-64, 67-69,
72-74, 79-80, 87-89, 114-115. 119-121,
122-129; Imperial House-hold of
62, 63, 69, 77, 79, 119-122, 122-128,
175; Japanese relations with 31,61,
68-70, 90, 115, 119, 123,139,167; Ma-
cao, Relations with —7, 80, 102-105,
109-118, 120, 128, 129, 133-142, 143-
146, 150, 152-158, 169, 173-180, 180-
183; Merchants of 23, 24, 30, 53-55,
58-69, 60 63. 65, 66-69, 69-71, 77, 79-
81,84-86, 89-90, 98-101, 107, 120-121,
127-128, 133-138, 139-142, 144-145,
152-153, 156-157, 165-166, 169-170,
174, 176-178, 181-182; Officials of.
their aloofness 58,63-64, 118 119,
121-123, 126-128, 133, 137, 154-156,
169, 175, 177; Official Corruption in
-68-70, 72-73, 76, 77, 84, 87, 88,
124-129, 143-144, 175; Peasantry of
68, 106,127-128,133-138,142, 152,
174,176-177; Philosophy of 37,58.
69, 74, 77, 108, 118-119, 121-123,
126-129, 154-155, 158, 175-176; Ports
—23, 53-55, 6 L-63,67-68, 71-73, 80-81,
85-88, 90, 93, 95, 102, 104, 115, 118,
141, 145, 165-169, 170-171; Port-
uguese Commercial relations with
7,15,23,24,31,53-55,69,61-64, 65-69,
70-71, 72-73, 78-81, 86, 89-91, 96,
98-101,128-129,133-139,139-142,144-
148, 152-154, 156-159, 165-172, 173-
175, 176-179,180-182; Portuguese dis-
covery of — 23,61-63, 165-166; Por-
tuguese negotiations with - 60-61, 62-
65, 83-86,89, 109-110, 112-117, 126-
127, 128-129, 143-144, 167-170,173-
179, 180-183; Portuguese prisoners
in—4l, 64, 73-76, 127, 168-169: Por-
tuguese social contactswith —104-105,
106-108, 129, 133-135, 138-139, 145-
148,152-156, 157, 158, 173-177, ISO-
-182; Portuguese trading posts in 48,
50, 61-63, 67-63, 69, 78-81, 82-83, 90,
93, 98-101,133,140-141,144-147, 165-
172, 173-174; Portuguese voyages to
23, 30, 37, 48, 50, 59, 60-65, 65-68,
72, 78-81, 91-92, 98-100, 126, 134-135,
139-142, 144-145, 162-168, 169-172,
173-175; Produce of —l5, 24, 31, 45-
55,61, 66, 68-69,98-100,134-138,152-
153 158, 176-177, 180-181; Revenues
of—7 B-80,83-84, 85, 121-123,127-128,
133, 140, 143-145,170,171-178; Sages
of— 122, 125-127, 129, 176; Ships of


24, 30, 53-54, 60, 64, 80, 84-86, 101,
106- 115-116, 119, 122; Silver
desired by —6B 69, 95. 98 90, 120,
Subjects of 54. 60, 65, 70-74, 86,
94, 103, 109-117, 122-123, 127-128,
133, 155, 166, 175 177; Trade with
11, 15, 26, 54, 59, 61-64, 65 68, 71,
77-79, 81, 85-36, 89, 90, 94-100, 103,
118-121, 128-129, 133, 135, 138-146,
152-154, 153-169, 165-168, 169-170,
173-175, 176-178, 180-182.
China-root —16,100, 158
China Sea 23, 50, 53-55, 58-59, 60-65,
65-70, 72-74, 79 89, 89-101, 102-108,
113- 118-121, 133-135, 139-146,
165-172,173-178
Chinaware 15, 31, 33, 54, 55, 60, 69,
100, 141, 156, 158, 182
Chincheo {See Cheung Chow)
Chinese adventurers 53-54, 60-65, 90,
107- 119-121, 165-8: Agreements
with the —B3-87, 89, 109 110, 112,
114- 129, 170, 173-174; Arts of
55, 99-101, 140-141,156-158, 180-182;
Astronomers—lss; Books—67, 70,
72, 73, 74, 80, 83, 84, 87-88, 100, 107-
8, |ll2-3,114-5, 117,156,159, 166-170,
174; Chronicles 12, 67, 69, 71-3, 78,
80, 87- 90, 106, 112-3, 117, 156, 159,
168, 172-3, 175; Conservatism 58,
62-4, 69, 78, 88, 118-123, 126-8, 133,
137, 154, 155, 169, 175-7; Corruption
among the 68-70,72-3, 76, 77, 84
87-8, 124-6, 128-9, 143-4, 175, 177-8;
Dialects —l2, 67-68, 72, 81-3, 103-4,
157, 167-170, 173, 182-3; Emigration
24, 53-4, 60,65, 69,70,76,94-5,121,
124 166, 173, 177; Eunuchs —l2l,
124-7, 175-6; Fisherfolk —lO5-8,173;
Imperial Household 63, 69, 77,79,
120,122-4,124-7,175; Imperial Orders
-80,83,86,89-90,94,110, 115, 117,
121-3, 129, 133,169, 174; Language-
-12, 67-8, 72, 81-3, 103-4, 157, 168 170,
181-3; Memorials 62, 74, 79-80, 84,
' 114-5. 127, 168, 170, 174, 176; Mer-
chandise —15, 31,55, 58-61. 69, 76,
79-80, 84, 99-101, 119-121,128,133-
7, 140-4, 152-4, 156 8, 165-7, 169-
172, 174, 176-7.180-2; Misunderstan-
dings with —63-5, 71-2, 72-4, 121-3,
126-7, 166-9; Patriots 69, 73-4, 79-
80, 84, 88. 114-5, 124-7, 137, 167, 174,
175; Peasantry 68, 106-8, 127, 128,
135-8. 142,152-3,158,173,175-6,176-
7; Pirates 62, 66, 69, 70-3, 81, 84-
91, 101, 109-117, 119-121, 147, 167,
174; Reserve —5B, 63-4, 118-9, 121-3,
126-8, 133, 137, 154-6, 169, 175-7;
Scholars 107,121-3,127-9,137, 152,
155, 175, 181; Self-sufficiency of
56, 121-3, 126, 154-6; Temples 67-
108-8; Understandings with the Por-
tuguese 61-2, 65-71, 80-82, 84-8, 89'
90, 96, 98-101, 109-110, 112-8, 120-1,
133-8, 139-141,144, 147, 152 8, 165-6,
169, 173-4, 176 180, 180-2; Writer
12, 67, 79, 71-3, 78-80, 87-90,108,112.
5, 117-8, 167
Ching-hei Tong Chap 115,
117, 174
Ghing Hsi Tong (JB-M.'jt) 67, 166
“Chinoiserie” —lB3
Chiu Chow (<sB ft]) — 114
Chiu On —73
Chivalry 38, 44, 45, 150, 157
Cholas 56
Cholera 49
“Chop” —llO
Chorao 49
Chou Ching-lien, Sino-Portuguese Rela-
tions. Shanghai, 1936, 84, 87, 88,
114, 115, 170, 174
Christendom 26, 34, 52-53, 155
Christian effort 22, 26, 52, 56, 95,116,
138,150,155,164; tradition —42, 52.
149, 150, 154, 155
Chroniclers—B, 49, 65, 68-71, 163, 165
Chronicles —l2, 67, 69, 71-73, 78,80,
87-90, 106,112-113,117,168, 172-173,
175


Chrysanthemums— 158
Chuan Chow Off *H) —62, 72. 166, 167
Chue Yuen, Viceroy (^.?A.) — 72-75. 77,
80, 98, 98
Chui Chuen {!&■£?) 87
Chung Shan (See Heung Shan)
Church. The 25. 33, 34, 52. 149. 164
Churches 17, 44. 132,134, 154, 179
Church-plate— 33
Cidabo 48
Cidade do Nome de Dens na China 105
110, 129
Chinchona 153
Cinnamon 15, 30
“City of the Name of God” 105, 110,
129
Civet —l6, 100
Civic service 149-150, 153, 160, 178-
180, 180 182
Clergy— 34, 50, 150
Clocks —l5, 146
Cloth —l3, 15, 24, 30, 40. 55, 101, 146
Clothing— 16. 31, 49,142,148,180, 181
Cloves —l5, 55, 101
Clyde (P. H.), The Far East, New York,
1947 147, 178
Cochin —l3, 22. 24, 38, 41, 46, 62, 65,
84, 92, 146
Cochinchina—23, 30, 50, 54, 59, 149,
154
Cocoa —153
Code of conduct 157
Coelho (Adolfo) —157, 182
Coelho de Albuquerque (Duarte) 62,
64, 88
Coffee —153
Coffers 54, 65
Co-Hong —144, 178
Coins —l5, 157
Colledge (Dr.)—lss
College of St. Paul 130, 131
Collis (Manrice\ The Great Within, Lon-
don, 1946 148, 178;
The Land of the Great Image, London,
1943,-25. 26,126
Cologne —l4
Colombo —l3, 22, 41, 46, 49, 146
Colonies —35-36, 47, 152, 179
Colonizing system—4l, 47,134-138,152,
159
Columbus (Christopher)—9
Commerce —47, 56, 57. 93, 147.157;
Commercial documents 91. 157,
182 ; Restraints 34. 56,156. 160
Commodities —l5, 16, 31, 36. 37. 54-55,
59-61, 66. 69, 76. 79-80, 84. 99 101,
119-121. 128, 133-137, 140-144. 152-
154, 156-158, 165-167, 169-172 174,
176-177, 180-182
Concepcion (Fr. Juan de la). Historic
General de Philipinas, Manila, 1788
111. 173
Concessions granted 32, 128
Conch-shell windows—ls 3
Condiments (See Spices) —l3-16, 30-31,
36, 57-58, 61, 79, 140, 146, 157
Confectionary —lOO
Confucius —125.129, 176
Congo River 47
Conquistadores 51
Contraband 30. 69, 72, 83, 86, 90, 109,
122, 129, 148, 176-177
Contracts —157, 180
Cooking— 153
Copia de unas Cartas de algunos padres
e hermanos dela India , Japan, y Brasil
alas padres y hermanos de la misma
Campania, em Portugal, tresladadas de
Portugues en Castellano, Lisbon, 1555
75, 168
Copper —l3. 15. 29. 55. 66. 69, 99
Coral —l5, 29, 54, 101, 140
Cordage 142
Cordier (Henri) —112; Histoire gene-
rals de la Chine, 4 vols. Paris, 1920-21
118, 175
Corfacao 48
Cork —l3
Corn 68
Cornelians —lOl
Coromandel Coast—24, 50, 54
Correa (Caspar) —B, 65, 171; Lendas da
India, Lisbon. 1858-1860 46, 65-67,
163, 165, 166


Correia (F. A.), Conseguencias Eeondmi-
cas dos Descobrimentos, —l6, 17,161
Correia (Manuel) —l3O
Corsali (Andrea) 61
Cortesao (Armando), — 8, 62,103, 162,
165; The Suma Oriental of Tomi Pires
and the Book of Francisco Rodrigues,
(Hakluyt Society) London, 1944 55
58, 62, 65. 68, ioo, 102-3, 149, 162,
164-5, 167, 172-3, 179
- Gartografia e cartografos portugueses,
do seculo XV e XVI, Lisbon* 1935
67, 72, 166. 168
Cotton —l3, 24, 30-1, 90, 100, 146
Court of Inquiry 77,
Couto (Diogo do) —B, 23, 67, 133; De-
cadas da Asia, IV to XII, Coimbra,
1551-1561 and Lisbon, 1602-1736
23, 46-7,163
Craftsmen —142
Oranganore 48, 65-6
Credit documents 157, 182
‘'Cross of Christ” —lB
Cross-bow 51
Crown 33-35, 44
Crusades —l4, 17, 25, 27,34,38,52,56
Cruz (Frei Caspar) da, Tractado em gue
contam tnnito por extenso as Gousas da
China com suas particularidades, e assi
ao Reyno de Ormuz, Lisbon, 1570
68, 70-71, 75-77. 87, 90, 113, 167, 169
(Appendix B, 187-189; Appen-
dix C —l9O-201).
Cruzados 66, 99. 145
Crystal-wear—ls, 101
Cnama River —l4
Cultural contacts 21.118-119,121-123
128-129, 137, 148, 152-155, 156, 158,
175-176
Cunha (Tristao da) 50
Cnnha Gonjalves (Dr. L.). Camoe s nao
esteve em Macau, Coimbra, 1928 —132,
176
Cunha Rivara, Grammatica da Lingua,
Concani, J. 57, 188
Cups^ls3
'Cures for diseases —149, 179
Cnriosites —l5, 32. 100, 146, 158
Currency 16, 157, 182
Cuslard-applies —137
Cost (R). A Sketch of Modern Languages
in the East Indies 157, 183
Cutch —lOl
Daggers 15, 64
Dalgado (Monsg. Sebastian Rodolfo),
Glossdrio Luso-Asidtico, Coimbra, 2
vols., 1919-1921,-137,152,157, 177,
180, 183
Damao —15, 48
Damasks 54,99, 141
Dames (M. Longworth). The Book of Du-
arte Barbosa, (Hakluyt Society), Lon-
don, 2 vols. 1918 & 1921 65, 99,100,
162, 165, 172
Dantzig —l4
Danu 48
Danvers (F. C.), The Portuguese in India,
London, 1894 23, 46, 47, 163
Decorations 33, 158
Defence Works (See Fortresses)
Demagogues — 128
Development of Macao —139,140, 145-
161, 153 156, 173,-175, 176-180
Dialects —lO3, 104,157, 180-1, 182,-3;
Chinese, —12,67-68, 72,81-3, 103-4,
157, 167-170,173, 182-3
Diamonds —l5
Dias (Bu'tholomeu) —ll, 38, 50
Dingwall (Dr. E. J.), Racial Pride and
Prejudice. London, 1946 43, 163
Discoveries 48. 68, 90, 93, 134, 167
Diseases 19, 49, 149, 179
Dispensaries —155
Disputes 35, 63 65, 71-4,121-3,126-7,
166-9
Diu 22, 23, 28, 48, 49
Doha 48
Doctors — 155
Documents 32, 33, 65,91, 109, 113,
114, 117, 128, 140, 168, 182


Dodwell (Prof. H.H), The Cambridge
History of India, Vol. V., London,
1929—27,162
Dom Joao Island 169
Drake (Sir Francis) 22
Dresses iOO, 180
Drugs —l3, 15, 16, 24, 31, 54,' 146, 179
Dutch 15, 35-39, 41, 91, 93, 164, 180;
Ships — 36
Dnyvendak (J. A.) 25, 162
“Dwarf-slaves” ( See also Japanese)
54,61, 69, 70, 73, 74, 81, 88, 115, 167
Dyes —l6, 55
Dystentery 49
Ear-pendants —lOl
Early references to Macao 80, 82, 88,
106, 129-135
East, The—l 3, 15, 21, 22,-4, 28, 32, 36,
37, 41. 46-9, 60. 92-6,135,141-8, 154-
9,162-4, 165-6, 169-172
East India Company —156,159, 164,
178
East Indies —l5, 22, 23, 31, 46, 48, 50,
54. 56, 57, 69, 80, 82, 100, 129, 141,
157
Eastern Produce —15,29-31, 53-5, 56,
58, 68-9, 90, 94, 98-101, 135-8, 140-2,
145-6, 157-8, 176-9, 180-1
E?a (D. Francisco de) —143
Ecclesiastical services 22, 26, 33, 52-
3, 66-7, 95, 134,138,150, 154-5, 163-
164, 171-2, 179-180, 181
Economic contacts 13-7, 18-21,22-6,
30-3, 46-50, 53-9,60-3, 65-9, 72, 78-81,
83-5. 89-101, 119-120, 133-151, 157-8,
163-4, 165-6, 167-172, 176-8, 180-2
Eden (Richard), Historye of Travaile in
the West and East Indies, London,
1577 168
Education: in Europe 32, 115; in Ma-
cao—l3o, 131, 154
Egyptians —l4, 25, 27
El Dorado 40
Elephants —146
El-Kasr-el Kebir— 34, 44
Embroidery —l5, 32, 100, 158
Emigration of Chinese 24, 53-4, 60,
65, 69-70, 76, 94-5,121,124,166, 173,
177
Emperors of China—62-4, 69-72, 64,
77-9, 83-7, 109, 116, 118, 123-7, 165,
176-6
Empoli (Giovanni da) —6l
Empress Dowagers —124
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th Ed.,-
72, 167
Engineering 28, 49, 50, 52, 149, 157,
179
England —l5B, 172
English ( See British) — 38, 42, 91-3,156
Enmities 63-5, 71-4,123-7, 166-9
Envoys 58, 61-4; Portuguese 58-64,
126-7
Ethiopia —l5, 22, 39-40
Eunuchs and their influences —124-6,
175-6,
Europe —l5-7, 24, 37, 38, 52-3, 56-8,
97, 100, 119, 139-140, 148-150,157,-9.
181-3; European diplomacy 33, 43,
158; European merchandise 13-5 r
31-3, 35,89-90, 94-5,140-2,146-7,152-
4, 158, 161-3, 171-2, 179-182; Euro-
pean relations with the Chinese, — 8,
31,55,61-5,100, 123, 129. 134, 137,
140-2, 146, 150, 154-9
Evangelization: in the Ear East 98,
134,138,149-150,154-5,164, 179-180,
181; in South-Eastern Asia 55-7,
164
Evora Public Library 48-9, 141, 164
Exchange of currencies—ls 7, 159, 182
Exiles 41-3, 147-150; Portuguese
46-9, 69, 71
Expeditions, maritime —17-18, 24-6, 30-
3, 37-9, 47, 51-2, 58-9, 60-4, 65-6, 89-
98, 114-7, 121, 122-4, 142-3
Exports of China 31, 54-55, 61-2, 66-
9, 72, 78-81, 94-6, 98-101,120-1, 128,
139-142. 146,153-4,156,158,165,170-
2,177-9, 182; of Europe —l3-6, 89-
90, 94, 139; of Japan 68, 90-4, 98,


145-6, 170-2; of Portugal —l3-6,90;
of India —24, 29, 31, 36, 46-7, 54-5,
66, 89-90. 101, 161-4
Factories, trade —l3, 46-9, 54-4, 142-4,
163,171
Factors, Portuguese —5O
Fai Chow ((Kffl) 166
Fairs, trade 121, 144
“Fan Kwei” —7O
Fans —64, 100, 158
Far East—23, 23-31, 34, 48, 53-9, 60-5,
78. 90-101, 118-123, 133-4, 139-149,
154, 163 6, 170-2, 175-9, 183-3; Far-
Eastern trade 53-9, 60-8, 78-86, 90-
101,133-9,139-147,152-3,156 8, 163-
4, 165-172, 174-180
Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) —44, 71,173;
Asia Portuguesa, Lisbon, 1666-75 —37.
46-7, 111, 141, 163, 178
Farinha (Antonio Lourenco), A Expan-
sdo dafii no Oriente, Lisbon, 1943-46
95, 155, 171, 181
Farm produce near Macao 135-8,139,
141-2, 152-3. 176-7
Fat Tai Ni ( is> Vk ) 87
Ferdinand King — 16
Ferguson Donald 60, 82, 161, 165,
168* Letters from Portuguese Captives,
in the Indian Antiquary, Bombay,
1901-02 65, 66, 82, 161, 165, 166,
185-6
Feringhees 61
Fernandes Coutinho (Vasco) 64
Ferrand (Gabril) 25, 162
Ficalho (Conde de) Coloquios de Simples
e Drogas da India de Garcia de Orta,
Lisbon, 1891 & 1895 179
Fidalgos 44-5, 96
Figs —l3
Financial arrangements —l5-7, 20, 39,
66, 85, 91, 95-7, 98-9, 140-1, 145-7,
157-9, 182
Firado (See Hirado)
Firearms —l6, 51, 94,146
.Fire at Sea 49
Fish 142
Fisher-folk, Chinese —lO5-8
Flanders —13. 15, 16
Flax —lOO
Fleets 25, 35; pirate-fleets—ll 3, 115,.
120, 174-5
Flora Goohinchinensis by Father Joao de
Loureiro, S. J.— 149, 179
Florence —l5
Flores 23, 48
Floor 68
Flowers —152
Fong Mo {?}&*'■ 87
Foo Chow 77, 107
Food problems of China 31, 54, 66-8,
79-80, 89, 98-101, 127, 134-8. 152-3,
176-7, 180; Foodstuffs—l 6, 31, 49.
54, 68, 135-9, 141-2, 147, 152-3, 176-7
Footwear —142
Foquem ( See Ho Keng)
Forbidden City— 125
Forks —153
Formosa 56
Fortresses —22, 28, 33, 37-9, 46 50, 52,
149, 157, 164, 179
Foundation of Macao 9,11. 48, 89, 94,
102-113, 119-121, 129, 131-9, 160
Fianga (Bento da), Subsidios para a His-
toria de Macau, Lisbon, 1888 65,
165
France —l4
Franco (Father Antonio), Imagem da
Virtude em o Noviciado da Companhia
de Jesus no Beal Collegia de Jesus de
Coimbra, Coimbra, 1719 —ll5-7, 174,
(Appendix F 211-4)
Frankincense —66, 101
Franks ( See Fulanki)
Freitas (Dr. Jordao de) —8,82, 111,
112, 130, 131, 173, 202-210; Macau,.
Materiaes para a sua historia no Se-
culo XVI, Lisbon, 1910 82, 84, 86,
111, 115-7, 132, 161, 170, 174, 176,
(Appendix E 211-4)
—, Camoes em Macau, Lisbon 132, •
176


—, 0 Naufrdgio de Camoes e dos Lusia-
das. Lisbon, 1915—132, 176
Frees (Father Lius) 83, 86
Fruits 15, 16, 31, 137, 142, 176-7
Fukien —6l-5, 67-72, 74, 78-80, 84, 88,
89, 94-5, 99, 104, 106-7, 119-120, 166-
169
Fukuda 143
Fulankis 61, 63-65. 67, 68, 72-3, 80-5,
89, 110, 157,183
Funai 97, 142
Furniture—ls, 32,142,146,156,158,182
Fuselaria —lOO
Fu Tan Moon (fLMPV 80,169
Galawdewos, King 40
Galle 48
Galleons 92
Galleys 51
Galvao (Antonio) 22, 32, 50, 94
Galvao (Duarte) 50
Gama (Christovao da) —ll, 22, 39-40, 50
Gama (Duarte da) 82, 97
Gama (Fstevao da) 11, 50
Gama (Paulo da) —ll
Gama (Paulo da the younger)—67
Gama (Vasco da) —lO, 13,18, 22, 25, 38,
45-6, 50, 60, 92
Gambling—l 7, 38
Gardens — 158, 176
Garrisons, Portuguese 47, 50, 52
“Gateway to the Sea-Mirror Bay” —lO4
Gazetteers 12
Gems— 13, 15, 16, 18, 54, 55, 99, 100,
141
Genoa —l4
Germany —l7
Gervaix (Father R.) 8
Gibbon 22
Gibraltar, Straits of 47
Gilded ornaments —lOO
Gilolo —4B
Ginger —l5, 30, 31, 100, 198
Glass —l5, 101, 146, 153
Goa 13, 22, 24, 26, 28, 31, 36. 40, 46,
49, 78, 92, 96, 105, 111, 139, 145, 146,
158, 170, 181
Goddess of Mercy 106
Goddesses —lO4-8
Godinho (Manuel) —65, 67
Goes (Damiao de), Chronica do Felicissi-
mo Bei Dorn Emmanuel, Lisbon, 1566-
1567,-46, 47, 163
Goes (Gil de) 82, 133
Gold 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 31, 35, 40, 54,
55, 59, 95, 99, 120, 121, 141, 146, 147
Gold-leaf—loo
‘‘Golden Chersonese” ( See also Malacca)
93
Gomes (L.G.), Os diversos names de Ma-
cau, article in Bunascimento, Macao
1943 104,173
Gomes (Jeronimo) 65, 66,
Gonvalves (Manuel) —93
Gonsalves (Father Sebastiao), Histdria
dos Beligiosos da Companhia de Jesus
na India (ms.) 132,176
Goodrich (Prof. L. C), A Short History
of the Chinese People, London, 1948
122-3, 127, 154-5, 175,181
Gospel —62 ,
Gouvea (Bishop D. Frei Alexandre de)
111, 173
Governing classes —159
Government of China 62-4, 69, 73, 77,
95-6, 120-2, 126-9, 145, IG9-170, 175
Government of Macao 139,142, 144,
147
Grauet (Marcel), Chinese Civilization,
London, 1930 122, 175
Grantham (A. E.), Hills of Blue: A Pic-
ture-roll of Chinese History, London,
1927 118, 125 6, 175, 176
“Great Ship” —92
Greece 9,37
Groeneveldt (W. P.) 25, 162
Grotto of Camoes 131, 176
Gronsset (Rene), Histoire de VExtreme-
Orient, Paris, 1929 — 118, 175
Growth of Macao 139-151, 153
Guava 137 •
Guerra (D. Pedro de) —143


Guicciardini (Ludovico), Descrittione. . .
di tutti paesi Bassi, etc. Antwerp, 1567
- 16, 161
Guild House at Ningpo 66
Guinea Coast'— 13, 15, 16
Gnjerat — 30, 54, 93
Gulf of Siam 59
Gums —l3, 16
Gun-foundry —157, 183
Gunpowder 94
Guores —lO3
Habitations—32, 148, 149, 153, 179
Haggerty (M. J.) —127, 176
Hainan Island —154
Hat Tau (&i|) 70, 76, 85, 86, 113,
157,183
Hakka 61, 103
Hakluyt 92, 168
Hakluyt Society —23, 65,162,165, 168,
172, 173
Halde (Father Du), Description de la Chi-
ne, Paris, 1735 110, 111, 173
Hamburg —l4
Hangchow 76
Hansa cities — 14, 53
Hao Ghing Ao 104
Flap Hsien —l66
Harbours of Macao 102-8, 113, 139
Hazards of the sea 49, 66, 92,106,147
Henke (F. G.), The Philosophy of Wang
Yang ming, London, 1916 129,175
Henry, Cardinal (King) 34
Henry ‘the Navigator’ (Prince) —9,22, 38
Herbs— 146, 149, 162, 158
Heung Shan MrO>) —BO, 114, 133,135,
137, 138, 143, 153, 173, 176-7
Heung Shan Hsien chi 83,
170
Heung Shan Ou (ilfd j 104
Hides —l3
Hindu Empire —£6
Hirado —97, 142, 143, 170
Histdria da Expansdo Porluguesa no
Mundo, Lisbon, 1937-1942 46-7, 60,
163,165
Histdria de Portugal , Comemorativa do
8° Centendrio da fundagdo da nacio-
nalidade, Barcelos, 1928-1939 46-7,
163
Historians History of the World 38,
163
Historians, Portuguese —B, 15, 16, 17,
23, 37, 41, 46-9, 55, 60-1, 65-8, 70-1,
75-7, 82-4, 95, 98-101, 109-113, 115-7,
130-2, 137, 140-1, 144-9, 157, 161-4,
165-7, 170-2, 173-4, 176-180, 180-3
History of Macao 117. 134, 155, 158,
160, 176
History of Yenchow (^GH;^.) — 67, 166
Ho {Pj )—lO6
Ho-ah-pat 87
Ho Keang —lo2-3, 104,107,169
Ho Keng —BO, 102-3
Hoi Keang —lO4
Holland —l4, 17, 35, 38
Hohvell 42-3
Holy Cross, Land of the 47
Holy House of Mercy 133, 149, 176
Holy See —26, 33
Homen (Lopo) 67
Homen (Pedro) 64
Honey —l3, 15, 55
Hong Kong 89
Hooghly —4l, 48, 50
Horta (Garcia da), Coldquios de Simples ,
e Drogas da India —149, 153, 179,
181
Hospitality of the Portuguese—l 34-
135, 149, 153, 164, 160
Hospitals —133, 149, 179
Houses —32. 148, 149, 153, 179
Hsuang Tsung, Emperor 124
Hui Sam (tfr =.) —166
Hui Sei (Sf®) —166
Hui Sung tst#.) —166
Hui Yat {ff— ■) —166
Hui Yi (s*-.=.) 166
Hummel (A. W., Ed .), Eminent Chinese
of the Gh’ing Period, 1644-1912, Wa-
shington, 1943 —llB, 175
Hung Wu, Emperor —123,124


Hunter (Sir William) 52, 66, 185,186
Iberia—2s, 26, 56,
Iconography —lBl
Imperial Household of China 62, 63,
69, 77, 79, 119-122, 122 8, 175
Imperialism —l7B
Imports of China 31, 54-5, 59, 66-8,
72, 78-81, 89, 94-5, 98-101, 120, 139,
140-141,164-5, 169-170, 173-5; of Eu-
rope—l 3-6, 29, 31, 36, 156, 158, 161-
2; of Japan —68, 90-4, 94-7, 142-5,
146, 170-2, 177-9; of Portugal —l3-6,
18, 29-30, 31, 36, 46-9, 100, 156-8,
161-4; of India —24, 31, 54-55, 99-
101
India. Country of 13, 15,24-7, 30-1,
35, 41, 46, 48, 51, 54-6, 60-6, 69, 89,
100, 117, 129, 139, 146, 152, 157, 179,
181; balance of power in 51; coast
of 46, 47, 50, 54; discovery of 9-
10, 13, 14-8, 21, 22-4, 25-9, 30-1, 44-
5,46-7; Exports of 24, 29, 31, 36,
46-7, 54-55, 66, 89-90, 101, 161; Im-
ports of 24, 31, 54-5, 99 101; Port-
uguese shipyards in 92; shipping
of 24, 30, 48; Trade of —10,13, 26,
27, 30, 31, 37, 46, 54,56, 58, 90, 96,146
“India House” 22
India Office Records 66, 185-6
Indian Antiquary 65, 66, 82,161, 165,
166, 185-6,
Indian Ocean 10, 22, 26-7, 30, 38, 47-
8, 61. 92, 123
Indigo 29
In 10-China 93
Indonesia —l5, 22, 23, 31. 46, 48, 50, 54,
56, 57, 69, 80, 82, 100, 129, 141, 157
Industry 16, 35, 38, 47, 137, 153,
157-9
Inlluences, Portuguese 92,134-7,137-
141, 142, 147-150, 152-160, 178-180,
180-3
Iner Harbour of Macao —lO2-8, 109,
113, 138, 160
Jnstituto de Giencias Economicas, Ancus
do — l5, 161
Inquisition 36
Instruqdo para o hispo de Pequim e outros
documentos para a histdria de Macau
(See Mello e Castro)
Insurance —157
Intellectual contacts 21, 33, 118-9,
121-3, 128-9,137,148,162-5,158,175-
6, 181
Interpreters 64
Ipecacuanha 153
Iqoan (.Nicholas) —174
Iron 15, 55, 66, 99, 100
Isabella, Queen —l6
Islam ( See Mohamendans)
“Island of the Lotus Flower” 104
Italian agents - 61-2; example 22,
159; States 14, 53, 57. 159
Ivory 13, 16, 66, 101, 140, 158
Jacatara 41, 48
Jade —l5B
Jafanapatam 48
Japan, country of—Bl, 33, 48. 50, 61, 68,
73, 81, 82, 90-5, 98, 100, 101,105, 115,
119, 123, 129, 132, 139, 142, 144-7,
154, 167, 171; discovery of, by the
Portuguese 48, 68, 90, 167; Rela-
tions with China, 31, 61, 68-70, 90,
115, 119, 123, 139, 167; Trade of
31, 48, 68, 90. 91, 94-8, 119, 139 140,
143-6,170-2.177-9; Voyages to, by the
Portuguese 48, 68,81,82, 90-7,105,
142-4
Japan Society, Transactions and Procee-
dings of 95, 97, 171
Japanese pirates 54, 61, 69, 70-3, 88,
90, 115, 167; ships 61, 69, 90, 94,
subjects 54, 61, 69, 70-3, 88-90,
166-7
Japanese Yat Lam (9 67,166
Java 23, 50, 54-6, 61, 101
Javanese 93
Jayne (K. G.), Vasco da Gama and his
Successors, London, 1910 44-5, 165
Jeronymos —l7
Jerusalem artichokes —137


Jesultas na Asia (manuscripts in Evora
Library) 98, 169,172
Jesuits —2l-2, 32. 33, 41, 50, 75, 86-8,
95, 106, 132 3, 150,155, 165-172.173-
6, 170-181; Books written by 109-
110, 115-7. 130-1, 140-1, 140-1, 163,
165-170, 173 6 181; Colleges and re-
sidences—33. 109, 115, 130-2, 154-5,
169, 170, 180; Letters from 82-3,
86-7 98, 105-6.109, 111, 113,132,169-
173, 176; missionary work by— 21-2,
50, 50-6, 82, 95, 149-150, 154-5, 179-
180, 181; travels on China coast by
82, 87, 95, 106, 132, 149, 168-170
Jewels —15, 146
Jewish bankers —l6, 19, 36; mathema-
ticians — 10
John 111, King —33, 34, 47, 48, 84, 92
Jonquils —l5B
Junks —53, 54, 59-61, 63. 71, 80, 84,
90, 91, 94, 104,106-8,115-6,119,140-1
Justice 39
Justice, Court of 77
Kagoshima 97, 142
Kaempfer —l4O
Kammerer (Albert), La Decouverte de la
Chine par les Portugais au XVleme
Siecle et la Gartographie de s Portulans,
Leiden, 1944 67, 166
K’ang Hsi, Emperor —175
Kerchiefs —l5
Kettles —lOO
Kiangnan —175
Kilimani 22
Kiloa —l7
Kilwa 46
Kimonos —146
Knives— 15
Koo King-tseung —157, 183
Koon Yam Tong 106
Korea 93
Koxinga 119,174
Krause (F. E. A.), Geschichte Ostasiens,
Gottingen, 1925 —llB, 175,
Krishna (Bal), Commercial Relations bet-
ween India and England, London,
1924 30, 100, 162
Knchinotsn —143
Kum Tau Im-chong (-£-*}■ 104
Kurofnne 92
Kut Tai 136
Kwan Chap (MW) —177
Kwangsi Province 79
Kwangtnng Province —61-5, 67, 70, 78-
89. 89-90, 94, 96-9, 115,120,128, 133-
166-9, 172 5; Coast of— 23, 61-5, 79-
83, 85-9, 98-104. 109-111, 114-7, 133-
4, 165 6, 169-175; Pirates off 61-2,
69-73, 81, 84, 86 9, 91,109-117,120-1,
169-171, 173-5; Portuguese early vi-
sits to 23, 61-5, 65-7, 78-89, 98,102-
5, 165, 169-170,173-4; Provincial Au-
thorities of —61-5, 69, 78-81, 83-8. 96,
110, 114-6, 133,137-8,143-4,165, 169-
170, 172-4
Kwangtnng Tung-cki 87,.
88
Kwok Fai 87
Kwong-hoi ($-s!■) —BO, 83, 133
Labrador 93
Lac—ls
Lacquered-ware —l5, 146,158
Ladrones Islands —89
Lagoa (Visconde de), Grandes e Humil-
des na Epopeia Portuguesa —153,180,
Lailo 67
Lain Chin 84
Lam Foo, Viceroy 79, 80
Lam Hei-yuen 84
Lampacao 81-3, 88, 97, 98, 101, 109
129, 132, 135, 169
Lam Puk Sni —B2
Lam Wung-chung—ll4
Langer (W. L.), The Diplomacy of Impe-
rialism, New York, 1935 —l4B, 178
Language Chinese —l2, 67-8, 72, 81-
3, 103-4, 157, 168-170, 181-3; Portu-
guese—ls 3, 157, 180-1, 182-3
Laos —154
Lappa Island —169


La Tat —74
Latonrette (L. S.). The Chinese; Their
History and Culture, New York, 1942
112, 118, 123, 175
—, The Development of Japan, New
York, 1938 95, 171
Laufer (B), Plant Migration, New York,
1929—137, 176-7
Lauribunder 24, 48
Lead 15, 66, 69
Leather—l 6
Legends—lo 4, 108
Lei Kwong-tau 74, 166
Leitao (Estevao) —l4 3
Lek Karn Kei Tam <s#&■•%"<s) — 80
Lemhrangas das cousas da India, Lisbon,
1858 65* 165
Lemos Faria (Bernardo Aleixo de) —111,
174, 177
Leo X, Pope 21
Leopards —146
Leprosariums —133
Letters written by Jesuits 82-3. 86-7.
98, 106-6. 109, 111, 113, 132, 169-173,
176
Lettuce —137
Levantine trade —l4, 51
Li Un-bing, Outlines of Chinese History,
Shanghai, 1914 118, 176
Liampo —67-8, 70-3, 77, 94, 140, 167;
Battle of —71-2
Libedia 48
Librarian of Congress, Beport of —127,
176
Libraries —l2. 33, 48-9, 65-6, 75, 81-3,
109, 114, 117, 164, 168, 169, 172-4
Lilies —158
Lin Fa Chow —lo4
Linschoten (Jan Huighen van), Voyage
of (Hakluyt Society edition), London,
93, 100, 170, 172
Lin-tin Island (See Tamao) 23,
61, 171
Lin Wan Shan 82
Ling Knng 0 (iff 1T&) —73
Lingua franca —157
Lisbon —l3-5, 17, 31, 34-6, 47, 60, 65,
83, 92, 109, 130, 150, 158, 166, 174,
177, 181, 183
“Literati” in China —65, 76, 87-8. 108-
113, 121-3, 126-9, 137, 154-4,165,175
Liu Chin (&]&) —124, 126
Liu Kiu Islands—6l-2, 102-4
Livro das Mongdes 147
Ljungstedt (Andrew), Historical Sketch
of the Portuguese Settlements in China ,
Boston. 1836 111, 112, 114, 140,
144, 178
Lo Koon-Wai (Prof.) 12
Lo Tong (Aft) —7O, 73, 74
Lobo (Rui) 67
Loh Tsok-tseung 12
Lo Man Shan 89
London 14
Longford (J.H) ( See Murdoch and Ya-
tnagata)
Long Pak(-/$. &) ( See Lampacao) 80-3,
169
Lopes (David), A Expansdo da Lingua
Portuc/uesa no Oriente. Barcelos, 1936
153, 157, 180, 182-3
Lopes (Martins) 131
Lotteries 17
Loureiro (Father Joao de ), Flora Go-
chinchinensis, Lisbon, 149, 179
de Melo (Pero) 65
Loyalty of the Portuguese 41-3, 85,
115-7, 139, 150, 163, 179
Lubeck 14
Lucipara 23
Luis, Prince 84
Lnso-Indians 42-3
“Lusiadas” 17, 28-29, 45,52
Luther 21
Luthissi 76, 169
Luzon 61, 111, 120, 141


Macaista Imparcial, 0 — 141, 178
Macao—Administration—l42, 145, 147;
Archives 140; Buildings in —ll3,
129, 149, 179; Canton, relations with
103-5, 109-117, 133, 140-1, 144-6;
Captain-general of 143; China,
relations with —7, 80,102-5,109-120,
123-9, 133-146, 150-8, 169, 172-183;
Chinese approval of 128,134-8; Ci-
ty of 109, 110, 128, 129, 135,139,
140,145-6,148-151,160; Development
0f—139, 140, 145-151, 153-6; Early
visits t 0—80,82.88,106,129-135,173-
174; Farm produce at —135-8,139,141-
2, 152-3,176-7; Foundation of 9,11,
48, 89, 94, 102-8, 109,.111-3, 119-121,
129, 131-9, 160; Government of
139, 142, 144, 145, 147; Growth of
139-151, 153; Gun-foundry in 157,
183; Harbours of 102 8.109, 113,138,
139, 160; History of 117. 134, 155,
158, 160,176; Hospitality of 134-5,
149,153-4.160; Influences exerted by
- 147-150, 152-160, 178-180, 180-3:
Jesuit College in 109. 115, 130-2,
154-5; Medical services in 133,155-
6. 179; Municipality of 142, 145,
147, 173-4, 178-9; Names of 102-5,
172; Origin of —9, 11. 102-6, 109,
120-1, 136, 139; “Port of A-Ma”
102-9, 113, 138. 160; Provisions bou-
ght by—l3s-8, 141-2,148, 152-3,176-
7; Refuge centre 134-5, 149, 153,
160; Settlers, Chinese, in —lO4, 106-
8, 134-8, 142, 153; Settlers, Portu-
guese, in 129-133, 133-8, 139-142,
144-151, 152-160, 178-180; Ships
114, 115, 139, 142, 146; Temples
105-108: Tolerance in 155-6, 160,
178; Trade —ll, 133-147, 152-3, 158
Macassar 49
Mace —l5, 55
Machiavelli 21
Machoam 105
Mada 48
Madagascar 24, 93
Madeira Island 15, 16
Madras 30
Madre de Deus 92
Madrid 34, 35
Magalhaes (Fernao) 11
Magalha.es Sepulveda (Christovao Ayres
de) Fernao Mendes Pinto , subsldios
para a sua biografia e para o estudo de
sua obra, Lisbon, 1904 75, 82, 98
168, 169, 172
Mailla (Father J. A. M. de), Histoire
generate de la Chine, Yol. x. Paris, 1779
118, 175
Maim 49
Maize 135, 136, 152
Major (R. H.) 25, 162, 168
Ma Kan Siac (J^SL>5) — 105
Mak Mang-yang —B7
Malabar Coast 22, 24, 30,50, 92, 93
Ma-la-cap 'f ) 73
Malacca 13, 22-4, 28, 31, 36, 41, 49-
50, 54-65, 68-70, 81-7, 93, 96, 101-2,
139-141,145-7,153,157,163-6; Before
Portuguese Occupation 13, 46, 63-
6, 162-3; Chinese adventurers at
53-4, 60, 65, 67, 70, 90; Fortress at
28, 46, 49,167,163; Portuguese entre-
pot at 22-4, 28, 31, 36, 41, 49-50
54 8, 60-5, 81, 85, 93, 96, 145, 163-5;
Trade at - 13, 23-4, 31, 50, 54, 58, 61,
68, 81. 96, 101, 139, 141, 146-7, 163-5
Malacca, Sultan of — 73, 74, 76,
Malagueta 13, 15
Malaria 49
Malauchau Island 169
Malaya —l3, 28-9, 53-7, 61, 64-5, 68, 80
86, 90, 93, 101, 138-9, 153, 157, 162-5,
171-2, 178; Native rulers of 56, 63,
65, 67, 73-4, 76; Ships of — 54, 57, 93;
Produce of 64-8, 79,90, 99-101,140,
146, 163; Trade —l3, 53,56-8, 70, 89-
93, 99-101, 140, 146, 162-4
Malayan Archipelago —l5, 23, 28-31,
46, 50, 54-9, 61, 68-9, 82, 89, 93, 97-9,
140, 157, 162-5, 178


Malays —4l, 54-6,61, 63, 65, 67, 90, 93,
136.138
Malaysia {See Malayan Archipelago)
Malindi —22, 24, 92
Manaar 49
Manchns —ll9. 174, 175, 178
Mandioca —137
Mangalore 48
Manila 92, 111
Manoel, King —l6, 17, 21, 25, 29,31,
33, 46
Man ora. 47
Manrique (Father Sebastiao) 41
Manufacturers —l6, 35
Manuscripts, relating to China 60, 66,
75-6, 82 7. 97, 98 9, 115-7, 146, 165-6,
168-172: relating to Macao 48-9,
102-6, 109-112, 115-7, 130-1, 140-3,
174-6; relating to Southern Asia —23,
48-9, 60, 146, 162,164-6
Maps —33, 93,145, 167, 168
Ma Pui Shat ( ) 107
Maquao —lO5
Mariz (Pedro) —l3O
Markham (Sir Clements), Garcia da Hor.
ta’s Goloquios de Simples e Drogas da
India, London, 1913 179
Marques Pereira’s 8
Marques Pereira (A. F.), As Alfandegas
Chinesas de Macau, Macao, 1870 —138,
178
Marriage 39
Martaban 34
Martini (Father Martin), Novus Atlas Si-
nensis, Amsterdam, 1655 —l4l, 178
Martins (Francisco) 97, 142
Martyrs 91, 125, 154
Mascarenhas (D. Francisco) 97
Mascarenhas (Jorge) 62
Massawa 40
Masts 66, 142
Matara 48
Matchlocks 51, 94, 146
Materialism 21, 32, 33, 149, 150
Matoso (Antonio G.), Compendia de His-
toria de Portugal , Lisbon, 1938 —l5,
17, 20, 161
Mattos (Father Gabriel de) 109
Mauritania — 46
Maximilian, King— 34
Mazagao 47
Measures to Suppress Outlaws
*♦) —ll4
Meats 142
Medical Missionary Society —156
Medical Services 32, 149, 155-6, 179-
180
Medici (Duke Guilani) 61
Mediterranean, countries 25, 56 ; sai-
lors 10 ; trade 14-30
Mediterranean Sea—l 4, 30
Me Kong, River 130, 131
Melo (Dingo de) 64
Melo e Castro (Martinho), Apontamento
das Noticias enviadas pela Secretaria
do Estado de Ultramar para a Instruc-
cdo que se dene informar em Goa ao
Bispo de Peking sobre os negocios rela-
tives ao doininio de Macao 111. 137,
138, 173, 174, 177
Melo Coutinho (Martitn Alfonso de)
64-5
Melo de Silva (Luiz) —ll6, 133
Memorials 62, 73, 74, 79-80, 84, 114,
117, 127. 128
“Men of the Western Seas” 167, 152
Mendes Pinto (Fernao) 68,69,71-2,
75. 77-8, 82, 90. 94-5, 105-6, 167-170,
173: Letter by, at Macao on 20th Nov.,
1555 82, 105, 167, 173; Peregrina-
qam de Fernam Mendez Pinto, etc., Lis-
bon, 1614 63, 69, 71, 76, 78, 82, 90,
94, 95, 167, 169, 170
Mendonja (Manuel de) 129, 142
Mendon§a (Simao de) 143
Mendoza (Father Joao Gonjalez de),
Historia de las cosas mas notables, ri-
tos y costumbres, Del gran Beyno dela
China, etc., Rome 1585 —l6B
Menezes (Dom Duarte de) —50


Menezes (D. Fernando de) 97
Metal-ware 16, 16, 32, 99-100
Middle Ages in Europe 9,10,16,21
Mina, St. Jorge de —47
Minaturos 23
Ming Dynasty 62-4, 66, 69. 78-9, 103-
4, 118-124, 127, 129, 169, 174, 175,
183
Ming Shan Chong 73
Ming-shi Chue-yuen Ghuen ($)
67, 70, 73, 166, 167, 168
Mirrors 15, 146
“Mirror of the Sea” 104
Missions, Catholic in China 7-8,
109-111, 132-4, 138. 150,154-6,171-2,
179-181; by Portuguese chaplains
60, 56-7. 95, 165, 171; in Southern
Asia—2l-2, 50,56-7, 154, 163-4
Missionaries at Canton 86, 109,
168-9; at the China coast 82-3, 87,
95, 98, 106, 132, 149, 165. 168-170;
books written by 41, 70-1, 75-7,
87, 109-110, 113-7. 130-1, 140-1, 149,
163. 165, 170, 172-6,181; letters writ-
ten by —75, 82-3, 86-7, 98, 105-6.
109, 111, 113 132, 169-173, 176, in
Macao 105,109-111,131-4,150,154-
6, 173-4; Portuguese— 18, 32. 41,50,
70-1, 75-7, 82 3, 86-7, 95, 98, 105-111.
113, 131-4, 149, 150, 164-5, 163, 168-
172, 173-5
Mixed races 39 43
“Moat Mirror” —lO4
Mocha 24
Mohammedanism 54, 56
Mohammedans 10, 13, 27, 34, 37. 48,
51-3, 54-7, 60-1, 80; Mohammedan
Sultans 26, 56, 63: Mohammedan
Traders 20. 25, 54-7; Opposition to
the Portuguese— 10, 13, 25-8, 37-9,
41, 51-3, 56-7, 61-3,16 1-5
Moluccas —l5. 22, 24, 30, 46,48, 52, 55,
93, 97.101
Mombaim 49
Mombassa 22, 46, 48
Monasteries —l7
•Money 15-7, 19-21, 29-31, 35, 57-9,
66, 68-9, 79, 90-1, 98-101, 127, 140-1,
144-6. 149, 157, 161-2, 165-6, 170-2,
180-2
Mongha —lO6-7, 137-8
Mongols 123, 126
Mong-tung — 80
Monopolies 20, 28-9,32, 35, 97,144,
159
Monsoons—sl, 54-5
Montalto de Jesus (G. A..).Historic Macao,
2nd ed., Macao. 1926 —B, 65-6, 69,
77, 89, 109, 111-2, 117, 132, 135, 137-
8,144-5, 148, 165, 173-4, 176-9
Montgomery Martin (R .), China: Politi-
cal, Commercial and Social, London,
1847 118, 175
Monumenta Nipponica— 95, 171
Monte (Father Joao Baptista do) 132
Moorish mathematicians 10
Moors 25
Moreland (W. H.) and Chatterjee (A. C.),
A Short History of India, London,
1944 30,162
Mormugao 49
Morocco 16, 18, 34. 38
Morrison (J. R.), Chinese Commercial
Guide, Canton (sic. Macao), 1834 —-81
Morrison (Robert) 155, 164
Morse (H. B.) 81-2, 112; Lampacao, a
Mystery of the Far East, Shanghai,
1921-81-2, 169
Morse (H. B.), Far Eastern International
Relations, Boston, 1921 112, 114,
179
Moslems ( See Mohammedans)
Mother-of-pearl —lOO
Mozambique 22, 24, 46, 49, 97
Mni Ling 73
Murdoch (J.)and Yamagata (I.), A His-
tory of Japan, Vol. 11, Kobe, 1903
91, 95, 170, 171
Muscat 46
Museums 33
Musical Instruments —l5
Musk 16, 54, 55, 69, 99


Nagasaki 93, 143, 145
Nagayama (T.), Album of Historical Ma-
terials connected with Foretftfgj Inter-
course, Nagasaki, 1918 153, 181
Nails —66, 142
Namban byobu 92
Nam Tan (&M) 22. 61, 63, 115
Nanking 63, 70. 119
Nao 38, 66, 82. 87. 91, 95, 98. 107.
140, 143; construction of 91-2
Narsinga 15
Nationalisms 14-6, 19-21, 25 6.34-6.
56. 65, 90, 118, 120-3, 127-9, 159-160,
163-4, 174-6
Naval battles 49, 114-8
Navigational science —9, 10, 13-14. 16,
22. 24, 27. 38. 14, 50-53, 67, 91-4,
147-148, 161-164, 171-172
Neang Ma (■&*s) 104. 107-8
Needles 100
Negapatam 24, 41, 46
Negroes 17, 18, 39-40, 135, 137, 138,
177
Negumbo 48
Netherlands 14, 17, 35-7, 39
Neuf 91
Newfoundland 93
New Guinea 93
Ng Kwei-fong — 114
Ng Yue OH m) 72, 73
Ning, Prince of (See Chen Hao)
Ningpo 66-9. 90, 166, 167
Ningpo Fu-chih (-|£ 70,167
Nobility 35, 100, 168
Nomenclature of Macao 102-5, 173
Non-tributary States 81, 84
Novelties— 100, 146
Novgorod —l4
Nunes (Antonio), 0 Livro dos Pesos, Me-
dldas, e Moedas, Lisbon, 1868 —157,
182
Nutmeg— 15, 55, 101
Oceania 36, 50
Officials, Chinese, corruption of 68,
70, 72-3, 76, 77, 84, 87, 88,124-9, 143-
4, 175
Oils —l6, 136
0 Keang ()£&)—104
0 Kin 0W&) 70. 72-4
Okra —137
Olibanmu 68
Oligarchies 32
Olive Oil —l3
Oliveira Martins (J. P.), Os Filhos de D,
Jotlo I, 37-8, 163
O —lo4, 107
0 Moon Kae Leak (mrutM-)— 133
Onore 24, 48
Ophthalmic dispensary —155
Opium 54, 55, 101
“ )pium War” —l7B
Oporto 47. 92
Oquem (See Ho Keng)
Oranges —l5B
Orange-trees —l5B
Orissa 24
Ornaments —15,100
Orta (Garcia da) 32 (See Horta)
Ormuz —l3, 22, 24,28, 30,36, 46. 49,
146
Osorio (D. Jeronymo), De Bebus Emma-
nuelis Begis Lusitaniae Invictissimi,
Lisbon, 1571 —46-7, 103
On Moon (i&PI) 104, 107
Ou Moon Chap Tse i'M P^#-vfi 102
Overlordship of the ocean 52
“Oyster-shaped Mirror” —lO4
Pacee 46
Pacheco Pereira (Duarte) —ll. 22, 50
Padroado 98
Pagoda-trees 107
Pahang 55. 67
Paintings—l4o, 180-1
Pak Sek —ll4
Pans—loo
Papaia —137
Paris —162
Parrots —146
Patane, in Macao —l3O-1
Patani 59, 67, 70
Patriots, Chinese 69, 73-4, 79-80, 84,
88, 114-5, 124-7, 137, 167, 174, 175


■“Patroness of Sea-farers” —lO4, 107-8
Pan Chang In ( ) 87
Paul, St.. College of —l3O-1, 169
Peanuts —135, 136
Pearls —l3, 15, 16. 54. 55, 69, 99, 100,
141
Pearson. Doctor —155
Peasantry, Chinese—6B. 106-8, 127-8,
133-8, 142, 152, 153,173-7
Pegu —l6, 22, 24, 30, 48, 50, 97
Peking—63, 64, 72, 74, 77, 118, 120,
124, 126-8, 165, 171, 175, 183; Bishop
of —111; Court of —63-4, 69, 72-4,
95-6, 114, 118, 120, 126, 129, 154-5,
171,175
Pelliot (Paul) — 25, 162
Pepper ( See also Spices) 15, 24, 28-31,
54-5, 66-8, 79, 98-101,140-1,162, 164;
Chinese demand for 66, 68, 79, 89,
98-101, 140-1, 162; European demand
for —l5, 16. 29-31, 162 ; Source of
15, 23, 55, 100, 162, 164-6; Trade in
—l5. 24, 28-31, 55, 66, 68, 79, 98-101
140-1, 162, 164-5
Peregrine da Costa (Dr. J.), Medicina
Portuguesa no Extreme Oriente, Basto-
ra, 1948-—153, 180
Pereira (Atnaro), Informaqdo da China
75, 168-9
Pereira (AntSo) —B2
Pereira (Diogo) 82, 116, 132-3, 143
Pereira (Galeoto), Descripqdo da China
75, 76, 168
Pereira (Guilherme) —132-3, 142
Pereira (D. Joao) —132, 143
Pereira (Lan9erote) 75
Pereira (D. Leoniz) 22
Perea (Damiao) —46-7, 163
Peres (Father Francisco) 132
Peres de Andrade (Fernao) 50, 62, 63,
65
Peres de Andrade (Simao) —63, 78, 85,
88
Perestrello (Rafael) —61
Perfumes —l5, 158
Perry, Commodore 92
Persia —lO, 15, 24, 41, 55, 181
Persian Galf —lO, 24, 26, 50, 51, 53
Philantropy —lBO
Philip, King —34-6, 110
Philippines 30, 56, 61. 11l
Philological survey 153, 157, 180-1,
182-3
Philosophy, Chinese 37, 58, 69, 74, 77,
108, 118-9, 121-9, 154-8, 175-6
Pictures—ls
Pik Yve Chap Series —7o
167, 168
Pilots —92-4
Pineapples —137
Pinto (Gaspar — 143
Pioneers, of exploration 9-11, 13-4,
16-8, 21-2, 22-6, 28-30, 37-45. 46-53,
60-2, 91-5, 161-4; Portuguese, in Chi-
na-7, 23, 30, 37. 48, 50, 58-65, 65-8,
72, 78-81, 91-2, 98-100, 126, 134-5.
139-142, 144-5, 162-8. 169-175; in Ja-
pan— 48, 68, 81, 82, 90-7, 105, 142-4,
167,170-1; in Macao —lO2-6,109-117,
129-130, 139-142, 144-161, 152-160,
170-180; in Southern Asia 8.10, 13-
5, 22-33, 37-43, 46-9, 50-3, 53-5, 56-8
101, 163-6
Pirates, Chinese 62,66, 69,70-3. 81,
84-91, 101,109-117,119-121,147. 167,
174; Expeditions, Portuguese, against
25, 27.30, 84, 88-9,101. 109-111,
112-8, 121,170-1,174; Japanese 54,
61, 69. 70 5, 78, 88, 90. 115, 167; in
Southern Asia 25, 27, 30, 36,39. 49,
86. 101, 162; Threaten Canton 110-
8, 120-1
Pires (Tome) —8, 23, 55, 57, 99-101,149,
162, 179; As Portuguese envoy to
China— 62-4, 126-7,165; The Suma
Oriental (See Dr. A. Cortesao) 23, 55,
57,62, 102-4, 162, 164, 165, 173, 179
Pitch 66
Plagues —l9
Planking 66
Plants - 149, 152, 158
Plates —156


Plumes 15
Plutocracy 22
Po Ghai Sim yean 106
Polo (Marco), 25, 60, 162. 167
Pope 100
Porcelain —l5, 31, 33, 54, 55. 60. 69.
100, 141, 156, 158, 182
“Port of A-Ma” 102-8, 110
Porto da Amacao 105-8
Porto da China 105
Porto de Nome de Deus 105
Ports, African 22, 24, 30, 92, 93: Asi-
an 14-5, 24-9, 36, 56-8, 66. 68, 79,
98-101, 140-1; Chinese 25, 53-5, 61-
3, 67-8, 71-3, 80-1, 85-8, 90, 93, 95,
102, 104, 115, 118, 141, 145, 165-8,
170- Indian 10,13, 26. 27, 30, 31,
37. 46, 54, 56, 58, 90, 95, 146
Portugal Agriculture in 16, 19, 47j
Archives of 12, 33, 60, 65, 66, 75,
81-83, 109, 114, 117, 140, 165, 166,
171- 180-1, 185-6, 202-210; Captains
from —49, 60, 64, 67, 83-5, 113, 145,
163-4; Chroniclers of —8, 12, 49, 65,
67-8,163, 165; Church, The, and
17, 26. 33, 34,36, 44, 52,149,154,162-
4; Colonies of —l3, 15,18, 23. 24, 27-
9. 30, 35-7, 39, 43, 46-9, 50, 54-5, 57,
101, 139-141, 145-8, 161-4; Crown fo
17, 20-2, 33-4, 44, 47-8, 60. 66, 84,
92, 96, 100, 102, 110, 159, 161-3; Eco-
nomy of 13-7, 17-22,28-9,30-3, 34-
6, 47-50, 53-5, 92-3, 100-1, 139-140,
157-8, 161-3, 163-4; Empire of—l 3,
15, 18, 23-4, 27-30, 34-9, 43-50, 51. 54-
8, 101, 139-141, 145-8, 161-4; Envoys
from —5B, 61-4,126-7; Exports of
13-6, 90; Elects of 10,13,18,22, 25,
27, 29-30, 35-7, 40-52, 61, 64-5, 86,91-
3, 96, 114-7, 139-140,161-4; Fortresses
belonging to 22, 28, 33,37-9.46-50,
52, 69, 149, 157, 164, 179; Historians
of —8, 15-7, 23. 37, 41,46-9, 55, 60-1,
65-71, 75, 77. 82-4, 95, 98-101, 109-
117, 130-2, 137, 140-9, 157, 161-7,
170-183; Imports of—l 3-6,18,29-31,
36, 46-9, 100. 156-8, 161-4; Industries
in 16, 35, 38, 47,157-9; Kings of —
16-8, 20-2, 25-6, 28, 31-4, 35-6, 38, 46-
8. (50, 66. 84, 92, 96,100,102,110,159,
161:3: Libraries in 12, 33, 48-9, 65-
6, 75. 81-3, 109, 114, 117, 164, 168-9,
172-4: Manufactures in 16, 35. 38,
47, 157-9; Monarchy of —l6-18,20-2,
25-6, 28, 31 -4. 35-6,38,46-8,60, 66, 84,
92, 96, 100. 102,110, 159, 161-3; Mo-
hammedan opposition to —10,13, 25-
8, 37, 39, 41, 51-3, 56-57, 61-3, 161-5;
Navigational Science of 9-10, 13-4,
16, 22, 24. 27, 38, 44, 50-3, 67. 91-4,
147-8, 161-4, 171-2; Officials of —B-
- 13, 16-9, 21-2. 23, 25-33, 37-40,
41-5, 48-52, 54-5, 57-9, 60-5, 65-8, 78,
80-6, 89-98, 99-101, 102-4, 109-111,
116, 117, 126-7, 129-133, 134, 137-8,
141-3, 146-9, 161-6, 170-2, 173-4; Shi-
ps of — 9, 13-6. 25, 27, 30, 36-40, 48-
51. 57-63. 66-73, 82, 87-89, 91-2, 95-8,
100-101, 107, 110, 114, 115, 129-133,
139-144, 147, 150-1, 156-7,160, 161-4,
165-6, 167-172,173-5, 176-8; Trade of
13, 15, 19, 24-32, 34-6, 47,56-8, 60-
8, 65-8, 80-6, 90-101, 133-5, 139-140,
145-8, 152-4, 156-8, 161-3, 163-4, 164-
7, 169-172, 176-8, 180-2
Portuguese: Artillery— 51, 94, 115 6,
157,183; Canton, visited by 61-3,
85-8, 105, 116, 146, 163; Captain-ma-
jors—64, 66, 78, 83-6, 96-7, 129-130,
133,139,142-4,171-2.178; China, dis-
covery of, by the 23, 61-3, 165-6;
China, trading posts in, visited by the
48-50, 61-3, 67-9, 78-83, 90, 93, 98-
101, 133, 140-1, 144-7, 165-174; Chi-
na, voyages to, by the 23, 30. 37, 48,
50, 59-68, 72, 78-81, 91-2, 98-100,126,
134-5, 139-145, 162-175; Commercial
relations between the Chinese and the
—7, 15, 23-4, 31, 53-5, 59-73, 78,-81,
86, 89,-91, 96, 98-101, 128-9, 133-142,
144-8, 152-4, 156-9, 165-179, 180-2;
Contacts, social, between the Chinese


and the 23, 58-9, 60-2, 66-7, 83-6,
104-6, 129, 133-5. 138 9, 145-8, 152-7,
158, 173-7, 180-2; Descendants of the
—B, 20-2, 31, 37-43, 134, 138, 148-9,
150, 152-4, 155-8, 163, 176-181; Dis-
coveries by the 7-11, 13-5,16-8, 22-
3, 25-9, 44-5, 46-9, 58-9, 60-2, 67-8,
90-3, 134. 161-5, 167; Envoys —5B,
6i-4, 126-7; Exiles —39-42, 134, 148-
9 150: ‘Factories’ of the 13, 46-9,
54-5, 71, 142-4, 163, 171; Food-sup-
plies of the —16, 19, 31, 47, 46, 66,
68, 99-101, 135-8, 141-2, 147, 152-3,
158, 176-7; Historians —B. 15-7, 23,
27, 41, 46-9, 55, 60-1, 65-8, 70-1, 75,
77,82-4, 25, 98-101, 109-113, 115-7,
130-2, IS7, 140-1, 144-9, 157, 161-7,
170-4, 176-183; Influences exerted by
the — 92, 134-142, 147-150, 152-160,
178-180, 180-3; Japan, contacts with,
by the 48, 68, 81, 82, 90-7, 105.142-
4; Lampacao visited by the 81-3,
88, 97, 98,101,109,129,132,135,169;
Language influences of the—ls 3, 167,
180-181,182-3; Loyalty of the 41-3,
85, 115-7, 139, 150, 163, 179; Macao
settled by the —129-133, 133-8, 139-
142,144-151,152-160,178-180; Malac-
ca, entrepot of, at— 24-5,28, 31, 36,
41, 49-50, 54-65, 81, 85, 93, 96, 145,
163-5; Maps by the 33, 93,145, 167,
168; Medical services rendered by the
32, 149,155-6, 179-180; Missions con-
ducted by the —7-8, 21-2, 50, 56-7,
95, 109-111, 132-4, 138, 150, 154-6,
163-5, 171-2, 179-181; Missionaries
18, 32, 4i, 50, 70, 71, 75, 77, 82-3, 86-
7, 95, 98,105-111,113, 131-4,149-150,
154-155, 163, 168-172, 173-5; Misun-
derstandings between the Chinese and
the —63-5, 71-4, 121-3, 126-7, 166-
9; Navigators 9-10, 13-4, 16, 18, 22,
24, 27, 38, 44, 50-3, 67, 91-4, 147-8,
161-4, 170-2; Officials —B-11, 13,16-
9, 21-3, 25-33, 37-45, 48-52, 54-5, 57-
68, 78, 80-6, 89-104, 109-111,116,117,
126-134, 137-8, 141-3, 146-9, 161-6,
170-4; Pioneers —7, 23, 30, 37, 48,
60, 58-68, 72, 78-81, 91-2, 98-100.126,
134-5, ] 39-142, 144-5, 162-175; Priso-
ners at Canton—63-4, 75, 87,105,127,
168- Prisoners in China 41, 64,
73-6, 127, 163-9; Services of, against
pirates 25, 27, 30, 84, 88-9, 101,109-
118, 121, 170-1, 174; Services of, to
the Chinese 61-2, 65-71, 80-2, 84-
90, 96, 98-101, 109-110, 112-8, 120-1,
133-141, 144, 147, 152-8, 165-6, 169,.
’ 173-4, 176-180, 180-2; Shanchnan vi-
sited by the 81-3, 88, 98, 109, 132,
171; Ships —9, 13, 14, 16, 25, 27, 30,
36, 38. 40, 48-51, 57, 59, 61, 63, 66-73,
82, 87-92, 95-8, 100-1, 107, 110, 114,
115, 129, 130-3, 139-144, 147, 150-1,
156-7, 160-6, 176-178; Social contacts
between the Chinese and the 23,
58-62, 66-7. 83-6, 104-8, 129, 133-135,
138-9, 145-8, 152-158, 173-7, 180-2;
Trade —l3-9, 24-36, 47, 56-8, 60-8,
80-6, 90-101. 133-5, 139-140, 145-8,
152-8, 161-7, 169-172, 176-8, 180-2;
Traders —l3, 15-7, 19, 24, 26-32, 34-
6, 47, 56-8, 60-8, 80, 84-6, 88. 90, 96,
98, 100. 107, 110, 119,120,133-5,139-
144, 147, 149, 152, 154, 156-8, 161-7,
169- 72; Vogages to China by the
23, 30, 37, 48, 50, 59-68, 72, 78-81, 91-
2, 9«-100, 126, 134-5, 139-142, 144-5,
162-175
Portuguese Institute of Hongkong —165
Portulans 67, 68
Praia Grande of Macao —lO4
Precious stones —13, 16, 18, 101 141,
146
Prestage (Prof. Edgar), The Portuguese
Pioneers, London. 1933 22, 39, 51-
2, 161, 163, 164
Preto (Manuel 97)
Printing 32, 49, 157, 180-1
Prisoners; at Canton 63-4, 75, 87,105,
127, 168-9; in China 41, 64, 73-6,


127, 168-9; in the Far East —l7, 40-2,
43, 75-6, 163, 168-9,
Privilege 32, 35, 144
Produce: Chinese 15, 24, 31. 54-5, 61,
66. 68-9, 98-100, 134-8, 152-3, 158,
176-177, 180-1; Macao —135-9,141-2,
152-3, 176-7
Protestants 34, 155, 164
Provedor dos defunctos e auzentes —l3O
Provincial authorities: of Chekiang and
Fukien 67-9, 70, 72-4, 76-7, 80-1,
99, 128, 165-9; of Kwangtung 61-5»
78-81. 83-8. 109-110,112-7,133-4,144,
165-6, 169-170, 173-4
Provisons for ships — 141, 147
Pu-Cheng Shih — 77
Pulicat 55, 101
Pulo Condore 59
Purchas, His Pilgrimes 168
Putchuck 66, 101
Quarrels 35, 51, 56, 67, 63-65, 71, 78
“Queen of Heaven” 104
Queen of Portugal 60, 179
Quelba 48
Quemoy Island 67
Quicksilver 54, 55, 66, 100
Quigley (H. S,) and Blakeslee (G. H.)
The Far East, Boston, 1939-148, 178
Quilon 24, 28, 46
Quinchay 77
Quinteiro (Pero) —132
Rachol — 46
Ram ires (Alfonso), Informaqdo da China
75. 76, 168-9
Ramusio 162
Rarities 100
Rattan —lOl
Raynal 111
Rectors of Jesuit Colleges — 131
Red Sea 10,15,24,28,30.40, 50-1,124
Registo Livro II das Mangoes 174
Rego (Ambrosio) 64
Relations —172
Remedies —152-3, 158
Renaissance 44, 155
Benascimento 12, 21, 107, 108, 157,
173, 182, 183
Report of the Librarian of Congress —•
127,176
Residences 149
Bespondencia 157, 182
Retainers 134
Revadonda 46
Revolts 124, 126
Rhine River 14
Rhubarb 16, 31, 54, 69, 99, 158
Rice —68, 106, 135
Riga —l4
Rings —lOl
Rivalries 35, 56-7
“Rocks of Caraoes” 130-1
Rodrigues (Duarte) —133
Rodrigues (Father Francisco), Historia
da Gompanhia de Jesus, Porto, 1935-
1942-95, 155, 171, 181
Rolim (Pedro Barreto) 133, 143
Roses —l6B
Rose-water — 55
Rostock —l4
Roteiros — 93
Route to India — 10, 13
Rowbotham (A.H i), Missionary and Man-
darin-. The Jesuits at the Court of Pe-
king, Berkeley, 1942 155. 181
Boyal Asiatic Society, Journal of, (North
China Branch) 81, 169
Bua Nova dos Mercadores —l5
Rubies —16
Ruling class —159
Rutters 93
Saffron 54, 66, 101
Safim 46
Sages, Chinese 122, 125-7, 129, 176
Sagres 22
Sahara 15
Sail-cloths 66, 142
Sailendra Empire 66
St. John’s Island (See Shanchuan)
St. Jorge de Mina 47
St. Paul’s College 130-1, 169


St. Raphael’s Hospital —133, 179
St. Thomas Island — 14-6, 47
St. Thomas of Meliapore 48
Salcete 46
Salt-dishes —lOO
“Salt Pans of the Golden Grain Basket”
104
Saltpetre 55. 99
Sam Moon (Ji.Pl) 114, 115
Samori of Calicut 65
Sanceau (Elaine), D. Joao de Castro, Por-
to, 1946 —149. 179
Sandalwood 15, 55, 101, 140
Sande (Father Duarte),He Missions Le-
gatorum, etc., Macao, 1590 153, 181
San Gens 48
Sansom (G. 8.), Japan: A Short Cultural
History, New York, 1943 95, 171
Santa Casa da Misericordia 133, 149,
179
Santa Cruz —l7l
Santarem (Viscount)
Sapanwood 68
Saris (John) 170
Sati 39
Satins 54, 99, 158
Satsuma —124
Sauces —153
Scholars, Chinese —lO7, 121-3, 127-9,
137, 152, 155, 175. 181
Schools —lO9, 115, 130, 131, 154, 169
Schuhammer (Father 6.), O Descobri-
mento do Japdo pelos Portugueses, no
anode 1543, Lisbon, 1946 68, 95,
171
Scientific researches 32, 149, 179
Scissors 15
Screens 33. 92, 146, 158,181
Scrolls —lOO
Sebastian (King) 34, 38, 48. 92
Sedan-chairs —l5B
Seeds 55, 135, 136, 137, 176-7
Semedo (Padre Alvaro), Imperio de la
China, Madrid, 1642 109, 111, 113,
173
Sena 48
Sepulveda (Alonso Anriqnes) 65
Sepulveda ( See Magalhaes Sepulveda,
Chritovam Ayres)
Sequeira (Diogo Lopes de) 60
Sergio (Antonio), Sketch of the History
of Portugal, Lisbon, 1928 47, 163
Servants —135
Settlers ( See Macao, Chinese, Malacca,
etc.)
“Seven Tigers”— 124, 126
Shanchuan Island 81-3, 88, 98, 109,
132, 171
Shansi 136
Shantung 175
Sharks’ tins —lOl
Shawls —lOO
Sheep-rearing 19
Shekki —133, 135
Shelters 106
Shensi 136
Sheung Chuen To (_t#J $,) {See Shan-
chuen)
Sheung Yue (**.■£)— 67, 69, 70, 72-3,
166
Shimabara 97
Shin Tsung (Emperor) ( See Ghia Ching)
Ships Arab 48; Asian 24, 30,48,
54, 57, 61, 69, 90, 94, 140; Chinese
24. 30, 53-4, 60, 64, 80, 84-6,101,106-
7, 115-6, 119, 122; Hindu —24, 30;
Indian 24, 30, 48; Japanese 61,
69, 90, 94; Macao —114,115,139,142.
146; Malabar 24, 30; Malayan 54,
57, 93: Mohammedan 24, 54; Por-
tuguese —9, 13-6, 25, 27, 30, 36-40,
48-51, 57-63, 66-75, 78-82, 87-9, 91-2,
95-8, 100-1, 107, 110, 114, 115, 129-
133, 139-144, 147, 150-1 156-7, 160-
178
Shipwreck 49, 66, 92, 147
Shipyards 92
Shin Hing 133
Shogun 146
Shrubs 152


Shorn Mut (iMIS) 169
Shun Tak District 153
Shyrock (J. K.). The Origin and Develop-
ment of the State Cult of Confucius,
New York, 1932- 122, 175
Siam —23, 30, 50, 55, 58, 61, 62, 66, 68.
70, 85, 93, 101, 121; Siamese 54,
58, 65, 85, 141
Sibo 48
Silk 15, 24, 29, 31, 54, 55, 69, 90, 95,
99
Silva (J. M. A,). Bepositorio de Noqoesde
Botanica Aplicada, Hongkong, 1904
137, 177
Silva Rego (Father A.) 157, 182
Silveira (D. Gongalo da) 22
Silver —13,15, 35, 40, 54. 55,59, 60, 68-
9, 95, 98-9, 120-1, 140, 146, 157, 158;
Chinese demand for 68, 69, 95,98-
9, 120
Singapore 101
Sinologues 112
Siraj-ud-daula 42
Sirgam 48
Sirian 48
Siu Wong Knm 169
Skins 15, 16
Slaves — 19, 41, 55
Snuff-bottles 156, 182
Soar 48
Soares (Diogo) 67
Soares (Dr. J. C.) 0 Hospital da Santa
Casa da Misericordia de Macau, Macao,
1927 —l5O, 180
Social contacts 23, 33, 34, 58-62, 66-7,
83-6, 104 8, 129, 133-5, 138-9, 145-8,
153-8, 173-7, 180-2
Sooiedade Luso-Japonesa, Boletim da,
Tokyo, 1929 65, 165
Socotra 46
Sofala 24, 46, 93
Solor 46, 146
Somervell (D, C.) 26, 142
Sonnerat— 111
Sousa (D. Antonio de) 143
Sousa (Fernao de) 142
Sousa (D. Frederico Guilherme) 111,
173
Sousa (Frei Luis de), Annaes de El’ Bei
D. Joao Terceiro, Lisbon, 1844 46-
7, 163
Sousa (Leone! de).... 133, 142; Letters
by —B3-90, 96, 98,100,113, 117, 129-
130, 170 (Appendix D. 202-210)
Sousa (Martim Afonso de) 50
South Africa 22, 47, 50
South America 26, 43
South China {See: Agriculture; Canton;
China; Chinese officials; Coast of;
Emigration from; Macao; Peasantry
of: Pirates at Ports of; Portuguese;
Commercial relations between, and;
Discovery of, by; Prisoners in; Tra-
ding ports of, in; Trade of, with; Voya-
ges of, to; etc.) 7-8, 23, 31, 37, 53-9,
60-5. 65-78 78-89, 89-91, 94-101, 109-
118, 121, 128, 134-6, 141-5, 153, 165-
172, 176-7; South China Seas 23,
60-4, 65-9, 80-9, 90, 96-8,109-117,121,
165-172
Southern Asia — 13-15, 22-31. 53-6, 58,
60-1, 101, 123, 141, 146,157,162,163-
9; Manuscripts relating to— 23, 48-9,
60, 146, 162, 164 6; Missionaries in
21-2, 50, 66-7, 154, 163-4; Portuguese
pioneers in—B, 10, 13-5, 22-33, 37-
43, 46-9, 50-8, 101, 163-6
Spain — 10, 14, 16, 31-6, 47-1, 110
Spanish conquistadores 51; “Domina-
tion” 33-7, 39; Methods 35-7, 43,
50, 111; nobility 35; Succession
34; Writers —ll3
Spears 54
Specifics— 149, 152,158
Speculation 15, 17, 38
Spices 13-6, 24, 29-31, 36, 57, 58, 61,
79, 140, 146, 157
Spice Islands 15, 22, 24, 30, 46, 52, 55,
93, 97, 101,
Spoons —153
Sri Yijaya Empire 56
Storms 49, 91, 106


Stones —lOl
Sugar 13-6, 31, 54, 100, 141
Sulphur 99
Sumach —l6
Sumatra —l5, 46,50, 55, 56, 61,100,101
Sunda Islands 82, 93, 101, 141
Sunflower 137
Sung Dynasty —122
Sunning (sfa^) —80, 177
Sun Wui - 133, 177
Sup-Chi-Moon 80, 169
Supply-yards 66
Surat 24, 46, 48
Swatow 24, 46, 48
Sweet-potatoes 135-7, 152
Swisher (E.) 118, 175
Swords —l5
Taffetas— 99
Tagus, River —17
Tai Mau — 67, 166
Taipa —163
Takekoshi (Yasobnro), The Economic As-
pects of the History of the Civilization
of Japan. New York, 1930 —95, 171
Tamao - 23, 61, 67, 80, 161, 165, 169,
171
Tangerines —l6B
Tangir—47, 158
Tanka —BB
Tanna — 49
Tapestries 15, 55, 100
Ta-Ssi-Yang-Kuo, Lisbon, 1899-1902
137,177
Tavares (Belchior de Sousa) 50
Taxes —B3, 85, 87,140, 141, 144-6, 166
Tea —l5B
Teakwood 92
Tea-roses —l6B
Teixeira (Father Manuel, S. J.) —132
Teixeira (Father M.) —8; Macau e a Sua
Diocese, Macao, 1940-1941 —lO4, 155,
173, 181
Teixeira de Aragao (A. C.), Descripgdo
geral e historica das moedas cunhadas
em name dos Reis, Lisbon, 1874-1880
157, 182
Temples—67,los-8; “Temple of A-Ma”
—lO7-8; “Temple of the Goddess of
Mercy” —lO6-7,
Tenasserim 24
Ternate 23, 28, 46, 48
Tete 48
Thomar 34
Tien Han —lO7
Tien-Hsia Ghun-kuo 80,
169
T’ien Sha Monthly, Shanghai 23, 61,
80, 89, 161, 169, 170
Timor—ls
Tin —55. 100, 101
Tin-ha Kwun-kwok Li-ping Shue (A'F
67, 80, 166
Ting Yi-chung — 88
Tobacco —29, 137, 156, 181
Toishan (£o>) —177
Tokens —lOl
Tokyo 93
Tolerance 39, 42, 43, 155-6, 160, 178
Tomatoes —137
Tombs —lO6
Tonkin —154
Torre do Tombo 60, 66,165,166,185-
8, 202-210
Tortoise-shell —lOO
Toscano (Francisco) —82
Toyjjee (Arnold J.), A Study of History,
London, 1947 26,162
Trade, Asian —l4-5, 24-9, 36, 56-8, 66,
68, 79, 98-101,140-1; Canton 55,79,
88, 98, 109-110; China 11, 15, 26.
54, 59, 61-8, 71, 77-9, 81, 85-6, 89, 90,
94-100, 103, 118-121, 128-9, 133, 135.
138-146, 152-4, 158-9, 165-170, 173-8.
180-2; European 13-6, 29, 31, 36,
89-90, 94, 139, 156, 140-2, 146-7, 152-
4, 156, 158, 161-3,171-2,179-182; Far
Eastern 53-9, 60, 68, 78-86, 90-101,
133-147, 152-3, 156-8, 163-172, 174-
180; Indian —lO, 13, 24. 26-7, 29-31,
36-7, 46-7, 54-6, 66, 89-90, 95, 99-101,
146, 161-4; Japan 31, 48, 68, 90, 91,
94-8, 119, 139-140, 143-6, 170-2,177-


9; Macao —ll, 133-147, 152-3, 158;
Malacca —l3, 23-4, 31, 50, 54. 58. 61.
. 68, 81, 96, 101, 139.141,146-7,163-5;
Malayan —l3, 53, 56-8, 70, 89-93.99-
101, 140,146, 162-4; Pepper—ls, 24,
28, 31, 55, 63, 68, 79, 98-101, 140-1,
162,164-5; Portuguese —l3, 15, 19,
24-32, 34-6, 47, 56-8, 60-8, 80-S, 90-
101, 133-5, 139-140,145-8, 152-4, 156-
8. 161-7, 169-172, 176-8, 180-2; Pro-
ducts of—ls, 16. 31, 36-7, 54-5, 59-
61, 66, 69, 76, 79-80, 84, 99-101, 119-
121, 128, 133-7, 140-4, 152-4, 156-8,
165-7, 169-172. 174, 176-7, 180-2
'Tradesmen —142, 159
Traditions —42, 52, 109, 122, 129, 143,
149, 150, 154, 155, 176-7
Trarnezzino (Michele) —l6B
Trapor 48
Travessos (Manuel) —143
Trays —lOO
Trees —152
Trincomalee 41, 48
Trustee for dead or absent Portuguese”,
130
Tain Shan —l3B
Tsum —lO6
TsungTsai (s|s.) 77
Tuan Muhamed —63
Tuen Moon Anchorage —6l,
62, 64, 67, 80
Tumblers 153
Tung Koon District 114
Tung Oil —6l, 165
Tung-sai-yeung Hau 72,
167
Turbans 55
Turkey 55
Turks 10, 25, 27, 37, 51
Typhoons 91
United States of America 156
Usages—39, 86, 119, 122-3, 134, 148,
152, 153, 156, 181
Vaccination 155
Valeutijn, Oud en nieuv Oost-Indien—
-100, 172
Valignano (Father Alexandre) 181
Vargas (Prof. Ph. de) 12, 76, 169
Varnish 61, 100, 165
Varthema 25, 162
Vasconcellos (Carolina Michaelis) 17
Vaconcellos (Henrique Mendes de) 65
Vases 99
Vatican Library— 117, 172
Vaz (Afonso)—l42
Vaz (Alvares) —95
Vaz de Aragao (Diogo) 82, 95, 97
Vaz da Veiga (Tristao) 133, 143
Vegetables 31, 106, 135-8. 142, 162,
176-7
Velho (Pedro) 133
V Ivets 15, 101, 141
Venetians 14, 183
Venice —l4. 30, 53, 55, 57, 160, 168
Vermillion 54
Vestments —l5
Viana (Gonqalves), Vocabuldrio Malaio r
derivado do porlugu&s 157, 183
Viceroy of India 63, 90, 96,105, 139,
146
Victories 48, 168
Vilhena (D. Antonio de) 143
Vinegar 15
Voyages, Canton, to 61-3, 85 8, 105,
116, 145, 169; China, to —23, 30, 37,
48. 50, 59-68, 72, 78-81, 91-2, 98-100,
126, 134-5, 139-142, 144-5, 162-175;
Exlporation, of 9-11, 13-4, 16-8,
21-6, 28-30, 37-53. 60-2. 91-5, 161-4;
Japan, to —4B, 68, 81, 82, 90 7, 105,
142-4, 171, 178: Jesuits, by 82, 87,
95, 106, 132, 149, 168-170; Macao, to
80, 82, 88,106,129-135, 173-4; Portu-
guese, by 7-11, 13-5, 16-8, 22-3,
25-9, 44-5, 46-9. 58 62, 67-8, 90-3,
134, 161-5, 167; Southern Asia, to
8-10, 13-5, 22-33. 37-43, 46-58, 101,
163-6
Wako 54,61, 69-70, 73-4, 78, 80, 81,
88, 115
Wan Li, Emperor 124
Wang Chen (JL#.) 124


Wang (T. T-), Wang Yang-ming, Shan-
hai, 1936 122, 175
Wang Yang-ming (JL fh $ ) —122, 126-
7, 175
War, instruments of —l5, 51, 94, 115,
116, 146, 157, 183
Warehouses 54
Watches —l5
Water-cress —137
Watering places—s 9, 139
Watt (G.), A Dictionary of the Economic
Products of India, Calcutta, 1889-1893
137, 176-7
Wax —l3, 15, 55
Wei Chnng-hsien (■lcife®') — 124, 125
Weights and measures— 157
Wells Williams ( Samuel), The Middle
Kingdom, New York, 1883 —llB, 175
West River —B3. 104, 106, 133
Western Atlantic 47
Western civilization— 43, 53, 118, 139-
154,155, 178, 179, 183
Wheat —13
White way —( R. S.), The Rise of Portu-
guese Poicer in India, London, 1899
10, 23, 28, 162
Wieger (Father Leon). Textes Histori-
ques: Histoire politique de la Chine de-
puis Vorigine jusque em 1929, Tientsin,
1929 118, 175
Wilhelm (Richard), A Short History of
Chinese Civilization, London, 1927
124, 175
Willes ( R.) 168
Window-glass —153
Wines —l3, 15, 16. 142
Winstedt (Sir R. O.) —162; Malaya and
its History, London, 1948 54-5, 164
Women 39
Wong Chik ( i JL) 87, 166
Wong King-ng—loB
Wong Pak ( ) 87, 88, 120
Wong Pui ( ) 87
Woods 59, 92, 101
Woollen cloth— 15, 19, 140
World partition 34
Worm-wood —lOl
Writers —lO5, 115, 119, 129-130, 166,
158, 167, 176, 177, 179
Wu Ting-chu 79
Wn Tsung, Emperor ( See Chang Te)
Xaas 99
Xavier (St. Francis) 21, 22, 50, 75,
81-3, 88, 95, 133, 171
Tarnens —l2l, 138
Yang Ting-ho —122, 126
Yangtsze River —119
Yano (Dr.), Article in Boletim da So-
ciedade Luso-Japonesa , Tokyo, 1929
65, 165
Yard-arms 66
Yokosenra —143
Young (Sir George), Portugal: Old and
Young, Oxford, 1917 34, 36, 39, 47,
162, 163
Yuan Dynasty —lO4
Yue Tai-yau ( ) —ll4, 166
Yuen Kin-yue ( ) 84
Yuet Kong ( —73
Yuet Tai Chi Tiug-yi-chung Chuan ( I§-
A-fc'TfA&iif) 88
Yule ( Sir Henry) 25, 162
Yule (Sir H.) and Burnell (A. C.). Ho-
bson-Jobson, London, 1903 —137,153,
157, 167, 177, 180, 182
Yung Lo, Emperor— 123, 154
Yung River 68, 90
Zaiton 72, 167
Zanzibar— 46




CORRIGENDA
Page Line Instead of Read
24 2 “produce from Spice Island” “produce from the Spice Islands”
25 2 “had fallen info” “had fallen into”
33 12 “did not stint to the work of “did not stint in the work oJ
help” helping”
49 39 “see the name of” “see the names of”
67 7 “he.dway” “headway”
71 32 “the latter separately into” “the latter separately, into”
76 24 “merchants on shore, of the rich “merchants on shore of the rich
prize sent” prize, sent”
80 9 “Viceroy Lain Foo’s” “Viceroy Lam Foo’s”
81 28 “Lam Pak” “Lam Pac”
„ 31 “Lam Pak Kao” “Lam Pac Kao”
82 4 “clealy stated” “clearly stated”
87 16 “writers thal” “writers that”
„ 33 “robbed may districts” “robbed many districts”
„ 37 “other pirates where then” “other pirates who were then”
99 5 “their province” “their province. (104)”
101 27 “carried on such” “carried on on such”
108 26 “or its place” “for its place”
„ 31 “ando ther” “and other”
111 28 "seculo XVII" “seculo XVI"
„ 31/32 “and unfortunately for history” “for unfortunately for history,’’
115 18 “wreck” “wrack”
118 38 “filled be these Westerners” “filled by these Westerners”
122 24 “to a lesser by” “to a lesser extent by”
132 25 “writing Macao” “writing at Macao”
„ 32 “Quinteiro in which Pero they “Pero Quinteiro in which they
were” were”
„ 33 “man darin” “mandarin”
133 30 “a truly wondeful opportunity” “a truly wonderful opportunity”
134 2 “the westerners” “the Westerners”
135 6 “setters” “settlers”


136 6 “To the present day sweetpot- “To the present day the sweet-
atoes” potatoes”
138 15 “was, known among the Portu- “was known among the Portu
guese” guese”
„ 38 “have been, negroes or Malays.” “have been negroes or Malays.”
146 29 “community” “community”
147 7 “rather than as the” “rather than the”
152 27 “maire” “maize”
153 28 “in their turn must have” “in their turn, must have”
„ 28 “by whose whose who benefit- “by those who benefited”
ed”
164 41 “as one the most important” “as one of the most important”
165 35 “Vol. 307 and 416” “Vol. IV, pp. 307 and 416”
175 2 “Shangtung” “Shantung”
177 30 “Bernardo de Leixo Faria” “Bernardo Aleixo de Lemos Fa-
ria”
179 1 “Maurice Collin’s” “Maurice Collis’s”
181 26 “worked uder their aegis” “worked under their aegis”
„ 43 “Shanghai, 1895” “Shanghai, 1935”








