

THE LAW OE MAN
AT VARIANCE WITH
THE LAW OE GOD.
MARRIAGE QUESTION
U)t of il)t Biottst of
Published at the request of the Right Rev. Plc President,
and some Members of the Synod.
DELIVERED IN
“ At the Last Judgment no appeal to Temporal Laws will avail.”
“ Fmcunda culpas sascula nuptias
Primum inquinavere, et genus et domos ;
Hoc fonte derivata clades
In patrium, populumque fluxit.”— Hor. iii. 6.
D lirg
JOSEPH COOK & Co., 370, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY; and
THOS. BOSWOETH, 198, HIGH HOLBOEN.




Herewith is given an expansion of a Speech addressed to the Synod
of the Diocese of Sydney, on a motion relating to the proposal, then
(1875) before the Colonial Parliament, to give full legal sanction to
marriage with a deceased wife’s sister. That this proposal has since
become law makes it even more desirable to accede to the request made
that the speech should be published, in the hope that it may help some
whom this legislation has unsettled, or at least record the witness and
protest made against it.
Acknowledgment is due from the author to Dr. H. W. J. Thiersch for
much assistance from his work, “Das Verbot der Ehe innerhalb der
nahen Verwandtschaft,” (Nordlingeu, 1869), to which he would refer
others as a store of learning, research and common sense upon this
subject.
J. C. C
Ashfield, Sydney, N. S. W., 1876.




I*7
/<f -S
Bn t i)t JlaiTi'age
DECEASED WIFE’S SISTEB.
Addressed to the Synod of the Diocese of Sydney.
It is well known to the members of the Synod, that although
the particular act of legislation referred to has not yet
actually been passed in this colony, yet efforts are being
made for that end, which seem likely at no distant date to suc-
ceed. Moreover, we have recently had strong and decided ex-
pressions of opinion in favour of such legislation from men whose
judgment carries with it the weight of high positions in the
Church and in the State. Both reason and modesty demand that
a difference of opinion from such men, on so important a
question, should be soberly weighed and well substantiated. At
the same time we are often told, that the current of public opi-
nion is now running in favour of such marriages, and a very little
intercourse on this subject, among either clergy or laity, will
suffice to make one aware, that the objections to them are little
thought of, I may say even little understood, and subject to fre-
quent misrepresentation ; and that the whole question with which
they are connected —that of prohibition of marriage within cer-
tain degrees of relationship—is one that notwithstanding the
frequency of its discussion has had amazingly little real patient
study, considering its great importance.*
Speaking therefore, in behalf of those who do not hesitate
to avow their solemn conviction, that according to the Divine
principles of marriage revealed in Holy Scriptures, as they
are to be observed in the Christian Church, a man’s marriage
with his deceased wife’s sister is to be detested as incestuous and
abominable, I am bound under the circumstances above des-
cribed, to show strong cause for opposing such opinions as hare


been referred to, and for claiming an exemption which will be re-
garded with so little favour ; and I shall be compelled to trespass
much on the attention of the Synod by the necessity of present-
ing as full a statement of our case as the occasion will allow.
In the first place, we regard marriage as holding an altogether
singular and essential position in the foundation of human
society and morals. And these marriage questions appear to our
view essentially to affect man’s moral and spiritual life. It is
indeed difficult for us to conceive, how they can appear otherwise
to any man having faith, who will soberly and patiently consider
all the interests and consequences, individual and social, physical
and spiritual, ecclesiastical and civil, temporal and eternal that are
involved in them. As G-od instituted marriage, so do we believe
that He maintains the rule of it, and has His own will and
pattern and purpose concerning it, which are progressively deve-
loped and revealed in the Holy Scriptures. And inasmuch also
as God most certainly made man not for man’s own sake, but for
the sake of those ultimate purposes in the Creator’s mind, pur-
poses conceived from all eternity, which appear in the incarnation
of the Son of God, and His purchase and election of His Church,
and which are to have their final issue in dispensations yet to
come, so accordingly and in fact necessarily from its intimate
relation to the execution of such purposes, God has subjected
the union of the sexes to certain fundamental principles and re-
strictions of His own appointment. The will of G-od is there-
fore to be regarded as the only true determination of moral
questions and obedience to it as the only true expediency: and
the only question that can remain for those who agree with us in
this is the determining of what is really the will of God. IN ow,
there can be no doubt amongst us that G-od has subjected His
perfect will and pattern of righteousness to the circumstances of
its progress in being brought out and revealed amongst men.
He has suffered a suspension of the perfect pattern of what
should be to prevail for long seasons of human history ; and He
has overlooked with indulgence, periods of imperfect develop-
ment of moral truth in this particular aspect. As for example,
among the immediate descendants of Adam, and among the


families of the patriarchs, and indeed to some extent also
amidst the still higher development of God’s purpose which
was revealed to the children of Israel, marriages were per-
mitted which were not according to the perfect pattern, but
episodes, steps as it were in its construction. At the same time
what believing man does not see that God has vindicated the
principles His Divine will in this particular by severe chastise-
ments on nations that had become more signally depraved by
departure from the dictates of conscience respecting marriage ?
And who that acknowledges the one true God at all, does not see
that He has taught by providence as well as revelation how
essential to man’s welfare, physical, moral, and spiritual is the
observance of His laws concerning the union of the sexes.
All this, tends to enforce our convictions of the very
great moment of the questions now touched upon. All this
too, and more might be felt and avowed by a faithful Jew;
but to a Christian, the additional revelation of God that he
recognizes, affords additional reasons for interest in such
questions by its much higher elevation of the whole subject of
marriage, and additional motives for preserving its sanctity in
every reasonable, scriptural way. For it is not a question of
High Church and Low Church, it is not a ground of sectarian or
party debate, but it is surely an obvious matter to all who ac-
knowledge the divine inspiration of the New Testament that
marriage and its accessories are held therein supremely sacred,
and all violations of them as supremely sinful and destructive;
and that in what it is and in what it is there made to symbolize
and point to, there are inexpressible reasons for God’s guardian-
ship of it, and for our dreading a violation of the divine prin-
ciples imposed upon it.
The first source from which we endeavour to learn what these
principles are, and what prohibitions they entail upon marriage
is, of course, the Law of God, as delivered through Moses. If
there are any prohibitions of marriage with next of kin imposed
upon us by God’s law, then they must be found here, for in no
other place in Holy Scripture are there any expressed. Those
which do exist must be those expressed in the Old Testament,


for they are not found in the New. The only alternative would
be that we should come to the preposterous conclusion, that no
such prohibitions exist by Divine appointment for Christian
men. Those in the Mosaic law are found in three passages,
Leviticus xviii., Leviticus xx., and Deuteronomy xxvii.
As it will be useless to argue from these prohibitions if their
application to ourselves is disputed, this should be established.
And for this end we claim careful consideration, first of all for
the alternative just stated. Either we have to gather what God s
will is, what the ruling Divine principles are in this matter from
these passages, or else there is no statement of them at all in the
Bible. What would one reasonably infer? Would it be
that no such prohibitions exist for us ? Surely not. W ould it
be that they are to be determined from a certain moral sense
among Christians ? In that case where are we to find a standard
of this ? In modern or in ancient Christian codes P In Homan,
or in Greek, or in Protestant ecclesiastical law ? In Germany,
or Prance, or England 1 Is there no fixed principle regulating
such prohibitions ? Is there no instruction or no illustration on
this point in the moral teachings of Holy Scripture ? If we turn
to these passages to seek for such guidance, we shall find at the
outset something that may assure us strongly that the regula-
tions there laid down do involve principles of divine, moral law,
principles of eternal, universal, and essential necessity. The first
of them is prefaced by the following solemn words : “ After the
doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwell, shall ye not do;
and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you
shall ye not do; neither shall ye walk in their ordinances. Ye
shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk
therein ; lam the Lord your God.” Here is a distinction drawn
between the laws and customs of certain nations, and the laws
which God imposes; and immediately there follows a catalogue
of prohibitions of marriage within certain degrees of affinity and
consanguinity. Now, incestuous marriages are known to have
been one of the ordinances of the Egyptians, and to have been
supported by the myth of Osiris and Isis. After the prohibitions
and the addition of certain abominable practices which were also


practised in Egypt and Canaan, the warning is repeated with
enlargement —“ Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things ;
for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before
you, and the land is defiled; therefore I do visit the iniquity
thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabit-
ants.” And after more to the same purport, —“ Therefore shall
ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any one of these
abominable customs, which were committed before you, and that
ye defile not yourselves therein; I am the Lord your God.
(Lev. xviii. 3,2 d, 25, 30.) Should any one presume to restrict
these last warnings to the more bestial crimes immediately pre-
ceding, this inference from their position is destroyed by a com-
parison of the 20th chapter where the order is reversed. Here
those bestial crimes stand first in the catalogue, and the pro-
hibitions of marriage within certain degrees have the same
warning immediately following them, and separating them from
a regulation that is of a purely ceremonial character. (Lev. xx.
22,. 23.)
Can we reasonably demand plainer intimations than those
hereby conveyed (Ist) that these injunctions respecting sexual
intercourse are all of universal (moral and not merely ceremo-
nial) obligation ; and (2) that the violation of them is regarded
as detestable by Him who is the sole source of all moral truth ?
I must now ask leave to point out certain peculiar features in
these three catalogues (if we may so call them) of prohibitions,
in order to arrive at their true nature and purport, and their
application to the question now in hand. I will do so in as
succinct and orderly a method as I can.
The first catalogue (Lev. xviii.) enumerates twelve distinct
illustrative cases, without penalty, The second (Lev. xx.) enume-
rates, eight, with a penalty attached to each. The third (Deut.
xxv., 5,19) is the shortest of all, containing but three examples,
each with a solemn curse appended to it.
Now, the first question is, what kind of relationship is made to
constitute a ground of prohibition in these tables ? Is it only
consanguinity, blood-relationship, kinship by common descent,
or is it also affinity, relationship by marriage, kinship through


connubial union ? It is quite necessary to ask this, for there are
not a few now-a-days who do not recognize any bar to marriage
arising from affinity; who argue, that only those related by
blood within certain degrees, and not those related “ only by
marriage,” as they say, should be prohibited from inter-marriage.
Any one may at once satisfy himself that this is not the Divine
law before us. Prohibitions based wholly upon relationship by
marriage are here intermingled with those based upon common
descent. This appears in each of the three catalogues indicated.
Even in the last (Deut. xxvii) occurring in the list of solemn
imprecations that were to he proclaimed from Mount Ebal, out of
three relationships within which a union is denounced, two of
them are relationships by marriage alone.
Erom the nature of the penalties attached in the second of
these cataloges we see that the breaches of these prohibitions
were not indeed all accounted equally heinous under the Mosaic
law. There was no draconic blindness levelling all transgressions
under the same measure of enormity; but for all that, they were
ail alike eschewed and rejected, whether arising out of affinity or
consanguinity, as not agreeing with the Divine standard of
morality which was to have been exemplified in Israel. Of four
which hear the highest penalty, three are prohibitions based upon
relation by marriage. (Lev. xx, 11, 12, 14, 17.)
So much for the kind of relationship that by this Divine ap-
pointment ought to constitute a bar to marriage.
Next we have to enquire to what extent these prohibitions are
carried; that is, what degrees of relationship are prohibited from
intermarriage ? Here there is one question that immediately
crosses our path. Do these prohibitions in Lev. xviii. affect only
those persons, those particular relations therein mentioned, or
are they illustrations of a rule applicable to all similar or analogous
cases P That is, are we to restrict their meaning to the letter, or
is regard to be had to reasonable inferences from it ? The next
question is, can we discover any common principle upon which
these prohibitions are based, and one which will make those ex-
pressed and those reasonably inferred from them, consistent with
each other and with any other scriptural teaching concerning


marriage ? If we can, then it will be only reasonable that our
regard for these prohibitions, whether expressed or directly in-
ferred, should be strengthened, and also that our assurance of the
universal application of such a principle as a standard of Christian
morals should be confirmed.
Let us take the former of these subsidiary questions first.
Are these prohibitions in Lev. xviii. to be confined to their literal
expressions, are we to treat them as an exhaustive enumeration ;
or are we to regard the spirit that breathes in them, and to ex-
tend them as far as logical or mathematical inference requiies ?
My Lord, if these were to be confined to their literal expression ;
if these prohibitions were, I say, to be confined to those instances
here named, they would be altogether inconsistent with one
another and unreasonable; they would leave us to infer that a
state of things was countenanced by God’s holy law which has
scarcely been known in any heathen state. Lor in the first place,
these prohibitions are (after the fashion of the whole law) ad-
dressed to the male side only. It is the man that is prohibited
from marrying his step-mother, his mother s sister, his father s
brother’s wife, and so on. But surely we are not to suppose the
law so unreasonable and unnatural as to permit a woman to marry
the corresponding relatives to these? In this certainly it is left
to reason to deduce the meaning of the law, and the principle of
bringing it under the exercise of fair, reasonable inference is
established. Again, —A man is prohibited (Lev. xviii. 12, 13)
from marrying his aunt by blood, nay even his aunt by marriage
(v. 14) ; but he is not in express terms prohibited from marrying
his niece, which is exactly the same degree of relationship in-
verted. And so it has ever been inferred by the Christian
Church that such unions are proscribed by this law. Again,--
one is prohibited from marriage with his father’s brother’s
wife, but a mother’s brother’s wife is not expressly mentioned.
Yet would not the law be absurdly inconsistent if this were
not intended also? Moreover, a man is not here in set and
express terms prohibited from marriage with his own daughtei ,
and that not because of disparity of age, for a grand-
daughter is mentioned (v. 10), nor because such a union was


altogether unknown in their history, or too atrocious to be con-
ceived, for there are others mentioned {e.g. v. 7,8, 9) of
which the same might be supposed, but because such a prohibi-
tion was left to direct reasonable inference from others that are
expressed. It is plain therefore, that either is this catalogue of
prohibitions in the Divine law very inconsistent and very defec-
tive, or else it is intentionally incomplete. We conclude the
latter. We conclude that it was not intended to be an exhaus-
tive enumeration of prohibited cases. We conclude that these
catalogues were intended only to give instances of the extent to
which it was God’s will that prohibitions of this kind should
reach ; instances of the extent to which it was intended that the
principle in v. 6 should apply ; and that it is left to reasonable,
logical, and we may add, mathematical inference to complete the
full list of prohibitions, and make those mentioned consistent
with one another, and with the principles upon which any of
them are established. Those principles are firstly, (Lev. xviii. 6)
That a man may not marry a woman that is “ near of kin to him ”
(“the remainder of his flesh,” see margin) ; and 2ndly. That a
man and his wife become one kin. The same word exactly is used
for “kin” in Lev. xviii., and for “flesh” in Gen. ii. 24. The
man and his wife become one kin, and therefore, as he may not
marry his own “ near of kin,” so he may not marry his wife’s near
of kin. That is the only reason why he may not marry his wife’s
mother (Lev. xx. 14), his wife’s daughter, i.e., his step-daughter
(xviii. 17), nor even his step-grand-daughter. That is the reason
why he may not marry his uncle’s wife, because she is in his
uncle’s kin, and that is near of kin to his own father. That is
the reason, the only consistent reason why a man is prohibited
(Lev. xviii. 16, and xx. 21) from marrying his brother’s wife, viz.,
because she is one kin with his own brother, and is therefore a
woman “ near of kin ”to himself. And hence it directly follows
that conversely, I may not marry my wife’s sister, according to
the perfect application of these revealed principles which God
has imposed upon marriage, because my wife and myself consti-
tute one kin, and her sister thus becomes a woman “near of
kin ”to myself. What reason can be alleged against marriage


with a wife’s mother, or a wife’s daughter (a step-daughter) that
does not equally prevail against marriage with a wife’s sister ?
The reason that is alleged against marrying a wife’s daughter or
grand-daughter is that they are her near kinswomen (v. 17).
Surely, the wife’s sister is also her near kinswoman, and if that
is a reason in the one case it is a reason we must apply to the
other.
The limits of the application of these two principles may he
gathered from an examination of these catalogues, and are as
definite and plain as its extent. Whilst a man may not marry his
wife’s near of kin by hlood, by consanguinity, no prohibition lies
against marriage with her near of kin by marriage , by affinity.
Whilst he may not marry such near of kin by consanguinity of
his wife’s as he may not marry of his own, there is no prohibi-
tion of marriage with one standing in such a degree of affinity to
his wife as would in regard to himself occasion a prohibition.
For instance, he may not (v. 16) marry his brother’s wife, but
there is nothing said against marriage with his ivife s brother’s
wife. He may not marry his own uncle's wife, but no prohibition
is to be inferred thence against marriage with a wife’s uncle’s wife.
Once more it appears from this catalogue, that the principles
upon which it is based are to be made to abridge only the liberty
of the principals concerned and not of other parties related to
them. Thus, a man’s marriage prevents his subsequently marry-
ing his wife’s near of kin and her marrying his ; but it does not
prohibit his and her kindred from intermarrying. He may not
marry his wife’s daughter or grand-daughter, but his brother, or
his son, or his father are not prohibited by any instance here
given from marrying them. He may not marry his brother’s
wife according to the law, but he is not prohibited from marriage
with her sister. He may not marry his wife’s sister, but his
brother is not similarly prohibited.
And thus both the extent and the limits of the application of
the principles named are to be gathered from the instances given
in the scripture before us. And they are also manifested to be
not inconsistent and capricious, but perfectly systematic and har-
monious with each other.


But lam going on too fast; so it will appear to some, and
they will ask me to observe the 18th verse and see the implied
permission of marriage with a deceased wife’s sister that is con-
tained therein. “ Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister to
vex her, in her lifetime” —whence it is inferred that a woman who
was sister to a former wife may be taken after her death. Now
it has been often shewn, my Lord, that this is by no means a
necessary inference from these words. It has been often pointed
out that these words “ a wife to her sister” are but the ordinary
and only Hebrew idiom for “ one wife to another,” as the marginal
version renders it, and that in order to establish a conclusion incon-
sistent withthecontextupon any other meaningthat meaningshould
he proved the only one possible. It has been often and reasonably
argued that this verse is in fact but a prohibition of polygamy.
And if the undoubted prevalence of polygamy among the Jews
of early times should be alleged against this, be it remembered
that in the directions given of the duty of a king (Deut. xvii. 17)
he is expressly forbidden to indulge in polygamy, and yet not-
withstanding it is amongst the kings that we see the most out-
rageous violations of such a rule. The practice therefore of the
Jewish people is not a safe guide as to the meaning of their law.
This passage was actually thus interpreted and duly obeyed by
a considerable and ancient sect among the Jews, But we have
before us notwithstanding this the plain fact, that as a whole the
nation did not thus regard the passage, and that this marriage
with a deceased wife’s sister was practised among them, with the
support of their commentators and scribes. We shall not over-
look so important a fact as this is ; nor or disregard the force which
is claimed for it as an interpretation of the law. The ancient
Jewish custom did as a fact permit the marriage of a deceased
wife’s sister, and then expositors of the law treated Lev. xviii. 18,
as prohibiting only the marriage of the sister of a divorced
wife in her life time. Such for instance is the exposition given
by Philo of Alexandria, as I am informed by a quotation that is
worth repeating for its sound good sense. (See note A. at end.)
But Jewish expositors of these prohibitions also permitted in the
Mishna marriage with a niece ! Although the analogy between


the marriage of a womaa with her nephew which is prohibited even
when she is an aunt by marriage alone (Lev. xvii. 12,13,14) is clear,
enough for any understanding, yet this marriage of a man with his
niece was, we are told, even commended as specially exemplary,
and that merely on account of the tradition that Sarah was the
niece of Abraham !
It is surely necessary to determine then what authority Jewish
exposition or custom in relation to these marriage laws should
have with Christians, and to ascertain what standard we are to
be governed by—the principles upon which the Divine law
stands, or their expositions at the hands of Jewish Scribes, and
the exceptions to which they were exposed in their application
to the Jewish people.
Here then is the question. According to strict application of
the principles upon which the Mosaic prohibitions are based and
strict analogy of the degrees therein prohibited, the relation of a
niece and that of a deceased wife’s sister come within the prohibited
limits. The relation of a woman to her nephew is of exactly the
same degree as that of a man to his niece. Marriage between
the former is prohibited by the letter of the law, the latter, not
being mentioned expressly is by Jewish tradition justified. The
relation of a woman to her husband’s brother is of exactly the
same degree as that of a man to his wife’s sister. Marriage
between the former is prohibited by express command, but
between the latter it. is permitted by Jewish interpretation.
There is inconsistency somewhere. Is it in the Divine law, or in
the Jewish tradition ? Is it the explanation of all this that the
Mosaic law is inconsistent with itself and violates the principles
from which it starts ? or is it that the Jewish usage is inconsis-
tent with the true and perfect first principles of the law, either
by temporary concession or by erroneous interpretation and tra-
dition ? Those who now hear me will have no hesitation in reply-
ing that the fault must be with the latter. It is not to be thought
of that the positions of Divine law should rest upon mere cap-
rice and be entirely wanting in consistency and unity of principle.
We know from the New Testament that these Jewish deductions,
interpretations, and traditions were by no means a genuine and


reliable development of the Mosaic law, and especially those re-
lating to marriage. Moreover, we know, that as regards this
institution, there were other relaxations of.the true perfect
standard of the Divine will which were expressly permitted to
the Jews because of their weakness and inability to present the
full and perfect truth; relaxations which were to be but of
temporary effect, and were to apply only to the condition and
dispensation of the Jew. There can be no room to suppose for
a moment that our responsibility as Christians is fulfilled by
copying that construction of the Divine law which Jewish tradi-
tion put upon it. Surely our obvious duty is to discern in the
Mosaic ordinances, the principles laid down by God, and upon
them to build the highest things. Surely we are pledged in duty
not to continue standing thoughtlessly even upon the mere letter
of the law, but to interpret and complete the principles contained
in it according to the intention and spirit of the Lawgiver.
To sum up and apply what has been said in regard to the verse
now specially before us (Lev. xviii. 18), we say that even if the verse
be not as some maintain a prohibition of polygamy, as according
to all laws of grammar, idiom, and sense it may be ; even if the
construction that was put upon by the Jewish scribes was con-
templated by Moses and can be justified ; still this construction
has nothing to do with us. Why not ? Because it is not con-
sistent with the whole scheme of prohibitions here set forth.
Because such a permission at any time to marry a wife’s sister is
a departure from a consistent application of the principles upon
which those prohibitions are based, and therefore at most can be
only a temporary concession to the circumstances of the imper-
fect economy of the Jew. Because to marry a wife’s sister is
contrary to the first principle that a man and his wife are one
kin; and to the second principle, that a man may not marry his
own sister.
But the nature of my recent arguments leads me on directly to
notice another aspect of the question before us, and to the
counter-arguments that are based upon it. I refer to the com-
mand in Deut. xxv. 5-10, that under certain circumstances, a man
shall marry his deceased’s brother’s wife. It is argued from this


that because the degree of relationship of a woman to her
deceased husband’s brother is identical with that of a man to his
deceased wife’s sister, since the marriage of the former is com-
manded, therefore that of the latter may be permitted, or is shown
to be not unlawful. Or, as it has been expressed—since the
closeness of the relationship in the one case was not under cer-
tain circumstances to be accounted a hindrance to marriage,
therefore it is not to be accounted so in that which is its exact
counterpart.
Now what are the facts and what are the words we have to
deal with ? The first fact is that this very marriage, this marri-
age with a deceased brother’s wife is forbidden. It is forbidden
twice over in what may be called the body of the law. (Lev.
xviii. 16, and xx. 21.) And not only is a man forbidden to take
his own brother’s wife, but he is forbidden to take even his
father’s brother’s wife, a still more distant relation. And these
examples of prohibitions are clearly enough in accordance with
the fundamental principles of the whole scheme. They are
clearly enough consistent with each other upon the assumption
that a woman becoming one kin with her husband, a brother’s
wife is “ near of kin ” to the brother, he is in fact her brother —
and a father’s brother’s wife, an aunt by marriage, is “ near of
kin” to one’s father, in fact his sister. Thus, therefore, the
first fact is that the closeness of the relationship is accounted a
hindrance to marriage with a brother's wife. This is the rule
expressed by the Divine law in Leviticus, and solemnly re-
iterated by John the Baptist, “ John said to Herod, it is not law-
ful for thee to have thy brother’s wife.” Why? Not because
her first husband was alive merely, as he most probably was. The
marriage of a divorced woman to another man was not forbidden,
but simply because marriage within this degree of affinity was for-
bidden. It is the mere reiteration of the Mosaic law that he
utters, “It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother’s wife.”
This is the first fact.
Another fact is that you cannot call this taking of a deceased
brother’s wife in Deut. xxv. a marriage at all in the proper, ordi-
nary sense of that word. In marriage, there is at all events pre-


sumably a freedom of choice ou either side. Here there is to be
none; neither to the woman, nor to the man. “If brethren
dwell together, and one of them die and have no child, tbe wife
of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger; her hus-
band’s brother (marg. ‘ next kinsman’) shall go in unto her, and
take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband’s
brother unto her. And if the man like not to take his brother’s
wife, then let his brother’s wife go up to the gate unto the elders,
and say, my husband’s brother refuseth to raise up unto his
brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my
husband’s brother. Then the elders of his city shall call him,
and speak unto him : and if he stand to it and say, I like not to
take her: then shall his brother’s wife come unto him in the pre-
sence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit
in his face, and shall answer and say, so shall it be done unto
that man that will not build up his brother’s house in Israel.
And his name shall be called in Israel, the house of him that hath
his shoe loosed.”
Here then, the woman has no choice. There is only one man
in the first instance whom she may accept —her deceased hus-
band’s brother, or failing that his other next of kin. If he de-
clines, she has to humble herself by an appeal to the magistrates
to compel him to take her to wife. And as for the man, whether
he was husband’s brother or cousin, or whatever other kin (in the
case of Ruth it was not a brother, Ruth iv.), if he persisted in his
refusal, he was to be subjected to public insult of a kind peculi-
arly degrading and disgusting to the Oriental mind; the woman
was to loose his shoe and spit in his face, and his house was to
have a nickname of reproach thenceforward. Further, in marri-
age, a man’s children bear his own name, and are reckoned to him
as his posterity. But the fruit of this union were not to bear the
name of their real father, but of his brother. They were not be
reckoned to their real father as his posterity —the first-born was
not at all events —but as that of the deceased brother; and the
object was that the name of the childless dead should “ not be
put out of Israel.”
Now, if there ever was a case in which, as is acknowledged to
be true, the exception proves and confirms the rule, this is surely


one. The special circumstances which make the particular case
.exceptional, establish in all other cases the universal rule. We
have seen what the rule is, as it is clearly and consistently re-
iterated. “It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother’s wife.”
But here is a case in which according to the law of all the East
almost, under the conditions of a man’s dying without issue to
succeed to his inheritance and sustain his name, such a union was,
not permitted, but, under penalty, enjoined. It was a custom
honoured throughout the East and handed down to Israel from
the days of their earliest forefathers.* Judah in a similar case
had commanded his son Onan to marry the widow Tamar, and
upon his dying childless had appointed for her his third son
Shelah. The traditions of Israel, and above all the strong desire
for posterity and for a maintenance of the family name among
them would no doubt have received a great shock if the rule had
been made to apply in such cases. Moreover, the nature of
Israel’s promises, earthly as they were, the necessity for main-
taining the distinctness of the families and the properties allotted
them, which became the occasion for other kindred restrictions
arising out of the case of the daughters of Zelophehad, and above
all, the fact that Almighty God saw fit for His own wise purposes
to have it so, made the case before us altogether peculiar and so
exceptional as to take it completely out of the category of
examples for Christian times. And as we have already seen, the
form of this exceptional regulation in every respect strongly de-
notes that it cannot upon any pretext be made a pattern for
Christian men. A rule there undoubtedly is— the prohibition of
marriage with a deceased brother's wife, and as its correlative the
prohibition of marriage with a deceased wife's sister. The close-
ness of the relationship prohibits it, because a man and his wife
are one kin, and he may not marry his sister. If there is to be
any exception deduced from Deut. xxv., the case must be proved
to be equally exceptional and so also must be the regulations
restricting it. Surely, this is nothing more than what reason and
common sense require.
* The same custom existed among Indians and Persians; and it is said to
exist now amongst the Tartars, the Gallas in Abyssinia, as also in Siam, Pegu,
and among the Affghans.


To sum up the Old Testament evidence we have received—the
only prohibitions of marriage with near of kin that are contained
in the whole Bible, are those in Lev. xviii., Lev. xx., and Deut.
xxvii. These prohibitions extend to degrees of affinity and con-
sanguinity alike. They are inconsistent and incomplete, unless
they are to be regarded as affording instances only of the appli-
cation of certain principles and not as completely enumerating
all possible cases. They are made reasonable and consistent by
the application of two principles —(1) that man and wife are one
kin; (2) that a man may not marry his next of kin within cer-
tain therein specified degrees. By argument of analogy based on
the prohibition of marriage with a deceased brother’s wife, and
by a fortiori , argument based on the prohibition of even more
remote degrees of affinity (e.g. Lev. xviii,, 12, 13, 14), these
principles are extended to the prohibition of marriage with a
deceased wife’s sister, in the consistent and perfect application of
them. Jewish custom made an exception in favour of this, but
that is no guide for Christian practice. The levirate law of Deut.
xxv. is an exception of such a character as to establish for all
others than the Jewish nation in its occupation of Canaan, the
rule from which it departs. Hence the standard of perfect
morality, the thorough and complete application of the Divine
principles contained in the Mosaic law, and (as we shall presently
see) the unanimous deduction of the Christian Church from it
hitherto has forbidden the marriage of a deceased wife’s sister.
Before passing on to the New Testament period, it may be in-
structive to observe what was determined in the matter of pro-
hibitions of marriage by the moral sense of a great heathen
nation, whose respect for marriage and family life in its earlier
and better days was remarkable, and was accounted one great
source of its strength j I mean ancient Eome. There, not only
blood-relations of ascending and descending degrees were prohi-
bited from hater-marriage, but also the marriage of aunt or niece
or of grand-niece. The principle of parentela, or of the respect due
from parents to children was one principle on which the Koman
prohibitions were based. Out of this arose a prohibition of
marriage with an amt on either father’s or mother’s side, and


analogously with a niece, whether a brother’s or a sister’s child.
The Emperor Claudius when desiring to marry his brother’s
daughter Agrippina, had to get a decree of the Senate to enable
him to do so ; and although that was in the days when moral
debasement was weakening the true Roman character, even then
the attainment of his desire is said to have cost some considerable
effort. But prohibitions of marriage were not even in heathen
Rome confined to relationship by blood, but extended also to that
by affinity. Thus marriage was prohibited with a step-mother or
a step-daughter, with a wife’s mother or a son’s wife. And so even
upon a view of the nature of the marriage union, necessarily so
much lower than that of Christianity, it was held to necessitate
a prohibition of further marriage with certain other members of
the same family, or in other words, relation by affinity was con-
sidered a bar to marriage within certain degrees. This is all I
seek to prove by this reference. But, my Lord, I would place
such a fact in contrast with the modern legislation of certain
nations of Christendom; a sad, a shameful contrast as it seems
to me to be. And I would hold it up for the purpose of entreat-
ing some of my brother Christians who are arguing upon this
matter to observe that restrictions of the kind they are proposing
to repudiate have not been deemed inconsistent with the liberties
of one of the greatest, noblest, and freest nations of heathendom ;
but have eyen there been enforced by mere considerations of
family propriety and decorum. And that relation by affinity
should within certain limits restrict inter-marriage is shewn to
be a principle in which the moral sense of all men, heathen, Jew,
and Christian has hitherto agreed.
At the threshold of the New Testament period, we find the
history of John the Baptist estopped, and his earthly career
closed by one of these very cases of marriage within the prohi-
bited degrees. Herod had married Herodias, his
brother Philip’s wife. John met him with the rebuke, “It is not
permitted thee to have thy brother’s wife.” What was the harm
in it ? Some will reply—“ Because her husband was yet alive.”
That is impossible. It is impossible, I say, that that could have
been the point of his criminality. In the first place, that would


merely amount to saying—“ It is not permitted thee to have
another man’s wife.’’ But supposing Philip alive, as is asserted,
we believe, by Josephus, what hindered a divorce ? The woman’s
act entailed it; indeed, she is said to have procured a divorce.
And there was nothing to hinder a man’s marrying a divorced
woman according to the then existing usage of the Jews. The
Lord established indeed a higher usage forbidding this upon Sis
interpretation of the law of Moses for us (though modern legisla-
tion disregards that) ; but there was no prohibition that Herod
could be held responsible for of marriage with a divorced woman.
The sole point, the only possible purpose that could be expressed
in John Baptist’s rebuke was, that Herod’s was a marriage within
a forbidden degree of affinity. This was the only feature in it
which gave any special force to the terms he used. “It is not
permitted thee to have thy brother’s wife.” The circumstances
of his union with Herodias were not of that exceptional kind
which would have made it obligatory on a Jewish brother to take
her. The survival of her husband, the existence of her daughter
as his seed, each of these circumstances established it as a prohi-
bited union. And so, all that John Baptist does is to re-iterate
in its bare terms the prohibition of the Mosaic law —“ It is not
permitted thee to have thy brother’s wife.” And what follows ?
Hereby, in full agreement with the injunction with which the
last words of old testament prophecy (Malachi iv. 4) had foretold
his mission, the Baptist vindicates the perpetual validity and
universal obligation of the Mosaic law in this particular. He
asserts that lateness in time, majesty of station, alienship of
race from Israel notwithstanding, Herod the Edomite King of
Judah was as much bound by this law, when it was known to him,
as those who heard it from the lips of Moses. Hereby too the
prohibition of a union which is on both sides acknowledged to be
the exact correlative of the one in'question is brought into
singular and impressive prominence. And finally, after thus
boldly asserting that the putting away of such a sin was a part of
the preparation for the Lord’s first coming that his mission from
God demanded, so far from treating it as lightly as men are doing
now before the Lord’s second coming to judge all men, so far from


retracting bis words be sealed bis faitb in tbeir importance and
tbeir eternal truth with his blood;
In the teaching of our Lord himself as it affects marriage
within prohibited degrees of kinship we have no new legislation,
nor any express statement of rules. But our chief enquiry re-
specting it must be, how does the Lord’s teaching reflect upon
that of the Mosaic law ? Does it annul the regulations we have
there or confirm them ? Does it restrict their application to the
Jews, or enlarge and extend it to those who call themselves His
disciples ?
“ Think not,” He says, “ that I am come to destroy the law”—
and His holy teaching in respect to the law of marriage illus-
trated this at least as strongly as any other part of it. So far
was our Lord Jesus from relaxing any of those restrictions through
which God had in the law to the Jew as far as he could bear it,
taught the spiritual nature and protected the sanctity of marriage,
that He affirmed that code to contain relaxations which were not
a part of the perfect thing, but were concessions to the weakness
and hard-heartedness of those to whom it was given. He did not
relax the law of marriage but showed that there was a higher,
primitive, archetypal standard up to which He would have it
brought. In fact He treated some ordinances of the Mosaic
marriage code not as establishing a normal standard, but as con-
cessions to an abnormal, an imperfect one. “ Moses, because of
the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives ;
but from the beginning it was not so.” Some people talk as if
the “ liberty that is in Christ,” the deliverance from “ the bond-
age of the law,” the cessation of the operation of some parts of
it made the prohibitions of Lev. xviii. a dead letter for Christen-
dom. The fact is that that respect for marriage which has been
the universal ground of such prohibitions among Jews or heathen,
is more strongly and repeatedly enforced by Christian teaching
than by any other that the world has known. And in proportion
as it has lost that respect we may estimate our departure from
the distinctively Christian standard. I have already shown that
unless those prohibitions in Lev. xviii, are absurdly inconsistent,
unreasonable, and capricious, which we do not believe, they must


be regarded as a table of instances to illustrate bow far two defi-
nite and fixed principles are to prohibit marriage, and where they
are to cease to do so —the first of these principles being that a
man not marry his near of kin, and the other that a man and his
wife are one kin. Can we doubt Christ’s adoption of the first of
these ? And as for the second who can assert it more strongly ?
If He did not then in His Gospel express direct prohibitions ;
Christ did undoubtedly recognise the Mosaic law and confirm the
principles on which the prohibitions that are contained in it are
based. Therefore to these questions we cannot but answer that
He confirms the regulations of that law and extends the applica-
tion of them to all that call themselves his disciples.
Coming now to the apostles, we have no express directions
from them directly affecting our present enquiry. But we also
certainly have nothing that disturbs the inferences already drawn
as to the meaning and the continual application of the prohibi-
tions contained in the Mosaic law. Not one word of theirs in
any degree annuls or violates the principles on which they stand.
Quite the reverse. All their teaching tends to the exaltation of
the sanctity and the establishment of the spiritual side of marri-
age.
There are just two occasions on which some remark may be
made as having a hearing of some importance upon the question
before us. The first is the decree of the Council at Jerusalem
which was addressed to the gentile converts after the disputes at
Antioch, Acts xv. 28, 29. In that there is a mention of
an offence described as vropvsiu (“fornication” in the A. V.) that
is to be prohibited among the gentiles. There are obvious rea-
sons for questioning whether this could mean what is commonly
so designated. And it will be known by all my present hearers
that this question has been raised. But the special application
given to this word %opveia. in the Ist epistle to the Corinthians
(v. 1) throws light upon the matter and suggests a strong proba-
bility at least of the immediate connection of that decree with
the subject now in hand. The word is there applied to a marri-
age within the prohibited degrees. Now it can easily be conceived
that there was a necessity, and especially where the known laxity


of Greek morals in this particular had prevailed, for expressly
forbidding marriages of this kind, and for having gentile converts
instructed that the liberty , the freedom from the ceremonial and
civil ordinances of the Mosaic law by which they were to be dis-
tinguished from their Jewish brethren in the Church of Christ,
was not to extend to marriage within the forbidden degrees. JS’or
can it be contended taat the conjunction of two other apparently
ceremonial and temporary prohibitions makes them all stand upon
the same level. For in the first place, if the ordinary, wider
meaning be given to the word Tropveia here, it is not inferred that
that was but temporarily forbidden, or the abstaining from idols,
because abstinance from things strangled and from blood may be
so regarded. And in the next place, thei’e was a special ignor-
ance to overcome, a special tendency to resist among the gentiles
in the matter of these prohibited marriages which made the men-
tion oi them imperative. How much this was the case appears
from the other occasion referred to. I mean that case at Corinth
which has been used to illustrate the former. There a man had
married his step-mother (Ist Cor. v. 1)* ; and St. Paul says this
had excited no such shame and sorrow among them as he might
have expected, although it was a connection that was strongly
disapproved even among the outside world, the unbelieving
Greeks and especially the Homans. As for himself, he speaks of
the act with the strongest abhorrence, and makes it an occasion
for a exercise of the power of spiritual discipline vested in his
apostolic office.
How, I do not introduce these two instances as coming in the
direct lino oi the present argument, but as showing, the one pro-
bably, the other most unmistakably what was the character of the
apostolic mind in relation to the whole question before us, the
* I met with the suggestion that the father might have been still
living, and that this may have been the peculiar heinousness of the act.
This will not, however, agree with the language used. The sin would then
be called u.o iyjlu and not Ttopvnu. And is it conceivable that there could
have been any doubt, any lack of discernment of its abominable character
among the converts at Corinth in such a case ? Can any man refuse to see
that it was the womans being his father's wife that made the man’s action
detestable even among Gentiles : so that it washer nearness of kin that made
the crime so heinous.


question of marriage within certain prohibited degrees. And I
close these observations upon the evidence of the New Testament
period on the matter with this remark. In this period there are
but two instances of marriages being prominently and expressly
repudiated on account of the previous relationship of the parties
to them, and in each case this is a relationship by affinity, and not
by consanguinity ; in the one, a marriage with a brother’s wife, in
the other with a step-mother.
I pass on now to a brief review of Christian antiquity in
relation to the question before us. For various reasons not
necessary within present limits to be detailed, there is in the
earliest times a lack of express reference to the prohibitions that
were maintained in respect to marriages with next of kin. There
is no setting forth of laws or canons or tables of degrees on the
subject in the second and third centuries. The earliest docu-
ments of this kind rather assumed to be records of customs and
teachings received by tradition from the Apostles, and those im-
mediately instructed by them, than to have any legislative
character. In one of the most ancient of these —the apostolic
canons —the marriages of two sisters in succession, and of a
niece, are the only unions that are expressly reprobated ; and that
is among the causes which were to render unfit for the ministry.*
When councils began to express the mind of the Church by
means of their degrees or canons, we find it unmistakably
enunciated in regard to this question. In the 61st Canon of the
Council of Illiberis (a.d. 305), the marriage of a deceased wife’s
sister is proscribed. In the 2nd Canon of the Council of Neo-
cesarea (between a.d. 314 and 325), a woman’s marrying her
deceased husband’s brother is similarly dealt with. The Council
of Niccea did not deal with these questions. But not long after
it there occurred an occasion that evoked through Basil, Arch-
bishop of Neo-cesarea (370 to 3/9), a full and decided expression
of the previous and the contemporary sentiments of the Christian
* One writer on this subject urges that this was a restriction imposed upon
the clergy, and from them afterwards extended to the laity : arguing, as if the
mention of it among disabilities for the clerical office shewed that it might he
tolerated among the laity. He might as well argue that the mention of being
the “ husband of one wife” as a requisite in a Bishop or a Deacon, shewed
that a layman might have two.


Church on the very question now before us. A man enquired of
Bishop Diodorus of Tarsus (a.d. 378 to 394) whether, his wife
being dead, he was permitted to marry her sister.* Diodorus
wrote in reply that it was not forbidden. His letter was shewn
to Basil, and the Archbishop thereupon writes one to Diodorus.
He starts from the assumption that the letter which had been
shewn him, and which the person who had received it was shew-
ing everywhere as a sort of trophy, was a forgery, and falsely
attributed to Diodorus. For he says, a bishop to whom such a pro-
posal had been made would have shrunk with horror from it, and
not have given it a willing ear, or afforded it any countenance. He
then exhorts his brother bishop to a united opposition to such an
erroneous opinion, and takes occasion to set forth arguments
against it. He appeals to ecclesiastical tradition (ados) as con-
firmed by the testimony of holy men, with a force equal to that
of law, as having wholly repudiated such a union from having
the character of Christian marriage, and as having excluded
those who participated in such from either Baptism or the
Holy Communion until they were separated. In referring to
the well-known passage (Lev. xviii. 18) he says, that it was
addressed to those who were under the law, and held good
for them. But he remarks that we must not claim exemption
from the Mosaic law under the plea of Christian liberty in re-
gard to anything that presses upon us with severity, like the law
of circumcision, or the Sabbath, or the eating of certain meats,
and then put ourselves under it again in regard to something
that concedes to our fleshly appetites. If, he says, we are to
understand from this verse “in her lifetime” to mean for us
that after a wife’s death the marriage of her sister would be per-
mitted, this would not be confining ourselves to an exposition of
the law, but intruding on the office of the lawgiver. Otherwise
another expression in the same verse (“ to vex her”) might, he
says, be so twisted as to mean that a man might take the two
sisters at the same time if only their tempers agreed together.
There was many an unseemly thing not mentioned by name in
Holy Scripture, but nevertheless forbidden. But in this parti-
* I give this occurrence as it is related in the German of Dr. Thiersch.


cular case the prohibition was contained in the principle which
had been expressed by the lawgiver in verse 6 —“ Thou shalt not
approach unto any that is near of kin to thee.” Now, what is
so near to a man as his wife ? For it is written, “ they are no
more twain, but one kin so that through the wife her sister
comes into kinship with her husband. “ Hence as he will not
take his wife’s mother, nor his wife’s daughter to wife,—because
he may not take his own mother, or his own daughter, —in like
manner he is not to take his wife’s sister because he may not
take his own sister. Again on the other hand a woman is not
allowed to marry those next of kin to her husband, for the law
prevails with respect to each spouse alike.” He proceeds further
to allege the confusion that such unions would create. And
though I myself am disposed to think the good Archbishop to be
committing an error of judgment in descending from the high
ground of fundamental principle upon which he had been
arguing to the question of expediency, still there is one argu-
ment of this sort employed by him in which I am persuaded
that he has struck a truer note and taken a sounder and more
common sense view than the innovators of our day. He says,
“ O man, make not a step-mother of their aunt to thy children.
Take care not to arm her, who by duty already stands in the
relation of a mother to them with the envy of a step-mother.”
Again and again do we hear it asked by those who desire to
insist upon making this a mere question of expediency and to
support the change as expedient —Who so fit to take a mother’s
place to the orphan children as their mother’s .sister? We
answer, she has such a place as their aunt, but should she marry
their father and become a mother herself what guarantee in
reason or nature is there that she will not be as much a step-
mother in the invidious sense which that word has acquired as
any other woman. Whilst unmarried and prohibited from
marrying their father, the aunt can fulfil a relation to the
children which no other woman can, one which in the majority
of cases she could not fulfil if her marriage with their father was
regarded as possible. But in the position of their father s wife
any other good Christian woman may be as true a mother to them


and quite as little likely when she has offspring of her own to exhibit
the feelings to which a woman is then naturally tempted. The
Christian law of marriage does in fact preserve for the children
the advantage of a near relationship which (in its peculiar
features) the legislation of modern times destroys. An aunt is
by this made to be no more than any other woman to them.
But, as has been already said, we do not consent to base this
question upon expediency. It is determined upon the higher
ground of the principle, several times repeated, and as we have
here shewn, enunciated in the earliest ages of Christianity in the
application to the very case in hand. A man and his wife are
made one kin ; and a man may not marry his wife’s sister because
he may not marry his own. At the same time, past ages of
English society would testify to those who are not so infected
with this mania for change and for reforming everything after
their own ideas of expediency, as to see no experience against it,
that the observance of this divine principle has proved its
expediency in many and many a Christian household. Whilst we
may add the counsel with which Basil concludes his letter; “If
a person desires to enter into marriage in a lawful manner, the
whole world is open to him; but if his inclinations are burdened
with an evil passion, then he ought to be the more put on his
guard, so that he may learn to keep himself in sanctification and
honour.”
Now, a few words are requisite for the purpose of indicating
the value on the one hand of Basil’s letter as a testimony of the
general sense of Christian antiquity upon this question, and on
the other hand of the importance to be assigned to the opposite
opinion of Bishop Diodorus. There were parties in the Church
then as now. There were those who represented distinctly and
with the avowal of contemporary and subsequent ages the origi-
nal and universal judgment of the Catholic Church in their doc-
trine. Of these was eminently the Archbishop Basil. And there
were those who so distinctly and avowedly represented a fanciful
“ private interpretation” of Scripture, and an expression of doc-
trine for which they and their party alone were responsible, for
the most part not even professing to be that which had at any


past time been delivered to tbe Cburcb. Of these was Diodorus,
Bishop of Tarsus. Out of such a party originating in the theo-
logical schools of Antioch, Theodosius of Mopsuestia, and Nes-
torius of Constantinople were reckoned disciples and representa-
tives of the teaching of Diodorus. The fashion of interpretation
of Scripture which was maintained by him and his followers was
very much after the type of later neology and rationalism. Dike
the Jews, for instance, Theodosius applied the Messianic Psalms
to Zerubbabel and Hezekiah, and accepted only three of them
as relating to Christ. Solomon’s Song of Songs he expounded in
a manner before unheard of among Christians, as expressive of
mere earthly, sensual love. And it was wholly in accordance
with such a treatment of tbe Bible, bound to the letter and
emptied of the Spirit, that in disregard of the spirit of the Law-
giver, and in contempt of the tradition of the Church, the voice
of this Bishop of Tarsus was found claiming this license for Chris-
tians from the letter of the passage in Leviticus. But there was
not a voice raised in support of Diodorus’ opinion. In another
portion of the Church a like testimony to that of Basil s is
expressed by the Patriarch Timothy of Alexandria (a.t>. 381).
And no doubt was anywhere else cast upon the prohibition of
this marriage of a deceased wife’s sister as being the Christian
understanding of the Divine law throughout the Greek and Latin
Churches.
A case occurred near the end of the fourth century in which a
layman, named Paternus, of high position under the Emperor
Theodosius, asked the counsel of Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan,
as to the possibility of his son’s marrying a half-sister’s child
(that is, the child of a daughter of Paternus by a former marriage)
The terms of the Archbishop’s reply are applicable, to the case
we are specially dealing with. He says, “It must be remembered
that in Leviticus a father’s marriage with his own daughter is
not expressly named as prohibited, But when more distant degrees
of relationship are named as preventing marriage, then much more
must nearer connections be held to prevent it. “ Qui enim
leviora adstvingit , gruviora non solvit sed adligut .


It will assist our judgment of the temper of the Christian
teachers of that early age whose authority we are now claiming,
and of the principles they went upon, to observe in passing that
the marriage of cousins (forbidden by Roman statute) was not
actually prohibited by them, though it was considered to be
among those lawful things that, as a rule, are not expedient. St.
Augustine speaks of this in his £)e Civitate Dei, lib. xv. cap. 16.
In concluding this part of my subject I desire, my Lord, to say
to whom I especially appeal for a consideration of the argument
it supplies. It would be useless, indeed, to expect this of such
opponents, so many as they are in our days, as regard the very
name of an ancient Christian Bishop, especially if he has been
honoured in Church history with the prefix “ St.,” and with a
reputation for orthodoxy, as a suggestion of inveterate autocracy
and unreasoning dogmatism. But I appeal to men of sober
minds and of a disposition to estimate calmly the value of histori-
cal authority, I appeal to such men to consider whether the tes-
timony here alleged does not show that the ancient teachers of
the Church sustained the position which we now assume upon
this question, namely, that the Mosaic law furnishes illustrations
of the degrees of relationship within which marriage was to be
prohibited, and is to be interpreted according to its spirit and
with due exercise of reasonable inference, and not according to
the mere letter; and that its application to Christians in these
particulars was not only valid, but in certain respects more strin-
gent than to the Jews, and that in accordance with this the mar-
riage of a deceased wife’s sister was repudiated by the teachers of
the ancient Church. In short, it appears that the Church of
England derived this particular prohibition not from the days of
medievalism when prohibitions of marriage were unreasonably,
unscripturally, and unnaturally multiplied, but from those earlier
and better times when men were minded only to adhere to what
the Apostles had delivered, and to what a Christian, spiritual
interpretation of the Scriptures might determine.
We pass on now to times when large additions to the list of
prohibited degrees gradually came in and accumulated to a most
baneful measure. Out of the prohibitions attached to the old


Boman law of adoption, new prohibitions arose in the Christian
Church which were based upon sponsorship or “ spiritual rela-
tionship,” as it wass considered to be. But I believe lam correct
in saying that these were never introduced, or certainly not
established in the British Isles. Prohibitions were largely multi-
plied in the Greek Church, extending as far as several degrees of
cousinship. In the Soman Church it was even more so. They
were extended by canons of the Soman Council of 721, in the
time of Gregory 11. to seven parallel generations, or to the
seventh collateral degree. By the Council of W orms, a,d. 868,
it was affirmed that no Christian might take a wife from among
those related to him by blood as far back as a common ancestry
was known and remembered.* It must, indeed, have often been
a matter of some difficulty for a man to determine not whom he
might not but whom he might take in marriage. A partial
reform and correction of these restrictions was effected by Inno-
cent 111. at the Fourth Lateran Council, a.d. 1215. But they
were even then still left far in excess of those imposed by primi-
tive tradition and Divine legislation. The result of this was, for
one thing, that these prohibitions were often disregarded to the
injury of conscience in those who were made to account them-
selves transgressors of Church law, and either to live in defiance
of it, or should they from any motive afterwards choose to sur-
render to it, were made to sustain all the misery and shame of
judicial separation. But another result which has been perhaps
even more destructive in its consequences to morality at large
and to the maintenance of the moderate restrictions that are
based upon the Divine law was the use of dispensations. Such an
instrument as a dispensation was confined entirely to the Homan
Church, The Greek Church claimed no such power, but adhered
to the system therein adopted without any exception or release.
A dispensation was an express suspension of the law in a certain
specified instance. It testified so far to the existence of the law,
but it claimed a power which could belong of right to the Law-
giver Himself alone, to suspend its operation in a certain case.
* “ Nulli Christiano liceat de propria consanguinitate sen cognatione
uxorem accipere usque dum generatio recordatur, cognoscitur aut in memoria
tenetur.”


The exercise of such a power is reasonable and righteous enough
in questions of expediency; but in the Roman Church its exercise
was claimed in matters of Divine law and of the deepest moral
import. It was asserted as a prerogative of the plenitudo potes-
tatis of the Papacy. The extent to which theoretically it may be
exercised according to some Roman writers may be judged from
the assertions of Cardinal Cajetan (Luther’s opponent at Augs-
burg in 1519) that the Pope could grant a dispensation for the
contraction of marriage in all degrees of relationship, excepting
only a man s union with his mother, or a daughter’s with her
father !* The extent to which it actually has been exercised is
illustrated by the marriage of King Emanuel of Portugal to two
sisters in succession; by that of Queen Katharine of Arragon to
two brothers in succession; by that of Ferdinand, King of Naples,
to his father’s sister Johanna; and by many instances of the
marriage of uncles and nieces. From a very rare use of this in-
strument, dating in this particular adaptation of it we are told,
only from the fourteenth century, it came into systematic deve-
lopment until dispensations came to be granted for certain
charges regulated by scale according to the different degrees of
relationship. The Council of Trent made a show of curtailing
abuses in this direction, but the dispensatory power of the Pope
was re-affirmed under anathema; and subsequently to it the
Archduke Charles married by dispensation his niece, their son
being the Emperor Ferdinand 11. His two sisters in succession
married by dispensation King Sigismund of Poland. Philip 11.
of Spain by the same authority married his niece. There were
but few instances of permission of the marriage of a brother-in-
law or a sister-in-law up to the middle of the eighteenth century;
but since that time they have become frequent. lam assured by
a quotation from a modern Roman writer on the “ Catholic Law
of Marriage,” that the doctrine which at the present time seems
to be approved is that the Pope may give a dispensation allowing
marriage in all cases excepting only that with a person’s own
* “ Potest Papa dispensare cum omnibus personis conjunctis, nisi cum
matre et patre, ut matrimonium contrabant. Soli pater et mater de iure
natuite excluduntur a matrimonio.”— C'ajetanui. Thomas 2, ii. p. 637.


fatter or mother; although, as a fact, permission has never been
given for marriage with a sister or a step-mother, or a step-daugh-
ter, or with a mother-in law or daughter-in-law.
I have thought it important to have it understood what the
mind of the Roman Church is on the matter before us, more par-
ticularly for this reason. It is sometimes alleged by those who
desire to see the Church of England permit marriage with a de
ceased wife’s sister that the Roman Church permits such mar-
riages, and that we cannot assume to be more stringent on such
matters than she is. Now, it is fit we should know what such an
argument would lead to. It is fit, too, that we should know in
what way the Church of Rome permits them, and upon what
principles she assumes to do so. They are permitted in a way
that of itself testifies to the fact that they are contrary to Christian
usage and law, for this is the meaning of a dispensation. And
they are permitted upon principles that are destructive of all law
and that make all morality depend upon the will of the Pope.
Eor these dispensations stand upon the principle of the Pope s
supremacy to all law, and his assumed plenary power to suspend
it how and when he pleases.
In the commencement of the Reformation in Germany the
multiplying of the degrees within which Roman Canon Law pro-
hibited marriage, and the results of the system of dispensations
contributed to the great re-action against Rome. Luther, as is
well known, attempted to cut the knot of bondage by burning the
Canon Law before the gates of Wittenberg in 1520; and he ex-
presses his opinion that Lev. xviii denoted certain persons pro-
hibited from marriage, and not relationships. But the Reformers
soon retreated from the extremes to which their first heat of re-
actionary zeal seemed likely to lead them in this matter; and
Melanchthon, for example, takes a view opposed to Luther on the
purport of Lev. xviii. He regards the prohibitions contained in
it as of moral and not merely ceremonial obligation, and enforces
this by reference to the judgments pronounced against the heathen
for offending in such things. And in agreement with the teachers
of earlier days and with the Church of England, he esteems that
not particular persons, but corresponding degrees of relationship,


are therein denoted as forbidden to intermarry. In their
marriage prohibitions, the early German reformers, thenceforth
forsaking Homan Canon Law, fell back on Imperial statutes to
fill up vacancies and to confirm cases of doubt. These in turn
depended upon the old Eoman civil law, and embraced prohibi-
tions of marriage that belonged to a date prior to the in-
troduction of Christianity. Thus, for instance, the 'Wurtem-
burg ordinances on marriage (1553) went so far as to
include prohibitions like those that had been based upon
Adoption and Clientela. This falling back upon the civil code
produced an assimilation to the early Christian code. And
what its results were as regards the particular question now
before us may be gathered from the Church Ordinances of the
Grand Duchy of Saxony, (a. d. 1580), which gave tone and direc-
tion to the Lutheran establishments in Germany. Heciting the
Christian principle that a man and his wife become one kin by
marriage, and that accordingly neither might subsequently marry
the other’s next of kin (blood-relation, “ Bluts-freundin”), these
ordinances forbid expressly the marriage of a brother-in-law or
of a sister-in-law. A person wittingly marrying two sisters in
succession was to be publicly scourged. The Swiss Reformers,
though differing in so many points from those of Germany,
agreed in this. The Geneva Church Ordinances of 1541 agree
here entirely with those of the Lutheran Churches. The same
grades of consanguinity and of affinity are prohibited from marry-
ing, and they specially enact “ Que nue ne prennela relaissee de
son frere et que nulle femme ne puisse prendre celuy qui aura
este mari de sa soenr.” The Swedish "Reformation also took the
same course as the German in this particular. The Church
Ordinances of 1571 and 1686 contain similar prohibitions as to
other cases, and expressly forbid marriage with the sister or the
brother of a deceased spouse. And it is not unworthy of our
consideration in the present times that the pastors are charged
with the duty of making the members of their churches in their
house-visitings and catechisings acquainted with the divine and
human ordinances respecting forbidden degrees, and with main-
taining their moral sensibility in regard to them.


In England this matter of the prohibitions of marriage within
certain degrees of relationship came, as we all know, into
singular prominence at the time of the Reformation from the
circumstances through which it became the immediate occasion
of revolt against the authority of Rome. In all their more
important features these prohibitions had hitherto been the same
in England as elsewhere throughout Europe through the influ-
ence of the Roman Canon Law. But at this'period their funda-
mental obligation, the application of the Levitical Law to
Christians and other associated questions came under revision
under the main question as to the Pope’s right to assume to
render valid by Dispensation the marriage of a deceased brother s
wife in the case of King Henry YIII. And the ultimate issue
was the table of prohibited degrees appended to the 99th Canon
and attached, by whatever authority, to our Book of Common
Prayer.
Now, I have nothing to do here with any question as to the
extent to which this table shares the authority and obligatory
character of the Prayer Book, but merely to indicate it as the settle-
ment of the question which was then adopted in England. The
prohibitions are based upon those of Levit. xviii, accepting them
as applied to degrees of relationship, and not merely to persons,
and filling up the deficiencies in it by logical inference from what
is expressed. The thirty cases of prohibition are no more and no
less than those supplied thus from the Mosaic law. There are
none (as once in Germany since the Reformation re-adjustment
of the matter) based upon adoption, clientela, or consulship,
because English legislation on the subject was not affected by the
old Roman code. And there are none resting on purely human
or civil enactment as there have been in Germany, both from the
influence of the Roman code and of ancient Teutonic usage.
Dispensations were abolished in their aspect of permitting
marriages within prohibited degrees, and in their other aspect of
dissolving marriages already contracted, such dissolution in cases
of marriage within prohibited degrees was under certain restric-
tions to be exercised by the ecclesiastical court. An important
change took place in this feature of the law by an act of 1835,


but one that did not in the least alter the prohibited degrees
themselves.*
There is a remarkable unanimity in the settlement which this
question obtained among all the reformed churches as they were
up to the middle of last century. All agreed in the application
which was given to Levit. xviii. All agreed in the limits within
which prohibitions of marriage were upheld ; notably with res-
pect to the prohibition of marriage with a sister by marriage,
whether a brother’s wife or a wife’s sister. All agreed too in
laying aside dispensations for the permission of marriages within
prohibited degrees. Whilst in some lands the marriage code
differed by extending the prohibitions to cousinship of the first
and second degree, and to wards and adopted children, recogniz-
ing these restrictions as of purely human civil enactment.f
As to the question immediately before us therefore, the
question what testimony the history of the Christian Church can
produce as to the use made of Levit. xviii., and particularly as to
the marriage of a deceased wife’s sister, we have seen that
Christian antiquity as far as it has left any express testimony on
this subject, the Greek and the Homan Churches both when
united in one communion, and after their separation, the
Reformed Churches in continental Europe and those of Great
Britain, whatever their differences, all agree in this that Levit,
xviii. is to be regarded as an expression of the divine moral law
applicable to all ages and all men, and that the marriage of
a deceased wife’s sister was to be forbidden as contrary to that
law.J
I pass on now, my Lord, to a transition period which
gradually but slowly brought in those alarming, those calamitous
changes which later Protestantism has admitted. Such changes
in the marriage laws of Christendom began to be suggested in
* Effect of Law of 1835.—See Note B. at end.
f A German writer remarks upon the singular agreement of what he calls
the best formulated legislation on this subject, viz., the English Law, and the
best theological exponent of it, viz., Johann Gerhard.
X Individuals of eminence may be quoted as having held or differ-
ently, hut this which I have here stated is the practical testimony that is to be
derived from the acts of these Churches at large.


the 17th century. The distinguished name of G-rotius (1645)
was connected with them. Eminent for his learning and for his
writings in politics, literature, and theology, he was a fore-runner
of the rationalist school of Scriptural exegesis : and quite in the
vein of that school he expressed his judgment in favour of a
separation of the legislation of Christian nations from the revealed
laws of God, and reducing them to the standard of a supposed
natural law. Ho conceived that the prohibitions of marriage
should be regulated by this “ law of nature.” And do you ask
how far he supposed that would go ? Merely to the extent of
prohibiting marriages in the direct line of ascent or descent, and
the marriage of brothers and sisters !
But it was not for a hundred years that the ancient rule was
broken through, and prohibitions so long and so unanimously
maintained in Christendom began to be set aside. And when
this change came to be effected it is not without instruction to
remember through whose royal will it was done. It was that of
Erederick the Great, the disciple and friend of Yoltaire. By an
order in council of the year 1740, that prince ordained that ten
cases hitherto by law prohibited should be made optional, and
freed from all penalties or need of dispensation. These ten cases
were, the marriage of —
(1) a deceased wife’s sister
(2) a brother’s daughter
(3) a sister’s daughter
(4) a maternal uncle’-s widow
(5) a nephew’s widow (a brother s son s wife)
(6) a nephew’s widow (a sister’s son’s wife)
(7) a half-brother’s widow
(8) a father’s step-sister
(9) a mother’s step-sister
(10) a father’s half-brother’s widow.
It will be observed that cases (8) and (9) are not included m
the English prohibitions, and their express prohibition of cases
(7) and (10) depends upon the inference that the term brother
includes half-brother, or in other words that a half-brother is a
brother. But for the rest, they are included among those infer-


ences from the illustrative cases of prohibition given in the
Mosaic law which are necessary to save that law from the charge
of manifest absurdity and inconsistency, and to carry out the
simple principles upon which it is based. They are cases in the
prohibition of which all Christendom had hitherto unanimously
concurred.
These changes met with much resistance in Germany at first,
but they were sustained and confirmed with the growth of Deism,
first of all upon the throne in the person of Frederick the Great,
then in the seats of learning under royal favour, and lastly in the
pulpits of the national Church, where at the close of the 18th
and beginning of the 19th centuries it had obtained an almost
undisputed sway.
As a key to the course of theological argument upon which
legislation on these subjects is based in Germany, and as an
indication of its ultimate direction, I ask your Lordship’s per-
mission to exemplify the doctrines of Professor Michaelis, of
Gottingen, in the latter part of the 18th century. He is denoted
as having given the theological impulse to the orders in Council
of Frederick 11., and the tone to the weakening and undermining
of the biblical marriage laws that then began to operate in the
legislature. In his enquiry into the origin of the laws, he pro-
nounces that there is no natural abhorrence (horror naturalis )
of any of the interdicted marriages. He has no apprehen-
sion of respectus parentelce, filial reverence, as we may render
it, nor of any natural shame (yudor naturalis) as discoun-
tenancing such unions, not any consciousness of the unity
contracted by Christian marriage, or the obligations and restraints
arising out of the affinity that it creates. He conceives that he
has discovered the sole and only ground for these prohibitions in
the theory that they were devised for the protection of virtue
amongst those who were obliged to live together in the close re-
lationship of a family.* This superficial view is, as we may soon
* If this were the sole and only ground of such prohibitions, what an over-
sight that the relation of servant should not have been included in them.
Though exposed as much, or more than any near relatives in the household,
to the dangers indicated, there was no such protection extended to her as was
contained in the prohibition of marriage. Other provisions of the divine law
protected her from violence or seduction. These prohibitions of marriage
were superfluous if that was their only object.


find for ourselves, one widely adopted by many reasoners in
our own day, some of tbem unconscious of the utter rationalism
it involves. It is most true indeed, as Moses Maimonides, among
the Jews, and Thomas Aquinas, among the Christian writers, had
already observed, that a protection to virtue did arise out of these
prohibitions incidentally, and as of one of their intended conse-
quences. But what was new and at the same time erroneous in
Michaelis’ theory was, that this protection was their peculiar,
sole, and only foundation. Michaelis declares himself unmis-
takeably on this point. He avows his opinion that the act of
incest would not in itself be any more sinful, than offences against
morality between other persons not related to one another would
be. Agreeably to such opinions, he advocated the free and full
permission of marriage with an aunt on either side, or with a
brother’s widow, or with a father’s brother’s widow, though he
recommended that for a time they should be only allowed by
exercise of a royal dispensation.
Here came in, therefore, a new assumption of authority to dis-
pense with prohibitions expressed in the Divine law, by the King
instead of the Pope.
The ultimate result of the extension of such theories as those
I have here briefly reviewed was, that in Prussia the laws of 1794
reduced the prohibitions of marriage to a minimum that had
never been known before. They were restricted to only three
conditions, viz.:—
(1) Blood relations in direct ascent or descent.
(2) Pull or half-brothers and sisters, whether born in or out
of wedlock.
(3) Step-parents or parents-in-law of any degree.
Thus marriage was permitted between uncles and their nieces,
between nephews and aunts, whether by blood or by marriage,
and with a brother’s widow; and a civil dispensation might
legalise- marriage with a step-child that had been born out of
wedlock.
Now these are unions which are expressly and in the letter
forbidden in the Mosaic law, with the exception of the first, for
the prohibition of which there is a direct inference from the


second. But let us take good note of this—that not even the
letter of God’s word will hinder men’s impulse to transgress it
when the spirit of His law is ignored. What began here by
setting aside the spirit of the law ended by setting aside the
letter of it too.* And there cannot be any reasonable ground
for a doubt that the same course will ensue elsewhere. The
principles adopted and sustained by the innovators amongst our-
selves are of the same character, and in most respects identical
with those which Michaelis followed up to their just conclusions
in theory, and Prussian legislation in practice. The real standing
ground of such theorists in Germany was humanitarianism, and
not respect for God or regard for any revelation of His will. It
was the humanitarianism of Rousseau and Voltaire practically
developed. And its results in their uncleanness and destructive
pollution bear the stamp of their origin. Vet their worst has
not—it can not here be told. Still more and more revolting pro-
posals have proceeded from University teachers. New ordi-
nances respecting marriage are demanded, based upon “ Public
opinion and the concurrence of experienced moralists and
physiologists.” So boldly and completely has the ignoring of
God and of His having any will in this matter, and indeed of
there being really any morality concerned in it, asserted itself
amongst Christian nations.
Many reactionary efforts testify to dissatisfaction with
the condition to which this question has been brought. I
find it stated, that there is a recoil against it even in the doctrines
of later philosophy: and Hegel is specially mentioned as having
endeavoured to extol and idealize, and in his own way to spiritua-
lize marriage. Prom a healthier and sounder stand-point, this
has been the endeavour of Professor Hengstenberg and others.
The testimony of these more modern writers may not be adduced
* The comment of Hengstenberg upon this state of things is worthy of
our grave consideration: “Such'was the condition of this question at the
close of the last century and the beginning of the present that there might
well have been fears that the marriage of brothers and sisters would soon he
publicly sanctioned, and that wickedness would ho approved by the Legis-
lature, such as the Divine law declares to have been the occasion of the inflic-
tion of severe chastisement upon even heathen nations, and such as the con-
science of the graver among those nations denounced as crimes.”—Quotation
by Thiersch.


as lying against the marriage of a deceased wife’s sister, hut they
are alluded to as bearing evidence that a nation’s departure from
the principles that had prohibited this, upon the same ground as
other unions, has produced experiences not satisfactory to itself.
But as yet no practical result in the way of legislation has
arisen in Germany, and the condition of the law remains
as I have already stated it. Marriage connections are con-
stantly formed with an aunt or a niece, as well as with
a brother’s widow or a deceased wife’s sister. The Greek
Church retains her ancient ordinances unchanged. Sweden
too adheres to her original post-reformation statutes. As
for the Church of Borne her canon law testifies still to
what the ancient Church enjoined, but the frequency and
the ease with which dispensations can be had, destroys the
practical effect of such testimony; and permission to marry a
deceased wife’s sister is, I am told, a matter of no great difficulty.
England still maintains the old paths, but in the face of a loud,
persistent and increasing opposition. In these Australian colo-
nies the evil work has already begun of breaking loose from those
fixed principles of the divine law on this question, which the
Church has witnessed to, and the State has accepted in all past
ages.
I have found it necessary, my Lord, to review the historical
aspect of this great question as a part of the argument upon
which we base our protest against the proposed change, and our
justification of a claim to be free from any real or supposed
obligation to celebrate marriages such as the State is now about
to make unprohibited for the first time since the Christian code
of morals as distinguished from the heathen or the Jewish, was
fully adopted by European law.
We believe that marriage is an ordinance of God, —that its
nature and effects are most intimately interwoven with the moral
and spiritual nature of man, —that it is God alone who can define
or illustrate those effects perfectly, —that in order to do so and to
preserve the fulfilment of His own purposes with man, God
has revealed some of. these to faith, and opened others to our
observation, and has laid down certain rules and restrictions


relating to marriage. We believe that one of these is that a man
and his wife are made to constitute “ one flesh ” or “ one kin
and that one of the results of this is that those near of kin (or
“ near of flesh”) by consanguinity to the one are to be accounted
also as near of kin to the other. We believe that it is a moral
and perpetual law of Grod that a man or woman may not marry
within certain degrees of such nearness. This law we believe to
be fully illustrated in Levit. xviii. There it extends to relations
in the direct line ascending or descending, and to those in the
first degree collaterally from oneself or from those in the
direct line and the direct consequence of the effect of marriage
is that those marrying these relations, having become one kin
with them, stand in the same relation, and come therefore under
the same prohibition. A man or woman may not marry one who
stands in the direct line of ascent or descent, or in the first
degree of collateral relationship to his or her wife or husband.
This restriction binds their own selves only and not their kindred.
The relations of the parties married are not brought into that
degree of relationship to each other into which those parties are
brought to them. A man’s marriage brings his wife into the first
degree of collateral relationship to his brother, but does not bring
her sister into it. We have seen that the levirate marriage of
Deut. xxv. was not marriage in the ordinary sense of the term,
but was altogether exceptional, temporary, and special in its
circumstances ; that it was in no manner applicable to Christi-
anity, and was just such an exception in every way as proves the
rule forbidding such unions in all other cases than that specified.
Jewish custom respecting marriage we do not acknowledge as any
guide for Christians. At the same time we have seen that as far
back as any sure testimony can be obtained, both before and
since the Reformation, the Christian Church has acknowledged
the principles above stated, and the prohibitions thus arising from
them. And though others going beyond Levit. xviii. were added,
the Church of England did not accept them. She derives her’s
not from mediaeval but from primitive times, and has sustained
* A man or woman is prohibited from marrying sister or brother (Ist
degree from self) or father’s or mother’s sister or brother (Ist degree from
those ia direct line of ascent).


them upon the ground of Holy Scripture. In this we have
seen that the continental Eeformed Churches entirely agreed
with her testimony. And as to the dispensations of Eome, we
have seen that they arose from a multiplication of other prohibi-
tions far beyond the terms of Scripture, and that their use arises
trom the assumption of false claims which destroy all morality, and
which stand entirely on the theory of the Papal supremacy. We
have seen too, that the first encroachments upon these prohibi-
tions of marriage in the ancient, restricted form in which they
have been preserved in the Church of England, came in upon
the rising tide of modern infidelity : and not only this, but that
they break in upon the outworks of a system of morals, that
cannot be held intact when those two principles we have men-
tioned are once set aside; that there is nothing which upon
any fixed religious principle, any principle upheld hy Christianity,
can resist marriage with a niece, or an aunt, or a step-mother,
or a mother-in-law, or a step-daughter, when the principle that
prohibits marriage with a deceased wife's sister is violated.
“ The foundation of God standeth sure,” but no other does.
And we must see that we stand upon the foundation of God
in this matter, namely, the two principles above stated, as
they are illustrated in Levit. xviii, and as they have been under-
stood and applied by the Christian Church, if we would
resist the invasion of lusts and pollutions of the holy name of
marriage that we all abhor.
Hor can I conclude without protesting in this place against a
policy so certainly destructive as that of the measure here
referred to. I know well the scoffs and ridicule which such a
protest meets with on every side. I know well the mocking and
contempt which those who resist this innovation are exposed to,
and the taunts with which the counter assertions of this or that
eminent man are cast up against them. But what are these in
the balances against a most certain and solemn conviction that
here the law of God is being set aside, and that the testimony of
His revealed will that has been borne by all Christendom for
centuries is being ignored, and that the foundation principles of
all morality are being subtilly undermined, and that a work of
infidelity and apostacy is being effected, which, though now it


seems to be but trifling, is really itself an evidence of the advance
of unbelief and corruption, already made, and the sure precursor of
still worse things to come ? Yes, these words are easily laughed
at as the ravings of men behind the age,* but they are not thereby
proved false or visionary. And believing what we do—believing
that the character with which Christianity impressed marriage is
destroyed by this change, so far as the State laws go—that still
greater violations of it will come here, as they have elsewhere, in
consequence —that the basis upon which the new legislation is
constituted is not that of faith in God, but of a false rationalistic
expediency, whose root is unbelief and supreme confidence in
man alone, what can we do but speak out boldly and plainly for
love of our country, of our brethren and fellow-citizens, and of
God? What can we do but fear that as God reproved and
judged the heathen and the Jew for offences in this category
under their less clearer light, so He will visit Christendom with
the like plagues of war and ruin for their self-sufficiency and
unbelief, and proud departure from His ways? It is true that
God does not thunder out of heaven every time a great breach of
His truth is committed, yet the judgment for certain comes. And
though there have never been wanting scoffers to jest away
fears of national judgments, or rebels to deny their true nature
when they have come, still what man with any faith left in him
can deny, that God will visit offences against morality with such
judgments? And if it is true that those two revealed prin-
ciples of the nature of marriage are principles of morality, Chris-
tian morality ; and if the Church in all ages has not been wrong
in holding and testifying in her teaching that the Word of
God is to be interpreted according to them as prohibiting mar-
riage with one whom the unification of kin effected by marriage
has brought into a degree of kinship within which blood relation-
ship would prohibit it, then these proposed unions are offences
against Christian morality, and will be followed by all their con-
sequences.
* E. G. in the Australasian of June, 1875, commenting on the formal
protest of the Honbles. John and Charles Campbell recorded against the
passing of the Marriage with a Deceased Wife’s Sister’s Dill in the Legis-
lative Council.


What we do hold is, then, that the Church of England, in
agreement as to this particular with the whole Church, rightly
interprets the Word of God, and reasonably, moderately, and
justly restricts our liberty in her prohibitions of marriage, and that
whatever the State laws may permit our duty must ever be to
maintain this in word and action, in love of man, and in the fear
of God.


"Note A.— Table of degrees, illustrated by Diagram (page 35), so far as it
affects the Man.
A man is prohibited from marrying
(On his own side).
(On his wife’s side)
Second Degree.
First Degree.
First Degree.
Second Degree.
Grandmother
Mother
Grandfather’s wife
Son’s daughter
Daughter’s
daughter
Father’s sister
Stepmother
Sister
Wife’s Mother
Wife’s sister
Wife’s daughter
Wife’s Grand-
mother
Wife’s Father’s
Brother’s wife
Daughter
Son’s wife
Son’s son’s wife
Daughter’s son’s
wife
Wife’s Mother’s
Man and Wife
Mother’s sister
Wife’s Brother’s
Father's Brother’s
tcife
Mother's Brother’s
daughter
Wife’s Sister’s
wife
Brother’s daughter
Sister’s daughter
Brother’s Son’s wife
Sister’s Son’s wife
daughter
Wife’s Son’s
daughter
Wife’s Daughter’s
daughter
Note. —There are 30 eases of prohibition. Those in which the prohibition
arises from their marriage with the man’s blood relations are in italics. Those
in which it arises from the man’s own marriage are on the right hand.
Observe : —(1) The prohibitions do not extend to marriage relations of the
wife. (2) They are limited to the second degree, either by consanguinity, or
by being brought into unity by marriage with one who is in the second degree.
(3) Those based on affinity affect only the principals so related and not their
relations. (See page 11.)
Note B. — [Effect of Law of 1835.] The fact that there was a law passed
in 1835, making the marriage now in question and others within the prohibited
degrees ipso facto void, has been again and again used as if it shewed that
this marriage was only then for the first time prohibited by English law.
Again and again it has been shown how deceitful and untrue is such a use of
it. It will be sufficient here to explain that before that Act, this and all other
marriages, that were regarded by the law as incestuous or otherwise illegal,
had to be pronounced void by a sentence of the ecclesiastical court. If no
motion was taken to get this done during the lifetime of both parents, the
children of such marriages succeeded to inheritance as if they had been legiti-
mate : but if the illegality of their parents’ union was proved, the sentence
of the court disinherited them. To obviate many wrongs and dangers result-
ing from this, the law of 1835 was passed to make these marriages not only
voidable , but void from the first. That is, their previous and acknowledged
illegality was made to bar inheritance by children sprung from them without
any necessity for an ecclesiastical sentence. It is said to be the singular
position of this colony in the matter, that this Imperial Law of 1835 not
operating here, and there being no Court competent under the terms of the
older statute to declare such marriages void, positively no union however
incestuous or abominable could be declared void. Whether this be so oy npj;
must be left to lawyers to determine,


