

THE
RED PEN
BY
MRS. CLARKE WELLS.
AUTHOR OF
“Cause and Sufferings of Fallen Women.”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
ADELAIDE:
MRS. WELLS, AT 231, KING WILLIAM ST.,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1887.




Entered
in
Bi[?]
-
Vol. V


THE
RED
PEN
BY
MRS. CLARKE WELLS.
AUTHOR OF
“ Cause and Sufferings of Fallen Women.”
1887.




THE RED PEN.
A STORY FOR CHILDREN.
Little children come near, I want to tell you a
■story.
Once upon a time, in a town that was not this
town, their lived a family of geese. Now, for many
reasons, Mamma Goose was very proud. Firstly,
because she had a very fine big body, and a long
neck. Gooses like to have a long neck, because
they can hold their heads high, and look down on
nil the smaller fowls of the poultry yard, and then
Mamma Goose was very proud of her coop. But
that was hardly to be wondered at because it was
very nice, and instead of having to get up and
wander over cold, wet paddocks to look for little
bits of grass or fight the ducks and the chickeys
for scraps of cold potatoes and cabbage leaves, she
had nice mashed turnips and cauliflowers on pretty
•china dishes, and soft carpets to walk on, and beauti-
ful chairs and tables, and all the poor fowls at
the back door had to wait on her, so she was very
proud of all that, for she was only a goose, and she
was proud of Papa Goose too. But most of all,
Mamma Goose was proud of her three darling little


goslings, for they were so soft and pretty, and
young. But I must tell you their names. Well,
one was called Goody, and one Pretty, and one
Baby, and Mamma Goose loved them all very much
and called them her little children. But Mamma
Goose had one more thing to be proud of, and that
was of their Aunty Goose, and if ever there was a
nice goose, that aunty was it. And she had always
lived with Mamma Goose, and had nursed and pet-
ted her three little neices until she loved them
almost as much as their own mamma did.
Now, Papa Goose got very ill, and Dr. Drake
said he would have to go to another country for a
change, because that might do him good, so he
kissed all his little children and then went away in
a big boat, and for a few days they were all very
sorry, for Papa Goose used to give them lots of
lollies and cakes, and then he always wore such nice
clothes that he did not look one bit like a goose, but
just like a fine big gentleman. So it was no wonder
they were very fond and proud of him, though he
never did play land laughi with them like mamma and
auntie did, so in a little while they ran, and jumped
round their pretty coop more jolly than ever, for
there was no papa home now to say keep those
little goslings from cackling. So they were all soon
very happy, for they thought papa would come
back again, and it was only! a change. But papa
never came back, only a big letter with a black
edge came, and a lot of black dresses, and mamma.


and aunty cried very much, and then Aunty Goose
said, let’s tell the children, and Mamma Goose said,
yes, let’s tell the poor little children. So they went
to the nursery, feeling very unhappy, for it was so
hard to have to tell their poor little birdies they
had lost their papa and would never never see him
any more, and Mamma Goose thought her very
heart would break when she saw them. There
was good little Goody saying her letters ; little
Miss Pretty had kicked off her shoe and had upset
the water-jug trying to wash her pinafore in it, and
poor little Baby Goose had rolled herself up in
mamma’s white shawl and was fast asleep in the
big arm chair, so very softly Mamma Goose leant
down and kissed her a lot of times, then took
little Goody in her arms and carried her to the
other side of the room and with tears and kisses
told her that she only had a mamma now and that
all that was left of papa was the big likeness over
the mantlepiece, and Aunty Goose tipped up the
water-jug and lifted Pretty on her knee and pressed
her close to her heart and called her her pet, for
big tears would not let her say any more, and then
took off her pretty blue dress, for it was very wet
all down the front; but it did not matter, for she
would never wear it any more now, and took her to
Mamma Goose who held her so tight in her arms
that Pretty did not like it, besides, she wanted to
look at her new black dress ; but, as she saw no
prettv ribbons she did not care for it so she dropped


it on the floor very close to the water-jug, then sat
herself down on it and tried to put on her shoe
with the toe to the heel. So it was all over, and
there was nothing more to. do but put on tlieir
black dresses and watch the rain drops on the
window panes, for they never laughed in that pretty
coop any more ; for very soon one big crow came
and said there is no Papa Goose now and this coope
is mine, and another big crow came and said all
these chairs and tables are mine and I shall take
them. Then the chickeys at the back door said I
wonder what will become of Mamma Goose now
and her little goslings.
She will have to eat cold potatoes and cabbage-
with us said an old duck, and she waded a little
deeper into the gutter ; and as for that fine Aunty
Goose she will soon be plucked for the table of a
man that will swallow her in one mouthful, and
never know what a good dinner he might have had
if he had only eaten her properly.
But Mamma Goose only held her head high so as
no one could see her eyes, and took aunty and
her three dear little baby geese into a room all by
themselves ; then Mamma Goose said we shall
have to be poor, and live in a little coop. Then
Aunty Goose said —Oh ! oh ! oh ! how the ducks
and the chickens in the big coops will laugh and
you will have no beautiful long train that makes
you look like a peacock. And they all cried and


cackled for the loss of their pretty coop and chairs
and tables that for a minnte you could not hear
yourself speak. Then Aunty Goose said— let us go
away so as no one can see. And Mamma Goose
said —yes, let us go right away ; but how will I
manage for my poor little goosies ?
Work for them, said Aunty Goose.
Yes, said Mamma Goose, I’ll be a dressmakei.
Bo you can, said Aunty Goose, for you are so good
and clever, you can do everything, and I’ll do all I
can to help you.
Here Mamma Goose stretched out her long neck
and turned round her head as if she wanted to look
down on some one ; but as she only saw her own
little goosies she leaned down and kissed them and
then picked them up and ran away, with Aunty
Goose close by her side. That is to say, she got
into a big boat and went to quite another country
that was called Adelaide.
Now Mamma Goose had done a very foolish thing
which proved she was neither very clever nor very
good, for if she had been, she would have put
down her long neck and bowed her head to the
will of that good God that looks after all the
birdies, and eating in contentment the cold
potatoes and cabbage leaves and little bits of glass
until He bad seen fit to give her better. But, in


stead of that, poor foolish creature, she never
dropped her head, but walked by herself, and said
she was not meant to be a back door fowl and never
would be. But then she was only a goose, and
though she was very foolish and very proud she
never meant to be wicked.
But she had taken one false step, or she would
have stayed with those fowls that would have
pitied her little goslins and have helped her in her
trouble, for they would not all have laughed. But
she was hundreds and hundreds of miles away
now, and I do not think she ever wanted to go
back. So Mamma Goose stopped in Adelaide, and
everyone looked at her and everyone flattered
her, and everyone charged her more for every-
thing she wanted than it was worth, because
she was only a goose. So very soon Aunty
Goose and mamma and her little goslings found
themselves in a coop that had no nice chairs
and tables and soft carpets. But mamma’s little
goslings’ eyes sparkled, for they liked the change,
and clapped their little hands, and ran up and down
the bare passage, and made merry sounds in the
empty rooms. And she gave them their bread and
butter, and though it was not very good, she put
a little bit of sugar on it, and as they were
happy Mamma Goose held her own head so
high that you could not see her eyes, and
said she did not care, and put on her black
bonnet with the white border, because she looked


nice in it, and dressed her dear little goosies
in their wee black frocks and pretty white hoods,
and with Aunty Goose close by her side went
•out for a little more flattery, and then she took her
next false step, for she was only a goose. But she
never meant to be wicked. But the house was
eold and dark, and the dresses never came to be
made. The parrots said Mamma Goose did not
know how to make dresses. So she stretched her
neck again, and no one saw her eyes. But they
heard her laugh and talk, and the foxes came and
looked at her, and said she’d make a good meal, and
then some more foxes came and looked at Aunty
Goose, and said she was a fine goose, and wondered
which fox would pluck her. But Mamma Goose had
heard of foxes a long time before, so she put Aunty
Goose behind her and cackled very loud, and that
made them all laugh, and they said Mamma
Goose and her little brood only went out for
admiration, and they were giving it to her. So
Mamma Goose arched her neck and put up her
back, and made her steps a little longer, and
.said, “ Yes, you don’t often get a goose like me
in Adelaide, so admire away.” You see she
was very foolish and very proud, but she never
meant to be wicked.
And now I must introduce someone else to you,
and that’s Blackey. You never heard of Blackey,
for Mamma Goose brought him all the way across
the water with her, and she said he was no bigger


than the top of your thumb, and we knew he had a
very graft voice. But she never let anyone see
him, but she said he lived sometimes up the
chimney and sometimes under the bed, and some-
times behind the door. But little Miss Goody
Goose thought he must have lived very much
closer to Mamma Goose. But she never could tell,
for whenever he spoke, Mamma Goose always put
her handkerchief over her mouth. But she knew
they loved him very much, and that he always
played with them whenever Mamma Goose did.
hiow Mamma Goose said to Aunty Goose, “Let’s
take our little goslings home, because they will
want a warm drink and something to eat.” So she
picked little baby goose up in her arms, for she
was too soft and white and small to walk very far,
and Aunty Goose took little Pretty by the hand..
And little Miss Goody Goose ran on before, and
said, “ When we get home will you and Blackey
play with us in the big room upstairs ?” And
Mamma Goose said yes, and very soon they got
back to their coop ; it looked very cold and
desolate. But Aunty Goose made a fire, and little
Baby goose woke up quite refreshed, for she had
slept all the way home. And then Mamma Goose
gave her little children a warm drink and some
bread and butter, and a little tiny bit of sugar on it.
And they all ran up into the big room to play
with mamma and Blacky. But Miss Pretty Goose


got a little black cat on her back going up, because
Miss Goody goose got to the top of the stairs before
she did.
Now this made mamma very sad, for she could
see her dear little Pretty was very wilful, and that
spoilt all her beauty. So she called Blackey, and
he said, yes, mistress. And mamma said, Blackey,
our dear little Pretty has got that nasty black cat
on her back again. What shall we do with her.
Then Blackey said Shut the door, and leave her
on the dark stairs.
So mamma shut the door, and said Pretty, You
must stop there until that naughty black cat gets
off your back.
And every thing was very quiet, for mamma
could not play while one of her little children was
naughty.
But very soon Miss Pretty called out, Mamma,
I is a good little goosie now.
So mamma said, Blackey, do you think she will
be good now ?
And Blackey said, That has to be told.
And mamma said, Well, Blackey what is she to
do to prove it ?
And Blackey said she’s to give mamma three
big kisses, and I shall feel it on my toe.


So mamma opened the door, and Pretty ran and
put her little arms round mamma’s neck, and
kissed her so many times that Blackey called out
That’s enough! that’s enough! You’re tickling
me ! you’re tickling me. And then they all danced
round the room, and Blackey seemed everywhere,
and Aunty Goose heard the noise and came up to
see what it was all about, and they made Baby
goose Queen Mab and they all jumped round her,
and then Mamma Goose said it was getting late,
iet us put the litttle goslings to bed, so mamma
folded little Baby goose in her arms, and they all
went down stairs again to where they slept. The
light was very dim, and the bed was very hard.
But she put soft kisses on their lips, and she said
my little goosies are all right, and I don’t care, and
she stretched out her long neck and no one saw
her eyes, but she never meant to be wicked.
Not very long after that there was no more sugar,
and the butter was all gone, and the fire was nearly
out. But a knock came to the door, and Mamma
Goose opened it, and there was a fine big bird look-
ing in, and he said he had heard of Aunty Goose,
and he knew of a nice place for her, and all she
would have to do was to smile and be admired, and
he would look after her properly and pay her well.
But Mamma Goose said no, give us some work in
•our own coop, that we can make some money, and
I will be thankful, but I cannot let Aunty Goose go


from my side for the foxes to admire, for some day
one of them would catch her and run oft with
her.
Then Aunty Goose said no, Mamma Goose, let me
go, for I shall be able to help you put a little sugar
in the dear little goosies’ mouths, and I know how
to look after myself, and I won’t let a fox catch
me.
So Aunty Goose went, and tor a long time she
helped Mamma Goose to put a little sugar on their
bread, and Auntie Goose was admired and watched
by the foxes, and she dodged one and then another
and said, I know how to look after myself, and they
cannot catch me.
But Mamma Goose pined, and if you had looked
in her eyes you would have seen that she thought
a lot more of her pretty coop and chairs and tables
than she said she did, and her little goosies grew
pale, for the sugar Aunty Goose could give them
was not enough, and then one cold, bleak day a fox
caught Aunty Goose and ran away with her.
And for a few days Mamma Goose hid her head
under her wing, and then she stretched out hei
long neck again and said she did not care. And
no one saw her eyes. But she heard her little
goosies cry for their lost sugar, and she saw them
crouch round the empty fireplace. So she left her
own door open and a fox walked in and said, don t


live in this miserable coop and see your little ones
cold and hungry ; for if you will say yes, I will
show you a place where they can have bread and
jam. And Mamma Goose laughed a hard, loud
laugh and said, take my little goosies to that warmth
and comfort and I will follow. And when next
Mamma Goose was seen the cockatoos said she had
a black spot on her back.
Now very soon that fox got tired of giving
Mamma Goose’s little goslins nice things ; besides
he saw a goose that was newer than Mamma Goose,
so he ran off to catch her.
But Mamma Goose only stretched out her long
neck and laughed that hard cold laugh, and said
she did not care, and left her door open again, and
soon more foxes walked in, until mamma almost
thought every coat she saw was a fox. And then
she commenced to think, and saw that she had
walked into the fox’s lair, and was lost to the sight
of all those coats that covered truth and purity, and
would have saved the poor little pigeons and doves
and geese like Mamma Goose if they had only
known and beaten the foxes. But now mamma was
right in the fox’s lair, and could not get out any
more than the other little birds could. And very
soon the cockatoos said Mamma Goose had more
black spots on her back, and Mamma Goose knew
she had one on her face. But she said, I will keep
my feet as clean as I can in this muddy place, and


they cannot put a black spot on my heart. And she
laughed her 1 hard cold laugh, and stretched out her
long neck and said she did not care. And no one
saw her eyes. Then she stooped her neck and
nestled her head on her little goslings, for though
her lips were strange, her kisses were quite as
gentle, so they saw no difference. Only little Miss
Goody Goose thought mamma must have a cloud
somewhere, for she felt the rain drops. But Mamma
Goose always brushed them off, and called Blackey
who had grown more wonderful than ever, for
Mamma Goose said he brought the lollies and cakes
and the pretty new dresses. And she laughed and
chuckled and jumped with her little goslins.
And the cockatoos bobbed their heads, and said,
see how she delights in her wickedness.
And the hawks saw it and shrieked let’s tell the
jackalls to hunt her, that the lions may be fed, and
we’ll have her goslings.
And the jackalls smelt and started their work.
But they knew they’d have trouble, so they drove
Mamma Goose from her coop, and Mamma Goose
folded her little geese in her arms, and with her
long neck stretched out and her head held high,
laughed in her scorn.
And they said it was merriment, and chased her
again. And Mamma Goose let them, and she picked
up her little ones and ran again and said she did


not care, and then “ don’t care ” was quite dead
for Mamma Goose never never said it any more, for
the jackalls got some toads and three little vipers to
help them, and they ran Mamma Goose into a
corner, and told of the black spots on her back ;
and the big toads said, we know her well, and we
saw it, we saw it. And two of the little vipers
cried and said, yes, she put black spots on our
backs ; and the other little viper cried, she did!
she did! and she tried to put a black spot on my
back. And the lions growled and said Mamma
Goose was vile and that she would have to be pun-
ished to meet the ends of justice.
And the ravens watched it and told the magpies,
and the magpies jabbered, and the mocking birds
told it across the water, and a hawk grabbed
Mamma Goose and locked her in a Red Pen with
great high walls that you could not see over, where
the lions consign all their prey that the hawks and
the jackalls tell them have black spots on their
backs.
And the hawks overhead swooped down on
mamma’s three dear little soft white goslings and
bore them away in their clutches.
And they left the coop of Mamma Goose for the
toads and the vipers, and Mamma Goose felt her
arms empty and she struggled to get to her little
goosies. And she looked up and saw the high
high walls over her head, and with one long


wailing cry her cloud burst and it rained, and it
rained, and it rained, and it has never left off rain-
ing yet.
* # # * #
Now, in this Red Pen with the high, high, walls,
the birds with the black spots are not let to do as
they like, for they had storks there, that the lions
called guards, to drive them. Those that knew
them well said they had vultures’ heads, and they
were right, and those storks took poor Mamma
Goose, and plucked off' all her soft warm feathers,
and dressed her in rags marked with the brand of
their curse, and drove her with the rest.
But Mamma Goose stretched out her long neck,
and raised her proud head, and said I never had a
black spot on my heart, and they should not have
put me here. But the birds with the black spots
jumped and shrieked in their laughter, and told
her she had come to the right place to get one, and
a wicked old fowl stole a piece of the bread of a
lame duck, that gloried in theft herself, and said,
do you see that little hen over there, four years ago
when they first put her in here, you could almost
have wiped off her spots with a cambric handker-
chief. Watch her now, and the little hen hopped
round and pecked from side to side, and showed
her eyes, and you could see that cunning and
vice lived there, and she stuck her small hands
on her slender waist, and said, I go from this


again to morrow, and I shall go straight back
to the foxes, but they don’t get any more
than they give, for I know who gets the best
of the bargain now.
And the old fowl said, That’s right, little one, for
they will soon have you in the Red Ren again.
How many times were you caught last season ?
Only seven, said the little hen, and five of my fines
were paid out of that. So the lions were satisfied.
And she swore —oh, such a naughty word that I
must not put it on paper—and the old fowl laughed,
and turned round to tell a tale of another, and said,
do you see that old scarecrow hobbling over to us ?
She must have seen 60 winters ; and yet she is too
stupid to know ho who get many black spots. But
that does not keep her out of the Red Ren, for she
does to fill up. You see she has no coop of her
own, and the jackals caught her begging and
making her nest in the Park Lands, so they ran her
in to the lions, and the lions to save trouble, gave
her twelve months right off. Yes said the poor old
thing, as she took her last step, and I did every
day of it in that—and she pointed up to number
29, and pulled her rags a little closer round her,
and folded her withered hands and said, But I am
only in on a fine this time and I go out again
next week ; and she tried to laugh. And what
will you do when you do go? Why the same
thing, of course. And her laugh turned to a shiver,
and she hobbled away.


Caw! caw! caw! said a very black crow.
•she only did half what I do they would have cause
o put her in here, and she looked so wicked and
knowing that the little hen with the slender waist
Sped after her to see if she could teach her any-
thin, Here the old fowl turned to two more
mis“rable old birds that had been dnven m with
M— Goose, and said, why, back aganr, and you
only out yesterday!
Yes cried the leanest of them. We had only
; ust got round the corner when a jackall saw u
' !t he ran us in again, and he swore I was loiter-
hm and she was drunk, and we had not had time
o beg or steal a sup or a bite for our poor mou hs,
and here we are again, booked for another two
months. ,
Well von need not make so much jaw about it,
just as if we did not all know what that is, an s e
■' , lV . fiii ] lC r pannican, and swallow liei bit
of dry brfad with the rest, and poor Mamma Goose
trembled and shook, and writhed m her anguish
trembled, ghe wotlld have to get
.and they laug Mamm a Goose raised her
UB i head and waited by herself, and watched
proud iieaa . ftn ff er inff, and saw
the ir wickedness, “d her .
XureW Tf they would ody sometimes think of
self, suie y, ~ woul d be'.happier, so she
:c^i^
ber your fathers friends, and little children.


And they laughed louder than ever, and called
her goose ! goose ! goose ! why stick the knife,
for your own bleeding ? And they tore open their
cloaks and showed their black spots. And the old
fowl shrieked, don’t you know when we have once-
had the curse of their brand on us, we have no
fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, homes, or little-
children.
No, no ! said the little hen with the slender waist,,
if you want to be contented, blaspheme.
And if you want to be happy, drink, drink,
quacked an old duck, and she turned on her side
and went through the imaginary signs of emptying
a naughty big brandy bottle.
And if you want to get money, thieve for it is the-
only way you can when you once carry the seal of
then biand on you, said another old hen, and she
lan off with the only crust of a pigeon that was new
to the place, and if you want to make the best of the
Red Ren, flatter and lie and cringe, and lick the feet
of the storks they have put here to drive us, said
another crow, with one eye and a broken nose. And
then they will; turn a pigeon or a dove out of its.
hole if it has a little more light than your own and
give it to you, and not see the few extra rags yon
may crib to keep yourself a bit warm. Here the new
pigeon looked at her as if she thought she had
stolen her piece of bread and timidly said so ; and
the old crow swore such a big naughty word back
at her that all the yard heard.


But she bowed very low to the feet of the stork
that was passing and said, I am starching your
beautiful white dress, Miss, and there shan’t be a
•crease in it.
So she only smiled and turned to tell the new
pigeon that if she did not hold her tongue and go
on with her work she would report her, and then she
passed on to No. 18 and dragged out a little black
bird that was breaking the rules m trying to drown
her sorrow in her own song, and took her before
the lions and told them to shorten her fare and
take her bed from her, or she could not be expected
to keep order, so they put her into another black
hole for a few days. And when she came out she
•did not sing any more ; but she thought a wicked
word under her breath, and said that when they
had her next in the Red Pen it should be for some-
thing more than a fine.
And poor Mamma Goose heard and saw it all,
and then she knew they had put hei into one of
those great big lakes of fire you read about m the
Bible, and never let her die first, and poor Mamma
Goose shook and writhed again in her anguish and
threw herself back and held up her hands and
watched.
And the old fowl came and told more tales, and
.said, Do you see that little bantam over there ? She
was run in this season for loitering, and for a two
pounds fine was sent here for a couple of months.


Well, she got through the first of it all right, but one
day Madam Stork in driving her, used her vultures’
teeth, and little one turned on her and pecked her
back soundly. But she was soon overpowered and
they dragged her out before the lions, and the lions
gave her twelve months more, with a few days in
every month in another black hole. She don’t fight
any more now ; but she sups in all she can learn
and when she does go, take my word for it, she
won’t be any the quieter for what they have given
her, with all their work and knowing. And she
laughed and turned to tell another tale, and said,
Bo you see that miserable thing over there ? Well
when she first came in here she was almost as
gieat a goose as Mamma Goose was. She refused
her dry bread, and cried and sobbed until she gave
us all the mumps. She was run in over her little
chickens. A wicked, unkind fox one night gave
her a big thump in a dark street, and told her
to look after her little wee baby as she got
it for he’d had had enough of her. And she
got into a naughty naughty bad temper, and
roughly hit it against a railway carriage, and said she
wished it was dead, and whipped it. Just like lots
of ill-tempered mammas do that have good homes,
when papa vexes them, as the only way they can
smack him back. But that poor thing was ragged
and hungry and had no home. And some toads
saw it and told it before the lions ; and the lions',
growled ; and two jackalls pinned her by the arms.


and a hawk tore her little one from her breast and,
seized it in its clutches and carried it off. And t ley
gave her six months in the Red Pen to teach her
better —she learns plenty in here ! But she goes
out in a few weeks.
Yes, said the poor thing, as she came up to them,
And I will look till I find it. And she turned to
Mamma Goose and told how she loved him as s re
loved her very life. But she had acted m temper,
and no one would ever know what she suffered, loi
it all stuck there, and she touched her throat with
her knuckles.
And poor Mamma Goose put her hands on her
head (for it was all she could do) and told her to
hope.
No { no! said the old fowl. There is no hope
here. Look at that one ; they have lengthened her
sentence once, and they will do it again. And sre
hopped off to tell her so.
And they fought and quarrelled and told wicked
things, and laughed again, and said Mamma Goose
was only a goose, and no better than anyone else,
and she’d soon get burnt black.
But Mamma’s cloud crowned her head, and though
her face was swollen and her eyes red, her ram fell
and fell and kept the flames from scorching her.
And Mamma Goose pitied her little mates with the
black spots, and said she knew they were veiy


wicked. But the Red Pen made them worse ; for
the stoiks with the vulture’s heads drove them
wickedly. And she raised her proud head and told
them so and that they lived on the sm they pro-
voked, and delighted in the misery they made, and
if the big out world knew it they would teare open
the Red Pen, and take the poor little wicked birds
with the black spots to a better and kinder place.
But they only jeered at Mamma Goose, and
showed their teeth, and said that when birds once
came to the Red Pen with black spots on their
backs no one ever listened to their complaints, and
they would bend her long neck and make sport of
her spirit for their own joy.
But Mamma Goose raised her proud head and
fought them back.
But they drove Mamma Goose with the other
birds, and they gnawed at her flesh until it was
nearly all gone, and she was bleeding all over.,
But she still stretched out her neck, and though
she grew faint and weak and her steps were feeble,
the little birds with the black spots learnt to love
Mamma Goose, for they knew that she pitied their
sufferings and fought for them until she could fight
no more. And they brought her tiny bits of their
bread and little warm drinks, and told her not to
fight any more, or she would be left to die in one
of the black holes, as others had done, and the


ravens would come and write it down and tell tlie
magpies she was an old offender and had given the
powerful lions trouble for years, and between her
high living and riotous life had at last beaj.en her-
self to death, in spite of the care of the doctor and
the patience and kindness of the good storks.
And again the magpies would jabber, and the
mocking birds would carry it on, and the cockatoos
would plume their feathers and bob their heads and
say, See how good they are to those naughty birds
with the black spots. And the world would never
-care to know any better.
So Mamma Goose said, Yes, you are right ; for
it is not here that the God of all the little birds
wishes me to be. But I will never never forget
what'l see, so she put up her hands and watched
again. And they still came and went like the days.
And the poor old lame duck had been in and out a
lot of times, and each time she came in she made all
the poor wicked little birds with the black spots
on their backs long, by telling them how she had
rocked in the gutter and drunk from the naughty
big brandy bottle. And the little black bird that
was not let to sing was back too. But it was only
on a fine again, for she had bungled the watch and
chain and the fox caught her before she could make
off. But he never gave her in charge, for to disturb
a jackall would have exposed himself. So he
called her oh, such a lot of naughty wicked names


and let her go. But next day the jackalls saw her
with the old fowl and the one-eyed crow, shivering
at the corner of a dark street, so they ran them all
in to the lions. And the lions growled and said—
‘ Make them pay ns £2 each or send them back to
the Red Pen and lock them up and make them
work.’
But the old crow with the one eye had been to
the pawn-shop in the morning, so she put her hand
into her rags and said, ‘ Take it, Igo free.’ '
But the little black bird and the old fowl were
safely locked again in Nos. 18 and 46, hungrily
waiting tor their poor dinners of rotten potatoes
and bones.
And the little hen with the slender waist was in
again, and told for the twentieth time how she did
the tox that was going to cheat her by slipping her
hand into his pocket when he was not thinking and
stealing all she could feel—a few very small coins
and two rings—and as he ran off so did she, and
made gold of her plunder.
And they all laughed and used more wicked words
and said they’d do the same when they got'the
chance, and shrieked they did not care. But when
everything was dark and still, Mamma Goose heard
their rain patter round her, and she knew they
cried in their hopeless misery, shame, and persecu-
tion. And with the morning only started a fresh


day in toil and hunger, lies and sin, and fed with
the dim knowledge it brought them a little nearer
again to a breath of that freedom they were always,
longing for.
And so the time dragged on, and poor Mamma,
Goose grew fainter and weaker. But the old birds
with the black spots were very kind to her.
And then one morning the storks with the vul-
tures heads told her that justice was satisfied, and
she’d have to go as the other’s did, so they drew
back their heavy bolts and the little hen with the
slender waist shrank through, and then hopped o
straight for the foxes. And the old duck with the
lame leg got out as fast as she could and waddled
back to the gutter and the naughty big brandy
bottle. And Mamma Goose steadied her feet, and.
stretched out her long neck, and said I never had a
black spot on my heart and you could not put one,,
and then she passed on. But when she was quite
through she dropped her poor bruised head m her
hands, and never, never, stretched out her long
neck any more.
But two little sparrows flew round, and they said,,
poor Mamma Goose has got no coop now, let us
be kind and give her a home. So they took Mamma
Goose to their own little nest down by the great
large sea, and Mamma Goose drank beautiful long
big draughts of pure fresh air, and soon her feet
got a little stronger, and then she got up early


•every morning and went out all day. But at night
she would drag her poor tired feet home, and
Mamma Sparrow would put' her to bed and say,
why do you go out every day Mamma Goose ?
.And Mamma Goose would say, because I am
looking. And then Mamma Sparrow knew she
was looking for her little Goosies.
But one day Mamma Goose met old Father
Knowledge, and he said to her don’t cry Mamma
Goose for one of your little Goosies is learning to
lead with a lot of other little chickens straight up
that road, so Mamma Goose ran off as fast as ever
she could.
And there was little Miss Goody Goose, but oh!
so changed for they had plucked off all her own
Pietty feathers and dressed her in the pauper
plumes, but her own dear little soft face shone
•out. And Mamma Goose caught her in her arms
and said Goody I am your very own Mamma.
And dear little Goody flung both her arms round
Mamma’s neck and was with her once more, and
she buried her sweet little face in Mamma’s dress
and said have you got our dear little Pretty and
Baby, and Mamma Goose said no darling, I have
only got you yet, so come ; and she took little
Goody Goose and plucked off all the pauper’s
plumes and sent them back to them, and she
rolled poor little Goody’s wee, bare form in her
•own big cloak and carried her to the nest of
Mamma Sparrow down by the great big sea. And


Mamma Sparrow heard a noise at her door and ran
and opened it, and Mamma Goose said, see ! Mamma
Sparrow I have found one of my little goslings,
and fainted at her feet, and dear little goody rolled
on to the floor, and Mamma Sparrow called Papa
Sparrow and they picked >poor Mamma Goose
up and put her to bed, and they wrapped a piece
of new flannel round dear little Goody Goose and
laid her beside Mamma Goose in the nice warm
place, and Mamma Goose fell asleep with her one
little goosie tucked under her wing, and next
morning Mamma Goose and Mamma Sparrow
dressed little Goody Goose, oh! so funny, in along
dress and Papa Sparrow s big coat, and set her on
the end of the sofa.
But little Miss Goody Goose did not like that
so she got down and ran all about, and she did
look oh such a strange little bird.
And Mamma Sparrow made such a lot of cakes,,
and Papa Sparrow brought home a great big fish.
And Mamma Goose tried to smile, and little
Goody Goose asked to hear Blackey.
But Mamma Goose only shook her head and
said, darling! Blackey is crying for Pretty and Baby
and can never talk again till Mamma finds them..
So Mamma Goose left little Goody Goose with
Mamma Sparrow and went out to look for them.
And three great big Hawks swooped down on
the nest of Mamma Sparrow and bore little Goodjr
Goose off in their clutches again.


Then Mamma Goose remembered all the suffer-
ings she had seen in the Red Pen—and she
thought of the voice of the God of all the little
birds, that had whispered in her ear, Suffer ! suffer !
then fight and expose, your cause is good and
strength will come, and Mamma Goose said yes I
have faith.
Now Papa Sparrow and Mamma S]3arrow made
a great noise at little Miss Goody Goose being
taken from them like that, and said that the world
should know it, and they twittered so loud that
you could hear them from one end of their little nest
to the other, and that was all they could do.
But a little Terrier came to them to see Mamma
Goose and he talked to Papa Sparrow and said,
Mamma Goose has right on her side, and that must
be the strongest. So you and Mamma Sparrow—
hold her up, for she is ill yet —and I’ll bark in
front, and defy the lions, and prepare light and space,
and she shall speak for herself and plead for the
little birds she saw in the Red Pen, and the battle
will be won and the victory hers.
He thought different from that very soon. Still
his little bark was often heard, and it came to
Mamma Goose in the distance, and she knew how
much he had sacrificed in fighting for truth that no
one would listen to.
Now Mamma Goose left the pretty nest of the
little sparrows by the great big sea, and wandered
away and lived by herself, and fought, and fought,
and fought. But no one ever seemed to listen to
her. But, she said, There will come a day when
the cockatoos will see the truth. Because I have
faith, and for myself I will look for my little
goosies.
So Mamma Goose looked, and looked, and looked
again ; and sometimes Mamma Goose would meet


a poor fowl even more miserable and wretched than
she was herself, looking for her wee little chickens.
But they wearied soon and would finish their day’s
march by stepping into one of those lighted licensed
holes, to look for a little warmth and comfort for
themselves and drink from the naughty big brandy
bottle, until they were thrown into the cold, wet
streets, for the jackalls to run them into the Red
Pen again.
But Mamma never grew weary, though she was
often tired ; and she would meet the bright little
•children running home from school to their own
dear fathers and mothers, and she would say, Little
child, does a little goosie called Goody Goose live
anywhere about here ? And the little child would
say, No, Mamma Goose. And Mamma Goose would
say, Do you ever see little Miss Pretty Goose ?
No, poor Mamma Goose.
Little child, Can’t you tell me where to find my
little Baby Goose ?
It was always, No !
And Mamma Goose had walked so far and looked
so long, that I don’t think she ever expected it to
be anything else but No !
But she would pass on and ask the same question
of the next little child.
Now my dear little children, I know you feel
very sorry for Mamma Goose and her little mates
in the Red Pen, and when you fold your little hands
.and kneel at your mother’s knee to say your even-
ing prayer, and ask God’s blessing on all those you
love, will you sometimes say, ‘Please God, give
Mamma Goose back her three little goosies, and
all teach little children to pity the naughty little
birds with the black spots.’
Adelaide, September 1887,


