

THE
ADVENTURES
OF A
BOHEMIAN.








THE
ADVENTURES
OF A
BOHEMIAN.
H. S. PINCOTT.
Stephen Wrgthall & Co., Printers and Publishers, ? Evening News?
Offices, Little Malop Street.




THE ADVENTURES
OF A
BOHEMIAN.
CHAPTER I.
America, old boy, good bye ! a Nonsense ?
u No it?s not nonsense! I?m off to day by the 4 City
of New York/ come and have a parting drink, I might?nt
see you again, though I intend to be back in twelve
months ! ,? So I, Harry Stow, said to an old chum, on the
Circular Quay, Sydney, one fine afternoon in January
1881, little dreaming when I spoke that I was destined
to be away seven years, and that I would go through a
variety of ups and downs such as most Bohemians have
to endure
The Pacific mail boat, 1 City of New York,? was in
the stream, steam up, and the tender was just abouc
to start with the last lot of passengers, I amongst the
number. I only had a steerage passage. And what bliss


and comfort this is I soon found out. Food such as we
would not give to a dog on shore?half or twice cooked,,
served on tin plates ?tea like dirty water, coffee like pitch
and water. All shoved on swing tables in the ?tween
decks, every one helping himself, some with the fingers,,
others, more civilized, with their knives and forks. And
as for bedding ?sacks hung between 4 poles, no mattresses,
all coarse pillow slips stuffed with straw to rest your
weary head upon. There, now, you have the whole
kit ? of a steerage passenger by this admirable line,
described by their agents as ?superior to the second class
of any other line.? But did you ever know a Yankee who
couldn?t advertise ? I never did, and I had the pleasure of
living amongst them for three years.
I made up my mind like Mark Tapley to ?be jolly in
any circumstances,? so to commence with I took a critical
survey of my fellow passengers. A very interesting
study, truly. They were comprised of every nation
under the sun, from the heathen Chinee upwards;
among them a tall, rawboned Scotchman fresh from the
diamond field, a sandy whiskered, seedy looking, broken
down digger going to better himself in 'Frisco, a Presby-
terian minister with twelve small children and a sickly
wife. His two brother ministers in the cabin recognised
him very slightly. He was going to better the people, and
increase the population. An actor out of luck, whose
wardrobe consisted of a pair of black tights and a pair of
Roman sandels. He was very mysterious, and muttered


disjointed bits of Shakespeare. And last, but not least,
an impressible Irishman, who talked from morning till
night in spite of remonstrances, blasphemies, and loud
cries of ? Shut up,? and ? Nit,? whatever that means.
Next I made love to the cook, and courted the
steward, previous experience having taught me there?s
nothing like getting into the confidence of these worthies.
The cook was a tall nigger, with a tremendous head of
hair, which he wound round his head until it looked like
a gigantic mop. The bump of self-esteem was largely
developed in this individual, and he was always telling
me, ?You should see me when I?m on shore, sah, I?m a
gentleman, sah, and treated wid respect sah, by my friends
sah,? etc., etc.
The steward was water-eyed, and a bottle of Bourbon
whiskey made him an ally at once. Then I went below,
and secured my bunk, or what was an apology for one,
taking care to take a top storey, so that if the sack gave
way I should have the best of it.
We soon commenced to have rough weather, and then
our swing dinner tables were dispensed with, and a dirty
sail spread upon the hatch, and our tempting repast laid
thereon. Dirty, shoeless Chinamen, walking between
the tin dishes and handing the viands. What with the
Chinese and bad food, the steerage passengers almost got
to mutiny. A deputation was sent to the captain headed
by the rawboned Scot, holding a pannikin of tea. He
presented it to him, asking ? Can you make out what this


is ?? to which the captain replied,
? No, can you ??
? Well, it?s called tea in the aftercabin, but we thought
we?d make sure and ask your opinion,? said the Scot.
11 Oh well,? said the captain, ? I?ll send you some from
the cabin if you are not satisfied.?
But he didn?t. That?s all the satisfaction we got.
The firemen and stokers soon found out I had a soft
spot in me, and would come up remarking about the
sultriness of the stoke hole, and I generally rewarded
their information by supplying them with a little liquid
just for their stomachs? sake.
We went plugging steadily along, through storm,
breeze, and calm, sighted a few of the South Sea islands
and gradually approached the Hawaiian Islands.
I was very much struck with the lovely islands as
they loomed into view, and as we neared Honolulu and
passed through the coral reef I was charmed with the
beauty of the tropical foliages and the vivid coloring of
the water. The wharf was crowded with Kanakas dressed
in gorgeous arrays, the ladies donning bonnets and
carrying parasols of the most striking colors. Our steamer
was surrounded by Kanaka boys swimming round and
round the vessel, and diving for coins thrown to them
which they would catch long before reaching the bottom.
The city looked very enchanting, the white houses
surrounded by large verandahs peeping through groves
of bananas and palms, the King?s palace and hotel


showing out in bold relief. As we stayed here eight
hours I took a stroll into the town. I had a soda and b.
at the hotel, for which they charged me the modest sum
of one shilling. English and American money both go
down here.
I was much amused to see that they can teach us a
lesson, one that might be given to the Chief Commis-
sioner of Police. The guardians of the peace there carry
an umbrella and camp stool, and seat themselves quietly
when business is not brisk, and smoke a soothing pipe or
cigarette, instead of dawdling about, or looking into shop
windows. Just fancy seeing our worthy ? bobby ? doing
this in Collins street?
Honolulu possesses several churches, a fine theatre, and
several opium dens. Chinese predominate in the city,
the same as they do in ?Frisco.
The Kanaka Military Band is a beauty, and although
I hadn?t the pleasure of hearing it then, I listened to it
some years afterwards in the Golden City. Neither had I
the pleasure of seeing the King, but from what I hear he
is a very jolly fellow, like old King Cole, whom he some-
what resembles, both as regards color and tastes.
It is sad to contemplate how the heathen Chinee has
brought the curse of leprosy into this earthly paradise. It
is making sad havoc amongst the .native population, and
even Europeans are taking the terrible disease. I was
told it is a most heart-rending spectacle to see the
unfortunate victims being transported to the Lazaretto


which is placed on a neighbouring island. No sooner
does the disease show itself upon any one than he or she
is at once isolated from the rest of the population, and
when a sufficient number are collected they are sent away
in a small steamer to the leper settlements. I think the
case of that noble French divine who devoted his life to
succouring these unfortunates, until at last he fell a victim
to that fell disease, is one of the most noble and self
denying instances on record of a Christian doing his duty,
sacrificing all for the sake of his fellow beings.
The Chinese seem to have taken all the trade into their
own hands, and their filthy dens are to be seen in all the
principal streets A stranger has no difficulty in getting
any amount of credit in the islands, as there is a strict law
prohibiting anyone leaving in debt ; and if he is so
unfortunate as to owe his butcher, or his baker anything,
the said butcher or baker may take it out of him in so
many days work on the reefs, with a cannon ball tied to
his leg.
I suppose they have copied this cannon ball torture
from the Americans ; as when in Los Angelos, S-
California, I saw some tramps doing their forty-eight
hours sweeping the streets with that appendage to their
legs.
I was very nearly staying in Honolulu for a time, I
don?t know whether it was a fear of the leprosy or the
cannon bah that altered my opinion. One theatrical
company got stuck here, and the members had to blacken


their faces and dress as Kanakas to make their escape. I
just got back to the steamer in time, and we steam slowly
out of the harbour, through the surf, and once more into
the ocean. In a few days we sighted the rocky abrupt
American coast, with its jagged mountains looming up in
the distance, and soon saw the far famed entrance of the
Golden Gate.
It was a lovely morning, the sun was just rising as
the pilot came on board. The scene was enchanting as
we wound round corner after corner of abrupt headland,
and came in sight of the batteries, then of the island
where the military prison stands.
Then the City of San Francisco on the one side, and
Oatlands and Alameda on the other, unfolded themselves
to our view. It is hardly possible to imagine a more
beautiful sight, ?Frisco is a noble city to look at from
the harbour, all the splendid white stone and wooden
buildings, with their towers and cupolas shining in the
morning sun.
We were soon alongside the quay. No sooner had we
made fast than I dashed off the boat, determined to see
what was to be seen at once, and come back for my luggage
afterwards. I had not hurried along far before I was
seized, by a rough looking fellow, then another rushed
up, and they commenced to feel me all over. At first I
wondered what was up, but when asked, u Have you any
cigars, tobacco, or jewellery about you ?? I laughed at the
idea (fancy a Bohemian with cigars and jewellery !! !)
II
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN,


and replied, asking a question, ? You are custom house
officers ?? and produced my pocket book, with a spare
supply of the needful. I was then allowed to depart. On
reaching the gates of the dock what a habel of noises?'
? runners ? from all the hotels, from the ? Palace," down
to the lowest boarding house, shouting at the top of their
voices, each doing his best to drown the other. I
selected the Russ House, having heard of it on board as
a reasonable place, and in less than ten minutes I was*
there luggage and all.
The Americans are the finest people in the world for
looking after you, seeing that not only you but your trunks-
are all right, and as they say, ? don't go fooling about it,
either.''
Of course I wasn?t much impressed with the look of
things about the docks, as all the buildings in these parts
are low saloons, dance halls, and sailors? boarding houses.
But upon entering Montgomery street a fine lot of stately
buildings on either side, and cable tram cars running,,
backwards and forwards amidst a constant flow of traffic,
present themselves.
J must describe an American hotel to you so that yott
may have some idea of what an hotel is. X really believe
they are the only people that know how to run " hotels
pioperly, and as the Russ House is only a second rate one
I had better gi\e jcu a peep at the Palace. To-morrow
we 11 take you out to the Cliff House, and have a chat with
the seals. Then we 11 do the Woodward Gardens, the*


Park and last but not least go to the cemetery at Lone-
Mountain. In the evening we?ll drop into the theatres,
and finish up with one of the dives.
First of all for a general description of ?Frisco. The-
new business portion of the city is mostly built on
reclaimed land, and is possessed of two very fine streets,
Montgomery and Market, both of which are filled with
handsome buildings. In Montgomery street the Bank of
California, Bank of Nevada, and other public offices are
situated. In Market street you are at once struck with
the noble appearance of the Palace Hotel which covers a-
whole block. The Baldwin is only second to it, and is
upon the opposite side of the street further down ; this
hotel has also a magnificent theatre attached.
The Examiner newspaper office is also on the same
side of the street. Towards the end of Market street stands,
the town hall, which is even now a fine specimen of
architecture, although not completed.
In front of this building all mass meetings take place,
and Pat holds forth on Sunday afternoon to his suffering
countrymen upon their wrongs and English despotism
generally. One Sunday afternoon I went to hear them
hold forth upon O?Donnell, the slayer of Carey, prior to
his mock funeral which was to ? take place in the
course of the afternoon. They then indulged in the-
pleasantry of burning the British flag, and a plucky
British tar who was present elbowed himself through the
crowd, and picked up the scraps, with the remark, ? Pll
1 5
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


be here next Sunday to pick up the pieces of that flag if
you wish to burn it again, my lads.?
The funeral was a most amusing affair. First of all
came a brass band in green uniform, with elaborate yellow
facings ; then a hearse drawn by eight gray horses,
followed by the chief mourners in carriage and pair, a
whole string of Emerald Islanders on horseback and foot
decorated with their green sashes.
I think the solemn conglomeration was provocative of
a good deal of mirth amongst the great American citizens
and German lager beer saloon keepers.
Both Montgomery and Market streets are laid down
with cable trams, which run to all parts of the city and
suburbs. I must not omit to mention California and
Bush streets, which also contain beautiful specimens of
modern architecture.
In California street is one of the central fire brigade
stations. This department is most excellently managed ;
the alarms are all given by the u silent alarm system ? by
telegraph. There are signal boxes placed about the
streets in small glass cases, with full printed instructions,
and the only thing you have to do in case of fire is to
break the glass, touch a little brass nob, and off goes the
alarm to the station. Here the men and horses are in
constant readiness, and the steam engines with the fires
banked up. Immediately upon the alarm being given
the harness, which is suspended over the horses, drops
upon their backs, and if it occurs at night time the
T 4
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


blankets are dragged off the sleeping firemen all by
electricity, the only thing they have to do, being ready
dressed, is to buckle the harness and attach the horses to
the engine, which is done in the space of a minute and a
half. Off they dash; first of all comes an insurance agent
in a buggy, then the fire engine, then the hook and
ladder company, all going at full tear. The whole of the
traffic stops to let them pass. All the fire engines in the
?city turn out and wait at different central points to see if
they are wanted, whilst the one nearest to the conflag-
ration goes on ; if the rest are wanted they are sent for at
once. With all these precautions it is difficult for a fire
to get beyond control. I have seen as many as eight steam
engines pouring a flood of water on a fire. The man at the
head of the hose can, by a simple contrivance, telegraph
to the engineer to put on or turn off the water just as
?circumstances require.
The old town which is situated on a steep hill, is
occupied solely by the Chinese, who also have
their theatre, where the same play goes on all the year
round, a fresh act being introduced every night. Opium
dens here abound, as also do cook shops, and lottery
houses, and other places of iniquity. Roast pig is to be
seen in the cook shops, looking like a piece of polished
mahogany. Fish is vended in small junks, and weighed
by scale the same as in Little Bourke street, Melbourne-
The beetle nut is also largely used, and you see a small
piece of it, looking very white and tempting, peeping out
J S
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


of a wrapper of green leaf. It looked so nice that I was
nearly induced to test its flavour.
All the fine buildings of olden days are the receptacles
of thousands of Chinese, and you see their dirty, grinning-
faces from the balcony to the basement, indeed you see-
their almond eyes peering at you from the cellars.
While upon Chinatown I may as well describe a
Chinese funeral. After the hearse comes an American
waggon filled with roast pork, cake buscuits, rum and
whiskey, to help the spirit of the departed on his journey,
then a band composed of peculiar, shrill instruments and
cymbals, creating the most discordant din; t hen follow
the mourners in cabs. They keep up an incessant hub-
bub, at the same time throwing out bits of red and white
paper, with some Chinese characters on them, which are
supposed to be a passport for the corpse?s spirit through
the unknown territory.
At the other side of Chinatown and to the right
comes the fashionable part of the town, Nob Hill. Here
the wealthy autocrats live in the most superb mansions,-
surrounded by lovely grounds. It is surprising to note-
how steadily the trams ascend and descend this
precipitous hill. Only once has an accident happened,
the trams running over the stopping at the end of the
street, and wrecking some of the cars.
I think I have pretty well done the city, so we?ll take-
the promised peep inside the Palace Hotel.
The Palace Hotel is 7 stories in height, and every


room has a bay window, the estabishmsnt contains 4
'elevators. It has two large entrances, both going
right through the building, through which the cabs and
?carriages are driven with the guests. The whole of the
front of the building on the ground floor is occupied by
shops. The interior and sides are occupied by
hotel, telegraph and post offices, smoking, lounge, com-
mercial, and dining rooms, Talk about comfort, why,
here you can go, whether you are a guest of the hotel or
not, sit down, smoke your pipe, write your letter, or send
away your telegrams without stirring from the spot.
And will you not open your eyes when you go into the
dining room ? for breakfast the fare is so varied that you
are perplexed as to what delicacy to attack first- fruit,
fried oysters, salmon cutlets, porterhouse steak, and last
but not least, hot buck-wheat, and a vaiiety of other
cakes. And as for the dinner it is past conception, the
multitude of dishes, and the attentive manner in which
you are served at once attract you, even if you have a
weak appetite you must eat. Then again the excellent
manner in which everything is conducted in connection
with the general management. A car meets you at
the railway station and takes you to the hotel luggage
and all free of charge, and also upon the end of your
visit sends you back rejoicing. Every bed chamber is
provided with a fire escape ladder which is coiled up in
the room, and can be used at a moment?s notice by
merely opening the window and letting it down to the
17


footpath so that you can effect an easy escape. The
quadrangle of the Palace looks very brilliant when the
whole interior is illuminated and the band is playing on a.
V
Saturday night, and the tiers of balconies are lighted and
thronged with gaily dressed people.
I must not forget to mention Oatlands and Alameda,
on the other side of the harbour. Oatlands is a nice
little town, reminding me very much of our colonial
towns, and Alameda is the great watering place, and large
swimming baths are here, which are well patronised in
the summer.
Neither must I forget that ?Frisco has many hand-
some churches, the Roman Catholic Cathedral and Jesuit
Church being amongst the most imposing. The latter
built in an ancient style of architecture, and is possessed
of many fine paintings.
The city has also two first class daily papers, the
Courier and Examiner , both of which have fine establish-
ments and printing presses of the newest kinds.
The Public Library is also worthy of notice, and well
managed. There is a circulating library attached to it.
It will also well repay you to get up in the morning and
pay a visit to the fruit and fish markets, which are
conducted on an extensive scale.
I may here add that people in moderate circumstances
do not keep house, but live in a suite of rooms at a.
boarding house, and go to a restaurant for their meals.
All the cleaning in the houses is done by Chinese boys.
x8
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


Now for the Cliff house: get on the tram, and you?re
there in a few minutes. And how well you?re repaid for
the journey what a magnificent sight meets your eyes ?
From the verandah you see an unbroken expanse of the
Pacific Ocean, which leaps up in broken spray at your
feet, covering you with a deliciously cool sprinkle. Just
in front you see the celebrated Seal Rocks, covered with
seals gamboling about, roaming every now and then as
if to proclaim American independence.
It is impossible to imagine a more beautiful scene; you
seem to be lost in contemplating the immensity of the
ocean, which on a fine day has the most lovely variety of
tints, from bright emerald to royal purple. One could
stay for hours upon hours looking at it without ever
wearying. But we must away as we have so many more
sights to see, and by the bye, now that we?re on the
trams we may as well go to the Park, a lovely spot..
This is also out towards the ocean, though in a different
direction. A few years ago it was nothing but a
collection of sand-hummocks, but Yankee perseverance
has turned it into a beautiful pleasure garden, full of
ferneries, hot houses, and lovely climbs and lovers? walks
It is a popular place of resort on Sunday. I may here
remark that Sunday in ?Frisco is the great pleasure day,
the same as on the continent. The theatres give two
performances, a matinee at 3 in the afternoon, and the
usual evening performance.
Woodward?s Gardens are a private undertaking-a
I 9'
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


most beautiful pleasure garden, full of 01 namental lakes
covered with boats, a menagerie alive with wild beasts, a
?museum, ball room, and theatre. They are crowded on all
holidays, and you get a first rate afternoon?s amusement
for 25 cents. Of course you have to pay extra for your
refreshments, which are to be had all over the place.
There are so many theatres that I shall just glance at
them. The Grand Opera House, a splendid theatre of
immense size built upon the old principle, with gallery,
?upper circle, boxes, pit and stalls. In all the other
theatres, the pit is the best part of the house, the seats
-gradually sloping down from the back to the foot lights,
an avenue down the centre from which you take your
seats. Then there?s The California, Baldwin, Bush
street, Standard, Market street, and Adelphi amusement
houses. The California is a capacious house, but hardly
ever open. The Baldwin is a pretty little theatre,
beautifully fitted with f all back chairs, with velvet backs.
I he act drop is very fine, the drapery in it being
painted in the most exquisite manner. It is painted by
:a celebrated New York artist.
Besides the theatres, there are three other places of
.amusement, the name of one of which I forget ; but both
of them and the Winter Garden are devoted to comic
opera, which you can enjoy for 25 cents, and have a
wine and a smoke thrown in.
It is astonishing how well they put the plays upon
the stage, we could not do any thing like it as well in


Melbourne for three times the money, not saying anything
about the refreshments.
The Vienna Gardens, and other places of the same
description, are devoted to a variety of entertainments,
the principal part of of the programme being taken tip
by a beautiful instrumental concert given by sixteen
Mexican ladies. The admission to this place is to cents
which entitles you to refreshments. It is most comfort-
ably furnished with little marble tables and chairs,' and
here you sec thousands of Germans with their wives arid
families enjoying their pipes and laager beer.
Now for the dives. I suppose you want to know
what a dive is, eh ? Well, a dive is a , nothing more
or less, that is you have to go down into the bowels' of
the eaith to find your amusement. Most of the dives are
in Sutter and Dupont streets, not a very aristocratic
neighbourhood. The Fountain, is situated in another
part of the city, where you are admitted by ticket,-
as a precaution to keep the roughs out, but you
get full value for your money in alO cent drink. In the
Fountain there are male attendants, in all the others
lovely, but frail women, and the admission is free, all
drinks 5 cents. These latter are named the Palace,
Odeon, Gem, and Novelty. At the Fountain you get a
first class variety entertainment whilst enjoying your
smoke and having a social glass at one of the little
tables', and the audience is composed of respectable
citizens, but at all the last- named the performance is" of


a very low character. Legs predominate, and the wit is
rather strong. You meet every description of rowdy
here, from the merchant seaman and middy on the
spree to the ?Frisco hoodlum, the counterpart to
our larrikin. Always be prepared for a free fight, in
which knives and revolvers often take a prominent part.
Then there are the Dime Museums, so called from
the charge of admission, one dime ?ten cents. Here you
see the man alligator, who is made out of a real live
nigger boy, with the lower part of his body fixed up in a
small alligator?s tail, splashing about in mud and water
in a tank.
The wild man of the woods is kept in great
seclusion behind bars, with a danger signal attached; bare
to his waist with patches of black wool stuck over him
here and there Held by a chain, he rushes up and down
his cage uttering u hum-hum,? and strikes terror into the
beholder, .for which he gets the munificent salary of $lO
a week. *
Then there is the Circassian lady, with her flaxen hair
like a huge mop, the tallest man in the world, and the
living skeleton, the electrical lady, who shakes hands with
you and gives you a shock, the charming damsel who
tells your fortune, and the sword swallower, who
akes the stick out of your hand and thrusts it down
his throat.
They had also a group of half a dozen Zulus at one of
them, who danced a war dance. When blackened up


they looked very fierce, but when off duty and washed
and taking their laager beer, they looked and spoke
remarkably like natives of the Emerald Isle. All these,
besides several lesser attractions, are to be seen for the
small cost of ten cents.
My experiences in ?Frisco during my three and a
half years sojourn, were varied, and upon the whole any-
thing but agreeable. I found the Yankees altogether
too sharp and they got the best of me in every
transaction ?? Cutting my eye teeth,? as they called it
They are no respecters of persons, a the almighty
dollar ? is the only thing they care for.
I painted a great number of pictures for a firm who
were to share with me after completion, they paying my
current expenses in the meantime.
When I?d finished my contract my partner said, u Well,
professor (my title, every one must be either a genera]
judge or professor). u Well, professor, I guess we?ll have
no more pictures until we clear out this lot ; guess we?ve
been offered $450 for those there yesterday, but guess it
ain?t enough; we?ll hang on to them until we ge t
something better, professor. 11 How am Ito live in the
meantime, eh ? better buy me out boss. Give me a few
dollars and let me start again,?
u Well, professor, what do you call a few dollars ??
u Twenty.?
?No professor, not twenty; my brother said he
guessed you?d want to be bought out, and he said, 1 Give


the professor a dollar, but I?ll make it two, and give
you one out of my own pocket, but don t let my brother
know anything about it.?
I took the two dollars, and went out of the shop dis-
consolate and to the post office, where any amount of
letters containing birthday cards awaited me. Why do
people send hungry men birthday cards ? I blessed those
cards, and wrote my determination to exterminate every
card I came across in future. I hinted that the money
for the said cards would be better, and then sat down in
my saloon and had a glass of laager and counter lunch.
Every saloon has an excellent counter lunch, consisting of
clam, chowder soup, crabs, caviare, sausages, and little
salt herrings, salad and bread, so that as long as you have
five cents in your pocket you can?t starve, and 1 5 cents
will get you a good bed. Just when I was despairing (oh,
how many times did I despair during my stay in this
cold, selfish city, without money and friends ?) I got a job
to paint a tableaux for a maitre gras out of which I did
well, and for which I received a great amount of praise.
These maitre gras are a very fine sight?all of the people
going to the ball parade in the streets in fancy dresses,
some forming alligorical groups posed in position on a
platform on top of lorries, others walking or on horse
back; the streets are illuminated, and fireworks and
different colored fires are let off all along the line of pro-
cession. In the ball room a prize is given for the best
tableaux. These tableauxs are drawn round the room on


platforms, the figures being artistically grouped according
to the subject represented. I painted a Elaine,? Antony
and Cleopatra?s barge California, and a host of others.
Another slack time, and then I got an engagement at the
Market street theatre, and produced a variety of pieces,
from the a Sea of Ice ? to the burlesque of a Queen
Elizabeth.? But, alas, it didn?t pay ; the management
were a broke,? bailiffs with a attachments ? were con-
stantly at the doors taking the money, and we poor
artists were left to whistle for our pay. Many and many
a time I went to bed with nothing but a 5 cent lunch.
One day I was going down the street and espied a new
coffee shop. I must tell you they have plenty of shops
here for the sale of coffee, and they grind it before your
eyes. a There?s no deception, gentlemen!? (About the
only thing in which there is?nt deception here,
and I don?t know but what some of the beans
are not burnt dough.) They present the purchaser
of so many pounds with a china tea service. These
shops are generally decorated with descriptive papers
illustrating coffee culture. Happy thought ; I?ll see if he
won?t have it painted. In I popped. a Don?t you think
your store would look better painted in oils instead of
papered, boss ? ?Guess it would, stranger ; can you do
it?? a Yes.? a How much ?? a Let you know to-mor-
row.? I took out my rule and made measurements, it was
about one hundred and twenty feet long and fourteen
high. I made my calculations and next morning stepped


in and informed him that I could do the job for S2OO and it
would take me three weeks. ? Guess you don?t get the
job, siree ; guess I?ll be behind this tarnation counter
on Saturday night (this was Tuesday) and take five or
six hundred dollars, squire. Say ? I?ll tell you what
I?ll do, squire, I?ll provide the stuff, and if you like to do
it for the same price as papering, and get it done a 1 slick-
up ? job by Saturday, you can do it stranger.? And do it
I did, worked night and day, and a u slick-up ??job I made
of it, for which I got the munificent sum of sls. This is
the way with all Americans. Hurry and bustle, get a job
done u right away ? as they call it, and there are your
dollars. You must?nt go ? fooling about it, I guess.?
I have been in a barber?s shop having a shave and all
the time the building, a brick one, was being slowly
moved up by screw jacks, and another basement being
built, but business was not interrupted. It is also astonish-
ing to notice the rapidity with which a seven story
building is put up. They?ll plough out the foundations,
keeping a pump going in the reclaimed ground, put down
flat planks of wood, which are found to answer better
than piles, build up their foundations, and in less than
three months there?s a large brick building held together
by iron girders, plastered, painted, and a roaring
trade being done on the premises.
Business kept on fluctuating with me. Sometimes I
was rich, sometimes poor, and unfortunately I have never
possessed the happy knack of putting by for a rainy day.


But thank goodness I got no more birthday cards to rile
me when I was down. I got a commission to paint some
scenery for a Convent at Bernicia, a small township up
the river?a beautiful spot. I enjoyed myself very much
chatting to the sisters, whom I managed to keep in a
constant state of merriment with anecdotes of my
experiences.
Finding business very slack in ?Frisco, I resolved to try
my luck in Los Angelos, Southern California, and started
off by emigrant train one fine morning upon one of the
most charming trips I have ever had. You have every
comfort in an emigrant train, although its very slow, but
this is an advantage when you want to see the country.
And you have the vendor of peanuts and other edibles,
books, Sfc., who keeps you lively, and will strike a bargain
with you for anything. He accompanies the train all the
way. In going through the desert we were let out to
stretch our legs at a siding whilst another train passed
us. An arid scene, truly, with gigantic cacti growing to
the height of from 80 to 100 feet, looking like gigantic
telegraph posts. Then we came to the mountains, and
I was delighted with the beauty of the scenery. The
sides of the mountains looked more like a gorgeously
colored carpet than anything else, heather of every con-
ceivable hue being in flower.
In the gulches you saw numbers of bee ranches (bee
culture being a great industry here, and paying well)
dotted here and there beside a little mountain stream with


Its hundreds of bee hives. They looked so peaceful in
their solitude that I envied them their existence after the
? rough and tumble ? I had gone through. After tra-
velling several days and nights we arrived at Los Angelos,
a beautiful town surrounded by orange groves. The
modern portion of the town is like most American town-
* ' ? I
ships, nearly all the buildings being wooden, with the
exception of the Jesuit Church, which is a fine specimen
of architecture. The old town is composed of ? adobe n
(bricks dried in the sun) houses one story high, and
possessing hardly any windows, and miserable looking
hovels occupied by Mexicans and half-castes. Fruit and
vegetables are, I may remark, very abundant, and grow
to an enormous size. I was astonished at seeing numbers
of melons and pumpkins lying about in the fields ; they
are used for feeding cattle. Some of them are so large
that one would form a dray load. This, by the way, is not
a Yankee exaggeration.
X did not stay long in this part of the country. I was
to go to one Pat MacGuiness, to a get picture
raflled, which Patrick promised to do, at the same
time telling me I could have a few dollars advanced upon
it if I liked. To my sorrow I had eleven dollars, when I
wa�.informed 11 he guessed I?d had enough, and that he
wasn t going to sell any tickets,? but he?d keep the
painting. Knowing nobody here, I gave up the idea
of raffling and found a purchaser ? but MacGuiness
wouldn t let me take the picture to show him. u Guess
28
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


that ?ere picture don?t come down off that nail till you?ve
paid that ten dollar twenty-five cents.? , So I had to-
bring my customer over to the saloon, and he a judge
too! However, I sold it for sls. I painted two more,,
views and sold them also, one of which was afterwards
disposed of for double the sum I sold both. Having
enough of Los Angelos I resolved to return to ?Frisco by
steamer. There were four unfortunate military prisoners
(deserters) on board, and the poor fellows were handcuffed
every night and let loose in the morning. Nothing of
interest occurred on this trip. I arrived in the Golden
City just in time for the Centennial of the Knight
Templars. And a grand sight it was, and at the same
time gave me lots of work painting transparencies and
decorations. The whole of the city was most magni-
ficently decorated, triumphal arches and lines of flags
crossing the principal streets.
The Knights made a splendid display in their magni-
ficent regalia, cocked hats, sashes and aprons with skulls
and cross bones. There were 14,000 of them in pro-
cession, headed by most of the military bands in the States
It was a most imposing sight as they marched along
forming masonic squares, and circles &c. I was rather
amused with our American cousins glib way of dubbing'
them Sir Knight ? and bowing and scraping to a knight
who was probably a shoemaker at home, when they
show such a marked antipathy to giving an English Peer
his title. And the papers always come out with some-
2 9'
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


sneering remarks if one happens to be staying in the City.
Shortly after this I was taken ill and went to the hospi-
tal, where I received every attention.
The hospital is a wooden structure, built in a pretty
neighbourhood, kept scrupulously clean, mostly by con-
valescent patients. Breakfast at 5.30, dinner at ir, tea at
4 and then to bed. These are the rules.
I was shocked at seeing a patient operated on by
a German professor for some disease of the eye before a
class of students, male and female. The subject was held
by four students while the learned professor lectured, and
at the same time calmly went on with the operation?
ordering the unfortunate fellow to ? look down, sir,?? and
telling him ?it won?t hurt.? I don?t think he would
have liked it nevertheless.
It gives you an uncomfortable tremor in an hospital
when a screen is drawn round a fellow patient?s bed, and
next day you see something removed from the
with a white sheet thrown over it; you wonder if it will
be your turn next. Then you think of home, and
wonder if you will ever see it again. .
One of the patients told me that he saw an Irish
wardsman taking a man (who was supposed to
be dead, but was only in a trance), down to
the dead house, when he suddenly woke up
and enquired where he was being taken to. ?To the
did house of coorse,? said Pat. ? But I?m not dead.?
c ?Arrah hold yer whist ? replied Pat, ??the doctor says you


are, and he ought to know better than you, you spal-
pheen. How dare yez disphute his judgmint?? 1 I hardly
believe it?s true though, do you ?
I no sooner got out of the hospital than one evening,
walking down the street shortly after eleven, I received a
blow from a sling shot on the head from some
lioodlums who are adepts at this kind of thing. It cut
my head open in the most awful manner, and laid me
senseless. I was picked up by a policeman, and taken to
the Receiving Hospital, where it took the surgeon fully a
quarter of an hour before he stopped the flow of blood. I
was kept in all night, and next morning (Sunday) had to
parade the streets in blood smeared bandages, the admired
of all beholders. I went to a dear friend of mine, a
doctor, who had always shown me the greatest kindness,
and he re-dressed the wound, and informed me that
it was a wonder the blow had not killed me-
Unfortunately I had no redress, as I had no idea who
had dealt the foul blow, and as it was a thing of constant
occurrence, it was thought nothing of. I now com-
menced to regret that I had parted with my revolver,
when I saw that everyone carried them ; however
being a peaceful citizen I thought I?d better not carry
one at all as they being more used to firearms would
have the best of it even if I had one.


CHAPTER 11.
Receiving a letter from my father saying that it was
a pity I could not get to Europe and see the old masters f
I resolved to quit America, which had been anything but
a bed of clover for me, as soon as an opportunity
offered itself. It did not take me long to find a clipper
sailing vessel bound to Liverpool laden with wheat, and
I resolved to ship if possible. I interviewed the captain y
a sturdy Scot, a right good hearted, bluff, genuine man?
one of nature?s noblemen and after explaining my cir-
cumstances, and my desire to pay the land of my birth a
visit if I could work my passage, it was soon decided
that I should ship as painter and ordinary seaman. Great
was my joy at the prospect of leaving these, to me r
inhospitable shores.
In the course of a few days I duly presented myself
at the shipping office, and at the rate of � 4 10s. a month
I was engaged on board the good ship British General I
got my advance note, and I had no sooner left the shipping
office than a boarding house runner took me and my
advance note in tow. I must here explain that an ad-
vance note is a certain amount advanced to you when


you sign articles, out of which the sailor boarding house
keepers, or other hangers-on to the shipping, make cent
per cent profit by cashing, or supplying you with the
necessary outfit. Mr Levy (for such was his name) saw
that he had a green hand to deal with, and soon sup-
plied me with bedding, oilskins, sea boots, matches, soap,
dungaree suit, and a few coarse woollen shirts. He
pocketed my notes and put me into a boat, and before I
could say ? knife ? I was alongside the British General
lying in the stream. Here I was interrogated by
the police officer in charge as to whether I had
any murderous weapons or whiskey about me. Having
answered this question satisfactorily, I was permitted
to go on board ?my home for the next four months and
* ?
a fortnight. ? Show that man to the starboard for-
castle,? called the chief mate, who was in charge of the
deck. ?Aye, aye, sir!? cried the?prentice. I was shown
to the starboard forcastle; here I was shaken hands with
by all the watch, who wanted to know if I?d brought any
whiskey on board, and when it was found out I hadn?t
j sank a hundred per cent in their estimation.
? Are you ready to turn to, Stow?? called out the
mate. ? Yes sir. ? ? Well then come along here and lend
a hand to shift these sacks of wheat ?aft. ? ? Yes, sir.?
I turned out in my new rig-out sensation; the shell backs
soon saw I was a ? land lubber ? and looked at me with
anything but a friendly, but rather a contemptuous stare,
which gradually found vent in outspoken disapproval


when they saw me hauling a sack of wheat. Such remarks
as, 11 he dont call himself a sailor do ?e?? ?hope there ain?t
many more of ?is sort,? ? better send him up aloft&c;
were to be heard on all sides.
At five o?clock we knocked off for tea, and I found I
had to be slavey for the starboard watch, and had to fetch
and carry the meals for my superiors, the A.B?s, ? and
look sharp about it too, young codger,? the bully of the
forcastle remarked, or, you?ll d soon find out whose
boss here.? I didn?t think it policy to reply, but went to
the galley.
So my new experience began, and for three days I had
to haul sacks of wheat and pull away at a rope from the
after hatch, when the captain made his appearance, and
said, ? Well my mon, I think painting is more in your
line than hawking sacks of wheat; give him a paint brush
Mate.? I was then set to work painting, cleaning
brass work. I had to keep my watch, which I enjoyed
immensely. At last being all ready for sail, we were
tugged out of the harbour one lovely morning in Sep-
tember ; then we settled down to our regular employment
The Captain had his son on board, so that most of my
spare time was spent in teaching him and painting
pictures for the Captain. I brought a plentiful supply of
canvas and paints on board with me.
How I enjoyed a peaceful starlight night off the ocean.
How grand and sublime are the effectsP?How it makes one
think of the great Architect of the universe, and His


wondrous works ? How little we are? It humbles one
and makes one think what infinite pigmies we are after
all. I used to lie on my back on the hatch looking up
into the deep blue heavens, spangled with myriads of
stars, and wonder where do they end ; the longer you look
the more you become bewildered, and lost in a maze.
Then go and take a look over the side of the vessel and
see the water below like one blaze of fire with phospho-
r escent light, one living mass of infusoria. These delicious
reveries seemed like a balm to my troubled spirits after
the ? rough and tumble n of Frisco.
Time glided slowly along, and we kept pace with it
Went through the same monotonous routine day after
day. scrubbing decks at 5.30 a.m., breakfast at 8., making
sennet or painting till dinner time, more sennet
making or painting till 5 p.m., tea ; then either turn in,
or on watch as the case might be.
We had a very steady passage until we got into the
latitude o the Horn, when we experienced the usual
weather, hail, snow and sleet, constantly?all hands on
deck, ?bout ship and iay to. And pleasant work it is
turning out of a warm bunk on a cold wintry night and
tugging away at half frozen ropes, sometimes up to your
middle in water ; you have to hold on by your eyebrows
a large wave comes booming on board with a
regular thud, making the whole ship quiver.
But what a grand sight is a tremendous storm at sea.
The ship tossed about like a cockle shell It is sublime
35'
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


I enjoyed it as much as a calm night.
Early one morning we were nearly all being sent to
xl Davey Jones?s locker.? Another large clipper was within
an ace of running into us amidships about 4 o?clock I
shall never forget the sudden shout from all hands, and
then the equally sudden silence?a dead hush ?as the
other ship came rnshing along as if nothing could stop
her from crashing right into us, when she suddenly shifted,
her helm and sheared off. You can imagine what a
narrow squeak we had when I tell you that you could see
all on board, and hear what they said quite dis-
tinctly. However, ? a miss is as good as a mile.?
We soon got out of these latitudes and once again we
had fine weather ; but when off the river Platte we
experienced a terrific thunder storm. The lightning was
most awfully vivid, and had a grand effect as it played
.about the rigging.
When in the tropics we nearly met with another
disaster ?one of our side lights caught fire, and as we
were almost becalmed, all the sails hanging uselessly
about the masts, nothing could have saved us if they had
once caught. And to make matters worse, as we had just
finished holy-stoning and oiling the decks, the fire would
have run along them in one sheet. The mate with great
presence of mind threw a wet sack over the flames and
soon extinguished them.
We had lots of fishing for bonita and other deep sea
fish, and also captured a few sharks, two of which, with
3 6
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


their attendants, pilot fish, kept us company for many
hundreds of miles.
To relieve the monotony, we one day sighted a school
of sleeping turtle. We put off a boat and succeeded in
capturing two. Every now and then we sighted vessels
and one kept in company for some days, and the two
captains paid one another visits. The other captain?s wife
was ill, and our captain went to see her in consultation.
One day is pretty much like another on board ship. The
captain?s gray parrot used ta enliven us sometimes ? he
was a lively old bird, and could imitate anything, and I
verily believe could sing a ? shanty? as well as the sailors
At last we drew near to the shores of dear old
England. Then every one woke out of his apathy and
looked brisk and smiling.
In the Channel I had a sight of the Channel squadron
which passed us, steaming slowly along. It makes you
feel proud of your country when you see these magni-
ficent iron monsters gliding along, looking like huge
moving fortresses. We dipped our flag three times to
each ship as she passed us, and she returned the com.
pliment. No one was to be seen on board, but at a
signal from the Admiral?s ship every vessel did what
was required, with the most marvellous precision. At
last the pilot came on board, then what a rush for papers ?
Then the steam tug came alongside. Then all hands
were busy getting out the hawser. Then all hurry-
scurry getting the sails unbent and lowered down on


deck, making all snug for port. ? We were soon in the-
Mersey, customs officer on board, and anchored in the
stream, waiting for our berth in the docks.
How beautiful Liverpool looked at night, with its
rows of lights reaching as far as the eye could see. Then
the lights of the steamers going across to Birkenhead,
flitted past us like so many fire-flies. Of course every
one was anxious to get on shore the single men to get
paid off and have a spree, and the married ones to go and
see their wives and families. I was on the tip -toe of
anticipation to see the wonderful city of Liverpool. I
slept little that night. I was on anchor watch for -the
portion of the night, but when it was my turn
below I couldn?t sleep; I kept thinking what I should do-
and how I should get along in the land of my birth.
Dawn at last. The decks are washed down, and we are
towed into dock and all hands are scattered here, there, and
everywhere. Wedon?t get paid off for two days, so I wan-
der into the city with thethirdmate to see what is to be seen.
Liverpool is a magnificent city, mostly built upon the
modern principle, and has good broad streets and splendid
buildings. Of course the docks are the great wonder of
the city, reaching, as they do, for miles and miles. It
would be difficult to enumerate all the handsome public
buildings and immense warehouses, Ihe Custom
shipping offices, and sailors? home are all very fine
buildings, so also are the law courts and public library
and museum. All the principal hotels strike one at once


with their imposing appearance. Lewis?s monster
emporium is one of the great establishments of Liverpool.
In it you can buy anything from a needle to an anchor.
This enterprising firm have also a like establishment in
Manchester, and other large centres. They are most
marvellous places, and goods are sold so cheap that they
do the largest trade in any town they establish them-
selves. There are any amount of places of amusement,
and also fine parks and pleasure grounds in the city.
Life in the streets is very varied, and you meet with all
nations, and people are more disposed to answer you
civilly than in London. Swarms of little boot-blacks
in their red and blue uniform, are to be seen everywhere,
girls and old women selling flowers and fruit, and old
men, hawking laces and other odds and ends. The lame
and deformed, some begging, and others selling papers or
songs by the yard, are to be met with at every corner.
And amongst the most fashionable throng may be
seen Jack tar, just paid off, and ? half seas over/? taking
the whole of the footpath to himself, lurching from side to
side, not having got rid of his sea-legs yet. Jack has.
generally got some fair damsel in tow, whom he has
decked out in gorgeous ribbons and other finery. The
merchant princes have elegant equipages, which are to be
seen during the afternoon in front of the fashionable-
shops. I went to the Alexandra Theatre in the evening,,
and was much struck with its appearance. I forget the
name of the piece that was on, but the scenery was


excellent.
As soon as I was paid off, I went to London, and
was much pleased with my trip across the tight little
island. The scenery (in some places) was enchanting?
through lovely green fields, surrounded by hedges, with
pretty little white gabled cottages, nestling in gardens
and orchards, the smoke from the chimney quietly
curling up ; then we?d pass by a fine mansion, with its
beautiful park, and grand groups of elms, and beeches,
and sycamores, and here and there a fine old oak ; then a
canal would come into sight, with its barges being either
towed or steaming. And every now and then we?d
pass through some small village or country town, with
its picturesque buildings and old church tower.
Perhaps the bells would be ringing a merry peal. Then
the scene would change and we?d approach a large
manufacturing town, with its tall chimneys and countless
rows of workmen?s houses, tall warehouses, and workshops,
and smoky atmosphere. The brain and eyes were kept
busily at work until we neared the great city. Then
houses, houses, and houses everywhere as far as the eye
could reach, row after row, and smoke from thousands of
chimneys going up into the air, which was grim and
dirty, and made one wish for a sniff of dear old
Australia?s fine, clear atmosphere. At last we arrived at
Euston station, and a remarkably fine one it is ; and how
more accidents don?t happen puzzles one, when one looks
at the net work of lines running into the terminus. It


was night, and being a stranger I didn?t know where to
go to. However, one of my fellow travellers took me to
a cheap boarding house, where I had to clamber up an
infinity of stairs, and at length got to my room, and a
rather dirty, half-furnished, uncarpeted sort of concern it
was; made me think of the ?Mysteries of London,? ?The
Mysteries of a Hansom Cab? not having been invented.
I soon dropped into a fitful sleep, out of which I kept
dreaming of the floor slowly letting ihe bed down, and
someone smothering me, and robbing me of my hard-
earned gains. I got through it all right though, woke up
early in the morning, dressed and took my first ramble in
this gigantic city. I wasn?t in the best of spirits, felt
down in the dumps, and, oh! how you do feel solitude in
London ? I never felt anything like it in the bush of
Australia. I didn?t take notice of anything,
although even at this early hour a constant stream of
people and vehicles was on the move hither and thither.
But I kept hurrying along, keeping pace with the rest,
thinking how utterly alone I was, and if I should ever be
able to find out how to make a living amongst so many
millions, not one of whom seemed to care a fig for any
body else?s existence.
Keeping with the largest stream of people, I naturally
got right into the heart of the city, and feeling tired
and seeing a venerable old building, surrounded by a
small planted enclosure with seats, I betook myself to
one and sat down. My courage by this time had about


?oozed out at my finger nails,? like Bob Acres, and I felt
very, very miserable indeed. I had to wait until the Post-
office opened to see if there were any letters for me, and
to get a Post-office order cashed. The thought of the
latter rather revived me, and upon looking things boldly
in the face, I came to the conclusion that when that was
spent I could take to being a ?sandwich man,*? or a
pavement artist.
It was drawing near eight o?clock, and just then a
bell commenced to toll. A gentleman came up to me at
the same time and asked me when the service began.
I told him I didn?t know, being a stranger ; but this
roused me from my reverie. I first of all commenced to
look up at the venerable building with some interest,
then jumped up and took a flying survey all round. Then
stood as far back as possible, and espied a splendid dome.
?Ah! ah! St Paul?s!? I exclaimed, ? the place I have heard
so much about!? It is indeed a magnificent building,but
how black and dirty, covered with stains, and green
slime ? Oh, smoke and fog, you have a deal to answer
for !
I entered the sacred pile with feelings of veneration,
which increased upon hearing the morning service under
that splendid dome. After it was over I took a ramble
round the building, and admired all the magnificent
statuary.
You cannot see the exquisite proportions of the
exterior of St Paul?s until you get at some considerable


distance. The best place, I think, is from Charing Cross
Bridge. From thence looking up the river Thames, what
.a magnificent panorama you see ? -beneath you is the
Thames embankment, with Cleopatra?s needle and piles
upon piles of superb buildings, and amongst them all the
iar-famed dome of St Paul?s stands out a lasting
monument to its architect, Sir Christopher Wren.
After getting my remittance at the Post-office, I felt
raiher better in spirits and decidedly better in pocket,
and having got outside a good steak, looked upon the
world in a more kindly manner.
The traffic is enormous, especially about the banks
from whence the ?buses start. There is a continuous
stream of people and vehicles passing and repassing, and if
it were not for the regulations of the road collisions
wou.M constantly be taking place. The police have
enough to do putting up their hands and stopping
all vehicles every few minutes to let the foot passengers
cross the street. All the way up the Strand the living
'mass is ever moving.
It is amusing to notice the different styles of people,
from the fashionable ? dude ? to the poor crossing sweeper.
One is astounded to see how many modes there are of
making a living in a small way.
Now you?ll pass a row of ?sandwich men,? all
miserable and broken down, and as if the large boards
they carried slung back and front, each with a letter on
it, really kept them from falling down, so starved and


emaciated do they look. Probably there will be twenty
of them carrying a letter, the whole twenty forming the
name of some popular play or novel. On they trudge
through snow and sleet, or sunshine and dust, in the
sloppy gutter, for which they get the munificent
remuneration of two shillings and six-pence a week.
Others, stars in their profession, come out dressed in
fashion, for which they get better pay.
Then you feast your eyes upon some magnificent
equipage drawn by a really beautiful pair of horses, coach
and foot men in full livery on the box, a lovely
English beauty sitting languidly behind. Again you
turn to the footpath, and passing by the ordinary mor-
tals, are at once struck by the fact of the terrible
amount of poverty that exists in the midst of health,
wealth and grandeur,
A poor crossing sweeper claims your attention and
capper at the same time. Then there are vendors of all
the latest novelties, all shabby and hungry, and of course
there- is also a plentiful supply of boot-blacks. In the
less frequented thoroughfares are to been seen pavement
artists, sketching ?Ships at Sea,? ?A mackerel on a dish?'
?The Shah, ? &c., in colored chalks ; some of them are
splendidly executed. Then there?s the Italians with their
handle pianos, kicking up a row only to be equalled by
a steam organ. Italian girls with trained canaries and
love birds, who tell your fortune by picking out a small
folded paper from amongst a lot of others. Then there?s


the shabby-genteel conjurer with a small round table,
who performs all kinds of sleight-of-hand tricks. And
probably you?ll come across a group of acrobats going
through their performance, or a street reciter spouting
Shakspeare. I must not omit to mention the flower
girls, who mostly congregate about the doors of the
theatres at nights,
I am not going to attempt to describe London, as it
would take too much time, and also as there are so many
books written on the subject ; but I will just say that I
was particularly struck with the Strand and the Charing
Cross Railway Station, which is situated there, and is a
fine building. Regent Cresent and Trafalgar Square are
also very imposing. The Nelson monument stands in the
centre of the square, with Landsier?s lions at the base. I
paid a visit to the National Gallery, and how I
revelled in the pictures ? It makes one feel inclined to
throw away brushes and palette in disgust when one
looks at this vast collection of superior works. The dis-
tance one has to climb, or probably will never reach to
attain anything like success, is appalling. Then I took a
peep into the British Museum; here you could spend a
life-time and then not see all the curios.
One day I was going into Westminster Abbey when I
was stopped by a policeman, as I was carrying a packet
of sandwiches. It was useless for me to explain that it
contained eatables; the 4< dynamite scare ? was on, and the
orders were stringent about people carrying parcels,.
45"
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


However, I was more fortunate in the afternoon, when
I devoured them and subsequently had a ramble through
the fine old Abbey.
One is charmed with the architectural details of the
?exterior, and it and the Houses of Parliament close by
form a striking picture.
But how enraptured upon entering the building?the
nave is superb, the splendid columns and fretted arched
roof are marvels, the different chapels, with their monu-
ments of kings, queens, princes, and statesmen, and the
poet?s corner, with the ashes of all the great literary men,
all impress you with a feeling of veneration.
You are pestered all the way in your peregrinations
by the incessant babbling of a verger, who explains every-
thing to you in a monotonous voice, like a bee in a bottle.
I ran away from him once or twice, but was quickly
brought back to my party. ? Dynamite scare ? was still
on. I wished some dynamite would blow him up and
leave me to my own reflections.
The new Law Courts are a magnificent pile of buildings
in the Strand, but I did not think much of the Albert
Memorial Monument in front, which has a very dwarfish
appearance. Lower down is the inner temple, a peculiar
collection of chambers, courts, and passages. Here the
barristers congregate. The Temple Church is a fine old
building well worthy of inspection,
The Royal Exchange is a very imposing edifice. The
roof of the court inside is very fine* One would hardly
4 6
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


think, to look upon the dirty, low square exterior of the
Bank of England, that so much wealth was hidden within.
Hyde Park is beautiful, and of a morning it is an
agreeable change from the bustle of the city; but in the
afternoon all the rank, beauty, and fashion do there as-
semble.
One afternoon I went to the Westminister Aquarium,
a fine place of amusement. There?s the Aquarium and
all sorts of entertainments, from a dramatic entertainment
in the Aquarium Theatreto a circus.
I went to the theatres, but, with the exception of Drury
Lane, was disappointed with the houses, which are badly
constructed, and the entrances miserable. The Concert
Halls are large and commodious. I saw a performance at
the Alhambra, which is an immense building and sump-
tuously decorated. The ballet was magnificently put
upon the stage, about two hundred and fifty ballet girls in
'Various costumes taking part in it with principal danseuse.
You can put in an afternoon very comfortably at the
Crystal Palace and Kensington Park gardens, which are
very beautiful. I think it is a pity that exhibitions were
not all built after the same plan as the Crystal Palace ;
there is something so light and fairylike about it.
Whilst in London you must go up to the Horse
Guards and see two life guardsmen mounted upon superb
horses, in their two little sentry boxes on each side
of the gate. They look like two statues, neither horse
nor man scarcely moving a muscle. The men are the


pick of the British army, and both men and horses show
to what a perfection discipline and drill have brought them.
It is well worth travelling fourteen hundred mi les to look
at them. It makes you feel proud of being even distantly
connected with the British Empire. To see the guards
relieved is one of the sights of London, and crowds as-
semble to witness it. y
Probably you may see a company of the Foot Guards,
in their red uniforms and busbies, marching down to re-
lieve guard at the Bank of England, then again the same
feeling of pride will come over you. I wrote to a friend
of mine in America and told him if he wanted to see a
real soldier, he must come to England* I don?t know
how he liked it, as the Yanks say, ? Guess the Britishers
have whipped the world, and weVe whipped the Britishers,
and also add, u Guess we?ll have that small island
one of these days as a colony of the United States.?
Before you leave London don?t forget to go to the
Tower, it will repay you ; but you have an old fossil
here who will explain everything in the same
monotonous manner as the verger in the Abbey.
Lastly take a trip in the underground railway, and if
you feel sick of life, a jump off Westminster Bridge,
The Indian and Colonial Exhibition, commonly
called the Colonderies, was open, and so I dropped in
there one evening. The Indian court was very fine.
Woodwork fittings were carved most exquisitely, and
there were life-size models of natives in various costumes


placed here and there. The Canadian section was also
very interesting, and one could gain a good idea of fish
culture in this court. I thought Victoria was very poorly
represented, and I found a number of colonists who
visited it were of the same opinion.
A street in old London was still there, being left from
the Healtheries Exhibition. This was very quaint and
picturesque. The grounds, lighted with many colored
lights, and the splendid fountains, with the variegated
lime-lights playing on them, looked liked Fairy land.
Whilst in Kensington I called upon a wealthy cousin
of mine, who had just returned from the diamond fields.
I tried to get an order out of him for a picture, but he
said, ? paintings weren?t in his line, but as I seemed hard
up, probably I should find this of some service ? (handing
to me a P.0.0.f0r ios.). I hope his liberality won?t
hurt him.
During my few weeks stay in the city I painted
several pictures of colonial scenery, which I disposed of
to a picture-dealer in the Strand at satisfactory prices.
Receiving an invitation from an uncle to pay him a
visit, I packed up my limited wardrobe, and hastened to
his residence at Guildford, Surrey, wondering the while if
he would be of the same liberal turn of mind as my dear
cousin, recollecting the proverb, ? Blessed is he that
expecteth little, for he shall receive nothing at all.**
Isn?t that it. I found him, however, a splendid fellow
Neither he nor my aunt could do enough for me, and I


enjoyed myself exceedingly during my visit. Guildford
is a fine county town, and of course has its High-
street. I have never been in a county town without
one. There are several fine old ruins in the vicinty of
the town, and the scenery is delicious, quite refreshing?
two lovely rivers, and lovely park lands, with clumps of
trees.
Here I received my first military discipline. One
morning an orderly came to the door with the letters (my
uncle was a staff major), and I went to get them, and
entered into a conversation, colonial style, with the
orderly, for which I was soundly rated by the major, such
a proceeding being subversive of all discipline.
Gathering blackberries with my pretty cousin, and
plaguing my aunt?s parrot, and being awfully proper,
? and if I couldn?t be proper as proper as I could,? formed
the major part of my occupation. I might as well here
inveigh against the then fashion of minature furniture in
drawing rooms, and also afternoon teas. How any one
can look pleasant when making a guess where his chair
is, or whether he is going to land in it or on the floor, I
don?t know ; I couldn?t. And then, when seated, how to
smile at a young lady, or ogle her through your knees, is
an art that requires ? dude ?? culture. So as I lacked
it, I felt extremely uncomfortao-.c, and wished myself in
Bohemia again, smoking my pipe. And as for the
tTiimble full of tea, they?d do very well for a children?s
doll party. When will absurdity cease ?


The Guildford fair taking place during my stay, I had
the pleasure of seeing a real old English fair for the first
time. I wondered what was going to take place when I
noticed the unwonted stir in the town and the excite-
ment amongst the small boys, who rushed eagerly
forward to meet the gypsies? caravans. Comical
things they are,?regular little houses on wheels,
chimney and all complete. It must be very jolly for a
family man to jog along the peaceful country roads, from
village fair to village fair, with your household gods. No
taxes to pay ? and if you happen to take a wee drop too
much, why, your wife can drive up, cart you inside, and
put you to bed?no such thing as waiting at the street
corner for your house to come round to you.
I think a married Gypsy?s and canal man?s life in
England must be perfect bliss j they both travel about
with all their belongings, like a snail with his shell on
his back.
In one day scoies of caravans arrived and planted
themselves on the green, and in the market place, and.
next day the fair began. The market in the centre of the
town was crowded with farmers and buyers, some ofthe
old men in their smock frock s and knee breeches, the
smocks worked all over with braid, something like a
Maori?s face tatooed. Such hale, hearty looking old bucks,
with their jolly looking wives and daughters, with their
rosy faces all beaming with smiles.
Crowded pens of sheep, and cattle tied to rails, were in
5r


abundance. Bargaining was going on and loud talking
and laughter ; but above all could be heard the grunting
and groaning of the steam organ attached to the steam,
merry-go-round, which gave you a ride of two minutes
duration for two pence. Stalls full of cakes, &c., shooting
galleries, firing at bottles, and shying at cocoanuts?
u Have a shy sir, only a penny, and if you hits a nut you
takes ?im!?
Talking about steam merry-go-rounds, they have
brought them to a great state of perfection. One has
three horses abreast, all going at full speed. Another,
called the ? Ships on Land? has regular little yachts, rigged
and all complete, with a revolving lighthouse in the
centre, all accompanied by that lovely music, a steam
organ, which, I think, ought to have been invented at the
Inquisition. These affairs travel from fair to fair in their
circuit (drawn by a traction engine) during the summer
months, and winter in some large city. The prop rietor
of one, to whom I was talking, told me that the first time
heshowed the ?Ship on Land? he literally took the coppers
in hundreds. It is astonishing how large their takings are.
Every one patronises them; you?ll see the doctor, the parson
and county policeman having their two pennyworth.
Now we?ll take a walk to the green. There there are
more amusements of a similar character, and swing-boats,
shows of every description ??Walk inside, gentlemen, and
see the two greatest living wonders of the world, the
tallest woman, and the smallest man and woman, only
.52


three pence ; be iu time, be in time (tum-tum-tum on
the big drum). ? This way, if you please, ladies and
gentlemen ; this way. Come and look at the beautiful
panorama of the Zulu war ; only one penny.? This show
is a sell, all the beauty is outside in the flaring oil-
color pictures ?inside nothing but a collection of photos,
looked at through glasses in a wooden screen.
Then there?s a large travelling theatre, which gives
you a fresh play every five minutes. This is quite an
extensive establishment, roofed with canvas, wooden
sides, lined with green baize, lighted with lamps, seats for
dress circle and stalls, piano, orchestra, and a really good
stage lighted with gas. A delicious species of hand-steam
organ gives forth the Hallelujah Chorus and kk God Save
the Queen ? during the intervals (upon a platform outside)
to attract the audience. The company is large and very
melodramatic.
The play I saw was the ? Idiot Witness,? a blood-
curdling romance, full of love and murder. Three
murders in five minutes, and a marriage, is not sobbayd y
you know.
Now we?ll step inside and have our likeness taken.
? Only sixpence, and a beautiful gold frame,? as the gentle-
man outside informs you. And if you are an athlete you
can punch away at a machine with a sledge-hammer
until you get a kind of ? Jack in the Box? to jump outat
the top of the pole, where the strength of your blow is
indicated.
?53
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


The shooting galleries are formed of long iron tubes,,
with a big funnel-hke apertuie, and you are handed your
rifle by a pretty Gipsy girl, dressed in a most taking style..
If you feel inclined for a dance, you can have one with a
pretty country wench, who won?t refuse you ; or if you
are fond of beer and skittles, you can indulge at the
refreshment bar hard by.
The simplicity of the amusements of the English,
country foT stiikes you, but 1 .ear that as the railways-
extend they will soon do away with all this harmless en-
joyment. Even now card sharpers and other unprincipei
blackguai ds ate fiuciing their way amongst these innocent
people.
There are many hundreds of the rural population who-
have never seen London, and never desire to do so, but
rest content with shaking their heads and saying, ? Eh,
they tell me its an awful big place.? One old lady who-
went to Livei pool, and nau never seen the sea before in
her life, remarked, upon seeing a lugger with a boat
astern, ? Aye, look at the wonderful provisions of the
Almighty; even the ships have their little ones.?
The Salvation Army have a firm foothold in Surrey,,
and they have a large barracks in Guildford. You see
them parading the streets with their Hallelujah lasses
every Saturday and Sunday. At one meeting at the
barracks a barber?s pole was presented to a reformed
barber, and there was a great discussion amongst the
soldiers as to who was to receive the praise of getting the


pole. Soldier so and so, said sergeant so and so was the
means of raising the needful. But the sergeant disclaimed
the praise, and said it should be given to the Lord. At
this the reformed barber jumped up and said, ? Well,
I never heard of ihe Lord making barbers? poles before.?
I didn't wait to see if he got the pole.
My visit terminating, I bid adieu to my friends with
many regrets, and returned to London with some half
dozen paintings I had done during the time. I found no
difficulty in disposing of them. But one morning, as ill-
luck would have it, I took up ?The Stage? newspaper
and saw an advertisement, ? Wanted a scenic anist for the
Lyceum Theatre, Crewe.? I applied and got the job at
four pounds ten shillings a week. I was, of course,
delighted I started off for Crewe, and got into a cab at
my destination. ? Drive me to the Lyceum Theatre,
cabby.? I felt important, but what was my disgust at
being landed at a dilapidated oid building standing in a
back yard. Well, I thought, this is the stage entrance, and
they, I knew from experience, were always dirty.
? Stage entrance, cabby ?? ?I don?t know what kind of
entrance you calls it, but it?s the only one I knows on,?
he replied. And the only one it was, sure enough ; and
t o make matters worse, there was no doorkeeper. I went
o the nearest ? pub ? and found out where the manager
lived. He lived in a dirty tobacco shop, and wasn?t
to be seen till seven when the theatre opened ; as he was
having a nap, so a dirty girl, with her hair in dirty


curl papers, informed me.
Nothing for it but to [go back to the 44 Swan with
Two Necks? and wait patiently.
As I got tired of waiting I took a stroll through the
town. Crewe is not the most lively of places ; it is one
gigantic workshop for the North-Western Railway Com-
pany. There are several good streets, a fine old church,
and any amount of inns. I soon found there is only one
class of the community in it ?the working man ; and
the clatter of clogs at five in the morning, and mid-day,
and at six in the evening, of woikmen returning to
is deafening. There are some 12000 or 14000 men employed
by this large company here When a holiday occurs
things are altered, and the deserted streets and public
houses are all thronged. Beer, beer, beer is their
height of amusement.
At seven o?clock I went round to the theatre, and
interviewed my manager, a dirty little Jew with a hook
nose and a smirk, who introduced me to his partner, a
Welshman, who carried a large black bag, which was
supposed to contain the treasury receipts. Happy
delusion, as I found afterwards there never was any-
thing in it.
Our introductions being over, I intimated that a re-
fund of my travelling expenses, as a commencement,
would be satisfactory. 44 Certainly, Mr. Stow,? said Jew
Davis, and turning to his partner, Mr. Cadwallides,
44 give Mr. Stow 305.?
;6
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


And after a deal of fossicking in the black bag, a half-
sovereign was produced. Things looked black tor my
weekly salary. This preliminary being over, I was taken
in to view the house. What a sight! why even on a
new rush I had seen better theatres. A dingy little hole
ill-lit, a small gallery that would hold about 50 people,
and pit and stalls about 250, and a stage about 6 feet
deep, and dressing rooms like a lot of horse boxes.
? What am I to do with this ?? I exclaimed in disgust.
� Make it a little palace, my boy, and I?ve got a beau?
tiful place for you to paint in,? replied the glib Davis.
By half-past 7 about a dozen people had lounged in.
The orchestra, consisting of first violin, violoncello, and
flageolette, had played a doleful overture, Up went the
curtain upon ? The Stranger.? It ought to have been
named ? The Stranger, Stranger Than Ever.? I have
seen a good many ?tough? performances, but this beat
all Mrs. Haller would have done for Mrs. Gamp, and
the Count was heaviest of the heavy. But the u ardrobe?
it was superb. Of all the incongruous costumes they
were the most ? utterly utter.? Mr. Haller was rigged
out in a chintz wrapper and white cap, and the count
had a hammer-tail coat and a busby with
a red shaving brush sticking in it. Upon
going round to the dressing rooms, and being introduced
to the company, I mentioned to the leading man that
I thought his dress was rather before the time. ?U h e
correct thing, my boy, the correct thing, my boy ; I?ve


seen Irving play the same part, dressed precisely the
same. ? Finding I had put my foot into it, I didn?t offer
any more remarks. After the performance I regaled the
company with beers out of the ten shillings. The lead-
ing lady was very gracious, and took ? two of gin hotr
with a little sugar.?? The rest of the troupe were satisfied
with three-half-penny beer, whilst I and the managerial
a we ? did our whiskey. I was then told I had to produce
the pantomime of u Robinson Crusoe ? in two weeks,
transformation scene and all complete, which was to be
produced in a style never before equalled in the provinces
Mr Davis informed me his wife, who was a beautiful
dancer, was rehearsing the ballet girls. ? How many
have you ? ? u Six, my boy. Six will make a splendid
i.. ,
show ; 1 knock ?em higher than a kite.* 5 So I thought, as
I bid my adieus and turned into bed. One thing I will
say for all English country hotels : you get a splendid
feather bed and clean linen, so that if you are the happy
possessor of one shilling you can forget all your ills, sleep
peacefully, and wake up refreshed in the morning, which
I did, and after breakfast went down to the theatre, when
I was shown my paint room, a loft over a stable at the
back of the a Red Bull. ? A pleasant place in the depth
of winter. No paint pots, no brushes. The black bag
was referred to; result, 2s 6d to purchase materials for the
magnificent production of u Robinson Crusoe. ? I got
my canvas tacked up, whilst Mr Davis went fossicking
back yards in search of paint pots. Having to make th


best of a bad bargain, I set to work with a will and soon
finished the opening scenes, and commenced my trans-
formation, a fancy grotto, which, with the aid of a limited
supply of Dutch metal and foil paper, I made as gor-
geous as possible under the circumstances.
I got my first week?s in full; but the next, alas!
the black bag only produced the sum of �2 10s. On our
opening night, Xmas eve, the house was crowded, but
the audience only laughed, not at the pantomime, but at
the pantomime performers. Such a show you never saw.
The orchestra couldn?t play the music, and the actors
couldn?t sing. The baliet wouldn?t dance, and the prima
danseur performed two or three of her favorite pirouettes
without any effect. The wardrobe was magnificent*
one character appearing in a carriage rug, which was
borrowed from a local tradesman; the actor stuck
to it in lieu of two weeks? salary. I kept my eye on
the black bag that evening, and managed to screw
another pound out of it. Things couldn?t go
on like this long. Next night the orchestra wouldn?t go
in until they got their money, and waited until sufficient
receipts had arrived. The night after that the whole
company struck. Next morning no manager was to be
found. Mr Davis had departed. We (the company) went
to the Oak Concert Hall and gave a variety entertainment,
and managed to keep body and soul together. Meanwhile
we bought (on credit) a portable stage and effects, formed
ourselves into a joint stock company, and resolved to do


the ? sock and buskin ? in the neighbouring towns and
villages. I had to pay a visit to ? mine uncle ? and
leave as a token my overcoat to raise funds for
I performed the dual part of actor and painter. Arriving
at our first town, Winsford, a difficulty arose, the com.
party not having money enough to pay the carter. At
last a silver watch was produced and given
as security to the carriers until after the per-
formance, which was fated not to take place that
evening, for several reasons. First we couldn?t get the
stage fitted up in time. Next wecould?nt get an orchestra
to rehearse the music for our old friend, u Robinson
.. v 9
Crusoe. But in the evening, by persuasion and beers
we induced a fiddler and clarionet player to come
next morning, run through the score, and perform at night
with the promise of pay when we got the money at th e
doors.
By dint of hard work we got everything ready by night
and opened to a�y house, out of which, after paying
expenses, my share was 2s 6d.
The performance was ?? delicious.? The ballet of three
were immense. The orchestra mangled the music an
the leading lady sang out of tune. I acted the King o
the Cannibal Islands in the opening and policeman in
the-harlequinade. A policeman without a uniform isn?t
much, is he ? At all events we had a jolly good supper
after the performance, and comforted ourselves that our
- r ?* . i:
talent must be appreciated before the season terminated.
6o
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN


Next night our audience was so small that my share
came to nine-pence. However, nothing daunted we re-
solved to close the season and try Holmes Chappel, a
village hard by. Before leaving Winsford (as it is a
peculiar place in the salt districts of Cheshire) I may as
well give a short description of it. It is built on the side
of a hill and a canal runs through it, which takes the
salt to Liverpool. It is not rock salt, but brine, which is*
deposited here. The brine is pumped out of the earth,,
and the consequence is that the earth subsides in places,
and you see some houses sunk to the upper story, and
others with only the roof showing. The inn in which we
stopped had a counter-part of itself underneath, which
was utilised as a cellar.
The brine is placed in huge pans over a slow fire and
evaporated, the salt remaining, and it is then made into-
large blocks, The Hay market, which has a large hall
above, is were we gave our show. And it was the most
imposing building in the town.
I learned my first lesson in the Bohemian way of
economy on our last ever ing at Winsford. Each member
of the company produced a small paper parcel, which was
opened and placed upon the supper table. One parcel
contained ? toothsome? salt herring, another a rasher of
bacon, and yet another a few pennorth of cheese, A
feast for the gods ! total cost, tenpence. Our leading
man then expiated upon economy in the larder, and *
found his words were correct. By following his
6r
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


example I found afterwards that I could live
?comfortably upon three and eight pence a week ?
which, with rent of 2 rooms (ss), brought total expenditure
up to eight and eight pence. After discussing our supper
we lit our pipes and resolved ourselves into a committee
of ways and means, when it was unanimously resolved
?that we should send our stage over to Holmes Chappel by
a huxters donkey cart in the morning, and that the com-
pany should walk, with the exception of our advance
agent, who also occupied the distinguished position of
bill-sticker and leading man, for whom we managed to
raise the funds for railway fare, as befitted his important
position. On the road we managed to get a lift for the
leading lady and the three young ladies of the ballet, and
although it was the depth of winter we had a fine bracing
day, and enjoyed our walk immensely.
Upon our arrival, of course, there were a lot of yokels
out to take stock of us, as our advance agent had already
been to work and posted half a dozen picture posters of
?Robinson Crusoe.? As our stage had not arrived we tried
to get lodgings ; but the inhabitants fought shy of us,
some even laughed in our faces,.shook their heads and
said, ? No play actors for us ! we?ve been had by them
before ; we don?t want none of your sort. ?
At last by dint of persuasion and liberal gifts of free
tickets, we got into an inn a short distance from the
village. All was bustle as soon as our fittings arrived,
putting them up in the hall, which was over a furniture
*62
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


?warehouse. We soon had our stage in working order,
and as there was a piano one of our company was going
to play, so that we were all ready to show.
The proprietor of the hall was going to act as money
taker, so as to insure his rent, and hand us over the b dance.
We opened to a fair house, and our spirits revived as the
thoughts of a good supper looked us in the face. The
performance, however, was not a success. Our limited
numbers were not sufficient to thoroughly produce the
pantomime, and the harlequinade went very poorly. I
couldn?t persuade the county constable to lend me his
uniform, and the pantaloon made his wig out of a sheet of
cotton wool. The clown wore an old man?s wig, a white
blouse, with pieces of red callico stitched on it, and a pad*
of black tights. These tights formed the whole of his
wardrobe, and he was so fearful lest he?d have to part with
these to supply the inner man, that he slept in them. We
?only showed for one night, as next night we had?nt sufficient
to pay our rent. We then resolved ourselves into a com-
mittee of the whole, and decided, in our present financial
difficulties and with our limited company, we could not
represent pantomime successfully, and consequently
resolved to return to the legitimate drama, and forthwith
commenced rehearsal.
Holmes Chappel is a miserable place and possesse s
nothing of consequence, except a fine old church.
One of our company having had a Godsend in the
shape of a small remittance, which went into the common


purse, we resolved to make a bold stroke and try
Congleton, a small country town,-and having picked up
a brother Thespian in distress, we were able to have a
fine cast for the ? Corsican Brothers.? I painted a de-
scriptive bill of the duel scene, which was placed in front
of the hall and attracted crowds. I also dodged up a
snow scene. The evening came at last, and joy; the
money rolled in. We had a very good house. I had to
act the ghost, and not having any u trap,? had to be
slowly drawn across the stage on a piece of tin, which,
alas ! came against a knot in the middle of the stage,,
gave a jerk, and pitched me on my head against the
wings. This secured a tremendous round of applause
and a good hearty laugh from the audience, but sup-
pressed oaths from our heavy man. However, as we
ended up with ? Boots at the Sevan, ** and got through;
it creditably, the audience went away in a good humour.
Our jollification over, our supper was great, and we
resolved to put on the ? Streets of New York ? next night.
We invited one of the reporters of the local Thunderer to
.�up, regaled him with three half-penny beer, and got a
splendid notice.
First thing in the morning I was busily at work for
this great production painting 11 new and elaborate
scenery.? Rehearsal going on the meanwhile vigorously,
I had to rush down and go through my part - the
policeman?and arrest a small boy. I don?t know why I
always got cast as a policeman, except it is because they


are always good stock.
But I was quite a star in the farce, acting Paul in the
?Spectre Bridegroom,? and fairly took the audience by
storm. This performance was a great success, and our
funds increased and multiplied. Vanity, however, proved
our ruin. Elated with success, we resolved to put
? Macbeth'? on the boards on Saturday night. Our heavy
man was an immense Macbeth, and raved like a mad-
man. Lady Macbeth was very weak, and suffered from a
cold, though our heavy man said this was all the better, as
Lady Macbeth must have caught a cold walking about in
her night dress. I was cast for Lenox, second murdered
.an apparition, and the army, besides having to sing in the
witches? chorus, rush about at the win gs, crash swords,
and kick tins about to give a realistic effect to the battle
scenes. Of course, as the army, I had to rush frantically
across the stage, shouting and making prods in the air at
imaginary foes with a spear. And to keep up the illusion
of a numerous army, rush behind the scenes and change
my costume, and come on again as one of the opposition.
But when I had to appear as the apparition from the caul-
dron, with a pasteboard helmet on my head, and say in a
sepulchral voice, u Macbeth, Macbeth, beware Macduff?
dismiss me enough,? the trap wouldn?t work at the right
time, but shot me up when all hopes of my appearance
had been given up, and worst of all in the midst of
Macbeth?s speech. Being there, I wouldn?t be cut out of
my words, but made the great Scot stop while I got them


in. This sent the fat into the fire, and our leading
tragedian and I had a wordy interview when the curtain
fell on the act. It is useless to say this performance was
a success, and it was decided at our meeting alter
supper that the British public could?nt appreciate
Shakespeare, and ? Lost in London was hit upon as our
next effort. I had made up my mind to quit the com-
pany now that they got out of their difficulties, and a$
I had a few pounds in my pocket, resolved to
commence to start painting some views of the surrounding
scenery, which was very lovely. A beautiful river ran
through the town, surrounded by high hills abundantly
wooded. Some of the little g ] ens, with waterfalls and
deep pools, shaded by overhanging birch and ash, and
fringed allround withferns andbracken, werepictures such
as you only see in England- And what a beauty there is
about English scenery ! In spring you have everything
clothed in every discernible tint of tender green, and in
autumn all radiant with golden hues, and again in winter
all the trees, except the furze and hollies, denuded of their
foliage, the delicate tracery of every branch standing
against the leaden sky.
How I enjoyed my quiet rambles in the doughs,
away from the hurry skurry of theatrical life 1 made
up my mind to do a walking tour through
Chesire and Staffordshire, sketching here and there, and
stopping for any time in a place where u I struck oil. ?, ?
I did remarkably well in the blck country, and stayed for


a considerable time in the village of Biddulph, a lovely
spot, like an oasis in a desert, surrounded as it was by
huge iron works and coal pits. A little quaint old mill
in a valley, surrounded by lovely trees, was a pet subject
of mine The old miller?s house on the top of the hill,
with its crumbling walls and old thatched roof reflected in
the mill dam beneath, all formed a lovely picture. Then
the fine old ruins of Biddulph Hall, with its one remaining
tower out of seven covered with ivy. It had been
invaded by Cromwell, and the cannon-ball
holes were still to be seen in the walls.
And another ruined castle on the top of Mow Cop,
standing on the edge of a precipice about 250 feet high,
and nineteen hundred above the sea level. The view wa s
beautiful from here ; on a fair day you could see to Liver?
pool. I became quite settled down in this district, took
pupils, and painted away night and day. I painted forty-
six pictures for one patron alone, and any amount of
china plaques and oils for the Manchester and London
markets. I used to mix amongst ;11 sections of the
community, from the vicar downwards. There was a
working man?s dub and reading room, where we used to
meet of an evening.
One would think a christy minstrel troupe had been let
loose in the village, to see all the Lackened colliers and
iron workers knocking about, and a fine lot of fellows most
of them are. I got quite intimate with some of the ? booty?
colliers, as the head men are callled, and when I dropped


into oneof the village inns, they?d hold up the pint jugs of
beer (jugs are used here, three or four drinking out of the
same one), and ask me to have a sup. They are
very hard worked, but don?t seem to complain much. A
man thinks nothing of walking eight miles
to his work in the morning. Night and day
the work goes on. It is a sight worth looking
at to see a rolling mill in full work. It looks like
pandimonium flames issuing from the vast blast furnaces,
molten iron pouring out steam, smoke and flames in all
directions. Here you see the iron being puddled, ix. ,
making the pig iron into fine iron ; men bare it to their
waist stirring it in the furnaces, which roar, and the
forked flames rush out when the door is opened to stir
the iron up. Now you see it come out a square lump at
white heat, and placed upon a little truck and run to the
steam hammer, or crocodile?s jaws, where all the dross is
squeezed out of it. The men that attend these have wire
masks over their faces, thick leather gloves, and iron
boots. And you have to be very careful of the sparks, as
they fly right and left. Then it is taken and placed
between rollers, and comes out either sheet or bar iron.
It is cut to the required length by circular saws, just the
same as if it were wood.
After doing the rolling mill, I went down a coal pit,
which is pretty similar to a quartz mine, with the excep-
tion that the mines are all black. When you get down
the shaft and get into the main drive you see miners
'68
THE ADVENTURES OF A BHEMIAN.


lying on their sides with their candle beside them,
picking away in some of the small side drives. Trucks
empty and full going to the mouth of the shaft. And
that?s about all.
The u wakes ?(as they call their fairs in Staffordshire)
took place whilst I was there, and also a pretty old custom
called ? well dressing,? when all the wells are decorated
with everlasting flowers, dyed different colors and
formed into various texts and devices. The effect is very
pretty. On May Day we had the May Queen, and
dancing round the May pole, one of the prettiest sights
to be seen. The May pole with its variegated ribbons,
which the children, all dressed in white, and wearing
sashes across their shoulders of similar color to the
ribbon they hold, dance round and round,
weaving and unweaving the ribbons as they dance. It
does one?s heart good to see the venerable old vicar, his
face beaming with smiles, leading the sports.
Fustian cutting is another industry carried on in
Staffordshire, and is performed by girls. It is hard
work, but no machine has yet been invented to do the
work satisfactorily. Fustian is very much like velvet,
and the beautifully fine pile is entirely cut with a long
thin knife, with which the girls run rapidly forward and
backward. These girls, who are kept constantly on the
run for eight honrs, think nothing of getting up at
between three and four of a cold winter?s morning, the
ground covered with snow, and walking twelve miles to


their work. And for what ? A miserable pittance
scarcely sufficient to keep body and soul together.
The Church of England was a beautiful old building
three hundred years old, with some fine cedar trees
around it. The congregation was limited, most of the
work people being Wesleyans, Methodists, or Salvation
Armyites. The Methodists have a peculiar way for
begging at what they call their charity sermons. The
whole of the school children, teachers, and choir, accom-
panied by a band, with a huge violincello, parade the
streets, and sing from door to door, and of course make a
very good collection.
Of course we had our celebrities in the village. The
chemist was the man who was always posted up in news.
The clog maker was the man who went on the teetotal
for twelve months, saved fifty or sixty pounds, and then
had a jolly,beery time of it until he had spent his money.
The carpenter was the one who hardly ever worked, but
was always on the spree, and one day Mr B. ?, the local
tinsmith and great blue ribbon man, who unfortunately
possessed a very red face, saw fit to read him a lecture.
He replied, ?Well, Mr B. ?, I don?t (hie) see that you?ve
much to brag about (hie). Why ! your face is only an
outward and visable sign (hie) of an inward and spiritual
(hie) grace.
At Xmas our doctor, who was a very jolly fellow, gave
a ball. Talking about doctors, you can get a visit and
bottle of physic for two shillings?a remarkably low


tariff. But they are the same as doctors in the colony?
they are not always infallible. An anecdote is told about
one, a particular friend of mine, who was called in to
see a patient after he had been indulging in the ? rosy.?
Looking hastily upon the patient (a pauper), he said,
?? Oh ! give him a little brandy every half hour, and he?ll
soon be all right. He had only been dead two hours.
Christmas in old England is awfully jolly, and every-
one makes up his or her mind to be jolly. There?s the
jolly ringing of the church bells, there?s the jolly wait
singers, there?s the jolly girls under the mistletoe, and
there?s the jolly old roast beef and plum pudding, and no
unendurable hot wind.
In an evil hour I painted a sign of the ? Royal Oak ?
for one of the inns. (I may here add, in parenthesis, that
this is a favorite mode of artists in England paying their
board and lodging.) I had no sooner completed this than
I was deluged with signs, and I had to paint the ? Bird
in Hand,? ? The White Swan,? and ? The Roebuck.?
And my fame spread so that I was sent to a neighbouring
town to paint the white lion. As I got three guineas
each, and I did each of them in two days, they paid
me very well
I used to visit Burslem, Stoke on Trent, and Hanley,
very often, and had the pleasure of going through Min-
ton?s, and several other of the celebrated pot works, and
seeing the whole process from mixing the clay to the
finishing and painting. There are some first-class artists


employed, who get large salaries and paint exquisite
designs upon the china, the plaques and desert services
being most lovely works of art. A great many articles
are made in moulds, but it is most interesting to see how
the ? thrower ? (as this potter is called) upon the wheel,
which revolves very rapidly in a horizontal position, then
as the wheel whizzes round he forms with his fingers a beau-
tiful vase or other article, stopping every now or then to
measure it with his compass to see if he has got it syme-
trical. I stood for fully half an hour watching with rapt
attention the skill with which article after article is formed
under his skillful hands.
Hanley is like most towns in the potteries, surrounded
by pot banks, as the heaps of clay are called. Rows of
artisans houses, and large factories with their high
chimneys and large kilns, looking like large beehives.
There is a large market place in the middle of the town!
with a fine town hall. Here you see the potters lounging
about with their aprons tucked up, smoking their pipes
and discussing politics. There is a pretty little theatre,
and I went one evening and had the pleasure of driving
through a snow storm in a dog cart, nine miles, with the
snow tumbling off the umbrellas of the ladies, down my
neck, I was pretty well frozen by the time we arrived,
and not much in a humor for seeing a play, but I recollect
it was very nicely put upon the stage and the audienc e
very appreciative. I stayed there all night, and the
next morning had the pleasure of seeing a troop of
72
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


Hussars muster at bugle call in the market place. It is a
pretty sight to see them fall in with mechancal precision,
and to hear the roll called and then to see them draw
swords,and march off double file,their accoutrements,and
picturesque uniform glittering and looking bright in the
morning sun. Then come the baggage waggons in the
rear, and as they wend their way through the narrow
streets, you felt what a grand lot of men they are, and
that you need not trouble your head about invasion as
long as you have such troops to defend you. There is
something grand about a British soldier; he looks proud
of himself, and consequently everyone feels proud of
him.
Burslem and Stoke-on-Trent are a country part of
Hanley, but smaller. There is some lovely wild moor
scenery in the neighbouroood.
Before leaving the district I must take the Havanah
mill, a lovely mill, about five miles from Congleton ?
nestled in adovely glen surrounded by beautifully wooded
hills. You come across an old arched stone bridge crossing
a rapid stream and just above it a large weir, the water
falling in pretty cascades into the river below, and rush-
ing through the bridge. On one side you can see what
used to be two large silk factories, with a small village of
pretty little cots for the work people. There used to be at
one time close upon a hundred operatives working there,
but now, since the silk trade has gone to the continent,
all are tenantless, only one old man, about seventy nine


years old, being in charge. He, with tears in his eyes,
told me of the happy past. It was a sad picture to look
upon, and reminded one of ? Goldsmith?s Deserted Vil-
lage.?
I used to pay frequents visits to Manchester, which is
a fine city ; it reminded me more of an Australian city,
with its broad streets, than any I visited in England. It
is possessed of a fine cathedral, seveial splendid theatres
art galleries, and public gardens, Belle View being the
principal one, where large displays of fire works are con-
stantly given. Of course I went to the exhibition which
was a grand affair?the most successful one since that of
?sl It was splendidly arranged, but it is useless to attempt
to describe it. They had a model of old Manchester, just
as it was hundreds of years ago, which was very fine. The
picture galleries, fourteen in number, contained the
finest collection ever brought together. The
military band contests, ? taboggonin (sleighing down
an inclined plain with such velocity that the impetus
it sent you up a corresponding height), switch-back rail-
ways, etc., keep you in the height of enjoyment, and
relieved you after you had got tired with looking at the
beautiful exhibits and machinery.
In Manchester I met at a mutual friends, a doctor
connected with the Lancaster Lunatic Asylum, who asked
me if I would come down and paint some scenery for that
institution,at the same time telling me how lovely the sce-
nery was in that county. I at once accepted the kind offer,


wishing to see as much of England as possible. I said
good-bye to my friends, packed up my traps, and was off
in a few days. The town of Lancaster is a fine old city
with the o l d castle towering up in the centre of the town,
and its two higher towers, frowning on each side of the
gateway. On the top of one is a small lookout call j
o fGaunt?s chair. ?1 suppose he used to go up there
to look out for his enemies or to get out of the way of
his wife when she was in a bad temper. The streets are
crooked and narrow, and there are a lot of old fashioned
gabled houses with their wide plastered walls traversed by
huge oaken beams, painted black. But lam sorry to say
these are fast making way for modern buildings, with all
their hideous deformity of red and white brick, and
Spanish design. A fine rapid river?the Lune?runs
through the town.
About two miles out of the city is the Country Asylum
a splendid group of buildings, situated in a lovely spot.
The old building is built in a valley, bnt the grounds
enclose both valley and hill, and a main road runs right
through them, separating the new asylum from the old-
The view from the top of the hill is superb. Looking in
one direction you see the city lying at your feet, with
the old castle and fine old church standing upon an
elevation in its midst, and the river Lune wending its
way through several picturesque bridges to the sea.
Turning in another direction you still see the river
winding about, through beautiful green fields and forests


and far off in the distance the pretty watering place, Mor-
combe, and further the small village of Easham, where is
one of the oldest churches in England. There is a very
old Roman arch still in excellent preservation, and a
chalice found in the ruins, used by one of our first
bishops ; in the grave yard are several stone coffins,,
hewn out of solid rock, in the shape of a human body ,*
a fine old rectory close by, and a cluster of cottages, in
which live the funniest lot of old people you ever saw-
four of them were over one hundred and they spoke as if
they were yet young, and spoke of one who lived a
few miles away, who would be 120 next birthday. The
most remarkable thing was that they all were in
possession of their faculties, but of course were
with rheumatics and ? lumbager-??
Morcambe Bay is a pretty, though not fashionable,
watering place. It has an acquarium, concert hall and
theatre combined, and a fine pier with a pavilhon at the
end, where the band plays, and dances take place.
Enough of this. I must now get into the Asylum
and to work. A Lunatic Asylum ! How dreadful it
looks doesn?t it ? Yet I must tell you I spent some of
the happiest days of my life there. There was a time
when all sorts of barbarities used to take place in
as is evident by the chains, straps, handcuffs, and leg
irons, kept as curios in a sort of chamber of horrors in the
old Asylum. But what is the state ot affairs now ? Let
us take a walk about and see for ourselves. What


beautiful grounds, how splendidly they are laid out! !
They look more like a gentleman?s private grounds than
an Asylum?s. And those men working there are all
patients, and that man in the blue suit is an attendant.
There is the joiners? and cabinet makers? shop, with
about twenty patients working away. And just opposite,
the smithy. All the furniture and fittings are manu-
factured on the premises. Then the steam laundry is
just over the way, where about a score of female patients
are engaged, And just alongside are three large boilers
for heating the building, with self feeding furnaces, A
capital invention, by which the slack is thrown into the
furnace by a sort of clockwork machinery when it
requires it
Now we will go inside the building, and first of all
visit the hospital and No. i ward. In the hospital,
upstairs, many sad sights are to be met with. Some
patients who have met with accidents by their own
violence, but by far the greater number are general
paralytics, and in the last stages of softening of the brain.
Everything is beautifully clean, and every attention and
kindness is shown however refractory the subjects may
be.
Down stairs in No. ward, where all the violent
patients are kept, there is a large reading and recreation
room, where are congregated such a pitable collection of
human beings as fortunately it is not the lot of most of
us to see. A feeling of great uneasiness creeps over one


here. You feel peculiarly unsafe, and anxious to get
away. Furtive and suspicious glances, and dangerous
sullen looks, or idiotic smiles meet you on all sides, and
I i
oaths and low empty laughter assail your ears The
room is well but strongly furnished, as the furniture very
often meets with rough usage, Now we go along a
passage, with solitary cells on each side; all padded so
that the unfortunates confined in them may not hurt
themselves. Outside is an exercise court, surmounted by
a high wall.
In all the other courts the patients are quiet, and in
most cases perfectly sensible on every topic except one;
and unless you happened to hit upon it you would not
find out any aberration of intellect. These wards all
have a large dining-room and sitting-room, well furnished
and carpeted. Most of the sitting-rooms have a piano
and bagatelle table, cards, and books and papers of all
descriptions. The walls are hung with a fine collection
of oleographs, and everything is done to do away with
the idea of an asylum. There is one large dormitory
and a row of single bed rooms in each ward. Each ward
has either one or two attendants in both the day and
night watch. In the night the attendant goes round
every two hours and sees that all is correct.
The female wards are almost a counter part of the
males, with the exception that they are better furnished,
and have nice conservatories here and there. The female
attendants are all remarkably nice girls, and look charm-


ing in their black or grey dresses, and pretty white caps,
with a pretty little ribbon set coquetishly in them.
It is the custom of the male patients to give reading 8
and concerts once a week in their wards, to which a
number of the ladies are invited. The ladies in return
giving a dance and card party. And I can assure you
you would not see anythiug more mad than you see in
every day life.
In the new building is a splendid large dining hall ?
quite as large as St. George?s Hall in Melbourne, with a
fine large stage at one end. In it a ball is given every
week, and concerts, and theatrical entertainments by the
attendants occasional!}', to which a large number of visi-
tors come. The music is excellent, all the attendants
being first-class musicians, and an orchestra of 32 per-
formers is not a mean one. And they are not wantiug
in dramatic ability either. They gave the pantomime
of Robinson Crusoe (for which I painted the scenery,)
excellently; and I also had the pleasure of seeing them in
a Christy minstrel entertainment, which was full of good
songs and fun, and would compare favorably with a pro-
fessional show.
They have a beautiful little church connected with
the establishment, and their own chaplain. The service
is well conducted. The choir is excellent.
The Superintendent ?Dr. C.?was an extremely nice
gentleman, and all the junior medicoes were first-rate
fellows. They all lived in sumptuous quarters, and


seemed to have little to do except perform an occasional
post-mortem. Giving the patients salts, until they?d had
more than enough, and then giving them chalk mixture
as an antidote, seemed to be their principal treatment*
It was a long time before a patient who was a good trades-
man got out . lie was too useful to recover quickly.
One thing seemed to me to be ridiculous. When the
Commissioners came down to inspect the asylum, instead
of judging for themselves, they had the Superintendent
and medical staff at their heels; and if a patient said he
was quite recovered, and wished to be discharged, a shake
of the head from the Superintendent settled the matter at
once. And the answer invariably was, u Keep yourself
quiet, and you'll get out in time.? And a precious long
long time it would be too. Another thing I think wants
altering is the law relating to the wards in lunacy These
poor unfortunates ! God help them, if they ever get in,
good-by to liberty for ever. If a man were sane when he
came in, he?d be bound to end in hopeless lunacy, from
constantly fretting.
Several patients have escaped, and got out all night in
the outer world. The law is that if a lunatic escapes,
and keeps his liberty for fourteen days, he cannot be
claimed by the asylum authorities, without being again
brought up as a lunatic, and proved to be such. Of
course in here the more a man asserts his saneness the
madder he is, and the more he is requested to calm
himself.
8o
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN.


One visitor had rather an unpleasant experience in one
of the asylums. A lady going to see a relative who was
an inmate, unfortunately went upon an admittance day
and was through some oversight mistaken for a patient,
sent to the bathroom, told to undress, and the more she
stormed and protested, the more she was told to keep
calm, and in apite of all remonstrance, undressed, popped
into a warm bath, and clothed in the regulation dress
before the mistake was found out. I believe she got
heavy damages from the asylum for her treatment.
One old man, a very powerful fellow, a blacksmith by
trade, I asked how he got in. ?Well,? he said, ?You
see I was sentenced to six months as a vagrant, and next
morning I was taken out of my cell, and put in front of a
heap of oakum, and told to pick it. Well, I did?nt
believe in this ?ere game, do you see ? So I sits down on
the heap, and I lets a roar out of me; then the warder, he
comes, and he looks at me, and I lets out another terrific
roar, and rolls about, and kicks up my legs in the air, and
roars again. So the warder, says get up and do your
work, says he, and I lets out another roar. Up comes the
gaoler, and says, says he, go for the doctor. And the
doctor he comes, and he looks at me, and I roars again a
1 tremenyous roaroh, says he, he?s mad, send him to
the asylum. So, you see, they sent me here. I?d found
out before they treats you better here than in 1 quod.?
But I put my foot into it ons?t. I?d been sent for three
months as a rogue and vagabond, and that?s when I


found out about the roaring business; and they packs me
off to Whittingham Asylum, and you see that ere Super-
intendent was a 1 a downey sort of cuss,? and when I
commenced to sing with spirit a little song of my own
composition, which ends up with, ?What, leave Whitting-
ham Asylum; no, never leave Whittingham Asylum, so
long as I do live.? Oh, you won?t cry here, and blowed
if he did?nt discharge me next discharge day. And I
believe this ?ere cove would discharge me, if I did?nt make
myself so useful with this ?ere sledge hammer ? striking.? ?
Another extraordinary and unfortunate customer, was an
American sailor, whose only misfortune was an ungovern-
able temper; when it was roused, he was positively dan-
gerous, and he would think nothing of sticking a knife in
you. How he did sometimes pine, and at others rave for
liberty. He was like a caged lion; he'd been there seven
years, and as he knew had every likelyhood of ending his
days there. He used to get so violent that they had to
drag him and put him in a padded room. He took a
great fancy to me, and one day said, u Look at my head,
they have pulled all my hair out; seven of them have
tackled me at once; I?m almost blind, and shall never see
dear old America again.? The difficulty with him was
that he was dangerous in passion, but how many amongst
us are the same. The Superintendent was afraid lest he
should be blamed if he did any act of violence when he
was liberated, and the American Consul wonld?nt have
anything to do with him.


One poor old blind patient who fancied people were
always talking to him, used to sit in the corner and say
in answer to some imaginary imputation ~ u Your?e a
d d liar, all day long. Another used to rush about
laughing and talking to imaginary devils with the most
fiendish delight. Another never uttered a word but
kept continually tapping himself first on the head, and
then on his thigh. He had worn a bald patch on the
side of his head with his constant tapping.
One eccentric individual used to get up in the middle
of the Church service, or at any other meeting, and
give his whole pedigree, where he was christened and
confirmed, and the parish to which he belonged, this
interesting information given, he would seat himself
quietly for some time and then give you another edition.
Two patients for whom I was very sorry, and with
whom I had many an interisting chat, were a young
doctor, who upon his return from the West Indies with
a severe attack of liver complaint, got very despondent
and attempted suicide, and his parents being very old
and infirm, fearing to have him in the house had him
sent to the Asylum. He was an exceedingly clever and
intellegent gentleman, and he pined and fretted and got
so haggard and thin, that I verily believe he would have
either died or gone raving mad if they had not
taken him out. The other was a fine old gentleman,
a Councillor of the City of Liverpool, and Major of
Volunteers. He unfortunately for himself had married
83
THE ADVENTURES OF A BOHEMIAN,


a handsome young wife, who out of gratitude made him
a ward in lunacy, and used to visit him about once in
every twelve months and bring him three penneyworth
of snuff. Poor fellow he was doomed to perpetual con-
finement, instead of biding his days iu a happy home,
with somebody to look after him, and humor his eccen-
tricities, He was a wonderfully well informed man, and
had travelled over the whole of Europe, and his
conversation was most interesting. Here I may as well
add that some wives seem to have a happy knack of
making their old husbands ? wards in Lunacy.??
The matron was one of the most charming women I
ever met, full of kindly feeling and sympathetic thought
and of such a lively happy disposition that she endeared
all who came in her society to her, She was the
11 guardian angel ? of the asylum.
I was kept very busy here painting stock scenery,
and attending to the stage fittings, and for an act
drop ? I painted a view of Lancashire from the grounds,
which formed a charming view. It was so much thought
of that the Superintendent of the Whittingham Asylum,
in Lancashire, who was over here on a visit, engaged me
to paint a set of scenes for that institution, and as soon as
I had finished some pictures I had ordered I started to
have a look at this part of England.
There will be no need for me to describe Whitting-
ham, as although large, it is but a counterpart of
Lancaster.


Preston?called Proud Preston?is the nearest town,
a fine flourishing manufacturing place. There are
several fine streets, and a large market place, the town
Hall in the centre being a very fine building of Gothic
style of architecture. On market days there are
innumerable small stalls erected, with different colored
awnings, and when I saw it on a fine day it reminded me
very much of the pictures I have seen of Continental
towns. The surrounding scenery is pretty, for the most part
very hilly, and well wooded, and the lovely river Ribble
flows through it. There is a pretty little village called
Gosnagh, celebrated for its cakes, which I must say are
remarkably tasty. It has two village inns, a venerable
old church with a good peal of bells, and a sexton who
is in the habit of imbibing and using strong language?
even to the rector, who is one of the old style of English
clergymen, has a lovely rectory, keeps a good table, and
is always glad to see his friends. There is also a large
institution for the educated poor, endowed by some
philantrophic individual, and in this charming spot
the jolly old people end their days in a sort of happy
family, I lodged with one of the carpenters from the
asylum, and a peculiar individual he was. He had a pet
goat, and he used to stuff his pockets with oat cake, get
on all fours, and let the goat butt at him until she
knocked him over and got the cake out of his pocket.
The scenery all up the Ribble, which runs through
several charming small towns and villages, amongst


others the beautiful towns of Ribchester and Wharley,
are very pretty. The latter has a fine old
ruined abbey, and both have picturesque old
churches. There is something in these old
buildings that makes one feel devout. Their
beautiful stained windows, and old carved oak fittings,
their moss and ivy covered exteriors, and peaceful little
graveyards, all conduce to make one feel at peace with
the world, and forget his cares, and the thought creeps
in, how happy we might all be if we were as simple-
minded, and satisfied with as little as these country
people. For peaceful, quiet, happy scenery give me dear
old England. Wandering along the clear, sparkling
Ribble, how joyful you feel. Here you go through a
copse of thick tangled wood, all so beautifully tinted, and
under foot lovely green sods, ferns, and every here and
there primroses, blue bells, and fox gloves liven the
scene. Now on top of a hill you look down into a
valley and see the smoke from a few scattered hamlets
winding up through the trees. How pretty they look,
with their gabled roofs and white sides, with their black
beams alongside, and two or three lovely hay cocks, all
thatched, and looking golden in the setting sun, and,ah-!
there's the river like a silken thread, here moving slowly
along amidst beautiful fields, and there rushing
impetuously amongst large boulders, and, ah, just look !
how beautiful that old ruined Roman bridge looks,
with half its centre arch gone, the top covered all over
with green moss as brilliant as an emerald; how it stands


out in bold relief from the surrounding foliage. And,
there, down in that deep valley to the right, see, the
quaint old mill, and the miller?s house, and water race
alongside; how beautiful the water looks coming over
the wheel in a silver cascade, and then it rushes through
the race as if running for dear life to get back into the
stream again. Turn to the left and you see beautiful
Ribchester ; you can look down into its peaceful streets,
see the people passing to and fro, and there is the church
with its old tower ?the church which never deserts a
country town ?and rectory hard by, and that large old
Elizabethan building standing in that lovely park is the
Manor house. How beautiful the river looks passing
through that fine bridge, and that jolly little inn on the
opposite side, with its swing sign, and the old hostler
attending to those horses, why, there?s a picnic party;
look at those boys and girls playing kiss in the ring on
that green just in front?
So we go on delighted with everything, and thinking
(as the Rev. Astley Cooper said in one of his sermons
when preaching about the vanities of this wicked world)
u That this is a jolly good old world after all, and I love
it.?
We get into the town, have our lunch at the Fox and
Grapes, and wander through its streets and peer into all
the quaint little shops with their penn?orth of tape, and
salt herrings, and pickle bottles full of lollies, ?how these
shops with their old dames in charge, with clean white


aprons and caps do swarm in English country towns.
Have a chat with the old lady and she?ll tell you the
whole history of the church ; and, give that needy little
chap a penny, and he?ll have a penn orth out of that
pickle bottle.
Having discussed our lunch we went on to Wharley,
and saw its old ruined abbey. The main road goes right
through its fine old arched gateway. You commence to
think of the old abbot, and the friars and the jolly times
thev used to have before Cromwell spoilt their little ga me
We went into our Tittle church, where there were
exquisitely carved old oak seats in the chancel, for the
priests to sit on, with mottoes carved on them to the
effect, that, u he that sitteth on this seat and attends to
the service will find it very comfortable, but if he falleth
asleep, he?ll come to grief.?? They were all swung on
pivots, and would tilt over when one commenced nod-
ding. You see the ancients were far in advance of us,
and it is a wonder some speculative Yank has not patented
the idea, and introduced them into our places of worship,
although it would be rather a hardship to spoil one's day
of rest, when some of our hum drum ministers are preach-
ing.
We paid a visit to Stonyhurst College, where the
celebrated Tichborne was educated. It is a most lovely
place, the grounds are exquisite, and the building inside
is like a palace. Being at Stonyhurst where the circle
of the Holy Church is drawn, as Richelieu has it, brings


me back to two places I had forgotten. The one is the
parish church of Astonbury, a few miles from Congleton,
It was, in former days, one of theold monastery establish-
ments, and is a picturesque old building with a lofty
spire which is reflected in a miniature lake beneath. From
all the spoutings outside are quaint old heads, grinning
down at you. Inside the central aisle is very fine gothic
and the walls are decorated with several very old frescoes.
But what made me think of it now, was the fact that
it is at present very u high church/? The surpliced
choirs march in, followed by several ministers and
you see bowing to the altar, &c. The rector
even goes so far as to offer up prayers for
the repose of the souls of departed ones, I don?t
disagree with any of these rituals, but what I say is : do
it in a proper manner, or do not do it at all. Now if you
go to a Roman Catholic church, you at once feel the
impressiveness of the service, and its true solemnity and
grandness, and feel how earnest and believing every one
is?you may say blindly believing, but don?t we all
believe in the great unknown, and see but through a
glass dimly? How I admire the Roman Catholic service*
it is indeed solemn, and inspires one with feelings of
devotion. But, on the contrary, high v church to me is a
delusion and a snare. It has a ring of apology about it;
it is neither one thing nor the other.
Now just take a run down to Lanacster and go to St.
Peters, and listen to the Roman Catholic service there


and hear the real practical sermon from the priest, who
is a benevolent liberal-minded man. I must not forget
to tell you that when I was painting the act drop for the
asylum, he happened to come in and noticed I had not
put in the spire of his church. ? Where's St Peters ? ?
he cried, ? You must?nt forget that, or he won't let you
into heaven ?you know he keeps the keys."
I rambled about Lancashire, Cheshire, Stafford,
and Yorkshire, to my heart s content, sketching and
painting, aud staying here for a week or two, and then
away to some other spot I had heard about,? a happier
life by far than being chained down to a bank ledger, and
encased in a stand up collar and fashionable suit, and
having to keep up the habits of society, upon a pittance,
and talk idiotic nothings at a fashionable evening party.
Such was to have been my lot, but my desire to know
something more about my fellow creatures, than their
banking account fortunately spared me this infliction.
Whilst in Lancashire, I, and a Bohemian friend, went
as u Casual "to the workhouse one night and after the
usual il tubbing ? had our u skilly '* and went to bed in
the ward. Everything is cold and cheerless ; the only
thing that seems to be lively is the comb, and that is
chained, probably for fear that it might run away. Getting
up in the morning and having to crack stones is what
we did?nt bargain for, and I don?t think we?d go through
the same experience again, And while upon the subject
of the workhouse ? u the Bastille ?as they call it in
9 C


Lancashire ?I may tell you of the cruel custom they
have of parting the old couples, after they have travelled
through life?s rough journey together. It seems hard.
Cannot they let the poor old folks end their days
peacefully together ? My poor old landlord, who had
arrived at the ripe age of seventy-three, used to say to me:
? It?s hard sir, very hard, that after paying my rates all my
life, and now because I?m old and joined that strike they
won?t employ me, and they?re agoing to send me and the
missus to the ? Bastille.? And then they?. 1 ! part us. It? s
hard you know, they taught us, that ? those that God
had joined together, no man should thrust asunder.?
One morning I received a letter from m y old friend
the Captain, telling me that he was chartered for Sydney
and would I like a trip with him. As I thought I
should like to sec the old folks once again, I decided to
go. I went dowm to Liverpool to see him and make
arrangements. I arrived a little late and I was rather
surprised upon ringing and wrapping at his door at finding
the place in darkness ; and to have three stalwart police-
men rush upon me, seize me, and turn their u bulls eyes
on me. I felt very uncomfortable, all my past trans-
gressions coming before me.. \Vas I mistaken for a
burglar, or ? Spring-heeled Jack,? who was just then
frightening all the inhabitants ? However, after taking
off my hat, and looking me all over, and questioning me
over and over again, they left me to my own devices.
The captain?s wife afterwards explained that whenever


she went out of an evening she asked the policeman to
keep his eye on the house,
Having made satisfactory arrangements I returned,
said goodbye to my friends, and sailed from the East
India Docks, London. It was sad to see how deserted
these docks were, all of the shipping trade having gone
to Antwerp.
I had shipped in my old capacity of ordinary seaman
and painter, and had a very jolly trip. At Xmastime we
had quite a jubilee. The crew turned out and formed into
a band. A flour barrel was improvised into a bass drum
and a ? rid ? did for a kettle drum ; a penny whistle,
accordeon, and bones completed the instrumental portion
and our lusty voices the rest,
Our dresses were grotesque. Two were dressed in
Esquimeaux fur suits, six as ladies with enormous bustles
and chignons, four or five niggars and the rest as
ludicrously as possible.
Formed in procession, we marched all round the deck,
serenaded the captain, sang ? Auld Lang Syne,? ? Blue
Bells of Scotland,? Should old acquaintance be forgot,?
u Home Sweet Home,? &c , &c. And the drum and
penny whistles, (our whistler was quite a host in himself
having been a clown in a circus, playing two whistles
at once, one with his nose,) were kept going until the
cryooilf il grog oh !! ? and the steward?s beaming face was
seen with a jug of u rum,? and all hands wished the dear
old captain and his wife and family long life and


prosperity with musical accompaniments.
At New Year?s time we kept the ship?s bells ringing to
welcome the new year in, speed the old one, with its past
joys and sorrows, out. Then the same performance was
gone through as at Xmas.
We kept the ? trades ? with us all the way, and had a
splendidly quick run of seventy two days. How I
rejoiced when I saw dear old Australia?s shores again, and
when we entered Sydney harbour I felt at home again.
As soon as I was paid off I went to pay the old folks a
visit. But they did?nt kill the fatted calf?l suppose
its gone out of fashion.
So ends my ramblings, not, I trust, to be ? Continued
in our Next.?








' ? -
- V ?
I L
r *. ? '. yi
p* 1


