

THE AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES
A NUHLE-HEARTOQ RACE
THE REV.
C.-E. C, LEFROY
*_ * '
* . * 1 V 4
Reprinted by the kind permission of the Editor of
THE CONTEMPORARY REVIEW
February, 1929
LONDON
DENISON HOUSE, VMJxfIALD BRIDGE ROAD, S.W.I.


The Anti-Slavery and
Aborigines Protection Society
Denison House, Vauxhall Bridge Road, London, S.W.I.
President .•
CHARLES ROBERTS, Esq.
Chairman of General Committee :
LORD HENRY CAVENDISH BENTINCK, M.P.
Vice-Chairman of General Committee :
CHARLES • RODEN BUXTON, Esq.
Hon. Treaswrers:
ALFRED BROOKS, Esq., J.P,
SIR T. FOWELL BUXTON, Bart.
Hon. Secretary:
'ikAVERS BUXTON, M.A.
Parliamentary Secretary
JOHN H. HARRIS
Bankers :
BARCLAYS BANK, Ltd.,
95, Victoria Street, S.W.i.


AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES; A NOBLE-
HEARTED RACE.
IN many books of travel, and by superficial observers, the
Australian Aborigines are described as “ the lowest race on
earth.” But this description is simply untrue to fact; it is
indeed a gross libel. There is nothing very original about it. It
was started long ago by William Dampier—himself, it is said, some-
what of a buccaneer —the first Englishman who landed in Australia,
pn the North-West Coast, in 1688. He had what he called “ some
encounters ” with the natives—and stayed there only a short time.
But the phrase he coined has done duty ever since. It is quite a
useful label, because it puts the Aborigines outside the range of
conscience, and saves a lot of serious thinking as to the causes
of their rapid disappearance. There may have been 300,000 when
the white man first came. There are only about 70,000 left now.
But the description will not bear examination. The Aborigines, it
may be freely admitted, are often very destitute creatures, but you
cannot accurately judge moral qualities by physical appearances.
By their very origin they must have some good stuff in them—for
it is now generally agreed by anthropologists that they belong to the
Caucasian stock, with some admixture of negroid blood. Whence
they came, and how they reached remote Australia, would be hard
to say. Possibly they are an offshoot of the Dravidians of South
India or the Veddahs of Ceylon. However it be, they are the most
ancient representatives of the Indo-European family on the earth
to-day—and on scientific grounds alone the 70,000 of them who still
survive are well worth preserving.
But apart altogether from their origin, they possess natural
qualities which render them capable of appropriate civilisation
and uplift. When the white man first came into regular contact
with them, they showed themselves harmless and inoffensive crea-
tures. Captain Cook records no serious conflict with them—they
were totally different from the savages of some of the lovely islands
of the Pacific. Governor Phillip, who in 1788 established the first
settlement in New South Wales, was favourably impressed by their
friendliness and capabilities. The lively interest he took in them
was conspicuous in his dispatches to the Home Government. He
was anxious that they , should be dealt with on some recognised
system, leading to their preservation and uplift.
Unfortunately, Governor Phillip was before his time. It is
probable that no good will be served by dwelling at length
upon the cruel treatment meted out to them, not only in the early
days, but also in lessening degree ever since. But something must
be said upon the subject—the facts cannot be denied. All along


they have been recorded by contemporary writers and in the public
Press. All classes of the community have been implicated—not the
rough and brutal only. In 1824 an Attorney-General of New South
Wales declared that a certain judge in that Colony had openly
proposed that all the natives in a certain large district should be
destroyed. As late as 1838 a Governor of the Colony found it
necessary to issue a public proclamation to the effect that indis-
criminate killing of the blacks must cease for the future. In 1837
a Select Committee of the House of Commons, of which Mr. Glad-
stone and Sir George Grey were members, put on record the con-
viction that the effects of our colonisation upon the Aborigines
“ had been dreadful beyond example, both in the diminution of
their numbers and in their demoralisation.” No one dares to
extenuate the treatment given in Tasmania—where nine-tenths
of the Aborigines were exterminated in thirty years. And what
happened there and in New South Wales has been repeated in vary-
ing degrees in all parts of Australia, as more and more of the vast
Continent has been opened up for settlement. Plenty of people
are still living who know all about the wrongs done in Queensland
in the sixties and seventies —the punitive expeditions, the whole-
sale dispersals, the doings of the black police. In 1905 a Royal
Commissioner, Dr. Roth, was appointed by the Western Australian
Government to inquire into the administration of justice and the
operations of the police in the north-west part of that State. The
Commissioner’s Report was so damaging that it was never given
to the public.
And yet these wild men—as Governor Arthur, who was respon-
sible for their final extermination in Tasmania, declared when all
was done —are a “ noble-hearted race.” In the journals of famous
explorers, such as Sir Thomas Mitchell, General Eyre and Sir
George Grey, may be found many tributes to their kindness of
character and fidelity, and also to their remarkable intelligence.
When the white man has come into contact with them for the
first time, there is no evidence of primary aggression by the natives
in any part of Australia. In 1861-2, when the explorers Burke,
Wills, King and Gray were lost for many months in the dead heart
of Central Australia, groups of wild blacks who had never before
seen a white man befriended them again and again, as if they had
been lost children; and, as one after another the white men died,
the blacks became more and more pitying—so reported King, the
sole survivor of the party.
The following story also gives cause for reflection. A few years
ago, in a remote part of the Northern Territory, 230 miles from the
nearest settlement, four wild natives were arrested by a mounted
trooper and some black trackers, all armed, on the charge 6f


having raided a fencer’s hut. It is quite likely that these particular
natives were absolutely guiltless of any offence—because the object
of these punitive raids is to scare the natives generally, rather than
to find the actual offender. These prisoners were fastened to one
another with a chain round their necks to prevent their escape,
and had to accompany the mounted party on foot. What happened
as they neared the end of the long and weary journey was reported
by the white trooper when he reached his destination at Port
Darwin.
He had found the Roper River in full flood. He loosed
the blacks from one another, and set them to swim the river in
front of him. They reached the other side in safety. He
followed on his horse, but the animal was caught in the swirl
and thrown over; and before he could clear himself, he wis
kicked on the face by the horse, and rendered unconscious.
The current was quickly carrying him to certain death, when one
of the Aboriginals, coiling his chain round his naked body, ran
down the bank of the river, plunged into the stream, and at
the risk of his own life brought his captor safe to land. Not
content with this, after landing his man, he raced three miles to
a Mission Station to bring him assistance.
A good deal of forgiveness, as well as courage, must have been
operating there. One is thankful to record that when this very
noble deed was brought to the notice of King George, he conferred
the Royal Albert Medal upon his wild subject.
But this is by no means the end of the story. The present
writer was working in Sydney at the time in a missionary capacity.
Being much interested in the Aborigines, and anxious to raise them
in public estimation, he made a good deal of this heroic act in the
public Press, contrasting the harshness and cruelty of the white
man with the forgivingness and devotedness of the black. One
day a police sergeant from the Northern Territory entered the office
of the Australian Board of Missions, and complained that the white
people up there did not like our taking the part of the blacks—
and that, as a matter of fact, we were making altogether too much
of the incident. “ After all,” he exclaimed, ‘‘it is nothing so
very wonderful. The black fellows always act like that.” “ The
black fellows always act like that!” This was the testimony
of a man who had probably lived for many years in close contact
with the blacks, and not on the easiest terms. He spoke, not
willingly, but in a fit of pique—and so let out the truth. Can one
imagine nobler praise of any race ? Is it fair to brand as worth-
less a people which is capable of winning such a reputation for
courage and generosity?
But it is not only in moral quality that the blacks stand high.
Their general intelligence is quite up to that of the European.


A certain Aboriginal School in Victoria took the highest place
among the National Schools of that State for three successive years.
A full-blood Aboriginal of South Australia, David Unaipon, made
quite a name for himself a few years ago as a scientific inquirer.
He was not only a student of Newton and a fascinated searcher
for the elusive secret of perpetual motion : he was also the author of
a very practical invention for improving sheep-shears by combining
curvi-linear and straight movement. —They are very far from being
a stupid people.
Happily, a great movement of sympathy for this deep-feeling,
imaginative, intelligent and gentle race is now taking place in
Australia, and a determination is showing itself not to allow them
to perish. The motive cause was supplied by a very horrible
large-scale crime of quite recent date. About two years ago, in the
far north of Western Australia, a number of wild natives, estimated
about thirty, were reported to have been secretly murdered in
batches, at three or four different times and places, and their bodies
subsequently burned, by a punitive expedition of police, black track-
ers and civilians, organised to avenge the death of a white settler
who had robbed a native of his wife. The news did not leak out
until some months afterwards —but when it did become known, the
Western Australian Government very courageously appointed a
Royal Commissioner to inquire into the horrible rumour. After
prolonged inquiries in this remote locality, conducted under most
difficult conditions, the Commissioner generally confirmed the
report. He found that some time in the month of June, 1926
(nearly a year before), at least three lots of natives had met their
deaths while in the custody of the police party —and that in each
case their bodies had been burned. He also singled out two mem-
bers of the party, themselves police constables, as being personally
and specially concerned in one of the slaughters. Unfortunately,
when legal proceedings were taken against these two men, there
was not sufficient direct evidence to enable the prosecution to
proceed. This was only to be expected, considering that many
months had elapsed before the inquiry was set up, and that great
pains had been taken to secure secrecy and to destroy all traced
of the crimes.
This revelation of the savage cruelty towards the Aborigines
which is still possible in Australia has created there a widespread
and growing desire to make the Aborigines a grave national
responsibility. Among Federal arid State legislators and officials,
in the various Churches, and in the public Press, opinion is now
imperatively demanding that all the 70,000 survivors shall be
brought under the care of the Federal Government. The 50,000
Maoris are a national responsibility in New Zealand, and so are the


five or six millions of natives in the Union of South Africa.
Unfortunately, up to the present time, the responsibility for the
Australian Aborigines ha)s remained parcelled out among the
various States—and each State concerned has studiously left the
native question in the political background and has been very
jealous of any interference from the other States. Consequently,
there has hitherto been no national feeling or regard for them.
In fact, the bulk of the people in Australia, living as they do in or
near capital cities of the south, have hardly been aware of the
existence, across the northern- part of the Continent, of so many
survivors of the race which their immediate forefathers have so
largely, and not without great cruelty, dispossessed. Now, how-
ever, there is good reason to believe that the national conscience
is really being awakened—and quite obviously that national con-
science will be able to work most effectively through the Central
Government. When once the full national responsibility has been
recognised, Australia will not be long in creating a policy and an
administration worthy of its status as a nation. The administration
of Papua, ever since it was taken over by the Commonwealth in
1906, has been quite excellent in every way. All that is needed
now is for Australia to do for her own Aboriginal children what she
has been doing so well for her adopted children in New Guinea.
Surely that is not asking too much.
The working out of this scheme of nationalisation would require
the establishment of a chain of large native reserves, with here
and there a cattle station worked by the natives, across the whole
northern part of the Continent. The natives are not only
thoroughly reliable and loyal to their masters; they also make
excellent shepherds, stockmen, teamsters, blacksmiths, etc. In all
parts of Australia they have always been of quite indispensable
assistance in the first opening-up of the country. The bulk of the
70,000 remnant are roaming in the far north, and could be made
a valuable population asset in its vast and vacant spaces.
If the Federal and State Governments will agree to co-operate
in this humanitarian enterprise—and there is every prospect that
they will so agree—then the experiment will be watched with
deepest interest, not only in England, but also in other parts of
the Empire.
C. E. C. Lefroy.


S'bV
Hie and Aborigines
Protectioh Society
Exists to maintain Justice, for Native Race^,
The Committee cordially invites all those to
whom the of justice for weaker
races of the. world appeals as a duty to become
Members of the Society.
A Subscription of half-a-guinca and upwarda
constitutes Membership of the Society and ear
titles. Members to all literature issued by the
Committee.
forms of Membership and Bankers’ Orders can
Jt>e obtained from the Secretary of the Society.
50-52, Denison House.
Vauxhall Bridge Road. S.W.'I
February, 1929.
THE GARDEN CITY PRESS LTD., LETCHWORTB, —C 11196
