

nir nrjrJo i moA oV,
rJrjjUi u LJuji>i;ij
Volume 1934 J, Price 96c
The
Roosevelt Road
to Ruin
Robert Morris Pierce
Works of R. M. Pierce, Volume 7
The price of this volume is uniform throughout the world; bound in
ber 96 cents, postpaid $1.00; cloth $1.92, postpaid $1.98. Catalog free,
afts, notes, coins or postage-stamps of any country accepted.
Languages Publishing Company
IS West iBth Street, New York City




The
Roosevelt Road
to Ruin
Robert Morris Pierce
New York
Languages Publishing Company
15 West 18th Street


Published in December, 1934, as Volume 19341
of Pierce’s Library
Printed in the United States of America


THE ROOSEVELT ROAD TO RUIN
JUSTICE




THE ROOSEVELT ROAD TO RUIN
JUSTICE
The Franklin Roosevelt road to national ruin is
the road of unrighteousness. It is the 'political way
that leads to the destruction of peoples that are free.
In the sayings and doings of the President of the
United States of America and of his appointed
agents there is a lack of recognition of the only
ethical principle proper to the ideal state, the legal
principle known as justice. This defect is a signal
of danger, a sign of social disintegration and decay.
To failure on the part of the state to uphold the
moral precept of justice defined as equal individual
liberty, or freedom of people, in social m life, from any
mutual coercion not conducive to the like freedom
of all —are due many of our actual and potential ills.
Governments, national and local, are prone to coerce
or compel men in some ways more, in others less,
than is needful in order to preserve the existence
of society and maintain the freedom of every man


to do what he wills, provided he infringes not the
equal freedom of any other man. The state is apt to
practise, as well as tolerate, with regard to citizens,
inequitable compulsion or interference, either direct,
or indirect through breach of contract.
While justice cannot be complete until the world is
politically integrated, and while the equal freedom,
or common right, of men to the use of the land and
other natural media, or to an equivalent thereof,
is a knotty problem, calling for compromise, repre-
sentative democracy cannot become efficient and
stable until its structure and function are, like those
of other social institutions, definite and special: until,
in short, it confines itself to the single duty of admin-
istering justice. Thus to confine or limit itself, and
to specialise, the state must cease encroaching upon
affairs in general. It must quit aggressing upon,
or invading, the inherent or natural rights—so called
because essential to life in its fullness —of non-
aggressive or noninvasive men. It must get out and
stay out of all business other than its own: out, for
example, of the farming-business; out of the manu-
facturing and merchandising business; out of the
money, coinage and banking business; out of the
transportation, express and postal business; out of
the utilities-business; and out of the education, propa-
ganda and philanthropy business. There must be.


as a rule, no laws creative of special privilege,
monopoly, subsidy, pension, insurance, and exemp-
tion from taxation; no laws imposing customs-duties,
quotas, codes and licences; no laws restricting mi-
gration, residence, acquisition, production, consump-
tion, capital, gift, loan, exchange, speculation, con-
tract, merger, rent, interest, wage, price, competition
and profit. Laws must embody justice alone; they
must be accurately, promptly and cheaply interpreted
by the courts; and swiftly executed.




LABOR AND ENTERPRISE




LABOR AND ENTERPRISE
In respect of labor and enterprise, there is much
erroneous and cowardly thinking and talking. The
masses of men involved, with their physical and po-
litical power, becloud the issue and shut out the light
of reason. The essential question, so far as concerns
action by political government, is not whether
workers, individually or combined, should be pro-
tected in their rights of attempted or actual negotia-
tion and contract —by themselves or through their
acknowledged representatives—as to working for,
or cooperating with, other men upon whatever terms
they choose; but whether, the protection of such
rights being admitted as of course, these other men
should not also be protected in their corresponding
rights.
If the liberty of one man or combination of men
to enter into agreement with others should be upheld
by law, equity requires that the like liberty of each


of these others, alone or in combination, should also
he upheld. In contravention, however, of this tenet
of justice, it is liable to be taken for granted that,
while workers may discriminate in their choice of
occupation and employer, employers may not dis-
criminate in their choice of workers, rejecting any
such as may have natures or affiliations which they
consider unfit. This assumption is based in part on
a fallacious or evanescent class-distinction, and in
part on the fallacy that nonaggressive joint enter-
prise is a creature of legal concession rather than of
right. The truth is that men of the class called
workers have a right to be, and often are, or become,
employers; and that men of the class called em-
ployers have a right to be, and often are, or become,
workers; while joint or corporate endeavor, alike
of worker with worker, of worker with employer,
and of employer with employer, to whatever extent
interlocked and fused, is, in so far as it involves
no unlimited bondage and no iniquitous interference
or invasion, a contractural right, not a governmental
grant of power, and hence is subject to no just
inroad.


MONEY, COINAGE AND BANKING




MONEY, COINAGE AND BANKING
In respect of money, coinage and banking, also,
there is much fallacious reasoning and futile discus-
sion. Bound and biased, in these matters, by tempo-
rary or local custom and habit, men ignore essentials,
fall into error and confusion, and talk at cross-
purposes. Thraldom being chronic, the thralls forget
what freedom is. The main truths are these: In the
genesis of gift and barter into facile trade, certain
tangible commodities become common to so many
exchanges of commodities as to be recognized inter-
mediaries, media or mids, of exchange, the value of
one among which, in exchange, being relatively
stable or steady, forms a standard of comparison,
a meter or measure, of exchange-values.
Government, as a political agency constituted by
society for the sole purpose of upholding justice,
or equality of individual liberty, has, aside from its
own legislative, executive and judicial duties, and
the revenue and expense proper thereto, no just con-
trol over these concrete mids or means of exchange,


called moneys, and this abstract measure or gage of
exchange-values: no just control either over the
naming and definition of the units of these means
and this gage, or over the acquisition, preparation,
certification, issue, exchange and storage of the com-
modities or goods concerned. That a commodity
has become a recognized means of exchange does
not effect the equality of the popular liberties that
relate to it. Every citizen has the natural or inalien-
able right to produce, trade and hoard any form of
money he likes.
In a community made up wholly of rogues and
simpletons, mutual trust would be impossible; but
in a community made up, as is the rule in real life,
partly of rogues and simpletons and partly of honest
and prudent men, mutual trust or faith prevails in
direct ratio to the honest and prudent. Along with
the habitual redemption of particular promises there
comes common faith or belief in promises in general.
Belief or credit accorded to those special promises
that are tendered as substitutes for direct perform-
ances in the delivery of money of intrinsic value,
such as gold, or of goods other than, but of exchange-
value measured in terms of the exchange-value of,
this sort of money, conduces to the acceptance, and,
through writing or otherwise, to the recording, of
many of these promises.


The records or memoranda—embodied in paper,
metal or what-not—of promises, explicit or implicit,
to deliver or pay gold or other money of intrinsic
value, or its exchange-equivalent in other goods, may
be either fixed, in the form of bookings, or mobile,
in the form of notes of hand, coins, etc. The fixed
or stationary items, the bookings or book-credits,
may be mobilized, or made movable—and hence
exchangeable or negotiable—by means of bills,
checks or orders drawn against them.
The several promissory memoranda or expres-
sions, whether originally movable or not, are tangi-
ble commodities which, when commonly negotiated,
constitute media of exchange, or moneys— moneys,
however, not of intrinsic, but of extrinsic, value.
Written or imprinted moneys of this sort, in paper,
metal, or the like, are symbols of contractual or
deferred payments, due under various conditions of
time, place and circumstance, of goods other than
themselves : typically of moneys or other goods of
intrinsic value.
The discharge, in gold or its exchange-equivalent
in other goods of intrinsic value, of one express
monetary debt or obligation, or of one express mone-
tary claim or call, as it matures, often renders possi-
ble, or makes easier, the like discharge of others.
Many and various such monetary obligations and


calls are, furthermore, apt to be liquidated, ex-
tinguished, settled or cleared, not maturely, by means
of the promised gold or its equal in intrinsic value,
but prematurely, either through interchange or
through mutual offset and cancellation in account-
books.
Increase of the general belief or credit accorded
to promises of deferred or postponed payment of
money or other goods of intrinsic value implies,
other things remaining equal, increase of the tender
and acceptance of money of extrinsic or symbolic
value —that is, greater currency or circulation of
notes, drafts, etc. —in proportion to money of intrin-
sic value.
Decrease of the general belief or credit accorded
to promises of postponed or delayed payment of
money or other goods of intrinsic value implies,
other things remaining equal, decrease of the tender
and acceptance of money of extrinsic or symbolic
value —that is, smaller currency or circulation of
notes, drafts, etc. —in proportion to money of intrin-
sic value.
It is always possible that one-or-more delayed or
put-off payments of gold or its exchange-equivalent
in goods of intrinsic or inherent value, if allowed
to mature, may not be made. When such defaults
become numerous, through increase of individual


or group dishonesty and imprudence, or because of
social failure to forestall calamity, the belief or credit
of men in each other wanes, and widespread demand
arises for quick or immediate payment. Existing
claims are liquidated, new agreements are impeded,
and exchange turns back to moneys and other goods
of indubitable inherent value. Through the quash-
ing of contracts, negotiable instruments, and sym-
bolic means or moneys, trade shrinks in volume and
tends to revert to its primitive form of casual swap-
ping and gift.
Accordingly, wherever the exchange-value of gold
happens to be the standard or measure of exchange-
values in general, this precious metal, through de-
mand, supply, exchange and the consequent redistri-
bution of stock, store or hoard, would play its proper
part in the readjustment of men to each other and to
circumstances, and hence in the maintenance and
revival of mutual credit, or confidence, were not the
metal, in violation of justice and the sanctity of
contract, fraudulently acquired, forcibly confiscated,
and wrongfully monopolized or controlled by the
state, which compels men to accept, in its stead, at
their face value and in full settlement of debts and
claims, mere symbols, signs or tokens, however
worthless, of promises to pay, whenever and by
whomever tendered.


Money, being the means or instrument of all ordi-
nary exchange other than direct miscellaneous gift
and barter, and making possible, as it does, well-
known price, keen competition and wide distribution,
is the analog, in material commerce, of language,
which is the universal instrument of the commerce
of ideas. The unjust repression and the coercive,
monopolistic building-up, control and definition, by
political government, of monetary, coinage and bank-
ing systems, is an all-corrupting cancer in the social
organism. Touching every mercantile transaction
with the subtle poison of doubt, this evil growth
constitutes one of the greatest hazards to which the
continuous adaptation of man to the vicissitudes of
his environment can be subjected. It exerts a
freakish and erratic force foreign to, and destructive
of, the moving equilibrium of trade. It is a cause
of depression, panic and disaster. It is a collective
tyranny comparable with the denial of freedom of
speech and with the control and definition, by the
state, of all linguistic expression.


ROOSEVELT THE UNTRUSTWORTHY




ROOSEVELT THE UNTRUSTWORTHY
As to President Roosevelt’s connexion with these
and other affairs of state, it appears to me that his
premisses, reasonings, opinions, sentiments and acts
Sire in a high degree untrustworthy. In respect of
money, coinage and banking, Mr. Roosevelt seems
to have the animus of an embezzler. He commits,
without a qualm, what John Stuart Mill branded a
form of robbery to which but few statesmen would
stoop. In respect of labor and enterprise, Mr. Roose-
velt seems to have the spirit of a panderer. He
compounds, as a matter of course, tvith evil without
holding aloft any just ideal. Like many a madman
or busybody, Mr. Roosevelt may be both energetic
and active, without being, as a public servant or
ruler, either wise or good.
Mr. Roosevelt is obtrusively lavish, but lavish with
property that does not belong to him —with funds


that he hopes to be able, on behalf of the state, or of
his own political fortunes, later to confiscate or pur-
loin from the people. This mock generosity, habitu-
ally coupled, as it is, with officious boldness, mani-
fests itself in brazen disregard of human rights.
The boldness is mere audacity to do, not right, but
wrong. Mr. Roosevelt is not magnanimous enough
to wish men to be free. He is not bold enough to
make them so.
When Mr. Roosevelt is adversely criticised, as on
air-mail policy; when he is balked, as by the news-
papers on freedom of the press; when he fails of
results, as in price-boosting through gold-stealing
and money-juggling; he evades responsibility and
takes cowardly refuge in silence, or else in deroga-
tion of subordinates, or defamation of men wiser
and nobler than himself.


ROOSEVELT THE MUDDLED




ROOSEVELT THE MUDDLED
Mr. Roosevelt seems always in a muddle. His mind
is a jumble of superficial, conflicting notions and
childish gullibilities that belie his conceit about having
thought things through. His acts are the result,
not of thought, but of whim. Such thinking as he
may do is not only painfully parochial but also too
often shown in gross misstatement, in false claims,
in equivocation, in self-contradiction, in bad faith,
and in petulant, insolent, rash, ruthless and blunder-
ing disregard of the physical, moral and intellectual
integrity of his fellows. He puts folly before wis-
dom and wrong before right. He reverses cause
and effect and jumps at conclusions. He hitches
the cart before the horse and goes every-which-way.
That he often knows not the difference between deep
and shallow', good and bad, straight and crooked, fore
and hind, does not alter the nature of his acts nor stay
the evil results thereof.
Mr. Roosevelt confounds the state with society.


He mistakes an organic part for the whole organism.
He thinks that the function of political government
should be, not definite and special, but indefinite
and general, and consist properly in making every-
body happy at the expense of everybody else, rather
than, so far as happiness is the aim of life, in letting
everybody, through the experience and education of
equal freedom, make himself and others as happy
as he can. Mr. Roosevelt would have the govern-
ment support the people, rather than the people the
government. He thinks that property-rights are not
human rights. He fancies that the people are, like
the land, the common property of society, a part of
its assets and liabilities. He imagines that as in war,
so also in peace, each citizen is owned by all, rather
than by himself. To whatever extent society, in its
corporate capacity, may find it expedient to conserve
these bits of man-flesh—rather than to tax them to
death, plow them under, or otherwise get rid of
them—it must see that they are, like cattle, kept
in their respective stanchions, intact, well fed and
housed. Each human beast of burden, in order to
be made responsible for everyone but himself, must
have the privilege of being broken and trained by,
and of working or loafing for, the government. Re-
gardless of personal choice or gain, each one who
toils must serve the state for the support of all.


Mr. Roosevelt confuses justice with altruism,
kindness and pity. He mixes up that special justice
which is proper to politics and law, with justice,
right and fairness in general. In his concept of
political or legal justice, liberty is conspicuous for its
absence. The factor of equality predominates; and
this equality he conceives to be one, not of liberty,
but of opportunity, privilege and wealth. By dis-
pensing charity while withholding justice, he would
effect equality of wealth by denying equality of
liberty. He would have men equally well off, but
unequally free. He would do men into a “living”
by doing them out of their rights. He would make
us the playthings of a “benevolent despotism”.




ROOSEVELT THE DEMORALIZER




ROOSEVELT THE DEMORALIZER
Mr. Roosevelt is a demoralizer of manhood. He
demands, if not yet the production and distribution,
nevertheless the continuous redistribution, of com-
modities by force of law. By compulsion and regi-
mentation he would corrupt society and remilitarize,
reharbarize and repauperize mankind. By minimiz-
ing private enterprise, he would end by redistribu-
ting, not riches, but poverty. He would keep the
members of society free, not from unjust human
interference, but from all other adverse conditions,
including the results of their own good or bad na-
tures and deeds. But by thus divorcing advantages,
profits, benefits and rewards from circumstances,
capacities, deserts and merits, he would end by con-
verting initiative, industry, thrift and prosperity into
lagging, loafing, shiftlessness and adversity. He
would crush men down into flabby, spineless wretch-
es, leaning, fawning and feeding on the state.


Mr. Roosevelt says that his policies imply, not
revolution, but evolution. He differs from other
evolutionists in emphasizing, not the inheritance of
character acquired through experience, but the in-
heritance of character unacquired through lack of
experience; not natural selection, but unnatural selec-
tion; not the survival of the fittest, but the survival
of the unfittest. He thinks that the state should
educate the people, instead of the people educating
the state. The government should remold society to
the end of more general individual wealth bestowed,
instead of society remolding the government to
the end of more general individual liberty to acquire
and use wealth. He dreams that democracy develops
through responsibility of the demos or people for
its own prosperity, but not for its own adversity.
He holds that a self-governing society gains by dint
of its own political genius, but loses through no
fault of its own. He would be just whenever justice
means good business, but unjust whenever business
gets bad. The people must be made wise and good
through happiness, but not through misery. They
must learn through joy, but never through suffering.
They must always have their cake and eat it too.
Mr. Roosevelt’s politics without principle means life
without experience. His social “evolution” is noth-
ing but social dissolution.


Mr. Roosevelt would substitute the family-ethics,
the paternalism and maternalism, of conferring upon
men, as if upon children, benefits in inverse ratio to
abilities, for the state-ethics, or justice, of not infring-
ing upon personal liberty except in order to main-
tain its equality. By relieving men of the consequen-
ces of their fortunate or unfortunate surroundings,
and of their own goodness and wisdom, evil and
folly, he would kill righteous ambition, and breed a
race of drones, knaves and fools. By destroying the
natural relation between experience, conduct and re-
ward, he would cause parasitism, degeneracy and
national disruption and fall.




ROOSEVELT THE CONSPIRATOR




ROOSEVELT THE CONSPIRATOR
Mr. Roosevelt’s idea of government is that of a
conspiracy between himself, or the state, on the one
hand, and certain choice groups of private citizens,
on the other. Too narrow-minded and timid to pro-
tect men in equal freedom, lest, as is quite necessary
and proper, they profit unequally thereby, he would
forever meddle and collude with select coteries of
agrarians, industrialists and laborites. Jointly with
these hand-picked organizations or classes he would
take over, either in their interest, in his own interest,
or in the alleged interest of the public, the regulation
or rule of his countrymen. Through boycott of non-
conformers, repression of competitors, and general
invasion of rights, he would corrupt and debase both
business and government. It seems not to have
dawned upon Mr. Roosevelt, in his airy coquetry
with sociology and ethics, that, as the regime of
free contract and voluntary cooperation apposite to


peace replaces the regime of servile status and com-
pulsory cooperation apposite to war, the coercive
production and apportionment of goods or advanta-
ges becomes ever more incompatible with that up-
holding of equal liberty which is the sole function
of the ideal state.
Mr. Roosevelt is so infatuated with, and inured to,
the crass political methods of trickery, perfidy, bully-
ing, browbeating and manhandling that he actually
depicts as voluntary cooperation of freemen that
monstrous “partnership” of political government
with private cliques and organized special interests
which he effects by intrigue backed by the duress of
intimidation, dictation, and menace of seizure, fine
and imprisonment. Meanwhile, we hear from his
lips the refrain: “There are a few who loudly assert
that individual liberty is being restricted by govern-
ment, but when they are asked what individual liber-
ties they have lost they are put to it to answer”.
Here is a man who preens himself with the unction
and grace of a polity of plotting, planning, conniving
and agreeing to facilitate the robbing of Peter to
pay Paul. Caught in premeditated repression of the
liberties of a people, he would deceive them into
thinking that they are losing nothing: that bondage
is the same thing as freedom. Citizens, being now
"all brothers”, or children of the state, are to rest


content with the crimes of the father whose creatures
they are, so long as he divides the loot among his
favorites. This piratical policy would, as Woodrow
Wilson insisted, place us under guardians, put our
liberties in trust, and bring democracy to an end. It
is a travesty, a burlesque, rather than a method, of
government.




ROOSEVELT THE TYRANT




ROOSEVELT THE TYRANT
Mr. Roosevelt rules by divine right. He has a
corner on sagacity, sorcery, and holy purpose. As
an imposter, his will is more sacred than his word.
He is a wholesale dealer in broken promises. Hav-
ing duped and outraged the nation, he would make
believe that any purely destructive criticism of the
elect is “unpatriotic”. His critics, being loyal to
justice, honesty and common sense, instead of to him,
are traitors to their country.
His Excellency, however, fails to grasp the truth
that tyranny is tyranny, whether it be a tyranny of
one, of a few, or of many: that is, of a despotism, of
an oligarchy, or of a democracy. He forgets, too,
that the very business of wreckers is to wreck; and
that, until tyranny, even though it be his own, shall
have been torn down, liberty to construct cannot
exist. Hence the only rational suggestion of a “sub-
stitute” for his experiments, which Mr. Roosevelt so


anxiously expects from his critics, is the suggestion
that his political career be brought to a speedy end,
and that all his and other repressive legislation be
nullified or repealed, with consequent supersession
of the reign of law-made fear and stagnation by the
reign of spontaneous hope and activity.


ROOSEVELT THE VIOLATOR




ROOSEVELT THE VIOLATOR
Mr. Roosevelt and the crew of bluffers, slicksters
and nitwits who mill around his person and infest
his bureaus are violators of the equity of popular
freedom under law. They are, as a result, dragoon-
ing the people into lying, cheating, bootlegging, rack-
eteering and lynching. They think, talk and act in
respect of perishable concrete goods and in disrespect
of those abstract goods, those rights, or equal indi-
vidual liberties, which are imperishable so long as
human society is to survive, endure and progress.
These tyros at statecraft, but experts at chicane,
are inciting the populace to riot and rebellion. They
foreshadow the coming of the herd, the mob, the
jail; the rise of the stake, the gallows and the guillo
tine. Troops of menial charlatans and rabble-raisers
gloat over the remains of exploded nostrums and
panaceas and decry or ignore the existence of any
rationale of social life. These lilliputian quacks and


agitators, exhaling such vote-getting slogans as “the
greatest good of the greatest number”, “everybody
to count for one, nobody for more than one”, “the
abolition of poverty”, and “ease and abundance for
all”, swarm over and permeate the body politic per-
forming one ghastly vivisection, one wild blood-
transfusion, after another, to the end of alloting bene-
fits on a numerical or quantitative basis, so much
the head, regardless of human qualities, efforts or
worth. With weasel words and crooked acts these
minions of force set man against man, class against
class, section against section, and rend the nation.
Lacking the insight and suasive power of real
character and intellect, Mr. Roosevelt rests his poli-
cies carelessly or by preference on injustice, dishon-
esty and fraud. He and his cohorts have a flair for
hollow pretense, effrontery and threat, for wholesale
bribery, repudiation and default, for brutal confisca-
tion, violence and destruction. Mr. Roosevelt is all
too ready—as in the case of the army aviators —to
deprive people of their life, their property, their
powers and means of acquisition and exchange. He
would rob them of their prudence, their honor, their
confidence, their pride, and their respect for them-
selves and their country. He begrudges them even
their minor right of speech in protest against these
major deprivations. He has his ear to the ground,


and goes in for popularity, mediocrity, and indignity,
rather than for statesmanship, distinction and defer-
ence. He uses and countenances coarse slang, low
epithet, and hot stigma, in place of respectful and
cogent words. He converts government into a vul-
gar “game” in which the “tough guys” of an
“all-American team”, with “teeth” in their noxious
rules, usurp the powers of state and play in with
each other to do all opponents to death. He is
“thrilled” by the outcome of his own foolishness.
His enemies are contemptible “Tories”; they are but
“a few timid people who fear progress”; they are
“plausible self-seekers”, “theoretical die-hards” and
“doubting Thomases”—not to mention their being
“indecent, obscene cannibals”. Ostentatiously address-
ing the public, indiscriminately, as “my friends”, the
President hypocritically exhorts them to think of
others first and themselves afterwards, while in the
same breath exhorting them to judge of their gain
or loss of prosperity and liberty by considering them-
selves only. He assures them that, upon so doing,
they will find that he has paid them a fair price for
purposely “stepping on their toes”. Admitting that
he is one of an “overwhelming majority” which is
trampling on and commercializing the rights of men,
Mr. Roosevelt rides rough-shod over minorities and
transmutes citizens, whose liberties he has sworn to


protect, into subjects and slaves of the state. As an
emblem of his doctrine of “the good neighbor”, he
points a weapon at the heart of the nation and tells
it, so far as he dares, to put up or shut up.
Amid the uproar, the savage clash of interest and
opinion, and the vituperative fury of the controversy
already stirred up by Mr. Roosevelt this callow up-
start, abetted by cheapjacks whom he takes for
sages, stealthily strips us of our liberties and cal-
lously sweeps us onward into the abyss. This shallow
autocrat, subjugator of the human spirit, arrogantly
seeks to erect over America, downcast, bruised and
bleeding, a towering bureaucracy more gigantic and
terrible than any which the world has seen. He is
a collectivist, a communist, a socialist, and a usurper


ROOSEVELT THE DESTROYER




ROOSEVELT THE DESTROYER
Franklin D. Roosevelt is a disturber of the peace
that rests on right. He would dethrone justice. He
would destroy the equipoise of the individual liberties
of a great people. His policies rest on the doctrine
that might makes right. Many persons believe of
the so-called New Deal, as they did of Prohibition,
that it would be justified if it could only be forced
upon us. I do not accept this precept of might.
I rebel at its application throughout the New Deal.
I have hoped that the New Deal would fail. I now
hold that it has failed. In any event, I should think
too well of human freedom and civilization, hard-
won through thousands of years, to countenance any
shifty scheme, however triumphant for the time be-
ing, which is calculated to subvert them.
Mr. Homer S. Cummings, attorney-general of the
United States, has just warned us, twice over, that


the armed gangsters of this country now exceed in
number the two hundred thousand forces of the
nation’s army and navy. Herbert Spencer told us,
some years ago, that the policy pursued with altru-
istic aims by the expediency or opportunist politician,
such as Mr. Roosevelt, is the same policy as that
pursued with egoistic aims by every criminal. In
both cases it is assumed that the conditions of an
ultimate maximum of human welfare are either non-
existent or unknown; that all ends are therefore
particular or special rather than general or universal,
proximate or near rather than remote or final; and
must be pursued immediately or directly, through
current observation and experiment alone, rather
than mediately or indirectly through any established
principle such as that of justice properly defined.
One policy or mode of conduct is held to be intrinsic-
ally as good as another. Men have no rights but
only mights; and they have no mights except those
which the state, in its omniscience and omnipotence,
happens to delegate to them for its own aggrandise-
ment.
The prevalence of this irrational political skul-
duggery, of this opportunism, casuistry, empiricism
and pragmatism, of this immorality, rascality, crim-
inality and gangsterism, of this ignoring of justice
in legislation, in executive and judicial office, and in


the activities of armed forces, confronts the Ameri-
can people, y«s, the world, with utmost peril.
Unless we shake loose from the sinister grip of
Mr. Roosevelt and his marauders, as they kindle,
with unrighteous torch, the fires of national destruc-
tion, we shall ourselves be engulfed in the flaming
ruins.


