

FURTHER GLEANINGS
FROM
THE PAST
19.17


(A 'Yljoti L /Xe- j


THE DESCENT
BECK OF NORTHERN IRELAND,
from
THE PATRICIAN FAMILY OF BECK
AACHEN (AIX-la-CHAPELLE),
KIN TO BECK OF LONDON, STOLBERG,
FAMILIES OF BECK IN HOLLAND
THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
REV. WILLIAM BECK, F.S.A.G.
FORMERLY HON. EDITOR,
THE AUSTRALIAN GENEALOGIST,
SYDNEY




AUTHORITIES
Africaner Voorgeslag Kaapstad, Die (1935), p. 16: R. Loxton.
Battle Abbey Roll, The: Duchess of Cleveland.
Development of the Stolberg Brass Industry, 1497-1813, The: Dr. Karl
Schleicher.
Dutch Church, Austin Friars, London, Registers, 1571-1874; W. J. C. Moens.
Dutch Church, Austin Friars, London, Archives (Letters), per Mr. van
Duin.
Geslacht-Register der Oude Kaapsche Familien, pages 32, 33, Tome L: C. C.
Coetzee de Villiers.
Heraldry of Fish, The: T. Moule.
History of Cheshire; G. Ormerod. Revised and enlarged edition by T.
Helsby.
History of the County Palatine and Duchy of Lancaster; E. Baines (first
edition).
London Huguenot Society’s Publications.
Manchester Central Library: Reference Lib. MSS. per Mr. S. Horrocks, F.L.A.
Muster Roll of 1630 (Ulster): British Museum, London.
Netherlands Lion, The, Holland; magazine copies: February, March, 1925;
April, March, 1932; July, August, September, October, November, 1936;
March, 1937.
Parish Registers: St. Botolph’s, Bishopsgate, London, 1558-1628.
Parish Registers; St. Peter’s, Cornhill, London, Pt. 1, 1538-1666; Pt. 2,
1667-1774.
Rhineland Noble and Patrician Families, Contributions, BD 111, 1901, by
H. F. Macco; also Aachen Coats of Arms and Genealogy, BD 1907, H. F.
Macco; Ph. copies of pedigrees, etc., per Dr. Poll, Director of City
Archives, Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle), Germany.




FOREWORD
In the course of my genealogical research concerning the Beck family
in London and in Europe ere the two brothers went to Ulster during the
Plantation prior to 1630, I desire to acknowledge my indebtedness to the
correspondents who have rendered me much valuable aid.
John W. Beck, London, the Historian of the family of Beck of Northern
Ireland, deserves especial mention, and to him all branches of the family
will ever be indebted, for had he not begun family research work when he
did, spent weeks in the P.R.0., Dublin, examining family wills and other
relevant genealogical documents, and making extracts therefrom, owing to
the destruction of the P.R.0., Dublin, later on, and the loss of its very
valuable records, much of the invaluable genealogical data so necessary for
the elucidation of Beck family history which we possess, would have irre-
trievably been lost.
For many years we have regularly corresponded concerning the family
history, notifying each other of genealogical gains.
Early in 1951 I wrote to Mr. Percival Boyd, M.A., F.S.A., Secretary, The
Worshipful Company of Drapers, Drapers’ Hall, London, concerning certain
entries of apprentices of the name of Beck in its Roll of Drapers as far back
as 1551 and received a gracious reply, dealing with these entries, giving
details of others, together with Beck family pedigrees allied thereto, and a
reference to the Firm of Abraham Bee, which reads as follows: “1641 poll
tax (near New Exchange), 1638 rent £lOO with . . . Munn.”
Mr. G. A. Warne, Proprietor of the Firm of Walford Brothers, genealo-
gical booksellers, London, has favoured me with several 17th century Beck
references, one being an extract from Matthews’ “Year Book of Probates”
in regard to the will of Abraham Beck (merchant stranger), parish of
S. George, Botolph Lane, London, proved January 19, 1636-37 by his son
John. He has also enabled me to purchase valuable genealogical books
especially a copy of Moens’ Registers of the Dutch Church, Austin Friars,’
London, and copies of London Parish Church Registers, which have proved
helpful.
Miss P. Beryl Eustace, Dublin, has searched various Dublin Church of
Ireland Parish Registers and forwarded to me valuable references, includ-
ing notices of wills, concerning Dublin families of Beck, and notes concern-
ing the family of the Rev. George Mallory, vicar of Laraughbrian, whose
wife was my four-greatgrandaunt, Alice Strettell, the marriage having taken
place at Mobberley, Cheshire, England, in 1632.
She has also sent to me tracings of the signatures of my three-great-
granduncles, Abel and Amos Strettell, Dublin, and a copy of the document
in relation thereto.
These, and the tracing of the signature of my three-greatgrandfather,
John Beck, which had been appended to a marriage document, dated
October, 1715, and which was presented to me by Mr. H. G. Beale, Mel-
bourne, together with a copy of the original document, which is still in
his possession, have proved of great interest.
Being desirous of possessing a tracing of the signature of my three-
greatgrandmother, Elizabeth Beck, I wrote to the Registry of Deeds, Dublin
where I had been graciously received in 1947, and in reply, Mr. J. W. Dobbs,’
in the beginning of 1952, kindly forwarded to me a photostat copy of the
lease of the family estate near Downpatrick at a pepper-corn rent by my
three-greatgrandmother, Elizabeth Beck, to my two-greatgrandfather, Robert
Beck, and his brother, Thomas Beck, the ancestor of John W. Beck dated
the seventh day of September, 1725, clearly showing her signature
This, with the tracings of the other signatures, I greatly treasure.
To Mr. E. Heatly, LL.B., formerly Deputy-Keeper of the Records Bel-
fast, Northern Ireland, I owe much, and so does the Society of Australian
Genealogists.


When I called at the P.R.0., Belfast, in June, 1947, he graciously re-
ceived me, showed to me many valuable historical and genealogical books
relating to Ulster, and, at a later date, obtained permission from Dr. Chart,
then Deputy-Keeper of the Records, to give to me copies of the Annual
Reports of the Deputy-Keeper of the Records for presentation to the Society
of Australian Genealogists, of which I happened to be at that time the
Travelling Representative and a Vice-President.
He has constantly kept us in mind, forwarding to us copies of the
Annual Reports of the Deputy-Keeper when published, and genealogical
pedigrees when duplicates were available, and readily given to me valuable
genealogical data concerning Ulster families to whom I am related on the
distaff side.
Mr. C. T. Mclnnes, Curator of Historical Records, Scottish Records
Office, H.M. General Register House, Edinburgh, has rendered me valuable
service, in notifying me concerning probable sources of information, and
seeing to the ordering and forwarding of copies of genealogical books from
H.Mj. Stationary Office, Edinburgh, or an Edinburgh bookseller.
I am especially indebted to him for an explanation of a Beck coat of
arms mentioned in “An Ordinary of Scottish Arms,” contained in the “Public
Register of All Arms and Bearings in Scotland,” by James Balfour Paul,
Lyon King of Arms, published by William Green & Sons, Edinburgh in
1895.
Mr. Prank Beckwith, M.A., Head Librarian, The Leeds Library, Leeds,
England, has again rendered me valuable aid in copying for me several
16th century Beck wills, Manchester, in publications, which I was unable to
purchase or consult, and in notifying me of W. J. Fraser Hutcheson's book,
“Shakespeare’s Other Anne,” which through his instrumentality I was able
to purchase, and in which (Appendix III) there is an interesting and
valuable pedigree of the Becks of Freasley, Co. Warwick, England, in the
16th century, the period in which I am particularly interested because of
its bearing on our Beck genealogy.
Rev. Cecil O. Weir, 8.A., B.Litt., F.R.5.A.1., formerly of the Presbytery
of Banbridge, helped me in my County Down enquiries, and I am indebted
to him for getting me into touch with Mr. Thomas H. Livingston, Hon.
Secretary of the Society of Friends, Lurgan, who sent valuable information
to me concerning certain families related to me on the distaff side.
For the valuable information concerning the Beck family of Northern
Ireland in the Muster Roll of 1630, Sloane MS. 4770, in the British Museum,
London, I am indebted to Mr. Gerald Bonner, Assistant Keeper, Depart-
ment of Manuscripts, who, in reply to a letter of mine, furnished me with
the necessary extracts, also to the Keeper, Department of Manuscripts, for
making this possible. In regard to the location of certain parish church
registers, Mr. Bonner has also rendered me service.
Dr. Schulte-Strathaus, Press Secretary, The German Embassy, Sydney,
has rendered me very valuable aid, especially in furnishing me with the
address of the “Verband deutscher Zeitschriftenverleger, Dusseldorf, Ger-
many,” which publication, through its manager of the Frankfort Branch,
got me into contact with Dr. Karl Schleicher, Stolberg, to whom I am much
indebted for very valuable genealogical data concerning the Beck family in
Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle). My thanks are especially due to him for pre-
senting me with a copy of his book, “The Development of the Stolberg
Brass Industry, 1497-1813,” and several very interesting pages from a book
by Dr. Siegfried Schleicher.
Members of the Beck family will learn with interest that Katharina
Beck, a daughter of Isaac Beck, brother of Abraham Beck, London, was
married to a Leonard Schleicher in the 17th century, and that Dr. Schleicher
is therefore related to the Beck family.
Of those who have taken a keen interest in my research work and wil-
lingly helped me in my task, I would mention with much gratitude Mr.
H. Hardenberg, the Director-General of the State Archives, The Hague, Hol-
land, and Miss Elisabeth Prins, a member of his staff.


Having noticed a statement in RIESTAP’S “ARMORIAL GENERAL”
beginning with the words, “Beck-Londres, Holl.,” I wrote a letter concern-
ing it and another genealogical problem, and addressed it: The National
Archivist, The Hague, Holland, in which I enclosed a copy of the maga-
zine of the Society of Australian Genealogists, “The Australian Genealogist,”
August number, 1952, of which I happened to be at that time the Hon.
Editor, in which there is a reference to the standing of the Beck family
of Northern Ireland about 236 years ago, to vouch for me as a member
of the Council and a Fellow of the Society of Australian Genealogists,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, and received from Mr. Hardenberg,
Director-General of the State Archives, The Hague, Holland, a gracious and
helpful letter in reply.
This was the beginning of a very valuable and interesting correspon-
dence, which, in conjunction with that of Dr. Schleicher, has led to the
discovery of the Patrician Family Beck of Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle), from
which the family of Beck of London, Beck of Northern Ireland, and many
families of Beck in Holland in the 16th and 17th centuries are descended.
The names and the addresses of two Societies in Germany were for-
warded to me, and it was suggested that I should write to them to learn
if a complete pedigree of this family could be obtained.
The reply from the Historical Society, Aix-la-Chapelle, was helpful,
and I am indebted to Dr. Poll, Archive-Director, Aachen, for furnishing
me with photostat copies of certain pages of H. F. Macco’s two volumes.
They are the same as supplied to me by Dr. Schleicher, with the addi-
tion of a page showing the coat of arms of Peter Beck, 1489.
I was helped by the Reference Library, Manchester, in my research work
in regard to ‘“Gleanings from the Past,” and in these “Further Gleanings
from the Past” I have again received aid from the same quarter.
Mr. Sidney Horrocks, F.L.A., Librarian, Manchester Reference Library,
has rendered me very valuable service.
Being desirous of learning all I could concerning the pedigrees of Beck
of Upton Priory, Cheshire, and Beck of Manchester, I wrote to this Library
for information, and Mr. Sidney Horrocks very courteously replied to my
letters, at the same time forwarding photocopies of the pedigree of Beck
of Upton Priory and the pedigree of Beck of Manchester contained in the
Visitation of 1664-65, for which I am very grateful.
I had also made an enquiry concerning the location of the Tabley MSS.,
and he very kindly advised me as to what might be done concerning them,
and also made reference to other sources of information in regard to
various ancient Cheshire families in whose pedigrees I am interested be-
cause of descent.
In the course of my investigations I have examined registers of London
Parishes, and Mr. John W. Beck has also examined many for me.
I have carefully searched many books and magazines containing genealo-
gical data of the 16th and 17th centuries that I thought might throw light
on the history of the Beck family of Northern Ireland, and after due
consideration, have come to the conclusion that the London Huguenot
Society’s Publications and the membership Rolls of the Dutch Church,
Austin Friars, London, and its Registers, are of primary significance, and
that the various Church Parish Registers adjacent to it and Billingsgate
Ward, where so many of the strangers lived—these migrants were thus
termed —are much more helpful when consulted in conjunction therewith.
Moens’ words must constantly be borne in mind: “At first, and for
some time after their coming to this country, the refugees married much
amongst themselves, but gradually as they became better known and appre-
ciated many made alliances with English families.”


INTRODUCTION
In my youth I had thought very little concerning the origin of the family
of Beck to which I belonged. I had learnt, however, that the surname was
Scandinavian, and that it meant a brook or burn; that it was to be found
in the South of Scotland, the Northern especially, and other Counties of
England; and that as Norse and Danish settlement had taken place there,
the finding of the name in these parts was readily accounted for.
I had also learnt that the family had been long settled in Ulster, having
probably gone thither during the Plantation in the 17th century, and I began
to think that possibly it had migrated from Galloway in Scotland as so many
other families had done.
The finding of the statement: “Out of the Shire of Galloway, Parish of
Kirkmabreck . . . Samuel Beck” on page 523 of the Rev. John R. Thomson’s
edition of the book, “A Cloud of Witnesses”, a volume much beloved in my
youth because it related to covenanting times, had heightened this impression.
When, however, a copy of the book, “Words and Places”, by the Rev. Isaac
Taylor, M.A., came into my hands, I became much interested in the study
of the origin of names, and began to make a serious study of the problem.
What wealth of information it contains for the student. In chapter 1,
page 1, sixth edition, there are certain paragraphs concerning LOCAL NAMES
that should ever be borne in mind, and to realize how many and varied these
are one has only to turn to its Index of Local Names and to scan its many
columns to learn how numerous and important they are, of which BECK
may be considered a chief substantival component. In connection therewith it
is pertinent to note the words on page 106: “The word beck, a brook, is more
frequent in the Norwegian than in the Danish region . . This is
corroborated in the book, “A HISTORY OF SURNAMES IN THE BRITISH
ISLES”, by C. L’estrange Ewen, for on page 65 it is stated: “In England
abiding Scandinavian control was greatest in the Northern Counties, the
situation of the settlements of the Northmen being indicated in many cases
by Norse-Icelandic elements in the composition of place names.”
“Numbers of our surnames as Booth, Wray, Thwaite, Beck are derived
from these old Norse place-words.”
The first user of the surname BECK was probably the descendant of a
Norse family that had long been settled on the beck or brook, and he became
known as John or William Beck, and so down through the centuries this
surname has been borne by their descendants.
Two other statements in “WORDS AND PLACES” may also be quoted:
“The Anglo-Saxon yard, and the Norse equivalent garth, contain nearly the
same idea as ton.” (page 80)
“In the South of Scotland the only Scandinavian settlement on the main-
land was in Dumfriesshire. Here we find more than a dozen names with
the suffix by, and others ending in garth, beck, and thwaite. In the neighbour-
ing counties of Kirkcudbright and Wigton there are also a few outlying names
of the same class.” (page 115)
This is confirmed by my friend, the Rev. Douglas Beck, formerly Minister
of the Parish of Tyrie, Church of Scotland, near Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire,
Scotland, and new Minister of the Parish of St. Andrew’s South, Dunfermline,
Fifeshire, who is a native of Lochmaben, Dumfriesshire, with whom I have
been corresponding for a number of years.
It was a friend, Miss Cameron, Edinburgh, Scotland, who graciously
received me and was my hostess in that city in October, 1947, who brought me
into contact with him shortly after my return to Australia in 1948.
My genealogical research-work led him to undertake similar work in
connection with his family, and he forwarded to me for my information two
letters from which I extract the following:
“With further reference to your query for books dealing with the Beck or
Douglas Families the Scottish Central Library now writes as follows: “The


only works about the Beck family of which I have found any trace are
Pedigree of the Family of Beck of Upton, compiled by Matthew Gregson,
and continued by William Harrison’ (probably only a family tree, and unlikely
to be available).
The Beck Family of Northern Ireland, a Pamphlet by John W. Beck, 1929.
1 can find no reference to the family in books on Scottish Families, but in
“A History of the Douglas Family of Morton”, a quotation from the General
Register of Sasines reads: “1657, Dec. 28: Sasine dated 26th December of
William Johnstoun of Palmerland in four acres of the lands of Mossop in
Lmcluden on a disposition thereof to him by Isobel Beck, lawful daughter of
the deceased John Beck of Mossop, and which was granted in terms of a
contract of Marriage between them of the same date.”
This letter was signed by Mr. E. R. Milne, County Librarian, Aberdeen.
“l am afraid we cannot direct you to any history of the Becks as a family.
The name is known in Dumfriesshire (there were nine Becks in the last issue
of the Local Directory) but there is not much printed material relating to
the family.”
“In the Register of Sasines, 1672-1702, under Beck (Bueck) I note George
Beck, Merchant, Dumfries, and John Beck, Glasier, Dumfries. There are also
several Becks of Corslayes in Holywood Parish, near Dumfries. In the Return
of owners of lands and Heritages, 1872-1873, I note John and William Beck
(this William Beck was my grandfather: note by Rev. Douglas Beck) one in
Lochside and the other in Barras, both in Lochmaben Parish.
Another Beck, Senator James B. Beck, of Kentucky, a note on whose life
appears in Memorial Addresses . . . delivered in the Senate and House of
Representatives, Washington, 1891, was born in the Solway District of
Dumfriesshire in February, 1822.”
This letter was signed by Mr. M. D. McLean, County Librarian, Dumfries,
and was written in reply to one sent to him by Mr. E. R. Milne, County
Librarian, Aberdeen.
We are much indebted to these two County Librarians for their helpful
letters and kindly interest in family genealogical research, and are persuaded
that they are but a small part of the many acts of kindness being done by
them for research-workers.
In a letter from The Manse, Tyrie, written 1951, there is the following
statement: I would mention a church yard (which contains the remains of
many of my ancestors) namely of APPLEGARTH PARISH. This is a Parish
which has a peculiar hold on me because of its associations. Incidentally there
is a farm called FISH BECK quite near the above church-yard, so that I
think we can claim to have a close connection with these parts.”
In a letter, dated November, 1955, he states; “You will be interested to
know that the Christian name William has been perpetuated down through
the generations. My oldest brother is William, likewise my grandfather and
his father.”
He also sent a photograph of the row of Beck tombstones in Applegarth
Parish churchyard which he himself had taken, and the inscriptions thereon
are proof of a Beck connection of many generations with this Parish.
A further note is surely worthy of preservation: “When I was a boy, my
father used to go and clean the stones and lettering.”
Assuredly the name of this James Beck is worthy of remembrance, not
only because of his splendid craftsmanship, evident in the beautiful wood-
work of the Mansion House of Jardinehall, now a Boys’ School, but because
of his reverential care and filial regard concerning the memorials of his
ancestors.
From a further communication containing much valuable Beck genea-
logical data which I regret I cannot use because of lack of space, I quote but
one reference; “Thomas de Bek was juror on an inquisition in Lochmaben
in 1347. The inference is that the name belongs to even an earlier century
than that of the 14th in Dumfriesshire.


I have always found the Heads of Public Libraries most obliging and
helpful. Thus it was when I wrote on various occasions to the New York
Public Library, U.S.A. I wrote concerning the birth-place of Senator James
Burnie Beck, already mentioned, and received a gracious and helpful reply
from Mr. Paul North Rice, Chief of the Reference Department.
A further kindness in family genealogical research-work on the distaff
side deserves mention.
In March, 1953, I had occasion to write again to Mr. Paul North Rice
concerning a statement in Volume 111 of “A History of the Barclay Family”
in regard to Robert Barclay, son of my three-great-grandmother’s niece, Anne
Strettell, who had married John Barclay, the third son of Robert Barclay, the
Quaker Apologist, and received in reply a most helpful letter dealing fully with
a family genealogical problem, and giving names and addresses of persons
with whom it might be desirable to communicate.
It may be fitting to mention here that in 1950 there was presented to the
Society of Australian Genealogists a very valuable genealogical volume entitled
“OUR EARLY EMIGRANT ANCESTORS, (etc.)” edited by John Camden
Hotten, second edition. This had been selected by Mr. Gerald McDonald, Chief
of the Genealogy Division, and forwarded to me as Hon. Editor of the Society’s
magazine, “The Australian Genealogist”, together with a gracious letter from
Mr. J. R. Fall, Chief of Acquisition Division.
This volume has been a very welcome addition to the Library of the
Society.
Not only in Dumfriesshire and along the coast-line of the Solway Firth but
in the Northern Counties of England as already stated, the name Beck is to
be found, the word being in constant use instead of brook. One has only to
turn to W. T. Palmer’s book. “Lake District”, in the Penguin Series, to realise
how much this is so, and that the word will always be a reminder of how the
migrants from the far North set their seal on this part of the land and
contributed to its enrichment.
I am indebted to the Rev. O. B. McCarthy, Th.L., for the following
valuable reference: “In 1522, an angry expostulation was sent by Henry Beck,
the Mayor, because Ughtred did not inform him that the Town was in such
imminent danger when Albany threatened Berwick” (“Berwick-Upon-Tweed”,
by John Scott, page 122); also for much other Beck family genealogical data,
especially concerning the family of Beke of Eresby which I am unable to
include owing to lack of space.
In regard to the latter family it is interesting to read the comments
concerning its nedigree made by the Duchess of Cleveland in volume 1, pages
121-122, of her’ book, “The Battle Abbey Roll”, three volumes, published by
John Murray, London, 1889, a copy of which I happen to possess; also to
note her statements concerning Bec-Crespin and Bec-en Caux, for through
Joyce Newton, great-grandmother of Elizabeth Strettell, wife of John Beck,
Downpatrick, there is a pedigree showing descent from the house of Turstin
Goz through Hugh II (surnamed De Kevelioc and also Boham), sth Palatine
Earl of Chester, whose mother was a granddaughter of Henry I of England,
being Matilda, daughter of Robert (surnamed “the Consul”) Earl of Gloucester,
natural son of Henry I, and whose grandmother was a great granddaughter
of Leofric the Great, Earl of Mercia, and “The Lady Godiva”, sister of
Thorold de Bakenhales, Sheriff of Lincolnshire.
The pedigree is that of Mulneton (Milneton).
Pagan de Mulneton, natural son of Hugh 11, Earl of Chester by the
daughter of Meredith, lord of Hynley, = /William de Mulneton
/Morgan de Mulneton = /Ranulph de Mulneton
= Cecilia, dau. of Robt. de Pulford/William de Mulneton =I. Alice de
Heath/Ralph de Mulneton = Matilda, dau. and (co-heiress) of William de
Grafton (Massey).
William de Mulneton of Grafton = Cicely, daughter of Hugh Arderne of
Alford/Alice de Mulneton (daughter and co-heir) = Oliver Newton, of
Newton.


The Newton pedigree may be found on pages 35 and 36. “Gleanings from
the Past”,
Arms of Mulneton, Argent, on a cross engrailed Azure, five garbs Or,
Coat of Arms, Mulneton.
Hugh 11, sth Palatine Earl of Chester, had a supposed wife (first). The
daughter Amicia married Ralph Mainwaring, Justice of Chester. Amicia was
thus an ancestress of Cicely Mainwaring, daughter of Hugh Mainwaring of
Croxton, who married Thomas Fyton of Pounall. Their daughter Ellen or
Eleanor, co-heir with her sister Margaret, married Humphrey Newton, of
Newton.
When a student at Glasgow University in 1891-92, a Miss Cameron,
daughter of a Scots clergyman who had ministered to a church in Lancashire!
asked me if I had any relatives in that County, as several families of Beck
had been attached to her father’s congregation, and when I began to think
of family research several years before I got into touch with John W. Beck,
the recollection of that conversation led me to think that Becks might have
migrated from that part of England to Ulster as well as from the South of
Scotland.
That lent interest to Beck investigations in Lancashire, and latterly
having learnt that there were Beck wills of the 16th century belonging to
families in Manchester, contained in volumes XXXIII and LI of the Chetham
Society, I wrote to Mr. Prank Beckwith, Head Librarian, Leeds Library, to
learn if these volumes might be purchased. In a gracious reply he stated there
was no need to do so, as he could furnish me with copies of the wills required,
and in a few weeks’ time there reached me an encouraging, helpful letter
from him in which there were enclosed seven pages of typed material
concerning Beck families of the period in which I was interested, Beke of
Eresby, and the full text of the wills desired.
I regret that I am unable to make use of this valuable genealogical
material so generously placed at my disposal, and can only mention the wills
which are as follow: Mathew Becke, 1521; Robert Becke, 1556; Anne Becke,
1556; Henry Byrom, 1556, who married Mary, daughter of Thomas Beck of
Manchester; Thomas Birch, 1595-6, who married Marion, daughter of Thomas
Beck of Manchester. I infer that these two Becks named Thomas were father
and son.


In the course of my Lancashire and Cheshire investigations I had occasion
to consult volume 9, Preston Guild Rolls, 1397-1682: Annales Cestrienses.
There were several Beck references, but the spelling of one interested me
particularly. It is as follows:
“P. 16 —Willms Bekk (1542)—34th Henry VIII.”
This spelling Bekk is probably the original Norse spelling. It was the
opinion of Mr. Geo. W. Russell, formerly Town Clerk of Lerwick, Shetland,
an eminent authority concerning things Shetlandic in particular and ancient
Norse in general whom it was my privilege to meet during my visit to Lerwick
in 1947.
Having noted the words: “The Becks, a highly respectable family in
Manchester, entered their pedigree at the Visitation in 1664-5” in the course
of my research-work, I wrote to Mr. Sidney Horrocks, Reference Librarian.
Central Library, Manchester, England, concerning the reference, and he very
kindly supplied me with a copy of the Beck pedigree that had been entered.
Having carefully considered it in relation to the Beck genealogical data
in my copy of the Registers of Manchester Cathedral, 1573-1616, vol. 31,
L.P.R.S., 1908, the wills already mentioned, and other documents, I could
find no trace of migration of any members of these families of Becks to
Ulster during the Plantation period, and I therefore discounted any such
possibility of origin.
It should be borne in mind that family research would have been more
easily accomplished and origin more readily discovered, had it not been for
the rebellion in 1641. John Beke (the name is thus spelt in the Muster Roll
of 1630), one of the two brothers who went to Ulster prior to 1630, had to
abandon his house during this trying period and everything was lost.
This meant that when John W. Beck began his genealogical research
there was nothing left concerning the Muster Roll period in the possession
of the family to aid him in his investigations.
There was, however, a tradition that the family was of foreign, probably
German descent, and this was substantiated by the fact of the use of a family
crest similar to that of the family of Beck of London, which implied relation-
ship to that family.
As I had learnt from the Visitation of London, 1633-35. that this family
was descended out of Germany, it seemed fitting to seek to discover what
relationship, if any, in view of these similarities there might be between the
two families, and the chapters that follow are the fruits of my investigations.


Chapter I
KINSHIP TO BECK OF LONDON
John W. Beck, the family historian, who had rendered such good service
in his history of the Beck family, entitled “Beck of Northern Ireland”, in his
two Articles in connection therewith, published in the magazine, “Miscellanea
et Heraldica and The British Archivist”, Vol VII, Parts IV and V, stated
it thus:
‘Beck, presumed of London and had issue, at least, two sons
(a) John Beck (see later).
(b) Adam Beck.”
It seemed to me, however, that some further attempt should be made to
define the exact relationship to the family of Beck of London, and I therefore
essayed the task when I had completed my investigations concerning the
distaff side of the family of John Beck of Downpatrick which had resulted
In the private publication of “Gleanings from the Past”.
As I had learnt that in the course of the London Visitation, 1633-35,
Abraham Beck had submitted a crest and coat of arms to the College of
Arms, and they had been confirmed to him, I sought for and found the
proof in Volume XV of the Harleian Society.
I immediately noticed the statement that John Beck was son and heir,
and he, being in London during this period, could not possibly be the John
Beck mentioned In the Muster Roll, and so sonship was precluded.
But might he not be a grandson?
Examination of other documents revealed that this John was born in
1611, and that possibility was therefore excluded.
Taking into consideration the family tradition so well authenticated
that it was of foreign origin ere it had left London to go to Ulster, and noting
in connection with Abraham Beck that he was descended out of Germany,
I decided to search the London Huguenot Society’s Publications to learn if
there might be references to Abraham Beck and other Beck families and was
pleased to find quite a number and among them a form of Denisation in which
Abraham stated that he was of the Dutch congregation.
I then sought to obtain a copy of the Registers of the Dutch Church,
Austin Friars, London, and was successful in securing a copy of Moens’
edition. Being ignorant at that time that Abraham spelt his surname Becks,
Becx, as well as Beck, I failed to recognise the baptismal entries of his family
as well as that of his son John.
A copy of the form of Denization had been sent by me to Mr. John W.
Beck. In view of these negative results, and having noticed in the preface of
Moens’ book that membership Rolls of the Dutch Churgh from 1584 were
still in existence, I wrote to him, suggesting that he should get into com-
munication with the Huguenot Society to learn if these were available for
inspection, and he kindly did so. He was informed that these with other
documents had been removed from London to a place of safety, and as soon as
they were available for inspection, he would be notified.
In due course this was done, and he accordingly paid a visit to Horsham,
Sussex, where he examined Rolls, Registers, etc., but as he himself states
in a letter: “I am afraid the results are rather meagre.”
He found, however, one valuable family reference in the Baptismal
Register of the French Church, Threadneedle Street. London, which is as
follows;
“Baptism, 25/6/1615 Abraham, son of Abraham Beck.”
Thus matters stood in 1951. I did little in 1952 owing to various causes,
but in 1953 gave much time to research and have continued ever since.


Having occasion to consult Riestap’s Armorial General: Deuxieme Edition,
Tome I, concerning some Beck references, I noted the following; “Beck-
Londres, Holl. (Baronet I Nov. 1714, M. et le 12 Janv. 1764) etc.” and about
the end of December, 1953, thinking that something might be learnt from
Holland that would help me to solve the problem, I wrote a letter and
addressed it: “The National Archivist. The Hague, Holland.” I received a
very gracious letter in reply from Mr. H. Hardenberg, Director General, The
State Archives, The Hague, Holland, and so began a very helpful genealogical
correspondence which added much to my knowledge of the Beck family in
Germany and especially in Holland as indicated already in the Foreword.
Then, too, I had noted the spelling “Bee”, not only in the Visitation of
London, but also in genealogical data supplied to me by Mr. Percival Boyd,
and thought that notwithstanding the statement, “Descended out of
Germany”, there might be a French or Walloon origin.
The reason for this was a statement in a copy of Baedeker’s Guide-book
of the Rhine in my possession which reads as follows: “Stolberg is the
centre of a very enterprising manufacturing district, the numerous products
of which are sent to every part of the world. For the foundation of its
prosperity it was indebted to French Protestant refugees, who established
brass foundries here in the 17th century and drove a thriving trade.”
This is an error, and I know not how Baedeker came to insert this
statement in his valuable Handbook for travellers. As Dr. Karl Schleicher
puts it: “The brass industry in Stolberg was founded by old Aachen families,”
and anyone who cares to examine the evidence will find that this statement
is correct.
Having again examined the references to Abraham Beck in volume X of
the Hug. Sec. publications, and concluding that “Stalbarch” and “Stabbeard”
meant Stolberg, I sought to learn if this were so, and with the happiest
result.
The following genealogical data deserve attention: “Botolph Lane, 1617.
Abraham Becx, Catharine his wyfe, two children borne heere, Assuerus his
servant.” (London Hug. Soc. Pub., Vol. X, Pt. 111, p. 152.)
Cooplieden, denysons Abraham Becx, 1617 (p. 165).
Wyllem Becks voor Geert Ryceaert (present, R. Peenen) 15 April, 1589:
3 years a year 5 s.” (Pt. 11, p. 208).
In Pt. 11, p. 211, there is a further contribution for upkeep of student:
Bth August, 1591, and for four years. “Willem Becx 6 s.”
Without doubt, this is certainly one and the same man.
One notes with interest that the widow of Franchays Beke on the same
page is credited with a yearly contribution of three shillings.
One cannot fail to notice the various spellings of the name, and the
similarity of the spelling of the name by Abraham and Willem.
I had to write to Mr. H. Hardenberg, Director General of the
State Archives, The Hague, Holland, concerning the spelling “Becks”, and in
reply there is the following statement: “I quite agree with you that the
spelling ‘Becks’ must be a variation of Beck. You may regard the ‘s’ as a
patronymical one, and standing for: son: Becks being the son or daughter of
a Beck. I am sure that ‘Beke’ is another variation. You should not wonder
about all these variations in the spelling of family-names. These names in
the old days simply were not fixed and you may find a notary to-day the
pattern of accuracy —in one document spelling his own name three times
differently.”
It may be noted that in proof thereof in vol. X (in 4 parts) of the London
Hug. Soc. Pub. in connection with a James van Becke, 1571, the spelling is
also Beke: in the spelling of his children’s names the “van” is omitted. There
can be no doubt that the references are to one and the same person, for the
Christian names of the wife and the children are the same, and so’ are the
Christian name and surname of the servant.


It may also be here stated that in the Muster Roll of 1630 the spelling of
the family name is Beke, but the sons of the migrants to Ulster spelt the
name “Beck”, and used the Beck family crest in its two forms, that of the
raven simply, the earlier form, and the raven between wings, the later form,
surely evidence of knowledge of descent that cannot be gainsaid.
May not one infer that the spelling “Bee” was the one used by Abraham
in the merchant’s business, and so noted in the Visitation and in Sec. V
in London, 1634, and after his decease in 1636 was carried on by his son
John under the same name?
This would also account for the same spelling in the poll tax.
In the Registers of the Dutch Reformed Church, Austin Friars, London,
there are the following baptisms (p. 4): “25 Jun. 1615 Becks, Abraham f.
Abraham; 16 Mai 1619 Becks, Catharina f. Abraham; 29 Mar. 1624 Eijtgen f.
Abraham: 4 Ap. 1641 Becks Elizabeth f. Johan; 12 Mai 1611 Joannes f.
Abraham; 19 Mai 1644 Becx Maria f. Johan.”
In the same volume there is the following marriage on page 96 that is
worthy of note: “Mar. 1624 Guiljam de Buck v. London Haerlem (sic) met
Yken Beck v. Aken.”
The question arises; Are these Registers as complete as they should be?
One can only answer in the negative.
Moens in his Preface to the Registers states on page VI: “Very many
Baptismal entries were imperfectly made, the ceremony having often taken
place at the homes of the parents, and the details having apparently been
forgotten by the ministers officiating.”
To that it must be added that some baptisms were completely omitted
even although they took place in church.
In my copy of “THE REGISTERS OF ST. PETER’S, CORNHILL,
LONDON”, volume I, 1533-1666 and volume 11, 1667-1774, The Harleian
Society’s Publications of Parish Registers, there are these words in the
Preface of volume I, page XIII: “A large number of Dutchmen seemed to
have lived in the parish; there are numerous entries of them, and constant
mention of the Dutch Church (pp. 17, 19, 21, 23, 31, 43).
John Vansalt, an Elder of the Dutch Church, was buried 1603. James
Voulmur, a Dutch Preacher, buried 6 Jan., 1617. This was in Austin Friars,
and was part of the old Church of the Friars, and granted to the Dutch in
1550. Some of them were baptized in the French Church (pp. 24, 26, 27); this
was part of the old Church of St. Anthony’s Hospital, in Threadn’eedle
Street.”
There are seven baptisms entered in the St. Peter’s Baptismal Register
and certified as having taken place at the Dutch Church, Austin Friars, but
only two of them can be found in Moens’ copy.
They are: Daniell Vanhecke, 1576, Aprill 19 and Isaacke Vansalt, 1596
June 20.
There are no entries of the baptisms of Dauid Pope, 1578 June 1: Daniell
Pope, 1579 August 30: Susan Pope, 1580 Decern 18; Jerome Pone, 1587 Maye 21:
These were the children of Waldron Pope, merchant, London.
There is also no entry of the baptism of Peeter Vanvpheuen, 1596 June 27,
the son of Gylbert Vanvpheuen of Deuentree.
It should be noted that Waldron Pope had a son Abraham baptized at
the French Church, Threadneedle Street, on 24 December, 1581, a son Salamon
baptized 1583 August 4, and a daughter, Mary Pope, on August 25, 1584, thus
revealing the fact that there was a close intimacy between the two churches,
and that the “strangers” as the Dutch and French Reformed Church people
were called, worshipped, sometimes in one, and sometimes in the other, and
had the Sacrament of Baptism administered in either place.


Abraham Beck’s son Abraham was baptized there in 1615, and the entry
is to be found there: it is also entered in the Dutch Church Baptismal Register.
Probably John was also baptised there in 1611, and it came to be belatedly
entered in the Dutch Register.
As it is distinctly stated in 1617 that both his children were born here
(London) ONE IS PERSUADED that Jacques de Wale and his family were
already in England, and that Abraham’s marriage took place in London
and not at Courtre. Abraham’s statement in the Denization of 1618 that
he had been in London 17 years is also a confirmation of this.
At this point, it is perhaps fitting to make reference to a theory of
John W. Beck, the family historian, concerning the line of descent of Beck
of Northern Ireland. When I drew his attention to the discrepancy of years
and the fact that our ancestor John was in Ulster when the Visitation took
place, and that direct descent from Abraham was precluded, he was of
opinion that the family was descended from a brother whose Christian name
was Aaral.
As he had done much painstaking research-work and given careful
consideration to the problem, I became aware how necessary it was to learn
not only concerning the origin of Abraham, but how imperative to search for
and discover the Christian names of the members of the family to which he
belonged, and so this task was essayed and satisfactorily accomplished.
When through the courtesy of Dr. Karl Schleicher, Stolberg, I had
received the very valuable genealogical data taken from Macco-data also
received from and certified by the extracts furnished to me by Dr. Poll,
Archive-Director, Aachen, in response to my request made to the Secretary of
the Historical Society of that City I noted immediately the third member
of the family, “Gerlach, 1628 im Auslande” (in the foreign land), an elder
brother of Abraham, and being influenced by the theory mentioned, was
inclined to think this was the missing link and stated this in a letter to
Mr. H. Hardenberg, Director General of the State Archives, The Hague,
Holland.
It simply meant substituting the name of Gerlach for that of Aaral.
On further consideration and closer scrutiny of the evidence, however, I
was reluctantly compelled to abandon the theory of descent from a brother of
Abraham.
Having again closely examined the Alx-la-Chapelle genealogical data, my
attention was drawn to that of a younger brother of Jakob, father of Gerlach
and grandfather of Abraham, concerning whom it is stated: “Joachim, 1561
im Auslande”, and I began afresh the examination of volume X of the
Hug. Soc. Pub. with that possible line of descent in view and with gratifying
results.
In the meantime, I had another helpful letter from Mr. H. Hardenberg
in which there was the following significant statement: “It has to be borne
in mind that Joachim (Macco, Peltzer, p. 89) was “im Auslande 1551.” That
certainly further influenced me in regarding this line of descent as the
solution of the problem.
I also made a fresh study of the Parish Registers of London Churches
which I possess, and after carefully weighing the references which I found,
I was convinced that our line of descent from Beck of Aix-la-Chapelle was
through Joachim.
In addition, I carefully tabulated all the genealogical data concerning
Beck families of the 16th and 17th centuries in the various publications of
the Huguenot Society so that I might have them at hand for reference.
I now give the titles of the volumes of H. F. Macco in which the
genealogical data concerning the patrician family of Beck of Aix-la-Chapelle
or Aachen is to be found.
zur Genealogie Rheinischer Adels- und Patrizierfamilien. Bd 111.
Aachen 1901.
Geschichte und Genealogie der Familien Peltzer.


(Contributions to the Genealogy of the Rhineland Noble and Patrician
Families.)
(History and Genealogy of the Peltzer Family.)
Aachener Wappen und Genealogien. Bd I Aachen 1907.
(Aachen Coats of Arms and Genealogy.)
Peter Beck (b. probably circa 1445)
Peter John
Peter = Katherina
/
Dau. m. Gerlach Jakob Aegidius David Peter Joachim, im Auslande 1551
Johannes
Jakob = Gertrud von der Haggen
Gertrud Stefan Peter Wilhelm Dau. m. Gerlach, Kupfermeister in Stolberg
Gerlach = Ida (Idtgen) Bertolf von Belven
Jakob Gertrud Gerlach, 1628 im Auslande Hermann Isaak Peter Abraham,
1613. Barbara.
In the search for evidence it should be noted that the Becks of Aachen
and Stolberg migrated not only to Holland but also contributed their quota
to the strangers settling in London prior to the going of Abraham in 1601
one is persuaded that it was because of this earlier migration that Abraham
went thither and the migration continued thereafter as witness the marriage
of Yken Beck from Aachen who married Guiljam de Buck in March, 1624, in
the Dutch Church, London, and the baptisms of their children are entered
in the Baptismal Register. I infer that she was a member of Abraham’s
household until the date of her marriage. I infer also that Anthony Victor
who acted for Abraham during the Visitation was her brother and also a
member of the household.
I think it was he, a generation later than Abraham, and knowing the
development of the Beck coat of arms in Holland in regard to “the fish in
bend” in the fourth quarter instead of the bird, as in the coat of arms of
Gerlach, Abraham’s father, influenced Abraham to adopt this alteration and
so keep in line with Dutch branches of the family.
This is a reasonable supposition, for I think that Abraham, who had
been an elder of the Dutch Church, London, for some years, was in con-
stant touch with the Beck families in Holland as well as those in Ger-
many, and his son John, was affianced to a member of a Dutch family in
Middelburg and was married there on 19th of April, 1636. I think Abraham
was in poor health—his will was proved by his son John, January 19, 1636-7
—and so left the matter in Anthony Victor’s hands.
In regard to the use of the crest of the raven with or without wings
before the Visitation even as to the substitution of the fish in bend for the
bird in the fourth quarter of the coat of arms, I think there can be no
doubt.
There are several Becks mentioned in volume X of the Hug. Soc.
Publ. that are worthy of consideration, and I would mention one to be
found in Part 1., page 336: “Tower Warde. Peter Beck and Margaret his
wif.”
It is stated that they were Dutch and had a son Peter.
There is one Becks or Becx, however, to whom one’s attention has
been increasingly drawn, and having carefully considered the probabilities
of the case, I am strongly of opinion that he was the father of the two
brothers who went to Ulster from London during the Plantation.
I- find mention of him in connection with the Dutch Church, Austin
Friars, in Volume X, Part 2, page 208, where there is the following reference:
“Wyllem Becks, 15 April, 1589 55.” This was a contribution towards the
education of a student for the Dutch ministry.


He is mentioned again on page 211 as “William Becx, 65.” This was a
further contribution for the same purpose for a term of four years, the
date being Bth August, 1591.
This is certainly one and the same man.
(I have restated this to avoid referring back to genealogical data on a
previous page.)
It is very significant that in all my researches Willem and Abraham
are the only two men who spelt their names in such fashion, and I am
persuaded that it is no mere coincidence but a sign or proof of relationship
and descent from one and the same family.
In regard to the spelling “Becks,” in addition to Mr. H. Hardenberg’s
statement on a previous page, it may be noted that William Beck, born at
Stolberg in 1589, married an Elisabeth Becks, presumably a relation, on the
11th of January, 1648 (Macco, Bd. 111, p. 70).
Then, too, Gertrud and Isaac, members of the family, had their names
thus spelt; Macco, Bd. 111, page 185.
As further proof of this family spelling, the following in “The Nether-
lands Lion,” October, 1936, column 343, should be noted; “The name Beck
is also written Beckx or Becx,” and there follows a most interesting state-
ment concerning the family.
Finally, the spellings of Abraham’s surname in the London Dutch Church
Register are undoubtedly in agreement with this.
It should be stated that the Denizations of Abraham Beck and Jacques
de Wall are found together, but while Abraham’s surname is spelt Beck,
the surname of the man with whom Jacques was sojourner was spelt Becke.
Why should it be written M. Becke?
I am inclined to think that Jacques had said “Monsieur Guillaume,”
and the official, being uncertain as to the spelling, left it blank and spelt
the surname Becke as stated by Jacques.
Had he been a sojourner with Abraham, I think the name Abraham
would have been written down by the official. I am persuaded to believe
that he was staying with Willyam Becke, who had married his eldest daughter
Dorothee, was on a visit to Abraham who had married a younger daughter
Catherine, and when the official called that day, he had given the particulars
as stated.
I am certainly of opinion that is a reasonable interpretation of the
incident.
In regard to the birthplace of Jacques, he himself states that he was
born at Wilgiluan, in Flanders, and the statement in the London Visitation
that he was born at Courtray or Curtre (thus spelt in the Visitation) may
be considered an error on the part of Victor Anthony, who gave the
information.
I might state that Mr. C. Tihon, L’Archiviste general du Royaume, Brus-
sels, Belgium, from whom I sought to learn if this place could be discovered,
wrote in reply to a letter of mine: “The name is not known to us. It is
evidently an English corruption for another name.”
(This letter, written in French, was a very courteous reply to my letter
asking information concerning a number of questions which I had stated,
and which I thought possibly the National Archivist, Brussels, Belgium,
might be able to answer.)
Perhaps attention might be drawn to the fact that in 1617, a year prior
to the Denization, a full account of the household of Abraham Becx, Botolph
Lane, is given, in which there is no mention of Jacques de Wall as sojourner
with him.
In the examination of these various documentary evidences it must con-
stantly be kept in mind that Registrars and other Officials phonetically spelt
the names of the “strangers”—so the migrants were called—and this has
caused many difficulties in interpretation. In his book, “The Registers of


the Dutch Church, Austin Friars, London,” Moens has the following state-
ment in his Preface, page VIII: “In course of time many curious alterations
of the names of the strangers occurred, besides those formerly caused by the
Registrars simply spelling them according to their pronunciation, such as
“Savage” for “de Wilde,” and “Field” for “Van de Velde,” “Wood” for “du
Bois,” and so on.
In the London Huguenot Society’s Publications, Volume X, Part I, Pre-
face, pages XV, XVI, it is stated: “Owing to the variation of spelling pre-
sented by many of the surnames, difficulty will, however, often be
experienced in identifying and tracing individuals and families. Some names
would be quite unrecognisable without the aid which can be derived from
the collation of similar lists, and doubtless many errors will be discovered,
but for these there is every excuse. It must be remembered that the English
commissioners, in their visitation from house to house, would have great
difficulty in reducing the unwonted sounds to writing, which would be
roughly done on the spot; and further blunders would naturally be made
by the engrossers in copying from the original notes names all or less un-
familiar to them. Then again, some of the returns are in a decayed and
faded condition, and the names have in such cases been read only with
the greatest trouble and with some uncertainty; but as the various bits
have now been brought together, it will be easier to see and correct any
mistakes that may have been made.”
John Beck, the son and heir of Abraham, also spelt his name Becx, as
witness the Dutch Church Baptismal Register.
Mr. H. Hardenberg, Director-General of the State Archives, The Hague,
Holland, in a letter, March 22, 1954, states: “Becx originary from England,
living in Zeeland in the 17th century, bore the same arms; this seems to be
a variation in the spelling of the name.”
In a later letter, dated October 2, 1954, there is the following reference:
. . a Johannes Beck, bachelor from London, marrying at Middelburg
(Zeeland), April 19, 1636, Catherina de Wael Rogiers. I suppose him to be
the John from the Visitation of London.”
This supposition is correct, and further on in this record the proof will
be found.
Undoubtedly it is evidence that these references relate to one and the
same person and family, and accordingly help to bear out one’s belief that
Willem and Abraham were related.
I am inclined to think, judging by the difference of years, that Willem
was a cousin of Abraham’s father, and thus a son of Joachim, and probably
born about 1550 or 1552.
I am of opinion that Abraham knew of his presence in London, got into
touch with him on arrival, and was probably influenced by him in the various
ways in which a newcomer may be influenced by a relative of an earlier
migration.
In the list of “der Kinderen” marriages in the Marriage Register of the
Dutch Church, London, there is one that interests me very much.
It reads thus: “27 Mei 1571. Adam der Kinderen fs. Adams met Eliza-
beth van Roken uit landt v. Gulick.”
“Gulick” is surely a corruption of “Julich.” It is a reasonable assump-
tion that various individuals when they became Reformed Church, even
as Joachim Beck did, found their way into Holland, the adjoining country,
and some of them or their sons and daughters later on passed over to
England. Coming from the same territory, they naturally drew together,
and were likely to become related in marriage. One’s attention is drawn
to the marriage of another member of this “der Kinderen” family on page
127 of the same Register; “6 August, 1594. Bartholomeus Pieters wt. d’lant
v. Gulick met Sara der Kinderen v. London, we. Jan Weijsels.” “Gulick”’
in this case emphasises the truth of one’s statement.


I find that an Adam der Kinderen was married in London in 1551, and
unless there was a previous marriage, the Adam previously mentioned could
not have been his son.
An examination of this list leads one to believe that there were several
der Kinderen families who had migrated from Holland to London, and that
Adam was a family Christian name. It is quite possible that Willem Becx
had married a der Kinderen, and so the name Adam came into use in the
family of Beck of Northern Ireland.
Were Jacques de Wale or de Wall and his family in London ere Abraham
arrived there in 1601? That Abraham found his way to London via Court-
ray is not likely. A study of the lists of the various families of Beck in
Aachen and Stolberg shows migration to Holland or Antwerp, and Abraham
presumably followed that course. It may be reasonably inferred that he
kept in touch with the various families in Holland, and so it came to pass
that John and Catherin or Catherina married into Dutch families.
One finds that as early as 1567 there were de Wale families in London,
and one is not surprised that Jacques should find his way thither.
In St. Stephen’s Parish in 1599 there is the record of a John de Wall
viijd, and I am inclined to think that he was a brother of Jacques.
Was it through Willem and his family that Jacques’ family was intro-
duced to Abraham, and in due course the latter married Catharina?
Was it William, a son of Willem, who married an elder daughter
Dorothee?
The following in the Marriage Register of St. Botolph, Bishopsgate,
London, Volume I, page 34, has interested me very much:
“1601, July 27. Willyam Becke and Dorothee Wolley.”
One has only to examine the register to note this variation of the
spelling of Dorothy. I have noted back as far as 1582 that there are seven
marriages in which there is the name of Dorothy, and in each case the
spelling is Dorothie. In later years to 1611 there are six such spellings with
one exception, it being spelt Dorothy. That is certainly striking.
It should be stated that after 1611 the spelling is variable.
Dorothee is the French spelling of the name, and Wolley is one of the
phonetic spellings of Wale.
As proof I have noted the following: “John Waley, Bettys Walley, and
Elizabeth Wolley, who paid poll tax iijd.” in the records of aliens or stran-
gers. It should be observed that the compiler of the index has shown a
disregard of exactness in spelling the name and has written Dorothie,
but then he is equally indifferent in regard to exactness of paging, for he
has page 33, whereas it should be page 34, which somewhat surprises me.
I am persuaded that to the clerk who at that time made the entry
in the register, the spelling of the Christian name was not a matter of
indifference.
Concerning the name of John, the defective part of the Dutch Church
Baptismal Register from 7th January, 1582, to 29th June, 1595, has entries
of eight baptisms of the name of John, with no other name attached, and
I have shown proof on a previous page that several baptisms were never
registered.
I take it, therefore, that it is a reasonable supposition that one of
these may have referred to a sort John of Willem.
As the earliest date of Willem’s presence in London that I can find
is 1589, I think that ere his arrival in England he was already married and,
had a son William, and that John’s birth was of a very much later date and
in London.
Concerning a William Becke in the two volumes of T. C. Dale, 8.A., entitled
“The Inhabitants of London, 1638,” there are references to a Wm. Becke,
6t. Nicholas Cole Abbey, and a Wm. Becke, St. Botolp, Aldgate, but these
being 37 years later, I can draw no satisfactory conclusion in regard to
them.


Be that as it may, a William and John Beke, concerning whom I am
persuaded that they were the sons of Willem, were in Ulster not later than
1625, and so we have in the Muster Roll of 1630: John and Adam Beke in
the Barony of Ardes (SONS OF WILLIAM, deceased), and John Beke, brother
of William, in the Muster Roll of the County of Ardmagh.
This latter John was the father of John Beck, of Downpatrick.
What drew them to Ulster? The influence was probably twofold.
In London the strangers, as the Dutch and other migrants were termed,
were at a disadvantage, for they were much disliked and feared. They
were folk of integrity and individuality, industrious and skilled in many
trades, tenacious of religious freedom because of strong conviction, and so
had found their way to England where, under Queen Elizabeth I, they
were allowed to worship according to conscience. They had many ill-
wishers and suffered much at the hands of an ignorant and prejudiced
populace. One has only to read the references in the volume of the
London Huguenot Society’s Publications where this is dealt with, and in
the historical introduction in Moens’ Dutch Church Registers, to learn
how shamefully in many instances the migrants were treated, King James
I, as the chief offender, setting an unworthy example by his despicable
robbery of them, and the encouraging of place-hunters and needy, unscrupu-
lous favourites at his Court in their spoliation.
Then there were greater opportunities for an industrious family in a
new land, where the discrimination that bore so heavily upon them in
London did not exist, for all were adventurers together. The colonising
scheme of Londonderry and its lands by the London Companies was then
much in the minds of Londoners and talk concerning it was on every
lip. It was a venture that appealed to not a few.
It is with quickened interest one turns to the book entitled “London-
derry and the London Companies, 1609-1629,” published at Belfast, 1928, and
reads the following on page 114:
“THOMAS HAMOND,
“A copy touching a Certificate of the Londoners’ Promise of Lands at
4d. the acre.
“1628, May 20. I, Thomas Hamond, Sheriff of the City and County
of Londonderry, do hereby testify under my hand that about 18 or 19
years past I, then being an apprentice in the City of London, did see and
read Public Proclamations or declarations set upon the posts or corners of
the Exchange, promising that such as would come into Ireland to inhabit
and plant upon the Londoners’ land should have land for 4d. the acre, with
other things in the said declaration which I cannot now remember; but for
the 4d. the acre of land I took special notice thereof and did tell it to my
fellow prentices; and this to be true I am ready to testify upon my cor-
poral oath when I shall be thereunto lawfully called.”
But there were lands in Armagh and elsewhere in the North where
opportunity beckoned, where a comfortable living might be made, and the
thoughts of many turned thereto.
Though the sun of the adventurous Elizabethan day had gone down,
the glow of its sunset still lingered o’er the land and kindled the hearts
of not a few.
The new lands o’er the Atlantic Ocean made their subtle appeal, and
the London Companies on whom an onerous duty had been thrust or
weighty task imposed, were urging those who might be drawn by the
former to give preference to the lands they had to offer, equally invit-
ing, and much nearer home; so, too, the undertakers in Armagh and else-
where in Ulster, were eager to obtain settlers so that they might make full
use of their grants.
Concerning the Muster Roll of Ulster, 1630, I received the following
letter from Mr. Gerald Bonner. Assistant Keeper, Department of Manuscripts,
The British Museum, London, in answer to a request for information: “The


Keeper of Manuscripts has asked me to reply to your letter of 12th Januarj
I have looked up Sloane (not Add.) MS. 4770, the Muster Roll of Ulstei
1630.
“On f. 26b, the name ‘John Beke’ appears, numbered ‘l4s’ in the list
with the comment: ‘No Armes.’ The contingent to which Beke belong
is that of Anthony Cope, but I can find no direct statement that he wa
a tenant of Cope’s. The heading of f. 24 runs: ‘The Muster Roll of th
County of Ardmagh. Anthony Cope, Esq., undertaker, of 3,000 Armes, th
Names of his Men and Armes as followeth.’
“John and Adam Beke are listed on f. 255 b, with the comment
‘Swords and muskets.’ I cannot find their place of residence stated, whil
the list is for the Barony of Great Ardes, county Downe. I give the head
ing, f. 255:
‘Downe.
‘The Barrony of great Ardes.’ ”
It should be noted that while the spelling of the name in the Muste
Roll is Beke, the sons of both migrants to Ulster evidenced their know
ledge of descent by using the spelling of Beck on all occasions, thus revert
ing to the original spelling of the name.
In due course John made over the farm to his elder son Adam, wh>
became a very successful farmer and wool merchant, while he, with hij
younger son John, probably born about 1648, established a linen busines
in Charlemont, became prosperous, and amassed considerable property, anl
when he died, John became heir, and one is not surprised that soon afte
he is described as “gentleman, Belfast.”
One can thus understand how later on he was considered ‘an eligibb
suitor for the hand of Elizabeth Strettell, the niece of Mrs. George Mallon,
wife of the Rev. George Mallory, Vicar of Laraughbrian (Maynooth), ant
sister of Amos and Abel Strettell, wealthy Dublin merchants.
In concluding this chapter I might state that constant research con-
cerning Beck of London, apart from a common ancestry, strengthened m
interest, and I sought to learn what had become of Abraham’s descendant;.
It mystified and perplexed me that I could find no trace of them ii
London, but the mystery was solved when I learnt from my correspondence
with the State Archives’ Office, The Hague, Holland, that John anl
Catherina, the only surviving members of the family, had contracted mar-
riages in Holland.
Catharina, born 2nd May, 1619, and baptised on the 16th day of tie
same month, married Daniel de Hochepied at Amsterdam on the 6th cf
January, 1644, and died on the 9th of September, 1649, and her tombstore
in the Saint-Bavo Church at Haarlem, bearing the Beck coat of arms, hai
the following inscription: “Hie jacet nobilissima Domina, Domina Catharim
Beck, nata 2 Mail anno salutis 1619, etc.”
John married Catharina de Wael Rogiers at Middelburg, Zeeland, anl
it may be reasonably inferred that he gradually transferred his business
interests to Holland, for in a book of T. C. Dale, “The Inhabitants of Londoi
in 1638,” already mentioned, the following is stated in Vol. I, page 64 (MS.
No. 119), under the heading of Buttolph Lane: “Mr. Munn and Mr. Becl,
Dutch merchants, house worth annually £100,” whereas in connection witi
the same property in 1634, there is only mention of Abraham Bee.
The statement in Mr. Boyd’s data, mentioned in the Foreword, con-
firms this, and leads me to believe that John had taken Mr. Munn int
partnership, thus becoming free to turn his attention to business mor
and more in Holland, and eventually settled there.


ADDENDA
Since this chapter was prepared for the press, I am much pleased to
state that my inference concerning John Beck —the spelling is Becx as in
the case of Willem —transferring his business interests to Holland, and settling
down there, has been confirmed as correct.
I have received several interesting letters from Mr. A. L. van Duin,
Verger of the Dutch Church, Austin Friars, London, containing much valu-
able genealogical information concerning members of the Beck family in
Germany, Holland, and England.
In a lengthy list of letters concerning Becks supplied to me, there
is the following: “No. 3103 (Ist May, 1651, letter addressed to Johan Beck,
merchant, in Middelburg, son of Abraham Beck).”
This valuable information came to me in the following way: I had
written to the Minister of the Dutch Church, Austin Friars, London, con-
cerning certain membership rolls of the 16th and 17th centuries referred
to in volume X of the London Huguenot Society’s Publications, and the
Rev. Dr. van Apeldoorn, Minister of the Church, handed my letter to Mr.
van Duin, asking him to reply.
Mr. van Duin very kindly examined the Church Archives, etc., at the
same time notifying me where they were to be found for the purpose of
consultation, and sending me much valuable genealogical information con-
cerning the Beck family, which has added much to my knowledge, and some
of which will be found in the following chapters.
I gladly take this opportunity of thanking the Rev. Dr. R. H. van
Apeldoorn for thus obliging me, and am very grateful to Mr. A. L. van Duin
for assisting me.
I have also received from Mr. van Duin a copy of the Brochure of the
rebuilt Dutch Church, Austin Friars, London, for which I thank him.
It should also be stated that there has come into my hands a copy of
the book, “Archives of the London Dutch Church. Register of the Attes-
tations or Certificates of Membership, etc., 1568-1872,” by J. H. Hessels, in
which I find that Dutch descendants of the Beck family, settled in Col-
chester, England, used the spelling “Beke.”
The following are interesting; “Maria Beke, spinster, of Colchester,”
2nd April, 1628 (page 30, No. 380); “Sr. Pieter Beke, jr., and Catelyne, his
wife, the former having rendered very good service to the Co. ” (page
33, No. 423), 21st April, 1630; “Pieter Beke, who has been an E. of the Co.
of Colchester for several years” (page 36, No. 477), 9th May, 1632.
The Christian names are worthy of note.
This spelling is confirmed by Moens on page 144: “Maria Beke v.
Colchester.” I note that Susanna Beke, Spinster, was attested by Jonas
Proost, Minister, Colchester, 21st October, 1616 (page 18, No. 208), and
presume that she ie mentioned in the following; “. . . April, 1618, Jan van
Jxem v. Norwich met Susanna Beke v. Colchester.” (Moens’ Register of
Marriages, page 115.)


Chapter II
THE PATRICIAN FAMILY BECK OF AACHEN
(Aix-la-Chapelle)
In the book, “Aachen Coats of Arms and Genealogies,” by H. P. Macco,
Aachen, 1907, Vol. 1, page 25, there is a brief summary of names and events
concerning this patrician family.
There is mention of Peter Beck (coat of arms, 1489), who had given
receipts for a life annuity in the names of his children, Peter, junior, and
John, the last being dated 12th April, 1496.
He was deceased in 1498, for on St. George’s Day of that year Peter,
junior, attested the receipt of money in connection with it.
It is stated that members of the family played an important part in
the Brass Industry in Stolberg, and this is confirmed by Dr Karl Schleicher,
Stolberg, in his valuable and interesting book, “The Development of the
Stolberg’ Brass Industry, 1497-1813.”
It is well to define the meaning of the term “patrician.”
I have noted several, but in regard to that period and in connection
with Germany, I know of none better than that in the book, “History of
the Reformation,” Volume I (in Germany), by the Rev. Principal T. M.
Lindsay, D.D., LL.D. My copy is the second edition, 1907, published by
T. and T. Clark, Edinburgh, Scotland.
“The towns had originally grown up under the protection of the
Emperor, or of some great lord of the soil, or of an ecclesiastical prince
or foundation, and the early officials were the representatives of these
fostering powers. The descendants of this early official class became known
as the ‘patricians’ of the city, and they regarded all the official positions
as the hereditary privileges of their class. The town population was
thoroughly organised in associations of workmen, commonly called ‘gilds,’
which at first concerned themselves simply with the regulation and improve-
ment of the industry, carried on, and with the education and recreations
of the workers. But these ‘gilds’ soon assumed a political character. The
workmen belonging to them formed the fighting force needed for the inde-
pendence and protection of the city. Each ‘gild’ had its fighting organi-
sation, its war banner, its armoury, and its members were trained
to the use of arms, and practised it in their hours of recreation. The
‘gilds’ therefore began to claim some share in the govern-
ment of the town, and in most German cities, in the decades before the
Reformation, the old aristocratic government of the ‘patricians’ had given
place to the more democratic rule of the ‘gilds.’ The chief offices con-
nected with the ‘gilds’ insensibly tended to become hereditary in a few
leading families, and this created a second ‘patriciat,’ whose control was
resented by the great mass of the workmen. Nurnberg was one of the few
great German cities where the old ‘patricians’ continued to rule down to
the times of the Reformation” (pages 80-81).
In regard to the wealth and luxurious living of the patrician families
there is the following on pages 86-87: “The artists of the German renais-
sance belonged to the towns, and their principal patrons were the wealthy
burghers. The rich merchants displayed their civic patriotism in aiding
to build great churches; in erecting magnificent chambers of commerce,
where merchandise could be stored, with halls for buying and selling, and
rooms where the merchants of the town could consult about the interests of the
civic trade; in building Artushofe or assembly rooms, where the patrician
burghers had their public dances, dinners, and other kinds of social enter-
tainments; in raising great towers for the honour of the town. They built
magnificent private houses. Aeneas Sylvius tells us that in Nurnberg he
saw many burgher houses that befitted kings, and that the King of Scot-
land was not as nobly housed as a Nurnberg burgher of the second rank.


They filled these dwellings with gold and silverplate, and with costly
Venetian glass; their furniture was adorned with delicate wood-carving;
costly tapestries, paintings, and engravings decorated the walls; and the
reception-room or stube was the place of greatest display.”
Macco has the following heading: “BECK (Prot.).”
In view of his succeeding words that “Members of this family belonged
to the first confessors of the new faith in Aachen,” it is appropriate, and
it explains how it came to pass that Joachim Beck was “1551” im Auslande.”
It also accounts for the fact that his descendants and those of later genera-
tions of Becks established branches of the Beck family in Holland and else-
where.
There can be no doubt that these families in England and Holland were
descended from Peter Beck of Aachen or Aix-la-Chapelle, for Christian
names, family crests, and coats of arms amply confirm this. It is some-
what difficult to show pedigrees as completely as one would desire, for, in
regard to their forebears in Holland and England, Dr. Schleicher states in
one of his letters that the names of the children of those who were “in
the foreign land” were not recorded, only the names of the children of
the families who remained in Aachen and Stolberg being given due place.
The question may be asked: Did Peter Beck and his family belong to
the original patrician class as described by Principal Lindsay, or did it
find its place in the “patriciat” because of its wealth and prominent stand-
ing in the “gilds” of the city? There is no absolute proof to show that
they did, but I am inclined to think there is some ground for that opinion.
Be that as it may, there can be no doubt of this family’s place in the
patrician class. As proof thereof, it may be noted that Jacob Beck, the
son of Peter, junior, was a member of the city council, and this probably
may have led Mr. R. T. Muschart, the eminent authority on Dutch Heraldry,
to describe this family as “the magistrate-family Beck of Aix-la-Chapelle.”
Peter Beck, called Davids, the son of David, a brother of Jakob, and
thus a grandson of Peter, junior, was the Master of the Mint in Aachen.
In 1574 he was a member of the “Buck Guild,” and to learn what this
meant I wrote to Dr. Poll, Archive-Director, Aachen, who replied, stating:
“Meant is the Buck Guild, also called the ‘Confederation of the Buck,’ com-
prising mainly distinguished and wealthy citizens of the commercial class.”
Dr. Karl Schleicher, in his book, “The Development of the Stolberg
Brass Industry, 1497-1813,” writes thus of this Peter Beck: “A member of
the Notabilities’ Society ‘in the Buck,’ consequently a distinguished Aachen
citizen.”
When Peter, junior, died in 1551, a family property was sold, and the
list of names in connection therewith is an interesting one, and is to be
found in Macco’s Volume 111, page 69, “Contributions to the Genealogy of
the Rhineland Noble and Patrician Families,” Aachen, 1901. “History and
Genealogy of the Peltzer Family.”
This family property, at the sale of which all members of the family were
present, or represented as in the case of Joachim, did not, however, pass into
alien hands. Jakob and Gertrud, two of the interested parties, were the
purchasers, and from this and other transactions, it may be inferred that
Jakob was a wealthy merchant and a prominent citizen of Aachen.
In regard to Aegidius, brother of Jakob and Joachim, who is mentioned
in this family transaction, it may be stated that he became a minister of the
Reformed Church. He is the Aegidius or Gilles BeciUs—another spelling of
the family name, being used by him because he wrote in Latin—who was
minister of the Reformed Church in Frankfort, and whose letters, dated
19/9/1559 (No. 38): 8/7/1561 (No. 56): 5/4/1562 (No. 63), extracts of which are
in my possession, are to be found in the Dutch Church, Austin Friars, London
repository of Archives. Certain references to family and age in these letters
are in accord with this statement.
While his son, John, whom I shall mention later, also became a minister
of the Reformed Church, and so moved away from Frankfort, the other
members of the family of Aegidius continued to live in Frankfort, and in due


course Jakob George Beck, a great-grandson of Aegidius, born in Frankfort,
became a merchant in London, and his son, Justus, who had migrated with him
to London and become a prominent merchant, was created a baronet by King
George I. His coat of arms proves that he was descended from the Beck
family of Aachen through Aegidius, it being stated in Macco’s volume with
the exception of the bird in the fourth quarter, a dolphin taking its place,
even as a fish in bend is substituted for the bird in the fourth quarter of the
Dutch Beck families’ coat of arms.
In Moens’ Register of the Dutch Church, page 202, there is a monumental
inscription which reads as follows:
“JACOB GEORGE BECK, Merchant. Born in Frankford at Mayne:
Dyed in London, 22 Jan., 1702-3.”
Aegidius’ son, Johannes Becius, was, as Mr. A. L. van Duin states:
“. . . first minister in Antwerp (presumably senior minister W. 8.), and after
the surrender of this town to Parma, he was minister at Emden. Letters dated
15th December, 1589; Nos. 1168, 1242, and 1258. 15th December, 1589, he was
minister in Dordrecht. Letters dated 6th December, 1600; Nos. 1486 and 1794.”
What an inspiration the writings of John Lothrop Motley, also his
correspondence in two volumes, edited by George William Curtis, have been
to me. As a student I had read much in Glasgow Libraries, etc., but Motley’s
works were known only by name. When, however, in my first year as a
Divinity student, United Presbyterian Theological College, Edinburgh,
Professor James Hislop, D.D., Chair of Ethics and Practical Training, in a
lecture which deeply stirred the class, quoted the closing paragraph of Motley’s
eulogy of William the Silent, the great Dutch patriot, contained in “The Rise
of the Dutch Republic,” Motley’s books were sought after by me. I immediately
purchased a copy of “The Rise of the Dutch Republic,” and when opportunity
offered I acquired copies of his other works. More deeply stirred would I
have been then, had I known that a member of the Beck family had played
so worthy a part in the siege of Antwerp.
I am not surprised that Willem Becx had an interest in the education of
those training for the ministry of the Dutch Church, and so contributed
towards their upkeep, for the Reformed Church, to which his family in
Aachen had belonged, was dear to his heart.
The Stolberg Reformed Church was helped financially by the Dutch Church,
Austin Friars, London, for in The collection of letters of Abraham Beck there
is one, No. 2061, dated November, 1630, which contains a grateful acknowledg-
ment from Isaac Beck, Stolberg, of the receipt of £35 from the Consistory
of the London Church, Austin Friars.
It is fitting that this should be mentioned as showing the interest the
Dutch Church, London, had in its brethren of the Reformed Church in
Europe.
Doubtless the case of the Reformed Church in Stolberg had been brought
before the Dutch Church Consistory by Abraham, who was an elder, and this
generous gift was the result.
Macco gives pedigrees of various Beck families who, with other old Aachen
families, were interested in the brass industry in Stolberg, and with some of
whom they became related in marriage. They carried on successfully as brass
manufacturers until the middle of the 17th century, when the name of Beck
disappears from the industry in Stolberg. Whither had their descendants
gone? They had joined other members of the family in Holland or moved
elsewhere in Germany.
I am indebted to Dr. Karl Schleicher for a fuller knowledge of these
Stolberg Beck families which I have gathered from his letters and book, but
am unable to set down many interesting notes concerning them.
He states on page 10 of his book that Gerlach and William Beck, the sons
of Peter Beck, called Davids, became brass manufacturers in conjunction with
their father on the property which he had acquired near Stolberg. In many
parts he bears testimony to the worth and standing of various members of the
Beck families in Stolberg during the 17th century. r
rr c 1 • 26 C


The passage on page 24 of how “Religious considerations were of conse-
quence to Peter Beck and Matthias Peltzer, and because of the Counter-
Reformation, brought about a condition that led to the seeking of another
place where the ground of a new existence might be laid by enterprising
people,” indicates the resolute spirit that possessed these men.
The counter-Reformation, thus mentioned in his book by Dr. Schleicher,
and in a lengthy, valuable genealogical letter to me, brought difficulty and
anxiety to many of the old Aachen families who had become Reformed Church
and had not only been engaged in the brass industry in that city but had
founded it in Stolberg, and as one reads the story so vividly told, one realises
what trials were undergone, and what sufferings and loss were endured because
of their loyalty and devotion to the reformed faith.
As a minister of the Presbyterian or Reformed Church, I am much
interested in the following extract, taken from page 52: “Naturally, also the
calamine was a disputable object of the brass manufacturers. On the 16th
May, 1616, Jeremiah Hoesch, Leonard Momma, Matthias Peltzer, junior,
through the Synod in Linnich, were suspended from the Lord’s Supper because
they would not be reconciled, slighted the deputies’ admonitions and (there
was) continuance in their bitterness.”
It is a true and striking picture of the discipline of the Reformed Church
in Geneva, France, Holland, Scotland, and other countries where the
Reformation followed the Reformed Church type, and one is vividly reminded
of “The Fencing of The Tables,” at a sacramental service in a Scottish Church
many, many years ago.
Among the valuable documents sent to me by Dr. Schleicher are leaves
from a book by Dr. Siegfried Schleicher containing beautiful illustrations of
the tombstones in the Finkenberg Brass Manufacturers’ Cemetery, also a plan
of the latter showing the position of a Beck tombstone. It is interesting to note
the many coats of arms of the manufacturers buried there. There is a full-
page illustration of the church and church-yard in which the beautiful
building and sculptured tombstones are strikingly portrayed. The explanatory
statements attached contain valuable genealogical data.
A poem of four stanzas on the ancestral cemetery has much poetic charm.
All have added much to the value of the genealogical collection concerning
the Beck family, and I regret that it cannot be printed in full.
Fortunate indeed was it for the Beck family of Aachen that the Nether-
lands adjoined, and that like conscientious principles had imbued its folk and
added to their sterling worth. So Joachim Beck had found his way thither,
settled down, and his family taken root. So, later came other members of the
family, entered into commercial undertakings and pursued scholastic studies,
and so we find mention of Henry Beck, who was the father of David Beck, the
painter.
I regret that I am unable to make use of the wealth of genealogical
information so freely and kindly placed at my disposal by the State Archives,
The Hague, Holland, or quote as freely as I would like from writings in the
columns of “Questions and Answers” in a number of copies of the magazine
of the Royal Netherlands Society for lineage and heraldry. “The Netherlands
Lion.”
There are many notable names among the Dutch families, but I can
mention only a few.
There is David Beck, born in Delft, 25th of May, 1621, the son of Henry
Beck, Schoolmaster, who had an interesting and successful career as a
portrait painter. He visited England, worked in the studio of Van Dyck, and
while in London became drawing master to the sons of King Charles I. Later
he travelled extensively, in the course of which he visited the French and
Danish Courts, and then found his way to Sweden where he found favour with
Queen Christina and was appointed Court painter. She entrusted him with
various missions in connection with her portraits which he carried out
successfully. He travelled also in Italy, and was there signally honoured.
Queen Christina, as a token of esteem, conferred on him a Swedish honour.
To those who are interested in his life story, I would recommend the Rotterdam


Year Book, 1917, in which there is an account of his life and works. It is
contained in an article, “Henry and David Beck,” by W. J. L. Poelmans, a copy
of which I was privileged to receive from The Hague, which I have read with
much interest, and from which this brief summary has been taken.
The following names in “The Netherlands Lion,” July, 1936, column 252,
will also prove of interest: “Governors of Curacoa: 1659 (or sooner)-1664,
Matthias Beck, 1664-1668, Matthias Beck; 1668-1669, William Beck (provis.)
1704-1709, Mr. Jacob Beck; 1709-1710, Abraham Beck.”
In column 282 of the August number, 1936, of “The Netherlands Lion,” one
learns that the families of Beck and Crommelin inter-married in Holland.


Chapter 111
THE FAMILY CREST AND COAT OF ARMS
According to Macco, Peter Beck of the patrician family Beck had a coat
of arms in 1489 which we now reproduce.
A later coat of arms, evidently a development, was used by his descendants,
which Macco describes thus:—
“Quarters, 1 and 4 a bird. 2 and 3 a star, crest a bird.”
Can anything concerning origin be inferred from the crest? According
to Beck of London the bird is a raven, and the family tradition and use of
Beck of Northern Ireland is in agreement with this. Taken in conjunction
with the origin of the name, it is a reasonable assumption that the family
was of Scandinavian descent. The raven is the sacred bird of Odin.
In a book, “The Heroes of Asgard” (English Literature Series), by A. and E.
Keary, adapted for the Use of Schools by M. R. Earle, on page XIII of the
Introduction there is the following:—“At Odin’s feet, in his palace of Glad-
sheim, sit two wolves. On his shoulders perch his two ravens, Hugin and
Munin (Thought and Memory) whom each day he sends out over the world
to bring him news of how men fare and what they do.”
The raven was a reminder of a memorable and historic past associated with
Odin himself.
The number of points in the star of the Beck coat of arms varied. Prom
a letter, dated October 2nd, 1954, containing much valuable genealogical data
concerning Beck families, which I received from the State Archives, The
Hague, Hallond, I quote the following:—“ln the Aachener Wappen I on
Tafel 5, Macco reproduces the arms of Gerlach Beck, 1605; quarterly, 1 and IV
a bird, II and 111 a six-pointed star; crest: a bird.”
According to Macco, I also note that in 1620 a coat of arms for seal was
used by Gerlach, Jakob, William and Baltasar Beck, and that it had a star of
five points in the second and third quarters.


There is another Beck coat of arms which was used in Stolberg, and I
am indebted to Dr. Karl Schleicher for sending me a copy of it. It is to be
found in Dr. Siegfried Schleicher’s book, page 20, being'one of the coats of
arms of twelve old Stolberg families printed thereon, and is here reproduced.
References to this coat of arms may be found in “The Netherlands Lion,”
March, 1932, Questions and Answers, column 93, and April, 1932, Q. and A.,
column 123, but the statements there made can not be discussed in this
brochure.
In regard to the crest and coat of arms, there are some points in regard
to date that are difficult to determine, but I think it may be taken for granted
that crest and coat of arms as set forth in the London Visitation of the
College of Heralds, 1633-35, were but a confirmation of crest and coat of arms
already in use among some of the Beck families in Holland, and thus the
right of Beck of Northern Ireland to either crest or coat of arms was inde-
pendent of London, there being descent from the same family. Had there
been no Visitation, Abraham’s crest and coat of arms had never been recorded.
The question may be asked: why did not Abraham use the coat of arms
of his father, Gerlach Beck, 1605, in the fourth quarter of which there was
a bird? I think this question may be answered by the opinion already
expressed that Anthony Victor was more familiar with the “fish in bend” in
the fourth quarter among Dutch Beck families, and Abraham being in contact
with Beck families in Holland as well as Stolberg, naturally acquiesced in the
alteration. This can be readily understood when it is remembered that John
Beck, Abraham’s son, married Catherina de Wael Rogiers at Middleburg
Zeeland, April 19th, 1636, and some years later, as already stated, settled down
in business there. ‘
In the search for proof I was interested to find in “The Netherlands Lion”
of April, 1932, “Questions and Answers,” column 93, a statement by William
J. Hoffman, that in the Public Museum, Utrecht, there was a Beck coat of
arms with “IV in green and silver fish placed sloping right.” (I use the term
“fish in bend” for this.)
But I was much more interested to learn from a reply to this in “The
Netherlands Lion” of April, 1932, “Q. and A.,” column 123, by Mr. R. T.
Muschart, that this coat of arms in this way likewise occurs on the seal of
Peter Beck, who appeared on the 7/4/1663 in court at Amsterdam as the
guardian of Maria van Nijhoff, John’s dau.-mother Catharina Beck (probably
the sister of Peter), and that while Macco in his description of the Beck coat
of arms speaks of the bird in the fourth quarter, the fish in bend had taken
the place of the bird later. This to me is proof that certainly in Holland at
least, about the end of the 16th century, or in the beginning of the 17th
century, the fish in bend took the place of the bird.


As I desired to learn how and when this coat of arms came to find a
place in the Utrecht Public Museum, I wrote to the State Archives, The Hague,
Holland, to ascertain if a photograph could be procured and its origin stated.
In due course I received a gracious letter in reply from Mr. B. van ’t Hoff,
Director of the State Archives of the Third Section, The Hague, intimating
that a photo, could be procured from the Centraal Museum, Utrecht, and
instructing me how to proceed.
Accordingly, I wrote to Dr. M. Elisabeth Houtzager, Directrix, the Centraal
Museum, Utrecht, Holland, concerning the matter of sending a money order
for the photo, and postage. Ere my letter reached Dr. Houtzager, she had seen
to the request immediately, and to my surprise and pleasure, the photo, with
an explanatory letter from Drs. J. P. W. Philipsen, Conservator of the
Historical Department, Centraal Museum, reached me much earlier than
expected.
I had hoped that the coat of arms was that of Peter Beck who had used
it as a seal, but I found that it was that of Catherine Beck, daughter of
Abraham Beck, of London, and in explanation thereof, I take the following
from Drs. J. P. W. Philipsen’s letter:
“The 1928 catalogue of the historical department in our museum has it
under nr 249, a series of eight small escutcheons in sculpted and painted
llmewood, probably sawed out of a sepulchral board.
“They are dated about 1730 and represent together the eight quarters
of one o fthe children of Egbert de Leeuw, since 1680 ‘ontvanger der huisgelden’
(town collector of a tax paid by house owners) at Utrecht: De Leeuw, Schade,
De Glarges, Michaelis, Hochepied, Van der Muelen, BECK, and De Wale.
They measure each 0. 13 x 0. 145 M.”
I am much indebted to Dr. M. Elisabeth Houtzager, Directrix of the
“Centraal Museum,” for her prompt and courteous action in forwarding the
photo., also for permission to reproduce it in this brochure.


Had this copy of the coat of arms been of Dutch origin, it would have
emphasised my statement re period and place concerning the substitution of
“the fish in bend” for “the bird” in the fourth quarter, but it does not in
the least detract from it. It but needs to be noted that Catherine only arrived
m Amsterdam probably about the time of her marriage in 1644 to Daniel de
Hochepied, was deceased in 1649, and it was therefore most unlikely that
such a change could have taken place in the coat of arms of any Dutch
family of Beck because of her influence.
One is surely correct in believing that Peter Beck in 1663, only 14 years
from the death of Catherine, or 19 years from her marriage in Amsterdam,
probably entirely unknown to him, being elderly as the guardian of Maria
van Nijhoff, and born probably about the beginning of the 17th century,
used this coat of arms as his seal because it belonged to his family. I am of
opinion that the alteration took place about the end of the 16th century or
the beginning of the 17th.
It should be remembered that there was not a rigid uniformity concerning
crest or coat of arms among the Beck families in Holland, and probably
among the Beck families in Aachen and Stolberg also. The Stolberg coat of
arms printed proves this.
The crest of Jakob Beck, 1705, at Curacoa, had a swan instead of the bird
or raven.
In a book, “The Heraldry of Fish,” by Thomas Moule, published by
JOHN VAN VOORST, London, MDCCCXLII, a copy of which I possess, it is
stated on page 41: “A dolphin forms part of the arms of Beck, a family of
foreign extraction. Sir Justus Beck, created a Baronet by King George I, in
1714, bore for arms, quarterly, Ist or, a blackbird proper; 2nd and 3rd, sable,
a mullet or; 4th azure, a dolphin hauriant or.”
This is confirmed by the illustration of Sir Justus’ coat of arms in the
book, “The Genealogical and Heraldic History of the Extinct and Dormant
Baronetcies of England, Ireland, and Scotland,” by John Burke, Esq. and
John Bernard Burke, Esq., London, 1841.
Sir Justus had used the mullet or star of five points even as his ancestor,
Peter Beck, had done in 1489.
Mr. William J. Hoffmann states in his Article, “Q. and A.”, column 98,
in “The Netherlands Lion” of March, 1932, that the coat of arms of Sir
Justus Beck is the same as that of the coat of arms in the Museum (Centraal),
Utrecht, with the exception of the 4th quarter.
This is not so, however, for the second and third quarters of the Beck
coat of arms in the Museum have stars of six points, as shown in the photo.
Having been informed that Sir Justus was probably a grandson of
Abraham Beck, I could not understand the silence of the Burkes’ book
concerning his lineage, nor how it came to pass that he did not use the
arms of Beck of London. My perplexity disappeared when I learnt from
that same Article of Mr. Hoffmann that he had been naturalised in 1703,
and was the son of Jacob George Beck and Maria. . . .
There is another coat of arms which we now reproduce; it is that of
Beck of Upton Priory, Cheshire, England.
That this family is of the same stock we can not doubt, though the
pedigree only begins with Thomas Beck of Salford and Upton, born 1777,
who married Sophia, daughter of Joseph Harrop of London and Upton in
1804. Though the crest is the same as that of Beck of London, the coat of
arms is entirely different. Had this family been descended from Beck of
London, the coat of arms would have been the same.
As John, the only surviving son of Abraham, had left London and settled
down in Middelburg, Holland, one can see the impossibility of this, being
persuaded that he is descended from an earlier migrant from Holland
possibly from the same line as Beck of Northern Ireland.


This use of the crest of the raven between wings is another traditional
testimony to the fact of this form of the crest being in use among some
of the Beck families before it became attached to Beck of London.
That the families of Beck who migrated to Ulster and are mentioned in
the Muster Roll of 1630 knew of their descent from the original family in
Aachen or Aix-la-Chapelle cannot be doubted; the two forms of the crest
having been used may be taken as sufficient proof of that fact.
John W. Beck discovered that the Papers by F. L. Berkeley in connection
with the Corcoran School of History, the University of Virginia, U.S.A., had
references to Becks, and having procured and examined abstracts, was
delighted to learn that they referred to members of the Beck family of
Northern Ireland.
William Beck of the Ardes branch, a grandson of one of the original
brothers one notes how the grandfather’s Christian name comes down in
orderly fashion had emigrated to Virginia, had done well in business, and
purchasing various properties, one of them being a plantation of 1632 acres,
had become a planter.
The following is one of several abstracts furnished to me by John
W. Beck:—
“No. 22, June sth, 1699. Richard Whitehead to William Beck, planter,
Indenture of Sale, 1,632 acres. King and Queen Counties, South Side of
Mallaponey River, Whitehead covenanting he is fully seized of the
Said land in fee Simple and will covenant Beck’s title.
Signed by Richard Whitehead and William Beck,
Beck’s crest being ‘a’ horn between two wings (crest probably being
somewhat indecipherable through wear and tear).”
Had the one who made the comment re the seal known the history of
the family, he would have realised that the blurred and indecipherable part
represented not a horn but a bird, especially seeing that the crest of the
younger brother who became his heir in 1710, and which he used as his seal
was described as “a fowl seated on a twig.”
This William Beck evidently had a son called Thomas who predeceased
his father, and so the younger brother John and his two nieces in Belfast
became heirs to William’s estate.


In Nos. 31 and 32 one learns that on April 29, 1710, “John Beck and
others, Belfast, Antrim County, Ireland, with John Scasbrick, mariner, Liver-
pool, England,” signed an Indenture re the estate, and that; “Two wax seals
bear the figure of a fowl seated on a twig, two others that of a kneeling man
worshipping the sun and a sunflower, with the motto, “Jadore qui me brule.”
The likening of the earlier form of the family crest, a raven on usual wreath
which John Beck, the younger brother used, to a fowl seated on a twig, is
certainly naive.
How much one would have liked to have been present when these docu-
ments were about to be signed, and thus to have met John Scasbrick, mariner,
Liverpool, about to sail for the Indies and Virginia.
Scaresbrek or Scarisbrick (Scasbrick is a contraction) is the name of an
ancient Lancashire family, and he was probably a descendant. He did not
use the family crest as a seal, but having wit and imagination, had one
made of a man kneeling and worshipping the sun and a sunflower with the
motto, “I adore who burns me.”
One can see the twinkle in his eye as he looked round the company and
drew it forth and affixed it to the documents. Did the legal dry-as-dust
atmosphere of the room vanish and the hot sunny one of the lands o’er the
Atlantic take its place? What tales of adventure he must have had to relate,
and what a joy to have spent an evening in his company.
So William Beck of Virginia, cousin once removed, of John Beck, Lisburn,
used the family seal of the raven between wings in 1699, or 1706, and his
younger brother John the earlier form of the bird or raven only, and John
Beck, later of Downpatrick, that of the raven between wings.
One is glad that in the early days of settlement in Ulster both families
remembered and made use of this ancestral family link, thus revealing that a
memorable and historic past had not altogether been forgotten.
Beck Crest and Coat of Arms (Har. Soc. Vol. XV)
This is the earliest form of the crest, the later form being that attachd
to the coat of arms of Beck of Upton Priory, Cheshire. Beck of London usd
the later form.


Not only to London, and from there to Ulster did the descendants of
Peter Beck find their way, but also to the Cape of Good Hope, South Africa,
where from a coat of arms in use such a belief may reasonably be inferred.
Through the kindness of Mr. H. Hardenberg, the Director-General of the
State Archives, The Hague, Holland, I have received photocopies of pages
32 and 33 of “C. C. de Villiers, Geslachtregister der Oude Kaapsche Familien,”
Tome I (Capetown, 1893); and page 16 of the booklet of A. Loxton, “Die
Afrikaner Voorgeslag met familiewapens. Vertaald deur Ch. J. Engelbrecht.
Kaapstad 1933. Nationale Pers, Beperk.” In the latter the coat of arms of
Johannes Zacharias Beck is shown as follows: —
One has but to compare this coat of arms with that of Sir Justus Beck
to realise that they belong to one and the same family of Beck, and that
even as a descendant of Peter Beck found his way to Frankfurt, so others
found their way to Langensalza, Stuttgart, and elsewhere in Germany, and
one or more of their children’s children, even as descendants from Beck
families in Holland, migrated to South Africa and founded families of Beck
there.
That is the only reasonable explanation that can account for such a
coat of arms being in the possession of such a family.
The Reverend Hendrik Beck, who preached his first sermon at the Cape
of Good Hope on the 23rd of April, 1702, may be mentioned as one of several
Becks who found their way to South Africa.
Concerning the members of the Beck family who have migrated to the
United States of America and founded families, much might be written, but
lack of space forbids. Suffice it to state that they are playing a worthy part
in that great country.
As one puts this tale of years of painstaking, genealogical research into
the printer’s hands, one is conscious that the task essayed is not as complete
as one would have desired perhaps some day hence another Beck of the
family of Northern Ireland will take up the task of further investigation and
find its final proof yet one is persuaded that the line of family descent
through Willem Becx, son of Joachim, is correct, and that he was the father
of William and John who went to Ulster during the Plantation, and that a


later William and John, grandsons of that earlier William, according to the
Berkeley Papers in the Corcoran School of History, the University of Virginia,
U.S.A., in 1699, 1706 and 1710, used the Beck family crest of the raven in its
earlier and later forms as their seals, even as John, son of the original
John, had the later form of the raven between wings attached as a seal
to his will made in 1718 and proved in 1722, certified as having been seen
and examined by John W. Beck with keen interest in the course of his
genealogical investigations in the P.R.0., Dublin, some years before its
destruction.
It is especially worthy of note that ere these proofs were discovered later
generations did the same, and that their faith in the family tradition has
been amply justified.
One is gratified to think that another family tradition, that of foreign
descent ere the Plantation of Ulster, apart from the substantial testimony of
the family crest itself, has been equally justified, and that the various families
of Beck of Northern Ireland can rest assured that they are entitled to the
crest and coat of arms “with fish in bend”, not because of a presumed descent
from Beck of London, but from the fact of kinship thereto, being descended
from the same family, it having been proved that they were already in use
among branches of the family in Holland prior to the Visitation of London,
1633-35, when they were confirmed to Abraham Beck.
Finally, and with this one would conclude; one is verily persuaded that
among the various branches descended from the Patrician Family Beck of
Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle) of fifteenth century repute, the family of Beck of
Northern Ireland may rightfully claim and take a fitting and honourable
place.


MOBBERUEY PARISH CHURCH,
Cheshire, England,
where Elizabeth Strettell, wife of John Beck, of Devoripatrick dauahter of
Hugh Strettell and Mary Hulme, born at Mansion? was
18th January, 1655.^




. y /CjQ
h**L (PaJC&uj'
/to Jj o~vv~<J fr-o (y-y^AAJ^Aj '
cA-4S*Xr-r~ e -' (Co /-


PRINTED BY
3L WU er
238 CASTLEREAGH STREET
SYDNEY






27 Baan Baan Street,
Dapt®,
N. S. Wales*
June 29th*, 1957*
Very Rev# Dr# Reid,
Roseville, N.S.W
Dear Dr# Reid,
Further Gleaningd fr«m the Bast " and
I enclose a copy ®f ray
am hoping that it will prove ®f interest t® y®u#
I had hoped t® see y®u at the General Assembly, but later ®n learnt that y®u had
sent an apology#
There are still valuable mss* in L®nd®n which will thr®w light ®n ®ur particular
family and ®ther Beck families allied t® it, and I am therefore continuing ray
research-work and am hoping that I shall be spared t® include it in a further
brochure.
I have received ph®t®o®pies ®f Quaker Records ®f the 17th. and IBth* centuries
in which there are interesting items concerning ray three-great grandfather and
grandm®ther, J®hn and Elizabeth Beck, als® ray three-great granduncles, Amos
and Abel Strettell, and other allied families, and am thinking of dealing with
these in a study ®f Quakerism. I would have liked t® include a chapter in the
present brochure but was unable to d® s® as I did n®t wish t® iiend more than £lOO
in printing and blocks at the present#
Families of Becks and friends in the old world and the new have been lately
writing t® me ab®ut ray research-work, and this brochure may influence those near
London to assist in the examination ®f relevant documents. It will als® interest
uy continental European correspondents and be some acknowledgment of their help#
Their lengthy, friendly genealogical letters have enriched, and added much zest
and joy t®, my life.
With kind regards.
I am.
Yours sincerely.
