

The Substance of an Address
DELIVERED BY
Rev. F. H. L. PATON, 8.D.,
IN
St. Andrew’s Hall, Wednesday Afternoon, 22nd March, 1911.
The Rev. F. H. L. Paton, 8.D., who called at Brisbane on his
way back from the far East, whither he had gone as a member of a
delegation from the Presbyterian Church of Victoria to inquire
into the spiritual needs of the Orient, and who had broken his
journey on the way back for the purpose of visiting the mission
stations in Cape York Peninsula, addressed a meeting of members
of the Queensland Women’s Missionary Union in St. Andrew’s
Hall, Creek Street, on the afternoon of Wednesday, March 22nd.
Mrs. Alexander Stewart (President of the Queensland Union)
occupied the chair. Several ministers also were present.
The Rev. F. H. L. Paton expressed the pleasure he felt at
being privileged to address that gathering about the work in which
they all were so deeply interested. They were particularly
interested in Korea through the sending out there of Miss Meenie
Campbell, who was to be followed by Miss Lang, who now was
preparing to enter upon the work there, and in regard to the
work in North Queensland they necessarily were more interested
than any other State, because the missions were situated in their
own territory.
Referring to the work in Korea, the Rev. gentleman said it
was difficult to speak calmly about such a subject. There was
such a commingling of pain and joy in that land, an admixture
of national humiliation combined with unparalleled progress in
spiritual matters. Of the political situation one might not speak,
except to say that the missionaries ought to have at the present
time the prayers of the whole Church, because of the very difficult


situation in which they found themselves. It was hard for the
Japanese to realize that neither the Christian church nor the
missionaries had anything to do with politics, their aims being
entirely spiritual.
Regarding the spiritual position of Korea one could not speak
without enthusiasm. Replying to the questions as to whether
the revival was being continued, he felt bound to say in one sense
that if by revival were meant the outward physical manifestation
that accompanied the earlier stages of the movement, the revival
was past. But if by revival were meant a deep spirit of love to
Jesus Christ, and an intense passion for souls, that moved men
and women to endure all kinds of hardship in order to bring their
fellow countrymen under the sway of Jesus Christ, then he could
assure them that the revival was still at its full height. In no
country that the delegates visited was there found such a manifest
tide of love sweeping through the Church. Being too poor to
contribute to the spreading of the gospel many earnest Koreans
were giving so many days of their time each year to this great
object. This entailed considerable hardship upon them when it
was remembered that even by working practically all the year
through they were hardly able to exist.
Dealing with the million souls movement, the Rev. gentleman
said although a million people had not yet been gathered into the
o Z a^n hur l f s 16 direct result of that movement, some
2,000,000 people had had their attitude to Christianity materially
altered. Had the Church outside Korea done its duty, certainly
he felt convinced the prayer for the ingathering of a million souls
would have been literally fulfilled.
One great result of the movement was the splendid training
m personal work which many of the native Christians had re-
ceived, so that through their earnestness and God-given skill in
dealing with inquirers thousands of their countrymen were being
brought into the kingdom. 6
As to the work generally in Korea, the people were being
nlled with love to Jesus Christ and also with a consuming passion
tor so much so that not only were they busily engaged in
endeavoring to spread the gospel amongst their fellow country-
men at home, but also they were pursuing them to various other
parts of the earth, whither they had emigrated. Indeed, where-
ever Koreans had gone, there the native church had sent mis-
sionanes to minister to their spiritual needs. One great feature
of the work in Korea was the self-supporting character of many
ru. ™ e , na^v ? lurches. The majority of these churches cost the
Church outside Korea nothing but the salary of the European


missionary who supervised the. wo* to each »“•
And this was done m spite of the direst pover brforej
members and adherents of those ’ , n( j the present
but they were even poorer at tonJ s that
economic outlook, conseque d intensity. The
that poverty would ww > m , support,
foreign churches, therefore d that tlm Koreans would
and in doingso.they
was absolutely
thmte carry o'n the good work of spreading
Christ’s kingdom in that necessitous coun ry.
Dealing with the question as to tire
wonderful revival in Ko . r ® a ’ ~, t hers w lr o might be able to
inquiries of the missionaries “ the delegates had
afford them any enhghtmen . ag general impression
found that in the first place it appears upon the people of
in Korea that God local purposes,
Korea not for the benefit of that nation J rfes and
but rather that the Korea g oriental countr i eSj bringing
evangelists travelling throug Divine Master. Already
the people there into oX™ was having its
in Chma and Japan ae noWe eflect 0 f
due effect So 1 ““j in jJ rea that it was far easier for
the preaching of the gosp fl their count rymen in Korea
KheT”untry, and it had beer, well -id "Ws
" 3TS& tulctist, and new sense of
the marvellous power of His gospel.
The second reason * d .“ d the
Koreans gave at present were giving up
and practice, -tully <o,u + j v 0 f God s word.
several weeks in the y e^ r ° r ti being to conduct Bible
Missionaries were set apart for the ® ho attended these
teStvn centres and con-
wonde rful spirit of prayer
the tmra reason gxv , Dvervthina was taken to
which prevailed among eP P ■ was laid before Him,
God in prayer by them. Kvery proo ts , knees Tkey
and the solution was soug also Relieved that prayer
believed entirely in prayer w hich God had given to His
afforded them a suof their work and the
people to assist them mth JV churches therefore were
praying CtaX and Cean Christians were praying Christians.


The last reason assigned for the movement was the great
personal work which the Koreans were at present engaged in.
So marked was this that the invariable question in conducting an
examination of a Korean applicant for entry into the church, was,
“ Have you been preaching the gospel to your neighbours ? ”
or “ Have you led anyone to Christ ? ” A negative answer to
those questions was bound to result in the rejection of the can-
didate for the time being. The Korean could not understand
a real Christian who did not bring somebody with him into the
kingdom.
The Australian church had a share in that great work, and
she had a special interest in the district of Ken Seng, with its
population of over 1,000,000 souls, and in which a small force
of missionaries were working from three centres.
So busy were the missionaries in some parts of the country
teaching the new converts that they had had for the time being
at any rate to suspend preaching to the heathen.
It was a hard life that the missionaries were living,
they were living that life in such a way as to beget in the heart
of the natives a deep love and reverence for them, and while he
could not withhold his meed of admiration from the men of the
mission he felt that he must lay the very highest tribute at the
feet of the women workers who were enduring hardships and
travelling under conditions that could not be described, and
scarcely could be imagined here. If the Church in Australia
only realised what difficulties and hardships the missionaries in
Korea had to face they would pray harder for them than ever.
The Koreans themselves were a fascinating, simple-minded,
other-wordly race, full of love, and appreciation for the people
who had come to teach them the Christian faith, and it was not a
rare thing to find them coming out, sometimes in a body of 200,
five miles from the city or village where they lived, to greet the
delegates from the Australian church.
The supreme need of the native churches in the extreme
south of the country was a deeper outpouring of the Holy Spirit.
They therefore met in the first week of the new year, and for four
days they prayed and talked about the receiving of the Holy
Spirit in the fullness of His power, and there came upon that
gathering a great outpouring of the Spirit, and the missionaries
went back to their various fields filled with the Spirit and feeling
that God indeed had visited them, and that their work in the days
to come would be more full of power than it had been in the days
which had gone by.


NORTH QUEENSLAND MISSIONS.
“ Coming to North Queensland,” said Mr. Paton, “ naturally
that was the fascinating field for every Australian. Everyone of
us must naturally feel that great as are the claims of other countries
upon us, the supreme claim upon every Australian, after our own
home mission work, is the work amongst aborigines. I had a
special desire to see this work, because of my knowledge of the
work amongst the black races in other parts of the world. I
therefore know the kind of difficulties that the missionaries have
to face. Thus I longed to see what was the result of the preaching
of the gospel amongst a people even more degraded than those
amongst whom I had been privileged to labor in the earlier years of
my life. I had heard a great deal and had read a great deal about
that work in your “ Miracle of Mapoon,” and I was quite prepared
to find that the actual condition of things would perhaps be a
little disappointing. When we read a good deal about some things
we often form exaggerated ideas of it, and when we come into
contact with the actual the ideal falls short. So that I went to
Mapoon quite prepared to be disappointed ; but I can honestly
say that after seeing work in the Pacific and also in the far East,
much as I had heard and read of the work at Mapoon and Weipa,
and the results of the work of Mr. Hey, and the other missionaries
there, no one can realize who has not seen it the miracle of grace
that has been wrought amongst the aborigines there. And in
considering that work you must not overlook the great difficulties
and obstacles which one has to overcome in working amongst a
black race. I know of some of the difficulties of dealing with
native races, but when I saw the difficulties which the missionaries
have to contend with in North Queensland I felt that those which
faced us in the New Hebrides were scarcely to be compared with
those which confront our noble friends in North Queensland.
First of all there was the difficulty of the degraded character
of the race. They are far below anything I have ever seen in my
missionary journeys. There is, therefore, the difficulty of ele-
vating a race so degraded as to be from a human point of view
almost hopeless. Then there are the difficulties of the contact
of that degraded race with the still more degraded specimens of
our own race. One finds it difficult to speak calmly when one has
seen the results of that contact upon these unfortunate aboriginal
people, and no one who moves about and sees what one cannot
fail to see even at the present day, of the results of that contact
of that weak and degraded race with the outskirts of our own
civilisation, can help being grieved to the heart, and one must feel
more intensely than ever the unpayable debt that we owe to that
unfortunate race. But fortunately there is another side to the
picture, and while I sat in the school and was really boiling over


with indignation at the signs I saw before me of the contact
between the two races, I was suddenly recalled to the presence
of the children by hearing what they were singing. It was—
“ There’s a wideness in God’s mercy,
Like the wideness of the sea ;
There’s a kindness in His justice,
Which is more than liberty.”
And when I thought of God’s mercy coming down to redeem these
people from the inhumanity of man I grew calm again, and I was
able to thank God for Mr. Hey, and for Mrs. Hey, and for Mrs.
Ward, who, under God’s blessing, had achieved these results,
and through whom the Lord Jesus Christ had stretched out His
almighty hand and had taken hold of these children to lift them
out of conditions of sin and shame, and to make them worthy
citizens of this great Commonwealth.
And then, again, in connection with this work there had been
the difficulty of the continual battle which our missionaries have
had to fight against the attempts of those who would like to see
the reserves thrown open, and the natives exploited for the sake
of gain, and I am sorry to have to say that they have had to fight
even against the influence of those who ought to have been their
warmest supporters in standing between them and the injustice
that comes from contact with the outside world. There are many
special difficulties that they have had to face, and that have
caused our missionaries not only to be continually striving with
the sin and the weakness and the degradation of the people whom
they are seeking to lift up to a higher fife, but they also had to
fight against outside influences which are continually seeking to
come in and destroy their work. But in spite of all the diffi-
culties the work which is being accomplished by our missionaries
in North Queensland is such that I do not think there is a more
wonderful work going on in the world, considering the difficulties
which have to be faced, and especially the degraded character of
the people amongst whom they are laboring.
One does not like to mention any one amongst our mission-
aries in particular, but I must say that one cannot help being
struck with the deeply Christlike character of the leader of that
mission. Ido not think I shall ever look upon the face of a man
who is a greater missionary, or who is more Christlike in character
than Mr. Hey. It is, therefore, an especial pleasure to be able to
bear testimony to him and his work. In view of the personal
attacks made upon him, and the attempts, not so long ago, to ruin
his career and to damage the influence of the missionary, it was a
deep joy to me to talk face to face with the police magistrate who
had been charged with the duty of investigating these allegations,


and to hear him say that there was nothing in them. “ I went,
said he, through the whole thing that I was appointed to investi-
gate, and there was nothing in it.” Of course, those of us who
know Mr. Hey and are acquainted with the noble work which he is
doing were aware that there was nothing in the charges preferred
against him, but nevertheless it was a source of great joy to hear
the verdict of the magistrate who investigated the matter, from
his own lips. No one could visit Mapoon and look into the faces
of the children without feeling that there was a people who, if
they were left alone with the missionaries, would be the very
happiest people on the face of the earth.
And what I have said about Mapoon and about Mr. Hey
applies equally to his colleagues who are doing a similar work,
perhaps under even greater difficulties.
For years Mr. Hey has been endeavouring to find a solution
of the problem of lifting up these degraded people and providing
them with something suitable to their temperament which wifi
insure a happy future for the race, and by patient toil and seeking
in many directions he has found this solution, and he has been
working it out for the last five years. When a young aboriginal
has graduated from the school, and a young girl also has graduated
from her school, and the times come when young couples ought
to be married, Mr. Hey gives them the option of settling down on
a little block of their own. If they desire to do so the mission
station finds them a cottage, and that cottage is presented to them
so as to give them a start in life. The block is bounded on both
sides by certain well defined boundaries, but it extends back as
far as the energy and industry of the young couple can carry it.
The cottage is paid for out of the earnings of a little cutter which
runs between the North Queensland reserves and Thursday Island,
carrying stores for the cattle stations inland. So that the young
couple with that block of land and a neat two-roomed cottage
have a very good start in fife. From that time onward, however,
they must paddle their own canoe ; everything in that little block,
including the whole of the produce, belongs to them.
Fifteen couples have been set up in this way, and one of
the most beautiful sights I saw in my travels was to look across
those blocks and see the maize, the cassava, the sweet potatoes,
and other plants which are being cultivated by these people,
knowing what it meant, knowing that these people had been lifted
up from an aboriginal condition and knowing that many of these
young people had been saved from degradation superinduced
upon their aboriginal condition by the evils of the white men. It
was, I say, one of the most beautiful sights my eyes rested upon, to


see those green fields, about 100 acres in extent, with cottages
dotted here and there, occupied by young aboriginal couples living
lives full of happiness and with every prospect of becoming one
of the finest communities on the earth if they are left alone in the
reserve, unmolested by the outside world ; but for that we still
have to fight.
That, I believe, is the solution of the aboriginal problem.
That is our only hope, and I believe the whole of the Church, and
the whole of the Christian conscience of this Commonwealth will
stand behind these people when it is learnt that nothing must be
allowed to intrude there. For this we must pray and work, if
we are to pay back the debt we owe to these unfortunate people
for the wrongs which they have suffered through our coming into
contact with them.
The work at the other stations also is being well maintained,
although the missionaries have many difficulties and discourage-
ments that are inevitable in such an undertaking. But if the
Church is behind them in prayer, I can see a promise of the working
of God’s Spirit in the hearts of the aboriginals, and in due time
our missionaries shall reap the precious harvest from the good
seed they now are sowing.” (Loud applause).
A vote of thanks was accorded to the speaker on the motion
of the Rev. Jas. Gibson, M.A.
