

[fOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.]
THE GREAT
MELBOURNE TELESCOPE:
AN EXAMINATION OF AND REPLY TO
THE OFFICIAL EEPOETS FEOI MELBOUENE
RESPECTING THE INSTRUMENT,
ITS ERECTION AT MELBOURNE, &c. } &c.
BY THOMAS GEUBB, F.E.S., &c.
*/♦
m h




PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
WSS& 11 0133
The statements which have from time to time emanated from
Melbourne respecting the Great Melbourne Telescope—so far as
these are of an unfavorable nature —being industriously published
by certain adversedly interested parties in England, must produce
a general impression that the instrument is undeserving of that
high character it received here from the eminently qualified Com-
mittee of the Royal Society, and other competent persons, who
have carefully inspected it during its construction, and sub-
sequently tested its performance.
Desirous that these statements should be estimated at their
true value, I, soon after their appearance, prepared a report, ad-
dressed to the chairman of the Telescope Committee, which, had
it been published, would probably have set the matter right; but
considerable delays occurring in the transmission of this report
between the members of the Committee, and meantime accounts
of a more favorable character arriving from Melbourne, it was
considered (at least by one member of the Committee) that matters
would soon right themselves, and thus the publishing of the report
fell to the ground.
The result is such as might have been anticipated. With the
exception of one item, the last yearly official report of the Mel-
bourne board, repeats, with some additions, the unfavorable
statements of the preceding year.
Under these circumstances, I consider it as due, not only to
myself, but to the members of the Committee, and those who
have taken an interest in the undertaking, not to remain longer
silent. Should the instrument which the Melbourne Government
munificently ordered at their own cost, not as yet afford as
brilliant results as were expected at Melbourne, or in this country, -
I hope to show that this is not due to either defect appei'taijfing
to the instrument, as sent from this, or oversight of its makers.
In doing this it will be necessary to refer to correspondehce, yx"
with Melbourne, for which there is already a precedent given
by the reports from thence.


THE EQUATORIAL MOUNTING, AND ITS ERECTION AT MELBOURNE.
The official -gtaff of the Melbourne Observatory evidently have
one special difficulty to encounter —the Government grants for
the support and extension of the establishment being more or
less dependent on its popular working.
Gerat results, and speedily to be obtained, were fully expected
from the G. M. T. on its reaching its destination, and notwith-
standing the short time (considering its magnitude) occupied in
erecting it, impatience was exhibited externally, while internally
the officials, instead of showing (as they could have done) that
such impatience was unreasonable, took the course of endors-
ing it by attributing the long time taken in the erecting to
deficiencies andmistakes in the instrument, and wrong instructions
received in respect of the piers. How far correctly will appear in
the sequel.
I am glad to find that the fast Melbourne Report of the visitors,
in one respect, thatof the Equatorial mounting of the instrument,
does ample justice to it in the following statements, which
will be found at page 6 of the Report for the present year
(1870): —
“ As a piece of mechanism, the telescope as a whole, is superb.
“ The facility, quickness, and accuracy with which it can be
“ directed to any point by one man is almost marvellous, especially
“ when the enormous weight of the moving mass is considered.
“Not less worthy of admiration is the precision with which
“ the clock movement causes the telescope to follow the star. In
“ these points it is difficult to perceive how the instrument
“ could have been better.”
Much, however, of an objectionable nature published in
the Melbourne Reports remains hitherto unretracted and un-
answered, and this I now proceed to discuss.
The first official report (subsequent to the arrival of the
instrument at Melbourne), contains the following :
“ Had the piers been built according to a tracing sent out by Mr.
“ Grubb (the maker of the telescope), they would have to be taken
“ down again.”
And the succeeding report (lately received) repeats the charne
as follows:
As regards the piers. In the drawings sent us by Mr Grubb,
“theßecess in the pier for the clock was too small by a con-
“ side'rahle amount, and had the piers been built, consisting as
“ they'd© of large blocks of finely cut blue stone, the south pier
“ at least would have to be taken down to rectify the error.”


Notwithstanding more than one communication from me to Mel-
bourne, which I conceive should have at least produced very grave
doubts of the propriety of repeating a statement involving the
competency or care of the engineers and constructors of the
instrument, yet the Board having done so, it is necessary that I
should refute it.
Now, I purpose to shew—
Ist. That the charge is unfounded.
2nd. That the mistake on which it is based originated at Mel-
bourne.
Now, first, the only drawing sent from this “ as instructions for
the erection of the piers” at Melbourne, was a tracing from a draw-
ing purposely made for the latitude of Melbourne, during Mr. Le
Sueur’s stay in Dublin, and while he had unrestricted access to the
instrument and everything connected therewith, including the
drawing ; and the “ recess in the pier” for the clock was (after
consulting with Mr. Le Sueur himself, and with his full appro-
bation), made in that drawing in size as follows, viz.:—Three
feet wide, four feet high, and quite through the pier ; also, and
with the same approbation of Mr. Le Sueur, the polar pier was
draAvn with vertical sides, but diminished at half-height by an
off-set of three inches at each side, making the upper portion of
said pier of that thickness which was required by the instru-
ment (viz., three feet.)
The tracing was forwarded (along with a tracing of a design
for a revolving roof) in October, 1857, through the President of
the Pioyal Society, I not being, at the time, in communication
with Melbourne. I heard subsequently, through the same chan-
nel, that the proposal for the revolving roof had been rejected,
from which it must be inferred that the tracings had duly reached
the authorities at Melbourne.
Now, had this tracing been used in erecting the piers, it would
have been found perfectly correct, and the recess for the clock
more than ample ; and the cost would have been saved of some
detrimental alterations made there in the instrument.
For the general proof of these statements I refer to the follow-
ing extracts. On the 31st December, 1868, Mr. Le Sueur writes
from Melbourne as follows: —
“ The piers were commenced only about a month ago, and are
“ now finished.” Again, “I am glad the piers were not built
“ before I came out, as, when I w r ent into the matter, I found that
“ they required considerable modifications.”
The next letter from Mr. Le Sueur, dated February 28, 1869,
contains the folloAving :
“ I have made a slight mistake, which, hoAvever, may be recti-
“ fied if found advisable. The south pier was built up of same


“ height (query thickness) throughout, not taper towards top, as
“ you had it in Dublin, so that the upper plummer blocks did
“ not reach over the side; so I had them lengthened. But
“instead of lengthening them only just enough to clear, and
“using a canted pulley on the side of wall, I lengthened them so
“ that outstanding part = radius of counterpoise weights, thus
“ enabling the weight to act without canting the pulley. This
“ lengthening, I find, now prevents the telescope from sweeping
“in declination when near meridian. When about an hour
“ off, however, it sweeps without hindrance. This will not inter-
“ fere with observations much, but simply require attention in
“ reversing,” &c.
The foregoing extracts show that the instrument is admitted
by Mr. Le Sueur to have been erected under disadvantageous
alteration—how “ much,” will be apparent from his own state-
ment. In the Eeport, the “ alterations and improvements” made
by Mr. Le Sueur, &c., are held up as of such importance that
without them the instrument would have been nearly if not alto-
gether useless ;* while (I would observe) the acknowledged “mis-
take” is not attributed by Mr. Le Sueur to any error in the draw-
ing, nor does he in either letter, make any allusion to the clock
* Here I am not alluding {only') to the laudatory accounts given in
the Melbourne Papers of the “ improvements by Messrs. Ellery and
Le Sueur.” In the last Eeport of the Melbourne Board a letter of mine is
quoted, of which the only portion which need he quoted here is as follows :
When this instrument left Dublin it was in perfect working order, and re-
quired no alteration whatever, (except that most trifling and foreseen one in
connection of the clock, due to the difference of latitudes). The Board
go on to state as follows ;
“ In reply to these remarks, the Board has to state that the exact latitude
“ of the place was communicated to Mr. Grubb before the construction of
“ the telescope was commenced, and it is to be regretted that these altera-
“ tions, of which Mr. Grubb saw the necessity, were not made in his work-
“ shop, so that the telescope might have been sent out in all points ready
“ for use.”
“ The Report of the Government Astronomer, which is appended, gives a
“ detailed account of the alterations which it was absolutely necessary to
“make in order that the telescope might be used at all; and though these
“ are, as Mr. Ellery states, of no great importance in themselves, they
“ become so, as establishing the fact that, in one respect at least, about which
“ there can be no dispute, the telescope was not fit for use in Melbourne
“ when it left Dublin.”
Now, the fact so triumphantly paraded by the Melbourne Board, as “ about
which there can be no dispute,” amounts to this —that I did not, previous to
the packing up of the instrument in Dublin, attempt to adjust the length of
the two small shafts and the plummer block, which form the connection
with the driving clock, for the difference of latitudes of Dublin and Mel-
bourne. It was never contemplated to make this adjustment here, as it could
only be done with certainty on the spot (at Melbourne); and it was left
undone here both in accordance with the contract and with the approval of
the Committee. It should have been done at a cost of some 40s. or 50s , and
without incurring an hour’s delay, during the erection of the instrument at
Melbourne.


recess having been too small, or give any clue to where the draw-
ing was assumed by him to have required modification in the
erecting of the piers. (Subsequent disclosures indicate why he
was not more communicative on these points.)
At length, -writing to Mr. Le Sueur in the November following,
complaining of his silence in the matter, and mentioning my
having drawn up a report, addressed to the Chairman of the
Telescope Committee, I left it to him to show, if he could, that
any modification, and what (in my drawing for the piers) was
necessary.
Which requisition brought the following statement from Mr.
Le Sueur, viz. :
That the size given in my drawing for the clock recess was
two feet eight inches by one foot eleven inches.
Whereupon, conceiving that he must have used a wrong scale
in the measurement, I wrote to him (January 26th, of this year)
as follows ; —•
“Your statement respecting the size given in the tracing for the
“ clock aperture would, indeed (if correct), show a gross error on
“ our part, but you cannot expect me to believe (except it be ac-
“ finally placed before my eyes) that my son, when taking a tracing
“ from a drawing in which the clock hole is represented as three
“ feet wide by four feet high, could make the tracing to represent
“ it as two feet eight inches, by one foot eleven inches, as you
“ stated it, and therefore I must call upon you either to confess
“ that you have been in error, and that the tracing shows three
“ feet by four feet for the size of the clock aperture, or, to send
“ the tracing to the care of Dr. Eobinson, as Chairman of the
“ G. M. T. Committee, for inspection and confirmation.”
In reply to which requisition, Mr. Le Sueur sent Dr. Eobinson
a tracing, not that which was taken from the drawing, the details
of which Mr. Le Sueur while here had been consulted upon, and
which, as I have already stated, had been sent as my instructions
for the piers, but another tracing which had been sent in 1866
to Professor Wilson, as giving “ a good general idea of what will
“ be required in the way of masonry,” and under caution not to
use it further than for the foundation of the piers.*
* It was shortly after the contract for the instrument had been signed
(in 1806) that Professor Wilson (then Secretary, now a member of the Mel-
bourne Board) wrote to me requesting information on several points con-
nected with the instrument, including that of the piers. In reference to
this last point, I sent bim a tracing of a rough drawing which I told him
gave “ a good general idea of what will be required in the way of masonry,”
but that “ the details of the clock are still subject to consideration and ex-
periment,” and therefore I deferred to “ limit the size of the aperture in
“ the pier for containing it, but that there is no objection to the foundation
“ being proceeded with.” It was only recently that I even suspected the use,
or (to speak more correctly) the abuse, which has been made of this tracing.
On suspecting it I wrote to Professor Wilson, inquiring whether it was pos-


So far then as the piers of the instrument are concerned, there
has been a double mistake at Melbourne, viz.:—First, the allowing
of a tracing sent under the caution above described to get into
Mr. Le Sueur’s hands, without that caution being annexed ;
Secondly, the mistake of Mr. Le Sueur in using that tracing
instead of the true one, with which he was so well acquainted
here; and while it has been attempted to throw the onus upon
me, I have been kept in ignorance of the circumstances.*
THE SPECULA OF THE GREAT MELBOURNE TELESCOPE, AND THE
MELBOURNE REPORTS CONNECTED THEREWITH.
The metallic specula supplied with G.|M. T., consist of two large
mirrors (denominated A and B), and two small (a and b). Mirrors
A and B were cast from the same admixture of metals, pre-
viously prepared. Speculum Ais that which was generally used
here during the temporary erection of the Equatorial mounting,
and which was fully tested and approved of by the Telescope
Committee of the Eoyal Society. Speculum B was not con-
sible that it could have been, by mistake, used in the erection of the piers.
To which Professor Wilson replied as follows :—“ At present the Board is
“ engaged in examining and investigating for the purpose of reporting
“ officially to the Government on the telescope. You cannot, therefore, expect
“me to express any opinion just now. I will send you a copy of the Report
“when printed.” This letter is dated April 23rd, 1870. I have received
a copy of the Report. It contains no allusion to my query, nor have I had
any subsequent communication from Professor Wilson. I perceive, how-
ever, that the Board published a letter of Mr. Le Sueur, addressed to the
Government Astronomer (dated six days subsequently to Professor AVilson’s
letter to me) which contains the following statement:—“ The only instruc-
tions received from the makers for the erection of telescope, are, so far
“ as I am aware, contained in the tracing of piers sent out to you,” (Professor
Ellery,) “by Mr. Grubb.”
* The Board, at page 4 of their Report, state that in addition to adjusting
the connection with the clock, the only alterations made at Melbourne are
the card-board disc and a small shifting of the eye-stop, and that it is to
these I refer as injurious.
In this there is considerable mistake. The alterations to which I mainly
referred, and which the Board, when writing their Report, appear not to
have been cognizant of are, as follows :
Ist. —The “ modifications” stated by Mr. Le Sueur to have been made in
my instructions when constructing the piers.
2ndi—The mistake by Mr. Le Sueur of making the polar pier too thick
hy six inches.
3rd.—The alteration smade in the instrument for suiting it to the over-
thickness of the piers, whereby the instrument has been placed
under permanent disadvantage in respect of its movements.
4th.—To which I may add an apparent one in the alterations, temporary
or permanent, in eye-pieces.


sidered as finished at the time of the Committee meeting here
for the trials. It was subsequently polished, and finally ap-
proved of by Mr. Le Sueur, my son, and myself, as fully equal to
speculum A. The specula were, in accordance with the instruc-
tions of the Committee, previous to packing, coated with a
solution of shell-lac in alcohol, as practised by Mr. Lassell.
Having thus premised, I turn to the Melbourne Keport for the
last year, which, at page 12, states as follows ;
«At first the large mirror (called A) was mounted in the
“ telescope, but the definition with either of the small mirrors
“ was not good, and it soon got strongly tarnished. Subsequently,
“in September, mirror B was substituted, and the telescope
“performed much more satisfactorily.”
All which is readily accounted for by statements in letters
previously received here from Mr. Le Sueur, viz.:—•
Ist.—That he found it impracticable to entirely remove the
shell-lac coating.
2 nc p—That with his best exertions, the surface remained sticky
in parts.
3rd.—(On being questioned as to the particulars of his process,
and the possibility of his having used methylated spirits instead
of alcohol), he admits having used methylated spirits, and states
his process to have consisted in brushing it over the surface, and
then mopping well with water. (He excuses the using of methy-
lated spirits as been overruled by Mr. Ellery.). In his letter to
Professor Ellery, published with the last Melbourne report, the
process is again described, but with no essential difference. It is
verbatim as follows :
“ The varnish was removed from mirror A in the following
“ manner :—Large pieces of cloth were placed on the surface,
“ and saturated with methylated spirits ; when the varnish was
“ sufficiently softened, as much as possible was removed by mop-
“ ping up with clean cloths (this process was repeated many
“ times), distilled water was then freely used, and finally pure
“ alcohol.”
The Melbourne Board, referring to the process mentioned in
the above extract from Mr. Le Sueur’s letter, state that—“ It is
“ difficult to see how it can have had any deleterious effect upon
“ the polish of the speculum.”
No such difficulty however exists on considering the rationale
of the treatment, which includes the deposition on the polished
surface of a substance differing essentially from the original, and
only soluble in very strong alcohol. I cannot understand how
Mr. Le Sueur came to the conclusion stated in his letter, in the
appendix to the report, that the method he employed could not
be supposed to have any deleterious effect on the polish, after
stating, as he had previously done, that he found it impracticable


to entirely remove the shell-lac coating, and that with his best
exertions the surface remained “ sticky” in parts, and afterwards
the speculum tarnished quickly.
The process was radically had, and it is evident by his own
statement, that the surface was, after his attempts at cleansing
it, left in an unclean state, and to expect under such circumstances
that it would not tarnish, and that quickly, would he quite absurd.*
I shall here add a few corroborative facts, viz.:—After months
of use at Dublin, this speculum’s surface exhibited no tarnish.
2nd. After the speculum arrived at Melbourne (some portion of
the surface being denuded of varnish, probably with alcohol), it
Avas described in the report for that year as exhibiting a “ very
tine polish.” 3rd. Speculum B, cast of the same metal and
coated with the same varnish as A, has, according to Melbourne
reports, been really cleaned from the varnish, and has not since
shown sensible tarnish, although the soap used in cleaning it
was likely to have dimmed it. 4th. The centre-piece, of eight
inches diameter, cut out of speculum A in forming its central
hole, was polished here shortly after speculum A had been, and
on several occasions it has been coated with the lac varnish,
which, after remaining for months, has been removed without
difficulty, simply by alcohol (but no water), and without injury to
the surface, which still remains in good working order. There is
abundant evidence, especially in the last item of the foregoing,
to show that speculum A has become unfitted for present use,
solely from injudicious treatment at Melbourne.
The Melbourne report, so far from acknowledging this, attempts
to turn the tables on me by assuming that this speculum (which
was approved of by the Committee) was “not good.”
* A somewhat different statement appears from Mr. Le Sueur in his letters
in the appendix to the report. He says that after his “cleaning process,”
the mirror A was then “fairly bright, and appeared perfectly clean; close
■“examination afterwards showed that a faint trace of lac still remained on
“ the surface, which became considerably tarnished after short use.”
He attributes the tarnishing which ensued not to the thin film, hut to
the metal (although mirror B of same metal, has not sensibly tarnished),
and he attributes the streaky marks, which he could not remove, not to his
own imperfect removal of the film, but (contrary to all evidence) to the
brush used in laying on the varnish here.
Respecting mirror B, his letter aforesaid states—“ That the varnish was
“ removed from B by means of naphtha, mopping as before, washing with
“ soap and water, and finally with distilled water. The mirror, though at no
“ time very bright, is still in fair working order.” From the last statement
{this mirror having left this with an excellent polish), I conclude that it also
has suffered, though compared with mirror A, but little—from the water
process. Water, though probably innocuous in itself, appears to have the
property of throwing down other substances upon the polished surface. For
instance, if on stopping the polishing machine, the wet polisher be allowed
to remain stationary for a short time on the speculum, a distinct impression
of the pitchy patches of the polisher may be observed. Mr. Le Sueur
had opportunities of witnessing this -while here. Why he used water at all,
more especially in the case of speculum B, I cannot explain.


Referring again to the paragraph of the report which states
that—
“ At first, the large mirror A was mounted in the telescope,
“ hut the definition with either of the small mirrors was not good,
“ and it soon got strongly tarnished.”
This is succeeded by a paragraph, in which some suggestions
of the President of the Royal Society (made as probably account-
ing for the telescope not being found satisfactory at Melbourne),
are set aside as conveying a wrong impression. This paragraph
concludes with the following words No simpler explanation
of the defect can be made than that mirror A is not good.”
A very simple explanation, no doubt; but resting solely on the
unsustained assertion of persons who acknowledge elsewhere that
they have no experience in instruments at all approaching in size
that of the G. M. T., and whose “ ipse dixit” is in direct opposi-
tion to the previous decision of the Telescope Committee. So
far for the statements respecting speculum A.*
Now, with respect to mirror B.
This mirror B appears from the report to have been for some
time in use with the small mirror a.
The only fault found, apparently, with the telescope so consti-
tuted is, that it gives a slightly cruciform image of a star —a fault
which did not appear when mirror B was finally tested and
approved of here, as being fully equal in definition to mirror A.
The fault is not, therefore, fairly attributable to the large specu-
lum B, but, probably, to the small mirror a, which was re-polished
at Melbourne, as nothing short of the most scrupulous care in the
supporting of a mirror on the polishing machine could insure
freedom from strain during the polishing, and a perfect figure
when removed.
The usual and palpable methods for ascertaining where the
defect lies (such as turning the small mirror round in its cell, or sub-
stituting the other —un-repolished—small mirror) do not appear
to have been tried. Neither was examination made of whether
any of the balls of the supporting levers of the large speculum
*This mirror (A) in tarnishing, becoming unequally so, has given rise to
a suggestion at Melbourne that it is composed of two different alloys not
thoroughly mixed. This, I consider it would be impossible to effect even by
design. The tarnishing is described as having two distinct appearances, one,
that of large patches of the surface being more tarnished than others, this
is accounted for by another statement, viz. :—That after the cleaning (?) the
surface remained “ sticky” in patches. The other appearance, viz., that of a
mottled or reticulated appearance in the tarnishing, I conclude to arise from
the tendency which speculum metal has to assume a crystalline structure, and
which under a strong tarnishing influence (and we know not to what extent
this may have occurred) would, very probably, develop this appearance. The
contrast between the reported state of this speculum at Melbourne, and the
actual state of the centre portion of the same casting here (after several
coatings and removals of the lac varnish mentioned elsewhere), is not without
its significance.


had got out of place during the transit—(a thing quite possible,
and which actually occurred in the case of another speculum
lately constructed here.)
Whatever be the cause of this appearance, it must (judging
from the accounts of the astronomers) be very slight. Mr. Le Sueur,
writing, says :—“ It is not a conspicuous feature by any means,
nor is it permanent,” and that it most probably arose from some
abnormal condition of the levers, and that once remedied, they
would get rid of this cruciform image ; while Professor Ellery (the
Government astronomer), in his report, states that the mirror
B performs very much better than A; that the telescope will
now, doubtless, compare favourably with others of its class and
dimensions, and that Mr. Le Sueur entirely coincides with him
in this expression of opinion.
The Melbourne Board, however, appear to have seen this cruci-
form image under considerable exaggeration of the usual appear-
ances, and that portion of their report which relates to it, is at
once so curious and illogical, that I give it “in extenso
“In the report of the Royal Society of London it is stated * the
“ Committee found that the light of even large stars was collected
“ into hard and perfectly circular discs, free from rays.’ This
“ clause of the Committee’s report presented great difficulty to the
“ members of the Board who examined the telescope, and not-
“ withstanding the fact that Mr, Le Sueur stated in his report,
“ with reference to the testing in Dublin, that to his eyes, ‘ with
“no combination of mirrors, and on no day or night, were stars
“ defined in a manner at all approaching to that described in the
“Committee’s report,’* they felt it to be incredible that gentle-
“ men of the high scientific position of the members of the Com-
“ mittee could have seen what the members of the Board saw,f
“ and have written as they did. This difficulty, however seems
“ be removed by the fact that speculum B—the one now in use
“ —was re-polished after examination by.the Committee. This is
“ clear from the following passage in a letter from Dr. Robinson
“ to Mr. De La Rue; —
“ c Speculum B was re-polished to remove a slight diffusion of
* Doctor Eobinson states that Mr. Le Sueur never even hinted this
opinion of his either to himself (Dr. Eobinson), or to other members of the
Committee.
Mr. Le Sueur’s statement to the Board differs essentially from what he had
previously communicated in a letter to Dr. Eobinson, viz. :
“It was incumbent upon me to show that an ordinary inexperienced eye in
“ ordinary weather could not expect to see stars as hard, sharp, and perfectly
“ circular discs, free from rays. Something not far from this, however, I have
“ seen on few and far between occasions for a few moments.”
f What the members of the Board did see was (according to their own
report) the cruciform image, and of which Mr. Le Sueur, in another place,
states that they would not have noticed the circumstance at all had he not
directed their attention to it.


“ ‘ liglit which you noticed, and which was perfectly removed by
“ 1 the process. His command of figure is so great that lam certain
“ ‘ this speculum also was perfect when it left his hands.’
“ From the words in italics it appears that the Committee
“ never tested this speculum in its final state, and that it was
“ sent out entirely in reliance on Mr. Grubb’s well-known com-
“ mand of figure.
“ This circumstance entirely relieves the members of the Board
“from the unpleasant position of differing from the members of
“ the Committee on so simple a matter of fact.”
In the last paragraph the Melbourne Board gratulates itself
upon the assumption that this repolishing of mirror B relieves them
from the unpleasantness of differing with the telescope Committee;
forgetful, to all appearance, that mirror B has been approved of
by their own officials at Melbourne as superior to that mirror
which had been fully tested and approved of by the Committee,
and that it also had (previous to its leaving Dublin, and to either
of the large specula being coated with the varnish) been pro-
nounced by Mr. Le Sueur, myself, and my son, as fully equal to
speculum A.
ALTERATIONS IN DETAILS AT MELBOURNE.
At page 13 of the last Melbourne report is the following:—
“ The principles of the Cassegrain telescope are fully under-
“ stood. No experimental alterations have been made except such
“as were actually required to get the telescope to perform at all,
“ and from all I can ascertain the adjustments have been more
“ carefully and critically made than they were in Dublin.”
And at page 4 of the same report it is statedthat “ the only other”
(other refers to the equatorial mounting) “ alterations which have
been made” are a card-board disc and a small shifting of the eye-
stops.
Thus, in one part of the Melbourne report, it is stated that no
experimental alterations have been made except such as were ac-
tually required to get the telescope to perform at all, while, in
another part of the report, it is stated that the only alterations
made in the telescope were the addition of a card-board disc and
a small shifting of the eye-stops.
Now, these two statements are inconsistent, for the telescope
performed (not merely at all, but) very well in Dublin without the
card board disc, and with the eye-stops as adjusted by the maker, and
it is absurd to say that it would not do the same at Melbourne, if
placed under similar conditions. The simple state of the matter is,
that the necessity of Mr. Le Sueur’s card-board disc was caused by
his own shifting of the eye-stops. It, indeed, only requires the prin-
ciples of the Cassegrain telescope to be fully understood to perceive


that the card-hoard disc cannot he of use except in some few
extreme cases, and, when not of use, that it must be a disadvantage;
and in regard of the position of the eye-stops, the report is com-
pletely in error in what it attributes to Dr. Robinson and insinuates
as to myself. The report states that Dr. Robinson now agrees
that the disc is necessary “if the eye-stops are retained in the
“ places originally assigned to them by Mr. Grubb.” Now, Dr.
Robinson states exactly the reverse of this, viz.,:—That the disc
is not necessary if the eye-stops he in the position assigned to them
by Mr. Grubb, hut that a disc will be required if the eye-stops
he far removed from that position.
The following may serve as another instance of inconsistency
When the intention is to show that there are no grounds for
the statement that the telescope had been injured at Melbourne,
the report states as proof of this, that “ the telescope, since its
“ arrival, has been in the charge of Mr. Le Sueur, who was
“ selected by the Telescope Committee themselves and then the
report gives an extract from a letter written by Dr. Robinson to
the President of the Royal Society, including the following re-
specting Mr. Le Sueur:—“ He is thoroughly versed in its (the
“ G. M. T.) optical and mechanical requirements ; and for the last
“ three months he has been constantly in Mr. Grubb’s works,
“ studying all the mechanism of the telescope (of which I see he
“has acquired full command), and taking an active part in the
“polishing of the specula, &c.”
Upon which the Board remarked as follows :
“ The Board considers it in the highest degree improbable that
“ a gentleman so selected, and who subsequently enjoyed such
“opportunities of becoming familiar with every point in the con-
“ struction and working of the telescope, should have been guilty
“ of such errors as the opinions expressed in England seem to
“ attribute to him.”
But when it becomes the desire of the Board to show that no
alterations had been made in ignorance or neglect , the following is
given as proof, viz. :
“ As to Mr. Grubb’s statements, &c., Mr. Le Sueur reports
“ that, concerning the mechanical and optical arrangements, I
“ received no explicit instructions whatever.”*
The Board had, of course, the right to choose either of the two
foregoing and very opposite statements for their argument, hut
not, I apprehend, to use both.
* How far this statement of Mr. Le Sueur is consistent with facts, may he
gathered from the circumstances, that not only during the many months that
he was here for the express purpose, every facility and assistance was
afforded, and every pains taken to make him fully up to the details of con-
struction and management of the instrument; hut also when the time was
approaching for the taking down and packing up of the instrument, and he
appeared indifferent about being present, I impressed upon him the great
importance of his presence, and the careful noting of all the details of the
process, as guide for himself at Melbourne.


ADDENDUM.
Since the foregoing pages were penned, an examination of Mr.
Le Sueur’s statements, published in the appendix to the Melbourne
report, respecting eye-stops, and his large disc, obliges me very
reluctantly to resume the subject.*
Mr. Le Sueur, after nominally giving Dr. Robinson’s arguments
against the “ large disc,” (although he merely gives an outline
of them,) proceeds to state as follows. I underline those parts
to which I particularly refer :
“ I stated also that when the eye-stops were placed in or very
“ near the plane of image of small mirrors—this mirror plus
“ cell did its light stopping work effectually, without the addition
“ of disc —but that with the stops pushed into the position assigned
“ by the makers, the disc was in my opinion absolutely necessary.”
Again —
“ Dr. Robinson concedes that the disc is necessary if the stops
“ are pushed in from the normal position, A feiv moments’ in-
“ spection at the telescope will be sufficient to show that the position
“ assigned by the makers, is (for lower processes especially) con-
“ siderably within the normal one —hence the necessity of the
“ disc.”
These statements not only include a palpable absurdity, but
are in other respects highly erroneous. They are absurd in
stating the necessity for the disc ; while admitting that when the
eye-stops were placed in a certain position, there Avas no need of it
(the work was done “ effectively” without it); and the statement
that the position for the eye-stops, Avhichmade the disc necessary,
was that assigned by the makers, is totally erroneous. The
makers never assigned or approved of, but, (as I shall show),
thoroughly discountenanced any other position for the eye-stops
than the normal one, in Avhich they Avere used here,t and the ex-
* * Mr. Le Sueur’s statements have led the Government Astronomer at Mel-
bourne to state in his last official report, that Dr. Robinson noAV agrees
that the disc, Avhich had met Avith much opposition on his and my part, is
necessary, if the eye-stops are retained in the place originally assigned to
them by Mr. Grubb. lam authorised to state that Dr. Robinson never
said this, or anything like it, but exactly the opposite.
+ The following is an extract from my letter to Mr. Le Sueur, of November
17th, 18C9:—
“ It is further a matter of regret to myself and others, that scarcely is
“ the instrument erected at Melbourne, when alterations are made or sug-
“ gested, as improvements, or necessary, which are neither of these, but
“ contrariwise, and which so long as acted upon, must prejudicially affect the
“practical working of the instrument. Of the latter class there is the
“ assumption, contrary to all experience, of the necessity of introducing
“an opaque disc, stopping off just double the diameter of the central


tracts which I append from Mr. Le Sueur’s letters, clearly show
,£that it was he who prepared,- and had adopted (while we have
objected to), this alteration of the eye-stops.
I should here mention that the eye-stops of the eye-pieces of
the Great Melbourne Telescope, were constructed with special
provision for accurate adjustment. Besides being adjustable la-
terally by four opposing screws, this part was soldered into a short
tube, sliding stiffly within another attached to the eye-piece, and
ample range, not only for adjustment, but also for experiment
was in the lower eye-pieces thus provided; and these eye-pieces
were used here (I need hardly add), quite to the satisfaction of
the committee and others. Now, Mr. Le Sueur was perfectly
cognizant of these details, and approved of them.
It is evident, from this premised description, that while Mr.
Le Sueur might state, he could not possibly “ show,” by reference
either to telescope or eye-pieces, the position assigned by the
makers for the eye-stops; but a plausible (while factitious I case
might be made out by pushing the sliding tubes in to their fur-
thest limits, and asserting that the eye-stops were then in the
position “ assigned by the makers.” If such be Mr. Le Sueur’s
tactics, they are very reprehensible, both as respects Dr. Bobinson
and the “ makers.”
But, besides this, there are strong indications in Mr. Le Sueur’s
letters that he has been doing more than jmshing in and pulling
out the eye-stop tubes : it would appear that in one instance at*
least, he has altered them.
In the lowest power eye-piece (to which it will be seen Mr.
Le Sueui pai ticularly refers), the proper distance between eye-
stop and eye-lens is (in round numbers) three inches; and the
sliding-tube admitted of the eye-stop being pushed jierhaps three-
tenths of an inch within the proper position, and of being drawn
out far more than that quantity exterior to it, and still slide stiffly.
Now, in one of his letters, Mr. Le Sueur speaks of “ pushing in
the eye-stop tube until a position is reached (one and a-half inches
for large eye-piece).”* This could not have been done without
portion of the speculum which is requisite, or which you may recollect
( as squired here. This assumption, which, probably, was a result
Jot your previous attempts at improving the eye-pieces, which had been
carefully adjusted here, I had supposed when first reading of it to he a
‘‘sudden idea of yours, and I certainly was surprised to observe from your
“ last received letter, that you continued to use this unnecessary and detri-
“ mental disc; but I trust that Dr. Robinson’s remarks on the subject in his
‘‘letter to you will have convinced you; and that so far as the eye-pieces and
the extra disc are concerned, you have found it desirable to restore the
“ instrument to its previous condition.”
* Phis is mentioned in his letter to Dr. Robinson of June, 1809 I give
the whole passage as curious I take it that eye-stop should be where star
„ r! p cr ° s . s > and moreover, that this position is only very slightly within
„ plane of image of small mirror. Now, when eye-stop is placed in said
plane, the eye actually sees the small mirror, and continues to see it


previously shortening one of the tubes, probably by an inch.
Had the statement been that of placing- an eye-stop one and
“ fringed with colours, while eye-stop is pushed in a considerable distance.
“ A position is at length reached (one and a-half inches for large eye-piece),
“ where the colours are thrown to borders of field, but by no means out of
“ it. This is the only feasible position for practical observation, and appears
“tome to difier unaccountably from true theoretical position. Moreover,
“ the fact that stop is no longer near plane of image of small mirror, appears
“ to me to increase the difficulty of getting rid of direct light.”
This was followed in the succeeding month (July, 1869), by a letter to my
son, containing the following:—
“ By the bye, if you are making a Cassegrain, I would call your attention
“ to the following peculiarity, which does not seem to have been considered
“ in this case at least;—
“ Let P Q he image of large mirror in small, this from eye at Ais seen
“ projected on small mirror, and is there very nearly equal section of cone of
“ rays for central star.
“ An eye-stop is competent to arrest the light from objects external to the
“line A P or A B approximately; but how are you to stop the direct light
“from objects within the angle”A B C —of course the mirror, whatever its
“ size, stops part of said light, but by no means all, except it be so con-
“ structed that the diameter of external rim of cell equals diameter of field
“ lens + section of cone of rays at small mirror.”
Then, with reference to the G. M. T., he states:—
“ Keeping the same mirrors, the only remedy is placing a disc H E, to
“ make up the deficiency, such disc = diameter field lens 4- section of
“ cone =at least about 16'. Practically I have found that in the neighbour-
“ hood of bright objects, an 18' disc is necessary to get rid of the direct
“ light.”
The letter concludes with the following:—
“ I remember seeing a Gregorian at your workshop, in which the size of
“ large mirror (image ?) occupied only a small portion of small, and was
“ puzzled for the reason, which, however, is now quite clear.”
The foregoing extracts and diagram include Mr. Le Sueur’s argument for
a permanent large disc. It is evidently fallacious. He asks—“ How are
“ you to stop the direct light from objects within the angle A B C?” Surely
it is already done by the opaque body B C, and if not done by B (1, would
neither be done by the larger opaque screen PQ. In any case, he appears
to have forgotten, that an eye placed at A and an eye placed at the eye-hole of
a properly adjusted eye-piece, are in very different conditions.
The theoretical position for the eye-stop is known as that of the plane of
the image of the small speculum. Practically, I consider it to be a shade


a-half inches,” &c., it might be understood as an experiment made
with a temporary stop, held, perhaps, in the hand; but that the
outer tube had been cut, seems to be placed beyond doubt, by
another letter of his, wherein, as his reason for continuing to
use his large disc, he states that “ without it the stop must, of
course, be in the plane of image.” And adds, that “ this involves,
in the larger eye-piece, pulling the stop tube so far out that it
will no longer hold.” There is but one way of accounting for
these statements of Mr. Le Sueur's (whether taken separately or
collectively,) viz., that this eye-piece, at least, had been altered at
Melbourne.
I had long since expressed my opinion that Mr, Le Sueur
must have tampered with the eye-pieces, and now, seeing that his
successor is, probably by this time, installed, it is very desirable
that I should, on the part of the “ makers” (myself and son)
decline to be accountable for either the present state of the eye-
pieces or for any deductions to be drawn therefrom.
But whatever the present state of the eye-pieces is, there can
be no question of this, viz.: —that as they were adjusted and used
here, no (Le Sueur) disc was required. And if Mr. Le Sueur
should attempt to say that he received instructions, or even
countenance, from either the makers or Dr. Robinson, to adjust
the eye-stops in a different way, he would say that which was
perfectly untrue. The documentary evidence I have given clearly
shows that scarcely was the instrument erected at Melbourne,
when Mr. Le Sueur commenced his tampering, and by rude ex-
periments and fallacious reasoning, tried to convince Dr. Robinson
and the." makers,” of the propriety of altering the position of the
eye-stops, and of using his large disc. Failing completely in this,
he seeks, with high imprudence, to make out a case for himself
and against us, by proposing to show at the telescope, that the position
assigned by the makers for the eye-stops involves the necessity for
his disc. Oblivious (apparently) of the facts that no such disc was
required here ; that he was expected to use the eye-pieces adjus-
ted as they were here, and that for even a factitious proof of his
position, the eye-stops must be (not in, but) out of that position
“ assigned by the makers.”
within it, viz., just so much as the opaque annulus around the small speculum
admits of, without the introduction of false light, and which position is most
readily found (for eye-pieces constructed with the adjustments of those of the
G. M. T.), by turning the telescope in daylight upon a terrestrial object, and
(beginning with the eye-stop tube drawn out too far) pushing it gradually
in until the false light disappears from the field. Mr. Le Sueur was made
perfectly acquainted with this by myself while he was in Dublin.


APPENDIX.
Finding that unauthorized and untrue accounts of the Great
Melbourne Telescope,which had appeared in one of the Melbourne
papers,were being republished in one or more English periodicals,
I sent the following letter in March last, to the editor of the
“ The Student,” no notice of which has been taken by that
periodical:—
“ TO THE EDITOR OF THE ‘ STUDENT.’
“ Sir, —As you have given, in the last number of your period-
ical, an extract from an Australian paper, in which are some state-
ments which are at once incorrect and injurious to my character
as a man of business and a manufacturer, I trust you will do me
the justice to insert the following reply to them in your next
number :
“ The extract sets forth, firstly, that * a good deal of delay is
* caused by the many adjustments and alterations which are con-
‘ stantly required to be made in the telescope, a portion of which
‘ are due to faults of construction, and others are suggested by
‘ experience in working the instrument.’ Now it is established
on evidence of the highest authority, that at the time when this
instrument left Dublin, it was in perfect working order, and re-
quired no alteration whatever, except a most trifling and foreseen
one, in the connecting, of the clock, due to the difference of latitudes.
The alterations which have been made are, as far as I am ac-
quainted with them, no improvement. Some of them very much
the reverse; and some made in ignorance or neglect of the
instructions which I furnished.
“ Secondly—The extract states that * on unvarnishing the second
* speculum, it was found that the coating had injured the polish
* of the reflector, which will have to he re-polished before it can
‘be used; this will cause some delay.’
“ There is here some confusion. The second speculum (B) ap-
pears, from advices direct from the Observer at Melbourne, to
be that one which is in preseut use, and the first speculum (A) to
have been laid aside, somewhat injured, not by the protecting var-
nish (which experience shows to be impossible), but by the im-
proper and insufficient means used in removing it.
“ Thirdly—The extract states that * the astronomical photo-
‘ graphic apparatus has not arrived from England, although it
* has long since been paid for.’
“To this I reply that the photographic apparatus has not yet


been paid for; neither had it been ordered by the Melbourne
Government when the statement appeared in your last number.
At the recommendation of the Committee of the Royal Society, a
photographic apparatus suited to the great telescope was put in
hands, and considerable progress made in its construction, when
this was arrested by a letter from a Melbourne official, which
states that it was doubtful whether the Melbourne Government
would pay for it. Its completion was recently resumed, at the
request of the President of'the Royal Society, but it was only the
last mail from Melbourne which brought the order for the appa-
ratus.
“ (Signed,)
“ THOMAS GRUBB, F.E.S.
“ Dublin , March 23, 1870.”
-r'
Browne & Nolan, Printers, Nassau-street, Dublin.
