

The King’s Pilgrimage
May, A.D 1922
“Their name liveth for Evermore.”
ISSUED BY THE
Anzac Day Commemoration Committee
QUEENSLAND




THE KING’S PILGRIMAGE.
Our King went forth on pilgrimage,
His prayer and vows to pay
To them that saved our Heritage
And cast their own away.
Kipling.


The King’s Pilgrimage
May, A.D. 1922
“Their name liveth for Evermore.”
ISSUED BY THE
Anzac Day Commemoration Committee
QUEENSLAND


PREFACE.
In 19 22 His Majesty the King paid a pilgrim-
age to cemeteries in France and Belgium wherein
are buried the bodies of soldiers who laid down their
lives in the War. From “The King's Pilgrimage,”
by kind permission of the publishers, Messrs.
Hodder and Stoughton, the Anzac Day Com-
memoration Committee of Queensland has prepared
this little brochure containing illustrations and
some descriptive matter of His Majesty’s visit, in
the hope that it may give comfort to those in Queens-
land who mourn the loss of brave sons whose remains
are interred in France and Belgium. The visit
of the King will be a consolation to those bereaved
relatives, assuring them of the personal sympathy
of him who, in his own person, represents every
individual of the British Empire. That his visit was
neither formal nor perfunctory is more than evident.
As he is the chief person of our great Empire, so
on this occasion, as in other events, he was the chief
mourner on behalf of those who themselves are
denied the opportunity, but whose hearts long to
reach those graves. That he was accompanied by
Her Majesty the Queen made the pilgrimage a
family affair on behalf of the people who constitute
the Empire. His Majesty’s interest gives assurance
that the cemeteries are well kept and cared for, and
will continue so to be.
The Anzac Day Committee assures the public
that so far as can be done the graves of soldiers in
Queensland are not uncared for. The Committee
suggests it will be a fitting thing that on Anzac Day
pilgrimages be made to cemeteries in which lie the
remains of those soldiers who, though they returned
to their country, yet laid down their lives for the
Empire as truly as if they died on the battlefield
itself.


TERLINCTHUN.
" Stunding beneath this cross of sacrifice and facing the great stone of remembrance.


The King’s Pilgrimage
May, A.D. 1922.
The King showed by his conversations with the
representatives of the Overseas Dominions that
there was never absent from his mind the thought
that, in the greatest ordeal of battle which the
British race has had to pass through, the children
nations of the Empire came to the side of the mother
country with the instinctive spontaneity of the blood
in a limb responding to a message from the heart;
and that the crimson tie of kinship never broke nor
slackened through all the perilous anxious years.
Across the sea, held for them as a safe path by the
British Navy, the men of the Empire, and women
too, kept passing at the King’s word to whatsoever
point at which the peril was greatest, the work most
exacting. The graves of the Flanders battlefields
told triumphantly of this august Imperial Assembly.
There the dead of the Mother Country have round
them those from Australia, New Zealand, Canada,
South Africa, Newfoundland, the West Indies, the
Pacific Islands, and India. The voices of the dead
re-echo the King’s words, “A single-hearted assembly
of nations and races which form our Empire/’
Many places which the King passed during his
pilgrimage he had known during the days of the war.
Very jealously the secrets of his visits to the Front
had to be guarded then, especially when both the
King and the Heir Apparent were at the same time
in the battle line. No public record exists of such
visits.
THE KING'S SYMPATHY.
The pilgrimage, however, was different, it was
for a definite and sad purpose, a visit of the chief


AT CROUY BRITISH CEMETERY.
The King talking to an Australian Father and Mother visiting
their Son’s Grave.


mourner of the whole family of British peoples.
Amongst the graves he visited were those of personal
relatives and of his own personal friends whose
remains lie amongst those of other soldiers, marked
by memorials as simple as their own, and differing
in no respect. They died as soldiers of the King,
were buried as soldiers of the King, and no greater
honour marks the manner of their grave than that
of the humblest private in the great Army. The
King showed that his grief for his personal relatives
and friends was extended to all his soldiers. A
mother hearing of the King’s intended pilgrimage
wrote a letter asking that a bunch of forget-me-nots
be laid upon her son's grave. The King undertook
the duty, which he carried out reverently, dutifully
fulfilling the pious task, taking pains to identify the
grave and then, bending down in homage, placing
upon it the mother's flowers. An Australian father
and mother happened to be visiting their son’s grave
during the King’s pilgrimage; he stopped, talked
with them, heard their story of grief, and gave them
his sympathy. Another incident showing the King’s
sympathy was his stopping and talking with the men
working in charge of the arrangement of the graves.
The cemeteries are consecrated as Holy soil to
the British race, and it was fitting that he who himself
was consecrated with Holy oil as “The Person” of
the whole Empire should visit them to pay his
homage and make his prayer.
The King did not hide from those with him that
the memory of all the cost which the cemeteries
express weighed heavily on him, and that in his mind,
with pride in the thought of such superhuman
devotion, there was a passionate hope that never
again in the world’s history would man be called
upon to suffer as the men who fought had suffered.


PICQUIGNY.
The King and Queen in a Cemetery where a number of
Australians sleep.


Speaking of the arrangement of the cemeteries
where general and private, peer and peasant rest
side by side beneath the same simple stones, equal
in the honour of their death for duty's sake, the King
agreed that this was the only possible way.
THE FINAL HOMAGE.
At the last stage of the pilgrimage the crowning
act of homage was performed, for which the King
was joined by the Queen. The Royal party, includ-
ing Admiral the Earl Beatty and Field-Marshal the
Earl Haig, was received by General, de Castelnau,
representing the French Army, Monsignor Julien,
Bishop of Arras, and by other French officials. The
King and the Queen advanced to the Cross of Sacri-
fice, where His Majesty placed at its foot his chaplet
of red roses, palms, and bay, and stood at the salute.
The King and Queen subsequently moved towards
the Stone of Remembrance, ascended the steps,
where her Majesty, bending lowly, placed at its foot
a wreath of rosemary and carnations. The great
stone was covered with the Union Jack —the three
crosses of St. George, St. Andrew, and St. Patrick
uniting as a fitting shroud overlaying an Altar of
Sacrifice. As the King had stood at the Cross of
Sacrifice, facing the Stone of Remembrance, he
delivered, in a voice vibrant with emotion, a message
to his people over all the seas in the name of the
Queen and of Himself.
THE KING’S SPEECH.
“For the past few days I have been on a solemn
pilgrimage in honour of a people who died for all
free men.
“At the close of that pilgrimage, on which I


TERLINCTHUN. THE LAST POST.
" They lie in the keeping of a tried and generous friend, a resolute and chivalrous
comrade-in-arms, who, with ready and quick sympathy, has set aside for ever the soil in
which they sleep, so that we ourselves and our descendants may for all time reverently tend
and preserve their resting-places.”


THE KING BOWED DOWN.
The King Reading Inscriptions on Wooden Crosses at Tyne Cot Cemetery.


followed ways already marked by many footsteps of
love and pride and grief, I should like to send a
message to all who have lost those dear to them in
the Great War, and in this the Queen joins me
to-day, amidst these surroundings so wonderfully
typical of that single-hearted assembly of nations
and of races which form our Empire. For here, in
their last quarters, lie sons of every portion of that
Empire, across, as it were, the threshold of the
Mother Island which they guarded, that freedom
might be saved in the uttermost ends of the earth.
“For this, a generation of our manhood offered
itself without question, and almost without the need
of a summons. Those proofs of virtue, which we
honour here to-day, are to be found throughout the
world and its waters —since we can truly say that
the whole circuit of the earth is girdled with the
graves of our dead. Beyond the stately cemeteries
of France, across Italy, through Eastern Europe in
well-nigh unbroken chain they stretch, passing over
the holy Mount of Olives itself to the farthest shores
of the Indian and Pacific Oceans—from Zeebrugge
to Coronel, from Dunkirk to the hidden wildernesses
of East Africa.
“But in this fair land of France, which sustained
the utmost fury of the long strife, our brothers are
numbered, alas! by hundreds of thousands. They
lie in the keeping of a tried and generous friend, a
resolute and chivalrous comrade-in-arms, who with
ready and quick sympathy has set aside for ever the
soil in which they sleep, so that we ourselves and
our descendants may for all time reverently tend and
preserve their resting-places. And here, at Terlinc-
thun, the shadow of his monument falling almost
across their graves, the greatest of French soldiers
—of all soldiers—stands guard over them. And this


TERLINCTHUN.
The Stone of Remembrance with the Queen’s Wreath.
"Their name liveth for evermore.”
TERLINCTHUN.
The Salute at the Stone of Remembrance.


is just, for, side by side with the descendants of his
incomparable armies, they defended his land in
defending their own.
“Never before in history have a people thus
dedicated and maintained individual memorials to
their fallen, and in the course of my pilgrimage I
have many times asked myself whether there can be
more potent advocates of peace upon earth through
the years to come than this massed multitude of
silent witnesses to the desolation of war. And I feel
that, so long as we have faith in God’s purpose, we
cannot but believe that the existence of these visible
memorials will, eventually, serve to draw all peoples
together in sanity and self-control, even as it has
already set the relations between our Empire and
our Allies on the deep-rooted bases of a common
heroism and a common agony.
“ Standing beneath this Cross of Sacrifice, facing
the great Stone of Remembrance, and compassed by
these sternly simple headstones, we remember, and
must charge our children to remember, that, as our
dead were equal in sacrifice, so are they equal in
honour, for the greatest and the least of them have
proved that sacrifice and honour are no vain things,,
but truths by which the world lives.
“Many of the cemeteries I have visited in the
remoter and still desolate districts of this sorely
stricken land, where it has not yet been possible to
replace the wooden crosses by headstones, have been
made into beautiful gardens which are lovingly cared
for by comrades of the war. I rejoice I was fortunate
enough to see these in the Spring, when the returning
pulse of the year tells of unbroken life, and goes for-
ward in the face of apparent loss and wreckage; and
I fervently pray that, both as nations and individuals,
we may so order our lives after the ideals for which


GENERAL VIEW OF ETAPLES.
The King and Dominion Representatives together in the Cemetery.
(Obverse view of the Stone.)
ETAPLES,
The King at the Stone of Remembrance.


our brethren died, that we may be able to meet their
gallant souls once more, humbly but unashamed.”
The King’s speech ended, His Majesty and those
around him saluted, while from the bugles of the
Coldstream and Grenadier Guards there came the
sound, as of a long-drawn-out sigh, of “The Last
Post.”
“There is no music, of all the music of the world,
that so brings home to the soldier's heart proud
sorrow, healing consolation. In the daily round of
his dutiful work ‘The Last Post' comes to tell him of
the end of a day of this troublous life, that the shades
have lengthened, the evening come, the busy world
hushed, his work done, and he may rest. And, when
he goes to the graveside to say the last farewell to
a comrade who has found for ever peace, he hears
again ‘ldle Last Post,’ to say to him that his mate
is not dead, hut sleepeth, and will rise again. The
common and everyday use of the music takes nothing
from its nobility, hut constantly communicates its
message of immortality so as to make of it a habit
of mind.
“The call of ‘The Last Post’ ended; and to the
closing moment of the King’s, pilgrimage came a
sense of overpowering emotion, which made men look
resolutely forward, not wishing to catch their neigh-
bour’s glance. The spirits of the mighty army of the
dead seemed to marshall in that God’s Acre, set high
on the cliff looking over the sea; come to receive the
homage of the King, for whom they died, and to hear
that in the land which they saved their names will
live for evermore.”


LOUVENCOURT.
Typical View of a Cemetery.


“All that they had they gave —they gave
In sure and single faith.
There can no knowledge reach the grave
To make them grudge their death,
Save only if they understood
That, after all was done,
We they redeemed denied their blood,
And mocked the gains it won.’
Kipling.


A. J. GUMMING, Government Printer,
Brisbane, Queensland.
