





Printed for private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS.
Vol. III.
PART I.
(March 1827 to June 1833.)
Printed by order of the Vajiranana National Library.
BANGKOK
1012.




Fort Cornwallis 9th March 1827,
Envoy to Siam
To G. Swinton Esq.
' Secretary to Government.
Sir,
In the 90th and 170 th paragraphs of the Journal
of my late Mission to Siam 1 reported that I should on
a future day submit some account of the journies per-
formed overland through the Siamese dominions by
Messrs. Harris and Leal, and as I have now had an
opportunity of arranging the papers which were fur-
nished to me, 1 do myself the honor to tender a copy
of the whole for the inspection of His Excellency the
Vice President in Council.
1 have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney Captain.
Envoy to Siam.
Calcutta Ist March 1827.


Introduction,
During the late Mission to Siam Captain Burney
left at Ligor with the Siamese Governor or Rajah of
that place, Mr. Harris a sub Assistant Surgeon on the
Penang Establishment, and Mr. Leal, an interpreter,
respecting whom more will appear in a succeeding
paper. The Rajah had pressed Captain Burney to
convey to Bangkok on board the Mission vessel one
of His Highness’s sons and a Commissioner from
Siam, with their followers, to make room for whom in
the vessel, as well as to ensure in some measure the
fulfilment of an engagement which the Rajah had made
to join Captain Burney at Bangkok, His Highness
was requested to let Messrs. Harris and Leal accom-
pany him to the capital overland. Mr. Harris kept
some notes of his journey from Ligor, and the following
account has been drawn up from these notes, with
some assistance from Captain Burney. It is right to
add, that Mr. Harris took great pains to acquire a
knowledge of the Siamese language, and to seize every
opportunity of affording medical aid to the Siamese,
for the purpose of rendering such knowledge and aid
subservient to the success of the Mission. His desire
of conciliating some of tho Siamese Chiefs induced
him even to take before them, several nauseous doses,
which he found the Phra Khlang and the- Rajah of
Ligor afraid to let him administer to their children,
until they had first seen him fearlessly take such
medicines.
The Mission had received from Mr. Crawfurd at
Singapore the following account of Ligore, the general
accuracy of which was afterwards proved. “ The
river of Ta Yung ( Tha-wang) leads part of the
way to the present town of Ligor, called in the
Siamese language Lakon (Lak’hon). After going two
Fort Cornwallis 9th March 1827.


hours up the river the traveller proceeding to Ligor
quits his boat,, and an hour’s walk (half an hour’s)
conveys him to the town by a good road with an
avenue of trees. Ligor is a walled town with ram-
parts of brick and mortar with four gate ways and a
wet ditch (which during the rains communicates with
the Thouaug River). It is in form an oblong square.
There are not above 14 or 15 old cannon mounted
(the Mission did not see one). The place contains
about 5,000 inhabitants and appears at one time to
have been much more populous; but it was twice
captured by the Burmans, and may of the inhabitants
carried off (Alompra in 1760 and again so lately as
1785 by one of Minderagee’s generals). The present
chief is a great favorite of the King of Siam, who has
much increased his authority, which not only extends
over all the tributary Malay States on both sides of
the Peninsula, but within the last year over Singora.
He has in his hands the power of life and death. The
number of males borne in the conscription rolls within
the proper jurisdiction of Ligor, exclusive of the Ma-
lay tributaries, is said to be 12000.”
In addition to the above the Mission collected
at Ligor the following particulars. The chief retains
in his own hands every particle of power and per-
sonally conducts the most trifling details. He has
a Than Belat or Deputy, but no Yokohnt or other
officer as in most of the Siamese Provinces, The
office of Belat is said to be a sinecure, excepting when
the chief leaves the country; at which time that
Minister and two or three others are formed into a
Commission of Government. There are three or four
Commissioners sent to His Highness from Bangkok
as a kind of Assessors but he seems to treat them
with very little consideration. His Highness’s wife,
a first cousin of the present King of Siam, is said to
possess much influence over the Chief, and to be
principally consulted by him. Their eldest daughter


is one ot the present King- of Siam’s wives, and she
lately presented His Majesty with a son and heir-
His Highness’s eldest son by a concubine named
Phra Phakdi Bor Irak is Governor of Quedah by
appointment from the Court of Siam.
The town of Ligor stands on a very extensive
plain, which appears to reach to the great central
range of mountains, and is covered with paddy cultiva-
tion, There is a little pepper cultivated in the interior
and some iron collected at a place called Lamphoon.
But the tin mines are much neglected and said to be
exhausted. The Mission was shown near the landing
place on the banks of the Tha-wang, some old brick
foundations, alleged to be the site of the Dutch
Factory which existed here from the beginning of the
17th Century to the middle of the last. Ligor now
conducts no direct trade with China, Cochin China or
other foreign port. What little trade it possesses is
with Siam and is entirely engrossed by the Chief.
There is not a single brick dwelling house in the town
but a great many temples and pyramids of that
material, and most of them in ruins. One pyramid,
or Phra Ghaidi, with a high gilt spire is visible
from the sea and larger than any which the Mission
afterwards saw at Bangkok. The Mission could
learn no intelligence of the ancient inscriptions on
stone said by Leyden in his dissertation on the
languages and literature of the Indo-Chinese nations
(Asiatic Researches vol. X ) to exist in the
vicinity of Ligor among the ruins of a very ancient
temple belonging to the former Thay jai race. The
Chief’s house is of plank with a tiled roof. It is
situated within the fort which consists of an old high
wall in a most dilapidated condition, and without a
gun mounted in any part within or upon it. Indeed
the Mission saw scarcely a musket at Ligor, and
understood that the Chief had sent the whole of his
military means to Queda. The number of women also


far exceeded the proportion of men. Most of the
latter were said to be in the interior attending to
cultivation, but the Mission had reason to believe that
His Highness had left many of them with his boats
on the opposite coast.
The Mission Brig had no difficulty in making
Ligor port excepting what proceeded from light west-
erly winds and a strong easterly current, and it met
with no difficulty in departing again, although from
the high swell and surf, which are raised whenever
the northerly winds blow strong, and the shoal at the
head of Tantalam Island, it is evident that Ligor
roads are not safe for a ship during the height of the
north east monsoon. The brig was lying at anchor
in three fathoms, about two and half miles from the
mouth of the Tha-wang river which is to the north
ward of that of Ligor. The two rivers join a few
miles inland, and the latter is now little used.
Captain Alexander Hamilton, in his New Account
of the East Indies in* 1744, gives the following ac-
count of Ligor.
“Ligor lies about 12 leagues to the northward
of Saugore, and between them lies a low uninhabited
island, called Papier. It reaches from Saugore within
three leagues of Ligor River. It is well stored with
wild buffaloes, hog and deer, which are free for all per-
sons to kill at pleasure. The road of Ligor lies two
leagues from the river and about a league within the
river’s mouth stands the Dutch Factory, a pretty com-
modious house, built of brick after the Dutch fashion.
The town stands about two miles above the factory.
It is built of bamboos and thatched with reed.
There are many Pagan temples in it, which have
steeples built very high, in form of very sharp pyramids.
They are so small, that in the road they look like
ships’ masts. It produces abundance of tin but the
Dutch engross it all.”


Hamilton’s Island of Papier is now named in Hors-
burgh’s Charts Tantalum , which word Mr. Crawfurd
supposes to be a corruption of the Malay Tana, or land
of Thaloong, a Siamese Province lying between
Singora and Ligor, called also Merdelong and Bandelon,
corruptions of Menang country, and Ban village of
Thaloong. The Siamese do not recognize Tantalam
as an island. The north end or our Ligor Point they
call Lem or Point Chhoomph<'k, and the channel
which divides the island from the main they call
Khlcng or river Phonang. Hamilton’s Papier may
be derived from the name often given to the mouth
of the Ligor river, Pak nam Phya or Pak-Fhiya.
The old Portuguese travellers call Ligor, Lugar and
Lungar. The Siamese ministers write Pha thaloong
whence Petelong the early Portuguese name for
Thaloong. The Chinese again corrupt it into
Khontelon.
La Loubere in his Historical Relation of Siam
mentions the following anecdote of a French engineer,
M. de la Mare, whom M. Chaumont had left at Siam.
“ When by the King of Siam’s order he went to Ligor
to take a draught thereof, the Governor would not
permit him to go round it under two days, though he
could have done it in less than an hour.”
The accompanying Geographical Sketch* has been
compiled from a slight sketch prepared by Mr. Leal
from several native maps and descriptions collected
from Pegu and Siamese travellers at Bangkok, from
the accounts of four sepoys of the 25th Bengal Native
Infantry, who conveyed public dispatches from the
Envoy at Bangkok to Martaban and Tavoy and re-
turned with answers, and from a manuscript map of
the west coast of the Gulf of Siam received from Mr.
Crawfurd. Horsburgh notices his want of authentic
documents regarding the Gulf of Siam and Tenasserim
Coast, which have never been surveyed. His chart,


however, has been for the most part followed in
delineating the coasts of this sketch.
The Green line marks Mr. Harris’s route and the
blue Mr. Leal’s.
( Signed ) H. Burney Captain.


ACCOUNT of an Overland Route from the town
of Ligor to Pothiu, a village on the Isthmus of
Kraw, by Arthur Harris Acting Assistant Surgeon
attached to Captain Burney’s Mission to Siam.
Sunday 18th December 1825.
Everything ready for our departure, and the Raja
of Ligor having allowed Mr. Leal and mj'self 8
elephants to carry ourselves, servants and baggage,
about noon the Raja, preceded by a Siamese band of
musicians, went to the wat or Siamese temple where
his daughter lay embalmed. Her remains had been
in that state since the month of April or May, and the
Siamese priest daily prayed over them. We are told
that the Raja had not time to burn the body in a
suitable manner, but that he intended doing so upon
his return from Siam. About 10 o’clock the Raja
came to our house upon an elephant which had very
rich trappings, and desired us to mount and follow
him, which we did. We passed through the town
of Ligor and over extensive plains until half past two,
when we crossed the Thaw *ng river and arrived at
a place called Nam Jen,* where we halted for the
day. Nam Jen is a small village and contains a
Siamese temple, called Wat Chomlan. b We found
here an attap house erected for the Raja’s accommo-
dation, and a smaller one for ourselves. Before our
departure from Ligor some men had been sent by the
Rajah to erect similar houses at most of the places
where we halted. Our whole party now consisted
of about 3 or 400 persons with 80 elephants ; nearly
100 Siamese soldiers dressed in scarlet and armed
with muskets walked before the Raja’s elephants,
and before them again a party of Malays was em-
ployed in clearing the road and sometimes in making
a new path. Besides the Rajah and ourselves the subor-
dinate Siamese officers only were mounted. There were
no women and the elephants were chiefly employed
in carrying the Raja’s baggage, which consisted, we


Were told, of nil the treasure and curiosities that he
had been able to collect at Queda or to procure from
Penang for the King and Wangna of Siam, The
Rajah left his women and sick son at Ligor to follow
him to Bangkok by water upon the change of
monsoon in March. Mr. Leal made the Latitude of
Ligor by observation 8-.° 17'. 10* N.
MONDAY 19th December, We continued at
Nam Jen all this day in consequence of the Rajah
being slightly indisposed. He applied to me for some
medicine, but before he would take it, he desired one
of his followers, a stout healthy man, to take a dose
and report its effects. It was a purgative.
TUESDAY 20th December. We started from
Nam Jen about 9 o’clock in the morning and at 10
crossed a small stream Nam Khao G from which the
road was very bad and miry, the elephants sinking
in mud at every step, until half past two p. ra., when
we arrived at a place called Ban Booa ThaphanN
Our halting houses were near a Siamese temple called
Wat Khongloon and close to the sea side, as we heard
very plainly the beating of the waves. But it rained
verv hard and we were unable to go and see any
thing. Our road this day passed through thick jungle
and sometimes through paddy fields.
WEDNESDAY 21st December. We left Ban
flvoa Thapkan about 10 a. m. and after passing over
very bad roads covered with water, we arrived with
a few of the party only, at 8 o’clock at night, at
Ban Clai* a village on the right bank of the river
Clai, inhabited chiefly by Chinese, who are employed
in cultivating pepper. Our halting houses were as
usual near a Siamese temple. The Rajah did not
come up this day.
THURSDAY 22d December. Mr. Leal and 1
took a boat and went down to the mouth of the Clai
River in about an hour; the banks of the river are


Very high and covered thick jungle. At the village
the river is about 100 yards wide, but the mouth is
narrower, being blocked up by the sands gathering on
the bar and on each side, and here the surf was as
high and violent as that at Madras. The bed of the
river is sandy and the water very clear. The Rajah
arrived late this night and in passing our halting
house enquired how we had got on through the bad
roads and weather. Mr. Leal took an observation at
the mouth of the River Clai and made the Latitude
B°. 42'. o".
FRIDAY 23d December. We were detained all
this day at Ban Clai in consequence of the whole of
the Rajah’s baggage not having come up. In the
evening he asked us to accompany him to see the
village of B<»n Clai. It contained about 1000 persons,
chiefly Chinese and the head man was a Chinese.
One of the Rajah’s followers was attacked this night
with cholera, and at the Rajah’s request I administer-
ed medicine which overcame the disease.
vSATURDAY 24th December. We started from
Ban Glai at \ past 7 in the morning, at 10 crossed
a small stream named Khlong Punsoo , at half past 10
another Khloni Klien*, at halt past 12 another Khlong
Kara Hoc*, near which w'e passed through paddy
fields; at half past 1 we crossed another clear and
sandy stream, Khlong Tha Phoon , at 3 another Klong
Thanah h . near the foot of a high hill, at 6 p. m. we
arrived at a place call Ban Kuang 1 where we halted
for the night. Our road this day lay chiefly through
thick jungle and we saw several immense pieces
of timber, apparently cut to be removed. Our halt-
ing places situated at the foot of a hill on a plain,
through which a fine clear stream, Khlong Kuang,
flowed. The Raja hearing from me that the next was
Christmas day directed his people to supply us with
such extra articles as could be procured to enable us
to celebrate our festival. The Rajah had given us on


the day we left Ligor a supply of claret and cherry
brandy which had been sent to him from Penang.
SUNDAY 2jth December. We crossed the
Khlong Kuang at half past 7 a. m., at 11 Khlong
Chhoon j , the banks of which were very steep, at
half past two we came in sight of an extensive range
of mountains on the left side of the road, and at 6 p.m.
we arrived at our halting place, near a small village
called Hooa Nah w . Our road this day lay chiefly
through thick jungla. In the evening the Rajah sent
for us while he examined some of the villagers
respecting the next day’s route.
MONDAY 26th December. We left Hooa N<>h
at 8 a. m. and after crossing 3 or 4 small streams
and in one place some hilly ground called by the
Siamese the Nine Hills 1 , vve arrived at 6p.m. at our
halting place near a small village named Kanom m .
Our road this day was through thick jungle, and the
Rajah’s followers were prepared to meet tigers. It
rained all this day very heavily and incessantly.
TUESDAY 27th December. Heavy rains de-
tained us all, this day and we were unable to stir out
of the house for a moment.
WEDNESDAY 28th Deer. We left Knnom at
past 6 a. m., at 12 crossed a stream Khlong Ghekram
and halted on the other side, near a small village
of Siamese, Ban Ghekram, around which there was a
good deal of paddy cultivation. The bamboo we saw
prowitiff here was of enormous size, and the Siamese
use it for keeping water and for other domestic
purposes. There was a bamboo bridge constructed
over the Ghekram stream but the elephants passed
through the water. The Raja discovering this day
that I had a pocket compass made a pretence of
borrowing it from me and he did not return it again
until I saw him at Bangkok.


n place of gold
o Place of
fatigue op
fatigue spot.
p Pring is a
fruit the Malay
Munnium or Ru-
munya, whence
the name Roma-
L nia is said to
be taken,
q Khlung is
cleared.
r Hooee is
deep and reng
a vulture.
s Kham is to
cross or across
ferry.
t The steel or fine iron of
this place is said to be the
best in the Siamese Domi-
nions. The swords of the
great officers of the Court of
Siam are manufactured of the
steel procured here.
u The Thakam discharges
northern is situated Tha-
THURSDAY 29th December. We left Ban
Chekrom at half past 7 a. in., at 8 crossed Khlony
7 hnthong 11 , a small stream, at 12 we passed near some
hills, the road leading between two of them at some
distance from each other, and about 3 p. m., arrived
at our halting place near a village Baa Kode ° on the
side of a very rapid stream, Khlony Knolut, which we
crossed. Our road this day passed over extensive
uncultivated plains, but there was as usual some
paddy cultivation around the village where we halted.
Mr. Leal and some of the party were here attacked
with fever.
FRIDAY 30th December. We halted this day
in consequence of some of the elephants being
knocked up.
SATURDAY 31st December. We left Ban Kode
at past 6a. m., at 10 crossed Khlony Diuha, at
half past 10 Khlony Sai, at past 11 Khlony Ban
priny p and about 3 p. m. we arrived at our halting
place near a small village Ban Klnny q . The rood
this day passed through jungle, but level ground.
SUNDAY 1st Januaiy 1826. We left Ban
Klung at \ past 6 a. in.,'at 10 crossed Khlong Hoove
Young reng v . At 12 we saw a hill to our left, at 8
p. m. we arrived at our halting place on the right
bank of a large river, Khlong Thakham s , on the opposite
side of which, towards the mouth of the river is a large
Mne iron of town called Ban Bhoonphen*. Our road
b this day passed through jungle and over
rds of the some extensive uncultivated plains In
turecTof t»Te the evening the Rajah took Mr. Leal and
sre. myself in a boat some way up the river.
MONDAY 2d January 1826. We
were detained this day in passing the
elephants across the Thakham M which
was broad and deep. The elephants were
obliged to swim over it, and the baggage


v Don, inland-
inside.
orminq the to b e carried in boats. Mr. Leal and I
* r <3ovt f The attempted in a boat to go down to the
ei is the mouth of the river, but it was too late in
ame indeed fche , We gftW & b ranc h 0 f the river
the whole. J
ped at the running down to the southward which we
uver isusu- were told led to the town of Bhandon* .
ere it bears
Kham. This We visited the town of Fhoonphin which
arge stream con tains about 1200 Siamese inhabitants
nnom 3 days .
loonga near under a Chinese officer, and the houses
ere are nu- are on both sides of the river. We saw
over 6 .Tamed here several immense pieces of timber
id Valentyn and some very long boats like those be-
longing to the Chiefs at Bangkok. Mr,
Leal took an observation and made the Latitude
9°. 38'. 0". The Rajah told me that this river Thakham
is tne northern boundary of his jurisdiction. This
day some of the Rajah’s followers were attacked with
cholera, and I was requested to afford them medical
aid, which I did with success.
THURSDAY 8d January 1826. We started at
10 a. m. crossing Khlong Thakham in a boat, down
the left bank of which river the road passed for some
time. At 4 p. m. we arrived at our halting place
near a small village, Bon Kalok. The road this day
lay through immense plains with patches of paddy
cultivation. At this place there was no houses erect-
ed for the accommodation of Mr. Leal and myself and
we were obliged to shelter ourselves by putting our
two houdahs together, which we covered with some
attap leaves stitched together which the Raja had
brought with him. The Rajah apologised for our bad
accommodation, stating that as far as his author it}
extended he had been able to have provision made
for us.
WEDNESDAY 4th January 1826. We started
at 7 a. m., crossed a small river, and passed through
a small village, the names of which 1 did not learn.
We then passed through very extensive paddy fields
thong, a town forming the
northern boundary of the
Rajah of Ligor’s Covt. The
southern channel is the
Bandon, which name indeed
is often given to the whole.
The Rajah stopped at the
place where the river is usu-
ally crossed & where it bears
the name of Tha Kham. This
is known to be a large stream
which leads to Pennom 3 days
journey from Phoonga near
Junk Ceylon. There are nu-
merous islands off the mouth
of the Bandon river named
by Horsburgh and Valentyn
Larchin Isles.


w dose
arranged.
x As (Vlr Harris did not cross
what he conceives to be the
Chhalya river the port of
Chhaiya is probably nothing
more than an arm of the sea
supposed by him to be a river.
A large broad stream as he
describes it would most pro-
bably have come from the
central mountains or far from
the interior. Horsburgh and
Valentyn have a place named
Patanur near Chhaiya, whe-
ther a former town or some
corruption we cannot learn.
Much trade and intercourse
pass through the Bandon
river and thence, by means of
elephants, between Chhaiya
and Phoonga a town situated
in the Bay of Bengal on the
continent to the north of
and halted at 2 p. m. at Phumrieng'", a small village
situated inland of the town of Chhaiya. Shortly after
the Rajah requested us to dress ourselves in our best
suits and prepare to be introduced to the Siamese
Governor of Chhaiya, wdio would come to pay his
respects to the Rajah. In the evening we went lo the
Rajah’s house and saw Phya Chhaiya, who showed
himself to be inferior to the Rajah, sitting at a res-
pectful distance and joining his hands together when-
ever he spoke. Phya Chhaiya is an elderly man, and
seemed to show no curiosity about us.
THURSDAY sth January 1826. We paid a visit
this day to the town of Chhaiya which contains about
2008 inhabitants, some Chinese. Most of the houses
were planked. The river of Chhaiya is a large broad
deep steam, in which we saw some junks lying We did
not cross it but passed, I suppose at the head of the river-
We were told that this town exports a large quantity
of paddy. We saw gambling shops in the town, and
Chinese and Siamese busily engaged. The town of
( hh iya is defended by a stockade fortification and we
were told that the inhabitants in the province amount
to 18 or 19000 souls, an 1 that there is a great deal
■d not cross of trade here.- x Mr. Leal made the lati-
•to be the tute of Q hhaiya
FRIDAY 6th January 1826. We
started from Phumrieng at \ past 9, at
past 2 passed near a large stone hill, and
at \ past 4 arrived at our halting place
near a small village, Ban 'I ha Reun - y ,
around which as usual, there was paddy
cultivation.
SATURDAY 7th January 1826.
At 8 a. m. we started, crossing a small
stream, Khlong Thareua, and at 11 we
arrived at the sea beach, along which
and on the sands the road continued the


J'unk Ceylon. The tin and
other produce of which is-
land, whenever required, are
conveyed by this route to
Bangkok.
y Reua is a boat. A little to
the southward of Tha ReUa
& close to the sea shore is a
small town named Pansong.
z The Malay name for Cas-
Marina Littorea.
ft. Sewun is a
garden.
b We have been told that a
colony of Malays under a
Malay chief waS within a few
years back Settled at a place
called Rinnong or Rindong
on the western shore of the
Isthmus of Kraw, but that the
Burmese attacked and laid it
waste, when the inhabitants
fled and settled at this place
Lang Sewun. The name of
Isthmus of Kraw appears to
have been take from Kraw’
which is said to be a small
inland town between Chhaiya
and Choom phon, although
not set down in any chart or
map that we have ever seen.
At Lang Sewun Horsburgh has
■a place named Penomxin, whe-
he tin and whole of this Hay. We saw a prow under
sf which is- ga jj anf j b eac b was beautiful, lined
equired, are
s route to by A ran * trees, without any surf and
the sand quite hard. We passed the
t. a nttie to mouths of two streams, Ketone/ K»nthoree
mid Khlong Panice JJoowut , where the
a Pansong. water being deep, the elephants were
amofor Cas- C arried out into the sea. At 4 p. m. we
halted on the sea shore where we were
obliged to make temporary accomodation with how-
dahs and attaps. A party of the Rajah’s followers went
into the jungles and soon returned with posts and other
materials with which they built him up a house in a
short time. During the night we experienced a very
heavy squall.
SUNDAY 8th January 1826. At 7 a. m. we
pursued our journey, which continued for an hour
along the sea shore. We then turned inland and
travelled through thick jungles until 5 p. m. when we
passed through a village surrounded with paddy cul-
tivation, at 6 we saw a high hill, and at 7 we arrived
at our halting place on the right bank of a large river
Khlnng Lang a Sew on, on the other side of which is a
pretty large village named Lang Sewun.
MONDAY 9th January 1826. We
halted I his day, giving the elephants rest,
I visited the village of Lnng Sewun,
which is surrounded with Durian and
Beetlenut trees. There was a junk in
the river which is a fine broad one. I
saw Malay b in the village which contains
about 600 inhabitants and exports prin-
cipally beetle nut.
TUESDAY 10th January 1826, The
elephants were early taken higher up
the river to cross and we at past 7
passed over in a boat. At past Ip. m.
we crossed a small clear stream with a


the* a former town or some
corruption of Lang sewun or
Choomphon wo 0.0n.« ■cro.
The Portuguese from whose
charts Horsburgh probably
took Penomxin use a« a tor
the Siamese letter Chho.
e Suwi is surf,
d Sai is land.
sandy bottom, named lihlong fhakho
and arrived at our halting place near a
village on the other side, called Thahho.
Our road this day passed over good
even ground, with extensive paddy fields
on each side.
WEDNESDAY 11th January 1826. We started
at past 7a. m. and at 2p. m. halted on the right
bank of a stream Khlong Suwi, near a large Village
named Suvli, which contained, we were told, about
20('0 inhabitants, and the Governor of which is a
Phra. We also learnt that some of the Burmese in-
habitants carried away from Mergui were in this town.
The road this day was a good clear one with paddy
fields on each side.
THURSDAY 12th January 1126, At | past 9
we crossed Klong Suwi c and at 1 p.m. halted on the
right bank of a steam Khlong Wisai rt . The road
this day was of the same description as that on the
preceding day. The Rajah did not stop at W>sai
but went on we were told, to the next stage to
Chhoomphon.
FRIDAY 13th January 1826. At | past 8 a.in,
we crossed Khlong Wisai , and after passing through
some jungle, we came to very extensive paddy culti-
vation, which surrounds the town of Chhoomphon,
near and below which we halted at 6 p,m. on the
right bank of the Chhoomphon river, at a place that had
been prepared for the Rajah and where we again
joined him;
SATURDAY 14th January 1826, We halted
this day. The River Chhoomphon is extremely wind-
ing, with a sandy bottom, and we saw some junks
above us, off the town of Chhoomphon where they
must have gone up with a high tide, as at the place
where we were the river was fordable. The banks
were high and we saw no rocks. We could gain no


d This person is the Phra
Khlang of the Wangna or
Grand Prince of Siam and he
was specially sent down: from
Bangkok with a reinforce-
ment of troops to defend
Chhoomphon after the former
Siamese Governor had made
an irruption into the Anglo-
Burmese territory and car-
ried away the inhabitants of
Tenasserim and many villages
around it. The Governor of
Chhoomphon was sent up to
the capital where he died in
confinement. At Choomphon
the Siamese forces destined
to attack the Burmese at
Mergui always assembled &
the Phya or Govr. was entrust-
ed by the Court of Siam with
the duty of watching the
Burmese on the Coast of
Tenasserim. Since the Bur-
mese invasion of Siam under
Alompra the Siamese Domi-
nions on the Eastern shore of
the Gulf between Ligor and
the capital is remarkably
thinly peopled and Ligor itself
has but a scanty population.
The Govr. of Chhoomphon it is
said is not allowed to trade,
and that place since the
conquest by the Burmese of
Mergui and Tavi>y, appears
to have been converted into
a purely military post or
garrison. This accounts for
the absence of Chinese and
for the entire cessation of
that valuable trade which
formerly passed Mergui and
the Gulf of Siam.
e Horsburgh has a place
called Bardia here, a corrup-
tion of Bandon Ban Chhaiya
Pothiu, or what we cannot
discover.
satisfactory information respecting the point desired
by Captain Burney, whether it would be practic-
able to open a communication between this river
and one on the opposite coast and so make a
navigable canal across the Isthmus of Kraw. Phva
is the Phra Kray d the Governor of Chhoomphon at-
Wangna or ’
Siam and he tended by some men with musquets
t downifrom waited on the Rajah who introduced us
i reinforce- ’
to defend him. He did not seem to show the
r the former same respect to the Rajah as the Gov-
r had made fn , , > .
.. . , ernor or Uhhaiya had done.
i the Analo- V
1 asked the Rajah here to lor ward
to Mr. Maingy at Mergui a letter which
Captain Burney had entrusted to me,
but be assured me that this could not
be done, as very positive orders had been
sent down to Phya Kray from Bangkok
desiring him to prevent all communica-
tion between the Siamese and the inhabi-
tants of the English territories. From
this day the Rajah began to show a good
deal of reserve and distrust towards us,
and we undsrstood that he had received
unpleasant letters from Siam. In the
evening I visited the town of Ghhoom-
phon which, though stockaded in the
manner as Chhaiya, did not appear to
contain so many or such good houses.
The only brick building is a temple.
The inhabitants were said to amount to
about 7 or 8000. We saw no Chinese
here. We did not see any of the Burm-
ese prisoners, but we heard that there
were a good many at Chhoomphon. Mr.
Leal made the Latitude of Chhoomphon e
10°. 55'. 0".
SUNDAY 12th January 1826. At
i past 7 a. m. we crossed the Chhoomphon


river and pursued our route through paddy fields and
some times jungle, until \ past 5, when we halted
near a small village surrounded as usual with paddy
cultivation and named Sang soon*.
MONDAY 16th January 1826. We started at
7 a.m, passing over a good even road with Jungle how-
ever on each side, until £ past 3, when we halted
at the head of a small river called Pathiu, near
the south of which is a small village of the same
name containing about 200 Chinese and Siamese in-
habitants employed in fishing and making BalachanS,
which is conveyed to Bangkok. The Siamese Chief
of the village, Fhra Pathiu* came to pay his res-
pects to the Rajah towards whom the Phra showed
more humble reverence than any other Siamese Chief
we had seen. The Phra of Pathiu* appeared a quiet
mild character of about 52 years of age, and as he had
never seen a white face before, he displayed great
curiosity respecting the colour of our skin and our
dress and customs. On another occasion when I paid
him a visit he made me bare my arm and called his
women out to see me and they appeared highly
delighted.
Late this night the Raja of Ligor sent for me,
and with a great deal of kindness and address invited
me to inform him truly, whether Captain Burney had
appointed me and Mr. Leal to accompany him over-
land for the purpose of ascertaining the route, and
examining the state of the country. The Rajah then
made many excuses, complaining that all his ele-
phants were knocked up. and that he would be under
the necessity of requesting Mr. Leal and myself to
proceed from Pathiu to Bangkok in a boat. He beg-
ged of me not to be uneasy, that he would appoint
some of his best and confidential men to accompany
us, that the Phra of Pathiu had procured a very good
and safe boat, and would direct his own son to go with
us. The Rajah pointed out to me to notice the very


great trouble and inconvenience to which his desire of
fulfilling his engagement with Captain Burney had
subjected him, in travelling over such a miserable
country and during such bad weather.
TUESDAY 17th January »826. Finding pri-
vately from some of the Rajah’s followers that
he hid received positive orders from Bangkok,
prohibiting his taking us with him overland,
and seeing him uneasy and anxious,
we made up our minds to proceed by sea. To
own the truth, I did not regret the conclusion
of my land journey. Mr. Leal and I were on
separate elephants b} r ourselves. The elephants had
Siamese howdahs with covers and when tired of sitting
we could double up our legs and lie down. Although
the animals were very quiet and tame, yet their
motion was extremely slow and rough, and in difficult
roads most fatiguing and painful. The road was so
bad that not a day passed without the Rajah being
obliged to lea ve some of his elephants behind and get
others in their room from the inhabitants of the
villages.
i
We examined the boat which was 40 feet long
but narrow and carried 14 oars. There was a kind of
cabin put up for us, and the Rajah certainly took
every pains to make us satisfied, directing the Phra
of Pathiu to supply us with every thing that could
be procured, and treat us with great respect and
attention.
WEDNESDAY 18th January 1826. About 8
a.m. the Rajah of Ligore took leave of us very kindly
and pursued his route by land. He left 25 of his
followers with a Siamese officer, Nai Sirootha h , and
his Dobash, Sultan Shaw, a native of the coast of
Coromandel, who had usually served as interpreter
between us and who seemed to possess much of the


Rajah’s confidence. The Raja left some of his sick
followers also to proceed by sea, in another boat in
company with us. We embarked in the boat at past
3 p.ra. and dropped down to the village of Pathiu, where
after having procured all our provisions &c. we were
detained until the 27th by strong easterly winds.
The village as was before said, contains about 200
inhabitants, occupied principally in fishing. The
river is narrow and shallow and at the mouth of it is
an extensive mud flat containing beds of oysters.
At some distance to the southward, there is another
flat, in which cockles of various descriptions are pro-
cured. To the north the coast is studded with rocks.
There is no tjood water near Pathiu and the inhabit-
o
ants are obliged to bring what they use from some
distance inland. Mr. Leal made the Latitude of
Pathiu 61°. 10'. 0".
FRIDAY 27th January 1826. The bad weather
abating we left Pathiu at 12 a.m. and after rowing for
three hours we anchored close to the shore, being
obliged to wait for the boat conveying some of the
Rajah’s sick followers. At 9 p.m. there being a fine
breeze, Mr. Leal who took charge of navigating the
boat insisted upon proceeding, and we then set
sail.
SATURDAY 28th January 1826 We continued
under sail all this day in sight of the coast, which
appeared low. Mr. Leal accidentally discovered am-
ong Nai Sirootha’s baggage a Siamese black book,
containing copies of some letters which the Rajah of
Ligore was sending to Bangkok with us. The letters
excused the Rajah as much as possible for having
proposed to bring us overland, stating that we had
been forced upon him but that he had given us no
opportunity of seeing the proper route between Ligor
and Bangkok and suggesting that our papers should
be seized and examined on our arrival at Pak nam.


i Sam 3, roi hundred, and
yot peaks. This is Kempfer’s
“Samajotn” and the “Moun-
tains of Pensels” of Por-
tuguese charts. All junks
bound to China or Cochin
China from Bangkok, steer
along the western coast as
far as Sam roi yot, where
they fill up their water and
then strike across the Gulf
of Siam, due east. It is said
that the Portuguese call
these mountains Pluthes or
combs from their points being
arranged serrated on the
same line like the teeth of a
comb.
j Near Samroiyot is a Siam-
ese village called Kooi or Cai,
which Mr. Crawfurd justly
supposes must have convert-
ed into the Ciu of European
navigations and of Hors-
burgh’S'chart, by some writer
marking the i in the wrong
place. Loubere writes it in
his map Couil, but Captn.
Hamilton calls it Cui and
Kempfer Kui. The last men-
tioned author describes “the
coast hereabouts as very
steep and rocky and not
unlike those of Sweden.”
k Me mother, nam water
the name given to the largest
river in Siam or any other
country.
1 “Chinese place.” On this
river and particularly at a
place called Wakhon chaisi
reside the principal manu-
facturers of sugar who are
all Chinese.
m Pak mouth, &
nam water or
river. The title
of Chao Phya is
generally added
to the mouth of
the Menam by
way of distinc-
tion, & this is
Kempfer’s
Pagnam Tonfia.
SUNDAY 29th January 18z6. We
came in sight of the mountains called
Samroiyot 1 “ 300 peaks,” at the foot
of which at a small village of the same
name we anchored about 4 p.m. to take
in water. We found here that the Rajah
had passed by land but had kindly
left a supply of provisions for our use.
At 7 p.m. we again got under weigh and
continued our course along the coast
where it was so steep and rough that
I thought if the boat met with any
accident, I should never be able to
get ashore L
MONDAY 30th January 1826. On
this day Mr. Leal, who had a compass
and quadrant with him, finding that the
passage along the coast would be un-
necessarily long and tedious, obliged the
boatmen to steer a more easterly course
and direct for the mouth of the Menam k .
The boatmen objected much and towards
evening a stiff breeze coming on, the
boat, which had no keel, could not keep
her course and was driven to leeward
until 10 p. m. when she got aground on
the mud flat between the mouths of the
Thachin 1 and Menam, rivers, where we
were detained all that night.
TUESDAY 31st 7anuary 1826. Fortunately the
boat met with no injury and was easily got off at 6
this morning. Between 8 and 9 we entered the
Menam and shortly after we anchored off the Fort of
Pal'nam m . Mr. Leal and I went ashore and visited
the Governor or Phya of Paknam who showed a dis-
position to detain us until he received orders from
Bangkok respecting us. But in consequence of the
information which we had collected from the copies of


the Rajah of Ligor’s letters we made a pretext for
returning to the boat and set sail for Bangkok where
we arrived opposite Captain Burney’s house about 10
o’clock at night.
INTRODUCTION.
. Captain Burney engaged as one of Iiis inter-
preters, Francis Joseph Leal, a native of the Azores,
who had gone to Bangkok via Macao and had resided
in Siam for nearly 6 years and who happened to he at
Singapore as an officer on board a free trader. Mr.
Leal’s knowledge of the language, and character of
the people of Siam, as well as his strict integrity,
general intelligence, and fearlessness of character,
rendered him ot infinite use. He was always employ-
ed when any disagreeable communication was to be
made to the Siamese Ministers, and when no other
interpreter would venture to interpret the whole of
what was said. Shortly after his arrival at Bangkok
from Ligor, he was selected to take charge of a large
party of Burmese prisoners which it became necessary
to send back to Mergui overland. Although the
Siamese Ministers had at length been persuaded to
release these people, some apprehension was enter-
tained that during their route to Mergui, the subordi-
nate Siamese officers might attempt to detain some
of them, and Mr. Leal was considered a very fit person
to prevent such proceedings. He was requested -to
keep a diary in his native FWtuguese language and
how well he executed the service entrusted to him
will appear from a perusal of his journal, of which the
following translation was made through the kindness
of Mr. Swinton. A few explanatory notes only have
been added and the orthography of the names adapted
to the English language.
Mr. Leal had an opportunity of visiting the whole
line of the Siamese frontier from Martaban to Pah-chan
below Mergui. The topographical knowledge which


he had thus acquired made him an object of great
j ea lousy and dislike to the Siamese Ministers, who
proposed a very insidious scheme for detaining him in
the country and preventing his leaving it with the
British Mission. The scheme however was discovered
and Mr. Leal was brought away and transferred to
Mr, Commissioner Maingy at Tavo} 7 , where he is now
employed.
During his journey from Ligor to Paihiu Mr.
Leal had a quadrant with him by which he ascertained
the latitude of several place between those towns, but
unlortunately, at the time he made the journeys des-
cribed in this journal, he had no means of taking
correct observations.
He left Bangkok with 541 Burmese prisoners in
fi junks on the 13th February 1826, sailed from the
bar on the 23rd, and arrived on the Ist of March at
Bangnarom, in about latitude 11°. 50'. 0". on the west
coast of the Gulf of Siam, whence he commences the
following journals.
( Signed ) H, Burney Captain.
HOUTE from Bangnarom to Mergui by land,
TUESDAY 4th March 1826, I set out from
Bangnarom for Mergui accompanied by 541 Burmese
including men, women and children at 5 o’clock in
the morning. I found the road bad to the extent of
two miles and afterwards proceeded 7 miles with the
advantage of a good road. 1 reached a field at 1 o’clock
in the afternoon, where there was good water. There
1 halted until about 4 o’clock and resumed my march
until 9 at night, when I arrived at a place where there
was a pool. There I passed the night under some appre-
hension lest the Siamese might kidnap some of the
people and as a precaution I placed 20 sentinels.


March sth. I set out at \ past 4 o’clock in the
tnorning, met with good road the whole da} T until
x past 6 o’clock in the evening, when 1 found very
bad water and was obliged to pass the night there-
in this place were two roads, one which I was obliged
to pursue, and the other leading to Banthaphan. In
the same place are two large trees, one' to the right
and the ether to the left. The latter is marked with
four crosses, denoting the day of the month and the
year, and stands on the road to Bangihapkcin. The
former is marked with two crosses and stands on the
road leading to Mergui.
March 6th. 1 set out at 5 o’clock in the morning
and marched until 9 at night. Notwithstanding all
my exertions I could get no water during the day, the
heat was insupportable and our thirst equally so. I
was obliged, as well as those who accompanied me to
pass the night without food, but the road good.
March 7th. I set out at 4 o’clock in the mor-
ning; at 9 we met with two roads, one leading to the
east and the other S. S. E. As I did not know which
of them to select I was obliged to remain there the
whole day and send forward 20 persons each way to
ascertain the route to Mergui. Those who advanced
by the S. S. E. returned at four in the afternoon with
the information that the road did not continue beyond
a certain point. Those who pursued the Eastern
Route airived at 9 in the night with the intelligence
that the road continued in a right line. There I
I m
passed the night without the occurrence of any thing
particular. In this place there is excellent water, a
small field, and a large stone to the left with one of its
points fractured, which constitutes the mark of the
road to Mergui.
March Bth. f set out at half past three o’clock in
the morning and arrived at the foot of a mountain


a Khao is the
Siamese word
for mountain,
Kasoon is a
ball or pellet.
b These trees
are said to mark
in this direction
the boundary of
the Siamese &
Burmese territor'
ies & the place
is said to be
called Sing
Khon thee phe.
c The Burmese Inhabitants
of Mergui go up the Tenas-
serlm River as far nearly as
the Latitude of Tavoy to cut
Sapan wood, which they bring
down the stream in long nar-
row floats of bamboos. Mr.
Leal supposed that the
stream on which he had here
embarked was the main
branch of the Tenasserim &
called Khao Kasoon a at 11 in the forenoon. There
I found a small stream on the banks of which I desired
the people to dress their rice and refresh themselves
until 4 o’clock in the afternoon when I resumed my
journey. At 5 I crossed the mountain Khoo Kassoon
with extreme difficulty in the ascent and descent.
At past 10 o clock at night I arrived in a field where
there was a tamarind tree on the right side of the
road. There I passed the night without any further
occurrence.
March 9th. 1 set out at 4 o’clock in the morning
and at 9 arrived in a field where I found three
tamarind 1 * trees, and a beautiful stream. There I
desired the people to dress’their rice, and as soon as
they had done I resumed my journey until 4 o’clock
in the afternoon, when I reached a pagoda, where the
people entreated me to halt during the night to enable
them to adore their divinity. In that spot are 5
mango trees.
March 10th. I set out at sin the morning and
met with good road the whole day until 7 at night,
when I reached the vicinity of the Tenasserim River.
There 1 passed the night.
March llblu At 1 oclock in the night I called
the people and desired them to fell bamboos for the
purpose of making floats to go down to Mergui and as
the river was very narrow it became necessary to
make floats of 10 bamboos. There were in all 75.
On this day great inconvenience was experienced
from the many trees which 1 encountered in the
inhabitants said river. At 4in the afternoon 2 lads
tr h nea T Hy a as tiied of fever - 6 I halted and passed
avoy to cut the night there®.
March 12th. I continued my jour-
ney down the river, but with difficulty,
meeting with some wide plains whose
names I could not ascertain.


that the road from Bangnarom
led so much to the northward
as is described in the accom-
panying Geographical Sketch.
But some of the more in-
telligent Burmese prisoners
declared at Bangkok that the
stream on which they would
have to embark was a small
branch of the Tenasserim,
issuing from the central
mountains & falling into that
river near the old city of
Tenasserim.
d This party most probably
came from Tenasserim at
which a small force had been
posted after the Siamese
Govr. of Chhoomphon had the
year before plundered it.
e Of the Madras 13th Rcgt.
& Asst, to Mr. Maingy. Mr,
Leal, allowing for the deten-
tion of 3 days at Cangnarom
& of the great portion of the
4th & Bth days route, whilst
engaged in ascertaining the
direction of the road & con-
structing bamboo floats, was
about 16 days from the bar of
the Menam to Mergui, but his
progress was necessarily
slow owing to the number of
women and children among
the Burmese prisoners and
we were Informed that the
Kaspon hill might have been
crossed at a more easy
pass. There are 2 instances
on record of the journey
between the old capital of
Siam and Mergui, at the time
the French were driven out of
it having been made in 10 days
& on one of these occasions
the parly consisted of pri-
soners in chajns escorted by
March 13th. 1 set out at 5 in the
morning and at 2 in the afternoon saw
a Burmese fishing boat and availed my-
self of it to transmit a letter to Mergin’,
apprizing the Governor of mv approach
from Siam and that I required transports
for the conveyance of the Burmese pri-
soners who were with me.
March 15th. At 3 in the morning
20 boats approached my float from
Mergui, bringing 50 sepoys, 1 subadar
and an officer* 1 . I enquired of him
whence he came, and whither he was
going. He replied that he came to sur-
vey the river, and to ascertain who the
persons were on those floats. After some
complimentary expressions he withdrew,
and I continued my voyage towards
Mergui.
March 15th. I arrived at Mergui
at 8 in the morning and waited on Cap-
tain Briggs® the Governor. We were
engaged in conversation for 2 hours after
which I took leave of him and at 8
in the night embarked for Tavoy. I
commenced my route from Bangnarom
accompanied by 54*1 Burmese and arrived
with 537.
ROUTE from Mergui to Tayoy ami
back by sea.
March 16th 1826. At 8 o’clock in
the night 1 embarked for Tavoy and
used our oars the whole night. At Bin
the morning we had a little easterly wind
until 11. when it shifted and we could
not sail. We rowed the whole of the
afternoon. At 6 my people were quite


a detachment of Siamese
soldiers ( See p. 383 & 384
Modern Universal .History,
vol. 7, ed. 1759.) Mr. Crawfurd
was informed that the late
King of Siam had (constructed
a military road from Muang
Mai,fa little above Bangnarom
towards Mergui for the pur-
pose of invading the Burmese
territories, and that this road
would admit elephants &
even wheeled carriages. But
in former times there appears
to have been a carriage road
between the Gulf of Siam and
Tenasserim, as in a letter
from the Bishop of Tabraca
from Siam in 1761, published
in vol. 5 of the Nouvelles Let-
tres Edifiantes, page 377, we
find the following passage:
“J’y ai envoye M. Martin
(a Merguy.) il alia jusqu'a
Piply fou Ton a coutume de
quitter dcs bateaux et y
attendit inutilemcnt les
charettes pendant trois se-
maines.” Piply is the Siamese
Phriphri, a large town on the
west coast of the Gulf of Siam,
in about Lat. I3 U . 20" and once
the. capital of the Siamese
Empire. It is to be hoped that
our officers at Mergui will
shortly be able to reopen and
reestablish these old and
almost forgotten roads into
the rich kingdom of Siam and
thus revive the ancient and
valuable commerce which was
conducted with Siam through
this channel first by the Por-
tuguese and afterwards by
the French.
fatigued and we were obliged to rest
until 10 when we resumed our voyage.
March 17th. At 4in the afternoon
I passed the mouth of the Kiver Pulloh
and there found the water favorable dur-
ing half an hour. At half past 5 in the
afternoon a violent storm arose from the
N. E. accompanied with heavy rain.
This continued till past Bat night,
when the weather cleared up, but at
midnight it again became cloudy.
jveiies Let- March 18th. 1 continued advancing
age 377, we .
g passage: until 1 at night, when 1 passed the
m. Martin river of Pamhu. At the month of it is
lla jusqu'a
outume de a smj ill bay, about 20 or 25 houses, and
eaux et y a,nd from 30 to 40 persons, who come and
mcnt les -ii .. . ...
it trpis se- reside there tor the purpose ot selling
the Siamese fish at Tavoy and Mergui. There 1 re-
town on the , i.i . i
. , . mamed nearly two hours until my people
iulf of Siam, “ j r r
y and once refreshed themselves, and then resumed
ie Siamese 7 voyage. The wind blew the whole
hoped that J J ®
Mergui will night from the S. W. without any land
reopen and fi rPeze> Towards the morning there was
s old and °
roads into a calm until 12, when it again blew
>f Siam and f res h from the same point S. W. At 4
indent and
e which was 1 saw the mouth of the river of Tavoy,
am through and
at 7 entered the bar where a two
by the Por-
irwards by masted vessel lay at anchor, with sails
resembling a schooner and a long boat.
As I was in want of water I went on
board of the above mentioned vessel to get some.
1 saw 2 Chulias who told me that they had no
water and that 2 gentlemen were in a small
cabin. I enquired their names, but could get no
information on that head. I withdrew, and as it
was low water 1 was obliged to wait for the flood tide,
when 1 resumed my voyage.


March 19th. At 8 in the morning I reached
Tavoy and immediately waited on Mr. Maingy f the
Governor, who received the letters ot which I was
the bearer from Siam, and we then proceeded to
breakfast. Mr. Maingy informed me that he had
received letters from Captain Barney in which he
suggested the expediency of sending me to ChlMomphffn
for the purpose of receiving the remainder of the
prisoners who were still there. 1 agreed and after
breakfast Mr. Maingy went to prepare the letters
which he intended to send to the Governor of Chhoonv-
phon of which there were three, one written in English,
one in Milay, and the other in the . Siamese language,
together with a pair of double barrel pistols. I took
leave of him at 10 in the night, when 1 set out from
Tavoy for Mergui, and from thence to Ghhoomphon.
It was fine weather during the day an 1 at midnight it
rained a little. At Tavoy 1 was informed by Mr.
Maingv that some of the people were very ill disposed
and that they had twice attempted to set fire to the
city, in which they Could not succeed owing to the
apprehension ot the ringleaders®.
March 20th. My people had no sleep during the
night. I reached the bar in the morning. At 9
o’clock the sea breeze began to spring up, the tide
was against us. At 2 in the afternoop I espied a
vessel to the westward of the Island ot Tavoy. At 5
o’clock we could see her distinctly. She proved to be
a brig bound to Tavoy. There was a calm all night
until 12, when a land breeze sprung up. Prior to
this, at \ past 11 o’clock 1 passed close by a little boat
in an inverted position, but saw no bo ly, or any thing
which could lead me to believe that any serious loss
had taken place, and as it was night 1 could not
examine minutely. In the morning there was an ap-
pearance ol a severe storm from the Is. W. At 8 all
was dispelled and at 10 the wind increased from the
South. At 3 o’clock I reached Mergui and proceeded


h These were the 4 boats
and men of the Govp. of
Chhoomphon’s fleet captured
by Lieut. Drever of the
Madras 19th Regt. whom
Major Frith of H. M. 38th had
to deliver the letters which 1 brought from Tavoy to
the Governor of Mergui, who immediately desired me
to examine and collect all the Burmese boats which
were capable of proceeding to Pah Chan . This order
1 instantly executed.
March 21st. At an early hour in the morning
1 began to make arrangements for proceeding to
Ghhoomphon and found not more than 12 boats adapted
for the purpose, which 1 endeavoured to get ready
with 112 Burmese. Prior to this, at 11 in the mor-
ning 1 went to prepare 4 boats for the Siamese
prisoners who were at Mergui, and to see that they
were supplied with the following articles of provisions
for the voy-age, viz. rice, fish, beetle-nut and chunam,
halachan , &cr; all their muskets, blunderbusses, spears
and all other articles belonging to the said Siamese
prisoners were delivered to them. At 8 in the night
every thing was ready, but 1 was detained until
the next morning in consequence of a heavy fall
of rain.
March 22d. 1 could not set out in consequence
of the continuance of the rain, strong winds and a
heavy sea. Thus it continued until 11 at night.
Towards the morning of the 28d the weather im-
proved.
ROUTE from Mergui to Ghhoomphon along the
coast by sea as far as the mouth of the Pale Chan River,
then up that river to the Siamese post of Pah Chan
about the centre of the Isthmus of Kraw and thence
by land to Ghhoomphon on the west Coast of the Gulf
of Siam, and back to Mergui in the same way.
March 28rd. At 8 o’clock in the morning twelve
Burmese boats were ready with 112 men, and tour
ihe 4 boats Siamese boats with 109 h Siamese Pri-
-3 Govp. of ...
et captured soners, who were returning to their
er of the native country. At 11 o’clock to set
«sail for Pah Chan. The Burmese boats


Sent out with a dctachmt. of
sepoys to put a stop to the
Siamese depredations in the
vicinity of Mergui in the
month of March 1825.
i Fresh Water Island.
j The exact situation and
name of this river are as yet
unknown. It is however some-
times called Pak Chan and
may be that termed the
Chilinga in some Charts. In
a Burmese map a place called
Channa is put down at the
mouth of this river and a little
to the northward of the is-
land, we have heard, some
ruins of a large town named
Chuddine are still visible.
But this Coast was never
surveyed and the whole of it
between Mergui and Pak Chan
is said to be intersected by
innumerable channels and
creeks. The large river
noticed by Captn. Forrest as
nearly opposite the north end
of St. Mathew’s Island would
appear to be lower down the
coast (See his chart of the
Mergui Archipelago.) Many
native travellers declare that
nothing would be easier than
to make a navigable canal
thro’the Isthmus of Kraw by
joining the Pak Chan and
Chhoomphon rivers. Mr. Leal
who was requested to ex-
amine this matter confirms
all the statements previously
received and declares that
letachmt. of were very small' ami moved slowly,
stop to the Those of the Siamese were large and
itions in the ~
gui in the very swift. At 4in the afternoon 1 lost
sight of them, and conclude that they
stand. took the way of Ko Nam.' 1 It rained
heavily the- whole night.
March 24th. During the day we used sails and
oars. At 4in the afternoon J passed Ko Nam Cheat
At midnight I reached a place where the Burmese had
formerly a Factory. There 1 reposed during the night
and found a large bank of oysters and fresh water.
25th March 1826. At 4 in the morning 1 re-
sumed my voyage. During the day the wind was
variable with a strong current to the south. At 6 in
tuation and the afternoon 1 reached the month of the
' are as yet river J and was obliged to pass the night
weversome- _
k chan and waiting for the flood tide.
March 26th. At 1 o'clock at night it
began to l>e hig'li water whilst I advanced
up the river sounding from 5 to 10
fathoms. The river is immensely wide.
I was obliged to await the return of the
flood tide until 10 at night. 4of the boats
which accompanied me were left behind.
March 27th. At 2 in the night
1 resumed my journey. At 4 past S
o'clock 1 reached Pah Chan, went ashore,
and proceeded to examine the place. I
met 8 Burmese boats and 11 belonging to
the Siamese; at the same time I heard
some one call out at a short distance
in the Siamese language to know who
were the people and whose the boats that
had arrived there. I replied they were
Burmese coming from Mergui and pro-
ceeding to Ghhoomphon in the service of
the Company. They enquired what the


the Pak Chan is a beautiful
broad and deep river through-
out; that the Chhoomphon is
very sinuous in its course
with a sandy bed, but that
there are no rocks in either
river or hilly ground between
them, and that in fact even
now, during the spring tides
the two rivers often unite.
Mr. Maingy is about to ascer-
tain this interesting point.
Dr Hamilton in the 18th
number of the Edinburgh Phi.
losophical Journal notices a
communication by water as
existing through the isthmus
of Kraw but his information
placed it near Junk Ceylon.
iv Deputy of
the Department.
i chalk op
Chunam Hiii.
nature of the service was. I did not
wish to state this, but invited them to
my boat to hold a conversation. They
declined doing so. On my enquiring
who they were they answered they were
guards posted to watch in that quarter.
In the mean time they withdrew. At
5 in the morning 1 pursued my journey
on foot toward Chhoomphon accompanied
by 38 Burmese and after a quarter of
an hour’s progress, I saw at a distance
three persons who, on coming near us,
enquired of us whither we were proceed-
ing, I replied, towards Chhoomphon and
requested of them to show me the way.
They told me to follow them. I did so until 10 o’clock
in the forenoon when I lost sight of them. During
the day I met very bad roads. At 9 in the night
I halted and at 11 about 7or 800 Siamese approached
me with a Chief named Belat Krow , u who came from
Chhoomphon to ascertain what I wanted. I replied
that I was deputed by the Governor of Tavoy to re-
ceive the Burmese Prisoners who were, at Chhoomphon.
He informed me that they had already gone away.
On ray asking how many there were, he answered 300
and said further that the Governor of Chhoomphon was
at Pathiu, and that he was going to Chhoomphon to
send for him. He withdrew at 12. All his followers
were armed with muskets, swords and spears. It
rained the whole of that day and night.
• <d o
March 28th. At 4in the morning I resumed my
journey until 9 when [ reached Khao Poon 1 , where 1
was received by nearly 3000 Siamese. I halted and
met Phra Seni. He asked me what number of men
I brought with me. I told him to reckon, when he
ascertained there were 38. He then asked me what
was my object in coming there. I replied that I
was to receive the Burmese prisoners who were at


Chhoomphon. He told me they were all sent away
to Mergui to the number of 450. On my asking him
if I could proceed to Chhoomphon, he answered that
the Governor was absent, that he was the person who
officiated now in that capacity 7 , that there was no place
ready 7 for my r reception and that I should wait until
4 in the afternoon to enable him in the mean time to
prepare a place. He then withdrew with his people.
After 4 o’clock 1 advanced and in half an hour reached
a large rice field where I saw about 7 or 8000 Siamese
all armed and with different uniforms, some red, some
green, and others white. Among them were three
Chiefs Phra Siri, Phoo Chwai m and BeLai Krom. I
was received at that place by the whole of those
people. They were all seated but on my reaching the
centre of the assembly they rose and accompanied me
to a straw hut, in a corner of which was a bamboo
mat to sit upon. I then learned that this was the
place intended for my residence until the arrival of
of Phya or Governor of Chhoomphon. I observed to
the three Chiefs that the place in question was more a
sty, than a habitation for human beings. They told
me not to be impatient. That they would be with me
day and night until the arrival of the Phya Ghhoom-
phon. They ordered boiled rice for 38 Burmese, but
it proved insufficient even for 10. There I passed the
night accompanied by the said Siamese Chiefs.
March 29th. In the morning, the Chiefs told me
that a place was now ready within the city for my
abode, but as it was raining violently at this
time I was advised to wait until the cessation of
the rain, which continued till 2 in the afternoon.
At this period arrived Phya Krai" 1 , the Governor of
Chhoomphon, who said that he came from Pathiu, an
assertion not to be credited, since that is 2 days’
journey by land and he spent only 12 hours on the
route. He entered a pagoda and sent a message to
apprize me of his arrival and invited me to meet him.
1 immediately waited on him and found him cleaning a


tobacco pipe. He enquired about the Burmese War.
I replied that peace \yas already concluded and that
the Burmese were ready to pay all the expenses in-
curred by the company, and that they had actually
discharged a great part thereof. I delivered to him 3
letters, one in English, 1 in Malay, and the other in
Siamese, the last of which he read and enquired what
t he other 2 contained. I explained to him that they
were in tenor precisely the same as the one he had
perused. He mentioned that the Burmese prisoners
had been sent to Mergui and that there was not one
at Ghhoomphon. I told him that I suspected that
at that place there were many Burmese whom he
should, deliver over to me. He swore it was not so.
I remarked that he should be cautious since I came
with 112 Burmese in 12 boats at the cost of the
Company and should it hereafter be discovered that
any of the Burmese Prisoners remained behind either
through forgetfulness or design the Company would
exact payment of all expenses incurred in this expedi-
tion. Phya Chhoomphan laughed heartily at this
declaration and ordered 4 trays of eatables of different
kinds, but I pretended illness and said I had no
appetite under an apprehension of some deceit which
the Siamese are very capable of practising. He said
there was not a suitable place ready for my reception,
but I must have patience and go back to the quarters
where 1 had already abode. I then told him to
prepare his letters and it was my intention to return
to Mergui on the following day. I took leave and
returned back to the straw hut.
March 30th. At 4 o’clock in the morning I got
my people ready to depart. 8 of the Burmese re-
quested leave to go and buy tobacco which I granted.
Five minutes after they returned, saying they were
stopped in the way by 30 Siamese. I prohibited them
from going out any more. At 10 the Governor sent
for me and told me that his letter was prepared and 2


elephants were ready to conduct me as far as Pah Chan.
I offered him my acknowledgments, received his
and took leave accompanied by Phra Siri and Belat
Krom. On my complaining of my boats being very
small and expressing my anxiety to proceed ex-
peditiously, they offered me one of the Siamese boats
which had come from Mergui. I was accompanied
by 50 Siamese and 2 elephants, but the road being
bad we could not reach Pah Chan that day. At 7in
the evening I halted and passed the night in the field
under incessant rain.
March 31st. I set out at 6 o’oclock in the morn-
ing and arrived at Pah Chan at 2 in the afternoon.
I was immediately informed that the Burmese had
robbed the Siamese of some articles. I punished them
in the presence of the Siamese who had accompanied
me, in order that they might see that I have not come
to deprive them of their property but to perform my
duty in a friendly manner.
April Ist. I set out at 6 o’clock and arrived at a
place called by the Siamese SamYYon.t n . I observed
it to be in ruins. I could get no water. At o in the
afternoon 1 got out of the mouth of the river and was
exposed during the night to an easterly wind. The
boats which accompanied me remained astern.
April 2d. The whole of this day I navigated
with oars. In the afternoon I came in sight of a
large vessel near an island, 4 miles off, called by the
Siamese Bang Nohe, whither 1 steered my course. In
the mean time the wind freshened from the E. N. E.
and the vessel trimmed her sails and disappeared. I
was therefore unable to ascertain what ship it was,
whence she came or whither she was bound. At 6 I
came in sight of an Island called by the Siamese
Ko Vat or Pagoda Island. During the night there
was a calm.
April 3d. In the morning there was a strong
current and I was obliged to wait until the setting


o The Burmese prisoners at
Chhoomphon had been sent
back in small parties at
different intervals and it is
satisfactory to know that the
whole 237 arrived at Mergui
after Mr. Leal left it although
the jealousy of the Siamese
Chief of Chhoomphon had
forced them to take a month’s
journey via Bangnarom in-
stead of the direct and easy
route of a week or IO days
from Pak Chan to Mergui.
in of the ebb tide, which took place at 11 in the
morning. I then resumed my journey. At past
4 in the afternoon I arrived at Mergui, where I un-
derstood 53 Burmese had arrived and on enquiring
how many the Siamese had released I was informed only
53 and that several had proceeded to Bangkok but the
prisoners at number could not be ascertained. 0 The
i been sent mentioned 53 Burmese complained
parties at . , .
is and it is that they were prohibited from pursuing
now that the the route of Pak Chan by Phya Krai who
d at Mergui _ ' ,
tit although sent 8 Siamese to accompany them, in
the Siamese order that they may proceed by no other
keamonth’s road than that of Bangnarom and that
ignarom in- they were not supplied with any pro-
ct and easy -vision except a bag of rice. This scanty
or IO days 1 °
o Mergui. supply restricted them to one meal, in
24 hours. They ( the Burmese ) complained also that
all their wearing apparel had been stolen as well as
their knives ( it being the practice of every Burman
to carry one with him) and on requesting the
restoration of these articles they were threatened with
punishment.
ROUTE from Mergui to Tavoy by Sea.
April 4th 1826. At 4in the afternoon my boat
was ready to sail for Tavoy, but I could not move
as the letters of the Governor were not yet ready.
April sth. 1 waited the whole of this day for
the letters of the Governor which did not come into
my possession until 9 at night when I myself went
to receive charge of them and of a packet of books for
Mr. Blundell.
April 6th. I set out at 9in the night with the
ebbtide having 20 oars to my boat. In the morning
I came in sight of the bar of Pulloh. I wished to go to
Pulloh in consequence of my having heard at Mergui
that Mr. Maingy had gone there. At midday I
reached the bar of Pulloh and entered. 1 discovered a
boat coming out which informed me that Mr. Maingy


had proceeded to Pamhu. I returned. At 10 in the
night 1 reached the mouth of that river and the huts
of fishermen, who apprized me that Mr. Maingy had
gone to the Island of Tavoy. 1 instantly set out for
that quarter, to meet that gentleman if possible.
Pulloh it is said contains from 7 to 800 souls and
several habitations.
April 7th and Bth. (Note -The writer, after
detailing some unimportant circumstances relating to
his progress reports his arrival at Tavoy, where he
was informed that Mr. Maingy had not yet arrived.)
April oth. At 7in the morning I waited on Mr.
Blundell p who informed me that Mr. Maingy had
not yet arrived and that he could not arrange matters
until the arrival of that gentleman or the issue of
his instructions. At 9 o’clock after breakfast, I
proceeded to interpret a letter which came from
Chhoomphon. Mr. Blundell told me that he wished to
send a copy of that document to Mr. Maingy. At
12 it was ready, but it could not immediately be
forwarded as some other public dispatches were not
yet prepared. It was fair weather and I took a walk
with Mr. Blundell and 4 other gentlemen, namely,
Captain. Paynton, the Master Attendant &c. At 7
we returned and went to dinner. ■
April 10th. Mr. Blundell dispatched a boat with
a letter to Mr. Maingy. At 10 o’clock there arrived
a boat from Rangoon with passengers who having
heard that the English were about to deliver over the
country to the Burmese did not wish to continue
there, and they furnished the intelligence that all the
inhabitants of Rangoon were desirous of leaving the
place, some flying to Martaban, some to Tavoy and
others to Mergui.
April 11th. Two more boats arrived from
Rangoon full of passengers. They brought advices
that a vessel remained there to receive troops for


Martaban, that several other boats would arrive in the
course of 4 or 5 days with Burmese passengers, and
that when the boats above alluded to left Rangoon
8 vessels lay at anchor there, 3 belonging to the
Company and o Merchantmen.
April 12th. At 4 in the afternoon Mr. Maingy
arrived from Pambu. He was employed the whole
day in writing letters to Rangoon and could not dis-
patch me on that day. Captn. Warwick of the Bhip
Carnatic discharged the Company’s cargo, consisting
of canvas, cordage Ac, and shipped rice. The weather
proved fair during the day, but it rained a little at
night.
April 13th. At JO o’clock two boats arrived from
Mergui bound to Martaban for the purchase of rice.
At 2 in the afternoon there arrived a Chinese Junk
from Penang bringing 4 Chinese carpenters and some
Chinese passengers. I was detained in consequence of
Mr. Maingy not having time to complete the letters
for Siam. I heard at 11 at night of the seizure of
2 thieves. It was fair weather during the day, and it
rained all night.
April 14th. The rain continued until 4 in the
afternoon. Mr. Maingy was all day employed in writ-
ing to Rangoon. At night there was an order for
doubling the number of sentinels and after 8 o’clock
no person could admit any one within doors without
the written permission of the Governor.
April 15th. At 8 in the morning 1 received or-
ders from Mr. Maingy to get my boat ready to
proceed to Martaban.’ I then went to receive some
cordage and half a piece of canvas, the latter for the
purpose of making a field tent, afid also some sail
thread; all these were out of the Company’s stores.
At midday every thing was ready. At 2 proceeded
to receive charge of the Governor’s letters. At 3 a
fire broke out in 2 Burmese habitations. Prompt


assistance was afforded on the occasion by the troops,
the Governor, his second, the Captain of the Corps, 2
Lieutenants, Serjeants, &c. The 2 buildings in ques-
tion were burnt down but the injury did not extend
further. It was suspected that this conflagration was
the effect of design, but as yet this point has not been
ascertained with certainty.
ROUTE from Tavoy to Martaban by Sea.
April 16th 1526. 1 set out from Tavoy for Mar-
taban and at the same time the schooner sailed for
Rangoon. It was fair weather during the night.
Tavoy is a fine city, is said to contain 16,000 souls
and has a large tin mine and some silver 01 . Towards
morning I reached the bar of Tavoy. At 2 in the
afternoon I came in sight of 4 vessels which I believe
were from Rangoon, 3 of them were large and 1
small. I did not hail them as they were at a great
distance.
April 17th. At Bin the morning I saw a brig
in a westerly direction. Winds variable. At sunset
there was a calm and rain during the night.
April lath. Until 10 in the morning the wind
was from the north. It then blew from the S. E. At
12 a boat passed us bound to Tavoy from Martaban.
The wind was favorable during the afternoon. At
6 there was a calm. At B I reached the mouth of the
viver Ye, in which quarter the Burmese said there
were 3000 persons belonging to Martaban. 1 asked
them what profit the country yields. This they could
not tell.
April 19th. I came in sight of two boats which
1 • supposed to be bound either to Tavoy or Mergui,
I could not hail them as they passed at a consider-
able distance.
Note—The subsequent paragraph describes the
state of the weather.


April 20th. I came in sight of the pagoda at the
bar of Martaban. At 2 in the afternoon I entered
within its points, at 4 I wished to land but could not
in consequence of low water and my not having a
small boat. At 5 a boat pushed off from shore with 4
Burmese to obtain accounts from Tavoy, who informed
me that 200 sepoys were in the country with a Lieu-
tenant and that the English intended to form a settle-
ment r there. At 8 the flood tide set in. I weighed
anchor and steered for Martaban.
April 21st, I reached Martaban at I in the mor-
ning and anchored off the fort. I waited on Captain
; Fenwick® and delivered to him the letters which I
brought from Tavo}' and also stated to him that I
was desirous of proceeding to Bangkok. Upon his
mentioning some difficulty I told him I would proceed
to Rangoon and wait on Mr. Crawfurd. He stated in
reply to this that I might do so and I withdrew with
the intention of setting out for Rangoon. But he
again sent for me, promised to supply me with 20
people and told me that it was unnecessary to go to
Rangoon, I agreed. Captain Fenwick informed me
that Mr. Crawfurd had left Martaban 5 days ago for
Rangoon, and that Mr. Crawfurd was Resident at
Martaban. At 7in the evening the rain commenced
aud continued until morning.
April 22d. I was waiting the whole day for the
20 men who had net yet come. Captain Fenwick
desired his interpreter to get ready a boat to proceed
to the bar. At 4 o’clock in the afternoon he was in-
formed that this was done. Captain Fenwick then
proceeded to embark and I accompanied him. On
reaching the boat it was discovered that it had only
4 oars, upon which it became necessary to defer the
journey to the following day.
April 23d. I was obliged to wait this day also,
in consequence of the non-arrival of the 20 Burmese


t It is interesting to com-
pare this route with the ac-
count of the last invasion of
Siam, and of the retreat of
their army given in Tome sme
p. 444 et seq. de Nouvellcs
Lettres Edifiantes Paris 1820.
n Muartg in
Siamese is a
town place or
country, Khlang
is a river, Bang a
streamlet, Wilai
ease, pleasure.
v Burmese
Zemih or
Athane ?
w Mykwan ?
who were to accompany me. At 10 in the morning
Captain Fenwick set out for the bar. I walked about
the place and was informed by several persons that
there were not more than 200 or 300 souls at
Martaban, that the rest had gone over to the other
side of the River. At 4in the afternoon there arrived
in the bar of Martaban a vessel with troops. 1
understood that she conveyed 100 sepoys who remain-
ed at the bar of the river, where a new town would
be formed.
ROU TE from Martaban to the City of Bangkok
up the river, across the 3 Pagodas to the Mekhlong
.ting to com. and down that river. l
with the ac-
it invasion of At 4 in the afternoon Captain Fen-
e retreat of . . .
in Tome sme Wl °k arrived, together with the 20 men
ie Nouvciics who were to accompany me as far as
~ Par,s ,82 °- Bangkok, and 2 small boats. The Hood
tide set in at 10 in the night when I set out accom-
panied by 20 Mons or Peguers and 3 Burmese.
April 25th, At 2 in the afternoon I arrived at
Milang w Uthran. At 6 I reached Khlang Bang Wilai
where I passed the, night.
April 26th. At 4in the morning I resumed ray
voyage. At 7 I met 3 fishermen's boats, all Peguers,
among whom were two women. At 9 I reached Kh-
long Peli v , where I desired my people to refresh them-
selves, At 6 I came in sight of 10 Pegu boats, in
which where were about 50 persons belonging to the
Siamese troops, who said they were going as far as
Martaban for the purpose of purchasing some pro-
visions.
April 27th. At 8 I reached Phra Mongue w . (The
rest of this article relates to some difficulties of naviga-
tion which he experienced).
April 28th. (Note —This article reports his
arrival at a place call Khlong Mykwan, where the


x Bo well,
Chan 'saucer.
Tamcuiw, rising,
small elevation.
y This is the boundary In
the direction between the
Siamese and Burmese ter-
ritory and is named by the
Siamese PhraChaidi Sam ong
“ 3 Pyramids or Pagodas ” and
by the Burmese we believe
Kiae pie and Praw Thoungo.
It is to be regretted that Mr-
Leal had not an opportunity
of ascertaining the exact
position of these pagodas as
there is a difference of up-
wards of a degree in the
position assigned to them in
different maps. But that they
cannot be in so high a Lati-
tude as 15°. 4. 3. we should
infer from the fact of Mr. Leal
having been 7 days reaching
them from Martaban. Mr.
Gibson, the Burmese envoy to
Cochin China, places the
pagodas in Latitude 3O
Long. 99°. 20, and the mean
Burmese say is a large quantity of Teak easily cut
apd conveyed to Martaban.)
April 29th. At II o’clock I arrived at Khlong
Mysekleet where I was obliged to pass the afternoon in
consequence of the indisposition and extreme fatigue
which my people had experienced.
April 30th. At 6 in the morning, after my
people had refreshed themselves, I resumed voyage
up the river Uthran. At ID we reached a strong place
which took us an hour and a half. At past 5 I
arrived at Mykesath. I there lauded and reviewed the
spot where the Siamese troops resided. I found it to
be a fine place. My people did not sleep, being
engaged in- arranging the articles belonging to them,
such as rice, fish &c 4 They were obliged to leave
there 10 bags of rice &c. being unable to transport
them.
May Ist. At 3a. in. I left Mykesath for SanyoLa
by land. I arrived at Bochan * where I desired my
people to refresh themselves. At 10 I reached a small
river called by the Siamese Namkroot ponyyoon, and
lounctary in from thence a place where there are 3
stween the
rmese ter- ragodas y or rather stony piles. The
med by the middle one had a Chinese umbrella.
idi Sam ong ... , ... , ,
godas » and w| nch the wind had deranged. I desired
we believe one of the Burmese to restore it to order,
hat"mr* as vvas ent e r ing in half of the
opportunity Pagoda tumbled down. I quitted the
pagodaws P ,aCe at midda .V- M V People were all
mce of up- laid up with sore legs. At 2 I reached
rG . e *" the a rock called bv the Siamese Tame am * .
to them in *
ut that they There the Burmese left three bags of
'we should r * ce unable to transport them
:of Mr. Leal from thence to Sanyala the journey
fs reaching being 0 f t W o b our3 au( | a half I reached
aban. Mr.
se envoy to the Sanyala liiver* at past 4, where
>iaces the j ordered the people to refresh them-
ide 14". 30
i the mean selves. On the eastern side of the


between his position and that
given in Captain
fLat. 15°. 43. Long. 38°. 54) has
been taken, and the pagodas
in the accompanying sketch
placed in Lat. I5 J . 6. Long.
99 0. 7.
z Head of the Khiong River.
a Bed or resting place
of elephant. The Burmese
Kudcc-.cin. Much
occurs in distinguishing
places on the confines of Siam
and Ava from most of them
bearing a Siamese, Burmese
and Pegue denomination.
The names given in the accom-
panying Geographical Sketch
of places on the uthran River
were said in Bangkok to be
those in use with the Mows
or Peguers. *
b The Ist or Sangole river
is considered as the head of
the Mekhlong or the river
flowing towards Bangkok.
The 3d is the Alantay. Tha
din deng is place of red
earth.
ion and that r i ver is stationed the first Siamese guard
98^54)*has at a place called Singole. At 5 I crossed
he pagodas Bie river in a float which I found there,
ying sketch waited 0 n the Siamese Chief, the
s°. 6. Long-
head of the guard above alluded to. He
long River. received me with civility. The Guard
consisted of 60 old Peguers. He told me 40 were
in the fields felling timber for making canoes and
some had gone to Martaban to purchase provisions.
He further stated that Martaban was his native country
and he still wished to be free from the Siamese,
and return to the land of his birth. On his applying
sting place to me for some medicine I supplied him
he Burmese with a small quantity of salts. The said
l\ing Wishing Chief sent 6 of his people to accompany
fines of Siam nie as far as Loom Ghhang a . He had
ost of them ith him a youn cr female, who he said
se, Burmese J °
'nomination, was his wife. He furnished me with
ntheaccom- i o( j g j n „ B [ n his house and ordered
hicai Sketch & °
uthran River quarters for ray people. fhe name
ngkok to be of this Chief is Phya Phakdi Song
th the Mows
Kram.
May 2d. At Bin the morning I reached a small
river called by the Siamese Suaroi, where my people
refreshed themselves. I then resumed my journey,
and passed several little, streams whose names I could
not ascertain. At G in the afternoon I reached Loom
Ghhang. My people were exceedingly fatigued and
so was I. There I found the second Guard consisting
of 32 Peguers. I numbered 27 boats large and small.
There were also some persons carrying on traffic with
the people of the plains; their trade consisted of
cotton cloth, Bees wax, Ivory, Sapan wood, Honey,
angoie river Buffalo and Deer’s Hides, Tigers Skins
the head of &(j> and cardamon3 . Here there are
,r the river
s Bangkok. 3 rivers, one issuing from Singoia ,
lantay. Tha anot | ie r from Thadin deng, and another
flowing towards Bangkok.


c Phan phu
um or Phan oon ?
a This is the Pegu Chief who ■
opened a communication with
the British army through
Mertaban, to the vicinity of
which he was sent early in
1825 with a force from Bang-
kok with the title of Rang
na rong Commander of the
Forces, corrupted by us into
Rau Rau and Rown Rown
e Thong is a
field.
f During the late war the
Siamese constructed two
forts at Menam Noi where the
Pegue General Maha Yotha
was stationed with a detach-
ment. But they were employ-
ed in cultivating cotton, of
which the finest description
in Siam is produced at
Menam Woi, and in cutting
sapan wood and large timber
for the Siamese state boats,
which articles are all brought
to Bangkok from the frontiers
of Tavoy by the Menam Noi
a "d Mekhlonq. There is no
May 3rd. At 9 the boats with which Phya
Phakdi Song Khram had ordered me to be furnished
being ready, I set out and fell in with 10 or 12 boats
engaged in the same traffic as above described. I
could not ascertain the name of this place®. 1 saw
several floats and canoes proceeding towards Bangkok.
At 7 in the night I was obliged to stop, as it became
very dark and the river was very difficult to navigate.
May 4th. At sin the morning, after my people
had refreshed themselves, I resumed m} r voyage, but
with difficulty. At 4 in the afternoon 1 met with
a wrecked boat with 5 people who were cutting bam-
boos to make a float. They informed me that Phya
gu Chief who 'Maha Yotha d had left Menam Noi for
licationwith , ' _ , .
my through Bangkok, accompanied by 7 boats. At
s vicinity of si n the afternoon I fell in with 7 boats
“Lg- engaged in traffic with the people of the
tie of Rang plains, one of which approached me and
ider of the j.p e men | n jj- begged of me to sell them
cl by us into 00
m Rown a little medicine, which they wished to
administer to a woman labouring under a fever. I
did not sell but gave them some Peruvian bark with
instructions how to use the same. At 7 in the night
I reached a field called by the Siamese Thong e locally
and was obliged to stop there that night it being very
dark and at the same time the rain began falling with
considerable violence.
May sth. At 5 in the evening,
after my people had refreshed themselves
I set out and found the passage easier,
as the rain which had fallen had caused
the river to rise. At 9 I reached Menam
Noi* and waited on the Governor of that
place, Phya Tacon Yu, * and also on his
Second Phya Ghhayok *. After half an
hour’s conversation they wished to oppose
my passage to Bangkok, but on this they
could not succeed. They then agreed to


teak in this direction. Menam,
mother of water or river and
Woi small. Chhayok is said
to be a small post a little
above Menam Noi. Mr, Leal
does not appear to have
noticed it or the Siamese
party may perhaps have been
withdrawn at the close of the
Burmese War. Chhayok may
be the Daraik of some maps.
This is the place where
travellers bound for Tavoy
from Bangkok generally begin
their land journey. It is the
Chaillot of Lettres £di Mantes,
where the Burmese on their
retreat from Siam first con-
veyed their guns, and where
the Bishop of Tabraca, navi-
gating against the stream
arrived in IO days from
Phoctret or Pek. From this
place the Bishop commenced
his land journey with the
Burmese, arriving at Tavoy in
14 days, after a most fatiguing
march. 2 sepoys whom Cap-
tain Burney sent from Bang-
kok to Tavoy were nearly a
month reaching that place,
but they were purposely
taken by a circuitous route.
They understood that there is
a shorter road direct from
Menam Noi to Tavoy and they
found their journey from
Chhayok extremely labori-
ous, passing over hills and
through forests in which they
could discover no traces of
a path. Captain Low in the
month of February 1825 tra-
velled from Tavoy to a hill
which he conceived to be the
Siamese frontier, and which
he places in Long. 98°. 39. He
was six days reaching it and
his perambulator measured
54 miles and 3 furlOngs, from
which he deducts 5 miles and
3 furlongs for the windings of
the road. But he appears to
make no allowance for the
ascent and descent of hills
which he crossed, a calcula-
tion that would still further
send me to Bangkok and to retain my
people namely the 20 Peguers from Mar-
taban who accompanied me, but I refused
assent to this proposition. It was at
length proposed, that I should remain
there until the dispatch of a letter to
Bangkok. In this condition too I did
not acquiesce as 1 was short of provi-
sions. 1 applied for some rice when 2
bags of it were ordered to be given to me
together with a Jack and some plantains.
1 quitted Menam Noi at a little after
11. At sin the afternoon there came a
boat with 5 persons from that place for
the purpose of accompanying me to
Bangkok. At 6 1 reached the Guard
called Thatuko 9 . J did not land to avoid
inconvenience. At 9 I reached a beetle
nut field and there we reposed.
May 6th. At 1 in the morning I
resumed my voyage. At 4- 1 passed a
place called b} the Siamese Sam Sing 9.
In that quarter were many vessels and a
son of Phya Maha Yotha who was load-
ing them with sapan wood. 1 did not
wait on him as it was still dark. At 12 I
reached the other Guard called Danclai 9 /
The Chief who commanded there is
named Belat Krom. He enquired whith-
er 1 was proceeding. 1 replied to this
question. He wanted me to leave with
him the people who accompanied me,
a request with which I would on no
account compty. 1 asked him for a little
rice which he refused. This guard con-
sists of 30 persons. In this place was
another son of a Ph3-a Maha Yotha in
a large boat with his wife. I asked
whither they were bound. They answered


to Bangkok. I inquired after his
father, he replied that he had gone down
three days ago and that it would be di-
fficult to meet him before reaching Bang-
kok. At past 3 I passed Banchiom h
where 1 understood were 4 or 500
Peguers. At (j 1 arrived at Pak-phrek 1 .
The Deputy Governor supplied me with
5 bags of rice half of which was in
tiie husk.
May 7th. At 6 1 reached Ratphre J
and landed for the purpose of waiting-
on the Governor. He deputed his Second
to meet me in a Pagoda. The first thing
he said was that I could not leave that
place until the arrival of orders from
Bangkok. After an hour’s conversation
he sent for my people from the boat and
as soon as they were ashore, would not
allow them to go back. As 1 had still
5 servants I left the said Chief, returned
to my boat and ordered my people to
push off. About 50 or 60 Siamese
then advanced to prevent my departure.
Some of them seized my boat and refused
to Jet her go off. Upon this I took up a
bamboo, and the very first against whom
I used it lay extended on the ground,
another was struck on the arm, and the
3d on the head, the rest fled and I
thus extricated myself and pursued my
voyage k . At 6 I reached Banchang 1
where I did not stop. Ratphri is said to
contain 100 persons and Banchhang from
3 to 4000 almost all Chinese.
May Bth. (Note —This article re-
lates to his arrival at Mekhlong and the
state of the river, which was crowded
with vessels, floats &c.).


apologise for Mr. Leal, at-
tributing his conduct to an
excess of zeal : to deliver im-
portant dispatches without
delay. But had Mr. Leal con-
sented to have stopped here
at Menam Wol, there is no
doubt, as he well knew, that
the Court of Siam would have
sent him back to Martaban.
1 Elephant village. The
“ Bancang” of Lettres Edifl-
antcs where the Burmese on
their retreat from Siam left
a Siamese Governor,
m Near the
Portuguese
Factory at
Bangkok.
May 9th. At 4 in the afternoon I
reached Thachin. From Meld dong to that
place the tract is inhabited by Peguers.
In Thachin there is an extensive spot
said to contain 15 or 16000 persons. I
did not stop there, but came to Khlong
Menam Luang , where I was obliged to
wait nearly half an hour for the flood
tide.
■nor. May 10th. After midnight 1 con-
tinued my voyage up the little river Menam or Bang
Luang. About 3 in the morning I reached Menam
River at Bangkok, and arrived at Captain Burney’s house
at a late hour at night. I did not wish to occasion
any inconvenience and I went down to Sampen m and
and remained there till dawn. I waited on Captain
Burney at 8 in the morning, and by the grace of Cod
my route was thus safely completed.
A LIST of all the Cities and Villages, places both
great and small, through which I, Francisco Joze Leal
passed, and of which mention if made in this route
namely :
Bangnarom has no population.
Mergui is said to contain 5000 persons.
Chhoomphon has a large population said to amount
to 10,000 persons.
Pakchan has a guard of 60 persons constantly posted
and relieved monthly.
Pulloh is said to contain 7 to 800 persons, in the
mouth of the river of Pulloh are about 30 or 34
fishermen.
Tavoy is said to contain 16,000 persons.
Ye has a Pegu population to the extent of 30,000 souls
( not a tithe of this number ).


Martaban is said to contain between Peefuers and
Burmese upwards of 30,000 persons.
TERRITORIES belonging to Siam.
Songola contains 150 persons.
Loom Chhang Do. 32 Do.
Menam Noi Do. 150 Do.
Tha tuko Do. 30 Do.
Ban Clai Do. 30 Do.
Ban Chaim Do. from 4to 5000 Peguers.
Pah phrek. is said to contain from 7to 8000 Siamese.
Rat phre Do. 10,000.
Ban Chhang contains from 3 to 4000 persons, Chinese
and Siamese.
Me Khlong is said to contain from 12 to 13,000 Chin-
ese and Siamese.
Thachin is said to contain from 15 to 16,000, Chin-
ese, Siamese and Cambodians.
(Signed) Francisco Jose Leal
Bangkok 10th May 1826.


Fort Cornwallis the 6th September 1827.
SUPERINTENDENT OP POLICE.
John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I beg to report for the information of the Hono-
rable the Governor in Council the arrival this morning
of about 35 persons, men, women and children, from
getul, who report that they have fled from that place
in consequence of orders having been given by the
Siamese Government to seize and send to Siam a
certain number (about one hundred; of Kedah boys
from 13 to 15 years of age, and that the quota of these
youths to be furnished by the Setul District is seven-
ty, Lingoo to provide the remainder. Three more
boat loads of the inhabitants of Setul are reported
to be on their way here and altogether about 150
persons have fled from thence to save their families
and children from this oppression. Twenty-three
boys had been seized before these people fled. The
object of the Siamese is said to be an Establishment
of Malayan goldsmiths and other handicrafts for the
palace of His Siamese Majesty.
I have &ca. &ca.
(Signed) K. Gaunter
Supdt. of Police,
Police Office
3d September 1827.


Fort Cornwallis, the 13th September 1827.
To Governor General.
To the Right Honble.
William Pitt Lord Amherst
Governor General in Council Fort William.
My Lord,
We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your Lordship’s letter of the 23d July, and to convey
our assurances of the most implicit adherence being
observed to the line of conduct therein pointed out:
The Report of Captain Burney addressed to the Right
Honble. the Vice President in Council of the 23d
April and .2 May having been submitted to us we
deemed it due to ourselves to enter into some expla-
nation on those points wherein facts or reasoning
appeared to be perverted to our prejudice, and we
have to regret that our opinions should have proved
so much at variance with those entertained by your
Lordship.
2. We have now the honor to enclose copies of
all the papers which led to the attack on the pirates in
the Korow River, from which it will be perceived that
the measure did not originate on any political arrange-
ments, nor was it resorted to by Captain Low in
prosecution of such, but conducted under our order
arising out of communication from the Police Depart-
ment in consequence of increasing acts of piracy
committed by persons finding shelter on that river.
It may be proper to add that since the measure
was resorted to not an instance of piracy has been
reported.
3. We beg to assure your Lordship that in
directing the attack in question, we acted under the
belief established by our records, by every map and


chart within our reach, and more particularly by one
furnished by Captain Burney himself in April 1825,
that the Krean was and has ever been the boundary
between Kedah and Perak; to the latter state there-
fore all communications were made. If we have been
misled by our authorities on this case, we must sincer-
ly regret that it has brought upon us so serious a
charge as the infringement of a treaty, and the terri-
tory of another state ; the very last thing of which we
should willingly be guilty. In further explanation of
the general subject of your Lordship’s letter we beg
leave to refer to the enclosed Minute of our Pre-
sident.*
4. We have the honor to enclose draft of letter
addressed to the Chief of Ligore on the subject of
Nackoda Oodin, the result of our enquiry shall be
reported as soon as possible. In respect to the Ex-
King of Quedah, as it appears that the Hastings may
shortly be expected here, we propose availing our-
selves of that opportunity to remove that personage
with his family to Malacca.
We have &ca.
(Signed) R. Fullerton
~ K. Murchison
Fort Cornwallis
The 6th Septr. 1827.


Minute of the President.
Petering to the orders recently received from the
Right Honorable the Governor General on the subject
ot removing the Ex-King of Kedah to Malacca, it now
becomes that some decided measures should
be adopted on the case, but in proposing those measures
I think it right for the information of the Superior
Authorities with whom ultimate decision will rest, that
all the attending circumstances of the case should be
clearly, fully and distinctly stated. The orders of the
Supreme Government on this occasion appear to be
founded on an expression used by Captain Burney to
the following effect. “1 visited the Ex-King however,
and I hope convinced him of the utter groundlessness
“ of such a charge and lam satisfied that if the ex-
“ pediency and advantage of his removing be seriously
“ urged on his Highness, by the officers of this Govern-
“ merit, he will consent to proceed to Malacca. 1 have
“ no hesitation in adding, that the absolute necessity
“ for removing him from this Island appears to me
“ now demonstrated beyond all doubt.”
In answer to the injunctions of the Vice President
in Council alread y received on this matter, we have
repeatedly assured His Lordship in Council of our
earnest wish and desir& that the Ex-King should con-
sent to remove to Malacca and I can safely and most
conscientiously affirm that every argument has been
used in personal communications, and every measure
resorted to thro’ other channels in order to induce the
King to assent to the measure, and all without success;
for the courses of failure and sentiments ot the King 1
must refer to the r arious letters and recorded com-
munications that have passed on the subject.
Fort Cornwallis the 13th September 1827.


To induce the assent of the King, the proposi-
tions alluded to by the Governor General and now
sanctioned, were proposed, but it never was contem-
plated that these propositions or any others of the
nature of a Treaty or reciprocal obligation could take
effect without the sanction of the Supreme Authority.
We are now then to consider the nature ot the order,
how far decidedly imperative or open to further
reference, and the measures we are to adopt in
consequence.
Two propositions are laid down.
Ist. That we have a right to dictate the place of
residence of a refugee.
2nd. That so long as such refugee resides within
our protection, it is our positive duty to prevent his
making use of that residence for the purpose of carry-
ing on illicit intrigues against a friendly power.
These positions are incontrovertible and with the latter
the Ex-King of Quedah has been daily impressed ever
since his residence here. But there is another quest-
ion arises, and that one we have already put to the
Supreme Government and as yet received no reply.
Namely, whether in the event ot the King intimating,
as he has done, his desire to quit our protection rather
than proceed to Malacca, we are to permit him to
depart and seek protection elsewhere. On this point
it may be observed that he came here to seek our
protection, that he has never been treated as a priso-
ner, but with every mark of honor and respect suitable
to the unfortunate situation in which he has been
placed. That it must be doubtful whether we are justi-
fied in making him a prisoner, or whether the order of
the Right Honble. the Governor General is intended of
authorize that extreme measure, nor does it distinctly
appear that reference has been made to the latter
part of the 13th article, which makes its provision
for the future residence of the King conditional


onl} 7 , as particularly alluded to in my Minute of 18
September 1826.
It is true that on a former occasion, when the Ex-
King intimated an intention of quitting out protection,
persuasion was used with success to induce him to
remain and abandon a course likely to be followed
by his own ruin, but it must be recollected that he
now stands in a somewhat different state. He was
not then required to remove from the Island, the
requisition of which arising from the Siamese he
deems it a point of honor to resist, even at the hazard
of the total loss of our protection to his person.
Moreover it must be observed that at the period in
question he still entertained hopes of obtaining
through our means his restoration to his ancient
kingdom. Those hopes are now entirely cut off; the
Treaty has been published in every newspaper in India
and, I have ascertained, has been fully explained to
him. He knows we have engaged to oppose all
attempts of his own at the recovery of his kingdom,
and he has now arrived at the crisis of his fate ; all
hopes of aid from us must now be at an end and in
whatever plans he now entertain despair must
form a material part.
On the other hand it must be observed, that as
lie himself has declared, his object in quitting our
protection is to retire to Belli or Siak, and there
we know his object will be to collect his friends and
adherents, and thence make an attempt on Quedah
or as he terms it himself, to meet his fate; an
attempt that would end probably in his total ruin,
but in the meantime produce piracy and confusion all
around us. We are moreover to consider, that under
the 13 Article of Captain Burney’s Treaty and now
ratified by the Governor General, we engage not to
permit the “former Governor of Quedah (meaning the
“ Ex-King) or any of his followers to attack or disturb
“or injure in any manner the territory of Quedah or


“any other territory subject to Siam. bor any such
attack or occurrence, by no means improbable were
the King to quit our territory, we might be held
responsible for all after events. As all communica-
tions recently received from the Supreme Government
too manifestly evince the transfer of all confidence in
us to another quarter, it behoves us to be particularly
guarded in our proceedings, and full in the expla-
nations of the motives under which we act. After
maturely weighing the circumstances of the case in all
their bearings it seems to me to be scarcely possible
to fulfil with effect the 13th Article of the treaty if we
permit the Ex-King to quit our territory and protect-
ion. The alternative would follow in due course, that
observing towards him that line of conduct hitherto
pursued, and as far as possible placing our precaution-
ary measures under cover of outward marks of honor
and respect, we should nevertheless prevent his clan-
destinely quitting this Island.
As the ship Hastings, expected shortly, will afford
a convenient opportunity for the removal of the King,
family and followers, and as some notice should be
given him for preparation, I propose that Mr, Gaunter,
the Superintendent of Police, whose knowledge of the
language and his having been already employed as a
medium of communication render him a fit person,
should make the necessary communication attached to
the Minute. Although I hope and trust the King will
at last be induced to comply with the desire of the
Right Honble. Governer General, it nevertheless be-
comes necessary that the eventual refusal as well as
occurrences arising out of the decided objections of the
King should not be entirely lost sight of. 1 therefore
propose that Mr. Gaunter should be directed through
the means of confidential persons to watch the pro-
ceedings of the King and obtain a timely insight into
his views and intentions in order that any plan for
quitting the Island may be counteracted by further


measures. Some communication may also be required
to be made to the officer commanding the troops to
select careful and steady native officers to take charge
of the King of Quedah’s Guard, hitherto considered as
one honorary entirely.
(Signed) R. Fullerton.
Port Cornwallis
The 13th September 1827.


To R. Gaunter Esqre.
Superintendent of Police.
Sir,
The directions of the Right Rouble, the Governor
General having been recently received for the removal
of the Ex-King of Quedah to Malacca, I am directed
by the Governor in Council to inform you, that
adverting to your situation as Superintendent of
Police, your knowledge of the language, as well as
well as personal acquaintance with the King, having
been frequently employed as the medium of Com-
munication, it has been deemed proper to select you
for carrying these directions into execution in the
manner least offensive to that personage. You are
accordingly directed to obtain an interview with him
and in the first place remind him of the protection
he has hitherto enjoyed under this Government.
You will then intimate to him that circumstances
have rendered it indispensably necessary that his
place of residence should be changed to Malacca, that
it is the earnest wish and desire of the Right Honora-
ble the Governor General as well as of the Governor
that he should remove as early as possible, and
make immediate preparation accordingly. You will
inform him that on his removal to Malacca the
pension now drawn by him will be increased to 10,000
Dollars per annum ; that the house now occupied by
him will be received at the valuation put on it
when purchased, and the amount appropriated to
finding him another suitable residence at Malacca;
that a vessel will be found to convey himself,
family and followers to Malacca at the public
expense; that he will thus be received and treated
by the public authorities with the same mark of honor
and respect which have invariably been paid to him
Port Cornwallis the 13th September 1827.


here. You will remind him that being under our
protection, we have the right of dictating his place of
residence. That is is only on these terms that he can
expect to derive pecuniary aid from the Government,
and in the event of his intimating any desire or inten-
tion of quitting the protection of the British Govern-
ment, you will use every argument in your power to
convince him of the ruinous consequences that must
result from such a step; that by such he must forfeit
entirely all support and protection from us and place
himself in a situation wherein it must become our duty
to act as his enemy in the event of any attempt of a
nature hostile to the existing authorities of Quedah.
In pointing out these as fit arguments to be used
by you, it is not the intention of the Governor in
Council to bind you to their strict adherence to the
letter of them in the first instance, should you find any
prospect of success by other reasoning.
As the abandonment of our protection by the
King and his quitting the Island would under present
circumstances be an event of a very embarrassing
nature, it would be advisable that you should
confidential persons to procure correct information of
his plans and intentions, and keep the Governor in-
formed of all that may come to your knowledge, as
well as the result of your communication with the
King,
I am &ca.
( Signed ) John Anderson
Secry. to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
The 18th September 1827.


Port Cornwallis The 4 October 1827.
MINUTE by the PRESIDENT.
I now submit for record two letters received from
Mr. Gaunter whom 1 deputed to communicate with
the Ex-King of Quedah on the subject of his removal
to Malacca, considering him a likely person to have
some influence over the mind of the King. I regret
to say no good effect has been produced. Since
receiving these letters X have had an interview with
the King, and after using every argument and speak-
ing to him in most decided language, I regret to say
he remains obstinately fixed to his determination not
to go to Malacca, but if permitted, to quit our protec-
tion entirely and seek it elsewhere. I propose therefore
as the last resource to transmit to him the letter
attached, and if it fails of effect, we must then consider
whether we are to allow him to depart, or to use
force in sending him to Malacca. The Board will per-
ceive that the Vice President in Council have sent
no reply to our question, but repeat their piesump—
tion of his being removed. The Board will also
perceive that the order of the Right Honble. the Gov-
ernor General is peremptory, and directs his removal to
Malacca. It is an order therefore we must obey, and
does not seem to leave with us the option of any other
course.
(Signed) R. Fullerton.
4 October 1827.


To THE KING of QUEDAH
I have to announce to my Friend that orders have
been received from the Supreme Government, fixing
the place of my friend’s residence at Malacca. A
vessel is prepared for the conveyance of my friend,
all his family and followers to that, place. My friend
must accordingly without fail prepare to depart as
soon as possible, no further delay can be allowed. My
friend will, so long as he remains at Malacca, be treat-
ed with the same marks of attention and respect he
has always received, and an additional sum of 4,000
Dollars per Annum will be allowed him for his main-
tenance. The directions of the Right Honble. the
Governor General being positive and peremptory must
by every means be obe3 T ed,and nothing can now be
admitted against them. Should my friend, after his
arrival at Malacca, wish to address the Governor Gen-
eral, his letter will be sent, but so long as he remains
at Prince of Wales Island no favor can be shown, and
my friend must consider his residing at Malacca the
only condition on which he is in future to receive the
support and protection of the British Government, and
I must conclude by expressing my hope that my friend’s
acquiescing in the direction and advice of his best
friends who have so long afforded him protection, will
prevent the necessity of my resorting to stronger
measures in order to ensure obeßenee to the orders of
the Right Honble. the Governor General.
(Signed) R. Fullerton.
Fort Cornwallis The 4 October 1827.


Monday 17 September 1827.
Honble. Sir,
I have had two interviews with the Ex-King and
have fully communicated to him the orders of the
Supreme Government, explained to him the advantages
he will derive by going to Malacca, and the con-
sequences of not doing so. His Majesty appears as
yet resolved not to go to Malacca, and says it he must
not reside here, he would wish to seek an asylum else-
where, claims a right to be permitted to go, upon some
former promise of Government. He told me Siak was
the place he contemplated going to, as he has con-
nections and friends there. His Majesty sometimes
hinted at the idea of applying for leave to remain here
until another reference on the subject could be made
to the Governor General ; Sometimes spoke of going
himself to Calcutta or sending his eldest son. The
result of our last conference was a request that 1 would
allow him four of five days to consider the matter well
before he gave a definite answer. From my private
informant I understand the King yesterday sent a
letter to his younger Brother, Tunku Soliman, inviting
him to come and see him, and that the object in so
doing is to get T. S. to take charge of His Majesty’s
sisters and their families in case he should be obliged
to go away.
I remain
( Signed ) U. Gaunter.
To the Honble.
R. Fullerton Esquire
Governor.
Fort Cornwallis The 4 October 1827.


Saturday 22d September 1827,
Honble. Sir,
I beg to acquaint you that I had another inter-
view with the Ex King last evening, and again tried
every argument in my power to persuade him to re-
move to Malacca, but could not succeed in altei’ing his
opinion on that subject. He appears to have a decid-
ed dislike to such a step, and frequently explains he
should be disgracing himself and country by so doing.
His Majesty farther said, that if he cannot be permitted
to remain here under the protection of the British Gov-
ernment, he wishes to be allowed to depart and seek
that protection elsewhere, and as he expressed it,
follow his Fate! I pointed out to him distinctly the
consequence of not complying with the wishes ot the
Supreme Government and of you, by removing to
Malacca, and reasoned with him as much as possible
on the subject, but could not turn his mind or alter
his feelings. He made several remarks on the Treaty
with Siam as far as it regarded himself and seemed
much hurt at it. Our conference ended with his say-
ing, he intended addressing a letter to you to request
another reference of his case to the Right Honble the
Governor General and permission to remain here until
an answer to that is received. This, Honble. Sir, is
the result of my interviews with the Ex-King, who 1
do not think will ever willingly remove to Malacca.
I remain &ca.
(Signed) R. Gaunter,
To The Honble. R. Fullerton Esq
Governor.
Fort Cornwallis The 4 October 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 15th November 1827.
Translation
of a letter from the Baginda Mooda, Son of the Rajah
of Ligore, at Quedah, to Mr. John Anderson.
( After Compliments. )
I beg to acquaint my friend and request he will
make the same known to the Honorable Robert
Fullerton, Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca, that during the present month,
Malays, Chooliahs and Chinese traders have been
reporting here that the Rajah of Quedah was collecting
prows and men in the Frye River, about 70 or 80
prows, and that it is his intention to send Taunku
Deen, Taunku Abdullah, Taunku Dayer and To Johan,
the familv and followers of the Rajah of Quedah,
to attack Quedah. I am accordingly in doubt, but
inclined to believe it untrue, for the Rajah of Quedah
resides under my friend’s Government, and my friend
would not permit him to do so, because the Right
Honble. Lord Amherst, Governor General of Bengal,
sent Captain H. Burney to make a Treaty at the
Capital, establishing a permanent friendship. I there-
fore do not credit the report but I herewith send
Aluang Paromlok to my friend and request my friend
will accompany him to wait on the Honble. Robert
Fullerton, Governor of Pulo Penang, that he may
explain all my wishes so that friendship may be
prolonged.
Moreover in respect to the report of the people
relative to the Rajah of Quedah preparing prows at
Prye, if it should prove to be correct, I request my
friend will prevent them from doing anything contrary
to the Treaty of the Right Honorable Lord Amherst,
Governor General of Bengal, and 1 request my friend


will send some person to accompany Aluang Paromlok
to examine the place agreeably to the customs of
friendship and Aluang Paromlok will bring a full
report to me.
Dated 17th Rabealakhir 1243 or 6th November
1827.
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Government
Penang
The 9th November 1827.


To the Son of the Rajah of Ligore.
Letter
from the Malay Translator to Government to the Son
of the Raja of Ligor at Qnedah.
I duly received my friend’s letter brought by
Aluang Paromlok respecting the rumours abroad of
the Rajah of Quedah preparing prows in the river
Prye with the intention of sending Taunku Abdulla,
Taunku Dice and To Johan to attack Quedah, and 1
read it in the presence of the Honble. the Governor,
who at the same moment gave orders to Mr. Gaunter
and Captain Low to send my friend’s Envoy with
people to examine and ascertain it there was any
truth in the reports. He has returned and stated
that they are not true. I therefore' send him back
and he will no doubt make known all particulars to
my friend, whose mind will now be at ease.
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Tr. to Government.
Penang,
The 12th November 1827.
Fort Cornwallis The Jsth November 1827.


Translation
ot a letter from the Ex-Rajah of Quedah to the Double,
the Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and
Malacca.
( After Compliments, )
On the 18th day of Rubealawal I received a letter
from my friend, the contents of which have afflicted
me much and astonished me extremely. Being im-
posed on by the treachery of the Siamese I removed to
Prye intending to place my children with my brother,
Taunku Solymon, and afterwards to return and attack
the Siamese. Mr. Cracraft was sent by Mr. Phillips
(o convey me to Pulo Penang, intending to assist me
in returning me to my country of Quedah. My con-
fidence therefore was unbounded as the heavens that
the Company would assist me in returning to my own
Country, and that I should be enabled to remain there
by the power of the Company, agreeably to the en-
gagement made when the island of Penang was granted
by my deceased father. 1 therefore remained at Pulo
Penang, placing confidence that the expected assistance
of the Company would be given. During the time
Mi-. Phillips was Governor till my friend’s arrival, how
many letters did I receive promising me assistance and
desiring me to wait, which impressed me with great
confidence and hence I have remained now Six Years
here.
Now my friend informs me that there is an order
from the Governor General directing my being sent to
Malacca, and that there is to be no evasion ; that if I
do not comply of my own will that my friend must use
force to carry into effect the Governor General’s orders,
and it has alarmed me exceedingly to find that I should
be unexpectedly sent awa} r to another country ; my heart
Port Cornwallis The 15th November 1827.


is distressed aiid can think no more, and my expecta-
tions have been disappointed. However if my friend
will not assist me according to the Treaty, it signifies
not. I shall go away to some other place, wherever ray
fate majf carry me; but as to proceeding to Malacca,
mv mind can never be reconciled to it. lam utterly
averse to it. I am now only waiting for the fair
weather and I shall quit this place and proceed to some
other country. With respect to the place 1 cannot
positively state it, for it will depend upon the Chiefs
of the places I may proceed to, whether I shall be
permitted to reside there, and upon myself to select a
place that I like. I only request that my friend will
give me a ship and money as a present from the Eng-
lish Company and let not my friend trouble himself
about any thing else. Dated 18th Rabealakhir 1243
or Bth November 1827.
( A true Translation )
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Translator.
Pinang
The 9th November 1827


Minute by the President.
Having now used every endeavour ill my power
to induce the Ex-King of Quedah to remove to
Malacca, as far as threats and promises could have
effect, but in vain, and no answer having been
received from the Supreme Government, we must now
decide on one of two measures, either to make him
a prisoner and send him by force, or to permit him to
quit our protection and territory, the alternative
which he seems to prefer. After the most mature
consideration of the case, it apears to me that the
latter is the least objectionable course. The forcible
seizure and making a prisoner of our ally would of
of itself be a very severe and questionable measure,
nor can [ I ] say what consequences might result or
how far an appeal to the law might operate towards
its adoption with success, nor am I certain that the
order of the Right Honble. the Governor General
referring to the observations with which it is * [ ]
contemplates so severe a measure. The Ex-King has,
on a former occasion, been assured of free permission,
to quit our territory when he pleased. His for-
cible retention would be a breach of faith, neither
are we bound by the Treaty to retain him at any
particular place within our own territory, but to
prevent his residence within certain defined coun-
tries. I propose therefore that the letter annexed
be sent to him forthwith and its terms and conditions
rigidly adhered to, unless affected by any orders that
may intermediatedly arrive.
( Signed ) [R. Fullerton ].
9th November 1827.
Fort Cornwallis The 15th November 1827.


To the Ex King of Quedah,
1 have now repeatedly informed my friend of the'
desire and orders of the Governor General of India for
the removal of my friend and his family to Malacca,
i have used every argument to- induce him to comply
with the wishes of his real friends and I expected,
considering the long protection and continued comfort
my friend has enjoyed under British Protection, that
he would have been disposed to listen to the advice
of those who are the best judges of his welfare, but
I am sorry to pei’ceive all my reasoning in vain, and
nothing short of actual compulsion can bring about
the wishes of the Supreme Government. I write this
letter therefore to inform my friend of the only terms
and condition on which he can continue to enjoy the
protection of the British Government; these are
That he forthwith proceed to Malacca with his family
and there reside. He will then in that case receive
10,000 Dollars per annum and be treated in all mat-
ters, and with the same respect as he has hitherto
been on the Island. He will still be considered as
an Ally of the British Government and should any
favorable opportunity offer hereafter he may rely on
the support and assistance towards his restoration to
his kingdom. He must on his part stipulate that he
will enter into no designs hostile to the Siamese,
calculated to disturb or excite alarm or commotion
in any country under their authority. Should my
friend decline these terms it becomes my painful
duty to announce to him the entire withdrawal of
the Protection of the British Government and to
direct him to leave their territories within 15 days
from this date. In announcing to him this determina-
tion it is necessary at the same time to inform him
that we are bound by Treaty with the King of Siam,
Fort Cornwallis The 15th November IB2T.


not to permit him to reside ou this Island, on
Wellesley Province (Prye), in Perak, in Salengore or
in any Burmese Country. We are also bound not
to permit him or any of his people to attack Quedah
or any other Siamese country. It will be necessary
therefore that my friend if he determines to quit our
Protection should proceed to the Island of Sumatra
or other place at a distance from any Siamese Country,
and that he should abstain from any attempt to attack
the Siamese: he must otherwise become an enemy
to the British Government and be treated as such.
Before ray friend determines on quitting for ever
the Protection of the British Government, it becomes
him well to consider what may be his future late and
that of his family. If once he quits their protection,
he cannot expect again to enjoy it, and he will well
consider and weigh the advantages he may still enjoy,
with the risk of distress and misery and almost certain
ruin, he must in his old age encounter by seeking
new friends. Having thus fully stated my mind to
my friend, I trust he will yet determine on complying
with the directions of the Supreme Government.
As soon as his determination is known, which must
be in ten days from this, a vessel will be prepared to
carry him to Malacca or to the place to which he
wishes to be carried, but my friend must not expect
one day’s delay to be allowed beyond the time now
fixed. Fifteen days is the utmost limit that will be
allowed for his remaining here.
(Signed) R. Fullerton.
Governor.
The 9th November 1827


Fort Cornwallis The 20th November 1827.
To R. Gaunter Esq.
Superintendent of Police.
Sir,
I am directed by the Governor in Council to
desire that you will immediately wait on the Ex King
of Quedah, and inform him that the period allowed in
the letter to him (of which the enclosed is a trans-
lation) for his quitting this Island will expire on the
27th Instant, that a vessel is preparing for his con-
veyance, and that he must be ready to embark with
his family on or before that day. You will make him
distinctly understand that this order is imperative,
and unless willingly obeyed, the Governor in Council
will have no alternative but to force compliance by
measures which it is their earnest desire to avoid.
You will also ascertain from him the size and descrip-
tion of the vessel required and you will inform him
that directions will be given to the Commander to
proceed either to Malacca or to such Port on the Is-
land of Sumatra as the Ex-King may name, and in
the former case the Ex-King will remain an ally
under the protection of the British Government, en-
joying their support and assistance on the terms and
conditions already explained to him, in the other case,
that is of his proceeding to any place beyond the ter-
ritories of the British Government, he must distinctly
understand that all connection support and assistance
from us to himself and family will cease and determine
for ever. You are further empowered to receive from
the Ex-King any communication he may have to
make relative to the settlement and adjustment of his
affairs here. Should he determine and actually pro-
ceed to Malacca, you may assure him the British
Government will not withhold their pecuniary assis-
tance in that respect, but in the other case he must


be required to quit the Island as a Person unlicensed
to reside here and make his own arrangements. You
will as soon as possible, communicate to the Master
Attendant the description of vessel that will be requir-
ed. He has the orders of Government to provide a
suitable vessel.
I am &c.
(Signed) John Anderson
Secry. to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
The 16th November 1827.


Translation
of a letter from the Ex Raja of Quedah to the Honble,
R. Fullerton Governor Pulo Penang 1 &c.
( After Compliments.)
I have received the letter which my friend sent
me on the 23d Rabialakhir, in which my friend advises
and directs me to go to Malacca, and also refering to
other matters which 1 fully understand. I have well
considered all particulars and have been much as-
tonished at the purport of my friend’s communication.
In respect to my friend’s orders to proceed to Malacca,
as my words have already been uttered, and 1 have
said I cannot go, if I could I would not deviate from
what I have said, for it is the custom of Malay Kings
to consider any variation from express declarations
extremely disgraceful. Moreover, it is mentioned in
my friend’s letter that if 1 do not like to go to Malacca,
I may proceed to some other place, excepting only
such places as are mentioned, namely this Island,
Province Wellesley, Perak, Salengore or any Burmese
country, and if I am disposed to go any where else, my
friend desires me to decide on the place and expresses
his intention of making preparations for conveying me
thither, by the assistance and compassion of the
Company. Let not my friend be offended, but I hope
my friend will forgive me when I state that if possible
1 should wish to remove by myself and I request my
friend will make arrangements for paying me the
tribute of Pulo Pinang, viz., the amount of balance
from the time of my quitting Quedah. My present
dwelling I also wish to transfer to the Company at the
price 1 paid for it. I also request my friend’s assistance
to make all those who are indebted to me settle with
me. This would be a great assistance from my friend.
Were I to conform to my friend’s instructions, there
Fort Cornwallis The 20th November 1827.


would no longer be any source of confidence left me in
respect to a certain time for my returning to my own
country, for my age is advanced and I do not know
how much longer I shall live.
Moreover I beg to remind my friend that I have a
letter from my friend in which he states'that he would
uot compel me to remove to Malacca and that I should
be permitted to reside here and receive the same pro-
tection I enjoyed from the time I arrived here but now
my friend’s letter informs me that force must be re-
sorted to. Ido not know what to think or say more
and I might perhaps express myself incorrectly ; but I
<cannot be satisfied when I-reflect that my country was
seized from me and my 7 friend will not assist me, for
my friend now conforms to the new Treaty with the
Siamese, and casts off the Treaty with my deceased
father and myself. My friend is only troubling me
from day to day urging me to remove to Malacca.
Rather than my mind should be kept in this state of
trouble any longer, it is better I should relinquish the
Company’s assistance altogether. I only request the
tribute of Pulo Pinang and price of the House, and a
settlement of those who are indebted to me. This will
be sufficient to enable me to quit Pulo Pinang and 1
shall have little more to consider of.
Dated 25th Rabialakhir 1243, or 15 ; November
1827.
( A true Translation )
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Translator.
Pinang 17 ; Novr. 1827.


From the Honorable the Governor
to the Ex King of Quedah.
I have received my friend’s letters. The orders
of the Supreme Government are positive and must be
obeyed. My Friend must depart from this Island on
or before the 27th of this month. If the title deeds
to the house are delivered and transmitted to the Gov-
ernment before that day the same amount that my
friend paid for the house will be paid to him, and if
an agent be left for the settlement of all affairs he
will receive all proper assistance, but let not my friend
deceive himself with false expectations, the period of
his remaining on his remaining on this Island cannofi
be delayed beyond the term fixed.
(Signed) R. Fullerton,
Governor,
Pinang 19th November 1827.
Fort Cornwallis the 20th November 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 29th November 1827.
Translation
of a letter from the Ex Rajah of Quedah to the Honor-
able R. Fullerton, Governor of Pulo Penang, Singapore
and Malacca.
(After Compliments.)
1 have to inform my friend that the numerous
letters from my friend and his often repeated advice
to comply with the orders of the Governor General of
Bengal by removing to Malacca, have given me much
uneasiness and anxious consideration, that I might
not deviate from the wishes of the Governor General
of Bengal and my friend’s advice, but at the present
day I can think no more, and if the Governor General
will comply with my request herein stated, I will
conform to the wishes of the Governor General by
proceeding to Malacca with all my family. The fol-
lowing are the requests I have to make of the
Governor General and Council of Bengal. Ist. I
request the Governor General will fix a time for my
returning to Quedah to be established as formerly.
2ndly. Until I do return to Quedah, I request the
Governor General will allow me for my expenses
20.000 Dollars a year, for my family and followers
who will have to accompany me are numerous, and
10.000 Dollars would not be enough for my expenses.
3rd. In case the assistance of the Governor General
to return me to Quedah be long delayed, I shall be
permitted to quit the place and remove to any other
country, and if beyond the company’s jurisdiction,
that the Company shall not detain me. 4th So long
as I may reside at Malacca, if any of my slaves ab-
scond to any place whatever the Company will assist
in seizing and returning them to me. sth. 1 request
the Governor General will give me a present of a ship
by which I may be enabled to proceed with care and


comfort with my family to Malacca. Such are my
requests of the Governor General and my friend.
With respect to these five articles, when my friend
has acceded to them, there will be no further delay in
my removing, and in a day or two however I shall be
prepared to go to Malacca, but if my friend is not
disposed to accede to the several requests above stated
I do not feel inclined to go to Malacca, for if I do go
there I shall certainly be exposed to great difficulty
and distress. In respect to the allowance of 10,000
Dollars a year granted me while in charge of my Gov-
ernment of Quedah, it is of no consequence.
Dated 4th Jemadilawal 1243 or 23: November
1827.
( A true Translation )
( Signed ) John Anderson
Malay Translator
Penang
26: November 1827,


Letter
to the Rajah of Quedah.
I have x’eceived my friend’s letter of the 4th of
Jemadilawal and have only to inform him in reply
that if he is not on board ship for Malacca by 10
o’clock on Thursday morning next, all connection
between my friend and the British Government must
cease, and all payments will also cease from this
day.
( Signed ) R. Fullerton.
The 26th November 1827
Fort Cornwallis The 29th November 1827.


Fort Cornwallis the 17th December 1827.
To The Honorable the Recorder.
Honble. Sir,
We do ourselves the honor of submitting to
your perusal, extract of a letter received some time
ago from the Right Honble. the Governor General and
copy of the article of the Treaty with Siam to which
it refers.
2. You will perceive that the orders for the
removal of the Ex-King of Quedah are of a peremptory
nature, and such as require the most perfect obedience
on our part. All possible means have therefore been
taken and every possible encouragement held out
to induce the King to proceed to Malacca, but
without effect, and we are now satisfied that nothing
short of actual force will produce his removal as
desired. Before, however, we proceed to that severe
measure, it becomes necessary well to consider the
law of the case, whether we are warranted by any Act
or Statute to use force on such an occasion.
3. The Ex-King was expelled from Quedah in
the Year 1822 by the Siamese Chief of Ligor, was
invited and received by us and has since resided here
under our protection, having been permitted to
purchase a house for himself and has been treated with
every mark of honor and respect due to his unfortunate
situation, with an allowance of 6UOO Dollars per
annum for his maintenance. Various attempts have
at different times been made by negotiation with the
Siamese to bring about his restoration, of which the
article enclosed is the last.
4. We are perfectly aware that it rests entirely
with yourself to give an opinion or not on the case, but
we doubt not that the circumstances in which we are


placed will in this respect meet with due consideration.
There is no other Law Authority within our reach on
whom an} 7 dependence can be placed, and while we are
most earnest in our desire, as indeed, our duty requires
of us, to carry into effect the orders of the Supreme
Authority of India, we are nevertheless most anxious
to avoid recourse to a measure the immediate con-
sequence of which we cannot foresee, provided there
exists any doubts of its strict legality, and in this case
we should prefer the only alternative that remains,
another reference to the Supreme Government.
( Signed ) R. Fullerton.
R. Ibbetson.
The sth December 1827.


To the Honorable Robert Fullerton
Governor in Council
&c. &c. &c.
Honorable Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of yesterday’s date. There are many rea-
sons that oblige me ( with much regret) to decline
giving any answer to your question, whether you are
warranted by any Act or Statute to use force on the
occasion alluded to.
First. If force is employed the King of Quedah
may claim the protection of the Court, of which I am
a judge ; whether such protection can be afforded 01
not I need not stop to enquire,
Secondly. If force is employed and death
the party causing death will probably be brought
before the Court here.
Thirdly. I infer that as you are now “ satisfied
that nothing short of actual force will produce the
removal of the King of Quedah as desired , and as
you state “ the orders for his removal to be of a
peremptory nature, and such as require the most pei-
fect obedience on your part,” that you are prepared to
employ force, in case I am of opinion that you are
warranted by any Act or Statute to use it on such an
occasion.
Whether you are warranted by any Act or
Statute, or by the Law of England, or Nations, or not,
I think, from your own Statement, that such proceed-
ing, will bring the character of this Government to a
level with that of the Rajah of Ligore, and disgrace
the British name among all civilized nations, and I
Fort Cornwallis The 17th December 1827.


cannot consent to have my name mixed up with such
transaction,
I have &c.
( Signed ) J, T. Ciaridge
The Gth December 1827.


To the Son of the Rajah of Li gore.
I am directed by the Honble. the Governor ot
Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca, to ac-
quaint my friend that ever since the ratification of the
Treaty concluded by Captain Burney on behalf of the
Right Honorable the Governor General with the Court
of Siam, every means of persuasion have been employed
by the Government to induce the Ex-Rajah of Quedah
to remove to Malacca ; but he has made every possible
objection to conforming to the desire of the Governoi
General and the Governor of Penang in this respect.
The Rajah has however promised to remove from
this Island and to proceed to some place not interdicted
in the Treaty. It is expected he will proceed to some
port on the East Coast of Sumatra, Delhi or Siack, and
a conveyance will be found by this Government for
him to such place as he may fix upon for his future
residence.
Every proper measure of precaution has been
taken to prevent the Rajah removing clandestinely
from hence, but I am directed to suggest to my friend
the propriety of keeping a strict watch on his part, in
case any of the adherents of the Ex-Rajah should make
an attempt to disturb the peace of the Quedah Country.
My friend will no doubt take this caution in good part.
I am instructed to add that the Honorable the
Governor has long been expecting the arrival of some
accredited Envoy from the Rajah of Ligore to reside
here, as suggested by the Governor some months ago,
and approved by the Right Honorable the Governor
General These Agents would be able to keep my
friend and his father fully informed of all proceedings
going on here in which they may be interested, and a»
Fort Cornwallis The 17th December 1827.


some time may elapse before an answer can be received
from your father it would be better if my friend sends
one or two from Quedah.
( Signed ) J. Anderson
Malay Translator.
The 6th December 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 27th November 1827.
Translation
of a letter from the Baginda Muda, son ot the Rajah
of Ligore at Quedah to the Malay Translator.
( After Compliments.)
I beg my friend to inform the Honble. the Gover-
nor of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca,
that the letter sent me by Mr. Crab has duly reached
me, informing me of the preparations making for the
removal of the Rajah of Quedah from Pulo Penang, in
conformity to the Treaty; the contents ot the letter
I fully understand. In respect to the Governor of
Pulo Penang and my friend having made preparations
to remove the Rajah ot Quedah from Pulo Penang
agreeably to the Treaty, I am extremely delighted,
and when the intelligence [ ? reaches ] the Chow Piya
of Ligore, he will also be much pleased, and be greatly
obliged to my friend. In respect to what my friend
says desiring me to send an Agent to reside at Pulo
Penang, I shall make the same known to the Chow
Piya of Ligore and whatever he may be pleased to
direct I will conform to [and] communicate the same
to my friend.
A true translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Translator to Government.
Dated 27 Jemadilawal 1243
or 15th December 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 17th December 1827.
To the Ex King of Qnedah.
As the day fixed for your departure for Malacca
has arrived, and you have made no preparation indi-
cative of any intention to embark on the ship prepared
for you, I must conclude that you have finally deter-
mined on rejecting the terms offered to you for the
continuance of the protection and future support of
the British Government. I have only now therefore
to fulfil the painful duty of announcing to you the
course of conduct which will be observed towards you
by this Government, and before I proceed to that
part of the subject, I must here recall to 3 7 our re-
collection the circumstances under which you sought
and have enjoyed the protection of this Government.
Yon were driven out of your country by the Siamese
troops of Ligore, an asylum was offered to you on the
Island which you accepted. Your person was de-
manded by the Siamese as a fugitive dependent of the
King of Siam. The demand was refused and you were
saved from the hands of your enemies. You have
now resided more than ten years on this Island.
You have been treated with every mark of honor
and respect due to your past, and with every mark of
kindness and attention due to your present situation,
and you have received from the British Government
a pecuniary allowance adequate to all your reason-
able wants. Neither have your Political Interests
been neglected. Various negotiations have been
set on foot at different times, and at considerable
expense, for no other purpose but to obtain your
restoration to your lost rank and situation. Every
thing that could be done has been done to promote
your interests, short of engaging in actual hostility on
your account ( a measure which you had no right to
expect or demand) by the intervention of the British


Government. Your friends, relations und dependents
have been restored to you. In the mean time, circum-
stances of a political nature connected with another
state, and arising out of the very arrangement which
restored to you your family, have rendered it necessary
and expedient that your place of residence under our
protection should be changed from this Island to an-
other neighbouring British Settlement, not a place
inhabited by people of another race, language or re-
ligion, but by Malays of the same as your own, and
where in point of the most scrupulous prejudice no
objection can possibly arise. In order to induce you
the more readily to comply with the wishes of the
British Government favourable terms have been offered,
which you had no right whatever to expect or demand.
The pecuniary allowance was offered to be increased
from 6,000 to 10.000 Dollars per annum, every accom-
modation was offered you with a view to your rendering
yourself more comfortable in your new than you have
been in your old habitation. You have been assured
that the same marks of honor and respect would be
paid to you. You have been assured that your interests
would not be lost sight of, that on any future opening
that might hereafter offer by negotiation your interests
would not be forgotten, and lastly that you would at
Malacca be in all respects considered as in exactly the
same relative situation with the British Government,
as that on which you stood at present. From your
late letters I was led to hope that you were dis-
posed to attend to the advice of your best friends,
but I am concerned to find that in your ultimate
determination the advice, of the ill disposed has pre-
vailed. It only remains for me therefore to remind
vou of what you have already been informed; that
when a fugitive Prince seeks protection from another
state the latter has the right to dictate the place
most convenient to itself for the residence of the .* .
You have already been informed that Malacca was fix-
ed on for yours, preparations were made for conveying


you thither at the public expense. Instead of at
once embracing the opportunity offered for securing to
yourself and family a safe and honorable retreat from
future * , you have spurned the proffered boon;
while owing your safety and existence to this Govern-
ment, you have assumed the right of dictating to them
terms and conditions as if you were in fact as in name
a real Sovereign, and rejecting those held out to you,
have declined proceeding to the place allotted for you.
it follows that you have thereby completely forfeited
all right, title or claim to the protection of the British
Government. You will no longer therefore be ack-
nowledged here as King of Quedah. Those marks of
honor hitherto paid you will be withdrawn; all pecuni-
ary allowance from the Government will now cease,
and you must make your own arrangements for your
maintenance. The British Government no longer
undertakes to protect you from your enemies, nor do
they engage to use any influence or exertion whatever
under any circumstances to promote your future in-
terests. Having declined the conditions on which
you were to proceed to Malacca, those conditions are
of course at an end. Whether any pecuniary assis-
tance will ever again be given to you or to any branch
of your family must depend on the merciful consider-
ation of the Right Honble. Governor General, and
with him it will rest to determine whether you are to
be permitted to reside in this Island. While you are
here you will be considered no more than any other
Malay Inhabitant. No letters whatever will either be
written to you or received from you bearing the style
or title till now employed. If you have any thing to
■say you will address yourself to Mr. Gaunter, the
Superintendent of Police.
* blanks here in the future
original , while (
(Signed) R. Fullerton
Governor.
The 16th December 1827.


Fort Cornwallis The 27th December 1827.
President’s Minute.
As it now appears clear that the Ex King of
Quedah will not quit this Island except by compulsion,
and as every thing that could be done short of that
has been done to induce him to remove and without
effect, it only remains to submit the papers that have
passed to the Supreme Government. Desirous of car-
rying the orders of the Eight Honorable the Governor
General into full effect, and anxious at the same time
to avoid any discussion on doubtful points of law ari-
sing out of the case, as well as other unpleasant
results which might have attended the forcible seizure
of that person, we thought it right to attempt, at
least, to obtain the benefit of the legal opinion of the
Honble. Recorder on the case. The application was
made to him under circumstances of peculiar embar-
rassment, of which he was fully advised. It rested
entirely with him, of course, to give or withhold his
opinion, but I certainly did not expect that he would
have assumed to himself the right of questioning,
much less of arraigning, the political measures of the
Supreme Government, ' or of addressing us in a style
altogether unprecedented and quite unbecoming the
relative situation in which he is placed towards this
Government.
It will be perceived by the correspondence that
from the Bth to the 12th December the Ex King had
evinced a disposition to comply with the wishes of
Government, and even intimated his intention of pro-
ceeding to Malacca; the exertions of Captain Low and
Mr. Gaunter had so far succeeded as to induce him
to set about preparations for his departure, and a
vessel was in readiness for the reception of himself and
followers when he suddenly changed his mind, and


completely altered his whole style of conduct and com-
munication with the Commissioners; so sudden a
change, and the extraordinary demand of a written
paper from me, agreeing to permit him to proceed
from Malacca where he pleased, a document which,
consistently with the Treaty, could not be given him,
sufficiently showed that he was acting under no com-
mon advice, and could not but raise a suspicion in my
mind that the adviser was a legal one.
•
It has been ascertained that Sir J. Claridge, the
Recorder of this Court, has been the only European
Gentleman with whom he has of late held any inter-
course, and that visits with him had been interchanged
about the period in question. That a public officer,
holding the rank and station of Recorder, should have
given advice or encouragement to any person in the
situation of the Ex King in direct counteraction of
the political arrangements of the Supreme Government,
and in direct contravention also of a ratified Treaty, or
even interfered at all in such arrangements I could
scarcely have believed. What passed at the meetings
of the Recorder and Ex King I cannot of course say,
nor do I think it right at present to take means to as-
certain, but duly considering all that has passed, the
letter of Sir J. Claridge, the subsequent conduct of the
Ex King, the sudden change in his determination,
simultaneous with those visits and communications, I
can have no doubt whatever in my mind that en-
couragement has been given and that hopes of assis-
tance from a higher quarter have been held out to the
King, which have entirely done away not the influence
of this Government only, but of the Supreme Govern-
ment itself, over the mind of the Ex King. Aware as
Sir J. Claridge must have been of the views and objects
of the Supreme Government, of the obligations ot the
Treaty, in respect to the Ex-King, of the situation in
which he stood, for they were all explained in our
letter, the admission of visits or of any intercourse


whatever, giving countenance thereby to resistance,
was in itself an act of impropriety too obvious to admit
the excuse ot inadvertence, for if the influence attached
to the station of the Recorder is to be used in obstruct-
ing the measures ot the Supreme Government, or of
this, not legally before the Court nor even cognizable
by it, and in which it has no concern, the legitimate
authority of the Executive Government must be com-
pletely subverted, the means of executing their proper
duties destroyed, and the supremacy of the Recorder
established, which I consider myself warranted in say-
ing is too clearly the grand object in view throughout
the whole course of his conduct since he came to this
Island.
In our proceedings with the Ex King we have
been guided entirely by the principle laid down, “ That
when a fugitive Prince seeks the protection of another
state, that state affording it, has the unquestionable
right of determining the place of residence of the re-
fugee, as may be most convenient to itself.” The Ex
King of Quedah has hitherto enjoyed our protection,
and has been allowed to reside on this Island. Cir-
cumstances have occurred to render it necessary and
expedient that he should remove to Malacca. He
has been distinctly and repeatedly informed that
his residing there is the condition on which
alone he can enjoy the continuance of our pro-
tection. After more than three months’ negotiation, in
which every argument has been used, every inducement
held out, he peremptorily refuses to remove. It follows
therefore, that he has forfeited for the future, all
consideration for his interests ( right or claim to pro-
tection he never possessed). I propose therefore, that
the letter, draft of which is annexed, should be sent to
him, in the latter part of which an opening is left for
any alteration of resolution that may be necessary on
receiving the final orders of the Supreme Government,
but I confess that his conduct has been such as to


destroy in my mind every feeling of commiseration,
and 1 think we should earnestly recommend to the
Supreme Government making his proceeding to Malac-
ca in the first instance, the only condition on which
any future consideration will be allowed, the residence
of his family there or of that portion to which the
Supreme Government may be considerations of huma-
nity be disposed to grant pecuniary assistance, should
also be insisted on.
From the letters received from Messrs. Low and
Gaunter it would appear the residence at Malacca is
not now the sole ground of objection, that the object
of the Ex King is to remain here, and that force
would be required to remove him from this Island,
It will be necessary therefore that we should be
favoured with the sentiments and instructions of the
Supreme Government in what manner we can lawfully
proceed. There seems little reason to doubt the ex-
ertion of all the influence of the professional judicial
authority on the Island against us, and although
the Governor and Members of Council concurring
in opinion as judges of the Court might by their over-
whelming vote counteract any practical effect, it would
nevertheless be most desirable that we should act in
such case under the best legal opinion that can be ob-
tained. This Government (the whole of these Settle-
ments being within the jurisdiction of the Court of
Judicature) possesses no power of enacting legislative
regulations to meet such a case. Act 35, Geo: 3, Cap:
84—Sec. 6, the only one framed in respect to aliens, does
not apply ; the removal of suspected or disaffected per-
sons has often been and may still be required, it has
been done hitherto from the obvious necessity of the
case, but as there appears now on the part of the
Recorder a disposition to try every act of Government
by the most strict and precise rule of law, a test which
few newly established or acquired Settlements can
bear, it is probable other questions will arise. The


pension hitherto allowed to the Ex King is entirely a
political one, granted in consequence ot former political
connections with the King and his lather. Its
resumption therefore is certainly not cognizable in a
municipal court. Adverting however to the course
hitherto pursued by the Honorable the Recorder, we
deem it by no means improbable that a claim on the
Honorable Company may be urged, nor should we be
much surprized to find the Treaty of 1801/2, whereby
we bound ourselves to pay 10,000 Dollars for the posses-
sion of the Island set up in the Court as the grounds
of a suit against this Government.
(Signed) R. Fullerton,
Fort Cornwallis
The 27th December 1827.


Fort Cornwallis January 1828.
To the Honble. R. Ibbetsou Esquire
Resident Councillor.
Honble. Sir,
I have the honor to report that during the last
two or three days between 12 and 1300 of the inhabi-
tants cf Purlis and Setul have fled from there and
come to this Island and Province Wellesley. The
reason assigned by these people for their emigration
is the tyrannical and oppressive Government of the
Siamese, who the} 7 state intend compelling the popula-
tion of these States publicly to swear allegiance to that
Government, and to enforce the rite by torture or
captivity.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) K. Gaunter
Supt. of Police.
Police Office
8 January 1828.


Fort Cornwallis The 9 July 1828.
To the Honorable R. Fullerton Esquire
Governor in Council
Prince of Wales Island.
Honorable Sir,
******
4. With respect to the Ex Raja of Quedah we-
deem it sufficient at present to observe, that we do not
consider it advisable to attempt his forcible removal
from the Island. The communication which you have
made to him, adverted to in the 4th paragraph of your
letter, is entirely and we authorize you distinct-
ly to inform him, in the name of the Supreme Gov-
ernment, that while he persists in declining to retire
with his family to Malacca, or if he prefer it to Siak
or Delhi, all pecuniary assistance and allowances will
be withheld, and he will forfeit all claim to the future
consideration and favor of the British Government,
Should the Ex Rajah offer to proceed alone to Siak or
Delhi, leaving his family at Prince of Wales Island, it
will be sufficient to inform him that until he consents
to their removal to Malacca, if they do not accompany
him to either of the two places above mentioned, no
allowance will be granted to himself or them. His
Lordship in Council does not conceive that the Ex
Rajah possesses the means of equipping from Siak or
Delhi any formidable armament for the recovery ot
Queda, or has energy sufficient for the undertaking,
and as far as regards apprehended acts of piracy, in
the event of his settling on the East coast of Sumatra,
it will always be iu our power to treat such acts as
they merit. It may be hoped, however, that without
having recourse to the extreme measure which the
Law of Nations authorizes for the suppression of
pirates, we shall possess sufficient security for the


Ex Raja 5 s goods conduct in the continuance of his
pension which will be liable to resumption at our
pleasure.
We have &c.
(Signed) Amherst
W. B, Bayley
C, T. Metcalfe
Fort William
29 February 1828,


Fort Cornwallis the 10 September 1828.
To John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government
P. W. Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I beg to submit the following information which
I have collected relative to the Ex King of Quedah.
The Honorable the Governor in Council has been
made aware that two of his sons have taken up their
abode lately at Qualla Muda and are now there with
their families, and have also been joined by some, indeed
many, of the dependents of the Ex King from hence.
I am informed now that it is his intention shortly to
join them there, and there is now a vessel belonging to
him lying to the Southward in which his property here
is to be embarked, after which he will take an early op-
portunity of leaving this with the greatest secrecy.
It is said that he has engaged in some confederacy
with some of his former subjects at Quedah to make
away with the few Siamese who are stationed there ;
and he is then to be reinstated in his former station.
It does not appear however that he has made any
warlike preparations among his own immediate follow-
ers, though I understand he has secretly been convey-
ing gunpowder to his adherents at Quedah. The date
of his intended departure I have not as yet been able
precisely to ascertain, though I hear it will be between
the Ist and 12th day of the ensuing Moon, and after
the performance of certain religious rites which must
take place between those days.
I am &c.
( Signed ) J. Pattullo
Supt. of Police
Fort Cornwallis
10 September 1828.


Fort Cornwallis The 17 September 1828.
To John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government, P. W. Island,
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter dated the 10th instant, desiring by order of
the Government that I should adopt measures in concert
with the Superintendent of Internal Police for prevent-
ing the clandestine escape of the Ex Rajah of Quedah
from this Island.
I now beg to report that I have made arrange-
ments At the same time I deem it my
duty to state that from the numerous facilities for
escape which this Island affords to any individual who
is not actually in confinement, and whose person is not
attachable, it is not improbable that the Ex Rajah may
{ if he really meditates such a measure ) be enabled to
elude the utmost vigilance of the Police and to effect
his escape.
I have &c.
( Signed ) James Low Captain
Supt. External Police,
P. W. Island.
12 : September 1828.


Fort William 30 January 1829.
Tavoy 30 November 1828.
To A. D. Maingy Esqre.
Civil Commissioner.
Sir,
I beg leave to transmit through you, for the in-
formation of the Supreme Government, the substance
of some intelligence received by me via Singapore from
the Portuguese Consul at Bangkok, Don Carlos de
Silveira, as well as the original of a memorandum for-
warded to me by Mr. R. Hunter, shewing the benefits
which he had derived from the Treaty with Siam
during a late visit to Bangkok.
That a Burmese deputation had been sent to Siam,
and that the messengers had been detained on the
frontiers of that country, agreeably to the practice of
the Siamese, are facts which have been known on these
Coasts for some time past, and the sentiments reported
by the Portuguese Consul to have been expressed on
the occasion by the King and Wang-na of Siam re-
spectively, correspond with my knowledge of the
characters of each of those personages.
Mr. Leal has received at the same time a letter
from Siam, apprizing him that the Rajah of Ligor has
been appointed to command the naval part of the
expedition under equipment at Bangkok for the war
with Cochin China.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) H. Burney.
Deputy Commissioner
Tenasserim Provinces.


SUBSTANCE of Intelligence received from Don
Carlos de Silveira at Bangkok by Captain H. Burney
at Tavoy.
It is very probable that the Siamese will lose all
their influence over the Laos Provinces, and if these
join together, they will be able to annoy the Siamese
very much. A letter from the Court 3 of Phya Aphuy
Puthan gives information of a party of Laos from
Chung-mai to having crossed the Menam Khong°, and
attached a party of Siamese who were seizing Laos
people to carry them as slaves to Bangkok.
The prisoners were all retaken, many of the
Siamese were killed and the remainder were obliged
to fly, leaving behind their arms and provisions. The
king ordered more troops to be sent, but it being the
I‘ainy season, few people went, The letter was re-
ceived on the 30th May 1828.
July 7th. Ten or twelve days ago, the King re-
ceived a letter from the King of Ava, brought by an
ambassador, who remains at Menam noi a . This was
kept a profound secret till the day before yesterday.
I have heard that the letter is written in a very ele-
gant, insinuating style, but the contents a short of
a. Commander in ('hief of the Siamese Army in
Southern Laos near Kinchan or Lanchang
b. Symes’s Zemee— Northern Laos.
c. Great Cambodia River. There must be some
mistake in this. Ch-hung-mai, the Zemee or Jehenay of
European maps is in about Lat: 20° and Long: * Ol,
and Kinchan the Lan-chang of European maps and the
Winkjon of the Dutch ambassadors is in Lat; 1 8° and
Long: 103 upon the Great Cambodia River, Menara
Khlong. Perhaps another Laos Principality, Chhiung
rai, nearer the river, is meant.
d. A Siamese frontier post to the northwards of
the 3 Pagodas and N E. of Tavoy.
Fort William 30 January 1829.


Jeremiad.. His Majesty says that what bad formerly
been predicted by the Saints had come to pass, that in
the course of time the Burmese country would fall
under the dominion of a Christian Power, but that it
could not remain so long, as the English are not of
the same religion as the Burmese and Siamese. The
principal object of the letter is to induce the Siamese
Government to join with the Burmese in driving the
English out of India. 1 believe the letter contains
other particulars which 1 have not yet been able to
learn. The King proposed to send the ambassador
back from the frontier but the Wang-na recommended
that he should be received, that they might learn all
that he had to communicate and then inform the
English of it. The King however insisted upon send-
ing back the Ambassador without any answer. The
Burmese are not crushed enough yet.
The 14th July the Dutch Ship Concordia arrived
from Batavia with an Agent Mr. Schinimar. The
cargo consists of arrack, white cloth, chintz and some
other articles not suited for the Siamese market. Up
to this date, 7th August, nothing has been sold.
On the 20th July a letter from Khorat brought
the details of an act of treachery committed by Chao
Kenchan e . Phya Ophuy Puthan was stationed at
Pabo 25 Coros f distant from Menam Khong, and Phya
Pechai Son Cram with Rummichan on the banks of
that river, that they might seize the remainder of the
inhabitants of Kinchan. An Embassy consisting of
100 people arrived from Cochin China who immediate-
ly crossed the river to confer with the Siamese officers
of Chao Kinchan.
e The Prince of Lanchang or Langang of Europe-
an maps, who has lately been driven out of his Prin-
cipality.
f. A Coro is 2J Siamese fathoms of 6| English feet
each.


The Ambassador said lie had come from the King
of Cochin China to propose the restoration of that
Prince to his own territory, and to obtain for him the
King of Siam’s pardon, that another embassy was to
proceed by sea to Bangkok, with presents, and that
Chao Kinchan would return to his own city in a few
days. The Siamese Officers being satisfied with what
the Ambassador said went the same day -to tell the
General, Phya Aphuy Phuton, the result of the in-
terview. He was also much pleased and desired them
to bring the Ambassador to him. The next day Chao
Kinchan arrived at Kinchan. He accosted the two
Siamese offiicers in the most friendly manner, embrac-
ing them and talking to them as if they were his
brothers, and begged the} 7 would accompan} him to
see the General the next day. They met accordingly,
and were all seated close together, when one of Chao
Kinchan’s people fired a musket at Phya Pichai
Son Cram and killed him on the spot. Hammichan ran
away and threw himself into the river, but was killed
by a spear. About 500 Siamese were killed and many
taken prisoners with their arms and a great quantity
of paddy. The General having only 250 men with
hint fled to Non Bon Larnbu, about 4 days’journey
from Pabo. The King was very angry when he heard
of the stupid conduct of those officers. War with
Cochin China seems inevitable and preparations are
making for it. People are busy making the gun
boats and the Phra Khlancj is going to Bamplassoy
Chantibun and Thong jai 9 to hasten their completion
at those places.
11th August 1828. Mr. Schiniman, the Dutch
Agent from Batavia, was exempted yesterday, as a
special favour from the King, from paying duty on
the goods he had brought and had free liberty given
him to buy and sell as he pleased, in consideration of
the same indulgence having lately been granted by
g. On the frontiers of Cambodia.


the Batavian Government to 7 junks belonging to the-
King trading to that place.
The Agent had waited so long for the King’s
decision that he had determined to sell his cargo for
any thing he could get for it, and pay any duties and
charges the Siamese pleased, and he was certain that
the Government of Batavia would make the first junk
that arrived there from Siam, pay the duties of the
7 junks, and also for all his losses. The goods he has
brought are not suited to the market, as they are of
too good quality, nevertheless he will be able to sell
them without loss. The white cloth is very broad and
strong enough, fine red handkerchiefs and beautiful
bed covers, some pretty good muskets of 1 and 2
barrels, and narrrow chintz in long pieces, and some
striped cloth to make trousers and also 28 Leaguers
of Batavia Rum.
(Signed) H. Burney
Deputy Commissioner
Tenasserim Provinces.
Tavoy
30th November 1828.


MEMORANDUM transmitted by Mr. R. Hunter
to Captain H. Burney at Tavoy.
Duties to spec: G. Noormahul to Siam, say ac-
cording to the old Plan would have been vizt.
Import Duty on 90,000 Rs. at 8 Per Cent Rs. 7,200
Brig’s measurement Duty ... ~ 1,700
Paknam and Paklat Charges „ 160
5000 Ps. Sugar bought by me Rs. ... „ 7,500
382 Bs. Tin ad 3 rs. - ~ 1,146
140 Ps. Stic Lac (S, ... ~ 210
100 Ps. Sapan wood difference of price 4r.
before, now „ 250
6 Ps. of Ivory ad 10 ... ~ 60
Rs. 18,226
According to your Treaty the Brig "J
measuring 3 fms. 1 rubt. & 1/6 > Rs. 5,596
at 1700 Rs. ... s ... J Rg 12,630
In favour of new Treaty twelve thousand six hundred
and thirty Rs. besides if I could have got Camboge or
Ivory to have invested all my funds, the balance would
have been much more in favour. Now we have no
trouble with clerks, weighmen, &c. &c. &c.
( Signed ) R. Hunter.
Fort William 30th January 1829,


Fort Cornwallis The 3rd January 1829,
To J. W. Salraond Esquire
Acting Deputy Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose a copy of a letter
received by me from the Raja Muda at Quedah re-
questing that certain people who have left that country
to reside in Province Wellesley may be sent back.
I request permission to observe that the numerous
parties of Malays which have lately emigrated from
Quedah have been driven to that extremity by the
harsh and oppressive measures of the Siamese Chiefs.
I have suggested to the Raja Muda that references
of this nature should be made to Government, not to me.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) James Low.
Fort Cornwallis
The 2 January 1829.
ORDERED that Captain Low be informed that
unless the people are Criminals, they cannot be forcibly
returned.


Fort Cornwallis 23rd February 1829.
Translation
of a letter from the Rajah Muda, son of the Rajah of
Ligore at Quedah, to the Malay Translal or.
1 request my friend will inform the Rouble, the
'Governor of Pulo Penang that Twanku Koodin, the
nephew of the Rajah of Quedah, and Twanku Daggang,
Twanku Jaffar, the two sons of Twanku Long Puteh,
with Panglima Manan and two peons formerly in the
English service at Kwala Prye, and two persons named
Che Men Alii and Che Ahiya, who reside at Tanjong
Tokong, and Panglima Sain, Panglima Punghu, Imam
Semahun, Che Haji, Panglima Hoosein, Panglima
Meir, Panglima Hoosein who resides at Teluk Ayer
Tawar, Che Rhio, Awang Lahat, Che Akkub who reside
-at Pulo Penang, took English colours, stating that
they were going to look for a livelihood, and they went
and seized 16 people who were guarding the birds’
nests at Pulo Metia, and 8 people of Salang. In re-
turning they seized 30 people belonging to Pulo
Langkawi. On the 12th of Shaban, Twanku Din,
Twanku Daggang, Twanku Jaffar and the Panglimas
who are named above, came to the sea beach in the
night. Twanku Din, Twanku Daggang, Twanku Jaffar
and all the Panglimas above named came on shore and
approached the Fort where I reside and attacked it,
and fought with and fired upon the Siamese. Twanku
Din, Twanku Jaffar, Twanku Daggang and the Pang-
limas above named fled to their prows and these people
are concerting to commit mischief and to infringe the
Treaty made by the Right Rouble. Lord Amherst,
Governor General of Bengal. I therefore request my
friend to seize them according to the custom of the
English.


Moreover, respectable Chinese, Malays and
Ohooliahs are reporting that the Rajah of Quedah is
going to send Twanku Abdullah, Twanku Din his sons,
and Twanku Long Puteh the husband of Twanku Jam
Jam, with some Malays at Kwala Prye to go across the
country to do mischief to Quedah, If such is true as
stated, I request my friend will prevent them, and that
there may be no infringement of the .Treaty made
between the English and Siamese. Written on
Thursday the 16 Shaban.
A true Translation.
Penang
The 23rd February 1829.


Letter
from the Acting Resident Councillor to the Rajah
Muda, son of the Rajah of Ligore at Quedah.
I have this morning received friend’s letter
dated 16 Shaban, in reply to which I have to acquaint
him that the Honble. the Governor lately proceeded
to Singapore, but the purport of my friend’s letter
shall be communicated to him immediately. Mean-
time, I lose no time in 'dispatching two vessels to look
after the pirates who have been making incursions
on the Quedah coast, and I have given directions to
the officers of Government here to keep a most vigilant
watch over the proceedings of the Ex Rajah ot Quedah
and his followers, and to prevent, by every possible
means, all attempts to disturb the peace of my friend’s
Government at Quedah. My friend may be assured
of the anxious desire of this Government to observe
the stipulations of the Treaty as strictly as possible,
but he must also be sensible how difficult it is to
watch closely the proceedings of such a multitude
of Malays and refugees scattered about in this quarter
and it will be-necessary for my friend to take proper
precautions for defence, while every exertion shall be
used to prevent any hostile equipments here.
(Signed) J. Anderson
Acting; Resident Councillor.
c 5
Penang
23rd February 1829.
Fort Cornwallis 23rd February 1829.


To J. Pattullo Esquire
Superintendent of Police.
Sir,
1 herewith transmit for your information copy of
a translation of a letter just received from the Rajah
Muda, son of the Rajah of Ligore at Quedah, and to
request you will proclaim by beat ol gong throughout
the town, that any persons residing under this Gov-
ernment aiding or abetting the Rajah of Quedah or any
of his followers in making an attack on Quedah or any
of the places on the coast will be treated as pirates,
and if you have any reason to believe that the pro-
ceedings of his relatives and followers, as reported by
the Young Chief at Quedah, have been by his con-
nivance or assistance, you are authorized to inform
him that if he is detected in any endeavours to sub-
vert.the existing Government at Kedah, he will be
put into restraint.
You are also authorised to engage any additional
number of peons you may require to keep a vigilant
watch over the proceedings of the refugees, to seize
ihe parties mentioned in the Young OhieFs letter, if
found within the jurisdiction of the Island.
The two armed cutters will be dispatched to
Quedah this evening to look after the pirates.
I am &ca.
(Signed) J. Anderson
Acting Resident Councillor.
23rd February 1829.
Fort Cornwallis 23rd February 1829.


Fort Cornwallis 25th February 1829.
To the Honble. R. Fullerton Esquire
Governor in Council.
Honble. Sir,
With reference to my letter of the 23rd instant
I have now the honor to transmit for your information
annexed copies of a letter from Captain Low, Superin-
tendent of Police, Province Wellesley, with my reply,
and orders to the Master Attendant. The Officer
commanding the troops having upon the recommenda-
tion of the Master Attendant and my requisition sent
12 sepoys on board the two gun boats, the vessels
sailed jesterday in pursuit of the pirates.
2. Mr. Pattullo the Superintendent of Police
has also handed me a letter to his address from the
Ex Rajah of Quedah, of which the enclosed is a
translation.
3. Whether the proceedings already noticed are
by the Ex Rajah’s direct authority or not, it is im-
possible for me to say, but it is not, 1 dare say,
probable, that he will be anxious, so long as he
remains on this island in the midst of his late subjects,
to discourage with much sincerity either them or his
relatives who have the means to annoy and distress
the Siamese, even if he does not retain influence over
them, which he disclaims. The Chiefs named Twanku
Din and Twanku Long Puteh are notorious pirates,
and it is generally believed that their attacks on the
Quedah coast do not arise from any devotion to the
interests of the Ex Rajah, the object being plunder,
with a total recklessness of the ultimate result as far
as regards the welfare of that Chief.


4. In adopting the precautionary measures which
I have the honor to report, I have had reference to
former proceedings on record and especially to the
commands of the Right Honorable the Governor Gen-
eral in Council in the dispatch under date the 26th
November 1827 * (paragraph 5). an extract fiom
which, as well as a copy of the last communication
made to the Ex Rajah through the Superintendent of
Police on the 4 November last*, are annexed for more
immediate reference.
5. The Siamese have a very small force at
Quedah, and this, it is supposed, offers a great
temptation to attack by some of the more desperate
refugees, assisted by pirates from other quarters. A
question naturally arises whether the British Govern-
ment is to be expected to guarantee the present
possessors of Quedah in the tranquil possession of the
country and guard the coasts as formerly engaged
with the Malayan Government, and whether the Siam-
ese should not be bound to keep a sufficient force for
their own protection as well as to cooperate against
the numerous pirates infesting the neighbourhood, as
the Malayan Chief did in former years. This Govern-
ment has been constantly called upon by the Siamese
Authorities at Quedah to prevent any infringement of
the Treaty and to keep the numerous Malayan re-
fugees in order, and this has been done as far as
possible ; but the best precautions will sometimes not
avail, and we are burthened with an increased ex-
pense in maintaining armed vessels, additional police
&ca. to keep a disorderly mass of refugees in check.
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. Anderson
Acting Resident Councillor.
Fort Cornwallis
The 25th February 1829


Fort William 1st May 1829
Tavoy 28 February 1829,
To A. U. Maingy Esqr.
Civil Commissioner.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to report to you, that the
messengers whom I dispatched to Bangkok with letters
to the Portuguese Ex-Consul have just returned with
a letter from the Deputy Foreign Minister of which I
enclose a translation. The Portuguese Consul informs
me that the Cochin Chinese had deputed two Missions
to the Court of Siam in order to effect a reconciliation
between that Court and the Prince of Southern Laos
or King Chin,* but that both Missions have entirely
failed, and that subsequently the Prince had been cap-
tured and brought to Bangkok where preparations are
being made for executing [ him ] with veiy great
tortures. The circumstance of this Prince having
been apprehended will, Mr. Silveira imagines, put an
end to the differences which had for some time past
existed between Cochin China and Siam, and the
Court of Bangkok with this view, was about to depute
a Complimentary Mission to Cochin China.
*,#*** *
I have &c.
(Signed) H. Burney.
Dy. Conir.


Fort William 30th April 1830.
Memoranda from the King of Quedah.
the 16th March 1829.
The Kingdom of Quedah descended from my
ancestors to me with the dignity and title of King, in
respect of which the Kings of Quedah have been in the
custom of presenting the Boongah Mass or Gold Tree
as a mark of respect to the King of Siam, but the
Kingdom of Quedah was in no wise a tributary state
to the King of Siam, with whom ray ancestors many
times went to war. On my taking refuge on this
Island, I understood I was to receive the protection of
the King of England, and that my children were to
receive the same protection. When 1 was on the
throne I sent my son and ray minister to Siam, to the
King of Siam, at which meeting the King of Siam told
mv son that he wished to send an army to attack the
country of Perak. My son and the Bandara (Minister)
consulted together and were aware that if the Siamese
were to send an army to Perak they must pass
through Quedah, and that would occasion great sur-
prise and disquiet among the subjects of Quedah, and
might cause a war to take place between the countries
of Siam and Quedah. On this the Bandara ( Minister)
engaged with the King of Siam respecting the country
of Perak that he would collect an army and go and
attack them, and that there was no occasion for His
Majesty to trouble himself on the subject. The King
of Siam was much pleased, and I paid all the expenses
of the war on taking Perak. There afterwards came
the message of Rajah Lagore (King of Ligore) as
King for rice and paddy for the supply of the army
which was going against Cochin China; I prepared
all the rice and paddy accordingly, and after this
came a letter saying that the Rajah Ligore had sent
peons to receive the rice and paddy. When the peons


arrived they were allowed to come into the rivet.
They sent for the Bandara Laksamana and the Tuman-
gong (my ministers then in charge) and demanded
the rice and paddy. The Bandara answered the rice
and paddy were ready. While talking together they
suddenly seized the Bandara Laksamana and the
Tumangong -and murdered them, and many more of
my establishment were murdered by them. At that
time I was at Marahbooh River, so that no immediate
news could come to me. The Siamese came into
Marahbooh River and fired, and .plundered the coui>
try, and murdered all the inhabitants. When my
family heard of this outrage, they became so alarmed
■that 1 was obliged to- take them on elephants and
brought them to Prye in Province Wellesley, my wish
being to put them all under the charge and care ot
■my brother Rajah Solyman at Prye, and then to
leturn and attack the Siamese. About this time a
messenger from Governor Phillips by Mr. Cracraft,
Major Combs and Mr. John Anderson came to Prye
requesting me to meet the Governor and stated that
Governor Phillips sent them to ■conduct me and my
family over to Poolo Penang, the Governor wishing to
o
assist me agreeably to the engagement of the Com-
pany with my father, through Mr. Light, who came
into Quedah by desire of the Company and who by
Treaty were engaged, that if any enemy should come
from sea against Quedah, the Company would them-
selves fight those enemies, and if the enemy came
from the land the Company should assist with money,
'expenses, arms, guns, powder and shots, and further
if the slaves of Quedah people should run away to
Poolo Penang, the Government should allow them to
be taken back, and further to pay yearly the slim o'f
ten thousand dollars as rent -or income and many more
points were made in the Engagement which will
be found in the books of the Secretary’s Office of
the Government This gave me great assurance that
the Company would not, fail to assist me, and I


accordingly brought my family over to Poolo Penang.
Immediately on my arrival at Poolo Penang, Governor
Phillips gave me all the respects due to my rank,
and requested of me to remain in Poolo Penang,
stating that he would send letters to the Governor
General and Council in Bengal to grant me assistance
to retake the country of Quedah from the Siamese,
and reinstate me, agreeably to the Engagement of the
Company with my father. In the year 1238 on the
19th of the month Mohorum, Governor Phillips sent
a letter requesting me to wait until the return ot
Mr. Crawfurd from Siam. Governor Phillips gave me
for my expenses five hundred dollars per month,
avowing, should I still wish to go away from Poolo
Penang he would not stop me, and that I was five.
And further in the year 1238 on the 25th day of the
month Rajah, Governor Phillips sent another letter,
informing me that he had received an answer from
the Governor General and Council ot Bengal in regard
to my wish to go from Poolo Penang to endeavour to
get my countiy back. That the Governor in no wise
wished to debar me from carrying my intention info
effect, and that the Governor General had given Ins
promise, that every assistance should be given for
my ease and comfort as long as 1 should remain in
Poolo Penang, and further that the Governor General
had a strong wish to assist me and use his influence
with the Siam Power to get back my country. In the
year 1238 on the 3rd day of the month Loolhahedah
Governor Phillips wrote to me another letter respect-
ing my income, during the time of my residence in
Poolo Penang, and that I should get 500 dollars
monthly. That in the year 1825 on the Ist day of
October, Governor Phillips sent another letter re-
specting me and my family stating ttiat it was his
wish to reinstate me and family in our former dignity
and respectability as heretofore, and recommending
me to wait until a fair opportunity should offer.
That in the year 1242 on the 19th day of the month


Jaffer, Governor Fullerton’s letter to me states the
Engagements of the Siam Government with Mr.
Burney, which has been communicated to me, ex-
pressing a wish for me to quit Poolo Penang, at which
place 1 nought refuge. 1 have well considered these
points, and I do not wish to change my place of
sidence or to avoid the protection of the Honble. the
East India Company, or to throw a doubt upon British
good faith, or the Laws of Hospitality. After that
letter two or three other letters 1 have received from
the present Governor desiring me to go to Malacca,
and accompanied by threats, with which I could not
comply consistently with good feeling, and recollecting
that I came to Poolo Penang on the solicitation of
Governor Phillips, who professed his wish to ratify
the Company’s and my father’s Engagement. It is
now the endeavour to send me off to a distance from
my late kingdom, so that I maj forego all opportunity
of reinstatement in my kingdom, so as to accom-
modate treaties with my enemies to which I have not
been consenting. Ido not wish to go to Malacca and
as I came to Poolo Penang with the invitation of Gov-
ernor Phillips, who promised to let me return to my
country Quedah, aud as it was on the faith that the
Company would not evade their promise, or throw
aside their sacred engagement, on this offer that I con-
sented to remain on this Island. In the year 1238 on
the Ist day of the month Rajab, on Thursday, Governor
Fullerton, by letter, orders me to remove to Malacca,
or Siak, or Dellie and threatens that if I do not
submit to and follow his commands that what he terms
ray allowance would be stopped, and no more respect
would be shown to me, that I must consider myself
the same as the inhabitants in general, and 1 am for-
bidden to write to or send any letter to him, the
Governor, and I am degraded with the uncourteous
threats of being referred to the common police, an act
I am confident which would net be sanctioned by the
Honble. Company towards a Monarch, though under


affliction?. Not contented with such insult solely,
this Governor causes the Gong to beat through the
island prohibiting any person from selling any vessel,
balls, gun powder and arms to me and any ot my
people, I have still to state, that in order to add to
my distressing fate, bordering almost upon want, the
rent or payment due to me as heir to my father,
and by which Prince of Wales Island and Province
Wellesley are held of the Crown of Quedah, has been
purposely kept in arrear during the last fifteen
months, an injustice, unless redressed, which will drive
me to the highest authorities with my complaints,
which are too numerous to be detailed in this paper.
It is therefore to the Governor General of India
that I call for redress of my grievances, namely, that
notwithstanding my misfortunes I may be treated
with that respect which is due to me as the King of a
country, the Government of which 1 have been un-
justly deprived of. That the solemn Engagement
entered into on the part of the Honble. Company on
my taking refuge in Prince of Wales Island be in nil
things performed. That the rents or, payments by
which the said Island and Province Wellesley are
held, be immediately paid up, and regularity in future
be observed respecting such payments.
That my residence in Prince of Wales Island may
be rendered more respectable, and that so long as I do
remain in the Island, a Guard be assigned as formerly,
and that I may be at liberty to return to my own
kingdom when I may think fit, nevertheless upon such
terms as may be reciprocally suitable to the interest of
both parties.
Fallen and reduced as I am at present, I shall look
forward to a better understanding between myself and
the Honble. Company when the fair statement of my
case shall be known, together with a detail of the


wrongs and insults I have endured and 1 challenge the
the production of ni} r proof that during my residence
in this Island, I have deported myself otherwise than
with submissive conduct, even under oppression.
I beg to annex to this paper a translation of the
notice ] received from the Police Magistrate on the
28th February last, on which I need make no obser-
vation at present.
This letter is as a mark of faith and clearness
and presents that love which comes from me the
Police Magistrate and is to reach rny friend Yong
do Pertuan Quedah who is honored and celebrated.
The occasion is that Mr .Anderson has received a
letter from Quedah stating that Tuanko Long Pootee,
and Tuanko Din were causing disturbances with the
Siamese. Mr. Anderson having duly considered
that if were not authorised by my friend they
never would have done so! This is to acquaint my
friend, if it should be found to be true and that my
friend has given such encouragement, or my friend
is really concerned in this business, and it should so
appear to me, on that very moment my friend will
get the punishment of being put under arrest and a
guard of sepoys. Of this take notice, written on
the 23d February 1829.
( Signed ) J. Pattullo
Supt. of Police.
From the King of Queda.


Fort Cornwallis The 24th March 1829,
To John Anderson Esquire
Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to forward for the information
of the Honorable the Governor in Council three seve-
ral reports received this day from the Thanadar of the
Muda District, by which it would appear that the
Siamese have sent an armed party to the Chinese
Farmer’s village on the north bank of the Muda River r
and that their object is to apprehend Tuanko Long
Putih the, pirate, who has been lately creating distur-
bance at Kedah. The party it seems are awaiting
fresh orders from the Siamese Chief.
It is reported that Tuanko Long Putih is lurking
in the jungle, either within the Province or close on
the border.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) Janies Low
Snpt. of Police, Frov : Wellesley.
Province Wellesley
24th March 1829.
ORDERED that the Superintendent of Police
ol Province Wellesley be directed to afford every
assistance to the Siamese in apprehending the pirate
Tuanko Long Putih.


Fort Cornwallis The 7 April 1829.
Translation
I
of a letter from the Rajah Muda at Qnedah, son of
the Chow Piya of Ligore to the Acting Resident
Councillor of Pulo Penang.
( After Compliments.)
I beg my friend will acquaint the Honorable
Robert Fullerton, Governor of Pulo Penang, Singa-
pore and Malacca, that during the last month Tuanko
Din with certain Panglimas named came and entered
the Quedah River with 15 or 16 prows during the
night, landing and committing a disturbance, intend-
ing to attack the fort in which I reside : these cir-
cumstances I have already made known to my friend
in a letter which 1 sent by Hakim Itam and Che Mat
last month—all was stated therein.
During the present month the Rajah of Quedah
sent Tuanko Long Puteh, the husband of Tuanko Jam-
jam and the Rajah’s brother-in-law together with
Tuanko Long Putih’s three sons, also Pangkooloo
Pa-Ally who resides at Penaga ( Province Wellesley )
also Che Etam residing at Miniah, also Tuanko Akkil
who resides with Tuanko Jamjam, Hadji Abdullah
who resides at Pulo Penang, near the house of the
Ex Rajah of Quedah, together with the people of
Penaga, about 300 people more more or less. All these
came armed and equipped intending to attack and take
Quedah. On the fourth day of this month Tuanko
Long Putih arrived at a place called Padang Pusing
and seized a Chinese Compong erecting a stockade and
seized some Malay people of Quedah, impressing them
into his service to assist in making war. In conse-
quence of this the Malays were frightened and fled in
numbers, a part came to me and reported that Tuanko


Long Putih and his 3 son Panghooloo Pa Ally, Che
I tain, Tuanko Akkil and Hadji Abdullah, with a great
many ryots, were committing great oppression upon
the inhabitants, and exciting a great disturbance r
on receiving this intelligence I sent Aluang Kromluk
and some Siamese in that direction. When these
Siamese reached, * Tuanko Long Putih with the
before mentioned persons fought with these persons
under Aluang Kromluk from the morning till noon,
Tuanko Long’s forces were routed and fled across the
river of Kwalla Muda entering my friend's territory,
and now residing with Tuanko Jamjam at a place
called Pematang Bindahari. Tuanko Din, the nephew
of the Rajah of Quedah, and Tuanko Long Putih,
brother-in-law of the Rajah, and the other people already
mentioned went and carried on War in the Quedah
country, thereby breaking the Treaty of the Right
Honorable Lord Amherst, Governor General of Bengal,
which was made by Captain Burney at the capital
with the great King, also with my father the Chow
piya of Ligore, who established a friendship with the
Right Honorable Lord Amherst Governor General of
Bengal and the Honorable Robert Fullerton, Gov-
ernor of Pulo Penang, Singapore and Malacca and my
friend. Moreover as the Rajah of Quedah sent these
people, Tuanko Din and Tuanko Long Putih and all
the others mentioned to go and attack Quedah I request
my friend to search and seize these persons, and
punish them according to the custom of the English.
1 request my friend will let me know what proceedings
he may take in the matter, agreeably to the rules of
friendship.
Dated 18th Ramlan 1244.
A true Translation
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Translr. to Government'
Penang
The 26 March 1826*


Fort William 1st May 1829.
Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces.
To G. Swinton Esqre.
Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose translation of a letter
in the Talain language brought me lately some
traders from Bangkok. It is addressed to Major
General Sir A. Campbell, to whom the bearers of the
letter were desired to communicate the circumstance
of a party of Burmese having been sent into the
Dominion of Siam and of their having been seized
and confined at [the] town of Kamboori where the
Court of Siam ordered that they should remain until
such time as the Major General signified his wishes
whether the Burmese should be delivered up to
him.
I told the bearers and 1 addressed a communica-
tion to the same purport to Maha Yotha, that I
should be happy to take charge of these Burmese
and the Taliens returned to Siam professedly with an
intention of obtaining orders for bringing the men
to me. Should the men arrive it is my intention,
after examining them, to send them over to Rangoon
with a Letter to the Woonggy stating that I had
taken charge of them, fearing that they might receive
some injury at the hands of the Siamese and re-
questing the Woonggy to ascertain from the Men
themselves for what purpose the Chief Oozanah had
sent them to Siam.


I beg also to enclose a cop} 7 of a letter from
the Deputy Commissioner. .
I have &c.
(Signed) A, D. Maingy
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces,
Amherst
12th April 1829-


Fort Cornwallis The 8 June 1829.
To A. Sterling Esquire
Acting Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a
letter and other papers from Mr. Swinton, relative to
the residence of the Ex King or Rajah of Quedah in
the Island of Penang.
2. I conceive that if an attempt were made to
remove a fugitive Prince from any part of the Presi-
dencies in India where English law prevails, the local
Court would, upon application being made to it, have
the power to interfere and decide on the legality of
the removal. And this appears to me to be one of
the difficulties which have arisen from the introduc-
tion of the English system of laws into a country
where the manners of the people, the nature of our
Dominion, and the powers requisite for the Govern-
ment, are so different from what they are at home.
The Statute 55 Geo. 3d, C. 84, S. 6. seems to have
been framed with a different view, and to be applicable
only to the Subjects of a foreign State, who are not
natives of parts within the limits of the Charter of the
United Company.
3. I conceive that the Treaty made between the
United Company and the King of Quedah in 1802 is
at an end, so far at least as relates to the Ex King
or Rajah himself. It is of the nature of those
Treaties which the writers upon International Law
have termed ‘ real,” and even if it were looked
upon as “ personal ” it is one ot those which would
be terminated when the Rajah of Quedah had lost
his power and fled from the country. In the Trea-
ty the Rajah who executed it not only speaks in
express terras of “his Dominions” but undertakes on
his part to perform many articles of the treaty which


require the exercise of the powers of Government.
The stipend of 10.000 dollars is granted for considera-
tions which he is no longer able to fulfil, and it would
not be consistent either with the Law of Nations or
with common reason that the Treaty should be ob-
ligatory upon one party and wholly without influence
on the other. I will add that a Treaty between in-
dependent states (and that in question appears to me
of this class ). is not, even while in force, cognizable
in a Municipal Court, but is a proper subject for the
consideration of the respective Governments who are
parties to it, on principles of international law.
4. If however, the Ex Rajah should prefer a claim
grounded on the Treaty of 1802 for the stipend
originally payable under it, the Court will have to
decide upon their authority to entertain the question.
In what manner or at what time it may be proper for
the United Company to offer an objection to the
jurisdiction, 1 am not able to say without a further
knowledge of the forms of proceeding to be established
in the Court at Penang, but from the directions con-
tained in the Charter (p. 28)1 take it for granted
that they will be of the most simple kind, and that no
difficulty can occur in bringing forward the point in
question. If it should happen that the Court deter-
mines that it is competent to enter upon the enquiry,
and should decide against the United Company, an
appeal is given by the Charter to the King in Council,
and of the result, 1 cannot bring myself to admit a
doubt.
1 have &ca.
( Signed ) Jno. Pearson
Advocate General.
Fort William
The May 9 1829.


Fort William 10th July 1829.
To G. Swinton Esqre,
Secretary to Government
Political Department
Fort William.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honble. the Governor in
Council to request you will submit to the notice of
the Right Honble. the Governor General in Council
the enclosed correspondence with the Rajah of Ligore,
relative to some recent disturbances in the Quedah
territory and the proceedings of the Ex Rajah of that
country, his relatives and late subjects.
1 have &c.
(Signed) J. Anderson
Secretary to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
the 11th May 1829.


Translation of a letter from the Chow Piya of
Ligore to the Rouble, R. Fullerton, Governor of Prince
of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
( After Compliments.)
1 beg to inform my friend that I sent for my son
the Rajah of Quedah to come to Ligore, and appointed
Pra Sena Nuchit to act as Raja Muda for my son
together with Pra Sethi SongKram Belat and other
Siamese Chiefs to take care of Quedah and carry on its
affairs agreeably to the Treaty.
On the 27th day of 3d month Pra Sena Nuchit
my son, the Raja Muda, Pra Sethi SongKram Belat,
who were at Quedah, sent a letter to my son, the
Rajah of Quedah, stating that on the 12th day of the
3d month Tuanko Din, the nephew of the former
Rajah of Quedah, Tuanko Dagong, Tuanko laafar
the son of Tuanko Song Putih, with Panglima Maan
Panglima Amwang Lahat, Panglima Say on, Panglima
Hussain, Panglima Min, Chee Hou, Chee Auggor,
Chee Mat Ally, Chee Jaga and Che Akhil, in all 13
Malay Panglimas, with 13 Prows and crews and arms,
entered the mouth of the Quedah River, and at mid-
night they brought their prows close to the shore
where they landed, passing along the sea shore, with
the intention of doing mischief at Quedah ; but they
did not carry it into execution, for when they ap-
proached close, information was given to Pra Sena
Nuchit, who is acting for my son, informing him that
Tuanko Din with all his followers were coming along
the sea shore, and Pra Sena Nuchit, who is acting for
my son, on hearing this report sent Pra Sethi
SongKram Belat with other Siamese Chiefs and a
party of men to attack and oppose them in order to
preserve the country. They fell in with Tuanko Din
Fort William 10th July 1829.


and commenced fighting with muskets, and one of the
Siamese Chiefs was shot by one of Tuanko Din’s
people, and it being flood tide Tuanko Din and his
party fled with their prows to sea.
Moreover on the 7th day of the 4-th month Pra
Sena Nuchit, who is acting for my son, and Pra Sethi
SongKram Belat sent me a letter acquainting me that
Tuanko Abdullah, the son of the former Rajah of
Quedah, and his brother in law Tuanko Song Puteh,
concerted with Wan Aboobehas and Wan Harrum,
together with Malay people of Prye and Kwala Muda
to come into the country to attack Quedah, as Tuanko
Abdullah, the son of the former Rajah of Quedah and
Tuanko Din did once before ; they thought on this
occasion to come and repeat the mischief. These
Malay relatives and adherents of the late Rajah of
Quedah, who are residing near Pulo Penang, were
aware that the Rajah of Quedah had gone to Ligore,
and they concerted to commit mischief at Variance with
the Treaty. I request my friend will give orders to
the cruizers to examine the sea and coasts and discover
any persons committing mischief and such as are found
doing so punish them according to custom. Such 1
make known to my friend that he may be aware. I
have sent back my son the Rajah of Quedah to Quedah,
to be established agreeably to the Treaty which is fixed
between the Siamese and English for the purpose of
pursuing friendship between them while the earth and
sky continue. I request my friend who is exalted, to
punish these wicked people with severity and restrain
them from such pursuits at sea and on shore and all
the people of the country will cultivate and plant
paddy, and carry on business in security.
The above is what I have made known in a former
communication. Moreover on the 16th day of 3d
month, Aluang Burin Deja, a Siamese Chief of Purlis,
sent a letter informing me that Tuanko Din and fol-
lowers brought prows to Purlis and seized Che Daud


and Che Alii, and sent letters to induce the people at
Purlis to create mischief in Purlis, by which means the
people of the country are unsettled and cannot gain a
livelihood. I therefore send Koon Aksorn to make this
known, so that my friend may be informed. Moreover
I perceive that so long as the former Rajah of Quedah
had been residing near there has been much of these
proceedings, and they will not cease. 1 therefore
request my friend to take into consideration how the
Treaty between Quedah and Pulo Penang may be con-
formed to, so that they may become one for my friend,
and I trust that means may be taken to stop the pro-
ceedings of these wicked people.
Dated 13th Rama—year Pi kuln.
Penang the sth May 1829.
( A true Translation )
{ Signed ) J, Anderson
Malay Translator to Government.


Letter from the Honble. Governor of Pulo Penang,
Singapore and Malacca, to the Rajah of Ligore.
1 have duly received my friend’s duplicate letter
relative to the proceedings ofTnanko Din and Tuanko
Song Puteh, respecting which my sentiments have
already been to my friend. I have now
only to repeat that no protection is afforded to these
evil disposed people within the British territory, and
the armed vessels belonging to this Government are
constantly employed in pursuit of the pirates in the
vicinity of this Island.
- (Signed) R. Fullerton
Governor.
Penang the 11th Maj r 1829.


To
The Honble. R. Fullerton Esqre.
Governor &c. &c. &e.
Honble. Sir,
Agreeably to your desire I have now the honor
to submit translations of the 7 notes handed to
me by Koon Aksorn, the bearer of the Rajah ot
Ligore’s letters; no allusion is made in the letter
to these notes which profess to be copies of papers
found by the Siamese on Tuanko Song Puteh’s mak-
ing a hasty retreat from a small stockade near the
borders in the Quedah territory, on his late predatory
expedition.
1 have &c.
(Signed) J. Anderson
Malay Translator to Govt.,
Fort Cornwallis the 11th May 1829.


No. 1.
Translation of a Note from the Ex Rajah of
Quedah to Tuauko Song Puteh.
I formerly sent a letter to you desiring you to
arrange with my son, Tuanko Abdullah, to proceed to
Quedah, in consequence of Pad\ika Maha Mantri hav-
ing called you and your three sons; but I have now
received certain intelligence that Paduka Maha Mantri
has been put to death by the Siamese. It will be
better therefore to consult with your two sons not to
proceed to Quedah at present, for all the inhabitants
of Quedah are now in'great dread of the Siamese, and
it is my opinion that if you and your sons were to go
to Quedah accompanied only by Quedah people you
would certainly all suffer as Paduka Maha. Such
being the case, you should stop for a time until the
Rajah of Bengal arrives, when I will see him for a
little and we will go together. lam only waiting for
this cause.
Moreover you must give intimation to Tuanko
Din as herein mentioned.
Dated 23d Rajab 1244.


No. 2.
From the Ex Rajah of Quedah to Tuanko Song
Puteh and (his wife) Tuanko Jam Jam.
1 have received information that Tuanko Dagang
has proceeded to Pulo Lacavy to follow Tuanko Din.
I am of opinion it was not proper to let him go,
because it may possibly lead to difficulty with the
English and I am waiting only for the Rajah of
Bengal, in order that I may settle all my business and
and if they do not confirm to the old Treaty, I will
arrange for quitting Palo Penang and proceed where
I please.
With respect to the Rajah of Bengal the reports
are that he will arrive here in 10 or 11 days. It is
better therefore to wait and hear what is the determi-
nation of the people. Wherefore I request you will
recall your son (that is Tuanko Dagang).
Dated 6th Rajab 1244.


No. 3.
From Tuanko Din to Tuanko Song Puteh.
With respect to your directions conveyed by Pan-
jaung that 1 should endeavour to make arrangements
for getting you out of the Krian, the cruizers are
keeping very strict watch at present from the harbour
to Puloo Bunting, and I should not perhaps be able to
pass you, which would be productive of great embar-
rassment ; but 1 will proceed to Kwala Muda and will
endeavour to make arrangements.


No. 4.
From Tuanko Daiu, youngest son of Ex Rajah ot
Quedah, to Tuanko Song Puteh.
The letter which you sent me by your two sous
has reached me and I understand its contents and I
am very happy to be together, but I am much distress-
ed in consequence of my father being in Palo Penang
with the English. You are acquainted with all cir-
cumstances. I shall therefore consider and communi-
cate with the Rajahs in Palo Penang in respect to the
contents of year letter, for I am extremely desirous to
assist in this work. My brother, Tuanko Abdullah,
also is collecting people to send them to you.
28th Shaban 1214.


No. 5.
From Tuanko Jam Jam ( sister of the Ex Rajah
of Quedah ) to Tuanko Song Puteh, her husband.
My mind is extremely anxious and distressed in
respect to the business you are about to be engaged
in, but what can I say ? I rely on the Almighty that
He will protect you and pray for safety of you all. I
hope you will consider well and conciliate all the
people who accompany you. With respect to Raja
Abdullah, he is an old man and will be like your
brother; do not therefore conceal anything from him.
I entreat that you will take the advice of proper
people, tor you are not acquainted with the road, and
you must take care ot the people with you —those who
are Pangulas to treat them as such and the ryots as
ryots. 1 merely remind you of this, without presum-
ing to instruct you. Do not be anxious about me here
who rely on the protection of the Almighty.


No. G.
From Tuanko Din to Tuanko Song Put eh.
I have received a letter from Tuanko Abdullah
brought by ('he Ribu in which he requests to fix a
day that he has for accompanying us on the expedition
and 1 have returned answer by Che Saleh fixing the
7th day of the month for proceeding. I waited from
the 7th till the 11th and on that night I went on
shore, but mistook the road, and it was nearly day
light, so that I could not enter the fort. I therefore
returned to the boat, the young Rajah ( Siamese )
mounted his elephants. were 20 Siamese at the
fort and 20 at Koobang Rattan, the rest Malays. 1
therefore request you will arrange with your sons and
let us attack and seize this fort at once within these
3or 4 days. Do not let Lobby Ally and his followers
and arms remain. Ido not wish to make a long story;
you can enquire all of Che Ribu.


No. 7.
From Tnanko Abdurramman, son of Tnanko Song
Puteh, to Datri Bandar Rajah Ulama Satiya of Purlin.
The letter which you sent by my father Tuanko
Song Futeh has duly reached me and 1 understand its
contents. 1 have also received the tin which you
sent me.
in respect of my father’s intention of proceeding
to Purl is, that cannot now be carried into effect. He
is building a stockade at (furoon, and those who are
concerned in this business must make haste. X there-
fore beg you to send-Tein Sela Satiya to my father at
Findang, using all dispatch day and night, for my
father intends to proceed to the attack in one or two
days. 1 proceed by sea to meet my brother Tuanko
Din. This business you must settle definitely and I
trust to the assistance of the Almighty. All other
matters will be connected with Tein Sela Satiya when
he meets my father, Tuanko Song Futeh, at Findang.
( True Translations )
( Signed ) .). Anderson—Malay Translator
to Government,


Fort Cornwallis 22nd .June 1829,
Translation
of a letter from Aluang Piya Ban to the Malay
Translator.
After Compliments.
I send this letter to ray friend and for the pur-
pose ot making known to the Honorable the Governor
of Pulo Penang, Singapore and Malacca that J pro-
ceeded to Pulo Langkaivi to drive out Tuanko Din
who was committing disturbances there and oppression
upon the inhabitants, and Tuanko Long Putih also
did the same. They received intelligence that I had
taken my departure for that place and they fled to
Kuala Muda, whither I have pursued them. I there-
fore send a man to make known this to my friend
according to the rule of friendship.
Moreover the Rajah of Ligore has given me
orders that 1 shall do nothing that may be disagree-
able to the English and if any persons commit any
misconduct upon the inhabitants of Quedah, I am
directed to give intimation to the Governor of Pulo
Penang. The Siamese and English have established
a friendship that will last as long as the sun and moon
continue. 1 am now come with a great number ol
prows, people of Quedah are also accompanying me as
1 am apprehensive of the attempts of the wicked
people. 1 have therefore brought many prows and
let not my friend entertain any doubts. This I make
known.
My object also in entering the Murbow is to
examine the place, and to establish some people there
so that wicked people may not resort there. 1 intend
to remain two or three days and then return. This
I also make known.


Not having brought with me my Malay writer 1
cannot send this letter in Malay according to former
custom.
Dated Bth of 7th month, year cow.
A true translation from the Malay
into which language it has been
previously rendered from Siamese.
(Signed) John Anderson
Malay Translator to Government.
Prince of Wales Island
The 15th June 1829,


To Jphn Anderson Esquire
! Secretary to Government
Fort Cornwallis.
Sir,
1 have the honor, in reply to yourHetter of the 16th
instant, to report for the information of the Govern-
ment that Tuanko Long Putih, the person therein
alluded to has been notoriously connected with the
pirates of'Siac and other places in the Straits during
a long course of years.
He reached Penang under very suspicious cir-
cumstances and seems to have been since actively
engaged in aiding and abetting and fomenting the
late disturbances in Quedah, which with reference to
the existing Treaty with the Siamese threatens to in-
terrupt the amicable relations subsisting betwixt the
British and them.
The Siamese authorities of Quedah had even sent
people in search of Long Putih towards the Muda
River or the North boundary of this Province, and
they appeared to consider that the Treaty alluded
to provided against British protection being afforded
to him, especially as he was connected by marriage
with the Ex King of Quedah, and had openly mani-
fested hostile designs against the Quedah country.
The Tuanku’s followers, men whose occupation is
piracy, were also going at large, and 1 had reason to
suspect that they were connected with the gangs
which were committing almost nightly robberies on
the property and violent assaults on the persons of the
inhabitants of this Province. Under these circums-
tances and with reference to the general instructions
before received from the Government in similar cases,
Fort Cornwallis The 22nd June 1829.


i directed that Tuauku Long Putih should be told that
it would be advisable for him to go out of the Province..
But 1 positively enjoined the Police Officer intrusted
with the message not to compel him to go. The
Tuanku returned an insolent message that he did not
intend to leave the Muda District ( the only place in
the Province, to my knowledge, where he has resided ).
1 therefore considered it my duty to report the circum-
stance to Government. Since then L have had no
communication with the Tuanku, but 1 have learned
that he did leave the Province for his own convenience
and to further his own schemes against the Siamese of
Quedah, and that having been beat back by the latter
people from the Lancavy Islands, he again took shelter
in the Qualla Muda district within the British ter-
ritory. He has here lived unmolested ever since.
1 have &ca.
( Signed ) daraes Low
Superintendent of Police
Province Wellesley.
Province Wellesley
The I Oth June 1829


Port Cornwallis The 1st July 1829.
To John Anderson Esquire
to Government
Port Cornwallis.
Sir,
******
9. L respectfully request to suggest that the
concurrence of the Siamese authorities in a settlement
of a boundary line would be highly satisfactory, since
the 3rd article of their Treaty provides for it, and the
petty Siamese officers close to the frontier have occa-
sionally expressed doubts as to the boundary, and may
afterwards make them matter for altercation.
10. If the Siamese would agree to a natural
boundary, even should that be a little beyond the
limit of 60 orlongs Inland, it would be advantageous
to all parties.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) James Low.
Province Wellesley
Land Office
20th June 1829.


Fort Cornwallis The 7th July 1829.
To John Anderson Esquire
( Secretary to Government
Port Cornwallis.
Sir,
I have the honor in reply to your letter of the
27th instant to state, that it appears to me to be verv
possible to effect a settlement of the boundaries of
Province Wellesley in concert with the Siamese Chief
at Queda,h, since the 3rd Article of the Treaty of
Bangkok expressly gives him the power to act in such
a case along with the British authority nearest to the
boundary to be adjusted.
By a little conciliatory management, the Siamese
deputies who should be sent from Quedah might be
induced at once to settle a natural ([boundary ] instead
of attempting an actual measurement, a thing they
could not effect of themselves, and which cannot be
effected at present without great expense and waste
of time.
1 have &ca.
( Signed ) James Low
Superintendent of Land and Police.
Province We lies! ey
Land Office
28 June 1829.


Singapore the 10 October 1829.
Minister at Siam.
From Chau Pria Prah Klang, an officer of rank in
Kroong-Sri Ayuddhya (Siam).
To the Governor of Singapore.
The English and the Siamese having always been
on terms of friendship, and Singapore being at the
present time under the authority of the English, in
consequence of which the merchants of Siam resort
to Singapore and those of Singapore to Siam, when
any circumstances of difficulty arises we ought mut-
ually to afford every assistance for their relief which
lies in our power, in order that the merchants may
trade freely and without prejudice to their affairs.
For this reason we are strict in observing the rules
of a friendly intercourse.
In the year Ohuat, Phia-Kraisi loaded goods
belonging to the King on two Topes, the Nokedah of
one of which being a Chinese named Toh, of the other
Oham-Ammun ! of the name of Chai being the super-
cargo of the first. They were directed to take the
topes with their cargoes to Saigon. Having arrived
there and unloaded, Phia-Kraisi was taken sick and
died suddenly. As soon as the two Nakodahs were
informed of the death of Phia-Kraisi, they laid a plan
to get possession of the two vessels, and all the money
which had been realised on account [of] the proceeds
of the sale of the goods. To this day they have never
returned to Siam. Nakodah Cham, we have learnt
gave his tope in charge to another Chinaman, who
took it to Samarang. The tope of Nakodah Toh, it
is reported, was about to be sold to a merchant at
Singapore, the Nakodah himself intending to return


to China. A C hina man of the name of Leng' in the
employ of Looang-apeipanit when to trade at Singa-
pore. He it is who has given the information of the
intended sale of the vessel by Nakodah Toll.
Should Leng prefer any complaint on this account
we request the Governor of Singapore will assist us by
settling the case in a proper manner. The tope has
been detained in the hands of one Ootia by Leng.
This information has been conveyed to us by a Chinese
of the name of Ling-ing, who has written us a letter
on the subject. We have in consequence ordered
Koon Nakti Wanit to take his passage to Singapore
in the vessel of Muttoo Khan, a Bombay merchant.
When Koon Nakti Wanit arrives at Singapore to
settle the case of the tope, we confidently hope the
Governor of Singapore will fulfil the part of a friend.
Our wish is that the Governor would cause the tope
with the Nakodah, crew and property to be delivered
into the hands of Koon Nakti Wanit to bring back to
Siam, as a pledge of a long and friendly alliance.
Written on Thursday the 14th day of the ninth
month in the year 1198 (corresponding with 12:
August 1829).
(Signed) Edward Presgrave
Translator.


Port Cornwallis the 10 October 1820.
To Captain Low
Superintendent of Province Wellesley.
Sir,
It is scarcely necessary to apprize you, that in
defiance of every remonstrance to the contrary the Lx
Rajah of Qaedah quitted this island yesterday, and has
taken up his residence at Tulloh Ayer Tavvar on the
opposite shore.
By this further act of folly and obstinacy the Ex
Rajah has forfeited the little remains of consideration
that was due to his misfortunes, and it will be obvious
to you, who are already so well acquainted with the
views and sentiments of Government upon the subject,
that increased vigilance in watching his acts should
now be more than ever resorted to.
The suspicions of the Siamese will naturally be
excited by this apparent approximation of an inveterate
enemy towards their frontier j and they will no doubt
magnify their apprehension in a degree not warranted
by actual circumstances. Still to allay them must be
our object, and as they will no doubt have their own
informants upon all that passes, the readiest way to
assist in effecting this will be to show by acts that the
measure has not the sanction of authority. With
this view you will prohibit the assemblage about the
residence of the Ex Rajah or elsewhere on his account
of any concourse of people beyond what has hitherto
been usual as attendants upon his person, and also
intimate to him without reserve, that any attempts on
his part to deviate from such directions can only be
effected at the risk of his personal liberty. He has
already been informed that in consequence of former
conduct he is considered and will be treated but as


any other British subject, and of this he may again be
reminded should he evince the slightest disposition to
pursue a contrary procedure.
You are authorized to entertain a secret intelli-
gence to assist you in the watch it now becomes so
necessary to maintain, and you will immediately com-
municate to me any circumstances of a suspicious
nature that may occur.
I am &c.
( Signed ) R. Ibbetson
Resident Councillor.
Port Cornwallis
'Hie 9 October 1829. '


Fort Cornwallis the 14 October 1829.
To the Honorable Robert Ibbetson Esquire,
Resident Councillor.
Sir,
1 have the honor to acknowledge the receipt ot
your letter of the 9th Instant relative to the Ex Rajah
of Quedah.
I request to state that every exertion will be
made within my power to conform to the instructions
therein conveyed, although from the very reduced and
scattered state of the Police, and the small number of
the military guard. I am apprehensive that should any
disturbance of magnitude ensue, which however, it is
not likely will happen, it would be difficult to quell
it promptly.
1 have no doubt that the Siamese will take or
pretend to take alarm at the Ex Rajah’s approaching
so near to their frontier, yet T do not believe that he
would be able, even if allowed, to collect many re-
tainers here, with the exception of a few debtors, as
he is not popular amongst those of his former subjects
who are settled in the province, and is besides appar-
ently too poor to bribe.
I have communicated to the Ex King those parts
of my instructions which I have been directed by you
to impress on his mind.
1 have &c.
(Signed) J, Low Captain
Supt. of Province Wellesley.
Province Wellesley
13th October 1829.


Fori Cornwallis the 26th October 1829.
To
The Honble. R. Ibbetson Esquire.
Resident Councillor.
Sir,
I have the honor to solicit instructions with re-
ference to the following subject.
Should the Ex Rajah-of Quedah attempt to cross
the Siamese or other boundary of the province, will
[ be permitted, to seize him or to stop him if prac-
ticable by means of the police and the few sepoys
stationed here.
1 Guard of 1 Havildar
1 Naick
12 Sepoys.
Six only of which can be spared for a few hours in
an emergency.
I have &c.
(Signed) J. Low
Superintendent, of Police,
Province Y, ellesley
26 October 1829.


To Captain .Low
Superintendent of Province Wellesley.
Sir,
I hasten to reply to your letter of thn date re-
garding the Ex Rajah of Quedah, and to convey to
you my desire that should he attempt to pass over to
the Territory of the Siamese, you will endeavour to
prevent him by every means at your disposal. Our
Government has engaged by Treaty with the King of
Siam “not to permit the former Governor of Quedah
or any of his followers to attack, disturb or injure in
any manner the territory of Quedah, or any other
Territory subject to Siam” which leaves the line of
policy to be pursued by us not to be mistaken. You
will intimate in time whether any increase to the
Military Guard already at your disposal will in your
opinion become necessary, of which you will only be
enabled to judge by events as they arise.
1 am &c.
(Signed) R. Ibbetsou
Resident Councillor.
Fort Cornwallis
the 2b October 1821)
Fort Cornwallis the 26 October 1829.


Translation of letter from the Chow Pya of Ligore
to the Honorable R. Fullerton, Governor of Prince of
Wales Island. Singapore and Malacca.
( After Compliments.)
The letter which our friend sent to Quedah in
which our friend expressed a desire to have the boun-
daries of the territories belonging to the India Com-
pany accurately defined, we received in safety on
Wednesday the sth of Kabilawal and perfectly under-
stood its contents. The boundaries of the ground
belonging to Quedah and the English from the com-
mencement have been defined in a Treaty made with
the great men of Quedah and deposited with the
English. A copy of this treaty we have ordered to
be made and sent to our friend in which the boun-
daries are defined. Should our friend have any
doubts respecting the authenticity of the copy, let
him seek for the Treaty deposited at Pulo Penang,
which he will perceive is the same as the one we have
sent. Whereas we have always been well inclined to
the English, and never charged them with any evil
intention in any of our letters, why has our friend sent
a letter enquiring about the boundaries of the ter-
ritories at which we are very much astonished.
Wherefore we have sent Koon Akorn with a
letter to our friend, in order that he may enquire in
a friendly maimer, what are our friend’s intentions
in doing this. Moreover in the year 1774 of the
Siamese, corresponding with the year 1828 of the
English, a treaty was made between the two nations
signed and sealed by the Right Honorable Lord Am-
herst, who governs Bengal, A Sterling Esquire, Right
Honorable Lord (Jombermere, the Honorable J. Herbert
Harrington Esqre., the Honorable W. B. Bayley
Fort Cornwallis the 29th October 1829.


Esquire and G. Swinton Esqre., and sealed with the
Company’s arms in which every thing relating to
this business has been inserted and agreed upon.
At that time also Captain H. Burney and Captain
McFarquhar brought the Treaty to us, which we
received and forwarded to His Royal Highness the
Emperor of Siam who ordered it to bo confirmed and
issued letters to all the Governors of the Siamese
countries to observe it as long as there was heaven
and earth.
This we make known to our friend. Written on
the sth of Rabilawal 1245.
A true translation
Malay Translator
Penang
26 October 1829.


Rajah of Li gore.
Translation of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore
to the Honorable R. Fullerton Esqre., Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
At the time Koon Aksofn was about to start for
Pulo Penang, some of my people who are living on
the sea shore towards the west, suddenly came and
informed me that the Rajah of Quedah had ordered
Panglima Putih to take a letter and collect people by
persuasion to make war on the Siamese in Quedah.
This man was seized by them, and the letter found in
his possession. Upon ordering my people to examine
it, they clearly made out the name of Ahmed Tajuddin
Umkarram Shah, which is certainly the chop of the
King of Quedah. This letter I send to my friend who
will be able to identify the chop and know the con-
tents. It is mentioned in the Treaty that the English
and Siamese shall be in amity with each other, as
long as there is a heaven and earth, and shall not give
any cause of contention to each other.
The Rajah of Quedah has raised a commotion, and
does not wish to keep the Treaty, so that the people of
Quedah are Continually disturbed, and cannot gain
their livelihood by buying and selling, contrary to
the Articles of the Treaty. We therefore request our
friend to persuade him to keep it.
A true translation
(Signed) H. Nairne.
Malay Translator
26 October 1829.
Penang.
Fort Cornwallis the 29th October 1829.


Translation of the intercepted letter sent by the
Rajah of Quedah.
This Proclamation we make known to Panglima
Pootee, and desire him to order all our friends at
Satul and Lungo, who intend going to Teluk Barat
to return here, as we are about to leave Pulo Penang
to reside at Pulo Langkawi, so that we may collect
our adherents, as we wish to try our fortune in fight-
ing with the Siamese; and take care they do not
neglect this order directing them to come.
Written on the 24th Ramathan
2Gth October 1829,
A true translation
(Signed) H. Nairne
Malay Translator.
Fort Cornwallis the 29 October 1829.


Letter from Mr. Ibbetson to the Rajah of Ligore.
I'Tiave received my friend’s letter dated 26th
ultimo, in reply to a former one from the Honorable
Robert Fullerton, regarding the boundary line between
our territory and that of Quedah. My friend has not
properly understood that letter or he would not have
been astonished at the request it contained.
There was no intention to charge the Siamese
with any evil intention towards the English, and my
friend will perceive in reading the Treaty again, copy of
which has been received, that the length aud breadth
only of the English territory is there mentioned, but
which has never been measured, and this makes it
difficult to decide whenever wicked people disturb the
peace of the Country whether that disturbance is upon
English or Siamese ground.
What the Honorable Robert Fullerton therefore
requested from his friend was merely that he would
depute Commissoners to make this measurement in
company with other Commissioners of the Government,
so that when a proper line was marked out there could
be no mistake hereafter. The North and South
boundaries are already defined by rivers and the West
by the sea. There remains therefore only the East to
be defined and if a natural boundary could be chosen
for that also, such as rivers or hills, it would save a
great deal of trouble and expense in erecting marks.
I have further explained to Koon Aksorn the wishes
of the Honorable Robert Fullerton upon this subject.
With regard to the Ex Rajah of Quedah writing
to his adherents and friends, my friend must be aware
how difficult it is to prevent the secret transmission of
letters. Were the Ex Rajah to attempt by open force
to disturb the peace of Quedah such would be repelled
Fort Cornwallis the 29tb October 1829.


by us with force, and my friend may rely that even his
letters to this purpose would not be permitted to pass
if we know of them. He shall be admonished of this
proof of his evil intentions.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson.
Resident Councillor.


Fort Cornwallis 6th November 1829.
To the Honble. R. Ibbetson Esquire
Resident Councillor
Prince of Wales Island,
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor in
Council to acknowledge the receipt of your Communi-
cation of the 15th instant rewarding copies of papers
recorded by you relative to the Ex King of Quedah,
and to the Coffree Pensioners from Bencoolen.
With regard to the former the Honorable the
Governor in council approves of the communication
made by you to Captain Low, and adverting to the
necessity there is for the prevention of any violation
of the Treaty with the Siamese, and to the necessity
there will be to keep a most strict surveillance over
the motions of the Ex King and his followers, recom-
mends that in the event of his endeavouring to stir
up any disturbance or attempting to leave the Com-
pany’s Districts, that you immediately station a strong
guard over his house and person.
The strictest vigilance of the police at Province
Wellesley will be required to watch and report to you
any suspicious circumstances, and the Honorable the
Governor irj council approves of the authority given
by you to Captain Low to employ the best and most
efficient means of obtaining secret intelligence.
In order to quiet the suspicions of the Siamese
Government which are not unlikely to be raised by
the removal of the Ex King so close to their frontiers,
the Honorable the Governor in Council directs that a
letter be addressed to the authorities of that state at
Quedah explanatory of the disapproval of this Govern-
ment of the step so injudiciously taken by the Ex


King of Quedah, and assuring them at the same time
that all precautions will be taken to prevent any
breach of the Treaty, and inviting intelligence from
those authorities should it come to their knowledge
that the Ex King is making any clandestine attempts
to subvert their authority or to raise a rebellion
amongst the subjects at Quedah.
******
I have &c.
(Signed) J. Pattullo
Secretary to Government.
Malacca
The 28 October 1829.


Fort William 30th April 1830.
To Geo. Swinton Esq.
Chief Secretary to Government
FORT WILLIAM.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honble. the Governor in
Council to transmit to you for the information of the
Right Honble. the Governor General in Council copies
of the accompanying correspondence with the Resi-
dent Councillor of Prince of Wales Island relating to
the Ex King of Quedah and to a request which it was
deemed necessary to make to the Siamese authorities
to fix the boundaries of the territories of the respective
Governments on the Peninsula.
2. The object of this request was not to raise
any doubts or demands on the part of our Govern-
ment. The number of bad characters who had lately
taken advantage of the uncertainty existing, and who
were in the frequent habit of coming down to plunder
and murder the peaceable inhabitants settled within
our districts, rendered it imperative to have some
definitive boundary settled, to enable Government to
adopt means for repressing the marauders and restor-
ing tranquillity to the country. This could not be
effected without the chance of collision with the Siam-
ese authorities, and under that consideration they
were requested to appoint Commissioners.
3. Doubts had also been raised in the Court of
Judicature in some disputes about lands, so as to the
extent of our territory on the Quedah shore, which
made it the more requisite to have the boundary
fixed,
4. These reasons were fully stated in the letter


from the Rouble, the Governor to the Siamese autho-
rities, and have subsequently been explained to the
Agent of the Rajah of Ligore, which will it is
hoped allay any suspicions on the part of the Siam-
ese Government.
5. The Rouble, the Governor in Council regrets
extremely that notwithstanding every endeavour to
keep the Ex Rajah of Quedah from intercourse with
his late subjects there, and the repeated warnings
which have been given him, that he has nevertheless
taken the measures he has for removing himself and
his family to the opposite shore.
6. Every possible precaution will be used to
prevent his causing a breach of the Treat) 7 with the
Siamese Government. From a reference to the Resi-
dent Councillor’s correspondence it will be perceived
that no bad consequences are likely to result from his
removal to Province Wellesley, but it is evident that
while the Ex Rajah continues to reside within the
territories of Prince of Wales Island the Siamese
Authorities will always view his proximity to Quedah
with much suspicion, and the acts of our Government
with much distrust.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) J. Pattullo
Secretary to Government
Malacca the 28d November 1829.


Fort Cornwallis the 30th January 1830.
To John Pattullo Esquire
Secretary to Government
Fort Cornwallis.
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the Honorable the Governor in Council, that the
Panghulu Mukun of Pantai Oracora in the Quala
Muda district has this moment stated to me that a
party of Sixty Armed Siamese were seen by him yes-
terday evening in the jungle close on the boundary,
and that their force is reported to amount to 300 men.
As the spot they are thus reported to occupy is
on the south side of the Muda River where it has
never been usual for others than trading Siamese to
come, I request to be favored with instructions regard-
ing them.
I have dispatched the constable of Muda to de-
mand of Khoon Ban Pot, the Siamese Commander of
the party, his object for occupying his present posi-
tion, and will have the honor to forward the reply
which he may give without delay.
The people within the frontier are much alarmed,
but I am inclined to believe that the party has only
been sent to watch the Ex-King of Quedah.
The Quedah Chief ought in such case to have
communicated his intentions.
I have &c.
( Signed ) James Low
Supt. of Province Wellesley.
Province Wellesley
The 30th December 1829.


To
The Superintendent of Province Wellesley
Sir,
The Honorable the Governor in Council concurs
with you in opinion that the Siamese party seen on
this frontier are sent there for the purpose of watch-
ing the movements of the Ex King, whose extraordin-
ary conduct has of late been such as to give to the
Siamese authorities just cause of alarm. The Governor
in Coixncil approves the notification made to the head
of the Siamese party and can only direct that you will
add to it an injunction against their passing the fron-
tier. It may also be advisable to admonish the Ex
King on the dangerous position in which he has placed
himself and recommend his returning to the Island
forthwith.
I am &c.
(Signed) J. Pattullo
Secry. to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
Blst December {1829^
Fort Cornwallis the 30th January 1830.


To
John Pattullo Esquire
Secretary to Government
Fort Cornwallis.
Sir,
I have the honor to report that the Siamese
Armed Party alluded to in my last letter has suddenly
removed further within the Siamese territory and that
1 have sent a ( Siamese ) letter to warn the Chief not
to trespass on the British territory.
Adverting to the movements of this party, to the
circumstance of another having assembled at the Mar-
boo River, and to the report just received that a third
is preparing rafts up the Muda River for a descent,
and also to the great alarm which has thus been
created amongst the population, I solicit that I may
be favored with the instructions of the Honble. the
Governor in Council as to what course I am to pursue
in the event of any armed Siamese or other armed men
in their service passing the boundary of the Province,
and not departing when warned so to do.
I have &c.
(Signed) James Low
Snpt. of Province Wellesley.
Province Wellesley
Ist January 1830
Fort Cornwallis the 30th January 1830.


To Captain Low,
Superintendent of Province Wellesley.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the Governor in
Council to acknowledge receipt of your letter of Ist
instant in consequence of your previous communica-
tions of the 30th and 31st ultimo. A party of thirty
sepoys have been sent over, which will be immediate-
ly increased to the strength of a Company.
No armed party of Siamese are to be permitted to
cross the boundary, and in order to prevent alarm
whereby our inhabitants may be induced to quit their
habitations it will be advisable to detach small parties
to cover the frontier.
As it is evident that the Hx King of Quedah s
residence in the province is the originating cause of
all this commotion, he must be desired to return
forthwith to this island as his remaining where he is
will no doubt be urged as the grounds of these move-
ments of the Siamese, whereby so much alarm and
inconvenience is likely to result.
1 am &c.
(Signed) J. Pattullo
Secry. to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
The 2 January 1830.
Fort Cornwallis the 30th January 1830.


To John Pattullo Esquire,
Secretary to Government.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 2d Instant, and to report for the
information of the Honox*able the Governor in Council
that the several instructions it contains have been
complied with.
I beg to enclose a copy of my letter to the Chief
of the Siamese party which appeared on the frontier;
also a Copy of my letter to the Ex Rajah of Quedah
with a translation of his reply.
1 considered this reply so unsatisfactory that I
rode early yesterday morning to his house ( a Malayan
cottage ) and had an interview with him in presence
of witnesses.
I strongly remonstrated with him on the extreme
impropriety of his conduct in coming over to this coast,
a hasty step which, before he took it I had so
strenuously advised him not to take, and which he
must have well known to be directly contrary to the
wishes of the Government and to his own true interests.
I pointed out to him that by remaining in Province
Wellesley he is inducing the Siamese to collect their
troops near our fxxmtier under the supposition that he
means to attack Quedah, and that he has thus already
x'aised a commotion which xnay end in his own ruin,
and that whatever his private intentions are, his pre-
sence here caxi only tend to create alarm amongst the
Ryots of the Province and to excite the Siamese to
further acts of, perhaps, a more serious nature. He
was informed that it is in some degree inconsistent
with the amicable relations now subsisting betwixt the
Fox’t CoX'lXWalhs the 30th January 1830.


British and the Siamese that he should settle so close to
the Quedah boundary, and that his persisting to remain
here now cannot fail to prove displeasing to the Right
Idonble. the Governor General, whose good opinion he
seems so desirous of. I showed to him that his present
residence is one of great danger, since any party of
desperate men who might be hired by his enemies
hould easily land on the beach in the night and murder
or carry off him and his family without the chance of
his being assisted, as the few police peons at the
nearest Thannah would be unable to cope with a
determined band : that the party of sepoys which his
conduct has imposed on the Government the trouble ot
sending over, is intended to protect the Ryots, not him,
and that he should not delay a moment in returning to
Penang for good, or at the least for a while and until
the sentiments of the Governor General might be made
known to him.
The Ex Rajah replied—“ There can be no restric-
tion to my going where 1 please. The Governor
General did not forbid my coming here. ( But the Ex
Rajah is quite aware that such an extraordinary step
could never have been contemplated by his Lordship ).
I have chosen this coast for my residence because
living is cheap, and 1 can live quietly. I have no in-
tention to molest the Siamese in any way. lam now
waiting the reply of the Governor General to my
Representation of the hardships I have suffered and as
for ray personal safety it will be better for me to die
by the hands of the Siamese who have usurped my
rights than to live in poverty and neglect in town or
on Penang.”
“ I am however ready to return immediately to
Penang if the Government may be pleased to pay my
debts and to restore to me my former allowance, other-
wise I will not remove. If I should be driven out,
that I cannot help.”


With the knowledge I have of the Rajah’s dis-
position I am fully persuaded that he will adhere to his
resolution.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) James Low Captain
Supt. of Police P. W.
Province Wellesley
4 January 1830


Translation of a Letter from Captain Low to the
Commander of the Siamese I’arty beyond the trontiei
of Province Wellesley.
Captain Low desires to inform the Commander of
the Party of Armed Siamese which has come close to
the boundary beyond Pantar Amora, that his appear-
ance there has excited alarm amongst the Ryots close
to that frontier, because it has not been customary for
any party of armed Siamese to approach in that
direction.
Captain Low warns therefore the Commander
of the party or of any other party of Siamese, neither
to cross the British frontier with their men nor to
allow a single armed man to cross it.
Dated the Bth day of Yi month of the year
Chula-Eka Sok or Ist January I*3o.
(Signed) James Low
Supt. of Police
Province Wellesley,
'tr.
True Translation
James Low Captain
Supt, of Police.
fort Cornwallis the 30 January 1830.


(Translation.)
Letters of the same tenor addressed by Captain
Low to the Ex Rajah of Quedah
My friend has come to reside at Tulloh Ayer
Tawar, and the Siamese having been apprized of the
circumstance have considered it of great importance
as affecting them, and have taken measures according-
ly, the result of which is uncertain.
My friend therefore had better now return to
Penang'. Ist January- 1830.
(Signed) James Low.
Supt. of Police P. W.
A true Translation
James Low Capt.
Supt. of’ Police.
Fort Cornwallis the 30 January 1830.


Translation of a letter from the Ex Rajah of
Quedah to Captain Low.
I have received my friend’s letter from the
Panghulu of Tulloh Ayer Tawar, which I perfectly
understand and with which lam gratified. lam very
much distressed to find that my friend believes that the
Siamese have designs on my account.
Now my friend plainly informs me and desires
that I should return to Penang. When I proposed
coming to this shore I acquainted both Mr. Ibbetson
and Mr. Nairne and my friend with my intention.
However desirous 1 am to stay on the island and to
await a reply from the Governor General, } T et I cannot
do so as I have no money and am moreover much in
debt and under difficulties. My friend and every one
in Penang must know that at Tulloh Ayer Tawar'
where I am residing with my people, and which is under
my friend's management, things are cheap and expenses
are small, almost nothing. My friend and every other
person must be aware of the operations of the Siamese
up to the present time, both respecting Pulo Penang and
this Coast, which are under the Company. lam sure
in my mind that no other people will dare to molest
the territory of the Company. While here I trust in
my friend. lam now awaiting a reply from the Gov-
ernor General of Bengal to the last representation I
had to make, and as a promise was made to me that
a Reply would be sent down soon, I am glad that my
friend has desired me to return to Penang. Therefore
I request ray friend’s assistance to settle this matter
and to arrange for the settlement of my accounts and
for the renewal of my former allowance. If such be
effected I will return to Penang and live as before,
and await the reply from the Governor General.
Fort Cornwallis the 30th January 1830.


It is only on account of the distress to which I
have been put tor want of money that I am now
living here. My friend and all people are aware of
the situation in which I am placed, and other circum-
stances regarding me, I have trusted to the power of
the King of England during all the period that I have
lived under the Government of Penang. Dated the
6th day of Rujub—lst Januar) T 1830.
(A true translation)
(Signed) James Low Captain
Supfc. of Province P, W.


To
Captain Low
Superintendent of Province Wellesley.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honble the Governor in
Council to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 4*
instant intimating you have fulfilled the various in-
structions conveyed in my several letters to your
address, and further submitting the result of an un-
successful Communication you had with the Ex Rajah
of Quedah relative to his immediate return to this
island.
In reply I am directed to desire you will inform
the Ex Raiah that the terms on which he will receive
any pecuniary assistance from Government have al-
ready been fully explained to him —Namely, that he
proceeds and resides at Malacca. That in respect to
the dangerous situation he has now j laced himself
in he has been fairly warned and must abide the
consequences. Government will not take any further
interest in what concerns him or his personal security,
and if he persists in his present conduct must cease
to consider him in any other light than a common
individual subject to all the laws of the place where
he resides.
I am &c.
( Signed ) J. Pattullo
Secy, to Government.
Fort Cornwallis
the 5 January 1830.
Fort Cornwallis the 30th January 1830.


Fort William 30th April 1830.
Memorandum by Major Burney on the Ex King
of Quedah.
With respect to the poor King of Quedah few per-
sons will give themselves the trouble to read through
the voluminous mass of papers from which alone a
right knowledge can be acquired of the history of our
connexion with the State of Quedah, and of the title of
the Ex King to our interference on his behalf. It is
very easy from a little superficial acquaintance with
the subject to take up a popular view of his case, and
to dilate on the cruelty and injustice of deserting an
ally, to whom the British faith was pledged etc. etc.
But I hold that the following facts have been clearly
substantiated.
1. From the earliest times according to Malayan
historians themselves a great portion of the Malayan
Peninsula has been tributary to Siam, in the same
manner as our Bible shows us it has always been the
practice in Asia for great States to bind neighbouring
Chiefs to send gifts, give assistance in wars, and do
such other things as the strong may require from
the weak.
2. All the first European travellers and voyagers
who visited the Malayan Peninsula and Siam found
most of the 'Malay States, and among them Quedah,
subject to Siam, and all the Governors of Penang
between Mr. Light and Mr. Fullerton considered and
treated Quedah as a State dependent on Siam.
3. There was no Treaty made in the first ins-
ance with Quedah, but the father of the Ex King, the
reigning Monarch in 1786, offered Penang to the
Bengal Government upon certain conditions two of
which proposed to bind the British Government to
protect Quedah from all enemies.


4, The real motive, as reported by Mr. Light
himself, of the old King then seeking our alliance, was
to defend himself against the British* Government at
Malacca, which had just made Treaties with the neigh-
bouring Malay States of Perak and Salengore, had
established a factory up the Perak River, and had
deputed a Mission to Quedah.
5. Sir John Macpherson, then Governor General
of Bengal, refused to accede to the conditions above
mentioned because he conceived them likely to involve
the British Government in disputes with both the
Burmese and Siamese, and he sent Captain Light back
with such refusal to the old King, who, notwithstand-
ing that the Bengal Government declined to bind
itself to more than stationing an armed vessel to guard
Penang and coast adjacent, was persuaded to cede
Penang and allow Captain Light to settle upon it.
6. Shortly after the cession the King of Siam
gave a proof that he considered Penang as subject to
him, for he sent orders to Captain Light to prepare
boats etc. to aid Siam in an attack upon the Burmese;
and the old King of Quedah himself, when he quar-
relled with Captain Light, applied to the King of Siam
to drive the English out of Penang.
7. The quarrel arose out of this correspondence.
The Governor General had observed in reply to the 2d
of the King of Quedah’s conditions of being allowed
30,000 Spanish Dollars every year, that “ the East
India Company would take care that the King of
Quedah should not be a sufferer by an English Settle-
ment being formed at Penang,” yet Mr. Light was not
authorized to make any pecuniary remuneration to His
Highness. In the year 1791, after a short war with
Quedah, the first regular Treaty was made, but in that
Treaty we did not bind ourselves to defend that State in
any manner, and only agreed to pay His Highness 6,000
dollars every year upon condition that he permitted
a free export of provisions from Quedah to Penang.


8. In 1802, Sir George Leith made another
Treaty with Quedah, obtaining a cession of a tract of
territory on the sea coast, and consenting on our
part to increase our annual stipend from 6 to 10,000
dollars, upon the same conditions as before, a free
export of provisions from Quedah to Penang. In this
Treaty also no engagement was made for the British
Government to defend Quedah.
9. The Bengal Government from the earliest
down to the latest date of our connexion with Quedah,
pointedly desired to avoid all engagements or pro-
ceedings that might involve us in disputes with
the Siamese, and deprecated all idea of encouraging
the King of Quedah to throw off their dependence
on Siam.
10. Whatever doubts may arise as to the right
of the old King of Quedah to cede Penang and Pro-
vince Wellesley without the previous permission of
the King of Siam, an uninterrupted occupation on
our part of so many years, precluded the Siamese
Ministers from questioning our right, and they made
no difficulty therefore in recognising Penang and Pro-
vince Wellesley as British Possessions in the late
Treaty with Siam.
11. Upon the death of the King of Quedah (the
father of the present King) an uncle assumed the
Sovereignty, to remove whom and recover the throne
the present 'King went up to Bangkok, performed
homage before His Majesty of Siam, received an
honorary title from him, and an order to the uncle
to resign the throne to the nephew ; with which order
the present King of Quedah returned and by which
he became King of Quedah.
12. The present King of Quedah some years
after he has himself visited Siam sent up his eldest
son and prime minister to do homage before the King


ofS iam. and again acknowledged Quedah to be de-
pendent on Siam.
13. But the King misgoverned his country, dis-
gusted Ids own Chief's and dissatisfied those who had
placed him on the throne. He monopolized all the
trade of the country, gave a preference in his councils
to a cunning foreigner, a native of the coast of Coro-
mandel, and secluded himself with his women from his
subjects, who knew him only by the severity of his
punishments. Even his own brothers repeatedly re-
volted against him, and some of them went to Siam
and laid complaints against him, to answer which the
King of Siam summoned him in vain, five or six times
to appear at Bangkok.
14. The King of Quedah further, to the
positive stipulations of his Treaty with the British
Government, levied a very heavy duty upon the ex-
portation of grain from his country to Penang.
15. At the time the present King received the
throne of Quedah from Siam, he entered into certain
conditions with the Siamese, who charged him with not
having fulfilled them, and for this reason as well as for
his alleged misgovernment, the King of Siam sent a
force to Quedah in 1821 to seize the King and take
him up to Bangkok, but His Highness fled with his
women and treasure the moment he heard of the arriv-
al of a part only of the Siamese force.
16. Before Governor Phillips agreed to receive
the fugitive King at Penang he was required to
promise that he would remain in quiet at that Settle-
ment, and not undertake any hostile measures against
the Siamese from thence. But the King never abided
by this agreement, for he opened a secret correspon-
dence with the Burmese Government at Tavoy, and
the King of Ava instigated repeatedly his subjects to
revolt against the Siamese, and even deputed his own


friends and followers from Penang to go and attack
the Siamese of Quedah.
17. When Mr. Orawfurd proceeded as Envoy to
Siam, “ he admitted at once in his negotiations with
the Siamese Ministers the dependence of Quedah on
Siam, stating that the point had been fully enquired
into the most noble the Governor General of India,”
and been conceded without hesitation.
18. Five years after when Major Burney was
deputed as envoy to Siam, he was not authorized to
offer to the Siamese Court the equivalent which the
Penang Government recommended to be offered, as the
only means of effecting the restoration of Quedah to
the King ( the cession of a part of the Tenasserim
Coast ). He found that the resentment and passions
of the Siamese were violently excited against the Ex
King for his conduct for fomenting insurrections
amongst the people of Quedah, and opening a corres-
dence with Ava contrary to his engagement with
Governor Phillips, and he became convinced that the
King of Quedah had no chance, either by his own
means, or by means of any amicable negotiation with
Siam on our part, of ever recovering his throne.
19. Major Burney during his Mission became
convinced also, that there was no other way of restor-
big the King -to his dominions, but by our sending a
military force overland, and that if such a proceeding
were adopted, admitting for the sake of argument that
the views of the Home Authorities and the whole
course of our policy from our earliest connexion with
Quedah would have justified such a proceeding, it
would have been impossible to say how much further
we might have been drawn on. The King of Quedah
would have required the continued presence of our
military force to have enabled him to keep his seat.
His dominions are far too poor to support the expense
of any British force. They are full of jungle and hill,


&hd in contact with jealous and ill governed petty
Siamese States.
20. Before Major Burney proceeded to Siam,
Governor Fullerton declared his conviction that no
good understanding could be maintained between
Penang and Siam, as long as the King of Quedah
remained at Penang, and that the question, as regarded
his festolation ought to be settled one way or other as
soon as possible.
21. Acting upon the above conviction, and bear-
ing mind that the King of Quedah had repeatedly
expressed a wish to leave Penang, Major Burney*
when he relinquished the cause of the King of Quedah
in his negotiations at Bangkok, was induced to con-
sent conditionally, that the King of Quedah should not
remain at Penang, but that the British Government
should provide for him in some other territory. The
Siamese on their part, consented to release the wives*
sisters, children, and immediate friends of the King of
Quedah (70 persons) and provided the King of Quedah
were removed from Penang, to abolish the heavy ex-
port duty which they were levying upon grain at
Quedah.
22. The Siamese, immediately after the Treaty
was ratified by the Governor General, released and
sent to Penang the 70 persons above alluded to, and
abolished the export duty, hut the King of Quedah
refused to quit Penang, although it was offered to him,
that if he would proceed to Malacca or any other
British territory, he should be allowed a monthly pen-
sion of 1,000 Drs., being double the amount of the
stipend which which he had been receiving at Penang,
since the date of his finding an asylum there.
23. Major Burney never supposed that force would
be used to remove the King from Penang and he Vvas
well aware that the stipulation in the Treaty regarding
the King would require His Majesty’s concurrence.


But to provide for the King’s refusal, Major Burney
made the stipulacion conditional, giving the Siamese
the power ot continuing to levy the export duty upon
grain, it the King declined to become a party to the
Treaty, which however was useful to His Highness in
one way. It effected the release of 70 of his relations
and immediate adherents about whose captivity he had
been, for five years before, suffering great uneasiness,
24, The British Government had an undoubted
right to prohibit and prevent the Ex King of Quedah
from disturbing the peace subsisting between it and
Siam, and admitting that the King has a right to a
provision from us, we have on the other hand a right,
and indeed it is our bounden duty according to the
Law of nations, to take care that he shall not, from
under the shelter and protection which we ensure to
him at Penang, commit acts of hostility against a
power with which we are at peace. The stipulation in
the Siamese Treaty, engaging the British Government
not to permit the King of Quedah or his followers to
attack or disturb the Siamese, was well understood by
the Siamese Ministers and Major Burney to apply only
to our not aiding the King, or permitting him from
under our protection to commit acts of hostility. The
Siamese Ministers ridiculed the idea of the King being
able to do anything without our aid.
The King of Quedah is not, and never was, an
independent Prince. He was never so acknowledged
by the British Government, which on the contrary, on
occasion of intercourse with Siam, acknowledged her
supremacy over Quedah. The Ex King of Quedah
will not, and indeed cannot, remain quiet at Penang,
so near the place of his former rule, He has taken
every opportunity of molesting and intriguing against
the Siamese and all his attempts have only served to
to bring ruin and desolation upon his followers, to
excite the ill will of the Siamese against us, and to
interrupt peace and commerce between Penang and


the Siamese States in its neighbourhood. The King
of Quedah has no chance unless aided by the British
Government in recovering his throne, and as long as he
continues to reside at Penang, the Penang Government
itself admits, no good understanding can be established
between the Siamese and ourselves.
Major Burney" ii still of opinion that if suitable
means had been used by the Penang Government in
1827, the King of Quedah might have been induced
to remove from Penang. But he is not disposed to
look at the Treaty between the King and ourselves
with the eye of a Lawyer, and to argue, that the sum
10,000 dollars per annum, which he had agreed to pay
the King of Quedah was on condition that he should
fulfil certain things on his part, and that as he is now
unable to fulfil them our Treaty with him becomes
null and void.
The King being in distress, it better suits the
character and dignity of the British Government to
acknowledge his claims upon its justice, and to con-
tinue the payment of a stipend to him.
But let one more trial be made, and not through
the Government of Penang, but through some private
individual, to persuade the King to remove from Pro-
vince Wellesle} 7 to Malacca or and other British ter-
ritory, and offer him even 2000 drs, a month if he will
consent to such an arrangement. If he still persist in
refusing, pay him as before, his stipend of 10,000
dollars per annum, but fairly inform him that if he or
his followers molest the Siamese from under our
protection, we shall be under the necessity of removing
him forcibly from Penang, and of delivering up to the
Siamese such of his followers as go over to Quedah and.
commit hostilities against the Siamese. If the King
of Quedah prefers remaining at Penang, we must ap-
prize the Siamese of the same, and request them to
re-establish the export duty upon grain at Quedah,


agreeably to the stipulation in the Treaty which pro-
vides for such a contingency.
It is quite characteristic of a Malay to refuse to
hear reason “ upon compulsion ”, and to undergo any
sufferings rather than swerve from a fit of obstinacy.
But the poor King of Quedah has now put himself into
the hands of a lawyer of no great fame, Mr. Trebeck,
who lias composed for him the address presented to
the Governor General which, it is needless to add, is
full of untruths and inaccuracies.
( Signed ) H. Burney
Calcutta 9th January 1830.


Fort Cornwallis the 30th January 1830.
READ a letter from Rajah Mooda of Ligore, re-
siding at Quedah, forwarding an intercepted letter,
written by the Ex Rajah of Quedah, for the purpose
of instigating the inhabitants Quedah to join him
in offensive measures against the Siamese autho-
rities.
RESOLVED that the Superintendent of Province
Wellesley be furnished with a copy of the above letter,
and be desired to demand from the Ex Rajah of Quedah
whether such letter was written by him, and take care
to inform him that he will, by a repetition of such
conduct subject himself to be placed under a Military
Guai’d.
The BOARD further resolve that the following
Proclamation relative to the Ex Rajah shall be publish-
ed warning all persons in Province Wellesley from
joining with him against the Siamese, also that the
following letter be written to the Rajah Mooda, in-
closing copy of the Proclamation.


PROCLAMATION.
The Honorable the Governor in Council is pleased
to proclaim and publish for general information the
following circumstances connected with the Ex Rajah
of Quedah,
The Ex Rajah has gone to Jive in Province Wel-
lesley contrary to the express wish of the Honorable
the Governor in Council and continues to reside there
in defiance of every remonstrance of this Government.
The Siamese have supposed that the peace of the
Quedah country is endangered by the [ ? proximity ]
of the Ex Rajah to that territory and the native
population of Province Wellesley has become alarmed.
The Honorable the Governor in Council therefore with
the view of preventing the Raja of Quedah from acting
so as to molest the Siamese or disturb Province
Wellesley has deemed it proper to station a detach-
ment of Troops near the frontier, and to interdict the
Ex Rajah from attempting to influence any of the
inhabitants to make common cause with him.
Further it has been reported to the Honorable the
Governor in Council that the Ex Rajah has lately
written letters to some of, his adherents in Quedah
purporting that he has been promised the aid of the
British Government for the purpose of regaining his
authority in that country. It is proper therefore that
all the Malaj’an inhabitants of Quedah and Province
Wellesley should know that these assertions of the
Ex Rajah are totally false and only invented by him to
create mischief and ]' blank ] the English and
Siamese. Let the people of Province Wellesley beware
therefore of lending their aid to the Ex Raja in any
measure relating to the Quedah territory.
By Order
( Signed ) J. Pattullo
Secry. to Government.
1 February 1830.


Fort Cornwallis the 13th February 1830.
To Captain Low
Supt. of Province Wellesley,
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter of 2d Instant forwarding a suggestion for
settling definitely the boundary of Province Wellesley,
The Honorable tfce Governor in Council is of
opinion that Tuanku Solyman as proposed by you may
be used as an instrument for settling the boundary,
being the frontier chief, but care must be taken not to
excite the blame of the Siamese authorities at Quedah,
who will have to confirm the line settled. The attempt
therefore may be made under the present manifest
inconvenience from an indeterminate boundary al-
though some doubts of success may be entertained, but
the contemplated payment of money or release from
debt had better be kept out of sight for the present.
I am &c.
( Signed ) J. Pattullo
Secry. to Govt.
Fort Cornwallis
the 5 February 1830


To.
John Pattullo Esquire
Secretary to Government
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 2i Instant and to report for the in-
formation of the Honorable the Governor in Council
that in compliance with the instructions it contains I
this morning visited the Ex Rajah of Quedah and ex-
plained to him its contents in presence of witnesses.
The counterpart of the Malayan letter referred to was
then read over to him.
The Ex Rajah expressed himself to the following
effect—“l neither wrote that letter nor directed that
it or any such should be written. My enemies the
Siamese have fabricated it. Is it probable that I who
am waiting for the reply of the Governor General
should act so imprudently? The Siamese may perhaps
have forged my seal as the man who made it is in their
service, but the handwriting of the letter will be a
proof that it is not mine. I have only one person who
Writes for rne._ I request to be favoured with a sight
of the reported original, and in the meantime to he
ullowed to take a copy of tins one which has now been
read overT
I complied with the latter request and at the
same time strenuously advised the Ex Rajah to return
to Penang as the only course he could pursue if really
desirous of recommending himself to the favorable
notice of the Governor General. I regret however
to observe that his determination to stay here until
Fort Cornwallis the 13 February 1830.


he receives the expected reply alluded to remains
unshaken.
I have &c.
(Signed) James Low
Snpt. of Police Prov. Wellesley,
Province Wellesley
3 February 1830.


Fort Cornwallis the 29th April 1830,
Report on the Trade of the 3 Settlements, Prince
of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca.
TRADE OF PRINCE OF WALES ISLAND.
External, The trade of Prince of Wales Island
is carried on with the following places as will appear
in the statements, vizt. Calcutta, Madras, Bombay,
England. China, Java, Ceylon, Siam, Coast of Tenas-
serim, Acheen, Dehli, Quedah, and a few petty native
ports,
******
SIAM, Imports') The total Imports from Siam in Goods
from. j amounted to Sicca Rupees 216,788
of which the following are the principal articles.
Beche de Mer 6,120
Birds’ Nests 13,080
Oil 1,843
Paddy 2,880
Pepper 4,810
India Piece Goods 4,800
Rice 4,800
Sugar 5,200
Tin 38,250
Tobacco 129,500
China Sundries 1,000
Siam Do 2,700 with a
few minor articles of Specie. These were imported in
Dollars to the amount of Sa. Rupees 6,315.
SIAM, Exports The Exports amounted to 96,093
to. J in goods of which the following
were the principal articles.
Betel Nut 3,523
Opium 26,950
India Piece Goods 57,600
China Tobacco 7,360 with a
few petty articles.


The imports being as above Sicca Rupees 2,16,788.
The exports 96,093.
The Excess of Imports is 1,20,695.
SINGAPORE TRADE.
The trade of Singapore is carried on with the fol-
lowing places, England . . . Java, Rhio, Siam.
******
SIAM, Imports I The amount of imports is Sicca
from. J Rupees 7,71,057, of which the
principal articles are—
Brandy and Spirits 1,894
Earthenware 6,746
Iron Ware and Mongery 14,741
Ivory ... 4,946
Joss, Paper and Sticks 2,505
Nankeens 22,355
Oil 21,298
Pepper 3,641
Piece Goods Europe 8,420
Piece Goods India 4,536
Rice 79,095
Salt 42,967
Sticklac 74,748
Sugar 353,067
Sugar Candy 1,365
Tin 19,323
Tobacco 8,493
Wood Sapan 72,633
Woollens 3,262
Sundries India .\ 22,687
exclusive of small articles amounting nearly to Sicca
Rs. 2,380.
BIAM, Exports \ The Amount of Exports is Sicca
to. J Rupees 603,246 of which the prin-
cipal articles are —


Bees Wax 5,633
Camphor Malay 3,725
Copper Sheathing 3,447
Earthen Ware 3,578
Glass Ware 13,081
Gold Dust .. 9,767
Opium 114,201
Pepper , ... ... 1,263
Piece Goods Europe 181,729
~ „ India ... j.. ... 186,274
Rattans 22,160
Raw' Silk ... 2,904
Spelter 2,105
Sago ... ... 1,317*
Woollens 8,756
Sundries Europe 26,170
~ India ... ... 13,708
A Comparison of the trade of Siam shews an
excess of Imports of nearly Sicca Rupees 1,67,811.
MALACCA TRADE.
******
The trade of Malacca is carried on with the fol-
lowing places, Calcutta . . . Ceylon, Siam . .
******
SIAM. The only trade with Siam consists of
the following Import of Articles.
Oil 11,036
Paddy ... 2,725
Rice 76,685
Salt 4 ... 25,680
Sticlac 2,460
Sugar ... 11,975
Tobacco . 1,500
Siam Sundries 8,500
exclusive of small articles amounting to about 380
Rupees,


Fort Cornwallis the 23 June 1830.
To John Pattullo Esquire
Secretaiy to Government
Prince of Wales Island
Sir,
Your Dispatch of the 23 November 1829*, sub-
mitting copies of correspondence with the Resident
Councillor of Prince of Wales Island relating to the
Ex King of Quedah, and to an application which it
had been deemed necessary to make to the Siamese
Authorities to fix the boundaries of the territories of
the respective Governments in the main, has been
under the consideration of the Right Honorable the
Governor General in Council, in connection with seve-
ral letters addressed to His Lordship by the Ex
Rajah, and I am now directed to state to you as
follows.
2. It appear.? hy your Dispatch that the Ex
Rajah his passed over Iron Prince of Wales Island to
Province Wellesley, and endeavoured to renew an
intercourse with his late subjects, thereby pursuing
a course tending to make the Siamese regard the acts
of our Government with distrust.
3. We have an undoubted right to prohibit the
Ex King from disturbing the subsisting harmony be-
tween us and Siam, and we are bound by Treaty not
to permit the former Ruler of Quedah or any of his
followers to attack, disturb or injure any territory
subject to Siam, omitting all agreement from which
an inference might be drawn, that the Ex King of
Quedah being no longer in a condition to fulfil certain
things on his part, our engagements with him are
at an end,and his right to protection and the enjoy-
ment of stipulated stipend void, the Governor General
in Council is disposed to think, that it better suits


the character and dignity of the British Government
to acknowledge the claims of the distressed and fallen
Prince to commiseration and relief, in return for the
benefits Conferred by his predecessors and himself
when in prosperity^
4. Under this impression the Governor General
in Council is pleased to overlook the past impropriety
of conduct on the part of the Ex Rajah which led
to the resumption of subsistence allowance, as well
as his late proceedings in availing himself of his
propinquity to his late dominions, to open a corres-
pondence with his adherents in the Quedah territory
hostile to the Siamese, and to resolve, that another
attempt shall be made to induce him to conform to the
wish of the British Government that he should retire
to Malacca or some other place more remote from
Quedah than Prince of Wales Island.
5. It being understood that Captain Low is held
in esteem by the Ex Rajah and possesses some in-
fluence over him, that officer or 4 some one else at
Penang, to whose advise the Rajah may be disposed
to attend should be employed to point out to him
in a friendly manner his real position and true inter-
ests and be authorized to promise as a consequence
of his embracing the proposal to remove from Penang
to Malacca, or any place distant from Quedah, that all
arrears of his late stipend of Six thousand Dollars per
annum shall be discharged, a free passage be provided
for himself and his family and the full stipend of ten
thousand dollars pel 4 annum be settled on him from
the date of his fixing his residence at the place mut-
ually agreed om
6. But if the Ex Rajah pertinaciously persist in
adherence to his own views he must be immediatelv
removed from Province Wellesley to Prince of Wales
Island, and be permitted there to enjoy his subsistence
allowance of 6000 Dollars per annum, of which the


repayment may be reckoned to commence from the Ist
of January last. He must at the same time be distinc-
tly apprized in writing, that if he and his followers
persist in keeping up a clandestine intercourse or
correspondence with persons in Quedah, and molest
the Siamese from under onr protection we shall be
under the painful necessity of forcibly removing him
from Penang,-and of delivering up to the Siamese such
of his followers or adherents as may go over to
Quedah, or attempt in any manner to disturb or injure
the territories subject to Siam.
7. If the Ex Rajah perseveres in his intention of
residing at Penang the Honorable the Governor in
Council is requested to apprize the Siamese of the
refusal of the Ex Rajah to retire from thence, and to
inform them they are at liberty to reestablish the
export duty upon Grain, agreeably to the terras of
the Treaty.
8. Relatively to the question of the Eastern
boundary of Province Wellesley, I am directed to re-
mark, that amongst the correspondence submitted with
your dispatch the Governor General in Council does
not find a copy of the Honorable the Governor’s letter
to the Rajah of Ligore, requesting him to appoint
Commissioners for the purpose of ascertaining it. In
the Treaty of 1802 with the King of Quedah, it was
stipulated that a tract of territory on the sea coast
between two rivers to the North and South, and
measuring inland to the East from the sea side sixty
orlongs should be ceded to the Honorable Company, the
Eastern boundary was never, it seems, traced, or any
one appointed to undertake the duty. Ihdeed until late
years, the boundary in that directions is understood to’
have been mere jungle and waste, and scarcely worth
marking off. Recently increasing population has now
rendered it desirable to have the boundary defined, but
it is believed that at Penang there is a Map of Province
Wellesley executed by a Mr Fletcher, a surveyor, in


which the boundary line appears. If therefore doubts
continue to exist, and they probably may, owing to a
difference between the Penang and Quedah Measure-
ment of the or long, His Lordship in Council is of
opinion, that instead of alarming the Siamese or
exciting their jealousy, it will be better that our own
officers should measure out the sixty orlongs and
establish the line, leaving the Siamese when they
choose to take up the question to prove our measure-
ment erroneous.
9. To satisfying them however that we have no
intention of encroaching beyond the line so marked
out it may be advisable to furnish them with a copy
of a Map of the explaining to them that
we claim no land beyond that line which marks the
limits of our possessions to the Eastward, as held by
us since our first acquisition of that Territory.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) Geo. Swinton
Chief Sec. to Government*
Fort William
30th April 1830


Fort Cornwallis the 31 May 1830.
Translation of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore
to the Honble. the Governor' of Pulo Penang, Singapore
and Malacca.
( After Compliments.)
I beg to inform my friend that it has been report-
ed to me that the Ex Rajah of Quedah has removed
from Penang and taken his residence at Prye for the
purpose of doing evil things, and planning with the
Malays to invade and attack Quedah, in direct con-
tradiction to the treaty at present existing between
the Siamese and the English, drawn up by Captain
Henry Burney on the 20 dune 1826, in which it
is mentioned in the fourteenth article ot the Treaty
that all matters relating to the Quedah Country shall
be adjusted according to the 13th article of the
Treaty, by which the Siamese are allowed to have
the Government of the Quedah country ; and the
inhabitants of the two countries viz. Quedah and Pulo
Penang are allowed to trade on the same amicable
terms as formerly ; the Siamese on their part binding
themselves not to take any duties from provisions and
cattle that are reared in the Quedah country, sucli as
cows, buffaloes, ducks and fowls, paddy and rice, not
to put any taxes at the entrances of any rivers, or
farm them out, to allow all the slaves and companions
of the Ex Rajah of Quedah to go where they please ;
the English on their side binding themselves not to
have any intention of taking the Quedah country,
not to make war or raise any disturbance there,
not to allow the Ex Rajah of Qitedah or any of his
friends to make war or raise any connection in Quedah,
or any countries belonging to the Siamese, that they
would endeavour to induce the Ex Rajah to take up his
residence in another country, and not allow him to


remain at Pulo Penang or Prye ( meaning Province
Wellesley ) or Perak, or Salengore, or in a Burmese
country; should the English not remove the Ex Rajah
to another country according to the terms of the
Treaty, then that the Siamese should be at liberty to
impose duties on rice, paddy &ca. as formerly was the
custom ; and any Siamese, Malay or Chinese who wish
to leave Penang and settle at Quedah shall not be
prevented from doing so ; such is the purport of the
13th article of the Treaty mutually executed by the
Siamese and the Bengal Government, a copy of which
with the Bengal chop is deposited with the Siamese,
and a counterpart with the Siamese chop is deposited
at Bengal; all which circumstances are known to the
Penang Government :* this Treaty the Siamese have
ratified, and will continue to keep as long as there is
a heaven and earth ; should the Treaty not be adhered
to it vvill be a disgrace to the party breaking it. At
the time I arrived from the Siamese country, I released
Tunku Jamjam the younger sister of the Ex Rajah,
and Wan Nang, and Wan Ee, and all the companions
and slaves of the Ex Rajah, allowing them to depart
wherever they pleased. I also took off the duties from
rice, paddy &ca. in all things fulfilling the terms of the
Treaty, which however the Ex Rajah of Quedah does
not follow, as he has gone to take up his residence at
Prye, a place in which he is forbidden to live by the
Treaty, showing evidently that he does not wish to
follow the Treaty, but to act in contradiction to it; I
therefore request ray friends the Honble. Robert
Fullerton, Governor of Prince of Wales Island, Singa-
pore and Malacca, and the Honble. Robert Ibbetson,
the Resident Councillor and Raja Muda of Penang, and
the great men who reside at Penang under the authority
of the Bengal Government, to consider and fix on a
way of putting this right according to the terms of the
Treaty so that there may be no hindrance to the
friendship which at present exists between the Siamese
and English and that the inhabitants of the two


countries may continue to trade with each other as
formerly. A& soon as my friend is acquainted with
the contents of this letter I hope he will contrive to
settle this business according to the Treaty, and send
me back an answer by Kun Aksorn, my envoy, and
the bearer of this letter who has orders to return and
make me acquainted with my friend’s answer. Written
on the 23d of the month Ramlan.
A true Translation
(Signed) H. Nairne.
Malay Translator to Government.
Penang
The 18 May 1830.


Fort William 8th October 1830.
To the Right Honorable
Lord W. C. Bentinck, G. C. 8.,
Governor General in Council &ca. &ca. &ca.
. Fort William.
My Lord,
I have now the honor to transmit copies of all
letters and other communications which have passed
in consequence of the orders conveyed to the late
Government in Mr. Secretary Prinsep’s letter of the
30th last, relative to the Ex King of Quedah. I
regret to say that every attempt made by Captain
Low, Mr. Nairne, as well as myself to induce him to
quit Province Wellesley has failed, the Ex King after
having given hopes and every assurance of taking up
his residence on this Island, seems again to have relap-
sed into the same sullen state of obstinacy which has
generally marked his conduct since the completion of
the Siamese Treaty, and I now entertain the most se-
rious conviction that nothing short of the application of
actual forcible compulsion can produce his removal, nor
any thing short of a military guard detain him even if
removed. Legal doubts that have been started as attend-
ing the case induce me to abstain from having recour-
se to that extreme measure. The positive refusal to
reside on this Island or to go to Malacca may be con-
sidered as the virtual rejection of the liberal and con-
siderate terms held out to him, and if left to his fate the
British Government can have nothing to reproach itself
for whatever may happen to him. The Treaty it will
be observed in respect to his residence is only con-
ditional.
“ The English engage that they will make arran-
gements for the Governor of Quedah to go and live in
some other country and not at Prince of Wales Island


or Frye, or in Perak, Salengore, or any other Burmese
country. If the Enolish do let the former Governor
•/ O
of Quedah go and live in some other country as here
engaged, the Siamese may continue to levy an export
duty upon padd} 7 and rice at Quedah.”
There is no particular prohibition against his resi-
dence at Frye ( Province Wellesey ) more than Prince
of Wales Island, in either case the Siamese are at
liberty to impose duties on grain as provided for.
The residence of the Ex King there is no doubt ex-
tremely inconvenient, and must induce the necessity
of a much greater degree of vigilance to prevent the
infraction of a preceding provision, by any attack upon
the Siamese territory by his followers, and although
any serious danger to the Government of Quedah from
any such attack is entirely out of the question, the
residence of the Ex King on Province Wellesley is
further objectionable as tending to keep up constant
alarm, and measures must be taken to convince the
Siamese that such has not our sanction, but is in direct
defiance of our orders. A general Publication must be
made that he is so residing there. The keeping of
arms in his house and the assembly of armed men for
his protection must be prohibited and the inhabitants
must be cautioned against affording him any assistance
or acting in any way in his support, and such a course
may still have the effect of inducing the Ex King to
remove, an object to which Mr Ibbetson and his assis-
tants will no doubt continue to direct their utmost
attention and exertions.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) Robt. Fullerton
Chief Commissioner for the
Affairs of Singapore, P. \V.
Island and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
The 25th August 1830.


Translation of a letter from Captain Low to the
Ex Raja.
After Compliments.
The instructions of the Right Honorable the
Governor General in Council of Bengal have been
received to the effect that should my friend persist in
not following the line of conduct which the Supreme
Goverment desires my friend to pursue, namely to
proceed to Malacca, it will be required of my friend to
proceed thereupon to Pulo Penang, for such are the
orders of the Supreme Goverment, and they must be
■attended to. My friend cannot be allowed to remain
longer on this coast. Moreover when my friend shall
have gone over to Penang my friend will, so long as
he shall continue to reside there, receive from the
Honorable Company a yearly subsistence allowance
of 6,000 Spanish Dollars, and repayment at that rate
commencing from the first day of January last (1830)
being at 500 Dollars per month.
This is settled by order of the Supreme Govern-
ment, and it is also settled that if my friend csr any of my
friend’s followers go and league with people in Quedah
so that any disturbance with the Siamese authorities
shall ensue, or clandestinely correspond with persons
in Quedah, or do any thing within the British territory
under the British Flag which may molest the Siamese
in any way, the Supreme Goverment will be under
the painful necessity of forcibly removing my friend
from Penang and of delivering up to the Siamese such
of his followers or adherents as may go over to Quedah
or attempt in any manner to disturb or injure the
territories subject to Siam. My friend I trust will
quit this coast and go to Penang within six days hence
Fort William Bth October 1830.


and mj 7 - friend may stay where he pleases on that
Island. This negotiation must be considered at an end
after the receipt of a reply to this letter.
Written and dated on the 14th day of July 1830.
A true translation
( Signed ) James Low.


To R. Fullerton Esqr.
Chief Commissioner for the Affairs
of Singapore, Prince of Wales Island
and Malacca.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
dispatch, No. 126, dated the 25th August,* relative to
the Ex Rajah of Quedah.
2. The Raja having, rejected the liberal terms
which you were authorized by the [instructions of]
30th April last to propose to him, and it appearing that
nothing short of compulsory means will effect his re-
moval from Province Wellesley, the Governor General
in Council now deems it essentially necessary to the
preservation of tranquillity in that quarter, that he
should be removed by force if necessary, after once
more declaring the positive orders of the Supreme
Government for his immediate retirement to Malacca
or such other place of residence as he may choose to
fix on equally or farther removed from the neighbour-
hood of the Siamese.
3. In the event of his complying with this order
the Governor General is still willing to allow him the
full stipend already authorized by the instructions of
the 30th April last, while he shall remain at the place
fixed for his future residence.
4. If he compel you to employ force for his
removal, you will be pleased to authorize the British
authority at Malacca to pay him the inferior stipend
of six thousand dollars for the support of himself
and his family while he shall remain there, with a
distinct intimation that it will be forfeited if he at-
bWt William Bth October 1830.


tempt to return to the vicinity of Qued&h or by any
other act of disobedience and contempt of the order
of the British Government.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) G. Swinton
Chief Secy, to Government.
Fort William
Bth October 1830.


Fort William 10th June 1831.
To The Chief Secretary
to the Government.
Sir,
I had the honor to report to you on the 26th
February last, having, in consequence of a friendly
letter from the Rajah of Ligore, deputed Mr. Blun-
dell to that Chief. I now beg to forward for the
Honorable the Vice President in Council copy of
a letter from Mr. Blundell stating his having failed
in reaching Bandoung, the Rajah’s usual place of
residence.
2. The failure of Mr, Blundell’s Mission is to be
ascribed to a report, which has occasioned considerable
alarm, not only among the Chiefs tributary to Siam,
but also at Bangkok, of our having received on this
coast envoys from Cochin China, with whom measures
have been concerted for the conquest of Siam. This
report has emanated from the two Cochin Chinese
vessels that lately quitted Calcutta having been driven
into Rangoon by distress of weather.
3. The mischief which such a repoxt was likely
to produce has, I hope, been checked. Letters have
been addressed by me to the Siamese Chiefs explain-
ing the circumstances under which the Cochin Chinese
vessels put into Rangoon.
4. The envoys from the Rajah of Ligore to the
Governor General, alluded to in Mr. Blundell’s letter,
have arrived at Moulmain. I shall forward them by
the first steam vessel proceeding to Calcutta. They
have brought with them a number of presents and
about twenty thousand rupees for the purpose of pur-
chasing a small steam engine.


5. lam happy to state that the expense incurred
on account of Mr. Blundell’s Mission to the Rajah of
Ligore does not exceed four hundred rupees.
I have &ca.
(Signed) A. D. Maingy
Tenasserini Provinces.
Tavoy
4th May 1831.


To the Commissioner
in the Tenasserim Provinces,
Moulmain.
Sir,
I have the honor to report to you my return to
Tavoy, having failed in the object with which I was
diputed by you, with presents to the Rajah of Ligore.
2. I arrived at Tuccopa on the 17th February,
where a letter and message awaited me from the Rajah
of Ligore, thanking me for the compliment paid him
by my visit, aud expressing his regret it was not in
his power to receive me, as he had just then been
called to Bangkok to assist at the Funeral of the
Second King of Siam, but that he sent two of his sons
to receive me. These young men arrived at Tuccopa
on the 22d. ' I expressed to them my great regret that
I should not meet with their father, but intimated my
intention to accompany the images of Gautama which
I had brought with me as presents, across the country
to their father’s residence. To this every possible
objection was urged, concluding with the question of
why I wanted to cross the country now their father
was absent and they had been commissioned by him
to receive any communication I might have to make.
I had no satisfactory reply to make to this as the
ostensible object of my visit could not now be accomp-
lished and I did not consider myself warranted to
excite the jealous suspicions of the Siamese by insisting
on going across the county without some adequate
object in view. I confined myself to stating that
not thinking any difficulties would be raised to
my going even if their father were absent, which
I was not inclined to believe, until it was con-
firmed to me by them, I had sent away the vessel
Fort William 10th June 1831.


that brought me; That Tuccopa was a wretched place
to reside iu and that I should prefer travelling to
remaining there. On their still making objections
I endeavoured to alarm them by saying I should
consider their frivolous excuses as tantamount to a
refusal to allow me to proceed, that I should report
the same to my Government and that I could not
answer for the light in which you would view so
suspicious a circumstance as my being not allowed
to proceed beyond the place 1 was then at. I told
them also I much feared such a want of civility in
them would very probably tend to put a similar end
to the Mission their father was sending through you
to the Supreme Government by your refusing to pro-
vide them with a passage to Calcutta. These hints
however had not the effect which I anticipated of
procuring me an invitation to accompany them on
their return home.
3. From what I had learnt privately when at
Tuccopa I imagine the Rajah of Ligore could not
have allowed me openly to visit him without incurring
the suspicions of the Court of Siam in a greater
degree than at any former period, as it appears they are
greatly excited by Major Burney’s Mission to Ava
and the circumstance of two Cochin Chinese vessels
having lately visited both Calcutta and Rangoon to
which latter place, I believe, they were driven by
stress of weather on their return.
4. I was treated during my stay at Tuccopa
with great hospitality and attention, the Rajah s sons
doing every thing in their power to make me com-
fortable. I informed the young man I thought it
very probable I should be enabled to gratify them
next year with a trip in the steamer and would cross
over the country from some part or other of the coast
and bring them back with me. They wished to know
from whence, but I told them I was not yet myeslf
aware of that.


5; binding my health daily failing me owiug to
hiy long confinement in such an uninteresting and
unhealthy place (at that season of the year) as
Tuccopa, I resolved upon waiting no longer for the
vessel that brought me, but came away in a native
boat and arrived at Mergui on the 14th ultimo, in a
state of much suffering from anxiety of mind and
exposure to the weather.
6. Tuccopa is nothing more than a small village
situated about thirty miles up a small river of the
same name. The river has a north west course and
discharges itself by several mouths, the southermost of
which is in North Latitude B°. 55', and the northern
in north Latitude 9°. 20', forming Sunderbunds navig-
able for small craft. At Tuccopa the river is at this
season very narrow and shallow. There is very little
cultivation in the neighbourhood and the few people
whom I saw seemed in miserable circumstances.
Nearly the whole population, however, with the
Governor of the place at their head, have been em-
ployed during the last three years at Bandoung ( the
present residence of the Rajah of Ligore ) in building
boats for that Prince, without being allowed to visit
their wives and families during that period. The only
produce that renders Tuccopa of any value to the
Siamese is that of tin of which about two thousand
peculs are annually obtained. The monopoly of the
collection is vested in one person direct from the Court
of Siam, but I could not ascertain what he paid for it.
This man has a number of personal slaves
(forming at present almost the only inhabitants at
Tuccopa ) who are employed in collecting the ore, and
at the same time both sublets his privilege to others
and obliges all others who collect the ore to sell it to
him at a fixed price. It is collected in the bed of the
river near the foot of the hills at about a day’s journey
east of the place and brought in on elephants.


7. The route across the country to Bandoung is
described as of easy access and during the rains as re-
quiring very little land journeying, the Tuccopa river
can then be ascended to near the foot of the hills,
across which, a day's journey, the Bandoung River is
met with in which a boat will reach that place in four
or five days. In the dry season one day’s journey on
this side of the hills and two on the other are taken,
in consequence of the shallowness of the river. The
hills are described as far from steep.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) D. A. Blundell
Deputy Commissioner..
Tavoy the 15th
April 1831.


Fort William 22nd July 1831.
To K. Murchison Ksqre.
Deputy Resident at
Prince of Wales Island,
Bit,
I have the honor to report Tuanku Kudin left
this Province this morning and it is reported that he
has gone towards Quedah and that thirty boats collect-
ed from Penang and various parts of this coast (which
Went with passes as petty traders) await him at some
place betwixt this and Quedah. When I have re-
ceived fuller information on this subject I will have
the honor to apprize you of it* Should Tuanku
Kudin as formerly invade Quedah it will perhaps be
necessary that I should make a requisition for an in-
crease of troops to prevent any disturbance on the
frontier, and to drive back those individuals who may,
in defiance of every proclamation to the contrary)
have left the province with Tuanku Kudin to molest
the Siamese*
I have &ca.
(Signed) James Low
Assistant Resident.
Province Wellesley
the 16th April 1831,


To K. Murchison Esqre.
Deputy Resident at
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
1 have the honor to supply the following addition-
al information on the subject of the reported intended
attack on Quedah, as stated in ray letter of the 16th
instant.
1. It is Widely reported that the Chief of the
Siamese, Prince of Pondelon or Dalooiig, [Phatalurg]
has given private encouragement to the armament.
2. A force rated at 8000 men ( which may be
deduced to perhaps 500) have, by reports entitled to
some credit, come down from Patani and have, in
conjunction with Malays front within the Honble.'
Company’s jurisdiction, seized on two Siamese posts,'
a day or two distant only from the North East fron-
tier of this Province, from whence they have either'
marched or intend in a few days to march on Quedah,
From private information I have every reason to think
it highly probable that Tuanku Soliman, the Ex Rajah’s
brother now governing the Siamese districts Eastward
of our Eastern line of frontier, intends to join this
force. He is in alliance with the Patani Chief and
many of his people, headed, it is said, by his son
Tuanku Mahomed and his nephew Tuanku Mahomed
Kapi, have already joined the force alluded to above.
1 am also inclined to credit this information on the
grounds that it affords the most ready explanat-
ion of the recent extraordinary conduct of Tuanku
Soliman,
Fort William 22nd July 1831.


Should this Chief evacuate his post to attack the
power in amity with the British, I would respectfully
suggest, as a measure conducive to the general tran-
quillity and as consistent with the Treaty of Bangkok,
that with the consent of the Siamese authorities at
Quedah, the Tuanku’s Post of Kotah be seized and
kept for the Siamese until the affairs of Quedah shall
have been settled.
3. I find it extremely difficult to get informa-
tion as to the strength of the invading parties, their
rendezvous and their routes, since I have no gun boat
as formerly at command, and people not concerned in
the expedition are afraid to cross the frontier or put
to sea. But from all_ I can learn the party in boats
and the lower land detachment have formed a junc-
tion at Lala [on thej river Murbow, and there await
some concerted signal to attack Quedah Fort, which
it is supposed will take place in a day or two.
4. On my return from the Northern frontier
yesterday I observed a large Purlis trading boat lying
in a creek, the crew of which told me that two days
before, i. e. on the 15th instant, their boat was seized
along with another boat which was in company, by
Ahmud, commonly called Tuan Kechil, son of Rajah
Kaji Kassim, merchant in Penang, who ordered them
to accompany him to attack Quedah, but that they
slipped their cable during the ensuing night and es-
caped, the other boat remaining. This took place on
the beach at 'Qualla Muda and within the Honble. Com-
pany's jurisdiction.
5. The ammunition, cartouch boxes and other
warlike stores for the expedition have been purchased
in Penang, and the Bengal or Hindostan men who
have been enlisted at 5 dollars monthly besides
rations, have received sepoys coats, which were
easily obtained in the Penang shops, the owners
of which had purchased them from Sepoys and other
persons.


This last appears to me to be an exceedingly
unfortunate circumstance, since whatever may by
the issue of the expected contest, the intention of
the ringleaders is evident, aud cannot fail to make
an impression on the Siamese unfavorable to British
faith.
6, The Province is internally quiet at present,
but with such movements as are taking place all
around precautions are necessary, especially as gangs
of robbers may be expected to take advantage of the
posture of affairs to plunder our outer districts.
7. I have done all that my limited means
will allow of to ensure the internal peace of the
Province.
1. A Proclamation has been issued confirm-
ing one promulgated formerly, and declaring that
those who accompany this expedition will run the
risk of all the penalties which their conduct may
subject them to.
2. No boats are allowed for the present to
leave the Coast for Quedah.
3. All boats returning from Quedah will be
detained and the crews examined and proceeded
with accordingly.
4. Lists are making out of the people who
have left the Province to go with the expedition.
5. Depositions will be taken as they can be
obtained against the ringleaders.
6. A Post has been established with four
Sepoys and two Peons at the mouth of the Muda
river, to which six more Sepoys will require to
be added.
7. Another post is preparing on the North
bank of the Pry River at the frontier, near Tuan-
ku Soliman’s residence, where I intend to post
two peons and 8 or 10 Sepoys if supplied.


8. A letter has been addressed to the Quedah
Siamese Chief, expressive of my regret that people
should be so daring as to venture into Quedah in
defiance of British Proclamations to the contrary,
and offering, if he desires it, to apply to the
Deputy Resident for such aid as may be wanted.
Also informing him of the reported disposition
of Tuanku Soliman’s people and his (Soliman’s)
suspicious behaviour at the present time, and of-
fering to apply for aid to occupy that place for
the Siamese until affairs have been settled.
9. A Post has been ordered to be immediate-
ly formed on the high road to Quedah leading
out of our North East frontier, to which place a
temporary guard of twelve men will be sent if
the Detachment I have already applied for be
granted.
8. Under whatever aspect present affairs are
viewed the ultimate total ruin of Quedah seems inevit-
able. This Province it is to be hoped will not sustain
any injury and it is most likely that the greatest part
of the remaining population of Quedah will seize the
opportunity offered by the confusion which will arise
to emigrate into the Company’s territory.
I have &ca.
(Signed) James Low,
Assistant Resident.
Province Wellesley
the 18th April 1831


To K. Murchison Esqre.
Deputy Resident at
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I have the honor to report that certain intelligence
has been received that several near relatives of the Ex
King of Quedah, with numerous adherents, have gone
northward of the Honble. Company’s territories with
the avowed purpose of attacking the Siamese in
Quedah, and as I have special reasons for believing
that Tuanku Abdullah, son of the Ex King, meditates
a speedy junction with these lawless characters, I have,
in order to maintain the peace of this Province, and
our amicable relations with Siam, taken on myself the
responsibility of placing Tuanku Abdullah under re-
straint, which was happily effected during the middle
of last night. Tuanku Din will accompany him.
He will be forwarded to the jetty at Penang
during the evening and delivered into the charge of
any person you may be pleased to direct to await his
arrival there.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) James Low
Assistant Resident.
Province Wellesley
20th April 1831.
Fort William 22nd July 1831.


To K. Murchison Esqre.
Deputy Resident at
Prince of Wales Island*
Sir,
It is Unnecessary for me to report to you, since
you have been already acquainted with it, the sacking
of Quedah by the piratical force under Tuanku Kudin
and others, the success of which, from the reports made
to me by people who have returned, may be mainly
attributed to the misplaced and culpable bravery of
of about 30 or 40 natives of Hindostan (most of whom
w r ere discharged Sepoys ) who led the attack, and
whose appearance under Ahmed or Tuan Kechil, mer-
chant of Penang, their commander (and who wore a
British officer’s uniform, it is reported ), at their head,
so paralyzed the efforts of the Siamese that they made
but a short resistance and fled, after killing, it is
fifty or sixty of the assailants.
I have now the honor to submit a few remarks'
Which may serve to elucidate the object of this inroad
or attack on Quedah, which so manifestly tends to in-
terrupt the existing amicable relations betwixt the
British Government and the Siamese.
Quedah-having been reduced by the invasion of
the Siamese from an independent Principality or near-
ly so, to a mere Province of Siam, it is very natural
that its former occupiers should wish to regain posses-
sion of it. But nothing has yet been adduced, that
I know of, directly implicating the Ex King in the
last irruption into that country —although he must be
exposed to strong suspicions.
This is the second attack which has been made
within the last three years by the very same individuals
Fort William 22nd July 1831.


oh Quedah. On the former occasion they were beateh
off, nor did the Siamese deign to supplicate the
Penang Government, as far as I know, for military aid,
relying, as they have in this last attack done, on
their own strength, and the terror with which they
fondty believed their former prowess had inspired the
Malays.
The Siamese, it is notorious, have misgoverned
Quedah, although bound by the 13th Article of the
Treaty of Bangkok “to take proper care of its
people/''
They have carried upwards of 1,000 of the child-'
ten of its inhabitants into slavery in Ligore and Siam,
thus exasperating the people to rebellion, and relying
on the terror of their arms, they have endeavoured to
rule Quedah by aid of the Very men whom they
oppress, and have scarcely ever before maintained
attack or insurrection.
In opposition to my remonstrances several years
ago, they employed as their admiral or Laksamana,
a man named Pu Kursa, a noted pirate who dared not
venture to Penang, and whose protection by the Siam-
ese was reported by me to Government.
This person joined the present invading force
With his followers.
The whole country has risen, I am informed, in
favor of Kudin and a large Patani force has joined
him.
The Rajah of Ligore, it is well known, has ever
shown in his conduct a degree of mental and bodily
Vigour and of ambition, rarely to be found conjoined
in any true Siamese. He is in fact the son of a Chi-
nese by a Siamese mother.
When I was in Phoonga the Chief informed me
that the Rajah of Ligore had tried to supplant him at
the Court and to get Phoonga and Junkceylon annexed


to his government. In this he was disappointed, for
it should seem that the Court of Bangkok, after he
had seized Quedah, were rather jealous of his growing
influence, and when I visited Trang in 1824 the
Emperor had fettered him with a Council of two
Chiefs.
He contrived however by his interest at Court to
lull the suspicious excited by the reports of his ene-
mies, the Chiefs of Daloong or Sangora, that he wished
to assert independence, and he got the Chaiya and
Choomphon Provinces annexed to his government,
giving him a considerable additional command of men.
He might perhaps be now able to collect from two
to three thousand troops within a month’s time from
within his own jurisdiction alone, and by requisitions
on the lower provinces of Siam, perhaps nearly ten
thousand men.
The Governor of Sangora has long been his bitter
enemy, and has been constantly representing to the
Court at Bangkok that he has misgoverned and des-
troyed Quedah.
The Court acted so far on these complaints as
to direct the Ligorian to proceed to the capital to
explain matters —an order he has found plausible
means to evade, and no doubt will in future decline
'complying with.
His secret influence with people about the Court,
which is to my knowledge great, alone insures his
head after such behaviour.
The Governor of Sangora has been long a con-
cealed friend of the Ex King of Quedah, a natural
consequence of Ins dislike of the Ligorian and of his
own private views, directed to the destruction of the
latter, and he and the Ex King have long kept up a
private correspondence. About a month ago a special
messenger named Moon Kak and nine followers came
overland and through this Province from Sangora


charged, as my police officer at Panga discovered,
with a confidential communication to the Ex King.
They evaded my questions, merely stating that they
wished to purchase some fire arms. I did not give
the subject much consideration at the time but it is,
in coincidence with recent events, entitled to some
notice.
That the Chief of Sangora would place the Ex
Rajah, if he could, on his former throne, he becoming
subservient to Sangora, I have scarcely a doubt. But
knowing as I do the efficiency, as well as the unbend-
ing and despotic temper of the Siamese Government,
I cannot conceive it to be at all probable that either the
Sangora, the Phoong, the Thaloong or any other Siam-
ese Governor would venture, even in thought, to afford
military aid to the Ex King for the recovery of his
country. And on such an exigency as the present,
none of these Chiefs would dare to hesitate a moment
in complying with any requisition of the Ligorian for
troops to support the honor of the Court, especially
as Ligore is a Province of the first rank. But the
Ex King cannot well, I should think, be blamed
for endeavouring to effect his restoration through
the intercession of the Sangora Chief with the Emperor
of Siam.
As it was the Court of Siam itself which gave the
order for the expulsion of the Ex King of Quedah,
on account of his dela} 7 ing to pay to it the customary
homage of an inferior State, it will therefore in all
probability resent the present attack as an insult to
its dignity, rid itself of any impression which the
Sangora Chief may have made on it favorable to the
Ex Rajah’s interests and order an expedition against
Quedah of too formidable a nature to be resisted by
feeble or disunited Malays,
But it is likely too, that impelled by his known
recklessness and ferocity of disposition, the Ligorian


Tuanku Kudin the nephew
of the Bx King of Quedah,
Tuanku Dagang and Tuanku
Jaffar, the two sons of Tuanku
Long Putih, with Panglima
Mannan, two discharged Hon-
ble. Company’s peons from
Prye, Che Man Ali and Che
Chiya both from Tanjong
Tokong, Panglima Sam, Pang-
lima Imam Semahum, Chee
Hadji, Panglima Hoosain,
Panglima Mun, Panglima Hu-
sain, Che Rhio, Awang Lahat,
Che Akui.
will forthwith assemble his troops and inflict his venge-
ance on that devoted country, converting it into little
better than a jungle. There is indeed no data by
which we can calculate the probable effect which the
late attack may have on that semi-barbarous Court
( Siam ) or to what lengths it may go, inflated as it is
by vanity and believing as it no doubt will that we
have connived at, if not abetted, the insult offered to
its power.
Their slumbering ambition may be awakened, it
may lead them to consider the Treaty as broken and
stimulate them to renew the scenes of desolation which
followed their arms in former times on the Peninsula
of Malacca, over which they have ever been impatient
to extend their depopulating and degrading sway-
Perak and Salengore would in such a case be the first
States to suffer.
But I fervently trust such a consummation may
be averted.
Tuanku Kudin the nephew, Tuanku Long Putih
the brother-in-law, with Jaffir an illegitimate brother
of the Ex King are the Chiefs of the present expedi-
tion from this quarter now in Quedah.
In February 1829 the Siamese Chief of Quedah
complained to the Penang Government against the
the nephew individuals whose names are given in the
and Tuanku margin, and who he describes as pirates
ns of Tuanku w ho ] iac ] j us t b een repulsed in an at-
h Panglima
harged Hon- tempt to surprize under British colours
peons from the Quedah Fort.
» Sam, Pang- He also reported about the same
ahum, Chee me that th e Xx Xing and his SOUS with
a Hoosain, 8
mgiima Hu- Long Putih, husband of Tuanku Jurajum,
«ang Lahat, j.jj e gx Xing’s sister, intended to attack
Quedah, and requested that they might be prevented


from so doing. The Honble. the Governor in Council
then issue a proclamation that all persons molesting
Quedah would be treated as 'pirates , and the Ex King
was informed that he would be put under restraint
should he act in a hostile manner against Quedah.
These Chiefs attacked the Siamese by sea and
land in 1829 and being beaten off with loss Tuanku
Kudin then returned to Province Wellesley and fixed
himself at the mouth of the Muda river on our side.
Here, at the instigation of the Siamese, it is said, he was
attacked in the night time by some Chinese, who
barred his door, placed a quantity of gunpowder below
the house, and blew him up with his family. His
wife and child were killed and he himself so dread-
fully scorched that it was not believed he would have
survived. After this event he seems to have thought
only of revenge.
When I took charge of Province Wellesley,
Tuanku Kudin had established himself at Bukit Tun-
gal, on the Kreean River in this Province, the
previous occupier of which, Toon Kunoo, he had
shortly before inhumanly murdered and robbed, and
whose wife he had seized. Here he began to commit
oppressive and piratical acts which compelled me
(not being then a magistrate) to forcibly expel him
from our territory.
He remained for some time away, but on finding
that other characters equally notorious as himself
could live with impunity at Penang he went there,
and eventually set himself down close to my residence
in this Province, defying my authority.
Being then a magistrate I could not proceed
against him without formal affidavits &ca. and I was
informed by authority that unless I chose to run the
risk myself he could not otherwise be apprehended,
or if apprehended, legally detained in custody; and
that Government could not with a Court of Judicature


here, bear me out if I seized him without the re-
quisite legal formalities. He has therefore continued
to reside wherever he liked. At the same time the
Government declared that “he ought not to be per-
mitted to remain within the Honble. Company’s terri-
tories.”
Tuanku Long Putih has twice attacked Quedah
since the Treaty was made betwixt the British and
Siamese, as has Jaffar also.
The former was often, previous to this period
told by me to quit the Province, but he applied for
protection to, and was supported by the Ex Rajah,
and finally sent me a reply in insolent terms that he
would not go.
To my request what was to be done, the Honble.
the Governor in Council w 7 as pleased to direct that
“should he remain quiet he did not perceive any ad-
vantage from disturbing him.”
I reported to Government that this pirate, Long
Putih, had attacked Quedah and had returned to live
in Province Wellesley.
On my ordering him out, he declared he would
not go, and I found that he had applied to the
Honble. the Recorder for the protection of the Court.
I therefore thought it useless to proceed further ip
the matter. *
Tuanku Abdulla, now under restraint, was an
active agent in the expedition before this last one
against Quedah, and by all accounts was just going
to join Tuanku Kudin when apprehended along wdth
Tuanku Din and Joonoos by my order a few days
ago. His intention could in this last instance there-
fore scarcely be doubted. He w r as found in the very
same position on our frontier which he occupied pre-
vious to his former attack on Quedah. Mr. Pattullo,


then Superintendent of Police, reported to Government
that “two of the Rajah’s sons ( Abdullah and Din)
have taken up a position on the Muda River to join
the Ex Rajah and escape.”
The people who have so inconsiderately and culp-
ably left Penang and this coast with this present
expedition appear to me separable into three parts or
classes. One, at the head of which is Tuanku Kudin
himself and to which Tuan Kechil seems to have at-
tached himself, went for the sake of plunder and to
gratify a restless disposition. The second class also,
headed by Kudin, Long Putih and by other Chiefs,
seems to have been actuated by the spirit of revenge
and hatred. And the third has obviously followed for
the purpose of collecting and bringing away their
friends and relatives into our territories.
The second class, with the Hindostan men, will
remain there probably until expelled by the Siamese.
When the Siamese do appear, some resistance
may be made by a few of Kudin’s party, but it is to
be apprehended that the bulk of the population will
seek refuge in Province Wellesley. And as they will
be pressed hard by the Ligorian it is even possible
that under the exasperation of the moment his troops
may pass our frontier and devastate the Honorable
Company’s frontier territory if not opposed by an
adequate force. The populution would then have
every reason to assist the regular troops in defending
the frontier.
Tuanku Soliman, who lately gave me so much
trouble about the boundary, and who avoided all com-
munication of a friendly nature, has sent to me a
letter couched in deprecatory terms, which serves to
confirm my suspicions of his being concerned in the
attack on Quedah. I have informed him verbally that
all matters at issue have been referred to the Ligor
Chief, to whom he may apply as to his proper lord.


Should Soliman fly into our territory I fear I
must detain him in custody, that the Siamese may
not have additional cause to think that we encourage
treason on the part of their public servants.
It may perhaps be asked how it happened that
the movements of Tuanku Kudin and , others were
not known.
During the last four years scarcely a month has
passed over without reports of expeditions on the part
of Kudin and others against Quedah or remonstrance
from the Siamese regarding these people being pro-
tected and the permission given to the Ex King to
remaining at Penang, and one expedition did actually
attack Quedah in the year 1829 as before stated, but
was quite defeated.
The Siamese believed themselves invincible, and
the people of Penang considered Kudin and his party
too contemptible for notice.
The police, however they might be convinced
that Tuanku Kudin would again try his strength
on a befitting occasion, could never obtain such evi-
dence as a magistrate could act upon; where the
interests of a portion of the population, and the
feelings of the whole, are, as in the present case as
regards the Malays, ranged on one side, the difficulty
of detecting combinations is very greatly increased,
and it has not been hitherto customary or authorized
that any public officer should seize persons on bare
suspicion only.
Lately too the Police Establishment was reduced
to such narrow limits and the pay was so low that
■every possible inducement existed for designing men
to attempt to corrupt them and bribe them to con-
nivance.
I rather believe however that they have generally
resisted the temptation. Yet with such a weak aud


scattered police, without any Intelligence Depart-
ment, or allowance for one, or any gun boat or other
boat,it has often been found impossible by me to
obtain even common information.
My control has never extended over the petty
trading boats of this coast, which get passes at
Penang and are then beyond the cognizance of my
police.
Every body now says he knew of the intended
attack—so we all did by report I dare say. But did
any person come forward and declare that he person-
ally knew when, how, or where it was to take place ?
I had long ago believed that such an expedition
would be sent a second time and reported to the
then Government accordingly. But no discretionary
authority was ever given to me to act on presumptive
evidence only. I could not have done so without
incurring a very serious responsibility with reference
to my situation as a magistrate, and the existence
of the Charter of the Court of Judicature and the
probability of a new Court of Judicature being soon
reestablished.
#
Had Abdullah and Din and Joonoos resisted,
which they seemed at first disposed to do, much blood
might have been shed. But as noted disturbers of
the public peace I trust their detention by me will
be deemed a measure of urgent necessity and will be
justified by that necessity.
I frequently wrote to the Siamese Chief inform-
ing him that Kudin and others meditated an attack
and offering to assist on our frontier. And I very
lately complained to him against Tuanku Soliman for
encouraging armed men to cross our frontier into
his district. Yet that Chief, although he profusely
thanked me for my information, treated it lightly,
never deigned to ask for military aid, and seemed
secure in his own means.


The boats which left Penang and Province Wel-
lesley at intervals with the professed purpose of
trading had Custom House passes and of course could
not be cognizable by my police while the owners re-
frained from overt acts. Generally speaking these
trading boats conveyed the arms and stores, passed
the Rouble. Company’s jurisdiction and formed a ren-
dezvous in the creeks betwixt us and Quedah, the
ringleaders living all the while quietly at Penang
and Province Wellesley without any arms or warlike
stores near them, as if quite unprepared for any act
of aggression. When all was ready they slipped off
in small sampans and joined their party,
Should assistance ever be afforded from Penang
to the Siamese under circumstances like the present,
my impression derived from local acquaintance with
the country and people, of the force which would be
required effectually to drive out such a banditti as
that of Kudin and his party from the Fort, and to
retain it until the return of the Siamese may be here
(and I trust to its being considered as not intrusively
so ) stated.
To carry the Fort, backed as Kudin is by the
whole native population of Quedah and as report
speaks by a strong body of men from the populous
and more warlike province of Patani, not less I con-
sider than two Till Companies of Sepoys of 100 men
each if possd a party of artillery and Golaundauze
to throw a *ew shells in, and an adequate number of
strong boats, manned, would be wanted.
Each boat to have a gun or mortar mounted on
a platform to be lightly covered in, and to carry a
supply of provisions for a month at the least.
It would depend on circumstances after the Port
should fall what force would be required to garrison
the place, and whether any land operation might be
necessary. But I apprehend .the latter could not be


undertaken very extensively with such means as Pe-
nang at present affords, without reducing its defensive
strength too much. Perhaps it might be requisite to
dislodge the insurgents from Allooster the former
Capital lying about 5 hours up the river, and where
they are now in force.
I believe that the appearance of British troops at
Quedah in aid of the Siamese would instantly con-
vince the inhabitants of the futility of holding out,
and induce them to return to their homes or seek a
refuge from the expected vengeance of the Ligorian
by emigrating to Penang and Province Wellesley.
In such event too it might be politic to issue
a Proclamation that any householders or persons
domiciled at Penang or Province Wellesley who
should be found in arms opposing the Honhle. Com~
pany’s troops would be treated as traitors and enemies
to the British.
I beg to state, that having deemed it my duty in
the present exigency to make a temporary arrange-
ment in my military capacity with the Officer Com-
manding the troops, I am ready and will feel proud
to act either in that capacity or in ray political one,
in any manner which may be considered most con-
ducive to the public interest.
I have &ca.
(Signed) James Low
Assistant Resident,
Province Wellesley
the 25th April 1831.


To the Resident,
Sir,
It is my painful duty to report a series of events
which have terminated in the expulsion of the Siamese
from Quedah and the capture of the place on Tuesday
the 16th instant by a flotilla force under the personal
command of Tuanko Kudin, a notorious character,
whose suspected addiction to piracy must be well
known to you.
2. This flotilla is stated to consist of 35 or 40
boats of very small burthen, carrying perhaps from
300 to 400 men, amonst whom were 30 or 40 disbanded
Sepoys of the late local corps, clothed and accoutred
like the Company’s troops.
3. Mr. Peterson, the Provisioner, happened to be
at Quedah at the time, purchasing bullocks &ca., and
was an eye witness of the whole affair. He states that
Kudin’s flotilla approached in rapid pursuit of the
Siamese boats which had been cruizing at the mouth
of the river, and were abandoned without resistance.
That on nearing the Fort, the Siamese discharged
about 40 cannon shots from the fort guns without
effect; that Kudin’s party then made a vigorous attack,
succeeded in setting fire to the combustible building
inside the fort and took it by escalade, in the midst of
the smoke and confusion.
4. The Siamese garrison, consisting of 200 men,
after a very feeble defence, fled in the direction of
Ligore, whither a detachment of Kudin’s force have
gone in pursuit. The King ( who is the son of the
Ligore Rajah ) fled in the same direction on the night
preceding the attack, and a vague rumour prevails that
he has been overtaken and put to death.
Fort William 22nd July 1831


5 It is further understood that a very consid-
erable land force has been collected from our own
territories; that it had occupied a position on the
Siamese western frontier and from thence has pro-
ceeded against Ligore. In this body also, there are
many disbanded Sepoys, wearing the Company’s uni-
form. It was at first supposed that the land force
was to cooperate with Kudin in the attack upon
Quedah, but I incline to the belief that Ligore is its
real destination.
6. On receiving the first intimation of these
movements, which was on Saturday the 14th instant,
I requested the Commanding Officer to throw over a
strong party of Sepoys to occupy our North East fron-
tier, in order to protect our own territory and to be
prepared to act as circumstances might require. The
Company’s boats Emerald and Diamond were sent out
to cruize in the vicinity of Quedah River and collect
information, but Quedah had fallen before they reach-
ed their cruizing ground, and I have now employed
them in watching our own coast in order to intercept
plunder or the return into the Company’s territories
of those who have been engaged in the expedition.
7. I have confined my immediate view to the
preservation of our own frontier and an endeavour to
open a communication with Ligore, both by the direct
overland route and by the way of Trang, but it is
necessary to be prepared for future events and I there-
fore solicit your earliest attention to the predicament
in which we are placed with relation to the Siamese
by this most unfortunate affair.
8. By the Article of the Treaty of Bangkok it is
stipulated that “ the English shall not disturb nor
attack Quedah, nor permit the former Governor or any
of his followers to attack, disturb or injure in any
manner the territory of Quedah, or any other territory
subject to Siam.” We must examine whether the


Treaty has been violated either in this particular
article, or in its more extended signification.
9. It does not appear to me that the Ex King
himself is implicated either directly or indirectly at
present, at least, I have no direct evidence against him,
and although his sons Abdullah and Din have un-
doubtedly been concerned in the plot, they have been
arrested before they crossed the frontier and the letter
of the 13th Article has so far been observed.
10. But it cannot be denied that the general
spirit of our friendly relations with Siam has been
violated on this occasion. English subjects both from
Penang and Province Wellesley have joined the invad-
ing force, the arms and ammunition have probably
been procured in our bazar, the boats have cleared out
from our own port and bear the passes usually granted
to boats of their ostensible character, and we neither
interfered to prevent the attack nor gave our allies
timely notice of its approach. On these grounds
[ it appears ] to me that we are bound to offer such
reparation as we now can for the injury we have
( though unintentionally ) permitted, and join the
Siamese in active cooperation if they require it. This
line of conduct is further recommended by the obvious
anxiety of the Supreme Government to preserve our
friendly relations with Siam, and it is evident that the
suspicion of bad faith which now attaches to us can
only be removed by decided and unequivocal measures.
11. The hostile armament has been furnished
from various sources comprehending several of the petty
Malayan States in our vicinity, who feel a deep interest
in the overthrow of the Siamese power at Quedah and
the restoration of a Malayan dynasty, but I consider
such a combination to be quite unequal to a protracted
struggle with a State so superior as Siam in energy
and warlike resources, and policy seems to require our
prompt co-operation with the Siamese both to secure


the ultimate tranquillity of the Peninsula and to main-
tain the friendly provisions of the Treaty of Bangkok.
12. The capture of Quedah must also be viewed
in another point of view, divested of any connection
with Siamese Politics as a piratical aggression, and
particularly offensive to us from the manner in which
the equipment has been furnished. Tuan Kechil, one
of the leaders of the flotilla, and who was conspicuous
in the attack ( dressed in the uniform of a British
officer ), is a British subject born on this Island. He
is now in custody in the Fort, having been arrested in
the act of bringing plunder for sale in our bazar.
Kudin is not a British born subject, but 1 imagine he
and the rest of the insurgents who were engaged in the
attack upon Quedah are all liable to be treated as
freebooters.
13. Having submitted these points to your con-
sideration I must now beg your attention to the pre-
dicament in which Tuanko Abdullah, son of the Ex
King, and Pungooloo Joonoos are placed. Captain Low
has reason to believe that Abdullah was about to cross
our frontier to join the forces proceeding against
Quedah and he arrested him within the Company’s
jurisdiction under circumstances that left no doubt of
his intentions. Pungooloo Joonoos was apprehended
under similar circumstances. They as well as Tuan
Kechil are now confined in the Fort and I request
your instructions in the event of the charges against
them being fully substantiated.
14. As soon as the mass of contradictory evidence
( or reports ) can be sifted, I shall have the honor to
lay before you a separate dispatch regarding the con-
duct both of the Ex King and his son Abdullah. I
have already stated my impression of the King’s in-
nocence, but I shall watch his proceedings and shall
not hesitate to put him under arrest if he makes any
movement indicative of his being in league with
Kudin’s faction.


15. Before concluding this imperfect [ account]
1 must advert to the want of timely intelligence
through which most of the dilemma in which we are
placed with the Siamese has arisen, and I beg to re-
mark,
Ist. That the preparations, though extensive,
were carried on with much tact and secrecy.
2nd. The whole native community were favorable
to a movement directed against the Siamese, whose
cruelty and oppression at Quedah have excited
universal odium. The Mahometan part of the popula-
tion ( Arab and Malayan in particular ) were further
influenced by feelings of religious animosity.
3rd. The Pungooloo Mookims at Province Wei-
lesle}?, on whom Captain Low has greatly relied for
information, joined the insurgents, and our Island
Police are numerically weak and ill paid, and had no
interest in betraying the party in whose favor their
wishes, at least, were engaged, and
4th. We have neither guard boats nor establish-
ments of any kind for keeping watch in the harbour
and examining native craft. I now find that some of
the European merchants were aware of the preparations,
though possibly, not of their precise destinations, but
whatever was the extent of their information, they did
not disclose it to any Government Officer until the
aggression had actually taken place.
I have Aca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Deputy Resident.
Prince of Wales Island
the 25th April 1831.


Fort William 3d June 1831.
To the Secretarj 7 to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acquaint you for the informa-
tion of the Honble. the Vice-President in Council, that
a hasty private communication from Mr. Murchison,
received yesterday, informs me of the capture of
Quedah by a strong party of Malays, headed by the
noted pirate Tuanko Kudin, and that report speaks of
a still stronger force having actually proceeded over-
tovvards Ligor itself, headed by Tuanko Long Pootee
of Siak, and joined by the Ex-King’s two sons Tuanko
Din and Abdullah, also Tuanko Soliman, the Ex
King’s brother, who hitherto has continued to hold,
under the Siamese, the same domain bordering on Pro-
vince Wellesley that he did under his brother’s govern-
ment. lam further concerned to state that many of our
own subjects, even some of the Panghooloo Mukims, or
headmen of Province Wellesley, are also of this party,
together with about thirty of the disbanded local
corps who were dressed up in their old uniforms with
the view no doubt of leading the Ex King’s enemies to
the supposition that he was assisted by the English
Government.
The secrecy with which this expedition has been
fitted out argues very forcibly the general interest
in favor of its success. There never was a doubt
but that every Malay State in the Peninsula of
Malacca and East coast of Sumatra are more or less
interested in the fate of the Ex King, and would
always contribute to aid his restoration upon any
certain prospect of success ; but that not a single
individual among the many hundreds of our own sub-
jects who must have known of this intended expedition


should have come forward to give intelligence to the
local authorities of what was going on appears the
most surprizing, particularly when it is considered,
that considerable numbers of Siamese may be reckoned
among them. There is this certainly to be said, that
■any number of Malay boats might be collected in
readiness for an expedition, upon the numerous creeks
and rivers upon the coast, beyond our jurisdiction,
without the slightest outward show of any preparation,
and a land force in like manner where the country
is so thinly inhabited, might equally be collected
with the same secrecy. Arras such as the people
use are easily collected by degrees, and secreted in
boats and other hiding places beyond the possibility
of search, evidenced by the fact that not even the
Siamese themselves had any .intimation of what
was about to happen until the enemy was at their
gates.
To efface, as far I am immediately able to do, the
very suspicious light in which this affair cannot fail to
be viewed at the Court of Siam, I have addressed
a letter, copy of which is enclosed, to the King’s
Minister : And with reference to the late correspon-
dence regarding the removal of the Ex King to
Malacca, I shall at once proceed to Prince of Wales
Island for the purpose of carrying that measure into
effect, for although Mr. Murchison appears to think
him perfectly innocent of actual concernment in
this attack, there is not a shadow of doubt upon
my mind, but that he has aided and abetted it by
every means in his power, except being personally
present.
As for our own subjects who have taken the
serious and responsible part of injuring the state of
our alliant, I shall imprison them wherever they are
to be found, to be dealt with hereafter, and act gen-
erally in such -a manner as to evince to the Siamese,


our respect for Treaties, and extreme disapprobation
of what has happened.
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Resident at Singapore.
Singapore
Resident’s Office
3d May 1831.


To His Excellency The Chao Pia Prah Klang
Chao Kun Kosa &ca. &ca.
I am seriously concerned to communicate to your
Excellency for the information of His Majesty the King
of Siam, that intelligence has this reached me of a
considerable force, headed by the noted pirate Tunkoo
Kudin, having attacked Quedah by surprize on the
18th ultimo, and succeeded in taking it. There exists,
at present, I am sorry to say, but little doubt on my
own mind of the Ex King having been materially con-
cerned in supporting this attack, although he positive-
ly denies the fact, and is at present residing apparent-
ly in quiet at Prince of Wales Island. lam further
privately informed that many of the invading party
were equipped like English sepoys, of course purposely,
with the view of leading to the supposition that the
attack was countenanced and assisted by the English.
To efface this impression in particular, I have con-
sidered it my duty as well as inclination, thus hastily
to explain the nature of my own feelings upon this
unforeseen event, and to assure His Majesty, that had
timely intimation reached me of this intended piece of
treachery, it should have been forcibly prevented. I
ought to have explained to your Excellency that the
charge of this Settlement, as well as those of Prince of
Wales Island and Malacca, are now confided to my
management by the Right Honble. the Governor
General of India and that in consequence I am imme-
diately about to proceed to Prince of Wales Island
for the purpose of preventing any further violation of
the existing Treaty between our respective Govern-
ments and to enforce obedience where I perceive it
likely to be evaded, and I have to solicit you will as-
sure His Majesty that no trouble or expense on my part
Fort William 3d June 1831.


shall be spared, in bringing to punishment any subject
of ours, or individuals residing under the protection of
the English Government, who shall be found guilty of
having engaged in this flagrant attempt to disturb the
peace and harmony of our respective Governments. I
am not yet informed of the exact force which has thus
seized upon Quedah in the manner above described,
although I feel confident from the necessarily mixed
and discordant nature of its members that it cannot
long retain possession ; of this, however, I desire to
assure your Excellency, that the assistance of the
English Government shall at all times be avail-
able to cooperate with the forces of His Majesty in
its recapture, whenever I am informed of His Majesty's
intentions upon that point. A man known by the
title of Tuan Kechil, also Tuanko Abdullah and
Janoos, have already been apprehended and remain in
confinement at Prince of Wales Island, and I have
given strict orders for the arrest of all others found
under similar suspicions. I write this in extreme
haste to assure your Excellency of the continued friend-
ship and good will of the English Government and
in the earnest hope of soon receiving in return the
sentiments of His Majesty.
Dated Singapore, this 3d day of May 1831.
9
True Copy
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Resident at Singapore.


Extract from a letter dated Penang 11 May 1831.
“ The Malays, worn out with the cruelties of the
Siamese, have risen upon them, driven the whole
Siamese force away from Quedah and both parties are
busily employed in cutting each others throats as fast
as they can. We are however perfectly quiet here and
likely to remain so, unless the Bengal Government will
assist the Siamese in regaining possession of the
neighbouring country, which by a Treaty the British
have bound themselves to do when in hopes of creating
a diversion in our favour during the late operations
against Ava. But I rather think Lord William
Bentinck will pay them off in their own coin, as all
their assistance consisted in promises which were never
kept, as not one Siamese made his appearance in the
Burman territories during the whole war. Our sup-
plies come in as usual and the intercourse is kept up
as far as regards the trading community. Rice
fortunately for the poor inhabitants is abundant and
cheap. The Malays deserved great credit for the
manner in which they carried the fort, which is a
regularly built one of brick and of greater extent than
our own, with a deep ditch round three parts of it.
The secret was so well kept that all the inhabitants of
the opposite coast started together, under a Malay
Chief who had collected a great many of the disbanded
sepoys of our former local corps, for whom fresh
regimentals had been made up, agreeable to their old
patterns, with one young man dressed as a British
Officer. The distance hence is not more than fifty
miles along shore. They got into the mouth of the
river, on one side of which the fort is situated, at
daybreak planted scaling ladders and mounted the
walls, carrying everything before them —in half an
hour they had full possession. We have the young
man who headed the storming party here in safe


keeping, as it will be difficult, if not wholly impossible,
to persuade such suspicious vagabonds as the Siamese
that the whole were not Company’s troops, headed by
one of their officers.”
( The above was enclosed in Rear Admiral Sir E.
Owen’s letter to the Admiralty, No. 203, 18 June 1831,
in which he merely says of it —“ The accompanying
information, although not strictly official, is by a chan-
nel which leaves me no doubt of its authenticity. )


Fort William 22nd July 1831.
To the Deputy Resident.
Sir,
Your letter of the 25th ultimo* conveying intel-
ligence of the capture of Quedah by a flotilla force
under the command of Tuanku Kudin, reached me
yesterday.
The precautions you have taken to secure the im-
mediate tranquillity of our own territory appear in
every way so perfectly judicious that I shall at once
proceed to remark upon the other points brought to
my notice, and requiring more immediate attention in
the present interval of quiet, proceeding from the
absence of any Siamese force in our immediate vicinity,
and first with regard to subjects of the British Govern-
ment, who have thus attacked and injured without
authority another State in strict alliance with our own.
There cannot be a question, if the injury thus
given had been sanctioned by the English Government,
the Government so sanctioning it would have been
guilty of the offence, and answerable accordingly to
the Government of Siam, and it therefore behoves us,
in proportion as we are anxious to avoid this im-
putation, to render to the State thus injured by our
subjects every reparation in our power, and which can
be done effectually only by punishing the offenders as
far as the nature of the case admits. I am not prepared
at the present moment to state what that may be, but
in the interim feel no hesitation in desiring that in-
dividuals of this description, proved to have been in
arms against the Siamese in the late capture of Quedah,
be apprehended and confined if found within our ter-
ritory. Under this view of the case, Tuan Kechil and


Joonoos will remain in custody pending further In-
struction, but as Abdullah was not actually found in
arras, and further, is not a British subject, it is my
intention to remove him hence with his father, until
when it would not be safe to give him liberty, and he
must therefore x’emain under present restraint.
With regard to Tuanku Kudin, whose addiction
to piracy is so notorious, I would not hesitate if in my
power, together with all other public robbers of his
particular description and engaged in the present at-
tack on Quedah, to deliver them up, if requested, to
the justice of the Siamese, and you will accordingly
have him apprehended with that view if he presumes
to return within our territories; but I believe it is
contrary to the Law of Nations to treat in the same
manner any persons but such as by the frequency and
heinousness of their crimes raa} justly be declared the
enemies of the human race.
That the 13th Article of the Treaty with Bang-
kok has seriously been violated by these acts there
cannot in m3 7 judgment be a doubt, although from the
measures now in progress, aided by the precaution
I took at Singapore of writing to the Minister of
Siam, 1 trust the suspicions of that jealous Govern-
ment will gradually subside, as the real truth becomes
developed.
The Ex King has certainly evinced considerable
tact in avoiding the appearance of open and direct
control, hut it is hardly to be supposed that he has
really been ignorant of what was going on, and if
not ignorant, that he could possibly have demeaned
himself as a mere passive spectator of events. In-
directly therefore I consider him to have been the
prime instigator of the attack ; the leaders of the ex-
pedition are his near relations, they have lately been
living in close communication with him, and in the
seduction of the Pangholoos and people of Province


Wellesley I fear may also be traced the Ex King’s
object in residing there so long, and his late reluctance
to quit that Province until all things were matured.
Not the least remarkable feature in the case is his
affected indifference as to the event which cannot
possibly be natural.
Under these impressions, together with the con-
viction that tranquillity cannot otherwise be restored,
I have resolved to enforce the orders of the Supreme
Government for his removal to Malacca, or such other
place of residence as he may choose to fix on, equally
or further removed from the neighbourhood of the
•Siamese.
The second article of the Treaty provides that
should any place or country subject to the English
do an} thing that may offend the Siamese, the
Siamese shall not go and injure such place and country,
but first report the matter to the English who will
examine into it with truth and sincerity, and if the
fault be with the English [ they ] shall punish accord-
ing to the fault.” In this respect we have already
anticipated what may be considered the wishes of the
Siamese, and should they eventually require it on the
terms of the Treaty, I quite concur with you that we
should also yield them our active co-operation in the
recovery of Quedah: Full justice would thus be
rendered them and retaliation entirely prevented
You have correctly stated in my opinion the
principal causes which enabled the adherents of the
Ex King to fit out their expedition with such tact and
secrecy, but I place no faith in the assertion that any
of the European merchants knew what was about to
happen. When the reported force from “ Patani and
other Malay States ” shall have failed, or effected their
object, the same pretence to superior intelligence will
again spring up, but at a moment, as in the former
instance, when it is not worth notice. The most in-
telligent Chinese merchant in this settlement has lost


a considerable quantity of merchandize, seized at
Quedah by Tuanku Kudin. This ignorance of passing
events on his part, entirely rebuts the presumption in
my opinion that any thing approaching to a precise
information was in the least known generally on the
Island.
Our present establishments were never intended
for times like the present, but these will not continue
long, and the removal of the Ex King in the course of
this month will soon disconcert the measures of his
supporters, and good order and quiet be gradually
restored. Intelligence certainly is particularly re-
quired, and I need hardly suggest to you that able
agents should at once be employed as a temporary
measure, both here and at Province Wellesley.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.
Prince of Wales Island.
Resident’s Office,
19th May 1831.


Copy of a letter from R. Ibbetson Esqre. to the
Ex King of Quedah.
( After Compliments.)
My friend is desirous that I should put in writing
the substance of what I have twice communicated to
him in person Vizt. that the orders of the Supreme
Government for his removal hence are imperative and
must be carried into effect; 1 here quote for my
friend’s information the order in question.
“ His Majesty having rejected the liberal terms
which you were authorized by the letter of the 30th
April last to propose to him, and it appearing that
nothing short of compulsory means will effect his re-
moval, the Governor General in Council now deems it
essentially necessary to the preservation of tranquillity,
that he should be removed by force if necessary, after
once more declaring the positive orders of the Sup-
reme Government for his immediate retirement to
Malacca, or such other place of residence as he may
choose to fix on, equally or farther removed from the
neighbourhood of the Siamese.”
Thus my friend will see that if to preserve peace
and quiet with the Siamese at a time when peace and
quiet actually, prevailed, it was then considered neces-
sary that my friend should remove to a great distance
from the former, how completely those predictions are
now verified by the late capture of Quedah by my
friend’s relations and adherents, and how much more
urgent in consequence is the cause for his removal.
Argument and persuasion have already been so fre-
quently employed with my friend in vain, that it now
falls to my duty reluctantly but distinctly to inform
him that the latter must cease. On my way hither I
have hired a house at Malacca for ray friend, and 1
Fort William 22nd July 1831.


have now also hired a ship to convey my friend with
his family and followers either to that settlement, or
any other place of residence my friend may select,
“equally or farther removed from the neighbourhood
of the Siamese.” The stipend of 6,000 Dollars per
annum will be paid to my friend so long as he remains
at the place now fixed on for his future residence; but
I must distinctly inform my friend that this will also
be forfeited if he attempt to return to the vicinity of
Quedah, or by any other act of* contempt and dis-
obedience of the Governor General in Council.
( Signed ) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.
Dated 22nd. May 1831.


Secret Department.
To the Chief Secretary to the Government
Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to my letter dated 3rd May last,*
I have now the honor to transmit for the information
of the Right Honorable the Vice President in Council
copy of a correspondence* which has passed between
the Deputy Resident of this Settlement and myself
regarding the capture of Quedah and the removal of
the Ex King to Malacca.
The measures it became necessary to take to effect
the latter object are explained in the enclosed copy of
my correspondence with that Chief, and the third en-
closure contains copies of reports from Captain Low
which will be useful in elucidating the management
and tact displayed by the King’s adherents, and in
assisting the judgment as to the degree of culpability
attributable to the latter. I by no means however
concur with Captain Low in the view he has drawn of
the probably hasty proceedings of the Siamese Govern-
ment regarding their subjugation of Perak and
Salengore.
In the tumult which will follow the retaking of
Quedah some trifling collisions may possibly occur
upon our borders, but it is too obviously their interest
and inclination to keep well with us, [ and not ]
rashly to pursue a conduct diametrically opposed to it.
The Ex King sailed hence for Malacca on the 6th
Instant, not without evincing to the last considerable
opposition, which only ceased on a movement of the
police accompanied by Military, which convinced him
Fort William 22nd July 1831.


that it would be useless and that my determination
was fixed.
******
I consider the removal of the Ex King hence to
Malacca as an important epoch as regards the future
tranquillity of this settlement, and effected as it has
been without actual force, and at a time when those
most prejudiced in his favour could not but admit the
expediency of the measure, the opinion that it is a
harsh one will gradually subside.
******
It is not my intention to encumber myself beyond
necessity by apprehending people indiscriminately who
have been engaged in this attack on Quedah. One or
two of the Punghaloos or other conspicuous characters,
if possible those who have made ofi with muskets given
them in charge for the protection of the Province, and
who may legally in consequence be committed to stand
their trial, will suffice as an example to lead others to
consider the impropriety of their conduct, but it appears
doubtful how far 1 should be warranted in confining
subjects less equivocally situated, and I shall therefore
be cautious how I interfere beyond what may be
necessary for the due preservation of the peace.
I am daily in expectation of the arrival of the
Siamese before Quedah, and I have stationed the
schooner “ Zephyr ” and “ Emerald ” cutter off the
Quedah and Mirabow Rivers to co-operate with them
at sea. Their commanders have been directed to con-
sider Kudin and Long Putee as pirates, and to treat
them as such should they fall in with them at sea.
This co-operation, together with the removal of
the Ex King to Malacca will sufficiently convince the
Siamese of our honest participation in their success, and
efface the unfavorable impression which late events
cannot fail to have excited regarding our good faith.


I hope soon to inform you that quiet is again
pretty generally restored, and so complete I think will
be the success of the Siamese, that any further at-
tempts of the Malays will not again be made, at least
for a long period.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.
Prince of Wales Island,
Resident’s Office,
the Bth of June 183 1.


Fort William 12th August 1831.
Translation of a letter from the Rajah of Li gore
to Robert Ibbetson Esqr. Resident.
After Compliments.
I make my friend acquainted with the following
circumstance. At the time Captain Henry Burney
proceeded to the Siamese Country to make a Treaty
at Pra Maha Nakon Sri Jutia (Siamese name of
Bangkok ) he took away the Treaty with him in order
to get the seal of the Right Honble. the Governor
General affixed to it, a copy of which he deposited
with me, and I gave him a copy with the seal of the
Siamese Emperor attached to be deposited in Bengal ;
and I have been informed that he left a translation
of this in the English Language at Penang. Now in
the 13th section of the Treaty it is mentioned that the
English do not desire to take the Quedah country and
that they will not foment or raise disturbances or
insurrections against Quedah j that they will not allow
the Ex King or his slaves or ryots to attack or raise
disturbances at Quedah or any countries under the
Siamese authority, and many other subjects are clearly
laid down in the Treaty which Captain Henry Burney
translated and left at Pulo Penang. My friend also
has sent letters to Quedah stating that the English
have great pleasure in ratifying the Treaty and would
prevent the Ex King from attacking Quedah, and if
he persisted in his attempts that he should suffer the
punishment due from the English, and as my friend
has sent a number of letters to this purport the Siam-
ese have placed great confidence in them and acted
according to my friend's suggestions. The Siamese
have also fully performed all the articles of the Treaty.
But now the Ex King, who resides in the English
territories has prepared a number of prows for the


purpose of attacking Quedah and thereby broken
the Treaty. As the Ex King has not obeyed the
orders of the English, but has caused the Treaty
to be trangressed, contrary to the orders of the
English, I hope my friend will pursue such measures
as in his opinion may be most proper. The
Siamese have kept the whole Treaty. They dwelt
in security meditating how the good understanding
and friendship with the English might be con-
tinued, but as the Ex King has been the first to
attack Quedah, contrary to the Treaty, the Siamese
are now making preparation to enter Quedah, but
without any intention of committing a single hostile
act against the English. I hope therefore my friend
will not be suspicious, and assist the officers of the
Ex King who have acted contrary to the Treaty, and
will send me a reply stating in what way the Ex
King will be punished. I have fulfilled the Treaty
and am anxious to increase and strengthen my friend-
ship with the English, and am desirous that the
countries of Quedah and Pulo Penang should be
considered as one, so long as the heaven and
earth are in existence, and that there may be
no end to the great friendship between the two
countries, so that, it Pulo Penang stands in need
of assistance from the Siamese it may be granted,
and if, on the contrary, Quedah stands in need of
assistance the English may give it in a friendly way
as is proper.
I have sent an Envoy with goods from the
Siamese country as a present for the Governor
General of Bengal, through the Martaban country,
and have requested Mr. Maingy to give him every
assistance in his power so that he may arrive in
safety in Bengal, as I am desirous of encreasing and
strengthening the good understanding and friend-
ship. As the Malay scribe is not very well acquainted
with his business, should there be any improper


expressions, I hope my friend will not on this account
take offence.
Written on the 26th day of the 6th month 1246.
A true translation
(Signed) H. Nairne
Malay Translator.
This letter is written altogether in a very
humble strain, quite different from his former com-
munications.
(Signed) H. N.


To the Raja of Ligor.
I have received my friend’s letter dated wherein
my friend correctly states the nature of the
Treaty existing between the English and Siamese
particularly that portion of it contained in the 13th
Article and which my friend complains has been in-
fringed by the act of the Ex King. My friend will be
happy to learn that in consequence of my suspicions
to that effect, and the continual trouble and distur-
bance occasioned by his followers and adherents, the
Ex King has already been punished by removal to
Malacca, much, against his inclinations, and even under
the most sacred protestations of his innocence, and it
would therefore be a source of inward satisfaction to
myself if my friend can really adduce undoubted
evidence that “he has prepared a number of prows
for the purpose of attacking Quedah ” because such
proof, particularly if confirmed by any letters of his
own, would at once convince me of his want of faith,
and prevent my placing the least reliance in his word.
That the Ex King’s friends and relations have attacked
Quedah, contrary to the Treaty, I regret to say there
cannot be a doubt; and my friend hopes “ I will not
be suspicious and assist the officers of the Ex King,
who have acted contrary to the Treaty.” My friend
will see from what I have already done that suspicion
dwells on the side of my friend only, for independent
of having, as already stated, sent away the Ex King,
I have also ordered boats and ships off the mouth of
the Quedah and Mirabow Rivers, with the view of
intercepting “ Kudin ” and “ Long Puteh ” should
run seaward from the forces of my friend, and if
they venture into Province Wellesley they will also
meet their fate. I feel that there is but one thing
Fort William 12th August 1831.


now wanting to establish the future tranquillity be-
tween my friend and the English in this quarter, and
that is the demarcation of the Province Wellesley from
the territory of Tuanko Soliraan, whose people, partici-
pating apparently in the fate of their former sovereign,
seem to imagine they make acceptable offerings to his
unsullied dignity by creating disturbances along our
frontier, I fear encouraged by Tuanko Soliman, his
brother, whose conduct lately has been very equivocal,
arising no doubt from similar feelings.
My friend says “ I have fulfilled the Treaty and
a anxious to encrease and strengthen my friendship
with the English.” Now the 3rd Article of the Treaty
provides for the definition of this boundary, although
ray friend has hitherto evaded any adjustment of so
simple a measure. Let my friend and I then now go
hand in hand in this affair, nothing will more effectually
tend to the suppression of disturbances than well de-
fined boundaries, because the evil disposed cannot then
assemble in multitudes upon the borders of either party
without one or the other being answerable for their
conduct, whereas at present all is uncertain and in
quelling disturbances there is constant litigation as to
the territory in which it has arisen, instanced at the
present moment with the people of Bukit Sambul, who
call themselves the subjects of the Tuanko Soliraan
and the friends of Tuanko Kudin, and where report
says the latter intends to take refuge when driven from
Quedah. I shall be happy to hear from my friend in
reply to this letter, and in the mean time beg to assure
him that he may implicitly rely upon me for giving
effect to the stipulations of the Treaty existing between
our respective Governments.
( Signed ) R. Ibbetson
Rest. Singapore.
Dated 14th June 1831


Fort William 14th October 1831.
To the Resident of Singapore.
Sir,
I have deferred reporting to you officially upon
the progress of events at Quedah, in the hope that each
succeeding day would bring me tidings of the re-
capture of the Fort by the forces of the Ligore Rajah,
but as so much time has already elapsed without pro-
ducing any very decided proofs of the Ligorian’s
success, or of his ability to take the Fort by assault,
1 once more solicit from you distinct instructions for
my guidance, in the event of the Rajah making formal
application to me for direct and powerful co-operation,
which I conclude he will soon do. and would have
done at an earlier period had not his pride checked
such an admission of his own weakness. Indeed, he
has already made application to me for co-operation
to a certain extent, for Tuanko Solyraan having at
length unequivocally joined Kudin with a force of 600
or 800 men, the Ligorian has urged me to occupy
Solyman’s territory contiguous to our own. But this
I shall decline, because after the fall of Quedah, Soly-
man’s lands will come quietly within the scope of our
territorial arrangements with the Ligore Rajah, and
it would be premature and an unnecessary exposure
of the Company’s troops to take and maintain posses-
sion of a post easily assailed by the Quedah forces
under present circumstances.
In your early letters you certainly recognized the
principle that we were bound to co-operate in the re-
capture of Quedah if the Ligore Rajah required it,
but in reply to my letter on the occasion of your
departure from Penang, requesting you to give me
distinct instructions how to act in the event of our


co-operation being formally solicited, you merely said
that large or expensive measures would be unnecessary,
and thus I am left to act upon somewhat conflicting
instructions. Should any pressing emergency occur,
I must act according to the best of my judgment, on
the general principle you originally laid down, but I
consider such an occurrence as improbable, and that
you will have time to send me your orders before any
decided movements are required. I beg then to ask
you if I am to comply with the requisition of the
Ligore Rajah for Sepoys and Artillery to act decisive-
ly against the Fort under the Direction of British
officers.
His Majesty’s Ship Wolfe and the Emerald have
been blockading the Quedah River ever since your
departure, but 1 apprehend that Captain Hamley’s
other duties will not allow him to remain there much
longer, and on his departure Kudin will get ample
reinforcements from the Lankavies and other places,
and will certainly be able to destroy the Ligurian’s
flotilla.
Just before the Wolfe resumed her station Kudin’s
prows attacked the Siamese boats and gained some
advantages over them, and had not the frigate bore
down the advantage would have been more decided.
Captain Hamley has performed another service of
some importance by dispersing a considerable flotilla
from the Lankavies with reinforcements for Kudin.
In all my letters to the Ligorian I have strongly
urged the necessity of expediting his attack upon the
Fort, pointing out also that the Wolfe could not con-
tinue the blockade much longer, but I begin to doubt
his ability to take the fort by assault, and the quest-
ion seems to be whether we are to take it for him,
or allow the insurrection, with all its evil conse-
quences to our own subjects, to go on for an indefinite
period.


I earnestly request you to give me a distinct
reply for I am unwilling to act upon my own respon-
sibility in a matter which ought to to be regulated by
your orders.
I am &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Deputy Resident.
Prince of Wales Island
The Ist of August 1831.


Fort William 2d September 1831.
To the Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
In my letter to your address of the 3d February
last* I reported my intention of renewing my efforts to
release from slavery the 300 Taliens whom I had
ascertained to be in captivity at Zemmai and Laboung,
1 now have the honor to state, for the information
of the Honorable the Vice President in Council, that
the result of ray endeavours have been attended with
complete Success, and I may with safety assert that
the fulfilment of no part of my duty as a public
servant has ever brought with it so much pleasure.
2. Having succeeded in obtaining a list of the
names of the persons whom I considered I could with
any degree of justice claim as British subjects, I de-
termined in February last to depute an Agent to the
Minister of the King of Siam, to explain to them the
ground on which my claim was founded; also to
obtain from them, if possible, an order from the
King of Siam to the Chiefs of Northern Laos for
the unconditional release of such of the captives as
were desirous to return to this Province.
3. I selected as my agent to Bangkok the late
Myo Thoogee of Shwai Gyeen, the Chief of our Talien
inhabitants at Maulmain, and one of the most in-
telligent and gentlemanlike natives I have ever met
with. A translation of the notes kept by him during
his absence from Maulmain is herewith forwarded.
4. Nothing could have been more friendly than
the disposition shewn by the King of Siam in the
discussions between his Ministers and the Shwai Gyeen


Myo Thoogyee, by whom I am assured that his deten-
tion at Bangkok would not have exceeded ten or fifteen
days had it not been for the violent opposition made
by the Wangna, or Second King, to the orders issued
authorizing the appointment of a Siamese officer to
accompany the Shwai Gyeen Myo Thoogyee to La-
boung and Zemmai for the purpose of ascertaining the
justice or otherwise of the claim made by me.
5, As might have been expected every effort was
made by the Chiefs of Northern Laos to defeat the ob-
feet of the Shwai Gyeen Myo Thoogyee’s visit to them
but they had opposed to them a clever and shrewd
native, whose information regarding the disposal of
the slaves was correct,- and who aiso had the advantage
of being personally acquainted with many of them. It
was therefore difficult to deceive him, and the whole of
his conduct is marked with so much decision and judg-
ment that the Chief of Laos actually became alarmed
and restored to him, in addition to the captives origin-
ally claimed, 29 inhabitants of this Province who had
been seized on our frontier by the Red Karians and
sold by them at Zemmai and Laboung.
6. I have distributed food and clothing to the
219 captives who have lately arrived at Moulmain. It
is my intention to settle them on the banks of the
Salvein River as wood cutters, and I entertain no
doubt of the return to this Province during the next
North bast Monsoon of the 75 persons who were un-
able to accompany the Shwai Gyeen Myo Thoogyee.
******
I have &ca.
( Signed } A. D. Maingy
Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Mauhnain
The 3rd August 1831.


Bengal Secret
and Political
Consultations,
vol. 362.
No. 5.
1831
Tuesday Sih Feby
Wednesday 9th
10th February
11th & 12th Felyy.
13th
Uth 15th & 16th
17th
18th
Translation of a Journal kept by the Shwai Gyeen
Myo Thoogyee on the occasion of his being deputed
by the Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces to
Bangkok for the purpose of getting released from
slavery a number of Taliens said to be held in captivity
by the Chiefs of Zemmai, Laboung and Layonng.
Having made the necessary preparations for
my journey and received instructions from the
Commissioner I quitted Moulmain at 3 o’clock
in the afternoon and arriving at the village ot
.
Nantay about sunset I put up there for the night.
Having obtained boats at Nantay I proceeded
up the Altaran river, and at night put up at
the village of Altaian.
Encamped in ascending the Altaran river.
Met with several parties of wood cutters. At
night slept in the jungle.
Continued to ascend the Altaran river.
Dismissed our boats and commenced our
journey towards the three Pagodas. During the
last three days we have seen large parties of
wood cutters - employed in felling some very fine
teak.
Travelled through extensive teak forests, the
timber extremely fine, but at a great distance from
any river, and therefore difficult to be removed.
Passed the three Pagodas and slept on the
banks of the Thoungala, a river in the Siamese
territory which falls into the Kamboori river.
Left the Thoungala river and crossed the
river. This river takes its rise about five days
journey from Tavoy and also falls into the Kam-
Fort William 2nd September 1831-


boori river. It is narrow and very winding. At
night slept at Kahdyne tshein, Siamese post con-
taining a few houses and about one hundred men.
There met with a great many Kariens engaged
in the cultivation of cotton. I was detained at
this place until the morning of the 23d instant,
but not prevented from moving about. I was
detained under the pretence that no boats could be
procured for myself and my party. 1 was how-
ever aware that my movements were purposely
retarded in order that my arrival might be an-
nounced at Karnboori.
Reached Beelut, another Siamese post of 100
men armed with muskets. I was again detained
at this post for three days in spite of all my en-
deavours to get away, and I believe that excuses
would have been made to keep me at Beelut some
days longer had I not threatened to get the Chief
of the post punished.
I slept at Dan Kaboh, another Siamese post
of 20 men.
I slept at Dan yeik another post of 20 men.
I slept at Datlayo another post of 20 men.
Arrived MoungThein and was detained there
for ten days in order that my arrival might be
announced at Bangkok. I remonstrated violently
against'this xinnecessary detention, but 1 could
not persuade the Chief of Moung Thein to allow
me to move until he received orders from Bangkok
permitting me to proceed [to ] Kamboori. I
met at this place a son of Maha Ayothias. He
was there with 200 men for the purpose of collect-
ing sapan wood for the King of Siam. Each man
was expected to collect 150 Yiss of sapan wood.
The sapan wood forests in this quarter are
said [not] to be very extensive. I was told that
not less than 3000 men are annually employed in
cutting sapan wood for the King of Siam without


receiving pay for their services. The most of
these men are said to be employed in the direction
of the Tenasserim sapan forests. Since my quit-
ting the Three Pagodas I have met with no teak
forests. Within the last few days I have seen a
great many Careens conveying cotton on small
bamboo rafts to Bangkok.
I was permitted to proceed. We were in our
boats for two days and two nights.
Reached Kamboori, which is surrounded with
a stockade and contains about 300 houses. There
are 20 old guns in this village. Paddy is cul-
tivated here, the first I have seen since my de-
parture from Maulmain.
Reached Bammay, a large village and sur-
rounded with good gardens. Tobacco appears to
be cultivated in large quantities.
Reached Bampan, a village containing about
40 houses.
Reached Phee-ap, another large village con-
taining 300 houses and surrounded with a wooden
stockade. I saw a great deal of cultivation and
many large gardens The Siamese appear to take
great pains with their tobacco.
Quitted the Menee River and crossed a small
lake leading to the Mai Tshan Rizer. At the en-
trance of the Mai Tshan River there is a battery
of fifteen guns. This battery is about a dain
(two miles ) from the sea. Another dain beyond
this battery there is a village containing 50
houses, and two dains beyond the villige to
the capital. The banks of the river are covered
with houses and fruit trees.
On the 19th we reached the Capital and at
about 10 in the morning the Chief of Kamboori
and Maha Ayothia’s writer took me to a house
allotted for myself and my followers. The hou£e
in question belongs to a son of Maha Ayuthia’s


and is distant from Maha Ayothia’s house about
twenty yards. The house is large and spacious and
had not been previously occupied.
On the 22nd Maha Ayothia’s writer came and
called me requesting me to go to Maha Ayothia’s
house. The writer informed me that the King had
sent one of his Woongyees to Maha Ayothia’s house
for the purpose of ascertaining the object of my mis-
sion. On my arrival at Maha Ayothia’s house I
explained to the Woongyee the object of my being
deputed to Bangkok, and I then delivered to Maha
Ayothia the letter addressed to him b}' the Commis-
sioner, after which a good deal of general conversation
followed regarding the health of the commissioner, the
number of houses and inhabitants at Maulmain, the
number of troops and the terms of friendship existing
between the English and Burmese. Being asked by
the Woongyee whether I had any letters from the
Commissioner to the Woongyees I replied that I
had ; upon which the Minister requested me to deliver
the letter to him, in order that it might be read
before the King. The Woongyee having received the
Commissioner’s letter quitted me and I returned to my
own house. In the afternoon, seeing the Woongyee
returning from the Palace to Maha Ayothia’s house, I
went to him and enquired what had taken place at the
Palace. He told me that the Commissioner’s letter
had been read in the presence of the King and the
Ministers, and that on hearing its contents the King
had observed that he had no wish to detain any British
subjects but on the contrary he was desirous that they
should not be allowed to communicate or intermix with
his subjects, and added he would at once give an order
to have the Commissioner’s claim enquired into, and
that if any British subjects should be found residing
as slaves with the Chiefs of Northern Laos, that they
should be restored and delivered over to the Commis-
sioner’s Agent. I was also told that the Ministers


would fix a day for receiving me and hearing
what I might have to state.
Nothing particular occurred. I saw Maha
Ayothia, whose conversation had reference to the
power and strength of the English and ro their
system of Government. He after expressed a
wish to live under British rnle, but observed that
he must die in Siam as the King of Siam would
never allow him to quit his dominions. Some ot
my followers met with their relations who had 18
or 20 years ago fled to Siam. These men had an
opportunity of visiting the different batteries on
the banks of the river, and stated that they con-
tained about 170 guns and 200 Suijals. They al-
so stated that a large iron chain was moored
across the river in order to prevent shipping from
passing the batteries.
Maha Ayothia’s writer told me that the Min-
isters had assembled at the Palace and requested
my attendance. 1 reached the Palace at 11
o’clock and there met the Chief Woongyee
and Mengyee Maha Ayothia, besides Woongyee
Chakree and Prah Narine. A Talien of the
name of Memig Ba acted as Interpreter.
The usual questions were then put to me regard-
ing the health of the commissioner and state of
the country. I was also questioned respecting
the situation held by me. The Chief Woongyee
then observed that Mya Pien and Nga Chau, the
two head men alluded to in the Commissioners
letter, could not be British subjects, as they and
their relations have been subjects ot the King of
Siam since the days of the King who owned the
first white elephant, and that he had been assured
of this by the Chiefs of Northern Laos, and
further that Nga Pein and Nga Chau had held
appointments under and received letters from the
King of Siam, and that consequently the English


could have no claim to them. I replied that the
Chief Woongyee must have been deceived, and
that I was prepared to prove that the raliens in
captivity at Zemmai and Laboung are British
subjects and that they had been seized and sold
as slaves after they had received a protecting pass
from the great English General Sir A. Campbell,
and that moreover such protecting pass port had
been shown by Nga Fein and Nga Chau to the
Chiefs of Zemmai and Laboung and that I had
brought it with me in proof of my assertion. The
Minister then ob erved that if what 1 had then
said should prove to be correct, that the King of
Siam had been deceived by the Chiefs of Northern
Laos, and that 'as friendship and peace subsist
between the Siamese and the English, that the
Chiefs of Zemmai and Laboung should be ordered to
deliver to me the captives enumerated in my list,
provided they were willing and desirous of
placing themselves under the Government of the
English ; and further that as the Commissioner
had requested in his letter to the Woongyee
that I might not be detained at Bangkok
longer than was necessary, that people should
be appointed to accompany me with order
from the King to the Chiefs of Zemmai and
Laboung to release all such persons as I
could prove had been seized and carried into
captivity after they had received a protect-
ing pass from Sir A. Campbell. I then
observed tint there are several inhabitants,
British subjects, with the Chiefs of Zemmai
and Laboung, who were residents of Moul-
main, and who had been seized and sold by
the red Kurreens.
A dreadful fire broke out this day and con-
sumed, it is said, 1000 houses. Several persons
also lost their lives.


I ascertained that the Wangna or Second King
had addressed the King and opposed the release
of the captives at Zemmai and Laboung, observing
that the English never allowed the Siamese to re-
main quiet but are always making applications to
them for the release of persons whom they claim
as their subjects, and that always meeting with a
ready compliance from the King of Siam to their
demands, that they are never likely to be satisfied ;
therefore it would be better to check at once such
demands, otherwise, of what avail are our fire
arms and ammunition if we do not use them.
Owing to the opposition made by the Wangna my
departure was delayed. I received this informa-
tion from Maha Ayothia and Pia Narine, who also
stated that the King of Siam in reply to the
Wangna had observed that he had no desire of
going to war with the English, with whom he was
living on terms of friendship, and that if he had
enemies he would prefer conciliating them than
having recourse to arms. My detention being
longer than I anticipated, and seeing no prepa-
rations being made for my departure, I solicited
the Chief Minister and Maha Ayothia to obtain
leave for me to quit Bangkok and to be furnished
with letters to the Chiefs of Zemmai and Laboung
for the delivery of such slaves as I could prove to
belong to the English. I also solicited that the
Chief of Yahein, who was then at Bangkok, might
be allowed to accompany me, and that to him
authority might be delegated for ensuring the re-
lease of the slaves. I was informed that His Ma-
jesty objected to the Chief of Yahein being the
person selected to accompany me to Zemmai and
Laboung, lest on my arrival at those places 1
might experience difficulty, delay and evasion, in
consequence of the Chief of Yahein being related
to the Laos Chiefs, and that another Siamese offi-
cer should be appointed for that purpose. I was


afterwards [informed] that the Chief of Thampe-
ing had been ordered by His Majesty to accom-
pany me to Zemmai and Laboung. and that I should
be allowed to quit Bangkok as soon as that Chief
arrived there and had received his instructions.
Within the last seven or eight days several alarm-
ing fires have broken out in this city and destroyed
a great number of houses, amongst them the re-
sidence of the Wangna, it having been set on fire
by lightning.
On the 22d April the Chief of Thampein
having arrived at Bangkok and received his in_
structions, we left the city in boats and ascended
the Maipieng River. Maha Ayothia sent seven of
his own men to accompany me. In [ the ] evening
we arrived at the village of Bantoon and slept
there.
On the 23d passed Bantaphan, a village
containing about 20 houses. The banks ot the
river between Bangkok and this village are well
cultivated. Slept at Darawaddy, the former
capital of Siam, and once in possession of the
Burmese. It is now occupied by cultivators and
contains about 500 houses.
Reached the village Thepak containing about
20 houses.
Reached the village of Mong Bin containing
about st) houses.
Reached the village of Kanoon and put up
for the night at Khantawan, formerly a city but
now containig no more than 100 houses. In the
vicinity of the villages through which I have
passed during the last 3 or 4 days I saw every
where extensive paddy fields. The cultivation of
tobacco appeared to be greatly attended to.
Reached the village Odoon containing up-
wards of 100 houses.


Reached the village Thento, containing tip"
wards of 20 houses. We passed this day through
some teak forests.
Reached the town of Meing then Eit con-
taining upwards of 300 houses
We passed through to the villages of Banphan
containing 50 houses ; also Bankoon containg 20
houses. On the 4th arrived at Thampein, the
Chief of which place having been ordered to ac-
company me, we were here delayed for two days
to enable him to collect men to accompany us.
This town contains from 150 to 200 houses. On
the sth of May we left Thampein and travelled
through some fine teak forests.
We reached Yahein and remained there until
the morning of the 9th. Phis town contains about
500 houses. Its inhabitants are principally em-
ployed as wood cutters, and I met with at Yahein
some of the finest specimens of teak timber I have
ever yet seen. There is an excellent bazar at
Yahein, much visited by the inhabitants of Labo-
ung and Zemmai, who come to it for the purpose
of purchasing foreign articles brought from Bang-
kok. I may here observe that the owner of almost
every house in Yahein is possessed of an elephant.
These useful animals are principally employed in
moving timber. I saw no stick lac here.
On the 9th we quitted our boats and proceeded
on elephants. On the 10th we arrived at Bandat
and slept there. There are about 50 houses in this
village.
Travelled through a forest containing oil trees
and slept in it during the night.
We crossed the Nawayong Creek and reached
the village Baynapike containing about 20 houses.
The inhabitants of the village are wood cutters
and are possessed of some good cattle besides
elephants.


13th May
We reached Meinthein, a town containing 400
houses. The Chief ot Meinthein is independent
inasmuch as that he is merely tributary to Siam
and not under the Chiefs of Zemmai, Laboung or
Yahein. A large quantity of teak is taken to
Bangkok from Meinthein. We remained here for
three days owing to our requiring more elephants.
16th do.
We proceeded on our journey with 20 eleph-
ants and on the 17th arrived at Baynanyeen, a
village containing 20 houses.
18th do.
Slept at the village of Banthanckein contain-
ing about 30 houses. 1 here for the first time
met with stick-lac. The lac was seen on most of
the trees belonging to the villagers.
19th do.
Arrived at the town of Lagoon containing
2000 houses. The town is divided into three dis-
tinct divisions, each division being surrounded by
a wall. Two divisions on the right bank of the
river, and one division on the left. I remained
here for six days, in order that the heads of the
neighbouring villages might be collected for the
purpose of accomf anying me to Laboung. I re-
ceived great kindness from the Chief of Lagoon
and met with a few Kukas, inhabitants of Moul-
main, trading here. Cattle was extremely abun-
dant and could be purchased at 5 and 6 rupees a
head. Several Chinese were also trading here.
The bazar was well supplied, and I have no doubt
but that a lucrative trade might hereafter be car-
ried on between the inhabitants of Moulmain and
those of Lagoon.
26th 27th & 28th May
29th do.
/ Continued our journey through the jungle.
We reached Laboung. During the last four
days we have passed through some very line
forests containing principally teak. We found on
our arrival at Laboung a shed constructed for us
without the town, where I was allowed fo remain


for 8 daj’s. Daring this time I was inactive, but
was employed in collecting information regarding
the persons whom I came to claim and finding
out who possessed them.
The Chief of Thampein requested me to at-
tend at the Palace, where I met the Chiefs and all
the principal officers of the cities of Lagoon,
Laboung and Zemmai, and also the son of the
Chief of Reeay ( the town of Beea} 7 is situated
S. East of Lagoon, distant seven days' journey ).
The son of the Chief of Reeay had with him a
party of 500 armed men. I was first asked by the
Chief of Laboung the usual questions regarding
the health of the Commissioner, and was then
called upon to give an account of my journey from
Maulmain to Bangkok, the period of ray stay there
and the nature of the recaption which I received
from the Ministers of Siam. Several questions
were also put to me regarding Maulmain and the
strength and power of the English, and I was fin-
ally asked the object of my visit to Laboung. I
then explained to the Chief of Laboung what had
brought me to his country and informed him that
it was in support of the claim which had already
been made to him by the Commissioner for the
release of the British subjects which he and the
neighbouring Chiefs retained in captivity, as
slaves. That a list specifying the names of the
persons detained by him had already been sent to
him by the Commissioner but that the Commis-
sioner’s demand not having been attended to I
had been deputed to the Court of Bangkok for the
purpose of obtaining an order from the King of
Siam to the Chiefs of Laos for the immediate
delivery of the British subjects detained by
them, and that being furnished with an order
from the King of Siam 1 had come to claim
[ its fulfilment ]. On receiving this information
the Chiefs retired.


On the sth the Chiefs having again met I
was sent for and was requested to bring with me
Naga Chau and Naga Pein, both of whom had
accompanied me from Maulmain, both of whom
had escaped from Laboung These men were
questioned b} T the Chiefs regarding the period of
their residence at Laboung, and whether they had
not received Siamese letters. I observed that
such sorts of questions would only lead to un-
necessary discussion, that the Chiefs of Laboung
and Zemmai are well aware how they obtained
these men, and that Naga Pein, when first brought
in captivity to Laboung produced the protecting
pass, which he had received from Sir A. Campbell.
After a considerable deal [ of ] unpleasant dis-
cussion, [I ] called upon the Chiefs to state
whether they intended to abide by the orders
of the King of Siam delivered to them by the
Chief of Thunipein. The Chiefs after consulting
together for some time consented to question-
ing the captives. The list containing their names
was now produced, and the name [of the ]
first person mentioned in it was called and
[ he was ] questioned regarding his inclination
to return to Maulmain or remain at Laboung.
To which he replied that he was unwilling
to quit Laboung. I at once discovered that
another person had been substituted for the
person. I claimed, and on my exposing their
attempt to deceive me, I was assured that
the man mentioned in the list was dead.
A similar attempt was made to deceive me
when the second person was called in and
examined, on which I distinctly told the
Chiefs that unless they dealt fairly with me that
I should at once [return] to Maulmain. At this
moment one of my followers informed me that
the person first claimed and said to be dead, was
at my house, and had come to me to seek protec


tion. On his being brought before the Chiefs
they pretended that he went bj 7 another name
amongst them. I now asked the Chiefs if they
were not ashamed of themselves, and repeated my
determination to quit them unless they attended
to my demand. I further pointed out to them how
seriously they might suffer by disobeying the or-
ders of the King of Siam, and I called upon the
Chief of Thampien to carry into effect the instruc-
tions he had received at Bangkok, apprising the
Chiefs of Zemmai and Laboring that I had the
names of several of the inhabitants of Maul main
who had recently been purchased by them, and
that unless those persons as well as the Taliens,
for the release of whom I had brought an order,
were immediately given up to me, I was convinced
the English Chief would consider their conduct as
most unfriendly and that the peace and good will
subsisting between the Maulraain Chief and the
Chiefs of Northern Laos would be interrupted #
This threat appeared to alarm them, it being at
once determined by them that every man named
in [the] list should be called up and examined.
The examination lasted for 9 days and every diffi-
culty was secretly opposed to my recovering the
captives. Many of them received large bribes to
remain [in] Zemmai and Laboung The list with
which I was furnished contained the names of ‘228
persons. Of these 18 were dead, 25 had been
persuaded by bribes under promises of obtaining
situations not to return to Maulmain, and 25 of
the men claimed by me were at Mem-Woohgyee,
An order for their release was however made out
and an assurance given that their departure should
not be questioned or disturbed. On collecting the
captives whose release I had obtained, I found
them to amount to 210, so that I had actually suc-
ceeded in obtaining the emancipation of 30 persons
beyond the number included in my list. I regret


to state in the course of ray enquiries I ascer-
tained that there yet remain in captivity with
the Chiefs of Northern Laos between 4 and 500
inhabitants of the Province of Amherst who have
been seized and sold as slaves at Zemmai and
Laboring since the capture of Martaban by the
English. The Chiefs of Zemmai and Laboung
were extremely desirous that I should furnish
them with a receipt for all the persons delivered
over by them to me, but this I refused granting
until they consented to furnish me with 20 ele-
phants for the conveyance of our provisions as far
as our boundary river of Thoung Ein. After
having made every arrangements for rny departure
a claim was started by the Chief of Laboung
for the cost of the grain which the slaves had
consumed during their captivity, and also for the
hire of ploughs and buffaloes which had been lent
to them. 1 ridiculed this claim and asked the
person who was sent to make it if his master,
who called himself a Prince, was not ashamed of
himself in making so unjust a demand. My ob-
servation was considered by the Chief of Laboung
as insolent, but the Chief of Lagoon espoused my
cause and observed that so far from being insolent
I had displayed a great deal of good sense and
argued rightly against the demand made by the
Chief of Laboung.
Having made every arrangement for my de-
parture I proceeded to the village of Duongto,
where I remained for two days in collecting the
captives ; on 11137 again examining these people I
found several of them too unwell to follow me, no
less than 50 being laid up and unequal to under-
take so long a journey during the S. West
Monsoon. Having appointed two natives of
Bengal, Jummun and Summud Ally, in charge
of these people, I left this village on the 21st


June, bringing with me 210 persons released from
captivity.
We arrived at the village of Mein hoot con-
taining 50 houses. Here we remained for four
days procuring elephants. From the 26th June
to the 10th July we were journeying through the
jungle and had many difficulties to encounter on
account of the heavy rains and the delay in cross-
ing the river. On the 3rd [the] men in charge of
the elephants refused to proceed any further and
nothing but threats and having a very strong
party with me induced them to proceed. Had I
not had recourse to measures of violence towards
the people in charge of the elephants, a great
number of my followers must unavoidably have
perished. On the 10th we reached the Thoung
Ein, the boundary river, and here most fortunate-
ly met with Binya Rajah the brother in law of
the Chief of Zemmai whose title is Chokara Maha
Woon. From this person I received two baskets
of rice and he further assisted me with o
elephants, agreeing to accompany me as far as
Maulmain. For the use of his elephants and the
rice which he had supplied I could not persuade
him to receive any remuneration. I suspect that
Chokara Maha Woon had been sent by the Chiefs
of Zemmai and Laboung to the boundary river
for the purpose of preventing my taking with me
any of the Kariens who might be anxious to
place themselves under British rule. The want
of boats occasioned my delay for three days in
crossing the boundary river. On our arrival at
Wen weet we obtained 8 baskets of rice from a
Karreen Sokay, for which I gave him a receipt.
On the 13th 14th and 15th we continued our
journey, and always managed at night to put up
at Karien villages. From each of the Kanen
villages we procured some rice, and for which


receipts were granted. On the morning of the
I6th I left my followers at Lyne Boon, a Karien
village, and getting into a small boat, 1 descended
the Saluen river and reached Maulmain on the
20th.
A true Translation
(Signed) A, D. Maingy
Commissioner in the Tenasserim,
Provinces.
Maulmain
The 3d August 1831.


Fort William 9th September 1831.
To the Resident at Singapore.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter to the address of Mr. Chief Secretary Swinton
No. 2 dated Bth June last,* with its enclosures, and
in reply to convey to you the Governor General’s entire
approbation of the measures taken by you to effect the
removal of the Ex Raja of Queda from Penang to
Malacca, and to express his Lordship's satisfaction at
the final accomplishment of this desirable object.
2. With respect to the proceedings of the adhe-
rents of the Ex Raja, who, fitting out their expedition
from Penang, have succeeded in capturing Quedah from
the Siamese, and for the expulsion of whom measures
are now taken under the direction, it is stated, of the
Chief of Rigor, the Governor General cannot avoid ex-
pressing his regret that so little vigilance was exerted
to prevent an occurrence of such ill aspect towards a
nation connected with us by Treaty. The circum-
stances which gave encouragement to these adven-
turers, and enabled them to concert and prepare their
measures are fully explained by Captain Low, but will
never be comprehended by the Siamese, who, it may
be expected, will look upon this buccaneering expedi-
tion as having been fitted out under the connivance,
at least, of the British authorities at Prince of Wales
Island. Sensible of the difficulty of the position in
which you are placed by this untoward event, His Lord-
ship is fully prepared to admit the expediency, if not
the necessity of some steps on our part for the purpose
of undeceiving tho Siamese Chiefs as to the fact of our
participation in the enterprise. The removal of the
Ex Raja is of that description, and the prompt mea-
sures taken by you to effect it merits therefore the
highest approbation, but the extent to which our co-
operation should be given to the Siamese with the


same view for the recovery of Quedah is a question of
considerable nicety, and as no obligation to the effect
is incurred under any Treaty, His Lordship is inclined
to think it may be the better polky to avoid any
operations of a hostile character either by land or
sea.
3. If those concerned in the enterprise against
Quedah return for refuge or asylum into the British
they must be seized and punished for the
offence under the Proclamation issued, but there can
be no reason to prevent their taking refuge elsewhere,
if they do so peaceably. The insurgents are certainly
entitled to expect of us neutrality, but His Lordship
would confine the measures of a hostile character, if
any be taken against them, to the prevention of fur-
ther assistance of men or arms joining them from
Penang or Province Wellesley. Except in so far as
may be required for this specific purpose, His Lord-
ship doubts if it can be necessary to maintain a strict
blockade of the mouth of the river on which Quedah
is situated, but he concludes that you will see the ex-
pediency of avoiding at any rate joining the Siamese in
operations by land.
4. A copy of your letter and of this reply and
likewise of the reports of Captain Low, explaining the
origin of the expedition against Quedah will be com-
municated for the information of His Excellency the
Naval commander in chief, a detachment from whose
squadron will be in the Strait, available for any
service that may be required by circumstances. You
will of course communicate fully and unreservedly
with the Commanders of His Majesty’s vessels that
may be on duty in those seas.
I have etc.,
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep,
Secry. to the Govr. Genl.
Simla
15 August 1831.


Fort William 14th October 1831.
To the Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
Contrary to the expectations expressed in my dis-
patch of the 8 June last No. 2,* the disturbances at
Quedah still continue active as ever, and without
decided co-operation from us in favor of the Siamese,
the success of that power I fear appears doubtful. So
long as other expectations were entertained, I consi-
dered that temporizing measures such as the partial
blockade of that river, with the view of preventing as
far as possible the further ingress of our own subjects
to their assistance, and the removal of the Fx King,
by further establishing their confidence in us, would
have sufficiently encouraged the Siamese to effect the
rest with vigour. But this now appears extremely
problematical, and a question arises whether, by not
more strenuously endeavouring to prevent the former
Governor of Quedah, or any of his followers from
attacking, disturbing or injuring in any manner the
territory of Quedah, the spirit of that Treaty is not
broken.
With reference to this point I have the honor to
transmit for the purpose of being laid before the
Honble. the Vice President in Council copies of two
letters noted in the margin, and further to state that
[in ] an interview a few days back with Mr. Hunter
(a gentleman long resident at Bangkok and fre-
quently noticed in the correspondence of Messrs.
Crawfurd and Burney ), who was present at the read-
ing of my letter to the Minister, I received the most
gratifying account of the satisfaction which it pro-
duced, established by the fact that His Majesty, in
consequence of it, instantly created him (Mr. Hunter)
a Grandee of the Realm.


After the many friendly protestations on our part,
should the Siamese now have cause to suspect us even
of indifference from the passiveness of our acts, and
find, from the want of our co-operation, that they have
more to contend with than, single-handed, they are
able to effect, they may still arrange some compromise
with Soliman and Tuanko Kudin, leaving us to get on
as we best may, having by our acts fully established
the ill-will and hatred of both parties. The con-
sequence of such a proceeding would be the desertion
of our population at Province Wellesley and insult and
robbery from all around us, whenever opportunity and
motives of revenge prompted them to annoy ns. But
on the other hand it may be also argued, what right
have we to assume an interference in the Government
of a nation, the people of which are able to set them-
selves at liberty from the authority of an usurper.
The Treaty of Bangkok is not an offensive and defen-
sive one, nor is the point at which we should desist
from aiding the latter at all defined. Ineffectual efforts
have been made to assist them, but when these are to
cease becomes the question.
I shall as soon as possible repair to Prince of
Wales Island, and be ready to act as circumstances
and mature reflection dictate but the dilemma is per-
plexing, and one upon which I would fain have had the
instructions of Government.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.
Malacca
Resident’s Office
The Bth September 1831


Translation of a letter from the Chou Pia Prah
Klang, Minister of the King of Siam, to the Resident
of Singapore.
In a letter which the Resident of Singapore has
sent by a vessel belonging to a Chinese trader of the
name of Eish it is stated, that on the 18th of April
1831 a noted pirate called Tuanko Kudin at the head
of a worthless gang attacked and took Quedah and
that it was the opinion of the Resident that this was
done with the knowledge and concurrence of the Ex
Rajah of Quedah, who some time ago took refuge in
Pulo Penang, although he denies it, and is appar-
ently residing quietly at the latter place. Some of
the people who invaded Quedah were equipped like
English soldiers, with the view of inducing the belief
that the attack was countenanced by the English,
whereas they knew nothing about it. On the con-
trary, that had it come to the knowledge of the
Resident of Singapore, that he would have immediate-
ly prevented it, for he is desirous of observing the
relations of friendship and alliance with Siam, and
was on the point of setting out for Penang in order to
seize any persons infringing the Treaty between the
two nations. Three individuals named Tuanko Bakie
(suppose Kechil) Tuanko Abdullah and Yanoos had
been arrested and confined at Penang, and all others
concerned in the plot were ordered to be seized. The
Resident of Singapore is of opinion that owing to the
discontented nature of the people engaged in this
affair that there is a want of unanimity and that they
are not likely to agree amongst themselves for any
length of time. On the part of the English, that
Fort William 14th October 1831.


there was every desire to assist the Siamese nation
and uphold the existing Treaty of friendship.
That the Governor of Bengal had entrusted the Go-
vernment of Penang and Malacca to the Resident of
Singapore. All these circumstances the Chou Pia
Prah Klang has communicated to the King of Siam,
and has received His Majesty’s commands to reply
that in sending so clear and satisfactory a letter, in
arresting Tuanko Kudin ( suppose Tuanko Kechil )
Tuanko Addulluh and Yanoos, and giving orders for
the seizure of all others concerned in the invasion of
Quedah, all idea that the English had any participation
in the matter will be effaced. For upholding the ex-
isting friendly relations between the two countries,
the King of Siam expresses his thanks to the Resident
of Singapore under whose management the affairs of
Penang and Malacca will be wisely managed and the
friendship of the two nations will descend to posterity.
With regard to the Treaty which was entered into
some time ago, it is provided in the 13th article that
the Siamese shall have the management of the Quedah
country and its people. That the inhabitants of Pe-
nang and Quedah shall have the liberty of trading as
formerly.
On buffaloes, oxen, ducks, fowls, fish, paddy, rice
and all kinds of provisions which the people of Penang
and the shipping may require the Siamese shall not
impose any duty, neither shall they farm out the
mouths of the rivers in the Quedah country, though
they are to be entitled to the * and proper imposts.
The Siamese engage that on the Rajah of Ligore’s
return to Siam the family and followers of the Ex
Rajah of Quedah shall be freely released. The Eng-
lish are not to take possession of Quedah either by
force or otherwise or to allow the Ex Rajah or his
followers to create any disturbance or trouble what-
ever in any part of Quedah or other dependency


of Siam, but to use their endeavours in placing him
in some other country and not allow him to settle
either at Penang, Quedah, Salengore or Burmah. In
case of the non-fulfilment on the part of the English
of this stipulation the Siamese are to be at liberty
to impose a duty on paddy and rice in Quedah as
formerly. In the event of the Siamese, Chinese or
Malays residing at Penang wishing to remove to
Quedah, the English engage to offer no opposition to
their doing so. Such are the stipulations of the 13th
Article of the Treaty, every part of which the Siam-
ese have strictly observed, and have not deviated from
the path of friendship. But the Quedah country has
now been thrown into confusion in consequence of
Tuanko Pangeraw (the Ex Rajah) having disregarded
the orders of the English at Penang, refusing to settle
himself in another country agreeably to the Treaty,
but has fomented disturbances repeatedly and al-
though he did not accompany the invasion himself,
he ordered his dependents to go and incite the Malay
pirates to attack Quedah and therefore, according to
the laws of Siam, he is equally guilty with those who
were actually present and concerned.
Before this event took place the Rajah of Ligore
made frequent remonstrance to Penang relative to
the disturbances created in Quedah by these Malayan
pirates belonging to Tuanko Pangerang, of which the
English must long ago have been aware. On the
19th day of the 4th month of last year (Siamese style)
the Chief of Pulo Penang sent a letter to the Siamese
Chief of Quedah stating that Tuanko Pangeran would
not be permitted to make war on Quedah, that if he
disobeyed the orders of the English he would be puni-
shed, and that if his people created any disturbance,
they would be seized and sent to the Siamese Chief
of Quedah, who confided in this communication and
did not suspect that Tuanko Pangeran would then plot
with Tuanko Koodin, Tuanko Abdullah and [Yanoos],
these worthless Malays, and attack Quedah, which has


now been laid waste. The Rajah of Ligore has how-
ever been ordered to equip a force, put an end to this
war, restore tranquillity, and place the country on its
former footing. He accordingly set out on the 23rd
of the 6th Month of this year ( Siamese style ) after
which the Resident of Singapore’s letter was received.
The Rajah ot Ligore was ordered, in case any difficulty
should arise with the English, in carrying these ins-
tructions into effect, to send a letter and a messenger
to the authorities at Penang, and seeing that they
were not concerned in the invasion of Quedah to
observe scrupulously the friendly stipulations of the
Treaty. When he arrives at Quedah, Tuanko Koodin
and the adherents of Tuanko Pangeran will not be
able to resist him and they will flj into the English
districts, and no sooner than he returns they will
come back and create confusion again, and the
Quedah country will never be at peace. Tuanko
Kudin and Tuanko Long Putih will turn pirates
and the English and Siamese traders will not be
able to pursue their traffic in security. Tuanko Pan-
geran and this portion of the Malays will plot against
Quedah, take refuge in the English dependencies, and
the Siamese, although anxious to follow and punish
them will be hindered by the Treaty of friendship
which they are bound to observe. However if the
mischief is so often repeated the forbearance of the
Siamese will be greatly tried and owing to Tuanko
Pangeran and these worthless Malays the friendship
between the two nations will be lessened. If therefore
the Resident of Singapore be desirous of perpetuating
the good understanding between us he must look well
to this affair in all its bearings. Tuanko Long Putih
and Tuanko Koodin harass the trading prahus from
Penang to Malacca and are thorns and foes to both
parties. It is not expedient therefore that they should
be allowed to remain in any of our dependeucies.
If the Resident of Singapore will send Tuanko


Abdullah, Tuanko Bakie ( Kechil ) and Yanoos to the
Rajah of Ligore together with those Malays who have
been guilty of this act of perfidy in attacking Quedah
and may have taken refuge in the English territories,
the Quedah Country will be perfectly quiet and
peaceful and the friendship between the Siamese and
English will not be disturbed, but will on the contrary
be increased and descend to the latest posterity.
Written in the Siamese and also in the Malayan
language on the 22nd day of the 7th Month of the
present year ( Siamese ) and delivered to Mr. Hunter
of the Ship Madeline. One copy has also been sent
overland to the Rajah of Ligore for transmission.
Translated from the Malayan copy
( Signed ; R. Win grove
Assistant Resident
Singapore.


Fort William 11th November 1831
To the Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to report for the information of
the tlonble. the Vice President in Council, that in
pursuance of the instructions conveyed in your letter
of the 16th September the Vakeels from the Rajah of
Ligore have been apprized of the removal of the Ex
Rajah of Quedali to Malacca and also that the tenor
of the letters addressed by Mr. Ibbetson to the
Siamese Government has been fully explained to
them.
2. Having further communicated to them the
impossibility of their seeing the Governor General,
in consequence of His Lordship’s absence from the
Presidency, they have determined for the present to
forego their intended visit to Calcutta, and have, at
their own request, been provided on the Honble.
Company’s Ship the Enterprize with a passage to
Mergui. They take with them to Ligore the letters
and presents intended for the Governor General.
3. On their departure from Mergui I shall not
fail to address a friendly letter to the Rajah of Ligore,
making known to him that his vakeels might on two
occasions have proceeded on Steam Vessels to Calcutta,
and that they have during their stay at Maulmain
been treated with civility and attention. The tenor
of Mr. Ibbetsou’s letters to the Siamese Government
shall also be translated into Siamese for the infor-
mation of the Rajah of Ligore.
I have &c.
(Signed) A. D. Maingy
Commissioner in the
Tenasserim Provinces.
Amherst
The 10th October 1831.


Fort William 25th November 1831.
To the Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
With reference to my letter dated the Bth ultimo
regarding the affairs of Quedah, I have the satisfac-
tion to announce to you, for the information of the
Honorable the Vice President in Council, the fall of
that fortress to the forces of Siam on the morning of
the sth instant, which settles in the most satisfactory
manner the pre-existing difficulties alluded to upon
this subject.
As the present is a favorable opportunity for
defining the boundary of Province Wellesley, it is my
intention to seek a personal interview with the Rajah
of Ligore expressly for this purpose. Any consider-
able acquisition of territory in that direction, although
easily obtained, may not be desirable, and I therefore
contemplate merely the demarkation of a boundary
in the manner provided for in the 8d article of the
Treaty of Bangkok, to be formed by nature, such as
rivulets and hills, as far as possible, and in which
some small addition of country will probably be in-
cluded, the consequence of which cannot be otherwise
than beneficial; but I shall of course avoid definitely
accepting any thing beyond this, otherwise than sub-
ject to the approval of Government.
I beg to enclose copy of a letter addressed by me
to Commander Hamley of H. M. s Ship Wolfe, to
whose indefatigable exertions the termination of this
war is mainly to be attributed.
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson,
Resident Singapore.
Prince of W. Island
Resident’s Office,
The 10th October 1831


To H. Hamley, Esqr,, K. L. A.
H. M. Ship Wolfe.
Sir,
Your return to this port from the blockade of
Quedah River, with accounts of the fall of that for-
tress to the forces of Siam, affords me the fairest
opportunity of tendering to you my cordial and
sincere acknowledgments for the persevering and
cheerful zeal with which, at my request, you have so
ably co-operated in hastening this desirable event,
under circumstances too so truly vexatious to the
spirit of British Seaman, unaccustomed to the timid
and protracted mode of undisciplined native war-
fare.
******
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.
Prince of W. Island
Resident’s Office,
The 10th October 1831
Fort William 25th November 1831.


Extracts of the Log of H. M. S. Wolf under
Commander Hamley.
11 July 1831. A.M. 10.30. Observed a great
many armed proas to the N.W. steering towards Queda,
which port we were blockading, manned and armed the
extra boats, pinnace and cutter, sent tbem in company
with the Emerald cutter under the command of Lieut.
Burridge to prevent their getting in. 11.10. made sail
towards the boats. 12. proas retreating from the fir-
ing of the boats with precipitation.
P.M. 0.30. One of the proas being disabled sur-
rendered. Lieut. Price took possession of her On
examination found on board one gun of about 8 I r.,
two swivels mounted, several muskets with numerous
other implements of war, destroyed the whole of them.
3.30 tacked, boats returned . . . made for anchorage
. 5 came alongside a Siamese proa to communicate
7 August. A.M. 3.30 manned and armed the
extra boats, pinnace, cutter and gig and sent them in
company with Crocodiles boats towaids the fort of
Queda.
11 August. P.M. Supplied the Siamese with
one case of powder of 120 lbs per order ot C apt. Mon-
tagu.
[There are constant references to communications
with Siamese proas, j
8 Sept. A.M. 9.30 came alongside a proa in
distress, being full of men, women and children. Sup-
plied them with water, rice and bread.
13 Sept. A.M. 10.20. Communicated with a
Siamese proa. P.M. 3.30 Cutter rescued from the
Siamese 1 man and 2 Women.
lit. Sept. A.M. 8.30 Sent cutter to communi-
cate with Siamese. Supplied a boat in distress with


rice and water. P.M. 2. Supplied a Malay proa in
distress with rice, water and bread.
15 Sept. A.M. 8. Observed much firing be-
tween the fort and Siamese.
17 Sept. A.M. Daylight. Observed heavy fir-
ing between the Siamese and the Malays. 9 Observed
several Malay Proas escape from the harbour. 11
made sail after them.
P.M. 3.30 Sent cutter to board chase. 5.30
Cutter returned, chase being Malay proas full of wo-
men and children.
18 Sept. P.M. Sent boats to anchor 2 Malay
proas, being deserted and adrift. Found on board
ammunition, guns and other arUis and two men, one
being dead, the other severely wounded in the head,
brought him on board. One of the proas sunk.
19 Sept. A.M. 9 Sent pinnace to Malay proa.
Siamese took possession of her.
Oct. A.M. 10 Came alongside a Siamese
proa. Observed a large fire at Quedah fort. P.M.
1. Sent the cutter to Quedah fort. 5.30 cutter re-
turned.
5 Oct. A.M. 8 Sent cutter to Quedah fort.
19 Oct. A.M. 8 Sent cutter to Quedah fort,
10 Ditto returned with Siamese proa.
£1 Oct. A.M. The Captain and officers went
on shore to the Rajah of Ligore.
22 Oct, A.M. 7 Weighed and made sail [for
Penang].


Fort William 14th October 1831,
Minute by the Vice President.
10th October 1831.
******
With respect to Mr. Ibbetson’s application on the
subject of Quedah he may, I conceive, be instructed,
pending the receipt of orders from the Governor
General, that he is not to detach any force to the
aid of the Rajah of Ligore for the recovery of
Quedah.
(Signed) 0. T. Metcalfe.


Fort William 4th June 1832.
To His Excellency Sir E. Owen, K. 0. 8.,
Rear Admiral and Commander in Chief.
Sir,
I am honored with your Excellency’s letters dated
the 12th instant, and beg in the first instance to
tender my acknowledgments for the obliging offer of
assistance it conveys, either to model or arm the boats
about to be equipped and employed by Government in
the protection of the trade. Two are now building at
Malacca, and I am daily expecting four more from the
Rajah of Ligore, which when realized, I shall most
thankfully avail myself of your Excellency’s offer.
The boats are to be fitted with masts and sails in the
fashion, each to carrry one large gun, and
being in length from forty to forty five [feet], they
will be calculated I hope in point of sizj to afford all
the convenience and accommodation necessary for
Sepoys or other fighting men.
Although 1 cannot but regret the decided tone of
disapprobation with which your Excellency views Cap-
tain Montague’s co-operation with the forces of Siam,
I must nevertheless confess, that except in aid of
those of the Honble. Company, and even then only if
engaged under the express authority of the Supreme
Government, would I have requested any decided
assistance from H. M.’s ships, for it was a point
which I considered of paramount importance, first to
ascertain, before so acting, how far our Government,
under all the circumstances of the case, was pledged to
support the Siamese at Quedah. The question I felt
could properly be decided only by the two Supreme
authorities, the Governor General and the Emperor of
Siam, and in adopting such measures in the interim,
as were best calculated in my opinion to undeceive
the latter as to any participation on our part with the


followers and adherents of the Ex King; without at
the same time actually joining the Siamese in any
operations by land, 1 did all that it was competent in
me to attempt. I am happy in knowing that my
conduct generally in this affair has been approved of,
as intimated to me in Mr. Secretary Prinsep’s letter
of the 15th August last* copy of which, with other
correspondence on the same subject, has 1 am aware
been forwarded to your Excellency.
I have no official report of the transactions of
Commander Hamley K, L. A. off Quedah, other than
what he has kindly communicated to me in person,
of all the trouble and difficulties he had to contend
against in that disagreeable duty. When I last
quitted this station in June I was in daily expectation
that peace would be restored and his aid no longer
required; but I have never been aware that he acted
otherwise than in the blockade of Quedah River
which I am happy to observe meets with your Ex-
cellency’s approbation.
******
I have etc.,
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Governor.
Resident’s Office
Prince of W. Island.
The 17th November 1831.


To His Excellency Sir E. Owen, K. C. 8.,
Rear Admiral and Commander in Chief.
Si,r
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your Excellency’s letter dated the 26th February last,
and to record my cordial acknowledgment of the unre-
mitting attention with which you have protected the
trade in this quarter, the effect of which is apparent
in the fact that not a single instance of piracy of a
serious nature has been brought to my knowledge since
your departure from the Straits.
The Supreme Government have authorized the
building of six large row boats to be employed in the
manner you have suggested and 1 am now engaged in
hastening their equipment. lam sanguine in the ex-
pectation, that assisted by the vessels your Excellency
can occasionally spare for the service, piratical depre-
dations will at least on this side of the Straits, soon
become a novelty.
Captain Hamley will no doubt have furnished your
Excellency with copy of my correspondence with him
regarding the late capture of Quedah from the Siamese,
by a force under the command of the relations and ad-
herents of the Ex King, by which the 13th Article of
the Treaty of Bangkok has no doubt been violated, in
defiance too of repeated proclamations by the late
Government in these Straits ; and of the consequences
which might have been expected to result from such
proceedings. As the first step towards the mainten-
ance of our friendly relations with the Government of
Siam I removed the Ex King with his family to Malac-
ca, and have tendered to the Siamese the aid of the
marine forces at my disposal to assist in blockading
Fort William 4th June 1832.


the mouth of the Kedah River, whilst they are effect-
ing their attack hy land. Captain Hamley most rea-
dily fell in with my request to proceed there with the
Wolf for the purpose of distributing translations of the
enclosed proclamation which I issued in the hope that
it might further tend to disperse the forces of the
Malays, although I fear without more effectual assis-
tance than I am at present disposed to give them, the
Siamese will make slow progress in recapturing the
Fort of Quedah until they have collected their scat-
tered forces and assembled in great numbers, as the
country itself appears partially to have risen in favor
of the invaders, which gives a character to the insur-
rection quite different to the one contemplated in the
Treaty. For the peace and quiet of all concerned I
shall be glad that matters are finally brought to issue,
as nothing can be more in jurious to the traffic and cul-
tivation of places situated near such a warfare than its
long continuance, independent of other evils when it
is over, vizt., the certainty that most of the Malays
will turn to pirating when they are worsted.
I have etc.,
( Signed ) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.
Malacca
Resident’s Office
The 12th July 1832.


Proclamation.
Whereas with the view of upholding the faith of
Treaties and of preserving our friendly relations with
the Government of Siam, it may immediately become
necessary to co-operate with it in the recapture of Que-
dah, conformably with the 13th Article of the Treaty
of Bangkok, dated the 20th June 1826, and whereas
many British subjects having joined the present pira-
tical attack upon that capital by Tuanku Hudin, his
followers and associates—This is to give notice, that
such subjects abovementioned as do not peaceably
return to their homes within five days after the pro-
mulgation of this notification will subject themselves
to all the penalties attached to British subjects found
in open arms against its own Government, and that
of our ally, contrary also to express Treaty, and the
repeated orders and proclamations of the late Govern-
ment in these Straits.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.
P. of W. Island
24 June 1831.
Fort William 4th June 1832.


Fort William 30th December 1831.
To the Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir.
Conformably with intention contained in my letter
of the 10th ultimo, I have had an interview with the
Rajah of Ligore at Quedah, and have now the honor to
report to you for the information of the Honorable
the Vice President in Council the success which has
attended it, having at last obtained a definite boun-
dary to Province Wellesley, which for so many years
had been a principal desideratum with the late Gov-
ernment, and now made more important than ever in
consequence of the hostile feelings and disputes which
are constantly arising between the subjects of our
Government and the Malayan inhabitants on that line
of frontier.
Nunber 1. The accompanying copy of the Agree-
ment upon this subject between the Rajah and myself
will afford for the present a general outline of the
boundary established, but I hope ere long through
the assistance of His Excellency the Naval Comman-
der in Chief to be able to transmit a correct plan of
the whole, and in the interim therefore merely to
observe by way of explanation that “ Mooda ” River
continues as formerly our boundary to the North, as
does the Krean River to the South. That the three
brick pillars mentioned in the agreement will be
erected at an expense not exceeding three hundred
rupees, and the boundary road of about thirty five
miles in length, in a line meandering from one pillar
to the other, as the nature of the country will best
admit, will be made by the convicts. The addition
of territory obtained in this negotation may be estimated
at as much again as we originally possessed under the


former title ; that is, instead of 2| miles inland from
the sea, it will now average about five, with this fur-
ther advantage, that the soil and country beyond our
former boundary is superior in every respect to the
mangrove swamps nearer the coast. The whole ex-
tent of the newly acquired territory is uncommonly
rich in rice ground with a considerable population,
now daily encreasing by the runaways from Quedah
and Purl is, and good management alone will be neces-
sary, not only to raise a tolerable revenue, but also to
ensure such supplies for the Island, as under all or-
dinary circumstances, will make us independent of
neighbouring countries.
Number 2, 3. -The enclosed translation of the
accompanying letter from the Rajah of Ligore to
the Right Honourable the Governor General speaks
so plainly for itself that little observation appears
necessary from me. His request for military aid
in the event of the Malays recapturing Quedah
involves questions of considerable importance, onty,
of course, to be adjusted by the highest authorities
at Bangkok, but it displays the workings of his
mind, and confirms me in the belief that his
fears and wishes are those precisely, which every
one acquainted with the existing state and feelings
of the Malays at Quedah would naturally possess.
To a limited extent I am decidedly of opinion that co-
operation might be useful were it only to operate in
the suppression of piracy. Hitherto for instance, in
consequence of the suspicious jealousy of the Siam-
ese towards us, pirates were never chased up rivers
beyond our own immediate boundary, whereas now,
our presence on the contrary would be courted by
them where ever we pleased to go, and without im-
mediate co-operation, in the sense implied in the re-
quest of the Rajah, a sufficient display on these occa-
sions might be made as to induce a belief on the part
of the Malays that such would doubtless be our conduct,


and thereby deter them from the attempts anticipated ;
for, as justly observed by the Rajah of Li gore, the
prosperity of this Island is so intimately blended with
that of Quedah in these matters, that I do consider
decided measures necessary at present to efface the
impression so generally prevalent among the Malayan
population that the opposition of the Ex King’s
adherents to the Siamese is rather pleasing than
otherwise to the feelings of Englishmen, They have,
I know, been encouraged in this belief by actual
observation of the fact, and nothing but the sad reflec-
tion of the past has awakened them to a sense of the
reality, that Government views their conduct differ-
ently.
4. Tuanku Soliman is at last a prisoner to the
Siamese, by which we are rid of a treacherous and
troublesome neighbour, now to be succeeded by
military posts of the latter, opposite to ours, along the
frontier of Province Wellesley. This will effectually
maintain quiet there for the future, and enable Cap-
tain Low ( whose time has lately been solely occupied
in maintaining the peace) to settle the district under
the newly received land Regulations, by which union
of events, with his ever zealous endeavours, and great
accession of population, I hope to see Prince of
Wales Island ere long pay for itself.
5. In several conversations with the Rajah of
Ligore I succeeded in explaining to his ultimate com-
prehension the difference which existed between the
laws of our country and his, where by the latter it was
permitted at the will of its Chief to surrender any indivi-
dual to another state at pleasure. It smoothed consi-
derably the vexation he had experienced at finding his
worst enemies, after narrowly escaping him, could find
protection nowhere but at Prince of Wales Island.
6. As another proof among the many I have
already given him of our sincerity in his cause, I


suggested that he should furnish two intelligent
Siamese, whom I would entertain and pay in the
Police, as peons. The idea originated with myself
upon his observation that we harboured all his
enemies, to which I replied that our people did not
know them. He was infinitely pleased with the
proposal and as they will be really serviceable in de-
tecting combinations of the nature alluded to, and
also tend to guard us at a cheap rate against the
charge of inattention to his interests, should any
untoward event again occur, I hope the measure will
be sanctioned.
7. Enclosed is a Memorandum of the expenses
of this negotiation which I trust will not be considered
to have been improvidently incurred.
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Resident at Singapore.
Resident’s Office
Prince of Wales Island
The 23d. November 1831.
[ The total amounted to Sa. Rs. 1360. 13. 2.]


ENGAGEMENT betwixt Robert Ibbetson Esqr.,
Resident of Singapore, Pulo Penang and Malacca,
who has come into the Quedah country, and the Chou
Phaya of Ligore Si Tamrat, who is under the domi-
nion of Somdet Phra Phootthee Chow Yo Hooa who is
the Supreme Ruler over the Great Country of Sri
Ayuthaya, vizt. Siam. With reference to the third
article of the Treaty betwixt Somdet Phra Phootthee
Chow Yo Hooa, who is the Supreme Ruler over the
Great Country of Sri Ayuthaya, and the British Govern-
ment, it is now agreed on betwixt the above contract-
ing parties vizt. the Chow Phaya of Ligore Si Tamrat
and Robert Ibbetson Esq., Resident of Singapore,
Pulo Penang and Malacca, and with respect to the
subject of the boundary betwixt the British
of Province Wellesley, and the country and Govern-
ment of Quedah, that the said boundary shall be
as follows —From Surnmatool on the South Bank of
the Soongee Qualla Mooda by a road leading to the
River Pry, at a spot ten orlongs East of the River
Sooogee Dua Hooloo, then descending the middle
of the Pry River to the mouth of the River Soongee
Sintoo, then ascending the Soongee Sintoo in a
straight direction eastwards, and up to the hill Bukit
Maratajum, then from Bukit Maratajum along the
range of hills called Bukit Berator to a place on the
north bank of the River Krean, five orlongs above and
east of Bukit Tungal, and it is agreed that brick or
stone pillars shall be erected, one at the boundary of
Lunatool, another at the boundary on the Pry River,
and a third at the boundary on the Krean River.
Two copies of this Agreement have been made out
and to these have been affixed the Seal of the Honour-
able English Company, and the signature of Robert
Ibbetson Esqr., Resident of Singapore, Pulo Penang
and Malacca, and the Chop or Seal of the Chow Phaya
Fort William 30th December 1831.


of Ligore Si Tamrat, one copy to be retained by
each of the above contracting parties, and the said
agreement has been written in three languages, the
Siamese, Malayan, and English, on Wednesday the
Second day of November one thousand eight hundred
and thirty one of the English era.
(Signed) S .j
R. Ibbetson
Resident of Singapore
Prince of Wales Island
and Malacca.
Seal and Signature
of the Rajah of
Ligore.


This letter from Chau Phriya Sri Thammasook-
raj Chat De Oho Chai Mahai Sooriya teebadee Apaiya
peeree bra Krommabahu Chau Phriya Ligor Si Tarnrat
to the Right Honorable Lord Bentinck Governor
General of British India.
After the usual Compliments.
I am desirous to acquaint my friend that formerly
I took Captain Henry to pay his respects to
the Emperor of Siam, Somdet Phra Phoot thee Chau
yu Hua, who is mighty and exalted, at the capital
Phra Maha Nagara Sri in order to make
a treaty of friendship and alliance which might last
so long as the sky and earth should endure, and 1
expressed my clear conviction that this friendly alli-
ance would be yet more firm!}' cemented. Now my
friend knows that Quedah and Pulo Penang lie so close
together as to resemble a single country. If Quedah
is in peace the rice fields will be cultivated and food
will be abundant in store and trade will be carried
on betwixt Penang and Quedah, thereby linking
them together and maintaining a friendly intercourse,
and I am of opinion that this state of things will ex-
ceedingly strengthen the alliance betwixt the English
and Siamese. Moreover in a former year when my
friend visited Penang and the news of that event had
reached Ligore, I thought it to be a favorable oppor-
tunity to endeavour to improve the good understand-
ing then subsisting betwixt my friend and me. I
therefore prepared a few articles of Siamese manufac-
ture of various descriptions and, it being inconvenient
and too late to send them by way of Penang, I dis-
patched some of my people with them to Mergui, with
a request to Mr. Maingy to assist in forwarding them
to my friend in Bengal. But 1 am yet uninformed
Fort William 30th December 1831.


whether these these things have reached their destina-
tion or not. There is another subject I wish to notice.
Tuanku Din and Tuankn Lang Pntih, relatives of the
former Rajah of Quedah, having excited a rebellion in
the Quedah country, I was obliged to bring down
my forces to quell it. This having been effected, and
Tuanku Din having been killed, I have regained my
authority over Quedah. Now Mr. Ibbetson, the Rajah
of Singapore, Pulo Penang and Malacca, and Captain
Low have gratified me by coming to visit me in
Quedah. These two gentlemen, as also Mr. Murchison,
the Resident of Pulo Penang, have afforded me such
aid in all my late operations that I feel myself deeply
indebted to my friend and now return him my sincere
thanks. Moreover the Rajah of Singapore ( Mr. Ib-
betson ) asked me to settle the land boundary betwixt
the territory appertaining to Penang and that of the
Siamese. I was exceedingly pleased at this request,
and immediately complied with it. In an old agree-
ment with the Company the measurement in land from
the sea was considered to be sixty orlongs. I have
moreover now given much more than formerly in order
to gratify the Raja of Singapore and Captain Low.
Certain hills and rivers have also been fixed on at as
land marks, and points have been also fixed on at which
stone boundary pillars are to be erected. A written
agreement has likewise been made out in duplicate, and
to this has been affixed the seal of the Honourable Eng-
lish Company, the signature of the Rajah of Singapore
and own seal, and copies have been mutually inter-
changed betwixt us in token of friendly alliance, With
regard to Tuanku Soli man who occupied or resided close
to the frontier line, I have ordered him to quit the place,
for I cannot countenance a man who has behaved so
wickedly towards the English as he has. The ports
hitherto occupied bjr his people shall be in future held
by Siamese. The Rajah of Singapore acquaints me
that should an enemy attack these my frontier posts
and the Siamese there be unable to resist him the


latter will be permitted to seek shelter within the
English territory.
I am still under some little apprehension respect-
ing the condition of the Quedah Province on account
of its distance from that one in which I reside and
as the attention which I am obliged to pay to the
many other Provinces under my Government prevents
me from personally superintending the affairs of this
one.
Adverting to the probability of the Malays again
conspiring to act as they have lately done in the
various rivers of Quedah, and to my friend’s not being
perhaps all aware of the oppression and devastation
which these wicked pirates have committed over the
face of the country up to this day, the Rajah of Singa-
pore has informed me that in the event of the Ex
Rajah’s of Quedah’s relatives again creating any dis-
turbance he will assist me in quelling it, but that he
cannot assist should any other Rajah so act. On this
account I am anxious to have an addition, or supple-
ment made to the Treaty with the English Company,
and to the following affect, that should any rebellion
or disturbance arise in the Penang territory, infor-
mation, if desired, should be sent to Quedah, and if
required, then Quedah shall send a force to aid Pulo
Penang; and if any rebellion or disturbance shall arise
in Quedah, then if necessary, a letter shall be sent to
Pulo Penang to ask the aid of a force to put it down.
Thus would the two countries become as one, and
peace would be permanent!} 7, established. My friend
must be well awai’e that Penang, equally with Quedah,
is injured by these disturbances.
I have another request to make of my friend.
All those who conspire against my country are my
enemies. Yet they have all fled to Pulo Penang,
where they live unmolested, and are only watching a
good opportunity to come again and excite to rebel-
lion and mischief in my country. There is one man


named “Seid Abdullah man,” an old inhabitant (of
Quedah) who owes me many dollars, and who occu-
pied places of trust under me. This man has been
guilty of rebellion and has besides amassed consider-
able wealth b} r means of robbing and plundering in
Quedah. With this plunder he has fled to Penang
where he is now living at his ease.
I therefore earnestly solicit that my friend will
order this man to be delivered up to me, as such an
example will overawe my enemies. So long as the
latter have such a secure place of refuge, my country
will not keep quiet. There is another man called
“Tuanku Mahamed Iriva” lately a resident in Quedah
with his family. This man has his relatives there.
He has been a strong supporter of Tuanku Din, and
was made by him one of his Panghulus (Chiefs), He
also came and fought with the Siamese at Koobhoo.
But he was here defeated and driven back to the Fort,
at the mouth of the river, where he continued to
oppose my troops. When my force was about to take
that Fort he went to Purlis (in Quedah) and there
incited the Malays to insurrection, .and to make an
attack on my army. But when my troops went to
meet him he was unable to oppose them, and therefore
fled to Penang. lam desirous also to have him sent
to me and request ray friend to assist me. Should my
friend comply it will thus be noised abroad, that my
friend is favorably disposed towards me, and all the
rebelliously inclined will be disheartened. For what
can I do with these pirates, and wicked persons of
Quedah who have fled to Penang. I have no recourse
against them, and they have no apprehension of con-
sequences, but only consider how they may best con-
spire at a future period. I greatly desire to cement
more firmly the friendly relations existing betwixt my
friend and me, so that Penang and Quedah may
become like one country. I have therefore one other
wish to express to my friend. If offenders or wicked
persons fly from Penang to Quedah I will seize and


deliver them up. And if offenders or wicked persons
of Quedah fly from it to the British territory I request
that they may in like manner be delivered up to me.
My friend will act in this manner and approve or not
according as he shall see best. Should he approve of
(the proposition) I apprehend that it will prove an
execllent arrangement. 1 have given a copy of this
letter to the Rajah of Singapore, in order that he may
direct a translation of it to be made into English, and
I have requested him to forward my letter to my
friend accompanied by two silver articles of Siamese
manufacture (a rice and a betel holder) as token of
my regard, and an earnest of my desire for maintain-
ing a lasting and firm friendship which can never be
broken; and as I am anxious to have my friend’s
sentiments in regard to these amicable proposals, 1
request my friend will reply by letter. This letter is
dated on Wednesday on the twelfth day of the moon’s
decrease in the 12th Month in the year of Hare (or
2d November 1831).
True Translation
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Resident Singapore.


Fort William 20th February 1832.
Southampton Penang
3d January 1832
To His Excellency
The Right Honble. Lord Win. Bentinck, G. C. 8.,
Governor General in Council &ca. &ca. &ca.
FORT WILLIAM.
My Lord, ,
As I was about to sail this morning the accom-
panying letter from H. H. the late Raja of Queda
was sent to me with a request that it might be for-
warded to your Excellency.
I have the honor therefore to enclose it together
with a translated copy of one which I received at the
same time.
And I have &ca.
(Signed) E. W. C. R. Owen,
Rear Admiral Commanding
in Chief.


Translation of a letter from the Ex Rajah of
Qnedah to His Excellency Rear Admiral Sir Edward
Owen, K, C. B.
( After Compliments.)
1 have already fully informed my friend of the
oppression I have received from the Siamese in having
my country treacherously taken away from me. At
that time I brought my family with me, with the
intention of placing them with my younger brother
Tunko Soliman at his residence at Pry, as I was
anxious to form some plan of retaking the country of
Quedah from the Siamese, because my ministers,
people and army were still unbroken. On a sudden
Mr. Cracraft, Mr. Anderson and Captain Coombs came
as envoys from Governor Phillips for the purpose of
persuading me to take up my residence in Pulo
Penang, stating that the Company were desirous of
assisting me, in compliance with the terms of the
Treaty which they have made with my deceased
Father and Uncle through the medium of Captain
Light and Sir George Leith, Bt., Lieutenant Governor,
Vizt. that the Company would render assistance in every
case of difficulty down to the latest posterity. Now
this was in both Treaties which were to continue so
long as the sun and moon continued to revolve. On
hearing this, my confidence in the assistance of the
English Company was increased ten fold, and in conse-
quence thereof I came to reside at Pulo Penang, and
and for about twelve years there were no symptoms of
any thing being done as I was led to believe would be
the case. In the mean time Captain Burney went
and made a Treaty with the Siamese without my
knowing any thing of the circumstance and on his re-
turn from the Siamese comitry, I was suddenly ordered
Port William 20th February 1832.


to remove to Malacca. As I would not consent to this
my monthly stipend from the Company was stopped
by Governor Fullerton. I then asked permission to
reside at Province Wellesley for the purpose of
gaining a livelihood. Shortly after Nearne came to
shew me the translation of an order which had just
been received from Bengal; in this I was ordered to
take my residence again at Pulo Penang. Whilst
determining what to do, I received a letter from the
Resident, Mr. Murchison, inviting me to come to
Penang in compliance with the orders of the Governor
General of Bengal. He also gave me a house and the
ground attached to it with my old stipend from the
Company. Upon this I removed to Pulo Penang to
the house which had been given me, and remained
there three or four months under the protection of the
Company, when the disturbance between the people
of Quedah and the Siamese took place. Of this I
was entirely ignorant and never countenanced the
expedition which had been made. On a sudden the
Resident, Mr. Ibbetson, said he had an order for me
to retire from Penang and go to Malacca or some
other country equally distant from the Siamese terri-
tories. At this I was extremely startled and astonish-
ed, as I had not been guilty of doing any thing wrong
However being desirous of respecting an order ema-.
nating from such an authority, I complied with it, and
went to reside at Malacca until I could receive the
orders of the Governor General of Bengal in answer
to a petition' I sent him. I gave the house and
ground, received as a gift from the Company, to my
family to reside in. Now Mr. Ibbetson has taken
away this house and intends to dispose of it by auc-
tion, thereby causing great distress and inconvenience
to my family, who have no other place to live in, as
1 went to Malacca in compliance with orders received,
and am now greatly distressed to hear such news
of my family. Moreover, however great my distress
has been during former years, it has been much


increased since coming to reside at Malacca, where 1
have been constantly afflicted with fever, and in con-
sequence thereof have made a petition stating my
complaints to the Governor General *, which I have
forwarded with this to my friend by my
Mahommed Hukih, and as I have no other person to
confide in except my friend, I trust to his kindness to
forward my letter to the Governor General and per-
haps by the blessing of providence and the kindness
of my friend I may receive an answer and be put a
little more at rest. Such is the purport of this letter.
Written on Tuesday the 16th Rajib 1247.
(True Translation)
( Signed ) H. Nairne.
[ * The petition of the King of Quedah to the
Governor General is the same in substance as this
document. It is dated 3 January 1832 and a trans-
lation appears in Bengal Secret and Political Con-
sultations, Vol. 366 (No. 2 of Consultation of 7 May
1832).]


Fort William 4th June 1832.
To the Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter dated the 13th February last, with enclo-
sures, calling for explanation regarding the grounds
of my application to Rear Admiral Sir Edward Owen,
to blockade the River Purlis.
******
Information derived from various quarters at that
date, left no room to doubt that Tuanko Long Pootie,
with other relations and adherents of the Ex King,
recently driven from Quedah, had again proceeded, as
on the former occasion, up the various rivers and creeks
bordering upon Province Wellesley ; from whence, as
well as from Prince of Wales Island, they were recruit-
ing their scattered forces, and obtaining supplies of
arms and ammunition, without the possibility of pre-
vention by our police, and where to have pursued
them would have answered no good purpose, when in
the words of Sir E. Owen, I could not “ treat as
pirates any against whom no acts of piracy had been
specifically alleged, or proof obtained.” What was
then to be done to prevent a second attack upon the
Siamese similar to the former, and that by a force
again fitted out from Penang and Province Wellesley?
I could not blockade the mouths of the various creeks
up which these people were recruiting, for indepen-
dent of the numerous vessels which such a service
would require, on what pretence could I possibly have
attacked them, without encountering the risk of judi-
cial process, to assist them in which there would not
have wanted either money or advisers? To have met


them at sea, I should have been equally at a loss but
off Quedah or Purlis. 1 was there sure to be told,
there are the relations and adherents of the Ex King,
who having been fitted out at Penang and Province
Wellesley, are now come to attack us in violation of
Treaties and your promise to prevent them. Here a
more ostensible reason for intercepting their further
progress would have been presented, and to act in
any manner further than this I never for an instant
contemplated. The term blockade is perhaps too ex-
tensive in its meaning to be properly applied to such
a service, but His Excellency Sir Edward Owen, from
my personal communications, must have been fully
sensible at the time of what 1 have now stated; but
probably desirous to evade a troublesome and dis-
agreeable call, he took, I think, a somewhat fanciful
view of my intentions, which I felt at the time, but
did not reply to.
I hope my letter of the 21th* November last will
support the statement I have here offered, and that
under the perplexing circumstances of the case I could
not consistently have acted otherwise than I did. I
considered it just possible that a last attempt might
probably be made by the Ex King’s relatives and
adherents to assist the insurgents, in which case I had
no other means than the one I proposed of even at-
tempting to prevent the further assistance of “men or
“ arms joining them from Penang or Province
“ Wellesley,” the effect of which, had it succeeded at
that moment when quiet was almost restored, would
have gone far to efface with the Siamese, the favorable
impression, then established, of our sincerity, I knew
the Malays also to be at their last gasp, and that the
most effectual way to prevent “ a long, a teazing and
“ a vindictive warfare” was to put down by every pos-
sible means the resuscitation of its spirit within our
own temtory; knowing also that to a man, Europeans
as well as Natives would have contributed towards


the enterprise had they perceived me indifferent to
the result.
I have etc.,
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Governor.
Singapore
25th April 1832.


23 May 1832.
i
Bengal
Political Department.
Our Governor General in Council
at Fort William in Bengal.
******
Para. 13. Our political relations with the States
in the Malay Peninsula are, to a certain extent, defined
by the Treaty with Siam; and the policy to be
observed towards those States is simple and obvious.
We considered that their subjugation by the Siamese
Government would be injurious to our interests, and
we therefore induced the King of Siam to engage not
to attack them, and bound ourselves on the other hand
to prevent them from attacking him. In any other
case than those contemplated in this engagement our
policy is to abstain from all interference with these
States.
14. The Siamese Government has engaged to
allow the export of provisions from Quedah to our
territories free of all dut) 7 , but this concession was
conditional upon our not permitting the Ex Rajah of
Quedah to reside in Prince of Wales Island, Province
Wellesley, Perak, Salengore, or the Burman territories.
This condition we have not fulfilled. The Ex Rajah
not only refuses to proceed to Malacca, although an
encrease of his stipend was tendered to him on that
condition, but has actually taken up his residence in
Province Wellesley near the frontier of his ancient
possessions, at which proceedings the Siamese autho-
rities have naturally taken umbrage. We perceive
however from the opinion of your Advocate General,
that you would not be legally warranted in forcibly
removing the Ex Rajah from the Settlement.


15. Major Burney’s surmise that the late Gov-
ernment of Prince of Wales Island might, by greater
address and a more conciliatory demeanour, have per-
suaded the Ex Rajah to withdraw voluntarily, may or
may not be well founded. It at least appears not
improbable that the Ex Rajah might have been in-
duced to do what he himself suggested, namely, to
proceed to Delli, or Siak, or some other part of Su-
matra, if the Penang Government had not signified to
him that his going to those places, though it would
not be prevented, would deprive him of his stipend,
and of the countenance and protection of the British
Government. When your Government afterwards
caused intimation' to be made to him that his stipend
would still be continued wherever he might reside, pro-
vided it were not in any of the places named in the
Treaty of Bangkok, the favorable moment was past,
and -he refused to quit 1 enang. His allowance was
accordingly stopped, and continued under suspension
from January 1828 to the latest advices.
16. Your final resolution was, to remove the Ex
Rajah by force if necessary, from Province Wellesley,
but to allow him to reside at Penang and draw his
stipend as before, the Siamese authorities being
consequently released from the engagement (hitherto
faithfully observed on their part) not to impose any
duties on the export of grain.
17. What has been done in pursuance of this
resolution of your Government we are yet uninfor-
med; and it is possible that the stipend of 6000
dollars per annum may have been restored to the Ex
Rajah under a pledge which cannot now be recalled,
of his being allowed to remain at Penang.
18. We may allow that it is no violation of the
Treaty of Bangkok, to permit the Ex Rajah to reside
at Penang, provided we waive the commercial benefit
which was promised us in consideration of our ejecting


him. This however is a sacrifice of the substantial in-
terests of our own subjects in the important particular
of the price of their food, which we do not deem our-
selves warranted in making from deference to an
individual whose anxiety to remain in the neighbour-
hood of his former possessions affords a strong presura-
tion that he cherishes designs, which we are bound by
Treaty to hinder him from attempting to realize. It
may be that we have not legal power to expel him
from the Settlement, though, if so, we should conceive
that a similar objection must apply to the meditated
employment of force to remove him from Province
Wellesley. But we have the power of retaining his
stipend under suspension, until he is willing to pur-
chase its restoration by choosing some unobjectionable
place of abode. And this measure we desire may be
adopted, unless, as we are apprehensive, you have
already entered into engagements which preclude such
a proceedings.
We are,
Your affectionate friends,
(Signed) J. G. Ravenshaw
&ca. &ca.
London
the 23d May 1832.


Fort William 25th June 1832.
To the Chief Secretary to Government,
Fort William.
Sir,
I am directed to inform you that after a careful
perusal of the whole of the correspondence connected
with the case of the Ex King of Quedah, together
with the letters from that Chief received though His
Excellency the Naval Commander in Chief and a per-
son named Bastian, who was deputed by the Ex King
to Calcutta; His Lordship has come to the conclusion
that under all the circumstances of the case the
character of the British Government for generosity
and justice requires that the Ex King should receive
the benefit of the full stipend of 10,000 dollars a year,
authorized to be settled upon him by the instructions
of the 30th April 1830* on condition of his retiring
to Malacca or some other place more remote from
Quedah than Prince of Wales Island.
If His Honor in Council concurs in this view of
the subject, it is requested that orders may be issued
to the Resident at Singapore to pay the Ex King the
full stipend of 10,000 dollars with arrears from the
date of his sailing for Malacca.
In this concession His Lordship further thinks
all the minor claims of the Ex King should be con-
sidered as having merged.
I have &ca.,
(Signed) W. H. Macnaghten,
Secry. to the Governor General
Simlah
6th June 1832.


Fort William 19th November 1832.
To the Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William,
Sir,
I have the honor to transmit to you for the
purpose of being laid before the Honorable the Vice
President in Council copy of a letter from Mr. Bonham
dated the 9 instant and of its enclosures, with the
copy of ray reply thereto, regarding the appearance
of some Siamese war boats at Tringannu, and the
evil consequences likely to arise to our trade in that
quarter should any warlike attack by the former be
made upon the latter.
For the reasons stated in my letter above alluded
to I shall refrain from further remonstrance pending
the present reference.
I have &c.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Governor W. Island, Singapore
and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
28th August 1832.


To R. Ibbetson, Esq.,
Governor &ca. &ca. &ca.
Prince of. Wales Island.
Sir,
1 do myself the honor of informing you that I
have received authentic intelligence of the arrival of 5
Siamese war boats at Tringannu, which has caused
considerable alarm to the inhabitants of that Settle-
ment, and some uneasiness to the Chinese traders of
this, as should the Siamese proceed to hostilities, our
commercial interests with the ports on the east coast
of the Peninsula are likely to be much affected,
I believe the ostensible reason for the visit to
Tringannu is to search for certain persons who have
fled from the State of Patani, it being understood,
however, that the Siamese have a large force at a
place called Ligile in Patani, close on the borders of
Calantan, induces a belief that they may intend
to invade both Calantan and Tringannu, both of
which states they are bound, by the Treaty entered
into by them with Major Burney, to respect.
In order therefore to prevent, as far as possible,
a catastrophe so pregnant with danger to the com-
mercial interests of this Settlement, I have written to
the principal Commander of the Siamese flotilla,
and brought to his notice the Treaty existing between
our Government and that of Siam, by which the latter
is bound not to molest either Calantan or Tringannu,
copy of which I herewith enclose.
I beg further to add, that of late the trade of this
Settlement has suffered by pirates infesting the coast
from hence to Tringannu ; this I have brought to the
notice of Captain Plumbridge, and could that officer
Fort William 19th November 1832.


be induced to take a cruize as far as Tringunnu, and
examine the islands on his passage, I anticipate con-
siderable benefit in every respect. Such a proceeding
would at all events disperse the pirates, and his
appearance at Tringunnu would keep in check the
Siamese, who would at once conceive that the visit
had been caused by them, and would by no means call
on us for further interference.
I have &c.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Resident Councillor.
Singapore
The 9th August 1832.


To Chow Phya Calahom
Principal Commander of the Siamese
War Boats at Tringannu.
After the usual Compliments.
It has been bronght to my notice that five Siam-
ese war boats have lately arrived at Tringannu, and
that furthermore an army with elephants and many
people are at a place called Ligile, in the country of
Patani on the borders of Calantan, This letter is there"
fore sent to bring to the remembrance of the Siamese,
that by the 12th Article of the Treaty entered into
between the English and Siamese on the first day of
the seventh decreasing Moon 1188 year dog 8, accord-
ing to the Siamese Era, corresponding with the 20
day of June 1826 of the European Bra, it is agreed as
follows ;
“ Siam shall not go and obstruct or interrupt
commerce in the state of Tringannu and Calantan.
English merchants and subjects shall have trade
and intercourse in future with the same facility
and freedom as they have heretofore had, and
the English shall not go and molest, attack or
disturb those states upon any pretence whatever.”
I trust therefore that the Siamese war boats will
proceed in friendly manner towards those states as
they have agreed to do, and not molest them, as by
doing so they interfere with the English trade.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Resident Councillor.
Singapore
9 August 1832.
Fort William 19th November 1832.


To the Resident Councillor, Singapore.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter dated the 9th instant with its enclosure,
on the subject of the appearance of five Siamese war
boats at Tringannu, and submitting your opinion,
should the former proceed to actual hostilities with
the latter, that our commercial interests with the
ports on the East Coast of the Malay Peninsula are
likely to be much affected.
Upon this point I am also decidedly of your opin-
ion, but for the following reasons I am not the less
doubtful of the propriety of interference.
In the first place the commerce of “English
merchants and subjects ” has not yet been interfered
with.
In the second, it does not appear that we have
more right to complain of the appearance of Siamese
War Boats at Tringannu, than would the Siamese
have a right to complain of the appearance of ours in
that country. On the contrary indeed it appears to
me from the context generally of the Treaty of Bang-
kok, that Tringannu and Calantan are both viewed
more in the light of dependencies on Siam, than of
states entirely independent of that power.
In the Treaty just alluded to, it must be observed,
that the same prohibition which in Article 12 inter-
dicts our interference with Tringannu and Calantan,
Article 14 equally maintains with regard to the in-
terference of Siam with Salengore. The object of
this (the result of mutual suspicion) appears to be to
stop on the one hand the extension of our Dominion
towards Siam on the East Coast, whilst on the other,
Fort William 19th November 1832.


the Dominion of that power is equally checked from
approaching nearer to our Settlements on the West
Coast.
At the period when the Treaty was concluded,
the country of Perak had all hut fallen a prey to
Siam, but the troops of the latter not having assem-
bled in numbers sufficient to strike the blow, advan-
tage was taken to stipulate (Article 14) “that the
Rajah of Perak shall govern his country according to
his own will*” and made by us to comprehend the
the object of this clause. The Rajah was not long in
deciding that point and the Siamese were reluctantly
forced to give up a prize which a little more energy
or foresight on their part would have secured for ever.
Perakj instead of Salengore, thus became the barrier
to their further usurpations in this quarter; and will
so continue whilst our secret influence in that country
is greater than theirs.
Under this view of the case you will refrain from
further remonstrances pending a reference to Govern-
ment, and further instructions from me; the mea-
sures you have already adopted will be sufficient I
doubt not to prevent serious inconvenience for some
time.
I have &ca. &ca.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Governor &ca. &ca. &ca.
Prince of Wales Island
28 August 1832.


To R. Ibbetson Esqr.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malaccea.
Sir,
lam directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
dispatch No. 17 of the 28th August last regarding the
appearance of some Siamese war boats at Tringanu
and to acquaint you in reply that the Honorable the
Vice President in Council entirely approves the tenor
of your letter to Mr. Bonham to refrain from further
remonstrance with the Governor of Siam pending
the reference to the Supreme Government.
2. The Vice President in Council directs me te-
state that you have properly pointed out to Mr. Bon-
ham the spirit and intent of the Article in the Treaty
with Siam relating to Tringannu and Calantan, and
justly remarked to him that you were doubtful of the
propriety of our interference, while as yet the com-
merce of English merchants and subjects had not been
interrupted. The Treaty in question does not confer
on the * rotes of Tringanu and Calantan any right to
demand our interference in their favor to defend them
against the Governor of Siam, and the Article itself,
on which Mr. Bonham has founded his remonstrance to
the Commander of the Siamese war boats, distinctly
provides against our going to molest, attack or disturb
these states, while it is quite silent with respect to
the right of Siam to do so, so long as the English are
permitted to carry on their trade and intercourse with
them as heretofore.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G, Swinton
Chief Secretary to Government,
Fort William
19th November 1832.
Port William 19th November 1832.


Bengal
Political Department.
21st November 1832.
******
Para. 4. The Ex King had refused the proposal
’ made to him to quit Province Wellesley, where his
presence was most injurious to our interests, and to
return to Penang upon the promise of restoring his
former stipend. You had accordingly given orders to
Mr. Ibbetson, the Resident at Singapore, if the resis-
tance of the Ex King should continue, to effect his
compulsory removal, not to Penang but to Malacca,
residence at which place he was to be permitted to
during his draw his allowance of 6,000 dollars if
removed by force; 10,000 if he should, even at this
late period, by a- voluntary acquiescence, render the
employment of compulsory means unnecessary.
5. On receiving these instructions, Mr. Ibbetson
communicated to you his intention personally to
superintend the arrangements for the Ex King’s
removal.
6. Before, however, Mr. Ibbetson had left Singa-
pore for this purpose, he received a letter from Mr.
Murchison stating that soon after his arriving at
Penang he had “discovered the chief causes from
“ which the frequent negotiations with the late King
“ of Quedah to induce him to take up permanent
“residence on this Island had proved unavailing:”
he “therefore perceived that by a little manage-
“ment” that object might be accomplished: “it is
“ not necessary” (he says) “to trouble” Mr. Ibbetson
“either with a recapitulation of these causes, or with
“ any detailed account of the measures by which the late
King’s confidence and good will towards the British
“ Government were gradually restored : it will suffice
“ to report that after a few personal interviews he


Capture of Quedah by a
strong party of Malays Head-
ed by the noted pirate
Tuanko Kudin. Proceedings
in consequence.
Subsequent recapture of
Quedah by the Rajah of
Ligore.
“ very cordially embraced the proposals he had so fre-
“ quently rejected, and has now distinctly accepted the
“ terms offered by this Government on the condition
“ of his residing permanently on the Island,”
tuedah by a 11. There are several unpleasant cir-
Maiays Head- cumstances connected with these events,
icted pirate
Proceedings In an act of aggression upon a State not
only at peace with us, but which we
•ecapture of . , . m
e Rajah of were bound by express Treaty not to
suffer any persons under our authority
to molest, a great number of our own subjects took
part: among others about thirty disbanded Sepoys
dressed in the British uniform. It appears also that
some of the boats composing the flotilla were collected
from Prince of Wales Island ; and Captain Low states in
express terms that “ the ammunition, cartouch boxes
and other warlike stores for the expedition have been
purchased in Penang.” Yet no British authority had
the slightest suspicion of what was going on until the
expedition had set out.
12. Further, the leaders in the expedition were
the nearest relations of the Ex King of Quedah ; and
there is no room for doubt that their proceedings were
greatly encouraged and facilitated by the Ex King’s
residence in Penang and in Province Wellesley, which
we were expressly bound by Treaty to prevent ; if
indeed the aggression was not actually stirred up by
himself, under favor of those opportunities. And the
restoration of his pension and of all the marks of favor
which he had formerly enjoyed, happening at the
precise moment when it did, is confidently asserted
by Mr. Ibbetson to have promoted the objects of the
expedition more than would have been done by “ an
actual supply of 6,000 dollars to Tuanko Kudin ” by
the Ex King.


13. Under these circumstances the local autho-
rities had absolutely no option ; and they accordingly
removed the Ex King to Malacca; in which removal,
knowing that force would be employed in case of
refusal, he quietly acquiesced. But this did not cure
the mischief which had been already done.
14. In order to make amends to the Siamese
Authorities for our neglect of the obligations of the
Treaty, and to remove the unfavorable impression
which that omission must have produced upon their
minds, Mr. Ibbetson thought it incumbent upon him
to aid the recapture of the place by blockading the
mouth of the river. Your instructions discouraged
any attempt on the' part of the local authorities of
Prince of Wales Island to mix themselves “up in
“ any operations of a hostile character either by land
“ or sea,” but those instructions did not arrive until all
was over, the Siamese having retaken Quedah, aided
by our co-operation to that extent. The case was
unquestionably one of conflicting obligations, but it is
much to be regretted that by our own default we
should have been placed in a position from which we
could not extricate ourselves but by giving our assis-
tance to replace the Malays of Quedah under the yoke
of a government which from all that we learn appears
to be most deservedly odious to them.
* * * * * *
We are
Your affectionate friends
(Signed) J. G. Eavenshaw
&ca. &ca.
London
21 NoVember 1832.


26 June No. 10 of 1833.
Bengal
Political Department.
******
• 2, We trust that the settlement which now ap-
pears to be effected, of the causes which distiirbed the
good understanding of the authorities in Prince of
Wales Island and Siam, will be permanent. You
have done what the obligations of Treaty required of
you in removing the Ex Rajah of Quedah to a place
not directly contiguous to his former territory, the
peace of which he had disturbed; and you have dealt
with sufficient liberality by him, in restoring him to
the enjoyment of his full stipend of 10,000 Dollars
per annum.
3. It was of importance, with a view to pre-
vent future disputes, that the boundary of Province
Wellesley should be well defined, an object which Mr.
Ibbetson appears to have successfully negociated with
the Rajah of Li gore.
******
We are,
Your affectionate friends,
(Signed) 0. Marjoribanks
&ca,
London
26th June 1833.


Printed for 'private circulation.
THE
BURNEY PAPERS.
Vol. III.
PART II.
(August 1830 to June 1840.)
Printed by order of the Vajiranana National Library.
BANGKOK
1912.




(Extiact from Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to the
Admiralty, No. 140, 6th August 1830.)
Southampton, Penang,
6th August 1830.
Sir,
******
1 beg to add the following brief sketch of the
present state of the coasts of this part of the Peninsula,
according to me slight knowledge 1 have obtained for
the information of their Lordships. . .
I need not inform you Sir that this island and
settlement formed part originally of the territor} T of
Quedah between which and Malacca are the little
Sovereignties of Perak and Salangore. Quedah was
equivocally a feudatory of Siam and being compelled
by that power to i rake war on Perak, became
weakened, and during our war with Ava the Siamese
Government sent a force which drove out the King of
Quedah.
That is still in the hands of the Siamese
who were proceeding next to take possession of Perak
when the Government of this island interposed, and
Perak still preserves a nominal independence. The
Rajah is a weak and timid person very well disposed
but without energy, pressed as he is on one side by
the power of Siam and on the other by the more
active Rajah of Salangore. Many of his people have
emigrated and he is left in poverty and weakness.
The countenance of the Government of this Island is
his only security, he feels how much he is dependent
on it and wishes to place himself and dominions under
its protection.
The present Rajah of Salengore is said to be a
restless and not unintelligent young man. He has
pressed much on Perak and .s desirous to annex it to
his own territory as a barrier between him and the
Siamese. The Chief of Perak feels it is impossible to


resist, and if we do not interfere would prefer uniting
with Salangore to falling under the dominion of Siam.
On the east coast of the Peninsula the territory
of Tringanu is likewise feudatory to Siam.
The Empire of Siam is in policy, religion and
manner very similar to that of Ava with which it has
been much at war. It has a French Mission, of which
the head is a titular Bishop, established in the Capital.
The branches extend over all parts of the territory
and there are on this island four priests of that nation
dependent on the said Bishop and corresponding with
the Missionary Society in Paris. They have establish-
ed a school in which about eighteen Chinese youths
are now receiving an ecclesiastical education prepara-
tory to their being returned to their own country
where they are to act as missionaries. The Chief
of these four priests was some years in China. The
youths they state are all sent from thence for the
express purpose of being thus educated.
The French Mission is confined to the territories
of Siam, the Catholic affairs of the territories south-
ward of it, namely Perak, Salangore, Malacca, Johore
and Pahang being all considered to belong to the
Mission of the Portuguese from Goa.
The Government of Siam is said to be under great
apprehension respecting the British Power since the
termination of the' Burmese war, and this Government
has been desirous to avoid all measures which can
lead to a misunderstanding with them by exciting
fears or jealousy. There is nevertheless no treaty
formed with any of the Native Governments in this
vicinity nor any public measures taken to secure our
influence with them or to unite their exertions for
the common benefit.
* « # # * *
I have &ca.
(Signed) B. W. C. R. Owen
Rear Admiral Commanding in Chief.


( Enclosure D. to Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 171, 6 Oct. 1830. )
Southampton, Penang,
sth October 1830.
Sir,
With reference to our conversation of this morn-
ing and looking to the latter part of the 2d. Article
of the Treaty with Siam ... it appears to me that
whilst immediate means are taken, as was agreed be-
tween us, to ascertain whether the piratical force is
still in the Marbou River, it will be proper in your
communication with Quedah to consider that force as
Siamese: To call-on the present Governor of that
Province in consequence to declare for what purpose
they had been collected : To complain at the same
time of the two acts of piracy and demand the punish-
ment of the offenders. Should he disclaim all
knowledge of the vessels so collected, he must then
be called on to drive them from his port or to assist
in their destruction.
If you agree with me in these propositions, I will
send the Southampton to convey your messenger (who
should be a person in your confidence). I will give
Captain Fisher orders to take the necessary measures
in conjunction with that person after an answer is
obtained and to act as, on the information they
receive, the occasion may require: if this meets your
views I will at once call on you and concert the farther
measures.
Who have &ca.
(Signed) E. W. C. R. Owen.
R. Ibbetson Esqre
Deputy Resident.


( Enclosure B. 2 in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 171, 6 Oct. 1830.)
From Mr. Ibbetson to the Governor of Quedah.
1 have to acquaint my friend that many pirate
prows have lately passed -through this harbour com-
mitting trifling depredations, and have now taken up
a position in the Quella Mirabou, from whence they
issued and captured two China junks which quitted this
harbour about eight days ago on their way to Quedah.
On reference to the 2d Article of the Treaty
between the English and Siamese my friend will
observe that “ should any Siamese place or country
“ that is near an English country collect at any time
“an army or a fleet of boats, if the Chief of the
“ English country enquire the object of such force the
“Chief of the Siamese country must declare [it].”
Now I do not mean by this to impute that my friend
has in any way aided or abetted in collecting these
pirates, on the contrary, I am sure he will assist in
destroying them, and it is with this object in view
that I now address my friend.
I have deputed Captain Low to deliver this letter
to my friend accordingly and he proceeds in His
Majesty’s Ship Southampton to explain to my friend
what is required of him ; and if my friend cannot send
immediate assistance in the shape of armed boats to
co-operate with those of His Majesty’s Ship South-
ampton to request at least that my friend will depute
a confidential agent to proceed with Captain Low to
Quella Mirabou in order that no misunderstanding
may hereafter arise between the English and Siamese
as to the nature of the attack that may be made upon
those marauders.
The Commander of the Southampton is a King’s
officer of considerable rank who, in concert with
Captain Low and my friend, will arrange the measures
that it may be necessary to adopt.


(Public Record
Office.}
Admirals’
Despatches.
Ad. 1/198.
To His Excellency
Hear Admiral Sir E. W. C. H. Owen,
K. C. B. &c. &c. &c.
( Enclosure C. in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 179, 14 October 1830.)
H, M. S. Southampton, Penang,
16th October 1830.
Sir,
In compliance with the directions contained in your
letter to me of the 14th instant, I have the honor to
report for your information that the nature of the force
sent out ter co-operate with us by the Siamese Governor
of Quedah was for the most part nothing more than the
common boats of the country, having a very small brass
swivel, or wall piece, in the bow and another abaft,
several of them having only a single mast, and rowing
from 10 to 14 oars. They were I understood put in
requisition by the Governor of Quedah upon the occa-
sion, as were the crews, who were the common people
of that place, without having been in any way pre-
viously organized ; there was nothing in any of them
like soldiers and they had only from three to one mus-
ket in each and these of a very bad quality. lam not
aware of the rank of the person who commanded them
but I understand he had charge of the police of the river
and immediate coast. He seemed to be a man of some
intelligence and I understood from Captain Low had
previously lived at this island or in the neighbourhood,
but having been engaged in some unlawful pursuits he
made his escape to avoid punishment. The boat that
he was in and which appeared to be about the largest,
rowed fourteen oars, had three of these small pieces,
one forward and two aft; he had but three muskets, was
rigged with two masts, with a crew 1 understood of
sixteen men. The whole force was of the poorest des-
cription, but 1 understood from the person commanding
them they were much inferior to their usual armed
force of boats being got up on the spur of the moment,
the crews taken from the streets, and the very worst
arms put on board.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) Peter Fisher
Captain.


Enclosure A 2 in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 254, 9th August 1831.
To Wm. Hamley Esqr, K. L. A.,
H. M. Sloop Wolf.
Sir,
With reference to my letter of the 15th inst.,
and to your reply of the same date I have the honor
now to acquaint you that the state of the war at Que-
dah appears by report very near its close, and that
although nothing decided has occurred within the
Fort, the Siamese have nevertheless regained every
inch of country within half a mile of it, confining its
inmates, already distressed for provisions and even
water, to very narrow limits.
The disturbed state of the country in the interior
of Malacca makes it indispensable that I proceed there
immediately in the Zephyr, and it would be very satis-
factory to myself, as well as extremely beneficial to
the public interests, if you could continue at this set-
tlement until the final overthrow and dispersion of
these pirates. It is impossible to calculate precisely
upon the undertakings of Native Powers, but as far as
I am able to judge from information daity received,
the present state of things cannot possibly continue
many days and may indeed be over ere I quit this place
on Sunday next.
I do myself the honor to enclose extract of my
instruction to Mr. Murchison* by which you will
observe the line of policy I am adopting is, if possible,
to punish the leaders of these pirates, without inflict-
ing unnecessary severity upon the deluded wretches
who have been induced to accompany them.
In consequence of the Treaty between our Gov-
ernment and Siam it is of political importance that
every demonstration of assistance on our part should


be particularly evinced on the present occasion, and it
is with this view principally, as well as to show the
pirates themselves that we are perfectly prepared for
them, that I have thus long blockaded Quedah River.
This show of co-operation not only I hope ensures our
good understanding with the Siamese but will also
I trust avert any premeditated injury from these
marauders themselves.
I have &ca.
(Signed) R, Ibbetson
Resident Singapore,
Prince of W. Island
Resident’s Office
19 June 1831.


(Enclosure in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to the
Admiralty, No. 301, 5 October 1831.)
Southampton. Trincomalee,
5 July 1831.
Sir,
The insurrection of the Malays of Quedah against
the Siamese authorities has quickened the desire I felt
to reinforce the vessels I had sent before for the pro-
tection of our trade within the Straits of Malacca.
I now send Captain Montague of the Crocodile
for that purpose. He will consult with you on all
things relating to the interests of Prince of Wales
Island, as well as with Mr. Ibbetson and the other
authorities in your vicinity.
As he will do so fully in every particular I need
not now say more than to express the sincerity of my
good wishes.
I have &ca.
(Signed) E. W. 0. R. Owen.
To K. Murchison,
Deputy Resident
Prince of Wales Island.


(Enclosure A3 in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 313, 13 November 1831.)
Service Secret Department.
To Wm. Hamley Esqre
H. M. Sloop Wolf.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to enter into communica-
tion with you regarding the operations now in pro-
gress at Quedah, and to make a request that until the
present insurrection (in a state so contiguous to our
own ) shall have subsided you will afford to this settle-
ment the great benefit arising from the presence and
services of a man of war in the vicinity of Quedah.
Yesterday I received despatches from the Rajah
of Ligore dated the 13 ultimo,* stating that he was
in movement against Quedah at the head of a large
land force and that his flotilla was making a corres-
pondent advance from Purlis to the Quedah River.
The messenger who brought these despatches esti-
mates the land force at 15,000 men with 500 elephants,
and the flotilla as consisting of 80 prows each contain-
ing 80 men.
I cannot gather more precise information or whe-
ther there is any battering train with the land or
sea forces, but I infer they possess nothing beyond
“ Eamlakers/’ (long swivels) and muskets, and it
seems doubtful whether the Siamese (numerous as
they may be) will succeed in carrying the Fort if
its garrison be as strong, well appointed and discip-
lined as your reports and other information lead me
to suppose.
Presuming that you will kindly afford every aid
in your power to the Local Government in this emer-
gency, I proceed to state my request that in the first
instance you will enforce a strict blockade of the


Quedah River. The Honorable Company’s Cutter
Emerald will be placed under your orders, and her
Commander Mr. Collins is well qualified by local
knowledge to afford you valuable assistance in effecting
this object. You will distinguish the Siamese boats
by the elephant in their flags and it would be desirable
to send Mr. Collins to communicate with the leaders
and to explain our purpose.
Should Tonku Kudin, or any of the insurgent
chiefs or their forces, endeavour to escape to sea I
have no hesitation in requesting yoii to treat them as
pirates. But I particularly request you to use every
means to distinguish such persons as these from the
mere peasantry, many of whom have been compelled or
cajoled by Tonku Kudin to remain within the Fort.
Individuals of this description, seeking refuge in our
territories may be permitted to pass unmolested . .
Should the Siamese attack upon the Fort prove
unsuccessful, and should the Rajah of Ligore, or the
Chief of the Siamese, apply to you for actual aid I
must leave it to your own judgment to decide how far
you can comply with the requisition. I shall merely
state to you that Mr. Ibbetson has recognised the
doctrine “ that the British are bound by the spirit of
the treaty of Bangkok ” to afford “ actual co-operation
to the Siamese if they desire it,” and that the pledge
of the Government has been given to the Rajah of
Ligore to that effect . . . There is considerable reason
to hope that the strength of the Siamese armament
and the unequivocal demonstration of our feelings on
the occasion, which will be evinced by the actual con-
junction of the English and Siamese naval forces, will
dishearten Kudin’s faction and enable the Siamese to
regain possession of the Fort without any co-operation
on our side beyond a mere blockade of the river.
. . . The interference of the British Government
arises solely from the Treaty of Bangkok ... If


the Ex King’s relatives (followers) were not implicated
in the insurrection our co-operation with the Siamese
would not be imperatively required. If Kudin and the
present leaders therefore should have evacuated the
Port and effected their escape, I would urge you not
to proceed to direct hostilities without previously con-
sulting me upon the subject.
I have &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Deputy Resident,
Prince of Wales Island
July 8. 1831.


(Enclosure A 5 in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 313, 13 November 1831.)
His Majesty’s Sloop Wolf,
Off Quedah, 11 July 1831.
Sir,
In reference to Mr. Murchison’s letter dated 8
July 1831,* I have the honor to acquaint your Excel-
lency that I arrived off Quedah in the afternoon of
the 9th and found that the night previous thirty-six
Malay prows had come out of Quedah and beat off
the Siamese flotilla consisting of thirty-two prows.
The following morning a reinforcement of twenty
Siamese prows arrived which with our appearance
induced the Malay prows to enter the Quedah river
under the Fort and the Siamese to resume their
position.
This morning thirty-three prows were discovered
coming in as from the Lancavies and steering for
Quedah. As I had no doubt they were going to join
Tuku Kudin against the Siamese, I felt it my duty
from the spirit of the treaty with the Siamese to warn
them off and if they persisted in going on to use force
in dispersing them. It being at the time a calm I
immediately sent the boats manned and armed in
command of the first Lieutenant Mr. Burridge with
orders to take the Emerald Cutter in tow and proceed
towards them and if they did not immediately disperse
to compel them to do so. A light breeze having
sprung up 1 slipt from ray anchor and made all sail in
support of the boats. On the approach of the boats
they all drew up together and sent a dispatch boat to
say they were going to Quedah to join Kudin against
the Siamese, on which Lieutenrnt Burridge informed
them the) r were not to go on and if they persisted
after a sufficient time given he would fire on them.
Their boat having returned among them some minutes,
and they showing no disposition to retreat, the two


boats cast off from the cutter and commenced firing
at them. After two or three rounds they all took to
their oars and sails and flew in every direction, the
boats pursuing and firing at them as they retreated.
One of the sternmost being disabled, lowered his sail
and laid his oars in. He said he had been hired to
assist Kudin against the Siamese. We found on
board thirty men, one long 8 pounder, three swivels,
a quantity of spears, krises and powder, the whole of
which I ordered to be thrown overboard and sent him
after the rest ( all of which were similarly armed and
manned) to communicate to them if they attempted
again to get into Quedah I should sink them. I have
no hesitation in saying had we not been here they
would have captured the whole of the Siamese flotilla,
as the Malay prows' in Quedah would have come to
their assistance and thus surrounded the Siamese,
The prows driven off have, I understand, been
some time collecting in the neighbouring islands for
the purpose of assisting Kudin against the Siamese.
*#** . * *
1 have &ca.
(Signed) Wm. Hamley
Commander.
To His Excellency
Rear Admiral Sir E. W. C. R. Owen, K. C. 8.,
&ca. &ca. &ca.


(Enclosure in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to the
Admiralty, No. 301, 5 October 1831.)
J. W. Montague Bsqre.
Captain of H. M. S. Crocodile.
Sir,
Adverting to a letter with which I have been
honored by His Excellency Sir Edward Owen, by
which I find that the services of His Majesty’s Ship
Crocodile have been made available for the purpose of
suppressing the insurrection at Quedah and of piracy
generally, I do myself the honor to state to you in
what manner and to what extent the force under your
command may be applied with reference to the first of
these objects.
The invasion of Quedah, by Tuku Din, the ne-
phew of the Ex Rajah of Quedah, and his followers is held
by Mr. Ibbetson, the Resident, to be a violation of the
13th article of the Treaty of Bangkok . . . and Mr.
Ibbetson infers that as we have failed to prevent the
aggression, we are bound to repair the injury by co-
operating in the recapture of the Fort if required by
the Siamese to do so. Should the Rajah of Ligore,
who is the representative of the Siamese and now carry-
ing on the siege or blockade of the Fort make any
requisition to you for direct co-operation, you are
therefore at liberty to afford it, if you ascertain that it
can be effectually given without too serious a loss of
life ; but I would suggest that as no harm can arise
from a short delay, it may be safer for you to refer to
me before you engage in any extensive enterprise, as
my information of the Siamese movements on the
land side may enable me to judge more correctly than
you can do how far an attack by boats would be likely
to succeed.
The blockade of the river seems to be the chief
duty which at present devolves upon you, and although


you cannot effectually blockade such a river the ap-
pearance of His Majesty’s Ship, in friendly co-operation
with the Siamese flotilla may have such a beneficial
effect in depressing one party and encouraging the
other that I must request you to maintain the blockade
as rigidly as you can. Captain Hamley will put you
in possession of all the information he possesses, and
this, with the services of Mr. Collins of the Honorable
Company’s Cutter Emerald, will enable you to con-
tribute every possible aid which His Majesty’s Ships
can render in a service of this description.
1 have &ca.
{ Signed ) W. Murchison
Deputy Resident.
Prince of Wales Island
3 August 1831.


(Public Record
Office.)
Admirals’
Despatches.
Ad. 1/206.
To Rear Admiral
Sir E. W. C. R. Owen, K. C. B.
Commander in Chief
&ca. &ca. &ca.
(Enclosure A to Rear Admiral Sir E. Owen’s
letter to the Admiralty, No. 301, 5 October 1831.)
H. Majesty’s Ship Crocodile,
Off Quedah, 8 August 1831.
Sir,
I have the honor to inform you that I arrived at.
Penang on the Ist instant, and finding from Mr.
Murchison the Resident, that the services of the
Crocodile would be required to assist the Wolf in the
blockade of Quedah, I lost no time in proceeding
here, when I found the Wolf, Emerald, Company’s
Cutter, and between 30 and 40 Siamese Row boats,
armed with small guns and ramlackers. Since my
arrival here I have been in constant communication
with the Rajah of Ligore and on his assuring me of
his intention to storm the walls of Quedah yesterday
morning at 4 o’clock, I sent all the boats of two ships
with the Emerald Cutter under the command of Com-
mander Hamley together with the Siamese flotilla to
the mouth of the river, ready to co-operate with the
Rajah’s troops in the event of their storming the walls
A sharp contest took place about the time appointed
which lasted till 9 o’clock and 1 fear the Siamese have
been defeated at the stockades or outposts of Tuku
Din, the Malay Chief, and nephew to the Ex Rajah
of Quedah. He has a strong force, and prows locked
to each “'other across the river, and about a cable’s
length outside them an iron chain is extended to each
bank of the river, with piles to keep up the bight.
The boats returned to the ships at half past ten, since
when I have had no further information from the
Rajah.
******
I have &ca.
(Signed) J. W. Montague
Captain.


(Enclosure in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to the
Admiralty, No. 314, 13 November 1831.)
To His Excellency Rear Admiral
Sir E. W. C. R. Owen, K. C. B.
&ca. &ca. &ca.
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
* * * The Quedah country towards the
interior I regret to say is not yet entirely quiet al-
though that prospect is not, I trust, far distant, but
the antipathy of the Malays to the Government of
Siam, and the facilities of revolt offered by a wooded
country enables them with but very slender means to
renew offensive operations which may always be ap-
prehended unless the latter maintain considerable
forces in the country * * *
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Resident,
Malacca
Resident’s Office
4 September 1831,


(Public Record
Office.)
Admirals’
Despatches.
Ad. 1/205.
To His Excellency
Rear Admiral Sir E. W. 0. R. Owen
K. C. B. &c. &c. &c.
(Enclosure E in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 313, 13 Novr. 1831.)
H. M. Sloop Wolf,
Off Qnedah, 4th October 1831.
Sir,
The Siamese forces continued to make gra-
dual appoaches to the Fort of Quedah until the morn-
ing of the 4 instant when, many of the Malays as op-
portunities offered by night, having made their escape
and Tuku Kudin being reduced in numbers to a few
Chiefs and about one hundred men without provisions
or ammunition, the walls were scaled, the place vio-
lently carried, and most of the Malays killed in the
assault. Kudin, after being wounded in five places,
retreated with ten of his followers to a small room
within the fort. The Siamese, wishing to take him
alive, attempted to get him out by setting fire to the
roof. Seeing his fate sealed he and a principal Chief
killed each other, the remaining nine rushed out from
the flames and were instantly killed. There was no
further opposition.
A great many Malays that had been kept in the
fort against their will particularly old men, women
and children, made their escape at different times since
the blockade and came off to this ship for protection
to whom I gave passes and sent to Penang. 1 have
the satisfaction to know that the lives of between three
and four hundred persons of this description have been
saved by His Majesty’s Sloop being here.
The Siamese being now in quiet possession of
Quedah and the services of His Majesty’s Sloop under
my command being no longer necessary I shall pro-
ceed to Penang . .
I have &ca.
( Signed ) W. Hamley
Commander


( Enclosure 0 in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 313, 13 November 1831.)
His Majesty’s Sloop Wolf,
Off Penang, November 7. 1831.
Sir,
I took no part in the hostilities
between the Malays off Quedah and the Siamese flotilla
further than by a blockade of the river to prevent
supplies of arms and ammunition being thrown in,
and the large force of prows collected there annoying
our trade ... I had frequent communication
with the Rajah of Ligore, through his Chiefs. Many
of his applications were that I would with my boats
and people attack the Fort which I constantly and
decidedly refused, stating to him that I had come
there for the purpose of blockading the river only,
and preventing the Malay prows making their escape
to our settlements ; all their applications were of this
nature requiring assistance and co-operating with
them, which I refused except as above stated. I had
one communication from Tunku Kudin the Malay
Chief requesting me to allow his prows to come out to
attack the Siamese flotilla which 1 refused to permit
Our operations were chiefly confined to a
blockade of the river, boarding such vessels as might
be passing, and watching the Malay prows in the
river. During our stay there the Siamese land forces
were constantly engaged with the Malays and latterly
in attacking the. Fort of Quedah. Of those oper-
ations I know nothing more than from seeing the
firing and from reports brought out by the Siamese
flotilla.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) W. Ham ley
Commander,
To His Excellency
Rear Admiral Sir E. W, C. R. Owen,
K. C. R, &c. &c. Ac.


(Enclosure A in Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 313, 13 November 1831.)
His Majesty’s Sloop Wolf,
Penang, 9 November 1831.
Sir,
. . . Your Excellency will perceive by the first
requisition I received from Mr. Ibbetson . . . that
he expected from the information he had received to
hear of the fall of the Fort of Quedah every hour.
Numerous reports also reached Mr. Murchison, con-
tradictory and not to be depended upon, from the op-
posite shore.
Being extremely anxious to proceed to the other
end of the Straits in execution of your Excellency’s
orders, I determined to run up to Quedah myself to
ascertain the real state of affairs. On mentioning this
to Mr. Ibbetson in the course of conversation he asked
me to take up some proclamations which he had then
read} r and distribute them in the neighbourhood of the
fort. These proclamations (five in number) were in the
Malay language and as I understand calling on the
peaceably disposed Malay inhabitants in the neigh-
bourhood of Quedah not to join in the insurrection
against the Siamese and if they were disposed to
come into the Honorable Company’s territories in Pro-
vince Wellesley they would there find protection.
With the view of ascertaining how matters stood,
I went in His Majesty’s Sloop to Quedah. On my ar-
rival there I sent a boat with a Lieutenant into the
river, attended however by all the ship’s boats, man-
ned and armed ( in command of the first Lieutenant )
in case of a surprise, I directed the second Lieuten-
ant who was to go into the river to make every obser-
vation in his power of the state of the place for my
information ( but not [on ] any account to enter the
Fort) and to distribute the proclamations to any per-
sons at the landing place if he had an opportunity.


One of the proclamations was directed to Kudin, the
Malay Chief, and taken to him by one of his followers,
the others given to persons on the beach. The boats
•met with no obstruction to their purpose and then
■came off. I found that the Siamese had not come in
any force, and at this time those who had left Ligore
■were not within many miles of the Fort of Quedah,
neither had any Siamese flotilla arrived off that river,
1 clearly perceived from the ship as well as from the
reports of the officers that the Fort had been put in a
state of defence and every precaution taken to guard
the river by a strong chain passed across it, and the
armed proas ( some with twelve pounders) moored at
the entrance for its defence. We also observed a large
armed force of Malays on the walls and about the
Fort. I like .vise gained information from many
fishermen I spoke from Quedah to the same purport.
Having performed this service I returned to Penang
and Mr. Ibbetson having gone to Malacca, I com-
municated in conversation to Mr, Murchison ray
observations , , ,
I have &ca.
( Signed ) W. Hamley
Commander..
To His Excellency
Hear Admiral Sir E. W. C. R, Owen, K. C. B,
Commanding in Chief
Aca. &ca. &ca.
Penangu


No. 314.
Southampton, Penang,
13 November 1831.
Sir,
******
I request that you will please to lay the whole
[of the correspondence previously mentioned] before
the Right Honorable The Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty, who will learn thereby that the Malay
expedition which surprised the Fort of Quedah had.
its organization, equipment, arms and ammunition
from this Island.
It has however extensive ramifications and had
received a turn tending to interest the whole Penin-
sula as a war of Mahometanism against idolatry.
The part taken by this Government has for this
reason it is feared given a bad impression at this
moment to the Malays in general * * *
Involved as the merchants of all these settle-
ments are in the supplies for the Malays the part
this Government has found itself compelled to take
in support of the violated articles of the treaty of
Bangkok, however right in principle and policy, has
been unpopular as pressing on their interests.
******
I have &ca.
(Signed) E. W. C. K. Owen
Rear Admiral
Commanding in Chief.
To Captain
The Honorable George Elliot
&ca. &ca. &ca.
Admiralty.


( Enclosure to Rear Admiral Owen’s letter to the
Admiralty, No. 32. dated 4th February 1832.)
Che Mali Hakin, Jarvic Pakan, residing at Que-
dah, states that he is employed as clerk by the
Siamese Authorities at Quedah. That about 12 days
ago he left Quedah by the orders of the Rajah of
Li gore to procure a physician. That on his arrival
here having got a person to go to Quedah, he left
Penang three days ago with thirteen people. That
having arrived at Tanjong Jaya he fell in with an-
other prow about 14 Coyans burden which fired at
deponent’s boat. That the Siamese in deponent’s
boat having returned the fire twice jumped out of the
boat and escaped to the shore, leaving deponent and
his wife and two Malays who were captured by the
pirates. That towards the evening deponent was put
into a boat and ordered to bring back sixty dollars
for the ransom of his companions. That he arrived
at Penang last night and is now come forward to
give this information. The pirates informed him
they would wait at Tanjong Jaya two days for the
money.
Sworn before me this 13th day of
January 1832 after having been
duly explained to deponent in the
Malay language.
(Signed) H, Nairne
Justice of the Peace,


Fort William 23 May 1833.
To the Chief Secretary to Government,
Fort William.
Sir,
1 have the honor to acquaint yon for the informal
tion of the Right Honorable the Governor General in
Council that I last month visited in person the small
settlement that has been lately forming near the
southern boundary of these provinces by refugees from
the neighbouring Siamese States under the govern--
ment of the Rajah of Ligor. They consist of upwards
of 100 families who have fixed on a site about 15
miles up a small river named Bauhpyeen in Latitude
10. 55 N. and were busily engaged in clearing the
land around their village for grain cultivation and
also in collecting tin ore.
2. As it would be highly dersirable to encourage
the resort of these people to our territories and their
settlement in this distant and for many years unin-
habited quarter, I would beg leave most respectfully
to suggest to his Lordship in Council that an increase
of 50 Rupees a month be allowed to the Mergui
Establishment for the purpose of fixing among them a
respectable native head man, who would regulate
their settlement and be their medium of
tion with us. There is every reason to look for an
annual increase to their numbers as they assured me
the whole population in our neighbourhood would
gladly take refuge among us from the vexatious and
tyrannical Governor of Ligor.
3. The soil of that part of the country where
they have settled appeared admirably calculated
for every species of cultivation, and though the hopes
which had been formed regarding the quantity of tin


ore to be found have not yet been realized, there is
still room to expect ultimate success. An active and
intelligent Chinaman, with a small party of his coun-
trymen, has fixed himself at the place and is preparing
to work on a large scale during the ensuing rains and
a party of Malays are also engaged in the same
manner.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G. W. Blundell
Officiating Commissioner in
the Tenasserira Provinces,
Molarayne
The 4th April 1833.


To Commissioner in the Tenasserim
Provinces.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated the 4th ulto., and in reply to acquaint
you that the Right Honorable the Governor General
in Council has been pleased to sanction an increase of
50 Rupees per mensem to the Mergui Establishment
for the purpose of paying an individual for superin-
tending the settlement of Siamese refugees who have
recently located themselves near the southern boun-
dary of the Tenasserim Provinces.
I have &c.
(Signed) W. H. Macnaghten
Sec. to the Government,
Fort William
23 May 1833.
Fort William 23d May 1833.


Fort William 18th July 1833.
To W. H. Macnaghten Esqre.
Secretary to Government
Secret and Political Department.
Sir,
In addition to the statement I formerly rendered
Government, regarding the resources, revenue and
commerce of Siam, I now respectfully beg leave to
send herewith an account of the names of the different
Provinces, Cities, Towns &ca. of that kingdom, to-
gether with the population of each, which being with
respect to trade the -next in extent to China of any
native state in Asia, may not be unacceptable. The
exports are nearly fifty thousand tons annually,
giving employment to 200 vessels of various descrip-
tions and burthens from 50 to 1200 tons each, and
still encreasing. The greater part of the goods pro-
curable there are extremely well adapted for th e
Europe market, the particulars of which are fully
described as well as their place of growth in the
account I gave in to the Secret Department on my
arrival here, which I collected for the, use of Gov-
ernment with much care and attention during my
residence at Bangkok of years after commercial pur-
suits, the longest period any British subject ever
{remained at the place.
I have &ca.
(Signed) D. E. Malloch-
No. 14 South Road
Intally Bth July 1833.


1.
Fort William 18th July 1833
Names of Provinces, Principalities, Cities, Towns
and Villages of Siam, with the Population of each con-
sisting of Siamese, Chinese, Peguers, Cambojeans, Ta-
voyans, Cochin Chinese, Laos, Malays, Moors and
Christians taken from the Public Records by an Officer
of the Siamese Government and delivered to Mr. D.
E. Malloch at Siam 20th January 1827.
Siamese ... 48,090
Chinese ... ... 60,700
Peguers ... ... 15,000
Laos ... ... 3,500
Cambojeans ... ... 1,000
Tavoyans ... ... 700
Cochin Chinese ... 500
Malays ... ... 2,000
Moors ... ... 1,500
Christians ... ... 950
Bangkok Population.
KRUNG was formerly the Court of Siam and the City at
Muang Ju.
Siamese ... ... ... ... ... 15,000
Chinese ... ... ... ... ... 10,00 ft
Laos ... ... ... ... ... 50ft
Combojeans ... ... ... ... 200
Peguers ... ... ... ... ... 200
Malays ... ... ... ... ... 300
2d,200


Names of Provinces
Cities Towns and
Villages.
Siamese
Chinese
Laos
Cochin
Chinese
Cambo-
jeans
Mtiang Ju [In?]
60
50
30
Muang Phrom
120
75
75
...
Muang Sing
90
45
40
...
Muang San
220
220
230
...
Muang Chainat
600
700
150
....
Muang Manuram
90
150
70
...
Muang Sakee Krang ...
450
300
70
...
Tha Sung Kung Taphao
150
900
55
...
Muang Uthai
4Q
75
30
70
Muang Sakhon
450
700
300
...
Muang Phichet
300
150
70
...
Muang Phipalok
1,500
1,200
300
...
Muang Phixai
1,500
1,500
300
...
...
Muang Trang
70
150
700
...
Muang Phree
70
300
1,500
...
...
Muang Noa
40
150
1,000
...
...
Rangpho
600
700
150
...
Muang Sangkolok ...
2,500
1,200
300
♦ *v*
Muang Sokhathai
1,000
300
150
...
...
Muang Capheeng
300
300
300
...
Muang Raheeng
300
300
220
...
...
Muang Meetac
150
40
150
...
Muang Thra ...
150
300
600
...
...
Muang Lara Bae
3,000
1,500
4,500
...
Muang Phelxahan
150
150
150
...
...
Muang Khoiat
1,500
900
1,500
...
900
Muang Rang Rory
150
150
150
...
300
Muang Khan
150
70
300
...
150
Carried forward
16,400
12,725
13,485
70
1,350
2.
Population.


Names of Provinces
Cities Towns and
Villages &c.
Siamese.
Chinese.
Laos.
Cochin
Chinese
Cambo-
jeans.
Malays.
Peguers
Muang Surin
150
70
150 ...
200
...
#( •
Muang Songkha
150
70
200 ...
1,500
...
...
Muang Nokhan Vat
150
150
...
1,500
...
...
Muang Battabong
150
1,500
...
9,000
...
Muang Sang
700
450
...
1,500
Muang Koenbea
3,000
750
750 ...
1,500
3,000
...
Muang Canbari
300
70
200
...
...
Muang Sisavat
...
...
150
Muang Say ok
...
...
...
•••
Muang Phitcabari
2,200
300
450 ...
3,500
Muang Hamphan
1,500
450
...
3,000
...
Muang Chaija
3,000
700
4,500
Lakhong
7,500
900
12,000.
Muang Talang
750
150
...
1,000
Muang Songkhla
5,000
850
...
5,500
Muang Talung
9,000
1,200
...
10,000
Maang Takua Thang 1,500
300
...
2,000
...
Muang Talibeng
450
...
...
I
700
Bangplasoi
600
500
...
800
...
Kangpoming
300
150
...
400
Rajong
700
450
1,000
Chantaban
8,000
2,000
..=
10,000
...
Thung Jai
700
1,000
800
Malay.
Muhang Tana
200
...
...
300
...
Muhang Tepha
800
...
1,200
...
Muang Nongchik
1,000
...
2,000
Muang Tain
5,000
350
...
...
8,000
Muang Jaring
6,000
150
12,000
Muang Calantan
2,500
...
5,000
...
61,300 12,510
1,550 ...
12,350
88,400
150
3.
Population


Names of
Provinces Cities
Towns &c.
Siamese.
Chinese.
Laos.
Cochin
Chinese.
Cam bo-
jeans.
Malays.
Peguers.
Muang Brang
Khana
4,000
650
7,000
Muang Mong Bui
600
1,800
Muang Pein
1,200
4,000
Muang Ranzee
700
2,000
Muang Sai
2,500
...
5,000
Muang Sam
2,400
Muang Pak
1,200
Muang
Savannphan
750
'
Muang Siket
1,750
Muang Roiet
3,700
Muang Yieng
Chan
150,000
2,000
Muang Pasuk
7,500
450
Muang Luang
Phabaijg
14,500
450
Muang Chieng
Mai
75,000
900
Muang
Lamphung
37,000
900
Muang Chieng
Seen
Muang Chieng Rai
...
Muang Ule
Khan Khong
700
*
Muang Khanajuk
300
500
Bangkhong
400
500
Muang Pachim
150
300
Paevamthathin
150
300
Lakhow Haisi
150
1,500
Muang Saphan
450
750
305,100
9,200
• • • ...
...
19,800
4.
Population.


Siamese,
Chinese.
Laos.
Cochin
Chinese.
Cambo-
jeans.
Malays.
m
C
®
ss
®
SUr
From Page 4
305,100 9,200
10,800
do.
do. 2
16,400 12,725 13,485 70
1,350
do.
do. 3
61,300 12,510 15,500*
12,350
88,400
150
do.
do. 1
48,090 60,700 35,000 500
1,000
200* 15,000
(* sic. incorrect.; 430,890 95,135 18,535* 57014,700 100,200* 15,150
Total
675,180 (Average) 2 Women to every Man.
From Page 1 Moors 1,500
do.
do. 1 Christians 950
Grand Total Men 677,630 Besides Women and Children.
( * sic. Incorrect. )
(Signed) D. E. Malloch.
[ Note.—The writing of this document is very indistinct, and in
many cases it is impossible to distinguish between a and u, h and k, etc.
Consequently only obvious alterations have been made].


Fort William 19th September 1833.
From the Rajah of Ligore.
A letter expressing kindness, sincerity and purity
of heart, which will remain as long as the sun and
moon and other heavenly bodies continue to revolve,
from me Chou paya Sitam sookrat Tiboodi Apay
Piri Boora Kroompahoo, the Governor of Likorisi-
tamrat. May the Lord of all worlds cause this to
arrive in the presence of my friend the Right Honor-
able Lord Bentinok Governor General of British India,
who is high and great among the English, wise,
prudent and renowned in all countries both far and
near.
In the first place, I wish to give information to
my friend, that Tunkudin and Tunku lung putih,
descendants of the Ex King of Quedah, raised a re-
bellion in the country of Quedah. I engaged in a
war with Tunkudin, and when I had taken Quedah,
1 returned home. Tunkudin died in battle. The
Honorable Robert Ibbetson Resident in Singapore
Pulu Penang and Malacca and Captain James Lowe
accompanied me to the country of Quedah. Now the
King of Singapore, Pulu Penang and Malacca (i. e.
Mr. Ibbetson ) requested me to ascertain the boun-
daries of the respective territories of Pulu Penang
and Siam. I therefore settled the boundaries of these
two countries with much pleasure. According to the
documents of the Company their territory formerly
extended from the sea shore to sixty roolongs* in-
land. I have now given more than formerly, accord-
ing to the wish of the King of Singapore, Pulu
Penang and Malacca and Captain James Lowe. I
have prepared a document for the signature of the
* A roolong is said to be about twenty fathoms.
This term belongs to a Siamese cycle.


Honorable English Company, which the King of Sin-
gapore, Pulu Penang and Malacca signed. I also
added my signature as a token of good understanding
and friendship on both sides.
I formerly took the liberty to send a kind letter
to my friend, with a salva and a box, and a gilt
mootam, the manufacture of Siam, which I committed
to the care of the King of Singapore, to be conveyed
to my friend in the country of Bengal in the month
Jamadulawal, in the year of the palandah. Concern-
ing this letter and the presents which accompanied it
I have received no information. Subsequently I sent
some of my people with presents, the manufacture of
Siam, to Mr. Maingy at Moulmain, hoping that, by
his means, they would be forwarded to my friend in
Bengal. While my people were at Moulmain, they
received information concerning the attack made on
Quedah by Kudin. This intelligence disconcerted
them, and not knowing whether they might, under
these circumstances proceed to Bengal or not, they
informed Mr. Maingy that they would return to me
with the presents. This was the reason of their not
proceeding to Bengal.
At the present time I send Nymeh with others
of my people who will embark at Pulu Penang and
convey to my friend, as a token of respect the follow-
ing presents namely :
Seven Siamese historical pictures
One vessel for containing cold water
One large tea pot
One large bowl
One small Do.
One Stand for a Do.
One vessel for rinsing the mouth
Two small gilt bowls
One Do. Do. box
One Dish or stand for the Do.
Four snuff boxes


Two pieces of cloth of gold thread, the manufacture
of Siam
Six pieces of flowered silk
Two pieces of the colour of the tonjoong purit
Eight pieces of the colour of the lunga seed
Six rolls of silk
These are a few articles which will show my
friendly intentions, and at the same time serve as a
specimen of the manufactures of Siam.
The Siamese are not accustomed to go to Bengal,
but when they shall have once been I shall be able to
show my respect by sending them again, for I earn-
estly desire to be on friendly terms with the English.
I have now to state, that I have settled the boundaries
between the Siamese and the English, according to
the wishes of the King of Singapore and Captain
James Low. As the countries of Pulu Penang and
Quedah are near to each other I hope that ray friend
will consider that they ought to increase in friendship
and attachment as long as the earth and sky shall
continue. Moreover I should be much pleased to see a
steam vessel. I have entrusted the management of
my concerns to Nymeh, and I hope my friend will
treat him with due respect. I beg that a steam
vessel may be sent for me to see it. I should be
very much gratified by a constant intercourse with
Bengal.
1 write this letter Monday the eighth day of the
month Tulkaidah in the 3 7 ear 1247.


To the Uajali of Ligore.
To His Highness Chan Phraja Sri Thamassoo
Kharat Chat Deecho Chai Mahai Soomja
Teebadee Apauga Peeree Bora Krommapaho
Chau Phraja Ligor Si Tamrat.
My honored and valued friend,
I have been highly gratified by the receipt of a
letter from my friend which was delivered to me by
Nymeh, who also presented to me sundry articles spe-
cimens of the manufacture of your counti’y, as tokens
of your friendship and regard for me. I accordingly
receive them as such and as our friendship is recipro-
cal, I have transmitted a few articles in return by
Nymeh who has taken charge of them and will on his
arrival present them to you in my name. I hope you
will make me happy by accepting them as tokens of my
favor towards a person who is so attached to the
British Government as yourself.
I take this opportunitj- to apprize you that Mr.
Ibbetson forwarded your former letter and presents to
me, which were duly acknowledged.
It will always afford me sincere pleasure to com-
ply with your request that a steam vessel be sent to
Ligore, but at present it is out of my power as the dis-
tance is great, and no vessel is immediately available
for the performance of so long a voyage. I shall not
however lose sight of your wish on this subject and if
a model, such as you wish to see, should be procurable
in Calcutta, I sdxall have much pleasure in sending
it for your inspection. In the mean time I send you
a picture of one. Believe me to be always desirous
of receiving intelligence of your Highness s health
and welfare.
In conclusion &c.
Port William
19 September 1833.
Fort William 19th September 1833.


Fort William 31 October 1833.
Secret Department.
To
The Officiating Chief Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter transmitting one from the Ex King of
Quedah for the purpose of being translated and re-
ported upon and directing me to intimate to the
writer of it that no document of that description will
be attended to by the Supreme Government unless
they are forwarded through the regular channel.
In reporting upon the Ex King’s letter it will be
proper to explain that prior to my receipt of it I had
received from Mr. Garling the following communica-
tion dated the 10 ulto.
« His Highness the Ex King of Quedah addressed
“me requesting permission lo proceed to Penang for
<£ the purpose of bringing away his relations and pro-
•“ mising not to land. Viewing this as the suggestion
■“ of his advisers and as a measure pregnant with
■“ future embarrassment I declined acceding to his
■“ wishes, and intimated to him my expectation that
■“ he would not take any steps which might involve me
in an unpleasant duty. I informed the Ex King
<l that as I had your general views I did not think
that I ought to send the reference to you.”
2. “The Ex King having again addressed me
“ and enclosed copies of two documents, I have appriz-
“ed him that translations of this address and its
enclosure should be forwarded to you.”


3. “ Permit me to request your direct instructions
“ and should you not comply with the Ex King’s
“ wishes I beg to be informed if I am at liberty to
“ secure the person of the Ex King should he attempt
“ to remove or quit Malacca.”
To this communication 1 replied from Singapore
on the 23rd. “You will intimate verbal!}' to the Ex
“ King of Quedah that before he can be permitted
“to quit Malacca it will be necessary that he state the
“ precise country to which he wishes to proceed when
“ the propriety of granting his request will be taken
“ into consideration. It is an idle waste of words and
“ time again to enter upon this oft repeated subject.
“ The Ex King has constantly told me that he
“ could not trust himself elsewhere than under
“ the protection of the British Government and it
“ is therefore idle and worse than useless on his part
“to forward indefinite promises or wishes on the
“ subject.”
A second letter from Mr. Garling dated the 9th
instant forwarded further letters from the Ex King.
To these I deferred replying until my arrival
at Malacca when I took that opportunity of noticing
two questions at once, vizt, his desire to proceed to
Salangore or Perak as submitted to you and his wish
to proceed to Belli directed to myself.
1 have not considered it worth while to transmit
the enclosures alluded to in Mr. Garling’s letter of the
10th because that letter contained a mere general
request for leave to proceed anywhere he pleased, his
right to do which he attempted to support by a kind of
promise he endeavoured to show was contained in
some garbled extracts from my former letters.
In reporting therefore upon his letter to your
address the only question which appears to arise is
the comparative expediency of granting one or other


of his requests. By residing at Perak or Salangore
he would be able to annoy the Siamese as much as
if he were resident at Prince of Wales Island, for both
of those countries being hostile to Siam, would willing-
ly join in any attempts on Quedah aided by his money
and further supported by the prospect of plunder,
opportunities for which are never wanting in distur-
bances of that kind. Not ostensibly appearing in
such transactions, the Ex King also would elude the
proof necessary to convict him and thus be ready in
the event of failure again to seek the protection of our
Government.
I do not consider there are equal objections to
his residence at Delhi. The people of Sumatra are
totally beyond the reach' of Siamese control and would
not be influenced by similar feelings to co-operate in
expeditions against Quedah. Money of course would
tempt the needy, but that expended all other means
would fail.
Por these reasons I am dedidedly of opinion that
his residence on Sumatra would be less inconvenient
even than his present residence at Malacca, where he
is under the control of evil disposed European advisers,
who are constantly urging him and his dependents to
commit acts as repugnant to his own interest as they
are unbecoming towards our Government.
******
I have &ca.
(Signed) R. Ibbetson
Govr. P. W. Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Malacca
26 August 1833.


To the Ex King of Quedah
Written 31 October 1833.
My esteemed Friend,
After Compliments,
I have had the pleasure to receive my friend’s-
letter written on the 14 Mohurrum 1249. I much
rejoice to find that my friend’s son Abdoollah arrived
in safety in Malacca.
It was proper in him to report to our friend the
kind condescension with which he was treated by the
Governor General during his stay at Calcutta.
I regret to find that our friend does not enjoy
good health. I represented to the Governor General
our friend’s wish to remove to Perak or Salangore but
this has been declared to be inadmissible.
The augmentation of our friend’s allowance was
granted for his comfort and the Governor General will
be happy to find that it has been the means of satisfy-
ing our friend and inducing him to refrain from
preferring groundless complaints and to pay implicit
attention to whatever may be recommended to him by
the Governor of Prince of Wales Island.
I remain with much consideration &ca.
(Signed) W. H. Macnaghten
Secretary to Government,
Fort William 31st October 1833.


Fort William 7th January 1835.
To the Secretary to Government
Political Department, Fort William.
Sir,
At the express- desire of the Ex King of Quedah,
I enclose for the information and orders of the Right
Honorable the Governor General of India in Council
copy of a letter to my address from that Chief. The
purport of it is clearly set forth in the letter itself,
vizt., to be allowed to proceed to Penang for the pur-
pose of conveying to Malacca certain relatives.
Adverting however-to the trouble that the autho-
rities experienced formerly before they could remove
him to Malacca, I can by no means recommend that
the prayer of his letter be granted.
What the direct object of the Ex King’s wishing
to visit Penang is, I am at present unaware, but I am
satisfied seeing he has a son of 30 to 40 years of age
who can escort his daughters to Malacca should they
be willing to go, that the motive assigned by him is
not the true one. If he is permitted to visit this
settlement his presence will doubtless be viewed with
suspicion by the Siamese, and I have great doubts if
he will be prevailed on to return without being com-
pelled by positive force.
The Ex King has now been absent from Penang
near four years, and is, I believe, nearly reconciled
to Malacca as a place of residence, and if the Gov-
ernment merely desire me to say that his wishes
cannot be complied witjb, I think it will be no more
than what he expects.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) S. G, Bonham
Acting Governor.
Prince of Wales Ish nd
Ist December 1834


Translation of a letter from Sultan Ahmed Taji-
odien Allira Shah, with the usual compliments, ad-
dressed to the Honorable Samuel G. Bonham Esqre.,
Governor, &c. &c.
We have to state that situated as we are we are very
unhappy on account of our children and family being
away from us residing at Pulo Penang which place is
a great distance from Malacca. Our children, grand-
children and relatives have been several times very ilf
and in great danger without our being enabled to
embrace them. We are also now advanced in age
and sickly and are consequently the more impatient
to have our relations about us.
To send merely to fetch these our relatives to
have with us here is difficult as we have no one we
can trust. It is true we have our son Abdullah, but
he is yet young and knows nothing of sailing about,
and our relatives have refused to trust themselves to
him in such a voyage, for they have none of them
ever been at sea, nor seen any other sea but that in
crossing to Pulo Penang. They have heard there are
many dangers between this and Penang, and the
chances of being taken by pirates on the way which
frightens them greatly. If we were to think of trust-
ing them to others we could not do so properly as it
is not the Malay custom for females of respectability
to mix with men, even to show their faces is consider-
ed a sin, independent of the shame. Therefore it is
that we have great hopes of our friends assisting us to
go ourselves to bring away our relatives in order that
they may reside with us.
We can go and remain at Qualla Krean, or at
Jurao, where it will be easy for them to join us. We
trust our friend will assist us by this permission. In
Fort William 7th January 1835.


the Secretary of Bengal’s letter he states to us that
in any of our wishes we were to address ourselves
to the person at the head of the three settlements.
Now with the assistance of God, our friend presides
over these Settlements and we trust will not prevent
our wishes especially as we have already got the
Secretary’s letter which we can show our friend if he
wishes.
If it shall occur to our friend that we are wish-
ing to return to live at Penang, we beg to state that
we have no intention of the kind, as we have no
farther comforts there, our servants and people having
since we left it dispersed and deserted our relatives
there when in distress. . Even if the Government
wishes us to return to' Penang we should not wish
to do so, so that if our friend wishes to have any
kind of written document from us to this effect we
are ready to give it.
Further, if our friend should be afraid of our
doing anything to disturb the Siamese residing at
Quedah, we have to state that we will do nothing of
the kind, we have no means of making war. Our
friend must be well aware that it requires a great deal
of money, and where are we to get it. Even for our
present expenses we are dependent on Government
for the money, and with the amount we are obliged to
support our expenses both here and at Penang.
With all that Government allows us we are not
enabled to save any. We are barely able to pay the
current expenses of our servants here and of our re-
latives at Penang. Should we therefore wish to wage
war with Siam and had the means of doing so, even in
that case, if it was against the wishes of Government,
we would never do it.
The Government have made an engagement with
the Siamese, and it is with their assistance only that
we have been enabled to withdraw our relatives


and friends from their hands. It would therefore
be extremely bad in us to forget the kindness of
Government.
We therefore wish our friend to accede to our
wishes at this present juncture, whilst the north
winds are yet not so strong, and we shall be greatly
obliged to our friend for his kindness.
Of our property here at Malacca, together with
our servants, we shall leave all as they are, excepting
such as are necessary to carry with us.
We beg our friend to give the necessary direc-
tions to Mr. Garling or to Mr. Lewis for the care of our
property during our absence, and that one or two proas
may remain with our people during the night to take
care of our house and property.
Written on Sunday, 30th of Jemadil Akhir 1250.
( A true translation )
(Signed) W. T. Lewis
Assistant Resident
7 November 1834.


To the Acting Governor of
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
I am directed by His Excellency the Right Hono-
rable the Governor General of India in Council to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated the Ist
ultimo, submitting translation of one from the Ex
King of Quedah requesting permission to proceed to
Penang to convey his relatives to Malacca and stating
your opinion that the application should not be com-
plied with.
2. In reply lam desired to acquaint you that
for the reasons assigned in your letter the Governor
"General in Council entirely concurs in the opinion
you have expressed as to the inexpediency of com-
plying with the request perferred by the Ex King
on this occasion,
I have &c.
(Signed) W. H. Macnaghten
Secretary to Government in India,
!Fort William
7th January 1835.
Fort William 7th January 1835.


Fort William 4 July 1836. (sic)
To the Resident Councillor
Malacca.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
dated 6 June regarding the movements of the Ex
King of Quedah.
2. Concurring as I fully do in the sentiments so
amply expressed by Mr. Ibbetson in his correspon-
dence with the Supreme Government I feel disposed
to allow the Ex King to proceed to either Battabarrah
or Delhie under the following conditions, which you
will be so good as to explain both verbally and in
writing so as to preclude all misconception.
The Ex King is to make his own arrangements
for passage and is to proceed with his followers direct
either to Battabarah or Delhie, apprising you which
of the two places he prefers, where he is to domicile
himself peaceably, abstaining from all political in-
trigue, and on no pretence whatever seeking to visit
Penang or any of the Malayan States on the Pen-
insula under the penalty of forfeiting the friendship
of the English Government and the stipendiary pro-
vision he now enjoys.
4. In making this communication you will of
course treat the Ex King courteously. At the same
time, whilst impressing upon him a proper sense of
this mark of favor on the part of the Supreme Gov-
ernment you will make hin understand that I very
much disapprove of the attitude of opposition to Gov-
ernment which he appears to have been assuming.
I have &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Governor.
Singapore
23 June 1835


Fort William 3d August 1835.
Political Department
To the Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter dated 31st October 1833, intimating with
reference to Mr. Ibbetson’s dispatch as per margin
that the Honorable the Governor General of India in
Council felt disposed to allow the Ex King of Quedah
to quit Malacca and domicile himself at Delhi on the
coast of Sumatra,
2. As I concur entirely in the sentiments con-
veyed to the Supreme Government by Mr. Ibbetson in
the 9th and 10th paragraphs of the letter above ad-
verted to I have given authority to the Resident
Councillor at Malacca to carry into effect the arrange-
ment which the Honorable the Governor General of
India in Council has been pleased to sanction, intimat-
ing to the Ex King that he is to proceed direct either
to Battabarra or Delhi to domicile himself quietly at
one or other of these places, to abstain from political
intrigue and on no pretence to visit Penang or any of
the native states on the Malayan Peninsula under the
penalty of forfeiting the protection of the British
Government and the stipendiary provision he now
enjoys.
3. As 1 conceive it to be very desirable that his
own request to quit the British Settlements in the
Straits should be complied with, I have thought it
best to pass over lightly, though not without animad-
version, the vexatious opposition to Government which
the Ex King has from time to time evinced.


4, Lately in the early part of June he addressed
the Resident Councillor at Malacca intimating his in-
tention to quit the settlement on the 14th of that
month. I did not receive Mr. Carling’s letter in time
to give him instructions how to act in such an event,
but I intimated that I would not sanction the employ-
ment of forcible means to arrest the Ex King’s person,
as I conceive that such a proceeding is no longer
justifiable on the political grounds which might have
warranted the step at an earlier period, and that if the
Ex King should be weak enough to act in direct oppo-
sition to the orders of the Supreme Government he
should be sufficiently punished by the stoppage of his
stipendiary provision, but I do not apprehend the
probability of his carrying this threat into execution
and under this supposition I have thought it best
after reprimanding him to allow the indulgence of the
Supreme Government as to his place of residence to
be carried into effect. Should he however have done
so I shall withhold his stipend until I can report upon
the case and obtain the orders of the Supreme Govern-
ment upon it.
5. In the mean time, I take for granted that if
the Ex King conducts himself with propriety in avail-
ing himself of the permission of the Honorable the
Governor General of India in Council to reside at
Delhie in preference to Malacca, it is not intended that
any reduction should be made in the stipendiary allo-
wance he now enjoys.
I have &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Governor.
Prince of Wales Islan l
the 3d July 1835.


Fort William the 7th April 1836.
Political Department'
To
W. H. Macnaghten Bsqr.
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to report for the infor-
mation of the Honble. the Governor of Bengal that
in accordance with the sanction of the Supreme Gov-
ernment the Ex King of Quedah has proceeded to
the native state of Delhi on the coast of Sumatra
and that in order to enable him to meet the ex-
penses incidental to the arrangement I have autho-
rized the Resident Councillor at Malacca to make
to the Ex Rajah an advance of 2 months stipend
which I trust will be considered as a reasonable
indulgence and one that involves little or no risk.
I have &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Governor.
Prince of Wales -Island
24th February 1836


Fort William 4 July 1836.
To the Secretary to Government
General Department—Fort William.
Sir,
I regret to have occasion to report for the in-
formation of the Honorable the Governor of Bengal
that there is some ground for apprehending that
another attempt is in preparation against the Siamese
at Quedah by the Ex Rajah,, in combination with the
piratically disposed Chiefs of some of the neighbouring
Malay States.
2. The grounds for suspicion are as follow. The
Ex-Rajah quitted Malacca under the sanction of the
Supreme Government with the ostensible view of
locating himself either at Batabarrah or Delhie on the
coast of Sumatra, and on the express understanding
that he was not to touch at Penang or any of the
Malayan States of the Peninsula ; he has nevertheless
proceeded to a place named Bruas in the Perak
territory on a mere pretext, and I have reports both
from Malacca and from the Assistant Resident at
Province Wellesley that he is engaging in an exten-
sive intrigue to recover possession of Quedah. These
reports are vague and in many points inconsistent,
and reaching me when they do, when the vessel by
which this letter is despatched is on the very point of
sailing, I should not have troubled the Supreme Gov-
ernment with the communication of intelligence which
may prove to be exaggerated, if not altogether erro-
neous, if I did not consider it advisable both to guard
against the contingencies which may arise out of this
matter and, with reference to the unquestionable
encrease of piracies, to suggest the propriety of re-
questing his Excellency the Naval Commander in
Chief to send another sloop of war to the Straits


pending the preparation of more efficient local means
of defence.
3. I shall report more fully in a subsequent
letter. All that I can now state is, that bearing in
mind the views of the Supreme Government communi-
cated to my predecessor on the occasion of the former
attack upon the Siamese at Quedah, I shall abstain
from any direct measures of hostile interference, but
that 1 shall employ every means short of that to
neutralize the buccaneering purposes of the Ex Rajah,
to whom as well as to the Malayan Rayahs, I have
strongly expressed the extreme dissatisfaction with
which the British Government would view any such
attempt. His Majesty’s Ship Wolf and the Honorable
Company’s Schooner Zephyr are both at Singapore,
engaged against the pirates in that quarter. On the
return of the latter, which I look for daily, 1 shall be
enabled to adopt more decided measures of precaution
by stationing her at Perak to prevent the egress of the
Ex King with a piratical flotilla which, with the addi-
tional precaution of sending a military force to Pro-
vince Wellesley to check the passage of the insurgent
forces through our territory and the prepared state of
the Siamese at Quedah to -repel any attack, give me
every hope that the main object of the marauders
would be effectually frustrated although the mere at-
tempt would unquestionably foster piracy and disorder
in this part of the Straits.
I have &ea.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Governor..
Prince of Wales Island
3 7 April 1836,


To the Secretary to Government
General Department
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to transmit duplicate of my
•letter dated 17 instant* and hastily avail myself of a
passing opportunity of making a farther report for the
information of the -Honble. the Governor of Bengal
altho’ I am still unable to afford precise information
regarding the object with which the Malayan flotilla
has been collected on the coast of Perak.
7. That the Ex King is intriguing with Perak
and other states is evident, and there can be no doubt
as to the intention to attack Quedah. Captain Low
has arrested several of the Ex King’s emissaries, who
were endeavouring to gain over the Malays of Province
Wellesley to join in the attempt. The Ex King is
besides on the Perak territory against the wish of the
British Government and is obviously supported by a
large flotilla collected by the Rajah Mooda and other
Malayan Chiefs. There is then every ground to be-
lieve that he is in a position which would justify the
English, with reference to the 13th article of the Treaty
with Siam, to interpose. The Article stipulating that
he shall not reside on the Peninsula is conditional and
the Siamese at Quedah have only to exact the trifling
condition, but the more important Article binding
the English “ not to permit the Ex King or any
of his followers to attack, disturb or in any man-
ner injure the territory of Quedah ” is likely to be
infringed, and it is to me an important consideration
Fort William 4 July 1836.


whether the Perak state has not, by co-operating with
the Ex King against Quedah, placed herself beyond
the pale of the neutral provisions of the Treaty
with Siam, which guarantee that neither Siam nor
the English shall attack her, and 1 am under a strong
persuasion that I should be justified in removing the
Ex King from Bruas forcibly and putting him under
restraint until the Honble. the Governor of Bengal
O
might decide upon his future destination. A measure
of this description would also tend more effectually
than any thing else to break the league and check
the efforts of his adherents. At present, however, I
am not in a position to ensure the success of the
attempt and failure would be extremely pernicious.
I must be guided by circumstances but I am strongly
of opinion that such a step would be the best policy.
I have not forgotten the views laid down by the
the late Governor General of India on the occasion of
the former attack on Quedah. His Lordship was of
opinion that under the peculiar circumstances attend-
ing it, the Governor, Mr. Ibbetson, was justified in
sending the Ex King to Malacca and in giving a
degree of co-operation to the Siamese which would not
otherwise be warranted. On this occasion the cir-
cumstances are entirely different, but perhaps nearly
equivalent in their effects upon the feelings of the
Siamese Government. There has been no preparation
ol 'insurgent force within our own territory ; on the
contrary the Ex King’s emissaries have been arrested.
The Siamese have had timely information. The
Ex-King and his adherents have been warned and
his attempt against Quedah has been denounced by
Proclamation. Nevertheless he has left Malacca by
permission of the British Government and has gone to
Bruas, from whence if we do not remove him, the Siam-
ese may with some ground infer our connivance. I
have just received letters from the Governor of Quedah
requesting me either to remove the Ex-King or to
allow him (the Governor of Quedah) to do so, and it


is not easy to give a substantial reason for not doing
one or other if the Ex-King is decidedly plotting
against the Siamese. In the present juncture I have
confined myself to the assurance that I shall adopt
all possible measures to induce the Ex-King to quit
Bruas. I must anticipate a remark on the part of
the Governor of Bengal by explaining that when the
Ex-King left Malacca there was not the slightest
indication of this movement, it was of course a matter
of policy to conceal it that he might leave Malacca
with the sanction of the English Government and that
he might draw as much cash from us as possible.
It is fortunate that I refused him more than two
months’ stipend.
8. It may be important to favor me as soon as
possible with directions how to act; whether it be
considered sufficient to deprive the Ex-King of all
future countenance and support (of course this is his
position at present) or whether I am to employ force
to ensure the fulfilment of the Treaty with Siam. If
that Article be construed largely its observance can
be ensured by no other means than by putting the
Ex-King and all his family under a military guard.
* * # * * *
I have &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Governor.
Prince of W. Island
28 April 1836.


(Enclosure in Yice Admiral Bladen Capel’s letter
to the Admiralty, No. 29, 8 July 1837.)
To the Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
* * * 1 have now the honor to submit for
the information of the Right Honorable the Governor
of Bengal, though in a brief and hurried manner, a
further report upon the state of affairs at this settle-
ment in connexion with the position of the Ex King
at Bruas on the coast of Perak.
2. It is unquestionable that he meditates another
attack on Quedah though it is probable that the
measures I have taken -may retard the attempt and
possibl}' prevent it altogether. But such being the
-declared purpose of the Ex King, and his presence on
the coast of Perak and the intrigues he is carrj ing on
having the most decided tendency to excite distur-
bance on Province Wellesley and piracy generally,
and requiring precautionary measures on our side
which involve no small expense, I urgently solicit of
the Right Honorable the Governor of Bengal as to
the measures which are to be applied to the Ex King
personally.
3. His position at Bruas is on several accounts
so obnoxious that I should feel strongly inclined to
remove him by force, but I am now aware that the
attempt to seize him would be attended with bloodshed
and a chance of failure, and I confess that I am not
disposed to take such a responsibility on myself. The
case presents a choice of difficulties—if the Ex King
remains where he is, or elsewhere on the Peninsula, a
pernicious and extensive excitement will be fostered,
and jealousy on the part of the Siamese will be engen-
dered, leading to collision on our frontiers. If, on the
other hand, he be removed forcibly, it is now evident


that he and all his family must be kept under per-
petual surveillance to ensure the strict observance of
the treaty with Siam, and the alliance between the
Ex King and the English, which his own infatuation
has now broken, will have to be removed to the
extent at least of maintaining him and watching him
perpetually.
4. If the old man could be induced to move over
to Delhi there can be no doubt that such would be
the best alternative, but I consider this to be now
hopeless. For,the present I must content myself with
the measures already reported, which have apparently
had the effect of separating the state of Perak from
the Ex King’s cause and have greatly tranquillized
the settlement.
******
I have &ca.
( Signed ) K. Murchison
Governor &ca. &ca.
Prince of Wales Island
14 May 1836.


To K. Murchison Esqre.,
Governor of Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am directed to acknowledge the receipt of your
''two letters dated the 17 and 18 April* last conveying
your apprehension that another attempt is in prepar-
ation against the Siamese in Quedah by the Ex Rajah,
in combination with the piratically disposed Chiefs of
some of the neighbouring Malay States, and further
that an extensive movement was in preparation am-
ongst various Malayan Chiefs both of the Peninsula
and of Sumatra, that they had collected in force in the
adjoining territory of Perak and that reports had
reached Mr. Garling of its being intended by them
eventually to attack the three British settlements in
the Straits, stating also the measures of precaution
and defence adopted by you in consequence at Prince
of Wales Island.
2nd. In reply lam directed to express the hope
of His Lordship in Council that the means that will
be at your disposal after the arrival of Captain Chads
with His Majesty’s Ship Andromache and of His
Majesty’s ship Raleigh which has also been ordered
by the Naval Commander in Chief to reinforce the
Naval armament in the Straits will not only have
relieved you from all apprehension for any of the
British Settlements, which His Lordship in Council
cannot believe there can have ever been real ground
for entertaining, but will have led to effectual me-
asures being taken for the suppression of the piratical
combination to which you allude in connexion with
the general plan explained at length in ray letter
dated the 4 ultimo and its enclosures.
Fort William 4 July 1836.


/
3d. The Right Honorable the Governor General
of India in Council doubts not that the designs as-
cribed to the Rajah of Quedah will by the measures
above alluded to be effectually frustrated. Although
indeed His Lordship in Council would not wish that
Captain Chads with the naval force at his disposal
should be long diverted from the execution of the
general scheme of measures for the prevention of
piracy which has been specifically entrusted to him,
still his services will of course be available in case
of any movement decidedly hostile on the part of the
Ex Chief of Quedah or of the Rajah of Perak or of any
other chiefs who may espouse his cause against the
Siamese and so likewise for the maintenance of exis-
ting relations and treaties.
4, You will receive from the Political Depart-
ment any further instructions in respect to the Ex
Rajah of Quedah that may be called for by his recent
proceedings, the correspondence in respect to that
Chief having been conducted in that department.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to Government.
Fort William
The Ist June 1836


Port William 1st August 1836.
General Department.
To H. T, Prinsep Bsqre.
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
. . . . I now do myself the honor
to report for the information of the Right Honorable
the Governor of Bengal, that all indication of a hostile
movement upon Quedah by the Ex Rajah supported
by confederate Malayan Chiefs has disappeared and
there is every ground to believe that tranquillity in
this quarter is securely reestablished.
2. The Ex King is still stationed on the coast
of Perak, where he has been joined by his family from
Penang. He is residing in a small dismantled brig,
and being discountenanced by the Rajah of the coun-
try, poverty must ere long compel him to make sub-
mission to the British Government. In the event of
his doing so, I beg to recommend that he be again
sent to Malacca and there placed under such a degree
of surveillance as will effectually prevent his engaging
in political intrigue. He has violated the condition
on which his stipend was sanctioned by the Supreme
Government, as well as his promise to me prior to
quitting Malacca, and it is abundantly proved that
the indulgence lately accorded to him of being per-
mitted to enjoy his stipend whilst residing at a Native
State must be withdrawn, and the only question is
whether he should be placed under restraint at a
British Settlement or allowed to be at large on a
declared understanding that all connexion between
himself and the East India Company is finally
dissolved.


3. Of these two courses, I beg respectfully to re-
commend that the former be adopted, chiefly because
it best provides for the due observance of the Treaty
with Siam, by which we engage “to prevent the Ex-
King from attacking Quedah,” partly also, because I
conceive that the Right Honorable the Governor of
Bengal may be disposed to regard the proceedings of
this unfortunate person with some degree of pity, in
consideration of his advanced age (he is said to be
70 years old) and making due allowance for the
natural desire of a dethroned Prince to regain his
country. I advocate this plan only on the supposition
that he makes submission, and on the understanding
that his future stipend be reduced to a mere mainten-
ance vizt. about Spanish Dollars 200 per mensem,
which, considering his large family, will leave him no
surplus funds for improper application.
4. I hold depositions taken by Captain Low on
arresting the Ex-King’s emissaries in Province Welles-
ley, also letters from the Ex-King in which he does
not conceal his desire to regain Quedah, asserting at
the same time his claim to the full stipend of 10,000
Dollars per annum in virtue of the original Treaty
between his father and the Penang Government as a
consideration for ceding Penang to the East India
Company. This engagement was declared by the
Supreme Government to have become null and void
when the Siamese took possession of Quedah, and
subsequently he was allowed a similar stipend under
certain conditions which he has entirely violated. I
refrain from troubling the Right Honorable the Gov-
ernor with these documents unless called for, as their
production is not necessary to establish the fact of
his having violated the terms on which the last
stipendiary arrangement was sanctioned.
5. To what extent the state of Perak was impli-
cated in the coalition cannot now be exactly determin-
ed, because the measures adopted appear to have


‘deterred the Rajah Moodah from any overt act, which,
it may be presumed, he would otherwise have commit-
ted, as he had unquestionably collected a flotilla of
ififty-two proas, many of which were armed without
any other assignable motive, and particularly as it is
known that the Bx-Rajah or his emissaries had spread
the belief that the British Government had permit-
ted him to go where he liked, and to attempt the
recapture of Quedah. Whatever may have been the
original object of the state of Perak there can be no
doubt that it is decidedly separated from the interest
of the Ex-King.
6. So great is the difficulty of obtaining correct
information in these countries, from exaggerated re-
ports and the effect of panic, that I cannot even now
say with precision whether the measures to which I
had recourse were or were not more extensive than the
occasion strictly demanded. The total incidental ex-
penses amount to Company’s Rupees 5,000, which
though large at a first glance will, I trust, be consider-
ed moderate when due allowance is made for the effect
of a sudden transition from a very reduced peace
establishment to one calculated for the defence of a
harbour and an extensive and assailable frontier.
7. The absence of the Schooner Zephyr was par-
ticularly unfortunate as it left us with no maritime
force beyond one little gun boat commanded and
manned by natives. In this position I considered it
•an imperative duty for the preservation of the public
peace, the maintenance of the Treaty with Siam, and
the prevention of buccaneering war on our very
coasts, to adopt such prompt and decisive measures as
would distinctly prove (which mere correspondence
could not have done) that the British Government
was decidedly opposed to any infraction of the Treaty
with Siam. I trust that the Right Honorable the
Governor of Bengal will be of opinion that this emer-
gency justified my proceedings, and that the expenses


will be sanctioned. I need hardly say that the amount
will ere long be absorbed in the forfeiture of the Ex
King’s pension, even if my proposition to allow him
a maintenance be adopted.
8. On the return of Mr. Bonham and Captain
Chads from the mission on which they are now em-
ployed I shall take occasion to report at large on the
condition of the Malayan States. I now confine my-
self to a remark, which I offer respectfully to the
notice of the Right Honorable the Governor, that the
system of non-interference which has formed the basis
of our intercourse with the Malayan Chiefs for several
years, has a good deal contributed to the present pira-
tical and unsettled condition of the Straits.
I have &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison
Governor.
Prince of Wales Island
25th June 1836.


(Enclosure in Vice Admiral Bladen Capel’s letter
to the Admiralty, No. 29, 8 July 1837.)
To K. Murchison Esqre.,
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
******
2. If it should be ascertained that the Ex King
is availing himself of his residence at Perak to commit
or encourage aggressions upon the Siamese he should
be instantly removed and by force if necessary.
3. In the event of its being necessary to resort
to force for the purpose the Ex Rajah should be
sent back to Malacca and there detained, under
such arrangements as shall effectually prevent his
being the means of disturbing the public peace in
future * * *
4. But in the first instance, and before resorting
to force, the Ex Rajah should be required to repair
without delay to Batabara or Delhi, on the coast of
Sumatra or to return to Malacca, on pain of forfeiting
his entire stipend, and he should be distinctly ap_
prized that he will no longer receive support from the
British Government in the event of his again incurr-
ing its displeasure.
******
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. H. Macnaghten
Secretary to the Government
of India.
[Fort William
4th July 1836.]


Fort William 1st August 1830.
To K. Murchison Esqre.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
In continuation of my letter to your address under
date the 4th ultimo,* I am desired to acquaint you
that a copy of your letter dated the 25th June last
relative to the proceedings of the Ex Rajah of Quedah
has been forwarded for consideration and orders to
the Political Department, and to state at the same
time that the circumstances detailed in your letter
above referred to have not induced His Lordship in
Council to alter his views as to the treatment which
should be shewn towards the Ex Raj’ah, and you will
accordingly be guided by the instructions with which
you have been already furnished as regards that in-
dividual.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. H. Macnaghten
Secretary to the Government of
India.
Fort William
Ist August 1836


Fort William 24th October 183*3.
To the Secretary to Government
Fort William,
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter dated July 4th * conveying the directions
of the Right Honorable the Governor of Bengal for mV
guidance in regard to the Ex King of Quedah.
In reply I beg permission to state that after due
consideration it appears to me that those discretionary
orders are not exactly applicable to the circumstances
of the fix Rajah’s present position and that 1 therefore
deem it most prudent to abstain from any decided
measures for effecting his removal from Perak without
further orders, either in reply to this letter or to' inv
(former communication dated 25th June last. * •
Your letter now under acknowledgment directs
me to remove the Ex King by force, if force should be
necessary ; but the whole arrangement seems to be
based on the supposition that lie is still engaged in
hostile machinations against Siam. This, I beg re.
spectfully to state, is not the case at present. He is
and has been for some months perfectly quiet, though
it cannot be doubted that on his first, arrival at Perak
he engaged in such an intrigue, and is probably del er-
red from renewing it only by want of means and the
defection of his allies.
In his various letters to me he urges his demand
for payment of the arrears of his full stipend, and ex-
presses his readiness to go to Delhi ; but all the in-
formation I can collect disposes me to think that he
will never voluntarily quit Perak. In fact while he
expresses his desire to go to Delhi he invariably sti-
pulates that his slaves now at Penang shall be sent to
him. a condition with which he lias been repeatedly
informed the British Government cannot comply.


1 therefore recommend that the local Government
be authorized to effect his removal either to Malacca
or to Delhi by force, if he will not voluntarily remove
from Perak within a given time, without reference to
the question whether he is or is not now engaging in
hostility against the Siamese Government of Quedah,
but 1 think it right to state that the successful exer-
tions of Captain Chads, and the anti-piratical measures
about to be applied by Government are likely to ren-
der it a matter of small importance whether the Ex
Rajah receives his stipend at a Native or a British
Port, that is to say at Delhi, Battabarrah or Malacca.
I have &ca.
(Signed) K. Murchison, Governor
F. W. 1., Singapore and
Malacca.
P. W. Island
22d September 183 d.


Tb the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca,
Sir,
I am directed by the Right Honorable the Gov-
ernor General of India in Council to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter dated the 22d ultimo* * * *
2. In reply lam desired to state that Hie Lord-
ship in Council is very unwilling to sanction a resort
to force for the purpose of removing the old Ex Rajah
from Perak where it does not appear that he is en-
gaged in hostile machinations against Siam. But His
Lordship in Council desires that no part of his stipend
be allowed him until after he shall have removed to
Malacca or to some place in Sumatra; that he be
distinctly apprized of this resolution, and that as he
will receive no stipend in arrear, it will be best for
him to leave his present abode at the earliest practic-
able period. By this means he will in all probability
be quietly induced to comply with the wishes of our
Government.
I have &ca.
(Signed) W. H, Macnaghten
Secy, to Govt, of India
Fort William
54th October. 1886,
Fort William 24 October 1886.


To the Honorable the Court of Directors
of the East India Company.
H( norable Sirs.
Para. 251. By the 55th paragraph of the letter
from the Government of Bengal dated the 29th No-
vember No. 8 of 1836* Your Honorable Court were
apprized of the permission granted to the Ex King of
Qnedah to quit Malacca and proceed to Delhi on the
coast of Sumatra. Alt hough he was allowed to do so on
the express understanding that he was not to touch at
Penang or any of the Malayan States of the Peninsula,
yet it appears that he proceeded to the Perak territory,
wln-re his conduct excited apprehensions that in com-
bination with the piratically disposed chiefs of some of
the neighbouring Mala}’ states, he was meditating
another attempt, against the Siamese at Quedah, and
further that an extensive movement was in prepara-
tion among various Malayan chiefs both ot the Penin-
sula and of Sumatra with a view eventually to attack
the three British Settlements in the Straits. As
regarded this latter - 'design we felt satisfied that no
real grounds existed for entertaining any apprehens on.
252. Subsequent communications announced that
all indication of a hostile movement upon Quedah by
the Ex King, supported by confederate Malayan Chiefs,
had disappeared and that there was every reason to
believe that tranquillity was generally re-established
in that quarter.
253. The instructions issued to the Government
of Penang on this occasion were to the effect that it it
should be ascertained that the Ex King who was still
at Perak, was availing himself of his residence at that
place to commit or encourage aggressions upon the
Siamese, he should be instantly removed and by force
if necessary.


204. In the event of its being necessary to re-
sort to force for this purpose we desired that the Ex
King should be sent back to Malacca and there detai-
ned under such arrangements as should effectually
prevent his being the means of disturbing the public
peace in future. In that case the expense of maintain-
ing himself and family was on no account to exceed
the amount of the stipend formerly enjoyed by him,
namely 6000 dollars,
255. Our desire was further signified to the
■effect that in the first instance and before resorting to
force the Ex King should be required to repair without
delay to Battabaree or Delhi on the coast of Sumatra,
or to return to Malacca on pain of forfeiting his entire
stipend, and that he should be distinctly apprized that
he would no longer receive support from the British
'Government in the event of his again incurring its
displeasure, and further that in consequence of his
having violated his engagement, the Supreme Govern-
ment no longer considered itself under any obligation
to continue to his family after his death the stipend
which he now enjoys, but that whether they’’ should
receive any and what degree of support must depend
upon his and their future behaviour.
We have &ca.
(Signed) Auckland
&ca. &csk.
Fort William
■3oth January 1637


Fort William 5th June 1837.
To W. H. Macnaghten Esqre*
Secretary to the Government of India
Fort William.
Sir,
Adverting to }mur letters of the 4th July,* let
August * and 24th October * last it becomes my duty
to report to you for the information of the Right
Honorable the Governor General of India in Council,
that. I have been necessitated in consequence of the
conduct of the Ex Rajah of Quedah to remove him
forcibly from Bruas, and tliat he is now in the harbour
on board his own brig the Julia under the guns of His
Majesty’s Sloop Zebra.
2. By your letter of the 24th October last I be*
came aware ot the anxiety of the Supreme Government
to abstain if possible flora force in the accomplishment
of this object, and I trust that the corresjKMidence
annexed will satisfy His Lordship in Council that I
took every means to induce the Ex King to remove
peaceably before 1 had recourse to it.
3. Before I left Singapore I sent up the Honor-
able Company’s Schooner Zephyr to afford him a pas-
sage. She was accompanied by H. M. S- Raleigh, and
Captain Quin landed and had an interview with the
Ex Rajah. At that time he had committed no overt
act showing that he was engaged in hostile machina-
tions against Siam, and 1 therefore did not then think
it necessary, or consistent with the instructions con-
tained in your letters, to countenance or direct his
compulsory removal. Captain Quin therefore after
using every exertion to induce the Old King to remove
from Bruas was compelled to return without him.


4. On my arrival at this station I soon ascertain-
ed beyond doubt that the Ex King was doing all in his
powet to disturb the relations existing between the
British and Siamese Governments, and which in fact
the Ex King, as will be seen by his letters when re-
monstrated with, admitted, and that he was clandes-
tinely issuing Proclamations to the Malays and Mus-
sulmans of this place and its vicinity calling on them
to assist him in the recovery of Quedah.
5 lat the Same period received a letter from
the Siamese Governor of Quedah stating that a number
of armed boats were collecting at the Lancavies at the
instigation of the Ex Hajah for this purpose. ( which
the Ex King had admitted to he the fact) and calling
On me to fulfil the stipulations contained in Captain
Burner’s Treaty of 1826,
6. At the Lancavtes Island, about 60 miles to
the northward of this station, I found everything to
be in anarchy and confusion in consequence of the
proceedings of these boats, some of which undoubtedly
belonged to the place and were under the command of
one Che Mat A Hie, a person on whom the Ex King
has lateh conferred some title of honor, and the depo-
sitions enclosed will fully prove this fact.
7. 1 may here remark that On remonstrating
With some of the Ex Rajah’s relations on the impro-
priety of that Chief sanctioning these outrages and
stating that acts thus committed bordered on piracy,
I was answered that Che Mat A lire and his companions,
the persons who from the depositions and by the letters
from the Siamese Governor (the latter since the cap-
ture of the Ex King) it will appear were the perpe-
trators, were not thieves, but the places from whence
the birds’ nests were procured formed part of Quedah,
that that country belonged to the Ex King and
therefore he had a right to collect hie revenues
thereon.


8. It is hardly necessary to say that I could not
sanction such proceedings and I therefore deemed it
right to take means for the apprehension of the Ex
Rajah himself, being satisfied so long as he remained
in this neighbourhood it would continue to be the
scene of these disorder!)' outrages and 1 therefore
addressed a demi-official note to Captain Stanley of
H. M. S. Wolf, requesting him if circumstances ad-
mitted of it, to repair to this station. Before however
an opportunity offered for dispatching it, H. M. Sloop
Zebra fortunately arrived, and after communicating
fully with Captain McCrea on the subject, that officer
undertook to remove the Ex King, and for that
purpose left this station for Bruas on the 17
instant.
10. Captain McCreas letter* explains the ne-
cessity of bringing the Ex King to this station. I
have given orders to have his brig put in a worthy
state, when she will be dispatched with him, under
convoy of the Zebra to Malacca, which is the cheapest
and most convenient arrangement that could be pos-
sibly made for his removal to that settlement. And
the Resident Councillor has been instructed, pending
further instructions, to act strictly up to the orders
contained in the 3d paragraph of your letter of the
4th July last.
11. Captain McCrea speaks highly of the end-
eavours of Syed Abdool and Rahman Ben shahab
to prevent bloodshed and to induce the Ex King to
accompany him peaceably to Malacca. This person
married a sister of the Old King, is an influential
person and has been very useful to me since the Efx
King has been here, as indeed has Hashim, designated
by Captain McCrea as the Secretary.
12. There appears to me no chance of inducing
the poor old King to rUrsr the condition he is now in.


and to which he has through his own obstinacy and
perverseness reduced himself, in its true light at all
[or] to reconcile him to the restraint that must now
of necessity be imposed on him, and I thick it there-
fore proper to have some one about him who is
interested in him but in whom I can place continence,
Syed Abdool Eohman is a person exactly of this
description, and in consideration of his services I have
presented him in the name of the Governor General
with a gift of 200 Rupees and Hashim with 100,
which I trust will meet the approbation of His Lord-
ship. And here I would respectfully urge that it
would in my opinion be very advisable to pension the
former at 50 Rupees per month. This measure I feel
assured would much tend to promote concord between
the local authorities and the Ex King, and enable
me to keep myself informed at a comparative cheap
rate of any future intrigues or cabals in which
the poor old King will very probably attempt to
embark.
13. 'Phis dispatch has been penned in great haste,
but with reference to circumstances that have trans-
pired at this Settlement during the past year, 1
am desirous of obviating any misapprehension or
anxiety that might arise from the Government
being only partially informed of the real state of
things. * * *
] have &ca.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca,
Prince of Wales Island
29th April 1837.


To the Ex King of Quedah.
After Compliments.
1 have received my friend’s letter to which I
can only reply stating that I am ordered by the Gov-*
©rnor General of Bengal to see that my friend does
not molest Quedah. If therefore any of my friend’s
boats or my friend himself is found proceeding to the
north of Bruas for this purpose he and they will be
apprehended and brought here. Such are the orders
our ships have, because my friend must not proceed to
Quedah. Come to me here and I will hear all you
have to say. The Captain of the Zephyr will com-
municate to you all necessary information. The
Zephyr is to be sold. If my friend does not now avail
himself of her, he cannot hereafter have her.
Dated Singapore 24th February 1837.
This letter was sent to the Ex King at Bruas by
Captain Quin of H. M. S. Raleigh, but the old Rajah
could not be induced by peaceable means to return to
Malacca or Singapore.
(Signed) S. G. B.
Fort William sth June 1837*


To the Ex King of Quedah.
( After Compliments.)
I have received this morning a letter from the
Siamese Governor of Quedah stating that the Ex Rajah
of Quedah is assembling a fleet of boats to attack
Lancavie and subsequently Quedah. I have already
told the Ex King that this will not be permitted. If
therefore after this warning 1 find the Ex Rajah s boats
molesting Quedah, a vessel of war will be forthwith
sent to destroy them, and notice of this my intention
has been forwarded to the Siamese Governor of Quedah
who has further been informed that the Ex King will
not be allowed to enter the Penang territories, and
that so long as he resides in the territories of Perak
or Salengore he is not under the protection of
the English. The Ex Rajah had better proceed to
Singapore where I will shortly join him. He can
afterwards proceed to Bengal if he thinks fit.
Penang 27th March 1837.
While this letter was in the hands of the writer to
be put into the Malay language yours to the address
of Mr. Salraond'has arrived, which as lam here has
been handed to me by that gentleman. I again
tell you until you return to Singapore or Malacca you
will have no money. Such are my orders from Bengal.
Moreover I again repeat you will not be permitted to
molest either Lancavi or Quedah, and our boats and
vessels have strict injunctions not to let your boats
pass up. Go to Malacca or Singapore and I will meet
you and endeavour to arrange about your affairs, and
bring with me such of your family as you may wish to
join you and the baggage &ca. now in possession of
Mr. Norman Mclntyre,
Port William sth June 1837.


From the Ex King of Quedah.
After Compliments.
I have received my friend’s two letters under date
the 24th and 28th* of February 1837, by the hands
of Mahomed Akib, their contents 1 fully understand.
It is with the utmost astonishment I learn that my
friend wants to prevent me from attacking the Siamese
in Quedah, and taking back my country. My friend,
as well as the whole world knows that this country
descended to me from my ancestors, that the Siamese
have treacherously taken it from me, and that it is
my determination to take it back from them. My
friend also well knows that the Siamese did not take
it with the concurrence of the English Company. It
is the Siamese themselves who have done me this
great injustice. 1 earnestly entreat that the Company
and friends and all the adherents of the Company in
Pulo Penang, Singapore and Malacca will not inter-
fere in this matter between me and the Siamese. If
it be within my power, 1 will certainly take back my
Country from the Siamese. Moreover I pray that my
friend will instruct all captains of cruizers not to
molest either my people, or those who wish to assist
me in this affair, who bear my passport with ray
Chop, when they fall in with them. 1 beg and pray
my friend will do this favor for me, because I conceive
that neither the King of England nor the Governor
General of Bengal can consider it wrong in my taking
my own country from the Siamese and not the
country of another. If the Company had taken the
Country I could say nothing. Let me hear decidedly
from my friend his intentions in writing and do not,
my friend, be annoyed with me in this matter.
Dated 27th Dalhadjah, Monday 1252 (3d April
1837).
Fort William sth June 1837.


Translation of a Notification addressed by the Ex
Rajah of Quedah
To
All Mohametans of whatever degree who are his
Adherents.
This Notification is addressed by me The Sultan
Ahmad Tajooddin Hallim Shah, Rajah of Quedah, to
all my Mohamedan adherents of whatsoever caste and
degree and to all my own people of Quedah, Be it
known to them that I intend immediately to proceed
to Pnlo Lancavi and from thence to my conntry of
Quedah. Whoever are desirous of assisting me wher-
ever they be let them assemble at Pulo Lancavi.
Now as to the guard boats and vessels at sea (The
Company’s) let no one be apprehensive, because we
have sent a letter to our friend Governor Bonham,
who is set over Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and
Malacca, and also to our friend Mr. Salmond, who is
the Resident at Pulo Penang requesting that they
should give instructions to all the guard vessels (lagi-
laga) that should they meet any of my followers and
friends south or north, or any of my people who are
proceeding to assist me in my affairs with the Siamese,
that on my pass being produced they shall allow them
to go unmolested, because 1 cannot be considered by
either the Governor General or the Rajah of Europe
to be acting improperly in this matter. I shall be
held faultless therein because I am only returning to
my own country.
Dated 2st Dalhaigur 1252 (27th March 1837).
The paper of which this is a true translation was
given to a person in Province Wellesley and is now
in my possession and bears the Ex King’s seal. It
cannot fail to be observed how much he wishes it to
be believed that the British Government sanctions his
proceedings.
(Signed) 8. G. Bonham
Fort William sth June 1837.


Proclamation.
The Honorable Mr. Bonham, Governor of Prince
of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca, proclaims
to all classes of persons as follows. At present the
British and Siamese are at peace, and agreeably to
the Treaty betwixt them are mutually bound to pre-
serve peace and amity. Now it has been reported to
the Honorable the Governor that persons are assembled
or intend to assemble at Pulo Lancavi and elsewhere to
the northward of this Settlement with the object of
disturbing these existing relations. Persons so acting
must abide the consequences, for men of war and armed
men will be sent to destroy any assemblage of boats
or bodies of men who shall be assembled for such
an evil purpose.
Dated at Prince of Wales Island on this 7th day
of April 1837.
(Signed) S. G. B.
Governor.
Fort William sth June 1837.


Substance of a letter from the Siamese Rajah of
Quedah to the Honorable the Governor and to Mr.
James Low.
( Compliments. )
The letter sent by the hands of Nye Juikoot I
have duly received. It is therein stated that the re-
port of the Ex King of Quedah collecting men to at-
tack my county does not appear certain but that a
letter would be dispatched to the Ex King warning
him not to meditate any thing of the kind. I have
since learnt by the Commander of my gun boat that
on the sth instant he fell in with 20 prahus at Qualla
Ta-Boong-ow ( about five hours sail from Quedah ),
partly from Tanjong Tokong (Penang) and partly from*
Penagah (Province Wellesley) steering for the Lancavi
Islands and bound thither by direction of the Ex King.
lam of opinion that if the Ex King is permitted to
continue remaining at Bruas he will undertake some
grand project. I beg my friend will compel the Ex
King to go and reside in some place within the mean-
ing of the Treaty. I also beg my friend will arrange
matters so as to be conformable to the treaty made by
Captain Burney in the capital of Siam.
Written 7th April 1837.
Fort William sth June 1837.


Substance of another letter from the Siamese
Rajah of Quedah to the Honorable the Governor.
Mat Ally had been deputed by the Ex King of
Quedah for the purpose of assembling men and boats
and taking their station at the Lancavies, On hear-
ing of this I dispatched my gun boats to disperse the
party which has accordingly been done. The gun
boats are yet cruizing after the Malays, If Mat
Ally is not taken there will be no end to the
intended invasion, because the Ex King at Bruas is at
the head of the affair. On the tenth of Mohurrum
Tunka Dyee, Tunka Mahomed Akip, Hadjee Baki,
Panglima Poee and Tahir, with three prahus, entered
Marbu River and attempted to persuade the inhabitants
to join them in the meditated attack. Their endea-
vours however were fruitless, and they were obliged
to quit Marbu. I trust my friend will take steps to pre-
vent any attack and inform Tunku Dyee &ca that they
are acting contrary to Treaty. I should be glad if my
friend could give me an order to seize the Ex King
at Bruas which will restore peace and tranquillity. It
is rumoured here that a ship has been to Bennova ( ! )
(Capital of Siam ) and brought a letter from the
Governor General of Bengal stating that the Ex King
of Quedah is residing in Bruas contrary to the tenor
of the Treaty. I beg my friend will let me know if
this is correct, that I may make the same known to
the Rajah of Ligore. 1 trust my friend will cause the
removal of the Ex King to Malacca in accordance
with Treaty.
Written 22d April 1837.
These two letters received the day the Ex King
was brought into this harbour.
(Signed) 8. G. B,
Penang,
Fort "William sth June 1837.


POOTI, a Malay, being duly sworn deposes as
follows. I am employed by Ko Leet and Baba Long
Tee in one of their prows, collecting birds’ nests on the
coast of Quedah, and am their agent on that service
generally. They have now 22 persons employed there.
About 18 days ago I was on board one of them, that
commanded and owned by Noquedah Mahomet Seelly,
at Pulo Purda, when Tunko Jaffier came there with
six prows. He came on board of our prow and said
he wanted duty in the name of Yem Tuan ( Rajah of
Quedah). The Noquedah replied that if the Rajah of
Quedah returned to Quedah he would pay him duty,
at present he was paying duty to the authorities of
Siam. Tunko Jaffier said that if the Noquedah would
not pay duty he would take the prow and all on board
to the Rajah of Quedah at Bruas. Tunko Jaffier had
remained on board of the said prow ten days when the
Noquedah advised me to take the boat ( sampan kee-
) and go and speak to Baba Long Tee at Purl is.
I arrived there in two days and saw Long Tee who
desired me to come to Penang and make report to the
police. When I left Mahomed Seelly’s prow she had
-on board one and a half pecul of white birds’ nests and
three peculs of black birds’ nests, and Tunko Jaffier
had taken charge-and command of all.
Sworn before me at George Town, Prince of
Wales Island, -the 27th April 1837.
(Signed) Wm. Balhetchet
Justice of the Peace.
X
Mark of Pooti,
Fort William sth June 1837.


KOON RAT BANGSA, Malay man* being sworn
deposes as follows. lam a Noquedah and left Trang
about one month and a half since in a five Coyan
boat, bound to Penang, with a crew of nine men.
When in the mouth of t;he Purlis River five boats
appeared. Wan Kay and Wan Chee were the leaders.
The latter showed me a paper with a large chop
affixed to it and said it was the chop of the Ex King
of Quedah (Yam Tuan) and who was about to enter
Qtiedah. Immediately afterwards Wan Chee and
about twenty Malays entered ray boat. Wan Chee
gave orders to seize the whole of us, our hands were
fastened behind our backs and the boat plundered of
all its arms. * * * We were taken to
the Lancavies. Several other boats were then at the
Lancavies. * * * On hearing of the ap-
proach of the Siamese, the fleet sailed for Bruas,
remained one day at Pulo Adang, where a storm
coming on Wan Kay’s boat, in which 1 was, separated
from the others and the next day, now eight days ago,
we arrived at Teluek Bahang, north point of this
island, from whence I made my escape. Yesterday
I applied for and obtained a warrant to apprehend
Wan Kay, but before the warrant could be put in
execution Wan Kay departed the Island. I estimate
ray loss at 500 dollars or upwards.
Sworn before me at George Town, Prince of
Wales Island, the 29th April 1837.
(Signed) Wm. Balhetchet
Justice of the Peace.
Mark of
0
Koon Rat Bangsa.
Fort William sth June 3837.


( Enclosure in Vice Admiral Bladen Capel’s letter
to the Admiralty, No. 29, 8 July 1837.)
His Majesty’s Sloop Zebra,
Penang, 25th April 1837.
Sir,
In pursuance of a request from the Honorable
S. G. Bonham that I should co-operate with him in
removing the Ex King of Quedah from his abode at
Bruas, as well as dispersing a fleet of boats that were
collecting to assist him in his meditated attack on
Quedah, 1 have the honor to acquaint your Excellency
that this sloop [sailed] from Penang the 17th instant,
anchored the 18th off Bruas Uiver in five fathoms
water, and eight miles from its mouth.
The 19th, at eleven A. M., the pinnace, two
cutters, gig and gun boat in proceeding, manned and
armed, to the river, were, on the flats, overtaken by
a squall, which lasted two hours and rendered their
situation extremely critical.
Two war proas were at anchor and driving ; one
of these, carrying throe guns and sixty men, for a
time gave shelter to some of the boats. At 1 P.M.
the weather cleared up, and finding that these proas
and likewise two others were in the service of the
Ex King and making for the river, dispersed them.
Leaving the gun boat to guard the entrance,
went up to Bruas and found the Ex King guarded by
a stockade and some hundreds of Malays, armed with
spears, kreeses and guns of all kinds.
Desirous of drawing him from this position by
persuasion I gradually opened the purpose of our visit,
and in pointing out the imprudence of his meditated
attack on Quedah, urged him to consider the security
of his income, the welfare of his children, the fatal con-
sequences that might attend his removal by force, and
concluded with a supplication that he would spare me


this paintul dutjq and quietly retire to Malacca or any
of the places stipulated in the Treaty. To this he re-
plied—“ I have made up my mind to go to Quedah,
moreover it is against the dignity of a King to be
moved in such a manner. Dead you may take me, but
never alive.” He however added, “ consideration
should be given to what you have said and you shall
have my answer in the morning.” We returned to
the gun boat (four miles below the town ) for the
night, and finding that another war proa, commanded
by one of the Ex King’s sons, had been stopped during
our absence, we disarmed and turned her out of the
river.
The morning ( the 20th ) only brought a request
for further deliberation and leaving orders with Lieu-
tenant Lefebvre to follow with the gun and other boats
when they floated, I accompanied by Mr. Stewart, in
the gig. paid a second visit to the Ex King. This visit
was as unsuccessful as the first and on retiring he
seemed to smile at the force we had brought to carry
him away.
Half way down the river the boats were met ad-
vancing, and being followed by the Ex King’s Chief,
in the hope that the effusion of blooi might still be
spared, I sent him back to say that a blank cartridge
would be fired on our opening the town. This blank
cartridge was returned by a shot from the Ex King’s
brig, a general discharge from the stockade and a line
of between three and four hundred Malays extended
on its front. The firing then became general and
at the expiration of one half hour, the brig, stockade
and all visible points were completely silenced by
the severity of our fire, and from
the pinnace’s gun under Lieutenant Lefebvre. The
cutters under Lieutenant Gaitskell and Mr. De Lisle
were not less gallantly led and it would be impossible
to witness a finer spirit than that which was displayed
by the officers and their respective crews.


A flag of truce was hoisted at the stockade and
the Chief, Syed Abdorrahman bin Shabab, came to
declare the Bx King’s readiness “to go wherever we
might choose to take him.” The next day, at high
water, he, amidst the repeated cheers and exertions
of the crews, was brought down in his brig to the
mouth of the river and on the 22d warped over the
flats and anchored alongside of the Zebra.
That part of the river which fronts the stockade
is not more than forty feet wide, and in the jungle
on its sides large bodies of Malays were opposed
to the boats, but notwithstanding the strength of the
position I am happy to say that our loss has fallen
far short of what might have been expected, having
had one killed, one mortally wounded, two severely
and one slightly. I had no means of ascertaining
the loss of the Malays, but from the number that
were seen on the ground, I fear the slaughter must
have been great.
The condition of the Ex King’s brig, her want of
provisions, having sixty people on board, the sick and
the wounded, made it necessary that we, at this
season, should return to Penang before proceeding to
Malacca, where I have been requested to take him on
my way to Singapore.
******
I have &ca.
(Signed) Rt. C. McCrea
Commander.
His Excellency
Vice Admiral The Honorable
Sir T. Bladen Capel, K. C. B.
Commander in Chief
&ca. &ca. &ca.


To the Governor Prince of Wales Island.
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am desired by the Eight Honorable the Gover-
nor General of India in Council to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter dated the 29th April last for-
warding copy of a correspondence connected with the
removal of the Ex King of Quedah from Bruas.
2. In reply 1 am directed to observe that the
Governor General in Council has learnt with much
regret that the Ex King was so ill advised as to dec-
line obedience to your requisition for his departure from
the coast of Quedah, but His Lordship in Council is
sensible at the same time of the absolute necessity of
the measure to which you had recourse with a view to
the preservation of the public tranquillity and our
pledged faith with the Siamese Government.
3. His Lordship in Council has every reason to
be satisfied with the manner in which you have acquit-
ted yourself of the difficult and delicate duty confided
to you. A copy of the 9th paragraph of your letter
together with a copy of the communication addressed
to you by Captain McCrea will be forwarded for the
consideration of the Naval Commander in Chief, and
His Lordship in Council has no doubt His Excellency
will duly appreciate the meritorious services of that
officer. A copy of the letter addressed to His Excel-
lency on this occasion is sent herewith for your inspec-
tion.
4. The Governor General in Council sanctions
your having presented Syud Abdul Ruhman with a
gift of 200 Es. and Hashim with a gift of 100 Es., and
Fort William sth June 1837.


he approves the measures which you proposed to adopt
relative to the custody of the Ex King and his re-
moval to Malacca.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) W* H. Macnaghten
Secretary to the Government of
India.
Fort William
5 June 1837.


Fort William 1st November 1837.
To the Right Honble.
Lord George Auckland, G. C. 8.,
, * Governor General of India in Council.
The Petition of the British and other
Merchants and Inhabitants of Prince of
Wale? Island,
Humbly Showeth
That your Petitioners confiding in your Lordship’s
known sense of justice, and viewing with deep con-
cern the unfortunate condition of His Highness Sultan
Ahmud Taujud din Halim Shah, Ex King of Quedah,
and of the inhabitants of that country, respectfully
beg leave to bring to notice circumstances connected
therewith which in their opinion merit serious con-
sideration.
2. That His Highness and his predecessors had
long been faithful allies of the East India Company
and never given any cause of offence, had greatly
encouraged a considerable trade with this Settlement,
and on occasions of very pressing emergency, as of the
Java expedition of 1811, by abundantly supplying
His Majesty’s ships and those of the East India
Company with provisions on moderate terms, had
rendered the ijiost important services to the British
Government.
3. That this Island and its dependency, Pro-
vince Wellesley, were originally granted to the East
India Company by His Majesty’s father, when a
Treaty was made by which he considered that he and
his successors could always rely upon the assistance
of the British Government; When therefore His High-
ness’s country was invaded by the Siamese in the year
1821 and by an act of base perfidy on their part he


was compelled to seek an asylum in a foreign state,
the local authorities of this Island, generously sympa-
thising in His Highness's misfortunes, and justly
deeming that the faith of the British Government was
pledged to maintain his rights, in adherence to the
spirit of the Treaty, they invited His Highness to
come hither and for several years held out to him a
promise that he should be restored to his Kingdom.
But it is with great concern that your Petitioners are
compelled to state that so far from any effort having
been made to restore him, every attempt made by
him to recover his Kingdom has been frustrated,
chiefly by the means of the assistance rendered by the
British Government to the Siamese, and lately, while
residing in a foreign jurisdiction, his person has been
forcibly seized by one of Hi« Majesty’s ships, after the
slaughter of many of his devoted followers.
4. That it is well known that ever since the
Siamese invasion of Quedah in the year 1821, and
more especially since the year 1826, when a treaty
was concluded by which the Emperor of Siam was
■acknowledged by the British Government as Sovereign
of that Kingdom, frequent disturbances have agitated,
not only Quedah, but the adjacent states, creating
serious alarm in the minds of the inhabitants of this
Island, who on a recent occasion were called upon by
the local Government to arm tlmmselves for the public
safety, and that the same excitement, so adverse to the
prosperity of these countries, will it is feared con-
tinue to prevail while affairs remain on their present
footing.
That all the stipulations made by this treaty with
the Siamese in favor of the Malayan inhabitants have
been grossly violated by the Siamese, who have grie-
vously oppresc-M them, and carried away into slavery
great numbers of the young men, women and child-
ren ; have imposed a tax upon the exportation of rice
and provisions ; have farmed the rivers of the country


atld have otherwise monopolised the tradeacts of
cruelty and oppression which have excited a general
feeling of indignation throughout the neighbouring
Malayan States, have destroyed the trade and greatly
depopulated the country.
6. That not only your petitioners but the Native
Inhabitants of this Settlement, and of the surrounding
Countries, are impressed with the belief that the
honor and good faith of the British Government have
been compromised by the Treat} 7 made in 1826 with the
Emperor of Siam, and by the subsequent treatment of
the Ex King of Quedah, while it is notorious that no
advantage whatever has been derived from the said
Treaty, made as it was, against the faith of the old
Treaty of Alliance with the Ex King's predecessor;
and as the Siamese have violated without scrtiple the
stipulations of the Treaty made with them, and this
Island and its dependency will continue to be dis-
turbed while the country of Quedah is suffered to
remain under the oppressive sway of its present mas-
ters, your Petitioners deem it their duty most respect-
fully to represent, that the interference of Government
is impartially called for to put an end to a state of
things so prolific of mischief to British interests in
this quarter, and they therefore humbly solicit that
such measures may be taken for the purpose of
redeeming the credit of the British Character and
restoring its influence in the States of the Malayan
Peninsula and the Eastern Archipelago as in the wis-
dom of your Lordship shall appear to be just.
And your Petitioners shall eyer pray
[Here follow 30 signatures.]


To S. G. Bonham Esqr.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am desired to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter dated the 18 September last, to the address of
Mr. Secretary Macnaghten with its enclosed Petition,
and in reply to state that the representation of the
Merchants and other inhabitants of Prince of Wales
Island will be forwarded to the Governor General, but
the President in Council cannot hold out to the Me-
morialists the hope that it will be found possible to
change the course of policy which the British Govern-
ment has for some time pursued in respect to the
States and Chiefs of the Malay Peninsula.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to the Government
of India
Fort William
the Ist of November 1837.
Fort William Ist November 1837.


15 November No. 29 of 1837.
. India
Political Department.
* # * # *■ *
Para. 126. Mr. Trevelyan’s Memorandum has
satisfied us that the course you adopted of restoring to
the Ex King his entire stipend of 10,000 Dollars per
annum, was the only one consistent with justice.
127. We regret however to learn that the Ex
King, under pretence of availing himself of the per-
mission granted him for residing at Delhi in Sumatra,
proceeded to Perak and engaged in an intrigue for
repossessing himself of his former dominions. By this
direct breach of his engagements, you were justified in
causing intimation to be made to him that you were
no longen under any obligation to continue his stipend
to his family after his death, and that unless he
immediately repaired to Battabaree or Delhi, or re-
turned to Malacca, his whole stipend would be with-
drawn. In case of his availing himself of his residence
at Perak to commit or encourage aggressions, you
very properly directed that he should be removed, by
force if necessary, and detained at Malacca on a
reduced stipend.
We are &ca.
( Signed) J. R. Carnac
&ca. &oa.
London
the 15th November 1837.


Fort William 14th March 1838.
To S. G. Bonham Esqre.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island &c.
Sir,
I am desired by the Honorable the President in
Council to transmit for your information and guidance
the enclosed copy ot a letter this day addressed to
the Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces on the
subject of Mrs. Breesley’s case and of the letter from
the Commissioner with its enclosures* to which it
was a reply and you are requested to give your early
attention to the subject of these papers and bring
them to the notice of the Commander of any one of
Her Majesty’s Ships of War that may be on the
station in order that an effort may be made to release
Mrs. Breesley from captivity if she be still detained
prisoner at Songkra.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to the Government
of India
Political Department.
Calcutta
14th March 1838


Fort William 15th August 1838.
To the Honorable S. G Bonham Esquire
Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
* * # # # *
Birds Nest.
The Birds nest Islands have appertained to the
Siamese from time immemorial, indeed the Quedah
Chiefs could not have claimed them as pendants to
their tributary state, since they do not lie off the
Quedah coast but form part of the now Malayan
Siamese possession on this coast of the Peninsula.
But as the Siamese are not fond of the sea, the
Rajahs of Eigor, always acting under the authority
of the Court of Bangkok, had all along rented these
islands to the Quedah Rajahs for the time being at
an annual rent of six or seven thousand dollars, by
which the latter gained about five or six thousand
dollars which was about one half of the value of the
quantity collected there, and is about half of its value
at this day.
***###
Cotton.
Before the Siamese occupation the average an-
nual quantity of Cotton imported into Quedah, but
not all it should seem from Penang, was 264 bales
valued at about Spanish Dollars 9,240. The present
quantity is rated at 106 bales valued at about 2,634
dollars. The reduced population accounts for the
difference. But cotton is still consumed by the
Malays forming the emigrated population and per-
haps in sufficient quantity to counterbalance this


deficiency, although I venture to think from obser-
vation amongst the people, that owing to the cheap-
ness of fine goods, weaving has gone almost into
disuse with numbers who formerly so employed
themselves.
******
It would occupy too much space here were I to
recapitulate the arguments advanced by me in the
first part of my Historical Sketch of the Straits (which
I lately had the honor to transmit through you to the
Right Honorable the Governor General in Council ) to
prove that Quedah from the earliest period of its his-
tory has been directly dependent on Siam, that its
Rajahs have held their office by the sufferance of the
Emperor, and that their own uncontradicted records,
and notoriety still attest the latter fact. It will also I
hope have appeared that the Quedah Chiefs from hav-
ing their minds deeply tinctured with the intolerant
spirit of Islamism disliked to be under the dominion of
what they termed an infidel nation and therefore in
order to free themselves from it had determined to
league with some European power, and that finding
the British to be the most convenient and potent of
the rival European nations on the East, the Rajah for the
time being concluded the Treaty which used * Penang,
but that he studiously avoided any disclosure of his
state of vassalage to Siam, a disclosure which we may
believe might, had it been then made, have modified if
it would not have checked the negotiations for the
cession.
It was this politic reservation which for so many
years interposed betwixt Quedah and Siam that moral
influence of the British name, but it was attended
by the never failing consequences ot duplicity. It
placed the relations between Quedah and Penang
in a false position, and it exasperated the Court of
Siam against both. Against Quedah for presuming


to attempt escape from its rule exerted for centuries,-
and against the latter for having been the instrument
of that attempt.
3. With reference to the first and third para-
graphs of the petition I can only to the Treaty
of Bangkok and to the view of Quedah politics I
have ventured to [depict] in the Historical Account
alluded to.
4. The population of this station is perfectly
quiet and with the exception of a remnant of the
Ex RajalTs old Chiefs and their friends seem to feel
very little interest in Quedah politics. It is not much
to be doubted that the Native mercantile community
have on various occasions helped on with no sparing
hand the very movements which they now affect to
despise or at least to be alarmed at It is also
known that most of the leaders of the disturbances
have been men of Arab extraction and others not
natives of Quedah,
5. Soon after the Treaty of Bangkok had been
concluded the Siamese Governor of Quedah end-
eavoured to conform to its stipulations in so far
as the then condition of that country would admit.
But the frequent insurrections of the Malays there,
in concert with Penang Malays and combined with
attacks from without by the Ex Rajah’s adherents,
such attacks it may also be observed being at the
same time infractions of the above Treaty, compelled
the Siamese Government to employ towards the in-
habitants a more rigid system of rule than they had
begun with.
It became also necessary to remove the most
dangerous insurgents to Ligor, and these people were
accompanied by their families. It is probable that
in the execution of this measure a few may have
suffered unjustly, and that the constant intriguing
of the Ex Rajah’s people with the Quedah population


may have rendered it impossible for the Siamese to
act up to the full spirit implied in the 13th Article of
the Treaty of Bangkok.
Although the Ex Rajah’s adherents had thrice
attacked and disturbed Quedah, and subsequently the
Ex Rajah himself had left Malacca and had established
hijpself at Bruas with openly avowed design of invad-
ing Quedah) the Siamese Governor of that place, haras-
sed as he was by preparations for defence, did not take
advantage of the latter part of tlra 13th Article of the
Treaty and so shut its ports to British trade. On one
or two occasions when a scarcity has threatened that
country, the exportation of rice has been suspended,
but the moment the danger disappeared the prohibi-
tion was removed and certainly this is what they have
a right to do on the principle of self preservation.
The fact is that the sale of rice is a sine qua non with
the local Government of Quedah, rice being almost
the only article which the people have to export. My
local position on the frontier of Quedah must always
have rendered it almost impossible that I should not
have been apprized ot any serious infraction of the
Treaty.
I must admit that in my capacity of Principal
Assistant I have had frequent occasions to notice to
the Quedah Siamese Chief irregularities on the part
of his inferior officers, which had they not been che-
cked in time might have grown to such a height as to
induce acts of infringement on the Treaty. But a
remonstrance has generally had the desired effect. It
would always be easy for the merchants to point out
to the local authority at Pena ng any infraction of the
Treaty. But such should be supported by some proof
to enable him to act or remonstrate.
The Siamese no doubt regard our Treaty pretty
much in the same point of view as any other native
Eastern Government does. The Treaty of Bangkok is


a little in advance of Siamese political economy and
doubtless some vigilance will be necessary to prevent
them insensibly sliding off from it, although they may
be well aware of its general advantages, both positive
and negative.
The Siamese adhere to the stipulation not to farm
the mouths of rivers “ in Quedah.”
******
The assertion that the Siamese have violated
without scruple the existing Treaty is vague and gra-
tuitous and (as I believe and have in part explained
in paragraph 5 ) substantially unjust.
******
I have &ca-
(Signed) James Low
Acting Resident.
Prince of Wales Island
The 20th March 1838.


Fort William 11th July 1838.
To H. T. Prinsep Esqre.
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
Adverting to your letter of the 14th March last*
and its enclosures I have now the honor to report that
previously to its coming to hand I had directed the
steamer Diana to proceed to Sangora for the purpose
of attempting the liberation of Mrs. Breesley and her
attendant. The Diana returned yesterday, and I now
transmit copy of a letter from Captain Congalton to
the address of the Eesident Councillor, and translation
of a Siamese letter to myself from the Chief of
Sangora.
2. On the whole, altho’ some of the replies of
the Acting Chief of Sangora are somewhat obscure,
from what I have heard from Captain Congalton and
from an European gentleman residing at Bangkok on
this subject, which has recently been received at this
settlement, I am tolerably certain the European
females whoever they may be, have been sent to the
capital. By the first opportunity I shall address the
Praklang or Minister and I have little doubt, if Mrs.
Breesley or any unfortunate females are detained in
captivity at Sangora, or at any other place in the
Siamese Empire, and the fact is proved to the satis-
faction of the Court of Bangkok that they will be
released.
3. The questions and answers about the “ Sam-
pan Pukat ” arose in consequence of my having
desired Captain Congalton to make enquires on the
coast respecting certain boats which had a short time


before left Singapore with property on board belong-
ing to merchants of the place and which were missing,
and supposed to have been run away with by their
own crews.
I have & ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
24th May 1838.


To The Honble. T. Church Esqre.
Resident Councillor.
Sir,
1 have the honor to report to you for the informa-
tion of the Honorable the Governor the arrival of the
H. C’s Steamer Diana from Sangora, Calantan and
Tringano. On my arrival at Sangora on the instant,
1 handed and delivered the Governor’s letter to the
Siamese in charge of that place, the Rajah having
been called up to Bangkok by order of the King of
Siam. After reading the letter he told me that the
two white women had just left Sangora ( three days
ago ) and that the King of Siam had sent for them.
1 then told him that 1 thought he misunderstood the
Governor’s letter, and that he had better read it over
again before he gave so decided an answer, that it was
well known that the white women had been now
detained some years in Sangora, and as the Governor
of Singapore had sent the steamer for the express
purpose of taking them to their relations that I should
not leave until they were delivered to me, and if he
did not, that I had orders to go on to Bangkok with a
letter to the King, that he had better [ send "J some of
his people to-morrow to see in whose house they were
living and that I would land the following day and
receive them. He said that he was sorry that I did
not seem to believe what he said, but that they were
sent for from Siam and that they left three days ago.
On my return on board the Diana I found Mr. Mitchell
had called a small fishing canoe alongside, who also
said they knew that two white women had been
living a long time in Sangora, and that they had left
three or four days ago for Bangkok. During the
following day I made every enquiry amongst different
classes of people, and they all agreed that about three
Fort William 11th July 1838.


or four days ago the women had left. On the 15th I
went to the Acting Rajah again, when I put the
following questions to him.
Where did the two
white women come from
when they first came to
Sangora ?
Do you know by what
name they went when
they first came ?
You now say they are
both gone to Bankok a
few days ago, do you
know for what purpose
they have gone there ?
Had either of the wo-
men any children while
they remained here?
Do you recollect what
language either of them
spoke when they first
came to Sangora ?
How many years is it
ago?
What is the name of
the person that sent you
the letter requesting the
women to be sent to Ban-
kok ?
Do you know if the
King intends sending
them to Singapore, or
overland to the Burmah
country ?
From Bankok.
When they first came
here I was at Bankok.
I do not know.
Neither of them had
any.
Both spoke Siamese.
I do not know.
Akhoor, half Siamese,
half Chinese.
I do not know anything
about what is to be done
with them.


In what kind of vessel
did they leave Sangora for
Bankok ?
Do you recollect how
many days ago since the
Sampan Pukats that has
been away left Singapore ?
Do you know if she is
at Bandalore [ ! ] now ?
Boats can go up the ri-
ver from Sangora to Ban-
[ ! ] dalore ?
Can boats go from Li*
gore to Bandalore [ ! ] ?
A kind of schooner. I
was informed by the No-
quedah of a Chinese junk
that they left in two fast
sailing and pulling boats,
and that both the ladies
dressed the same as the
ladies at Singapore and
that they were both very
white.
Sampan Pukats never
come here, otherwise I
would have detained them.
Do not know any thing
about her.
I have nothing to do
with Bandalore [! ] and
cannot tell if boats can go
or not.
I know nothing about
it, do not know Ligore,
knows Lykong close to
Siam.
I have now no more questions to ask you, but I
still think the information regarding the two women
is not correct, as when the other gentleman ( Captain
Handel ) came overland from Penang the Kajah told
him there were no such women here. 1 now wait for
an answer to the letter of the Governor of Singapore, and
if you are not telling the truth, you will have to ans-
wer for it to the King of Siam. At 5 P. M. having
received the letter weighed and-steamed to the east-
ward, at 7 came up with and took a small pirate prow
that was trying to get in shore of us, to prevent which
I was obliged to fire several rounds of grape shot,


killing seven out of nine men that composed her crew.
1 found also in the bottom of the boat two men and
two women, Siamese, that they had taken about noon.
One of the women said that she had often seen the two
white women, and that she was in the compound of
the Rajah the day the two white women left Sangora
for Siam.
I have &ca,
( Signed ) S. Congalton
Singapore
24th May 1838.


(Translation.)
Letter from Son tire Noorack. Acting Rajah of
Soongara to the Honorable Samuel George Bonham
Esqre, Governor of Penang, Singapore and Malacca.
I received your letter brought by Captain Con-
galton stating that an English gentleman proceeded
from Penang to Soongora for the purpose of getting
possession of a woman of the name of Breesley, the
wife of an English captain who was killed by pirates,
and stating also that you wished to have this woman
and lier attendants sent to Singapore, and expressing
a hope that you may not be disappointed.
Your letter further states that a Sampan Pukat
belonging to Chinese of Singapore is missing, and
that you were given to understand that the crew
had plundered her of her cargo and escaped in her
to Soongara.
I fully understand the contents of your letter.
On Captain Congalton’s arrival at Soongara the
Rajah of Soongara, to whom your letter was addres-
sed, had previously left Soongara for Bangkok in
obedience to the commands of His Majesty of Siam.
On the arrival of the Rajah of Soongara at Bang-
kok he addressed a letter to me which reached my
hands on the 3d day of the 6th month ( corresponding
to the Ist May instant) informing me that he was
ordered by the Minister of Bangkok immediately to
produce at Bangkok the two women who are in some
manner connected with the English and about whom
letters have been addressed to the Minister of Bang-
kok by the Rqjah of Lamboon and the Governor of
Penang, Singapore and Malacca, and who have been
Fort William 11th July 1838.


supposed by these persons to be residing at Soongara
for a long time; which letters treating upon different
other subjects have been duly received by the Minister
of Bangkok.
In consequence of my having received the above
letter from the Rajah of Soongara, now at Bangkok, I
sent to Bangkok the two women above mentioned on
the 18th day of the 6th month same }ear (correspon-
ding to the 16th May instant).
Concerning the Sampan Pukat vyhich you say
the crew ran away with into Soongara I have sent
people to make enquiries about her, the result of
which has been that the Sampan never came into
Soongara at all, and I hope you will not feel dissatis-
fied with what I have here said regarding it.
Dated at Soongara on Tuesday the 22nd day of
the 6th month in the dogs year or 1200 (correspon-
ding to the 20th May 1838).
True Copy
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor


To the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the President in
Council to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
dated the 24th May last* on the subject of the capti-
vity of Mrs. Breesley and her attendant, and stating
the opinion founded upon information obtained, that
certain European females have been sent to the capital,
where it is your hope that if the circumstances of Mrs.
Breesley or any females 'being detained in captivity
is proved, the Court of Bangkok will be disposed
to order their release.
2. In reply I am desired to state that His
Honor in Council approves your proceedings [in ]
connexion with the Chief of Soongara on the subject
of the liberation of Mrs. Breesley, and begs that you
will take any other occasion that may offer of urging
on the Siamese Government to procure the release of
this unfortunate lady and any other person in similar
circumstances of distress.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary Governt. India.
Fort William
11th July 1838.
Fort William 11th July 1838.


tort William 15th August 1838.
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire,
Officiating Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge your letter of
the 27th December last and its enclosure from Mr.
Secretary Macnaghten to your address of the 24th of
the preceding month,* touching the contents of a peti-
tion* from the merchants and other inhabitants of
Penang, relative to the present state of the Ex Rajah
of Quedah, which
I
Ist. States, that in consequence of the oc-
cupancy of Quedah by the Siamese the station of
Penang and its is frequently in a very dis-
turbed state, so much so that on a recent occasion the
inhabitants were called on by the local authorities to
arm themselves for the general safety.
2d. That in consequence of that excitement the
prosperity of the adjacent countries is injured and the
trade of the petitioners thereby much decreased,
3d. That the stipulations of the Treaty of Ban-
kok have been grossly violated, by which a general
feeling against the British Government has been
engendered throughout the neighbouring Malayan
States ; and
Lastly Urging that some steps may be taken
to restore the credit of the British Government in
this quarter, by which I infer the petitioners mean
to suggest an abandonment of the Treaty concluded
by Major Barney with the Siamese, and the re-in-
statement of the Ex King of Quedah.
As regards the first case of complaint, I have only
to say that since the final removal of the Ex King of
Quedaii from Bruas to Malacca I have not heard of


any circumstances occurring in the remotest manner
affecting the public peace at Prince of Wales Island.
As reported in my letter of 29th April 1837 * to the
address of Mr. Secretary Macnaghten, excitement to a
very limited extent did undoubtedly exist at that time
and which was created while the old King was at
Penang, by a party who wished that he should be per-
mitted to land ; this being refused, and the mob as-
sembled for the occasion seeing their request would
not be acceded to peaceably, retired. This temporary
excitement was produced by the old King’s appearance
at Pri«ce of Wales Island, which his absence soon
removed ; and Penang as far as I am aware has been
perfectly tranquil ever since. The serious alarm, it is
alleged, the inhabifants-were on a recent occasion sub-
ject to, and their having been called on by the Local
Government to arm themselves was fully reported on
by my predecessor, Mr. Murchison, in letters dated as
per margin, and I have only to add that the circums-
tance which caused the Petitioners then so much alarm
turned out to be the Rajah of Perak with 30 or 40
boats laden with tin coming to the Penang market
from his own country. I mention this particularly
because 1 have, when at Penang, heard this matter
made the subject of considerable merriment. If any
panic existed at all, it certainly only extended to the
European part of the population and I am satisfied in
reality but to a very small proportion of it. I may as
well here remark that I was at Penang in July 1836,
as a Commissioner for the suppression of piracy, and
having at the time no direct interest in the station,
had ample means of ascertaining the grounds and the
extent of the alarm, which the Petitioners say was
then so prevalent.
On the second point it will be seen that I place
no faith whatever in the allegation that the mercantile
interests of Penang have suffered from the alarm and
excitement said to exist in consequence of the occup


anoy of Quedah by the Siamese, nor do 1 believe there
iias of late been any just cause for any alarm what-
ever, and as regards the second part, vizt. that the
mercantile interests of the place have suffered by the
transfer, I must beg to refer you to Captain Low’s
letter forming an enclosure to this dispatch. The
trade between Quedah and Penang in its most flouri-
shing days scarcely exceeded a lac of dollars. Had
the whole been lost it certainly could have been scar-
cely felt, but on the reverse it appears to me from
< aptain Low’s statement that the trade with Quedah
now and the consumption of the inhabitants that fled
into our territories on the capture of Quedah by the
Siamese, at least amount to as much as the trade
between Penang and Quedah in 1819/20.
On the third point I have only to say that no
authenticated facts of a violation of the Treat}’ on the
part of the Siamese have ever been brought to my
notice, nor as far as I can trace by the records of this
Office to that of any of my predecessors, and I am not
satisfied therefore that they exist or ever did. I can
safely say I never heard of them until I saw the
present petition nor can I admit that the neighbour-
ing Malay States have any general feeling of ill will
against the British. They would undoubtedly have
been better pleased had their own countrymen been
upheld by our Government in the occupancy of
Quedah, but not from any feeling of attachment to-
wards the Ex King personally, but simply because
they object to seeing a Musselman population subject
to a native following another religion. This feeling
is engendered and studiously kept alive by the Arabs
residing at Penang and by all Mahomedans who have
performed the pilgrimage to Mecca, to whom the
simple Malays pay unbounded respect, whjch, of
course, is not extended to them by the Siamese.
The fourth point, though from a mercantile body,
treats of matters entirely political. The whole of these


questions are fully before Government and must have
been so at the time of the ratification of Captain
Burney’s Treaty. To many of its provisions public
opinion in the Straits is undoubtedly opposed and I
think always has been, but at all events, whatever
might have been the result had the British Govern-
ment at the time of the seizure of Quedah in 1821
stood forward in favor of the Malays, I believe those
best informed on the subject generally admit that
Quedah at that time acknowledged herself to be tri-
butary to the King of Siam. The nun-continuance of
the payment of the customary tribute was indeed, I
am told, the immediate cause of the expulsion of the
Ex Rajah.
I have & ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Singapore
The 30th May 1838.


Fort William 12th September 1838,
To H. T. Prinsep Esq.
Secretary to Government Fort William.
Sir,
In continuation of my letter of the 24th May * I
have the honor to enclose translation of a letter I have
just received from the Chau Phya Praklang the first
Minister of State at Bangkok by which I think,
as the translation bears the signature of Mr, Hunter,
a resident at that place, and with whose signature
I am acquainted, it is manifest that Mrs. Breesley is
not nor ever has been at Sangora and that the two
Burmese women, probably concubines of English cap-
tains, are not detained in the Siamese territories
contrary to their wishes.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) S. G, Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca,
Prince of Wales Island
Bth August 1838.


The letter of his Excellency the Chou Phya
Praklang First Minister of State to His Majesty the
King of Siam, to the Honorable Mr. Bonham, Gov-
ernor of Singapore, Penang and Malacca.
I have received your letter stating that you have
received orders from the Right Honorable the Gov-
ernor General of Bengal to send a letter to the
Governor of Sangora to ask his assistance to release
two European females and that the letter was sent
by a fire ship. The Acting Governor of Sangora
returned an answer to your letter, a copy of which
you forwarded to me. In your letter you wish tc
know if the females have arrived here, and if so
you would rejoice, because they Avould be under the
powerful protection of the Chou Phya Praklang, and
that he would return them to their friends.
When the fire ship returned she captured one
Malay pirate boat which had on board four Siamese
as prisoners, two men and two women, and that you
were happy to release four Siamese subjects and would
when opportunity offered return them to Sangora, and
that all the pirates in the boat were nearly killed;
afterwards the fire ship saw six large pirate boats
attacking a Chinese junk, and that the fire ship went
to her assistance and killed about 100 pirates, and
took 30 pirates as prisoners to Singapore to be
punished according to English law. Governor Bon-
ham hopes that the road between Siam and Singapore
will now be open for the merchants of each country
to continue to trade and that the merchants of both
countries may know that the Siamese and English
have a treaty to protect them &ca.
Mr. Blundell has sent a Pegu messenger named
Mono- Sole Cha with letters, he arrived here at the
O
Fort William 12th September 1838.


same time as the Governor of Sangora.
The King enquired of the Governor of Sangora
respecting the European females. He answered that
the two women at Sangora were not Europeans, that
they were natives of Rangoon one named Emila, the
other Emilong. Emila was the wife of a captain
named Nickales* and Emilong was the wife of a Cap-
tain Mikila. In the Siamese year 1180, which is
twenty years ago, Mirgui belonged to the Burmese.
Captain Nickiles took the two women in his ship from
Rangoon bound to the Nickobars, he met with a storm
and put into Mirgui. The Governor knew that there
was two Burmese women on board from Rangoon, and
wished to seize them. ' Captain Nickiles, being in-
formed of that, took the two women with the intention
of going to Ponang. When they arrived opposite
Takoppa, near an island called Malta, the guard boats
seeing two Burmese women on board ( the Siamese
and Burmese being enemies) seized them and sent
one to Tukkopa and one to Ligor to see if any inform-
ation could be got from them respecting the state of
affairs in Burmah. The Rajah of Ligor and Governor
of Takoppa sent the two women to Bangkok. Captain
Nickales went in a war junk to Quedah and from
thence to Penang, where he asked a letter from the
Govexmor of Penang and returned to Quedah. The
Governor of Quedah sent him and the letter to Sango-
ra, the Governor of Sangora sent Khun In Montien
with the letter to Bangkok, which Was shown the
King. When His Majesty knew that these two Bur-
mese women were the wives of Englishmen and that
one of the husbands had come to Sangora to receive
them and having letters from the Governor of Penang,
the king sent the two women by Khun In Montien to
the Governor of Sangora to be given to Captain
Nickiles. The Governor of Sangora delivered the two
women to Captain Nickiles. He said it was the wet
season and he could not take them overland with him


but left them under the charge of the Governor of
Sangora. He also borrowed one hundred Spanish
dollars from the Governor of Sangora and promised
when the rains were over he would return, pay back
the SS LOO and take away the two women, but he never
returned. Three years afterwards the Governor of
Sangora sent Khun Pakdei Wonsa with a letter to the
Governor of Penang to request that he would tell
Captain Nickiles to come and receive Emela and
Emelong, The Governor of Penang in answer said
Captain Nickales was not in Penang but if he ever
came there he would tell him to go and receive Emela
and Emelong. He has never come to receive them,
therefore they have always resided at Sangora. The
Governor of Penang’s letter was written in Malay
dated A. D. 1825, which is a good evidence in this
business.
The new Governor of Penang sent Captain Ran-
dall last year to Quedah with a letter, the Governor of
Quedah sent Captain Randall and the letter on to
Sangora. In the letter the names of the women and their
persons were wrongly described. The Governor of
Sangora told Captain Randall that he knew of no such
women as he was asking for.
On account of this I sent a war boat to Sangora
to bring Emela and Emelong to Bangkok and gave
them to Mr. Hunter ( who is by the King’s orders,
Luang Yisoot ). and Mong Soie Cha, the mes-
senger from Moulmein to question and examine the
two women, and Mr. Hunter and Mong Soie Cha
understand all this business clearly.
These two women the King gave to Captain
Nicholas a long time ago and even now His Majesty
wished to send them by the Peguan messenger Mong
Soie Cha. The women refused to go being the wet
season, and Emelong says her husband Captain Mikila
died in Malacca and at the time of his death she was


with him. Eraela says Captain Nickelas has left her
twenty years and she has heard nothing of him.
But if Captain Nickiles is still alive the Chou
Phya Praklang will send Emela to him as his wife.
Mr. Blundell sent a letter here respecting an
English female named Mrs. Breesley, the wife of an
Englishman called Captain Breesley, that had been
killed by his crew of Lascars upwards of eight years
ago. This has nothing whatever to do with the Go-
vernor of Sangora, What person knows that Mrs.
Breesley is in Sangora, or that has seen her there, let
them be sent here and I will examine into the truth
of the story.
The Honorable Mr. Bonham, Governor of Penang,
Singapore and Malacca and Mr. Blundell, Resident of
Moulmein, have sent letters here asking for Mrs. Brees-
ley, therefore if she was here she would most certainly
be given up, as we do not wish anything to interrupt
the existing friendship.
Siam 21st June 1838.
True Copy
( Signed ) S. G. Bonhara
Governor.
Translated into
English by
( Signed ) Robt. Hunter
Siam.


( Enclosure to Rear admiral Maitland’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 73, dated 1 November 1838.
To Captain Stanley,
Commanding H. M. S. Wolf.
Sir,
It has just been brought to my notice, that
there is a fleet of boats in the Mirboo River .
fitting out for the purpose of attacking Quedah
* * * I intend sending the gun boat Dia-
mond to Quedah to inform the Siamese authorities
of that place of the circumstance, and I think if you
get under weigh in the Wolf also, and run down to
Quedah, remaining there for one day, and looking on
your return into the Mirboo River, that the move-
ment would have the desirable effect of tending
materially to the dispersion of the boats which are
now there, and of obviating the unpleasant alternative
of my being compelled to ask you for assistance to
remove them by force.
My object at present is to avoid hostile measures
against this confederacy, in the hopes they may yet
see the expediency of returning from the Siamese
territories, but should you find them by any chance
at sea engaged in combat w r ith the Siamese, it is my
request that you assist the latter in dispersing the
former, and dealing with them as enemies * * *
It is the wish of Government to break up this associa-
tion of deluded people, with as little violence as
possible, though after the warning they have received,
should they be found in a state of active operations,
they must of course stand the consequence of their
indiscreet and obstinate behaviour,
I have &c.
•(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
22d July 1838.


Fort William 26th September 1838,
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire
Secretary to Government Fort William.
Sir,
I regret to acquaint you for the information of
the Honorable the President in Council that the State
of Quedah is again in a disturbed state, originating
in Tuanku Mahomed Saad and Tuanku Mahomed Taib,
two nephews of the Ex Rajah, with some followers,
having posted themselves in the Merbo, a river in the
Siamese territory of Quedah about 15 miles to. the
northward of Prince of Wales Island, from whence
they nightly make incursions into the country and
plunder the inhabitants.
'A. Tuanku Mahomed Saad and Tuanku Maho-
med Taib are persons who were formerly in captivity
at Bangkok and released by the Siamese as stipulated
for in the 13th Article of Captain Burney’s Treaty
“being the kindred of the Ex Rajah” and would
otherwise have been put to death. Their adherents
are generally the refuse of the inhabitants of Prince
of Wales Island and Province Wellesley, which it is
impossible for me to prevent leaving the settlement
whatever it suits them.
3. Enclosure No. 1 having been handed to me
by Mr. Salmond among other papers which it is un-
necessary at present for me to trouble the Government
with, I requested Captain Stanley in Her Majesty’s
Ship Wolf to proceed to Quedah to see the state of
defence in which that place is, as well as to show the
insurgents that I was on the alert to prevent their
taking Quedah and also to assist the Siamese in any
sea operations against them should the Malay fleet be
found at sea. I also gave him a letter to the Tuanku
Mahomed Saad, copies of which and his reply are
enclosed Nos. 2 and 3.


4, Captain Stanley returned on the 26th instant
and informed me that he had been detained for a day
at Quedah to enable the authorities at the mouth of
the river to communicate with the Chief of the
Siamese who resides some little distance inland, the
result of which was a message that the Siamese were
in hourly expectation of a reinforcement of men from
Purlis to the number of 2,000 and some boats, and
that with the boats they already had ( fifty or sixty in
number) they were in no alarm for the safety of
Quedah itself, but that they wished the Wolf to remain
until the arrival of the expected reinforcement, and
then that she might be permitted to proceed with the
Siamese fleet to drive the Malays out of the Merbo.
5, As it is difficult to make the Siamese com-
prehend that the constant attacks and acts of aggres-
sion on their country made by the Ex Rajah’s follow-
ers and other ill disposed inhabitants of this station
have not the tacit concurrence of the British Govern-
ment, and which I believe to be sedulously circulated
by interested and designing persons under its protec-
tion, I should have been disposed to approve of the
plan of proceeding, to convince the Siamese of our
determination of maintaining the provisions of the
Treaty entire, but the Wolf is under order for England,
and it is impossible to say when the promised fleet
would arrive at Quedah and be able to put to sea, and
it was therefore impossible to detain her for this
service.
6, The Government will observe from the reply
of Tuanku Mahomed Saad that he does not deny his
intention of attacking the Siamese territories, and
Captain Stanley, who on his way down from Quedah
went on shore at Merbo and had a personal communi-
cation with him, reports the same ; and farther, that
he says he is determined never to permit Quedah to
remain at peace, so long as he lives. At Merbo were
found 25 to 30 boats of inconsiderable strength under


the command of a man named Hadjee Mustapha, a
native of Java, but a subject oj the British Government,
by reason of his holding lands in our territory.
7. I must here remark that I am thoroughly
satisfied the insurgents are fully aware that they can-
not b} T any means keep possession of Quedah even if
they could take it. The heads of the confederacy are
possibly actuated by a hope of revenging themselves on
the Siamese, the followers simply by the hope of
plunder to which charge the former are also undoubt,
edly liable.
8. On the return of the Wolf to prevent as far as
possible the necessity of having recourse to force to
drive these freebooters from the Mirbo river I sent one
of our gun boats with a Proclamation, copy of which is
enclosed, No. 4. My messenger returned yesterday
stating that the people who were there heard it read,
but declined moving out of the river. It is my in-
tention therefore as a temporary measure to keep a
strict watch on the Malays at Mirbo, and if I find that
they put to sea and attack the Siamese, to aid the
latter by means of Her Majesty’s brig Victor, Captain
Crozier, who is now here, having promised me his
co-operation so that I shall I hope have the means of
at all events preventing the Malays from investing
Quedah itself, leaving it for the present to the Siamese
to drive the Malays out from their own territories.
9. I should I confess have been better satisfied
by at once sending a force into the Mirbo river, which
is only, as before observed, fifteen miles to the north-
ward of this island to disarm the marauders and burn
any boats obviously intended for purposes of hostility,
leaving sufficient small ones to carry off the people
from the vengeance of the Siamese, but I have at
present scarcely a sufficient force to effect the object
without a chance of some opposition. This, on the
arrival of the steamer I shall be able at once to effect


without any such chance under Captain Crosier’s
directions and should I find that the confederacy only
increases in numbers by delay I shall venture to an-
ticipate the approval of Government to the measure,
10. I shall of course take care that no proceed-
ings are on any account commenced by land, except
such as may be found necessary to drive these free
booters out of the river should they remain there. My
sole object is to remove from our immediate vicinity
a confederacy injurious to our commerce which dis-
turbs the internal peace and welfare of this settlement,
and which I conceive we are bound to disperse by the
Treaty above alluded to, Article 13.
11. Until I hear fro'm the Government approv-
ing of what I have done, or directing some other course
of policy to be observed, I must of course act on the
principles I have detailed and if 1 find this predatory
association likely to gain strength by inaction [on]
our part, thereby inducing the ill disposed of our com-
munity to believe that they will be permitted to
ravage a country in amity and connected by Treaty
with us, I shall at once dispel all such impressions by
a hostile attack on Tuanku Mahomed Saad and his
followers.
12. Referring to the second article of Captain
Burney’s Treaty. I would request the consideration of
'Government to its provisions that I may be instructed
how to deal with" Tuanku Mahomed Saad should he or
any others described in the Proclamation as British
subjects fall into my hands. lam particularly an-
xious on the subject, as one of the heads of this ex-
pedition, Hadjee Mustapha, was with me in Her
Majesty’s Ship Andromache as a pilot, was once com-
mander of one of our gun boats and is now a land
holder in Province "Wellesley, where his family resides,
and where he will in case of discomfiture retire. That
this question may be considered in all its bearings I


think it right to say that it is possible he has com-
mitted no overt act of hostility against the Siamese
while resident on British ground but as a British subject
he has done so while on Siamese ground, by assisting
in fitting out an expedition expressly for the purpose
of infringing a Treaty which he is, as a subject, I
conceive, bound to respect, and by associating himself
with persons whom we are expressly pledged not to
permit to molest, attack or injure the Siamese terri-
tories.
I have &ca,
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
The 30th July 1838.


Translation of a letter from the Siamese Governor of
Quedah.
To the Honorable J. W. Salmond Esquire and
Captain J. Low.
After Compliments,
I wish to acquaint my friends that Tuanku Maho-
med Taip, who lately attacked the Siamese post on
the Muda River, has joined his brother Tuanku Maho-
med Saad and Che Mat Ali and entered along
with them the Murbout river with a fleet of boats.
It is my intention to send guard boats to endeavour
to drive them out and to seize and send them to Ligor.
Formerly these two first named persons were released
from imprisonment at Ligor by virtue of a treaty be-
twixt the English and Siamese by which the relatives
of the Ex Rajah of Quedah were to be restored. It
is also stipulated in the Treaty that the English will
not permit the Ex Rajah or any of his relatives or
followers to disturb the Country of Quedah. It was
on this account that the Emperor of Siam allowed
Tuanku Mahomed Saad and Tuanku Mahomed Taip
to return. Now it seems to me that this conduct of
these two persons is under the control of the Company* .
It behoves my friend therefore to restrain them and
drive them away agreeably to treaty before they have
encreased their force and resources, and urged on t°
a serious issue, so that the friendly relations produced by
the Treaty may be maintained inviolate henceforth, and
the good faith of the English may remain unquestion-
ed. Moreover the great Emperor of Siam has not yet
a “ Belongs to, or is really in the Company’s busi-
ness.” The [? text] of the original is not Malayan.
The letter has not been written by a Malay, and this
passage has been translated nearly verbatim.
Fort William 26th September 1838.


been informed of these events and I wish on this
account to acquaint my friend with the same, in a
friendly manner as agreed on in the Treaty. For
this is a matter of importance. Moreover Tuanku
Abdullah has come to Penang from Malacca to stir up
the Company’s people to enter Quedah and join Tuanku
Mahomed Saad and Che Mat Ali to disturb and molest
it contrary to the Treaty.
This letter dated on Monday the 2d of the dec-
rease in the month Kubin at Khair (9th July 1838.).
( A true Translation )
(Signed) James Low
Principal Assistant.


To Tuanku Mahomed Asahad and Wan Mat Alii.
Since my arrival here many complaints have been
made to me of acts of violence having been committed
by you and your followers at sea on Chinese and
others; and in some instances of your having taken
and put to death certain inhabitants of this Island,
for which if you are taken you may be held answer-
able to the laws of England.
From enquiries I have made of Tuanku Abdullah
I find you consider yourselves at war with Siam, and
are only endeavouring to retake Quedah from that
power. This lam willing to believe is the case, but,
if the information I have received of your proceedings
be correct, you have certainly committed outrages
on persons under British protection altogether un-
warrantable. You are aware that by the Treaty be-
tween the English and the Court of Siam the English
are bound not to permit “the followers of the late
Rajah of Quedah to attack, disturb or injure in any
manner the territory of Quedah or any territory sub-
ject to Siam.” Now as it is clear that you are either
invading Quedah or committing acts of piracy or
both, and as it .is my duty and agreeable to my orders
from the Governor General of India to suppress piracy
as also disturbances between the Malays and the
Siamese, this is to inform you in a friendly manner,
that if I hear of my further acts of violence on your
part against persons going peaceably to and fro by
land or sea, or of any further attempts to invade the
territory of Quedah, I shall at once send a force to
treat you as enemies in the one case and as pirates
in the other, especially as a few days ago when at
Malacca the Ex King disavowed all connexion with
your proceedings. You cannot therefore plead that
Fort William 26th September 1888.


you are acting under hie sanction.
And moreover I expect that after the receipt of
this notice you will break up your camp at Qualla
Merbow and peaceably disperse your followers.


Letter from Tuanku Mahomed Asahad to the
Honorable S. G. Bonham, Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
( After Compliments. )
I have duly received the Honorable the Governor’s
letter complaining of acts of violence and piracy com-
mitted at sea.
I left Pulo Penang with one prow to seek live-
lihood in the neighbourhood of Panguh, not with the
intention of doing any mischief but to procure it in an
honest way. I have succeeded in obtaining a little
paddy and rice. In returning I was detained by con-
trary winds at Pulo Bunting, and while I was there
the Siamese Rajah of Quedah sent against me 27
prows, large and small, to seize me, but I did not
allow myself to be seized by them, but gave them
battle, which lasted from 6 till 4, at which hour it
began to blow and by the blessing of God, the Siamese
prows got into confusion. However, they got posses-
sion of one of my prows with cargo. After escaping
from their injustice I reached the territories ot the
Perak country, I have been a great sufferer by all
this. All those who perceived the injustice of the
Siamese towards me pitied me and assisted me with 12
prows and meil, and I sailed with them in search of
food. On reaching Pulo Telibong the Siamese with
30 prows surrounded me to seize me, but I fought
with them ; when a breeze sprung up they separated.
On my way from Pulo Klong I touched at Pulo Lun-
kawa, where the people entreated me to save their
wives and children from the Siamese, and I according-
ly embarked them on board of my prows, when the
Siamese surrounded me with 30 prows. It happened
to be night and 4 of my prows got into the hands of
Fort William 26th September 1838.


the Siamese, but on the following morning I fought
with them and escaped from their cruelty. All those
people who have suffered oppression and injustice from
the Siamese, on hearing these reports, united together
and joined me, which increased my followers to a large
number. From thence I returned to Pulo Budun and
while I was there a Siamese Chief of Merbout came
and invited me to enter the river and asked me to as-
sist him in carrying his wife and children into the
Company's territory. Not many days after this the
Siamese sent against me 80 prows with which I fought
and defeated them. They returned back to Quedah.
Again the Siamese sent [prows] against me, 39 in
number. Amongst them were 7 Chinese topes, a boat
and a schooner. With these also I fought and defeated
[them], and about fifteen days after the Siamese again
sent 54 vessels, 10 of which were Chinese topes, whilst
my fleet consisted of 20 prows. However, I fought
with them and defeated them. During the time I
remained at Murbow I fought thrice, and once was
attacked by land. The women I brought from Lan-
kawa and Murbow I sent them all into the Company’s
territory Such has been the injustice of the Siamese
against me. My uncle Tuanku Soleman and his child
Tuanku Umbum and his two children, Tuan Mahomed,
Tuanku Yoosoof, the Datu Bandahara of Quedah, Sree
Pakurma, jayah of Pulo Lunkawa, the father of Wan
Mahomed Alii and several other great men did the
Siamese kill without the slightest fault. Where am
I to look for assistance after such cruelty except in the
Governor who I trust and hope will pity me that I
have suffered so much injustice.


Proclamation.
Prince of Wales Island, 27th July 1838.
Whereas by the Treaty existing between the Bri-
tish and Siamese Governments dated 20th June 1826
it is incumbent on the former “not to permit the
former Governor of Quedah or any of his followers to
attack, disturb or injure in any manner the territory
of Quedah or any other territory subject to Siam,”
And whereas the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca has just received a requisition
from the Siamese authorities at Quedah to expel from
their territories Tuanku Mahomed Saad a nephew of
the former Governor of Quedah, who is collecting an
hostile force in the River Merbo for the purpose of
disturbing Siamese possessions, And whereas it is
alleged that certain persons professing to be British
subjects and holding lands and having their families
within the limits of Prince of Wales Island and its
dependencies are at this moment aiding and abetting
the said Mahomed Saad, And whereas it is the deter-
mination of the said Governor to maintain entire the
provisions of the said Treaty. This is to notify to
whom it may concern that in compliance with the said
requisition a force is about to be sent to the Merbow
River and other places in the Siamese Territory for
the purpose of expelling the said Mahomed Saad and
his adherents therefrom, and that immediately after
this notice all persons professing to be British subjects
are hereby required to withdraw themselves from
the Siamese territory and return peaceably to their
homes, otherwise they will be considered as having
forfeited all claim to protection as subjects, and if
found in arms will be dealt with as declared enemies.
( True Copies )
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor.
Fort William 26th September 1838.


( Enclosure to Rear Admiral Maitland’s letter to*
the Admiralty, No. 73, dated 1 November 1838. )
To Captain R. Crozier,
Her Majesty’s Sloop Victor.
Sir,
Adverting to the personal communication that
has passed between us on the subject of the threatened
attack on Quedah, I have the honor to enclose for your
information copy of a dispatch* that I yesterday ad-
dressed to the Supreme Government, which will put
you fully in possession of the objects I have in view,
the principal one of which is to prevent Quedah itself
falling into the hands of the Malays.
I have this morning heard that the Malay flotilla
has moved from the Mirboo River, to another called
Sugie, a few miles on this side of Quedah, from
whence, if practicable, it is very desirable it should be
driven, as so long as the boats composing it remain
there, it is impossible to say how soon the insurgents
may possess themselves of Quedah.
I am aware however of the very small force at our
disposal: until therefore the steamer arrives from
Calcutta, or Her Majesty’s Sloop Hyacinth and a gun
boat can be brought up from Singapore, 1 do not see
that much can be done beyond the Victor occasionally
showing herself off Quedah, which will probably
prevent the Malays from attacking that place by sea.
My letter to the Government will inform you of
the steps that I think should be taken should the
Malay flotilla be found at sea.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
Ist August 1838.


,( Enclosure to Rear Admiral Maitland’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 73, dated 1 November 1838.)
H, M, Sloop Victor,
Penang Harbour, sth August 1838,
Sir,
I beg to acquaint you that 1 proceeded to Quedah
in Her Majesty’s Ship under my command, taking
with me the gun boat “ Diamond.”
In passing the Mirboo River I sent the gun boat
in, desiring Mr. Stewart the Commander to ascertain
whether all the proahs comprising the Malay flotilla
had sailed from the Sungei Sala River: At 9. P. M,
Mr. Stewart rejoined me, and reported they had all
left, not leaving a hut standing on the banks of the
river.
We experienced light airs and calms during the
night, and also on the following day, and did not
anchor till 3 P. M. off Quedah in 4 fathoms water,
about 4 miles from the entrance of the river.
On consulting the Commander of the gun boat,
it was considered too late to land that evening; and
about 5 P. M. a Malay Chief came off to inform me
that Quedah had been stormed and taken the previous
day, by the party under Tuanka Mahomet Saad, and
that his brother Tuanka Mahomet Taib was in posses-
sion of Toompoo, a town situated on the river a day
and a half’s march from Quedah, and had with him
between 3000 and 4000 men.
At 8 A. M. the next day, I landed at the Fort of
Quedah, accompanied by two of my officers and Mr.
Stewart and bad an interview with Tuanku Mahomet
Saad, The Chiefs Tuanku Wan, Mahomet Ally, Haid-
jee Mustapha and others were present, with about 200
men the garrison of the Fort.
The account of the capture of Quedah and Toompoo


was confirmed by Tuanku Mahomet Saad and the
other Chiefs, with a loss on their side of two killed
and four wounded; and thirty killed and twenty
wounded on the part of the Siamese.
The Malays attacked Quedah with thirty-three
proahs having on board seven hundred men, and three
hundred went by land; these were joined by several
hundred of the Quedah Malays, on their march. In
the Fort they stated there were only fifty or sixty
Siamese, who ran away after firing a few shots at
them, having been previously deserted by the Malays
who garrisoned it.
As far as I could discover, the whole population
round Quedah were in favor of Tuanku Mahomet Saad,
and he told me he expected 15,000 fighting men
would join him, in the course of a week, from Parlis,
Settol Langar and Tanjong Settar; and I did not
meet or hear of a single Siamese to take charge of
your despatch to the Rajah of Quedah, who, I was
informed, had retreated to Ligor,
The Fort of Quedah mounts 24 guns of large
calibre, sixteen smaller ones on the low ground, front-
ing the entrance of the river, yet it is by no means
a formidable fortress, from the decayed state of the
gun carriages, and onty being able to point the guns
in one direction: and with the naval force in the
Straits of Malacca, I consider the Fort might be
carried without much difficulty, or great sacrifice of
life; but until the Siamese drive the Malays back
from the interior of Quedah the possession of the
Fort would be useless, for I heard of no Siamese Chief
to give it up to, or men to defend it.
As the Malays had surprised and taken six proahs
from Troong that quietly entered the Quedah River,
thinking it in the possession of the Siamese, I dis-
patched the gun boat to warn them at Parlis, the


Sungoo River, and at Troong, that the Malays had
taken Quedah.
Tuanku Mahomet Saad informed me he left the
Mirboo River, with a Malay flotilla, the same evening
your proclamation had been read to them, and pro-
ceeded to Sugie Sala, and from thence to Quedah on
■the Ist August.
I sailed from Quedah yesterday at 1 P, M.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) Richard Crozier
Commander and Senior Officer
in the Straits of Malacca.
The Hon. S. G. Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales Island
&ca. &ca. &ca.


To H. T. Prinsep Esquire,
Secretary to Government, Fort William.
Sir,
Adverting to my letter of the 30th ultimo * on
the affairs of Quedah, it is now with regret that I have
to report that the nephews of the Ex King succeeded
in driving the Siamese out of the Fort of Quedah on
the 2d instant.
2. In the letter above alluded [to] I enclosed
copy of a proclamation I had sent to the Mirbow river
and elsewhere calling on all British subjects to return
to their homes, and it appears that the day after it
had been read the Malay flotilla left the river and pro-
ceeded to Sungu Sala and from thence to Quedah.
3. On the 30th ultimo Mr. Salmond handed me
a letter dated the 20th of the same month from the
Siamese Chief, written, it will be observed, before Her
Majesty’s Ship Wolf had gone to and returned from
Quedah. I nevertheless lost no time in requesting
Captain Crozier in Her Majesty’s Sloop Victor to pro-
ceed to that place with a reply to the Chief, and also
for the purpose of intercepting the Malay flotilla
should it have put to sea, and of rendering the
Siamese such assistance as they might require. Cap-
tain Crozier left this port in the execution of this ser-
vice on the 2d, arrived at Quedah on the 3d, where he
found the Fort in possession of the Malays. His pro-
ceedings on the occasion are fully detailed in his letter
to my address dated the sth instant.*
4. The fall of Quedah is entirely attributable to
the remissness of the Siamese Government. The popu-
lation of the province is, as is known to the Government,
essentially Malay, amounting probably to 20,000
Fort William 26th September 1838.


souls, for management of which the Siamese have-
not certainly more than 500 of their own countrymen,
a body totally inadequate to the object in view. The
Fort of Quedah when taken had only sixty Siamese
in it.
5. The insurgent’s force amounts to probably 500
people and will not I think increase much, but will, if
left to itself, of its own accord disperse, with the ex-
ception of the Chiefs and a few followers, more
especially so when it is known that the Rajah of Ligor
is aware of the state of things in Quedah, and the
peasantry begin to discover that the insurgents live
upon the produce of their labour, for from the best
information that I can obtain I am satisfied that
plunder has been the principal object of the Malays
on this occasion,
6. On reference to the records of this office I
observe that Mr. Ibbetson, on a former occasion
similar to the present, was of opinion that unless more
decided assistance was rendered to the Siamese than
Government appeared desirous of affording, their
success in driving the Malays out of Quedah would be
doubtful. The reply to that letter dated the 28th
November 1831 from Mr. Secretary Swinton remark-
ed that the instructions already furnished on the 15th
August* were to guide generally the operations of the
local authorities, but that the necessity of further in-
structions was superseded by Quedah having again
come into the possession of the Siamese.
7. The principle of these instructions appears to
be the observance of neutrality as much as possible,
confining our hostile measures to the simple preven-
tion of assistance being afforded to the insurgents by
men and arms from the British possessions.
8. With due respect I must here remark, that it
is entirely out of my power to prevent this or any
other assistance being given to the insurgents, for


even if the Quedah river is blockaded, boats can al-
ways land anywhere on the coast between our
northern boundary, the Mooda River, and the Quedah
River, a distance of between 40 to 50 miles, and that
the inhabitants of Province Wellesley can always-
moreover pass in and out of Province Wellesley to-
Quedah whenever they see fit.
9. I have no doubt whatever but that the
Siamese will shortly appear in considerable strength
in the interior of the Quedah territory, and that the
force will be sent as formerly under the Rajah of
Ligore who will have little difficulty in driving the
insurgents out of the interior. In this case the
Ligorian will most probably call on us, under the
provisions of the Treaty, to co-operate with him in
taking possession of Quedah Fort.
10. I have already observed that the Siamese
Government maintain a very inefficient force of their
own countrymen in Quedah, arising I believe in the
entire worthlessness of the country in a financial point
of view, and probably conceiving that they have the
British Government at hand to help them against the
inhabitants of Quedah under the provisions of the
Treaty, whereby we are bound not to permit the Ex
King or his followers to molest or disturb Quedah.
11. It of course remains entirely with the
Supreme Government to dictate what course of policy
is to be adopted on the occasion. We have assisted
the Siamese already in wresting Quedah from the
hands of the Malays and they have now again, through
their neglect and want of proper precaution, lost it.
It may be therefore considered we are now at liberty
to decline further assistance, and if I was satisfied that
the Malays could retain Quedah I should venture to
recommend the principle of non-interference.
12. But, on the contrary, lam satisfied that the
Siamese will never allow Quedah to remain under


Malay control, and that it has both the means and
desire to retain it in its possession. The Siamese
Government will not of course be well pleased when
it finds that Quedah has been overrun by a band of
freebooters, more especially so when it discovers that
the very men, Tuanku Mahomed Saad and Tuanku
Mahomed Taib, nephews of the late King, and who
were released from captivity through our agency, are
the leaders of the expedition. The Malays are told by
the inhabitants of this Island, that the British care
very little about the Treaty, and that it was made at
a peculiar time ( during the Rangoon war) and to
serve particular purposes which now no longer exist
&ca. &ca., and as they certainly have great cause to
dislike the Siamese they readily believe all and every
thing of the sort that is told them whether by design-
ing or idle people. Should Government be pleased
to consider itself bound either by treaty, or that it is
desirable under the explanation now afforded, to co-
operate with the Siamese, I would respectfully suggest
that when the Siamese have retaken the interior of
the country that I should be authorized to attack
'Quedah Fort either with or without them, and put
them again in possession of it, but I would respectfully
but urgently recommend that if the British interfere
at all active co-operation be afforded to the Siamese,
which will tend to show thezn that we are really an-
xious to uphold the provisions of the Treaty entire,
and to convince the Malays that what they hear
buzzed about in the Bazar of this Island is unfounded,
and that they have no hope of the British Government
remaining passive.
13 I have already expressed my conviction that
the Malays will never be permitted to occupy Quedah
(unless indeed some arrangement could be made with
the Siamese through our intervention). Our permit-
ting the former therefore to remain in Quedah I
certainly consider a very doubtful policy, as it can
only tend to cause excitement and confusion in our


possessions, seeing that they will be the places of
outfit on the part of the Malays for their expeditions
and of refuge for either party in cases of 'dis-
comfiture. Still however it appears to me that we
had better stand neutral altogether than not take an
active part.
14. Should Government decide in assisting the
Siamese to the extent I have ventured to suggest
Quedah will be in their possession again in a month or
two after the Siamese force is brought from Ligore.
Should we act otherwise they will still get possession
of Quedah in the end, but probably not for months,
during which time this station and its vicinity must
continue in a very undesirable state, while if the
Malays see that we are determined to attack Quedah
Fort and put the Siamese in possession, they will, I
have little doubt, immediately retire.
15. In his letter the Siamese Chief complains
of not having answers sent in return to some of his
former letters. This complaint is not, I find, founded
in fact, as copies of translations of letters recently
sent him, and herewith enclosed, will show, nor must
it be forgotten that on the 24th ultimo Her Maje-
sty’s Sloop Wolf went expressly to see him at
Quedah, at which time the Chief, according to Cap-
tain Stanley’s account, said he was in hourly ex-
pectation of a reinforcement of 2000 men and some
boats, but that with what he had he was in no alarm
for the safety of Quedah.
16. From Captain Orozier’s letter* will be seen
the steps [that] have been taken to inform the Siam-
ese authorities of Quedah having fallen into the hands
of the Malays.
1 have the honor &ca.
(Signed) S. G, Bonham
Governor of Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
The 6th August 1838.


Letter from the Siamese Governor of Quedah to
the address of the Resident Councillor aud Assistant
at Province Wellesley.
This is to acquaint my friend that the adherents
of the Ex Rajah of Quedah residing at Pulo Penang
and Province Wellesley have come over and com-
mitted acts of aggression against the inhabitants
of Quedah and driven a great many from their
habitations. 1 have frequently brought this to the
notice of my friend but have received no reply to
any of my letters.
I wish to be informed by my friend how far the
report respecting Tuanku Abdullah’s intentions of
attacking Quedah is correct. Should such be the
case I request my friend will agreeably to the Treaty
put a timely check upon the hostile proceedings of
Tuanku Abdullah.
Dated 20th of July 1838.
Received at Penang 29th July and by Mr. Bon-
ham on the 30th.
Fort William 26th September 1838.


Letter to the Siamese Governor of Quedah in re-
ply to the foregoing.
I have received your letter to the address of the
Resident Councillor. On the 24th the Wolf was sent
to communicate with you and to render you every
assistance, and he arrived on the evening of that day
at Quedah. She remained all the 25th and left
Quedah the 26th. You then told the Captain of that
ship that you in two days expected 2000 men and a
fleet of boats from Purlis. By the treaty you are
bound to take proper care of Quedah and if you dont
drive the Malays off from the land, 1 shall write to
the Praklang at Bangkok when I return to Singapore
and request him tt) send a proper force to take charge
of Quedah. I will destroy Tuanku Mahomed Saad’s
boats if they attack you at sea, but on the land you
must take care of yourself. The British Government
is not bound to protect you against an internal revolt*
though it will assist you in destroying any boats
that may be ascertained to have been fitted out by
persons belonging to Penang, or which belong to
the inhabitants of Penang, for the purpose of invad-
ing Quedah.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor
Penang
The 31st July 1838.
Fort William 26th September 1838.


Translation of a letter from Captain James Low
to the address of the Siamese Governor of Quedah.
( After Compliments.)
I have received my friend’s letter and wish to
acquaint my friend that my friend is aware that I
have all along been writing to my friend and to his
local officers requesting them not to countenance the
residing in the Siamese territory, near the mutual
boundary, of those persons who had fled from justice
from the British side. Those letters have never been
attended to, and my friend’s officers have followed
their own course. Those murderers and robbers who
have fled thus from justice at various times, and
have been assembled near the British frontier, have
found an asylum under my friend’s people. At pre-
sent too the people who have long resided at Kobo,
under the government of rny friend, have joined
Tuanku Mahomed Taib and his followers, who are
about thirty in number, Should any of the people
within this province attempt to assist those evil dis-
posed persons I shall prohibit them, but at present
I do not know if there be any such or not.
1 shall assist my friend in every reasonable and
proper way. 1 request that my friend will drive
off all evil disposed people from the frontier and
send sufficiently strong parties to maintain his posts
there.
Dated 31st May 1838.
True translation
(Signed) James Low.
Principal Assistant.
Fort William 26th September 1838.


To the Siamese Governor of Keddah.
( After Compliments.)
I have to acquaint my friend that I have received
information from Captain Low in Province Wellesley
that my friend’s people at the various posts along the
mutual boundary have been driven out and forced into
the British Territory by a rebellious subject of ray
friend Tuanku Mahomed Taip and his gang of marau-
ders, and that Captain Low has afforded my friend’s
people every requisite protection. He also reports
that he ordered the above party of Malays to quit the
frontier and not disturb it any longer or else he would
expel them by force which they forthwith did. But
as they may have gone further into the Keddah count-
ry, I trust my friend will be speedily enabled to as-
semble a force to disperse them. I must further
acquaint my friend that when his people were fight-
ing with the Malays the shot passed thickly over into
the English bank of the river, thereby endangering
the lives of the settlers there, and that damage was
thereby done both to houses and fruit trees, and that
had Captain Low not prevented them the sepoys and
police stationed there would have fired in return!
But he wished that my friend’s people should drive
off these marauders. It will be proper that such risk
should not be run again : for the distance across the
Muda River is about two orlongs only. My friend I
trust will reflect that had he and his officers attended
to Captain Low’s warnings the disturbances would
have been most probably checked at its commence-
ment, for Tuanku Mahomed Taip could have been
seized at Koobboo where he was residing. But my
friend and his officers have neglected the ordinary
precautions for defence, notwithstanding the remon-
Fort William 26th September 1838.


strance of the Penang Authorities and those of Cap-
tain Low, and have not only left the frontier posts
unguarded but have placed confidence in desperate
Malays, most of whom have fled from the English
territory for crime.
My friend must also be aware that there has not
been a single reply received from the Rajah of Ligore
to any one of the many letters sent to him during the
past two years by the Penang civil authorities or by
Captain Low.
As yet none of my friend’s troops have arrived.
( Signed ) J. W. Salmond
Resident Councillor.
Prince of Wales Island
The 10th June 1838.


To H. T. Prinsep Esquire
Secretary to Government, Fort William,
Sir,
In my letter of the 30th July* I alluded to two
persons named Tuanku Mahomed Saad and Wan Mat
Alii, to whom I had written on the subject of their
hostile proceedings against the Siamese State of
Quedah, and likewise enclosed a copy of my letter to
their joint address, and of the reply of Tuanku Maho-
med Saad thereto, and I now forward a translation of
a letter which I have recently received from the
Praklang or First Minister to the King of Siam bear-
ing on the same subject, as the complaint it contains
against these people, coming direct from the capital of
the Empire, may induce the Government to authorize
stronger measures to be taken against these freeboo-
ters than, considering the circumstances under which
Quedah is occupied by the Siamese, it might other-
wise be disposed to sanction.
2. Tuanku Mahomed Saad is, as I have already
said, a nephew of the Ex Raja, being the son of Tuan-
ku Doad, a brother of the Raja. His wife and two or
three children reside in this Island, which report says
he occasionally manages to visit. Wan Mat Alii is
the son of the Sii Paka Majoya, who was the head man
at Pulo Lancavy, a large island opposite to Purlis,
during the time the Ex Rajah held possession of
Quedah. He is not, as far as I can discover, a British
subject, but he undoubtedly must be considered as a
“ follower of J he Ex Rajah.”
3. Since writing my letter of the 6th instant* I
have received authentic intelligence of Tuanku Ab-
dullah, the eldest son of the Ex Rajah of Quedah,
having arrived at Quedah Fort, and here he has been
Fort William 26th September IS3S.


proclaimed Rajah. This Tuanku Abdullah accompa-
nied a person called Bus-tian to Calcutta, alluded to
in a letter from Mr. Macnaghten to Mr. Swinton
dated 6th July* 1832.
4. These persons have undoubtedly been the
cause of the present predatory capture of Quedah by
the Malays, who have been instigated thereto by see-
ing that on a former occasion they were permitted to
do so with impunity, the Chiefs at the same time
giving out that all the English at Penang are in their
favour and that they will be upheld by the British
'Government.
5. At present the people of Penang and Prc-
vince Wellesley go to and return from Quedah when-
ever they see fit, and no doubt supply the insurgents
with arms &ca. The punishment for this species of
■offence is I observe provided for in the proposed penal
code for India, Sections 114 and 115, page 30 of the
printed copy. But 1 confess I am ignorant of the
steps that should be taken against offenders of this sort,
as the law now stands. It appears advisable therefore
that the reference contemplated in the concluding part
of the penultimate paragraph of your letter of the 15th
February 1831, dated at Camp Muhil, should be
made, and the result be communicated to me as early
as convenient.
6. Since writing the above, the gun boat Dia-
mond, which dispatched to the northward by Cap-
tain Crozier on the Victor’s leaving Quedah for the
purpose of giving information to the Siamese authorities
of the state of things at that place, has returned, and
Mr. Stuart, the person in charge of her, informs me
that the Siamese had all fled from tne sea coast and
that he could not find any Siamese Chief to whom he
■could deliver ray letter, and that the Malay Chiefs
who are acting under the Siamese Government are in
great alarm, lest the proceedings of their countrymen


at Quedah should bring down the vengeance of the
Siamese on them.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island.
The 13th August 1838.


Letter of Chou Phya Praklang, first Minister of
State to His Magnificent Majesty the King of Siam.
To the Honorable S. G. Bonham Esquire
Governor of Singapore, Penang and Malacca.
I received your letter informing me that you sent
the Fireship to Sungora, and on her return encoun-
tered and captured a piratical boat, in which were
four Siamese subjects, two men and two women, natives
of Sungora, and when an opportunity offers you would
return them to Sungora. ' Afterwards the fire ship on
her passage down saw six large piratical boats attack-
ing a Chinese junk. She went to their assistance and
fired upon them, killing nearly one hundred pirates
and taking thirty prisoners, which were to be punish-
ed according to English law &ca. &ca.
The Acting Governor of Sungora sent a letter
here informing me that he had sent the guard boats
out after pirates. They fell in with and captured a
pirate boat. On being questioned he said that there
was another boat in company commanded by Pang-
lima Ame. When off Patani they fell in with the
boat of Panglima Assam from the Island of Kalang.
They sailed together with the intention of committing
piracies in the vicinity of Sungora. When the fire-
ship returned she sunk one piratical boat and took
another. His (Che Ama) boat escaped the fireship
being furthest off and night coming on. The letters
from Sungora confirm Governor Bonham’s letter.
The Ministers of State informed His Majesty the
King of Siam of the contents of Governor Bonham’s
letter and His Majesty was graciously pleased to learn
that Governor Bonhan had sent the fireship to Sungora
and that she had encountered and taken pirates in the
Fort William 26th September 1838.


vicinity of Sungora, also that she assisted a Chinese
junk and destroyed six large boats, killing about one
hundred men and taking thirty prisoners, for which
His Majesty the King of Siam thanks Governor Bon-
ham seeing that what Governor Bonham has done is
proper between two friendly countries.
All the merchants of this country are very glad
that the fireship was so fortunate in her attack upon
the pirates. The junk of Phra Pra Suit Wanit, which
trades to Singapore, w T as attacked by pirates and saved
in consequence of the assistance given her by the
fireship. The Malay pirates, His Majesty hopes, will
after this example be afraid to put to sea, and that the
merchants may trade to and from Singapore safely.
Last year [the) Governor of Junkceylon sent a
letter here stating that. Che Matalee, residing in an
island called Lancavi, now has removed to a long is-
land abreast of Junkceylon. He owes to several peo-
ple at Punguh large sums of money. Ihree years ago
on the death of the late Governor of Junkceylon he
ran from the long island and joined the Malay Gover-
nor of Quedah. The old Governor sent Che Matalee
to call together all the bad people from the neighbom-
ing islands on the west side for the purpose of com-
mitting acts of piracy on the merchants’ crafts trading
from Junkceylon, Takappa, Quedah &ca. to Penang.
Che Matalee returned to the long island and settled
as a pirate. He attacked a Chinese boat returning
from Penang, The Siamese guard boats went to her
assistance and saved her and caught two of her pirate
boats ; one boat contained seventeen men, the other
seven. Matalee ran to Pera. This year we received
a letter from the Governor of Quedah stating that
Chee Matalee called together several people, the
followers of the old Rajah of Quedah from the vicinit}
of the English country, and proceeded to the island
called Lancavi. He sent his uncle Chee Momun, and
his father in law, Tuan Long-a-Rue, to call all the


people at Lancavi to join Matalee in his piratical
practices. The Chief of the Island, Chee Su-On,
caught Chee Momun and Tuan Longa-Rue. Chee
Matalee and Tuan Kumat Suat went to Pulo Bunting,
The Siamese war boats went to seize them. They
made their escape and went outside Penang, some-
where in the vicinity of Pera, On the 19th of April
1838 Chee Matalee and Tuan Kumat Suat and their
people with fourteen boats returned to Pulo Bunting
and recommenced their piratical depredations and sent
a letter to collect all their followers for the purpose
of attacking Quedah. The Governor of Quedah sent
a letter to the Governor of Penang The fireship ar-
rived at Penang from Singapore. The Governor of
Penang sent the fireship to catch Matalee and his
people, but after a search of four days could not find
them and returned to Singapore. After that the Gov-
ernor of Quedah sent eighteen guard boats to the
northward in pursuit of the pirates. They fell in with
the piratical boats and engaged them, one of which
they nearly sunk. The people had to leave her and
got on board of some of the other boats. They all
ran and night coming on they made their escape into
the vicinity of the English stations of Penang, con-
sequently the Siamese war boats could not follow
them over the English boundary, and returned to Pulo
Bunting. Chee Matalee and Tuan Kumat Suat, when
the war boats leave, come out to sea and seize on
merchant boats, and when the war boats make their
appearance the pirates run for Penang. This they
have done two or three times, and now all the merch-
ants are afraid to carry on trade to Penang. Chee
Matalee and Tuan Kumat Suat are partizans of the
old Rajah of Quedah, all of which are under the Eng-
lish flag. All these pirates are enemies to the Siamese
as well as the English countries. Therefore, for
friendship’s sake sent the fire ship and catch Chee
Matalee and Tuan Kumat Suat who are sea pirates.
Afterwards I suppose all would be quiet and the


merchants from Quedah, Junkceylon, Takooatung,
Takoppa and Punguh will be able to trade as here-
tofore.
Seal
Bangkok
The 24th June 1838.
Translated into English by
(Signed) R. Hunter, Siam.


( Enclosure to Rear Admiral Maitland’s letter to
the Admiralty, No. 73, dated 1 November 1838.)
Her Majesty’s Sloop Hyacinth,
Penang Roads, 12th September 1838.
Sir,
. . . 1 sailed from Penang on the mor-
ning of the 22d August, arrived off Quedah the same
evening but too late to communicate with the shore.
The following morning Mr. Stewart, the Com-
mander of the Diamond gun boat, landed and was
informed that the man we went in search of had
effected his escape with the Siamese, when the Malays
took possession of that place. * * *
I anchored off Pulo Telibon on the evening of the
29th: two days elapsed before I communicated with
that place, and on doing so I found it had been taken
possession of five days previously by Makon Alii, a
Malay Chief, I believe, well known to Mr. Bonham,
without any loss of life, and taking a few Siamese
prisoners only.
The whole line of coast from Quedah to Trang
being now in possession of the Malays
I proceeded to visit Panjang . . . On
the Bth I sailed for Penang and have to report the
arrival of Her Majesty’ Sloop in that harbour to await
your further orders.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) Wm. Warren
Commander.
Commander Richard Crozier
Her Majesty’s Sloop Victor.


To the Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am directed by the President in Council to
acknowledge the receipt of your letters dated res-
pectively the 30fh July* and 6th* and 13th August,
on the subject of the enterprise against Quedah headed
by Tuanko Mahomed Saad and Tuanko Mahomed
Taib, and aided by Wan Mutalla, son of a Chief of the
Island Lunkaru.*
2. It appears that the two first named Chiefs are
nephews of the Ex Rajah of Qaedah, and that having
collected a body of Malay rovers they availed them-
selves of the general disaffection felt by the Malays
against the Siamese supremacy and mastered the
principal part of Quedah in the early part of August,
overpowering the weak garrison left there by the
Siamese.
3. By the treaty concluded by Lieutenant Colo-
nel, then Captain Burney, in June 1826, the British
Government is bound to do its utmost to prevent such
enterprises and to afford explanation of any gathering
of troops or boats that may take place, but it is not
stipulated that we are to assist in the recovery of the
lost forts.
4. You ascribe the success of the Malays to the
neglect and improvidence of the Siamese, but as you
think there can be no doubt of their exerting them-
selves to recover the lost places and to put down the
insurrection, and that they will bring force enough to
make their success in the end certain, you think that
we are bound, as well by policy as by a sense of jus-
tice and good faith to give assistance to the Siamese
in operations they may engage in for the purpose.
Fort William 26th September 1838.


6. It appears from your last letter above ack-
nowledged that the eldest son of the Ex King of
Quedah, Tuanko Abdoolla, has since gone to the Fort
of Quedah and been proclaimed King, and the rise
against the Siamese is stated to be so general along
the Malay coast that a Siamese officer could not be
found any where with whom Mr. Stuart could hold
communication when sent in command of the gun-
boat to deliver letters and information.
6. The Siamese have applied for your assistance
in putting down the present insurrection, which they
treat as a piratical enterprise, and have suggested that
the Government steamer should be employed in seizing
and destroying the vessels of the Malay Chiefs en-
gaged in it, which they, assert find protection in the
British territory, and there appears to be no doubt
that the population of Penang and Province Welleslej 7
are favorable to the enterprise of the Malays and that
it has been aided by recruits and resources derived
from the British territory, if indeed it has not been
fitted out there.
7. The President in Council entirely approves
the Proclamation issued by you in July last,* recal-
ling all subjects of the British Government who might
have been induced to take part in the expedition
against Quedah, and the other steps taken by you to
prove to the Siamese that the insurrection has no
countenance from the British Government, are also
confirmed and approved.
8. The que3tion however remains what specific
further assistance you are called upon to give to the
Siamese when they shall appear in force to put down
the insurrection, and whether British subjects or
Malay [ illegible ] whose residence is in British ter-
ritory, when proved to have joined it and to have
taken an active part against the Siamese, after and
with knowledge of your proclamation, can be brought
to punishment and in what manner.


9. With respect first to this last question the
President in Council has no hesitation in deciding
that the heads of the present enterprise, if they fall
into the hands of the English officers or authorities,
must be kept in close confinement, with a view to
their being punished in any manner that the law will
permit. If the British law as enforced and adminis-
tered in the Straits will not meet the case His Honor
in Council would seriously consider whether they
should not be delivered up to the Siamese to be dealt
with according to the laws and customs of that count-
ry, for the offences committed within its frontier.
This alternative is always open to the Government
and it will ensure that the parties will readily submit
to any treatment that may be ordered by Government
under the condition of its refraining from a resort to
it.
10. The two nephews of the Quedah Rajah, who
obtained their release in consequence of the provision
in their favor contained in the treaty with the Siamese
concluded in 1826 and who have now used their
liberty to engage in hostilities against Siam, in direct
violation of the stipulations of that Treaty, have in
the opinion of the President in Council placed them-
selves in the predicament to merit very severe treat-
ment.
11. Hadjee Mostafa also, who is stated to have
once commanded a Government gun boat and to be
still a land holder in Province Wellesley must similar-
ly be kept in close confinement in case of his falling
into the hands of the British authorities, in order that
he may be dealt with as other British subjects who
have taken part as leaders in this enterprise.
12. It is the intention of His Honor in Council
to consider in the Legislative Department the expe-
diency of passing a law prescribing a specific punish-
ment for this and similar offences committed in the


territory of our allies. His Honor in Council has no
doubt that the rigorous imprisonment of these persons
in the interim, while the further proceedings to be
held in respect to them arc under consideration, will
be justifiable and. proper, and the alternative of deli-
very to the Siamese being always, as before observed,
open, the prisoners will willingly submit to abide the
result of the deliberations of the Government on their
future treatment. If in your opinion there will be
inconvenience in keeping the leaders of this expedi-
tion in confinement in the settlements under your
administration, you will consider yourself fully autho-
rised to use your discretion in sending them to
Calcutta to be dealt with as may seem fit.
13. But although by this severity towards the
leaders, if captured.on the seas or after return to
British territory, the Government may satisfy the
Siamese, when the present disturbances have been
quelled, our ally will naturally expect some early
demonstration in aid of the operations undertaken to
subdue the insurgents, and to prove that we have not
countenanced or encouraged the enterprise.
14. Upon this difficult point the President in
Council can only at present convey his approbation of
the steps contemplated by you vizt. the employment
of the steamer Diana when she rejoins and the gun
boats at your disposal, with any of Her Majesty’s
Ships of War that may be in the Straits, in blocka-
ding the ports attacked by the Siamese so as to
prevent supplies of men, arms, provisons or munitions
of war of any kind being thrown in by sea.
15. His Honor in Council entirely approves your
refraining altogether from taking part in any land
enterprise and His Honor in Council would not allow
the men of the Government vessels to be landed to aid
in any storm of works or other operations of that kind
which would identify them with the Siamese, and fix


on them the stain of participating in any acts of
savage barbarity that might be perpetrated during or
after a successful assault.
13. The blockading force may consider itself at
liberty to accept any general surrender which may be
tendered and the places given up must then im-
mediately be given over to the Siamese authorities.
It will be impossible also to refuse to accept the sub-
mission of individuals attempting to escape after the
siege of a place has been formed, and the delivery of
such to the Siamese, except in extreme cases or under
assurances that their lives will be spared, might be
thought inhuman.
17. It remains only to consider whether as this
enterprise has been led by the nephews of the Ex
Rajah and his son has been proclaimed King as the
result of its success, any measures of the rigour are
called for against him. His Honor in Council leaves
it to your discretion to take steps to secure the person
of the Ex Rajah and place him under restraint or
otherwise accordingly as you shall see reason to be-
lieve that he is furnishing aid in men or money or in
any other way to the enterprise. Of course, pending
an enterprise undertaken by the family of this Chief
for the recovery of his rights of sovereignty from a
state in friendship with us, the Government can sanc-
tion no payment of stipend to any members of that
family so as to incur the more than probable risk that
the money would be employed in hostilities against
our ally.
18. His Honor in Council trusts that the above
explanation of the view taken by the Government of
India of the principal questions involved in the em-
barrassing relations subsisting with the Siamese, as
affected by this Malay enterprise, will suffice to enable
you to act promptly with confidence in the juncture.
You will of course communicate on the subject of any


operations that may be in progress with His Excellen-
cy the Naval Commander in Chief when he shall pass
through the Straits on his return from China, furnish-
ing him with a copy of the correspondence to enable
him the better to judge what aid to afford you from
Her Majesty’s Squadron and what instructions to give
to the Commander left to direct the operations.
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to Government of India.
Fort William
The 26th September 1838.


Fort William 6th February 1839.
Political Department.
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire
Secretary to Government Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 26th September last on the subject
of the affairs of Quedah, and I now enclose for the
information of the Honorable the President in Council
copy of the instructions I forwarded to the Resident
Councillor at Penang for his guidance, and his reply
which with Captain Warren’s letter of the 15th instant
will put Government in full possession of all that has
heretofore passed and of the state in which matters
now are.
Government will observe that in consequence of
there being no civil officers here besides Mr. Church
to perform the duties which at Penang occupy the
time of the Resident Councillor, Recorder and an
Assistant, I have been unable to quit this station, and
that I was therefore compelled to leave it to the dis-
cretion of the Penang authorities to enforce the
blockade of Quedah River and coast or otherwise be-
fore the arrival of the Siamese force, and it appears
that it has been considered advisable to do so. I
shall, however, forward [? messengers ] to Penang to-
morrow, and be able to ascertain how far the adoption
of the measure was proper, when should it not appear
likely to have the effect of inducing the Malays to
withdraw from Quedah and return to their homes it
will be a matter for consideration if the flotilla should
not be recalled until the Siamese make their appear-
ance in sufficient force to retake the country.
I found some difficulty in wording the Proclama-
tion giving publicity to the inhabitants of Penang and
Province Wellesley, of the state of affairs at Quedah,


so as to meet the anomalous position in which it
appears to me we are placed the present unhappy
enterprize. I therefore had recourse to the form and
style of that adopted on a former occasion under simi-
lar circumstances and which formed an enclosure
in Mr. Ibbetson’s dispatch to Mr. Secretary Swinton
dated 4th July 1831, and is referred to in a letter
from that Department of the 15th August* following
without comment, and I presume therefore not disap-
proved of. Copy is herewith annexed.
I likewise enclose copies of two letters that I have
addressed to the Minister at Siam, that of the 28th
instant is still here, but a vessel will sail in a few
days for Bangkok, so that in two months from this date
an answer to both may be expected.
From information derived from Mr. Hunter, a
gentleman residing at Bangkok, whose opinions are
worthy of every consideration, I have reason to think
the Court of Siam have been very anxious to ascertain
the views and intentions of the Supreme Government
at the present crisis. From the same authority I also
learn that the Rajah of Ligore (-the same person who
was so conspicuous during the outbreak in 1831) ha_
been sent from Bangkok to retake Quedah but I suss
pect without any troops, the Siamese Government
having left it to him to gather, if he can, a force from
the Provinces, which will account for the non-appear-
ance of any Siamese force on the frontier of Quedah.
I am also told on good authority, the Siamese are in
expectation of being shortly attacked by the Cochin
Chinese, which further tends to corroborate the opi-
nion that no troops can at present be spared from the
capital for the recapture of Quedah.
It is very satisfactory to me to see that His
Honor in Council appears to consider this question
embarrassing and perplexing; it is, in fact, much
more so than Government is aware of from the cir-
cumstance of the most influential part of the popula-
tion of the place, European and native, being adverse


to the claims of the Siamese, and favourable to the
Malay cause; entirely overlooking the necessity that
exists for maintaining the provisions of the Treaty,
and of course giving every sort of encouragement to
the insurgents to continue in their present course.
It may be right I should here add that I have
heard that letters in reply to mine of the 2d Septem-
. ber last* have been sent from Siam and I suspect have
been carried on in the vessel on which they were dis-
patched. I am ignorant of the contents of the dis-
patch, but as no force has yet reached Quedah, I have
purposely not adverted to it, as I am thereby enabled
to write in a strain that will I trust beget an explicit
avowal of their intentions and thereby enable Govern-
ment to judge if there is any necessity for the further
continuance of support and assistance on our side
should a sufficient Siamese force not have appeared at
Quedah before the replies arrive.
I likewise enclose translation of a letter received
from the Ex Rajah wherein he expressly disavows all
connexion with the insurgents, I have had no reason
to be satisfied that he has rendered them any pecunia-
ry assistance, of which indeed as yet they have not
been in want, having had a very good market 1 sus-
pect at Penang, through Chinese Agency, for the sale
of the plunder they have been able to collect from the
Ryots at Quedah. I have not therefore as yet cur-
tailed the Ex Rajah’s allowances and which I do not
understand to be the wish of Government, unless it is
evident that he is aiding and assisting the Enterprize,
but which will, of course, oe immediately carried into
effect should I have tolerable proof that he is assisting
the insurgents with the proceeds of the Government
stipend.
I have the honor &ca,
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor.
Singapore
the 31st December 1838.


To the Resident Councillor
Prince of Wales Island.
Sir,
On the 20th August last I had the honor to
address you on the subject of the state of Quedah and
to forward for your guidance a copy of my correspon-
dence with the Supreme Government and some other
documents connected therewith. At that time I
hoped to have been able to return to Penang at an
early date, but as I have found, and I still find it
impossible to do so at present from Mr. Church being
unprovided with an Assistant, I consider it my duty
to enclose to you copy of a dispatch I have recently
received from the Supreme Government on the same
subject and to request that you will put yourself in
communication with the Naval Commander at Prince
of Wales Island and will request him to carry into
effect, as far as he is able, the wishes and orders of
Government.
At present I can only send the three gun boats
but I hope in a short time to be able to place the
steamer Diana at his command also.
I am not aware how matters, at present, precisely
stand at Quedah, but if you consider that by enfor-
cing the blockade of the coast at once, though the
Siamese forces may not be in possession of the in-
terior, the measure may tend to a more speedy settle-
ment of the question than by remaining quiescent
until their forces have appeared and taken possession
of the interior, you will not hesitate to carry fully
into effect the directions of Government and prohibit
any further assistance being thrown into Quedah by
declaring it, and as far as you can by putting it under
a strict blockade. In this case means should be taken
to prevent any boats for the future entering that river,
Fort William 6th February 1839,


by which measure some of the insurgents, seeing that
we are bent on driving them out, may probably at
once be disposed to abscond.
Should it be considered by you advisable to pro-
claim the blockade at once, you will have the goodness
to procure translations of the accompanying proclama-
tion and send them for distribution to Quedah and
elsewhere by the Naval Officer directing the opera-
tions. A copy should also be sent to the Master At-
tendant’s Office for the information of ail persons leav-
ing Penang, and no further port clearance for Quedah
be granted.
I take this opportunity of sending you a copy and
translation of a letter from the Ex Rajah of Quedah to
me, denying all participation in the proceedings of
his son and others against Quedah. A copy of it
should be sent to the insurgents that they may not
hereafter be permitted to plead in extenuation that
they are now and have been acting under his instruc-
tions. The Ryots also seeing that the Mahamed Saad
and the other leaders of this enterprize have no autho-
rity for their present proceedings and that their pro-
ceedings are disavowed by the Ex Rajah may be pos-
sibly induced to disperse.
Sould any of the leaders of the expedition be
taken, and it is very desirable the principal ones
should be, you will of course detain them in strict
custody and report the matter to me without delay,
'but considering yourself* conveyed to me in the con-
cluding part of the 12th paragraph of Mr. Prinsep's
getter.
These are all the suggestions that at present oc-
cur to me but which I hope will be sufficient to enable
you to carry on the necessary operations consequent
on the orders of Government until my arrival, which
I hope will not be now long delayed.


I have communicated freely with Captain Warren
on the subject and he is perfectly aware of the wishes
and orders of Government thereon, and I feel assured
he will do every thing that is necessary to put them
into most effectual execution.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor.
Singapore
The 10th November 1838,


Proclamation.
Whereas with the view of upholding the faith of
traders and of preserving our friendly relations with
the Government of Siam it has become necessary to
co-operate with that power in the recapture of Quedah
conformably with the 13th Article in the Treaty of
Bangkok dated the 20th June 1826, and whereas
many British subjects have joined the present pira-
tical attack upon this capital by Tuanku Mahomed
Saad and Tuanku Mahomed Taib and their followers
and associations, This is to give public notice that
such subjects abovementioned, as do not peaceably re-
turn to their homes within ten days after the promulga-
tion of this Proclamation will subject themselves to all
the penalties attached to British subjects found in open
arms against their own Government and that of an ally.
And it is hereby also notified that the whole
coast of Quedah is hereby declared to be under effec-
tive blockade and that any vessels or boats attempting
to enter into those territories will after [? this notice]
be liable to detention unless provided with a pass
from the authorities at Prince of Wales Island.
And in order that no one may hereafter plead
ignorance of the circumstances under which Quedah
has recently been captured by Tuanku Mahomed Saad
and others, it is hereby further notified that the for-
mer Rajah of Quedah has written to the Governor of
Prince of Wales Island, Singapore and Malacca, a
lecter dated Malacca the 3d October last, disclaiming
any participation in the capture of Quedah from
the Siamese by those now in possession of that
Country.
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor.
Fort William 6th February 1839.


To the Honorable J. W. Salmond Esquire
&ca. &ca. &ca.
Sir,
I have the honor to acquaint you for the inform-
ation of Mr. Bonham that I landed at Quedah on the
7th and had a communication with Tuanku Mahomed
Saad, who is in command of that place. After stating
the object of my visit I handed him the Proclamation
and stuck two others against the walls of the Fort,
much against his will, and was anxious to know if I
was acting under the orders of the Supreme Govern-
ment. Upon answering him in the affirmative and
asking him his determination, he said he must have
time to consider. I was to have had an interview the
following day with Tuanku Abdullah, the Ex King’s
son, hut being anxious to promulgate the proclamation
I sailed for Parlis, leaving the gun boats, Nos. 2 and
3, and Her Majesty’s Sloop’s pinnace to watch this
place to prevent any supplies of arms or ammunition
being thrown in.
On the 9th 1 landed at Parlis and issued the pro-
clamation and the following day at Satoh, where I
found Mahomed Alii with 40 war proahs and a
schooner of six guns equipped and in preparation for
sea. He, like his confederates, wished for time before
he gave his determination. However I gave them all
a positive assurance of the determination of the
Supreme Government to replace the Siamese in posses-
sion of the country.
Having reason to suppose the Siamese had pos-
session of Linger, I dispatched Mr. Stewart on the
** Diamond ” with a proclamation and a letter to the
Chief of the Siamese forces to convince them of our
Fort William 6th February ]839.


earnestness in their cause. On his arrival at that
place he found it had been retaken by the Malays last
Monday without any loss, and therefore returned with-
out effecting the desired object.
On my return off Quedah I am happy to inform
you I found that Hadjee Buckie, an influential Chief
and one particularly mentioned by Mr. Bonham, was
captured by the boats in endeavouring to get into
Quedah. I now send him to Penang in charge of an
officer with a view of his being kept prisoner until
this affair is settled, whatever the Government may
determine hereafter.
In adverting to your letter of the sth* with a
petition annexed thereto, I beg to acquaint you that
on the 13th I arrived in Bap harbour in the Island of
Lancava, which place I found in possession of the
Having remained there some hours and
communicated with the shore I could hear nothing of
the petitioners, and have reason to suppose most of the
signatures attached to it were by persons living in
Penang.
I send by this conveyance three Chinese inhabi-
tants of Penang who were wrecked on their way to
Moulmein, and who have been detained at Lancava by
the Malays against their will.
I have &c.
( Signed) W. Warren
Commander.
Her Majesty’s Sloop Hyacinth
Off Quedah.
The 15th December 1838.


To the Chow Phya Praklang,
Prime Minister to the King of Siam.
I regret to report for your Excellency’s informa 1 -
tion that the state of Quedah has again fallen into the
hands of the Malays and which it was entirely out of
my power to prevent as your Excellency will learn by
the following statement.
For some months past it has been known that in
Quedah Province Malay people have been collected
from various parts, which has been brought to the
notice of the Siamese authorities. On the 24th July,
having reason to know that there was a fleet of boats
in the Merbow River which is in the Siamese territory
and fearing that they intended making a descent on
Quedah, I sent Her Majesty’s Ship Wolf to Quedah
to inform the Siamese Chief of the fact and to warn
him. On the arrival of the Wolf the Siamese Chief
told the Commander, Captain Stanley, that he was
aware of what was going on but that he was in no
alarm, as he daily expected a considerable force from
Purlis, and that with the boats he then had at his
disposal the Fort was quite safe. Captain Stanley
also told the Chief that if the Siamese boats would
accompany him he would assist them to drive the
Malays from the Merbow River. The Chief desired
Captain Stanley to await the arrival of the expected
boats from Purlis, but this he could not do, and as
the Chief appeared to be in no immediate alarm the
Wolf returned to Prince of Wales Island.
Your Excellency will see that the English could
do no more, for it would have been improper for an
English foi'ce to have landed on the Siamese territ-
ories without the presence of the Siamese authorities.
On the 30th July I received a note written by the
Fort William 6th February 1839.


Chief of Quedah on the subject of these Malays, writ-
ten on the 20th of the same month, being four days
before I sent the Wolf to his assistance tllough not
received by me until six days afterwards. Thinking
it proper to answer this letter I sent on the Ist of
August Her Majesty’s Ship Victor with the reply,
but on the arrival of the vessel Quedah Fort was
found to be in the possession of the Malays and no
Siamese Chief could be found to whom to deliver the
letter. The Chief of Quedah will of course tell his own
story to Your Excellency, but of this it is right your
Excellency should be informed, that when the Fort
was taken there were onty sixty Siamese in it, that
only one Siamese was killed and only two of the
besieging party.
All these matters I have reported to the Gov-
ernor General of India and hope in less than two
months to receive instructions, when I shall again
communicate with 3 r our Excellency and with the
Authorities in Quedah, should the Siamese have
acquired possession of the interior,
I take this opportunity of observing that report
says there were only 300 Siamese in Quedah Province,
to which small force must be attributed the present
confusion; had an adequate force of real Siamese
been there, the present untoward event cuuld not
have occurred.
Her Majesty’s Ship Hyacinth left Penang on the
20th for the purpose of proceeding to Trang to advise
the Siamese of what had happened at Quedah and to
assist the Siamese in dispersing the Malay flotilla
should it be found at sea creating confusion and in-
juring the Siamese.
With every &ca.
(Signed) S. Gr. Bonham
Governor.
Singapore
The 2d September 1838.


To the Chou Phya Praklang
Prime Minister to His Excellency the King of
Siam.
On the 2d September last I had the honor to
address ycrur Excellency relative to the occupation of
Keda by the Malays and informing you that I should
report the whole matter to His Excellency the Right
Honorable the Governor General of India in Council,
which having been done I have received instructions
to maintain as ffar asj possible the provisions of the
Treaty existing between our respective nations entire,
that friendship and good faith may be preserved.
In obedience to the instructions from my superior,
steps have been taken to blockade the Quedah River
and tht coast of that Country as much as possible by
a sloop of war, three gun boats and the steamer Diana,
to prevent further supplies of men or arms, provisions,
or munitions of war of any kind being thrown into
Quedah by sea
The sloop and gun boats have now been on this
service for nearly a month, and were sent under the
presumption that an adequate force would have been
sent by the Siamese Government to retake Quedah
from the Malays,' but as yet no Siamese force has
arrived, or even indeed been heard of.
The services of these vessels were sent by the
British Government to assist the Siamese, thereby
showing its wish to faithfully perform the stipulations
contained :n th» Treaty and 1 fee? satisfied that your
Excellency cannot do otherwise than acknowledge its
having fully performed its part. As yet I have
received no reply from your Excellency to my letter of
the 2d September and I am therefore entirely at a loss
Fort William 6th February 1839.


to know if any and what steps have been taken by the
Siamese Government to recover its lost possession but
I think it proper your Excellency should be informed
that unless some measures are very shortly adopted by
the Siamese for its reoccupation the resources now at
my command for the purpose of afiording assistance
will be no longer available.
With every &ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor.
Singapore
The 28th December 1838


Translation of a letter from Sultan Ahmud Tajad-
in Alim Shaw to the Honorable S. G. Bonham Esquire,
Governor &ca. &ca.
After Preamble.
I declare to my friend that the Quedah country
is my country and that all those who have gone there
and have done any thing without my knowledge are
bad people (are to blame) even my own children who
will not listen to ray words are likewise to blame.
I wish to have this arranged as I am residing in the
Company’s territory. In consequence I now ask for
assistance from the Company that can drive away all
the people that have done this. Let me not be im-
plicated in the affair because lam old. Such im-
proper acts I could not think of doing. With regard
to myself until I shall have received answers to my
letters from Bengal and England I would do nothing
of the kind. I think some people in Penang must
have assisted with arms, ammunition and money to
have enabled the parties to go and do what is not
proper in Quedah, thereby giving me a bad name to
the Company. I trust my friend will sift this matter
properly so that it may be properly known and that
I may be free from all suspicions entertained by the
Company (Government). This is what I wish to
make known. Written on the 13th day Rajah Hejira
1254 ( 3d October 1838.)
( True Translation )
(Signed) S. G. Bonham
Governor.
Fort William 6th February 1839.


Fort William 27th February 1839.
To H. T. Prinsep Esqre.
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
Since my arrival at this station I have made
every enquiry in my power respecting the present
state of Quedah and the probability that exists of the
Siamese coming down in sufficient force to drive the
insurgents out of the Province but I have been entire-
ly unable to gain any satisfactory information on the
subject.
2. On the 4th instant a deputation of Siamese
arrived overland from Siam, and brought me a letter
from the Rajah of Ligore, copy of which with ray
reply are enclosed. I at the same time received a
letter dated so far back as September last from Mr.
Hunter, a mercantile gentleman residing at Bankok,
which is enclosed. The persons composing the deputa-
tion* over that at Seetool and Lungu, places about
forty or fifty miles to the northward of Quedah Fort*
there are already 6000 Siamese and that the Rajah of
Ligore has with him at Ligore 4000 more, and that
both bodies of men are ready to move as soon as the
Rajah hears that the British Government is disposed
to assist him. What credence is to be given to this
statement it is doubtful to estimate, but there is no
doubt that at present the places abovementioned are
in possession of the Siamese.
3. Captain Warren of Her Majesty’s Ship
Hyacinth, who yesterday came in for water and left
again earjy this morning, informs me he thinks that
the insurgents are beginning to feel the effects of the
blockade from the want of salt and opium, and that
overtures had been made to the officers of the boats by
some of the insurgents requesting to know if they
would be permitted to leave the country. They were


told they would be provided they took nothing with
them. I had also heard similar reports here. The
fact is that from the blockade the insurgents, being
unable to get their plunder to Penang, are not so
readily supplied with opium and salt and other neces-
saries as they were formerly,
4. In ray last letter of the 31st ultimo I hinted
that the principal part of the plunder acquired by the
insurgents was brought to this Settlement, and then
attributed its introduction to Chinese agency, I now
regret to say that no doubt exists on the subject but
that the Chinese are not the sole receivers of this ill
gotten wealth as will be seen by enclosed copy of a
note from a merchant of this station.
5. From this document will be observed that
Tuanku Mahomed Saad, the head of the insurgents,
was indebted to a mercantile firm the sum of forty
dollars and on being requested to pay it since he has
been in possession of Quedah he has done so with fif-
teen head of cattle. These cattle of course must have
been the property of persons in Quedah and I have no
doubt that many more debts due by Mahomed Saad
and his associates have been paid in [a] similar way.
6. In my mind there is no doubt that the attack
on Quedah by the Malays originated entirely with a
view to plunder. It is generally understood that the
whole of the Province has been devastated, so much so
indeed that when at Malacca on my way up here the
Ex King requested me strongly to put a stop, if pos-
sible, to present proceedings by driving the Malays
out of Quedah, adding that if it ever so turned out he
should be permitted to return to his country he
should find it a desert and useless,
7. The Supreme Government has before it Cap-
tain Burney’s report of his mission to Siam and from it
will ascertain the value the Court of Siam appeared at
that time to attach to the possession of Quedah.
8. I confess I am entirely at a loss to report
when the Siamese are likely to appear, and when they


do, how long it will be before they will probably
succeed in driving the Malays from Quedah. In my
letter to the Rajah of Ligore I have urged on him the
necessity of dispatch and intimated that I cannot an-
swer how much longer my superiors may be disposed
or able to continue to assist the Siamese should any
further delay take place.
9. The Hyacinth, steamer and three gun boats
are now on the coast and are able, I am in hopes, to
prevent supplies from being thrown into Quedah or
the plunder of the insurgents finding an outlet by
boats, but still they have opportunities of driving
cattle and bringing portable articles into Province
Wellesley. These, though morally certain that they
are stolen property, I am unable to seize, as the
nominal owners would immediately rush to the Court
and the result of a suit would, to say the least of
it, be very doubtful, as it would be impossible nearly
to prove that the persons in possession were not the
rightful proprietors.
10. I have at present in the Fort one of the
principal leaders, by name Hadjee Bakkie. He was
present at the capture of Quedah Fort and is the per-
son alluded to in the 4th paragraph of Captain Croz-
ier’s letter of the sth August last* which formed an
enclosure of my dispatch dated the day following,
and there is no doubt of his having taken a very
active part throughout. The manner in which he
was taken [is] stated in Captain Warren’s letter of
the 15th ultimo,* and yet so far as I am aware there
is at present no certain means of bringing him
even to trial, much less of ensuring conviction and
punishment.
I have &ca
(Signed) S. G. Bonham-Governor
Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Prince of Wales Island
18 January 1839.


Substance of a letter from the Rajah of Ligore to
Samuel George Bonham Esquire, Governor of Penang,
Singapore and Malacca.,
I beg to inform my friend that 1 have been
absent from Quedah on a visit to the Emperor of Siam
where I was detained from indisposition, and during
my absence the Malays captured and ruined the
country of Quedah. In the Treaty existing between
the English and Siamese, article 13, it is stipulated
that the English will not permit the old Rajah of
Quedah or his followers to'attack or molest [Quedah].
The old Rajah’s relatives Tunku Mahomed Saad,
Tunku Mahomed Akip and others who were appre-
hended in the invasion of Quedah by the Siamese were
set at libertj’- after the completion of the said Treaty.
Now Tunku Mahomed Saad, Tunku Mahomed Akip
and Che Mahomed Ally have, contrary to Treaty, in-
vaded the Quedah country. Che Mahomed Ally with a
fleet, is now attacking the subjects of Siam at Situal.
I beg my friend will allot a ship and render assis-
tance as on former occasions; I rely much on my
friend’s support in this instance which will tend
to increase our mutual friendship. As a token of
friendship I send two cups and a tray of composition
metal of Bangkok. I took charge of a letter from
Mr. Hunter which accompanied this and beg to he
honored with a reply thereto.
Written on the 27th day of the Ist month year
Dog.
Fort William 27 February 1839,


To the Rajah of Ligore.
I have this day received ray friend’s letter dated
27th day of the 1 month year Dog, informing me of
your arrival at Ligore. I have already written to Bang-
kok to the Praklang one letter dated 2nd September,*
the last 28th December.* In the last I advised the
Praklang that the coast of Quedah and its rivers were?
tinder blockade to prevent the supply of men, arms
or ammunition, by a sloop of war and gun boats,
which had been there for nearly a month, but that
if the Siamese force did not shortly appear that I
could not permit them to remain much longer. I
beg my friend will therefore send an adequate force
to drive the Malays from Quedah and take possession
of the country.
6th January 1839.
Fort William 27 February 1839.


To the Honble. S. G. Bonham Esqre.
Governor of Singapore.
Dear Sir,
We have just learned at the Court of Bangkok
that the Malays have revolted, attacked and driven out
of Quedah the Siamese authorities, and in consequence
His Siamese Majesty has ordered my friend the Rajah
of Ligore, who is now here, to go and retake Quedah.
He will leave this in two days and he has requested
me to give him these few lines by way of introduction
to you On his arrival in Quedah he will write you
fully respecting the state of affairs there. He requests
me to state that with the late Governor Ibbetson he
was personally acquainted, and that on all occasions
he found him very friendly towards the Siamese Go-
vernment and himself ( the Rajah ) personally, and he
begs in the present instance that the English Govern-
ment will continue to cherish the friendly feelings
towards the Siamese Government which thev have
shown on former occasions, that as heretofore they
will discountenance the Malays in their treacherous
attacks on Quedah, and will if found necessary give
assistance to retake Quedah and reinstate the Siamese
authorities there in terms of the article 13 of the
English Treaty with the Siamese.
I have been called upon repeatedly by the Minis-
ters, and asked my opinion as to what steps the Eng-
lish would pursue, whether they would assist the
Siamese or Malays, or remain neutral. I replied that
my opinion was that they would assist the Siamese, as
they had done on former occasions. At all events if
they did not assist the Siamese they would remain
neutral, as it was not at all probable that they would
assist the Malays to take Quedah, having a Treaty
Fort William 27 February 1839.


With the Siamese to the contrary. T'he answer
seemed satisfactory, as the Praklang said in that case
we can easily conquer the Malays. He made one of
his secretaries write down my reply for His Majesty s
information.
The firm with which I am connected are the only
English merchants here, and I must say that the
Siamese authorities allow every facility to trade, we of
course paying the heavy duties as agreed in the famous
[treaty] of 18^6.
I remain &ca.
( Signed ) Robt. Hunter^
[September 1838.]


Prince of Wales Island
21 st January 1839.
My Dear Mr. Prinsep,
On the 18th* I addressed you a very unsatis-
factory letter on Quedah affairs, in as much as you
will find from it there appears to be no immediate
prospect of the Siamese driving the insurgents out of
the Province. Young will however tell you all I really
know and from him [you] .will be able to ascertain the
real nature of this outbreak. I am sorry to say so,
but 1 confess 1 cannot help thinking that some of the
European gentry have been at the bottom of these
proceedings from the commencement; that they are
now encouraging and inciting the insurgents by sup-
plying them with arms &ca. is not denied. It is cur-
rently reported the principal insurgent was indebted
to many of the merchants of this place. How he has
paid one European firm my official communication
explains. The principal difficulty we have to contend
against is to prevent the plundered property of the
Quedah ryots from being brought to our market by
the insurgents. If this could be effectually prevented
no supplies would be sent to them, and I think in that
case the mob would disperse, but as long as [the]
Malays can live by plunder instead of by labour there
is but a small chance of their returning to peaceful
avocations. lam not aware how this difficulty can be
alleviated except by passing an enactment somewhat
similar to that proposed in Macaulay’s Code, page 30,
declaring all persons resident in our territories liable
to a certain punishment who shall be found trading
with the insurgents: perhaps however this position is
provided for in Section 114 of that Code.
Fort William 27 February 1839.


It has just come to my knowledge that a Siamese
woman, an inhabitant of Quedah, has been brought to
this station by a Chinese merchant, she says against
her will, and that she was given with some other per-
sons to the Chinese by the head of the insurgents ( no
doubt in payment of something or other. ) This is a
question tangeble* however by a British Court and I
shall have him prosecuted for the felony if I can
inedict* 15 Geo. IY. Cap. 113. Sec. 9., but I very
much doubt the result as it is not impossible under
present circumstances that the*
the Bill. To the same Chinese was also sent a large
horse the property of the late Chief ( Siamese) of
Quedah, but in this question I cannot interfere and
here lies the mischief; the property was not stolen in
our territories and I therefore think that no indictment
would be ( ? accepted or received J against him for
receiving stolen property—again the question would
be mooted if said horse was not stolen.*
If the Government therefore determine to con-
tinue the blockade and to assist the Siamese until they
have driven the Malays out of Quedah, some act pro-
hibiting all intercourse between the inhabitants of the
Settlements and those at present in possession of
Quedah and rendering such of our inhabitants as may
hereafter be detected in trading with the insurgents,
that is in buying their plundered property or in sell-
ing them arms or other necessaries, liable to be tried
for felony, and if found guilty to be transported or to
any other punishment the Government may think
more commensurate with the offence.
This is however a matter in which I can render
but little assistance at this distance. Young knows
the difficulties and perplexities under which we labour
and can explain them, and the authorities in Calcutta,
being aware of the objects to be attained and those to
be guarded against, must be infinitely better qualified
than I am to suggest the proper remedy and form the


necessary enactment, but whoever undertakes it,
should it be decided to pass such an enactment, should
be reminded that his workmanship will have to under-
go the ordeal of an English Court of Justice with its
concomitant technicalities [■ illegible ] and that no por-
tion, if possible, should allow any latitude of construc-
tion,
I remain, My dear Mr. Prinsep, yours very truly,
( Signed ) S, G. Bonham.


Fort William 6th February 1839.
To S. G. Bonham Esquire
Governor Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honorable the President in
Council to acknowledge the receipt ot your letter of
the 31st December last together with its enclosures
and in reply to state that His Honor in Council ap-
proves the proclamation issued by you to the inhabi-
tants of Penang and Province Wellesley with reference
to the state of affairs at Quedah and does not consider
that any further orders are required at present from
the Supreme Government in addition to the instruc-
tions furnished to you on the 26th September last, in
regard to the occupation of Quedah by the Malays.
You will of course keep the Government informed of
the approach of Siamese troops and of their proceed-
ings. It may be proper that you should be informed
that Dr. Richardson has been deputed to Siam by Mr.
Commissioner Blundell and any communication you
may have to make to the Court of Siam on the subject
of the proceedings of the Malays in Quedah may fitly
be addressed through him.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to Government of India.
Fort William
The 6th February 1839.


i 6 February No. 4 of 1839.
India
Political Department.
Miscellaneous.
******
Para. 69. The Ex King of Quedah having in
spite of the repeated remonstrances of Mr. Bonham,
‘■the Governor of the Eastern Settlements, collected a
force for the avowed purpose of invading his ancient
possesions, it was impossible, consistently with our
Treaty with Siam {to which an appeal was made by
the Siamese Governor) 'to avoid interference. We
regret that the Ex King’s perseverance in the course
he had adopted made it necessary for Captain McCrea,
of Her Majesty’s Sloop Zebra, to have recourse to
actual hostilities, but the loss was not great, and the
Ex King has been removed to Malacca, which place he
must not be permitted again to leave.
******
We are &ca.
( Signed ) J. L. Lushington
&ca. &ca.
London
6th February 1839


Fort William 24th April 1839.
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire
Secretary to Government Fort William.
Sir,
I have the honor to enclose for the information of
Government copies of letters to my address from the
Rajah of Ligor and from the Praklang at Bankok
Copies of letters to which they are answers form
enclosures to my dispatches of the 18th ultimo* and
31st December* respectively.
Among the enclosures will also be found copies of
two private letters from Mr. Hunter which will enable
the Government to form some judgment of the temper of
the Siamese Government on the subject of Quedah, and
of its feeling towards the British Government generally.
I regret to say that I am still unable to afford any
information as to the probable time that may elapse
before the Siamese will be able to drive the insurgents
out of Quedah, the culpable neglect and dilatory man-
ner of proceeding on the part of the Siamese having
allowed the Malay faction to gain a head and an im-
portance which it could not have done had it been
suitably opposed at the commencement.
The Hyacinth, steamer and gun boats are still on
the coast and I believe the blockade on this side of the
Peninsula to be effective, but I have every reason to
think the insurgents, if they do not do so now, will
shortly be able to draw their supplies from Sangora
and other ports on the eastern side of the Peninsula
unless prevented by a force being sent from Siam,
which Mr. Hunter appears in his last communication
to think will now be the case.
I have the honor &ca.
( Signed } S. 0. Bonham
Governor Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca,
Prince of Wales Island
The 23rd February 1839.


Letter of the Rajah of Ligore to the Honorable
S. G. Bonham, Esquire, Governor.
After Compliments.
I have had the honor of receiving raj? friend’s
letter by Nai Shong Dit. In it my friend advises me
that the man of war cannot continue long in her pre-
sent position and urging me to dispatch with speed a
force to Keddah.
Some delay has occurred in getting the large
Siamese force sent off because the rains have been very
heavy. I solicit the favour of my friend therefore that
he will allow the man of war to remain a little longer
until the Siamese force shall arrive. I had further sent
Nai Shong Dit to buy a vessel and had directed Nai
Chow to go to Bankok. But the latter has been pre-
vented by sickness, so I have been obliged to dispatch
Nai Shong to that capital. I have for these reasons
now sent China Hoh to buy a vessel (at Penang.) This
vessel will go to guard ( the Quedah coast ). I hope
my friend will oblige me by directing the Commander
of the Man of War to assist the people of this vessel
should they engage the Malayan fleet. I trust that
the English and Siamese will for ever continue friends.
I have sent China Hoh and Nai Bang who will give
my friend every information.
Dated 3rd Month 13th of the increase on Monday
( i. e., the 13th of the present lunar month. )
( A true translation )
( Signed ) James Low
Principal Assistant.
P. S. I beg my friend’s acceptance of a teapot
washed with gold, which is not so worthy of acceptance
as other Siamese manufactures, of which I may be able
to send specimens.
Fort William 24th April 1839.


Translation
The letter of the Chow Phya Praklang, Minister
of State to His Majesty the King of Siam, to the
Honorable Mr. Bonham, Governor of Singapore, Pe-
nang and Malacca.
I have received your letter per Nocquadah Is-
mael’s vessel, a Bombay trader, dated 2d September
1838,* informing me that the Malays had collected a
force at Mirboo, a country belonging to Quedah, and
that you had sent Her Majesty’s Sloop of War “Wolf”
Captain Stanley, to inform the Governor of Quedah,
and that the Governor of Quedah told Captain Stanley
that he was aware of what was going on, that he
daily expected assistance from Purlis, and that
with the Fort and gun boats the place was
quite safe, and that Captain Stanley also informed
the Governor of Quedah that if the Siamese boats
would accompany him he would assist to drive the
Malays from Mirboo River. The Governor of Quedah
desired Captain Stanley to await the arrival of the
boats from Purlis, but that Captain Stanley could not
stop and returned to Penang, and that the English
could not assist more for it would not be proper or
according to English custom for an English force to
enter a Siamese country without the presence of the
Siamese authorities, and that on the 30th July you
received a letter from the Governor of Quedah on the
subject of the Malays, written on the 20th* of the
• same month, four days before you sent the Wolf to
his assistance and not received by you until six days
afterwards. On 12th August in token of friendship
you sent Her Majesty’s sloop of war “Victor with a
reply, but on the arrival of the vessel the Quedah
Fort was found in the possession of the Malays, and
no Siamese Governor to be found to deliver the letter
Fort William 24th April 1839.


to, and that you had on 20th August, sent the
Hyacinth to Trang to assist the Siamese in dispersing
the Malay flotilla should it be found at sea, but that
the Hyacinth had not returned and that you had sent
a letter to the Governor of Bengal, and that in two
months you expected an answer, when you should
-communicate to me the same, and all other infor-
mation in your letter I perfectly understand the
whole.
And from your letter I, the Chow Phya Praklang,
am fully convinced that you are true hearted towards
Siam and all your letter was fully made known to
His Majesty the King of Siam.
And His Majesty was pleased to approve of your
proceedings in sending letters and war ships, which
was proper between two great and powerful nations
and for which His Majesty the King of Siam feels
much obliged to you and desires me to write you a
letter of thanks.
I am aware that you have gone to Penang, and
1 sent a letter via Ligor and Trang, but owing to
the Malays the boats could not leave Trang for
Penang.
Early this month, Mr. Hunter, who is Luong
Awood Wiset, received a letter per “ Samuel Hor-
rocks” from you and communicated its contents, in
which you complain that you had not received an
answer to your letter of 2d September, and that you
had sent war ships to blockade Quedah and that you
had prohibited the exportation of rice and warlike
stores to the Malays from Penang and that you had
now Her Majesty’s Ship of War Hyacinth, and three
gun boats off the Quedah river, and that you asked
to know what the Siamese intended to do respecting
Quedah; and that you are afraid if the Siamese do
not come quickly and in force you will not have the
means of assisting them, as all the ships of war are


called to the Bombay side. Every thing in your letter
to Luang Awood Wiset I understand.
The reason of the Malays taking Quedah was on
account of the Governors of Ligor, Singora, Talang,
Chia, and Chumpon all having been called here to
attend a religious ceremony of great magnitude and
that the Governor of Quedah was at that time in
Talang. 1 received a letter from the Siamese officers
at Ligor in September informing me of the loss of
Quedah, and I reported the same to His Majesty, on
which His Majesty ordered the abovementioned Gov-
ernors to go and fight the Malays, and the Governors
left this in October to prepare for war. Since then
I have received letters from the several Governors of
Ligor, Singora, Talang, Chia and Chumpon, informing
His Majesty that the Malays had taken Quedah,
Purlis and Trang, and [were] advancing towards
Talang nd Singora. The Rajah of Ligor prepared
his troops and sent and drove the Malays out of Trang.
The Governor of Talang he sent his troops to intercept
the Malays, and the Governor of Singora sent his
troops to fight the Malays at Ban Makhaur and has
beaten them. Now the four Governors of Ligor,
Talang, Chia and Chumpcn have joined their forces
together and marched to Satoon, after which they will
march and retake Quedah. The Governor of Singora
will also march his troops against the Malays near
Singora. This is what the above Governors have
written they were going to do, but what they have
actually done I have not yet heaid, as at this season
the communication between Ligor and this is ex-
tremely difficult.
In your letter to Luang Awood Wiset you stated
that you had sent a war ship and tluee gun boats to
blockade Quedah and that you had prohibited the ex-
portation of rice and warlike stores from Penang to the
Malays of Quedah, for which I Lei much obliged.
You being head Governor have done all that is proper,


and eternally cemented the friendship of the two
countries Siam and England, and on account of that
friendship the existing treaty will last as long as
Heaven and Earth.
The Malays in the small countries friendly to
Phya Sia, otherwise the Ex Rajah of Quedah, who
have assisted him to retake Quedah, the Siamese will
beat them into subjection. That you agreed to assist
in the beating of the Malays I have already thanked
you for.
It has been my intention to have sent this letter
over land via Ligor but was afraid it might have been
detained as the former one was, therefore I send it by
the Siamese ship Caledonia, to the care of Resident of
Singapore, with a request to forward the same to you
at Penang.
Supposing the abovementioned Governors go and
fight in Quedah, and the Rajah of Ligor send you a
letter requesting assistance, I ask you as a favor to
assist him.
Bangkok 19th January 1839, corresponding in
Siamese to the fourth day of the third month of the
dog year.


To Honorable S. G. Bonham Esquire
Governor, Penang,
My dear Sir,
I had the honor to receive per Samuel Horrocks
your favour of the 19th December,* which was the
only letter received by that vessel.
With regard to the intentions of the Siamese
Government respecting Quedah it is rather a difficult
matter to get at. The King on hearing of the loss
of Quedah, ordered the Rajah of Ligor and Governor
of Singora to go and drive the Malays out of Quedah.
All the several Governors were here at the time
assisting at the great ceremony of burning His Majes-
ty’s mother, and at the same time the Royal order was
given for Phya Si Pipat (brother to the Praklang)
to collect a force of 7000 men and a sufficient number
of war boats and to proceed to Singora as soon as
possible. In the interim I suppose they received
letters from Quedah stating that the Malays were few
in number and that the force of Ligor and Singora
would be sufficient to drive the Malays out of Quedah.
Consequently the expedition under Phya Si Pipat
never went.
The Kajah of Ligor will be very hard pushed be-
fore he calls upon the Siamese Court for assistance, as
when here, he said he could easily beat the Malays
if the English did not assist the Malays, and that if
we gave them the same assistance as in the case of
Tuankoo Kudin the war in Quedah would soon be
stopped. Per this opportunity the Praklang has sent
you a long letter in answer to yours of 2d September,
I have translated it into English, and by the Pra-
klang’s order sent it to the care of the Resident of
Singapore with a request to have it sent to you by
the first favourable opportunity.
We have just had notice of an English official
having reached Kanburee [?] on his way from Moulmein
Fort William 24th April 1839,


to the Siamese Court. He in the Siamese letter is
styled Chee-A-Woongu, Governor of Moulmein. Mr
Blundell has gone to Calcutta, it may perhaps be my
old friend Captain McFarquhar, who was assistant
to Captain Burney in making the former Treaty ot
1826. The Praklang was very anxious that I should
tell him the object of his mission. I said 1 thought
it probable that another Burmese war might be con-
templated and that the Governor General might wish
to know the intentions of the Magnificent King. He
said they would always be sure to assist the English
to beat the Burmese. Boats and officers have been
sent off to receive the Mission, and if it [isj only to
ask the assistance of the Siamese against Burraah,
the Mission will be attended with success, as our
friend would expect to gain a little territory by the
movement.
1 do not think the King would be induced by
any consideration to relinquish his claim to Quedah
until it is under his sway again, as to give it up now
would be like acknowledging his want of power to
take it. After once getting possession the friends
of the Malays would have a better chance of success,
though even then I am afraid it would be but small
unless we could give them ground instead on the
other frontier.
The Praklang desires me to inform you that he
has never received a letter from the merchants of
Penang, and if one was sent it has most likely fallen
into the hands of the Rajah of Ligor, who would take
care not to forward it to Bangkok. One of the
Bombay ships will sail for Singapore in five or
six days and I will by her write you again and
let you know how the mission gets on, and its
object, &ca.
I remain &ca.
Signed Robt. Hunter.
Bangkok
The 21st January 1839.


To S. G. Bonham Esquire
Penang.
My dear Sir,
Just before I left Bankok last night the Praklang
received a dispatch from the Rajah of Ligor stating his
inability to expel the Malays from Quedah, and that at
the very least he must have 3,000 soldiers from Bang-
kok. What effect this communication will have on
the Royal Golden mind of His Majesty is hard to say.
At all events he will be very savage with the Chief of
Ligor and if he do not play his cards well I would not
for a very high premium insure his lije unless he
might contrive to live without a head The Siamese
ship Caledonia is all ready loaded for Singapore °nd
her cargo is partly on my account, so that last night
as soon as the dispatch arrived, and before it was
known at Court, I came down here to get the ship off
ere the King can send down an order to stop her,
which he will be sure to do. There is no doubt now
but that His Majesty will set about the business in
real earnest. Had he and the Chief of Ligor taken my
advice at first Quedah would now have been in the
possession of the Siamese, by just the show of a large
force, which I advised them to send ; instead of which
they sent no force at all [and] gave the Malays courage,
which will occasion great loss of life which might have
been avoided had they managed properly.
The Praklang’s son is just coming on board so I
will shut up this scrawl and refer you to my letter and
the Praklang’s per this opportunily.
1 remain &ca.
( Signed ) R. Hunter.
Off Siam Bar,
22d January 1839.
Fort William 24th April 1839.


Fort William 3d July 1839.
The Letter of Chou Phya Praklang Minister of
State to His Magnificent Majesty the King of Siam
To the Honorable Mr. Bonham, Governor of Singa-
pore, Penang and Malacca.
I have received your letter of the 28 December
1838* on the 24 January 1839 per ship W. S. Hamil-
ton, Captain Brown, informing me that you had
written to his Excellency the Right Honorable the
Governor General in Council respecting the affairs of
Quedah, and that you had received instructions from
the Supreme Government to maintain as far as pos-
sible the friendship between the two nations according
to the existing Treaty, and that faith and friendship
may in future be increased.
You also inform me that you have sent to
blockade Quedah River and sea coast and that you had
sent one large ship of war and three little ones and a
fire ship to prevent further supplies of men, arms or
provisions being thrown into Quedah, and that these
vessels have been a month on that service to assist
the Siamese and as yet there was no appearance of a
Siamese force. Had a Siamese army gone they would
have seen that the English were ready to assist them,
but as the Siamese troops had not gone and as you
had not received an answer to your letter of 2d Sep-
tember* you did not know what were the intentions
of the Siamese towards Quedah and whether they in-
tended to recapture it or not.
That the services of the men of war were sent
by the English Government to assist the Siamese, but
that unless the Siamese force comes quickly, the
sources of assistance now at your command will be no
longer available. Your letter contains other matter
all of which I understand, and all the ministers of


state see with pleasure that it is the wish of the Right
Honorable the Governor General in Council to streng-
then the good friendship which exists between the
Siamese and English nations, and that the Ministers
of State, knowing such would give joy to His Majesty
agreed in Council to inform him of the kind intentions
of the Supreme Government and that they did so
accordingly,
His Magnificent Majesty was pleased to hear that
you had acted so well and at once you had made the
affairs of Quedah your own, sent ships to blockade the
Quedah river and prevent the importation of provi-
sions, munitions of war &ca. and that you had sent
letters to Siam stating that you had received instruc-
tions from His Excellency the Right Honorable the
Governor General in Council to preserve good faith
and friendship with the Siamese, for which His
Majesty presents his thanks to His Excellency the
Right Honorable the Governor General, also to all his
Ministers in Bengal, Bengal being a large Country,
the head of all English Countries in India. His Ma-
jesty also feels very much obliged to the Honorable
Mr. Bonham for having sent and blockaded Quedah
and that the friendship between the Siamese and
English will be everlasting.
You also wish to know what the Siamese intend
to do respecting Quedah. His Majesty ordered the
Rajah of Ligor, Phya Talung, Phya Singora, Phya
Chia, and Phya Ohumpon to prepare a force in the
west and go and fight the Malays, all of which I have
already informed you* of their proceedings* in my
letter to you per Caledonia ( a Siamese ship. ) Since
then I have received a letter from the Rajah of Ligor
informing me that he had sent his forces against Chee
Matalee at Satoon and taken possession of Satoon and
all the Malay stockades, fourteen in number, and that
Chee Matalee and all Malays, men, women and chil-
dren fled to their boats, sixty or seventy in number,


some small and some large, and anchored outside the
river. The troops of the Rajah of Ligor could not
follow them, having no boats, all His Majesty the
King knows and is very displeased with the Rajah of
Ligor.
His Majesty knows that Tuanka Masa at and
Tuanka Masa-A Hip, the Malay Chiefs, who are now
at the head of the Malays in Quedah, are nephews of
the old Governor of Quedah and His Majesty thinks
the reason that the Malays rose against Quedah is
because the old Rajah is under the protection of an
English flag, and if you find out that the old Rajah
has done wrong, show him his error and make him
send an order to his nephews to withdraw from Quedah.
He will do this as he is afraid of the English.
The Rajah of Ligor in December last sent you a
letter per Nai Thong Det and Nai Choie. What as-
sistance the Rajah of Ligor requires I beg for the sake
of friendship that you help him.
The above written in Bankok 29 January 1839.
[True Translation
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham]
Governor.


Fort William 27 February 1839
To Governor of Prince of Wales Island,
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am directed by the Honble. the President in
Council to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
dated 18 ultimo enclosing copy of a correspondence
with the Rajah of Ligore and of a letter from
Mr. Hunter, a British merchant residing at Bangkok,
relative to the Malayan insurgents at Quedah.
2. In reply I am desired to state that Dr.
Richardson having been deputed from Moulmein on a
mission to Siam with the sanction of the Government
it will be proper that you should use the services of
that officer for your communication with the Court
of Siam with respect to the disturbed state of affairs
in Quedah. Through Dr. Richardson also you will be
able to receive accurate information in respect to the
intentions of the Siamese Court.
####*•*
I have &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
Secretary to Government of
India,
Fort William
27 February 1839,


Fort William 27 March 1839.
To H. T. Prinsep Esquire
Secretary to Government of India
Secret and Political Department
Fort William.
Sir,
1 have the honor to report for the information of
the Honorable the President of the Council that the
usual annual deputation of a few Siamese officers to
this place have arrived from Bangkok. The letters
brought by them merely request that they may be
treated with civility and kindness and were written •
that orders were immediately issued for every mark of
respect [to be shown] to them.
I have not received any report of Dr. Richardson’s
proceedings since he quitted Moulmain.
I have &ca.
(Signed) G. W. Blundell
Commissioner in the Tenasserira
Province.
Moulmain
26 February 1839.


Fort William 24th April 1839.
To the Honorable S. G. Bonham Esqpire
&c, &c. &c. Governor of Singapore and
the Straits of Malacca.
Sir,
Since I had last the honor of addressing yon no-
thing particular transpired up to the 7th instant,,
when from 60 to 70 boats of various sizes and descrip-
tions containing about a thousand women and children
came out from Qfuedah imploring protection &ca, the
Siamese having in the night made their sudden ap-
pearance in the neighbourhood. The two following
days the same thing occurred. After partially re-
lieving their wants,, they were safely conveyed to
Wellesley Province and Penang, since which time the
Siamese have been cautiously approaching and attack-
ing the Malays with every success.
This day I am happy to inform you the Malays
evacuated the Fort and the Siamese immediately took
possession of it where their flag now flies; but I
regret to say the whole of the Malay Chiefs that were
in the Fort have effected their escape, and from all I
have interrogated they differ so much I have not yet
been able to satisfy myself in what way they got
away. However I have the pleasure ot informing you
that very few or no lives have been lost in regaining
this part of the Country and Fort &ca. The women
and children that were taken in the Fort by the
Siamese were all at liberty about their usual avoca-
tions and not a single instance of cruelty has been
committed. I am able to speak positively having
been at the Fort a few hours after they had possession
of it.


They will in a day or two inarch to Purlis, which
place they will easity possess. That being done I
shall raise the blockadei, withdraw Her Majesty’s Sloop,
the Honorable Company’s Gun Boats and “ Diana ”
Steamer and return to Penang.
I have &ca
(Signed) Win. Warren
Commander.
Her Majesty’s Sloop
Hyacinth, off Quedah.
20th March 1839.


Fort William 12th June 1839.
To H. T. Prinsep Esqre.
Secretary to Government
Fort William.
Sir,
Adverting to my letter of the 23rd February last,
1 have the gratification of enclosing for the informa-
tion of the Right Honorable the Governor General of
India in Council, copy of a letter to my address from
Captain Warren of H. M. Sloop Hyacinth, and my
reply thereto.
From Captain Warren’s letter and from other
sources of information, I think that the State of Ked-
dah may again be considered under the rule of the
Siamese, but I am not certain where the Malay Chiefs
have taken refuge. The contest has been much pro-
tracted by the encouragement that has been afforded
to them by the inhabitants of this Island and as they
may be yet stimulated to a renewal of hostilities 1
shall leave the gun boats here, and request Captain
Warren to remain in this vicinity for a short period
longer. So long as the Hyacinth remains here there
is no chance of a renewal of hostilities, and every day
tends to disperse the people engaged in the revolt and
to break up the confederacy.
My opinion of Captain Warren’s services in
bringing this matter to a conclusion will be seen in
copy of my reply to that officer. It is within my
knowledge that the officers and men have been greatly
harassed and fatigued, and that from a want oi officers,
both her Lieutenants being dead, the Captain and
Junior Officers have been incessantly on duty, the
latter in the boats, some of them for two months at a
time. 1 therefore respectfully trust that I may be
permitted to pay the Captain and crew of the Hyacinth
Batta on the same principle and at the same rates


which were sanctioned to H. M S. Wolf when em-
ployed on a similar duty in 1832, as will appear in a
letter of Mr. Secretary Swinton in the Political De-
partment dated 24th September 1832 to the address
of Mr. Governor Ibbetson.
I havo &ca.
( Signed ) S. G. Bonham
Governor Prince of Wales
Island, Singapore and Ma-
lacca.
Prince of Wales Island
15 April 1839.


To the Honble. S. G. Bonham ■
&ca. &ca. &ca.
Sir,
In my letter of the 20th March* I then informed
you of the Siamese having retaken Quedah Fort, sub-
sequent to which, from their supineness and inactivity
they allowed the Malays to reassemble and partially
surround the village of Allorganoo and Head Quarters
of the Siamese. For three successive days they had
partial fighting, each day ending in favour of the
Siamese, the third day the Malays were entirely dis-
persed and the Chiefs Tuanku Mahommed Saad and
his two brothers declared the war at an end, and
escaped in the direction of Province Wellesley sending
directions to the people at Purlis to make their escape
in the best manner they could. It then only re-
mained for the Siamese to take possession of the
Purlis, but from their tardy movements they did not
do so until the 6th Instant. The population of this
place I think fully equal to Quedah, and the wretched
state of the women and children was beyond descrip-
tion. I afforded them every assistance in making
their escape and am happy to say most of them got
away, some few of the last who had not the means
of doing so 1 sent down in the Honorable East India
Company’s Steamer Diana.
I regret however to inform you that, notwith-
standing the vigilance of the boats, Whan Mat Allie
and his two confederates Hadjee Mustapha and Van
Smaell effected their escape over to Lancavi on the
night of the 3d instant. From all the information
1 could collect it was supposed he was going there
to collect his war prahus and go with them to Butto
Barra. I then proceeded to Lancavi and finding two
Fort William 12th June 1839.


schooners of 3 guns each and one Tope laden with
rice and gun powder and four war prahus, one
with 4 guns and the others with two each, ready
for sea and evidently intended to convey his plunder
and followers, I immediately determined upon des-
troying them which I fully accomplished the same
afternoon.
The whole state of Quedah being now in posses-
sion of the Siamese, the service upon which Her
Majesty’s Sloop under my command, with the Hono-
rable East India Company’s Steamer “Diana” and
gun boats being at an end, I have withdrawn the whole
force and returned to Penang, in reporting which 1
must beg to acknowledge the cordial support and as-
sistance I have received from Mr. Congalton of the
Steamer “Diana” and Mr. Stewart of the gun boats
during this vexatious and harassing duty.
1 have &ca.
(Signed) W. Warren
Commander.
Her Majesty’s Sloop Hyacinth
Off Penang.
11th April 1839.


(Enclosure to Rear Admiral Maitland's letter to
the Admiralty, No. 70, 8 July 1839.)
Her Majesty's Sloop Hyacinth,
Penang, April 13th 1839,
Sir,
. . . [On the 11th instant] I returned
to this anchorage . . . having performed the
service entrusted to me.
Owing to the tardiness of the Siamese this service
has been protracted so long. On the 7th ultimo they
suddenly made their appearance in the neighbourhood
of Quedah with a force from six to seven thousand men
and a hundred elephants . . . On the 20th
the supplies of the Fort being entirely cut off and the
great scarcity of water compelled the Malays to take
advantage of the dark night and evacuate the Fort.
. . . It was not until the 6th instant they got
entire possession of the Country.
• •••••
I have &ca.
( Signed ) W. Warren
Commander.
Rear Admiral Maitland.


Fort William 3d July 1839.
To. S. G. Bonham Esqre.
Governor of Prince of Wales Island
Singapore and Malacca.
Sir,
I am directed by H. H. President in Council to
acknowledge the receipt of your letter under date the
5 March last forwarding translation of a letter from
the Praklang the Minister for Foreign Affairs at Bang-
kok, respecting the affairs of Quedah.
2nd. In reply I am desired to state that the
Government of India is disposed to reserve the deter*
mination of the course of Policy to be adopted towards
Siam until informed of the result of Dr. Richardson’s
Mission.
3d. The letter of the Praklang, so far as it
relates to local matters connected with the Settlement
of Quedah, may be acknowledged by yourself in
ordinary course, but in reply to it no reference should
be made to the views or wishes of the Government of
India, so as to leave it open to the Government to take
at any time its own course as well in respect to those
operations as to other matters that may arise out of
the mission in question.
I have &ca.
( Signed ) H> T. Prinsep
Secretary to Government.
Fort William
3d July 1839.


Fort William 21 August 1839.
To the Governor of Prince of WalesTsland
E. Settlements.
Sir,
With reference to my letter dated 3 July last re-
garding [the statement] to be made by you to the
.Government of Siam in repty to the letter of the
Praklang on the subject of the late Quedah insurrec-
tion, I am directed by the President in Council to
forward for your information an extract of a letter
from the Commissioner in the Tenasserim Provinces,
from which you will perceive that there is reason
[to think j the communication with Dr. Richardson
has beeu cut off, no letter either public or private
having been received from him for a long time ;
further it appears that intercourse with Moulmain
has been [restricted] to the Inhabitants of Zimme
territory and they are no longer permitted to resort
to Moulmain for traffic, bringing with them cattle and
other articles of supply which at this time are more
than ever required.
2d. This conduct of the Siamese Authorities after
the essential aid rendered by our Government in the
recovery of Quedah is looked upon by the President
in Council as a very ungracious and unfriendly return.
It is the desire of His Honor in Council that you will
take an early opportunity of addressing to the Prak-
lang a remonstrace on the subject of these proceedings
and of explaining to the Court of Siam in a forcible
manner that the obligations of friendship in which
the British and Siamese nations were bound by the
Treaty of Bangkok were reciprocal, and that if the
conduct of the Siamese Authorities toward the British
Government and authorities be unfriendly and free
communication with them be denied as appears to


be tlie case with Dr. Richardson, if moreover the
-commercial intercourse, which for some years has
■subsisted between the Shan subjects of Siam-and the
British Tenasserim Provinces, be suddenly interrupted
at a juncture like the present, the Court must expect the
British Government will consider itself absolved from
the obligation of rendering to the Siamese any friend-
ly assistance in case of future hostilities in which they
anight look for aid and co-operation,
3d. If the letter be addressed to the Praklang
<on the above subject His Honor in Council thinks it
cannot be too clearly laid down that the Government
•of India will look upon the course taken by the Siam-
ese Authority in the Shan territory, in their proceedings
towards the British Stations on the Tenasserim Coast
as the test of the friendly or hostile disposition of that
Court. His Honor in Council leaves it to your discre-
tion either to convey this remonstrance merely by
letter or to depute an officer for the purpose of giving
force to the message and quickening a disposition to
return a satisfactory reply, according, as from your
knowledge of the Court of Siam, may appear best with
a view to the object (now of very great importance)
of obtaining from the Provinces of that Empire the
supplies required by our troops at Moulmain.
4. It may be right that you should personally
know that at this present moment a principal cause
•of difference and discussion with the Burmese has
arisen out of an inroad by Shan subjects of Siam into
the Burmese territory for which compensation is de-
manded from the British Government under construc-
tion put by the* upon the 10th article of the Treaty
of Gandaboo by which it is alleged by the Ministers
of Ava our British Government entered into a guaran-
tee to Burmah against such aggression.
5. It is not the wish of His Honor in Council
that any direct mention of this cause of difference


with Burmah [should be] inserted in your letter to*
the Prahlang at Bangkok, but His Honor in Council
has thought it right to make you aware of the circum-
stance to enable you to meet auy explanation that
may be offered by the Siamese Court and that you
may be prepared to state it as a ground for requiring
that a good understanding should be maintained be-
tween the officers of the two Governments [of] the
territory bordering on the Ava dominions.
I have the honor to be &ca.
(Signed) H. T. Prinsep
&c. &c, &c.
Fort William
The 21 August 1839


[To the Government of India. ]
India
Political Department.
Miscellaneous.
#*##*#
i* Para. 53. The statements in the Petition from
merchants and others at Penang, respecting the in-
jurious effects produced upon the trade of the Settle-
ments by the Siamese occupation of Kedah appear to
be exaggerated, if not groundless ; and their attempts
to induce you to take measures in violation of a solemn
Treaty are wholly indefensible.
54. We approve the instructions which you
issued to the Governor of the Eastern Settlements on
the subject of the successful attempt of the son,
nephews, and other adherents of the Ex King of Kedah
to get possession of that place and its territory. We
are bound by Treaty not to permit such attempts on
the part of the Ex King or his followers; and as it was
not in the power of our local officers to prevent the
expedition, you had no alternative but to afford to the
Siamese authorities co-operation by sea to the extent
of preventing supplies from being thrown into any
port which the Siamese forces might attack. We
would at the same time suggest to you the propriety
of intimating to the Siamese Government that they
must not expfcct us to take the responsibility of defend-
ing their conquest for them. The territory of Kedah
appears on this occasion to have been left wholly
defenceless.
55. You have since informed us that the Siamese
have succeeded in expelling the Malays from the Fort
of Kedah, and we are glad to learn that no cruelties were
committed by them on recovering possession of the
place.


56. We regret to find that no adequate means
were afforded by existing enactments for punishing
either the authors of this enterprize or those inhabi-
tants of Penang who furnished them in various ways
with important assistance. You have in consequence
passed Act No. X of 1839, which appears well adapted
to guard against such offences hereafter, so far as
respects the settlements in the Straits; the more
general question (in consequence of some doubts
suggested by Mr. Amos) being reserved for more
mature deliberation.
57. The parties concerned in the present enter-
prise cannot of course be punished under an Act passed
subsequently to their offence, but the Ex King’s son
Tuanko Abdoolah should be informed that in case of
his hereafter undertaking or countenancing any ex-
pedition on the part of his adherents against Siam, he
will forfeit whatever claim he possesses to succeed here-
after to his father’s stipend of 10,000 dollars.
******
t
We are
Your Affectionate Friends
( Signed ) W. B. Bayley
&ca. &ca. &ca.
London
the 2d June 1840.




