

TIHIE/VdDnCIE
<4
TIME'MDJSIHI


»
. " , r . \
• -i- \ , ' . .,r i _ . . • • v
»
« • * * • > • * 1 . 1
*>/ «■
T
-
' 4
.
V .. * -
' ' , ■ ' ig
11 ' I ' I. : ■ 1 -II • -
•*
'
v,'.. * X ' * •/ >
- v " ' 1 ,
,
1 I
Kelvin Grove College of Advanced Education
t Bl BBS
, . ■ - Presented by
? Mrs. Jan Doddridge
— - - v _
\
- ' IMIMWII 1 mihiiiuJLw
• " ' T ' t I , ', ''
«.
♦ * '
4 I V •
■ ; i i i *
N '
».
« • I .
% * 5 -3J j "• «. H H . ,p
, , 1' '» » « .
? ¥ , • '
. -
*
• "• ' * . I -
"'■ • *■ *
' - • ' I ' s ' .-I.
jff I
.
' . * -
« /
I . . i
? . \ J


GO?
-A
•S l V\3) •




The Voice of the Bush
Harold Crawford Johnston
To DEIRDRE and JUDITH
(All Rights Reserved)
Copyright by Enid Stewart Delalande, Brisbane
ENOGGER.A STATE SCHOOL
Printed by Martin W. Kennedy, at the Office of The Worker Newspaper Pty., Ltd., Dunstan
House, Elizabeth Street, Brisbane.
Registered at the G.P.0., Brisbane, for transmission by Post as a Book


Johnston. H
The voice o
A# 14819953
B# 4204323
KG
THE KEY
I heard a whisper in the wood . . .
I listened, and I understood:
For all the past and future stirred
And blended in that whispered word;
A single word, and yet THE KEY
To open every mystery.
It trembled there on fairy wings
And spoke to me of hidden things . . .
The inner meaning of the breeze . . .
The language of the birds and trees;
A whispered word, that seemed to bring
The promise of eternal Spring !
A word of hope to souls oppresst .
Of calmness and of peace and rest
A whisper, yet it seem'd to roll
Like thunder thro' my very soul .
A key, that opened every gate,
And Silence grew articulate.


How It All Began
HEN the White Man first arrived in
Australia, with a view to settlement, he
found a land filled with good things.
The climate was genial; indeed, to the man
accustomed to the bleak north country, it must
have seemed almost like another Garden of Eden;
while the rainfall was generally ample and the
soil fertile.
Every bay, estuary, river and lake swarmed
with edible fish, to be had for the taking; while
all manner of game birds —duck, teal, goose,
pigeon, brush turkey (weighing generally from
eight to ten pounds), and plain turkey (fine birds
of delicate flavour, and weighing up to thirty
pounds), were in countless millions.
At first the settler took his walks abroad
hung over with weapons like a Christmas tree
in full bloom, in order that he might protect
himself against the wild beasts and still wilder
men he expected to meet. But he soon learnt
that the "wild beasts" were little more dangerous
than his own home sheep had been, and that
the "wild men" were too indolent to attack any-
thing but what they wanted for food.
It is true that, in the Far North, he later
discovered the alligator (he is really a crocodile),
a fearsome beast, growing at times to thirty feet
in length and weighing up to a ton and a-half;
while snakes were everywhere aplenty. But the
crocodile is a home-keeping reptile, while snakes
could generally be avoided by the exercise of
reasonable care.
And yet the new settler was not entirely
happy. He felt that he was an exile. He soon
forgot the bitter winds, that blew off the North
Sea, and began to hanker after the fleshpots of
England, forgetting that he had found those
fleshpots empty as often as not.
Also he missed the neat lanes and hedge-
rows, and the prim and conventional life of his
homeland.
One of our early poets described Australia
"Lands where bright blossoms are scentless,
And songless, bright birds ..."
And, for quite a long time, this was accepted
overseas as a true picture of the great Southern
Land—of a land where, in the coastal regions
particularly, the air is heavy with the fragrance
of a thousand flowering shrubs and vines! "And
songless, bright birds!" What of the Australian
Magpie (really a pied crow), the supreme song-
bird of the universe, as all competent authorities
now admit!
And the butcher-bird, whose clear, flute-like
notes are surely sweet enough to make the
average human singer turn green with envy!
And the bell-birds? And the whip-birds? And
the crooning doves and blue wrens? And the
warblers, of which Australia has no fewer than
ninety species? And the kookaburra, the most
popular bird on earth. Go out into the nearest
bush in the early morning. You will not have
to go far: and listen to "Jacko's" gurgling
chuckle; and, if you do not feel inclined to laugh
with him, you would be well advised to go along
and pick out your lot in the cemetery.
And so the settler, blind to the beauty around
him, and deaf to the music of thousands of singing
birds, introduced the sweet-briar and the black-
berry : and, finally, that devilish thing, the prickly
pear; and, of living creatures the sparrow and the
starling, and the rabbit and the fox. And, ere
long, spent most of his leisure in devising plans
for getting rid of the introduced pests.
But, through it all, he found time to hunt
and harry and destroy the unique and beautiful
bush creatures —the kangaroo, and his lesser
relatives, the 'possum and the wombat: and, to
his eternal shame, the koala and the platypus.
Do you wonder that the Bush Folk decided to


CHAPTER I
The Great Revolt
FOR upwards of a hundred and fifty years
the Bush Folk of Australia had been hunted
and shot and eaten by Man. And now their
oppressor had added to his other infamies
by laying poison, in order to rid himself the more
speedily of the harmless and inoffensive creatures
whose feeble protests against such methods
had hitherto been treated with contempt.
But now the Bush Folk had made up their
minds to rise—to revolt —to rebel. They could
not think of any other dreadful threats, or they
would most certainly have decided upon them as
well.
"Quite time, too," declared the Kangaroo.
"For hundreds of years, before the coming of the
White Man, we were hunted by the abos. But
we did not mind that very much. It broke about
fifty-fifty, if you know what I mean."
"What broke?" asked the Emu, anxiously;
"Not the eggs, surely?"
"Eggs!" sneered the Kangaroo. "That is all
you know; but—"
"Oh, please don't let us quarrel among our-
selves," pleaded the Mother Bear, who was carry-
ing her latest cub upon her back. "Let us unite
against the common enemy and get on with the
business of the meeting."
"We cannot get on with the business of the
meeting until we have a meeting," observed the
Pelican, "and we cannot have a meeting until we
appoint a chairman.
"Move Mr. Pelican take the chair," said the
Emu.
"Second that!" This from the Cockatoo.
"Pretty Cocky!" interposed the Dingo.
"Order! Order!" cried the Pelican, taking
the chair, which was not really a chair, but only
a big, flat stone. However, that did not matter
much, as the chairman had no intention of sitting
down. He began:—
"You all know why we have met to-day—
"I don't," broke in the Wombat, sitting up
suddenly and rubbing his eyes. "And I'm not
going to say I know if I don't. And I think it
is silly holding meetings in the day-time; and I—"
He rolled over and fell asleep again.
"Well," resumed the Pelican, "we have met
to decide what we are going to do about it."
"That's the way to talk," sci'eamed the
Cockatoo. "That's the way to talk. What are
we going to do about it, eh?"
"Order! Order!" said the Pelican. "What
are we going to do about Man ? Man, the tyrant!
Man, the poisoner! That is the question before
the meeting."
"Eat him!" suggested the Dingo.
"Look here, Mr. Dingo," said the Pelican
severely, "I must remind you that we are here
to discuss a very serious matter, and I must
request you to conduct yourself properly. Eat
Man! I never heard of such a thing!"
"It's all right for you to talk like that,"
growled the Dingo. "You can eat fish; but I hope
you don't suggest that the superior animals
should go slushing round slimy rivers and
swamps after fish."
"I wish they would," whispered Mr. Hare to
his little cousin, the Rabbit.
"Yes," agreed the Rabbit. "I think a fish
diet would be just the thing for the Dingo."
"But what are we going to do about Man?"
went on the Pelican. "That is the question before
the meeting. Why doesn't some member make
a proposal?"
"In my humble opinion," ventured the Hare,
timidly, "we should agree not to prey upon each
other, for a start."
"Hear! Hear" from some of the lesser folk.
"With reasonable exceptions, I presume?"
said the Cormorant.
"Such as—?"
"Oh, such as—well, such as fish. Fish are
not joining up, I understand."
"Now isn't that clever!" broke in the Fox.
"We must not prey upon any creatures, excepting
those we desire to eat. Oh, I see!"
"Loud cheers for Mr. Fox!" barked the
Dingo.
"Anyhow, fish are cold-blooded creatures,"
said the Pelican. "And the scientists say that
cold-blooded creatures do not suffer pain."
"They certainly do not make much fuss when
they are caught in a trap," said the Fox. "Not
like some creatures I know," he added, looking


slyly at the Hare and the Rabbit. "But, let us
be fair. I am standing up for the fish in their
absence."
"It is their own fault that the fish are not
here," protested the Pelican. "I told them about
the meeting, and even offered to bring them along
in my carry-all. But they just said, 'Oh, yeah!'
Quite rude about it."
"It is not much use trying to deal with Man,
unless we can agree among ourselves," remarked
the Koala, rubbing his nose thoughtfully.
"I quite see that," said the Pelican. "We
must all be prepared to make sacrifices. No
victory is ever won without sacrifice. I think
we should pledge ourselves, jointly and severally
—I just remembered that they always say,
'jointly and severally'—not to interfere with, nor
molest, nor to, er, nor to—"
"Devour," suggested the Bandicoot.
"Nor to—l thank you, Mr. Bandicoot—nor to
devour any member of our union, nor his, nor
her family. Those in favour of the motion say
'Aye!' to the contrary 'No!' Carried."
"Sheep will not be admitted to the union, will
they?" asked the Dingo.
"No; at least, I should think not," replied
the Pelican. "Sheep are aliens, so I think I must
rule that they are not eligible for membership.
Of course, it may be urged that the Hare and the
Rabbit—"
"Hey! You agreed to accept us; and, if it
comes to that, the Fox is as much an alien as
we are," cried the two little creatures together.
The Chairman proceeded, hastily: "Omitting
sheep, then, and other so-called domestic animals,
we are now pledged not to —not to what I men-
tioned before. Next business."
"I think we should have a plan of campaign,"
said the Bandicoot. "It is always done."
"What is a plan of campaign?" asked the
Emu.
"Decide what we are going to do, and how
we are going to do it."
"We decided that on the first motion,"
growled the Dingo. "Only sheep and other
foreigners are to be eaten in future."
"I suppose you regard yourself as the only
hundred per cent Australian present!" sneered
the Fox.
"I am certainly the oldest," replied the Dingo,
complacently.
"Take a look at yourself!" cried the Kan-
garoo. "Why, you might have come from any-
where. But Me! lam distinctive—"
"You mean queer!" said the Dingo in a nasty
tone.
"And, further," went on the Kangaroo,
"naturalists declare that the dingo is not a true
Australian at all, but that he is really a sort of
Chow dog."
"I'll Chow dog you, if I have any more of
your impudence," snarled the Dingo.
"I really don't know what you are all
quarrelling about," observed the Platypus. "Com-
pared with me, you are all moderns, while we
belong to the oldest family, not only in Australia,
but in the whole world."
"You certainly look it!" remarked the Fox.
"Why, you are not finished. What are you trying
to become, anyhow? A bird, or a quadruped, or
a reptile? Old stick-in-the-mud! Why don't you
try to advance with the times?"
Here the Pelican rapped his beak sharply on
the "chair" to call the meeting to order.
"Attention! Attention!" he cried. "We have
already decided that Man is to be—"
"Obliterated!" put in the Bandicoot.
"What does that mean?" asked the Goanna,
plaintively. "I wish you wouldn't use such long
words."
The Pelican looked enquiringly at the Bandi-
coot, who took the hint. "To obliterate," he
explained, "is to wipe out —to erase—to abolish
—to exterminate."
"You are getting worse and worse," com-
plained the Goanna.
"I think we should do something fierce,"
said the Kangaroo. "We should attack Man.
That's what I think we should do."
"Are you seriously proposing that we should
attack Man?" asked the Koala, anxiously.
"Nothing but," replied the Kangaroo, calmly.
"Oh, I don't think we should do that," said
the Koala. "I mean Man is—Man is rather nice,
when you get to know him."
"Yah, you quitter!" snarled the Dingo.
"I m not a quitter, really," replied the Koala,
mildly. "But I don't believe in going out looking
for trouble, and that's what you will be doing if
you try to attack Man."
"Order! Order!" cried the Pelican.


~ M *'" Stoncr™ •
The Wombat sat up suddenly. "What have
you got?" he asked.
"I don't know what you are talking about,"
said the Pelican.
"Don't know what I am talking about!"
repeated the Wombat, crossly. "You ask us to
give our orders and, when I ask you what you've
got, you try to put me off. I don't know why
you can't have proper menus, anyhow. Then I
could see what to order, instead of listening to
your silly remarks. I want something to eat."
"This is not an eating house," said the
Pelican, coldly.
"What did you say?" grunted the Wombat.
"Not an eating house? Then why are we all
sitting round here?"
"If you hadn't been asleep, you'd have known
that we are holding a meeting to deal with Man."
"I decline to deal with Man," said the
Wombat, firmly. "I don't like Man: and I want
something to eat. Nice idea of a meeting, I must
say. Having us all sitting here till it's long past
tea-time, and never asking us if we had a mouth
on us. Talking—talking a lot of rubbish!"
"Hey! How do you know we've been talking
rubbish?" demanded the Fox. "You don't know
what we've been talking about when you've been
asleep all the time."
"Have you been talking?" asked the Wombot.
"Yes, I have, and I —"
"I'm glad I was asleep," grunted the
Wombat.
"What do you mean by that remark?"
snarled the Fox.
"Nothing."
"Eh?"
"Nothing."
"I think we should adjourn the meeting
now," said the Pelican. "I must go and see about
getting something for tea. I suppose you are all
hungry, too."
"Now you are talking sense," said the
Wombat, briskly. "What are you having for tea?
I'd like a couple of turnips, and a bunch of carrots,
and a handful or two of wheat, and a cob of corn
—or anything else you have."
"There will be only fish," replied the Pelican.
"Fish! Fish!" grunted the Wombat. "What
a crowd! Don't invite me to any more of your
meetings, for I won't come if you do. Fish!
Fish! I was never so insulted in my life." He
lumbered off and disappeared in the undergrowth.
"This is going to be a great revolt, when it
gets properly started," observed the Dingo. "I
am not hungry myself, so I think I'll just go along
and have a look at the sheep and lambs frisking
about. I think they look so pretty."
"I'll come with you," said the Fox, jumping
up.
"Ha! ha! he! heh! heh! h-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-
hoo-too!" burst out the Kookaburra. "Ha! ha!
hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo!"
p.
. W >
v
THE WOMBAT . is not a Bat, but a pig-like little fellow, who is
affectionately known to Australians as "Digger"; with his strong claws
he digs a new home when required.
—Blocks by courtesy of Queensland Department of Public Instruction


M . JIM AND THE
KOOKABURRA




CHAPTER II
Two Vagabonds
"'Oh, the Bush is free and the Bush is fair—
I pay no rent, and I haven't a care:
I sit in the shade of a gum and smoke,
For I've broken the chain—and I've shed the
yoke;
I am lulled to sleep by the sighing trees,
And roused in the morn by the gentle breeze.
While you City folk, in your stuffy flats,
Listen-in to your jarring jazz—and cats,
The native bear, in the neighb'ring tree,
Tells bedtime tales to her cubs—and me;
And I often laugh, as I listen there,
For a funny old thing is the Mother Bear;
I laugh till the curlews, down on the flat,
Stalk along to see what I'm laughing at.
The jackass laughs at you City folks,
But he comes to tell me the latest jokes,
And you wouldn't believe the tales I've heard
Since I got friendly with that old bird!
I am miles and miles and miles from a town,
And I've made up my mind to settle down,
So my postal address, for the time to come,
Is: "Down by the creek, in the shade of a Gum"!
AS Jim Morrison finished his song he
brought his blankets out of the tent and
shook them. Then he gathered some
leaves and sticks and started a fire.
"Hur-r-r-r, Ha-ha-ha-ha-he-he-he-he-heh-hoo-
hoo-hoo-hoo," called the Kookaburra from his
perch on the branch of a gum-tree just outside
the tent.
"Hallo, Jacko!" said Jim cheerfully. "What
are you laughing ta this time?"
"Hee-hee-hee-hee-hurr-r-r, hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo!"
chortled the bird. "Laugh! I should just think
I would laugh! So would you if you had been at
the meeting yesterday."
"Meeting? What meeting?"
"Meeting of the Bush Folk. Oh, it was
funny!"
"What's biting them?" asked Jim.
"Kark-kook-koo!" laughed the Kookaburra
again. "Biting them? Ha! ha! That's a good
one! But the meeting wasn't about anything
biting them; it was about what they wanted to
bite."
"I see," observed Jim. "And what have they
decided to bite?"
"I don't want to be personal, or to hurt your
feelings," replied the bird, "but the meeting was
called to deal with a—with a two-legged animal
—Man, in fact. I suppose they intend to bite
Man."
"But what did they decide to do with him?"
"I think they decided to abbreviate Man,"
replied Jacko, scratching his ear.
"Abbreviate Man?" repeated Jim. "That
means to shorten him. "Which end are they
going to start on—bite his feet off, or his head?"
"Search me," answered the bird. "But I
don't think it was abbreviate they said, after all.
No, it was 'Ob-something. Oh, I remember; it
was obliterate; that is what they are going to
do with Man."
"Now, you're talking!" exclaimed Jim,
admiringly. "And when is this obliterating busi-
ness to start —or has it started already?"
At this the bird laughed until he nearly fell
off the branch. "No, not yet," he gasped.
"I suppose they arranged a plan of cam-
paign?" asked Jim presently, when he had made
the tea.
"They talked about that," replied the bird,
"but the Pelican pointed out that everything must
be done in proper order. He explained that


nothing was ever settled at the first meeting. He
used a lot of big words that I can't remember.
Only prelminaries were discussed. I remember
that part. Clearing the air, sort of."
"And did they clear the air?"
"Not so's you'd notice it," replied the Kooka-
burra with a chuckle. "Not so's you'd notice it.
They spent most of the time making nasty
remarks about each other."
"Just like a lot of men!" was Jim's comment.
"The Pelican was in the chair," went on
Jacko.
"The Chair?"
"Yes; it wasn't a chair, really, but only a
big stone. And the Pelican wouldn't sit down—
said the stone was too hard. He stood up all the
time. He did look funny! He was the Chairman,
and he never stopped talking."
"They should have called him the Speaker,
instead of the Chairman," observed Jim.
"Hee-hee-hee-hoo-hoo-hoo!" laughed Jacko.
"The Speaker! That's a good one. I'll suggest
that at the next meeting."
"Who all were at the meeting?" asked Jim,
as he sat down to his breakfast.
"Oh, the Fox and the Hare, and the Badger
and the Bear, and the Bird in the Greenwood
Tree," replied the Kookaburra, airily.
"The Badger?"
"Well, he wasn't a badger, really; he was a
Wombat. But I think a Wombat is something
like a Badger, don't you?"
"Something. And what did the Wombat
have to say about the matter?"
"He was asleep most of the time," replied the
Kookaburra, with a chuckle.
"He would be," agreed Jim. "And the Dingo.
I suppose he was there?"
"Yes; as large as life, and twice as natural."
"And what about the Hare and the Rabbit?
Were they talkative?"
"Yes."
"And so they are not to be eaten in future
by the Bush Folk?"
"I wouldn't be too sure about that," replied
the bird, "but that is what they decided. They
decided not to prey on one another—fish
excepted."
"But the Fox must have agreed to that."
"Oh, yes—l was a bit surprised, but I over-
heard him telling the Dingo, behind his paw, that
the Rabbit was too hard to catch, anyhow."
"I suppose the Fox didn't argue much,
though?"
"The Fox!" screamed the Kookaburra. "I
should say he just did argue—and boast! You'd
think, to listen to him, that he was the world's
original and only genuine rebel, and all others
were imitations and fakes."
"So the fish are still to be eaten?"
"Yes," replied the Kookaburra; "they
declined to attend the meeting."
"Were they invited?"
"Oh, yes, they were invited, all right. Ha-
ha-ha!"
"Who invited them?"
"The Pelican—ha-ha-ha! Yes, the Pelican
invited them, but they declined, without thanks."
"And I always regarded fish as rather stupid
creatures," said Jim. "But I was nearly forget-
ting; what about the Black Snake?"
"The Black Snake was not invited," replied
the bird. "Later on, perhaps, he may decide to
attend; then I'll take him along—l'll provide
transport, I think they call it. What a lark! I'll
provide transport. Ha-ha-ha! Hee-hee-hee!
Hoo-hoo-hoo!"
"Now, that is very nice of you," remarked
Jim. "And, would you really take him along
safely?"
The Kookaburra did not reply in words, but
gave Jim an atrocious wink.
"But I don't understand why you should be
so anxious to obliterate Man," observed Jim.
"Me!" cried the bird, in a shocked tone.
"Who said I was?"
"Well, you attended the meeting, didn't
you?"
"Yes."
"And voted, I suppose?"
"Yes, I voted."
"For the obliterating of Man?"
"Too right, I did. Everybody else was voting
that way, though I didn't think Man was in much
danger from that crowd. Me? I wouldn't
obliterate Man, if I could. I think he is the fun-
niest creature we have. He always takes himself
so seriously. Hoo-hoo-hoo!"
"Still," persisted Jim. "you must have given
the others the impression that you had a griev-
ance against Man?"
"Every creature has a grievance."
"What is your particular grievance against
Man?" asked Jim.
"I don't like the name he calls me."
"What—Kookaburra ?"
"Please, don't say that again," pleaded the
bird, with a shudder. "Why, it's the kind of name


you'd call a grub. Some of the Bush Folk are
quite proud of their new names. I was talking
to Mrs. Native Companion the other day, and she
told me her family were not to be called "Native
Companions" any longer; they were Brolgas—
B-R-O-L-G-A-S. Hoo-hoo! I nearly laughed
right out, for if ever a bird looked like a Native
Companion, she did. And the Lyre Bird is
Menura; yes, Menura, if you please. But I don't
care what silly names they call themselves. . . .
I am objecting to them calling me a name like—
like you know what you just said. I made up a
little song about it the other day. Would you
like to hear it?"
"Of course, Jacko; of course." And the bird
began:—
"I wish they'd call me Jacko,
Like they did in days gone by,
'Stead of Kooka-kooka something,
Which it makes me want to cry;
Call me Jacko! . . . Good old Jacko!
Just as if they liked me well—
Call me Jacko . . . Good old Jacko,
For I think that name is swell.
"Now they call me something nasty,
Like I am some kind of pest,
Tho' I'm certain everyone agrees
I try to do my best;
Tho' I never look for credit,
Yet I must confess I'm hurt
When they call me names that make me feel
My proper name is 'Dirt'!
"I wish they'd call me 'Jacko',
Like their fathers always did.
For that name has grown familiar
To each Australian kid;
Yes, I wish they'd call me 'Jacko,'
For that name, I think, is swell,
'Stead of Kooka-kooka-something
That I dunno how to spell."
"Good old Jacko!" cried Jim when the song
was finished. "Still, you must admit that Kooka-
burra is quite an old and respected name. It is
what the Abos. called you."
Abos.—huh!" sniffed Jacko. "I think it was
just like their impudence calling decent birds
names like that. I could call the Abos. some nasty
names if I liked. . . . And I will, too, one of these
days when I have some time to spare."
"There is something in what you say,"
agreed Jim. "It is certainly a bit over the odds
giving the Bush Folk names without asking their
permission. But I don't see what we can do about
it now."
"The others can look after themselves," said
Jacko. "If they like to put up with it, let them.
But I am entering my protest against being called
—you know what—and I don't care who knows
it."
"Righto, Jacko!" said Jim; "I'll back up
your protest any time you want any help."


CHAPTER 111
The Second Meeting
I WAS thinking," began the Pelican, when
the Bush Folk met for the second time—
"You want to be careful you don't get a
headache," observed the Fox, with a sly wink at
the Dingo.
But the Pelican ignored the interjection. He
continued: "I was thinking that it would brighten
up the proceedings if some of the members were
to, were to—er —er—were to sing, or recite. It
would make the meetings less formal, I was
thinking."
"I'll bet that old bird has been composing
something, and he's simply dying to try it out
on us," whispered the irrepressible Fox. "All
right, Mr. Pelican," he added aloud; "you start!"
"Oh, I couldn't think of doing that," replied
the Pelican, modestly. "No, I couldn't think of
starting. Perhaps you would open, Mr. Fox!"
"No, no," replied the Fox. "Let us have
yours first. You are our leader, you know!"
"Oh, of course, if you insist," said the
Pelican. "Well, since you are so pressing. I
call my little effort:
" 'Faithful and True . . . ' "
"The Dog and the Dingo, the Cat and the Fox
May boast of their beef or their mutton;
But there's one dish for me, right out of the box,
And, for others, I don't care a button . . .
That's Fish! Fish! Beautiful Fish!
There's nothing to equal that beautiful dish—
There's nothing like Beautiful Fish!
Give me Mullet, or Whiting, or Garfish, or Pike,
And all other foods you may keep;
The Cow is a creature I hate and dislike,
And I shrink at the sight of a Sheep;
But Fish ! Fish ! Beautiful Fish !
A feast for a monarch—an epicure's dish—
Oh, Beautiful, Beautiful Fish!
I'm not like the creatures who roam the whole
earth
In search of the novel and new;
Till the day that I die, from the date of my birth,
To my first love I'm constant and true. . . .
T rue to my Fish—my Beautiful Fish!
Every night—every morning, I relish a dish
of Beautiful, Beautiful, BEAUTIFUL FISH!
As he concluded his song, the Pelican closed
his eyes and threw up his head, while his throat
moved as though in the act of swallowing a
"beautiful, beautiful Fish."
"Well," observed the Fox, scratching his ear
with his hind paw, "you are certainly constant to
your first love, all right. I am aware that a fish
diet is generally regarded as a brain food:
though I cannot see that this has been proved
up to date."
"What's that?" cried the Pelican. "What's
that? Are you hinting that I have no brains?
You don't mean that, do you?"
"Me!" exclaimed the Fox. "Far from it. I
think you are a marvellous bird . . . simply mar-
vellous. I don't know how you manage to do it."
"That is all right then," said the Pelican,
smugly. "Now, who is to be the next performer?"
"I could give you a little thing of my own,"
said the Bandicoot.
"What is it about?" asked the Fox. "Not
about roots, I hope."
"No; it is about a Pirate and a Bullfrog. It
is a moral story."
"Oh, I think, if it is a moral story, we must
have it," said the Pelican. "I dislike improper
stories."
"I mean that it has a moral," said the
Bandicoot.
"I see," said the Pelican, blinking. "Well,
let us have it."
And the Bandicoot, thus encouraged, started:
The Pirate said he loved to roam
In search of bright, red gold;
The Bullfrog always stayed at home,
But never caught a cold;
One day the Pirate tried to take
A British man-o'-war;
'Twas very sad ... a great mistake—
They buried him ashore.
The Bullfrog, in his slimy pool,
Laughed at the Pirate's fate—
"Ho! ho!" he cried; "now who's the fool?
Not me, at any rate."
Just then a Cormorant dived in—
The Bullfrog gave a kick—
One little kick ... It seemed a sin,
He disappeared so quick.
"I'm glad your little song had a moral, my
dear," said the Pelican, kindly, "though I don't
know exactly what it was. But I think every
song or tale should have a moral."


"What was the moral of your own song, if
I may presume to ask?" inquired the Kangaroo.
"It was meant to illustrate perfect trust and
constancy," replied the Pelican; "perfect trust
and constancy."
"Oh, yeah!" sneered the Dingo. "It sounded
a bit fishy to me, all the same."
"I understand that it is the intention that
counts," observed the Kangaroo; "even if Mr.
Bandicoot's song had not been a good one, and,
in my opinion, it was most excellent, his intention
was to illustrate—to illustrate what he said just
now."
"Yes," agreed the Dingo; "of course, if his
intention was good, that is another matter
altogether. But, even then, one is so apt to be
misunderstood in this cruel world. I can recall
an experience of my own. One day I chanced to
be travelling across some open country, when I
saw a poor little lamb caught in a rabbit trap. I
did feel sorry for the poor, helpless little creature.
The poor little thing was bleating pitifully; it
nearly broke my heart. I thought I must do
something to help it. Yes; yes; that is what I
thought. I tried and tried. You know what
those dreadful rabbit traps are like. I found that
I should have to bite the poor little lamb's leg
off to free it from the trap. Well, just as I
finished that, I heard a dog barking. Naturally,
I looked up—and there was the farmer, rushing
toward me . . . and he was carrying a gun.
Anyone with half an eye could see that I was
trying to help; but the farmer raised his gun
and fired at me—fired at me, mind you, when
I was doing my best to save his property. I was
so disgusted that I came away. It is a cruel
thing to be misunderstood. I hate ingratitude.
I vowed that never again would I try to rescue a
lamb. And I have kept my word."
"I quite believe you," remarked the Emu.
"Are you ready yet, Mr. Fox?" asked the
Pelican.
"Very well," returned the Fox. He had a
good voice, too, as the Bush Folk noted with
surprise. They did not expect much from him,
but his song sounded well. He called his song
THE CHANGING SCENE
I wandered thro' the bush last week
And saw a lot of wonders,
Including many a funny freak
That seemed to me like blunders;
I met a lot of purple frogs,
With candy stripes around them,
All dressed up in their Sunday togs . . .
I was so pleased I found them.
The crows had whiskers on their chins,
Trimmed in the latest manner;
Each Wombat was supplied with fins,
And bore a tartan banner;
And every snake had forty legs,
And waddled most amazing;
The kangaroos and sheep laid eggs,
Altho' the sun was blazing.
I saw ten thousand bandicoots
All seated round a table,
And gobbling sausages and boots
As fast as they were able.
I saw a little Teddy bite
A Dingo who offended . .
The Dingo promptly died of fright,
And so the fight was ended.
I saw—
"That will be enough from you," growled the
Dingo. "You saw me die of fright, did you?
Well, come along and have a try at me yourself."
"No, thanks," replied the Fox, loftily; "I
am too busy attending to the meeting."
"Next contribution, please," said the Pelican
at this juncture.
"If the members would like to hear me,"
said a small voice.
"Who is it?" asked the Chairman.
"Me!" replied the small voice.
The Pelican peered about, but failed to locate
the speaker. "Please stand up when you address
the Chair," he called.
"I can't stand up; I have no legs to stand on,"
said the voice again. There was a rustle, and a
little creature slid into view.
"Oh, it is you, Mr. Adder," observed the
Pelican. "Are you going to sing?"
"No—not sing," replied the Adder in a sad
tone. "I never learned to sing properly. I joined
a singing class, but after a few weeks the teacher
said it was a shame to take the money. He said
I was hopeless. Mr. Swan was the singing
master."


"Mr. Swan!" laughed the Fox. "Your voice
must have been bad if you could not reach his
standards."
"No one loves me," observed the Adder,
plaintively.
"Popularity means very little, after all," said
the Pelican. "As you say you cannot sing, I take
it that you propose to give us a recitation?"
"Yes, a kind of recitation," replied the
Adder. "I have some very interesting figures
which the members may care to hear."
"They wouldn't," declared the Dingo, firmly;
"and no figures are interesting. You have some
weird ideas about entertainment, I must say."
"You don't know whether my figures are
interesting or not," protested the Adder. "You
have not heard them."
"And, what is more, I am not going to hear
them, if I have anything to say about it,"
retorted the Dingo.
"I think—that is, if you don't mind very
much—l think we won't have your figures to-day,
Mr. Adder. Some other time, perhaps."
"I have written a little song about Spring,"
said Mrs. Koala, suddenly, and, as there was no
objection, she began:
Gone are the days of wintry gloom,
And Spring is in the air;
The flowers are bursting into bloom,
And all the world is fair;
The tender gum-tips raise their heads,
The grass is emerald green;
And bear-cubs, in their cosy beds,
Awake to view the scene.
The tender gum-tips raise their heads,
And . . . hum . . . and—hum . . . and hum .
And tender gum-tips raise their heads—
And . . . hum . . . and—hum . . . and hum .
"You are thinking of bees/' broke in the Fox,
rudely. "Gum-tips don't hum."
"I didn't mean they did hum," said the Koala,
looking ready to cry. "I just forgot the second
verse. It was something about birds singing and
. . . and ..."
"More gum-tips, I suppose!" sneered the
Fox. "If you are trying to write a song, you
had better leave out the gum-tips. Once you
mention gum-tips you simply can't think of any-
thing else. Gum-tips! Gum-tips! and Gum-
trees ! Gum-trees! That's about all you know in
this country."
"What's wrong with gum-trees?" growled
the Dingo, stung into action by the slight upon
the glory of his native land.
"Everything," snarled the Fox. "You folk
only know Australia. Now, if you had ever seen
England . . . England . . . Ah, the trees!"
The stately trees of England,
They shed their leaves each year,
Not stick to them, thro' thick and thin,
Like what they do out here;
They've grown like that in England
A thousand year or two;
And, if it's done in England, ain't
That good enough for you?
I dunno who you think you are;
I know I wouldn't blow
About a lot of scraggy things
That dunno how to grow;
Not like the trees of England—
All planted in a row.
As the Fox concluded his outrageous song-
there was such an outcry from the other members
that the Pelican hastily adjourned the meeting.


CHAPTER IV
The Fox's Apology
1 I 1 HERE was a very large attendance of the
Bush Folk at the next meeting, it having
_L been rumoured that the Fox was to be
severely censured for his unwarranted attack
upon Australian gum-trees. Even the Wombat
put in an appearance bright and early, in the hope
of witnessing the downfall of an animal he
heartily despised.
"The Fox will hardly have the impudence to
attend after such an exhibition, I should think,"
observed the Kangaroo.
"Huh! He'll be here all right," said the
Cockatoo. "You mustn't look for any delicacy
in such a creature. Hallo! What did I tell
you?"
The Fox loped into the meeting, with his
head held high and his brush spread out to
display its full beauty. He nodded cheerfully to
the other members, and then took up his usual
post, next to the Dingo, who regarded him sourly.
The Pelican looked very nervous, but declared
the meeting open in the usual form. Then he
cleared his throat and, after a splutter or two,
began:
"Before proceeding with the usual business
of the meeting, I have a very painful duty to
perform. You will recall that at the last meeting
an unfortunate thing occurred, when one of our
members—one of our most esteemed members, if
I may be permitted to say so—forgot himself so
far (in the heat of debate, I feel sure) as to heap
ridicule and, yes, derision, upon one of our most
sacred institutions—in short, upon our glorious
Australian gum-trees. I think we might reason-
ably call upon that member—that esteemed
member—to withdraw his remarks; and—er—in
short—apologise for having uttered them. What
have you to say about it, Mr. Fox?"
"Me?" cried the Fox, "are you referring to
me?"
"Yes, you!" replied the Pelican calmly. "I
take it that you are prepared to apologise for
your remarks . . . the remarks which have given
such pain to your fellow members."
"Apologise?" repeated the Fox.
"Yes, apologise," said the Pelican firmly.
"I will not apologise!" declared the Fox,
emphatically.
"Come, come!" urged the Pelican. "I don't
think that is the proper way to take it. We all
make mistakes at times, and it is generally
regarded as an honourable gesture to admit such
mistakes, and to do whatever lies in our power
to remedy them. I feel quite sure that the
meeting will be quite ready to accept your apology
and, er, and say nothing further about the
matter."
"But I was only speaking the truth," objected
the Fox.
"I don't think it would be wise to reopen
that question," said the Pelican. Come! Be
reasonable, Mr. Fox. We are all friends here, you
know."
"If you will permit me to make a personal
explanation," began the Fox.
"Certainly! Certainly!" agreed the Pelican.
"A member is always entitled to make a personal
explanation at a public meeting. It is done every
day. Attention! Mr. Fox desires to make a
personal explanation."
"At the first meeting," began the Fox, "some
of the other members appeared to resent my
presence, even going so far as to twit me with
being an outcast—"
"Alien was the word used, I think," inter-
jected the Pelican.
"Alien, then. But I felt that I was regarded
as an outcast—as a pariah—as a leper. I tell
you that it cut me to the quick. With one or
two exceptions you are all indigenous to this
country—to this great country . . . and it is a
great country—"
"Hear! Hear!" from the members.
"I repeat, this great country," went on the
Fox. "But, in justice to myself, I must go into
a little personal and family history, although my
natural modesty—l may say, my well-known
modesty, makes me loth to do so. Yes, for many
centuries the Fox has been an aristocrat,
pampered, possibly, but, I venture to say, unspoilt.
My family has always maintained the high
traditions handed down through the ages—"
"He doesn't love himself at all," murmured
the Bandicoot.
The Fox went on: "All the best people in
England laid themselves out to cherish and
protect me. I was regarded, if I do say it myself,


as one of the brightest jewels in the English
crown. It is true that my partiality for fat
rabbit was not openly encouraged and that even
the best people sometimes made unkind remarks
if I chanced to disturb a covey of partridges.
But, if I raided a farmer's poultry yard, that was
quite another matter. The poultry belonged to
the farmer, and the best people bore the loss of
a few of the farmer's hens or geese with
exemplary fortitude. . . .
"But, mark what happened! A few years
ago I was living a peaceful and happy life in
'Merrie England,' and it was indeed 'Merrie
England' in those days, when some misguided
person, learning that the rabbits were taking
charge of your country hem your great
country, suggested that certain members of my
family ... all carefully selected, and of
unblemished character, should be sent here, to
cope with the rabbit pest—"
"I rise to a point of order," cried the Rabbit,
suiting the action to the word. "Pest!" he
shrieked. "Who made the rabbit?"
"Search me," rejoined the Fox. "I'm sure I
don't know who made them, or why."
"Well, whoever made us must have loved
rabbits, or he wouldn't have made so many of
them."
"All right, I withdraw 'pest'," said the Fox;
and went on: "I was one of the first selected —
naturally; and when I arrived in your great
country—your great country, I was accompanied
by my mate, Vixen, and our two cubs. At first
we were treated as though we were visiting
royalty, and when we were taken for an airing
through the streets of the city the traffic would
be held up by the eager crowds who pressed
round to catch a glimpse of the beautiful
creatures—meaning me and my family.
"After a few days we were conveyed to the
country, where we found a den, complete with all
modern conveniences, and the evening meal all
ready to be served.
"The next morning I rose with the dawn and
stretched myself. Then, accompanied by my
faithful spouse, I went to the front door, to view
the prospect. And what a prospect it was! A
land flowing with milk and honey, as one might
say, and overflowing with rabbits, all ready and
waiting to be eaten, and no questions asked.
"Vixen snuggled up to my side and mur-
mured: 'Oh, Boy! What a country! It's a
shame to take the money!'
"I told her to get back to the cubs . . . that
I would bring in a fat rabbit. That's what I
thought, but I was mistaken. In England, the
rabbit is a nice, fat little thing, that couldn't
race a healthy snail; but I came to the conclusion
(after an hour's chasing them) that the brutes
here were some new breed of greyhound.
"What was I to do? Vixen and her cubs
were hungry. So was I. And there were lambs
everywhere—where the rabbits had left room for
them. You think, perhaps that I should have
known better than to interfere with the farmer's
lambs. I did. But I felt that I had been misled
and deceived . . . that I had been lured to this
country ... to this great country by fraud and
misrepresentation. Do you wonder that I felt
hurt—that I took a dislike to Man?
"And what was Man's reaction? He fired
guns at me. In England a man, so lost to all
sense of decency and right behaviour as to
discharge a gun at a Fox, would be hanged,
drawn and quartered. That is what would be
done to such a man in England. Did that thought
deter the Australian? Not a bit. He shot many
members of my family, and even took their skins
to adorn the females of his own species. I admit
that his women looked more attractive when so
adorned; but, Oh, the infamy of the thing! I
can—cannot go on —"
The Fox covered his muzzle with his paws,
while his sides shook with the sobs which he
appeared to be quite unable to suppress.
"Poor fellow!" said the Pelican. "No wonder
he dislikes Man."
"I can see what is going to happen," whis-
pered the Bandicoot. "The Chairman is going to
apologise to the Fox."
"Shouldn't wonder," agreed the Kangaroo.
"That silly old bird would fall for anything. But
just fancy that slimy Fox trying to put a tale
like that over us."
"Order!" cried the Chairman. "After hear-
ing the personal explanation of Mr. Fox, I feel
that we have wronged our brother member. Will
someone please move a vote of sympathy with
our brother?"
"I don't mind doing that," grunted the
Wombat. "A creature like that deserves some
sympathy. I suppose he is only following his
nature. He can't help being a sneak."
"Do you dare to call me a sneak?" cried the
Fox, baring his fangs.
"Nothing but," replied the Wombat, calmly.
"You look like a sneak, and you act like a sneak,


and that's just what you are. Yah! You and
your high society! You know you have always
been despised. Yes, I said despised!"
"I have never been despised," cried the Fox,
trembling with passion. "I have always been
admired. In nearly all the fine homes in England
the most treasured trophy is my brush—my tail.
Ha! Ha! A lot of you ridiculous creatures would
be safe, anyhow. I appeal to you, Mr. Kangaroo.
Don't you think that my brush is the most
graceful decoration you ever saw on a living
creature?"
"I don't pretend to be an expert on the
subject of brushes or tails," replied the Kangaroo,
coldly.
"But," persisted the Fox, "wouldn't you be
proud to have a tail like mine?"
"I have a tail which suits me perfectly well,"
answered the great marsupial.
"Do you call that thing a tail?" sneered the
Fox. "Why, it looks more like the pole of a
dray."
"What good is your tail, anyhow, except to
hang upon a wall?" demanded the Kangaroo.
"And no country has ever adopted you as a
supporter upon its coat of arms. But my friend,
Mr. Emu, and I—why, we represent Australia."
"A pair of freaks—" began the Fox.
Talking of tails; you seem to be very proud
of that thing of yours," broke in the Wombat.
"So would you be, if you had one at all,"
snarled the Fox. "What do you know about
tails?"
"Oh, more than you'd think," retorted the
Wombat. "When I was being fitted out, they
showed me the tails they had in stock. They only
had things like that you are wearing left, so I
said that, if I couldn't have a proper tail, I
wouldn't have one at all."
"You are nothing but a lot of low-down,
ignorant creatures," growled the Fox," and I
decline to stay another minute in such company.
Yah! You and your precious revolt! When
Man hears about your revolt, he'll just die of
laughing—that's what he'll do, and—"
"I suppose you'll sneak along and tell him
about it," was the Wombat's final remark, as the
Fox rushed away into the scrub.
"Now you've done it," observed the Pelican.
"You've offended him. He won't help us with our
revolt now."
"Aw, don't worry," remarked the Kooka-
burra. "He'll be here for the next meeting,
trying to take charge again, if I know anything
about his style, and I think I do. Ha-ha-ha-hee-
hee-hee-hoo-hoo-hoo!" . . .
"I'd like to sing a little song before the
meeting closes," said the Mother Bear. "I broke
down last time, and I have felt it so much. But
I have composed another song, and I know this
one better. . . .
THE KOALA'S DREAM
I dreamt I was an aeroplane,
And flew across the sea,
And all the time I searched in vain
For just one single tree;
But there was only raging main,
As wet as wet could be. . . .
I thought about my little home,
Up in that lovely tree,
And wished I did not have to roam
Across the cold, wet sea;
For. Oh, I thought the restless foam
Looked angrily at me;
I thought perhaps my cub might wake
And grope about for me,
And, maybe, cry with cold, and take
A header from the tree.
I cried, "Oh, please, for pity's sake,
Please take away this sea!'
And, in a trice, my dream was o'er,
And, in my own home tree,
I heard my darling Teddy snore,
Then cuddle up to me;
And, oh, I hope that never more
I'll cross that angry sea.


CHAPTER V
The Call of the Bush
"J X ALLO, Jacko!" called Jim Morrison.
I—l "Hallo! Hallo! Hur-r-r-ha-ha-ha-hee-
X X hee-hee-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo !" responded
Jacko.
"How's the revolt going?"
"Koo! koo! koo! oo! oo! oo! . . . The revolt
hasn't—hasn't started yet. The Bush Folk are
still squabbling."
"The Bush Folk don't know when they are
well off," said Jim. "Now, if they had to live in
a city, they might have some cause for
complaint."
"But you used to live in a city yourself,
didn't you?"
"Like a fool, I did," replied Jim; "and I
should probably have continued living there-
until I died or got skittled by a motor car, if I
hadn't met a chap in the street one day."
"And did he persuade you to come to the
Bush?" asked Jacko, cocking his ear.
"Well, I don't know that he intended it that
way, but that was the upshot," replied Jim.
"However, I'd better tell you about it."
I met a chap one day in the street
A fellow I used to know,
Away outback, in the land of Wheat
This chap was "Down for the Show."
He wasn't so tall . . . only six feet high,
But he seemed about ten to me;
While I'm five-ten, or very nigh—
I felt about two-foot three!
I had lived here for years: I was spick and span,
While the Man from the Bush was green;
But, between ourselves, he looked like a Man . . .
While I—l looked simply mean.
Yes, I was born and bred on the land,
Tho' you wouldn't think it now,
And no one would guess, to look at my hand,
That it ever held a plough;
For I wore a suit of the latest style,
And had beautiful, marcelled hair,
As I lounged along, with a silly smile,
And a languid city air.
I was strolling along, quite blithe and gay,
And chirpy as I could be
Till I met that chap in the street that day
And noticed him watching me,
His face was browned by the Western sun,
And his hands were nearly black,
But he looked as if he could carry a ton
Or more on his mighty back.
And he walked along with a swinging stride,
Like a king in his own domain,
While I minced on by the bushman's side
Like a turkey out in the rain.
And he talked of jumbucks, and wool and wheat
Till I felt that I'd been a fool . . .
Till I loathed the sight of a city street,
And hated an office stool.
If you want a job as a clerk to-day,
I know of a vacancy;
For I'm off back, and I'm going to stay
'Cause the Bush is calling Me.
"And then you made up your mind to come
back to the Bush?"
Jim laughed. "Well, not just straight away.
But that chap started me thinking about the bush
thinking and thinking:
Till above the noise of traffic . . .
Trams and motor cars and that,
I could hear the Curlews singing
In the Gum-trees on the Flat.
I got dreaming of the Bellbirds,
And the waving fields of grain,
And, in fancy, heard the Moo-cows
At the slip-rails once again;
I could almost see the pumpkins
And the Paddymelons grow;
And the country kept on calling
Till I simply had to go.
"But, I say," observed Jacko, "Curlews don't
get up in the Gum-trees, you know."
"I know that," replied Jim, with a laugh.
"And, I hope you'll excuse me, but that part
about the Paddymelons, you know. Paddymelons
don't grow on vines, like other melons."
At this Jim put his head back and roared.
"No, old chap," he said, "I wasn't trying to put
it over you, but many of the city people would
swallow it. They have some weird notions about
the bush."
"Isn't there any more of it?" asked Jacko.
"It sort of sounded as if there would be."
"No more of that," replied Jim. "That was
only a joke; but the matter was growing too


serious for joking. I used to lie awake at night
and get thinking about my old home, till . . .
I could hear the Gum-trees sighing
And the mournful Mopoke crying,
With, anon, the gentle rustle
Of the night-wind in the bough;
I could hear the slip-rails rattle
With the coming of the cattle . . .
Hear the lowing of the milkers . . .
Gosh! I'd almost kiss a cow!
Hallo! Hallo! What's the matter?
Thought it was the milkcans' clatter;
Wonder if that horse got better
That was gored by Murphy's bull?
And the sheep? I'm fond of drafting . .
Work? We never called that grafting!
What I'd give to get my fingers
In a jumbuck's greasy wool!
Dingoes in the gullies wailing . . .
Devils sure, their fathers hailing,
While the Plover, down the meadow,
Her uneasy vigil keeps.
I could see the water curling
In the creek, and hear it swirling,
Babbling over broken shallows
To the silence of the deeps.
I could hear the Curlews calling
Where the Carson boys were "falling"
Down across the creek, that summer,
Where we nippers used to swim;
And old Andy Brown, our neighbour,
When he'd done his daily labour,
How we loved to get him yarning . . .
Telling tales of "Lanky Jim."
Lanky Jim, the "Lucky Digger,"
And of Dean, "who fought the Nigger."
Andy always ready for us
With a new and better yarn
And the ploughing, and the sowing,
And the day I started mowing . . .
And that time I rode the outlaw
Back of Old MacDougall's barn. . . .
"Is that all?" asked Jacko. "Oh, I wish
there was more of it."
"Thank you, Jacko," said Jim. "But about
the Great Revolt; have you had any more
meetings?"
"Yes, two; though the first of them was
really a social affair. You see, the Pelican
thought it would . . . would—"
"Brighten the proceedings?" suggested Jim.
"Yes, yes; that was it . . . brighten the
proceedings. But it didn't brighten them too
much, as it turned out. The Fox made an awful
scene."
"He would. . . . Didn't they ask him to
sing?"
"Ask him!" shrieked Jacko. "The Fox
doesn't have to be asked to do anything. He
only has to be stopped. Oh, I suppose I'd better
tell you about it. You see, the Pelican had com-
posed a song."
"That bird is certainly coming on," said Jim.
"And what was the theme of his song?"
"What do you think?" chuckled Jacko. "Now,
what just do you think would appeal to the
Pelican?"
"Fish, I guess."
"Yes; fish, fish, beautiful fish! . . . Koo! koo!
koo! Yes; the old chap sang a beautiful song
about beautiful, beautiful fish."
"Any other songsters?"
"Oh, yes; the Bandicoot sang something
about a Pirate and a Bullfrog."
"Queer mixture," observed Jim.
"Yes," agreed Jacko, slowly. "It was a moral
song, the Bandicoot said. . . . They both died."
"And was that the moral?"
"I think it must have been. I didn't notice
any other."
"And who was the next performer?"
"The Fox."
"He sang about Sheep, I suppose?"
"Oh, no; he sang something about purple
frogs and crows with whiskers."
"Huh!" exclaimed Jim. "What does he know
about purple frogs and crows' whiskers?"
"Oh, a little thing like not knowing anything
about either wouldn't trouble the Fox," replied
Jacko. "Anyhow, you couldn't get him to admit
that he didn't know all about everything—and
then some."
"Any others?" asked Jim.
"Well, the Adder tried to give us a little
talk on figures."
"Only tried?"
"Yes—tried," chuckled the Bird. "But no
one would listen."
"I should just think not. Nice idea of enter-
tainment. Who came after the Adder?"
"Oh, poor little Mrs. Bear. She started to
sing a song about Spring, but forgot the words,


Then the Fox got sneering, in that nasty way of
his. And then, what do you think the low-down
animal did?"
"Bit Mrs. Bear, perhaps? I wouldn't put it
past him."
"No; it was lots worse than that," replied the
Kookaburra. "He sang a scandalous song about
our beautiful Gum-trees. I was never so shocked
in my life. Oh, there was a scene!"
"I should just think there would be a scene,"
said Jim, indignantly. "If I happen across him,
I'll try if I can't put a bit of decency into him
with a charge of shot. You didn't let him get
away with that, surely?"
"Get away with it!" screamed Jacko. "Why,
at the next meeting, the Pelican asked someone
to move a vote of sympathy with the poor thing."
"What poor thing."
"Th-th-the Fox!"
"What? After saying a thing like that?"
"That was nothing new," said Jacko; "he's
always at it."
"But, surely, none of the Bush Folk fell for
that?"
The Kookaburra laughed at the recollection.
"Ha-ha-hee-hee-hoo-hoo! Oh, yes; the Wombat
did."
"But I understood that the Wombat didn't
like the Fox?"
"I don't think he loves him. But he said
that an animal like the Fox—a sneak, he called
him—deserved some sympathy."
"Eh . . . heh! And how did the Fox take it?"
"He had to take it," replied Jacko. "He
started to bluster, but the Kangaroo took a hand.
. . . Yes —told him a few unpleasant truths about
himself—and he went off in a huff."
"So the Fox has withdrawn from the Revolt,
eh?"
"Oh, he'll be back," replied Jacko, confidently
KOALA and her baby (Native Bear). One of the best known and best
loved Australian animals.
Blocks by courtesy of Queensland Department of Public Instruction


CHAPTER VI
A Visitor
1 1 1 HE Kookaburra estimated the Fox's
behaviour accurately. At the next meeting
_L of the Bush Folk the Fox trotted in and
took his seat, nodding in a friendly fashion
towards the Wombat, who, however, ignored the
greeting.
"I trust that members will try to confine
their remarks on this occasion to questions
affecting the issue," began the Pelican.
"Hear! Hear!" cried the Kangaroo, thump-
ing the ground vigorously with his tail.
"I have been thinking over matters and
would like to make a few remarks," said the Emu,
stalking into the centre of the arena.
"Yes . . . yes . . . certainly. Attention!"
called the Pelican.
"Well, I—" began the Emu. He ceased and
stared towards the edge of the clearing.
"Why don't you go on?" asked the Chairman.
"I—I—" stammered the Emu. "Who—who
is this coming?"
The members all turned, and saw a little
girl who was standing, with her finger in her
mouth, gazing at the assembled Bush Folk in
wonder. She appeared to be about five years old,
and had blue eyes and golden hair.
"Ooh! It is Little Goldilocks!" cried Mrs.
Bear. "Dear Little Goldilocks."
"But Goldilocks has long hair," objected the
Bandicoot.
"I know she used to have," agreed Mrs. Bear,
"but all the humans have their hair cut off now.
I suppose her Mother cut hers off. I think it
was a shame, but she looks beautiful, all the
same."
"Yes, she looks good enough to eat," said
the Fox, sidling towards the little maid and baring
his fangs.
"What are you going to do?" asked the
Pelican, hastily.
"Only just going to see w T hat she's like,"
replied the Fox
But here the Wombat took a hand. "Get
back to your place, you," he said, grimly, "or I'll
butt you into the middle of next week."
"What right have you to interfere?"
demanded the Fox, angrily; "you mind your own
business."
"I'm making it my business," grunted the
Wombat. "Just get back to your place and leave
this little girl alone, or I'll tear the hide off your
back. Yes, and off your front."
The Kangaroo hopped forward and looked
down at the Fox.
"You dare to touch this little girl," he said,
"and I'll kick what the Wombat leaves of you into
the scrub."
"And I'll pick the eyes out of your head, if
you dare to touch her," screamed the Emu.
"Take my advice, and leave her alone," hissed
the Adder, sliding forward.
The entry of the Adder into the arena was
too much for the Fox. He backed away, hastily,
snarling, but keeping a wary eye upon the little
serpent, whom he appeared to dislike.
"You are a fine crowd to be talking about
revolting," he snarled. "You are going to deal
with Man, and yet, the first chance you get of
doing so, you want to adopt him."
"But she isn't a Man," objected the Bandi-
No; but she's a woman, or will be some
day, and that is even worse. If we had any sense
we'd take her and hold her as a hostage. Then
we could make terms with Man . . . the Father.
I suppose she has a Father; I understand that
most little girls have. And the men Fathers are
silly things. They'd give anything they had to
save their ridiculous cubs."
"We don't want to keep her: and we haven't
anywhere to keep her, if we wanted to," objected
the Bandicoot.
"I'd look after her . . . keep her in a safe
place," began the Fox, eagerly.
"I haven't the slightest doubt that you'd
keep her in a safe place," observed the Emu.
"Yes—a very safe place; but let me tell you—"
"That will do," interposed the Pelican. "Mr.
Fox, I must ask you to kindly resume your seat.
This little girl is our guest. Come along, my dear,
don't be afraid."
The little maid gazed, round-eyed, at the
Pelican. Then she allowed her look to stray
round the gathering of Bush Folk.
The Kangaroo stood to attention, while the
Brolga and Emu bowed in their best style. Then
she noticed the Mother Bear.


Dear little Teddy!'* she cried
"Ooh!
delightedly.
"That is Mrs. Koala," said the Pelican.
"Don't be silly!" gurgled the little maid.
"It's a dear little Teddy and it's got a littler one
on its back. Ooh ! darling little Teddies !"
"What is your name, my dear?" asked the
Pelican.
The little maid, who was stroking the fur
of the Koala cub, looked up. "I'm Judith," she
replied, dimpling.
"How old are you?"
"I'm five now. My birfday was las' Sattiday.
And my Mummy made me a cake wif five candles;
and Deidwee's birfday was on Sattiday, too."
"I see," said the Pelican, who didn't see at
all. "You are twins, are you?"
The little maid looked puzzled. "I dunno
what you're talkin' about," she replied at last.
"Is the other little girl your sister?" went
on the Bird.
"Deidwee isn't a little girl. She's a big girl.
She's seven," replied Judith; "and Mummy made
a cake for Deidwee, too, and it had seven candles
on it. . . . And we had cake and ice-cweam . . .
and lemonade . . . and waspberry. Do you like
waspberry?"
"I don't know what it is," replied the Pelican.
"Don't you ever have any birfday parties?"
"No," answered the Pelican, sadly.
"I'll tell Mummy, and then she'll let you come
to my next birfday party . . . and then you can
have as much waspberry as ever you like. Won't
that be nice?"
"Yes; very nice," replied the Pelican. "And
thank you so much."
At this stage the Fox, who had been regard-
ing the scene with a very cold eye, coughed, in
an attempt to attract attention. But, as no one
took the slightest notice of him, he started up and
snarled:
"Look here! Haven't we had about enough
of this foolishness? Why don't you get on with
the business of the meeting?"
"The business of the meeting can wait," said
the Pelican, impatiently. "I'm going to talk to
this little girl."
"But —" began the Fox.
The Kangaroo interrupted him rudely. "Oh,
do keep quiet!" he cried. "You are never happy
unless you are making a nuisance of yourself. If
you are so very anxious to get on with the
business, for goodness' sake, go away and hold a
meeting by yourself. Then you can have things
all your own way. But I'm going to talk to this
dear little girl."
"So am I," said the Bandicoot; while the
Kookaburra set up a cheerful "Huh-huh-huh-ha-
ha-hee-hee-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo!"
"Ooh! There's dear old Jacko!" cried the
little maid, clapping her hands. "Hallo, Jacko!
How are you, Jacko!"
"Cheerful and chirpy," replied the Bird.
"Koo! koo! koo!"
"But, I say; this isn't fair," complained the
Bandicoot. "I can't see her, with all you great,
overgrown creatures crowding round her."
"And I can't see anything at all," squeaked
the Platypus. "And I'm sure the dear little girl
wants to see me."
"Sit down in front!" screamed the Cockatoo,
who was perched upon a branch at least twenty
feet from the ground, and whose view could not
possibly be blocked out.
"Get out of the way!" grunted the Wombat,
butting the lesser creatures aside. "The little
girl would rather see me than you odd-looking
creatures."
"I think she should sit on that stump, in the
centre," said the Pelican. "Then we can all sit—
or stand around—in a circle, so that everyone can
see her. Would you like that, my dear?"
"Oh, yes," agreed Judith. "And please let
me nurse the darling little Teddy."
The Pelican looked enquiringly at Mrs.
Koala, who at once waddled over to the stump and
allowed the little maid to gather her cub into her
arms.
"Where do you live?" asked the Bandicoot.
"Just over there," she replied, pointing over
her shoulder.
"With your sister?"
"Yes, and my Mummy and Daddy, too."
"What is your Daddy's name?"
"His name is Daddy."
"But, what is his other name? I mean, what
does your Mummy call him?"
"Mummy calls him Thweetheart."
"Do you play games?" asked the Kangaroo.
"Yes ... we play ladies; and we dance some-
times . . . and we cut out —Deidwee and me."
"What did you say your sister's name was?"
asked the Pelican.
"Deidwee."


t - r^"'.
J . BMfc M? & WBpy.-A
I know," cried the Kookaburra,
"Deirdre, isn't it?"
"That's what I said . . . Deidwee," replied
the little maid, calmly.
"Can you sing?" enquired the Mother Bear,
who had taken up a post close to the stump, so
that she might keep an eye on her cub.
"I can sing about the Twain," replied Judith.
"The Twain?" repeated the Pelican. "What
is a twain?"
"The big puff-puff twain.'
The Twain goes puff-puff all the day
And puff-puff all the night;
I always think it's gone away,
But it comes back all wight. .
I often wonder why it goes,
To just keep comin' back,
And why it doesn't wash its clo'es
They're always drefful black.
And then I think I'd like to get
On board the puff-puff twain,
But I'm afwaid it might forget
To bwing me home again."
As she finished her song, the little maid
bowed solemnly, turning, so that she included the
whole of the Bush Folk, who screeched and
screamed and howled with delight at the per-
formance.
"And now, my dear," said the Pelican, "don't
you think you had better run home. Your
Mummy may be getting anxious about you."
"Yes, p'waps I'd better," agreed Judith.
"And, please, can I take this darling little Teddy
wif me?"
"I'm so sori'y, but poor Mrs. Koala ... I
mean, poor little Mother Bear would be lonely
without her Teddy," replied the Pelican.
"But I'd look after him. He could sleep in
my cot with me."
"But, see, my dear, if someone took you
away, and your Mummy could not find you, what
would she say?"
"Oh, she'd cwy all night, and so would my
Daddy," replied Judith. "Well, can I have my
darling little Teddy to play with next time I
come?"
"Of course, you can, my dear. And come
again, as soon as you like. But, do you think
you can find your way home?"
"I'll go with her," exclaimed the Kangaroo.
"And I'll see that nothing interferes with her,
too," he added, looking sourly at the Fox, who,
however, appeared to have lost all interest in the
proceedings.
"And I'll go with Mr. Kangaroo," said the
Emu. "And I'd like to see anyone try to stop
me."
"I'm sorry I can't go," grunted the Wombat.
"But I'm not very fast, so I suppose I'd only
delay you. But I hope Judith will come along
again."
"I'll fly on ahead and see that the coast is
clear," cried the Kookaburra.
"Me, too," screamed the Cockatoo. "Me too!
Me too!"
KOOKABURRAS. These two fine Australian "Cobbers" need
no introduction. Found in all States, and are the most popu-
lar birds in the Commonwealth
-Blocks by courtesy of Queensland Department of Public Instruction


CHAPTER VII
Figures and Fancies
J ELL, I am glad to see such a good
attendance," began the Pelican.
\ \ "And I hope we'll get some business
done this time," said the Fox.
"That is the purpose of the meeting,"
rejoined the Pelican, rather tartly.
"You'd never guess it," snarled the Fox.
"Whose fault is that, I'd like to know?"
demanded the Kangaroo. "Whose fault is that?"
"Meaning that it is my fault?" retorted the
Fox.
"Just meaning that," said the Kangaroo.
"Well, I must say I like that," observed the
Fox, looking round the meeting. "Why, I am
about the only member who sticks strictly to
business, and doesn't allow himself to be side-
tracked by girls, and—"
"That will be quite enough," broke in the
Pelican. "The dear little girl, who was present
at our last meeting, was very welcome. I am
speaking for myself, of course, but—"
"You are speaking for us, too," cried the
Bush Folk, with the exception of the Fox and
the Dingo, who remained silent.
"And I am sure that we are all looking
forward to her next visit," added the Pelican.
"Hear! Hear!"
"Oh, all right; have it your own way,"
growled the Fox.
"Would the members like to hear my
figures?" asked the Adder, timidly.
There were cries of protest at the suggestion,
but the Pelican called for order and observed:
"I really think that Mr. Adder is entitled to
a hearing. You won't be very long, will you?"
"Oh, no," cried the Adder, eagerly. "I have
them all ready . . . just a few calculations."
"I think I'll have a little sleep," observed
the Wombat, rolling over.
And the Adder began: "The trouble started
with the introduction by Man of foreign creatures
—aliens to our soil—"
"Are you going to start that all over again ?"
snarled the Fox. "I thought we had settled that
question at our first meeting."
"Order! Order!" cried the Chairman. "I
must ask members not to interrupt—"
"In the old days," went on the Adder, "the
Bush Folk of Australia had adjusted themselves
to their environment. It was the fault of Man
that the balance was upset, though I am willing
to admit that he acted in ignorance.
"Take the Sparrow, for example. For many
centuries the Sparrow had been regarded with a
tolerant eye. That was in England, of course,
where, I understand, the Sparrow was
accustomed to spend his spare time in running
down and devouring earwigs and other objection-
able insects. So, naturally, the farmer looked
upon him as quite a useful little fellow to have
about the place. In the cold and wintry weather,
he encouraged his children to cast crumbs of
bread to their humble little friend. He was
humble in those days. Everybody loved him . . .
even the poets, who wrote pretty little twittering
verses about him in the Spring "
"Of course, this is very interesting,"
observed the Pelican, "but I thought you were
going to give us some figures.
"They are coming now," replied the Adder.
"In England the Sparrow, like the Bush Folk here
. . . the original Bush Folk, I mean, had adapted
themselves to the conditions in which they were
placed—"
"Isn't this thrilling?" whispered the Emu,
leaning over towards the Kangaroo.
"Let us hope it will improve with age,"
rejoined the Kangaroo. "If he keeps on in this
strain much longer, I am afraid I'll be keeping
the Wombat company."
"But when the Sparrow arrived here,"
proceeded the Adder, "he appeared to lose his
sense of proportion-—"
"You mean addition, don't you?" broke in
the Emu.
"No—proportion. The Sparrow, as I have
said, lost all sense of proportion—"
"It is news to me to learn that the Sparrow
ever had any sense to lose," growled the Fox.
But the Adder was not to be side-tracked.
He went on: "A bird that in his (or her) home-
land had behaved with propriety and decorum—"
"Oh, Gosh!" cried the Emu; "propriety and
decorum!"


The Adder resumed: "With propriety and
decorum, no sooner found himself (or herself)
in the great open spaces than he (or she) went
flat out after records—"
"He'll be bursting into poetry in a minute,"
observed the Emu.
"Flat out," repeated the Adder. "Appar-
ently the business of chasing the drowsy earwigs
and other objectionable insects of England had
merely served to keep the Sparrow in good health,
but he (or she) soon discovered that it was quite
hard work to run down the agile Australian species
and so he (or she) decided to become a vegetarian.
There was wheat in abundance, to be had for
the taking, so why work?
"It is estimated that a single pair of
Sparrows, given favourable conditions, will
increase, or could increase, to sixty-five thousand
pairs in five years. Do you realise what this
means? It means that, at the end of twenty
years, the Sparrows in Australia would number
sixty-five thousand times sixty-five thousand
times sixty - five thousand times sixty - five
thousand pairs.
"There would be enough Sparrows to devour
the whole wheat crop in a few days. In fact,
there would be so many Sparrows that there
would no longer be any room for the wheat crop,
as the Sparrows would cover the whole country,
and even shut out the light of the sun. I have
the details all set out here. Would you like me
to show them to you, Mr. Pelican?"
"I do not know anything that I should like
less," declared the Pelican, earnestly.
"The Sparrow should be ashamed of himself,"
declared the Fox. "I move that he be expelled
from the Union."
"Second that," ventured the Rabbit.
The Adder looked at the Rabbit curiously.
"I don't think I'd do that, if I were you," he
advised.
"Why not?" asked the Rabbit, in surprise.
"Because," replied the Adder, solemnly, "the
Rabbit is an even greater offender in this respect
than the Sparrow. I have the figures here—"
"I don't think we'll have any more figures;
that is, if you don't mind very much," said the
Pelican.
"Very well," agreed the Adder. "The rate
of increase of Rabbits in this country is such
that, if all were allowed to die from natural
causes (about sixty millions are killed every year
by Man), within twenty years the whole country
would be covered by Rabbits . . . eight or nine
deep. There would not be another living creature
in the land: not a tree: not a blade of grass—"
"We've heard quite enough," cried the Fox.
"I move that the Rabbit be expelled from the
Union—straight away—this very minute, before
he increases any more."
"Half a mo'," said the Dingo. "Who brought
the Rabbit here?"
"Man, I suppose," admitted the Fox.
"Well, then," said the Dingo, triumphantly.
"Man is really responsible for the whole trouble.
If anyone is to be expelled, let it be Man. Let
us get rid of the cause of the trouble. Obliterate
Man: and then we can deal with the Rabbit at
our leisure."
"Oh, yeah !" sneered the Fox. "You're clever,
aren't you? Can't you see that while we are
occupied in obliterating Man, the Rabbits, having
a free hand, would increase and multiply until
they had covered the whole country . . . eight or
nine deep ? And there wouldn't be a living
creature left, except Rabbits, nor a tree, nor a
blade of grass. It's horrible! What could I get
to eat?"
"You wouldn't be interested in food,"
observed the Adder.
"I'd always be interested in food," retorted
the Fox.
"Not if you were dead, and that's what
you'd be," replied the Adder. "And that's what
we'll all be if we don't stop the Rabbit going on
in such a fashion."
"I'm sorry," said the Rabbit, sadly. "I
didn't mean to do it."
"I am quite sure you didn't," said the kindly
Pelican. "You couldn't possibly know what
would happen. At least, I don't think you could."
"I could have told him," said the Adder.
"But no one ever listens to me. I don't push
myself forward; I'm too modest, that's what I
am."
"Did you ever think of employing a publicity
agent?" asked the Fox. "Someone to blow your
trumpet, you know!"
"You certainly don't require a trumpeter,"
remarked the Emu, looking hard at the Fox.
"That will be enough from you," retorted
the Fox. "Go on, Mr. Adder. At least, you do
know what you are talking about."
"Thank you, Mr. Fox," said the Adder,
gratefully. "It is nice to find one's efforts
appreciated. Well, as I was—"


Nay, rather should you envy him —
No cars, to threaten life and limb —
No rent to pay ... no tax to bear—
No, nothing, only Prickly Pear;
And not a thing on earth to do
But chew . . . and chew . . . and chew .
. . and
"Oh, my goodness! That wretched reptile
is going to unload some more figures on us,"
murmured the Kangaroo.
The adder went on: "I shall not trouble you
with any details about the Starling for, although
that bird's actions have been unpleasant (to say
the least of them) he has not yet—l repeat, not
yet—started after records in the matter of
increasing and multiplying. No; I shall confine
myself, during my few remaining remarks, to the
introduced vegetable pests.
"There is the Sweetbriar, for instance a
modest little plant, as I learn, in its homeland,
but disposed to become aggressive here. Then
there is the Blackberry—"
"Blackberries are beautiful things!"
screamed the chorus of birds.
"Blackberries are not wholly evil, I am
willing to admit. But what is there to be said
in favour of the Prickly Pear? Echo answers,
'Not a thing!"'
"But I understand that the Prickly Pear is
being dealt with . . . successfully dealt with. Is
not that so?" asked the Pelican.
"That is so," admitted the Adder. "It is
being successfully dealt with by the Cactoblastus
Cactorium—"
"Order! Order!" cried the Pelican, hastily.
"I don't like such language. lam surprised at
you, Mr. Adder."
"What have I done?" asked the Adder, in
surprise.
"You have been guilty of using bad language
un-Parliamentary language," said the Pelican,
firmly.
"Not me," replied the Adder. "I merely told
you the name of the little creature which has
been brought in to deal with the Prickly pear."
"And what did you say the name of this—er
—this creature was?"
"Cactoblastus Cactorium."
"Do you seriously assure this meeting that
that is the name of a living creature?"
"I do."
"And who gave it that name?"
"Man, I presume."
"This is a bit over the odds," exclaimed the
Fox. "Even if I hadn't been in favour of
obliterating Man before, this last infamy would
swing my vote in favour of it. It's an outrage,
that's what it is. Fancy being saddled with a
name like that."
"Cactoblastus doesn't mind," said the Adder.
"It doesn't care a hoot what you call it, so long
as you don't take away its Prickly Pea. I have
some verses about it ... if you'd care to hear
them."
"Yes; let's have them, by all means," said
the Dingo. "They'll be pretty bad, if they're not
better than your figures." And, thus encouraged,
the Adder struck up:
THE SIMPLE LIFE
The Cacto. has a stylish name,
For which he's not at all to blame;
He took just what they handed out
And trotted off, and set about
The little job he had in view—
To chew the Pear ... to chew and chew.
The Cactoblastus doesn't care
For anything but Prickly Pear;
Depression, and the price of gold,
And cost of living, leave him cold;
He doesn't even read the news,
But calmly sits . . . and chews . . . and chews.
Do not despise this humble bug,
Nor look upon him as a mug,
Because he sits and chews the Pear,
And doesn't know, and doesn't care
About Defence, or S.P. bets,
Or how you'll ever pay your debts.
CHEW!
As the Adder concluded, a strange-looking
little creature waddled into the clearing. It
appeared to be a bird of some kind, but had an
unfinished look as it was covered mostly with
down, though it had bunches of feathers here
and there stuck on, without any attempt at order.
The creature had a long neck, which seemed to
have a permanent list, giving it a curious, one-
sided appearance. It stopped in front of the
Pelican, as though it recognised that bird as the
leader. Then, lifting up its voice, it remarked:
"Quah . . . quah . . . quah . . . quahk!"
The Pelican gazed curiously at the newcomer.
"I don't think I have seen you here before," he
remarked at last. "Who are you?"
"I'm the Motherless Duck," replied the
stranger. "I'm the Motherless Duck, and I'm
clean out of luck. Quah —quahk."
"Look here," said the Adder, "if you were to
lay sixty-five thousand eggs and each of the sixty-
five thousand hatched out, and then each of the
new ducks laid sixty-five thou —"


"I decline to lay sixty-five thousand eggs,"
broke in the newcomer. "I'm a drake."
"You shouldn't call yourself a Motherless
Duck, if you are really a Motherless Drake," said
the Adder, angrily.
"Why do you call yourself an Adder?"
demanded the little creature.
"Because that is what I am ... an Adder."
"You are nothing of the kind," retorted the
Motherless Duck. "I have been standing there,
listening to you for the last half-hour, and you've
only been multiplying. You're a multiplier, that's
what you are—not an Adder."
"Hith!" said the Adder.
"Hith, yourself," retorted the Motherless
Duck.
"I think we should adjourn now," said the
Pelican. "I am sure that we are all very grateful
to Mr. Adder for his very interesting and instruc-
tive address; and I trust that on some future
occasion—perhaps next year or the year after —
we may have the pleasure of hearing him again."
"Hurr-r-r-r-r, ha-ha-ha, hee, hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-
oo-00-00-," laughed the Kookaburra.
CHAPTER VIII
The Forest King
JIM MORRISON came out of his tent just
as the rising sun glinted through the tree-
tops. He stretched himself, and then
began:
There's a tang and a bite in the morning air
That tells of the coming Spring,
And I laugh at trouble and sordid care,
As into the saddle I swing.
With a bound, we are off, in a tingling breeze,
While the morning glory falls;
While the cobwebs hang from the dripping trees,
And the startled Plover calls.
A rush and a leap, and the stream is cross't .
Past the swamp, where the Pheasants hide;
Hear the Curlew call, like a soul that's lost!
See the silent Dingo glide!
Ho! a Magpie carols his morning lay,
And a jolly old bird is he,
As he sits on a branch, at the break-o'-day,
And warbles to welcome me.
Oh, the world is fair, and my heart is light,
As we rush to clear a log,
And I laugh aloud at the cheerful sight
Of my frisking, barking dog.
Lo! a scuttling hare, and my dog gives tongue,
But he merely barks in play.
List! the Black Duck calls to her straying young
With a quacking of mild dismay.
Oh, the air is keen, and my horse is strong
I rise in the stirrups and sing
Till the Gum-trees echo my cheerful song
And the mountain gullies ring.
Let the merchant boast of his hoarded gold
The lawyer his princely fee;
The broker sits chained to a city stool
And mutters of stock and share,
But I have been bred in a diff'rent school
And fed upon other fare.
For the air is keen, and my steed is strong
I rise in the saddle and sing
Till the mountains echo a Freeman's song
And the Forest hails me King!


"Ha-ha-ha-ha, heh-heh-heh, hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo,
hee-hee-hee, hoo-hoo! oo! oo! oo! oo!" called the
Kookaburra from his usual perch.
"Hallo, Jacko," cried Jim, "feeling chirpy
this morning, eh?"
"Oh, just so-so," replied the bird. "Just so-
so."
"Anything gone wrong with the Revolt?"
asked Jim.
"Not to say wrong, exactly. But I've been
listening to figures until my poor head is buzzing.
It feels like a swarm of Bees sounds."
"So the Adder managed to get his blow in,
after all?"
"And what a blow it was," replied Jacko,
solemnly.
"What was he trying to prove?" asked Jim.
"Trying to prove!" repeated Jacko. "He
proved that there wouldn't be a living creature in
this continent in a few weeks ... or it might
have been years. My head is not what it was.
He told us that, if we don't do something about
it, pretty pronto, the Sparrows will be so thick
that we won't be able to see the sun. Yes, and
that isn't the worst by any means. The whole
country is to be covered, feet deep, or it might
have been yards deep, with Rabbits. Oh, the
Revolt hasn't a chance."
"But I thought you were going to abolish—
or was it obliterate—Man?" asked Jim, in
surprise.
"Yes," replied the bird, mournfully, "but
what is the use of obliterating Man, if the whole
country is to be covered yards deep with Rabbits,
while we are looking the other way? Yes, and
Sparrows so thick that we won't be able to see
the sun? What is the good of Sparrows, any-
how ? And who wants to live in a country
covered, miles deep, by Rabbits?"
"But Rabbits are good to eat, you know,"
urged Jim.
"Aw, only Man eats them really now, since
the Dingo and the Fox got tired of chasing them
and took to eating Lambs. And, supposing we
do get rid of Man, what happens? The Adder
said that Man kills about sixty million Rabbits
every year, and that, if Man stopped killing them
for only one year, those sixty million Rabbits
would keep on increasing and multiplying till
there were . . . Oh, I forget, how many. But it
was something awful. Do you know that every
time I breathe seven hundred and thirteen more
Rabbits appear—"
"You should try holding your breath,"
suggested Jim.
"What's that?" cried Jacko. "Yes; I suppose
I could do that. I wouldn't mind holding my
breath for half a day—half a day a week—if I
thought that would do any good. But I don't
suppose it would. The Rabbits wouldn't know I
was holding my breath, and I don't suppose they'd
care if they did know. Oh, bother the Rabbits,
anyhow; I'm going to attend to my own affairs.'
"Wise old bird!" laughed Jim.
"What, Me?" cried Jacko, in alarm. "I'm
not the wise bird. You are thinking of the Owl."
"I have often wondered how the Owl got his
reputation for wisdom," observed Jim.
"Oh, that's dead easy," replied the Kooka-
burra. "It is just because he just sits still and
doesn't say anything. Everyone thinks I must
be silly because I laugh and chatter and enjoy
life. But the Owl just sits and stares, and stares
and sits, and never utters a sound but that
'Book-Book!' of his. People don't know what it
means, so they conclude that it must be some-
thing terribly clever. But, if you ask me, I think
he doesn't say anything, for the simple reason
that he doesn't know anything. That is what I
think of the Owl."
"I'm not sure that you haven't solved the
problem," said Jim. "Now I come to think of it,
that is Man's own attitude towards life. If a
chap is in the habit of laughing and telling every-
one he meets that the world is a jolly good place
to live in, people look upon him as an Ass . . .
an amiable Ass, perhaps, but none the less an
Ass. Another fellow wears a long face and shakes
his head, mysteriously, when his opinion is asked,
meaning to say that the whole world is going to
the dogs and bad times are coming . . . droughts,
and floods and fires and shipwrecks and wars —
and the whole silly crowd look upon that mournful
bloke as one of the few wise men who have
survived."
"But every Man is not an Ass," objected
Jacko. "You are not an Ass."
"Thank you, Jacko," laughed Jim. "Though
I have my doubts sometimes."
"And we had a little girl at our last meeting.
She wasn't an Ass, either."
"What brought a little girl to your meeting?"
asked Jim.
"She just wandered in. The meeting had
hardly started when she just drifted along."


"And what did the members have to say
about it?" asked Jim. "Didn't she interrupt the
business ?"
"Koo! koo! koo! koo!" laughed the Kooka-
burra. "Interrupt the business! She stopped the
meeting."
"I don't get you," said Jim.
"Everything stopped as soon as she put in
an appearance. Then we got the little girl to sit
on a stump in the centre, and all the Bush Folk
sat round or stood round and talked to her—or
listened to her. And Mrs. Bear let her have her
cub to cuddle. It was the best meeting we have
had so far. Though the Fox didn't think so."
"So the Fox didn't do anything to entertain
the little girl?"
"No," replied Jacko. "When the little girl
came, the Fox got up and started sidling towards
her. You know how that sneaking animal moves.
He was baring his teeth, too—"
"Yes; and what happened then?"
"Then the Wombat stood up to him. Oh,
you should have heard the things he said to the
Fox, too. And when the Wombat had finished
the Kangaroo took a hand . . . said he'd deal
with whatever the Wombat left of him. And then
the Emu told him that, if the Kangaroo left any
of him, he would attend to it. But the Fox stood
up to it pretty well, till the Adder started for
him. I got the impression that the Fox doesn't
like the Adder. I don't know why, I'm sure. I
think he is a nice little chap."
"I cannot say that I am over fond of the
Adder myself," said Jim. "But I guess it is only
prejudice. He has never done me any harm.
Possibly he is a very affectionate little creature,
but I wouldn't fancy him as a pet."
"I think he would be a dreadful trial,"
laughed Jacko. "But you ought to hear him
rattle figures off. And so modest about it all,
too. He told us he was modest, so it must be
true. At least, we wouldn't have known if he
hadn't told us. When he told us that, the Fox
asked him didn't he ever think of hiring someone
to blow his trumpet for him. I don't know what
the Fox meant by that, because I had never seen
the Adder with a trumpet."
"How long did the little girl stay?" asked
Jim.
"Until the meeting was over."
"But she had to go home then, didn't she?
I wouldn't trust that Fox."
"Neither did we," laughed Jacko, "so we
decided to see her safely home. The Kangaroo
and the Emu walked . . . one on each side of her,
with the Bandicoot and the Paddymelon in front,
and the Goanna bringing up the rear—and flocks
of birds . . . Cockatoos and Magpies and Parrots
and Pigeons, and, of course, I was there. The
little girl got home quite safely."
"You let me know if that Fox gets up to any
of his pranks," said Jim, "I'll fix him."
"I think we'll be able to deal with him,"
replied the Kookaburra; "but you never know
what the brute may get up to. And the Adder
may not be always around."
"Righto!" said Jim. "Come along any time
you have nothing better to do. Always glad to
see you."
"Ha-ha-ha! Hee-hee! Hoo-hoo-hoo!" replied
Jacko as he flew away.


CHAPTER IX
Another Visitor
THE next meeting of the Bush Folk carried
the matter of the Great Revolt very little
further, as the Pelican had hardly called
the members up for business when the proceed-
ings were interrupted.
The Fox had just begun a passionate attack
upon the common enemy, Man, when the Kooka-
burra set up a cackling.
"I do wish you'd make that fool bird keep
quiet, Mr. Chairman," said the Fox. "How can
one be expected to concentrate with that absurd
laughing?"
But the Kookaburra was not to be stopped.
"Stand to attention!" he screamed. "Stand to
attention! Visitors! Visitors!"
"Did you say Visitors . . . more than one
Visitor?" asked the Pelican, peering about.
"Yes," replied Jacko. "Two Visitors . . . the
little maid, Judith, and her sister. I suppose it
is her sister. Kark ! kark! ark! ark! kuck! kuck!
kook! koo! koo! koo! koo! Come in! Come
in! Don't knock!"
All the Bush Folk stood to attention, as
requested, and into the circle marched Judith,
holding the hand of a little girl, apparently older.
The older girl limped slightly, but otherwise
appeared to be strong and healthy.
In striking contrast to Judith's golden locks,
her sister's were as black and glossy as a satin
bird's wing.
"This is Deidwee," exclaimed Judith.
"How are you, my dear?" said the Pelican.
"Fix up a seat for her, some of you. Have you
had your leg hurt?"
"Yes; I fell on a broken milk bottle and got
the tendon at the back of my heel cut," replied
Deirdre.
"And Deidwee had to go to the hospital,"
put in Judith, who apparently felt that she was
being left out of things. "And the doctor gave
her a-—I forget what the doctor gave Deidwee;
but she had to count ten —"
"They gave me an anaesthetic," said Deirdre.
"That's what Judith means. And the doctor
sewed up my leg. I didn't like being in the
hospital a bit, so Mummy brought me home."
"And everybody came to see Deidwee and
bwought her pwesents," added Judith. "And I
wis' I could get my leg cut, so's I could get a
lot o' pwesents, too—"
"You ought to be ashamed of yourself,
Judith," said her sister, severely. "It wasn't a
bit nice getting my leg cut, or getting it sewed
up either. And, anyhow, Daddy got you a lot of
presents when you cried. Judith was real bad.
She said she'd run away from home if I had all
the presents. Wasn't she naughty?"
"Can I have darling little Teddy?" asked
Judith, who decided, apparently, that a change of
subject was advisable.
Mrs. Bear promptly handed over her Cub.
"I suppose we can get on with the business
of the meeting now," began the Fox, looking
sourly at the two girls.
"Let the business wait till next meeting,"
suggested the Kangaroo.
"That is a matter for the Chairman to decide,
I should think," said the Fox.
"What's that?" cried the Pelican, who had
forgotten all about the meeting. "Business? Oh,
well, that is a matter for the members to decide."
"Let the business stand over," cried the
members. "Bother the business! We want to
talk to these little girls."
"Yes; I agree with you," said the Pelican.
"Now, who is going to begin? You, Mr. Emu?"
"Glook! Glook! That is, later on," replied
the Emu. "The members would much rather hear
from one of our visitors, I think. Perhaps Miss
Deirdre would favour us?"
"Will you sing or recite something, my
dear?" asked the Pelican, addressing the elder
girl.
"My Daddy says I am not a very good
singer," she replied, "but I'll do my best. I think
I'll just call it 'Deirdre's Song.' You see, ,it
hasn't any other name." The little girl got up on
the stump beside her sister and began. Her voice
was not strong but it was sweet, and the Bush
Folk listened with rapt attention as she sang:


DEIRDRE'S SONG
Bears in their little nests agree
And don't fall out and fight;
Oh, what a dreadful thing 'twould be
To fall from such a height!
Now, often, when I cannot sleep,
The cats upon the tiles
Come in to help me count the sheep
And stack them up in piles.
When I was sick, a thousand Bears
Came in to visit me
Till every room, and all the stairs
Were crowded as could be.
And Golliwogs and Native Dogs
Came in by packs and packs,
And Kangaroos and little Frogs,
With numbers on their backs.
The Frogs climbed up upon the bed,
Or sat upon the rails;
The Bears pretended to be dead,
And held each others' tails.
Then one old Bullfrog climbed a pole
And lit a cigarette,
But dropped the "fag" and burnt a hole
In my mosquito net.
Each "Teddy" stood upon his head
And tried to count his toes,
But that was hard and so, instead,
He thought he'd count his nose.
I watched the Bush Folk dance and leap,
And murmured, "Hip! Hooray!"
And then somehow I was asleep,
And when I woke 'twas day!
And Mummy smiled at me and said:
"Come, darling! Here's your tea!"
And I sat up and felt the bed,
And there was only me ... "
The Pelican had been looking rather puzzled
as Deirdre's song went on but, as you doubtless
know, that bird is always polite and dignified.
"And do you think the Bush Folk . . . the Bears
and Kangaroos . . . and Frogs . . . really called
to see you when you were sick?" he asked at last,
looking anxiously at the little girl.
"Oh, I am quite sure they did," replied
Deirdre. "Auntie says I must have been asleep
all the time and dreamt it all; but my Daddy said,
'What nonsense!' He told me the Bush Folk
were as kind as they could be, and when they
heard that little girls were sick, they often and
often came along to cheer them up . . . and make
them better. And they made me better."
"Yes, of course, it all happened," put in the
Kangaroo. "I was there, so I ought to know."
"Do you seriously expect us to believe all that
nonsense?" demanded the Fox.
"Yes, of course, the Kangaroo was there,"
said the Bullfrog. "I saw him myself, and he
had all his family with him. Didn't you, Mr.
Kangaroo?'
"Yes . . . hundreds and hundreds of them,"
replied the Kangaroo, Without a blush. "Mr.
Koala can support me in that, can't you?"
"Yes . . . yes," faltered the Koala. "Yes, of
course it happened. I remember you speaking to
me, Mr. Kangaroo, but I don't remember any
other bear holding my tail. ... I must have
forgotten that part
"Teddy hasn't got any tail," gurgled Judith
to her sister. "Look!"
"Well, that's settled," observed Mr. Pelican,
calmly. "Now, who is next? Mr. Paddymelon?
You have a musical face."
"Thank you, Mr. Chairman," replied the
Paddymelon. "If our guests would like to hear
me?"
"We'd love it," said Deirdre, speaking for
both. And the Paddymelon, drawing himself up
to his full height, which was not very great,
recited vigorously:
The Paddymelon does not grow
Upon a vine, nor in a row,
Like peas or beans, as might be thought,
Nor in a bag may he be bought;
In fact, he's not a kind of fruit,
But just a simple little brute.
The Paddymelon . . . that is Me!
Is just a sort of Wallaby.
And what's a Wallaby? sez you—
Why, he's a sort of Kangaroo.
The Paddymelon hops about
And dodges in, and dodges out—
Keeps out of trouble, if he can,
And gives a wide, wide berth to Man.
He does not care for Dogs and such,
Nor love the Dingo over-much;
But little things like that, you know,
Are sent to try us here below.
But anyhow I'm proud to be
A super kind of Wallaby.
And what's a Wallaby? sez you—
A super kind of Kangaroo.


As the Paddymelon concluded the Kangaroo
bounded forward and stood, glaring down at his
humble relation.
"And so you are a super kind of Kangaroo?"
asked the owner of that name, in a fierce voice.
"I didn't say that," began the Paddymelon.
"No!" interrupted the Kangaroo, "but you
said you were a super kind of Wallaby, and the
Wallaby was a super kind of Kangaroo. What
did you mean?"
"I did—did—didn't mean anything," stam-
mered the poor little Paddymelon. "You see, it
was only poetry, and poetry never means any-
thing, really."
At this the Kangaroo put his head back and
laughed . . . and laughed, until he had to lean
up against a tree.
"Look here!" he said, when he could speak
again. "You take my advice and alter some lines
of that beautiful song of yours, or you may be
running up against trouble. Some of my brothers
will be turning you into a super kind of dead
Paddymelon, if they hear you. But such impu-
dence only amuses me."
Presently the Kangaroo's attention was
drawn to the Adder, who was plainly in distress.
"What is the matter?" he asked.
"A dreadful thing happened the other day,"
replied the Adder; "and I have only just
discovered it. You remember I was telling you
about the Sparrows? Well, I forgot to include all
the Sparrows in between."
"In between what?" asked the puzzled
Kangaroo.
"In between the start and the finish. I only
counted the sixty-five thousand times sixty-five
thousand times sixty-five thousand times sixty-
five thousand, and forgot all about the original
sixty-five thousand, and the second lot of sixty-
five thousand times sixty-five thousand, and the
third lot of sixty-five thousand times sixty-five
thousand times sixty-five thousand. Oh, I feel
so mortified!"
"I wouldn't worry about a little thing like
that, if I were you," observed the Kangaroo.
"There are too many Sparrows, anyhow. And
perhaps those others you forgot died."
"Did you ever see a dead Sparrow?" asked
the Adder, sadly.
"I don't remember. I never went out looking
for dead Sparrows. Had something better to do."
"But, after you had done everything you
had to do, that was better than looking for dead
Sparrows, you wouldn't have anything left that
was better to do that looking for dead Sparrows,"
persisted the Adder.
The Kangaroo blinked, but at length admitted
that he supposed he wouldn't.
"Well," went on the Adder, "if you went
out looking for dead Sparrows, you'd be
surprised."
"At the number of dead Sparrows I'd find?"
"No," replied the Adder, solemnly, "at the
number of dead Sparrows you wouldn't find."
The Kangaroo stood silent for a while; but,
apparently, the problem was too far back in the
book for him. . . .
"I'm sick of Sparrows," he said, at last.
"Well, take Bears," began the Adder.
"I don't mind," said the Kangaroo. "Where
shall I take them?"
"I don't want you to take them anywhere,"
replied the Adder, "though it is kind of you to
offer."
"Oh, I like Bears," said the Kangaroo, "and
there are not so many of them."
"Oh, there are quite of lot of Bears, too,"
went on the Adder;
Supposing that you count each Bear,
Then add up those that are not there;
Then enter quick, lest you forget
Each little Teddy Bear you've met;
Then every Bear you didn't meet
You'd mark, in figures clean and neat,
And then, in order to be fair,
You count the Bears that never were.
"I'm sorry, but I can't stay any longer," said
the Kangaroo, hopping away.
"I am afraid that our guests have not been
very much interested in all those figures,"
observed the Pelican, who was himself looking
very bored. "And it is getting late, so I suppose
we must close the meeting. But perhaps you
will be able to come again," he added, addressing
the little girls.
"We'll come again to-morrow, if you like,"
said Deirdre.


CHAPTER X
A Variety Show
HEN the Bush Folk met next day it was
noticed that there were two strangers
present. These were formally intro-
duced by the Emu as "My cousin, Mr. Casso-
wary," and "My distant relative, Mr. Jabiru, or
Black-necked Stork." The Cassowary bowed
gracefully to the assembled members; but the
Jabijju, an enormous fowl, with a huge bill like
a spear, contented himself with staring solemnly
at the Pelican.
The two little girls came along, bright and
early. Judith at once called for the Teddy Bear,
cuddling the furry little cub up to her and taking
no further interest in the proceedings; but her
sister sat up, bright-eyed and eager, ready for the
promised entertainment.
"Who will give us the first item?" began the
Pelican.
"I'll start, if you like," responded the
Bandicoot.
"You always want to lead the band,"
sneered the Fox.
"That's just the one thing I don't want to
do," retorted the Bandicoot. "Everyone knows
my retiring nature."
"I am quite sure of that," observed the Peli-
can. "Attention! Mr. Bandicoot will oblige!
Mr. Bandicoot!"
Mr. Bandicoot obliged:
Let lordly birds and animiles
Gaze at me with disdainful smiles
And deem me but a humble beast:
I am not worried in the least.
For well I know, for honest worth,
There is no creature on the earth
That stands in general repute
Above the little Bandicoot—
The Bandicoot . . . the Bandicoot!
The dainty little Bandicoot!
I do not claim that I should stand
In front, so I can lead the band;
Let others lead; from what I hear
The safest place is in the rear,
Besides, that suits my modesty,
So I trot on contentedly
Nor care one single little hoot
That I am but a Bandicoot—
A Bandicoot ... a Bandicoot!
A modest little Bandicoot!
"It is just as well that you told us you were
so modest," commented the Fox. "I'd never have
guessed it myself."
"Next, please!" called the Pelican, rapping
his beak sharply upon the stone which served as
the Chair. "Mr. Goanna; we have not heard
from you yet."
"I'm sorry, said the Goanna, looking very
sorry for himself, "but I never went to school,
and I don't know any words to rhyme with my
name."
"Never mind," said the Pelican, kindly—
Never mind, my dear Goanna,
Tho' you do not wave a banner
And can't play the grand pianner
Yet you have a pleasant manner.
"Oh, thank you so much, Mr. Pelican,"
exclaimed the Goanna, gratefully. "I think you
are a nice bird . . . the nicest bird I ever saw."
"Pleasant manner, huh!" sneered the Fox.
"I think it is simply absurd to flatter a ridiculous
creature like the Goanna. I suppose you'll be
making up some verses for the Platypus next."
"I am quite capable of making up verses for
myself," said the Platypus, loftily.
"Yah! You collection of scraps!" snarled
the Fox.
"What do you mean . . . collection of scraps ?"
cried the Platypus, angrily.
"Just exactly what I say," retorted the Fox.
"When they had finished making all the other
Bush Folk, they found they had a lot of bits and
pieces left, and thinking it was a pity to waste
all that material, they made you ... for a joke."
I don't think that is quite fair," interposed
the Pelican. "And I fail to see why Mr. Platypus
should feel ashamed of his appearance. I under-
stand that he is greatly admired . . . both at home
and abroad. Go on, please, Mr. Platypus."
Thus encouraged, the Platypus went on. His
voice was not very strong, but all the members
admitted afterwards that he knew his piece well.


THE PLATYPUS
I'm just a little Platypus,
They say I am a funny cuss,
But still I never make a fuss,
For, after all, it might be wuss;
Supposing they had called me "Gus,"
And made me ride upon a 'bus:
Why, that would be ridiculous . . .
In fact, it would be scandalous,
And, tho' I bear no animus,
It makes me feel all tremulous,
And cranky and cantankerous,
When I hear silly folks discuss
The lack of rhymes for Platypus,
When it is simply marvellous
The heaps of words that rhyme with "Us,"
Including Hippopotamus;
But more would be superfluous;
So that is all from Platypus,
Whom people call "A Funny Cuss."
"Oh, what a lot of big words you know,"
cried Deirdre, clapping her hands. "Doesn't he,
Judith?"
"What?" asked the little maid
"Doesn't he know a lot of big words?"
"I dunno what you're talkin' about," replied
Judith, calmly.
"Do you mean to say that you were not
listening to Mr. Platypus ?" demanded Deirdre, in
a shocked tone.
No; I was talkin' to darling little Teddy."
"Well, you ought to be ashamed of yourself,"
exclaimed Deirdre. "I never heard of such a
thing! Talking at a concert! Don't you think
she ought to be ashamed of herself, Mr. Pelican?"
"Judith is a privileged person," replied the
Pelican, softly. Then, turning to the members,
he added, "Now, Mr. Emu, are you ready?"
"I think my—er —my distant relative has
something to say," replied the Emu, looking
towards the Jabiru. "What about it, Mr. Stork?"
So far as could be judged, the Stork had
taken not the slightest interest in the proceedings
up to this moment, but, on being addressed
directly, he turned his head and said: "Yes, what
is it?"
"Can you recite?" asked the Pelican. "Our
friends, and your friends as well, would like to
hear from you."
"I don't mind," answered the big bird. "I
am a good reciter, if I do say it myself, though I
am better as an after-dinner speaker. But here
goes:
They call me a Stork ... a Black-necked Stork,
But I don't mind telling you
That my real name doesn't rhyme with cork.
Because it is Jabiru;
Jabiru is a very stylish name,
And I'm proud of my pedigree;
So you'll all admit that I wasn't to blame
When they plastered that name on me.
I stand on the shore of a lone lagoon,
And I concentrate and wish,
And, if I knew how, I would sing a tune
To attract a big, plump fish;
Then I'd raise my bill, like a flashing spear,
When that fish swam into view;
I'd lunge, while the other birds raised a cheer
For the champion, Jabiru.
"That fowl will be writing thrillers one of
these days, when he has a bit more practice,"
observed the Fox.
"Would your other—er—relative care to
favour us?" asked the Pelican.
The Cassowary stepped forward gracefully,
and bowed. "I am sorry," he remarked, "but I
haven't brought my music. Next time, perhaps."
"Certainly, Mr. Cassowary," said the polite
Pelican. "Your turn now, Mr. Emu." And the
Emu started up:
No need to stress my elegance,
Nor boast about my size . . .
My feathers, nor the piercing glance
That burns within my eyes.
These points are known, yes, known, indeed,
Throughout this country vast;
I need not speak about my speed
But, Golly! Ain't I fast?
The Kangaroo can show some pace
He does the best he can;
But when he meets me in a race
He's just an "also ran";
To-day a Flash of Lighting tried
To race me for a bet;
I laughed until I almost died . . .
That poor thing's running yet!
As the Emu concluded, he looked round,
waiting for the usual burst of applause. But
the last verse of his song appeared to be too
much for his audience. Deirdre rose from her
seat and walked across to the Kangaroo, who
stooped to hear what the little girl had to say.


"Ooh! Isn't that Emu an awful fibber?" she
whispered. "Just fancy him expecting anyone
to believe that he could run quicker than a Flash
of Lightning!"
"The Emu isn't a bad fowl in some ways,"
replied the Kangaroo, "but he simply can't help
telling tall stories. He's just built that way."
"Now, Mr. Kangaroo; it is your turn," said
the Pelican.
"Righto!" he replied; "I won't keep you
long. ..."
I don't expect that I shall be
Accused of over-modesty;
But still I will not waste your time
In searching for some silly rhyme
To prove to you that I am wise,
Or magnify my wondrous size.
My claim to greatness is secure,
And shall from age to age endure,
Despite the sneers of lesser folk,
Whose vain pretensions are a joke.
Still it is comforting to know
All living things admire me so,
That each and every one of you
Would like to be a Kangaroo.
"Oh, I was almost overlooking you, Mr.
Brolga," said the Pelican, addressing the Native
Companion, who was standing as though in deep
thought.
"Very well," replied the big bird, "I was
expecting a call, but I thought that, as you have
had so much singing, our guests might like to
see a dance for a change."
"Oh, I love dancing," cried Deirdre.
The Brolga lifted up his head and uttered
a loud and piercing cry and, within a minute,
about twenty members of his family stalked into
the arena and, after bowing to the members,
stood, awaiting the commands of their leader.
"Before we start the dance," said the Leader,
"I must explain to these good folk how it came
about that the Brolga became a dancing bird. . . .
THE BROLGA LEGEND
In the olden days, when the light was dim,
The belle of the Tribe was a maiden slim;
She was lissom and light, and she danced away
From the fall of night to the break of day;
And the Tribesmen sighed for that maiden sweet
With the graceful form and the dancing feet.
But she vowed she would wed no man but He
Who could dance with her the Corroboree . . .
Who could dance the steps with a tireless tread
Till the sun seven times blazed overhead;
But the Man who faltered and fell by the way
Must leave the Tribe for a year and a day.
It is told that the Tribesmen did their best,
But no single Man e'er survived the test;
So many were banished, that e'er they knew,
Of the younger men there remained but two:
And the Elders prayed to their gods for aid,
For they feared the lure of that Dancing Maid.
Then their gods gave ear to the Elders' prayer,
Tho' they smiled at the sight of that maiden fair;
"She must dance," they said, "for such is her
fate:
But the Tribe we must save ... if not too late."
So the Maiden vanished from sight of men:
And now, as a Brolga, She comes again.
As the Leader concluded the legend he
uttered a peculiar cry, and the other Brolgas at
once took their places, as if for an old-time
Quadrille . . . dancing, swaying and bowing to
partners . . . and changing the measure in
response to their Leader's calls.
The birds went through the performance
silently, as though they were taking part in a
religious rite, while the other Bush Folk . . . and
the two little girls . . . were silent and watched
the strange spectacle with interest.
Then the Leader uttered a new cry and, on
the instant, the dancers stopped . . . and bowed.
And the Bush Folk broke out into cries and
screams of delight.
"Oh, I never saw anything so beautiful, did
you, Judith?" cried Deirdre.
"Ooh! It was bew-ful," replied that little
maid who, in her interest in the dancing, had
dropped the little Teddy, who waddled across and
climbed upon his Mother's back again.
"Thank you, Mr. Brolga," said the Pelican.
"And please convey our thanks to your talented
family."
The Leader uttered a shrill cry, and the
dancers, again bowing solemnly to the assembly,
with a special bow to the two little girls, stalked
away through the trees and vanished.
"Well, I think we must close now," observed
the Pelican. "It has been very entertaining, I
think. ... I trust that our guests have enjoyed
it . . . and hope to see them again . . . very soon."
"Oh, yes; we'll be glad to come again!"
cried both of the girls.
"You will see them safely home?" said the
Pelican, looking towards the Kangaroo.
"You can rely upon us," replied the great
Marsupial, glancing round at the usual bodyguard.


CHAPTER XI
The Army
HEN the Bush Folk next met, the Fox
at once attempted to take charge.
"I must protest against the manner in
which the business of our Union is being con
ducted," he began.
"You might at least have the courtesy to
wait until I have declared the meeting open,"
said the Pelican, severely.
"Well, why don't you declare it open, and
be done with it?" snapped the Fox.
"Are you presuming to dictate to me . . . the
properly appointed Chairman?" asked the Pelican.
"I consider that it is competent for me to
dissent from your ruling if I don't like it," began
the Fox.
"Dissent, then, if it gives you any comfort,"
retorted the Pelican, shortly.
"It isn't the least bit of good trying to get
any business done at these meetings," complained
the Fox. "That Pelican won't give anyone else
a chance to say a word."
"You always appear to do your share," said
the Pelican.
"My share!" snarled the Fox. "And how
many shares do you want?"
"Oh, I don't think Mr. Pelican speaks out of
his turn; he's the Chairman, you know," inter-
posed the Bandicoot.
"Who asked for your opinion?" demanded
the Fox, angrily. "Anyone would think you were
an expert, to hear you."
"I am, in a way," replied the Bandicoot. "It's
like this—the Pelican speaks first, and then you
speak, Mr. Fox. That means that the Pelican
speaks before you, so you must speak after
him—"
"Yes; and then he speaks again, doesn't he?"
The Bandicoot bowed. "Granted. But when
the Pelican speaks again, he speaks after you, so
that you must have spoken before him. But you
had already spoken after him, so that each of
you has now spoken twice: that is, before and
after the other."
The Fox appeared to be overwhelmed by the
Bandicoot's logic; but the Pelican flapped his
wings and screamed triumphantly.
"How did you work that out, Mr. Bandicoot?"
he asked.
"Oh, by studying arithmetic and that,"
replied the other.
"I think arithmetic is a fine thing," observed
the Pelican. "And I must have my next family
taught arithmetic. Is there much of it?"
"Oh, lots and lots. There's addition
and multiplication—"
"That sounds hard," interposed the Pelican.
"What is it about?"
"That is what the Rabbits do . . . and the
Sparrows," replied the Bandicoot. "Increase and
multiply. You remember Mr. Adder was telling
us about them the other day."
At the mention of his name the Adder looked
up. "Sixty-five thousand times sixty-five thou-
sand times sixty-five thousand times sixty-five
thousand," he muttered. "Yes, that's what it is.
How many is that?"
"What are you talking about?" cried the
Pelican, impatiently.
The Adder repeated: "Sixty-five thousand
times sixty-five thousand times sixty-five thou-
sand times sixty-five thousand. That's how many
Sparrows there would be in twenty years. I am
just working it out."
"I hate multiplication," said the Pelican.
"Isn't there any other kind of arithmetic, Mr.
Bandicoot?"
"Yes; there is division."
"What is that about . . . not Sparrows, I
hope?"
The Bandicoot took a deep breath and
started: "Supposing you have caught six fish."
"What kind of fish?"
"It doesn't matter what kind of fish."
"What nonsense you talk," said the Pelican,
crossly. "That is the most important point.
Some fish are all bones. It isn't likely that I'd
be wasting my time over fish like them."
"What are your favourite fish?" asked the
Bandicoot.
"Let me see," replied the Pelican, closing his
eyes. "I think Bream. I don't often catch them,
as they mostly keep in the deep water —"
"Very well," said the Bandicoot; "now you
have just caught six Bream—"
"I like division!" sighed the Pelican.


The Bandicoot went on: "And just after you
catch the six Bream, two members of your family
come along—"
"Two! All the Pelicans in the district would
be along if they saw me catching Bream—"
"Only two come," went on the Bandicoot;
"and you like these two—"
"They'd be Horrie and Millie," said the Peli-
can, musingly. "Yes; I like them all right—after
dinner—"
"But you haven't had your dinner yet,"
objected the Bandicoot; "and, as you have all
those fish on hand, you naturally ask them if
they have a mouth on them."
"No one ever had to ask a Pelican if he had
a mouth on him! Anyone with half an eye could
see that!"
"les, all right," said the Bandicoot,
patiently. "You ask the other two to sit down
and have a bit of fish."
"I wouldn't be so silly," objected the Pelican.
"Let them catch fish for themselves."
"But these two are particular friends of
youi-s. Besides, you don't feel very hungry."
"A Pelican is always hungry!"
"But you didn't have the fish until I gave
them to you—by Arithmetic—"
The Pelican gasped and almost choked, and
before he had fully recovered, the Bandicoot was
into his stride again.
"You'd invite them to dinner with you—"
"I'd only give them one Bream each,"
declared the Pelican. "They'd want more, but
that's all I'd give them—one each—"
"You couldn't do a thing like that," objected
the Bandicoot. "You'd spread the six fish out
on the grass and ask them to help themselves—"
"You don't know much about Pelicans,"
said the bird. "Help themselves! They'd just
gobble up the whole six—all those beautiful
Bream."
"Oh, no, they wouldn't," said the Bandicoot.
"They'd just sit there politely, and you'd divide
the Bream . . . make a Division."
"I don't think much of Division," observed
the bird."
The Bandicoot px-oceeded: "Now, we have
three Pelicans and six Bream. How many Bream
would each Pelican get?"
"As many as he could gi-ab."
"No; there would be a fair division," replied
the Bandicoot. "Three into six."
"Three what?"
"Three Pelicans."
"And six what?"
"Six fish . . . six Bream. How many times
would three go into six?"
"Hold on!" cried the bird. "Pelicans don't
go into fish; fish go into Pelicans."
"But six would not go into three," protested
the Bandicoot.
"That's only a lot of nonsense," said the Peli-
can. "Six would go into three all right . . . why,
six would go into one, if the one was a Pelican
and the six were fish. I knew ai-ithmetic was
only foolishness. Let us get on with the
business."
"Oh, you are anxious to get on with the
business of the meeting now, are you?" observed
the Fox. "I thought we were in for a session of
arithmetic."
"I hate arithmetic," said the Pelican.
"I agree with you, Mr. Chairman," said the
Fox, with a wink at the Dingo. "The rules of
Arithmetic, especially the rules of Division,
should not apply to fish . . . cei'tainly not."
"What do you know about fish?" demanded
the Pelican.
"As much as I want to—"
The Pelican opened his great mouth, but
before he could utter the crushing retort he had
just thought of, the Kangai'oo hopped aci'oss and
whispered in his ear.
"Speak up; I can't hear what you say," said
the Pelican, crossly.
"Don't take any notice of the Fox; he is only
pulling your leg," said the Kangaroo, a little
more loudly.
The Pelican started up in alai'm and looked
at his feet. "He is not doing anything of the
kind," he snapped. "I am surprised at you . . .
saying a thing that isn't true."
The Kangaroo altered the form of his
l'emai'k. "He is only trying to get your goat."
"I haven't any goat ... I hate goats—nasty
things!"
"I mean, he is only trying to annoy you,"
said the Kangaroo, taking the direct method.
"Well, I wish you'd say what you mean,"
l'etorted the bird. He swallowed a couple of times,
and then went on, in quite a mild tone:
"It is possible that, during the heat of the
debate, we had overlooked the vital matter for
which our Union was foi-med—the obliteration


of Man. I propose that, in future, we confine
ourselves to a discussion of the means to that
desirable end. What do you suggest, Mr. Fox?"
"What do I suggest?" repeated the Fox. "I
suggest that we get going at once ... at once
and obliterate Man. That is what I suggest."
"But we decided that at our first meeting."
"Yes, I know we did," agreed the Fox, "but
have we done so? Have we obliterated Man? I
ask you, Mr. Chairman, have we?"
"There is always to-morrow," replied the
Pelican vaguely.
"You might just as well say there is always
next year," retorted the Fox. "And unless we
get a move on we'll be talking about how we are
going to obliterate Man next year; yes, and the
year after, and the year after that. To-day is
the time. To-morrow never comes. Act now!
That is my motto."
"Yes; but how?" asked the Pelican, gazing
helplessly round the meeting.
"Attack him! Get him on the run."
"And then what?"
"Run after him."
"It's no use talking like that," objected the
Pelican. "I can't run. You know that perfectly
well."
"And it's no use telling me to run after Man,'
grunted the Wombat. "I couldn't catch him in
a year."
"I think you will have to run after Man
yourself, Mr. Fox," observed the Pelican.
"I don't see why I should be expected to do
everything," complained the Fox.
"I haven't noticed you doing much so far,"
put in the Kangaroo. "Unless you call talking
doing something."
"You pride yourself upon being a great
runner," snarled the Fox. "What about you and
your friend, the Emu, having charge of that
department?"
"What do you mean by department?" asked
the Emu.
"There must be departments of various
kinds to carry out the plan of campaign," replied
the Fox. "To begin with, we must have a
Campaign Director—a General in charge of the
fighting forces. I nominate my friend, Mr. Dingo,
here, as General."
"Don't know anything about it," growled the
Dingo. "Why don't you be it yourself?"
"Perhaps I had better," agreed the Fox.
"But I must have a Chief of Staff. I appoint
you Chief of Staff, Mr. Dingo."
"What will I have to do?" asked the Dingo,
suspiciously.
"Oh, nothing, excepting to agree with what-
ever I propose; and —er —back me up."
"And I suppose you'll have a safe position,
well out of danger?" observed the Kangaroo.
"Look here!" said the Fox, in a fury. 'lf you
knew anything about such matters, you'd know
that the General always directs the operations
from the rear—out of the line of fire. What a
nice position an army would find itself in if the
General happened to get killed!"
"I wondered why you were so anxious to be
the General," said the Emu. "Now I know."
"We must not forget the Commissariat; that
is most important," observed the Bandicoot.
"I don't like the sound of it much," said the
Pelican. "Is it really necessary to have it?"
"Always done in the best armies. Isn't that
so, Mr. Fox?"
"Yeh . . . yes; that is, yes, of course." replied
the Fox.
"It is a very hard word . . . what exactly
does it mean, Mr. Fox?" enquired the Pelican.
"The Bandicoot will explain; it is his sugges-
tion," said the Fox.
The Bandicoot explained: "The Commissariat
is the department which looks after the provisions
—the stores for the army . . . attends to the
collection of food ... its storage and distribution.
The Army must have stores. Can't fight without
food, you know."
"In my opinion, most of us fight better when
we are hungry. "I know I do," grunted the
Wombat.
"Perhaps so," admitted the Bandicoot, "but
it is never done in the Army."
"Who is going to be this Commiss —what-
ever it is?" asked the Pelican. "Of course, I
might be, if the food was fish."
"You'd be eating the stores," remarked the
Fox.
"No; I wouldn't, really," protested the Peli-
can. "Of course, I might have a fish or two . . .
or three, after I had taken up the collection. I'd
be hungry, I expect. But I'd bring all the rest
along in my carry-all—lots and lots of them."


__ . ,
J m
M ' fJF Ma % <4
The Bandicoot pointed out that fish wo*ld be
only one item.
"I could round up a flock of sheep," suggested
the Dingo.
"You couldn't do that," objected the Fox.
"You'd be Chief of Staff, and it wouldn't look
well for the Chief of Staff doing work of that
kind."
"It would look a jolly sight better than
having other folk doing the job, and perhaps
eating the Sheep, when I was not there to protect
them."
"You'll have quite enough to do as Chief of
Staff," said the Fox.
"Oh, I wouldn't mind putting in a bit of over-
time in a good cause," replied the Dingo.
"Now; we shan't be long; we'll have the
whole campaign well under way in a week or
two," observed the Pelican, cheerfully.
"Yes; we have certainly managed to get
some business done at this meeting," said the Fox.
"I think someone should give those little pests
of girls a hint to keep away. . . . Coming here
disturbing our business."
"They are not pests," roared the Kangaroo,
stamping furiously. "And don't you let me hear
you call them that name again. They are two
dear little girls, and I hope they'll soon come along
again."
"And so say all of us," said the Pelican.
"They'll be welcome whenever they come. And,
if they interfere with business, we'll let the busi-
ness stand over."
MADAME KANGAROO . with her baby (affectionately known as
"Joey") in her "pocket" provided by Nature The full-grown male
Kangaroo frequently reaches the height of seven feet, and may weigh
as much as two hundred pounds.
•Blocks by courtesy of Queensland Department of Public Instruction


CHAPTER XII
Wisdom and Folly
T WONDER what has become of Jacko?"
I mused Jim Morrison, as he came out of his
_|_tent ... I haven't seen the old bird for
days. Hope he hasn't deserted me. Perhaps
something has happened to him—poor old chap!
But I don't think anyone would injure him—no
Man would. He'd be too scared; but I would not
trust some of those youngsters. They'd shoot
anything if they were allowed out with a gun.
It would be an awful pity. I hope—"
"Hur-rr-r-r, hee, hee, hee, hee, hoo, hoo, hoo,
hoo, hoo!" from the Kookaburra, who was perched
on the usual gum-tree.
"My word! I am glad to see you, Jacko,"
cried Jim. "I began to think you had quite
deserted me. Where have you been?"
"Oh, I have been busy," replied the bird.
"Busy?" laughed Jim. "You don't mean to
tell me that you have gone to work?"
"No . . . work came to me."
"That is a bit unusual, isn't it?"
"Let us hope it will keep on being unusual,"
rejoined Jacko. "I think I like a joke, as well as
most folk, but what I've had to put up with for
the past two days isn't a joke—very far from a
joke."
"What happened?" enquired Jim.
"The other morning," began Jacko, "just as
I had finished breakfast, a cousin of mine turned
up at my gum-tree. He had a female of the
species with him, and after I had said 'Hallo' to
him he said, 'Meet the Wife.' So I met her, of
course. Such airs you never saw. You'd think
she was a Lyre-bird, at the very least.
"I thought she might be sick, so I got off
one of my best jokes . . . kind of cheer her up,
you know. My cousin laughed till he nearly fell
off the branch. It was a new one on him. But
she! She just gave a little 'Heh! Heh!' . . . and
not a smile out of her.
"My cousin told me later that she came from
a very select establishment in the city—(l expect
it was the Zoo!) —and that she was very refined.
He asked me would I help him to find a nest, in
a good locality. He said she must have one with
an easterly aspect .. . and no neighbours too
close. She suffered from nerves, and must have
peace and quiet.
"Well, I thought I knew just the place for
them . . . nest all ready, in a gum-tree, just over
the hill; and a cheerful farmer, always ready for
a yarn. But she turned up her beak at it. Said
she couldn't think of settling down in such a
common locality, and got quite huffy because one
of the branches of the tree overhung a pigsty.
"I showed them about a dozen other trees
that first day, and not less than thirty next
morning, but nothing suited her.
"Then I told my cousin that what his mate
wanted was, not a good locality, but a good
bashing, and when he said, 'Oh, he couldn't do
that,' I offered to do it for him. That tore it.
They disappeared yesterday, without a word of
thanks for all the trouble they had given me. . . .
I spent a couple of hours looking for them."
"That was good of you, Jacko."
"Oh, not quite as good as you'd think,"
replied the bird, with a wink. "I wanted to get
that female by the back of the neck and try to
knock some sense into her silly head against a
tree."
"What a way to treat a lady," said Jim, with
a laugh. "You would not treat your own mate
like that, would you?"
"She doesn't need it . . . now!" replied the
bird.
Oh! Had her lesson earlier, eh?"
"Too right, she did. When we started house-
keeping she began to throw her weight about,
but I soon let her know that there was only
room for one boss in that nest, and I was It.
When I let up, she said she thought her neck was
broken, but admitted that she had been asking
for it. Koo! koo! koo! We have often had a
good laugh about it since."
"You are a very lucky bird," remarked Jim,
"to have a mate who can take a joke. As I was
saying the other day, quite a lot of people think
that the man who laughs must be a fool. If so,
I'm not at all sure that there may be a lot of
wisdom in folly."
"I don't get you," said Jacko.
"It's like this," began Jim. "But perhaps I
had better repeat some verses, written by a chap
I used to know. He said that, at first, he didn't
know whether to call his effort 'The Folly of
Wisdom' or 'The Wisdom of Folly,' but decided
upon the latter.


'J" SV' '•
>*•- - .H. VTVJ'V-%-
"The Wisdom of Folly, eh," said the Kooka-
burra. "It sounds like it ought to be something
in my line."
And Jim began—
THE WISDOM OF FOLLY
A foolish little fellow loved a foolish little girl,
And the foolish little girl loved him;
He didn't have a shilling,
But the little girl was willing;
So, tho' Wisdom bade them tarry,
They decided they would marry,
While the solemn old World looked grim.
The foolish little fellow and his foolish little bride
Laughed away the little worries as they came;
While the clever (?) people round them,
Seeking troubles, mostly found them,
These two fools went, laughing gaily,
Over trifles, beaten daily,
And they seemed to think that Life was but a
game.
The world is overflowing with the wisdom of the
dead,
But it kept on flowing past this foolish pair;
They snuggled up together
In the cold and wintry weather:
But they thought it was a pity
That, when flowers were bright and pretty,
Other people didn't want to get a share/
The foolish little fellow lived awhile, and passed
away,
And the foolish little woman also died;
But the mem'ry of their laughter
Seems to strangely linger after,
And the world is somehow brighter,
For that foolish little blighter
And the folly of his foolish little bride.
"That is what I think, too!" cried Jacko.
"Laugh! Laugh! Laugh! Koo! koo! koo!"
"By the way, how is the Great Revolt going
on?" asked Jim, presently.
'Oh, just going on. If you look close you
can see it moving. They appointed a General at
the meeting yesterday."
'Lh-huh! And who is to have the post of
honour?"
"Post of honour!" scoffed the bird. "Post of
safety, you mean."
"I don't get you."
"The Fox is going to lead the Revolt
from the rear," said Jacko.
"Still, that is only following precedent,"
observed Jim.
"Precedent?"
"Yes; the General always leads the army
into action—from behind. When I was at the
War we never saw the 'Brass Hat' who gave us
orders. I understand that he was in his dug-out
five or six miles behind the front trenches."
"What was the war about?" asked Jacko.
"Search me," replied Jim.
"But do you really mean to say that you
don't know why you were fighting?" asked the
bird, in surprise.
Jim shook his head. "If I ever knew, I have
forgotten. But I don't think I ever knew."
"Well! well! well!" observed Jacko, shaking
his head solemnly at every word. "What do you
know about that ? And the leader always keeps
out of danger. No wonder they think I'm silly.
When our crowd gets into a scrap, I always lead
. . . from the front—being the best fighter, you
know. But, in future, when there is any trouble
on, I'll pick out a nice post, on the top of a tree,
where I can get a good view. Then I'll sool the
others on.
"I think I'll start a war against the
Cormorants. I don't like Cormorants, and they
are nasty birds to tackle; but that doesn't scare
me. Not a scare. Who's afraid of the big, bad
Cormorant ?"


' *' * Cw <w "
"But look here," said Jim; "didn't you tell
me that the Cormorant had joined the Union?
You can't fight fellow members, you know. It
simply isn't done."
"Aw, I thought there must be a catch in it,"
observed Jacko.
"What about the fighting force . . . the real
army?" asked jim.
"Oh, we haven't come to that part yet,"
replied the bird, "and so far as I can see, there
won't be anyone left to fight after they have
appointed each other to jobs."
"All Generals, eh?"
"Oh, no," answered Jacko, "only one General
—the Fox! And he appointed the Dingo as Chief
of Staff. Then there is the Commi—Commis-
sariat, I think the Bandicoot called it. You'd
really think that ridiculous creature slept with a
dictionary, the way he talks."
"Is the Bandicoot to be in charge of the
Commissariat?"
"No; the Pelican, I think. He is going to
collect fish for the army."
"And I suppose the Cormorant is to be the
Pelican's Chief of Staff, eh?"
"I guess so," replied Jacko.
"I'm afraid the troops won't get fish very
often."
"That's what I thought," agreed the bird.
"But, when the Fox pointed that out," the Pelican
got quite huffy. He said he might have a fish
—or two—or three; but he'd be sure to bring any
he had left over along to the depot."
"Who is to be in charge of the depot?"
"Eh? I dunno. I suppose the Pelican and
the Cormorant."
"I'm afraid the troops won't get fish very
often," repeated Jim.
"No; I'm afraid not," said jacko. "And the
Dingo offered to round up the Sheep."
"He should be something of an expert at that
job," observed Jim.
"He has had plenty of practice," agreed
Jacko.
"And you say that nothing has been done
yet about the army—the fighters, who will be in
the front-line trenches?"
"What are trenches?" asked Jacko. "It's a
new one on me."
"Well, they are really kind of drains," said
Jim. "The soldiers dig trenches, and then get
into them, so that the enemy can't get at them."
"And do the enemy dig trenches, too?"
"Yes, of course they do."
"And get into them?"
"Yes."
"And stay there?"
"Not always. Sometimes they get out of
the trenches and fight."
"But aren't they safe in the trenches?"
asked the puzzled bird.
"Yes; safer than they are when they get
out."
"Huh!" scoffed Jacko. "If I found myself
safe in a trench, I'd jolly well stay there."
"But you'd have to get out of the trench
when the General told you to."
"But the General would stay in his own
trench, wouldn't he?"
"Oh, yes."
"Well, that settles it!" said Jacko. "When
the fight starts, I'm a General, see?"
"I think I'll be a General, too, next time,"
laughed Jim.


CHAPTER XIII
Ways and Means
« 7\ ND now," began the Pelican, when the
LA Bush Folk had attended for the next
_/ \_ meeting. "Now, as we have cleared the
air, as it were, I think we should revolve our-
selves—l think that is the right word, though it
may be resolve —revolve, or resolve ourselves into
a Committee of Ways and Means."
"Hey! What does that mean?" asked the
Wombat, sitting up suddenly and blinking.
"Do you mean to say that you don't know
what a Committee of Ways and Means is?"
demanded the Pelican.
"No, I don't," retorted the Wombat; "and I
wouldn't mind betting a couple of fish to a bunch
of carrots that you don't know yourself. You just
stand up there and get a lot of big words off your
chest and think you can put it over us. But you
can't put it over me, Mr. Billikin, or whatever your
silly name is. So put that in your pipe and smoke
it."
"I haven't a pipe," returned the Pelican,
coldly. "And, if I did have a pipe, I wouldn't
smoke it. I regard smoking as a filthy habit,
which is only practised by fishermen and other
low-down creatures. Not that I look upon all
fishermen as vicious. The line fishermen appear
to be harmless and quite content to sit there the
whole day long, so long as they get a nibble now
and then. One old chap comes down to my creek
a couple of times a week. He catches fish, too.
He used to throw them back into the water.
That was a silly thing to do. Now he passes them
over to me. He smokes; but I don't mind that.
The fellows I hate are those who bring nets —"
"You told us that part before," interrupted
the Fox. "What were we discussing?"
"Oh, yes," said the Pelican. "The Plan of
Campaign."
"We were discussing a Committee of Ways
and Means," grunted the Wombat, "and I said
I'd bet you didn't know what it meant."
"What! Me?" cried the Pelican.
"Yes, just you," retorted the Wombat.
"What does it mean?"
"A Committee of Ways and Means," began
the Pelican, slowly, "is—er—that is—a Commit-
tee of Ways and Means—is—er—is a Committee
of Ways and Means. Isn't that so, Mr. Fox?"
"Nothing but," replied the Fox.
"There you are," cried the Pelican,
triumphantly. "There you are. Mr. Fox agrees
with me. Now, what about it?"
"The Fox would agree with anybody, or any-
thing, to gain his own ends," grunted the
Wombat. "But he doesn't agree with me, I'm
thankful to say."
"Well, as we have now revolved ourselves —or
resolved ourselves —into a Committee of Ways
and Means, we can proceed with the business
before the meeting," resumed the Pelican.
"I think we are overlooking one very
important matter," observed the Adder.
"Has it got anything to do with figures?
Because if it has, I don't want to hear about it,"
said the Dingo. "I had a headache for days after
your last performance."
"I don't think we have time to listen to any
figures," observed the Pelican, hastily.
"It has not anything to do with figures,
excepting indirectly," replied the Adder. "It
deals with the sinews of war—"
"Oh, I see," observed the Pelican, who hadn't
the remotest idea what the Adder was talking
about.
"To start a war," went on the Adder, "we
must build up a War Fund, and the only
recognised way of doing that is by taxation."
"I don't like the sound of it much," said the
Fox. "What does it mean?"
"To start a war you must have taxation,"
went on the Adder. "It is always done."
"Are you quite sure it is always 'done?'
asked the Pelican, anxiously.
"Yes, quite sure."
"Well, if it always done, of course we must
do it," said the Pelican. "You all see that, don't
you?" he asked, looking round the meeting.
The Bush Folk did not see anything, but they
all nodded when appealed to, and the Adder
proceeded: "Every member must be taxed. I
should suggest a tax of fifty per cent, as a start."
"That sounds all right. How does it work
out?" This from the Fox.


"Well, take your own case," said the Adder.
"You hand over half your income . . . half your
collections ... to the general lighting fund—
the War Fund. If you collect two lambs, you hand
one of them in—'
"I won't do anything of the kind," snarled
the Fox. "Who's going to get the other lamb
—my other lamb? You?"
"I don't want your lamb," replied the Adder.
"But, say Mr. Kangaroo is appointed to receive
the taxes ... he would take charge of the second
lamb."
"What's that?" cried the Kangaroo. "Me
take charge of lambs! I decline to do anything
of the kind."
"Look here," asked the Fox, "who is going
to get the lamb . . . my lamb . . . after whoever
is to take charge of it keeps it for a while? I
mean, what becomes of the lamb . . . my lamb,
in the end?"
"You get it, I suppose," answered the Adder.
"Either you or the Dingo—"
"The Dingo can jolly well go and collect
lambs for himself," said the Fox. "And, if
I am going to get the lamb in the end, where is
the sense in handing it over? I'll keep it, when
I have it. Yah! You and your taxation!"
"All right; but, if we don't have taxation,
we must have Boards," said the Adder.
"What kind of Boards," asked the Pelican.
"They have Egg Boards and Milk Boards and
Meat Boards and Butter Boards and Onion Boards
and Fruit Boards and Export Boards—and lots
of other Boards."
"I always thought that boards were made of
wood," said the Pelican. "I didn't know they
made them of eggs and butter and milk. What
do we do with the Boards when we get them?"
"You don't do anything with the Boards,"
replied the Adder. "They do things to you."
"What do they do to us?" asked the Pelican,
in alarm.
"Oh, they stop you doing whatever you want
to do, and make you do what you don't want to
do. That is what Boards are for."
"Boards appear to me to be rather a pest,"
observed the bird. "Are you sure they always
have Boards?"
"Always," replied the Adder, solemnly.
"This appears to me to be a very serious
question," said the Pelican. "Of course, if they
always have Boards, we must have them . . . and
yet ... let me think."
The Pelican closed his eyes and appeared to
be wrapped in thought.
"Hush!" exclaimed the Kangaroo. "Mr.
Pelican is thinking."
"What is he thinking with?" enquired the
Wombat, lumbering forward and taking up his
stand in front of the Chairman. "What is he
thinking with?"
The Kangaroo beckoned to the Bandicoot,
who hopped across. "What does the Pelican
think with?" he whispered.
"With his brains, if any," replied the
Bandicoot.
The Kangaroo turned to the Wombat, who
was waiting for a reply to his question.
"With his brains, if any," he said.
"And, where does he keep his brains, if any?"
went on the Wombat.
"Where does the Pelican keep his brains, if
any?" whispered the Kangaroo.
"In his head, I suppose," replied the Bandi-
"In his head, I suppose," repeated the
Kangaroo, in a firm tone. "Yes, in his head, I
suppose."
Just then the Pelican opened his eyes and
flapped his wings:
"Silence!" cried the Kangaroo. "Mr. Pelican
has stopped thinking."
The Pelican looked calmly round the meeting.
"I have given the question of Boards consid-
erable thought," he began; "yes, considerable
thought. It is a very difficult problem, and one
that might easily prove too much for any but the
best brains among the Bush Folk. But I have
arrived at a decision which will, I feel sure, meet
with the approval of this—er—this great meeting
of intelligent Folk
"At the outset I felt that, if there have
always been Boards, then we must have Boards.
But, as we have never had Boards, then it seemed
to me that it w r ould be incorrect to say that there
have always been Boards. And, if there have not
always been Boards, then it was not imperative
for us to have Boards. And, if it was not impera-
tive for us to have Boards, then I could not see


why we should have Boards. And, if I could not
see why, then it seemed to me that none of you
would be able to see why, either.
"Finally, if none of us could see why, well,
that finished it. We would not have any of their
old Boards. Let them keep their Boards. Next
business."
The Wombat had been staring, round-eyed
and open-mouthed while the Chairman was deliv-
ering his judgment. As it concluded he said, in
an awed voice:
"Did you think all that out yourself, Mr.
Pelican?"
"I did," replied the Pelican, complacently.
"But doesn't it hurt your head?" enquired
the Wombat.
"Not now. It did at first, when I started
thinking. Now I can think and think for hours
and hours . . . and you'd never know I was think-
ing at all," answered the Pelican, who was
preening his feathers as modestly as if he were
just a common fowl.
"I always heard that you were a marvellous
bird," said the Wombat; "but I—but I—l think
I'll have a little sleep."
"Would I be permitted to make a few
remarks ?" enquired the Magpie, who was perched
upon a branch about twenty feet from the ground.
"Oh, is that you, Mr. Magpie?" said the
Pelican. "Of course, we shall be very glad to
hear from you. I have been expecting something
from you at every meeting."
"I have been waiting," laughed the Magpie.
"I am looked upon as a chatterer, I know, but I
like to say something when I do speak."
"Why don't you say something, then?"
snarled the Fox, "instead of going on in that
ridiculous fashion?"
"I'll say something, all right," retorted the
Magpie; "but whether you'll like it when I do
say it, is your own funeral. Here goes—"
THE MAGPIE'S PLAN
It seems to me, the Magpie said,
Before we deal with Man,
That we should spend some time instead
Upon my little plan.
Just teach the Lion, from his birth,
His proper food is grass,
And all the evils of the Earth
Would very quickly pass.
Or take the Fox, and make him feed
On leaves, instead of Sheep,
Or fill him with canary seed —
In bulk, you'd buy it cheap.
Then make the cruel Dingo feast
On hay, instead of blood,
And soon he'd be a gentle beast
And calmly chew the cud.
Then take our friend, the Wombat, he
Could spend his waking hours
In sucking honey, like the Bee,
From all the op'ning flowers.
The Kangaroo, whose graceful hops
Are surely hard to beat;
We'd teach him that the farmer's crops
Ain't grown for him to eat.
Of course, we shouldn't act in haste—
We'd preen our plumes—or pelts,
Then find out every creature's taste
And give him something else.
As the Magpie concluded his outrageous song
the Dingo leapt to his feet, with the hair on his
spine standing up like the quills on a Porcupine.
He bared his teeth at the bird, but, as that did
not appear to have any effect, he snarled:
"You'd feed me on hay, would you? And
I'd lie down and chew the cud, would I? Just
hop down from your perch and I'll give you an
exhibition of chewing."
The Kookaburra had been listening from a
neighbouring tree. He now flew across and
perched beside the Magpie—
"Hee, hee, hee! ha, ha! hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo!"
he began.
The Dingo looked fiercely at the newcomer.
"What are you laughing at?" he barked.
"Hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo!" repeated Jacko. "Tell
me when you are going to start chewing the cud.
will you ? I want to book a front seat for the
performance."
"G-r-r-r-h," growled the Dingo.
The Kangaroo took the remarks about his
diet calmly; and the Wombat, as we know, was
fast asleep. But the Fox appeared to be consid-
ering the matter. Presently he looked up at the
Magpie and remarked, in quite a cheerful tone:
"Your little song was very clever, Mr.
Magpie. I'm not quite sure that you have not
struck a solution of all the ills of the Earth. I'd


if-, * H' I WM }'y& VyTaMt t/f. *_ ; .«■* JBj» '.' *_L%P
like very much to discuss the question with you.
How about coming round to my place for a talk?"
"I am afraid I couldn't manage it," replied
the Magpie. "You see, my time is so fully
occupied. I had to put off no fewer than three
engagements to attend this meeting. But
perhaps I could spare a few minutes now."
"That will suit me," agreed the Fox. "Hop
down; you can sit on this log."
"What about you hopping up and sitting
here beside me. My friend wouldn't mind moving
along to make room, would you, Mr. Kooka-
burra ?"
"De-lighted!" chuckled the Kookaburra.
"Oh, yes—de-lighted. Koo! koo! You'll find it
a very comfortable perch, Mr. Fox . . . very nice
and comfortable."
"But you know quite well I can't climb a
tree," said the Fox.
"Oh, yes; I know that quite well," replied
the Magpie, winking at Jacko.
"Do you take me for a fool?"' asked the Fox,
savagely.
The Magpie looked critically at the Fox
before replying. "Do you press that question?"
he asked, innocently.
The Fox did not press the question
EMU . Australia's largest bird; and, with the Kangaroo, is featured
on Australia's Coat of Arms.. Though incapable of flight, can outpace
most horses
Blocks by courtesy of Queensland Department of Public Instruction


CHAPTER XIV
The Abduction
HEN the Bush Folk next met it was
noticed that the Fox was not in his
usual place.
"Think we're going to have a pleasant meet
ing," observed the Kangaroo.
"How so?" enquired the Emu.
"It looks as if the Fox had decided to give
the meeting a miss."
"You are an optimist," rejoined the Emu.
"That would be too good to be true. Ha! What
did I tell you?"
The Fox looked furtively round the meeting
as he loped over to his usual seat beside the
Dingo. He was plainly ill at ease, looking, as the
Bandicoot observed, "like a Goanna that had been
caught in the act of raiding a Brush Turkey's
mound."
"I wonder what that sneak has been up to
now?" said the Wombat.
"Don't worry yourself," remarked the
Kangaroo. "And, whatever he has been up to,
you may be quite sure that it is something not
very nice. However, it is hopeless to expect a
creature like that to behave decently. That job
should have been taken in hand when he made
his first appearance."
"At the first meeting, you mean?"
"No; when he made his first appearance on
the earth. He should have been strangled at
birth. I don't wish to be unkind," went ou the
Kangaroo, "but in my opinion the only good foxes
ai'e dead foxes . . . very dead foxes."
"My sentiments exactly," grunted the
Wombat.
"I need not remind you," began the Pelican,
"that time is going on . . . going on. Time is
going on."
"Never mind," said the Bandicoot, cheerfully,
"we've got eternity left."
"What's that?" cried the Pelican. "What
did you say we had left?"
"Eternity," replied the Bandicoot, calmly.
"Yes, yes," agreed the Pelican. "As you say,
we have eternity left. It is very comforting to
know we have eternity left."
"Just as well, perhaps," sneered the Fox.
"The way the business of our meetings is being
conducted, we'll be well into eternity before we
get a move on,"
"I do wish you would confine your remarks
to the business of the meeting, instead of continu-
ally trying to delay us," said the Pelican, severely.
"I like that," snarled the Fox. "You appoint
me General—"
"You appointed yourself," interposed the
Wombat.
"I did nothing of the kind," declared the Fox,
indignantly. "I leave it to the Chairman. Mr.
Pelican, was I not properly appointed General of
the Forces?"
The Pelican looked very uncomfortable at this
direct appeal for a ruling on a subject of which
he had but a vague recollection. But he was a
bird who could always be relied upon to do his
duty as far as he remembered.
"If my memory serves me," he announced,
"the question of the appointment of General was
—er —was not the subject of a formal motion.
It—it just happened."
"That's what I said," grunted the Wombat.
"You didn't say anything of the kind,"
protested the Fox. "You said I appointed myself.
The Chairman says that it just happened."
"Isn't that what I said?" demanded the
Wombat. "It just happened that you appointed
yourself."
"Am I the General, or am I not? Tell me
that," growled the Fox.
"Oh, be the General, if you like," said the
Wombat, graciously. "You are good for nothing
else. But don't you start giving me any orders,
or I'll let you know where you get off."
"You don't appear to realise your position,"
observed the Fox. "As General Commanding, I
can have any member of the force executed if
he refuses to carry out my orders."
"That's what you say!" grunted the Wombat,
lumbering over to the Fox. "Just repeat that,
will you?"
The Fox repeated it, but not quite so trucu-
lently, adding: "You must see that, unless
discipline is enforced, the whole thing will fall
to the ground."
"You won't have far to fall," grunted the
Wombat. "Have me executed, will you?"
"I appeal to the other members present,"
cried the Fox; "are you going to allow this fellow
to mutiny ... to defy me, the accepted leader and
General of the Forces? Are you?"


The Fox chanced to be looking directly at
the Kangaroo as he concluded his appeal. That
graceful animal at once hopped forward. "Do
you want my opinion?" he asked, mildly.
"Yes," replied the Fox, politely. "Are we
going to allow the Wombat to mutiny—to rebel
—to disorganise the whole force? Or are we
going to throw him out?"
"That's easy," replied the Kangaroo. "I
ain't."
"You mean, I take it, that you are in favour
of allowing the Wombat to mutiny; to —?"
"No," replied the Kangaroo. "I ain't going
to throw him out. And I ain't going to take
any orders from you."
"And I ain't, too," put in the Emu.
"I'm voting with the Ain'ts," cried the
Bandicoot.
"And so say all of us," broke in the Cockatoo.
"Now, all together—
"For the Fox is a no-good fellow,
And his heart is a dirty yellow;
If he had to fight,
He would die of fright . . .
He's a dirty, no-good fellow."
There was a sudden scream overhead, and
the Kookaburra arrived with a rush. He gasped
and croaked like a sick crow. What had become
of his cheerful laugh? What? It was evident
that the bird was labouring under some great
emotion. The Bush Folk gazed at him in wonder.
Then the Pelican spoke:
"What is the matter, Mr. Kookaburra?"
"She—She's gone!" gasped Jacko.
"Who?" cried the Pelican; "Not—not..?"
Yes; the little girl . . . Judith . . . she's
gone."
"What happened to her? Is she dead?"
"I don't know," replied Jacko. "She went
out this morning . . . and she hasn't come back."
"I'll go and look for her," began the
Kangaroo. The other members jumped up,
ready to accompany him, but stopped when the
Pelican spoke:
"I think it would be foolish to start out
without having a plan of campaign. Now, what
could have happened to the dear little girl? I
feel sure that none of our Bush Folk would dare
to interfere with her. At least, I feel nearly
sure," he added, glancing at the Fox.
"I don't feel sure at all," declared the
Kangaroo. "Not at all sure. But I'm going to
find out." He bounded over to the Fox and,
drawing himself up to his full height. It was
some height, too . . . nearly seven feet. He said,
in a dreadful voice: "Here, you! Do you know
anything about this?"
"Why pick on me?" stammered the Fox,
glancing up at the towering form, which
appeared to him to be as tall as the tallest gum-
tree.
"Don't try to put me off," cried the Kangaroo,
furiously. "Say yes or no, and say it quick, or
I'll tear the hide off you."
"And, if the Kangaroo leaves any of you,
I'll tear it into ribbons," said the Emu, stalking
forward.
"You are a beautiful crowd," snarled the
Fox. "How do I know where the wretched child
has gone? Why don't you—?"
He ducked suddenly, which was well for him,
as the kick launched by the infuriated Kangaroo
would otherwise have put paid to his account.
"Are you going to allow this?" he stuttered,
turning to the Dingo.
"Don't know anything about it, and don't
want to," growled the Dingo.
The Fox said nothing, and had a good reason
for his silence. For the next five minutes he was
fully occupied in dodging the whirling feet of
the giant Kangaroo. One stroke from the great
nail with which his toe was armed . . . and good-
night, Mr. Fox.
But the Fox, although not noted for courage,
is yet a fighter of parts. He was well aware
of both the strong, and the weak, points of his
foe. He knew that, if he could manage to get
behind the great marsupial, he would secure a
decided advantage. But the Kangaroo knew this
even better than the Fox. Whirling round, he
reached his selected tree in a couple of tremen-
dous bounds, and was then ready for the Fox's
attack. It did not come.
For the Emu had taken a hand. The Emu
has a very long neck and a very sharp beak. But,
if ever you have to fight an Emu, watch his feet;
for he can kick like a horse. He rushed the Fox
who managed, by turning and twisting, to avoid
the feet. And then, backing into the bushy top
of a fallen tree, he found himself reasonably safe
for the moment.
The Emu stood, looking at him: "Why didn't
you answer the Kangaroo's question about the
little girl?" he demanded.


"He didn't give me time," snarled the Fox.
"Not that I was afraid of him, the great, over-
grown creature. Not me; and I'm not afraid of
you, either."
"If you are so brave, why don't you answer
the question?" asked the Emu.
"I won't answer—" began the Fox.
"Perhaps you'll answer, if I ask you," hissed
the Adder, slipping towards the tree-top.
"Keep away," howled the Fox. "Keep away!
Take that dreadful reptile away, Mr. Emu, and
I'll answer."
The Emu turned towards the Adder: "Per-
haps you wouldn't mind withdrawing for a
moment," he said.
"Very well," agreed the Adder. "I'll just
try to work out that little sum about the Sparrows
. . . you know: Sixty-five thousand times sixty-
five thousand times sixty-five thousand, times
sixty-five thousand times sixty-five thousand . . .
the number of Sparrows we'll have in twenty
years. But don't mind interrupting me, Mr. Emu,
if you require my assistance."
"Thank you; I'll call upon you if I require
any help," replied the Emu. "Now, Mr. Fox! Do
you know anything about what happened to that
little girl?"
"Well, it was like this," began the Fox.
"It wasn't a bit like that," interrupted the
Emu. "What happened to the little girl?"
"You crowd are always ready to blame me
for everything," began the Fox.
"Perhaps I had better call the Adder," said
the Emu, turning half-round.
"Don't call that—that reptile," pleaded the
Fox. "Yes; I took the little girl away. But she's
safe. I haven't hurt her. Hey! Don't let those
others get at me, Mr. Emu. Let me explain—"
The outlook was decidedly black for the Fox.
The Kangaroo was in a furious rage . . . dancing
mad. The Bandicoot and the Paddymelon were
moving to cut off the retreat of the enemy; while
the Cassowary and the Brolga were standing to
attention, ready for the signal to launch a frontal
attack. The Wombat was lumbering forward,
with a determined look upon his face; and the
Cockatoo was screeching on his highest note.
"Order! Order!" cried the Pelican. "As Mr.
Fox has asked to be alkwed to explain, I think
we must, er, we should hear him. I have been
greatly shocked, and—er—and pained by what he
has admitted; but we must be fair . . . yes, fair
and impartial. We must not condemn anyone
unheard."
"I heard him myself," grunted the Wombat.
"With my own ears I heard him admit that he
had taken the little girl away, and I'll . . . Stand
aside and let me get at him!"
"I think we should hear Mr. Fox's explana-
tion," began the Pelican.
"We'll have his explanation later on, when
we have finished with him," declared the
Kangaroo, bounding towards the tree-top and
kicking furiously at the leaves and small twigs,
behind which the Fox had taken shelter.
"I think I may be able to drive him out,"
said the Adder. This was too much for the Fox,
who shrank back. When the Bush Folk had
entirely destroyed the bushes, it was only to find
that the Fox had vanished.
"There he goes!" screamed the Kookaburra.
"He's making for his den. After him! After
him! He can't get away!"
Now, if the way to his den had been over
open country, the Kookaburra's guess would
probably have been correct; but there was a con-
siderable amount of undergrowth through which
the Fox was able to make his way without any
loss of speed, while the Bush Folk were sadly
handicapped. It is true that the Paddymelon
and the Bandicoot were at home in such
surroundings; but, after all, they did not consti-
tute a very formidable fighting force; and the
Kangaroo requires open country to show his
speed. This is true also of the Emu; and in
a lesser degree of the Cassowary. Naturally, the
Wombat was not deterred, but in spite of his
determination he was soon lumbering along far
behind the leaders, and only in front of the
Platypus.
When the Fox finally broke cover, he was
within a couple of hundred yards of his den,
which he reached, a full length ahead of the Emu,
who was closely followed by the Kangaroo, with
the others nowhere in the race.
"Well, that's that," observed the Kangaroo.
"Now, how are we going to get him out?"
"I'd go in after him," began the Bandicoot,
"but—"
"If you'll all stand around, I'll go and bring
someone who will persuade him to come out," said
the Kookaburra. "Hoo, hoo, hoo! Don't let him
out while I'm away. I won't be long. Oh, you'll
see some fun. Ha, ha, ha, hee, hee, hoo, hoo,
hoo!"
And on the last note Jacko vanished.


CHAPTER XV
The Rescue
JIM MORRISON had finished his lunch and
was engaged in washing his few dishes at
the creek when he heard a screeching over-
head; and, looking up, saw the Kookaburra,
perched upon a branch only a few feet from the
ground.
"Oh, hallo, Jacko!" he called. "How are
things?"
"Ba—ba—bad!" gasped the bird. The little
girl is gone!"
"What's that?" cried Jim. "Gone! What
has happened to her?"
"The Fox has got her!"
"How do you know?"
"He—he—he admitted it."
"When?"
"Just now ... a little while ago—at the
meeting."
"But why did he do it?'
"He didn't say," replied Jacko. "He didn't
have time. No; he didn't have time."
"How did you find out that she had gone?"
"It was like this," said the Kookaburra. "I
was down on her father's farm. I was sitting on
a tree watching for a snake to come out of his
hole when her father ... I mean the little girl's
father; not the snake's father . . . when her
father and mother came rushing out of the house
calling, 'Judith! Judith! Where are you, Judith?'
Well, I forgot all about the snake. Then her
father ran up to the gate and looked up and down
. . . and her mother started screaming again,
'Judith! Judith!'
"Well, I thought I couldn't do any good, you
know, sitting there, staring at them, so I thought
I'd get along to the meeting and tell the other
Bush Folk about it.
"They all got terribly excited when I told
them, and they were just getting ready to rush
out and look for her when the Kangaroo looked
hard at the Fox and asked him if he knew any-
thing about it.
"Well, the Fox wouldn't answer . . . tried to
put him off, you know; so the Kangaroo told
him he'd kick the stuffing out of him . . . and
started to do it; but the Fox dodged him. Then
the Emu told him he'd sool the Adder on to him
if he didn't answer pronto. So the Fox owned up
that he had taken the little girl away; and, as
soon as he had owned up, all the members rushed
him with their ears back."
"And tore him to pieces, I suppose?"
"No," replied Jacko; "they didn't. He didn't
stay. No; he decided to go while the going was
good."
"I see. And he got clean away?"
"Sort of," answered Jacko. "He managed
to scramble into his den . . . just made it. But
the Emu nearly grabbed him; but he got in,
and he is still there.
"How can you be sure of that?" asked Jim.
"I'm sure of it, because every living
creature, for miles round, is standing round the
mouth of the den by this time. They'll be about
fourteen deep by the time we arrive. You'll
come, won't you?"
"Me!" said Jim. "Too right, I'll come. Just
wait until I get my gun and a pocketful of
cartridges, and I'll be along."
"Ha, ha, ha, hee, hee, hee, hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo,
00-00-00-00!" laughed Jacko.
Long before Jim and Jacko came within
sight of the Fox's den they could hear the screams
. . . and screeches . . . and howls . . . and growls
of the Bush Folk.
It really seemed that the Kookaburra's fore-
cast was correct. Jim afterward declared that
every Kangaroo and Emu and Cassowary and
Brolga in Australia were present, but this was
probably an exaggeration.
Mr. Pelican was surrounded by a vast flock
. . . big Pelicans and little Pelicans . . . and middle-
sized Pelicans, to whom he was delivering an
address when Jim amved.
Even the Wombat had a great following,
and the members of his clan were grunting
approval of their leader's remarks. Birds of all
sorts and shapes and sizes—screaming Cockatoos
and chattering Magpies, and Parrots and
Sparrows clustered thickly upon every tree, while
ducks quacked and geese honked on every side.
And the Dingo sat back on his haunches and
howled dismally, as his contribution towards the
general din.


Some of the Bush Folk looked just a little
scared and seemed disposed to run away when
Jim made his appearance, but soon settled down
again when the Kookaburra explained that their
visitor was a friend who had come along to help
them against the Fox.
"This is Jim!" cried Jacko. "My friend,
Jim! Good old Jim! He'll soon fix the Fox. That
thing he is carrying is a gun. He's going to
shoot the Fox with it. You just wait till you
hear it. It goes off with a terrible bang. But it
won't hurt any of you. It will only hurt the
Fox."
"Three cheers for Jim!" cried the Kangaroo.
And the Bush Folk cheered and screamed and
screeched and howled and growled and whistled
and sang and hissed and honked and quacked.
"Here, don't make it a welter!" said the
Kangaroo. "I said 'Three cheers'."
Most of the Bush Folk didn't appear to
know what the Kangaroo meant by a welter, but
they stopped.
"Thank you all!" said Jim. "Now we must
consider what we have to do first."
"Kill the Fox! Tear him to pieces!" cried
the Bush Folk, without any hesitation.
"We'll get the Fox, in good time," said Jim,
"but first of all we must rescue the little girl.
Where is she?"
The Bush Folk gazed at one another. Now,
where was the little girl? They wondered. They
were just getting ready to wonder again when
a faint cry was heard. . . .
"Hush!" called the Pelican. The cry was
repeated, a little stronger this time. "Mummy!
Mummy! I want my Mummy!"
"She is in the den," said the Kangaroo,
nodding his head.
"That is my opinion," agreed the Emu.
"Yes; I think that is where she is," observed
the Pelican.
"We must get that Fox at once," grunted the
Wombat, "He may kill the dear little girl."
"We must go carefully," said Jim. "Getting
the Fox out won't be much trouble. A couple of
shots fired into his den would bring him out—
on the run. Or I could poke some leaves and grass
down with a pole and then set fire to it. But we
can't risk that."
"I'll soon bring her out," cried the Kangaroo,
bounding forward. He lowered his head and
charged at the den entrance, but succeeded only
in jamming his head and shoulders into the hole.
He struggled and kicked, throwing dirt over any
of the Bush Folk who happened to be near enough
and, at last, got free. He stood up, looking at
the entrance.
"It is absurd to have such a little front
door," he observed, in a disgusted tone.
"The door isn't too little: you are too big,"
ventured the Bandicoot.
"Me?" cried the Kangaroo. "I am just the
right size."
"You can't be the right size if you are too
big," persisted the Bandicoot.
"Eh, what?" said the startled Kangaroo.
"Perhaps not, but I always thought I was just
the right size. Oh, I know what is the matter
—That front door is not the right size for me.
No; that can't be it, either, because, if the front
door is not the right size for me, I can't be the
right size for the front door. I don't know what
to do about it."
"I think I had better go in," volunteered the
Wombat.
"But do you think that it is safe?" asked
Jim. "Even a Fox will fight when he is cornered,
you know."
"Aw, him!" scoffed the Wombat. "But I'll
take a few of my mates with me."
He turned and gx-unted something to the
members of his family, and they surged forward
like a tidal wave. "Hey! Have a heart," said
the Wombat. "I don't want a hundred and fifty
of you ... a couple will do."
The leading Wombat disappeared into the
entrance and was closely followed by one of his
clan. The third member had his head inside the
enti-ance when he stopped and backed out again.
Then the second Wombat did the same, and,
finally, the leader.
"What is the matter?" asked Jim.
"The little girl is coming out," replied the
Wombat.
And then poor little Judith crawled to the
entrance on her hands and knees. She was in a
pitiful state, her dress being filthy and her face
covered with grime, through which her tears had
formed a number of rivulets.
"I want my Mummy!" she sobbed. "I want
my Mummy!"


Jim stooped down and gathered the little
maid in his arms. "Don't cry, little one, he
said, soothingly. "I'll take you to your Mummy."
"I'm so hungwy," moaned Judith.
"I think I put some biscuits in my pocket
before I came out," said Jim. "Ha! I thought
so ... I have three. Here!"
The little maid took the biscuits eagerly,
and while she munched them Jim was doing his
best to get rid of the grime from her face with
his handkerchief. It was not a very clean hand-
kerchief, but it was certainly cleaner than poor
Judith's face. The Bush Folk watched the per-
formance with great interest.
"Didn't they give you anything to eat?"
asked Jim.
The little maid shuddered. "Mrs. Fox gave
me some waw wabbit," she said, "and when I
cwied for my Mummy, she said she'd bite me
if I didn't stop. And I was so fwightened. And
I like you. Oh! And there is darling little
Teddy."
The Mother Bear trotted up and allowed
Judith to lift the cub from her back.
"And now, what about getting home?" asked
Jim presently. "Your Mummy will be anxious
about you."
"I want my Mummy," said Judith, beginning
to cry again.
"Where does she live?" enquired Jim, looking
round.
"I'll show you," cried the Kangaroo, eagerly.
"So will we," the Bush Folk exclaimed as one
creature.
"You can't all go," said the Pelican, "or the
Fox will escape. At the same time, I think that
Judith should have a guard of honour. I suggest
that it consist of Mr. Kangaroo, Mr. Emu, Mr.
Brolga, and Mr. Cassowary, and that each of
these select say, three other members of his
clan to accompany him. Those in favour say
'Aye!' to the contrary, 'No!' Carried. Good-
bye, Judith!"
And "Good-bye, Judith!" screamed and
screeched the Bush Folk. The Kookaburra flew
on ahead of the procession. Judith's father and
mother and Deirdre were standing on the front
verandah when the guard of honour entered the
gate.
"Whatever is this?" exclaimed the little girl's
father. "Oh! They have found Judith!"
The Bush guard stalked solemnly down the
garden path. Then it halted and opened out to
allow Jim to pass through. He handed the little
maid over to her weeping mother.
"Oh, my dear little Judith! I thought I
had lost you for ever," sobbed the mother,
clasping the rescued child to her and kissing
her, quite regardless of the state of her face.
The father came forward and grasped Jim's
hand. "Thank you," he said, simply.
"You want to thank these good Bush Folk,"
replied Jim. "They found her . . . and rescued
her. I did nothing but carry her home."
The father turned to the guard of honour:
"I thank you, you kind Bush Folk," he said.
The guard of honour bowed solemnly in
acknowledgment.
"Where did the Bush Folk find her, do you
know?" asked the father.
"In the Fox's den. The Fox had taken her
away.
"The Fox!" exclaimed the father; "wait until
I get my gun and I'll be with you. I'll—"
Jim raised his hand. "I think you can safely
leave it to the Bush Folk to deal with the Fox,"
he said. "They have earned the right to do so."
"I understand," replied the other. "Drop in
and see us any time you are along this way. And
thank you all, once again."
When Jim returned to the den entrance the
Pelican began: "While you were away we have
been discussing the position, and have decided,
if such a course meet with your approval, that
we shall, if possible, take the Fox, alive and unin-
jured, and then give him a fair and impartial
trial.
"It seemed to us that the Fox's offence is not
so much against the dear little girl—although that
was quite bad enough—but against us, inasmuch
as his action has brought disgrace upon the whole
of the Bush Folk. Subject to your approval, of
course."
"As a matter of fact, I said something of
the kind to the little girl's father, replied Jim.
"I told him that I considered that you good Bush
Folk had earned the right to deal with the Fox."
"Thank you," said the Pelican. "And now,
to bring the offender to trial."
"I'll get him for you," remarked the Wombat.
"Come on," he added, addressing his mates.


x %T jL* *
, Jikw~ ♦
- -.•■•. " - ■•••: --
jl «. !?Jr * iBffi'' '
mF M *dPl9HH^^^^H^HHE
_. .;: : -;,Jf 9 *
; | .
The three Wombats disappeared into the
den, and within a minute or two, after some
scuffling and yelping, the Fox darted out. He
stopped suddenly at the sight of the vast gather-
ing, glancing anxiously towards the patch of
scrub. But, finding his retreat in that direction
cut off, he made the best of a very bad job by
bolting down the open slope.
The Kangaroo overtook the fugitive in a few
flying leaps, and launched a tremendous kick at
the wretched animal. The Fox avoided this by
turning sharply to the right, but only to be
bowled over by a kick from the Cassowary, who
was running on the flank. And then the Emu
pounced upon him, grabbing him by the tail and
hanging on, despite the Fox's struggles. And a
score of the lesser Bush Folk flowed over him.
The Kangaroo was dancing around, awaiting
a chance to get his kick in.
"I surrender! I surrender!" screamed the
"He has surrendered, so he must be treated
as a prisoner of war. Isn't that so, Jim?" asked
the Pelican.
"Absolutely," agreed Jim.
"Can't I give him just one kick?" asked the
Kangaroo, anxiously.
"No; I'm sorry, but it can't be done," replied
the Pelican. "It is never done, is it, Jim?"
"Simply not done," agreed Jim.
"Well, this is surely my unlucky day,"
observed the Kangaroo.
ROCK WALLABY. His favourite haunts are the ranges and stony gullies
With remarkable agility he leaps from ledge to ledge.
—Blocks by courtesy of Queensland Department of Publ.c Instruction


CHAPTER XVI
The Trial of the Fox
IT was decided that the trial of the Fox should
take place forthwith. The Bush Folk, with
the culprit in safe custody, made their way
to the clearing in which their meetings were
always held.
Arrived there, they formed a circle, with the
wretched Fox in the centre, looking very sorry
for himself. Just as proceedings were about to
open there was a slight disturbance on the out-
skirt of the clearing, and Mrs. Fox, with her
two cubs, appeared.
She made her way at once to the side of
her spouse and rubbed her muzzle softly against
his side.
"Trying the sympathy dodge, eh?" grunted
the Wombat. "But it won't work here."
"Not if I have anything to say about it,"
agreed the Kangaroo.
The Pelican called the meeting to attention.
"I have asked our friend, Jim, to take a seat on
the Bench with me," he began.
"What do you call a Bench?" asked the
Wombat.
"It is the term always used to describe the
seat occupied by the presiding officer—the Judge
—at a trial," replied the bird. "We haven't a
real Bench, but I feel sure that our friend, Jim,
will not mind sitting on this log, close to me, so
that I may consult him on points of law."
"Points of law!" laughed Jim. "I am afraid
that I can't be of much assistance in that direc-
tion, but I'll do my best, and, as they say, 'Angels
can't do no more.' "
"I am rather in the dark as to how angels
conduct themselves," observed the Pelican slyly.
"I have not been a great traveller, so that I have
never had the pleasure of meeting an angel."
"Neither have I," returned Jim, with a
chuckle, "so we are in the same boat. However,
I'll do my best, angels or no angels."
"Thank you," said the Pelican, gravely. "And
now we must decide how the trial is to be
conducted. Are we going to have a jury?"
"He must be tried by his peers," observed
the Bandicoot. "It is always done."
"If it is always done, then we must do it,"
rejoined the Pelican. "You all agree to that, don't
you?"
"Yes, I suppose so." This from the Kangaroo,
who added: "We'll try him that way if it is the
right way. But, I say, what do you mean by his
peers ?"
The Pelican looked at the Bandicoot, who
stepped forward briskly. "By his peers is meant
by his equals," he said.
"Do you mean to tell me that you regard that
degraded creature as my equal?" demanded the
Kangaroo, furiously. "Me! One of the supporters
of the Australian Coat of Arms, only the equal
of that criminal?"
"I would point out that the Fox has not
yet been convicted," said the Pelican, mildly,
"and that he must be regarded as innocent until
he has been proved guilty."
"I don't care how you regard him, so long
as you don't regard him as my equal," retorted
the Kangaroo, sullenly. "And I'm voting for his
execution straight away if I have to put up with
such insults."
"Perhaps we had better leave that part about
the peers out," said the Pelican. He turned and
spoke to Jim, who nodded as if in agreement. "It
seems to me," he went on, "that it will be unneces-
sary to call evidence for the prosecution, as the
—the prisoner at the bar has already admitted
his guilt. But we must allow him to say anything
he can in ex—l forget the word, but it means
excuse."
"Aw, what's the use of all this flossy talk,"
grunted the Wombat. "Here, you!" he went on,
turning to the Fox, "if you have anything to say,
cough it up, or forever hold your peace. Do you
think we're going to stay here for a week waiting
for you?"
"A fair and impartial trial?" laughed Jim,
leaning over to the Pelican.
"Oh, the Wombat is not a bad sort," he
replied. "But he has had a very trying day, and
I suspect that he is getting sleepy."
Meanwhile the Fox had been gazing anxiously
at the Pelican who, after a further word with
Jim, turned to the prisoner and said: "We are
ready now to hear what you have to say in defence
of your action in taking that little girl—that dear
little girl—away; and —and—"
"And trying to make her eat raw Rabbit,"
put in the Kangaroo.


"She said she was hungry," muttered the
"You can refer to that during your address
in defence," interrupted the Pelican. "Attention!
Mr. Fox desires to make a statement."
"Oh, yeah!" grunted the Wombat. "He'll
make a statement, all right. But he can save his
breath as far as I'm concerned. I'm giving my
vote for his execution, and I don't care who
knows it."
"You can't do that at this stage," objected
the Pelican. "When he surrendered, we granted
him quarter, and —er —er —Please go on, Mr.
Fox."
"I shall not keep you long," began the Fox;
"but I feel it my duty ... to myself and family
(looking at Vixen and her cubs) to put my view
of the whole matter before you.
"When the Bush Folk, in meeting assembled,
decided to wage war upon our common enemy,
Man, and, after lengthy discussion upon the Plan
of Campaign, and Ways and Means, decided to
appoint me General—"
"You appointed yourself," interposed the
Wombat.
The Fox looked at the Wombat a moment,
but, deciding to ignore the interruption, he went
on: "Having been app—l mean, being in a posi-
tion of trust, I considered it to be my duty, in
the best interests of the whole of the Bush Folk,
to take such steps as I deemed prudent and desir-
able for the safety and security of myself and
my fellow fighters in the great cause.
"What I did, I did in my official capacity and
in the interests of my fellow members, confident
that, when my motives were understood, I should
have the support of all my fellow fighters in
the . . . the great cause which is, and always has
been, so dear to my heart—"
"I'll see the colour of his heart before this
day is over, if it is the last thing I do," said the
Kangaroo, in an aside to the Bandicoot.
The Fox proceeded: "That a certain action
of mine has not met with the approval of my
fellow members is a matter which I deeply regret.
But my action in that matter was one that has
always been regarded as, not only justifiable, but
praiseworthy, in the conduct of a war. All
Generals, from time immemorial, have taken
hostages, either as a guarantee of good behaviour
on the part of their families, or as a means of
forcing the enemy to agree to certain terms. To
win a war by force of arms is, perhaps, a good
thing, but to force the enemy to surrender by
the exercise of strategy is a much better thing;
and—"
"Hey!" shouted the Kangaroo, "are you
trying to persuade us that taking that little girl
away was a good thing?"
"I said it was justifiable," replied the Fox.
"I know something, that is a lot more justifi-
able," said the Kangaroo. "I've heard quite
enough of your talk. I know you think you can
talk yourself out of any difficulty, but you're up
against it this time. Justifiable! Justifiable! A
dirty, low-down trick like that, justifiable! I
appeal to the other members. Don't you think it
was a dirty, low-down trick to take that dear
little girl away into his den . . . and try to make
her eat raw Rabbit?"
The Bush Folk responded instantly to the
Kangaroo's appeal. The Dingo howled and the
Wombat grunted and the 'Possum and the Bandi-
coot squealed, while the birds screeched and
screamed and flapped their wings, each giving his
own rendering of "a dirty, low-down trick."
"Now, all together!" screamed the Cockatoo:
For the Fox is a low-down fellow,
And his heart is a dirty yellow;
If he had to fight,
He would die of fright,
'Cause he's a dirty, low-down fellow.
"Well, as we have decided what to do, we'd
better do it." said the Kangaroo. "This farce
has lasted long enough. Come on!"
' Half a minute!" called the Pelican, who had
been talking to Jim. "Half a minute! I think
we can settle this matter in a better way."
"Why can't you let us finish him off straight
away ?" asked the Kangaroo.
"This is what I suggest," went on the Peli-
can. "What is Mr. Fox's chief offence?"
"Taking away that dear little girl," growled
the Wombat.
"And trying to make her eat raw Rabbit,"
added the Kangaroo.
"Well, that being so, I suggest that we take
Mr. Fox's cubs away from him," said the
Pelican.
"Hey! You can't do a thing like that,"
howled the Fox. "You can't do a thing like that."
"Why can't we?"
"Because . . . because my cubs have never
done you any harm."


"Did the little girl . . . that dear little girl
ever do you any harm?" asked the Pelican,
grimly.
The Fox started forward. Then he stopped,
and stood, trembling. "I never thought of that,"
he said, at last, in a low voice. "I admit that I
was wrong; that it was a low-down, dirty trick.
And I'll submit to any punishment you may
impose. But don't punish my poor, innocent
cubs."
"It seems to me that we must do our best
to make the punishment fit the crime," observed
the Pelican. "You injured that dear little girl,
and your cubs must suffer."
"But, look here; two wrongs don't make a
right," urged the Fox. "I admit that I was
wrong, and I'm ready to take my punishment for
it. But if, instead of punishing me, you punish
my cubs, you will be doing a wrong thing, too,
won't you?"
The Pelican spoke again to Jim, who nodded.
Then, turning to the Fox, the bird said: "There
is something in what you say; a good deal, in
fact. But you must clearly understand that, if we
spare your cubs, we must ... we must —"
"You must kill me," broke in the Fox,
eagerly. "All right. lam satisfied. I know that
most of you think I am a coward; some of you
have called me a sneak. But I am not coward
enough, or sneak enough, to save my life at the
expense of my innocent cubs. Come on, Mr.
Kangaroo. You may kick me to pieces, and I
won't attempt to dodge. The Emu can pick my
eyes out, if it gives him any pleasure. I'll even
agree to allow the Adder to bite me. . . . All that I
ask is that you do not punish my mate or my cubs.
They'll have a hard enough fight . . . when I am
gone . . . without a single friend in the world."
Vixen sat back upon her haunches and
howled at the picture painted by her spouse, while
the cubs, sensing something unusual, snuggled up
to her side and whimpered.
"Bear up . . . and good-bye!" said the Fox,
addressing his mate. Then he stepped delicately
forward and stood, awaiting the attack of his
enemies.
The Kangaroo looked at him for a moment.
Then he said: "I have always been a fair fighter,
and I simply decline to attack an animal that will
not fight back. You have said that you are sorry
for what you have done. I believe you. .. . And
that is all I have to say about it."
"Thanks, old man," said the Fox. "You are
a good fellow. Would you mind keeping an eye
on Vixen ... on my mate . . . and cubs. Don't
let any of the others make it too hard for them."
"What's that?" cried the Kangaroo. "As far
as I am concerned, you can look after them your-
self."
"That goes for me, too," added the Emu.
The Wombat lumbered forward and took up
a position right in front of the Fox, at whom he
stared, fixedly.
"I didn't think you had it in you, old chap,"
he grunted, at last. "No; I wouldn't have believed
it, if I hadn't seen it with my own eyes, and heard
it with my own ears. . . . And I'm sorry I called
you a sneak."
"And I haven't the slightest intention of
biting you," said the Adder. "In fact, I'd much
rather kiss you."
"Oh, don't trouble, thank you," said the Fox,
hastily.
"I'm like the Wombat," observed Jim. "I
wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't seen it with
my own eyes and heard it with my own ears."
"I thought, perhaps, it might work," rejoined
the Pelican. "They say you can find some good
in everyone, if you only dig deep enough."
"You are sure some digger," laughed Jim.
"Well, I suppose this is all for the present,"
observed the Pelican. "I have been thinking that
we should have a social meeting . . . Say, the
day after to-morrow, to celebrate. That will suit
you all, I hope."
All the Bush Folk, with the exception of the
Fox, at once said that the date was suitable.
"What about you, Mr. Fox? Will that suit
you?" asked the Pelican.
"Me?" cried the Fox, looking up in astonish-
ment. "Are you really inviting me?"
"Of course, we are," replied the Pelican.
"Bring Mrs. Fox and the . . . the cubs along
with you. I feel sure they will enjoy it."
"Yeh—yeh—yes, of course, we'll come,"
stammered the Fox. "And I think it is fine of
you all. And you'll never regret what you have
done this day."
"Ha, ha, ha, ha, hee, hee, hee, heh, heh, heh,
hoo, hoo, hoo, hoo-00-00-oo," struck up the Kooka-
burra. "What a day it has been! And everything
in the garden is lovely again. Hoo, hoo, hoo,
hoo!"




Visitors to
The Conference


CHAPTER XVII
Crowning the Queen
1 I 1 HERE was a great gathering of the Bush
Folk on the day set apart for the celebra-
I tions.
Jim Morrison had been specially commis-
sioned to invite the father and mother of the two
little girls and, at the request of the Pelican, he
had brought his axe along and constructed some
rough seats round the stump upon which Judith
had been accustomed to sit.
All the Bush families were strongly repre-
sented. Mr. Kangaroo, who was one of the first
to arrive, marched at the head of a score of
stalwart members of his clan. Then came the
Emu, leading a similar number of members of his
family. The Cassowary stalked into the clearing
gracefully, followed by a round dozen; and then
came the Brolga leader, with his dancing troupe.
. . . And the Wombat, and the Bandicoot and the
Goanna were all strongly supported. There were
Magpies and Cockatoos and Doves, Galahs,
Regent Birds and Pigeons and Parrots, and Coots
of divers species, with Swans, Ducks, Geese,
Turkeys, Wrens, Bee-eaters, Woodpeckers galore,
and then, finally, dancing as daintily as any fairy,
came that rare, and generally retiring bird, the
Menura or Lyre Bird.
The Pelican looked a little anxious, as was
only natural. It was certainly a great occasion,
and, as he explained to Jim, he felt that the
responsibility for its success rested largely upon
himself.
"I suppose they will not be long now," he
said, referring to Judith and her family.
"Old Jacko will give us notice of their
coming; I asked him to," replied Jim.
"Ha-ha-ha-ha, hee-hee-hee-hee, hoo-hoo-hoo-
hoo-hoo! ' sounded from the top of a gum-tree.
And, at that cry, Jacko's family joined in the
welcome until it really seemed as though all the
Kookaburras in Australia had collected for the
great occasion.
As the guests of honour appeared at the edge
of the clearing the Pelican called: "Attention!"
in his best official manner, and all the Bush Folk
promptly stood to attention; that is to say, all
those who had any legs to stand upon, did so. . . .
And so remained while the Kangaroo and the
Emu conducted the party to their seats.
Judith was about to climb upon the tree
stump, as usual, but took a lower seat, in
response to a whisper from the Kangaroo, who
seemed to have appointed himself Master of
Ceremonies.
Then came the "March Past," led by Mr.
Kangaroo, with his suite, followed, in that order,
by the Emus, Cassowaries, Brolgas, Jabirus,
Wallabies, Paddymelons, Bandicoots and Adders.
Then came the band of Wombats, grunting and
panting, but determined to do their best, with
Mr. Platypus and his strange family bringing up
the rear.
After the "March Past," the Pelican began:
"Fellow members, we have with us to-day some
very distinguished visitors. I feel sure that you
all appreciate the honour they confer upon us
by their presence."
At this there were cheers and screams and
screeches of joy.
"Before we begin the regular performance,"
proceeded the Pelican, "I have a suggestion to
make, and I hope and trust that it will meet with
your approval. In every modern community
there must be a leader ... a head ... a ruler.
Sometimes this ruler takes the shape of a
dictator: but I suspect that you have enjoyed
the freedom of your native land too long to
welcome a dictator. That being so, I think that
the ruler should be either a king or a queen. I
feel that the Bush Folk of this great country
have now reached a stage when their importance
justifies the establishment of a monarchy.
"You may possibly have someone in view, as
suitable for this high office ... of king or queen,
as the case may be. My own leaning is towards
a queen; and if it is to be a queen, I think we
shall not have to look far to find one, suitable in
every respect, for the position. . . . One, who has
already won all our hearts, and who can be
assured of the love and devotion of the loyal Bush
Folk of Australia. Need I name her?"
"Judith!" screamed the Bush Folk. "We
want Judith! We want Judith for our Queen!"
"My word, Judith, you are in the boom,"
whispered her father.
"What are they sayin' about me?" enquired
the little maid.


"We wish you to honour us by becoming our
Queen," said the Pelican.
"But I haven't any cwown," objected Judith.
"I can't be a Queen if I haven't got any cwown."
"We have the crown all ready," replied the
Pelican. "I am afraid I shall have to ask you to
perform the ceremony, Mr. Kangaroo."
The Kangaroo took the coronet, which had
been prepared by the clever Bower Birds speci-
ally for the great occasion. It was a beautiful
wreath of bush flowers, skilfully intertwined, and,
as it chanced, it fitted perfectly upon the short,
golden curls of Judith.
And then the newly-crowned Queen was
lifted to her seat upon the stump. She bowed to
the Bush Folk and then said: "And now, can I
have darling little Teddy?"
"Your Majesty may have anything you wish
for," replied the Pelican; and the Mother Bear
trotted over and allowed Jim to lift her cub from
her back and hand it up to Judith.
"And now, Your Majesty, I have a very
pleasant duty to perform. It is not within our
power to confer upon you the freedom of a city,
but we are able, and now do confer upon you
what we regard as something far better . . . the
Freedom of the Bush. Hail to Our Queen!"
The Bush Folk responded promptly and kept
it up until the Pelican had to flap his wings
vigorously as a signal to stop.
At this moment a wail arose from Mrs.
Goanna, who was scratching round in the under-
growth in search of her little one. ... "I believe
Mrs. Wallaby picked my child up and has it in
her pocket," she said. . . . "That's what I
believe."
"I did not do anything of the kind," declared
Mrs. Wallaby, indignantly. "I have my own Joey
in my pouch. It is a pity that some of you
ridiculous creatures are not properly fitted up;
then you wouldn't go mislaying your wretched
offspring—"
"He is not a wretched offspring—" began
Mrs. Goanna. . . . "Oh, there you are. ... Do you
know, he has been more trouble to me than all
my other families put—"
"Order! Order!" screamed the Pelican. "I
am surprised at you, Mrs. Goanna. I don't
suppose that her Majesty is interested in your
domestic affairs." ... He preened his ruffled
feathers and then went on: "I have arranged a
little surprise for you to-day. 1 have asked our
friend, Jim, to bring along his ('What do you call
it?" he whispered). . . . Oh, yes, to bring along
his banjo, so that our musical artists may have
the benefit of an accompaniment. I have thought
that perhaps some of you may find this rather
strange, so our friend, Jim, has kindly consented
to open the concert. . . . Our friend, Jim!"
Jim Morrison slung the strap of his banjo
over his shoulder and began:
THE LAUGH CURE
When troubles assail you . . . when Fate seems
unkind
When all the known ills of the earth seem
combined
To drive you distracted; then make up your mind
That's the time for a jolly good laugh;
For whining and wailing won't help you a bit,
Nor cursing your luck your troubles to flit
Show the world you're a man ... a man, full
of grit,
Not a creature of sawdust or chaff
Meet the strokes of bad luck with a laugh!
Strike up, when you hear the first note of Despair,
With a jolly "Ha-ha!" Give the old chap a scare.
He'll scuttle away up the street, like a hare
He'll hurry away with a moan and a groan,
And mutter, "I think I had better postpone
My visit to-day; yes, I'll leave him alone;
I am not feeling well . . . I'm a bit under par.
My nerves are upset by that fellow's Ha-ha!"
If at times a blow falls that you cannot avert,
What's the good of you sitting down there, in the
dirt?
Get up! Be a Man;! Sing out, "Didn't hurt!"
And laugh at the malice of sorrow
You'll forget all about it to-morrow;
When Grief comes to me, as I told you before,
I don't even trouble to answer the door,
I throw up the window and say, with a roar:
"Be off! This is no place for lumber!
Clear out! You've mistaken the number!"
The Bush Folk looked rather puzzled at
Jim's song, but when Judith's father started to
applaud, they joined in with a will.
"I was wondering, your Majesty, whether
your good Mother would be kind enough to sing
something for us?" asked the Pelican, looking
anxiously at Judith.
"Oh, Mummy is a bew'ful singer," cried
Judith. "Please sing something, Mummy."


The little girl's mother rose at once and
walked over to Jim. She stooped and hummed
an air, Jim meanwhile striking the notes on his
banjo, and then she began:
THESE GIFTS I BRING
I bring you songs of simple things . . .
Of flowers, and woodland whisperings . . .
Of dancing waves on rolling seas . . .
Of lowing kine and drowsing bees . . .
Of sunlit pastures . . . golden wheat . . .
Of winter's chill ... of summer's heat.
I bring you songs of spaces wide,
Where stalwart, sun-browned stockmen ride
Of cattle, winding o'er the plain . . .
Of brazen skies ... of welcome rain . . .
Of dreaming in the wattle's shade . . .
Of loving youth and tender maid.
I bring you songs of gain and loss . . .
Of life beneath the Southern Cross . . .
Of noisy streets ... of busy marts . . .
Of honest toil ... of loyal hearts . . .
Of tracks, blazed thro' the wilds untrod . . .
Of brighter hope and trust in God."
"Now, what about you, Mr. Kookaburra?"
asked the Pelican.
"Righto!" replied Jacko, cheerfully. Here
goes!"
"Hallo! Here we are again;
How do you do, and why?
I think, perhaps, we'll have some rain
Or, maybe, 'twill be dry;
If winds blow from the West and East,
And North and South together,
Then I feel pretty sure, at least,
We'll have some funny weather.
And, even if the Sun does set,
Don't spend the night in sorrow,
For, after all, it's safe to bet
'Twill rise again to-morrow.
Don't worry, till you cannot sleep,
And stop that constant yappin';
You never see me sit and weep
O'er what may never happen.
Most people wear a solemn face,
But, spite of all their drooling,
The world would be a brighter place
With just a bit more fooling.
They often tell me I'm absurd,
I guess they're only chaffing;
Down in their hearts, you take my word,
They love to hear me laughing . . .
Ha-ha-ha-hee-hee-hee-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-
-00-00-00!"
"Good old Jacko!" cried Judith.
"And now, Mr. Cassowary," said the Pelican,
"we haven't heard from you yet." And the great
bird began:
"Away up North, where I belong,
We have a fearsome beast . . .
He measures thirty feet or more
Well, thirty at the least.
Enough about his loathly length,
So I will merely add,
No matter what his size may be
Each foot is very bad.
He roars like forty thousand bulls .
His hide is hard as rock;
If he should bump the largest gum,
That tree would get a shock.
If you can stand the scent of musk,
You'll surely like his style,
For, when he comes within a league,
You smell the Crocodile.
He has a funny habit when
He's looking for a meal . . .
He cries, as tho' his heart would break . . .
His tears don't simply steal,
But pour out, like a cataract,
From that vile creature's eyes . . .
Enough to float a battleship
Of quite the largest size.
But don't get feeling sorry, or
You'll waste your sympathy . .
The Crocodile is not at all
What he appears to be.
So, if you chance to see him thus,
Depart with utmost haste;
For Croc, has only one desire:
To see how nice you taste.
You sometimes travel to the Zoo,
And, maybe, give a bun
To Elephant or Bruin Bear,
Who join you in the fun;
The Bear is pleased as he can be,
And tries his best to smile,
But don't go off'ring any buns
To Mister Crocodile.
I've known this creature all my life . . .
I know him thro' and thro';
He doesn't care a hoot for buns,
But what he wants is You!
And if, by chance or carelessness,
You get a bit too near . . .
You've seen a coin go down a slot?
That's how you'll disappear."
It is possible that none of the Bush Folk
had any idea what the Cassowary's song was
about, but they cheered and screeched and howled
their appreciation just the same.


The Motherless Duck at this stage waddled
up to the Pelican and began: "Would the Queen
like to hear me sing?"
"Yes, I feel sure that Her Majesty would,"
replied the Pelican.
The strange-looking creature waited for no
further permission, but, lifting up his voice,
began:
"I'm the Motherless Duck . .
Quack, quack, quack, quack !
And I'm clean out of luck,
Quack, quack, quack, quack, quack, quack!
I'm the Motherles Duck, quack, quack;
I haven't a mother,
And no one will bother
To have any truck
With a Motherless Duck . . . quack, quack!"
He ceased and stood, looking at the Kanga-
roo. "Are you my mother?" he asked.
"What's that?" cried the Kangaroo. "Your
mother? No; that is, to the best of my belief,
I am not your mother "
"I thought you wouldn't be," sighed the
Motherless Duck, "but I hoped you might be. I
think you'd make a beautiful mother."
"Hasn't the poor thing got any muvver?"
asked Judith.
"No, your Majesty," replied the Pelican.
"I'll be the poor thing's muvver," said Judith,
calmly.
The Motherless Duck waddled across and
stood, looking up at the little maid. Deirdre
lifted it up and placed it on the stump beside her
sister, at whom the Duck stared in wonder. Then
it saw the bear cub.
"Are you his mother, too?" he asked.
Judith nodded.
"Then he'll be my sister," observed the
Motherless Duck
"No," laughed Judith, "he'll be your bwother.
What is your name?"
"Robin Hood."
"All wight, Wobbin," said Judith
Then came the Lyre Bird—Menura, master
of all mocking birds, with his beautiful tail
outspread. He stood, scratching for a while, as
though in search of inspiration . . . And then
he began his vocal performance . . . the call note
of the Thrush and the Bellbird . . . the joyous
warbling of the Magpie . . . the hoarse cry of
the Brolga, the booming note of the Bittern, the
mourning note of the Curlew, and the cheerful
chuckle of the Kookaburra, then changing to the
howl of the Dingo, the squeal of the Possum, the
quacking of the Black Duck . . . then the passing
of a motor car, the ring of the woodman's axe,
and, finally, the shrill scream of a mill siren.
Probably Menura's performance was familiar
to the Bush Folk, but, with the sole exception of
Jim Morrison, none of the visitors had ever
before heard Australia's wonder bird.
"And, now," said the Pelican, "I fear that
we must bring this gathering to a close. It has
been a very happy day . . . the first of many such
happy days, let us hope . . .
"Now, your Majesty," he went on, "wherever
you may be, please, remember that some of your
faithful subjects will always be on guard . . .
unseen by you ... to protect you . . . and cherish
you .. . Later on, perhaps, at our next gathering,
the secret word of the Bush will be whispered
to you. This will enable you to understand the
language of the Bush Folk throughout this great
country ... If, in the years to come, you are
ever in any trouble, call upon us and we will
quickly come to your aid ... If you are cold,
we shall shelter you ... If you are hungry, we
can supply you with food. And, if you are ill,
the Bush Folk know the herbs that cure all sick-
ness. Hail to our gracious and beautiful Queen
Judith!"


CHAPTER XVIII.
The Whispered Word
A FEW days later the Bush Folk held a
special meeting. There was a very large
attendance, the only noticeable absentees
being the Fox and the Dingo.
The Kangaroo explained that, at the request
of their Chairman, he had called upon the Fox,
who had asked to be excused on the ground
that, being an alien, he had come to the conclusion
that he had no right to take part in discussions,
which, after all, concerned only the real Bush
Folk of Australia.
"He appeared to be very uneasy," added the
Kangaroo, "and, during my call, he would not
allow his cubs out of his sight, apparently fearing
that his recent action had placed his offspring
in deadly peril. But he sent his best wishes,
and especially asked to be kindly remembered by
you, Mr. Pelican, assuring me that he would
always hold you in the highest esteem."
"That was very nice of Mr. Fox," said the
gratified Pelican. "And, what about Mr. Dingo?"
"The Dingo was not so polite," replied the
Kangaroo. "In fact, he was not polite at all.
He said that he was fed up with silly meetings,
at which nothing was ever done, and that he
proposed to stay at home in future and attend
to his own affairs."
"Unsociable brute!" grunted the Wombat.
"Well, if you ask my opinion, he's no loss. For
my part, I prefer his room to his company."
"Anyhow, the Dingo is not a real Australian,"
observed the Kangaroo. "He's only a kind of
Chow dog, after all."
"But what are we going to do about our
revolt?" enquired the Emu.
"The Revolt! The Great Revolt!" screamed
the Kookaburra. "Hoo-hoo-ha-ha-ha-hee-hee-hee-
hoo-hoo-hoo-00-00-00-oo!"
And thereupon all the other Bush Folk began
to laugh, too. At least, the Cockatoo laughed,
and the Magpie nearly laughed, while the other
birds screeched and screamed and whistled. And
the Kangaroo and all his lesser relations hopped
about and thumped the ground with their tails.
And the Platypus squeaked, and the 'Possum and
the Koala and the Flying Squiri-el squealed . . .
and the Wombat grunted . . . and the Adder
hissed, while the Goose honked, and the Duck
quacked . . . And they combined to make such
a noise that the most dreadful thunderstorm
would have been forced to keep silent, for very
shame . . .
When they had recovered and settled down,
the Pelican said: "I thank you, my friends, and
I think you have taken the proper course oi
dealing with the matter. The Revolt was never
anything but a joke. But it was a good joke,
and I am glad that it has ended so happily. I
feel sure that our meetings have brought us
nearer to each other . . . have brought about a
better feeling, not only among ourselves, but
also in our relations with Man."
There was another great demonstration as
the Pelican concluded.
"Attention! Attention!" screamed the
Kookaburra. "Visitors!"
Visitors, indeed! Jim Morrison and Deirdre,
and between them, Judith, the Queen.
"Present arms!" cried the Pelican, flapping
his wings. None of the Bush Folk had any arms,
but they promptly sprang to attention. The
quadrupeds erected themselves and waved their
forelegs vigorously . . . with the exception of
the Wombat, who kept tumbling over . . . and
the birds flapped their wings and cheered, or
sang or whistled . . . And, between the ranks,
Judith tripped daintily into the arena, with a
soft rose colour in her cheeks, and her blue eyes
dancing . . . and her short, golden curls glisten-
ing in the sunlight.
"Ooh, isn't our Queen beautiful," explained
the Mother Bear. And then, as Judith took hex-
seat upon the stump which sei-ved as a throne,
the little ci-eature waddled forwai-d and allowed
the Queen to gather her furry cub into her arms.
The Wombat stared at the pretty picture for
a moment. Then he turned to his mate, who had
bi'ought her latest cub along, and grunted into
her ear. Mrs. Wombat nodded, and then made
her way to the foot of the stump, followed by
her cub. She got her blunt nose under the
funny little creature and endeavoured to lift it


up. Then Jim, sensing what she wanted, lifted
the young Wombat and placed it on the stump,
beside the Queen.
Judith looked curiously at the newcomer.
Then she broke out: "Oh, what a darling little
thing!" She put down the little Teddy bear and
picked up the baby Wombat, who rolled over on
his back and held up his paws, like a playful
kitten.
"If your Majesty will kindly accept our
gift " began the Wombat.
"Are you weally givin' me the darling little
thing to keep?" asked Judith.
"If your Majesty pleases," replied the Wom-
bat, looking somewhat doubtfully at his spouse.
At this Mrs. Koala, who was standing by the
stump, said: "Your Majesty can keep my cub,
too." But there was a little tremor in her voice
as she made the offer.
"Poor little Mother Bear is going to cry,"
whispered Deirdre to her sister.
"Oh, don't cwy, Mrs. Bear," said Judith. "I
wouldn't take your little Teddy away; weally I
wouldn't."
"Your Majesty is very kind," murmured the
Mother Bear.
"And I won't keep your baby, too, Mrs.
Wombat," went on Judith.
"But I'm glad you let me nurse him."
"Your Majesty is quite welcome to anything
we have," said the Wombat, speaking for both
himself and his wife. "And we are ... we are
truly grateful."
And then a strange thing happened. The
Bush Folk were all standing round, but the
chattering had ceased. The Pelican sat, staring
straight ahead. The Emus, Cassowaries, Brolgas,
and the Parrots and Magpies were silent. Even
the Kookaburra appeared to be taking no further
interest in the meeting. The Kangaroo was still
standing beside the stump. To him Deirdre
addressed herself . . .
"What is the matter with everyone, Mr.
Kangaroo?" she asked.
But the giant marsupial gazed at her as
though quite unaware that he was being asked
a question. Deirdre spoke again . . . and again
with the same result.
"What is the matter, Mr. Emu?" asked
Deirdre, but Australia's greatest bird only stax*ed
at her stupidly . . . Then she turned to Jim. "I
do believe they have all forgotten how to talk,"
she cried.
"I wonder?" exclaimed Jim, looking curiously
round the gathering. "I have an idea," he added.
"I think, perhaps, Judith may be able to find
out what is wrong." He spoke to the little maid,
who nodded understandingly . . . Then, standing
up, she beckoned to the Kangaroo, who bent his
tall head to listen.
"What is wong with evwybody?" she asked.
The Kangaroo made no reply, but at once
hopped across to the Pelican and appeared to
speak to him. The big bird turned his head and
uttered a hoarse cry, whereupon the Kangaroo
returned to his post beside the stump, and, bend-
ing down, spoke in a low tone . . . One word only,
but the little girl's face brightened. She nodded
to the Kangaroo, who hopped away.
'The meeting is over," declared Judith.
"How do you know?" asked Deirdre, in
surprise.
"The Kangawoo just told me," replied Judith,
calmly, stepping down from her throne.
The Pelican screamed, and the Bush Folk
stood to attention. As the party moved off, the
Kangaroos and Emus and Brolgas and Casso-
waries bowed deeply, while the myriads of birds
overhead whistled and sang and crooned.
"They appear to be awake again, but I don't
know what they are driving at," said Jim. "I
wonder what it all means."
"They are sayin', 'Good-bye, Judith! Good-
bye, Little Queen. Come again soon. And bwing
Deirdre and Jim,' " explained Judith.
"They did not say anything of the kind,"
protested Deirdre, indignantly.
"Oh, yes, they did," replied Judith, con-
fidently. "They said it as plain as plain."
'They only squawked and screamed," per-
sisted Deirdre.
"It means what I told you," said Judith
"How do you know what it means?"
"The Kangawoo told me," answered Judith,
calmly.


"I don't know; you keep on saying things like
that, when they are not true," observed Deirdre.
"You know very well that the Kangaroo only
said one word to you."
Judith looked at her sister and Jim for a
a moment without replying. "Yes," she ad-
mitted, "the Kangawoo only said one word. It
was a funny word. I forget what it was, but,
as soon as the Kangawoo said it, I knew every-
thing they were all talking about."
"I wonder?" said Jim again.
As the party reached the edge of the clear-
ing, Judith turned and kissed her hand to the
Bush Folk, who at once acknowledged the salute
—after their kind.
"Good-bye, you lovely bew'ful people!" called
the little girl.
This brought another demonstration from
the Bush Folk.
"They said, 'Good-bye, our beautiful little
Queen!" translated Judith.
"They are lovely, beautiful people," said Jim,
"and you are a very fortunate little girl to under-
stand their language. I knew a man who had
spent years in the bush. He used to say that
he could understand what the birds and beasts
were talking about. I didn't believe him at the
time, but, perhaps, he was telling the truth."
At that moment the Kookaburra struck up
from the top of a gum tree: "Ha-ha-ha-hee-hee-
hee-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-0000-oo."
"Lovely, bewful people!" sighed Judith.
"You sound tired; let me carry you," said
Jim, and lifted the little maid up. She snuggled
up in his arms, and, laying her head on his
shoulder, fell asleep, murmuring, "Lovely, bewful
people!"
THE END
ENOGGERA STATE SCHOOL


Brisbane College of Advanced Education
RESOURCE CENTRE KELVIN GROVE CAMPUS
DUE DATE SLIP
Fines apply if this item is not returned or renewed
on or before the most recent date indicated below.
Renewals may be requested by telephone.


1 ■ .
' . . V . . , /■' ' .<
. .
*
'
t
?\ 4 ' ' »
, • « ,
1 1 ' ■
.
. /
.
. V
I , * .
1
■ ' 4
•
* * ,
. . - - *
V' : " , 4 *' , ' ' w
A,..~ ». "
■; v ,* - . ' . 4 v v •
.
I > * ' / %
. : .
'
»•. . : • . -
• , - »
™ # I
■
V * - 1
I . * *1 .
f >
•
■
. .
I • * . ■
. . 4 . • *
' '. • ' v •
' » t ' >
* '
« • / '
. - I
- • * * > ,
V • ; •
t • • •
"
I
• ' / ) •
" 1 \
— ' r


THE VOICE s
*
|fi ' / •' T c- j -v-
OF 1 " II
J726
