

THE
“GLORIOUS HOUSE OF SAVOY.”
THE SOCIALISTS’ TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY
OF HUMBERT I.
BY FRANCIS SCEUSA.
Copies may be obtained at Mr. McNamara’s.
221 Castlereagh Street.
Sndnen:
CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING WORKS, 3II KENT STREET.
1900.




THE
“GLORIOUS HOUSE OF SAYOY.”
THE SOCIALISTS’ TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY
OF HUMBERT I.
BY FRANCIS SCEUSA.
Sndnen:
CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING WORKS, 3II KENT-STREET.
1900.


INTRODUCTION.
This publication is an Epitome of what the Author has
seen, heard, read, and experienced during Forty Years of
United Italy under the beneficent Rule of Savoy.
It is presented to the Australian Public on behalf of the
plucked, starved, and outlawed wealth-producers of Italy,
and their slandered and persecuted Tribunes.
It is issued in consequence of the efforts made by a
number of reactionary Italian residents of Sydney, aided by
obliging local public men (who are, as a rule, ignorant of
Italian contemporary history) to exalt a Dynasty, hateful to
all progressive unbiased Italians who can discriminate between
the interests of the Nation and those of its Rulers, under the
pretext of honoring the memory of a murdered man.
As an introduction to the following historical sketches, it
may be useful to add that Italy, before the Sicilian Revolution,
was subdivided into several States quite independent from
each other. The principal ones were :—The Kingdom of Two
Sicilies (Naples and Sicily) under the Bourbons; the King-
dom of Piedmont, or Sardinia—ruled by the Savoy Dynasty ;
the Kingdom of Lombardy and Yenetia belonging to Austria;
the Papal States and the Great Duchy of Tuscany. Lombardy,
Tuscany, and one or two minor States had already been
annexed by the King of Piedmont, whom the royalist Italian
patriots looked upon as the future King of Italy. The great
majority of the inhabitants of the Peninsula and Sicily,
however, were in favor of an Italian Republic, and followed
Mazzini and Garibaldi.


THE
“GLORIOUS HOUSE OF SAYOY.”
The Awakening of a Nation.
In 1860, when the nocturnal Goddess of the Heavens
shed for the fourth time her chaste radiant beams over the
placid expanse of the historic Mediterranean, the dream of a
free regenerated Italy—mistress of her own destinies and
happy—which had engrossed the being of generations of
patriots, seemed to assume tangible form and become a
beneficent reality.
The brutal repressions which followed the abortive revolts
in Piedmont, Lombardy, the Papal States, Naples and Sicily
had fanned the sacred fire of revolution ; the blood shed by
Humbert’s grandsires, by the Hapsburgs, the King-Popes and
the Bourbons had added fresh fuel to the flames.
The persistent and intelligent work of Mazzini—the
invisible ruler of Underground Europe—was about to bring
forth its fruit.
The long Cimmerian night of despotism seemed to have
reached its limits; the bright hopeful dawn of a New Era was
already tinging with purple and gold the national horizon.
The glorious Sun of Liberty had risen ; the morn of Redemp-
tion had arrived I
The Cuckoo.
The Revolution had broken out in the South. The
Cyclopic island, which the mighty Etna dominates, was again
in the throes of one of those fearful convulsions that shake
kingdoms, disintegrate continents, overwhelm thrones and
humble the pride of “ God-anointed” men.
Garibaldi, the long-expected Messiah, disregarding the
advice of the prudent procrastinating patriots, had landed at
Marsala with one thousand Republican Red-Shirts determined
to conquer or perish.


Liberty-loving Britannia, whose noble heart had been
harrowed by the “ cry of anguish ” emanating from the
“ Neapolitan dungeons,” protected the landing with the
presence of her floating bulwarks.
Strengthened by the revolutionary forces of Sicily, the
Liberator defeated the King of Naples’ troops repeatedly,
entered heroic Palermo, was saluted as a Dictator, and
advanced upon Messina with the intention of invading the
mainland.
There, a peremptory order from Victor Emmanuel (who
had secretly connived at the equipment of the expedition in
the expectation of getting rid of the troublesome Republican
emigres, in the event of failure, and of benefitting by the
adventure if successful) forbade Garibaldi from advancing
further.
But the die was cast, and the Straits were passed.
With quite an army of enthusiastic patriots, Garibaldi
moved rapidly northwards, welcomed everywhere by the
people, and forthwith took possession of Naples, already
deserted by the Royal Lazzarom.
Appointing a Provisional Government in that city, he
resumed his march towards Rome; but, near Capua, he
found the way barred by Victor Emmanuel and his Pied-
montese army who had hastened to stop the progress of the
Republicans.
Demos and Aristhos—natural and irreconcilable foes
—thus found themselves confronting each other, both claim-
ing precedence, and with difficulty restraining themselves from
conflict. Demos, sure of the strenuous support of the people
whom he had freed, waited for the word to assert their rights.
But, unfortunately, He waited in vain. With the awful
prospect of grim civil war staring* him in the face, the
Liberator, choosing what seemed the lesser of two evils,
turned to his adherents and said: “ Italians, behold your
King 1”
Disappointment.
A mist which had risen above the Royal camp obscured
the new Sun of Liberty already high on the horizon. With
those fatal words eight millions of confiding long-suffering
people just rescued from the tyranny of an unspeakable
dynasty were handed over to the tender mercies of another
House, whose antecedents were little better than those of the


dynasty it displaced, through the over-sensitiveness and
morbid scruples of an otherwise excellent man, who was born
to be a leader in war, but not in politics and diplomacy. His
excessive generosity caused him to betray the Revolution.
Democracy was sacrificed on the altar of Patriotism ; and, for
the sake of the present, the future of Italy was bartered away.
A plebiscite was taken as a matter of form, for the questions
submitted were put in such an ingenious manner that it left
the people no alternative but to vote in the affirmative ; they
being put thus : —“ United Italy under Victor Emmanuel and
his descendants,” or “ The return of the infamous Bourbons.”
Yes, or No.
The Reward.
Garibaldi returned, as poor as when he quitted it, to the
rocky islet of Caprera, there to live Cincinnatus-like by the
sweat of his brow.
His followers were disbanded. Those, like Crispi, who
were willing to wear the livery of Savoy, were taken into the
Royal service; those, on the contrary, who remained faithful
to their Red-Shirt traditions were treated as rebels. Mazzini
and the most prominent Republican advocates were again
proscribed.
The South, which was proud of its free and easy-going
Provisional Governments, grumbled at the unexpected turn of
events; but Royal troops were sent from Turin to enforce
respect for accomplished facts. A pledge was given by Victor
Emmanuel that under his dynasty the people would have their
political freedom guaranteed just as effectively as under a Re-
publican Government; and, as a token of the Royal sincerity,
the formation of a National Guard to protect their own rights
was granted to the citizens. But the Guard was disbanded
as soon as practicable, and as for legal rights secured by
statute their exercise was never permitted to the fullest
extent. 1
The “ prudent patriots,” now that matters were more
settled and no risks were incurred by coming forward, flocked
round the Cuckoo, like so many vultures, clamoring for a share
of the spoil. The easiest and most lucrative offices were
occupied by them and by the old servants of the previous hated
Governments, whom Savoy trusted more than the Democracy.
Thus, very little was changed, except the Ruler. Even
the principle of the Unification Movement, “ JE Pluribw Unum ,”


failed to affect in a substantial manner the various provinces
now united in a political sense only, having never become a
truly homogeneous body.
The practical result of the Revolution, so far as it went,
was the fusion of several sovereignties into one with all the
defects of the former systems—more stable, however, and,
therefore, more difficult to reform.
The Torture.
The Southern Provinces of the new Kingdom were quickly
utilised as a place of deportation for the dishonest and in-
subordinate officers of the State. Sicily resented this action
and evinced her dissatisfaction so unmistakably that the
authorities at Turin (the then National Capital) resolved to
break her unruly spirit by the introduction of the rigors of
military discipline.
Conscription was accordingly introduced into the island.
But the fiery independent inhabitants openly refused to wear
the King’s uniform. Most of the young men likely to be
forcibly enlisted took to the mountains, or concealed themselves
in caves ; others distorted their own limbs, knocked out their
front teeth, and feigned deafness and other infirmities in order
to escape the odious barrack regime. The Piedmontese
authorities forced the refugees out of the grottoes by means of
suffocating fumes, or hunted them from place to place like
outlaws ; deprived those towns which declined to give up their
youth, of their water supply; arrested the parents of the
absconders; and, horrible to relate, applied red-hot irons to the
flesh of unhappy deaf mutes—expecting, apparently, to make
them articulate by this means I Many deserters, hunted like
wild beasts, were eventually compelled through motives of
self-preservation to combine and become regular bandits.
Thus modern brigandage was originated in the largest
and most fertile island in the Mediterranean.
The Fratricide.
But Sicily was not to be so easily subdued; and when
Garibaldi, eluding the vigilance of Victor Emmanuel’s cruisers,
set foot again on her classic soil and appealed for the means
to carry out the revolutionary programme in its entirety, her
sons rose en masse and eagerly followed their beloved and
generous old leader to the conquest of Rome.


The Liberator, at the head of an improvised army num-
bering several thousands, crossed the Straits of Messina and
started on his celebrated march towards the City of the Cfesars.
Near Reggio, however, he was suddenly attacked by an over-
whelming force of Royalist troops, who killed many of his
followers and crippled Garibaldi for life.
The survivors of the catastrophe were transported to the
far North and thrown into the dungeons of the King. Several
patriots who had deserted the regular army to join the Gari-
baldians in the hope of extending the liberties of their country,
being among the captured were shot at Fantina ! Grateful
patriotic Savoy I
He who, on a visit to Rome, passes the turbulent whirl-
pool between Charybdis apd Scylla may look over the Calabrian
shore. There, on the rugged forest-clad mountains, he will
see Aspromonte—the scene of the enormous fratricide. Then
he may visit the honored tomb of Humbert’s father in the
Pantheon of Agrippa, and pray that Avernus be not unmerciful
to his soul, for he was a “ Re Galantuomo.”
Military Laurels.
The time had arrived for the regal scion of the iron dukes
of Savoy to put to the test the vaunted military prowess of his
race. The heartless Hapsburgs were loath to allow the captive
mourning “ Queen of the Adriatic ” to return to her ancient
allegiance, and war was accordingly declared with Austria.
Victory seemed almost sure to smile on the Italian arms,
as the Emperor was fully occupied with the helmeted victors
of Sadowa, and the confidence of the soldiers in the august
Commander-in-Chief was great.
Victor Emmanuel engaged the enemy at Custoza with
ten army divisions; fought most valiantly, as the Savoys
generally do, but his gallantry and the blood heroically shed
by his son availed him little. Mars must have been other
than friendly, and somebody—anybody but the King—must
have been blundering egregiously on that day, for although, as
the official report declared, the Italians were “ masters of
the field,” yet the fact remained that Venetia had ultimately
to be purchased from its possessors.
Almost simultaneously with the unfortunate battle of
Custoza, His Majesty’s fleet attacked the few obsolete caravels
that Austria could muster off Lissa. In this engagement also


the Sardinian-led Italians had the singular fortune of remain-
ing “padroni delle acque /”—“ Masters of the Waters I”—most
undoubtedly, for many of them, with the best of their ships,
found a last uncontested resting place at the bottom of the sea.
Garibaldi with his irregular corps of Red-Shirts, however,
saved the military prestige of Italy to some extent by his
brilliant operations in the Tyrol. He had successfully fought
several engagements, and had advanced far into the enemy’s
country, when, peace being hastily concluded, he was ordered
back and informed that his services were no longer required.
Honors and emoluments were lavished upon the defeated
Royalist troops, while the victorious Red-Shirts were rewarded
for their devotion by neglect and ingratitude, and the widows
of their dead comrades were compelled to wait twelve years for
the pension to which they were entitled.
Robbing the Church.
The Italians had had leisure to realize that “ they were
better off when they fared worse,” but they heroically endured
fiscalism and Piedmontese insolence for the glory of posing as
a “ Great Power.”
The unexpected reverses of Lissa and Custoza came as a
revelation, causing great dismay and filling the people with
feelings of despair. Palermo, the nervous, irritable “ City of
the Vespers,” had more than enough of Sardinian nonsense.
She could endure it no longer and flew to arms ; but the
King’s soldiers—smarting under the sting of their recent
reverses—proved too powerful for the rebels, for, after seven
and a half days’ hard fighting, the revolt was smothered in
blood.
Then, as it was found, or found expedient to find, that
priests and monks had been at the bottom of the rebellion,
cnurch property to the value of 600,000,000 millions of francs
(£24,000,000) was forthwith confiscated. Where this vast
sum of money found its way very few Sicilians can tell, if we
except Crispi, Rudini and other eminent patriots, who made
splendid bargains by purchasing some of the church estates
for a tithe of their value, as very few bidders attended at the
auction rooms, the public being generally reluctant to buy
property “ that was God’s.”


The Marvellous Chassepots.
But in spite of their thousand-and-one troubles, the
Italians turned their eager eyes again on Rome—their heart’s
desire. A nation without its capital very much resembles a
body without a head, and the Eternal City was unquestionably
the historical and proper capital of a United Italy. The old
Garibaldian battle cry “Roma o Morte” (Rome or Death),
resounded once more all over the land from the Sea to the
Alps. But, as an answer to it, there came from Paris through
Minister Rouher the Emperor Napoleon III.’s famous chilling
“ Jamah !”—Never!
The Savoyan Agamemnon, fearing God and the reputed
Corsican, humbly acquiesced ; not so the despised Thersites,
bent upon snatching the thunderbolt from the presumptuous
Vicar of Almighty Jove on earth.
Unexpectedly the old, crippled, but hale, Man of Aspro-
monte was missed by the King’s guards, and found crossing
the Papal frontier, his course directed towards the City of the
Popes, and followed by a multitude of all sorts and conditions
of enthusiastic would-have-been warriors craving to be armed
with something more effective than pitchforks. Town after
town threw off the Pontificial yoke on their approach ; but, at
Montana, the irresistible Chassepots of the French Army of
Occupation “ made wonders,” and the malarious Campagna
was covered with the corpses of the foolhardy knights-errant
of political and religious liberty,
The troops of Victor Emmanuel remained seemingly
unconcerned at the slaughter of their fellow-countrymen,
whom they could have stopped from invading the Roman
territories, and saved the effusion of blood, if they had received
an order to that effoct. 2
The “ Black World ” —which had not changed since
La Sainte Barthelemi —intoned “Te Deums” over the Massacre
of Montana.
The Garibaldian defeat, however, proved to be after all a
moral victory, causing a revulsion of feeling even amongst the
King’s courtiers, and led to the passing of the Sentence of
Death on the blood-stained Temporal Papacy.
Saving His Throne.
The final act of the Napoleonic drama had just closed at
Sedan, and the “ eldest son of the Church ” —the chieftain


of the butchers of Montana—had departed to Hades. The
City of the Ciesars was now only defended by a few foot-
winged destroying angels—the riff-raff of European obscurant-
ism. Why does Ciesar fail to grasp his own ?
Victor Emmanuel hesitated—he the great grand-nephew
of the Pope-hermit Amadeus VIII., and of Victor Amadeus 11.
—the exterminator of the Waldenses—was afraid of Pius IX’s.
excommunication !
Impatient at the continued inaction of her sovereign,
Italy threatened to arise. Her ominous cry of “ Rome or
Death,” shook the massive walls of the Pitti Palace and
brought the King to his bearings. “ Hang my soul,” he
swore in his usual blunt style, “ but let me save my Throne 1”
Forty-eight hours later Rome was the capital of Italy,
and the Temporal Power of the Priest was a memory of the
past.
Imperium in Imperio.
But, unfortunately, the pedestal of that uncanny hybrid
—the Pope-King—was allowed to remain.
It was the wish of the nation that the dethroned successor
of Hildebrand, Sixtus V., and Gregory XVI., shorn of all
temporal privileges, should be reduced to the status of an
Italian citizen: the foreign powers, mostly indifferent or
helpless, would at that moment have hardly interfered. But
the devout Savoyan Caesar over-ruled the national wish.
Laws were passed endowing the Pontiff with sovereign
rights and privileges within the Vatican area, and conferring
on him a Civil List of three-and-a-half millions of francs.
Thus, thanks to the timorous bigotry of the dynasty of Savoy,
an Imperium in Imperio —two antagonistic sovereign powers in
the same capital—was created, and a permanent state of civil
war inaugurated.
The Wolf’s Share.
About this time, Victor Emmanuel Ferdinand Maria
January, the present King, was born. From his infancy it
could be easily perceived that the natural process ©f degenera-
tion applies to Royal as well as to more humble families, and
that the last of the Savoys had come.
The seat of Government and of Royalty had been removed
to Rome. But in taking up his residence at the Quirinal, the
King of Italy did not relinquish his former sumptuous abodes


at Florence and Turin, nor those of the dispossessed heads of
the old States of Naples and Sicily, Lombardy, Venefcia, and
others. He continued to hold his score of Royal palaces and
his threescore of parks, villas, and game preserves, while
thousands of his liege subjects were leaving the country for
want of a roof to shelter them, or an acre of land to cultivate.
First of anew dynasty of Caesars, in the City of the Caesars,
old Victor Emmanuel felt bound to live in a manner becoming
to a Cae3ar. Seventeen millions of francs were therefore
assigned to this “ patriot ” King, annually, by a grateful Nation
whose recent census had disclosed an incipient Pauperism
seventeen millions strong.
Verily, there is something in Patriotism after all! But
not always. Garibaldi had to sell his fishing boat—the gift
of British admirers —to buy his daily food, and Mazzini was
forced to partake of the scanty salt-bread of the Exile !
Humbert’s “ Ally.”
In 1878, Humbert I. inherited the “ Thorny Cro.vn ” of
Italy—-not to rule, but to be ruled.
Unlike his father, he hated the Gauls, and delighted in
displaying his antipathy by forbidding the goodly nectar of
Champagne from appearing at his table.
Then, as he felt the need of a friendly prop, he turned
towards the North, and became the Teutons’ humble and
subservient ally. But Imperial Alliances are costly, and Italy
was therefore compelled to devote nearly one-third of her
hardly-extorted revenue to warlike instruments and para-
phernalia.
Fresh taxation—burdensome and odious —had in conse-
quence to be resorted to ; and summary vexatious measures
were adopted to force the refractory to pay, and the grumbler
to keep his own counsel.
The people submitted, but warned the sovereign that a
renewal of the Triple Alliance was most undesirable. This
was rather hard on the Savoys, the Hohenzollerns and the
other Party to the compact, but the “ Man of Blood and Iron ”
was found equal to the emergency.
There was an old bone of contention between the Roman
and the Gaul lying almost forgotten in Northern Africa.
Crafty Bismarck—the minister of Humbert’s Ally I—trans-
formed it into one of discord, by putting the latter on the
scent.


The absent-minded French, while chasing “Krumirs”
from Algeria, invaded Tunisian territory, and seized it. The
Italian Premier, who was noted for his cleverness (Humbert
had the knack of calling exceptionally clever men to the helm
of State), asked for an explanation, and being assured that the
seizure had been unintentional, and that an evacuation would
follow as soon as the “ Krumir ” danger permitted it, he
allowed Boulanger’s brigands to remain. Savoy and her
allies had reasons to be satisfied. To the Italians, however,
Bixerta in the possession of the French, suggested Carthage
risen from its ashes, which provoked them to great
fury against their transalpine brethren; and some of their
number even tried to settle matters by violence in the streets
of Marseilles. New French fortifications were, in consequence,
erected to protect the south-eastern frontier, new orders
given to the Toulon arsenal, and another army corps es-
tablished at the gate of Italy.
It was industriously rumored that France intended
hostilities, and the gullible people believed it implicitly. The
Triple Alliance was renewed, and the Franco-Italian tariff
war, which ruined the agricultural districts of the Kingdom,
declared.
“ The Fatal Man.”
Francesco Crispi was dubbed the “ Fatal Man ” by one
of his masters ; and, truly, his dominance proved to be fatal to
Italy and the Savoys alike. A poor, but clever, barrister, he
started his career by writing articles in eulogium of King
“ Bomba ” in the official journal of Palermo. But, pro-
bably, not being sufficiently appreciated by His Neapolitan
Majesty, he turned “ patriot ” and became an active
Mazzinian conspirator. Perhaps he was not wholly ignorant
of the hatching of the Orsini and Milano attempts on
the lives of Napoleon III. and Ferdinand II. of Naples
respectively. It was patriotic and honorable, then, to en-
courage regicide.
Crispi took part in the Marsala expedition ; but when he
perceived the Savoy Cuckoo approaching, he hastened to help
the intruder to swallow the “ Two Sicilies.”
Called to the Government after the Tunisian affair, our
coat-turning hero humored his new master’s Gallophobia,
partly on account of the Knighthood of the “ Black Eagle ”
which the German Kaiser had graciously conferred on him,


and partly because the inquisitive and impudent Paris press
had reminded him that it is usually considered dishonorable
to have three living wives.
An accomplished courtier, he won the favor of the vain
Savoyan Augustulus by inventing the high sounding title of
“ Emperor of Ethiopia,” and its adoption by the King, in
anticipation of the return of the victorious royal legions
escorting the Negus of Abyssinia a prisoner to Rome.
By giving vent to anti-religious utterances, and by
indulgence in coarse abuse of the Vatican, he extinguished
the last hope of that reconciliation between Church and State
so devoutly wished for by the Romish Savoy.
The bombastic “Hands Off!” which he addressed to a
foreign power, supposed to contemplate intervention in the
Roman Question, made a name for him amongst a section of
his countrymen, and even gained him the temporary approba-
tion of the Democracy. But his popularity was evanescent;
for when he failed to bring a Pope, notoriously plotting
against the State, to his senses, or to compel him to quit the
national soil ; and when he was discovered to be only an
empty megalomaniac pandering to the atheistic proclivities of
the local freemasonry and to the imperialistic ambition of
the dynasty, he was put aside as a dangerous statesman.
The Rousing of the Serfs.
Nevertheless, on the fall of Premier Giolitti, who was
accused of peculation, it was the will of Fate that Crispi should
return to power to bring fresh calamities and disgrace on his
unfortunate country and King.
Volcanic Sicily was again in a great ferment. Her
peasantry, rousing from intellectual torpor, had at last found
out the real cause of their misery.
Three hundred thousands of her sun-bronzed sons, dear
to Ceres but despised by Fortuna, had combined, and under
the leadership of able generous tribunes belonging to the
educated class (one of them the son of a princess, the principal
lady-in-waiting to Queen Marguerite) 3 were now demanding
the breaking up of the large idle estates, more work, better
pay, shorter hours of labor, and the suppression of the
Mafia. 4 Some of the r demands had already been acceded to
in many districts ; the municipal councils of several towns
had come under their control; and it appeared that, before


long, they would become the masters of the situation, and
that the Calabrian and Apulian peasantry would have
followed their example.
It was a question of life or death for the wealthy and
their parasites, and for the hirelings of oppression in Southern
Italy that such a calamity—as they viewed it —should not
come to pass. The landholders, the aristocracy of blood and
money, and the Mafia coalesced against the Fasci —as the
Sicilian Labor Unions were called —and decided to set about
exterminating them.
But how ?
The fertile mind of their executor, Crispi—Humbert’s
favorite—would see to that.
The Mafia’s Executor.
Hunger, which had been beating hard at the doors of the
Poor, became starvation at the close of 1893. The village
clock struck the last hour of that memorable year, and through
the windows of the baronial castle, ostentatiously—provokingly
—illuminated, Lazarus could see Dives and his lucky offspring
sitting contentedly at the New Year’s Eve repast—their table
laden with the luscious fruits of his unremunerated toil—
whilst his family were perishing of hunger and exposure.
Human endurance has a limit, and the wronged, starving
man rebelled !
At the first clash of fractured panes of glass, 50,000
Royal troops, which had been hurriedly despatched from
Rome in full butchering array, pitilessly slaughtered Him.
Thus the extermination of the Fasci began.
The leaders and a thousand others were seized, and, in
spite of their proved innocence of the crimes alleged against
them, condemned to an aggregate penalty of 4250 years of
penal servitude —the King’s soldiers acting in the triple
capacity of policemen, prosecutors, and judges.
The Sicilian Laborer’s Cause was remorselessly suffocated.
He was deprived of the right of combination, and the Land-
holder’s heavy yoke again crushed him to the earth.
Thus history repeated itself.
Rome, after the lapse of twenty-two centuries, again sent
her irresistible legions to the aid of the “ latifundist ” of
Sicily to subjugate his discontented slaves. Again the hypo-
critical Roman Praetor, in passing sentence on the Leader of
the Serfs, recommended him to the mercy of those in


authority; and again the stoical reply came from the withered
lips of the modern Eunus: “ Avaunt I Have nothing to
repent; no mercy to ask for : finish !” 6
Robbing the Banks.
The dreadful enormities committed in Sicily “ by order
of the Mafia,” under the pretext of quelling bread-riots which
could have been easily averted by a timely distribution of food
to the famishing, evoked bitter, and even armed, protests from
all parts of Continental Italy.
Crispi, responsible for the bloodshed and unnecessary
outrages that had been perpetrated, became the object of
almost universal execration, and old charges were revived and
re-levelled against him.
Cavallotti, the leader of the Radical Constitutional Party,
whom a Crispian bully murdered afterwards, undertook to
expose the senilely cruel dictator on behalf of the outraged
people.
He accused Crispi in Parliament of complicity with the
Banca Romana Frauds; but Parliament, controlled by a
corrupt ministerial majority—Pilate like—washed its hands
of the whole disreputable business, and calmly directed the
accuser to appeal to the Magistrate. But this worthy, too,
declined to initiate proceedings against the accused, because,
he said, the alleged offences have been committed by a public
man in his official capacity, therefore only the Legislature can
adjudicate; besides which, as Crispi was a member of the
most distinguished “ Order of the Annunziata,” he could not
be prosecuted and lodged in Bomo Petri without permission
from the King.
But His Majesty being loth to grant the indispensible
authorization, and the two Houses being indisposed to impeach
their leader, no alternative was left to Cavallotti but to
publish a categorical indictment of the Premier, substantiated
by sufficient evidence 6 to show: That Crispi had ably defended
the Roman Bank in Parliament and had thereby succeeded in
frustrating a proposed inquiry into its affairs (knowing it at
the time to be rotten), in the expectation of a reward 7 ; that
he, while a Minister of the Crown, either connived at, or
countenanced, the grave irregularities of the said institution,
and had caused its defaulting governor, Signor Tanlongo,
to be appointed a “ Knight Commander of the Crown of


Italy ”; that he, while at the head of the Government,
and therefore the depository of immense power, freely
used the funds of the Bank by means of private loans
or overdrafts which were not entered in the books, and never
repaid ; and, further, that Crispi intended to discharge his
debt, by bringing in a Bill offering especial facilities and privi-
leges to the indulgent Bank ; that he had, also, obtained from
his royal master and had sold for 60,000 francs the Cross of
the “ Order of the Crown of Italy ” to one Cornelius Herz of
Panama notoriety.
Crispi was also accused of allowing the members of his
family to systematically travel free at the expense of the State,
or of some other institution ; and the extraordinary case was
brought to light of a railway company charging the cost of a
special train supplied to Signora Lina (the Premier’s wife) on
the occasion of one of her trips to a German health resort
(Wiesbaden ?) to the Railway Employees Pension Fund, having
waited in vain for the settlement of the bill!
The Fascination of the King.
Cavallotti challenged Crispi to prosecute him for libel if
he thought his charges were unfounded ; and, addressing the
Chamber of Deputies, he said on the subject: “ You have
here either a * Thief ’ or a * Slanderer ’ ; it is your duty to
punish either the one or the other!” But the Ministerial
Press “dissuaded” its inspirer and subsidiser from taking
that step, assuring him that his honor was too well established
amongst the respectable and right-thinking section of the
community to require vindication. Nevertheless, the scandal
was too great to allow the matter to drop, and a Royal
(whitewashing) Commission, mostly composed of Crispian
supporters, was appointed with the avowed object of inquiring
into the charges.
The Commission exonerated the Premier of complicity in
the Bank frauds, and held that the other charges made by
Cavallotti had not been proved ; reprehending him, however,
for his countenance of, or extreme indulgence towards, the
Bank Pillagers, whom he should have caused to be checked in
their “ kleptomaniac ” career. As for the sums of money
received by Crispi from the pillagers, the Commission were of
opinion that that was a matter not worth insisting on, as those
moneys were expended not for personal benefit of the receiver


but in “ furtherance of the interests of the State ” — i.e ., in
corrupting the electors so as to ensure the return of a Minis-
terial majority.
Notwithstanding the equivocal (however indulgent)
character of the Royal Commission’s Report, King Humbert
still retained his predilection for Crispi; and on a certain
occasion he even addressed him as his “Dear old friend ” in a
congratulatory letter intended for publication.
How may the action of the King be explained ?
It was rumored that Crispi’s power over Humbert was
sufficiently great to compel him to rescind Queen Marguerite’s
order against the admission to the Court of Signora Lina,
who had been placed in an awkward position by the alleged
discovery of her husband’s two previous marriages, both wives
being supposed to be still living.
It was also said that, warned in time by his favored
Minister, Humbert had succeeded in withdrawing six millions
of francs’ worth of deposits from the Banco, Tiberina just
on the eve of its suspending payment; and that the
threatening words once used by Crispi to the effect that, “ if
he were brought to trial, he would drag some personage of a
very high standing with him,” had reference to a person of
royal blood.
The most plausible explanation of the King’s fascination,
however, is that Crispi was considered indispensable to the
dynasty and the ruling classes; hence his ascendancy.
Exit Crispi.
But, however delayed by Savoy, the end of the Dictator
came at last.
The failure of the royal African legions to capture the
rightful possessor of the title “ Emperor of Ethiopia,” and
bring him a prisoner to Rome, placed poor Humbert in a
ridiculous position, from which it was imperatively necessary
to escape.
In view of this predicament, and in order, as well, to
divert public attention from the tremendous agitation for the
release of the “ Sicilian Labor Martyrs,” who had been buried
alive in the interests of the Agrarian Mafia, the Executive
took upon themselves the responsibility of sending a fresh
expedition to Massowah to resume operations against the
Abyssinians, without consulting Parliament.


The results of this disastrous campaign are well known.
The Italians, led by asinine presumptuous generals, were
entirely wiped out, thus suffering the greatest defeat that ever
was inflicted upon Europeans by any barbarous people.
The Italian Democracy, rising like one man, hurled the
megalomaniac Dictator from power, disclaimed any intention
of assuming the responsibility of his arbitrary act by con-
tinuing the war, and discussed the advisability of impeaching
the King.
But as no Cromwell was available, Savoy was permitted
to continue to nominally rule the country under the dictation
of the Reactionaries of the Kingdom. The new Premier was
the Marquis of Rudini, the wealthiest landholder of Sicily, a
ferocious reactionary who had advocated the closing of the
Public Schools, education being in his opinion chiefly re-
sponsible for the growing dissatisfaction of the masses.
He espoused the cause of the conservative classes, and placed
himself and the whole repressive machinery of the State at
their disposal. The Bread-Riots, which broke out again
under Rudini’s Government, found in him a Minister more
incompetent and brutal than Crispi.
“Shooting ’Em Down.”
Milan, the “Moral Capital” of Italy—the headquarters
of the Radical, Republican and Socialist Movement—was
gravely discontented with the ascendancy of the unprogressive
“ rural ” South in the administration of the affairs of the
country, and with the adoption of the methods of the Mafia
and Camorra as systems of Government. Milan, shocked at
the impunity of Crispi and of the murderer of Cavallotti, as
well as many other eminent violators of the law, had shown
unmistakable signs of her aversion to the existing regime;
and her republican proclivities had permeated Turin—the
cradle of the Savoys—and the entire valley of the Po. The
unveiling of her monument to the Martyrs of the “ Cinque
Giornate” raised her enthusiasm to fever heat. The local
reactionaries, who were in danger of losing for ever their grip
on the municipal and provincial governments, recalled the
saying of the infamous woman-flogging Austrian General, that
“ a few hours of blood-letting ensure many years of peace,”
and determined to act accordingly. The central government
sent sixty thousand men to their support.


On May 6th, 1898, a youth was arbitrarily arrested at
Milan for selling a Socialist protest against the violences
perpetrated by His Majesty’s Government on the starving
masses of Apulia, Campania, and other provinces. A crowd
collected before the lock-up demanding his release.
The pretext had arrived !
The King’s troops, directed by the local reactionary
oligarchy, proceeded to do their sanguinary work.
The leaders of the Socialist and Republican parties, who
had come forward to exhort the people not to respond to the
provocation and to keep the peace, were forthwith arrested.
The gatling gun, called into requisition, “ mowed down ”
crowds of inoffensive citizens, amongst them many women
and children. Four thousand, according to the correspondents
of the English press (400 according to the Italian papers),
were wounded and killed in the streets of Milan ; while the
military suffered only 37 slight casualties—mostly bruises and
knife-wounds—not one soldier being injured by firearms ! 8
The most ferocious and crushing repression in the con-
temporary history of the country was thus inaugurated.
The Ukase.
Bloodshed and long months of an iniquitous martial law
had, however, failed to terrorize the Democracy. In view of
the extension of the Socialist movement, Humbert was
advised to call General Pelloux—a notorious martinet—to the
head of the Government.
The dictatorial military Cabinet which took office decided
to paralyse the people by depriving them of the exercise of
their rights to freedom of speech, a free press, and free
association. But as a Bill to this effect amounting to a
suppression of the fundamental laws of the kingdom met
with a determined and insurmountable opposition in the
Legislative Assembly, General Pelloux suspended the sittings
of Parliament, and enforced the provisions of the Bill by
Royal Decree. These extraordinary proceedings, however,
having been declared unconstitutional, and therefore null and
void in their legal effects, by the Supreme Court at Rome, the
Government withdrew the Ukase—for the time being—
attempting instead to alter the Parliamentary Standing
Orders in such a manner as to cripple the Opposition, hoping
thereby to ensure an easy approval in the orthodox fashion of
their favorite Bill on its re-introduction.


But the high-handed manner in which the alterations
were carried through provoked such a storm of indignation
throughout Italy that the Pelloux Ministry was compelled to
submit to the judgment of the country.
The verdict of the People declared at the ballot-box was
favorable to the Opposition—to the Socialists and other
Radicals especially—who gained many seats at the expense of
the Ministerialists.
The country had already understood that the Constitution
had been trampled upon, and that Savoy had lent her co-
operation to the outrage. 9
Their Last Card.
Sobered by the unequivocal response of the People,
General Pelloux endeavored —through the medium of the
new Speaker of the Legislative Assembly—to come to terms
with the Extreme Oppositionists in order to be able to still
carry on the Government, but on being informed that no
truce would be agreed to by the Democracy if he persisted in
his liberticide designs, he resigned.
The difficulties experienced in forming the new Ministry
and its heterogeneous colorless composition, demonstrated
that the monarchical and conservative parties were either
played out, or demoralised, and that the day was not distant
when the Crown would feel obliged to appeal to a Mirabeau
for constitutional advice.
But as such a day would probably prove the last for
Royal, Political, and Economic privilege alike, the Con-
servative World of Italy—a most reactionary and unscrupulous
world by the way—was suddenly confronted with the prospect
of a hopeless morrow.
Of the two great pillars of Conservatism, one—the Church
—had, alas I already been shattered by the Savoyan Con-
servatives themselves ; while the other —the Throne—was
being undermined by the all-permeating tide of Revolution.
Symptoms of a coming storm abounded. The country
was demanding a Costituente —a new Plebiscite—to ascertain
the real standing of the Dynasty in the estimation of the
people, and to draft a fresh and more suitable agreement between
the Nation and its Ruler. That amounted to a leap towards
the Republic—a Social Republic, presumably, considering the
numerical preponderance of the Social Democratic element
over the Mazzinian and other capitalistic Republicans.


The “ subversive ” doctrines were permeating the army.
It was time to act—to push back the ever increasing
tide of discontent—to annihilate the Socialistic phalanxes
which were increasing in geometrical ratio at each electoral
contest.
But how was all this to be achieved ?
The means—the pretext—would be discovered : must be
found at any cost—even at the price of a crime.
And, then, the last card of the Reaction was adroitly
played.
Nemesis.
In a country in whose making the dagger has played a
conspicuous part, and whose statesmen have mostly been
active conspirators ; in a country where the very names of the
public thoroughfares are utilized to immortalize deeds of
violence and bloodshed, and their patriotic perpetrators ; and
where Royalty itself has been forced to bow to the inevitable
and erect monuments and memorials of all descriptions to
conspirators and regicides—there is, even now, no great scarcity
of incipient political assassins disposed to listen to the insidious
whisper of Violence from the false lips of those who will stickle
at nothing to promote their own interests.
A fanatic was found, who was brought to believe that the
murder of one man would avenge the slaughter of hundreds
of fellow-toilers, and punish the connivance of a sovereign at
the violation of the Constitution of the country, which he was
solemnly pledged to preserve intact, thus despoiling his sub-
jects of their dearly-bought liberties.
The fanatic was found : the deed, done!
Back to Cimmerian Darkness.
Behold the anxiously waited for opportunity 1 What
Martial Law and Military Dictatorship have failed to secure,
the Monza tragedy would accomplish.
Shocked by the dreadful deed and alarmed by its fre-
quent occurrence, the public were not likely to notice whether
the proceedings for avenging the death of the sovereign were
carried too far, or were being indiscriminately conducted.
Seize the heterodox Press, and the Reaction would have
a free and uncheckered career in its work of extermination,
which would be further facilitated by putting out of the way
the most active, intelligent, and able of the Reformers.


By these methods a regime of Terrorism would be
inaugurated under which it would not be difficult to extinguish
the last remnants of Freedom with impunity, and to arrest the
march of Progress—for the time being, at least.
There was no need to be particular—the Socialists and
the Republicans, like the Anarchists, are the unrelenting
opponents of the Throne ; therefore they, without distinction,
must be held responsible for the murder of its late occupant.
The Socialists, as well as the Anarchists, detest existing insti-
tutions ; therefore they must be held accountable for the deeds
of violence committed by professed or so-called Anarchists.
Then down with the Democracy !
Humbert’s remains had hardly been interred in the
Temple of all the Gods, before the Reaction reigned supreme
from the Alps to Lylibeum.
The Sun of Liberty, more or less obscured in Italy by
lowering skies during the past forty years, has now been totally
eclipsed.
The unhappy “Niobe of Nations” has been replunged
into the dense Cimmerian Darkness of Despotism !
NOTES.
1 Victor Emmanuel had solemnly promised to the Lombards, as soon
as they were rescued from the Austrians in 1859, and also to the inhabi-
tants of Tuscany, Modena, and Parma, who had shaken off the old ducal
yoke and allowed themselves to be annexed by the Sardinian King, that
a “ Costituente" to establish the terms of a modus vivendi between them
and his dynasty would follow the act of annexation. Was the Royal
promise kept ? Far from it.
2 The King of Italy had pledged his word to Napoleon III. to protect
the Papal State from any possible attempt at invasion on the part of his
subjects, and Italian troops had been stationed to that object along the
frontier. Victor Emmanuel’s Government was aware of Garibaldi’s
intentions and movements ; for, although the Liberator had left Oaprera
secretly, yet he was seen at Florence (the temporary capital) before
entering the Roman territory, and his lieutenant Nicotera was openly
recruiting Red-Shirts at Naples on his behalf. Therefore, if the Gari-
baldians were permitted to invade the Campagna, it was undoubtedly in
accordance with a pre-established plan formed by Savoy and the
Bonaparte in order to destroy them.


3 The nobleman alluded to is the young Prince of Cuto, from Palermo,
the Editor of the Socialist paper La Battaglia. During the last ten years
he has spent all his income and part of his property in support of the
Cause of the Oppressed.
. 4 The Mafia, erroneously believed to be a regularly constituted secret
society, is a ring or coalition of interests and aspirations controlling by
any means, fair or foul, the political, civil, and social powers ; and
therefore ruling the country. Those in authority—as the recent trial in
connection with the Notarbartolo murder has shown—have either to bend
or break before its will. Lately two members of Parliament have been
arrested, charged with being the instigators of murders and the leading
spirits of the Mafia. They are not, presumably, the only ones connected with
it; but as this institution systematically supports any Ministry, the Central
Government, as a rule, is indulgent and forbearing towards it, and only
resorts to rigour when it is unavoidable. Many municipalities and public
administrations are ruled by the Mafia. A deadly conflict has lately been
raging in Sicily between the Socialists and the Mafiosi; and the former
have succeeded in securing the arrest of 50 of the latter at Messina and
of many others at Palermo.
®A declaration to that effect was made before the Palermo Court
Martial by Dr. N. Barbato, on behalf of Messrs. De Felice, Bosco
Montalto, Cassisa, Bensi, Guli, Yerro, and other leaders of the Labor Fasci
condemned like himself to from 8 to 17 years’ solitary confinement for
alleged instigation of the Bread-Riots.
6 Ex-Premier Giolitti, on leaving office in 1893, had abstracted
from the State Archives a number of letters and other documents
bearing on the Bank Frauds’ case, w’hich had been found by the
authorities amongst the defaulters’ papers. He kept them in his
possession for future use; and copies of the same were now supplied by
him to Signor Cavallotti.
7 Among8t the documents furnished by Giolitti to Cavallotti,
there was a letter, alleged to have been sent by Crispi’s wife to the
fovernor of the Banca Romana. It read as follows : “ Dear Tanlongo,
presume you are aware by this time of the splendid speech made by
my husband in Parliament in support of your Bank. Can you oblige
me with 50,000 francs, which I urgently need P —Yours truly, Lina
Cbispi.” Signor Tanlongo, however, was not in a position to grant the
loan.
8 The total number of citizens wounded and killed during the riots
at Milan is variously estimated. The London correspondents to the
Sydney Morning Herald and Daily Telegraph were unanimous in stating
that on the 10th of May the gatling-guns “ mowed down 1000 rioters.
The Italian press, however, limit the total amount of casualties to the
relatively modest sum of between three and six hundred. The “ official
report ” says that only 87 were killed in the streets of Milan ; but to this
number, even if correct, must be added those who died later on in conse-
quence of their wounds, those who were killed in neighboring towns and
also many strangers and friendless people whose bodies (not being
identified or claimed by relatives) were quietly buried by the authorities.


Some eye-witnesses state that a great number of innocent persons, who
happened to be hurt by the indiscriminate fire from the soldiers, abstained
from complaining for fear of being implicated in the riots. The fact that
no soldier was killed or even wounded by rifle or pistol shot demon-
strates that no firearms were used by the people; and, therefore, that
the Milan disturbances were an accidental and spontaneous outburst of
popular indignation, rather than the result of a preconcerted conspiracy
with the object of overthrowing the Monarchy, and establishing a
Federal Republic, as alleged. It proves, further, that the use of cannon
was unnecessary and excessive, and the massacre perpetrated by the
troops a premeditated act on the part of the Conservatives in order to
terrorise the people and to put the Democratic leaders out of the way.
°On his accession to the Throne, the late King swore that he would
observe the Constitution and see that his Ministers did likewise. Now,
as the Constitution provides that no Bill can become law unless it is
approved by both Houses of Parliament, Humbert’s action in signing a
decree intended to enforce the very provisions of a Bill which had been
systematically opposed and practically rejected by the Legislative
Assembly constitutes a flagrant violation of the Constitution. The offence
becomes more heinous considering the nature of the measures enforced by
the above decree. And, yet, there are sycophants so shameless, so abject,
so crawling as to call “ a good ruler and a good citizen ” a prince who
has evidently committed an offence which more than one sovereign has
expiated under the axe of the executioner !




