

I








The United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia
(U.E.L.C.A.)
ITS HISTORY
ACTIVITIES
AND CHARACTERISTICS
1838- 1938
By
TH. HEBART
Lutheran Pastor, Langmeil, Tanunda, S.A
English version edited by
JOHS. J. STOLZ
President-General
U.E.L.C.A.
1938
Publishing House:
Lutheran Book Depot, North Adelaide


All Rights Reserved
1938
Registered at the General Post Office, Adelaide, for transmission
through the post as a book.
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia by
E. J. McAlister & Co., 24 Blyth Street, Adelaide, South Australia


PREFACE.
the pages of this book the history of the Australian Lutheran
" Church and of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in
Australia in particular is placed into the hands of Australian
Lutherans and of all those that are interested in this history.
Special thanks is due to Pastor Hebart, of Langmeil-Tanunda,
who undertook the writing of this history. Although the Publica-
tion Board of the U.E.L.C.A. had asked him to write only a short
pamphlet in preparation for the centenary of the Australian
Lutheran Church, the vastness oi the material and a resolution of
the general synod of 1931 induced him to a fuller representation
of the history. Without fear or favor he portrayed and evaluated
the historical events and the very complicated developments of
one hundred years. He also assumed full responsibility for his
work. Despite bodily weakness and an illness that brought him
very close to death’s door, he persevered with his work until it
was completed. In an admirable way he took up the threads of
the various happenings and wove them into a life-like picture of
the U.E.L.C.A. He faithfully endeavored to apportion praise and
blame in an objective way. His keenest critics will concede in
fairness to him that, even in those parts in which he characterizes
the E.L.S.A. rather sharply and perhaps without permitting a deep
sorrow to permeate all those parts, he has said nothing that cannot
be borne out by historical records. Above all, he revealed how in
a history fraught with much shortcoming and sin, the Lord Jesus,
the Head of the Church, w r as at work; how out of the various groups
of different origin He gradually built up a Church, the design of
which w r as evident in that group whose coming marked the be-
ginning of the Australian Lutheran Church.
1 • ‘ I / : • \,(
In the interest of a considerable number of Australian Lutherans
and of world Lutherans Pastor Hebart his book in German.
This English edition is not his work. But it was brought out in
dose co-operation with him. The editor and his co-laborers strove
faithfully to present throughout not their own, but his viewpoint.
Thus Pastor Hebart is really the intellectual author also of this
book.


The production of the English version was no easy matter. In
order to produce a cheap book a translation of the book of Pastor
Hebart was out of question. An outright translation would have
been easier than to present the contents in an abridged form. The
necessity of completing the work within the centenary year left
very little time and made it necessary for the work to be under-
taken by several men. It is sincerely hoped that the revision of
Mr. H. Schubert, B.A. (Hon.), and of Mr. 0. Knauerhase, 8.A., and
the final revision of Pastors Fritsch and Wiencke and the editor
produced a book of uniform cast and one which gives a complete
record of the developments in question. The value of the English
version is enhanced by addenda presenting short sketches of the
history of parishes and pastors. They were compiled by Pastor
Materne, Point Pass, S.A.
The publication of the two books was made possible by special
financial assistance. It was gladly rendered by the young people
of the Church and by a considerable number of individual members.
The Church gratefully acknowledges this help.
It is sincerely hoped that by the study of the history of their
Church Lutheran readers will be imbued with added loyalty to
the faith of their fathers, and become all the more faithful to their
Church and Lord, even to the point of forsaking all for their faith’s
sake.
It is also hoped that other than Lutheran readers will benefit
by the study of this book. Its pages reveal that the main struggles
within the Lutheran Church of Australia were due not to matters
of organization, but to matters of divine truth and principles. This
is an age in which Pilate’s nonchalant attitude expressed in his
question to Christ, “What is truth?” is all too common. May the
Lutheran attitude of taking divine truth and loyalty to the Word of
God seriously induce others to a like attitude and thus help to
bring about a return of the Australian nation to the Lord God and
His Word.
JOBS. J. STOLZ.
North Adelaide, S.A.
Written between November 10 (Luther’s birthday) and November
20 (the birthday of the Australian Lutheran Church), 1938.


Prefatory Remarks by the Author of the Original.
That the publication of my “Die Vereinigte Evangelische
Lutherische Kirche in Australien (V.E.L.K.A.), Ihr Werden,
Wirken and Wesen” and this English abridged edition was made
possible, is due to the zeal and energy of Pastor Stolz, the Presi-
dent General of the U.E.L.C.A. I thank him heartily for all he has
done.
I also wish to express my heartfelt thanks to all those who
actively co-operated with him in the preparation of this English
version. It was indeed no easy task to condense the material offered
in my German original and to present it in a fluently written style
without showing any gaps in the sequence of historical develop-
ments. It is obvious that some connecting links could be dealt
with but summarily.
Since comparatively little documentary evidence could be in-
cluded in the English edition, and the sources from which I drew
my information could not all be mentioned, it will be necessary for
any one who wishes to make a careful study of the history of the
Australian Lutheran Church, to turn to the German original with
its approximately 500 pages.
The greater number of Australian Lutherans and the general
public are able to acquaint themselves with the history of the
Lutheran Church by means of the English language only. It is,
therefore, a source of great joy to me that by means of this English
version the results of my historical research are made accessible
to the English speaking section of the Lutheran Church and to
fellow Australians in general.
May this book by the grace of God become a source of blessing
to the youth of the Lutheran Church and to many others.
THEODOR HEBART.
Langmeil-Tanunda, S.A.
November, 1938.


HONOR ROLL.
Financial support for the publication of the German original and
the English edition of this book was rendered by:—
Heinrich, A. H., Maitland
Rechner, C., Maitland
Clasohm, E. C., South Kilkerran
Peltz, R., Greendale
Wurst, W. F., Laura
Schilling, G. H., Adelaide
Huppatz, R., Lock
Jansen, C. J., Point Pass
Daljwitz, G., Angaston
Ladies* Guild, Tanunda
Stelzer, A., Nuriootpa
Luther League, South Australia
Luther League, Tanunda
Luther League, Ebenezer-Neukirch
Luther Lepgue, Yorketown
Luther; League, Light’s Pass
Luther League, South Kilkerran
Luther League, Point Pass
L.Y.P.S., Victoria
L.Y.P.S., New South Wales
Obst, O. J., Loxton
Linke, F. W. G., Moculta
Schmidt, C. G., Low Bank
Schmidt, G., Point Pass
Mickan,. W., Ebenezer
Pfitzner, J. A. J., Hampden
Linke, J„ Nain, Greenock
Kuhne, W« G., Horsham
Lindner, E. G., Mount Gambier
District Synod, New South Wales
District Synod, Victoria
Schilling, C. W., Moculta
Pech, John, Appila
Glatz, C., Loxton
Obst, A. J., Hampden
Ottens, C. C. T., Brinkworth
Obst, G. E., Bower
Ross, L., Bethany
Nitschke, P. R., Taldra
Nitschke, G. H., Loxton
Jaeschke, Ted, Jeparit
Obst, J. R., Jeparit
Mr, and Mrs. Thiele, Doncaster
Bothe, Jul., Dimboola
Grosse, E. J., Walla Walla
Grosse, E. G., Walla Walla
Unknown members of the parish of
Walla Walla
Congregation, Alma Park, N.S.W.
L.Y.P.S., Alma Park, N.S.W.
Kuhne, H. A., Horsham
Hahn, J., Light’s Pass
Co-laborers with the editor in preparing the manuscript for the
English edition were:—
Pastors: W. Fritsch, C. Pfitzner, G. Fehlberg, H. Schmidt, R. Linke, E. Wiencke,
J. T. P. Stolz, A. Loehe, S. Gross, B. Reuther, G. Venz, and Mr. P. Pfeiffer.
Assistance in the revision of the text was rendered by Pastors Auricht and W.
Riedel, and Messrs W. Schneider, S. Held, of the Immanuel College arid Seminary
. , , teaching staff, , ,
CORRIGENDA.
Page 35, line 6> and 7 from bottom, read Krumnow.
Page 55, line 7 from bottom, read Apostacy.
Page 89, line 6 from bottom, read parishes.
Page 116, line 8 from bottom, actuated, not accentuated.
Page 133, line 22 from top, insert, after Kifchheim —Haigslea.
Page 156, line 12 from top, read S. instead of T.
Page 193, line 12 from bottom, climate, not climatic.
Page 196, line 6 of second paragraph, occasion.
Page 196, line 3 from top, 1898, not 1888.
Page 198, line 15 from bottom, missionary, not missionaries.
Page 188, line 5 from bottom, insert before, returned —with thc>
exception of Goessling.
Page 207, line 12 from bottom, read K, not M.
Page 215, line 10 from top, read Australia instead of South Australia.


INDEX
Preface 5
Prefatory Remarks by the Author of the Original ...... 7
Honor roll 8
Corrigenda 8
Index 9
PART I.—THE HISTORY OF THE U.E.L.C.A.
Page
Introduction 15
Chapter One; The Australian Lutheran Church emanated from
the Prussian Lutheran Church, which was almost overcome
by unionism, and was sorely oppressed because of its loyalty
to the tenets of its faith 18
Chapter Two; As though by miracle Divine guidance directs the
little band along a course leading to liberty of conscience 23
Chapter Three; On tossing ships God safely bears the Lutheran
Pilgrim Fathers, made strong in the furnace of affliction,
over lands, rivers, and oceans to Australia 32
Chapter Four The Lutheran Church, transplanted from the
homeland of the Reformation, strikes root and begins to
thrive in South Australian soil (1838-1845) 37
Chapter Five; The young Australian Lutheran Church in
troubled waters. The first schism, 1846 49
Chapter Six: The Australian Lutheran Church receives welcome
additions from various sources in Germany (1844-1856) 54
Chapter Seven; The division continues and leads to further
divisions in both camps (1846-1863) 58
Chapter Eight; After Pastor KaveFs death a further division
occurs through Pastor Staudenmayer, and in South Aus-
tralia the so-called Tanunda-Light’s Pass Synod is formed
(1858-1863) 67
Chapter Nine: The common interest in mission work among the
aborigines 1 leads to co-operation—but not to amalgamation—
of the two main branches of the Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia —the Langmeil-Light’s Pass' Synod and the E.L.S.A.
1864-1874) 74
Chapter Ten; In Victoria another Lutheran Synod comes into
existence and later unites with the Evangelical Lutheran
Immanuel Synod (1848-1874) ; 80
Chapter Eleven; The union between the Immanuel and Victoria
Synods results in the E.L.S.A. giving up its confessional
connection with the South Australian sister synod; refuses
collaboration and follows its own course 87
Chapter Twelve; For ten years the Evangelical Lutheran
- Immanuel Synod and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Victoria follow a joint course as the Evangelical Lutheran
* General Synod. The question of calling pastors unfortu-
nately separates them again (1874-1884). The origin of
yv the “Immanuel Synod a.a.G.” (on old basis) 90


Page
Chapter Thirteen: The main branch leading to the U.E.L.C.A.,
that of the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod, now
proceeds alone, unhindered and richly blessed, through the
next three decades (1884-1914) 104
Chapter Fourteen: In 1910 the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, one of the two synods'
formed in 1885, joined the Immanuel Synod to form the
Church Federation. The origin and development of those
two synods, especially of that branch which united with the
Immanuel Synod 112
Chapter Fifteen: The Evangelical Lutheran General Synod, con-
sisting of the Lutheran Synod of Victoria, the Immanuel
Synod a.a.G. in South Australia, and the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland, under the leadership of
President Berlitz, follows its quiet course during the next
three decades (1885-1914) 121
Chapter Sixteen: The Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation
of Australia and the General Synod (together with the
other Australian Lutheran bodies) harassed by hatred,
slander, and war-time laws, survive this most anxious
period of their history and unite to form the United Evan-
gelical Lutheran Church in Australia, or U.E.L.C.A.
(1914-1921) 132
Chapter Seventeen: The U.E.L.C.A. since 1921 139
Chapter Eighteen: Two Lutheran bodies' which were forced out
of the E.L.S.A. find their way into the U.E.L.C.A. (the
parish of Dutton, 1895-1925, and the E.L.S.A. a.a.G.,
1902-1926) 146
Chapter Nineteen: Two city congregations, Sydney (1923) and
Melbourne (1934) sever their connection with the
U.E.L.C.A. to join the Evangelical Church of Germany 154
Chapter Twenty: A summary review - 157
PART lI.—THE ACTIVITIES OF THE U.E.L.C.A.
Introduction 163
Chapter One: By the progressive founding of congregations and
the building of churches, schools, and institutions a
Lutheran Church was established in a young continent 163
Chapter Two: The U.E.L.C.A. was privileged to tend the lambs
of the Good Shepherd in Christian schools 166
Chapter Three: In faithfully tending of the young the U.E.L.C.A.
endeavored to keep them with Christ 171
Chapter Four: The U.E.L.C.A. worked diligently in congregation
and parish feeding the Lord’s flock 174
Chapter Five: By discreet and far-seeing synodical and executive
work the U.E.L.C.A. was enabled to play its part in the
edification of the Church —the body of Christ 178
Chapter Six: The U.E.L.C.A. faithfully gathered the scattered
and ministered unto the weak in home and city mission work 181
Chapter Seven: The U.E.L.C.A. was permitted to bring the
gospel to the heathen by self-sacrificing mission work 186
1. The first attempts in South Australia and Queens-
land .. 186


Page
2. Fifty years of mission work among the Dieri in the
north-east of South Australia 188
3. The Lutheran mission stations in Queensland: Hope
Valley, Bloomfield, and Mari Yamba 193
4. Over forty years of mission activity among the
Aranda by the U.E.L.C.A. at Hermannsburg in
Central Australia v 196
5. The part played by the U.E.L.C.A. in the New
Guinea mission 200
6. Other mission activities 202
Chapter Eight: The U.E.L.C.A. was able to establish its own
college and to train suitable young men for the holy ministry 203
Chapter Nine: The U.E.L.C.A. was permitted to further God’s
cause by means of publishing and spreading Christian
literature 209
Chapter Ten: The U.E.L.C.A. was privileged to render aid in
needy cases 213
PART lII.—THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE U.E.L.C.A.
Introduction 219
Chapter One: The U.E.L.C.A. is' a “FREE” Church 219
1. It is free from the tutelage of the State 219
2. It is free to give itself a constitution according to
its inherent life and peculiar requirements 221
3. It is free in regard to self-maintenance 222
4. It is free in regard to membership and to participa-
tion of its members in its works 224
Chapter Two: The U.E.L.C.A. is a “U N I T E D” Church 226
1. It is a miracle of God that Lutherans have come
together 226
2. Much blessing has already come of the union 227
3. The designation “United” is a clarion call to achieve
ever greater unity 228
4. The Lord has graciously protected us from a new
division 228
Chapter Three: The U.E.L.C.A. is a truly “EVANGELICAL”
Church 230
1. The U.E.L.C.A. with its message takes its stand not
at the periphery, but in the centre 230
2. The U.E.L.C.A. preaches the message of the Saviour
of sinners, and not the natural goodness of man 232
3. The U.E.L.C.A. aims with its message at Christian
liberty as opposed to all legalism 233
4. The U.E.L.C.A. stresses as the object of its message
the joy of sonship and not the pleasure of social life 233
Chapter Four: The U.E.L.C.A. is a “LUTHERAN” Church 235
1. Owing to its history and necessary struggles
against unionistic tendencies it is obvious that its
standpoint cannot but be definitely and pronouncedly
Lutheran 235
2. This Lutheran standpoint is natural and essential
for a Church surrounded by different denominations 236


Page
3. Loyalty to the Lutheran Confessions has not caused
the U.E.L.C.A. to become fossilized 237
4. The fact that the E.L.S.A. refuses the U.E.L.C.A.
the hand of fellowship does not deprive the latter
of its Lutheran character - 238
5. The U.E.L.C.A. maintains close fellowship with the
Lutheran Church of the World and thereby avoids
the danger of isolation 240
Chapter Five: The U.E.L.C.A. is an “AUSTRALIAN” Church 242
1. It was only natural that the Lutheran Church upheld
the German language for a considerable time 242
2. The adoption of the English language by Lutherans
did not spell the death-knell of the Lutheran Church
in Australia 243
3. In its attitude towards the language question the
U.E.L.C.A. is guided by its sole obligation: to preach
the gospel 245
In Conclusion 246
ADDENDA A—
Parishes of the U.E.L.C.A. 249
South Australia - 251
Victoria 276
New South Wales 281
Queensland 285
ADDENDA B
Pastors:
In Office 303
Emeriti 312
Deceased ' 314
Pastors who temporarily served congregations ...... 325
From Depths of Far Silesia •••••• 331
On the Threshold of the Second Century 333


1
The History of the U.E.L.CA
Psalm XX, 5
We will rejoice in Thy
salvation, and in the
name of our God we
will set up our banners.


The Lutheran Pilgrim Fathers and their
benefactor, Mr. George Fife Angas, on the
“Prince George,” Plymouth Sound.
(Reproduction from the Angas monument on the
banks of the River Torrens, near the Adelaide
Bridge, Adelaide).


INTRODUCTION.
r r*HE United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia
(U.E.L.C.A.), a small, but nevertheless fresh and vigorous
branch of the Lutheran Church, will be able to celebrate its cen-
tenary jubilee on November 25, 1938. On this memorable day one
hundred years ago the first Lutheran service in Australia was held
on the sandy shores of Port Adelaide, South Australia. Having
escaped from the Prussian Union, and also from the great waters
of the ocean, the Pilgrim Fathers of the Lutheran Church thanked,
the Lord for His guidance, salvation, and the new hope He had
given them. Their leader was August Ludwig Christian Kavel,
their pastor, who Moses-like led them out of a land of oppression
to a land of libertv and thus became the founder of the Australian
Lutheran Church.
The passing of a hundred years since that memorable occasion
reminds Lutherans that it is now time to obey the injunction of
Assaph: “Give ear, 0 my people; incline your ears to the words of
my mouth, I will open my mouth. I will utter sayings of old, which
we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us; we will
not hide them from their children, showing to the generations to
O o
come the praises of the Lord, and His strength and His wonderful
works that He hath done.” (Psalm 78).
In compiling the history of this Church the author had a large
amount of historical records from which to draw. Thrice Pastor
Auricht wrote short historical summaries. These were never pub-
lished, but are still extant in manuscripts. In 1898 there appeared
a short review written by him. Furthermore, there were numerous
copies of valuable documents which the pen of Pastor Auricht
preserved, which included the minutes of all synods from the
beginning; the pamphlets published by the Victoria Synod
and the Queensland synods on the occasion of their respective 50th
and 25th jubilees; various publications in German and English;
above all the “Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung” (Church and Mission
News) for the Kavel-Auricht line, and the “Christenbote” (Christian
Messenger) for the Herlitz line. The author perused approximately
50,000 pages of historical material for the compilation of this
history.
The writing of this history was made more difficult by the fact


that the author had to deal with the history of the Lutheran Church
not only of South Australia, but also of Victoria and of Queens-
land, and in these States with altogether different synods. He had
to describe their separate beginnings, how they attracted and re-
pelled each other, a story of schisms and unions and of renewed
schisms and reunions. The history of the Australian Lutheran
Church may be likened to a dense Australian forest. Time and
patience and courage were necessary to hew a path through it.
The title of tins book shows that it is not dealing with the
history of the whole Lutheran Church in Australia, but of the
U.E.L.C.A., its history, its activities, and its characteristics. At the
same time the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Australia (E.L.S.A.)
and its development repeatedly did come under review. The his-
tory of the U.E.L.C.A. is closely interwoven with that of the
E.L.S.A, A studv of this book will show that the title chosen is
correct. Although there were several synods, and although the
U.E.L.C.A. came into existence only in the 83rd year of the first
century under review, the historical development of all the above
synods gradually led up to the organization of the U.E.L.C.A. The
activities of the U.E.L.C.A. deserved special treatment, and a
record of its peculiar characteristics also seemed worth while.
It is easy to follow the historical review with the aid of the
diagram appended. The first line of the diagram, the middle
Kavel-Auricht line (red), came from the Lutheran Church of
Prussia. Later this line was called the Immanuel Synod. Its
pastors chiefly hailed from Neuendettelsau. It was no assumption
to piqture this line as being straight. Each of the other two could
have been drawn as a straight line. The middle line, however,
according to the time of its beginning, is the first (1838), and
according to its inner vitality is the one wdiich leads to the
U.E.L.C.A. Like a river it received smaller and larger tributaries
from both sides. The manly profession of faith on the part of those
Lutherans, who, for conscience sake, came to Australia, exerted
such a powerful influence that it actually decided the course of the
wdiole Lutheran Church in Australia, The line to the left (deep
red—E.L.S.A.) came into existence by a separation from Pastor
Kavel. It may he called the Fritzsche line, after Pastor Fritzsche,
who led another group of persecuted Lutherans to South Australia.
It is the anti-chiliastic line which was continued by pastors from
the Dresden and later the Hermannsburg Mission Society. Under
fierce inner struggles it later developed awav from Hermannsburg
and linked up with the American Missouri Svnod, which claimed
to he the onlv genuine Lutheran Church body throughout the world.
This is the E.L.S.A.
The line to the right (pink) originated in the fifties of last


century owing to a large influx of Germans to Victoria and also to
Queensland. The majority of them hailed from Union Churches.
This line, after uniting with a branch which had separated from
the middle line in South Australia, became the Evangelical
Lutheran General Synod, and was later joined by a Queensland
synod. It may be called the Victorian line, or after its most im-
portant leader, Pastor Herlitz, the Herlitz line. Pastors from Basel
gave this important body its specific characteristics.
According to their respective attitudes to the Confessions of
the Lutheran Church the groups depicted by the three lines may be
designated as follows Deep red —hyper-Lutheran, red—genuinelv
Lutheran, and pink—quasi-Lutheran. The latter had not a genu-
inely Lutheran beginning, and only graduallv became soundly
Lutheran.
The first part of this book shows how the merging of synods
from the right and from the left with the middle line led to the
founding of the U.E.L.C.A.


Call to remembrance the former
days, in which, after ye were illu-
minated, ye endured a great fight of
affliction. Hebr. X, 32.
CHAPTER ONE.
The L .E.L.C.A. emanated from the Prussian Lutheran Church,
which was almost overcome by Unionism, and was sorely oppressed
because of her loyalty to the tenets of her Faith.
SINCE the year 1888 a tablet in the porch beneath the tower of
the Langmeil Lutheran Church of Tanunda, South Australia,
bears this inscription in German: *Tn order to preserve it in the
memory of coming generations, be it herewith made known that
the first German Lutherans, under the leadership of their faithful
pastor. August Ludwig Kavel, emigrated to Australia in 1838 by
reason of severe religious persecution in Prussia (Klemzig, near
Zuellichau)The persecution referred to in this historic inscrip-
tion was the outcome of the Union of the Reformed Church and
the Lutheran Church effected by the Prussian King, Friedrich
Wilhelm 111. who was himself a member of the Reformed Church.
The Australian, enjoying his cherished liberty, asks in surprise
bv what authority the Prussian King could enact such a measure
and how it was that the people of the Lutheran Church, after
enjoying religious freedom for three centuries, now for the most
part yielded so meekly. The chief reason is to be found in the blight
of Rationalism (reason supreme in religion) which swept Europe,
producing a fatal indifference to doctrinal and confessional posi-
tion. This seemed to present the proper opportunity for putting
into effect the idea of union, long and zealously fostered by the
King, an idea cherished by the whole House of Hohenzollem.
The way for Rationalism was paved, on the one hand, by
the deterioration of Lutheran Orthodoxy into an empty confes-
sionalism. a one-sided emphasizing of right doctrine and correct
belief, on the other hand, by the Pietisistic movement which
sought to counteract cold orthodoxy by stressing the necessity
of spiritual life. The latter, though fraught with much blessing,
soon deteriorated into shallow moralism and religious emotiona-


lism and lost all sense of the essential importance of doctrine and
the Confessions. Thus there was nothing to resist the onward
march of Rationalism, which prevailed unabated down to the time
of the divine judgments in the Napoleonic wars. The first har-
bingers of a spiritual spring blossomed simultaneously with the
casting off of the yoke of tyranny.
This dawm of spiritual revival deeply influenced the Prussian
royalty, resulting in deep piety in the case of King Friedrich
Wilhelm 111. In fairness to him it must be said that it was his
firm conviction that the union between the two Protestant Churches
would be a very powerful factor in the promotion of the revival
in church life. It must be effected at all costs.
That this political ruler could assume such authority in church
matters is traceable to the times of the Reformation. At that time
the rulers were asked by the Reformers to become “Emergency
Bishops.” Seeing that the princes were among the most ardent
confessors this was not detrimental at first, but it gradually led
their successors to make themselves overlords in the church. As
a consequence, the people suffered much oppression.
A new Church Book was compiled by the King and his spiritual
advisers, which sought to effect a compromise between the two
Churches. Among other things, it contained a form of Holy Com-
munion in which all that was essentially Lutheran was rigorously
excluded. A wording was substituted which was regarded as elastic
enough to be used with a clear conscience hy Lutherans as well as
by members of the Reformed Church.
This book, officially declared the most effective means for fur-
thering the union, led to open, though passive, resistance. It was
decreed that, on the tercentenary of the Augsburg Confession (June
25, 1530), in all churches of the land Holy Communion be cele-
brated according to the order provided in the new Church Book.
Almost universally the decree was obeyed and the book adopted.
Was there none to champion the Faith of the Fathers? There
was indeed. God had prepared His champion, Johann Gottfried
Scheibel, D.D., Professor of Theology at the University of Breslau,
capital of Silesia. Commanding respect, big in stature, strong-willed,
straight forward and frank, yet amiable and conciliatory, steadfast
and true, he was imbued with child-like faith and profound fear of
God. As he was thoroughly versed in the Scriptures, he was well
equipped for the attack upon the Union, the dangers of which he
clearly discerned. “As a Lutheran, I, in and before all things, con-
sult the Scriptures,” was his dictum. When still a student, the study
of the Book of Revelation wrought in him a faith unwavering and
steadfast as a rock. In his faith he stood alone among his Ration-
alistic fellow-professors in Breslau. He did not accept a call to
the high office of bishop-in-chief of the Lutheran Church of Russia,


but stayed and boldly fought the Union. This fight cost him all
his honors, income, and offices, even that of the ministry, and
brought him nothing but exile in return. But his fight to rescue
the Lutheran Church in Prussia continued. As one “falsely accused,
hated and hounded,” he earnestly and incessantly petitioned the
Ivina for permission to celebrate Holy Communion once in a while
with his congregation according to the old Wittenberg Order, all
of no avail. For an independent Lutheran Church in Prussia there
was no room. This noble champion’s profound significance to the
Australian Lutheran Church is obvious, seeing that Pastor Fritzsche,
when a student, sat at his feet, and that his (Scheibel’s) writings
were responsible for Ravel's leaving the Union. God had truly en-
dowed Scheibel, as his friend, Professor Steffens, said of him, “with
the gift, enjoyed by few, of dispelling the deepest sciuples of
struggling souls.” Perhaps the sainted pastor of our Australian
Lutheran Church was justified in writing of Scheibel: “He is in
truth our spiritual father.
Scheibel steadfastness made others steadfast. Men of high
intellectual attainments rallied to the Lutheran ensign. One was
Professor Steffens, the philosopher, whose stirring bugle-call rallied
multitudes to the nation’s flag in the struggles against Napoleon.
Another was Professor Huschke, the lawyer, who later did
yeoman service in the organizing ol the resurrected Lutheran
Church of Prussia. Many of his basic views are reflected in KaveLs
Church Constitution for South Australia. Men like these rose from
the ranks of the pastors in Silesia, Brandenburg and Posen. Such
places, where confessors stood boldly by the Lutheran cause, at-
tracted streams of faithful Lutherans from fax and near, who
sought spiritual ministration according to the pure Word and
Sacraments. Increasing tyranny exercised in deposing pastors and
depriving the faithful of their churches and personages, left no
alternative but to assemble for worship in homes, cellars, barns,
forests and quarries. The fidelity to their conviction was severely
tested. Their eager searching for religious edification led to a
grand revival. One who experienced it wrote in Auricht s Kirchen-
und Missions-Zeitung”: “It a glorious religious awakening in
which God’s Spirit breathed. Young and old, great and small,
youths and maidens, husbands and wives began to pray. School
boys held prayer meetings. We assembled together for evening
devotions and the Word of God moved our hearts.
While the few pastors, not yet sharing the fate of their fellows
in prisons and fortresses, went under cover of darkness to their
little, scattered congregations, lay-elders conducted reading ser-
vices, performed baptisms, even administered the Lord’s Supper,
though only in exceptional instances. One of these elders wrote


in ihe Langmeil (Tanunda) church register: "Like the little mice
in the silent hours the faithful souls crept to him (Kavel), and
when meetings with friends from other parts were arranged, the
darkest nights and the thickest forests were chosen/ 5 The oppressed
even succeeded in secretly holding a general synod in 1835, con-
vened for the purpose of organizing the congregations into a
Church. Friday evening prayer meetings and private confession
were introduced at that juncture.
Meanwhile petitions for toleration, couched in most pleading
terms, were lodged with the King and the Government. Instead of
toleration, severe conflict with the State powers ensued, and the
little flock was subjected to bitter oppression and persecution.
“Thus,” wrote the Prussian historian, von Treitschke, “in sharpest
contrast to the ideal of evangelical liberty, under that oious ruler,
persecution was possible. 55 .. . “In their resolution to stand
staunchly to the dictates of conscience the King could see only cul-
pable rebellion. 55
A few more details of the persecution will help the reader to
understand wffiy thoughts of emigration should enter the minds of
the victims. At one place on Christmas Day over 400 soldiers with
sword and bayonet drove weeping women from church, forced the
doors and led a Union pastor into the church. The militia was
billetted in the place until the Lutherans put in appearance
in ihe church. Official acts (baptisms, solemnisation of marriages,
and confirmation) by Lutheran pastors were declared illegal, and
pastors performing them heavily penalized, whereas a considerable
Judas-reward was earned for delivering up one certain pastor.
Refusal to betray officiating pastors meant jail for three months.
Midwives were compelled to report births of Lutheran children.
Penalties were inflicted upon parents for having children baptized
by Lutheran pastors. Those so baptized were, in some cases, com-
pulsorily re-baptized by pastors of the Union. To report on the long
terms of imprisonment of pastors w T ould require pages. Monetary
penalties imposed upon congregations ran into thousands of pounds.
Shocking ruthlessness was exercised in collecting the penalties.
Live stock, furniture, and produce were distrained and auctioned at
ridiculous prices. Nor did the peopled honor fare any better.
They were publicly decried as rebels, separatists, dissenters, se-
ducers, stiff-necked Lutherans and so on. The name of the State
Minister, von Altenstein, is intimately associated with these perse-
cutions. Members of the nobility were taken severely to task —one
countess detained in a fortress for twelve months —for allow-
ing church services to be conducted on their premises. Con-
temporaries comment with surprise on the fact that during all this
persecution (ten years) the sufferers could be accused of no dis-


orderliness or insubordination. Far from being rebels, it was
simply for their faith’s sake that they “endured a great fight of
affliction.”
It is with regret that this dark spot in the history of the land
from which Australian Lutherans hail is being sketched. It is done
only in the interests of a proper appreciation of the essentially
anti-unionistic character of the U.E.L.C.A.
In fairness let it be said that these persecutions incidental to
the Union were the climax of a political as well as church-political
system not confined to Germany. One need only bear in mind the
“Pilgrim Fathers” and similar instances. Though the Crown Prince,
later Friedrich Wilhelm IV, witnessed the whole matter with a
heavy heart, and upon accession to the throne exercised toleration,
he could not check the movement to a haven of liberty for Church
and conscience in foreign lands.


Be not dismayed, thou little flock.
Although the foes’ fierce battle shock
Loud on each side assail thee;
Though e’er they fall they laugh secure.
Their triumph cannot long endure;
Let not thy courage fail thee.
—Michael Altenburg.
CHAPTER TWO.
As though hy miracle Divine guidance directs the little hand along
a course leading to liberty of conscience.
|”N the measure in which pressure of persecution threatening total
■*- impoverishment waxed worse, the idea of emigration v gained
ground in the minds of the oppressed. The pros and cons of such
a course were weighed even by the early secret synods of 1835. But
for the time being the dictum, ‘‘Who believeth fleeth not,”
outweighed even the Lord’s injunction: “When they persecute you
in this city, flee ye into another. ’ In the course of time, however,
one group of 1,000 did emigrate to America. But Australia! Who
would have thought of it? Those who later did come to Australia
acclaimed it a wonderful dispensation of God to have conducted
them to these distant shores.
August Ludwig Christian KaveTs career and character had
a determinative influence on the development and character of
the U.E.L.C.A. By God’s grace he was its founder, the first to
lead his congregation thousands of miles to a totally unknown
continent. Such an undertaking required either an ultra-adventurous
spirit or a stout, God-fearing heart. That such a heart beat in
Pastor KaveTs breast is amply attested.
In that same breast dwelt another union, a very precious union,
which proved distinctive and formative in the life and character
of the U.E.L.C.A. It was the union between the personal piety,
warmly championed by Spener, the father of Pietism, and the
strong confessional trait, heroically exhibited by Scheibel. The tre-
mendous regard for ScheibeTs unequivocal confessional rectitude
on the one hand, and Spener’s apprehension of “dead orthodoxy”
on the other, left their abiding impression on the whole Kavel-
Auricht line.


Kavel, born and reared in Berlin, was the child of humble,
pious parents. Poverty, however, did not prevent him from acquir-
ing secondary education nor from studying theology. By giving-
tuition he earned enough to pay for the greater part of his educa-
tion. Thorough, industrious, genuinely pious, he avoided worldly
amusements on principle. Before fervent prayer and devotion
brought him to the conviction of sin forgiven, he experienced
violent struggles of soul, and even terrors of death. He scored
high marks in his examinations, passing the last in 1826, towards
the end of which year he was ordained. The text was striking:
“Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves,” Matthew
10.16. There and then he vowed that he “would stake goods and
chattels, body and life upon the truth. His choice of text fpr his
induction sermon in the Klemzig church was I Cor. 4 (faithful
stewardship). At his induction the notorious Union Church Book
was used. Unless they accepted it, candidates of theology could
not hope to gain office.
With extraordinary earnestness and zeal Kavel applied himself
to his work. The strong note of repentance courageously struck in
his preaching soon aroused the parishioners out of their spiritual
sleep and worldliness in which they had remained undisturbed by
Kavel’s predecessors. God’s Word was now bounteously offered to
the people in church and school, castle halls and peasant’s cottage.
Kavel was in his element. The public house, with its attendant
evils, such as gambling and dancing, was deserted and the church
filled. The sainted Pastor Auricht’s father was among the converts.
Of this renewal of spiritual life Kavel himself wrote in a letter
from London to the Klemzig people; “Satan, dead faith, unbelief,
sin reigned in the parish. ... He (God) beheld us lying in our
blood and thought: Your time is at hand. . . . Into hell He led
us, but out again. , , , Partaker of your joy, I daily had to pray
that your love for me would not exceed proper bounds.” He re-
minded them of that memorable evening, when in the service
preparatory to the 300 th Jubilee of the Augsburg Confession, as
they were assembled among the graves near the church, his words
so deeply affected them that they remained in prayer till midnight.
The little fire assumed mighty proportions. And that it was no
mere “straw fire” was proved by the test of time and by the
deepening conviction of the soundness of the Lutheran doctrine.
This conviction ripened to a full personal embracing of the whole
Lutheran heritage, and this tie nothing on earth would break.
Nevertheless, Kavel was still in the Union.
A pertain band of spiritually awakened people, who had stepped
out of the rationalized State Church and made contact with Kavel,
was warned against him by Scheibel (!). This induced Kavel. to


study Scheibers writings. These brought home to him the false
ambiauitv of the Union and made him doubt whether he could
c
remain in it. The influence of other pastors was not without effect,
and in 1835 came Kavel’s open and definite breach with the Union.
One warm-hearted supporter of the Union gave Kavel a wonderful
testimonial: “Kavel the honest, faithful, untiring, gentle, calm . .
and in regard to his work: "'The congregation entrusted to you
by the Lord visibly prospered. . . .” The same man then adjured
him to return to the Union. Another credited him with richness
of inner life and true depth of soul.
But having gained a positive position through Scheibel’s writ-
ings and through diligent study of Holy Scriptures, as well as the
Lutheran Symbolical Books, Kavel led his flock back to the positive
convictions held by their Lutheran forebears.
In January, 1835, he tendered his letter of resignation. The
chief reasons he gave were that the Union bred and fostered in-
difference to important articles of faith, and that pastors were
not pledged to any doctrinal basis. However, a petition to remain
in office until Easter was granted. But fearing the spread of this
“separatist” movement neighboring pastors requested the dismissal
of Kavel.
On Easter Monday he preached his farewell sermon ' (Phil. 1,
9-11) in which the true Lutheran note of justification and sanctifi-
cation predominated. There was no hint of bitterness, complaint,
or accusation in it. While his saddened flock was listening to his
paternal words of warning and admonition, the policeman stood
outside waiting to seize the church for the Union, immediately the
service was concluded. In the parsonage the faithful ones sang:
Let him, who would, bemoan and wail,
To grieve I’m not disposed
Kavel gently rebuked the weeping housemaid, declaring that
it was a day for rejoicing and for singing as in Psalm 124: “Blessed
be the Lord. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the
fowlers; the snare is broken and we are escaped.”
In Posen Pastor Kavel obtained official membership and also
ordination in the Lutheran Church. Back at Klemzig he enjoyed
a peasant’s hospitality and conducted services in cottages and the
forests. Punitive measures began to be taken against him and his
flock. Here the decision to emigrate matured with Kavel’s full
approval. Undaunted and courageous in battle against religious
indifference and the powers of darkness, his gentle nature shrank
from striving with men. Nor was he the aggressor in the strife
that led to the rupture here in Australia. In a letter to Professor
Huschke in which he writes of the provisional measures for emi-
gration which had been considered, he asks whether a policy of


emigration on a wide scale should not be pursued in the interests
of weaker brethren who might, by the imprisonment of pastors and
by prolonged persecutions, be induced to backslide.
As early as October, 1835, a petition for toleration pro tern
was sent to the King. It contained, inter alia, the following (cur-
tailed) : 64 Owing to the keen sense of our responsibility on the
great Day of Judgment toward our Lutheran Church and the sanc-
tity of her Confessions, we, under God’s guidance, have resolved
to leave our Fatherland with our families in the coming year.
This grave step we should not contemplate but for our faith being
jeopardized in the Union. Under the circumstances our consciences
compel us. For love of peace, we think, as did Abraham, 'Let there
be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee. . . .’ We feel con-
strained to emigrate rather than deny our faith. Thus we give
proof that the Lutheran Church is not concerned with earthly goods,,
nor with power over men, nor with dissolution of the Union, but
with liberty of conscience pure and simple.”
The petition, concluding with the assurance of continued inter-
cession for the King and his house, was of no avail.
Feelers were now ? sent out to ascertain the prospects of settling
in Southern Russia. A grave calamity had it eventuated! The
religious destructiveness of the Bolsheviks would certainly preclude
any attempt at joyous centenary celebrations.
Early in 1836 Kavel was sent to Hamburg with a view to
effecting an emigration to America. No company, however, was
prepared to make the necessary monetary advances for the project.
In, Hamburg his attention was directed to a wealthy philanthropist
in England and he journeyed thither. God disposes!
With Kavel we enter the London office of an influential English
merchant and manufacturer, Mr. George Fife Angas, and there
witness a meeting upon which hung the destiny of hundreds of
Lutheran families.
Angas proved to be God’s agent for their deliverance. He was
to point and pave the way to liberty of consciences. The meeting
was the beginning of a lasting friendship fraught with blessing.
Commencing in London, it was renewed in South Australia, where
but few miles separate the graves of the two men. The Lutherans
of South Australia owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to George
Fife Angas. He was a real gentleman, pious from youth, a Baptist,
by descent a "dissenter.” Family, history brought home to him
the true meaning of religious oppression by the State. Horror of
it was in his blood. Kavel’s mission could count on genuine, heart-
felt sympathy. Angas had world-wide connections. His ships plied
twixt many shores. Daily his thoughts spanned oceans and con-
tinents. He will know of some safe haven for the hunted dove.


Blessed by God with earthly riches, he was ever mindful of his
responsibility to Him in matters of honor, position, and wealth.
During the revival in England he organized a mighty Sunday school
movement. In wind and weather he journeyed from place to place
testifying for his Saviour. His influence in Parliament brought
about the liberation of slaves in Honduras, whither he sent mis-
sionaries. The Seamen’s Mission, on a large scale, was organised
by him. He made it his business to secure Christian men as
captains and officers. His diary, kept to the age of 90, reveals a
magnanimous man of broad vision, a Christian by persuasion, but
none the less a thorough English merchant, widely known for the
open-handed philanthropy which he exercised for his Lord’s sake.
He is nervous. Political, commercial, philanthropic, missionary
projects keep him intensely occupied. With Flaxman, his secre-
tary, acting as interpreter, he has time to listen to KaveTs pleading.
Little pleading is required. Forging of plans commenced forth-
with. Kavel learned with growing interest and hopeful anticipation
that he was negotiating with one of the Directors of the South
Australian Company, the very soul and driving force of the new
venture —the founding of the new colony of South Australia. He
learned, too, that Angas entertained the idea of setting up- a home
for “dissenters” in the new colony, and that honest, industrious,
and pious colonists were desired. Kavel was deeply moved and
highly elated as he beheld the guiding hand of his Lord. The ful-
filment of an earlier entry in Angas’s diary was under way: “For
the success of the colony I look only to God. ... If only I succeed
in securing God-fearing people, God will bless that land.”
Pastor Kavel stays in London for the time being. Mr. Angas
employs him in mission work among German seamen and in
Sunday School work among the German community in London. He
sends his agent, Flaxman, to Klemzig. Joy and gratitude is the
immediate response to his enjoinder: “Get ready, the time of your
deliverance is at hand.”
Preparations commenced. Properties were sold, cases packed.
Bible, Catechism, books of devotion, the unwieldy old Breslau
Hymn Book naturally were included. A contract was made with
the boatmen plying their trade on the River Oder. Their huge
barges were to provide the transport to Hamburg. June 8 was the
day fixed for the departure. On three barges hundreds of Lutheran
emigrants were to set sail on their long journey to the opposite
side of the globe. Emotional atmosphere w T as intense. Mr. Angas
had despatched the sailing vessel “Sarah” to Hamburg in good
lime. Pastor Kavel intended to join his flock in England. Every-
thing seemed to be perfectly organised and religious liberty assured
at last.


But alas! God’s hour was uot yet come. A further testing lime
of two years to the very day was in store. The Prussian Govern-
ment refused to grant passes. Elder Chr. Schubert writes in the
preface to the Langmeil-Tanunda Church Book (1849) : ''Refusal
of passports was due to the fact that they applied for passports
as a body. A deputation to Frankfurt on the Oder sought to
obtain tlie Government’s consent to leave the country. Particulars
were forwarded to Berlin. Several weeks elapsed and no reply
was forthcoming. We (Schubert was a deputy) repaired again
to Frankfurt, but failed to forward matters. We were called
fanatics and many other unpleasant names. We proceeded per-
sonally to Berlin to the Department of Ecclesiastical Affairs, at
the head of which was von Altenstein, but were directed to the
Police Department. We presented our matter very humbly and
submissively, but were laughed to scorn. As the King was away,
an audience with him was out of the question. We were told that
our application papers would be forwarded to the King and that
we should await the reply at Frankfurt. Again we waited for six
days in vain. Without means we could not stay in the town. De-
jectedly we returned home, where all were despondent. The ap-
pointed day of departure was only two weeks hence, the £SO deposit
was probably forfeited, as indeed it later proved to be. The boats
waited another fourteen days, hut all in vain. We had to stay,
the laughing-stock of all. Those who had not succeeded in dis-
posing of their properties were lucky. The others had to use all
their powers of persuasion to secure lodgings. The King later sent
two high officials who interrogated all Lutherans. But the status
quo continued, “No emigration and no toleration.”
This result can be understood. Whv should the Union, with
love blazoned on ils shield, reveal to the world what misery and
hardship it was capable of inflicting?
The struggle for liberty, however, continued, and, in spite of
all obstacles, resulted in victory, as by a miracle of God. A most
pathetic appeal to the King by Kavel, emphasizing the distressing
plight of the intending emigrants, again proved futile. Summer
passed. Winter came. But prospects did not brighten. In 185/
the people of Klemzig forwarded another petition lo the Govern-
ment. In it reasons were again given why they could not make
common cause with the Reformed in the Union. Justification of
the continued existence of the Lutheran Church proper was strongly
urged and confidence expressed that emigration would not bring
them into distress. The lengthy petition is a document of con-
siderable significance in the history of our Church, laying bare,
as it does, the real motives actuating the migrants. In its purpose,
however, it failed as completely as did a renewed deputation. This


deputation was arrested and escorted by the police back to Frank-
furt, because it demanded the right to emigrate on the grounds of
the Westphalian Treaty, which provided freedom of religion for
ail subjects. Another petition in the same year pleaded for pro-
tection at least against the outrageous disbandment of their meetings
for church services. From England, too, pressure was brought to
bear on the Government in Berlin. Mr. Angas sent over his agent,
Flaxman, vested with powers of attorney by the English Govern-
ment. As this also proved futile, a mighty meeting of protest was
contemplated in England at which Kavel was to take the platform.
Due to his vigorous opposition the project was dropped. He surely
deserves credit for the noble sentiment displayed in refusing to make
an attempt to gain his end with his home government through the
agency of a foreign power.
On the part of the Prussian Government all manner of ex-
pedients Avere tried to dissuade the petitioners from pursuing their
plan to emigrate. Not successful in this, they urged that Russia
was the more suitable for immigration. The Czar was supposed
to have promised available territory. In the eyes of the world,
of course, such an emigration would have been considerably less
conspicuous. For obvious reasons many Lutherans themselves pre-
ferred Russia. But the final decision was cast in favor of
Australia. The Government made the issuing of passports depen-
dent on a pastor of their faith accompanying them. This Kavel
was only too willing to do. Now they had to produce documentary
evidence proving that they wmuld be received and given an oppor-
tunity of making a living in Australia. Through Mr. Angas this
was supplied. Finally, at the end of 1837, all obstacles seemed
definitely to have been removed.
But now a new difficulty cropped up in England. In the mean-
time the finances of the South Australia Company deteriorated,
and Angas therefore could not induce his company to finance the
Lutheran emigration. Only as passengers would they convey them.
Now wise counsel was at a premium. The passage money of the
people of Klernzig bad dwindled tremendously. Angas’s generosity,
however, would not fail them. His attempt to procure crown-
lands for them was frustrated by the so-called Wakefield System
of colonisation. Without much hesitation, but not without severe
mental struggle, he determined to ship them over at his own risk,
and, as far as necessary, at his own expense, settle them on his
own land, and make the monetary advances required in the initial
stages of the settlement. His estimates for the venture amouned
to .01.000 or £5,000. Actually it required £B.OOO. And to make
matters worse, Angas, too, had lost large sums of money, and other
capital was invested in other enterprises. All manner of scruples


harassed his mind. Should he, a Baptist, assist Lutherans? Never-
theless, “They are genuine friends and believers in the Lord Jesus;
therefore it is not for me to consult with flesh and blood. My duty
is to love all who love the Lord. . . . These are not times for
unwarranted spending; God’s people living under persecution, . . .
May the Lord govern all my endeavors to assist His persecuted
servants. All that I can do for them I do as unto the Lord. What
would I do for Him, if He were in such straits.*’
His diarv contains the record of this mental conflict: “The
j
matter weighed heavily upon me. I was unable to see my way
clearly. In my mind a battle raged between duty and the fear of
loss. I cast myself upon the Lord and retired to rest.”
Next morning, within two hours, he had dictated to Flaxman
the finished plan for the transport of the Lutherans to Australia.
Thus the Gordian knot was slashed with the two-edged sword of
faith in God and the love of his brethren.
The path to the promised land was open. Matters now pro-
ceeded rapidly. Loan moneys were vested in several trustees. Con-
tracts and agreements between Angas and the Lutherans regarding
conditions of settlement were signed. In and around Klemzig
preparations commenced with renewed energy.
The two-year period of waiting was not devoid of blessing.
For the Lutherans it was a time of contemplation, humiliation,
probation, and religious deepening. Kavel used the time well to
acquire a thorough knowledge of the English language which was
of very real benefit to his people in Australia. Through KaveTs
mediation Angas had missionaries of the Dresden Lutheran Society
sent to South Australia. Another advantage of the delay was the
improved conditions in the newly-founded colony.
Great was the rejoicing over God’s help thus experienced. The
people, who had so long been oppressed, hailed it definitely as a
miracle of God, that a haven of liberty and a path to it were found
for them.
The Prussian Government regarded the whole emigration move-
ment as the work of wicked deceivers and cross-grained extremists.
Culled from the royal orders issued at various periods during
the negotiations are the following indictments: “It is impudent to
talk of violation of conscience. Such talk has its roots, either in
obstinate insubordination, or in blind faith in fanatics, who, for
personal ends, mislead religiously inclined souls. I shall know
how to drive these reactionaries back to their proper confines,” . .
“I shall leave nothing untried to conduct the deceived and the
deceivers back to the right path.” ... “I have been sorely pained
that subjects who are in the main good and religiously inclined,
but now blinded and duped by heresies and fanaticism, obstinately


harbor the delusion that the old Lutheran doctrines are to be
suppressed, and that they propose to go to South Australia, whither
fanatical heads intend to lead them, with a purpose of giving
free course to their fanatical and Utopian plans of religious liberty.
Retract, ye that be misled! Still there is time to desist from taking
a step which you will certainly have cause to regret, and which
can neither accrue to your temporal nor your eternal welfare.”
It may, however, be truly asserted: If Kavel had been a deceiver
and the Lutherans had been the deceived and Angas an accomplice
to both, then it was in the sense as stated by St. Paul 2 Cor. 6,
8-10: “As deceivers and yet true; as dying, and, behold, we live;
as chastened, and not killed; as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things.”


Get thee out of thy country, and
from thy kindred, and from thy
father’s house, unto a land that I
will show thee. And I will bless
thee, and thou shalt be a blessing.
Genesis XII, 1-2.
CHAPTER THREE.
On tossing ships God safely hears the Lutheran Pilgrim Fathers,
made strong in the furnace of affliction , over lands , rivers, and
oceans to Australia .
r jPHE reader is taken in spirit to the banks of the River Oder, near
the border between Brandenburg and Silesia, to the village
Tschicherzig, not far from Zuellichau, to the very same spot
where two years ago the river boats waited in vain. It is again
June 8, but now 1838. The day of departure is come, a day
of joy and gratitude for the wonderful providence of God. After
years of oppression the day of liberation is at hand. But it is
also a day of tears. It is a day of farewell to loved ones and the
dear homeland. They all approach the boats, the reverent old, the
vigorous young, the care-free children, all in their typical Silesian
attire. Their few possessions are soon stowed away. This day the
first of three batches, consisting of about 250 souls, is embarking
on the great ocean voyage venture across the ocean. We are in
possession of two reports of the departure and the voyage of this
first company of travellers. The one is by the hand of F. C.
Schubert, the elder already referred to, who has set down
his report in the Langmeil Church Record Book; the other is by
Ferdinand Kavel, a brother of Pastor Kavel, who, two months after
arriving in Australia, on January 27, 1839, wrote a detailed report
to the homeland. From these reports the following is learned:
Thousands were present when this first party embarked upon two
river vessels. The parting —in some cases never to meet again-
caused much heartache and weeping. As the ships began to move
away from the pier, the scene of farewell, with shouting, calling,
and waving, was tremendous and indescribable. As the boats glided
softly over the waters the assembly sang the hymns “We all believe


in one true God” and “All glory be to God on high.” On the
second day, Sunday, Frankfurt was reached, and here a divine
service was conducted without hindrance or molestation, for which
all were very grateful. The journey continued via the Friedrich
Wilhelm Canal to Berlin, where the second Sunday was, spent.
As they moved along under the numerous bridges they sang hymn
after hymn. Along the banks- of the Spree, where Berlin society
loves to forgather for pleasure, they intoned “Come, follow me,
the Saviour spake.” Presently they passed by the royal palace
at Potsdam. What must have been the feelings of these high and
mighty lords, who by their severe and heartless intrusion into
matters of faith, conscience, and personal liberty, had become
responsible for this exodus, as they listened to the joyous notes
of confession and praise! Bishop Eylert, spiritual adviser to the
King, relates how on a similar occasion the King remarked: “I
do not like to hear of it; find it unpleasant. Unheard of in a land
where liberty of worship and conscience prevails. . . . What would
Luther say, were he still living. I am sorry! May they fare well!”
On June 27 the emigrants reached their first goal, Hamburg.
During eleven days of waiting they enjoyed the hospitality of
Lutherans in this city. The ship, the fast-sailer “Prince George,”
had arrived from England with Mr. Flaxman, and was being pro-
visioned. On July 6 the travellers embarked, and still had time
to receive various visitors. They were also able to read an article
in a weekly paper which commended them for their cleanliness
and orderliness, their politeness and cheerfulness. It stressed the
absence of strife and bad language, the regularity of stirring morn-
ing and evening devotions. People gathered in boats to hear the
singing and to behold this happy community. Some mocked, but
not for long. Curiosity soon gave place to sympathy and goodwill.
On July 8 a steamer towed the “Prince George” out of the
harbor. The steamer was towing a second ship, the freighter
“Bengalia,” but the cable parted and it was left behind. Owing
to lack of space on the “Prince George” thirteen Klemzig folk
were quartered aboard the “Bengalia.” A heavy storm rocked the
ship and caused the majority to be stricken with sea-sickness. The
aged Mr. and Mrs. Lange, of Klemzig, died within two days and
their corpses were lowered into the sea. The aged parents of
Pastor Kavel safely withstood the rigors of the voyage.
On the twelfth day of their departure the “Prince George”
anchored off Plymouth, where, in consequence of foul weather,
it was obliged to wait for ten or eleven days. Here in Plymouth
they were joined by their spiritual father, Pastor Kavel,
from whom they had been parted for three years, and who now
met them to travel with them to distant Australia. Great was the


joy of reunion. How they thanked the shepherd of their souls, who,
discharging his duties faithfully, had now become their deliverer.
But when Mr. G. F. Angas also came aboard to greet the people
whom he had befriended, scenes of tense emotion were witnessed.
All acclaimed him as their benefactor. Mr. Angas was deeply
moved by the evidence of their gratitude. He spoke to them of
God’s wonderful guidance, of their hopes for the future, and told
them that they were in the same harbor, whence the persecuted
“Pilgrim Fathers” set out, to find in America a new home of
liberty. Pastor Kavel acted as interpreter.
Prior to the departure from Europe, Pastor Kavel published a
brief confession of faith, dated: London, July 7, 1838. In this
he declares that he is emigrating with his congregation for the pur-
pose of upholding the unaltered Augsburg Confession and the true
Lutheran Church. That enduring constant persecution or emigra-
tion are the only courses open to faithful Lutherans, he proves by
citing the conclusion of the new constitution of the Church in the
province of Westphalia, “that His Majesty, the King of Prussia will
not suffer Lutheran forms to be employed alongside of those of the
Union Church in his provinces.” A letter to those left behind in
Klemzig, Golzen, and Harthe, dated London, June 2, 1838, reveals
his faithful, German, Christian heart and his devoted pastoral care
for his flock.
The voyage to Australia was, on the whole, fairly comfortable.
On October 31 they sighted the Western Australian coast for the
first time; on November 18 they sailed along Kangaroo Island, and
on Sunday, November 20, they anchored off Port Adelaide. Deep
gratitude to God and expectant joy filled the hearts of all. At the
same time it must be remembered that there were fourteen deaths —
most of them as a result of scurvy —on this voyage lasting almost
five months. The freighter “Bengalia” had arrived two days pre-
viouslv. After divine service on the ship, Captain Chilkot, Pastor
Kavel, Mr. Flaxman, and Bro. Fiedler landed, in order to go inland
six miles to Adelaide, to obtain the services of a pilot. Elder
Schubert records: “Unloading was possible only at high tide and
was effected bv means of boats. It was a slow process, but finally
all were safely landed on the shore, and stood with their belongings
under the relentless heat of the summer sun. Finally a good-natured
Englishman granted us the use of a partly-constructed store-room.
All the grass was dry. We observed in the distant hills the smoke
of many fires. Our spirits were dampened.”
Attention is now directed to the second batch which was
to follow. The second boat is usually referred to as the “Kayer
Ship,” because the greater number of its passengers hailed from
Kav. This sailer really bore the name “Zebra,” and was a Danish


boat. The man in charge was Captain Hahn, who on the voyage,
and also later, proved kind and helpful, and was duly honored
by having a village in the hills named after him. This second party
arrived in Hamburg on July 7, 1838, in time to see the “Prince
George,” but was obliged to wait here for six weeks. This con-
tingent numbered 197 souls, including 91 children. The “Zebra”
left Hamburg on August 21 and required eighteen weeks to complete
the voyage, arriving on December 29. The party had suffered
severe hardships. Badly constructed cabins had collapsed during
the first storm. Typhoid fever and scurvy had broken out. Eight
corpses were lowered into a watery grave. A number was involved
in disputes, but earnest counsel restored order. On their arrival a
kind Englishman supplied two sheep so that they might enjoy fresh
mutton. Great rejoicings marked the arrival of Pastor Kavel, who
conducted a thanksgiving service on board ship and remained with
the new arrivals until unloading was completed.
Once more let the readers hasten back those thousands of miles in
order to accompany the third and last batch of those first emigrants.
These hailed chiefly from the province of Posen, coming from the
towns of Meseritz, Bentschen, Klastave, Kuschten, and Torrowe.
Numbering over 100 souls, they travelled in one Oder boat. They
were delayed both at Berlin and at Hamburg. From the latter place
a deputation had first to travel to London, to receive from Mr.
Angas an advance for travelling expenses. By this time the party
grew to 130. On September 21, the small ship “Catharina,” usually
referred to as the “Posener” boat, was able to weigh anchor. This
last batch of the first wave of emigrants addressed a hearty message
of farewell to the homeland. Devoid of all bitterness, they made
a beautiful confession of loyalty to Christ in all things.
The “Catharina” enjoyed a safe passage and arrived in Port
Adelaide on January 25, 1839. Only four of the party died on the
voyage. The Auricht family were members of this party. The later
pastor of Langmeil, Johann Christian Auricht, then only six years
of age, retained vivid impressions of the voyage, some of which
impressions are found in a letter of 1956, addressed to a
cousin in Germany. He refers to God’s protecting hand on that
long voyage of over 4,000 German miles. None of the party was
afraid, for thev often experienced the presence of God most vividly.
A teacher on board, Krummow by name, was very strict. Because
of moral weakness Krummow was later deprived of his office as
teacher.
There were now 570 Lutherans in South Australia, amounting
at that time to one~tenth of the total population of the colonv. An
endeavor bv the Prussian Government openly to discredit Pastor
Kavel and his flock in a lengthy detailed article in the official news-


paper of November 14, 1838, did not need greatly to concern those
against whom it was directed. The faithful reports of the papers
of Hamburg and other German centres created great interest and
a most favorable impression, which a nettled government sought to
suppress and erase. All these attempts to vilify Pastor Kavel and
his band stand condemned of the voice of history, which has clearly
laid bare the facts of the Union Church Book and the motives
leading to the emigration of our Lutheran forebears.


And he shall be like a tree planted
by the rivers of water, that
bringeth forth his fruit in his
season; his leaf also shall not
wither; and whatsoever he doetlT
shall prosper. Psalm I, 3.
CHAPTER FOUR.
The Lutheran Church , transplanted from the homeland of the\
Reformation . strikes root and begins to thrive in South Australian
soil (1838-1845).
IT is Sunday, the 24th after Trinity, November 25, 1838, a great
day for Lutherans, for it is the day of the founding of the
Lutheran Church in Australia. The first arrivals are still on the
sandy, marshy, inhospitable surroundings of early Port Adelaide.
The store, already referred to, of a certain Mr. Todd shall to-day
serve as the house of God. The worshippers have sought out their
best clothes and made due preparation for the first Sunday service
on Australian soil. They surely have cause for praise and thanks-
giving as they look back. But as they examine the dreary land
and stand under the fierce rays of the summer sun, they are led to
wonder whether the new country will grant them sustenance. How-
ever, the service has begun, and as they listen to the words of
their faithful pastor, based on iVlatth. 9, 18-26, they behold again
their all-powerful Lord and Master and are strengthened in faith
to meet courageously the difficulties confronting them.
The first consideration was to find a suitable place where they
could establish their congregation and find means of support for
their physical well-being. A party of eight or nine men set out to
explore the prospects of settlement. Even Adelaide consisted of
only a few huts constructed of clay and timber. Because all the
grass on the plain was dry, the “explorers” took to the hills, where
they found beautiful green pastures. But the difficulties of trans-
port ruled out all prospects of settling there. Besides, Mr. Flax-
man, who had come out with them, directed the newcomers to a
section belonging to Mr. Angas, bordering on the River Torrens.
On this the first settlement, named Klemzig, was established. This


section of 150 acres was rented for seven years at 5/- per acre.
It was carefully divided among all who had come with the first
boat. Each adult person received a strip of land nine feet across,
whilst children were allotted one half or one quarter. Building
sites were apportioned by lot. Two drays, each with four bullocks,
were rented, and employed for transferring belongings from Port
Adelaide. After four weeks all was safely brought to Klemzig.
In the meantime building operations began. Young and old worked
and helped as well as they could. Soon a village arose. Provisions
became scarce, but employment with good wages saved the situa-
tion. When the first rains fell, the gardens began to flourish.
Pr ices for products were high and the industry of the gardeners
was well rewarded. A cucumber was worth 1/-, a head of lettuce
1/-, a lb. butter 3/6, potatoes 6d. a lb., a loaf of bread 1/- and
more. Flour was unprocurable; bread was made of rice and bis-
cuits. Meat cost 6d. to Bd. a lb., an egg 4d., a hen 4/-, a goat in
milk £6, a cow £2O, a bullock £3O, a good horse £IOO. Wheat
was unprocurable in the first year; in the second year it could be
bought for £1 a bushel. The cost of ploughing one acre was £3.
Employment, however, increased with the increase in population,
and the ordinary laborer received 7/- per day, skilled workers
about double that amount. The inhabitants of the settlement began
to make good progress, and soon Klemzig was an attractive village.
This glimpse into the settlement of Klemzig is afforded by the
report of Schubert (1849) : In order to facilitate the estab-
lishing of this settlement Mr. Angas had loaned £1,200. The land
which Mr. Angas as Director of the South Australian Company had
bought round about Adelaide cost him 12/- per acre. The village
of Klemzig was built in the German style,- the high gables of the
houses facing the street. The church, with a small belfry and a
spacious manse, were included in the building scheme and were
completed together with the homes of the inhabitants. The home
of the teacher was attached to the church, which was also used as
a school. The whole scene was indeed picturesque.
The English colonists were greatly interested in the life and
work of these German settlers, especially in their immediate atten-
tion to agriculture. Hitherto the land had been used only for
cattle-raising on a big scale. Most Englishmen found in Adelaide
were artisans, engaged in constructional work, or else were specu-
lators in land properties in or round about Adelaide. Properties
further inland were not yet surveyed, as surveyors were scarce and
unable to cope with the demands of the new 7 colony. A period of
stagnation ensued. Most provisions w T ere imported and, in conse-
quence, were very dear. Little wonder that the flourishing village
of Klemzig claimed the interest and attention of English colonists.


The newspaper “South Australia’ 7 of May 1, 1839, contained a
glowing report of the Klemzig settlement and commended it as
& “model of practical colonisation.” The article stresses the cheer-
fulness, cleanliness, industry, peacefulness, and piety of the German
settlers. In less than six months gardens were flourishing. Fourteen
kinds of vegetables were being grown, apart from melons, maize,
mustard, cress, flowers, and other plants.
Before the church life of this Lutheran colony can be con-
sidered, attention must be paid to the founding of another settle-
ment, which came to share the spiritual life of Klemzig under
Pastor Kavel.
The second company of emigrants that came on the “Kayer”
boat “Zebra” found no room at Klemzig. But their kind-
hearted Captain Hahn cared well for them. On arrival he sought
to obtain land from the Minister of Finance, a very wealthy half
German, but all in vain, for these German immigrants were con-
sidered too poor. Soon, however, another opportunity offered. A
certain Mr. Dutton had bought 4,000 acres of land in the vicinity
of Mt. Barker. Mr. Dutton had studied agriculture in Germany
and was very interested in the new arrivals. He invited Captain
Hahn and a large party of men and women to accompanv him
on a tour to his property in the hills. On horseback and in vehicles
the party ascended to the top of Mt. Lofty, 2,334 feet above sea-
level. Captain Hahn was loud in his praise of the view obtained
from this vantage-point. The view of the sea, the plains, the val-
leys, the high eucalypts—up to a hundred feet—the waving fields
of green pasture, the running waters of the Onkaparinga in the
inland valley, all called forth enthusiastic praise of the country.
Captain Hahn consequently made an eloquent appeal to Mr. Dutton
to grant his party a small portion of his large holding under
favorable terms. He was successful in concluding an agreement
for the rental of one hundred and fifty acres. Great were the re-
joicings on his return to the ship. Pastor Kavel is said to have em-
braced his benefactor.
The removal into this valley beyond Mt. Lofty was attended
with the greatest of difficulties. The transport of one load cost £7.
Many made small wooden carts to haul their possessions or carried
them on their shoulders up hill and down dale. It took six months
of steady toil before the transport of passengers and their goods
was completed. The settlement was named Hahndorf in grateful
recognition of the services of Captain Hahn. Fifty-two families
founded this settlement; fourteen of these hailed from Klemzig.
In the second year a humble church of clay was erected. The pur-
chase of land caused serious difficulties. The pioneers were asked
to pay £7 an acre for land which had beep taken up from the


Government at £1 an acre. The interest rate on debts was 10 per
cent. Nevertheless, they took up two hundred and forty acres for
£1,680 and a credit of £1,500. After the first harvest they were
able to pay the debt and took up another two hundred and forty
acres this time from the Government at £1 an acre. As at Klemzig,
so here also, there were no serious brushes with the natives, who,
with the advent of European culture and civilisation, retreated ever
further inland.
Mention must be made of a third settlement, that of Glen
Osmond, at the foothills of Mt. Lofy. The passengers of the third
boat, “Catharina,” settled there, but soon found the position too
cramped, and in a few years dispersed to the other Lutheran colo-
nies. This settlement is best remembered because of the fact that
the first Lutheran Synod in Australia was held there.
Before the organization of a synod can be considered the con-
gregational life must be described. The Glen Osmond settlers
attended services at Klemzig. The Word of God dwelt richly in
home, school, and church. On all Sundays and church holidays
divine services were conducted in the forenoon and evening, like-
wise on each Wednesday morning. On week-day evenings, with the
exception of Monday and Thursday, members assembled in the
church in order to be instructed how to teach the catechismal truths
at home. In the evening 'of every first Mondav in the month a
mission service was conducted. On Thursday Bible study was held.
Wednesday evenings the Confessions were explained, especially for
teachers and elders. Lriday evenings were devoted to prayer meet-
ings, Saturday evenings were spent in considering the prophetic
Word. On Sunday afternoon the children received special instruc-
tion. Durina* the week thev attended school. Confirmation instruc-
tion was given daily. Special courses were held in the afternoons
for applicants for membership. Candidates for confirmation
memorized also the Augsburg Confession. Pastor Kavel preached
powerfully. Each cangregation had its teacher. Ferdinand Kavel
was teacher in Klemzig, Lriedrich Schwarz in Glen Osmond,
Lerdinand Welke in Hahndorf. At regular intervals Pastor Kavel
undertook the hazardous journey to Hahndorf, to labor there for
some weeks with the same tireless devotion. The congregations
flourished under the self-sacrificing spiritual care of their pastor
and his helpers. It was a time of blessed peace and first love. They
were, indeed as a 4 ‘tree, planted by the rivers of water. . .
Another great day is come for the young Australian Lutheran
Church. The scene is Glen Osmond. The high hills form the back-
ground. On either side the foothills rise from the plain. Pastor
Kavel and his elders are assembled beneath a large gum tree./ On
primitive seats arranged in semi-circle the bearded men and the


vigorous youths are sitting. From the three congregations the voting
members have assembled for the first synod, May 23 and 24, 1839.
A grand picture indeed, set in the glory of nature. An Australian
Lutheran Church is to be organized. The congregations are to be
established on a sound basis. The Church shall have a sound foun-
dation, a constitution. Various important matters have to be con-
sidered. This synod is, therefore, not merely the first synod, but
a synod of fundamental importance, for the very foundation of
the Lutheran Church in Australia is to be laid.
The chief point for discussion on this first synod was the “Con-
stitution of the Evangelical Lutheran Congregations of Klemzig,
Hahndorf, and Glen Osmond in South Australia.” A draft
was presented by Pastor Kavel and unanimously adopted by
synod. constitu.ti.on came to play a most important
part in the history of the Lutheran Church in this land. It
proved to be a source of great blessing, but also a rock of
offence. Although it experienced constant alterations in the
decades that followed, it remained essentially the same. Be-
cause it grew out of the peculiar conditions in which the Lutherans
found themselves in Australia, time revealed that the fundamental
principles of this constitution were sound, as they survived in the
constitutions of all the later Lutheran synods. Thus when federa-
lion and union was effected, 1920-1921, the constitution question
presented no difficulty. The conditions into which Pastor Kavel
and his congregation were placed differed entirely from those ob-
taining in Germany. Here they found no State Church subject to
state control, no church council appointed by the crown, no church
organization and government whatsoever. The shepherd was all
alone with his flock. What should Kavel do? Should he adopt the
role of bishop and rule the Church with a high hand? Such a move
would certainly have failed of its purpose in this land of liberty,
nor could Kavel have entertained an idea so contrary to his nature
and inner attitude. He loved the Church of Jesus Christ too fondly
to contemplate such a course. For this reason he placed himself
not above the Church, but into the very midst of it. Instinctively
he found the germ of church-government in his own little flock.
The primitive conditions into which the Church was placed led
Kavel to embrace a system of church organization as he visualized*
it in the apostolic Church, in which the office of elders and church
discipline were salient points. Consequently he names and defends
his constitution as being apostolic. No State or ecclesiastical insti-
tution, but Jesus Christ alone shall be in the Church.
The Constitution consists of fourteen articles. (1) Membership
is conferred only on such as hope to be saved not by their own rea-
son and strength, who accept the Confessions of the Lutheran Church


as being scriptural, and who are in agreement with this constitution.
(2) Every confirmed member has the right to vote. (3) Who may
be called as pastor? (4) The congregation shall have elders, whom
it shall elect. (5) Who is eligible for the position of elder?
Knowledge of Lutheran Confessions essential. (6) Duties of elders:
to rule in conjunction with those who are engaged in the ministry
of the Word; to watch over doctrine and conduct of the pastor;
in extreme cases to administer the Sacraments. (7) No accusation
against elders without two or three witnesses. (8) Who may in-
struct the young? (Examination of teachers in the presence of
the elders). (9) If the voting be equal, the elders to decide. (10)
Church discipline without respect of persons. (11-13) Grades of
Church discipline extending to the exclusion from the congrega-
tion, and reinstatement of those excommunicated. (14) The con-
stitution is to be explained and impressed upon the candidates for
confirmation. This constitution will be met again and again. In
this Constitution the influence of the theologians, Spener and
Scheibel, as well as of the Confessions themselves is noticeable.
Another important matter demanded the attention of that first
synod, namely, the Langmeil or New-Silesian Question, as it was
later called. Pastor Kavel soon realized that his congregation could
not remain in Klemzig for ever. There the members had not suffi-
cient land; the land was rented; and there was little hope of
extending the settlement, whilst speculators had caused land values
to rise considerably. Kavel conceived the far-sighted plan of find-
ing suitable land farther inland where the members of the various
congregations might come together to form one-settlement, in
which case the church life would benefit and the spiritual minis-
tration be very much simplified Quite unexpectedly he was
afforded the opportunity of fulfilling this plan. Flaxman came
under the spell of the land craze” of that time and, in violation
of the express instruction of Mr. Angas, he bought (in the beginning
of 1839) for Mr. Angas several parcels of land of 4,000 acres
each, 28,000 acres in all. It was a princely estate, situated at the
source of the rivers Gawler and Rhine. Flaxman bought this land
for £1 per acre, and now offered a portion thereof, 2,080 acres, for
sale to the Lutherans at £lO per acre. The synod was undeterred
by the enormity of the purchase price, £20,800. The project was
discussed with enthusiasm and twelve emissaries were appointed,
who should inspect the land situated about 40 miles to the north.
The journey was soon undertaken and on June 30, 1839, the pur-
chase was effected, the terms of contract being signed by members
of the commission.
The second synod was held at Hahndorf in 1840 (date un-
known). This svnod decided to forward a hearty invitation to


those who had remained in Germany to follow and come out into
the land of liberty. A previous letter had not arrived at its des-
tination, hence the renewed appeal. The second letter was dated
March 26, 1840, with an addition on March 30. Probably the
synod was conducted during these days. In this appeal kavel
stressed the blessings of religious liberty, the need of an assistant
and a successor in his care of the 430 souls entrusted to him, the
need of help in training young men for the office of the ministry,
the need of the advice and support of experienced fellow-pastors,
the desirability of training missionaries. The hope was expressed
that the friends in Germany had remained faithful to the pure con-
fession of faith, and a warning was appended that those who ex-
pected to find a life of worldly delights had better remain at home.
This letter of invitation was destined to become responsible for
important and serious developments in the further history of the
Lutheran Church in Australia, since the appeal was instrumental in
influencing another batch of emigrants to come to Australia instead
of sailing for America, as at first intended. Thus a second wave of
oppressed Lutherans left Prussia and came to South Australia. The
arrival of Pastor Fritzsche and his company of 274 souls on
October 28, 1841, proved to he an event of far-reaching vconse-
quences in the history of the Australian Lutheran Church. After
a time of happy and blessed co-operation with Pastor Kavel there
followed a separation of the two. Thus Pastor Fritzsche came to be
not only one of the original founders of the Lutheran Church in
Australia, but he is regarded by the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of Australia (E.L.S.A.) as its real founder. The two Lutheran
Churches, as they exist to-day, the U.E.L.C.A. and the E.L.S.A., go
back to those two men, Kavel and Fritzsche, respectively
Gotthard Daniel Fritzsche was born in Liebenwerda, in the
Duchy of Saxony, on July 20, 1797. He inherited his musical
talent from his father, a town-musician. His training was sound,
though not strictly Christian. From 1809 to 1819 he attended the
grammar school at 'Dresden. 111-health caused him to be exempted
from military service. He studied theology at Breslau. It was
Scheibel who helped him to become a faithful disciple of Jesus
and a convinced Lutheran. As a student he felt the pinch of
poverty. Nevertheless he retained a cheerful spirit. On the com-
pletion of his studies he accepted a private tutorship in the employ
of the devout squire Rappard in Pinne. Having declared himself
against the Church Union, he was warned not to perform the work
of a Lutheran pastor. For five years he labored as an itinerant
preacher, pursued and hunted from place to place. But he always
eluded his pursuers, often hiding his identity by adopting the dress
of a peasant or a* travelling artisan. But his health was under-


mined. He could carry on no longer. He thought of emigrating.
Therefore he left for Hamburg in 1840. The congregations of
Gruenberg, Zuellichau. Meseritz, Bruecken-Hauland, Turnowo had
already in 1835 extended a call to Fritzsche to be their pastor. These
congregations were keen on emigrating, and they hoped that
Fritzsche would accompany them. But now they could not make
up their mind, neither the congregations nor Fritzsche. The church
leaders at Breslau were against the idea. There was a difference of
opinion as to the destination and the defraying of the expenses for
such an emigration. Fritzsche and others journeyed to England
to obtain assistance, only to find that Mr. Angas was unable to
offer further support. The position appeared hopeless. But a num-
ber of congregations had already sold their property and expected
Fritzsche to abide by his promise. It was at this time that Pastor
Kavel’s letter of invitation arrived and gave a new impetus to the
movement. The Hamburg firm of Slomann & Co. agreed to trans-
port the whole company to Australia for £I,BOO. Thus Fritzsche,
against his will, was reallv obliged to lead his flock into a distant
land. Great difficulty was experienced in raising the necessary
funds. A Mrs. Richardson in England agreed to lend £270. A
Lutheran lady of Hamburg, Mrs. INerlich, supplied the balance.
Fritzsche had become engaged to her cultured, musical daughter,
Dorcben, ard the mother, who thought very highly of Fritzsche,
forsook her comfortable abode in Hamburg, and, with her daugh-
ter, joined the party of emigrants. The bride brought her beautiful
piano with her.
- After much delay and sundry difficulties the Danish ship,
“Skjold” (Captain Claussen), finally departed from Cuxhaven on
July 11 and dropped anchor at Port Adelaide on October 28, 1841.
The party had every reason to thank God for their arrival, for a
mysterious sickness had reduced their numbers by one-fifth (over
50). Every week about three corpses were lowered into the sea. How
sad and distressed this little flock must have been! AlUr the
arrival a thanksgiving service was held, during which Ferdinand
Kavel and Fiedler arrived. The following morning, Sunday,
they received a supply of fresh meat, butter, cheese, and eggs.
It was a time oFhappy reunion for many. Pastor Kavel also came
and escorted Fritzsche and his dear ones to Klemzig. On the fol-
lowing day friends from Hahndorf and Klemzig arrived at the
Port, and with their vehicles transported the party to their
homes, whe~e they were soon strengthened and comforted in body
and soul. They all received loving attention, till gradually they
were able to found their own settlement at Bethanv to the north
and in Lobethal near Hahndorf (1842). Mrs. Nerlich and daughter
Dorchen were accommodated in a shepherd’s hut in Hahndorf,


where on January 12, 1842, Pastor Kavel officiated at the marriage
ceremony of his colleague, Pastor Fritzsche. The marriage was,
however, of short duration. After the birth of a still-born child
(5/12/42) the young wife was stricken with a lingering sickness,
of which she died in an Adelaide hospital on February 19, 1845.
Her mother sacrificed all that she possessed in assisting the con-
gregation and her son-in-law, until, in 1847, her daughter Lisinska
came to take her back home to Germany. Mention may here also
be made of Pastor Kavel’s brief term of married happiness . On
April 28, 1840, Missionary Teichelmann, of the Dresden Mission,
officiated at his marriage to Miss A. Pennyfeather, an English-
woman, who arrived in Australia in March, 1840. In a letter to
Angas, Pastor Kavel reported the death of his wife on December
25, 1841, following the birth of a still-born son on the previous
day. Her mortal remains lie interred on the Klemzig Cemetery.
One section of the new arrivals, comprising twenty-eight fami-
lies and one hundred and seventeen souls, including thirty-four
children, settled at the foot of the Barossa ranges on a portion of
the Angas estate which was offered to them on lease. ' They were
but a short distance from the land which the congregations of
Kavel had purchased, but which had not yet been surveyed.. Here
they founded the settlement of New Silesia (Neuschlesien), later
known as Bethany (1842).
Kavel was a faithful adviser and helper of these settlers. He acted
as their unauthorized agent in all business dealings and supplied
two loads of flour on credit when the food supply gave out. Both
pastors promised to care for the spiritual requirements. Services
were at first conducted in the home of a member by the name of
Grosser. A school was founded. The first teacher was Roehr. He
was soon succeeded by the energetic Topp. The teacher received
an annual salary of £2O, free house, one acre for a garden, and
free pasture for two cows. It was earnestly hoped that Pastor
Fritzsche would erect his parsonage in Bethany. He, however,
preferred to make his abode in the midst of those of his flock
who had settled near Hahndorf in the beautiful valley which they
named Lobethal (2 Chron. 20, 26). Eighteen heads of families
bought of the Government approximately 200 acres situated along
the western arm of the Onkaparinga River at £1 per acre. Madam
Nerlich supplied the balance of her resources, £llO, for the pur-
chase. Since these settlers were, as yet, not naturalized, Krummnow
was, contrary to advice, accepted as purchaser, and later caused
a good deal of trouble. The building of a manse was likewise
attended with difficulties. Later a room for students was erected
on the same site, probably with the aid of the other congregations.
The first services were conducted in the open, later they were con-


ducted in the various homes. As the congregation grew in num-
bers, it set to work to build a brick church, 1844-1846. Teacher
F. Mueller received £9 per annum and had dinner in the homes
of the settlers in turn. From Lobethal Fritzsche also served his
members at Bethany, travelling via Hahndorf and Klemzig, where
a number of his flock had also settled. The journey per bullock-
dray lasted about a week. It was a time of happy co-operation
in the glow of first love. Auricht declares that Psalm 133 was
beautifully exemplified: “Behold how good and how pleasant it is
for brethren to dwell together in unity,” likewise Acts 4, 32: “And
the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and one
soul.” Kavel and Fritzsche worked hand in hand in matters of
public worship and church organization. In church and school
harmony and peace prevailed. Pastors and church members were
indeed one heart and one soul. Both pastors began to train young
men for the holy ministry. J. C. Auricht, until 1846 under the care
of Fritzsche, was one of the first students. It must, however, be
conceded that even these five years of harmony, 1841-1846, were
not free from difficulties and forebodings of evil. But of this later.
Many a thorny problem confronted the synods of this young
Lutheran Church. The third synod was held at Klemzig, on July
25, 1841. School matters were among the chief subjects of dis-
cussion, the ordering of school books, the disciplining of parents
who failed to send their children to school regularly, the fixing of
the age for confirmation (not under fourteen). It was resolved that
members marry within the bounds of the Lutheran Church, especi-
ally since there was no lack of maidens. Pastor Kavel desired
to begin with the training of young men for the holy ministry.
The fourth synod, conducted at Hahndorf on May 17, 1842, was
the first at which Fritzsche was present. Pastor Kavel desired
to be freed from the burden of civil duties. Communistic separa-
tists were rejected. The marriage laws of the State came under
review. Two school classes werre arranged, one for the fore-
noon, the other for the afternoon, according to the age of scholars.
Every year two school examinations were to be held.'
On March 12, 1843, the synod assembled at Klemzig. At this
synod, and for years to come, the question was discussed, whether
pastors should accept from the state authorities the proffered
licence to solemnize marriages, or whether the couples should
journey to the Government Registrar. A later svnod came to see
that there was no danger of state interference in accepting this
licence. The synod of 1844 was conducted in the Grosser home
in* Bethany. The proceedings concerned marriage laws, and there
were long discussions with the communist Krummnow, who was
excommunicated from the Church, and discussions about


chiliasm. The last united synod to be completed was held at
Hahndorf from August 24 to 28, 1845. A resolution was passed
to accept the right to solemnize marriage according to State laws,
as they contain nothing contrary to the Word of God. Long and
excited discussions took place concerning the “millennium” (cf.
next chapter). A division of the congregations into suitable
parishes, to obviate the long journeys of the pastors, could not
be effected. The Lutheran cause still prospered, but the later synods
point to a time of difficulties and unhappiness.
At this stage a review of the economic position and cultural
significance of these Lutheran settlers during this first period will
be of interest. They were held in high esteem by Governor
Gawler, who reported of the rapid progress of his German colonists
to Mr. Angas in England, He commends them as being religious,
well-behaved, loyal, and industrious. He says he would be de-
lighted to see 100,000 of them between the Gulf and the River
Murray. On May 28, 1839, six months after their arrival,
on the birthday of Queen Victoria, the Lutherans in a body
swore the oath of allegiance, and in a special address announced
their earnest intention of proving themselves faithful and help-
ful citizens in this, Her Majesty’s, dominion. Thereupon the
South Australian Gazette of June 8, 1839, refers to the evidence
of their reliability, industry, ability and versatility, their superi-
ority in many instances to English craftsmen. But their outstanding
attribute, the report says, is their deep piety, for in all they do,
they give all glory to God in prayer. A. Grenfell Price in
“Founders and Pioneers of South Australia, 1929,” places Pastor
Augustus Kavel among the founders of this colony. Dr. Price has
a special word of praise for the wisdom and foresight of Kavel
in founding self-supporting village settlements. Kavel realized that
South Australia was eminently suited for agriculture and the pro-
duction of wheat and flour (hitherto imported at great cost), as
well as for dairying on a large scale. The industry of these early
settlers won the admiration of all, as they set to work and in a
short time brought the products of their farms and gardens, their
pastures and farrnvards to the city market. Many of the wives of
these settlers walked from Hahndorf, and other places further
afield, and carried their produce to market. These German settlers
soon played the chief role in the provisioning of the capital. In
1841 only 2,500 acres of approximately 300.000 acres sold were
used for agriculture, and these were worked chiefly by German
settlers. With the money gained by the sale of their products they
paid rents, bought land, improved their holdings, paid for the
debts incurred in coming out to Australia. They grew the first
wheat and erected the first mills. The women helped their men in


the fields, being used to this work from their home-country. The
girls were employed to shear the sheep for those engaged in sheep-
breeding. They also were accustomed to this work, and would
shear up to 30 sheep a day. The folly of concentration in the
city and the wisdom of these German agriculturists became most
clearly apparent in the financial crisis of 1841, when, in conse-
quence of mismanagement, the young colony was brought to the
verge of ruin. Many concerns crashed, and Mr. Angas was very
much shaken bv this severe depression. But as the plagues of
Egypt were not able to afflict the Hebrews in the land of Goshen*
so this crisis passed harmlessly over the Lutheran villages of South
Australia. These colonists had not speculated, but produced. Their
homes, although primitive, were of their own design and construc-
tion, and therefore inexpensive. They produced the necessities of
life themselves and were happy and contented. In addition to their
industry they possessed thrift and a quality of workmanship which
compared more than favorably with that of their English neighbors.
Thus the verdict of Dr. Price. F. S. Dutton in “South Australia
and its Mines,” in 1846 paid a fine tribute to the tireless activity
of Kavel and his care for the scattered congregations. He draws
attention to the high degree of authority exhibited by him and the
respect which his people displayed towards him.
The Lutheran settlers themselves sent to the homeland many a
glowing account of the beautiful land into which God had led
them. The prophecy of their earthly king, that they would rue the
emigration, was not fulfilled, whereas the promise of Christ, their
heavenly King, was fulfilled most wondrously: “Every one that
hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands for My name’s sake, shall receive a
hundredfold.” As the trees bv the rivers, they, too, flourished
outwardly on the Torrens, Gawler, and Onkaparinga Rivers, whilst
spiritual!v thev were planted bv the Lutheran stream of “God’s
Word and Luther’s doctrine pure.”


O mighty God, on heaven’s throne.
Arise and help us through Thy son!
Behold how Satan finds great joy
Thy Church by discord to destroy.
—Martin Boehm.
CHAPTER FIVE.
The young Australian Lutheran Church in troubled waters. The
first schism, 1846.
Across the bright picture portrayed in the previous chapter
ominous shadows now fall. These were caused by a series of dis-
sensions which finally led to disruption. Chief among the disturb-
ing factors were the Langmeil land settlement dispute, the agitation
caused by Krummnow and the Apostolic Constitution; above all,
the so-called chiliasm propagated by Kavel (the teaching that the
millennium spoken of in Rev. 20 is still to be expected), and KaveT»
“Protestations” against certain passages in the Confessions.
The Lutherans had taken up Flaxman’s plan with enthusiasm,
and entered into a contract to settle on the land bought by him
for Angas. Despite the advantages offered by this plan of more
extended settlement in some of the best parts of the State, it was
found that the women-folk were loth to leave the homes which they
had just succeeded in making for themselves. Other factors caus-
ing reluctance were: Much of the passage money was still owing;
it would be difficult to transport their products to the city; the
additional financial burdens seemed too great. The Hahndorf
settlers withdrew first, and those at Klemzig and Glen Osmond
could not see their way clear to shoulder the burden. Kavel was
greatly distressed; he besought, admonished, and threatened in
turn; all to no avail. Fearlessly he then used the weapon of
spiritual discipline, refusing to give Holy Communion to those
who had “betrayed their trust.” When, however, the time to honor
the contract had almost expired, he was advised by Pastor
Fritzsche, on his arrival in 1841, to approach Mr. Angas in Eng-
land with a request that the Lutheran settlers be relieved of their
obligation. Mr. Angas generously did so, and promised to give
those who voluntarily took up holdings opportunity to purchase


them. In course of time, after a number of Pastor Fritzsche’s
people had settled in that district (Bethany), settlers from Klemzig
as well as from Hahndorf also began to arrive from 1842 onward.
This new settlement was named after one ol their home villages.
'Langmeil.” At the end of 1842 Kavel began to preach and, in
1846, to live there. Later on he built himself a dwelling, which
is still occupied. While Klemzig became more and more de-
populated, Langmeil and the neighboring town of Tanunda began
to flourish. The first Lutheran day school was built at Langmeil
in 1845. Many congregations can trace their origin back to Lang-
meil, which may be regarded as the mother congregation of the
Kavel group. Together with Tanunda and the congregations which
soon sprang up in that district, Langmeil became the centre of
Lutheranism in South Australia.
Mr. Angas was richly rewarded by God for his generous con-
duct towards his proteges. After passing through severe financial
difficulties he came to Australia in 1851. He .had granted the
Lutherans ten years to pay their debts, and here in Australia, cer-
tainly not without the help of many faithful German laborers and
tenants, he and his family received a rich reward. He acknowledged
that the Lutherans eventually paid all their debts and that they
remained true to him at their posts all through the “gold rush”
crisis. God granted him a special reward for all he had done for
them. These things must be said because they have been forgotten
by many, and Angas has been misrepresented as having enriched
himself by speculations at the expense of the Lutherans. Thus the
Langmeil land settlement scheme resulted in great blessing for
both the Lutherans and their benefactor, Angas.
Another disturbing factor of these early days was the activity
of the separatist and visionary, Johann Friedrich Krummnow. He
was a queer fellow, deformed and gnome-like in appearance, with
a positive genius for bobbing up in the places where he was least
wanted, sowing the seeds of trouble and mischief wherever he went.
Clandestine prayer-meetings in Light’s Pass, exorcising of
evil spirits, land dealing at Lobethal—these were but some
of the side-issues of his main scheme—the realization of a
communistic settlement. He was later able to carry out
his plan on a property of 2,000 acres at Hamilton, Victoria, pur-
chased with the money provided by his followers. Here he was
able to play the parson to his heart’s content. That he was a
chiliast and that he with chiliastic ideas influenced Kavel is a
legend. Krummnow died at Hamilton in 1880.
The introduction of the Apostolic Constitution was also
responsible for much dissension. Among Kavel’s followers there
were, quite naturally, some who shared the general resentment


against the restraining discipline embodied in the Constitution.
Opposed to it were also the Dresden missionaries who had come
at Angas’s request. Of these Schuermann and Teichelmann had
arrived just before Kavel, and two others, Klose and Meyer, some-
what later. They failed altogether to appreciate Kavebs peculiar
difficulties and took up a strongly antagonistic attitude toward the
Constitution. In their work among the natives they had to face
none of the problems of organization which confronted Kavel.
Fritzsche was quick to appreciate the peculiar conditions of the
Australian Lutheran Church and, according to Auricht, was in
accord with Kavel concerning the Constitution. Nevertheless, he
did not share Kavel’s view of the fundamental character of the
Constitution of being truly apostolic for longer than 1846.
The Protestations, too, were a disturbing factor. Kavel had
placed them on the agenda of the coming synod. In them he pro-
tested against a number of passages in the Lutheran Confessions,
chiefly against such as seemed to contradict his Apostolic Con-
stitution, and as appeared to give the Government any power in
church matters. An underlying motive was that the supreme authority
of the Word of God be upheld over against every word of plan,
even if embodied in the Confessions. These Protestations made his-
tory, remained a Shibboleth within the Lutheran Church for years,
until they were finally withdrawn after Kavel’s death.
The actual cause of the rift, however, was chiliasm. From his
first days in Australia Pastor Kavel concerned himself with the
interpretation of the prophetic Word. It must be emphasized that
there is no truth whatsoever in the oft-told tale that Pastor Kavel
believed in “gross chiliasm,” notwithstanding statements in the
completely unreliable “Mitteilungen” (Communications) of Pastor
Ey (E.L.S.A.). Kavel believed his idea of chiliasm to be "purely
Biblical.” He wrote in 1846: “Our conception of the millennium
is poles apart from that of the fanatical dreamers; they wish to
set it up themselves, we believe that Christ will come to establish
it.” Auricht, who was in the position to judge the matter at first
hand, repeatedly testified that in his sermons on “the last things”
Kavel was extremely careful and dispassionate. Indeed, he arrived
at greater clarity on the matter only amid many prayers and tears
during the conflict into which he was forced.
The origin of the controversy was an exchange of views con-
cerning chiliasm among certain residents at Hahndorf, known as
“Menzelbrueder” (Menzel-brethren). Pastor Fritzsche, who had
occasion to preach a sermon in Hahndorf at the time, immediately
attacked chiliasm, without having first ascertained from them
whether any unscriptural utterances had been made. “Then the
storm broke; this was the beginning of all discord' (Auricht).


Soon the fire, fanned Dy fanatical zealots (especially in Bethany),
spread through all congregations. While Pastor Fritzsche felt
obliged to preach anti-chiliastic sermons, Pastor Kavel remained
calm, '‘searching the Scriptures.” The synods of 1844 (Bethany)
and 1845 (Hahndorf) were agitated by this question, but arrived
at no definite decision, although the controversy had meanwhile
grown more bitter. Pastors Kavel and Fritzsche were both exhorted
to study the authorities supporting each other’s point of view. Thus
a truce was arranged. This truce, however, w 7 as broken when a
new batch of about 200 Silesian Lutheran immigrants arrived by
the ship "Patell” in 1845, and settled temporarily in Bethany and
Langmeil. They requested Fritzsche (in the absence of Kavel) to
permit them to attend the Lord’s Supper. He examined them, and
found everything in order, but when their chiliastic leanings were
brought to light, two brethren of Bethany (Topp, the teacher, and
Roehr) forced Fritzsche to refuse them their request. When a
second examination revealed that theirs was not a “gross chiliasm,”
however, Pastor Fritzsche was again ready to give them Com-
munion. But Topp demanded that they must be convicted of their
error, and maintained that “because Kavel teaches chiliasm, his
baptism and communion are likewise unorthodox.” Meanwhile,
however, the “Patell” people had withdrawn their request.
These, and similar unedifying incidents, heightened the conflict.
And yet, when Kavel and Fritzsche met occasionally, they gave
mutual assurances that Satan should not succeed in separating them/
but soon there was a different tale to tell.
The date of the decisive synod (August 16-17, 1846) was
rapidly approaching. Although at first intended to be held at
Langmeil, it was because the building of the church had
not been completed, held at Bethany. The agenda dealt with two
main groups of subjects, namely, chiliasm and its associated ques-
tions, and the so-called “Protestations.” In this second group of
subjects Kavel’s chief opponents were the Dresden missionaries, who,
in spite of the fact that they were not members of the Australian
Lutheran Church, were invited by Pastor Fritzsche. Teichelmann
and Schuermann accepted the invitation and were present. At this
synod the controversv did not arise from chiliastic problems, but
from the question whether the presence of these missionaries was
justified or not.
The unwise and unbrotherly tactics of Pastor Fritzsche in invit-
ing the two missionaries, Teichelmann and Schuermann, without
the knowledge and consent of his co-laborer, Kavel, and their
inopportune appearance in this heavily-charged atmosphere, was
certainly just as provocative as Kavel’s “Protestations.” Kavel
protested against the missionaries’ presence as being out of order.


He maintained that their attitude to the Australian Lutheran Church
and its Constitution should first of all have been discussed. A
violent debate arose on this question, and on the allied question
of church government in general. The controversy became so bitter
that Kavel and his followers withdrew from the synod in order to
avoid being manhandled. The real point at issue had not so much
as been discussed. Kavel and his followers continued their de-
liberations at Langmeil, the others at Bethany. The only result
of the conference was the sad realization that division had come in
spite of all assurances to the contrary.
It is manifest that even had the questions caused by the presence
of the missionaries not arisen, separation would have come. The
division of opinion on chiliasm was too great to permit of a peace-
ful development. Making chiliasm a cause of separation consti-
tutes something unique in church history. Never before in the
history of the Lutheran Church, or of the Church at large, had
chiliasm been made such a fundamental issue. The Lutheran
Church of the world has never, either then or since, held a unani-
mous conviction concerning chiliasm. If the Lutheran Church of
the world had ever been unanimously convinced that the teachings
of Rev. 20 have definitely been fulfilled in the past, then Kavel
would have been the cause of the separation, because he believed
in a fulfilment still to come. As the Church has not reached
unanimity on this question and a unanimous conviction concerning
chiliasm does not exist, the blame for separation must he laid at
the door of those who rejected Kavel and his followers. The anti-
chiliasts can refute this compelling logic only by maintaining:
“Because we are anti-chiliast, iherefore we alone in the whole wide
world are the true Lutheran Church.'’ In point of fact, this is the
stage of development at which the Fritzsche party arrived in the
course of time. That chiliasm was made a cause of church separa-
tion in 1846 was described bv representatives of the Fritzsche
party themselves, in the reunion of 1864, as something monstrous.
The wound inflicted upon the body of the Lutheran Church
in Australia at this Bethany synod of August 17, 1846, through the
schism which began at that convention, although patched up tem-
porarily or in part, has not healed completely to this day.


Che Lord wil! speed me on my way.
And point me where to go and stay.
And help me still and lead;
Let me in health and safety live.
And time, and wind, and weather give
And whatsoe’er I need. .
—Paul Flemming.
CHAPTER SIX.
Ihe Australian Lutheran Church receives welcome additions from
various sources in Germany (1844-1856).
A MEW wave of immigration lasting about ten years set in
about the time of the separation in the Australian Lutheran
Church. This immigration was responsible for strengthening both
paities, as well as establishing many new Lutheran settlements in
South Australia. It was motivated chiefly by glowing reports of
the excellent opportunities, healthy climate, fertile soil, easy liv-
ing conditions, facilities, and liberty, especially religious liberty,
which the Southern Continent offered.
That, however, the religious motive was dominant, notwith-
standing statements to the contrary, has been proved beyond shadow
of doubt by Pastor Iwan in his book, “Um des Glaubens willen
nach Australien” (“To Australia for Faith’s Sake”). Of course,
religious motives were not the only ones at work, economic, even
political reasons plaved their part.
The church register of the Langmeil congregation shows that
of 777 souls mentioned, 534 were immigrants who arrived between
1838 and 1857; 243 were born in Australia during the same period.
Of these 534 immigrants, 376 arrived between 1843 and 1856.
About 200 Lutheran immigrants arrived by the “George Wash-
ington" in September, 1844, among them the forefathers of families
still well known in the Tanunda district (Schrapel, Stiller, Hensel).
In 1845 the “George Washington” returned, and together with the
“Patell,” brought a total of 494 souls. In 1846 three ships brought
656 more immigrants; one of these ships was the “Heloise.” The
passengers by this boat came from the Nekla district of Posen, and
settled in the Lobethal district. In 1847 four ships carrying 698


souls arrived. On one of these was Pastor Oster, who died on the
voyage, but whose son, Philip, and another young man named
Strempel were trained by Pastor Fritzsche for the ministry.
The wave of immigration in 1848 was largely due to political
motives, but did not lead to the founding of separate settlements.
Lutherans also came in this year. The “Victoria” brought 216
souls from Weissenberg, near Bautzen, Saxony, under a Pastor
Kappler. This ship also brought one young man who became
widely known as a teacher and pastor, Gustav Julius Rechner.
Although Kappler came from Lutheran Saxony, he and those who
came with him did not unite with the Lutherans in Australia. He
served “German-Protestant” congregations in Adelaide and Hahn-
dorf, but, after a gold-digging interlude, finished his career as a
pastor of good standing of a Lutheran congregation at Mount Gam-
bier. A Hanoverian immigration took place in 1848. These
Lutherans settled at Klemzig. But as they did not agree with the
Constitution of the Lutheran synod, they chose a Christian of
experience and understanding, Friedrich Borgelt, to be their pastor.
He was ordained by the Revs. Stow" and Evans of the Congrega-
tional Church. He preached in Klemzig and Adelaide. From these
beginnings arose the present St. Stephen’s congregation of the
U.E.L.C.A. in Adelaide. The year 1848 brought also Another
Silesian group from the Liegnitz and Goldberg district numbering
400 souls.
Discoveries of copper led to further immigration, this time
of Harz miners (Hanover). They settled near Salem and Calling-
ton and were first served by Missionary Teichelmann (Dresden)
and later by Pastor Fiedler. Among these settlers we find names
such as Baum, Kuchel, Thiele, Paech, Otto, Kutzer.
A Saxon Lutheran immigration (1851) led to an interesting
discussion. The 98 newcomers were met bv members from Rose-
j
dale, which at that time was an outpost of the Bethany parish.
They desired that Pastor Meyer, Pastor Fritzsche’s successor at
Bethany, should give them Holy Communion, but first had to sub-
mit to an examination. This showed that they had chiliastic lean-
ings. Nevertheless, Pastor Meyer would have administered the
Sacrament to them, but the Rosedale elders objected. They de-
clared: “That all these things which the Saxons had mentioned,
such as the Great Apotasy, Anti-Christ, Conversion of the Jews,
were to be found in the Bible, could not be denied, but neverthe-
less such opinions w r ere un-Lutheran and consequently the Saxons
themselves were no Lutherans.” The Saxons in answer cited the
words of great men of God w"ho had believed in the general con-
version of the Tews, and even quoted a sermon bv Luther on this
subject. They then demanded that the Rosedale elders should show


that Luther was not Lutheran (!). This they could not do, and so
the Saxons were admitted to the Sacrament. Later they established
a branch of the Light’s Pass parish at Ebenezer, and* joined the
Kavel group.
Another Lutheran immigration took place in the year 1854, this
time of Wends, who came from the Saxon border of Silesia
(Dauban, Weigersdorf, and Klitten). They were the last ones to
certify religious oppression as the reason for leaving their native
land. There were probably other minor immigrations before this
second great wave ended. A number of villages were named after
those in the homeland, such as Siegersdorf, Schreiberhau, Gnaden-
frei, Gruenberg, Blumberg, and Schoenborn. By these immigrations
the young Australian Lutheran Church received appreciable addi-
tions.
Had the reception of members not been hedged about with so
many restrictions, the Lutheran Church would have increased to
even greater proportions. The chief hindrance was the Apostolic
Constitution of Kavel. It would have achieved recognition, in its
essentials at least, in any case; there was no need for its continu-
ally being exhibited as infallible. New arrivals were promptly
canvassed by the various sections, and were thus all too soon faced
with the problems of chiliasm, anti-chiliasm, and church-govern-
ment. It seems extraordinary that new settlers, except those from
the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Prussia, even though they came
from Lutheran parts of Germany, were not only instructed in
the Small Catechism, but in the Augsburg Confession as well. On
top of that a searching examination was conducted by pastors and
elders on questions such as this: —“Have you had heart-experience
of the fact that without Christ you are a lost and condemned crea-
ture?*’ A renunciation of various doctrines contrary to the
Lutheran faith was also demanded. The Apostolic Constitution
was virtually held to be an article of faith—and therefore funda-
j
mental! ' This attitude of the Australian Lutheran Church gave
rise to a number of “free” congregations, which, however, did not
exist for any length of time or were gradually absorbed by the
larger bodies. One “free” congregation (which has, however,
long since called itself Evangelical Lutheran) remains to this
very day, the Tabor congregation at Tanunda, founded by
C. Muecke, Phil.D. After a ministry of twenty years he was
succeeded bv a Pastor Roediger, who served a “free” congregation
at Gawler. Other “free” ministers were Pastors Fiedler and Burg-
hardt. The impressions which, in spite of the “spots and wrinkles”
of the Australian Lutheran Church mentioned, a young man of
earnest bend of mind could gather from the conditions of the
Church is well shown in a letter by G. J. Rechner (later pastor)


to his parents. He says: — 4 T have found that for which I have
yearned. I have found a Church built on the Rock, Jesus Christy
a Church where rivers of living water richly flow .... where we
have the Word of God in all its fullness.”
South Australia welcomed this new wave of immigration be-'
cause of its similarity to the first. The new settlers were so quiet
in their conduct, so industrious and law-abiding, so thrifty and
honest, so dependable and discreet, that they were welcomed with
open arms. They contributed immeasurably to the progress of
South Australia.


Though I have all faith . . . and
have not charity, I am nothing*
I Cor. XIII, 2.
CHAPTER SEVEN.
The division continues and leads to further divisions in both
cam ps (1846-1863).
HAD Pastors Kavel and Fritzsche known the sad consequences
of their separation, they surely would have tried more
earnestly to bring about a reunion. History shows what they
could not see —that this rift was only the beginning of further
divisions. It is a sad chapter in the history of the Church. Hatred*
bitterness, and strife held sway. True, it is well to remember, that
this was no more the case here than elsewhere. It is a remarkable
fact that into whatever country the Lutheran Church was trans-
planted at this time, divisions and factions resulted, e.g., also in
America. The reason for this was that a number of
questions of doctrine and of practice which' had remained un-
answered at the time of the Reformation and which had been rele-
gated to the background in the State Church of the Old Country,
clamored for solution in the newly founded Church in the New
World. Here, where the Church was freed from the fetters of state
control, it had to find a new basis, and so these questions claimed
attention. Nor must be overlooked the undeniable fact that the dis-
position of the German, with his thorough-going search after truth
and his positive convictions, is very prone to discord.
The position at the time was that Pastor Fritzsche, residing at
Lobethal, served in addition a small congregation at Hahndorf in
the south and the congregation at Bethany in the north, and Pastor
Kavel, residing in the two rooms attached to the church at Lang-
meil (dedicated Christmas, 1846) served this congregation and
his congregation at Hahndorf and that at Klemzig (until 1847).
These two parishes are the beginnings of the Bethany-Lobethal
and the Langmeil-Light’s Pass Synods.
Fritzsche showed himself to be a forceful and inconsiderate
opponent. He took the offensive and Kavel was on the defensive.


It must not be overlooked, however, that on a number of occasions
Kavel invited attack. Kavel and his people were subjected to much
ridicule. It was said that the chiliasts would get the blacksmith
at Tanunda to make a mighty chain with which to chain up the
devil for 1,000 years, or that Kavel and his congregation had gone
to the top of the Kaiserstuhl, the highest mountain near Tanunda,
to await the millennium. At this time he had also to defend him-
self against suspicions raised against him in Germany, for in-
stance, by a Berlin pastor who in a newspaper expressed amaze-
ment that a man who had dared so much for the Lutheran Con-
fessions could in so short a time raise so many objections against
them. Auricht, the pupil and friend of Kavel, who “for conscience
sake’’ had left Fritzsche, under whom he had been studying for
the ministry, and had come to Kavel at Langmeil, wrote in a letter
to his cousin in Germany: “We are not heretics. Except in the
doctrine concerning chiliasm and of the Constitution we are in
accord with Pastor Fritzsche. ’
There now ensued a literary conflict between the two pastors,
chiliasm and Constitution being the questions at issue. Pamphlets
were written by both sides in vindication of their viewpoint. In
a “Circular letter of the Lutheran Congregations at Langmeil* Hahn-
dorf ... to the Brethren of the Faith in all the World,*’ in which
Kavel declared that the debated “Apostolic Constitution’’ was the
only correct one, he offered further provocation. That this Con-
stitution was built up on sound principles is evident from the
following summary:—Christ is the head of the Church. The con-
gregation is the body of Christ, known as the Church. In the
Church there are offices which God has ordained, but there is no
order of precedence —all congregations are on an equal footing
as in the times of the apostles. The Church is not a State Church,
hut the Church of God. The congregations hold conventions. The
decisions are made conjointly by the bishop, the elders, the local
congregation, and the representatives of other congregations. Deci-
sions of congregational meetings are valid only if passed con-
jointly by the pastor, the elders, and the members of the congre-
gation. A congregation has the right to elect its officers, but this
must be done according to the Word of God. The congregations
have elders whose office, however, does not include the teaching
of the Word. Church discipline extends to all members and is to
be administered according to God’s Word. Excommunication and
also reinstatement of the penitent lie in the hands of the congre-
gation. In cases of necessity members who have had no training,
but who are endowed bv the Spirit of God, may be ordained to the
office of the ministry.
But Kavel obviously went too far when he condemned every


other constitution and claimed that his was the only right one.
He should also have known that the time w T as not opportune to
effect so great a change in church government in countries where
State Churches existed. How sincere he was in the matter we learn
from his pamphlet of 1849, “A Word of Admonition to those who
waver, 5 ’ in wdiich he stated: “I am willing for the sake of this
Constitution once again to take up my pilgrim’s staff. Christ will
one day ask me: ‘Kavel, have you recognized the Apostolic Con-
stitution as being according to My Word?’ 'Yes, Lord.’ 'Why,
then, have you not observed it? 'Because other Lutheran congre-
gations did not observe it. And then the Lord will say: Bind this
c
unfaithful servant. . .
In May, 1849, Kavel appears to have been guilty of another
unpremeditated and foolish action wdien he, in support of his
chiliastic teachings, published “A booklet by the pious Philipp
Jacob Spener.” In this Spener, by piecing together sayings of
Luther in an haphazard way, tries to prove that Luther himself
held chiliastic views. Fritzsche’s reply was not only sarcastic. It
was bitter. In it he accused Kavel of seduction, shameless hypocrisy,
and incorrigible fanaticism. He called him a veritable twister of
the truth and also gave expression to the suspicion that Kavel was
stressing the rights of the congregations only to seek popularity
among the people, while all the while he desired to rule over
them. Surely Fritzsche must have known him sufficiently well to
have recognized his absolute integrity. It was only natural that
Kavel complained of the bitter words and of the harsh tone used
by his opponent, and that he wrote: “What shall become of young
theologians, whose superiors have inculcated in them a spirit
of contempt of their opponents” —in truth, a prophetic word.
A point of controversy the institution of the Office of Elders
and, especially, that Kavel in his Constitution stated that the elders
should have supervision of the doctrine and life of the pastors.
Kavel certainly laid himself open to criticism regarding his attitude
to his Constitution. It is impossible to deduce from the New Testa-
ment a complete constitution of the Church. Despite its value it
cannot be claimed that the Kavel Constitution is fundamental and
binding for all Churches and for all times. But it must be remem-
bered that his great concern was to provide a biblical authority
for church government in a new land which lacked all traditional
authority. And furthermore, it was just the repeated attacks of
his opponents which caused him to overstate his case.
In passing, it is interesting to note the change of attitude on the
part of Fritzsche in reference to the Constitution. First he was
wholeheartedly with Kavel, but later, influenced by the Dresden
missionaries, he rightly regarded it as an adiaphoron, a question:


on which difference of opinion was permissible. As to Fritzsches
attitude to the Confessions: —He rejected Kavel’s Protestations and
held the view that the Confessions are binding in every doctrinal
pronouncement in reference to the Roman Catholic and other
heresies, but not in regard to every word and phrase contained in
them. This is precisely the attitude of the U.E.L.C.A.
An attempt at reunion was made. Kavel invited Fritzsche to
a discussion. The latter answered, also on behalf of his congre-
gations, that before a discussion could take place, Kavel would
have to state whether, and to what extent, he still upheld his.
Protestations. Although Kavel gave way on one small point, he
upheld his protest and so nothing came of the attempt at reunion.
The possibility of union was, as a matter of fact, excluded during
the lifetime of these two men of absolutely different dispositions.
Fritzsche s aggressive disposition and Kavel’s peaceful nature could
not remain in accord for any length of time.
Further cause of distress was provided for Kavel when, in 1851,
due also to influences from Lobethal, dissatisfaction broke out
among some members of his Hahndorf congregation. There were
disturbances at the synod at Hahndorf that year. On the Sunday
of the synod, Brother Z. pulled the spectacles off the nose of
Brother 8., an elder, and trampled them underfoot. (Because he
refused to apologize for this he was later excluded from the con-
gregation). Attempts at reconciliation failed, and on July 23, 1851,
Kavel received a notice, signed by the heads of 48 households, to
the effect that his services were no longer required, and that they
had called a Candidate Ruprecht as their pastor. He had come
from Sydney and had been employed by Kavel as a classics master
for his student of theology. Soon it was discovered that he had
been involved in the Berlin Revolution of 1848, which he
maintained was a holy cause; the teachings of the Lutheran
Church, however, he held to be “accursed dogmas.” His
congregation, which had taken possession of the church at
Hahndorf, soon found him out, gave him notice, and then joined
Fritzsche. Thirty families, however, remained true to Kavel, and
to these he ministered in the manse. In 1855 Fritzsche desired to
station his pupil, Strempel, at Hahndorf, and in order to gain
the use of the manse legal proceedings were instituted. Because
of his Protestations against the Confessions Kavel lost the case,
which was heard in the Supreme Court at Adelaide. A number of
families, who remained true to Kavel, now no longer wanted to
stay at Hahndorf, but settled nearer to him and became founders
of the congregations of Nam and Gruenberg. A small number,
however, remained and in 1858 built a small church. The present
fine congregation of the U.E.L.C.A. at Hahndorf is the fruit of
this small beginning.


It is indeed interesting to read some of the resolutions passed
.by synod in those years: —At Hahndorf (1847), marriages with
anti-chiliasts are forbidden; at Hahndorf (1849), lay-readers may
he appointed in case the eldeps have not the ability to read in
public; at Langmeil (1852), the right to vote shall not be granted
to anyone under the 18th year of age; at Langmeil (1854), women
are to have their heads covered when praying—it is said that after
this women rushed to put their bonnets on when grace was being
said at the table; at Langmeil (1856), English is to be taught in
the schools, going to dances, balls, and theatres is strictly forbidden*
As early as 1854 synod discussed the question which, with
the passing of the years, becabie ever more acute: whence can we
get pastors? As yet there was no other assistance in sight for 4
Kavel except his pupil Auricht. Even at that time Neuendettelsau
was thought of. A certain member, Haebich, however, had
privately applied to Prelate Kapff, of Wuerttemberg, and this led
to Pastor Staudenmayer being sent from the State Church there.
In January, 1858, he was placed in charge of the Light’s Pass-
Ebenezer parish. He made a good impression. His sermons
especially appealed to the people. In May, 1858, he conducted
the examination of Candidate Auricht. It is mteresing to read his
report of this examination of the first pastor of our Church to
be trained in Australia: Although Brother Auricht has been
instructed by one teacher only, he has revealed such a measure
of learning that he is fitted to enter the office of the ministry.
Auricht was ordained at Langmeil on August 1, 1858, and was
to assist Kavel at Hahndorf, Nain, Gruenberg and North Rhine,
Pastor Kavel remaining in charge of Langmeil and Gnadenfrei.
Auricht’s stipend was fixed at £IOO per annum, that of Kavel at
£l4O. Thus the synod now had three pastors.
But the last years of Kavel’s life were saddened by Stauden-
mayer’s objections to the Constitution. However, before a new schism
occurred, Kavel passed away on Sunday, February 12, 1860. He
had conducted service on the Wednesday before and spending
the evening with his brother-in-law, Fiedler. It is said to have
been on this occasion that in conversation he used the words, later
often Quoted by Auricht, “Nothing will help us through but true
living faith, and that may be gained only on bended knee.” Soon
afterwards he had a stroke and did not regain, consciousness.
Auricht reports that on the last occasion on wdiich he heard his
spiritual father, Pastor Kavel, preach (text 1 Cor. 1, 4-9) he had
said with tears in his eyes and with a broken voice that he trusted
in the grace of God to keep him also faithful and true to the end.
On the day after his death he was buried in the Langmeil Church
cemetery. His pupil and helper, Pastor Auricht, conducted the


funeral service, having as his text Hebr. 13, 8-9: “Remember them
which have the rule over you. . . . Jesus Christ, yesterday and to-
day. ... Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines.
. . . It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace.”
There were approximately 1,500 people gathered at the graveside.
Never before had such a gathering been seen in the district. The
inscription on the tombstone, which is carefully tended to this day,
reads: —
“To the memory of the sainted Pastor Ludwig Christian August
Kavel, born in Berlin on September 3, 1798. Pastor in Klemzig
near Zuellichau from 1826 to 1835. For the sake of the Lutheran
Faith and Confessions he in 1838 with his congregation emigrated
to South Australia. With extraordinary faithfulness he discharged
his office to the end. On February 12, 1860, as a result of a stroke,
he entered into the jov of his Lord and now awaits the glorious
resurrection.”
Kavel left a widow. When 53 years of age he was married to
Beate Irrgang, aged 26 years. Fiedler, wdio had married Kavel’s
only sister, and Aldenhoven were witnesses to the marriage. There
were no children of this union. The widow later married Stauden-
mayer’s brother, a chemist at Hahndorf. In 1900 she died at
Tanunda and was buried in the same Langmeil cemetery. Kavel’s
mother and his brother Daniel also rest there. The latter, weak-
minded from his childhood, was faithfully provided for by Kavel.
Kavel died a poor man. He gave liberally to the poor, especially
in the pioneering days, often sharing his last penny with them.
Auricht says that he gave more than he could afford. From a letter
of Pastor Reusch it is learned that the congregation of Langmeil, in
1883. on the occasion of the 400 th anniversary of Luther’s birth,
gave a special collection to Daniel Kavel, “because his brother,
who had transplanted the Lutheran Church to Australia, had left
him no material possessions!”
Pastor Kavel’s life had more than enough of struggle, privation,
hardship, and affliction. In addition to his pastoral activities,
which for the most part he carried out without assistance, he
trained his pupil Auricht. His life was that of a pilgrim in a special
sense. It followed a straight course. Once he had recognized a
course of action as being right nothing could move him from it.
Of gentle disposition, he nevertheless displayed firmness of pur-
pose. What he undertook he carried out, relying always only upon
God. There was no wavering, no hesitation. Always he had hia
goal before him. He w 7 as not of a quarrelsome disposition, never-
theless still he had to suffer many attacks. The historians of South
Australia. Price, Hodder, and Blacket, place him in the ranks of
the great founders of the State. Governor Gawler and his prede-


cessor have nothing but praise for him: “Pastor Kavel is a sincere,
distinguished, and highly esteemed man.” Pastor Goethe, the
founder of the Lutheran Church in Victoria, wrote in his monthly
periodical, the “Christenbote”: “Kavel to his last breath remained
the teacher, friend and father of his congregation, loved and
respected by all, a brave and a good man/' Pastor Brauer, the
historian of the E.L.S.A., says: “Kavel was a man of great enter-
prise, courage, energy, and organizing ability.” John Flierl, D.D.,
founder of the Lutheran Mission, New Guinea, and because of
his marriage to the daughter of Pastor Auricht, well versed in the
history of Langmeil, characterized him as follows: “This Moses of
the Australian Lutherans, who prepared and carried into effect the
emigration, for more than two decades watched over his flock in
the Australian wilderness and provided them faithfully with the
Word of God and the Sacraments; diligent in instruction, faithful
in admonition, and firm in discipline. Truly a great Christian
personality. The imprints of the blessings which he left behind
may be seen to this day. ’ And Pastor Auricht, who knew him best
of all, wrote of him in 1889: “We will not deny that at times a
certain harshness may have crept into his attitude, but we know
how he was driven to it. Otherwise he had the soul of a shepherd,
of a sufferer beyond compare; a true father of the first Lutherans,
he remained faithful and true to the end to the Bible and the
Lutheran Confessions. His sermons powerful, earnest, and
impressive; in his whole ministry there were only one or two Sun-
days on which he did not preach. He lived frugally. He was
unselfish and self-sacrificing. He corrected' without respect of per-
sons. In faith he sought salvation in Jesus Christ and with sin-
cerity he proclaimed it to others.” This account of the life and of
the worth of Pastor Kavel is finally concluded wdth a few sentences
from Dr. Price’s “Fathers and Founders”:
“Kavel was very strict in his faith and creed, but also very
liberal and tolerating towards others, who in regard to religious
dogmas differed from him. The man who left his native country
for conscience sake, and won assistance in a strange land; the man
who led his people across the world to a new colony, there realized
the mistakes of the immigrant owmers and established his com-
munity on a different and sounder base; the man who immediately
secured the naturalization of himself and his followers under the
free flag of their benefactors, and by the force of his moral and
religious suasion established his people and guided their destinies
to peace and prosperity for many years, was not merely a tolerant
priest, but a priestly ruler, a Moses who saved his people, but
made no errors which barred his entry to the Promised Land.
Such a leader should be enshrined in the memories of both the


races for which he did so much; and it is fitting that he should
rest among the settlements which he created and near the great
philanthropist whose munificence made possible his life’s work.”
The other branch of the Lutheran Church, the Bethany-Lobethal
Synod, must now be briefly considered. It assumed the name of
the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of South Australia, and later sub-
stituted Australia for South Australia —E.L.S.A. In this body the
attempt was made to take more of the government of the Church out
of the hands of the congregations. An executive council of pastors
and laymen was elected at the first of the three synods held during
this period (Hoffnungsthal, 1851). At the synod at Bethany
(1860) Pastors Goethe and Haussmann of the Victoria Synod
were present, and the conditions for a union were discussed. A
later chapter will show the reason why this union did not eventuate.
In 1853 there was an unfortunate schism in the Lobethal con-
gregation. Pastor Fritzsche very definitely opposed dancing and
demanded public apology from those that indulged in it. Some
refused, and this led to disruption in the congregation. The dis-
satisfied section called as their pastor a certain Pastor Fiedler, a
Hanoverian, who served “free*’ congregations in Hahndorf,
Lobethal, and Blum berg.
In one respect this synod had an advantage; it was able to
obtain the pastors required. First of all the Dresden missionaries
were accepted as pastors —H. A. C. Meyer, who for eight years
had been missionary at Encounter Bay, was in 1848 placed in
charge of the Bethany congregation, and proved a power in the
Church, organizing manv congregations: Schoenborn, 1855; Neu-
kirch, Carlsruhe, Peter’s Hill, Friedrichswalde, and Gnadenberg,
all in 1860. He died on December 17, 1862. There were in addi-
tion Pastors Teichelmann and Schuermann, the former at Callington
and Salem and later at Peter’s Hill and Yorke’s Peninsula, the
latter at Hochkirch, Victoria. In 1855 this synod gained
ciable help when the three candidates graduated from the Lobethal
seminary, Hensel, stationed at Blumberg, Oster at Rosenthal, and
Strempel at Hahndorf. In 1860 two Leipzig missionaries, who for
conscience sake had left the mission in India, came to Australia
and joined this synod, Fr. Meischel, installed at Adelaide on
October 14, 1860, and E. D. Appelt, stationed at Dutton.
The day of Pastor Fritzsche’s activity was drawing to a close,
but before the night came there still awaited him a great joy—
on May 8, 1863, a joint conference of both synods was held at
Blumberg to discuss the question of founding a combined mission.
Pastor Fritzsche was present and helped the matter along. In that
same year, on October 26, he departed in peace. He remained a
widower. He reached the age of 66 years. Dr. Loessel, pastor of


an independent congregation at Woodside, buried him beside bis
wife. The text of the funeral sermon was 2 Tim. 2. 11: “It is a
faithful saying: For if we be dead with him. we shall also li\e
with him. 55
Thus neithej of the founders of the Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia lived to see her 25th anniversary in November, 1863. And
no doubt, great as the cause for thanksgiving to God was, there
was also much reason for repentance of the impatience and the
arguments which marked —and marred —this period. But in heaven
above in the choir of the angelic hosts both together will praise
the grace of God which used them with all their failings to build
the Kingdom of God, and in His Light they will now have received
the solution of the problems which here on earth gave cause for
so much argument and disagreement.
In place of darkness light,
Peace instead of fight,
Joy instead of sadness.
Sorrow turned to gladness.


The spirit that dwelleth in us
lusteth for envy. But He giveth
more grace. James IV, 5-6.
CHAPTER EIGHT.
After Pastor KaveVs death a further division occurs through Pastor
Standenmayer, and in South Australia the so-called Tanunda-
Lighfs Pass Synod is formed (1858-1865).
TT has been pointed out that in Pastor Staudenmayer
an assistant was found for Pastor Kavel. Would he
adapt himself to the new conditions of the Church which he had
entered, and by making a careful study of its history would he
seek to understand and appreciate its peculiar characteristics and
individuality, or would he try to force upon the little synod the
traditions of the country of his origin by seeking to reform what
did not appeal to him, although it was regarded as of major im-
portance by the founders of this Church? The latter was the course
adopted by Staudenmayer. He had only just arrived when the
conflict began. It would appear that he was a talented man.
Auricht wrote of him: “He was a gifted and well-educated man.
Had a spirit of humility been combined with his ability he would
have been an asset to the Lutheran Church in Australia, but the
lavish praises of so many seem to have prevented this.” Even at the
first synod he attended (1858) he raised objections to certain
portions of the Constitution. These differences caused Pastor Kavel
much heartache in his latter years. Hardly had his eyes closed
in death when divisions within the Langmeil and Light’s Pass con-
gregations took place, leaving many regrettable results. Other
factors contributing towards the schism were Pastor Kavel’s Pro-
testations, and the call which Staudenmayer, without the knowledge
of Kavel, sent to a certain Pastor Keppler of Wuerttemberg, who
was to take charge of Kavel’s congregation at Hahndorf. Further-
more, Auricht was not a brilliant speaker, especially when com-
pared with the gifted Staudenmayer, and it seems that this difference
in ability helped to cause the rift.
At the synod at Langmeil (September, 1858) and at Light’s


Pass (September, 1859) Staudenrnayer objected to the questions
addressed to the confirmand: “Have you experienced that you are
lost in sin? Have you experienced that God has given you faith,
grace, and peace?” Another point of dispute was whether the right
to vote was given in confirmation, or only on attaining the age of
twenty-five years. These issues can only be judged correctly when it
is borne in mind that Kavel w r as greatly concerned about a vital ex-
perience of faith, and that he was dealing with people who had
experienced a revival, a people who in persecution had had re-
markable experience of the living God. All this gave to the newly
founded Church in Australia a unique character. A greater measure
of patience and tolerance on the part of Staudenrnayer would have
enabled him to understand and to appreciate what he found to be
unusual, and thus a division might have been prevented. It must
be admitted that he drew attention to weaknesses in the Constitu-
tion; by patient forbearance and peaceful penetration, however,
he might gradually have been able to remedy these. Instead he
tried to force the issue.
A compromise was indeed made. Those who wanted to have
their children asked: “Have you had any experience of faith?”
. . . . could have them confirmed by Kavel. Those who objected
to these questions, by Staudenrnayer. Likewise, those who desired
to uphold Kavel’s Protestations could do so, those who were of a
different opinion w r ere not obliged to do so. Thus “protesters” and
“anti-protesters,” as it were, might be members of the same con-
gregation. In its practical application, however, this compromise,
as may be expected, failed to stand the test. For example, when
the Langmeil congregation wanted to put a new roof on its church,
it expected that the congregation at Gnadenfrei, which belonged to
the parish, should bear its share of the cost of the galvanized iron.
But the Protestations were included in the constitution of the Lang-
meil congregation. Consequently, according to the title deeds, only
“protesters” had claim on the property. It is not surprising, there-
fore, that the brethren of Gnadenfrei, who were “anti-protesters,”
did not feel disposed to assist, unless the relevant clauses were
withdrawn.
All hopes that peace might he maintained by comnromise
vanished when differences in doctrine appeared, e.g., in the doc-
trine of the restitution of all things. At this time Staudenmaver
w 7 as also suspected of false teaching in the doctrine of the humilia-
tion of Christ. Later on. however. Pastor Rechner clearly stated
that Staudenmaver had never denied the deity of Christ, although
he had separated the two natures too much, and that Staudenrnayer
himself in the synodical sermon of 1859 had clearly stated his
agreement with the doctrine of the Lutheran Church on this ques-
tion. Towards the middle of 1860 Pastor Keppler arrived.


When synod met in September, 1860, at Langmeil, Kavel
already rested from his labors in the cemetery alongside the church.
Although the division did not occur at the synod, it was only a
few weeks later that opposition congregations were organized both
at Langmeil and at Light’s Pass. At Langmeil the congregation was
divided a fortnight after the synod. One of the elders obtained
the signatures of fifty-four members who wanted Staudenmayer
rather than Auricht. These, contrary to synod’s decision, immediately
ceased to pay their stipend for Auricht. At Light’s Pass heads of
twenty-five households lodged a complaint about Staudenmayer to
synod, but he had prevented them from being heard. Congrega-
tional meetings failed to settle the difference. These twenty-five
families left Staudenmayer and called their school teacher, Julius
Rechner, as their pastor. They had known him for ten years and he
was respected by all. Because of strained relations with Stauden-
mayer he had just previously left the work he loved and had
accepted a well-paid position as Mr. Angas’s secretary. Now ? he
accepted the call to be the pastor. This was a decision of great
significance for the future history of the Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia.
On December 26 the congregations Langmeil (Auricht), Light’s
Pass (Rechner), Gruenberg, Nain, and North Rhine met in con-
ference. This meeting decided to sever connections with Stauden-
mayer and his party. Auricht alone would not consent to this step.
He desired to have another discussion with Staudenmayer. This
look place, but it was of no avail. The difference could not be
bridged. And so the young Church was once again divided. “TTie
years 1858-1860 are among the most difficult and most unsettled
in the history of the Australian Lutheran Church,” Auricht wrote
as late as 1882. Two things, a too rigid adherence to the past
on the one side, a domineering attitude, together with a thoughtless
clamor for reform on the other, combined with a placing of the
messenger before the message, were the causes of the rift.
At first Auricht and those who remained true to him stood all
alone and with characteristic humility he says: “What a weak vessel
am I!” Rechner had been called by the Light’s Pass parish.
Should he be ordained? On January 27, 1861, at a conference at
Langmeil, the Light’s Pass brethren explained how they had come
to call him. This conference sanctioned their action and declared:
“Whereas Brother Rechner has been examined by Pastor Kavel on
the Symbolical Books when he took up his position as teacher;
and whereas he at the last synod has given a testimony of his
confessional standpoint; whereas a theological examination is not
possible, we are persuaded that an examination is not necessary;
be it therefore resolved that the ordination take place at Langmeil


next Sunday, the installation at Light's Pass, when the new church
is completed.” And so, on February 3, 1861, Rechner was ordained
to the office of the holy ministry at Langmeil by Auricht, who was
assisted by four elders of Light’s Pass. At a meeting that after-
noon it was decided that he be in charge of the congregations of
Light’s Pass, Gruenberg, and North Rhine, and Auricht of Langmeil
and Nain. The spirit in which Rechner entered the ministry is
shown in a poem from his pen: —
Thy free grace, 0 Lord, alone calls me to this sacred office;
As Thy messenger I’ll tread peaceful pathways in Thy service;
In Thy stead Thou sendest me to Thy Church, Thy precious bride;
To my feeble, sinful hands, Heavenly gifts Thou dost confide.
All my wisdom, my own strength, Lord, I know it ne’er availeth;
All my work, Lord, shall be built on the rock that never faileth.
Of Thy greatness let me speak in Thy temple without fear;
But, Lord, first on bended knee, let me to Thy Word give ear.
Gustav Julius Rechner, born on December 23, 1830, was the
son of a foreman in a woollen mill at Liegnitz, Germany. His
father had been deeply influenced by the revival of the time, and
thus the lad up in a spiritual atmosphere. Even as a youth
his life was one of prayer. For a while he was tutored by a
pious schoolmaster for the teaching profession, but because of
the cost he had to relinquish his studies and had to earn his own
livelihood in the factory. Then with a heavy heart he left hearth and
home and on the ship “Victoria” came to South Australia, where
he landed on November 8, 1848. The young man, mentally and
spiritually alert, attracted attention. On arriving Pastor Klose
of Adelaide, one of the Dresden missionaries, desired to secure
his services as teacher for Lobethal. While still on the boat he
became acquainted with Pastor Fritzsche, and soon afterwards he
met Pastor Kavel. Both promised him a position as teacher. But
the time dragged on, and he took up work at Bethany, and later
tried his hand at farming on his own, but he was hopelessly un-
successful. He was overjoyed when in June, 1850, he was able
to take up teaching in the school at light’s Pass. On February
14, 1849, out of deep conviction, he joined the congregation of
Kavel. With characteristic energy and perseverance he now sought
to realize his ideal, a model school at Light’s Pass. It is not sur-
prising that members of the congregation now desired him as their
pastor, for they knew him to be a spiritually-minded man. At that
time they had no prospect of getting a pastor from elsewhere.
And if it had been possible, what guarantee did they have that he
would - adapt himself to the conditions? But they knew r Julius


Rechner, their teacher, and therefore they called him. They never
had cause to regret their decision.
The ordination of Rechner called forth strong protests. Pastor
Goethe in the “Christenbote” protested and was supported by his
assistants, Pastors Haussmann and Niquet. The action of the
latter is particularly surprising, since they, having come to
Queensland as laymen, had entered the ministry in much
the same way. Pastors Keppler and Staudenmayer, as also
Pastor Schondorf of the Moravian Brethren at Bethel, declared
that they could not recognize this ordination. Pastors Fritzsche,
Strempel, anl Meischel expressed themselves in a similar strain.
A reply, signed by Pastors Auricht and Rechner, together with
fourteen elders, clearly refuted the charges which had been made
in these protests. The “Christenbote” did not publish this refuta-
tion, but it appeared as a supplement to the “Suedaustralische
Zeitung” (South Australian Paper).
The Langmeil-Light’s Pass Synod now enjoyed a peaceful de-
velopment. Auricht and Rechner understood each other perfectly
and worked hand in hand, one supplementing the other. The ques-
tion of property was peacefully settled. At Light’s Pass and Nain
the newly founded congregations were given a certain sum of‘
money which enabled them to purchase building sites. At Light’s
Pass the church “Zur engen Pforte” (of the strait gate) was dedi-
cated on August 4, 1861, as was also the manse, which Rechner
himself had built. In 1862 Auricht, with the assistance of his
congregations, built his own manse at Tanunda, and the congre-
gation at Nain was able to dedicate its church in 1861. For a time
Rechner still attended to the school. Then, with the assistance of
the other congregations of the parish, a school was built and
eventually the services of a teacher obtained. Rechner had been
married on October 23, 1850, by Kavel to Bertha Bergmann,
who, on her own initiative, had followed him to Australia. She
had left the Roman Catholic Church out of conviction, and had
been received into membership of the Lutheran Church at Liegnitz.
Only brief references to several of the outstanding resolutions
of the synods of those years are possible here: —
Light’s Pass (1861) The Synod shall henceforth be the highest
authority in cases of dispute within the congregations or between the
congregation and the pastor; the nastor may have an elder administer
Holy Communion to him; the elders shall be examined as to their
knowledge of the Bible, the Symbolical Books, and the Constitution,
and, after one year’s probation, shall be ordained; consecrated young
men shall study in a college in Adelaide and then be trained for the
ministry under Pastor Auricht—a decision which was never carried
into effect; letters of dismissal shall be required in the case of transfer
from one congregation to another; teachers shall be members of the
congregation; Bible classes and doctrinal evenings are recommended;
every communicant member shall contribute Id. per month for Pastor


Kavel’s widow; only in cases of absolute necessity shall children of
non-members be baptized; care shall be taken that the number of
“untrained” pastors does not exceed the number of “trained/’
Langmeil (1862) —Ehlers Catechism be examined and, if found suitable,
shall be adopted; Pastor KaveFs appendix on the Constitution and
“The Latter Days” shall be added, or be printed separately; further
consideration shall be given to the question whether the request of the
state should be conceded that voting on matters of property be
restricted to those over the age of 21 years, or whether it would be
preferable to forgo legal security of Church properties; in view of the
possibility of founding a mission among the aborigines in conjunction
with Pastor Harms and Pastor Fritzsche’s synod mission offerings
shall be received monthly. Light’s Pass (1863) —The question of union
with Fritzsche’s synod for the purpose of undertaking the combined,
mission work shall be further discussed; burials of non-members shall
be performed only after consultation with the elders; Oddfellows shall
not be accepted into membership of the congregations; the 25th pubilee
of the Lutheran Church in Australia shall be celebrated at Langmeil
on November 27th.
Pastors Staudenmayer and Keppler, who formed the Tanunda-
Light’s Pass Synod, comprising the parishes of Light’s Pass-Eben-
ezer-Gnadenfrei, and of Tanunda-Angas Park (Nuriootpa)-Lyn-
doch-Steinthal, and a congregation at Nain also followed their
own course of development. The inclination in this synod was
towards union with Victoria. This was of great significance for
the future of the Lutheran Church in Australia. In 1861 Keppler
visited Victoria in order to discuss the question of union. The
visit fulfilled its purpose, for Pastor Goethe, of Melbourne, the
founder and leader of the Victoria Synod, came to South Aus-
tralia in order to attend the synod at Light’s Pass in October,
1861. On tin’s occasion the Tanunda-Light’s Pass Synod fully
s revoked KaveTs Protestations. This synod recognized the Victoria
Synod as Lutheran and established altar-fellowship with it. It
also considered the possibility of a union with the Lobethal-Bethany
Synod.
The Tanunda-Light’s Pass Synod might now have enjoyed a
peaceful development, but Keppler, because of his being an addict
to drink, had to return to Germany (1864) and Staudenmayer’s
health began to fail. It is interesting to note that, after Keppler
left, his Nain congregation called as its pastor the local teacher
by the name of Heinze. He had commenced studying for the
ministry under Fritzsche, but had discontinued. Neither Fritzsche
nor Schondorf (Moravian Brethren) would ordain him. At last
Pastor Stow, of the Congregational Church in Adelaide, ordained
him as a Lutheran pastor. As an “anti-chiliast” he could joiq
neither the Langmeil-Light’s Pass nor the Tanunda-Light’s Pass
Synod, so he stood on his own. When, in 1865, Staudenmayer’s
health failed completely, and he had to return to Germany, this
synod was in great distress indeed. At the moment of greatest


need a successor was found in the person of Johann Peter Niquet,
who had come to Queensland as one of the Gossner lay-missionaries,
and had been a pastor in the Victoria Synod from 1856-1864.
When at the point of returning to Queensland he received and
thankfully accepted a call to Staudenmayer’s parish. He was re-
ceived with great joy by the members of the parish. Eight waggons
and one hundred people went to meet him at Freeling. Goethe again
attended the synod of 1865, and on that occasion complete union
with the Victoria Synod was decided upon. The revised Victorian
constitution was adopted. In this way the Tanunda-Light’s Pass
synod was brought into contact with the mission seminary at
Basel. From there Niquet received Pastor Reusch as assistant in
1867. Reusch was a gifted and lovable man. He married one
of the daughters of Niquet and was placed in charge of the
Tanunda parish, and resided at Tanunda.
November 27, 1863, dawned a beautiful clear day. At Lang-
meii the 25th jubilee of the Lutheran Church in Australia was
celebrated on this day. Between 500 and 600 Lutherans gathered
for the services, among them being many who had been present
twenty-five years before at the first service on Australian soil. In
order that all might vividly recall this first service on the beach at
Port Adelaide, an awning had been erected at the side of the church,
and here Auricht and Rechner conducted the first part of the
service. The speakers stressed that this should be a day of re-
pentance and of thanksgiving. The service then continued in the
beautifully decorated church. Pastor Gster and many of his mem-
bers attended, for efforts at reunion were being made at this time.
Under these conditions the first jubilee w r as celebrated. The young
Church was now divided into three branches. It had truly been a
quarter-century of divisions. Each branch claimed that it possessed
the clearest conception of the Lutheran doctrine, and this
claim was asserted with much sinfulness and unnecessary bitter-
ness. It is unmerited grace that the three branches were able to
continue their existence and prosper. The next quarter-century will
bring unions, first in this, and then in that direction, but, alas,
also new divisions. Nevertheless, the faithfulness and patience of
God, His forgiving grace and His blessings are new every morning.
He remains the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.


In essentials unity.
In doubtful things liberty.
In all things charity.
—Augustine.
CHAPTER NINE.
The common interest in mission work among the aborigines leads
to co-operation—but not to amalgamation—of the two main
branches of the Lutheran Church in - Australia—the Langmeil-
Lighfs Pass Synod and the E.L.S.A. (1864-1874).
% ! I I HER the memory of their common experience of persecu-
~ tion, nor their common confession of faith was sufficient to
heal the breach of 1846. Now the Lord uses the poor Lazarus, the
aborigine, as a means of bringing the divided Lutherans nearer
to one another. The successful crossing of the continent by Stuart
(1862) gave enthusiastic rise to the thought of mission work.
Stuart’s return to Adelaide (1863) was celebrated by a national
festival. Pastors Rechner and Auricht happened to be in Adelaide
at the time, and their thoughts immediately turned to the natives.
At the same time they paid a visit to Pastor Meischel, previously
missionary in India, and the subject of mission work amongst the
aborigines was soon under discussion. To their great delight he
drew from his desk an appeal for this work prepared by himself
two years ago. This instantly captured the hearts of both men,
and wdien published in the Tanunda “Kirchen-und Missions-
Zeitung” it powerfully gripped the hearts of its readers in both
synods. Already in March a combined festival was held at
Blumberg for the purpose of founding a combined mission.
Pastor Fritzsche also was present and helped to further the
work. It was his last appearance in public. A combined mis-
sion was decided upon, and Pastor Meischel was commissioned to
seek a grant of land at Lake Hope from the Government, and to
attempt to win the services of the previous missionary, Pastor
Schuermann, now of Hamilton, Victoria. A combined mission com-
mittee was elected, in which Pastor Rechner and Rudolph Graetz
represented the Langmeil-Light’s Pass Synod. All left the festival


completely satisfied. In August a general convention was held
at Rosenthal. Since Schuermann had declined, it was decided to
send a request for missionaries to Ludwig Harms, pastor at
Hermannsburg, Germany. This was a step of vital importance.
It was the means of bringing not only missionaries, but also pastors,
to Australia from Hermannsburg.
At a combined gathering held at Langmeil, June 22-25, 1864,
a further rapprochement was sought, and to this end the differences
were thoroughly examined, especially the doctrine of chiliasm and
the Protestations. Pastor Harms had indicated in his reply that he
had scruples about sending his graduates to work in a church body
\\ hich regarded the doctrine of chiliasm as sufficient reason for
sepaiation. The pastors of the E.L.S.A. now declared it their mis-
take to have made chiliasm a ground for separation. Pastors
Auricht and Rechner agreed henceforth to regard chiliasm not as
a doctrine, but as an “open question” upon which it is permissible
to debate, the Protestations were retracted. Thus confessional
unity was brought about, and with tears of joy the brethren parted,
singing the hymn, “Gathered here we join our hands, 0 Saviour,”
Even pulpit fellowship was restored. Thus, to the great joy of all
present, the disgrace of 1846 was obliterated. St. Augustine’s dic-
tum, In essentials unity, in doubtful things liberty, in all things
charity,” had become the guiding star.
If only the two synods had succeeded to proceed from con-
fessional unity to complete amalgamation the future would have
been bright indeed. Nevertheless, the combined mission had been
founded, and could now proceed apace.
The arrival of the missionaries who had been called from
Heimannsburg was delayed through the death of Ludwdg Harms.
His successor, Theodor Harms, however, complied with the request.
As a result the pastors Heidenreich and Hellmuth, the missionaries
Goessling and Homann and the layman Vogelsang arrived.
The 9th day of October, 1866, indeed became for both
synods, in fact for the whole Lutheran Church of Australia, a
precious and significant day. Multitudes had gathered at Lang-
meil-Tanunda, and Tanunda literally swarmed with German
vehicles of all descriptions. Men’s hearts were powerfully
stirred. On that day those missionaries and colonists were to be
Formally dedicated to their work, and their journey was to begin.
Lay helper Vogelsang received a pious and faithful companion in
J. L. Jacob, who also wished to serve in the mission. The church
was filled to overflowing. The Langmeil and Bethany brass bands
accompanied the singing. Pastor Oster based his sermon of con-
secration on Eph. 6. 10 ff. (the spiritual armor of the Christian).
Then, by the laying-on of hands, these first emissaries of the


Lutheran Church in Australia, were solemnly consecrated to their
arduous mission work in the interior of Australia. Among the
guests were also to be found the Victorian Pastors, Goethe and
Hiller, and Pastor Niquet of Light’s Pass, who happened to be
attending their synod during these days. As one may gather from
the “Christenbote” the festival made a deep impression upon them
also. After lunch in the new school (built 1865), the mission
party mounted the '"German” waggons, which were fully laden
and drawn by three or four horses. After a farewell verse had
been sung the mission caravan, led by the brass band, moved on.
Thus began their long, long journey. Few eyes were dry. Every-
one felt that it was a mighty venture undertaken in obedience of
faith. A mile north of Tanunda the brass band left after playing
tlie hymn, “Abide, 0 dearest Jesus, among us with Thy grace.”
A stop was made at Angas Park (Nuriootpa), where the assembled
crowd sang “Jesus, lead Thou on.” The first night was spent at
Aeukirch. There the narrative of these brave men’s further travels
must be discontinued. It will be taken up in Part II of this book.
Suffice for the present to state that a mission station was founded
on the Cooper’s Creek, first at Kopperamanna, later at Killapaninna*
From about 1879 it was also known as the Bethesda mission station.
This day of blessing and faith marked the beginning of a mis-
sionary enterprise, the development of which demands its own
chapter. It was a day which the Lord had made, this 9th day
of October, 1866.
During the ensuing ten years the common enterprise helped to
maintain amicable relations between the two synods. Yet synodical
division persisted. Who was to blame? It must be conceded that
the E.L.S.A. pastors had really done their part. Could the Lang-
meil-Light’s Pass Synod not be expected to make some sacrifices
in the cause of union? Chiliasm might have been erased from its
Constitution and catechism. The institution of the Church Council,
answerable to synod, as the E.L.S.A. preferred to have it. was in
any case an inevitable result of expansion. The paragraph of the
Constitution, so strongly maintained by Auricht and Rechner, which
declared the elders by virtue of office to be guardians of the pastors’
teaching and life, had in any case to be dropped later at the in-
sistence of Neuendettelsau. At all events the Constitution could
not be proven to have been prescribed by the apostles in the
Scriptures. However, both Auricht and Rechner felt themselves
bound too much to Kavel. Auricht was indeed a good theologian,
but trained exclusively by one man. Rechner, without much theo-
logical training, was essentially a practical man. Undoubtedly
human shortcomings here nullified a splendid opportunity of re-
union. A fraternal gathering at Rosenthal, August 6, 1868, liter-


ally cried out for reunion. It did not come to pass. This became
a deciding factor in the future course of the history of the Lutheran
Church in Australia.
During this decade the E.L.S.A. made more rapid progress than
the Langmeil-Light’s Pass Synod. In the former the number of
pastors increased from seven in 1864 to eleven in 1873, congre-
gations from twenty-three to thirty-three. Already in 1864 there
were 3,000 communicants.- The Langmeil-Light’s Pass Synod had
only two pastors during this period, and but approximately 750
communicant members. Nobody at that time would have dared to
predict that this small group, the main Kavel line, was destined
to play a leading part in the further history of the Australian
Lutheran Church. The E.L.S.A. was not without difficulties during
I his period. This synod was ruled by the Church Council. In
regard to this institution there were, however, differences of opinion.
Some favored a church government with wide powers, others a
purely synodical constitution, while yet others sought a compromise
between the two.
The main difficulties centred around Pastor Krause, who even-
tually succeeded Pastor Fritzsche in Lobethal. Fritzsche’s immedi-
ate successor was Dr. Loessel, who had come to Australia on the
recommendation of Harms, and was pastor at Hamilton, Victoria,
for a short time. Dr. Loessel look over Pastor Meischel’s congre-
gation at Adelaide which had become vacant by the latter’s
acceptance of a call to Mt. Gambier. On accepting the call to the
Adelaide congregation. Dr. Loessel stipulated that it sever its con-
nection with the E.L.S.A. This it did. After accepting Dr. Loessel
as its pastor the Lobethal congregation experienced a rift over the
question of synodical affiliation. The members who favored inde-
pendence formed a congregation with Dr. Loessel as their pastor.
(This was the third congregation in Lobethal, the second being
a free congregation under Pastor Fiedler). For two years the
original Fritzsche congregation had Pastor Hell mu th, who then
went to Queensland. It was at this juncture that this, the original
Lobethal congregation (of the vineyard of Christ), extended a call
to Pastor Krause in America. He was one of the persecuted
Lutheran pastors of Prussia, having been imprisoned for some
time. He left for America with his congregation, but later returned
to Germany. Here he betrayed the whereabouts of his persecuted
fellow-pastors. For this, however, he later expressed sorrow’ and
again went to America. He was a learned, able, simple man, but
of marked peculiarity, something of the nature of a stormy petrel.
After extending the call to Pastor Krause the Lobethal congrega-
tion heard disturbing rumors about the man and became hesitant.
They would not agree to the conditions laid down by Pastor Krause
and therefore thought the matter had lapsed. Suddenly a telegram


came from Sydney announcing his arrival, and by December 1,
1871, he was at Lobethal. He had scarcely arrived when he severely
criticised the Constitution and demanded also the reintroduction
of baptismal exorcism. Very naturally friction resulted. Other
developments in the synod were that Dr. Loessel did not remain
long with the Adelaide congregation (Bethlehem), and under
Pastor Homann, who did not stay long on the mission station, the
congregation again joined the E.L.S.A. and built its fine Bethlehem
Church. In the north the parish of Carlsruhe was formed (Pastor
Ey) and in Victoria Hochkirch came into the synod.
1 he small Langmeil-Light’s Pass Synod held conventions yearly
with two exceptions. These conventions were fruitful of important
resolutions, for instance: —Prayer meetings for mission work
among Jews shall be organized; the sermons of Kavel shall be
printed (this did not eventuate) ; at the most one sponsor from
another synod shall be permitted; public confession shall be held
on Sunday only as an exception, but as a rule on Saturday after-
noon; attendance in the ball-room and circus shall be forbidden.
Penance shall be demanded in the case of bankruptcy; pastors shall
be called only through the synod. All children shall attend the
congregational schools. In 1865 Auricht commenced his church
paper, the Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung.
Where to obtain pastors became the most urgent problem. They
could not come from Hermannsburg, as Hermannsburg was anti-
chiliast. A pamphlet concerning biblical chiliasm, written by
Inspector Bauer of Neuendettelsau, Germany, came to hand. A
correspondence ensued. Bauer, however, considered that undue
emphasis was laid on the matter of the Constitution, and took ex-
ception to the guardianship of elders over the teaching and life
of pastors.
In the meantime the relationship with the E.L.S.A, became less
cordial. The mission among the aborigines was not prospering.
The missionaries had returned convinced of its hopelessness, and
were accepting positions as pastors. These things grieved the
faithful mission friends, Pastors Auricht and Rechner. They could
point to the faithfulness of the lay helpers who remained at their
post. Then, too, without the knowledge of the Langmeil-Light’s
Pass Synod, the E.L.S.A. sought a rapprochement with the
Tanunda-Light s Pass Synod. Furthermore, a separate church-
paper, “Der Kirchenbote” (Church Messenger) was founded within
the E.L.S.A., the tone of which was often rather caustic. Moreover,
the E.L.S.A. established its own college. “Charity in all
had waxed cold. Further, very little remained of the uniting work
of charity amongst the aborigines. The gap that separated the
E.L.S.A. and the other synod became increasingly wider when.


quite unsought, there was a rapprochement between the Langmeil-
Light’s Pass and the Tanunda-Light’s Pass Synods, which led to
reunion. This union brought the Kavel line into connection with
the Victoria Synod as well (1874). Soon satisfactory arrangements
were made with Neuendettelsau for the necessary reinforcements
of pastors.
At this juncture it will be convenient to deal with the history
of the Synod of Victoria.


The law of Thy mouth is better ante-
me than thousands of gold ani
silver.. Psalm CXIX, 72.
CHAPTER TEN.
hi I ictoria another Lutheran Synod comes into existence and later
unites with the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod (1848-1874)
r T'G understand the distinctive character of the Victoria Synod
one must bear in mind that most of the early German settlers
came to Victoria not because of religious, but because of material
reasons. The quest for gold, which brought people from almost
all over the world lo Victoria after the discovery of the goldfields
in 1851, prompted many Germans to leave their home country
and to seek their fortune there. Some of the South Australian
German settlers, too, were afllicted with the gold-fever and, ex-
changing the plough for the spade, crossed the border. It is esti-
mated that by 1857 2.300 Germans were living in Victoria. Even
before 1851, however, Germans had settled in Victoria. There
had been a steady influx of Germans to Melbourne and surround-
ing districts, particularly since 1849. The authorities in Melbourne,
eager to see similar settlements in Victoria as the German farmers
had established in South Australia, encouraged German immigra-
tion by offering a grant of a £I,OOO to the first 400 Germans who
would establish farms in Victoria. Agencies soon supplied the 400,
but there were few’ farmers among them. Mr. Delius, an agent,
and a Mr. Westgarth even went to Germany to persuade Moravian
Brethren at Herrnhut to emigrate and settle in Victoria, but with-
out avail. Nevertheless, by 1851 a 1,000 Germans had settled in
Melbourne and the surrounding districts. The settlement of
Germantowm (Grovedale), in the vicinity of Geelong, was estab-
lished by German farmers, belonging to the Lutheran movement
of Prussia, from Zuellichau, Brandenburg, in 1849-1850, and the
settlement of Breslau, later known as Waldau and now as Don-
caster (ten miles from Melbourne), was established by Silesian
farmers from Goerlitz and the surrounding districts.
The man chosen by God to gather these settlers into a Church


was Pastor Matthias Goethe. Goethe was born at Neuendorf, near
Koblenz, Germany, in 1827. He was brought up as a Roman
Catholic and was being trained to become a priest, when he changed
his faith and joined the Protestant Church. Going to England,
where he was married, he came in touch with Rev. John Dunmore
Lang, a pastor and leader of the Presbyterian Church in New
South Wales. Dr. Lang was greatly impressed by Goethe’s learning,
his interest in theology, and' his rare gift for languages, and called
him as a teacher to his college at Sydney. Goethe’s stay in Sydney
was short. As he was suffering from asthma, he looked for a more
congenial climate and went to Melbourne.
Great was the joy among his countrymen in Melbourne, who
had tried in vain to secure a pastor from Germany, when Goethe,
impressed by the spiritual needs of the Germans, began to w r ork
among them and held the first services in Melbourne at Christmas,
1852. Presbyterian pastors ordained him as a Lutheran pastor. His
lovable, humble, unassuming nature soon endeared him to his fol-
lowers and, within four months of his arrival, a congregation was
formed. On June 11, 1854, the foundation stone of the first Lutheran
church was laid on Eastern Hill, Melbourne. The Government
had given the congregation a three-quarter acre block and £1,500
for the erection of a church. The congregation had raised £1,700.
The total cost of the building amounted to £4,500. The next year
saw the erection of a galvanized iron manse and the establishment
of a German school. Congregations were established at Hawthorn,
Northcote, Collingwood, Richmond, Boroondara, and at Kilbundora
(ten miles from Melbourne). In 1856 a stone church was erected
at Kilbundora and a Mr. Renner established a German school there.
Since 1853 Pastor Goethe had been conducting services at Waldau
and Germantown. In Germantown the pastor received valuable
assistance from a Bro. Stanger, who had come from Kornthal,
Wuerttemberg, and who conducted services, week-day devotions,
and gave catechetical instructions. Unable to cope with the work
Goethe found it necessary to call G. Haussmann to his assistance.
Haussmann, who came to Moreton Bay, in the present State
of Queensland as one of a group of Gossner missionaries (see
chapter fourteen) had relinquished his work at Moreton Bay,
Queensland, and had received further training for the ministry
from Dr. Lang, Sydney. He was serving the Presbyterian Church,
when Pastor Goethe in his need called him as a “'Lutheran’ pastor
to Germantown. A manse was erected for him on two acres of
ground which the congregation had received from the Govern-
ment. From Germantown Pastor Haussmann visited the Germans
on the goldfields at Ballarat, Creswick, Bendigo, and Ovens.


Both pastors used Bunsen's General Hymn and Prayer Book
which, because of its unionistic character, was a bone of contention
in the Lutheran Church for many years.
Pastor Goethe, knowing of the South Australian Lutherans, soon
sought affiliation with the E.L.S.A. of South Australia, and with
that purpose in view, communicated with the authorities of that
synod. The use of Bunsen’s General Hymn and Prayer Book in
Goethe’s and Haussmann’s congregations, divergency of opinions
about church discipline, and a lack of understanding on the part
of the E.L.S.A. of conditions obtaining in Goethe’s and Haussmann’s
field proved to be obstacles to an affiliation.
Goethe and Haussmann now set about to form their own synod.
A constitution was drawn up on the basis of the Wuerttemberg and
Hanoverian church constitutions. The first synod was held in Mel-
bourne, May 12, 1856. It was attended by the two pastors, four teach-
ers, eleven elders, and eight lay delegates. The draft constitution and
the name Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria was adopted. Ad-
herence to the Confessions of the German Reformation, particularly
to the Augsburg Confession and Luther’s Catechism, was professed,
and the connection with the German Evangelical Mother-Church was
stressed. Pastor Goethe was elected “Superintendent.” A synodical
council, composed of the “Superintendent*' and four elders, was
appointed. All adult male members received the right to vote in
their respective congregations. It was laid down that in their
schools the English language also, as well as the history and the
geography of Germany, should be taught. A fund for mission pur-
poses was established. June 25, the day of the presentation of the
Augsburg Confession, was declared the annual -Day of Repentance.
At the second synod, 1857, two additional pastors were present.
Towards the end of 1856 Goethe went to Queensland and persuaded
two more of the Gossner lay missionaries to join the Victoria
Synod, and two of them, Johann Peter Niquet and Wilhelm Gericke.
accepted calls to Victoria and were inducted at Ballarat and
Bendigo, respectively. This convention stressed the need for keep-
ing the heritage of the German Evangelical Church intact from
the influence of the Reformed, English environment. Especiallv
the Church Year, the hymns, Catechism, and catechetical instruction
should be preserved. A resolution was also carried that only the
Lutheran order of service in Bunsen’s General Hymn and Prayer
Book should be used when pronouncing absolution and at the cele-
bration of Holy Communion.
The third synod, held in April of the same year (1857), gave
Pastor Goethe permission to go to Germany to visit his widowed
and blind mother and to arouse interest for his mission work.
Pastor Haussmann was elected as the temporarv “Superintendent”


and Burkhard, a teacher and assistant preacher, who had received
no theological training, was ordained to take charge of Pastor
Goethe’s parish in his absence. In Germany Pastor Goethe was the
only overseas representative at a convention of theologians of the
Lutheran, Reformed, and Union Churches of Germany, but was
unable to achieve the purpose of his visit. Pastor Wichern, of the
‘‘Rauhe Hans,’ however, undertook to supply him with Christian
literature, and Prelate Kaplf, of Wuertemberg, to keep .in touch
with him. This eventually led to the calling of pastors from the
missionary seminary at Basel.
After Goethe’s return renewed efforts were made to unite with
the E.L.S.A. With this object in view Goethe and Haussmann and
two delegates from Victoria attended a synod at Bethany, South
Australia. Prospects for a union seemed bright. But when Pastor
Strempel, of the E.L.S. A., refused Communion to Haussmann, who
had preached for him at Hahndorf after the synod, the Victorians
lost all desire for union.
As efforts to unite with the E.L.S.A. were abandoned, Goethe
again turned to Germany. There had been a division in Pastor
Schuermann’s congregation at Hamilton (E.L.S.A.), and the dis-
satisfied section applied to Goethe and Haussmann for services.
An application for a pastor was sent by Goethe to the Lutheran
seminary at Hermannsburg, Germany, and as a result Pas’or
Loessel, Phil.D., who had seceded from the Prussian Union Church,
came to Hamilton. He, however, soon had to leave. Another arrival
from Hermannsburg was Jacobsen, wdio had been dismissed from
the seminary. Trouble had arisen in Germantown. On Good
Friday, 1861, a section of the congregation had forced Haussmann
out of the church. Goethe applied’ to Prelate Kapff for a suitable
pastor for the parish. Kapff forwarded the application to Basel*
and as a result Hermann Herlitz came out. During the interim
Goethe placed Jacobsen in charge of the Germantown congregation.
On his arrival Pastor Herlitz was dismayed to see that the church,
manse, and the greater part of the congregation were in the hands
of Jacobsen, and that he had to content himself wnth the school
building and only a few members of the Germantowm congregation.
The experiences wdth the men from Hermannsburg w 7 ere not of the
best!
Pastor Herlitz greatly influenced the history of the Lutheran
Church in Australia. He was born of Jewish parents at Neisse,
Silesia, on June TO, 1834. In England he embraced the Christian
faith. He studied theology at Basel and w r as ordained at Durlach,
Baden. With his advent in Victoria Basel comes into the picture
of the Imtheran Church of Australia and becomes another hone


•of contention because of its unionistic, i.e., interdenominational,
character.
In 1867 Goethe left for America, going first to California, then
to Mexico. In both countries he established congregations. He died
an early death. His departure marks the end of the period
in which the foundations of the Lutheran Church in Victoria
were laid. During this period the number of pastors and
parishes had increased to five. Pastor Munzel, a Gossner
missionary stationed at Castlemaine, had begun services at Ben-
digo. In 1861 a church and a manse had been built at Castlemaine.
In 1865 Pastor Niquet left Ballarat for the Light’s Pass parish,
which had been vacated by Staudenmayer. Two additional gradu-
ates of Basel had arrived, Pastors Woerner, who filled the vacancy
in Ballarat (1866), and Pastor Hiller, who went to Hamilton.
Jacobsen, of Germantown, after having caused a disturbance at
the 1863 synod, had joined the E.L.S.A. at Light’s Pass, and a
union with the Tanunda Light’s Pass synod and the Victorian
Lutheran Synod was brought about. In the same year Goethe and
Haussmann attended the synod at Light’s Pass and a union
of the Tanunda-Light’s Pass Synod and of the Victoria Synod was
brought about. At the 1866 synod strong objection was raised to
the accusations that the Victoria Lutheran Synod was unionistic.
It was at this time that Pastor Niquet was instrumental in causing
a spiritual revival in his parish and beyond.
In 1868 Herman Herlitz became Goethe s successor at Mel-
bourne and was elected president of synod and editor of the church
paper, the “Christenbote.” A new period in. the history of the
synod and in the Lutheran Church of Australia began. Herlitz
was a born leader, an able speaker, and an imposing personality.
In his hands the reins of synod were in safe keeping. Zealously
he worked for a united Australian Lutheran Church, and though
not successful, he achieved much. For many years he was president
of the General Synod (see Chapter twelve), which was composed
of Lutherans in Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, and South
Australia.
Four new men came from Basel in those years:—Pastor Heyer
came to Germantown in 1865, succeeding Herlitz; Pastor Reusch
to Tanunda in 1867; Pastor Leypoldt to Bendigo-Castlemaine in
1869 (Munzel had returned to Germany because of ill-health) ; and
Pastor Frank to Hamilton in 1872. Through the mediation of the
German Consul, Heyer’s congregation received £125 from Jacob-
sen’s congregation and built a new church. The congregations at
Melbourne and Bendigo made good progress. Frank, who had been
in charge of the Castlemaine congregation for a time, went to a
newly formed congregation at Dimboola. A new r church, costing


£4,000, was built in Melbourne, and was dedicated on November
22, 1874. Settlers from Mt. Gambier formed a congregation at
Horsham in 1873.
A most decisive year in tbe history of the Australian Lutheran
Church was the year 1874. It was a year in which there were
opportunities for a union of all the Australian Lutheran church
bodies. Alas, the importance of the hour was not recognized and
the opportunities were not fully made use of.
The first step towards union was taken in South Australia,
where, as stated previously, the Langmeil-Light s Pass and
the Tanunda-Light’s Pass Synods united. On April 29 a con-
ference was held at Angas Park (Nuriootpa) between the pastors
and elders of these bodies, and on May 28 a joint pastors’ con-
ference at Light’s Pass in Rechner’s. church. On June 7 the Lang-
meil-Light’s Pass Synod, at a special convention at Langmeil,
unanimously voted in favor of union, and on June 24 a brotherly
discussion took place between the pastors and members of both
parties. A joint synod held at Langmeil on August 23 effected the
union. In September, 1874, the official announcement was made
that the name of the united body was The Evangelical Lutheran
Immanuel Synod of South Australia.
The E.L.S.A., too, had been invited to the joint synod at Lang-
meal. But instead of accepting the invitation they raised four points
against the protoctol of the Light’s Pass meeting of June 24 and
ten points against the Victoria synod.
Further negotiations between the Immanuel Synod and the
E.L.S.A. resulted in a joint pastors’ conference at Rosenthal on
October 13-14. At this conference eight articles were set up which
were to form the basis for a union between the Immanuel Synod,
the E.L.S.A., and the Victoria Synod, and which basis was to be
proposed conjointly by the Immanuel Synod and the E.L.S.A. at
a synod to be held at Melbourne.
Of particular historical importance were the third and seventh
Articles. Article 3 demanded that in future no candidates be
called from Basel. Graduates who had severed their connection
with Basel could be called only after subjecting themselves to a
colloquium orthodoxiae. Article 7 denied to members of other
denominations the right to attend Communion at Lutheran altars.
Concerning chiliasm it was agreed that neither of the two con-
ceptions on this point should prevent a union.
The Rosenthal protoctol was signed by the pastors of both
synods. The only dissentient was Pastor Krause of LobethaL He
was not present, but in a letter stressed the point that the resolu-
tions at the forthcoming Melbourne synod could 'Hot be binding
upon the E.L.S.A. as its congregations had not been consulted.


Pastors Schuermann and Strernpel were to represent the E.L.S.A.
at Melbourne, Rechner and Reusch the Immanuel Synod. Prospects
for union seemed bright, but they quickly faded, due to the follow-
ing circumstances. Pastor Reusch, a few days after the signing of
the Rosenthal protoctol, asserted that he could allow his signature
to stand only with certain reservations. The pastors of the Immanuel
Synod, cognizant of the prevailing difficulties, modified Articles
3 and 7 at a conference which they held amongst themselves at
Langmeil on November 3 and 4. According to their opinion all
that should be required of pastors taking up a position in the Aus-
tralian Lutheran Church was that they should renounce any con-
nections with unionism or any doctrinal views opposed to the
Lutheran Confessions as well as any connection with dead ortho-
doxy, and that, as a safeguard, newly called pastors were to be
subjected to a colloquium orthodoxiae. Concerning attendance at
Holy Communion they thought it permissible for members of other
denominations to attend Communion in the Lutheran Church in
cases of emergency. It is not surprising that the E.L.SjA. took
strong exceptions to these alterations.
The Melbourne convention was held on November 23 and 24.
The atmosphere was at once electrical. Pastors Schuermann and
Strernpel maintained that the words “No pastors from BaseT 5 had
to be included in Article 3; the Victorians fought for the
omission of these words. Pastor HerlitzJ declared that a union
with the E.L.S.A. was impossible. He bitterly attacked Schuermann
and Strernpel on the second day, who thereupon left without a
word of farewell. Thereafter the proceedings continued smoothly.
Articles 3 and 7 were adopted in their modified form and the other
six articles in their original form. A confessional union between
the Immanuel and Victoria Synods w r as solemnly announced. The
E.L.S.A. remained aloof.
Where lay the causes of the failure? No doubt with all parties
concerned, but, perhaps, not in the least with the circumstance
that the Lutheran Church in Germany had no proper organization
through which it could supply its members in the dispersion with
the pastors they so sorely needed.


For I bear them record that they
have a zeal of God, but not accord-
ing: to knowledge. Rom. X, 2.
CHAPTER ELEVEN.
The union between the Imuanuel and Victoria Synods results in
the E.L.S.A, giving up its confessional connection with the South
Australian sister synod; refuses collaboration and follows its own
course.
A PERIOD of protests, passionate outbursts, and hasty denuncia-
tions followed the Melbourne synod. Each synod blamed the
other for the catastrophical outcome of the Melbourne convention.
Christian love which seeks to understand each other’s problems
was lacking. Congregations of the E.L.S.A. so bitterly attacked
their Church Council that it was found necessary to convene a
special synod at Carlsruhe in March, 1875, in order to enable
the Church Council to justify itself. At this convention the synod
declared itself in accord with the actions of its Church Council
and denounced as traitors of the Lutheran Church and as unfaith-
ful and unprincipled men the pastors of the Immanuel Synod
who had vainly sought permission to attend the convention with the
object of explaining their actions. At Hahndorf forty-six members
of the E.L.S.A., however, protested against the Carlsruhe denun-
ciations and the failure to bring about a union. The ministry of
the E.L.S.A. therefore deemed it advisable to debate the matter in
public and invited the pastors of the Immanuel Synod to attend.
These in turn demanded a public apology for the Carlsruhe denun-
ciations before they would attend, and, desiring the presence of
the Victorian pastors, invited the E.L.S.A. to the next general synod
to be held at Light’s Pass. No apology came, nor was the invitation
to the Light’s Pass synod accepted. At Carlsruhe the E.L.S.A. had
decided that it was impossible to continue mission work con-
jointly with the Immanuel Synod. For this reason the property
w T as divided in proportion to the contributions made by both bodies
for the maintenance of the mission. The Immanuel Synod received
one-third, and the E.L.S.A. two-thirds. The Immanuel Synod w 7 as


permitted to retain the station, which had been without a mis-
sionary for some considerable time, and the E.L.S.A. established
a new mission station at Hermannsburg on the Finke River in
Central Australia. Nine families at Hahndorf, however, persisted
with their protests and ultimately joined the Immanuel Synod.
Much trouble was also caused in Lobethal. Pastor Krause, the
incumbent of the congregation, annoyed that his submitted letter to
the Rosenthal conference was not read, published a protest in which
he severely criticised the Church Council for not having consulted
the congregations in the important matter of church union. Letters
and a commission sent to Lobethal to interview Krause achieved
nothing. As a result the Church Council informed Krause that,
because of “disregard for the synod,” he had excluded himself
from the synod. The Dutton synod of 1876 ratified the action
taken by the Church Council. An unfortunate sequel of the trouble
was that Krause’s congregation became divided. One section re-
mained true to him, the other opposed him. On April 23, 1876,
the opposing section prevented Krause from entering the pulpit
and forced him from the altar into a pew. Legal proceedings were
instituted against the disturbers of the peace. The two parties
subsequently came to terms. It was agreed that Krause remain in
possession of the manse and garden and that the church be the
property of the defendants. Krause began negotiations for the
purpose of affiliating with the Immanuel Synod. He and his con-
gregation were accepted in 1876, and in the same year Pastors
Auricht and Niquet assisted him in dedicating a new church, erected
with the financial the Immanuel Synod and appar-
ently also of the Victoria Synod.
In those years, too, a controversy was raging about the explana-
tions of the Catechism, which, in parts, the E.L.S.A. had altered.
Pastor Reusch and the other pastors of the Immanuel Synod found
that the E.L.S.A. in the doctrine of Christ’s humiliation had erred
from the Biblical Lutheran truth.
To not a few people of those days the division of the Lutheran
Church was a cause of great grief. A correspondence between
Pastors Auricht (Immanuel Synod) and Ey (E.L.S.A.) gives ample
proof thereof. Opinions, however, differed so much that a union
was impossible.
It soon became evident that the E.L.S.A. was being drawn more
and more into the channels of the Missouri synod, U.S.A. A new r
constitution was adopted by the E.L.S.A. at the Blumberg synod,
1877. This constitution retained the institution of the Church
Council, but restricted its rights to those of a president of an
American synod. The Church Council was given the right to elect
a president, but was made responsible to the synod. The synod


was to have the supervision of the pastors, teachers, and other
synodical office-bearers. The rights and duties of the congregations
were defined. This synod resolved that every congregation should
be entitled to one representative for every fifty communicants at
synods and that in future these should be held every two years
instead of every four years.
For the time being the E.L.S.A. still obtained its pastors from
Hermannsburg, Germany. Missionaries Goessling and Schoknecht,
who had come from Hermannsburg to Killalpannina, accepted posi-
tions at Jindera, N.S.W., and Natimuk, Victoria, respectively. Other
pastors from Hermannsburg were Wiese, who came to Jindera after
Goessling had left for New Zealand, and Bertram (Carlsruhe),
Georg lEmmaus, near Eudunda), Hoopmann (Yorketown), Meyer
(Hoyleton), Thiessen (Caltowie-Petersburgh), Bode (Germantown,
later Dutton), and Peters (Murtoa).
At the beginning of the next decade the new Missourian doc-
trine of predestination was promulgated. Pastor Harms of
Hermannsburg and the pastors of the Immanuel Synod were
attacked. A literary war ensued which became very bitter. In
order to terminate it Pastor Rechner, in the name of the Immanuel
Synod and the Victoria Synod (which two bodies had in the
meantime constituted themselves as the Evangelical Lutheran
General Synod), invited the pastors of the E.L.S.A. to a brotherly
discussion. It led to nothing. A number of the pastors and of the
members of the E.L.S.A. were not prepared to accept the Missourian
doctrine of predestination. Of their seventeen pastors ten officially
protested against this doctrine." When the editor of the “Kirchen-
bote” (E.L.S.A.) refused to accept some of their articles, recourse
was taken by them to the “Kirchen-und Mlssions-Zeitung’’ (Im-
manuel Synod). Owing to the dissension in the E.L.S.A. itself,
peace conferences with the General Synod w r ere at that time out
of the question.
By 1880 the E.L.S.A. had grown into a considerable body. It
consisted of seventeen parish, served by seventeen pastors. Four
of these parishes were in Victoria and one in New South Wales.
It had thirty-five day schools. The communicant membership was
5,141. A college was established at Hahndorf in 1875 as a pre-
paratory school for a theological seminary, but owing to financial
difficulties it enjoyed only a short ilfe.


They disapprove of those that teach
otherwise.
Augsburg Confession, Article X.
CHAPTER TWELVE.
For ten years the Evangelical Lutheran Immanuel Synod and the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Victoria follow a joint course as
the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod. The question of calling
pastors unfortunately separates them again. (1874-1884.)
The origin of the “Immanuel Synod a.a.GT (on old basis).
f~VFF the beaten paths there lies in Bavaria, Germany, the little
* village of Neuendettelsau, in which around 1875 Pastor
Wilhelm Loehe was laboring as a burning and shining light of the
Lutheran Church. Faith, hope, and charity, these three, under the
ministrations of his priestly spirit, had achieved wonderful results.
In his fight for purity of doctrine in the Lutheran Church his faith
had achieved in Bavaria what our Confession demands, namely, the
disapproval of the Reformed doctrine in respect of the Lord's
Supper. Faith, however, worketh by charity. Of this the various
institutions of Christian charity, founded by Loehe, are an eloquent
testimony. His seminary for the training of pastors is of
special interest. But also the Christian life of hope had received
new impetus through Loehe and his successors. It was a source of
special gratification to the followers of Kavel, inclined to a mild
chiliasm as they were, to find an institution so much in accord with
their point of view 7 concerning the doctrine of hope and its impor-
tance for the Church of the future. They looked to Neuendettelsau
to receive suitable pastors.
Small wonder then, that, after much unsuccessful correspondence,
an emissary of the Immanuel Synod in 1875 knocked at the door
of this seminary for pastors, and urgently solicited help. This man
was none other than the President of the General Synod, Pastor
Herlitz of Melbourne. He had been officially requested by a con-
ference of pastors of the Immanuel Synod to negotiate with
Neuendettelsau, that “in the future w T e also may be able regularly to
call from your seminary the men necessary for our synod.” This
request was signed by the pastors Niquet, Rechner, Auricht, and


Reuscb on behalf of the Immanuel Synod. Soon after this visit
Pastor Herlitz was able to report to South Australia that his
negotiations had been successful. In view of what happened in
1884 it is clear from the documents extant that Reusch, Herlitz, and
Deinzer (the principal of Neuendettelsau), as well as the other
Immanuel pastors, all agreed: “As for South Australia future calls
from Basel are out of the question.” It should be noted that the
Victoria Synod as such was not a party to these negotiations.
The good news that Neuendettelsau was willing to include South
Australia in its sphere of activity was soon confirmed in an official
letter from Inspector J. Deinzer. The bearer of this letter was
Johann StolzJ of Rothenburg, Bavaria, the first-fruits of the
above negotiations. The joy at his arrival early in 1876 was wide-
spread and sincere, as it was indeed an assurance of further help.
God had heard their prayers. The question whence to get pastors
was solved. The continued existence of the synod was, humanly
speaking, assured. After his ordination at Light’s Pass, Pastor Stolz
was installed at Point Pass in connection with the dedication of
Immanuel Church. At this time a synodical fund was created for
defraying payments for the candidates’ travelling expenses from
Germany. Thus the sending of pastors from Neuendettelsau con-
stituted a new factor in the history of the Lutheran Church in
Australia.
This decade was a period of most vigorous expansion for the
Church in South Australia. More candidates followed the first one
from Neuendettelsau, enabling the synod to supply its members,
as they moved further into the interior, with the necessary services.
Pastor Kaibel in 1877 took up his work in the newly-formed parish
of Appila, one hundred and fifty miles north of Adelaide,
and at the end of the year Pastor Koschade in Yorke-
town. In 1878 Pastor Matschoss became pastor of the
free congregation of Mount Gambier, which had become
vacant through the death of Pastor Kappler. Pastor Kuss,
w r ho arrived in 1880, was first stationed at Hahndorf. The end of
1882 saw the arrival of Pastor Doehler. He served the widely-
scattered centres of Condowie, Tiparra, Kilkerran, Baldina, Bundey,
and Steinfeld. Missionary J. Flierl, whose coming in 1878 proved to
be of great significance in the history of missions, was later joined
by J. Flierl, jun., to assist him in the work on the mission station
Killappaninna (Bethesda). When Pastor Heinze and his parish Nain
joined the Immanuel Synod in 1875, it received a further welcome
addition. In 1870 Pastor Auricht found a new sphere of labor
thirty miles from Langmeil in the newly-settled Murray Flats.
His centre of activity was named Sedan in memory of the battle at
Sedan during the Franco-Prussian War. In those years Sommerfeld.
a former E.L.S.A. congregation, joined the Immanuel Synod,


because it was unable to obtain the desired services from that body.
(Later this congregation rejoined the E.L.S.A.) It is noteworthy
that the anti-chiiiastic tendencies of Pastor Heinze were not regarded
as a barrier to his reception. It is a striking proof that the
Immanuel Synod no longer held to chiliasm as an article of faith.
Those years were characterised by an active, hearty, and har-
monious co-operation between the formerly separated pastors and
parishes. Regular general synods fostered the bond of union with
the Victoria Synod. The first of these was held at Light’s Pass in
1876. Pastor Herlitz was in the chair. Twenty-four congregations
had sent two hundred and nineteen delegates. Pastor Krause
and some of his Lobethal members were also there. The E.L.S.A.
was officially invited, but had declined. However, about fifty of
her members had appeared. This synod marked the official organi-
zation of the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of Australia.
The chief problems were how 7 to get a uniform church book and
constitution. As the “Wittenberg ’ Church Book was out of print,
it was resolved to publish it in Australia. A uniform confessional
usage was aimed at. Where private confession had not been intro-
duced, there should be at least private announcement for Holy Com-
munion, together with pastoral admonition. A firm stand should
be taken against the lodges. The congregations Lobethal (Pastor
Krause) and Lyndoch (E.L.S.A.) applied for membership and
were received after due investigation.
In November, 1877, a conference of pastors and elders had
become necessary. In October of that year the elders had convened
a secret conference at Angas Park, where, without the presence of
pastors, they had passed resolutions, and forwarded them to all
pastors and congregations of the synod. The elders, believing
themselves ousted from their status, which entitled them “to watch
over the doctrine and lives of the pastors,” here made a bold attempt
to assert their authority. With this act of arrogation the climax
of the institution of elders as Kavel had instituted it was reached.
At the synod at Tanunda (1878) a stubborn struggle ensued over
the “rights of elders.” The outcome was a mutual watching of
congregations, pastors, and elders. A synodical committee, con-
sisting of hve pastors, was found necessary. At this synod the
missionaries J. Flierl and C. A. Mayer (elder and later mission-
teacher) and Pastor Matschoss were ordained.
The second general synod assembled at Light’s Pass (Pastor
Niquet’s church) in 1879. Twelve pastors and two hundred delegates
were present. The chief topic w T as the constitution of the Immanuel
Synod. With his persuasive abilitv Pastor Herlitz helped con-
siderably to weld the various groups together. A uniform consti-
tution was adopted and printed in Tanunda in 1880. It w 7 as a great
pity that the main point, Article 3 (the calling of a pastor) was


decidedly vague. It did not definitely state that the congregations
must call through the synod and its officials, according to accepted
usage, and also only from proved Lutheran seminaries. This
ostrich-like attitude of not daring to stipulate the above conditions
bore the bitter results of disunion a few years later.
At the district synod held at Tanunda in 1880 much attention
was paid to the matter of Christian day schools. A school com-
mittee was elected. A public testimony in favor of Christian schools
was to be placed before the Minister of Education. The danger of
non-religious state schools was strongly felt. The synod at Nain
in 1881 seriously concerned itself with the training of teachers for
Christian schools. Another attempt was made to make peace with the
E.L.S.A. The resolutions of synods as well as sermons to com-
memorate the emigration should be printed. At the general synod
in 1882 it was resolved to have the “Wittenberg” Church Book
printed in Germany. Visitations of congregations were found
desirable, but were carried out only in the outlying congregations a'
Mount Gambier and Appila. This general synod w 7 as the last
peaceful one.
The last South Australian synod prior to those leading to
separation was held-at Point Pass in 1883. Forebodings of a coming
storm over the question of calling pastors were not lacking. It
was significant that it was emphasized—a call must be sent through
the synod. The decision to celebrate the Luther jubilee (1483- 883)
in all parishes, and to divide the offerings between the Neuen-
dettelsau seminary and the school fund was like the last ray of the
sun shining through the lowering storm clouds.
But before proceeding to sketch this fateful period, it is neces-
sary to note the course taken by the Victoria Synod during this
decade. The most important event was no doubt the connection
established with the parishes in the neighboring State, New South
Wales (1876). These parishes owed their origin to the migration
of a large number of Lutheran families from the Light’s Pass,
Ebenezer, and other districts of South Australia. Only one con-
gregation in New South Wales, that of Grafton, was founded through
direct immigration from Germany. It did not exist for long.
Towards the end of the sixties the Lutheran migration from
South Austraial to New South Wales began. In the vicinity of Albury
new land had become available. In South Australia many districts
were no longer suitable for farming, since fertilizers were still
unknown. Many of the holdings were too small for Australian
conditions. During 1866 and 1867 smaller groups had proceeded
to the famous Riverina district of New 7 South Wales. Among those
who went were Bartsch, Terlich, Schwartze, Krause, Raschke, Just,
Pollack, Wenke, Lieschke, Mickan, and Job. Gottfr. Scholzr. The


last-named in particular kindled much enthusiasm for New South
Wales. All efforts on the part of South Australian land agents
to deter the people proved of no avail.
The main caravan of migrants departed from Ebenezer-Neukirch
(Dimchurch) on October 13, 1868, under the leadership of the
cider Johann Gottlieb Klemke. Klemke, who had been a valuable
supporter of the pastors Kavel, Staudenmayer, and Niquet, and who
was a noble, pious, and humble man,* was appointed by Pastor
Niquet as the spiritual leader of the emigrants. Through ordina-
tion he received the right to administer the Sacraments. Altogether
fifty-six persons entrusted themselves to Klemkes leadership. Among
these the most prominent were Andreas Mickan and Michael Wenke.
At a special divine service the party was farewelled. In fourteen
covered German waggons and two spring carts they began their trek,
accompanied for some distance by Pastor Niquet, who, with a
fervent address, prayer, and blessing, committed them to God's
safe keeping on their long journey. A number of friends went
with them as far as Blanchetown on the River Murray. On their
journey they had at times to contend with a shortage of feed and
water. On Sundays they rested and held morning and afternoon
services. Finally, after five and a half weeks, the travellers were able
to look down upon their immediate destination, the town of Albury.
Their arrival created excitement and interest. An Englishman gave
them a dinner to welcome them. From there they proceeded to
Scholz’s homestead, and for ten weeks they camped at a creek, whilst
the men looked around for suitable lanl, where they could settle, and
build churches and schools. Most of them selected a former sheep
station, and, naturally, named the settlement Ebenezer. When later
on a post office was established, the place was named Walla W T alla
because there was already an Ebenezer in New r South Wales. Others
settled in a place which they named Bethel. It was difficult to
make a start. The waggons had to serve as living rooms and
bedrooms, until they had “pugged” their clay huts. To the accom
paniment of joyful shouts of the children the giant gum trees feL
before the axes of the pioneers. The virgin soil was ploughed and
the grain brought along from South Australia was sown. After a few
months the fields stood thick with ripening grain. Soon more
settlers arrived. In course of time a number of daughter congre-
gations were formed, Alma Park in 1877. Pleasant Hills in 1883,
and others. The holdings at that time amounted to two
hundred and fiftv to four hundred acres each. Later on
they were much larger. Through their tenacity of purpose,
diligence and industry, and firm faith in God. these South
Australian Lutherans were able to convert wide stretches
of the New South Wales wilderness into productive farm lands.
Today the Riverina is well known as one of Australia’s granaries.
Naturally these settlers continued to hold their divine services, as


had been their custom in South Australia. “Father* 5 Klemke was
iike a real pastor among his people. In February, 1869, the first
service in Walla Walla was held in Wenke’s hut. A Sunday school
was organized at once. Klemke’s son, Traugott, held school on
two half-days a week. In 1870 “Father 55 Klemke conducted the first
confirmation class and officiated at the Confiamation. They con-
tinued to observe church festivals, the four Days of Repentance,
and the monthly mission evenings as in South Australia. In 1872
Hie settlers erected the first church of bush materials and clay, and
Klemke dedicated it. In 1870 he had dedicated a church at
Gerogery, and in 1871 a church in Bethel, where “Father’ 5 Mickan
held services.
As earlv as 1868 “Father 55 Scholz had travelled two hundred and
thirty miles to Melbourne to attend the synod. He reported that for
the seventy families who had followed him, no pastor had as yet been
found. Pastor Herlitz was successful in obtaining Pastor Egen, who
arrived from Basel in 1872. He was installed bv Pastor Herlitz in
✓
the Walla Walla parish on the Second Sunday in Advent, 1872. At
that time the parish comprised four congregations between ten and
twenty-five miles from Albury. Each congregation had its own church
and three had a day school. On the same day “Father” Klemke re-
ceived from his fellow 7 elders the thanks due to him for his faithful
and unselfish services among the congregations. With the same
humility with which he had served he now again stepped into the
background. On September 4, 1873, he was called home. He has
since been held in grateful remembrance. The parish of Walla
Walla officially joined the Victoria Synod in 1875. The further
development of the New South Wales congregations will be dis-
cussed in a later chapter.
In the decade under review the Victoria synod as such enjoyed
a peaceful development. Synods were held annually chiefly in
Melbourne, in 1876 at Ballarat. On this occasion the local
church, built at a cost of £l,lOO, was dedicated. Synods were held
even at such places as Castlemaine (in 1877) and Sandhurst (in
1 879). Of special importance was the synod at Melbourne in 1881.
It was not only a general synod, but also the 25th jubilee synod
of Victoria. South Australia was represented by Pastors Rechner
and Heinze. The former held the jubilee sermon. Even Pastor
Hampe had come 1,000 miles from Grafton in Northern New South
Wales. The chief topic discussed was the calling of an itinerant
pastor from Basel. It is significant that in this period the question
of calling pastors from Basel remained practically dormant only
to become acute again towards the end. Doncaster had found a
pastor out of its own midst. This was Max von Schramm, a fellow
student of Pastor Herlitz, who, after his studies, became a pilot. In
1860 he accepted the position of teacher in the Doncaster congre-


Ration. For conscientious reasons he did not want to become a
state school teacher when Government support for church schools
was withdrawn. With the approval of their former pastor, Herlitz,
the congregation now decided to combine the office of day school
teacher with that of pastor. The synod (1876) attended to the
matter, appointing a commission of pastors and laymen (!) to
examine the candidate. On November 5, 1876, he was ordained
and installed by Pastor Herlitz. With his talents and strength of
character he proved a valuable asset to the synod. The activities
of the Victoria Synod extended even as far as Queensland. In 1878
President Herlitz obtained the services of J. A. Giezendanner for
the pastorate of Toowoomba. Giezendanner was an ex-Jesuit who
had received his training at the Roman Catholic seminary at Seven
Hills, South Australia, but as he refused to admit the infallibility
of the Pope he had not been ordained. After joining the Lutheran
Church and passing his theological examination he was ordained
by Pastor Herlitz. In 1888 Pastor Haussmann, of Bethesda, near
Beenleigh, Queensland, applied for admission to the Victoria Synod,
as it appeared that no synod could be formed in Queensland. Before
he was admitted he had to submit to a colloquium and to signify
his assent to the Articles of Union of 1874, since by joining the
Victoria Synod he also became a member of the General Synod.
The same procedure was adopted in the case of Pastor Hampe, of
Grafton and Tenterfield, New South Wales, one of the lay-men sent
out by the Gossner Missionary Society for Pastor Haussmann’s
second missionary enterprise (see chapter fourteen). Even in those
years the question of using the English language became pressing,
as there were young Lutherans who could not understand German.
At Murtoa a church and a manse were built. The newly-settled
areas in the Wimmera district were very scattered. Since Grafton
could no longer support him, Pastor Hampe took up work in this
district in 1882. At the time of the jubilee synod there were sixteen
churches, and fourteen Sunday schools with seven hundred pupils
and fifty teachers.
In 1882 the svnod adopted a revised church constitution. Even
this constitution did not contain a definite paragraph concerning the
calling of pastors. It has already been mentioned that as an
itinerant pastor was needed the question of calling a pastor from
Basel became urgent. The statement in the synodical report of
1888 that “Basel has declared itself willing also in future to send
us Lutheran pastors” occasioned a bitter attack by the E.L.S.A.
Writing in 1888 Auricht says: “They made hell hot for us, and
stirred our conscience.” Soon after. Pastor Schenk, who was
destined for Sydney, arrived from Basel. This event again brought
the delicate “call” question into prominence. Subsequent occur-
rences did so still more. Without seeking the mediation of the


synodical committee, and only on the authority of his parish, Pastor
Keusch applied to Basel for an assistant. Already at the Luther
jubilee in November, 1883, the .Tanunda congregation refused to
give half of the offering for Neuendettelsau, as had been previously
agreed. In December of that year Pastor Reusch convened a parish
conference, at which he submitted a call to Basel. This call was
thereupon signed and duly forwarded. The fait accompli was then
reported to the synodical committee and a claim for the travelling
expenses of the awaited pastor submitted.
It was on this reef that after ten years of peaceful co-operation
the Immanuel Synod of South Australia broke asunder, and the
connection of the Kavel line with the Victoria Synod came to an
end.
What is to be said of the reason for separation, that for thirty-
six long years kept apart what really belonged together? In the
constitution of 1880 it was mutually agreed to call only from a
“Lutheran seminarv or University/’ whereas Basel declared itself
non-confessional. The booklet, “The Evang. Missionary Society
at Basel, 1842,” a Basel publication, says of the Basel Mission:
“It subscribes to what is common to all Evangelical Protestant Con-
fessions. It does not let its graduates sign any Confession. The
Basel “Messenger to the Heathen” of 1850 says: “The Basel Mission
dare and shall never become confessional. From the above it
will be seen that in the case of candidates for Australia, Basel
would not hear of a disavowal of unionism, the chief point in
Article 3of 1874. Later on also Pastor Herlitz? was not successful
in pressing for an arrangement whereby the Basel candidates should
be made acquainted with the Articles of Union of 1874. That is,
]f we are to trust the statement of a prominent member of the
Immanuel Synod a.a.G. in a letter to the “Kirchen-und Missions-
Zeitung,’ in 1900, p. 293. He wrote as follows: “It turned out that
the candidates had not even seen the Articles of Union . . . Inspector
Oehler of Basel stated quite frankly that the voung men at Basel’s
disposal had no understanding even for the mild confessionalism as
subscribed to by the Immanuel Synod a.a.G.”
In view of these facts it cannot be maintained that the call w T as
sent to a Lutheran seminary, as was clearly demanded in the con-
stitution of 1880.
The question arises whether this call had at least a legal right*
Article 3 leaves quite open the question whence a pastor may be
called. It must, therefore, be admitted that Pastor Reusch had a
certain right to negotiate the above call for Tanunda. At the synod
in Tanunda in 1878 Pastor Rechner, the President, accorded the
individual congregation the liberty of calling a pastor, provided he
be orthodox. This ruling of the chair was recorded in the minutes,
but in the official report in the “Kirchen-und Missions Zeitung” it


appeared as a resolution of synod. No one protested in order not
to disturb the peace. Until then it had been the general practice
to extend calls through the synod at the suggestion of the individual
congregation. The two exceptions, Ruprecht (Hahndorf) and
Keppler (Hahndorf) were not attended with blessings. The
circumvention of the synodical authorities in this case cannot be
approved. It must be added that it was not a case of need.
Neuendettelsau was able to supply pastors as before.
Could the threatening rupture still be averted? It is not
surprising that the Lutherans who in Germany had fought against
unionism did not feel inclined to sanction renewed and continued
calls from a unionistic institution. A special synod met at Light’s
Pass on February 16 and 17, 1884, to deal with the matter. Pastor
Auricht issued an urgent appeal to “let love prevail. ' He stated
that “there was fault on both sides.”
In spite of this peaceful note the special synod accomplished
nothing. The authors of the call to Basel claimed that it was
justified, and the pastors Reusch and Niquet and their people finally
left the synod with the wmrds: “We are the Immanuel Synod.” In the
first days of March, 1884, the general synod was to meet in
Melbourne. Would it find a solution to the problem? Rechner
and Niquet were the delegates from the Immanuel Synod. They
went to Melbourne without definite instructions. The synod at
Light’s Pass was unable to furnish them with such definite instruc-
tions, as there was disunity on the question in the Immanuel Synod.
The very least to be expected of the general synod was that it would
show that Basel, as Pastor Herlitz claimed, had now agreed to the
conditions of the union (1874) in regard to the calling of pastors,
disavowing of unionism. But everything really depended on
Pastor Herlitz, the President. It seems evident that it lay in his
power to avoid a schism. As president of General Synod and
guardian of its agreements he should have referred to his arrange-
ments with Neuendettelsau concerning South Australia, to the
constitution of 1880, and the synodical resolutions of South Aus-
tralia, and decided that the Tanunda “call” had been contrary to
good order, and that this should be acknowledged. Further, he
should have seen to it that, although the call must now be sanctioned,
it was also to be made clear: In future calling pastors from Basel
is out of question for South Australia.” Unfortunately this
critical subject at once got into the wrong channel at the Melbourne
synod. The delegates of the Immanuel Synod demanded to see
the correspondence with Basel. Herlitz read what he had written
about the eight articles, but no more. To demand more would be
a vote of no-confidence in him. If they insisted on more they would
have to part company. When Rechner and Niquet withdrew their
request Herlitz magnanimously placed the whole correspondence


O], e table. With just as much magnanimity they felt compelled
foi the sake of honor and out of shame,” Rechner reported, to
forgo looking into the correspondence. Overcome by sentiments
o magnanimity Rechner and Niquet were moved to make a written
declaration which ended with the words, “We regret that we
distrusted your ministry and confess that, forced by circumstances,
we have allowed oureslyes to act contrary to the dictates of love
but hope that through this unfortunate incident the bond of union
may become all the firmer.” “This declaration,” says HerliS hl
us Jubilee Booklet of 1907, “was received with immense satis-
faction, and the Synod of Victoria believed that everythin- was
again in order. With empty hands and an uneasy conscience
President Rechner returned to South Australia. Had he stood his
ground as a convinced Lutheran should? What would his fellow
rennrt B , mUSt j 3v ® his Noughts, when in Herlitz’s
r .port on the general synod the above declaration was altered, that
i,Z P Tt 1 he - had glVen no testil "ony of his standpoint?
Although the declaration was expressly stated to be only a personal
Z’lr madC t . l ?f t I ° f the Immanue l Synod committee.
Out of the promise, “We will do our share to dispose of this matter ”
a become the conviction, “The Immanuel Synod regards this mat-
te f ra T“ led - The “Although our synod recognizes it to be
of little benefit to call pastors from a unionistic institution as lone
as. a Lutheran one is open to us,” in print read thus: “Althou-h it
rnf ht r ,| more beneficial for our synod to call its pastors from
ppfy us ” ,nStltUtlOn ’ as lon g as il is able adequately to
-• j IS j C .u 3r " I r a ', e scri, P les must have agitated Rechner’s
' and the minds of those who shared his conviction. After his
return Rechner reported to the synodical committee on the Mel-
ll j aS resolved 1° prepare a solemn declaration, and
T lat 111 ord er to get the signatures of all pastors of the
Immanuel Synod. And indeed it was highest time. The synodical
e ° received the resignations of the two missionaries Flierl at
cetraf 3 - t th !, Ch , r ’ Sterlbote ” the y bad read the result of the
to a ;' yn °TI i and - 0011 d see "? °, ther wa y out ‘ban to protest and
to resign. This important “declaration” stressed the fact that
tor us Lutherans it is permissible to call only from recognized
Lutheran seminaries and not from unionistic ones ”
dec! i- PaSt °p eXCCP I bleu sell, Niquet, and Matschoss signed this
decW.'.on Parlor Auricht made . very e„„e,l be. vai,' attempt
“dil. , : r „ R "T ! ' “S™"”-'- In U» reply he called the
eclaration a stab in the back at the hands of friends and breth-
sent br T 1 VT l K THe declaration” was, of course, also
sent to President Herhtz, but only after it had appeared in the
Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung.” It caused great consternation in


Victoria. Even in 1907 Herlitz writes in his Jubilee Booklet: “This
breach of loyalty! That is what at that time we called it, and that
is what we still call it!” The Immanuel Synod was now convened at
Gruenberg early in August. It became the actual synod of
separation. 209, and later 300, delegates were present, also
the pastors Appelt and Bode of the E.L.S.A. Pastor Koschade
was in the chair. Both parties had their own secretaries to
take minutes. The first ten Articles of the Augsburg Confession
were read out. All pertinent matters were discussed: Basel s atti-
tude, the Melbourne synod, the “declaration,” Article 3, and the
Tanunda “call, 5 the correspondence with Basel. Pastor Reusch
declared that he had never regarded Basel as Lutheran, but that Basel
taught Lutheran theology, that out of necessity the students attended
Holy Communion in Reformed churches as guests, that to look upon
him (Reusch) as Lutheran, but to refuse to call from Basel was as
much as to say: “You are good Lutherans, but we don’t want to
have such as you are in future”; moreover, that the disavowal of
unionism in the letter of call had intentionally been omitted, and
that they remained the Immanuel Synod, because they adhered to
Article 3. At the fourteenth session (Pastor Reusch was physically
very weak) Reusch and Niquet and their delegates left the synod.
Not squabbling but sorrow had marked the discussions. Thus upon
Pastor Niquet’s friendly words of farewell it was possible to dismiss
the departing brethren with the Lord’s Prayer. This was the last
separation in the line leading up to the U.E.L.C.A. In South
Australia this rift revived the former so-called Staudenmayer s
division, and spread to the newer congregations. Sad to say,
the spirit of bitterness, of excessive reproaching, of division in the
congregations, and fierce quarrels over church property poisoned
the next period.
Breach of loyalty, or loyalty to confession? That was now the
question. It was a bitter disappointment for Herlitz that it had
come to a schism because he, too, wanted to build and unite the
Lutheran Church in Australia. He repeated his allegation of
“breach of loyalty” again and again. Pastor Reusch was no less
outspoken. The accusations of a “breach of loyalty” were certainly
not justified, if those accused could plead to scruples of conscience.
That such scruples were felt is clear from the statements of Pastors
Auricht and Rechner in the “Kirchen-und Missions Zeitung.” The
latter wrote: “We would rather take upon ourselves the groundless
accusation of disloyalty towards men than to remain in continued
unfaithfulness against our better knowledge.” “With our Article
3 . . . we would close the doors of the Lutheran Mother-Church
against ourselves. In September, 1804, the synodical committee
announced: “Pastors Niquet and Reusch no longer belong to the
Immanuel Svnod; the connection w T ith the Victoria Synod has been


dissolved, since these pastors interpret Article 3 contrary to the
Confessions, in that, to obtain pastors who according to Article 3
reject all unionistic practices, they apply to the most unionistic
institution in existence. We can never agree to such an interpre-
tation. We hold that Article 3 must be interpreted according to the
Confessions, and not the Confessions according to Article 3. Thus
we have committed no breach of loyalty, but even to-day adhere
firmly to Article 3, if it is interpreted according to the Confessions.”
But this is not a matter- of “if!” The Immanuel Synod had
unmistakably changed its attitude. It realized that Article 3 was
not a suitable basis on which to build a Lutheran Church. With
a sore but lighter heart it now returned to its original basis and
icmained faithful to its own history.
What about the other party which in future called itself the
‘'lmmanuel Synod a.a.G. (on old basis)”? It had the right to
maintain: we adhere to Article 3 of 1874, in so far as the essential
point of this Article, in Basel as well as in Australia, would and
could be adhered to. This essential point was: the rejection of all
unionistic tendencies, and the wholehearted subscription to the
Lutheran Confessions? To this, however, the statement also
belongs: “they disapprove of those that teach otherwise.” In so far
as Basel could not reasonably be expected to subscribe to this
statement of the Confessions, in so far the Immanuel Synod a.a.G.
did not adhere to Article 3 either.
It is with great reluctance that this period is being sketched and
judgment passed on these sad events. But they concern the gravest
struggle in the history of the Lutheran Church in Australia, and
only the whole truth and perfect clarity can produce repentance.
Conscientious reflection must lead to the conclusion that all those
concerned were at fault. What a different course the history of
the Lutheran Church in Australia would have taken if Neuendet-
telsau had supplied pastors to the Immanuel Synod only on the
conditions that it sever its connection with the Victoria Synod,
which had reserved to itself the right to call from Basel; if Basel
at the outset had plainly declared: You South Australians are a
confessional Lutheran Church and we an inter-confessional mission,
and that both by conviction; therefore we cannot send you what
you desire, namely, Lutheran pastors; if the pastors of the Immanuel
Synod in 1874 would have held firmly to the clear formulation of
Article 3, as drawn up, together with the E.L.S.A., instead of
believing that they would be able to retain their Lutheran attitude
in principle in spite of the vagueness of Article 3; and, finally, if
the Basel pastors, to further the necessary union of the Lutheran
Church in Australia, had desisted from extending further calls to
their alma mater!
The author trusts that his presentation has made it sufficiently


clear that, in regard to the actions of all concerned, there were
many extenuating circumstances.
Whatever attitude one may adopt towards the separation of
1884, it must be conceded that it was necessary. In 1874 obscurity
and indecision were rife, which became more and more obvious and
had to be removed if the Kavel group were not to become untrue
to its history more and more. In the final analysis it meant that
either the Kavel group should gradually abandon its confessional
position or that the Basel group should adopt a more positively
Lutheran position. The peculiar circumstances in which the Aus-
tralian Lutheran Church originated, the constant severe criticism
of the E.L.S.A., and the fact that the small Lutheran Church in
Australia was dispersed in an Anglo-Saxon Reformed environment-
al! this contributed to make the Australian Lutheran Church adopt
a more positive Lutheran position. To this also the struggles
described in this chapter contributed and were, therefore, salutary.
Much heartache accompanied the subsequent negotiations for the
division of property. Each party called the other “the seceders.”
In the following years arrangements in regard to all church funds
were made orally. In the congregations there was much unrest.
Even before the Gruenberg synod the Hahndorf congregation quar-
lelled with their pastor (Kuss). He found a new sphere of activity
at Mannum. Pastor Braun, the assistant called by Pastor Reusch,
was stationed at Hahndorf. As had happened in 1860, the congre-
gation at Langmeil was again decimated. In the absence of Pastor
Auricht and without his knowledge his congregation was invited to
attend a conference of Reusch’s congregation, with the result that
thirty members, among them five elders, joined Pastor Reusch. This
defection almost broke Pastor Auricht’s heart. The sorrow of the
division of a flourishing Sunday school has not been forgotten. In
Pastor Kaibel’s parish the Caltowie congregation went over to
Pastor Reusch. The struggle raged most vehemently in Pastor
Stolz’s congregations, Point Pass and Robertstown. There were
breaches in both congregations. Both parties tried by various
means to get possession of the church buildings. This very sad
state of affairs came to an end when Pastor Stolz’s congregations
paid the other party compensation. Sad to say, this church scandal
was also aired in a political newspaper. It was a time of shame
and disgrace for the Lutheran Church. Finally it must be men-
tioned that Pastor Krause and his Lobethal congregation also joined
the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. Thus the old gentleman came into the
limelight once more. Pastor Ey,. in his “Mitteilungen,” relates what
was the outcome of his escapades. “On Christmas Day Pastor Dr.
Loessel died after asking Pastor Krause to take care of his congrega-
tion. When the latter disagreed with his congregation on this
question he promptly resigned. With the support of his adherents,


who still followed him blindly, he formed a fourth congregation
At Lobethal. Thus he holds the unenviable record of splitting into
liiree factions the congregation which Pastor Fritzsche had gathered,
and caused much grief in many families. And all this through
sheer obstinacy. Pastor Krause died in 1885 after singing his
own funeral hymns and delivering his own burial service address
on his deathbed.


The stretching out of His wings
shall fill the breadth of thy land,
O Immanuel, Isaiah VIII, 8.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN.
The main branch leading to the L.E.L.C.A. , that of the Evangelical
Lutheran Immanuel Synod , now proceeds alone, unhindered and
richly blessed , through the next three decades (1884-1914).
THE followers of Kavel had made two attempts, each lasting ten
years, to pursue a common course, first with the Fritzsche
Synod, then with the Herlitz synod, but had not succeeded. The
one section regarded them as not Lutheran enough, the other as
too Lutheran. Henceforth the Immanuel Synod continued its
course alone and unhindered, under strong leadership and undi-
vided. The period under review is of great importance in the
history of this synod. The inception of the New Guinea Mission,
the taking over of the Hermanns!)urg Mission Station on the Finke
River, the founding of the mission stations in Queensland, and,
most important of all, the establishment of the Immanuel College
at Point Pass, the formation of the Church Federation, the fore-
runner of the U.E.L.C.A. —all this occurred in the three decades.
For these great tasks, which will be more fully dealt with in Part
11, God gave capable leaders. During the first half of this period
—till 1900 —President Rechner had the reins in his experienced
hands. He was followed by Pastor Auricht till 190T, and then
by Pastor Leidig. Men of outstanding ability were also J. P.
Loehe and A. Ortenburger, pastors at Steinfeld and Appila, South
Australia, respectively.
After the separation nine pastors and nine parishes with about
2,000 communicants remained. Now considerable expansion set
in. At that time congregations were organized in the Murray Flats,
whose mallee lands had been cultivated by farmers chiefly of
German extraction. Steinfeld dedicated its first church in 1885,
and in 1889 received its first resident pastor (J. P. Loehe). At
Rlanchetown, on the Murray, a congregation was formed in 1899.
At Petersburg (Peterborough), a congregation of the Appila parish.


a small church was erected in 1885, together with the E.L.S.A.
congregation. But although the Immanuel Synod had separated
from the General Synod, the E.L.S.A., which was represented at
Petersburg by Pastor Fuhlbohm, could not agree to a common
dedication of the common house of worship. Nevertheless, both
parties attended the services of the ‘"other side.” The parish
of Point Pass in 1885 lost its faithful shepherd, through the
early death of Pastor Stolz. (His wife, a daughter of Pastor
Rechner, passed away only recently, October, 1937). Pastor Stolz
had to endure much enmity in connection with the separation of
1884. Auricht wrote of him in the “Kirchen-und Missions-
Zeitung”:—“His genuineness of character, his firmness of convic-
tion, his faithfulness even in minute details, his exemplary dili-
gence, the modesty and humility which graced him, caused us Jo
hold him in love and esteem.” In E. Rechner, the son of President
Rechner, the parish found a new pastor (1886-1891). Although
he had studied for fourteen years in Germany, his ministry was
short-lived. He did not believe himself called to the Office of the
Ministry. From 1892 on he was a tutor of the German language
in Adelaide. The vacant parish soon found a successor in Mis-
sionary Friedrich Leidig, who together with Joh. Bogner, had
arrived from Neuendettelsau in 1891 as missionaries for Bethesda
and Bloomfield respectively. In 1887 the E.L.S.A. congregations,
Callington and Salem, came over to the Immanuel Synod. Their
pastor (Dorsch) had accepted a call to Adelaide, and the E.L.S.A.
had no one to take his place. Pastor Koschade of Yorketown was
invited by the congregations, and installed in 1889. After Pastor
Heinze’s death, in 1891, his congregation at Nain, together with
that served by Pastor Auricht, and afterwards by Pastor Loehe,
united to call the candidate Adolf Sahel (1893). The parish was
enlarged by the addition of the Condowie congregation, when
Pastor Doehler succeeded Pastor Koschade at Yorketown. Pastor
Doehler served a widely scattered parish on Norke’s Peninsula.
In 1891 a small branch of the Immanuel Synod was formed in
Victoria by the addition of the new parish of Natimuk-Horsham.
Having received a request for services from a section of the E.L.S.A.
congregation at Natimuk (Pastor Schoknecht), President Rechner
sent Pastor Koschade, but also invited the President of the E.L.S.A.,
Pastor Oster, to participate in a joint investigation. The breach
proved beyond repair. A book might be written on the causes
prompting congregations in the Australian Lutheran Church to
go from one synod to another. Very often the pastor, owing to
his inability or obstinacy, was at fault. Pastor Kaibel accepted
the call to Natimuk, and in 1895 also took over the congregation at
Horsham, which, on account of a disagreement over the question of


financing the payments on its church property, seceded from the
Victoria Synod, to the great sorrow of President Herlitz. In course
of time a second parish was formed in the Victorian mallee with
Jeparit as centre (‘A. Fehlberg, pastor) Thus there was evidence
of considerable expansion in the Immanuel Synod during the first
half of this period.
Synods were held annually in the seven central congregations:
Light’s Pass, Langmeil, Gruenberg, North Rhine, Nain, Sedan, and
Point Pass. Mission matters claimed much attention. Mention
should be made of the most important resolutions. In 1884 a
synodical constitution was adopted defining the relationship be-
tween congregations and the synod. Congregations are expected
to send delegates to synod, and respect the Synodical Committee.
A congregation has the right to call a pastor, but is under obliga-
tion to call through the synod.* Synod (and not the elders!) shall
watch over purity of doctrine. For every twenty-five communicants
one delegate shall be chosen (since 1891 one for every fifty). On
important matters only delegates shall have a vote, otherwise all
present. Nain (1887) resolved upon a synodical assessment of
sixpence per communicant member; Light’s Pass (1889) abolished
the Synodical Committee. Point Pass (1892) decreed that in future
the Colloquium shall decide not the right faith, but the right
faith, “since questioning the r i g h t faith of a candidate is an in-
sult to the Lutheran seminary of Neuendettelsau.” In 1885 it was
decided to have the Wittenberg Church Book printed in Germany.
Nain synod (1887) emphasized Private Confession, and in 1894 the
duty of observing the third day of the chief festivals, also of devot-
ing the Harvest Festival offerings to the cause of Christian day
schools. In 1893 Pastor Leidig reported the introduction of the
liturgy of Loehe in Point Pass. As the services had hitherto been
liturgically poor, this was a step in the right direction. In course of
time this liturgy became the official order of service. At the synod
in Sedan (1898) the pastors promised not to use the “revised”
Bible. In connection with the synod at Point Pass, March 11, 1900,
the dedication of the new college buildings took place. In 1892 and
1893 some dissatisfaction was caused by synod resolving to use
part of the profits (£500) from the sheep industry at Bethesda for
synodical purposes. This amount was later repaid with interest by
voluntary donations.
In 1888 the golden jubilee of the Lutheran Church in Australia
was celebrated in Langmeil. This event was one of rejoicing for
Auricht and his small congregation. In commemoration of the occa-
sion he wrote a “Denkschrift” (“Lest We Forget”) which, however,
is available only in manuscript. As a monument of thanksgiving
the congregation erected a new church, the Langmeil Church of


Thanksgiving. In spite of a great drought sufficient funds were
collected with the help of synod. The aged Hon. John Howard
Angas also donated £IOO.
The fine new church was dedicated on the day of jubilee,
November 25, 1888. On the 50th anniversary of the Festival of
Emigration, June 8, a farewell was held in Kavel’s old church.
At the dedication a special festival hymn, probably composed by
Pastor Rechner, was sung: “This is the day the Lord hath made
. . . Immanuel will be with us!” On Tiis occasion Missionary G.
Reuther was ordained and farewelled for Bethesda (Killalpaninna).
In conjunction with the diamond jubilee of the Lutheran Church
in Australia at Langmeil (1898) the hundredth birthday of her
founder, Pastor Kavel, was celebrated.
But although much steady work was done during this period,
there was still some conflict, and the builders of the church often
had to use not only the trowel for building, but also the sword
of defence. This was due to attacks from the E.L.S.A. As early
as 1881 Pastor Herlitz wrote of the polemical articles appearing
in the “Kirchenbote” of the E.L.S.A.: “They are like Elihu
of old. who says: T am full of matter, the spirit within me
constraineth me. ” This was true also in the period under
review. During the years 1887-1889 the most exhaustive
theological discussions between the Immanuel Synod and the
E.L.S.A. took pi ace. Four conferences, each of them lasting several
days, were held, at which the two presidents, Oster and Rechner,
alternately took the chair. The discussions were commenced with
the reading of a Bible lesson and with prayer. The first joint
pastors' conference was held at Bethany in June, 1887, and reached
agreement on the attitude to be adopted towards the Confessions.
The second conference, in November, 1887, heard Pastor KaibeTs
theses on chiliasm and the anti-Christ, and discussed principles for
explaining the Scriptures. At the third conference, in March, 1888,
when a large number of laymen were present, the Immanuel Synod
demanded recognition of “Open Questions.” The parties appear
to have shown little desire to understand each other at this con-
ference. The presence of laymen was not conducive to objective
discussion. The impression is gained that the debaters play-
ing to the gallery. These discussions only resulted in increased
bitterness, as is evident from a statement by Pastor Dorsch:—“lt
is really the truth of which these people (the pastors of the
Immanuel Synod) are enemies of; but, because they are afraid
that such a confession might do them harm, they throw 7 sand into
people’s eyes.” It was high time that such attempts at union
came to an end. In an article entitled: “Why did the attempts
to unite fail?” Pastor Kaibel wrote: “We have a different concep-


tion of the prophetical word of the Old and New Testaments from
them. . . . But we did not make our conception a cause for severing
church fellowship.’’ The argument dragged on for years in the
church papers of the two bodies. Leidig proved himself an ablq
defender, and broke a lance in favor of the renowned German theo-
logians, von Hofmann, Thomasius, and Kahnis, who had been
termed modernists, with the result that he (Leidig) was denounced
as denying the deity of Christ. A similar literary war was waged
concerning the doctrine of predestination. At the synod in Hahn-
dorf in 1898 the E.L.S.A., by a majority vote, had adopted the
Missourian doctrine of predestination.
The first half of the period under closes with the death
of Pastor Rechner, the President, on August 21, 1900. For half
a century he was permitted to serve his Church with his manifold
gifts. For the first ten of these years he was a teacher. But soon
he held all the reins of the synod’s church and mission work in
his hands. Gifted with a fine ability for organizing, a clear dis-
cernment, and, above all, the courage of faith, he became a great
blessing for the young Australian Lutheran Church. At his giave-
side, at which fourteen pastors stood, one of them (Kaibel) said:
“He was a wall one could lean against; he found help, when every-
body else was helpless; he was a heroic example of faithfulness to
duty; he never lost faith and courage in the most difficult situations.
As president he undertook long, tiresome journeys, four to the mis-
sion station at Bethesda, and one to the mission stations in Queens-
land.” About 1,000 people attended his burial on the Light’s Pass
cemetery. Among the English people one heard the statement: The
King of the Germans is dead. This plain, yet versatile man, who
was equally at home in business and in spiritual affairs, was cer-
tainly a gift of God to the Church.
In September, 1900, a special synod was convened at Langmeil
to elect a new leader. Although not a man of Rechner’s calibre,
Auricht was chosen. What was lacking in Rechner, was supplied
by Auricht. “Rechner was more a man of quick decision, speedy
action, wide vision, and rare knowledge of human nature, a born
organizer, and leader of the masses; Auricht’s was a mild and
pliable nature, leaning on others, engrossed in the study of Holy
Scriptures, and drawing his life-breath from a quiet, retired life
in communion with God.” On the other hand, Auricht was the
living tradition, the last link with the beginnings, one who as
editor and publisher of the “Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung,” for
decades had exerted a quiet, yet strong, influence, and who would
have gone through fire for his Church and mission, and in a sense
actually did so. Now at the age of 68 he was called to the presi-
dency. The office of President of Missions, however, demanded »


younger man. Pastor Kaibel was called to fill this office, a full-
time position, since the missions at Bethesda and Hermannsburg
were then under the care of the synod. As vice-president of the
synod and residing in Tanunda, he was able to render faithful
assistance to President Auricht. The vacant parish of Natimuk
received a temporary pastor in Stephan Lehner, the first of Leidig’s
assistant pastors, till in 1902 he left for the New Guinea Mission.
He was succeeded by Pastor Loehe of Steinfeld. His place was
taken by Paul Breier, the second of Lcidig’s assistants. The Light’s
Pass parish received a new incumbent in the person of Rechner’s
grandson, Johs. J. Stolz. In 1902 M. Deinzer, the principal of the
Neuendettelsau seminary, sent Theodor Hebart, as the third assist-
ant in Leidig’s college and parish work. In 1904 Hebart became
pastor of the newly-formed Petersburg parish, formerly belonging
to Appila, and embracing also Wilmington and Caltowie. Later
on, by mutual arrangement, two small centres of the Immanuel
Synod a.a.G. were added.
The synods during Auricht’s presidency were concerned chiefly
with mission and college affairs. Appila (1902) half-heartedly
took over the college, hitherto a private concern of Leidig’s. North
Rhine (1903) published the first statistics, showing ten parishes,
forty-three congregations, 4,600 souls. Light’s Pass (1905) reported
the addition of a new congregation and church at Rhine Villa (Cam-
brai), served by Kaibel. It originally belonged to the E.L.S.A.,
and then was under the care of the E.L.S.A. a.a.G. This synod
also sanctioned the use of the small new hymn book of the Evan-
gelical Lutheran Church of Prussia. Hitherto the only book in
use was the large Burg hymnal with its 1,929 hymns. The latter
is still in use to-day.
Now “Father” Auricht’s day also drew to its close. He passed
away at Hahndorf on February 4, 1907, at the age of seventy-five.
The interment took place at Langmeil. A fine monument, a high
cross, close to the path leading to the church, testifies: “For to me
to live is Christ.” He had the one-sidedness of a Zinzendorf, “I have
only one passion, and that is He.” He was animated by a spirit
-of friendliness and lovableness, entirely devoid of hypocrisy. He
was a sanctified personality, on his countenance lay the “Dayspring
of Eternity,” the peace of God. At times, however, he would be
inflamed by holy wrath, when the honor of his Lord or the Lutheran
truth had to be defended. His life was - an example of pastoral
humility and meekness. He was an exceptionally busy man. For
years he set and printed his “Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung” by
himself. Even at a ripe age he copied theological books. An
enemy of all diplomacy, he was more like an open book, animated
by a childlike faith. But, above all, he was a man of prayer. He
prayed especially for the work of missions, and his hospitable


home was always open for missionaries on furlough. Although
his modesty brought him little honor, recognition, and earthly gain,
yet he deserves a place of honor in the history of the Australian
Lutheran Church. The blessings of his ministry were everywhere
evident.
The energetic, far-sighted, untiring Friedrich Leidig, pastor of
Point Pass, was the man God had provided to replace Auricht at
the helm of synod. No doubt there were other capable men, but
for the position of president he was, as time proved, the right man
in the right place. Before his election he already had his large
parish, the college, and the church paper in his charge, but with
jdyful courage he assumed this new duty. He at once made a
trip to the old country to arouse interest for the college and for
the Lutherans in Western Australia. Upon his return Point Pass
became the centre of the synod. The college was enlarged, a new
school and a church tower were built. But his work soon took
him further afield. He went to Western Australia, where, through
his instrumentality, Paul Stolz, another son of the late Pastor Stolz,
was stationed, supported mainly by the Lutheran “Gotteskaten” in
Germany (an organization to provide Lutheran pastors to congre-
gations in dispersion, the present Martin Lutheran-Bund Federa-
tion). Next he went to Queensland, and worked among the pastors
of the United German and Scandinavian Evangelical Lutheran
Synod to effect the formation of the Church Federation (1910).
Previously he had gone to Tasmania to provide for the Lutherans
there. In 1911 Pastor Fehlberg was placed in charge of this
field, being succeeded in Jeparit by Pastor Jericho. Next Leidig
called the representatives of the General.Synod to a conference
with the pastors of the Immanuel Synod. Although this con-
ference, held in Adelaide (1912) with Pastor Herlitz in the
chair, did not achieve the desired union, nevertheless it paved the
way to bring the General Synod into the Church Federation, and
into the U.E.L.C.A. All the grievous experiences of the past could
not dampen Leidig’s enthusiasm for a union of the Lutheran bodies
in Australia. His courage and energy were contagious. It was
always pleasant and profitable to be his guest. Small as the circle
around him was, yet the problems under discussion were always
important and far-reaching. Undoubtedly Pastor Leidig was a
special blessing for his synod and the Church.
After Auricht’s death the parish of Langmeil-Sedan was served
by Pastor Kaibel as locum tenens, and he soon received a call from
Sedan. Langmeil, however, adopted a waiting attitude. It looked
to Leidig as its prospective pastor, hut he would not leave the col-
lege, and eventually Pastor Hebart of Petersburg was called. Tak-
ing up his residence in Langmeil (1909), he served the northern


field from there. The northern congregations dwindled consider-
ably, since many farmers had settled beyond Goyder’s line of rain-
fall, and now had to move on again. In 1910 the St. Paul’s con-
gregation at Kapunda, founded in 1907, chiefly by Jobs. J. Stolz,
was added to the parish of Langmeil. In the meantime Neuen-
dettelsau had sent the brothers Wolfgang (1904) and Johannes
Riedel (1908) as assistants for Pastor Leidig. Wolfgang Riedel later
became missionary at Bethesda. In October, 1909, J. Riedel was
inducted as pastor of the new parish of Pinnaroo. Pastor Koschade
of Callington had done much pioneering work in this district,
gradually gathering the scattered settlers into congregations. A
new parish was also formed along the River Murray with Loxton
as centre. Pastor Kuss of Mannum, travelling by buggy over one
hundred miles through bush and sand, at first served the members
there. In 1910 his son, Martin Kuss, a graduate of Point Pass and
Neuendettelsau, became pastor of the Loxton parish. At the Yorke-
town synod (1909) Missionary Bogner, who on account of his wife’s
sickness had removed to Tanunda, was engaged as home missionary.
He also took over the so-called 44 West Coast” (Eyre’s Peninsula)
across Spencer’s Gulf, which had been first served by Pastor Hebart.
Thus synod expanded. God gave the increase.
In 1910 President Leidig submitted to the Sedan synod a new
church constitution, modelled on that of the Prussian Lutheran
Church in Germany. It aimed at placing more power in the hands
of the president, and was discussed for the next four years, but was
never adopted, as the World War broke out and prevented synod
meetings. At the end of this period the synod consisted of fifteen
pastors, over 4,000 communicants, and about 6,000 souls.
Towards the close of this period the 75th anniversary of the
Lutheran Church in Australia was celebrated at Langmeil. Presi-
dent Leidig held a stirring festival address on 2 Cor. 6,9: —“Be-
hold, we live!” in which he exhorted his hearers to hold fast to
genuine Lutheranism, and to preserve the bond of union with the
Lutheran Church of the old country.
A year later the ties with the Lutheran Church in the land of
the Reformation were forcibly severed for many years. The World
War had begun. But the connection with the One Above remained,
and even though the Church was as a ship on a storm-tossed sea,
this comfort prevailed: “HERE IS IMMANUEL!”


Can two walk together except they
be agreed? Amos 111, 3.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN.
In 1910 the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, one of the two synods formed in 1885, joined the
Immanuel Synod to form the Church I ederation. The origin and
development of those two synods , especially of that branch which
united with the Immanuel Synod.
TO-DAY the Queensland District is the second largest of the
U.E.L.C.A. It dates back to the year 1837, when “Father
Gossner, a Protestant pastor of Berlin, who was greatly interested
in mission work, sent out missionaries and lay helpers to the More-
lon Bay district in Queensland. He did so at the instigation of Rev.
John Dunmore Lang, the energetic leader of the Presbyterian
Church in Sydney. For the purpose of doing mission work among
the aborigines at Moreton Bay the British Government had promised
Dr. Lang an annual subsidy of £l5O and a further contribution of
a" pound for every pound collected. He applied to Pastor Gossner
for men, and on July 9, 1837, two ordained men, C. W. Schmidt
and C. Eipper, as well as Peter Niquet, a mason; Gottfried
Haussmann, a farmer; August Rode, a cabinetmaker; Leopold
Zillmann, a blacksmith; Wilhelm Hartenstein, a weaver; Carl
Franz, a tailor; Gottfried Wagner, a shoemaker; August 01brecht y
a shoemaker; and Leopold Doege, a gardener, were solemnly con-
secrated at the Bethlehem Church in Berlin. By June, 1838, the
party of thirty souls had arrived at Moreton Bay and settled at
Zion’s Hill, later known as German Station. Work amongst the
natives proved exceedingly difficult and there was great hardship,
especially as the little colony was forced to maintain itself. In the
years 1843-44 a second party was sent by Gossner, namely, Aug.
Richter, Job. Herrmann, Wilhelm- Gericke, and C. Gerler. The his-
tory of this mission will be told in Part 11. It suffices to say that
the missionary endeavors proved abortive. The ordained men left
the station. The laymen, at least for a time being, turned to tilling
the soil. Later many of them became pastors, and administered


to the spiritual needs of the ever increasing number of German
immigrants. That is the reason why the Zion’s Hill mission must-
have a place in the history of the Lutheran Church in Queensland..
Of particular importance for the development of the Lutheran
Church was the arrival of Pastor Schirmeister in 1857. Sent first
as a missionary to Chatham Island, east of New Zealand, he later
repaired to the mission station of Zion’s Hill, and then, in order to
work amongst the neglected German immigrants, he settled in the
growing town of Brisbane, where in 1858 he founded the St.
Andrew’s congregation, still extant.
This work amongst the new arrivals was necessary, as in 1859
some 2,000 of a total population of 30,000 were Germans. Organized
German immigration, however, took place between the years 1862-
72. Settlements were founded around Brisbane, Beenleigh, and
Ipswich in the South, at Maryborough, Bundaberg, and even Mackay
in the north. The rich Darling Downs were occupied and the
virgin forest countrv on the Logan and in the Rosewood and
Fassifern districts was made arable. As they had next to nothing
when they arrived the lot of the settlers was extremely difficult,
but through hard toil they surmounted the obstacles which faced
them and slowly worked their way to prosperity by means of in-
tensive agriculture, growing maize, sugar cane, bananas, and pine-
apples on their small plots, so that it was said: ‘‘The German’
settlers are the best in Queensland.”
Amongst these immigrants were many staunch churchmen.
Wherever they settled they built a little wooden church, thus pro-
viding a definite centre for their religious life. But each congre-
gation was left to itself. There were no leaders to organize the*
activity of the congregations, and so each congregation had to
depend on its own resources for securing a pastor. Throughout
the history of the Queensland Church the most urgent question was,
where to get pastors.
The work of Pastor Schirmeister has already been touched on.
This untiring pastor travelled not only to Ipswdch, but his pastoral
zeal took him as far afield as Toowoomba. In 1863 Gossner sent
Pastor Anger to be his assistant. He was placed in charge of the-
newly founded St. Paul’s congregation at Toowoomba. To the
great disappointment of the congregation he soon had to relinquish*
his post. A valuable addition was Pastor Heiner. He bailed from
the Prussian Union Church and was induced to come to Queensland
by a German doctor at Ipswich. Heiner became the founder of
many a congregation. In the meantime. Haussmann, a Gossner lay
missionary, whom Pastor Goethe had called to Victoria (see
Chapter 9), returned to Queensland. In 1862 he founded the-
Nazareth congregation in South Brisbane and extended his activi-
ties to the north, as far as Maryborough and Rockhampton. Re-


membering the purpose for which originally he came to Queens-
land, he later established a mission station near Beenleigh in the
Logan district, and made another attempt at bringing the gospel to
the aborigines. He appealed to Gossner for men, and in the same
year Gottfried Hampe, Friedrich Copas, Theodor Langebecker,
Wilhelm Burghardt, Wilhelm Guhr, David Pfrunder, and Hermann
Mix arrived in Queensland. All hut the last two became pastors.
Whereas Schirmeister and Heiner worked along positive
Lutheran lines, this cannot be said of Haussmann and others. The
Logan district, the centre of Haussmann’s missionary efforts, soon
became also a centre of church activities. A small band of strict
Lutherans, who hailed from the same Lutheran movement from
which the South Australian Lutherans came, had settled in this
district. The soul of the party was an elder, G. J. Schneider, under
whose firm guidance an active church life developed. Although
occasionally served by Haussmann, they wanted a Lutheran pastor,
and so in 1867 they applied to Pastor Auricht of South Australia
for a pastor. He made available to them Pastor Hellmuth, who
arrived in the following year. During his ministry a larger church
was built at Bethania and two smaller congregations were added
to the parish. He was succeeded by Pastor Eberhard of America,
whose ministry lasted only a short time, as he attempted to introduce
Romish practices.
Thus there were in the Logan district two distinct trends side
by side, a factor of great importance for the development of the
Church in Queensland —the one was soundly Lutheran, the other
indifferent to the Confessions. A similar position arose in most
oL the German settlements in Queensland.
This fact alone, however, does not warrant the almost inde-
scribable confusion which the history of the Lutheran Church in
Queensland presents. Numerous churches were built from the
plentiful timber, but they were not centrally controlled and Ger-
man individualism manifested itself in frequent schisms over trivial
matters. Thus churches sprang up like mushrooms, and it was no
uncommon sight to see two or three Lutheran churches in one
locality. Moreover, the shortage of pastors, too, permitted many
sectarian abuses to enter the Church. Laymen preached and even
women offered prayer in the services. It was also detrimental to
the welfare of the Church that pastors who were unworthy of the
position offered their services. In these circumstances it is not
surprising that most of the Gossner men, who had come out as lay
missionaries, with few exceptions entered the ministry. Much
irregularity, contrary to good church order, happened in this con-
nection. Some of them took up w r ork in the ministry without
ordination. Others were ordained by such as themselves had


entered the ministry in an irregular way. Lutheran consciousness
was hardly to be found amongst these men. On one occasion one
of these ‘-Lutheran” pastors, conjointly with a Baptist preacher*
ordained an aspirant to the ministry in the Lutheran Church! But
it cannot be denied that on the whole these men did valuable work.
Judging them by their fruits, the founding of congregations, the
spiritual life engendered, it is evident that they were mostly true
servants of their Lord. At the same time it was highly necessary
that a regular source for securing pastors was opened. It happened
in this way. Pastor Goessling, who hailed from Hermannsburg in
Germany, and who had worked in the southern states of Australia,
had become the pastor of the parish of Kirchheim. Through his
instrumentality the mission seminary at Hermannsburg consented
to supply pastors to the Lutheran Church in Queensland. On
March 12, 1883, four graduates of that institution landed at Bris-
bane, They were G. Heuer, C. Prenzler, Joachim Koehnke, and
Joh. Koehnke. The connections of Pastor Haussmann with the
Victoria Synod, which obtained its pastors from Basel, caused other
congregations in Queensland to turn to that institution. The first
graduate from Basel to come to Queensland was Pastor Maier. He
arrived as early 'as 1877. His first charge was German Station.
Later he became pastor at Charters Towers.
So far there was no organized church in Queensland. The pros-
pects for forming one were not bright. Fully trained men and
such as had no training, strict Lutherans and men who were indif-
ferent to the Lutheran Confessions, would these ever combine to
form one church? The need, however, of bringing order out of
chaos and of forming a synod made itself felt time and again,
especially as various sects, for instance, German Baptists, made
many converts among the Lutherans. But the numerous attempts
made at pastors’ conferences proved a failure. Pastors Schir-
meister, Hellmuth, Goessling, and Heiner were positive Lutherans,
but the others feared the formation of any organization which
would bind them to observe definite Lutheran principles. Never-
theless, in 1879, Pastors Schirmeister, Heiner, Maier, Goessling,
and Eberhard decided to unite on the basis of the Lutheran Con-
fessions and to support one another. The arrival of the pastors
from Hermannsburg strengthened the will for unity and organiza-
tion. In 1883 Schirmeister invited all the pastors to attend a con-
ference. Only half of them appeared. Still it was decided to form
a synod to be called “The Evangelical Lutheran §ynod of Queens-
land,” and accordingly a constitution was drawn up. In the mean-
time Pastor Sueltmann had become the successor of Pastor Eber-
hard. Sueltmann was a pastor of the Hanoverian Free Church
and for a time a lecturer at the mission seminary at Hermannsburg.


He was not only a positive Lutheran, but also a wise and experi-
enced man. After his arrival the constitution of the proposed
synod was once more revised (1885). It was then left to Schir-
meister and Sueltmann to appoint the time and place for the estab-
lishment of a united synod.
That this did not eventuate can be put down to the fact that
Pastor Herlitz now appeared on the scene. He attracted especially
those pastors who did not want to bind themselves by any con-
fessional ties and who had absented themselves from all previous
attempts at union. But, according to his own statement, he induced
also others to separate from the Hermannsburg pastors, namely,
Pastors Schirmeister and Heiner. He encouraged them to proceed
with the establishment of a synod. This eventuated in 1885,
when the pastors Schirmeister, Heiner, Maier, Langebecker,
■Copas, and Haussmann, formed The Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland. The first synod was held at North
Brisbane on September 16. Schirmeister was elected president and
Heiner secretary. Strangely enough seven pastors who had signed
the first proposed constitution of 1883 were neither notified of the
turn of events nor invited to attend the synod. They were pre-
cisely those pastors who by their strict Lutheran positions had
aroused the antipathy of the unconfessional group. Just these “Old
Lutherans” as they were called were not wanted in this synod. Nor
did these pastors who had thus, been ignored join up later as per-
haps had been hoped. For on August 5, 1885, at the old Danish
Lutheran church at South Brisbane the following eight pastors, A.
Sueltmann, G. Hellmuth, J. F. Goessling, C. Prenzler, G. Heuer,
J. Koehnke, as well as the Danes, J. C. Petersen and A. D. Hansen,
together with their congregations, formed themselves into the
Linked German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
The general “superintendent” was Pastor Sueltmann, the “superin-
tendent” of the Danish section Pastor Petersen, and Pastor Koehnke
was the secretary.
Thus instead of the one synod so long hoped for, there were now
two synods. This division was a source of constant friction. The
need for pastors was accentuated, for where one synod established
a church, the other followed. Congregations changed readily from
one synod to another. Such changes were never accentuated by
faithfulness to doctrine, but by financial or even personal motives.
Indeed, no synod was certain of its continued existence. In twenty-
five years twelve congregations left the German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod and twenty-three joined it. South Brisbane, which
will serve as an example, in 1891 grew dissatisfied with its pastor
(Egen) and severed its connection with the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod, and in 1897, under Pastor Becker, joined the United German


and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod. Many more similar examples
could be adduced.
Two attempts to unite the two synods failed. The hist, in lo95,,
was made by the German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod on the
motion of Pastors Sueltmann and Becker, hut personal animosity
against these two stood in the way of a common conference. Becker
had for a time studied at the Berlin University, but had not qualified
for the ministry. Nevertheless, he succeeded in getting into office.
He was ordained by Pastor Sueltmann for the South Brisbane con-
gregation. Becker had deprived the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
of its South Brisbane congregation. A violent attack followed
by Pastor Herlitz in the “Christenbote,*’ and Pastors Becker and
Sueltmann replied. To make matters worse Becker published a
pamphlet, “Contributions to the History of the Lutheran Church
in Queensland,” to which Pastor Frank replied with Ihe Lutheian
Church of Queensland before the Tribunal of Pastor Becker,.
F.B.U.” (These letters Becker added to his name. They stand for,
Fellow Berlin University, but do not represent a university degree.
Pastor Frank used them ironically).
A second attempt at union was made in 1908-9. This time
the Evangelical. Lutheran Synod took the initiative. "But the
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod was in no great hurry,
as not only Leidig’s Immanuel Synod, but also the E.L.S.A. a.a.C.
of South Australia were courting it. However, at a common ses-
sion of both Church Councils in October, 1909, unity of doctrine
was attained, and even a common source from which pastors could
be called agreed upon. But the stumbling block proved to be the
connection of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland with
the General Synod. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod would not
sever its connection with the General Synod, although it was of
less value than unity with its Queensland sister synod.
How necessary a united synod in Queensland was is shown by
the inroads which that active sect, the Apostolical Church, made
upon the Lutheran congregations. Its leader w r as F. Niemeyer, a
farmer, who had settled at Hatton Vale, and its favorite doctrine
the speedy return of our Lord to take to Himself the 144,000 sealed
believers, see Rev. 7 and 14*. Niemeyer s influence was unique,
and as the German language and customs w r ere rigidly maintained,
many Lutherans were won over.
Although the Danish section of the United German and Scan-
dinavian Synod seceded after five years, due chiefly to differences
of nationality and language, the synod retained its old name. How-
ever, it keenly felt its isolation. Many of its pastors inclined to
the E.L.S.A. It was only the active opposition of Pastor Sueltmann
which prevented the synod from joining the E.L.S.A. Since the
Church’Council of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran


Synod mediated a call from its Highfields parish to Pastor Backen
of the E.L.S.A., it had only itself to blame that the E.L.S.A. gained
a footing in Queensland. The result was that now there were three
Lutheran synods in Queensland. Negotiations between the United
German and Scandinavian Synod and the E.L.S.A. were carried on
frequently, and it seemed as if the former were heading towards
the E.L.S.A. Pastors of both synods were present at the
fifth jubilee of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod. Discussions again took place. Pastor Darsow of the
E.L.S.A. was in attendance. He had been invited by Pastor
Goessling just before. Darsow had been present at a meeting of
Goessling’s parish at which it was decided to link up with the
E.L.S.A. At the jubilee celebrations Goessling said not a word of
his intentions, although he had written resignations of himself and
of his parish in his pocket. On his return journey he posted them
at Brisbane, so that on the following day the officials of the synod
became aware of the faithless transaction. The result of the whole
affair was that synod turned more and more towards the Immanuel
Synod.
The problem of securing additional pastors was proving a
pressing one, so several missionaries of Lutheran mission stations
entered the local ministry. Missionary Doblies, FlierPs companion
in New' Guinea in 1886, returned, and later took charge of the
South Brisbane congregation. Hoerlein, missionary at Bloomfield,
accepted a call to Queensland. Mohr, a rolling stone, became
pastor in Douglas. In Missionary Krause the congregation of
Mackay received an energetic shepherd. Missionary Poland of
Hope Valley assumed the pastorate of Ipswich and later of Doug-
las. But the chief centre from which pastors were drawn w 7 as the
Hanoverian “Gotteskasten.” Pastors sent out were: J. Thun.
A. Hartmann, G. Fischer (Australian born). C. F. Schmidt,
after migrating from Germany, returned to receive a theological
training at Hermannsburg. In 1886 he came back to Australia
and took charge of the pastorates of Maryborough and of Bunda-
berg. In 1914 young Pastor Fuhlbohm returned after being trained
at Hermannsburg and in America. His father, Pastor Fuhlbohm,
together with Pastor Hoefner, was expelled from the E.L.S.A. and
had come to Queensland, see chapter 18.
Of great importance to the synod, to the whole Australian
Lutheran Church, and to the mission was the entry of F. Otto
Theile into Queensland as pastor of the German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod. Pastor Theile, Leidig’s first pupil at Immanuel
College, Point Pass, had completed his theological studies at
NeuendeUelsau. On his return in 1901, the parish of Bethania had
become vacant and it anplied. once before, to Pastor Auricht
in South Australia. Leidig and Auricht had no hesitation in send-


ing Theile to Queensland. He soon became secretary of the synod
and strove to bring that synod into line with the Kavel-Auricht-
Leidig synod. But the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod was slow to make a move. Others were also seeking to
negotiate. At that time the congregation of Mackay in the
far north was seeking a pastor. An appeal was sent to the
Immanuel Synod. It replied that it could help, but wished the
relationship of the two synods to be regulated beforehand.
In order to come to an amicable understanding, President
Leidig, together with Pastor Loehe, travelled to Queensland. At
Bethania on April 12-13, 1910, an important conference was held
with the pastors of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod. After exhaustive doctrinal discussions it was unanimously
resolved to place before the respective synods the motion “that a
Church Federation be formed/’ The Queensland synod of October
17, 1910, gave its assent and likewise the Immanuel Synod at its
Gruenberg convention in 1911, and so the first step towards the
establishment of the U.E.L.C.A. was taken. The two synods worked
hand in hand and, what was more, this Church Federation was a
powerful invitation to other Lutheran synods to join it.
Below are given some of the chief points of the constitution of
the Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation in Australia:—
11. —Confession: The Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation ac-
cepts the canonical books of the Old and New Testaments as the
Word of God and also accepts the Confessions of the Evangelical
Lutheran Church of 1580 known as the Book of Concord.
111. —Purpose and Aims: Outward expressions of the unity in
spirit between the two synods; mutual support in faith and confes-
sion; promotion of unity in doctrine and practice; common activity
in pursuit of common aims; union of all Lutheran synods in Australia
into one Australian Lutheran Church.
VII. —We hold all the Symbolical Books, as contained in the Book
of Concord, to be the unadulterated presentation and explanation of
the Word of God and the rule and norm of doctrine.
As through these Symbolical Books the recognized divine truth
has been carefully laid down they should also serve us as' a defence
against those false doctrines which in our own time are increasing
and spreading. Our synods accept the Confessions of the Lutheran
Church in their entirety because, according to our conviction, they
agree with the Word of God. We protest against that mode of
expression used also in this country that the above mentioned Con-
fessions are acceptable in so far as they agree with the Word
of God. This amounts to making oneself judge and master over the
Confessions and claiming the right to disregard that which does not
appeal to one and to accept only that which accords with one’s own
opinion.
We look upon these Confessions not as a law of faith, but as that
which they are called “Confessions” of faith, by which we confess
and express the faith of Holy Writ or the Scriptural truth. The
Confessions are to us the echo of the pure Word of God.
Although in our Lutheran Confessions all fundamental doctrines


.are fully and clearly explained (and this applies particularly to those
parts which concern our salvation), yet we hold that they do not
•cast full light on all parts of the Scriptures, particularly on those
dark passages which deal with the future of the Kingdom of God.
. t When due to the activity of the Lord in His Church more light
will be thrown on such dark passages, then our Confessions, too,
will have to be extended. It is. nevertheless, a matter of course that
such addition can be made only on the basis of the fundamental doc-
trines, and without detriment to the doctrines of the present Con-
fessions 1 .
At the time of union the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod consisted of 3,000 communicants, fourteen pastors,
thirty congregations. In seven Christian day schools 362 children
were instructed once a week and in the thirteen Sunday schools
411 children.
The connection between the two synods was not merely one on
paper. There were no secret suspicions of each other, and each
was represented at each other’s synods. The two were agreed and
could now well walk together.
The Queensland branch of the Church Federation benefited par-
ticularly through this Federation. Pastor Schmetzer was sent to
Mackay, and the three Pastors Reuther, graduates of Point Pass
and Neuendettelsau, being bilingual, infused new life into the
synod. Since 1911 the wise Pastor Heuer had the synodical reins
in firm hands. And now the United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod, inwardly strengthened, approached the trials of
the terrible World War and the post-war period.


For my brethren and companions’
sakes, I will say, Peace be within
thee. Psalm CXXII, 8.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN.
The Evangelical Lutheran General Synod , consisting of the Lutheran
Synod of Victoria , the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. in South Australia,
and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland , under the leader-
ship of President Herlitz , follows its quiet course during the next
three decades (1885-1914).
SOON after the separation in 1884 the General Synod constituted
itself anew, and formed one of the major Lutheran bodies in
Australia, till it'was merged in the Church Federation, and later,
in the U.E.L.C.A., Queensland soon made good the losses sustained
in South Australia, when the Lutheran Synod of Queensland joined
the General Synod (1890). The General Synod formed a well-
organized, harmonious unit, held together by the commanding
personality of Herlitz. Besides, its pastors consisted more and
more of graduates of the Basel seminary, men who, on the
whole, were of one mind and one spirit and united in brotherly
love. The fact that their Lutheran position was again and
again assailed by the other Lutheran bodies in Australia, only
served to draw them closer to one another. Wherever the bond
of unity was becoming loose, or a union with the a other side”
was desired, President Herlitz was always on the spot, per-
sonally, or in writing, to guard his General Synod. Only once
did he fail to prevent a schism when, towards the end of this period,
a number of pastors of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens
land seceded to form the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Aus-
tralasia.
The South Australian branch of the General Synod, the
Immanuel Synod a.a.G. consisted of the congregations under the
care of Pastors Niquet, Reusch, Krause, and Braun. After Krause’s
death, his Lobethal congregation united with Hahndorf to form a
parish. For fifty-two years (till 1937) Pastor Braun labored in this
parish. He soon was elected to the presidency of his synod, later


on for life. In 1890 Hahndorf built a church of real architectural
beauty.
The newly-formed congregations at Point Pass and Robertstown
both built new churches. With the organization of further con-
gregations a parish was formed, and was first served by Pastor
Drauz, the next arrival from Basel. A severe throat disease brought
his work to an early close (1897). Thereupon Pastor Siegle, sta-
tioned first at Caltowie and other northern congregations, took over
the Point Pass parish. When he settled on his farm on the so-
called “West Coast’' and from there attended to the flocks of his
synod in that district, Pastor Michel was installed at Point Pass,
and after his return to Germany, Pastor Zwar. The latter, Aus-
tralian-born, had received his training at Basel, and had already
served as a missionary on the Gold Coast in Africa. South of Point
Pass, with Eudunda as the centre, a new parish was formed (1900)
whose first pastor was K. Gutekunst. In 1913 he became the suc-
cessor to Pastor Herlitz in Melbourne. A change of pastors was
effected in the Light’s Pass parish in 1886, when the aged Pastor
Niquet, after living to see the new Immanuel Church erected, re-
tired to Adelaide at the age of 77. His place was taken by Pastor
Spanagel (1887-1900). Niquet, however, still continued to serve
the distant congregations of Blyth and Hoyleton, which had been
in his charge since 1870. In 1887 he had the pleasure of dedicat-
ing a bell at Blyth presented by the German Kaiser. He died
(1903) at the ripe age of 91. He was a descendant of a noble
Huguenot family, which in 1685 had emigrated from France when
the Edict of Tolerance towards the Protestants was revoked. He
was a true man of prayer and was instrumental in bringing about
a spiritual revival in his and neighboring parishes. After 30 years
of faithful service in the Tanunda parish. Pastor Reusch, for many
years a sick man, passed away in 1897, only 54 years of age. The
concourse of about 2,000 people at his burial testified to the love
and esteem in which he was held. His successor, Pastor Kaestner,
came from the Lutheran mission seminary at Leipzig, because In-
spector Oehler of Basel would not submit the confessional condi-
tions to the candidates for Australia. After ten years (1908) Pastor
Kaestner met with a fatal accident through a collision of vehicles.
The next pastor was Anton Hiller, a son of the Murtoa manse, and
formerly a Basel missionary. He was succeeded in 1911 by
Richard Held, at that time pastor at Doncaster, Victoria.
The St. Stephen’s congregation at Adelaide, which since its
inception at Klemzig was an independent congregation, joined the
Immanuel Synod a.a.G. in 1893. Upon Pastor Borgelt’s death in
1865. an elder, Christian Maschmedt, became pastor till 1891. In
the latter years he was ably assisted by K. Bechtel, also an elder,


Pastor Maschmedt was ordained and installed by pastors of the
Congregational Church. Services in Adelaide were first held in a
Baptist church. After a schism, caused by the publication of
Maschmedt’s hymn-book, containing in the preface peculiar views
on astronomy, his followers built St. Stephen’s in Pirie Street
(1862). Pastors Auricht and Rechner assisted in the dedication.
In 1878 the Klemzig congregation transferred to St. Stephen’s.
Maschmedt also took over the congregation at Hope Valley, eight
miles away. A church was built there in 1885, but sold in 1906,
whereupon the congregation disintegrated. He also served con-
gregations at Gawler, Stockwell, Eudunda, and Robertstown. After
his death in 1892 the aged Pastpr Niquet took care of St. Stephen’s
for a while. After joining the synod, the congregation was served
by Pastor Hegelau, the itinerant pastor in Victoria. Upon his de-
parture in 1896, the congregation had the good fortune to gain the
services of a very capable man, Pastor Eitel, Phil.D. of Tuebingen,
Germany. For thirty years head of a board of public education
in China, he was advised to seek a drier climate. Overwhelmed
with effusive expressions of thanks by the Chinese Government he
came to Adelaide, and was installed by President Braun (1897).
Soon the old church proved too small. Prior to building a new
church the broadminded Dr. Eitel opened negotiations with the
Bethlehem congregation (E.L.S.A.) and its pastor (Dorsch) with
a view to uniting the two Lutheran congregations in Adelaide.
They agreed on only one point, namely, that the Bethlehem con-
gregation had once left St. Stephen’s. The former would not unite
unless the St. Stephen’s Church agreed to join the E.L.S.A. St.
Stephen’s finally declared: “We must reject the specific practice
of the Australian Synod as a system of man-made laws, going be-
yond Holy Scriptures and the Symbolical Books, and setting aside
God’s commandments. Therefore it is impossible for us to think
of joining such a synod.” The old church was now sold for £1,200,
and a block for a new church acquired in Wakefield Street for
£9OO. The fine new church was dedicated on February 11, 1900.
Dr. Eitel introduced a more elaborate liturgy, patterned after that
of the Church of England. APer his retirement (1905) Pastor
Basedow, a South .Australian, for ten years Basel missionary in the
Cameroons, was installed as his successor, and labored till October.
1937. In 1906 the congregation numbered one hundred and
twenty communicants, and in 1912 one hundred and seventy.
Dr. Eitel never took part in synods, but on one occasion he
did cause a profound stir. It was when the Light’s Pass parish
wanted to call a pastor from Leipzig (as successor to Pastor
Spanagel) just as St. John’s in Tanunda had done. In the “Kirchen-
und Missions-Zeitung” lie published an “Open Letter to the Members


of the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. assembled at Angas Park.” He
strongly condemned the ever new separations in the name of Im-
manuel or Luther, and called his brethren to “repentance in dust
and ashes.” He pointed out that just the two parishes, Tanunda and
Light’s Pass, on account of predilection for Basel, had helped to
cause the separation of 1884, and now they would give up Basel, the
cause of separation, and call from Leipzig. If they were willing
to give up Basel, they could and should become reconciled to the
Immanuel Synod. Otherwise there would soon be a new Leipzig
synod, and then again a non-synodical party, and in the end more
disruption. Such drastic language must have had the effect of a
bombshell, especially since it came from within the synod. The
further calls from Basel prove that a new division was not desired.
The successor to Pastor Spanagel w T as Pastor Meier (1901).
The synod received a welcome addition to its ranks when in.
1907 the Moravian Brethren (Bruedergemeinde) at Bethel joined
it, and, incidentally, also the Lutheran Church. The immigration
of these people from Herrnhut, Germany, dates back to the fifties
of the previous century. Their first leader was a Brother Schon-
dorf. formerly a teacher in Russia, and an itinerant preacher in
Switzerland, who arrived in 1853. He soon transferred the
Brethren from Light’s Pass to Kapunda, where he had purchased
1,912 acres of land for £3,214. Here they built a church and a
school. After a peaceful beginning strife arose over the question
of ownership of the land. When Schondorf, ailing and deaf, gave
up the ministry, a Brother Jakobi was sent out. After him came a
theologian, Pastor Buck, but when he returned to Germany, in
1907, no further pastors were sent. The Brethren now applied for
admission to the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. and in Pastor Bemmann
received their first Lutheran pastor. For many years this congre-
gation adhered to its old customs, and to its Moravian hymnal.
Even to-day it is noted for its active missionary spirit. At that
time the synod also gathered a congregation at Lameroo in the
Pinnaroo district.
By faithful work the synod grew from about 1,800 communi-
cants in 1903 to 2,800 in 1914. It maintained three day schools,
and eight Sunday schools with 452 pupils. Synods were held
about every two years; at the last one before the Great War
expressed a desire to unite with the Immanuel Synod. They re-
solved to adopt the hymnal and the catechism (Buchrucker) of the
latter body.
The Victorian branch of the General Synod, the Victoria Synod,
practically ceased to expand in this period. One new parish was
formed at Horsham-Dimboola. The growth shown by the statistical


figures was entirely due to the formation of congregations in New
South Wales. From 1894 to 1906 the synod increased from 1,654
communicants to 2,416, or by 752, whereas in the next eight years
to 1914 by only 120. The city congregations in Victoria were
becoming considerably smaller. Church attendance in Melbourne
(1914) was reported as weak; in Ballarat the old people were
dying out, and the young were going over to the English Churches.
An English speaking home missionary was becoming necessary.
It had become the custom for the synod always to have a home
missionary in its employment, so that in case of a vacancy, a pastor
would be available. It was, however, becoming more difficult to
procure the necessary men from Basel, which needed them for its
own mission fields. Besides the confessional conditions imposed
created an unfavorable impression in Basel. Then, too, some of
the new arrivals soon left Australia again. In spite of these ex-
periences the synod in 1889 decided to adhere to the practice of
calling from Basel. Pastor Fischer arrived from Basel in 1888. At
first he was stationed in the new parish at Pleasant Hills, New
South Wales. In 1900 he took over the congregation of Horsham,
and also various home mission centres. Pastor Fischer was dis-
missed at the synod in 1906, because he was about to take up a
position in the Church of England. Pastor Bemmann, arriving in
1889, made Pleasant Hills the centre of his home mission activities.
Due to his faithful, self-sacrificing labors many a congregation
in New South Wales was organized. After Pastor von Schramm’s
death, Doncaster received a successor in Pastor Held from Basel
(1909). In 1912 he called to the Tanunda parish in place
of Pastor Hiller. Grovedale was now served by Pastor Hegelau,
late of Toowoomba. Pastor Goehner, a fellow graduate of Pastor
Held, was stationed at Pleasant Hills, when Pastor Bemmann trans-
ferred to Bethel, South Australia. Meanwhile Pastor Hampe, now
seventy-five years of age, had resigned at Dimboola. For forty-
four years this plain man had rendered pioneering service, during
the last twenty-eight years in the Wimmera district. He was suc-
ceeded by Pastor Bay. The congregation of Horsham left the Vic-
toria Synod to join the Immanuel Synod in 1895.
In New South Wales the isolated congregation of Grafton again
joined the synod in 1887, although it had nreviouslv seceded. The
reason for this secession that the Church Council refused
to ordain a certain candidate for it on the ground of unsuitability.
Pastor Schenk of Sydnev asked to look after the congregation,
but it was very seldom visited. Till his death in 1910
Fr. Doberer, r a lavman, held the congregation together by
conducting lav-services on Sundays. Much blessing rested
upon the work of this earnest, humble man. In Walla Walla, the


largest Lutheran congregation in New South Wales, Gottlob
Simp end o erf er labored as pastor since 1885. In 1888 the parish
was seventy miles long and twenty miles wide with seven con-
*regations. Very soon after the parish of Pleasant Hills was
formed as a branch of Walla Walla. The latter congregation be-
came the most flourishing congregation of the General Synod, and
was noted for its hospitality at churchly functions. At the dedi-
cation of the second church (1889) it prepared a dinner for 600
guests. In 1905 Pastor Monz arrived as assistant for Pastor Bern-
maim, but after a lew years he took over the Milbong parish in
Queensland. Pastor Goehner also left Pleasant Hills and the Aus-
tralian shores. In the meantime the new parish, Milbrulong-
Temora was formed. Its first pastor was Ernst Gutekunst. Later
(1912) Pastor Hartmann of Highfields, Queensland (German and
Scandinavian Lutheran Synod), was inducted at Milbrulong, and
Pastor Fiedler, a graduate of the mission seminary at Kropp.
Slesvig-Holstein, was placed at Temora. He served also Alee-
town and Forbes, which, however, had to be abandoned during: the
Great War.
The Victoria Synod held regular conventions, mostly in Mel-
bourne. The general synods, taking place every three years, were
held as a rally, usually in conjunction with the conventions of
the Victoria Synods. They were not truly representative. The
General Synod and its branches lacked a definite enterprise. More
than once synod thought of opening a mission of its own, but
could never summons enough courage to make a start. After the
separation (1884) the missions of the Moravian Brethren in Vic-
toria and Queensland were chiefly supported. Missionary
Hagenauer of the station Ramakyuck, and Kramer of Ebenezer,
both in Victoria, were frequent guests and speakers ?it the synods,
without being members. In 1908 the synod at Murtoa celebrated
the 50th anniveisary of Missionary Hagenauer’s ordination. Around
1890 the church elders caused a stir by demanding the right to
discuss the synodical programme on the Saturday prior to
synod. After synod rejected this demand it came up again
in a more serious form. But President Herlitz proved him-
self master of the situation, for he succeeded in having these
conferences abolished altogether. Herlitz was subjected to attacks
from without for participating in the Council of Churches. In
1893 Herlitz explained to synod that all Protestant Churches were
represented on this council in order to join in discussing the re-
ligious, moral, and social interest and welfare of the people. For
years the report on the activities of the council and the election of
representatives formed a part of the programme of synod.
In 1903 the Melbourne congregation celebrated its 50th anni-


versary. On this occasion Herlitz received from Germany the
Order of the Red Eagle, Class IV, for his untiring efforts to pre-
serve the German language and culture. He retired in 1914 at
the age of eighty from his post as pastor of Melbourne, and as
president and general president.
The third branch, the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland, came into the General Synod upon -the decision
of the former body ? s synod at Nundah (1889). It included
ihe pastors Maier (Brisbane), Langebecker (Toowoomba),
Wallat (Dugandan), J. Frank (Kirchheim), Hartwig, Berndt, and
Egen. Pastor Haussmann and his parish were members for some
years before. Gradually other pastors and their parishes also
joined. The immediate advantage of this, otherwise loose connec-
tion, was that a source from which to procure pastors was made
available, namely, the seminary at Basel. Since the union of the
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland with the General Synod
the latter was often called the “triple alliance.” This alliance was
an obstacle to healing the breach between the Lutheran synods in
Queensland. The General Synod, in session at Brisbane (1903),
resolved that if a synod, being a member of the General Synod,
desired to unite with another synod, such other synod must also
become a member of the General Synod.
The time had come for the old pioneer pastors to retire from
their labors. President Schirmeister of North Brisbane was the
first. After thirty years of faithful service in Brisbane he departed
this life at the age of seventy-three years (1887). Out of the income
from its valuable city property the congregation was able to provide
the widow with a pension of £IOO per annum. Pastor Maier at Char-
ters Towers w r as called to fill the vacancy. From 1889 to 1905,
the year of his death, Maier was president of the synod. His pre-
decessor in this office. Pastor Heiner of Ipswich, who had spent
his life caring for the German pioneers, died in 1901. On the last
day of the same year the nonagenarian, senior pastor, Haussmann,
entered his rest. In 1890, when celebrating the 50th anniversary
of his ordination, he w as still very actiev in spite of his seventy-nine
years; at the age of eighty-seven he could report that his congre-
gation was growing, and on his ninetieth birthday he received
special honors. The synod gathered at Beenleigh to celebrate with
him, and from Prussia he received the Order of the Red Eagle,
Class IV. (It arrived only after his death). Some time later he
fainted in the pulpit and after several days passed away. He can
hardly be regarded as positively Lutheran, yet his pioneering labors
and his missionary enterprise deserve recognition. Pastor Treuz of
Basel became his successor. When in 1905 Pastor Maier was
called away in the prime of life, after serving the St. Andrews’s


Church for about seventeen years, his post was temporarily filled
by his son-in-lc*w, Missionary Eugen Hiller (son of Pastor Hiller
of Murtoa). After receiving his training at Basel, he served on
the mission field in India for twelve years. After a yeai Pastoi
Treuz took over North Brisbane, and Pastor Hiller the Beenleigh
parish. Also the aged Pastor Copas of Maryborough, one of the
Gossner missionaries, entered his last rest (1906). His place was
taken by Theodor Frank, son of Pastor Frank, formerly of Dim-
boola, Victoria, since 1888, pastor of the Kirchheim parish in
Queensland. His son, missionary designate for the Basel mission
in India, was permitted to remain in Queensland, and took over
the Milbong parish (1900). He was successful in uniting three
small congregations, hitherto opposed to one another, so that
already in 1901 a new church had to be built. And when in 1903
both church and school were razed to the ground by a storm,
members of the congregation soon built them again, such was the
unity they had achieved. In 1908 Pastor Frank, jun., came to
Maryborough. Here, too, a union was effected between the two
congregations of Pastors Schmidt (BunoaUerg) and Frank. In
1908 the Sunday school consisted of one hundred and ten pupils..
The next pioneer pastor to be called home was T. F. Fangebeckei,
Toowoomba, another of the Gossner missionaries. He did a full
day’s work at St. Paul’s, Toowoomba. He began work there in
1866. On account of serious eye trouble he left Australia in 1874.
But having recovered he accepted, in the year 1883, an invitation to-
return to the charge. In 1885 he founded a: young people’s society
and soon after a missionary guild. His long and successful min-
istry came to an end with his death in 1909. For three years-
Pastor Hegelau filled the vacancy till Pastor Gutekunst from
Milbrulong, New South Wales, was called in 1912. In 1907 Pastor
Monz, who also had been in New South Wales, took over the parish
of Milbong. In addition to these the synod gained several other
pastors. Heinrich Wallatt, a lay preacher in Germany, was ex-
amined and ordained by Pastors Heiner and Maier and installed
in the new Dugandan parish in 1889. He was succeeded by Pastor
Seybold of Basel in 1905. When in 1890 the Hatton Vale parish
needed a pastor, Pastor Millatt of Tilsit, in East Prussia, a country-
man of Pastor Wallatt, was called.
The Evangelical Futheran Synod of Queensland also held annual
conventions. As a result of the way in which Pastor Egen lost
his South Brisbane congregation to Pastor Becker, the synod held
in 1891 decided that no congregation was to dismiss its pastor
without first conferring with the synod or the Church Council.
Because a congregation had joined the Wesleyans it was found de^


sir able to determine the relationship of a congregation and its
property towards the synod. Offerings for home missions were
arranged for in 1893. In 1897 a motion to permit laymen to dis-
tribute Holy Communion was rejected. The synod supported the
work of the Moravian missionaries, Hey and Ward, on the Batavia
River.
In 1909 the synod celebrated its 25th anniversary at North
Brisbane. In this connection a 44 Jubilee Booklet” was issued in
which each pastor wrote the history of his parish.
Mention must be made of two important events during this
period, the sad disruption which occurred in the Evangelical
Lutheian Synod of Queensland, and the earnest attempt at union
between the General Synod and the Church Federation. About the
yeai 1912 it became evident that some of the Queensland pastors
and their congregations believed it to be in order to belong not only
to a Lutherah Church, the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queens-
land, but also to a unionistic church, the Union Church of Prussia.
The matter came to a head when the pastors Treuz (North Bris-
bane), T. Frank (Maryborough), and Millatt (Hatton Vale) seceded
from their synod and took steps to join the Prussian Union Church.
They were soon joined by Pastors Frank, sen., and Gutekunst (Too-
woomba). They, no doubt, cherished the desire to remain in as
close a touch with the Fatherland as possible, and also to secure
for themselves the moral and financial backing of the large State
Church of Prussia. The example was set by the German congrega-
tion in the gold mining town of Charters Towers, which since 1896
was under the care of the Berlin consistory. When Pastor Maier
left the congregation around 1900, Pastor Ivan, author of “To
Australia for Faith’s Sake,” was stationed there till 1909. He was
followed by Pastor Schafhirt. When the latter left his flock in
1915, and support from Germany ceased, the congregation dis-
banded. Its valuable church property was sold for a sono- to the
Church of Christ.
The synod at Hatton Vale (1912) plainly declared that it was
impossible to belong to the Lutheran and to the unionistic State
Church at one and the same time. The synod drew up a protest
against the action of the above pastors. It was signed by the
Pastors Egen, Doblies, Hartwig, Guhr, E. Hiller and Seybold. It
reads: We the undersigned declare that, for conscientious reasons,
we disagree with joining the Prussian State Church, and emphati-
cally protest against such action. We desire to uphold the con- •
nection with the General Synod. There is no reason for separation.
The connection has been a blessing. We are firmly convinced that
for our conditions a union with a church body so far away can be
only detrimental for our future development. Finally we regard it


as our duty to remain faithful to our Evangelical Lutheran Church
in Australia, and to avoid giving offence to our sister synods, as
well as to all Lutheran Christians in Australia.”
By this defection the synod was reduced almost to one half.
The five pastors involved simply drew the consequences of a pre-
vious inner attitude towards the Lutheran Church. These five,
together with Pastor Schafhirt, now formed a new, the fourth synod
in Queensland, and, strangely enough, adopted the presumptuous
name, The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia. (This was
due to the fact that one German pastor in Samoa was a member).
As soon as the Great War broke out this svnod vanished into thin
J
air.
In the same year as the above schism the General Synod was
confronted with the question whether it should join the Church
Federation or not. Pastor Leidig, who had set his heart on uniting
the Lutheran Churches in Australia, took the initiative. The South
Australian portion of the General Synod was most, whereas the
Queensland portion was least in favor of a union. All were clear
on one point: —A union excluded calling from Basel in future.
When it became apparent that the General Synod might desist from
calling from Basel, the way was paved for a joint conference. It
took place on February 21-22, 1912, in St. Stephen’s Church, Ade-
laide. Nearly all pastors of the two Immanuel Synods were
present. The Queensland section of the Church Federation was
represented by Pastors Heuer and Theile. The Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland had sent Pastors Millatt and Frank,
sen. President Herlitz and Pastor Hiller were present from Vic-
toria. The first day afforded little hope for a union. It was natural
that Article 3 of 1874 and 1884 had to be considered. The pastors
of the Immanuel Synod demanded that Article 3 be dropped,
whereas Herlitz was determined to uphold it. The opposition of
the Immanuel Synod to Bible reading in state schools was another
obstacle against co-operation. On the second day Herlitz, on behalf
of his three synods, surprised the conference by declaring: “We
are prepared to adopt the principle that for Lutheran congrega-
tions pastors should be called only from Lutheran seminaries, be-
cause we believe it to he the right course. For the sake of unity
in the Lutheran Church of Australia we are prepared to drop Basel.
But we do not wish to be deprived of the right to call men trained
in non-Lutheran institutions, if they solemnly pledge to stand on
the same basis as we do. ’ The conference ended by Herlitz promis-
ing to submit a new formulation of the “call” paragraph. He recog-
nized that the negotiations had been conducted in the spirit of
brotherly love. A commission for conducting further negotiations
was elected. Soon after, the General Synod sent to the Immanuel


Synod, in session at Murray Bridge, a new formulation of the
“call” paragraph. In this draft the above principle was reiterated.
The desired exception to it was worded as follows: “If a candidate
from a non-Lutheran institution comes into consideration for one
of the synods belonging to the Church Federation, he shall be re-
quired to appear before a commission appointed by the respective
synod to satisfy it as to his orthodoxy.”
The Immanuel Synod found this draft too indefinite still. It
adopted the following formulation for submission to the General
Synod: “The synods constituting the Church Federation agree on
the principle that pastors for Lutheran congregations shall be called
only from such institutions concerning whose Lutheran character
the Church Federation holds a unanimous conviction. If theologi-
cally trained men come voluntarily and desire an office in a synod
belonging to the Church Federation, they shall submit to a collo-
quium orthodoxiae to be held by a commission appointed by the
Church Federation.”
The General Synod in turn rejected this formulation. It made
the union conditional on the acceptance of its above draft. Upon
Leidig s remonstration, when he explained certain aspects of the
Immanuel Synod s draft, Herlitz replied that, only by resolution
of the General Synod, could the former draft be altered. This,
however, would not be till September, 1914. In the meantime
another joint conference took place at Murtoa (April, 1913). It
agreed that all calls should go through the respective presidents to
the Lutherische Gotteskasten. ’ For some time a considerable
minority of the Immanuel Synod was making itself felt, demanding
that negotiations for union should continue only under the condi-
tion that the General Synod give up its standpoint in reference to
Article 3, not for utilitarian reasons, but out of conviction, that
the utilitarian principle does not justify a church union. The stand
taken by the above minority certainly had a salutary effect. The
Appila Svnod (March, 1914) empowered the pastors to continue
the negotiations, as soon as the General Synod should declare that
Article 3 has been dropped.
The Church Federation and the General Synod, not yet united,
but drawn much closer together, now had to pass through the
Great War and the post-war period. Seven years later (1921) the
desired goal was reached after God in His school had taught the
Australian Lutherans many a lesson.


“Then Samuel took a stone, and
set it between Mizpeh and Shen,
and called the name of it Ebenezer,
saying. Hitherto hath the the Lord
helped us.” Samuel VII, 12.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation of Australia and the
General Synod (together with the other Australian Lutheran bodies)
harassed by hatred , slander, and war-time laws , survive this most
anxious period of their history and unite to form the United Evan-
gelical Lutheran Church in Australia, or U.E.L.C.A. (1914-1921).
contents of this chapter deal with the worst but also the best
experiences of the Lutheran Church in Australia. First, there
was fear for the future; then the Lutheran Church bells rang for
the proclamation of peace —a peace, however, that terrified rather
than relieved; but finally a great ioy was in store for the Australian
Lutheran Church. After the storm the welcome sun appeared—
the “U.E.L.C.A.” was founded.
Very reluctantly does the historian go back to the horrible years
of the Great War. Before long, and in the process of time more
increasingly, the Lutheran people were made to feel that they were
looked upon not as Australians, but as hostile Germans. The
daily press deliberately added fuel to the fire of hatred burn-
ing so fiercely against Church, school, and mission. All for-
mer recognition of the loyalty and die great pioneering work of
the German Lutherans was now forgotten. Hatred and spite,
calumny and agitation against these people were allowed free
course. Discredited and defenceless they had become. For six
years neither synods nor pastors’ conferences could be held, and
even smaller meetings were forbidden. Danger of internment hung
over the heads of pastors. In Queensland eight of them were
actuallv interned for considerable periods. Two of these were
deported after the War, probably because they were not naturalized.
The severest blow, in South Australia at least, was the closing
of the Lutheran day schools. Step by step the Government took
measures against them. Despite repeated representations on the


part of pastors and laymen- —and in these representations all
Lutheran synods united—the schools were closed by an Act of
Parliament on June 30, 1917. This was felt not only as a decided
injustice, but a blow at the very roots of the Church. In Queens-
land, pastors were deprived of the use of that one day per week
which had previously been granted them for religious instruction;
confirmation instructions now had to be confined to Saturdays.
Even the church buildings themselves suffered greatly during
the War. The windows of many were broken; some churches were
defiled; others were burnt (Edithburgh and Forster in South Aus-
tralia; Bendigo in Victoria —the latter as late as 1925).
The work connected with the church papers became particu-
larly difficult when in 1918 their publication in the German lan-
guage was forbidden. The “Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung” became
the “Church and Mission News,'’ and the “Christenbote” became
“The Pilgrim.” The old folk, not well acquainted with the Eng*
lish language, sadly missed their German papers. Furthermore,
most of the German names of places (in most cases historical)
were abolished and others substituted. Langmeil became Bilyarra,
Hahndorf —Ambleside, Klemzig—Gaza, Gnadenfrei—Marananga,
Gruenberg—Karalta, Neukirch —Dimchurch, the Kaiserstuhl —
Mount Kitchener, Engelsburg—Kalbar, Kirchheim, Minden—
Frenchtown. Only after attempts extending over many years were
some of the German names restored in 1936 (South Australian
centenary), namely, Hahndorf, Lobethal, and Klemfcig.
All this oppression was not in any way deserved by the Aus-
tralian Lutherans. There were no citizens more loyal than they.
As Christians and Lutherans they well knew what they owed to
“the powers that be.” They were most industrious and peaceable
citizens and most obedient. Instead of retaliating they returned
good for evil, loyally, liberally giving of their substance to alleviate
the distress caused by the War. Congregations everywhere con-
tributed to the “Lutheran Relief Fund” established for this purpose.
Numbers of Lutheran young men left Australia’s shores to fight
against the land of their fathers, believing that to be their duty.
Their names are inscribed on many honor rolls throughout Aus-
tralia.
Despite all these difficulties and trials, however, the Church
was not appreciably weakened, except in the town or city congre-
gations in Victoria and Queensland. (In South Brisbane twenty-
eight families were lost). The Immanuel Synod which met again
in 1920 rejoiced in the fact that it had suffered little loss.
This was no doubt due to the fact that its membership was
chiefly rural with a strong church tradition and organization.
Although the 400 th anniversary of the Reformation had


to be celebrated quietly, although some had cravenly denied
their faith and some had even cast away the names of their
fathers, the Church was still able to confess joyfully: “Hitherto
hath the Lord helped us.” The presidents of the synods bore
the heaviest burdens of all, none more so than Pastor Leidig.
Various outposts of the Church (such as the work in Western Aus-
tralia and Tasmania) had to be given up owing to lack of funds.
That, however, did not solve all Leidig’s troubles. The Church,
its mission work and college, had to be maintained without the
help of synod conventions. The treasuries were frequently empty,
and Leidig visited one congregation after another, encouraging
especially the sisters of the Church to introduce the Home Collect-
ing Box. The results were good, from £l5O-£l9O per year were
collected. The college at Point Pass, although also put on the list
•of schools to be closed, was, thank God, eventually not interfered
with. But from 1917-18 Leidig, in spite of all his strength, was a
broken man. Help was sought, but in vain, and Pastor Schmetzer
of Mackay (Queensland) became his assistant. In his office as
president, Leidig received valuable assistance from Pastors Loehe,
the vice-president, and Stolz. During this anxious time the synod lost
its chairman of the Mission Board, Pastor Kaibel, who passed
away on September 26, 1918. Pastor Stolz took his place.
The Immanuel Synod a.a.G. had cause for rejoicing when
President Braun, who was in Germany at the outbreak of war, was
•eventually able to return to Australia. In the Victoria Synod Pastor
Hiller of Murtoa resigned from the active ministry and presidency
of synod, after having celebrated the 50th anniversary of his
■ordination. Special permission to hold a conference of pastors
and members of the Church Council had to be obtained from the
Government, and at this conference (1917) Pastor Gutekunst (Mel-
bourne) was chosen as president. The aged Pastor Herlitz died
in 1920 and was buried quietly; the old hatred against the Germans
was still very strong. Herlitz’s work in the Australian Lutheran
Church was deserving of a more representative gathering at his
graveside. In the Queensland synods little change took place in
these years. Pastor Heuer filled the office of president in the Ger-
man and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod, and Eugen Hiller, pastor
at Beenleigh, the corresponding position in the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland. These matters may seem of little importance
to those who did not experience them, hut for those concerned they
■were signs of the faithfulness of God, who helped them to fill the
gaps again and again, and so to retain what they had. His mercies,
however, - did not end there. As troubles always “work together
for good to them that love God,” so the years of the War were not
without ■ blessings • for the Church. Pastors from Basel, Neuen-


dettelsau, and other theological institutions in Germany were now
not allowed to come to Australia. In future, furthermore, only
men capable of both the German and the English languages could
he considered. This meant that only two courses were possible: (1)
To draw on America for pastors (or to have them trained
there), or (2) the Church to train them itself, which was the
most natural course to take. For the latter course, however, a union
of the Church Federation and the General Synod was necessary*
God’s time had come. And when that has come, nothing is im-
possible.
On April 20, 1920, the momentous conference of the General
Synod was held at Tanunda, at which it was decided to join the
Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation of Australia. The follow-
ing resolutions were carried:—
“We subscribe faithfully to the Confessions of our Evangelical
Lutheran Church, because in them, as in no other, the true doc-
trine of Christian faith is expressed. We, therefore, substitute for
Article 3 the following:—-
(1) As convinced Lutherans we declare: Lutheran pulpits for
Lutheran pastors; Lutheran altars for Lutheran communi-
cants. Exceptions are left to the conscience of the individual.
(2) Pastors are to be called only from those institutions of whose
Lutheran character the Church Federation holds a unani-
mous conviction.”
On June 24, 1920, a special convention of the Immanuel Synod
was held at Langmeil. The following resolution, drafted by the
ministry, was unanimously carried:—
“Synod rejoices in the attitude of the General Synod not only to-
wards" the Confessions of our Evangelical Lutheran Church, but also
towards the Evangelical Lutheran Church Federation, and expresses
its willingness to recommend the admission of the General Synod
into the Federation Concerning the clause, ‘Exceptions are
to be left to the conscience of the individual,* we take for granted
that the conscience of a servant of the Lutheran Church is one that
is enlightened by God’s' Word and bound to the Confessions of his
Church, inasmuch as in his ordination he has pledged himself not to
his conscience, but with his conscience to the Confessions of his
Church. We are all the more justified in taking this view since the
Presidents Braun and Gutekunst requested that the mention of
exceptions should not be understood as a loophole for unionistic prac-
tices. With reference to emergency Communion, the Church Federa-
tion adopts no other attitude than that taken by the Lutheran Church
of all times.”
At a special pastors’ conference of the Church Federation held
October 13-14, 1920, at St. Stephen’s Church, Adelaide, the twenty-
two pastors present were able to bring to a conclusion the prelimin-
ary discussions concerning union. Although the Evangelical Lutheran
Synod of Queensland preferred to wait for further developments, the
three presidents, Braun (General Synod), Leidig (Immanuel
Synod), Heuer (United German and Scandinavian Lutheran


Synod), were able to announce that the admission of the General
Synod to the Church Federation was an accomplished and welcome
fact. Also many practical questions were settled. Foremost among
these was that of the training of pastors in Australia, for the pur-
poses of which a seminary was to be established in Tanunda with
Pastor Loehe of Natimuk, Victoria, as principal. The amalgama-
tion of the church papers and book depots was also decided upon.
Of outstanding importance was the decision to co-operate with the
Synod of lowa, U.S.A., in carrying on the Lutheran missions of
New Guinea.
It was soon seen, however, that federation was not enough. All
synodical boundaries were ultimately put aside and amalgamation
was achieved. This step was hastened by the visit of F. Richter,
D.D., President General of the lowa Synod, U.S.A., who was in
Australia at this time in connection with the taking over of the
New Guinea missions by the American and Australian Lutheran
Churches. It was recognized by all that a single united church
body could approach the Government with more prospect of suc-
cess than a loose federation of synods.
The most important and the last conference of the Victoria
Synod (its 60th) met at Murtoa, February 28, 1921. Never before
had the Victoria Synod faced such weighty problems—the proposal
of the pastors’ conference for an amalgamation of all federated
synods, the great mission undertaking, and the proposed purchase
of Angas College. Synod decided unanimously to propose to the
other partners the amalgamation of the federated synods. The two
Immanuel Synods of South Australia held their respective con-
ventions at Gruenberg (where the separation of 1884 had taken
place) and at Ebenezer nearby. Dr. Richter and the delegations
from Queensland, New South Wales, and Victoria were present.
When these big questions were discussed at these conferences, a
unanimous and joyful decision was reached, adopting Victoria’s
proposals and thereby closing their separate existence. Messengers
hurried from the one place to the other to announce the joyous
tidings. Both synods were invited to come together for the first
joint conference at Ebenezer on the following day.
It is Tuesday, the 21st day of March, 1921, a day bathed in
sunshine. Around the church at Ebenezer there still stand Aus-
tralian pine trees, such as are largely used by Lutherans as Christ-
mas trees. The church pews are placed in position in the open.
The church would never hold the multitude expected. The synod
is not yet fully representative, hut the delegates from beyond South
Australia carry weight, F. 0. Theile and A. Hiller from Queens-
land, Simpfendoerder from Walla Walla, New South Wales,
Gutekunst and Jericho and others from Victoria, the two officers of


the Church Federation, Loehe and Siegle, Dr. Richter from U.S.A..
and George, a Barmen missionary from New Guinea. There is
another man who dare not he overlooked, the tall man with the
tottering gait and faraway look, the man who this day would take
the foremost place had the Lord not led him from activity into
passivity, F. Leidig. Among men he did the most to bring the
various synods together. He is still able quietly to rejoice that
the Lord has granted him to see this day.
Ihe devotions are over. Under the experienced leadership of
Dr. Richter the necessary resolutions are passed in quick succession
and the
UNITED EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH IN AUSTRALIA
with its four districts has taken shape. The officers are:
J. I. Loehe, 1 xesident General; Christian Siegle, Vice-President;
J. Schaber, Secretary. After the usual act of confession, by which
the synod declares its unswerving loyalty to the Lutheran Con-
fessions, President Loehe takes the chair and says:
“A great event has come to pass. We are one in a sense which
we did not dare to hope for a short while ago. ‘This is the Lords
doing, it is marvellous in our eyes.’ That what formerly kept us
apart has been sw ; ept away. Let that which we have done to-day
remain our constant duty:—‘Receive ve one another to the clorv
of God’.” ' b y
The resolutions adopted on that synod were worthy of the day.
The two church papers were merged into one (Lutheran Herald).
Synod embarked upon a real venture of faith and resolved to take
over the New Guinea missions in conjunction with the lowa Synod,
U.S.A. Further, steps were taken to try to acquire the Angas Col-
Noith Adelaide, as the college and seminary of the future.
Significantly, although without design, this great synod took
place at Ebenezer. “Hitherto hath the Lord helped us!” An
Ebenezer it was. On the memorial stone which this day presents
there is to be seen on the one side, in view of the dark past, a
humble Kyrie eleison (Lord have mercy!), on the other side a
thankful Hallelujah for the great things accomplished, and on the
third a confident Hosanna, because He Who helped so far will
help also furthermore.
The United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of
Queensland and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, at
their conventions at Pimpana Island (April 12, 1921) and at Kal’bar
(April 21, 1921) respectively, followed the lead given by Victoria
and South Australia. In Queensland the movement toward union,
resulting in federation in 1910, was begun. There also it reached
its consummation.


The united body comprised: —
In South Australia: Twenty-two pastors and parishes, with
6,060 communicants;
In Victoria and New South Wales: Thirteen pastors and
parishes, with 2,100 communicants;
In Queensland: Twenty-three pastors and parishes, with
4,550 communicants (among these were those who prior
to the War had formed the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australasia).
Total: Fifty-eight pastors in active service and 12,710 com-
municants.
From 1921 there have thus been (apart from the small E.L.S.A.
a.a.G., which in 1926 united with the U.E.L.C.A.) only two Lutheran
Churches in Australia, the U.E.L.C.A. and the E.L.S.A. Thanks be
to God that He gave the men to overcome the inherited divisions,
that since 1921 there exists the United Evangelical Lutheran Church
in Australia, which embraces the majority of the Lutherans in Aus-
tralia !


Jesus, Head of Christians all!
Grant that we, both great and small.
Through Thy Gospel light divine,
May be one, and wholly Thine.
(A.L.H., 226)
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.
The U.E.L.C.A. since 1921.
AS might be imagined, after such a long period of separation,
the organization of the U.E.L.C.A. required much thought and
labor. Committees had to be appointed; constitutions, laws and
by-laws, and necessary documents had to be drafted; funds had to
he co-ordinated. All this meant much extra work, especially for
the pastors, upon 'whom the bulk of the clerical work naturally
fell, and that in addition to their usual duties. The laymen, how-
ever, also gave liberally of their time and talents, especially at
general synods.
General synods were held triennially in rotation in the four
districts of the Church. The first took place at Melbourne, Victoria,
in 1922. District presidents assisting the General President (Loehe)
were the Pastors Braun (South Australia), Gutekunst (Victoria and
New South Wales), Hiller (Queensland). Twenty-nine pastors and
twenty-eight lay delegates constituted this first synod which dealt
with and ratified the following items: Admission of the Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of Queensland; constitution of New South Wales as
a separate district; opening of the Wartburg Seminary in Tanunda,
Ascension Day, 1921; purchase of Angas College, North Adelaide;
a visit of Pastor Theile to the New Guinea mission fields; founding
of two Mission rest homes (at Light’s Pass, South Australia, and
Toowoomba, Queensland); draft constitution; fruitless discussions
with the E.L.S.A. Office-bearers appointed were: Pastor Loehe,
President General; Pastor Siegle, Vice-President; Pastor Basedow,
Secretary; Gustav Krueger (Murtoa), Treasurer. The chief item
was the discussion on and adoption of the constitution, which was
modelled on that of the lowa Synod (U.S.A.), some of the most
important clauses of which are:
2. The U.E.L.C.A. receives and holds the Holy Scriptures of the


Old and New Testaments as the inspired Word of God and the only
rule and guide for her doctrine and practice.
3. With the whole Evangelical Lutheran Church she recognizes
and accepts as the correct and unadulterated exposition of the Word
of God and His divine will all the Symbolical Books of that Church,
viz., the three ecumenical Creeds, the Unaltered Augsburg Confession,
the Apology of the Augsburg Confession, the Smalcald Articles, the
Small and Large Catechism of Luther, and the Formula of Concord.
4. She rejects all attempts to introduce syncretism and other
doctrinal practices, such as officiating at mixed congregations, uniting
at the Lord’s Table with such as hold false doctrines; she also de-
clares herself opposed to all secret societies which are anti-Christian
in principle, and only makes use of such church and school books,
manuals, catechisms, hymn books, as are in conformity with the
doctrines of the Evangelical Lutheran Church.
The second general synod was held at Beenleigh (Queensland) in
1925, at which twenty-nine pastors and forty-nine lay-delegates
were present. This synod inaugurated the system of sessional
committees for preliminary discussion of the reports and drafting
of the resolutions to be submitted to synod. The most important
decision of this synod was the election of Jobs. J. Stolz, pastor of
Light’s Pass, South Australia, to the office of President General.
It was considered that this office, requiring much travelling, could
not well be combined with that of director of the college. Pastor
Stolz has since then been re-elected at all succeeding synods, includ-
ing the most recent at South Brisbane in 1937. Statistics at the
time of the Beenleigh synod recorded 14,000 communicants, 19,500
souls and 569 baptisms.
In 1928 Walla Walla, New South Wales, was host to the synod,
at which forty-one pastors and fifty-one lay-delegates were present.
During the three years since the previous general synod, the first
five graduates from Immanuel Seminary in North Adelaide were
ordained. Seven more pastors from overseas, some of them sons
of the Australian Lutheran Church, were received, and a further
seven were gained by amalgamation with the E.L.S.A. a.a.G. in
1926. Two had returned to Germany, Schaber and Ortenburgei
(Laura and Appila, South Australia). All districts showed healthy
growth. Increases were: Eight new parishes, twenty-nine congrega-
tions, 4,520 communicants. Offerings for synodical works amounted
lo over £12,500 annually. Pastor Heidenreich (Freeling, South Aus-
tralia) elected Vice-President, Pastor Doehler (Murray Bridge,
South Australia) Secretary, and Pastor Simpfendoerfer (Doncaster,
Victoria), Treasurer, offices which they have held ever since. It was
decided to transfer the Book Depot from Tanunda to Adelaide as
an undertaking of the Church, and to appoint a full-time
manager; to establish a General Synod Archives; to appoint a
General Statistician. The importance of the office of the President


General was recognized when it was divorced from full parish
work, in consequence of which Pastor Stolz resigned from his parish
and in 1930 moved to INorth Adelaide. He established a home
mission congregation in North Adelaide and became the editor of
the Church papers and almanacs as well. This in some measure
relieved the financial burden which followed the creation of this
new office.
The fifth general synod (1931) was held in Tanunda, South
Australia. This synod was held during the so-called “depression,”
a time of great financial stress, which provided severe temptation
to lose courage in carrying on the works of the Church. This was
the first convention which made use of radio broadcasting for a
synodical service. Forty-nine pastors and fifty-five lay-delegates
participated. At this synod the U.E.L.C.A. withdrew from the
management of the New Guinea missions, as these could now be
returned to their original owners. The first steps towards the
federation with the Emanuel Evangelical Lutheran Convention for
New Zealand were taken at this synod. (Federation was effected
in 1932. W. Loehe a son ol Director Loehe, was sent in 1933 to
assist Pastors Legarth and Christensen. He remained in
Zealand until 1936). During this synodical triennium further
growth was recorded. Three of Pastor Hossfeld’s congregations in
South Australia joined the U.E.L.C.A. The Church now comprised
seventy-eight pastors, sixty-five parishes, 257 congregations (seven-
teen more than three years before), and 18,940 communicants.
Synodical benevolence for this period amounted to £27,500. For
local congregational purposes £73,000 w T as raised.
The following interesting statistics are culled from the report
presented at the sixth general synod held at Horsham, Victoria,
in 1934. In ten years the number of pastors had risen from sixty-
four to eighty-four, communicants from 14,000 to nearly 20,000,
souls from 19,500 to 28,500, Sunday school children from 3,334
to 5,019, Sunday school teachers from 313 to 564. Pioneer pastors
who had gone to their reward during this synodical period were
Simpfendoerfer (Walla Walla), Egen (Nundah, Queensland), and
Leypoldt (Victoria). Pastors Bemmann (Adelaide) and Zwar
(Point Pass, South Australia) also passed away at this time.
IVenty young pastors had by now graduated from Immanuel
Seminary.. During this period the Church succeeded in securing
the services of Pastor Karl Muetzelfeldt from Germany for its
newly-established pro-seminary.
Mention should also be made of the main events in the individual
districts. In the South Australian district Pastor Braun, who had
been president of the Immanuel Synod a.a.G., and president general
of the General Svnod. presided over this district from 1921-1925.


In course of time it was seen that a younger man was needed for
this position; consequently Jobs. J. Stolz, the vice-president, was
elected president. On Pastor Stolz’s election to the office of presi-
dent general, the then vice-president, Pastor Held (Tanunda), be-
came the district president. In 1926 the E.L.S.A. a.a.G. was re-
ceived into the U.E.L.C.A. Pastor Heidenrich, who for many years
had been president of this body, became second vice-president of
the South Australian district in 1927, and finally president when
Pastor Held’s health failed in 1933. Pastor Doehler (Murray
Bridge) became vice-president in 1934. Since then both men have-
been re-elected regularly.
The Murray Bridge parish secured the services of Pastor
Doehler, who, being capable of ministering in both languages,
filled a most urgent need. The congregation has shown considerable
growth and is now building an impressive new church. Pastor
Meier, of Light's Pass, moved to the extensive Loxton parish on the
Murray. In Loxton a large church, possibly the finest of our
churches in the country, was dedicated in 1926. (Synod was held
there in 1928). Pastor Bemmann took over the city mission in Ade-
laide. Mount Gambier joined the Victoria Synod in 1931, which was
an advantage because of its geographical situation. A new inde-
pendent parish was formed at Sedan in the Murray Flats, with J,
Riedel as pastor. At Sedan a spacious church was built in 1923,
in which synods were held in 1924 and 1934. After the 1926
amalgamation the congregations on Yorke’s Peninsula were divided!
into, a northern and a southern parish, and are now served by
Pastors Sabel, jun., and Eehlberg, sen., respectively.
These and many similar rearrangements represent more work
and worry than the unitiated can ever realize. To relieve the
president somewhat, the ministry therefore decided in 1929 that
the arranging and conducting of the pastors’ conferences be taken
over bv the vice-president. The many official visits and the sup-
porting of certain congregations made it necessary to increase the
synodical assessment called “synod dues” from 1/- to 1/6 per
communicant member.
The South Australian district increased appreciably during the
period under review. This increase was due to the admission of
Pastor Hossfeld’s parish and the E.L.S.A. a.a.G., as also to normal
growth. In 1925 there were 7,750 souls and 6,420 communicants;
in 1931 statistics showed 13,586 and 9,441 respectively. Unfor-
tunately, there was no corresponding increase in later years,
chiefly on account of fewer births. Statistics reveal that in 192S
with 6,500 communicants there were as many baptisms as in 1938
with about 13,500 communicants, namely, 275. According to the


statistics of 1937 this district consists of forty-three pastors, 112
congregations, forty preaching places, 13,343 souls, and 9,761
communicants.
The death of Pastor Leidig on August 11, 1925, must be men-
tioned here. It had not been easy for him to leave all his work
and, with his wife, retire to Tanunda. Here, however, he had
time to learn the lessons of patience and resignation in the school
of suffering. He, was buried in the Langmeil Cemetery in the
presence of a large crowd, amongst them were sixty of his former
college students. This champion of Lutheran union in Australia,
founder of the college, promoter of Lutheran day schools, for
many years editor of the i4 Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung,” this tire-
less worker deserves a place of honor in the front ranks of the per-
sonalities of the Lutheran Church. The mark he has made in the
history of the U.E.L.C.A., despite the fact that he was a broken man
at fifty, is a lasting, deep, and blessed one.
During this period the district of Victoria lost the parishes in
New South Wales, which constituted themselves into a separate
district, but gained the Mt. Gambier parish from South Australia.
In 1930 the district of New South Wales had 1,450 communicant
members and Victoria had 1,350. A new 7 parish was formed in
Victoria with Warracknabeal as centre and E. Fischer as pastor,
but has since been dissolved. In Bendigo, where Pastor Leypold
had labored for sixty years, the work was continued. Changes in the
Melbourne congregation have indeed been great. When K.
Gutekunst left for Germany Pastor Frank (Maryborough, Queens-
land ) became his successor. He and his congregation, however,
eventually severed their connection w T ith the U.E L.C.A. by affilia-
tion with the Deutsche Evangelische Kirchenbund (German Evan-
gelical Church Federation). Pastor Gutekunst’s successor as presi-
dent was Pastor Siegle, but since 1924 Pastor Jericho has held the
office. The district now consists of seven parishes, six preaching
places, twenty congregations, 2,033 souls, and 1,502 communicants.
Gifts for missions in 1929 amounted to £2,250, more per member
than in any other district.
In 1921 the New South Wales district for the first time held
its own synod (Pleasant Hills). Pastor Schenk of Sydnev was
elected president. At the following synod, however, Pastor Simp-
fendoerfer (Walla Walla) succeeded him. In 1923 Pastor Schenk
with his congregation left the U.E.L.C.A. After some years Pastor
Fritsch, of Milbrulong, became president, and, on his departure
from New South Wales for Natimuk, Victoria, in 1929, Pastor
Hartmann became his successor to the office. When Pastor Hart-
mann accepted a call to Light’s Pass, South Australia, Pastor Fuhl-
bohm, now of Milbrulong, was' elected president (1934). The


Walla Walla parish is the most important in this district, and is 7
in fact, the largest in the U.E.L.C.A. It was served for forty-six
years by Pastor Simpfendoerfer. He was joined in 1926 by J.
T. P. Stolz as assistant pastor and gradually retired in favor of
the latter. With his death in 1933 an energetic and capable
leader went to his rest. This district has experienced a gratifying
growth. In 1925 there were 1.155 communicants, 1,453 in 1930,
and by 1937 the number had increased to 1,780, when there were
twenty-two congregations, five preaching places, 2,388 souls, served
by six pastors.
When the Queensland district constituted itself, Pastor Theile
became the first president, but after six months he had to make a
tour of inspection to New Guinea and E. Hiller, pastor of Been-
leigh, became his successor. Since 1928 Arthur Reuther, pastor
of Highfields, now of Bethania, holds the office. This new' synod
found itself badly in need of pastors, and especially of young
men, chiefly because of the language question and the opening up
of new districts. In the seventeen years under review on
the average one new man was appointed every year —eight of
them being graduates of Immanuel Seminary and six others former
students of Immanuel College. These young men joyously
threw themselves into their work, laboring harmoniously side
by side with their elder brethren. With their zeal little is lost
that could be gained for the Lutheran Church, and, as the
English language is mostly used, their wwk is successful,
especially with the youth. Statistics reveal the results of
earnest work. In 1923 the district had 4,800 communicants,
6,500 souls, 4,000 communion attendances. Ten years later
the figures were 6,534 communicants, 10,119 souls, 6,670 com-
munion attendances. In 1937 they had increased to 7,445, 10,927
and 8,323 respectively. Congregations numbered seventy-six and
preaching places ninety-nine. There are thirty pastors in Queens-
land. Since faithful work will lead to an increase in church
consciousness of the Lutheran people in Queensland their under-
standing and support of the works of the Church is sure to grow
accordingly.
“Good and pleasant ’tis to see brethren dwell in unity.” The
exact opposite of this was experienced in 1928 in connection with
the St. Andrew’s congregation in Brisbane (R. Monz, pastor). A
section of the congregation was dissatisfied and tried to take
possession of the church building by getting in through a window
on New Year’s Day, 1928. An arrangement had been made with
a pastor of the E.L.S.A. (Reimersl, who was waiting nearby, and
who, after the church had been forciblv taken possession of, was
led in and conducted a service. Through occupying the building


day and night, these people thought they could retain the possession
of it. An attempt was even made by cunning and force to take
possession of the manse, but in vain. Here was a church scandal
of the first magnitude, and one which has brought disgrace on the
Lutheran Church. Unfortunately the E.L.S.A. stood by Reimers.
Negotiations between the presidents of the U.E.L.C.A. and the
E.L.S.A. were fruitless, and so the St. Andrew’s congregation had
to resort to law in order to regain possession of their property.
The result of a settlement out of court was that the intruders had
to hand over the church in good condition. Pastor Reimers, how-
ever, later consoled his group by writing to the effect that, though
they did not have the church, they had the people—and God’s pure
Word. The U.E.L.C.A. owed it to its own honor to give up for
the time being the doctrinal discussions with the E.L.S.A. That
a dissatisfied section in a congregation cannot successfully claim
the rights and possessions of the whole congregation similar cases
in the past century should have taught; but that a Lutheran pastor
should permit himself to be made the leader of such people in
the hope of building his church thereby, is beyond comprehension.
v i
Such has been the course of the U.E.L.C.A. in the different dis-
tricts. It is true, the various elements were not welded 'together
immediately, and, for that matter, their distinctive traits have not
entirely disappeared even now. But there is reason for profound
gratitude that at the end of the first century it may be well and
truly said: The U.E.L.C.A. has not only been founded, but in the
period under review has become more and more consolidated. The
most difficult period of its history is past. In the coming decades,
may God grant that its constituent parts
“Through Thy Gospel’s light divine.
May be one. and wholly Thine.”


“They shall put you out of the
synagogues.’* John XVI, 2.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.
Two Lutheran bodies which ivere forced out of the E.L.S.A. find
-i their way into the U.E.L.C.A. (the parish of Dutton, 1895-1925,
and the E.L.S.A. a.a.G., 1902-1926).
TMTE history of the E.L.S.A. to the year 1890 has already been
A traced. The conflict which had been raging in its midst
for the last decade of that period had not yet subsided. The section
of the synod influenced by the Missouri Synod of North America
now carried on a bitter struggle against the old Hermannsburg
section. It is one of the tragic spectacles in the history of the
Lutheran Church to see how one Hermannsburg pastor after
another fell a victim to the movement which outlawed the institu-
tion from which they had come and how the few who dared defend
themselves were excommunicated. In the years 1895-1902 there
were two expulsions from the E.L.S.A., and both events were con-
nected with the name of Hermannsburg. The first to be ex-
communicated were the two Hermannsburg pastors, Hossfeld and
Hoefner, who could not see why they should denounce their
spiritual mother, the mission seminary at Hermannsburg in Hanover,
"Germany. The reason for the excommunication of the Pastors
Heidenreich and their followers in 1902 was that they could not
acknowledge it as wrong to support, as they had promised, the
Hermannsburg mission station in Central Australia after the
Immanuel Synod had taken it over.
In order to understand the first event it must be remembered
that in 1866 Hanover had come under the dominance of Prussia,
where the Union Church held sway, and consequently there was a
danger that the Lutheran Church in Hanover might become union-
istic. This naturally involved the Hermannsburg mission seminary.
It must be contended, however, that neither the Hanovarian
Lutheran State Church nor the Hermannsburg mission lost their
Lutheran character. Nevertheless, in spite of the fact that in 1892
Director Harms of Hermannsburg explained the position to the


E.L.S.A., that synod decided at its Rosenthal convention not to
have church fellowship with Hermannsburg because of its union-
ism and its view on inspiration. All the pastors, even those trained
at Hermannsburg, except two, favored the step. These two were
Pastors Hoefner of Rhinethal and Hossfeld of Dutton. Nor
the decision against Hermannsburg to the liking of Pastor
Heidenreich, sen. In 1894 his son, who had studied at Hermanns-
burg and at the Erlangen University, returned, but no sooner was
he ordained than the Missourians insisted upon his going to the-
college at Murtoa to learn Lutheran, i.e., Missourian theology.
There were even some who resented the fact that Pastor Heiden-
reich, sen., had admitted his son to Holy Communion.
The culminating point of this tragedy was the Hahndorf synod
of 1895. A definite decision had to be made concerning the two
“heretics.” Pastor Dorsch read a long paper on the corrupt state-
of the Hanoverian Church and, therefore, of Hermannsburg. No
discussion on the paper was allowed and it was demanded of
Hoefner and Hossfeld that they should answer either Yes or No
to the question whether Dorsch’s statements were correct. Feeling;
the injustice of the, procedure, both naturally replied No. Hossfeld
was given an opportunity to make a statement. After commenting;
on the incorrigible prejudice of the gathering he showed what a
sadly distorted picture the lecture gave, collecting as it did every
abuse in the Hanoverian Church during the last thirty years. There-
were loud interjections of “adjournment,” “adjournment,” “We do
not want to hear any more.” The judgment of synod ran thus:
These two are cancerous growths which we cannot tolerate any
longer. They are heretics. Ihe resolution that these two had
excluded themselves was carried by a great majority, Hossfeld
said a few kind words of farewell and with Hoefner left the
assembly.
Both of their parishes remained faithful to them. But the two*
neither joined another nor founded a separate synod. Pastor
Hoefner was later joined by Pastor Scherer of Hermannsburg, who
assisted him in his scattered parish. An. addition to Pastor Hoss-
feld’s parish was the Tabor congregation of Tanunda which came-
into existence as a free congregation under Dr. Muecke in 1850, cf.
chapter 6. Eventually, Pastor Hossfeld linked up with the
ministry of the Immanuel Synod, but his parish remained aloof,
although pulpit and altar fellowship with that synod was estab-
lished. In 1928 Hossfeld retired to Adelaide, but continued to serve
the Tabor congregation. Three of his congregations were absorbed
by parishes of the U.E.L.C.A. The fourth retained its independence,
but was served by a pastor of the synod. At that time the four


eongregations numbered over 400 communicants. And so in 1929
another little group, forced out of the E.L.S.A., merged into the
lU.E.L.C.A. The union of the Lutheran Church in Australia had
taken another step forward.
Seven years after the Hahndorf synod a similar deplorable
scene was enacted. Once more even stronger accusations were
hurled at the Immanuel Synod, at the Hermannsburg mission
which that synod had taken over from the E.L.S.A., and finally
at those pastors and congregations of the E.L.S.A. who, not seeing
-eye to eye with their synod, continued to support that mission.
It will be remembered that after the separation of 1874 the
E.L.S.A. left the Immanuel Synod in charge of the mission at
Coopers Creek (Killalpaninna) and in conjunction with the
Hermannsburg mission seminary in Germany started a mission on
the banks of the Finke River. After much hard labor a congre-
gation of twenty-five natives was baptized, but as two missionaries
had accepted positions in the south the situation became untenable
for the remaining missionary, Kempe. The undertaking was on the
werge of collapse. In addition to such difficulties as debts and
droughts came the strained relations with Hermannsburg, Germany.
Co-operation had, of course, become impossible since the mission
seminary had been placed under a ban. Instead of wholeheartedly
shouldering the responsibility of the work, the E.L.S.A. found itself
divided on this issue.
As not a few were opposed to the work a small society of mis-
sioh friends took it over. But what could the little band do?
They were too weak to carry on the mission work alone. So in
their dilemma their leaders, Heidenreich and Kliche, approached
the Immanuel Synod. At a special convention at Light’s Pass in
1894 this synod, full of faith, took over the mission. For existing
stock, building, and other improvements, £1,500 were paid. Pastor
Heidenreich and other members of the E.L.S.A. promised to con-
tinue their support.
Now within the E.L.S.A. a bitter controversy arose over such
support. It was contended that by supporting this mission they
would be aiding the “enemy” of the synod. At the pastors’ con-
ference at Bright ten reasons were given why the Finke River
mission should not be supported, the principal one was: that the
Immanuel Synod had departed from the fundamentals of the
Christian faith in an alarming way. Despite this the group in
favor of the mission at the Rosenthal Synod declared: “We must
remain faithful to our promises given to the Immanuel Svnod,
until it is definitely proved that the missionaries of that svnod do
not preach the pure Gospel.” Pastors Heidenreich (father and


sonj and Pastor f uhlbohm stood behind this declaration; the great
majority, however, voted against further support.
Events moved rapidly on towards a crisis. In 1899 Pastor
Fuhlbohm of Petersburg was put under the ban. A keen supporter
of the mission he had dared to officiate together with Pastor
Ortenburger (Immanuel Synod) at the dedication of the enlarged
church which both used. His synod condemned his action and,
dismissed him without further ado.
The proceedings concerning the Pastors Heidenreich, admittedly
painful for them, continued until 1901-1902. In 1901 the
two pastors and their parish representatives had discus-*
sions with the pastors of the Immanuel Synod concerning the
E.L.S.A.’s accusations of false teachings. They received a “satis*
iactory explanation.” Then followed one conference after another
at which attempts were made to persuade the Pastors Heidenreich
that the Immanuel Synod was heretical and that it was a sin to
support its mission. The crowding effort in this direction was
made at a special synod in October, 1901. At this synod the old
arguments were driven home with added force. A long list of the
false teachings of the Immanuel Synod was presented. But the
Heidenreichs remained steadfast. The result of the synod was that
fellowship with these twm pastors was severed; but worse was to
come.
In September, 1902, the now notorious synod of Eudunda was
in session. Here the Australian Lutheran church history furnishes
the most glaring example of fleshly "‘zeal of God, but not accord*
ing to knowledge.” The chairman, President Nickel, read a paper
on church fellowship. It became apparent from this that also
practices contrary to the Scriptures and to the Confessions is
sufficient cause for dissolving church fellowship, but that a member
or congregation who persists in false doctrine and practice could
be expelled only by a unanimous vote, and to achieve this all those
not in favor of such expulsion must be deprived of their vote.
Then came the practical application of the lecture and harsh
it was, too. The pastor referred to could not denounce
his former fellow ministers, the Pastors Heidenreich, and
the Immanuel Synod sufficiently: These pastors “deny the
truth,” are “betrayers of the sanctuary,” “for the fact that
the synod had not prospered as it should in the last few
years the Pastors Heidenreich, besides the enemies from the
nether regions, are responsible.” “We have to deal with false
teachers ‘who confuse souls’; with people ‘who give offence’; with
people of whom Christ says: ‘Whoso offends one of these little ones,
. . . ~ it were better for him that a millstone were hanged around
his neck and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea’.” Well


might hearls have trembled at such thunderings. It had already
been decided that the Immanuel Synod was heretical and that it
was a sin to support the mission of a heretical church. The motion
that synodical fellowship with the Pastors Heidenreich and their
congregations cease, was put and carried, but seven voted against it.
President: Dear Brethren, you have heard that this vote must
he, according to God’s Word, unanimous. These brethren have
acknowledged that they are on the side of the Pastors Heidenreich;
they want to take up the same attitude and persist in it. It is there-
fore necessary that at the second ballot they be deprived of the
right to vote. Seconded and carried.
President: The motion has been put that synodical fellowship
wish 'the Pastors Heidenreich and all those supporting them be
dissolved. The vote is taken.
President: Synodical fellowship is, by unanimous vote, dis-
solved.
In spite of all provocation the Pastors Heidenreich remained
calm throughout. With kindly words they absented themselves
from the gathering from which they were ejected, because they
refused to cease supporting the Finke River mission. What seems
a rather lame excuse was formulated by a commission appointed at
the next general synod of the E.L.S.A. to investigate whether the
depriving of the right to vote was legitimate. The commission’s
finding was to the effect that those voting against the motion might
not be expressing the attitude of their congregation and that, there-
fore, the congregations ought to get an opportunity of defining their
attitude.
Deep sorrow fills one as one looks back upon those events, and
what moves one most is the fact that they were not merely a sudden
aberration, but the result of a development which began with the
separation of 1846 and which received a strong impetus by the
E.L.S.A. being infiltrated with the kindred narrow spirit of Missouri.
If repentance of this act by the E.L.S.A. were evident the path to
a union of the separated Lutherans in Australia would be smoother.
The congregations of these pastors who were excommunicated
remained faithful to them. At a meeting held in Bethany in 1904,
comprising the two Pastors Heidenreich, three teachers and seventy-
five delegates, they did not wish to join the Immanuel Synod, but
to remain on the basis which the E.L.S.A. had adopted before the
Missourian influence had become dominant and, therefore, con-
stituted themselves the Evangelical Lutheran Synod on the old
basis, E.L.S.A. a.a.G. Heidenreich, sen., became the president.
In 1910 there were five pastors, the increase being due to the
addition of Pastor Hass from the Ohio Synod, U.S.A., of Pastor


Scherer, now in charge of Pastor Hoetner’s parish, and of Pastor
Schmidt, also of Ohio, as assistant of Pastor Heidenreich, sen.
The congregations of Edithburgh and South Kilkerran also
joined the synod. On August 8, 1910, Pastor Heidenreich, sen.,
died, at the age of eighty-two years. He had spent forty-five years
in the ministry. His son succeeded him to the presidency. In the
meantime the connection with the Ohio Synod, U.S.A., had become
so close that the synod decided to affiliate and was henceforth known
as a district of the Synod of Ohio and Other States. The synods
assisted each other financially; the hymn-books, agenda, church
books, and catechisms of Ohio were introduced, and men from Aus-
tralia were sent over to study in the seminaries of the Ohio Synod.
The following returned and took up parish work:—Pastor Lehmann
at Angaston-Eden Valley; Pastor Schulz at Petersburg; Pastor
Lienert at Edithburgh. Pastor Roehrs at Bethany also came from
Ohio.
As the old members died the support given to the Hermanns-
burg Mission of the Immanuel Synod naturally decreased. The
little synod had sufficient obligations of its own to meet. But when
in 1921 the U.E.L.C.A. came into existence, the desire for' union
grew stronger, especially as in America the Ohio Synod and the
lowa Synod were drawing closely together. The latter was in
church fellowship with the U.E.L.C.A. Voices were heard within
the E.L.S.A. a.a.G. in favor of uniting with the U.E.L.C.A. Four
discussions were held by the pastors of both synods. When in
1926 the E.L.S.A. a.a.G. at Edithburgh voted in favor of the union
between lowa and Ohio it was clear that the majority favored
union with the U.E.L.C.A. Later, as negotiations for union pro-
gressed, the synod voted in favor of affiliation with the U.E.L.C.A.
by 331 votes for and three against. The U.E.L.C.A. by a referen-
dum adopted the theses of union. At a special synod at Langmeil,
June 25, these theses were further discussed and all preliminary
arrangements for the union effected. At Bethany on the same date
the E.L.S.A. a.a.G. officially adopted the basis of union and dis-
solved its connection with the Ohio Synod.
A memorable day was the 26th day of June, 1926, when the
E.L.S.A. a.a.G. merged with the U.E.L.C.A.; another milestone in
the history of the Lutheran Church of Australia was reached.
Pastor Held was re-elected president of the enlarged South Aus-
tralian district. Pastors Lehmann and Hebart were elected vice-
presidents. The following day was celebrated as a special day
of thanksgiving. Thousands thronged to Tanunda to take part in
what was probably the largest church gathering in the history of
the Australian Lutheran Church.


The increase in the numbers of the U.E.L.C.A. due to the union
was six parishes, seven pastors, 1,375 communicants.
The main theses of union are: —
I. —INSPIRATION: We firmly hold that the entire Holy Scrip-
ture as to contents and words was written on the impulse and by
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.
11. —CONFESSIONS: Although it is our conviction that not all
historical remarks and exegetical expositions in the Symbols are
binding, and that in some points the confessed truth in the Con-
fessions can be more fully comprehended, further developed, and
more adequately expressed, without infringing upon the truth, never-
theless we subscribe with a joyful “Quia” (because) to the Con-
fessions because they are the pure and unadulterated exposition
of the Divine Word, the more so as the above mentioned limitation
lies in the very nature of a Confession.
111. —CHRIST’S EXINANITION: Concerning the Exinanition of
our Lord Jesus' Christ, we gratefully and reverently accept the
doctrine of Scripture as stated by our Confessions, without denying
the possibility that this unfathomable truth also “can be more fully
comprehended, further developed, and more adequately expressed
without infringing upon the truth.” It would be an infringement
upon the truth, to teach that the Lord Jesus Christ in the state of
humiliation had not remained in essential unity with the Father and
the Holy Spirit, surrendering anything which makes Him equal with
God (homoousios). Always and everywhere He was in full possession
of the divine attributes'. The assumption that in every instance He
had to ask the Father for power to perform miracles, we hold as not
being in conformity with the whole of the evangelical reports.
IV. —THE MINISTERIAL OFFICE: It was given by Christ to
the entire Church. There are two different views regarding the mode
of assigning the office, namely:—
(a) Assignment of office by the individual congregation.
Tb) Assignment of office by the organized Church.
The holding of either of these views is no obstacle to church-
fellowship. We hold that the two constituent parts of the organized
Church, i.e., the laity and the ministry, co-operate at the assignment
to office.
V. —CHILIASM: As regards chiliasm, three things are of im-
portance to us:—
(a) That, when interpreting the prophetical word, we observe the
principles of scriptural interpretation generally recognized amongst
us.
(b) That we, “taking heed to the Word of prophecy,” keep our-
selves open for any further light which the Lord Himself will give
through fulfilment.
(c) That both, those who interpret Revelation 20 as referring to
past events of church history, and thosie who take it to refer to
events of the future (“last days”), have equal right in our midst to
put forth and demonstrate their interpretation by earnest theological
exposition, always provided that they hold faithfully to Augustana
17, in this way the defenders of either interpretation contributing to
the understanding of the prophetic Word, in the meantime, however,
deeming it their obligation, not to teach their respective views as the
only admissible interpretation of God’s Word.
VI. —OPEN QUESTIONS: Truths, contained or indicated in


Scripture, concerning which we as Lutherans who take their stand
upon Scripture and Confessions have as yet not attained a unanimous
understanding, which, moreover, are not considered justifying
severance of Church-fellowship for the very reason that combined
and continuous efforts on the part of those of one faith are necessarv
m order to apprehend and define them in accordance with the Analogy
of Faith and the Analogy of Scripture—such truths, in short, we
denote as “Open Questions.”
, -FELLOWSHIP I We know ourselves in church-
fellowship with all those Lutheran church bodies throughout the
word who accept the Lutheran Confessions' as norm in doctrine and
practice, and with those only. Therefore we welcome every endeavor
which has as its goai the complete union upon the basis of Scripture
and the Confessions with Lutherans with whom as yet we do not
actually find ourselves in church-fellowship, provided such partici-
pation is not considered an expression of church-fellowship, e.g.,
Lutheran World Convention.
JOBS. J. STOLZ,
President General
of the U.E.L.C.A.
J. H. S. HEIDENREICH,
President
of the E.L.S.A. a.a.G


Unto them which are called, botfo
Jews and Greek, we preach Christ,,
the power of God, and the wisdom,
of God. 1 Cor. I, 24.
CHAPTER NINETEEN.
Two city congregations, Sydney (1923) and Melbourne (1934)
sever their connection with the U.E.L.C.A. to join the Evangelical
Church of Germany.
r reasons why the Sydney congregation severed its connection
-I with the U.E.L.C.A., before acquainting itself with the needs,
problems, and blessings of this Church, can be well understood on
account of its peculiar composition and history, but can scarcely
be justified. The German national element predominated in this
congregation, and the German consuls supported it, particularly
with a view to furthering national culture. Geographically and
historically this congregation was isolated from other Australian
Lutherans, the only connecting link was Pastor Herlitz. Even when
he succeeded in gaining the congregation as a member of the Vic-
toria Synod, conditions were not materially altered. The greater
number of members wished to maintain connection with German
culture. That explains why the Sydney congregation would not
support the founding of a theological seminary in Australia, and
eventually resigned from synodical membership (1923), and ulti-
mately affiliated with the Deutsche Evangelische Kirchenbund
(German Evangelical Church Federation) at the instigation of
Dr. C. Schneider, an emissary of a German evangelical organization.
This body had a high estimation of the Sydney congregation, claim-
ing that “from it a rebuilding of the Church of the Reformation
in Australia could be expected/’ Whether this was so may be
judged by a study of the congregation’s history.
The beginning of the congregation is to he found in the activity
of Pastor Goethe on behalf of the Germans in Sydney. From
1866-68 a candidate, Heide, ministered to the needs of these people*
and from 1873-79 G. W. Woerner was the pastor, who also extended
his activities to Grafton. The General Consul of Germany, Dr. R.
Kraul, at this time took a very active part in the affairs of the con-
gregation, particularly also in the direction of building a church,
154


which was dedicated by Pastor Herlitz in 1883.
With the assistance of Pastor Herlitz, G. Schenk (Basel) be-
came the pastor of this congregation. He was inducted by Herlitz;
in 1884. Pastor Schenk’s task was not an easy one, but through
faithful work creditable improvements were effected, though the
financial obligations and other difficulties arising from time to time
often endangered the very existence of the congregation. Till 1901
the situation was precarious.' In the year 1900 the congregation
received financial assistance from the German Kaiser to the amount
of £l5O. In the same year the congregation joined the Victoria
Synod. Pastor Herlitz, the president, however, was confronted
with many difficulties in the further development of the congrega-
tion. Its existence was more than once at stake. On the occasion
of the jubilee synod in Victoria (1906) Pastor Schenk revealed
that very little interest in the Church was evident, even though the
German Consul was taking an active part in congregational life.
A delegate to the Walla Walla synod in 1910 also deplored the
fact that it was extremely difficult to keep the younger generation
in the congregation through the medium of the German language
only. From the history of this congregation before and after the
War it is evident that it was not a significant factor in the life of
the Lutheran Church in Australia.
In 1923 the congregation officially withdrew from the U.E.L.C.A.
A reason was that it did not regard with favor the granting of
English services in cases where this became necessary. Ways and
means to bring the congregation back to synod were discussed and
suggested at the conventions of the U.E.L.C.A. at Beenleigh in 1925.
But after the convention at Walla Walla in 1928, to which Pastor
Schenk was invited, all attempts proved fruitless. The Sydney con-
gregation feared that its reunion with the U.E.L.C.A. would only
strengthen the party in its midst which desired English services.
All requests by this party for English services were of no avail,
and the question of membership of such members became acute.
The President General was then petitioned by them to provide such
services. Meanwhile a considerable number of Esthonian
Lutherans had come to Sydney and the U.E.L.C.A. was requested
by the Lutheran World Convention to minister to them. At the
general svnod in Tanunda (1931) the President General reported
that the U.E.L.C.A. did everything possible to meet the Sydney
congregation with the view of co-operation and affiliation, but that
all endeavors were in vain. The appeal to the congregation to
grant English services to those that desired them was not only
rejected, but these members were practically requested to with-
draw from the congregation. This withdrawal took place in 1928
when former members of the congregation and others (seventy


souls) constituted themselves the Evangelical Lutheran Holy
Trinity congregation of Sydney. As a last resort the U.E.L.C.A*
asked Dr. Schneider to use his good influence. He, however, led
the congregation into the arms of the Deutsche Evangelische
Kirchenbund. Pastor Schenk resigned his charge in 1932 and Pastor
Lahusen of Germany took his place. Under him a reconciliation
was effected between the German congregation and that of the
U.E.L.C.A.
The newly-formed synodical congregation was served by pastors
of the U.E.L.C.A. since its inception. Its existence was made pos-
sible through the financial assistance it received from the U.E.L.C.A.
T. Gross became the first resident pastor (1930). He also began
to care for the Esthonian Lutherans. In 1932 Pastor Lienert took
charge of the field. During his term Pastor Gielow’, a native of
Esthonia and a graduate of the Immanuel Seminary, North Ade-
laide, organized a separate Esthonian Lutheran congregation (St,
John’s) and eventually became the pastor of both U.E.L.C.A. con-
gregations (1936). Both have their services in the German church.
It is difficult to understand why the Melbourne congregation
severed its connection with the U.E.L.C.A. and in 1934 joined the
Deutsche Evangelische Kirchenbund. For eighty years this con-
gregation was a member of the Lutheran Church in Australia,
hs history was so interwoven with the history of the General Synod
that it needs no further reference here. Never has the connection
of this congregation with the Lutheran Church in Australia inter-
fered with its policy; never were any objections raised against the
Australian Lutheran Church, and it may be taken for granted that
such a step would never have been taken under the leadership of
Pastor Herlitz. In 1923 Pastor Frank became the successor to
Pastor Gutekunst, and there never seemed to be any reason to
believe that Pastor Frank ever thought of leading this congrega-
tion into affiliation with the Church in Germany. This action of
the Melbourne congregation was and still is for us a cause for grief.
The U.E.L.C.A. has rightly endeavored to win back this, its old
congregation. The report of the Horsham general synod in 1934
suffices to show what was done to move the Melbourne con-
gregation to retrace its steps, but all efforts were of no avail. The
U. was prepared to meet this congregation and assist it
to call a pastor to suit its particular conditions, but unfortunately
all these attempts were hitherto in vain.
This chapter has shown that the U.E.L.C.A. is prepared to
preach Jesus Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God
in whatever language required. This is clearly demonstrated by
the fact that the Word of God is now preached by the U.E.L.C.A.
not only in German and English, but also in Esthonian, and. in-
cluding the native languages, altogether in six languages.


My strength is made perfect in
weakness. 2 Cor. XIII, 9.
CHAPTER TWENTY.
A Summary Review.
TIAVING followed the history of the U.E.L.C.A. on its course
through its hrst one hundred years it is well to pause and
make a short review. A study of the diagram appended will be
helpful.
1. The line which began with Pastor KaveTs arrival was the
original and main one.
Pastor Fritzsche came to Australia three years later than Pastor
Kavel. and the line which goes back to him actually dates only
from 1846, the year of the schism between the two Lutheran leaders.
As for the others, the Gossner missionaries, who arrived in Queens-
land before Pastor Kavel reached South Australia, only gradually
developed along Lutheran lines, and only much later was a Lutheran
organization in Queensand formed; and Pastor Goethe began his
work in Victoria as late as 1852. Although the Kavel line was the
first it seemed for a while as if it would cease. \\ hilst the E.L.S.A.,
owing to the influx of the Lutheran missionaries, and the graduat-
ing of the three students of Pastor Fritzsche, had all the pastors
it required, for thirty-six years the Kavel Synod had but Kavel, and
later only Auricht and Rechner. Nevertheless, this line gained the
ascendency over all others.
2. The Kavel line is the one which throughout the hundred
years practically kept a straight course.
It did not lose its original characteristics. These are, besides a
staunch adherence to the Lutheran Confessions, a firm stand against
indifference, a pronounced rejection of dead orthodoxy, a definite
conviction that among those who adhere to the Lutheran Confessions
there may be differences of opinion (Open Questions) which do
not necessitate severance of church fellowship. On these points the
Kavel section remained loyal to itself throughout the ten decades.
There were, indeed, slight deviations to the right and to the left.


Whenever they occurred the original course was soon regained. It
is different with the E.L.S.A. and with the General Synod. The-
former, hearing the impress of Pastor Fritzsche’s rigidity, gradu-
ally developed towards ever greater rigidity. The cause of this is
the influx of the Missourian element, wKich after a long and bitter
struggle gained the upper hand. Due to this fact the E.L.S.A. has
moved further and further away from the Kavel line, so that to-day
not even the bridge of joint prayer can span the wide gulf. The
General Synod, on the other hand, developed away from its more-
or less unionistic beginnings and moved toward an ever more pro-
nounced Lutheran standpoint, which eventually made it possible-
for this line to merge with that of Kavel.
3. The Kavel line is that of the golden mean and exerted a
greater power of attraction than the others.
The E.L.S.A., too, no doubt exerted a great influence. With
the Kavel line it shared the power to influence the bodies of a
more or less indifferent type to become truly Lutheran. This
characteristic, common to both these lines, is due to their common,
origin under the fiery trial of persecution, which made such an
imprint upon their character that even a hundred years have not
been able to obliterate it. Wherever a German synod came into*
existence in Australia, even in the remotest corner, and even if
originally of a distinct unionistic tendency, it soon adopted the-
designation “Lutheran,” thanks to the Lutherans of South Australia*
The E.L.S.A., too, worked for the union of the Lutherans of Aus-
tralia, but it did not meet with success. 'lt was not only void of
the powders to attract, it actually manifested a repulsive tendency..
Its path was marked rather by expulsions. The General Synod
exerted a considerable attracting influence, but was itself attracted
by the Kavel line. The reasons for the attracting power of this
line are, so we believe, not far to seek. It was neither too rigid
nor too ready to yield. It represented a type of Lutheranism which
combined sweet reasonableness with the necessary firmness. In
one word, it the line of the golden mean. All those who be-
came more and more Lutheran, all those who found it impossible
to agree with the rigidity of the E.L.S.A. joined with the Kavel
line to form the U.E.L.C.A., which comprises the greater part of
Australian Lutherans.
4. In the V.E.L.C.A. the tendencies oj union are already
triumphing over those of dissension.
The history of its component parts reveals a deplorable amount
of dissension. The picture w r ould be even darker if the diagram
could indicate all the local schisms. Queensland alone would show
a whole network of currents and cross currents of disruption.


Australian Lutherans have reason to exclaim: “0 our guilt, our great
guilt!” Whenever they have to view the scars of former dissension,
such as two, or three, or even four Lutheran churches in one little
township, they should smite their breast in repentance.
Thank God, the dark past has given place to a brighter present.
The United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia has come to
be. In it the influences in favor of unity have already triumphed.
Part 111, chapter 2, will show how in the course of the seventeen
years of its existence it has become consolidated. And the E.L.S.A.
alone is still outside.
5. What about the E.L.S.A.? Will it remain outside?
It grew to a church body not much smaller than the U.E.L.C.A.
This is due mainly to having had its own seminary for many years.
A comparison of the statistics of 1908 and 1937 will reveal this. In
1908 the E.L.S.A. comprised thirty-eight pastors, one hundred and
fifty-four congregations, 14,000 souls, 8,500 communicants, and
16,474 attended Holy Communion. The statistics of 1937 credit
the E.L.S.A. with ninety-two pastors (including two retired), 320
congregations and preaching places, 24,960 souls, 15,917 com-
municants, and 37,598 guests at the Communion Table. During
this period contributions for church purposes rose from £3,464
to £11,500. The corresponding figures of the U.E.L.C.A. are: —
Pastors, including twelve emiriti, eighty-eight; congregations and
preaching places, three hundred and twelve; souls, 28,691; com-
municants, 20,488; communion guests, 32,631; contributions,
£8,300. The exact percentage of the figures of both bodies is:—
E.L.S.A., 46 per cent.; U.E.L.C.A., 54 per cent.
Will the two ever come together? The characteristic “Mis-
sourian” peculiarities of the E.L.S.A. and the futility of all nego-
tiations for union speak an emphatic No. But the history of the
Lutheran Church in Australia, taken as a whole, answers with a
hopeful Tes. What belongs together by nature eventually is bound
to come together. A of World Lutheranism also points in
that direction. In Germany a united Lutheran Church has become
the goal. In America one breach after the other has been healed.
The Lutheran Churches of the world are stretching out their hands
and hearts towards the consummation of one Lutheran Church.
The time of schisms has given place to a time of joining hands in
union. This is not of man’s doing. It is the Lord who in His
mercy has given such time. The waves of the Lutheran union
movement will not stop before Missouri in America and the
E.L.S.A. in Australia. On /the other hand, that misguided, im-
patient befingering of the fruit to see if it is not yet ripe, is of no
use, and does not receive the Lord’s blessing. Owing to the


E.L.S.A.’s connection with America it is unthinkable that union can
be effected here as long as the union in America has not been
brought about. The first act in the coming together of the Lutherans
will be staged in America. By then new factors will come into
operation here. A new generation will have grown up and taken
over leadership. Foreign elements will have been eliminated. An
Australian consciousness will be developed.still more. Australians
will understand one another better. It will become evident that the
blessings of union will far outweigh the benefit of upholding the
special “Missourian"’ peculiarities. It will be recognized that it is
sufficient for true unity that both parties take their stand firmly on
the Confessions without demanding unanimity in every peripheral
point of doctrine mentioned perchance in the Confessions. The
Lutheran laymen will increasingly press for union. They fail to see
why Christian fellowship should be denied to people whose daugh-
ters by marriage are gladly, 0 so gladly, accepted to “their side
without first having to renounce the “dangerous,” “soul-destroying
doctrines of “the other side.”
Much water wall still flow down the Mississippi and the Murray
before a union is reached. But the historic developments of the
past first century point with irresistible force in the direction of
union. The most important event of the second century of the
Lutheran Church in Australia wall be the merging of the E.L.S.A.
and the U.E.L.C.A.
- At the end of the first century Lutherans look back with thank-
ful hearts to the miraculous ways and work of the Lord which out
of greatest disunity led to the U.E.L.C.A. His “strength was made
perfect in weakness. They also look hopefully forward. The
task for the second century is set: The union of all Lutheran bodies
in ONE LUTHERAN CHURCH IN AUSTRALIA.
Well He knqws how T best to grant us
All the longing hopes that haunt us:
All things have their proper day.


II
The Activities of the U.E.L.C.A.
I Cor., XII, 6
There are diversities of
operations, but it is the
same God who worketh
all in all.




INTRODUCTION.
TPHH manifold activities of the U.E.L.C.A. are not recorded in
the spirit of self-glorification. “Except the Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build it.” “Not unto us, 0 Lord, but
unto Thy name give glory.” The history of these activities is
meant to give some impressions of the Zeal of those laborers who
have gone before, so that their example may inspire to greater
zeal in laboring in the good cause of the Church. The following
ten chapters will reveal not only the activities of a century, but
also the present day activities and tasks of the U.E.L.C.A.
God is not unrighteous to forget
your M-ork and labor of love.
Hebr. VI, 10.
CHAPTER ONE.
By the progressive founding of congregations and the building of
churches, schools , and institutions a Lutheran Church ivas estab-
lished in a young continent.
'THE first task confronting the Lutheran immigrants was the
establishment and development of a church organization.
From small beginnings in a new and undeveloped land have
sprung 228 congregations, almost all of which have their own
houses of worship. There are seventy-one parishes or fields, prac-
tically all have their own manses and. in many instances, school
halls as well. The original humble buildings had in many cases to be
replaced or at least enlarged. Occasions such as jubilees were
marked by enlargement and beautification of churches, so that the
old barn-like buildings are being replaced by more attractive
churches with altar niches and dignified altars. Great things have


indeed been achieved; but much stili remains to be done, particu-
larly in the outlying districts of the far-flung home mission fields.
It is most interesting and instructive to journey through the
various districts of the U.E.L.C.A.
Beginning in South Australia, one finds of outstanding interest
the old cemetery of Klemzig, Adelaide, with its monument erected
in commemoration of the coming of the first Lutheran congregation
under Pastor Kavel. Klemzig and Glen Osmond as Lutheran con-
gregations are but a memory. That Kavel’s work in Adelaide, how-
ever, is still in progress is manifested by the St. Stephen’s congre-
gation in the city, and that of Tynte Street in North Adelaide.
Through the Immanuel College and Seminary, the Lutheran Book
Depot, the residence of the President General, Adelaide, has become
the centre of the U.E.L.C.A.’s activities. Next one follows the path
of development through the Adelaide hills (Hahndorf, Lobethal,
the Callington-Salem-Yictor Harbour field) ; then northward to the
Barossa district with its twenty-three congregations; then farther
north to Kapunda, Bethel, Eudunda, Point Pass, Robertstown, and
other places. Farther north still there are the Blyth, Appila, and
Laura parishes. On the Murray and in the plains to the right and left
of this river are the parishes of Murray Bridge, Sedan, Stonefield,
Low Bank, Loxton, Berri, Pinnaroo, and Perponda. The two
peninsulas of South Australia have two parishes each. In the
South-East there is the parish of Mount Gambier. Crossing the
border into Victoria one finds the Wimmera and Mallee districts
-dotted w r ith fourteen congregations. A visit to Doncaster and Grove-
dale near Melbourne will convince that these congregations have a
will to live. Bendigo, the last of the goldfields congregations, how-
ever, is but a shadow of its former glory. Across the Murray, in
the Riverina of New South Wales, there is a chain of five parishes
along the Albury-Sydney railway line. The great metropolis,
Sydney, has an Australian and an Esthonian Lutheran congregation.
Coming to Queensland from the south one passes through the
Logan district with eleven congregations (three parishes). In Bris-
bane and suburbs there are three parishes, as also Lutmis, well
known as the Australian centre of mission activities in the interest
of New* Guinea. On either side of the Brisbane-Toowoomba
railway line two parishes are located. The Darling Downs, with
five parishes and the Lutheran rest home, Salem, in Toowoomba,
are a stronghold of the U.E.L.C.A. To the north, somewhat inland,
there are in the South Burnett district the parishes of Murgon,
Kingaroy and Proston: still further north the Mundubbera-Monto
home mission field; along the coast, the home mission field of
Nambour, and the parishes of Maryborough, Bundaberg, and of
far-awav Mack ay. A flying trip to the Hope Valley mission station


near Cooktown, and then to the heart of Australia, where, in the
neighborhood of Alice Springs, the Hermannsburg mission station
and outlying preaching places are located, concludes this hurried
survey.
Little imagination is required to appreciate the efforts that were
necessary to rear up out of nothing this Church with its buildings
and institutions. That this was possible within a hundred years
is of the Lord. He, however, is not forgetful of the “work and
labor of love 55 of those who labored in His service. Nor must
the present generation forget what the pioneers and founders of
their Church have done, so as to become inspired with zeal to
accomplish even greater things.


Where Holy Scripture does not rule,
I do not advise anyone to send his
child to such a place. Everything
must go wrong where the Word of
God is not studied. —Luther*
CHAPTER TWO.
The U.E.L.C.A. was privileged to tend the lambs of the Good r
Shepherd in Christian schools.
the very beginning it was regarded as self-evident in
Lutheran circles that when a new church was built a congre-
gational school was erected beside it. Six months after the landing
of the first Lutherans in South Australia a Lutheran day school
was established by them in Klemzig. The new congregations
founded in Bethany, Langmeil, and other places followed this ex-
ample and provided schools for the education of their children.
Among the more noteworthy leathers of this early period were
Topp (1844-1888) in Bethany; F. Kavel, Andresen, A. Schulz, and
August Geyer in Langmeil; Julius Rechner in Light’s Pass. For
about forty years school was held almost entirely in the German lan-
guage. These early school masters were faithful Christians, whose
meagre salary ranged from £2O to £BO per year and had to be
supplemented by gifts in kind and wheat, also the use of congre-
gational lands. Frequently other sources of income, such as the
keeping of a few cows and poultry, were necessary. The salaries
were paid out of the “school-money” contributed by parents for
the education of their children, under the supervision of the con-
gregation.
The installation of a teacher was a solemn ceremony, in which
the teacher was required to subscribe to Holy Scripture, to the
Confessions, and to the Constitution. The congregations retained
the right to inspect the schools. . The examinations were held in
the church, and were followed in the afternoon by a congregational
picnic.
The school was the subject of discussion at all conventions of
the Immanuel Synod. One of the weaknesses of these schools was
the lack of proper organization. To remedy this a teachers’ union


was formed, ll strove to attain some degree of uniformity in
methods and in books employed. A futile effort to ensure efficient
supervision of the schools was made by the Immanuel Synod by
means of a synodical school committee. It did not function for
long.
Gradually the ever increasing demand for English instruction
and the coming of free education supplied by the state jeopardized
the position of the Lutheran day schools. At this stage the
Immanuel Synod and the E.L.S.A. took a firm stand in the interests
of their schools, exhorting their congregations not to “defile” them-
selves by sending their children to the state schools. In the year
1880 the state proposed to assume the right to inspect private
schools, but a deputation from the above named synods, represent-
ing a hundred congregations, claimed the retention of their full
liberties in this respect on the grounds that according to the
“Lutheran Confessions Church and school cannot be separated with-
out endangering the existence of the Church, and that state control
spells the infringement of religious liberty and of the rights of
parents.” The deputation was successful. In 1896 a referendum
was taken, placing before the electors the question of religious
instruction in state schools, and that of state aid for private schools.
Pastor Leidig advocating a negative vote, pointed out that secular
schools were anti-Christian in character, that state aid would be
detrimental to liberty and to the German language, and that the
religious instruction in state schools would be insufficient. In the
rear 1911 another effort was made to inaugurate state inspection of
private schools, but once again a petition from the Lutherans and
opposition from others warded off the danger.
The golden age of Lutheran day schools was undoubtedly the
period just prior to their being closed by Act of Parliament during
the War. Many new 7 schools were established, and teachers were effi-
ciently trained an the Point Pass College by Pastor Leidig, who was
ably assisted in this work by C. Krichauff, formerly a teacher of
the E.L.S.A., and then a state school teacher, H. Schomann, and
others. KrichaufTs efforts were also directed toward the general
improvement of the' schools, to which end a Lutheran teachers’
federation was formed. Teachers of special note and merit in this
period w 7 ere men like F. Jacob, B. Schwartzkopff, G. Keller, J. F. W.
and A. Schulz.
The Immanuel Synod a.a.G. now as a synod devoted itself to
the cause of the congregational schools. A special school fund
was established, and one quarter of all mission collections was de-
voted to this fund. The minimum salary of a married teacher was
fixed at £IOO per annum.
This was a period of progress in every respect, and no one


imagined that the severest blow against Lutheran day schools was
about to fall. Misguided patriotic sentiment during the War caused
one obstacle after the other to be placed in their way; until at last
their death-knell was sounded on June 30, 1917.
The golden age of the Lutheran day school in Victoria coincided
with its inception in that state. The teachers received a salary of
£IOO per annum from the state, which levied a fee of one shilling
per week for every child. Hence Pastor Goethe was able to estab-
lish one school after the other, until in 1866 seven of them existed.
At his instigation the Victoria Synod adopted a special school con-
stitution pervaded by a fine Christian spirit. It demanded that the
teachers be pious persons to whom the spiritual well-being of the
children could be entrusted. Such men were found. These teachers
also took an interest in the welfare of the congregations, serving as
lay-readers and so forth when occasion demanded. But the Lutheran
schools of Victoria were not destined to flourish for long. In 1873
there came into force a law which declared all subsidized schools
to be state schools. In Doncaster the teacher, Max von Schramm,
who had refused to accept state aid. held out until August, 1884,
when the progressive secession of his pupils to free state schools
forced him to close the last Lutheran day school of the Herlitz
synod. The E.L.S.A. still retained some of its schools. The Vic-
toria Synod now established Sunday schools. The statistics of 1906
reveal that 485 children were cared for in fifteen of these schools.
The staunch Lutherans who' had migrated to the Riverina in
New South Wales retained their Lutheran- day schools for a con-
siderable time. Such schools existed in Walla Walla, Alma Park,
and Jindera. But here also these schools were superseded by the
state school; and then Walla Walla leased its school building to
the state, while the pastor was permitted to give instruction in
German and religion on two afternoons of the week.
The development in Queensland was similar to that in Victoria.
The German settlers deemed it self-evident that they must provide
for the education of their children, but it was with the greatest
difficulty that teachers were found. Though efforts were made to
acquire efficient teachers, in the main anyone with any degree of
aptitude for the position was simply appointed as teacher. The
available salaries were very meagre, and conditions generally ex-
ceedingly primitive. Some of the .Gossner lay missionaries in their
time served as teachers before entering the office of the ministry.
So, for example, W. Guhr taught in Toowoomba for twenty years
and had more than a hundred pupils. But before the Lutheran
day schools could be properly developed in Queensland, the state
schools were introduced, and the church schools were discarded.


A contributing cause was that many Lutherans in Queensland
quickly adopted the English language. One of the reasons why
the English language soon superseded the German was the fact that
most of them spoke Low German (Plattdeutsch) and the learning
of High German by the children actually meant the acquisition of
a third language. Nevertheless, Pastor Theile succeeded in re-
viving the Lutheran day school in Bethania, and gained the services
of J. F. W. Schulz as teacher from 1903-1909. He was a graduate
of the Point Pass College and teacher at Light’s Pass in South
Australia.
After the closing of the Lutheran day schools Sunday schools
were gradually instituted, and in South Australia “German school”
was held on Saturdays. Sunday school work was encouraged by
district synods. Committees were appointed to supervise the work,
which is further aided by the annual Sunday school teachers’ con-
ventions in all states. In South Australia a special instruction course
for teachers was recently inaugurated. A Sunday school paper, the
"Lutheran Children’s Friend,” is published in both languages. The
statistics for 193/ indicate that 5,024 children are being instructed
in these Sundav schools.
J
In Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland, where the state
laws made this possible, pastors of the U.E.L.C.A. impart religious
instructions in state schools to Lutheran children and others. The
latest statistics record 888 children thus cared for.
The closing of the Lutheran day schools in South Australia
during the War did not permanently put an end to them. “The
maid is not dead, but sleepeth.” The law forbidding Lutheran
schools in South Australia was rescinded as a result of deputations
and petitions in 1924. It was not, however, until 1929 that per-
mission was granted to give instruction in the German language,
and then but for one hour per day. But even before that date the
E.L.S.A. had begun to found new schools. In the U.E.L.C.A., how-
ever, owing to the fear that English Lutheran day schools would
be detrimental to the cause of the German language, and reluctance
to assume the financial responsibilities entailed by this step, undue
hesitation was shown in following the good example of the sister
synod. But at last the old spirit is reawakening. Luther says that
where Holy Scripture does not rule there he would certainly recom-
mend no one to send his child. And the evidences that training
in secular schools without religious instruction propagates the
spirit of worldliness can be readily seen. The thought of re-
establishing Lutheran day schools has never been dead, and has
now been given renewed imoetus by the faithful endeavors of
Pastor Muetzelfeldt, the President General, Pastor Stolz, and others.


Teachers for Lutheran day schools are being trained at Immanuel
College, and three such schools have now been reopened, namely,
in Langmeil-Tanunda, Light's Pass, and Appila. It is a cause of
gratification that the Education Department of South Australia is
not adverse to the opening of Lutheran day schools. On the con-
trary, it assists the Lutherans by accepting their trainees as students
of the State’s Teachers’ Training College. On the other hand, the
Church is no longer adverse to the state inspecting its schools, but
voluntarily invites state inspection.
Despite the fact that the work of the Lutheran day schools in
the past was marked by many shortcomings, it was richly blessed
in the training of God-fearing people, who have, in many instances,
been the mainstay of the Church. And if the Church is to prosper
the faithful spirit of the fathers will have to be revived, so that,
wherever possible, a Lutheran day school be erected beside the
church. The aim must be to preserve the old spirit of faithfulness
under the constantly changing conditions with their ever new de-
mands, so that, with ever greater zeal, we lead our children to the
Saviour, the Good Shepherd.


This is the way, walk ye in it
Isaiah XXX, 21.
CHAPTER THREE.
In faithfully tending the young the U.E.L.C.A. endeavored to keep
them with Christ.
The means of such tending of the Church’s youth are:—
A. Catechetical instructions.—These instructions were always
lostered by the Lutheran Church. Pastor Kavel’s synod placed
a special emphasis upon it, and added to the customary doctrinal
examination an examination of the heart (Herzenspruefungj
before the elders and members of the congregation. This “test
of the heart dei idcd the candidate s worthiness or unworthiness
tor confirmation. (In some congregations the practice of calling
upon the elders for their verdict still obtains j. Pastor Kavel him-
self prepared a catechism, which, however, was not published, and
instead of it the “Oelsche’’ Catechism was introduced. One thousand
copies were specially printed in Hamburg. Appendices by Kavel
(instructions concerning the Constitution, church discipline, and
the last things ) and Auricht (instructions concernino; confirma-
tion, the Church, the Confessions, and the Church Year, and the
Augsburg Confession in rhyme) were added to this already exten-
'ive hand book. Later pastors introduced the catechisms used in
the part of Germany from which they hailed, the Bavarian (Boeckh,
ouchrucker) and Lueneburg, also the Wuerttemberg Book of Ques-
tions (Fragebuechlein). The pastors who studied in America
introduced Reu’s, the Ohio and other catechisms. Various pastors
supplied the lessons themselves and usually dictated them to the
confirmands. The U.E.L.C.A. now has its own catechism in an
English and a German-English edition.
Catechetical instructions make heavy demands on both con-
nrmands and pastors. The confirmands frequently have to travel
long distances. In the early days they were usually obliged to
walk; later ponies and then bicycles were often used. The con-
firmands are expected to complete a course of instructions which
extends over many months and which demands hard work. To the


instruction in doctrine, as outlined in the catechism, is added the
study of Bible history, explanation of the Church Year, and the
memorizing of psalms and hymns. Pastors devote from forty to one
hundred and forty hours to the instructions of their classes, for much
depends on the size of the parish, on the distances to be traversed, on
the number of classes, on the previous training in Church and home.
The great distances separating the congregations of many parishes
present many difficulties. In the early times pastors sometimes
owned a number of horses, which would be used in turn for the
long journeys. A pastor would frequently spend one or more
nights in the homes of distant parishioners for the purpose of giv-
ing instruction. The fast but expensive car of to-day is rendering
a great service and helps to simplify the work of catechetical
instructions. Wherever good Sunday schools are found, or better
still, wherever Lutheran day schools have been established, this
work is rendered much easier. On the other hand, it is rendered
especially difficult, wherever the congregations are scattered and
bi-lingual, entailing a number of small classes annually. The
school laws of the country, making it hard to obtain exemption
from school, also tend to increase the difficulties of the pastors.
Saturday is often the only day on which children are free to attend
confirmation classes. The alternative is to w r ait until the child has
attained the school leaving age.
The pastors and children of other denominations escape these
difficulties. Only the Church of England retains confirmation with
a very brief preparation (probably not more than six to twelve
hours) of instructions. The U.E.L.C.A., however, in common with
the whole of the Lutheran Church, deems this system of catechetical
instructions a sacred trust, and by retaining it will continue power-
fully to exhort its young: —“This is the way, walk ye in it!”
B. Young people’s societies. —In the early years of the
Lutheran Church in Australia the Christian home together w T ith a
rigorous church discipline took good care of the confirmed youth.
But many immigrants of later years lacked the piety of the first
settlers and sought to introduce more of a worldly spirit. The
Church reacted against such influences, and endeavored to meet the
needs of its young members. Probably the first youth society to
be organized was founded in Bethany, South Australia, in 1868,
by Pastor Heidenreich. Its aim was “the strengthening of faith,
the fostering of godliness, the promotion of the fear of God, the
protection against moral dangers and the imparting of valuable
general knowledge.” Reception into this society was marked by
the fraternal kiss (Bruderkuss), which was customary in those days.
Similar societies were founded bv Pastors Rechner (Light’s Pass,
South Australia), Hellmuth (Bethania, Queensland), and Hiller


(Murtoa, Victoria). The special young people's services (Christen-
lehre) by Pastors Ortenburger, Leidig, and others also deserve
favorable mention. St. Paul’s congregation, Toowoomba,
Queensland, also founded such a society very early in its history.
This society appears to be the only one which has continued on
to this day without a break, ever proving itself a source of great
blessing for the youth and the congregation. Most of the early
societies succumbed to a lack of organization. The work of
caring of the confirmed received a strong stimulus, when in 1913
Pastor Held founded a young people’s society (Jugendverein) in
Tanunda, in which, even before the union, Pastors Held and Hebart
worked side by side, and when the young pastors, who had studied
in America, took the field. Of the latter Pastor Doehler (Murray
Bridge) rendered a signal service in promoting the founding of
societies and in uniting the societies of the South Australian dis-
trict in the South Australian Luther League (Lutherbund) —at
fanunda in 1930. Each district of our U.E.L.C.A. now has its own
state association which conducts an annual convention. This is
always gladly received by the various congregations and well
attended by delegates and visitors. Since 1934 the youth- of the
U.E.L.C.A. has its own official publication, ‘‘Lutheran Youth,”
edited by Pastor Loehe, South Brisbane. The total membership
of young people’s associations in 1937 was 2,680. In the eastern
states the English language is used almost exclusively; in South
Australia the heritage of the German language has been preserved
in quite a number of societies.
The various societies have rendered good service and have
greatly aided in keeping the young people within the fold of the
Church, in many cases even winning them back. The chief care
now is to preserve the young people’s societies from the danger of
secularization, so that they may really raise the spiritual level of
thb young members and help them to fulfil the motto: —
“This is the wav, walk ve in it!”


Feed the flock of God. 1, P©t©r V, 2
CHAPTER FOUR.
Ike L.E.L.C.A, worked diligently in congregation and parish
feeding the Lord's flock.
the new colonists in South Australia a hundred years ago
” it could be said in truth: ‘They continued steadfastly in the
apostles' doctrine. . . ." Part I, chapter 4, has shown this. Con-
ditions soon altered. The nature of the country precluded village
settlement for a farming community. Each family lived Dn its
own selection. The more the pioneers moved inland the larger
the holdings became, the more scattered the settlers had to live,
i he increase in the number of congregations under the care of one
pastor compelled the pastor to divide his time between the dif-
ferent congregations. Despite these difficulties the Word of God
dwelt richly among Australian Lutherans. On Sundays the
customary main service was augmented by regular evening services.
Almost everywhere in South Australia the evening of the first
Sunday of every month was dedicated to the mission cause. The
festivals of the Church ear were observed conscientiously.
Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost were each celebrated for three
days. Even the Days of the Apostles and of the Virgin Mary were
kept. Eour Days of Repentance with church cervices were observed.
There was also the Day of Thanksgiving on June 8, in commemora-
tion of the release from the oppression in the home land The
Reformation Festival was always celebrated on the nroper day,
October 31. The confessional service was invariably held on the
Saturday preceding the Sunday service, in which Holy Communion
was celebiated. The main Sunday services, though without much
liturgy, lasted from two to three hours. The work of the pastors
was augmented by that of the lav also by that of the
eldeis of the congregation. The Lutheran Church has no lay preach-
ing. Where it occurred, as in some instances in Queensland, it
soon checked, as»the Church believed it better to let the congrega-
tions hear in the lay reading services, read from books, the testi-


monies of the gieal pieachcrs, old and modern, than to expose them
to the danger of having to listen to men who were not duly called,
neither by an inner nor by an outward call. The pastors were, as
a rule, examples of faithful application to duty. They did not
mind distances. Not did wind and weather, the cold rain of winter,
and the broiling heat of the Australian sun deter them from ful-
filling their engagements. ’ They and their faithful horse would
see it through. Up to 3,000 miles a year covered within the
parish were no uncommon achievements.
A review of those times cannot but reveal that the pioneer
pastors were faithfully obeying the injunction at the head of this
chapter and that the congregations religiously attended the services.
Great changes have since then taken place. Week-day services,
with one or two exceptions, have disappeared. Even the Friday
prayer meetings are hardly known by the present generation. (They
became an established order during the time of persecution in
Prussia!). Many festivals and holy days have disappeared. The
Emigration Thanksgiving Festival survived in one or two congre-
gations till the time of the War and then lapsed completely. The
Church had a hard struggle in retaining or reintroducing the second
holy day of the three “high” festivals, also the festival of Ascen-
sion and Reformation Day, and one Day of Repentance. The
economic conditions, the influence of the Reformed Churches which
know no Church Year, threaten to undermine Lutheran usages. The
confessional sei vices are now almost universally conducted on
Sundays, either before the main service, or between it and the
communion service proper. The Sunday evening services in
country centres were largely discontinued because of the temptation
to immorality among the youth on the way home. In the cities the
morning services are in danger of losing their character as the main
services. This is due to the questionable fashion of the Reformed
Churches of making the evening service the main service. It would
he wrong not to admit that a decrease in true spirituality and an
*ln view of what the horse meant in the history of the
Lutheran Church of Australia, an entire chapter on the subject in
tms book was none too glorious a monument to that deserving' beast.
And what a thrillmg chapter it would be—an epic of clever re-
sourcefulness, of asinine obstinacy and trickery, of thrilling escapades
due frequently to the novice in horsemanship, of staunch endurance
ot horse and driver in broiling sun and blinding dust and pelting
rain, through and waters, bottomless marshes, ungraded hills, scoured
valleys, treacherous creeks in time, if not on time for services. In
innumerable cases Dolly and Fanny, Tyro and Tommy, and Hans could
sately be given free rein while a book or some piece of theological
literature was being absorbed by the unflagging Lutheran pastor.


increase of worldliness within the rank and file of the Lutheran
Church are at the hack of these charges.
There are, however, some redeeming features.
Lutherans, on the whole, are still more regular in attending
the services than members of the Reformed Churches. Mission
festivals and synodical and other celebrations with morning and
afternoon services and two sermons in each still draw Lutherans.
Communion attendance is on the increase. Lay readers of to-day
are as loyal as those of former periods. What splendid talent
selected from lay members of the congregation is constantly being
placed at the disposal of the Church! Above all, the pastors of
the Lutheran Church are as zealous as ever in feeding the flock of
God. The necessity of employing the English language was recog-*
nized and the additional work it entailed was gladly done by the
pastors. What that meant in the cases of pastors from Germany
is hardly sufficiently appreciated by the younger generation. The
scattered nature of their fields is still a difficulty. In the new
districts it cannot be expected otherwise. It is deplorable that it is
still the case in older districts, as overlapping, due to former dis-
sension, is the cause of it. The merging of the synods has not yet
resulted in rounding off the parishes according to geographical
location. (Here is a task for the present and the next generation!)
But the pastors do not mind distances. Nor do they mind work.
True, week-day services are not held, but there are other functions
which need the presence of the pastor, ladies’ guilds, young people’s
meetings, congregational and parish meetings, the latter when
matters of common interest to the parish are being discussed. Visit-
ing of families and calls on the sick are also necessary. The horse
has long been superseded by the car. The pastors are thankful for
this modern conveyance. This not only because it is much more
comfortable than the old means of travelling—this advantage is in
part offset by the cost of running a car —but because it enables
them to serve two, three, even four congregations, thirty to sixty,
even one hundred miles apart, on one Sunday. The pastors are
eager to beautify the services. The times of the services without
liturgy are past. Liturgy began to come into its own as late as
the beginning of this century. Pastor Leidig was the chief pioneer
in this field. The regrettable chaos in the orders of service due
to the specific history of congregations and synods is by no means
a thing of the past. But attention is being focussed upon this
subiect and success has been achieved in some measure. The order
of the “Common Service” is in use in the English services in the
rnaiority of parishes. This is the translation of Loebe’s liturgy
which is being adopted in increasing measure for the German ser-
vices. The pastors are alive to the necessity of announcing their
services to their congregations and to the general public by means


of secular newspapers and —a line means —the parish paper. The
number of parishes enjoying this agency of information is steadily
increasing. Use is also made of the radio. There are now live
stations, two national A stations and three B stations, from which
U.E.L.C.A. pastors regularly broadcast week-day devotions and full
Sunday services.
The pastors of the U.E.L.C.A. are busy men. The statistics do
not tell their miles of travel, the hours of their work, but they tell
the number of preaching services. In 1937 there were conducted
7,392 preaching services, 5,048 English and 2,344 German
(Lsthonian services are not included), an average of over one
hundred per pastor annually.
But there are sermons and sermons. A special reason for grati-
tude to the Lord is that the Lutheran pastors of to-day are, with
rare exceptions, fully alive to the necessity of taking the Lord’s
injunction to “feed” His flock seriously. They also recognize that
the quality of their sermons is not by any means a matter of indif-
ference, to say nothing of what is expected of them in other branches
of their work. The early Lutherans w r ere used to hearing good ser-
mons in the days when the German language alone held .sway.
They still expect the same class of sermon, be it in English or in
German. The pastors know this. The rivalry (not purposed as
a rule) between synods and congregations is a contributory incen-
tive to the pastors to strive after something beyond mediocrity in
their service. The lax pastor w 7 ould soon notice the drift of members
into a neighboring parish, causing an inevitable leakage in the
congregational treasury. Comments made by English people who
hear Lutheran sermons in chuc'ch or over the air, or read them in
the papers, reflect creditably upon their quality. This rule like
all others is, of course, not without exception. Distinguishing fea-
tures of the Lutheran sermons are their Scriptural-doctrinal ten-
dency, their Christ-centred nature, their courageous directness and
aggressiveness, their warm personal appeal and encouragement to
practical co-operation by the congregation. The fear of dead
orthodoxv, and that pietistic element whi'ch came in at the beginning
and which was reinforced by the pastors from Basel, as w r ell as the
constant connection with the rich life and depth of the Lutheran
theology of the home land of the Reformation is not without bear-
ing upon this fact.
Thus, as in the past, so in the present, the U.E.L.C.A. is leading
the flock of Christ on green pastures and beside the still waters.
The congregations of the U.E.L.C.A. have reason to sing:
How blessed we should e’er regard the vale
Where God’s Word brightly sheds its light;
Where righteousness may thus in truth prevail
And Zion ne’er be wrapped in night.


Now ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular.
1 Cor. 12. 7.
CHAPTER FIVE.
By discreet and far-seeing synodical and executive work the
U.E.L.C.A. was enabled to play its part in the edification of the
Church—the Body of Christ.
TF the Church, the body of Christ, is to be built aright, joint
-■-work on the part of the individual congregations becomes indis-
pensable. In the Church this joint work is carried on by the
organization of synods. As far as South Australia was concerned
this task was easy. The Lutherans who had been trained in the
fires of persecution had a clear idea of what the Church was, and
a strong desire to build the Lord’s Zion. The idea and the desire
found expression in church building and church work which was
not equalled elsewhere in the Commonwealth. In Victoria matters
were more difficult. Here there was neither a common,experience
(as the perscution in Germany had provided for South Australian
Lutherans) nor a joint church work. Emphasis was laid
upon “personal Christianity.’* The powerful personalities of
Goethe and Herlitz were the chief unifying factors. In Queensland
years of disheartening and disappointing labor were required before
even loose synodical affiliations were formed. What work lay
behind the founding of the various synods, and then in the uniting
of them in spirit and in truth." What travel and travail until the
U.E.L.C.A. was founded! Heartfelt gratitude is due to God that
the two hundred and twenty-eight congregations served by seventy-
one pastors have become one body, the United Evangelical Lutheran
Church in Australia. (Only three congregations remain as yet
unaffiliated, although themselves richly blessed by the Church which
surrounds and serves them!.
It is of utmost importance that church members become ever
more “church-minded.” While it is comparatively easy to awaken
interest in the local congregation and its property, since one is


obliged to assist in their maintenance, the response to wider needs
and broader duties requires more cultivation. The history of the
U.E.L.C.A. has clearly shown that next to common suffering in
persecution nothing so greatly assisted in cultivating this “church-
mindedness” as common projects with their accompanying weal
and woe. Church-works such as missions, colleges, seminaries,
and rest-homes emancipate the Christian mind from the narrow-
ness of parish-pump policies. It is evident that even now not all
parts of the U.E.L.C.A. are on a par in this regard—the E.L.S.A.
has made greater strides in this direction.
Great blessing accompanied the office of president as a unifying
factor. The president has ever been the foremost among equals.
The office has always reflected the man. Various other methods
were tried, singly or in combination (synodical committees,
Immanuel Synod; church council, Victoria), but the result has
always been the same; their importance was overshadowed by that
of the president; to-day it is still the case in both district and
general synods. Although much help was and is received from the
pastors’ conference, it has not removed the burden from the shoul-
ders of the president. Standing committees nowadays aid in the
work of the Church, also the assistant executives who have been
appointed for many years past. The work of the standing com-
mittees is carried out by their ministerial and lay members in
addition to their usual tasks, frequently without remuneration, and
in some cases even travelling expenses are donated by the members.
Only the office of president-general is established on an independent
basis. The office of president gained prestige with the passing of
the years. Despite all jealously-guarded congregational and
synodical privileges, wise and strong leadership was appreciated.
On special occasions, such as visitations, calls, inductions, and
jubilees, the president’s presence and help is sought. Regular
visitations have as yet not been inaugurated. Up to now these have
been intermittent and spasmodic. A curb to possible “lust for
power” is provided by the very definite accountability of the offi-
cials to synod.
Synodical conferences assist greatly in maintaining and
strengthening “church-mindedness” and the sense of joint responsi-
bility. Pastor Auricht states that, in contradistinction to
Fritzsehe, Kavel faithfully held annual svnods. This greatly aided
in the blessed and orderly progress of the Church’s work. Pastor
Herlitz was also alive to the great value of annual conferences,
even in small bodies, “The meeting and greeting of members, the
sense of common need and common blessing, the inspiration and
encouragement which such conferences foster is invaluable.” . . .
The annual synods are to Lutherans what the high festivals at


Jerusalem were to Israel. Delegates from all congregations (usually
one for every fifty communicants), brothers and sisters in Christ.
shepherds and flocks of the Lord, meet in happy companionship and
demonstrate visibly the strength and unity of the Church. Sunday
is the day of high festival, the other days are days of strenuous labor.
The larger the district, the greater the task, extending from one to
four pages of closely-printed agenda. Deep interest as well as
deftness in controversy are virtually demanded of the delegates if
the task is to be expeditiously accomplished. Parliamentary rules
of debate have been generally adopted, but are not too stringently
applied, lest the means seem more important than the end. Dele-
gates may then return to their own congregations reinvigorated,
informed, and enthusiastic, to place the problems and possibilities
of the synod before their fellow-members. The minutes were for-
merly copied by the teachers; nowadays printed copies of the
synodical report are distributed or sold in sufficient numbers to
inform the members of what was achieved and decided.
Every three years the general synod meets in conference, to
which each district in turn is host. The election of a delegate by
every parish, the manifold preparations by various committees and
executives of reports and financial statements, extended journeys to
distant states, the manifold and complex tasks to which the dele-
gates address themselves in conferences extending over a full week,
all this not only marks the most extensive periodical activity of
the Church, but especially recurrent “highs’ 5 in her synodical life.
Open-handed and open-hearted hospitality is given free play at
the synods, and generosity in support of the Church's work is well
to the fore. Offerings are taken up regularly at the intervals in
accordance with the custom introduced by Pastor Leidig. Up to
a total of £250 has been given at a single synod. In short, both
general and district synods express clearly and in many ways that
i4 ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.'*
Think of all those who help! The almanac devotes six and a
half pages to a catalogue of names of officials of synod. The
general synod has ninety-six positions to fill, the districts one
hundred and seventy-six. Publications board, college council, and
general executive consist solely of ministers; the personnel of all
other committees is composed of both pastors and laymen- Of
course, there are not as many different persons in these committees
as there are posts to fill; many serve in several capacities. Usually
pastors preside. Although circumstances do not always allow of
as wide a representation as might be desired, it is a cause for rejoic-
ing when positions are filled with members from near and far.
Wider interest and consequently greater support for the Church’s
work are thus ensured. Thus, “we, being many, are one body, and
every one members one of another.”


“He that gathereth not with Me
scattereth.” Luke XI, 23.
CHAPTER SIX.
Ihe U.E.L.C.A. faithfully gathers the scattered and ministers unto
the weak in home and citv mission work ,
✓
W7. LOEHE, of Neuendettelsau, Germany, once said that the
” work of missions to the heathen was “the Church in Action.”
Home mission work, however, as we see it, especially in the
American and Australian Lutheran Churches, has a right to be
similarly called. The object of this work is to look up those
members of the Church who have moved to new districts or to the
cities and to minister to them, and, in addition, to get in touch
with immigrants of the Lutheran faith, and, on the whole, to care
for the lost, even in hospitals and prisons.
It is a w r ork that the Australian Lutheran Church has always
done and the fruit of it is the U.E.L.C.A. as it is seen to-day. Even
into the most secluded parts of the bush, the Church has followed
its members and searched for them. Those who did this work in
the early period were called “itinerant preachers,” and they were
usually none other than the various pastors under the supervision
of their president. At the present time the work is carried on more
systematically under specially appointed home mission boards,
whose task it is also to seek the necessary financial support from
synod and congregations. The practically exclusive use of the
motor car as a means of conveyance has increased the possibilities
but also the expenses connected with the work.
It is interesting to glance at the home mission work of the early
period. For fourteen years Pastors Rechner and Auricht in South
Australia were the only two ministers of this synod, and, therefore,
had to minister to those scattered brethren alone. In a light gig,
with two horses yoked in tandem style, journeys would often begin
at dawn, over roads that were often very bad, across to the Hum-
mocks, right down to southern Yorke’s Peninsula. Nights would
be spent in a pug hut or a dug-out, in which divine services were


held with souls that were hungry for the Word of Grace. Pastor
Auricht also served the Murray Flat congregation (Sedan) in those
years. This always meant a journey of seven hours’ duration over
dangerous roads. Then for years Pastor Doehler traversed the exten-
sive stretches from Condowie to Baldina, Bundey, and Stonefield.
And when members of the Church moved to Appila, Peterborough,
Wilmington, in the north, it meant a trip of one hundred and sixty
miles to serve them. In the nineties the Loxton district was opened
up for settlement; Pastor Kuss served the people there from
Mannum for fourteen years. He used to travel by buggy, and the
journey took two days each way. He spent the night in the open
on the ground. This continued until a pastor could be stationed
there. In the first decade of this century the Pinnaroo district and
the West Coast (Eyre’s Peninsula) were settled, and among the
first settlers were Lutheran farmers. Pastor Koschade pioneered
the Pinnaroo district for the Immanuel Synod; the Immanuel
Synod a.a.G. and the E.L.S.A. a.a,G., however, were working there
as well. This rivalry between synods made the work much more
difficult and cumbersome. This was the case especially on the
West Coast where settlement was slow on account of the difficulty
of transport, and the journey had to be made either by boat or by
the roundabout way through Port Augusta. To reduce expenses,
Pastor Siegle (then Immanuel Synod a.a.G.) took up a farm on the
West Coast, hoping thereby to maintain himself to a certain extent.
The scheme, however, was not a success. But what long journeys
he used to make with his faithful horse! The itinerant preacher of
the Immanuel Synod, Pastor Bogner, regularly visited the West
Coast for some years, besides serving the new congregations on the
Murray at Ramco, Holder, Cadell, and other places.
The work in Western Australia and Queensland must also be
mentioned here. In 1907 Pastor Stolz (Light’s Pass) was sent by
the pastors of the Immanuel Synod to make a tour of investigation
in Western Australia. This led to the appointment of Paul Stolz,
and later also of Albert Reuther. as home missionaries to this work.
Pastor Leidig, while in Germany, had interested the present Martin
Luther-Bund (Federation) In the matter, so that it was financed
almost entirely with German money. The spiritual care of about
two hundred souls in the wheat-growing districts, at the saw-mills,
and on the gold-fields, was made possible by a special railway con-
cession to Churches which enabled a pastor to travel on all lines as
much as he desired for £3O per year. Pastor Stolz in one vear
travelled nearly 30,000 miles. Where the railway could not take him,
the bicycle was used. The undertaking seemed assured when through
certain brethren of the synod a manse was provided in Perth. But


the War came and the support from Germany ceased. The synod
could not carry on, and Pastors Stolz and Reuther left for America
and Queensland respectively. Since the formation of the U.E.L.C.A.
nothing was done beyond a tour of investigation by Pastor Obst,
which provided little encouragement to resume the work.
When Pastor Leidig discovered that a considerable number of
German families was in lasmania, he went there and found twenty-
five Lutheran families in Hobart and some more in Bismarck.
Pastors Leidig and Loehe visited these people several times, and in
1911 A. Fehlberg (Jeparit, Victoria) was stationed there. Pastor
Fehlberg discovered a number of Germans in Bismarck who had
come from Pomerania in Germany (1870), and who also answered
to his own name of Fehlberg; they were his cousins, but they had
already fallen into the hands of the Seventh Day Adventists. To
help lighten the financial burden connected with the work an
orchard was purchased, which Pastor Fehlberg also attended, but
the double work was not a success. The undertaking w r as abandoned
m 1914. A personal debt of £260 to Pastor Leidig incurred in
this work was later repaid by the synod.
Among the first in the Victoria Synod to undertake such a
gathering-in or mission work was Pastor \ iquet, a Gossner mis-
sionary, who worked amongst the people on the gold-fields. He
wandered up hill and dowm dale with the good tidings, mostly
among gold-seekers who were hostile to-Christianity. He left no
German tent unvisited. With much labor, many tears and much
fervent prayer, he persisted in Ids work and was permitted to see
that the Lord owned his work. Pastor Hampe (also a Gossner mis-
sionary ) was another of these itinerant preachers. He first wmrked
in South Brisbane and JToowoomba (Queensland) and later moved
to Grafton, New South Wales, which at that time belonged to the
\ ictoria Synod. Every three months he took a trip of
three hundred and sixty miles, going as far as Armidale and
lenterfield. 1 hese were, at least in part, dangerous journeys
which sometimes led through herds of half-wdld cattle, and
at times he was even refused shelter at night. When he
could stand this life no longer, Pastor Herlitz called him
to the Wimmera district in Victoria as an itinerant preacher
(1882). Here he served the newly established small con-
gregations at Wail, Katyil, Ni-Ni, and Winiam, and built one little
church after another—sometimes of wood, and other times of pug.
The roads in summer were generally good, but in winter very heavy
and muddy. The subject of itinerant preaching began to occupy
more and more time at synods, and in 1882 a resolution was passed
that a permanent “itinerant preacher'’ be r appointed. The new
arrivals from Basel were always given this position which provided
theifi with an opportunity of getting to know the conditions and the


people. Pastor Sinipfendoerfer reported in 1886 that in that year
he had made one hundred and sixty-six visits to places that
were scattered over a stretch of four hundred miles. Pastor
Fischer related in 1896 that in the previous year he had
crossed the Victorian Mallee eleven times and had travelled
1,542 miles to conduct thirty services for these isolated
people, all this in addition to his other parish work. No price
was too high and no way too difficult for him to minister to the
spiritual needs of those committed to his care. In New South
Wales it was Pastor Bemmann who especially labored untiringly
as itinerant preacher. In 1910 it was decided that the pastor at
Temora should be the itinerant preacher for that state. The work
undertaken by Pastor Fiedler from Temora in Gilgandra and Alec-
town was brought to nought by the War.
Of Queensland the same stories can be told. Congregations
sprang into existence through the faithful mission work of indi-
vidual pastors, of Pastor Schirmeister who travelled as far as Too-
woomba, Pastor Haussmann wdio went as far as Maryborough and
Rockhampton, Pastor Heiner of Ipswich, and others. With the
organization and founding of synods, however, this work became a
synodical undertaking. The Evangelical Lutheran Synod of
Queensland appointed Pastor Egen to this work, which he did in
addition to his ordinary parish work. Pastor Frank, jun., who
followed his members and others right to Kingaroy and Mun-
dubbera, deserves special mention. The United German and Scan-
dinavian Lutheran Synod, however, carried on this work with
greater energy, and from 1900 it had a special fund for the
purpose of supporting this work —in addition to the support in both
money and men (Pastors Hartmann and Fischer) —given by the
Lutherische Gotteskasten in Hanover (a branch of the present Martin
Luther-Bund). Very faithful work was done by the brothers,
Martin and Albert Reuther, for whom no distance seemed too great
with their bicycles.
From the beginning a tremendous amount of work was done
by the various groups that now constitute the U.E.L.C.A. in order
to bring together scattered Lutherans and to organize them into
congregations. In spite of inadequate organization, meagre finan-
cial support, and limited means of travelling, these itinerant preach-
ers and pastors of the early periods, as a result of heroic courage
and noble unselfishness, contributed greatly to the building up of
the Lutheran Church.
How different it all became in later times! Competition between
svnods (except for that with the E.L.S.A.) is no more. The present
better organization of home mission work ensures that both those
isolated people and the home missionaries obtain what they need.
They know that their Church is behind them. Of course, deficits


show that the necessity of this work needs still more stressing in
the congregations. The necessary pastors are now being provided
by the seminary in North Adelaide. What a joy it was, when, in
1925, one of the first class of graduates could be stationed
on Eyre’s Peninsula (West Coast, South Australia) as home
missionary! Later others followed him there and elsewhere. These
young Australians, born and trained in Australia, are well suited
for the work. Even to-day the work is not easy. Long distances
(especially on the West Coast) make the work more difficult. In 1925
six hundred miles had to be travelled by the West Coast home mis-
sionary in order to visit each of his congregations and preaching
places only once; in 1927 he travelled 21,000 miles by car, serving
ten to fifteen preaching stations; three services on a Sunday with
about one hundred miles of travelling is quite usual on home mission
fields. In Queensland the bicycle has been and is still being used
more than elsewhere —one pastor having travelled as much as 15,000
miles with his. But this strenuous work with the £12,000 or so per
year that the Church contributes towards it is undoubtedly worth
while, even though the increase of three hundred communicant
members for a synodical period of three years seems somewhat
small. Those small groups are the beginnings of the congregations
and the parishes of the future.
And now a glance at the “city mission/’ The cities have been
referred to as the cemeteries of the Church. Nowhere are church
members more easily lost than in the cities. They often live a long
way from their church, and as other churches are nearby, their
children are soon attracted to other Sunday schools, and thus they
become estranged from their Mother Church. In addition to this,
the pleasures in the city are so attractive. Truly self-sacrificing
work in the early days w r as done by the very capable Pastor von
Schramm in Melbourne over a period of twenty years. In South
Australia the beginning was made by the untiring Pastor Bemmann
in Adelaide. After he retired from parish work in 1923, the actual
work of gathering people into a home mission congregation was
begun by President General Stolz on his removal to Adelaide in
1930. As the work became too much for him, Pastor Wiencke, of
Queensland, was appointed. In 1937 the home mission congrega-
tion in North Adelaide numbered one hundred and thirty one souls.
In Brisbane, city mission work is being done by the emeritus, Pastor
Krause. Much more could and should be done in this work. The
E.L.S.A, has been more active in this respect.
With regard to the establishment of benevolent institutions, so
far only one is in existence, the Old Folk’s Home, “Salem,” in
Toowoomba, Queensland. Mav progress soon be evident in this
sphere also, so that the work of gathering together and catering for
the scattered and suffering may be carried out ever more faithfully.


In the wilderness shall waters
break out, and streams in the
desert. And the parched land shall
become a pool, and the thirsty land
springs of Avater-
Isaiah XXXV, 6-7.
CHAPTER SEVEN.
The U.E.L.C.A. was permitted to bring the gospel to the heathen by
self-sacrificing mission work.
T7HIOM the beginning the Australian Lutheran Church was a
“mission-minded” Church. This was particularly the case with
the Kavel section, no doubt due to its being influenced by pietism,
its renunciation of all dead orthodoxy, and its emphasizing of a
faith not only doctrinally correct, but one that is personal, vital.
This explains why all the mission fields of the U.E.L.C.A. had
their origin in the Immanuel Synod. The name of the church paper
of this synod, “Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung,” bears testimony to
its missionary tendency.
The chief missionary interests were centred on the aborigines.
The arid country in which most of the work was done, the nomadic
life of the natives, and the providing of them with work as well as
with sustenance, when once they were settled on a mission station,
made the work difficult. But the synod persevered in its endeavors
despite difficulties and meagre results.
I.—THE FIRST ATTEMPTS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND
QUEENSLAND.
L The work of the four Dresden missionaries in South Australia.
The benefactor of the Lutherans, George Fife Angas, was also
responsible for the sending out of these missionaries. Being a
friend of mission work, he did not only see to it that the aborigines
were mentioned in the state constitution and had certain areas appor-
tioned to them, but he also desired that missionaries be sent to
them. With the assistance of Pastor Kavel he secured four men
from the Dresden (later Leipzig) Mission Society. Mr. Angas did


not only provide almost the total amount of their passage, but
also paid £SO annually for their services for a number of years.
The first two missionaries to arrive were Schuermann and Teichel-
mann, They came out on the same boat with Governor Gawler,
South Australia’s first governor, and reached Holdfast Bay on
October 13, 1838. Meyer and Klose followed in 1840. Setting
to work at once they learned the language and opened a school for
native children on the northern banks of the River Torrens in the
vicinity of the present Adelaide Bridge. After doing preparatory
work at Encounter Bay, Schuermann went to Port Lincoln and also
became Protector of Aborigines in that district. Meyer continued
the work at Encounter Bay. A number of essays written by the
missionaries and dealing with the native language and ethnology
are in safe keeping at the Adelaide Museum. The missionaries
enjoyed the respect of the Governor and their fellow-citizens and
received substantial financial support from the Government. An
economic depression later, however, induced the Government to
discontinue subsidizing the missionaries who consequently were in
distress, even though Kavel’s congregations sent some contributions
to them. Meyer, who had married a Berlin society lady, for a time
resorted to wood carting to earn a livelihood. The Dresden Mission
Society, unable to do much for its missionaries in South Australia,
advised them to seek aid from the South Australian Lutheran con-
gregations. This they did by accepting positions as pastors in the
Australian Lutheran Church. Klose became the founder of the
Adelaide congregation of the E.L.S.A. Pastor Auricht in passing
an opinion on these missionaries wrote, “They should have remained
at their posts.”
Until KaveTs congregations began a mission of their own they
continued to forward contributions to the Leipzig and, later, also to
the Hermannsburg Mission Societies.
2. The Work of the Gossner Missionaries in Queensland *
A Ith ough this mission cannot be called a Lutheran mission—the
missionaries were connected with the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales —it nevertheless deserves mention, as several of the
Gossner brethren assisted in doing pioneer work in the Australian
Lutheran Church. The men who came to Queensland were Gossner’s
first missionaries. The first of them, with their wives and families
numbering thirty persons, arrived at what they called Zion’s Hill,
near Brisbane, on March 30. 1838. They were maintained by the
Government and friends of the mission in Sydney. This mission
*For a detailed account see F. 0. Theile’s “One Hundred Years
of the Lutheran Church in Queensland,” Part I.


was not a success either. Causes of the failure were the lack oi
leadership, the cessation of Government support, and the decrease
of contributions from .Sydney, which made it obligatory for the
missionaries to spend much of their valuable time in doing manual
work for a livelihood. Further causes of the failure were the
bird-of-passage nature of the aborigines and the proximity of the
mission station to the settlements of the white man. An attempt
at establishing a mission station thirty miles inland ended with the
wounding and imperilled flight of Haussmann. The misson enter-
prise at Zion’s Hill continued until 1860. Haussmann, who in the
meantime had been a pastor in Victoria, made a further attempt
to do mission work on his return in 1866, this time at Bethesda,
near Beenleigh, where he also conducted services for the German
settlers. The Victoria Synod and several Queensland congregations
supported him. Neglect in submitting a balance sheet on the part
of Haussmann led to the discontinuance of this support. An in-
glorious end followed. Unable to meet its debts the mission was
seized by its creditors.
IT.—FIFTY YEARS OF MISSION WORK AMONG THE DIERT
IN THE NORTH-EAST OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
In chapter 9, Part I, an account of the beginning of this work
is given. The fifty years can be divided into three periods,
1. The first period from 1866-1874, during which the Langmeil-
Light’s Pass Synod and the Bethania-Lobethal Synod conjointly
did the work , with missionaries from Hermannsburg .
- The mission caravan which the narrative left at Neukirch headed
for the arid country on the Cooper’s Creek in the north-eastern
corner of South Australia. The journey, which was beset with
many difficulties, lasted three months, the little company reaching
their destination at Lake Killalpaninna on January 31, 1867. Here
the Government provided the mission with one thousand square
miles of land and the natives with a reserve of one hundred square
miles. Moravian Brethren had settled at Lake Kopperamanna, ten
miles from Lake Killalpaninna, on December 10, 1866. The
aborigines, however, menaced the missionaries at both stations so
much that they had to leave for the south on saddle horses under
Government protection in May, 1867. When the establishment of
a police station in that area had made the country safe, the mission-
aries returned. Missionary Homann and the lay helper, Vogelsang,
who in the meantime had been married, were accompanied by their
wives. Another addition to the party was Koch, a gifted young
man who had found bis Saviour in Australia and who was to be
teacher at Killalpaninna. The natives gradually took up a more


friendly altitude towards the missionaries and came to the services.
In 1869 .a miniature primer, catechism and Bible history was pub-
lished in Dieri. In an endeavor to make the mission self-contained
it undertook to run sheep. In 1873 the nett income from this
source amounted to £470. Repeated droughts, however, depressed the
mission staff. The Moravian-Brethren left. Missionary Homann did
likewise in 1873 and became a pastor. Schoknecht left soon after
his arrival. Koch died an early death.
The congregations of the two church bodies did their duty.
Their members readily supplied the necessary means to meet the
enormous expenses. At weddings and baptisms collections were
taken up for the mission. By their combined efforts the congrega-
tions raised £3,500 by 1871. Nevertheless, the mission committee
was at times seized with despondency. The Kavel section was
disappointed that the missionaries left to become pastors. The
joint management by Hermannsburg and Australia caused diffi-
culties. The E.L.S.A. was willing to leave the control of the mis-
sion to Hermannsburg. The growing tension between the two synods
made matters worse. In 1874 the E.L.S.A. withdrew from the
work altogether. The property was divided, the E.L.S.A. receiving
two-thirds of the property and the Immanuel Synod one-third, in-
cluding the station. The latter had no missionaries and no pros-
pects of getting any. Thanks to Auricht’s and Rechner’s love for
the mission and to the faithfulness of the lay brethren on the station
the work was continued.
2. The second period (1874-1884) in which the work ivas carried
on by the Immanuel Synod and the General Synod , with mis-
sionaries from Neuendettelsau.
It was an act of faith for the small Immanuel Synod to carry
on the work. Pastor Rechner became the chairman of the mission
committee. As Hermannsburg did not make available a missionary,
C. A. Meyer, an elder of the Langmeil congregation, together with
his wife, was sent up, and in conjunction with Vogelsang and Jacob
he continued the work until Missionary Flierl arrived in 1878.
Under FlierTs energetic leadership the work soon began to prosper
and the first twelve natives were baptized Epiphany, 1879.
He transferred the station which had temporarily been at another
place to Killalpaninna and called it Bethesda. A church with a
spire forty-two feet high was erected out of mud bricks. Flierl
soon published a catechism and Bible history in the native language.
In 1883 he received as assistant a relative by the same name. The
work was rendered difficult by the tendency of the natives to roam
about the country. The older ones could not be persuaded to be-


come Christians. At the services, however, fifty to one hundred
attended. Droughts and years of plenty followed in rotation.
Endeavors were made to save the flocks in time of drought by sink-
ing wells. Through this precautionary measure the mission saved
its 5,000 sheep, whereas a squatter lost 57,000. The distance from
the mission station to the railway was reduced to one hundred and
twenty-five miles in 1883 by the extension of the railway line to
Farina. Jacob, who acted as carrier for the mission, nevertheless,
had still to spend eight months of the year on the track. The
scarce and slow means of communication made it difficult for the
committee in the south to manage the mission. A commission,
headed by Rechner, visited the station and made the best possible
arrangements for communication and transport. The synod faith-
fully supported the work and collected a sum of £BOO annually.
The Victoria Synod, which had appointed a sub-committee, sup-
ported the mission to the extent of £7O to £IOO per year. Mr.
Angas gave several substantial donations and the Bavarian Mission
Society forwarded £l5O to £3OO annually. The sheep, however,
were the chief source of income.
On two expeditions into the north-east Flierl satisfied himself
that the country was only sparsely populated and instigated a move
to begin a mission in New Guinea, where greater opportunities
obtained. When the schism occurred in 1884 the weakened Immanuel
Synod w 7 as left in possession of the mission on the condition that
£SOO be paid to the General Synod should the mission work among
the aborigines be abandoned. The native Christian congregation
Consisted of thirty-nine souls at that time.
3. The third period . 1885-1915, in which the Immanuel Synod did
the work alone.
(a) 1885-1900, the year of Pastor Reclineds death. —These
fifteen years were the heyday of the mission both economically and
spiritually. Meyer went to Hope Valley, which station Flierl
founded when, on his way to New Guinea, he was detained at
Cooktown, Queensland. Riegert, a teacher from Germany, filled
Meyer’s place. Missionary Reuther, from Neuendettelsau, who had
married the widow of Pastor Stolz, arrived in 1888. F. Leidig, a
further new arrival, after a short stay, left for Point Pass. Mis-
sionary Strehlow 7 arrived in 1892. He rendered faithful services
and in conjunction with Missionary Reuther translated the New
Testament into Dieri. The Dieri New Testament was published by
the British and‘Foreign Bible Society. Missionary Siebert was
enlisted as a third missionary to make possible more extensive work
among the aborigines living in camp? in the surrounding district.
Strehlow went to Hermannsburg. Missionary Wettengel replaced


him. The number of baptized increased to one hundred and
eighteen, and approximately three hundred natives either lived on
the station or were supported by the mission. The native Christians
earnestly endeavored to lead a Christian life and showed Christian
fortitude when facing death. For many years the mission committee
was composed of President Rechner, the Pastors Loehe and Auricht,
and the brethren R. Graetz, Pursche, Fr. Linke, and G. Hahn—
brethren of the good old stamp. Several commissions visited the
station in the interest of the work. Flierl, jun., left the station
for America. An artesian bore was leased from the Government.
Flood waters came down the Cooper’s Creek about every five years
and were hailed with great joy. The inhabitants of the station
would go forth to meet the flood waters and the church bell would
call them into the house of God to sing “Now thank we all our
God.” Windmills pumped the water into the gardens which soon
yielded vegetables in abundance. The aborigines did good work
among the sheep and as stockmen and carriers. A further exten-
sion of the railway line to Hergott Springs (Marree) brought the
railway to within ninety miles of the station. From sheep and
cattle an income of'£l,soo-£3,000 was realized annually. This high
income was very acceptable as it provided £1,200 for the needy
Bloomfield mission in Queensland, and additional funds for Her-
mannsburg.
The inland of Australia, however, is merciless. In 1897, 28,000
sheep were shorn; several months later 22,000 sheep perished for
want of feed and water. There was cause for anxiety. Asked
what they intended to do, Pastor Rechner answered. “What we have
done! We bought 7,000 sheep and we leave the feeding of them
in our Lord’s hands. Our duty is to fold our hands in prayer and
to glorify our Lord by putting firm confidence in Him.” Through-
out the synod prayer meetings for rain were held, and rain soon
came. The deficit ranged between £2,000 and £5,000. Fortunately
in 1900 £2,400 were realized through the sale of sheep before an-
other drought set in. The main thing was that during those years
the necessary means were forthcoming to maintain the three mission
stations.
(b) 1900-1915, the period of decline to the closing of the
mission. —After the death of Rechner Pastor Kaibel became chair-
man of the mission committee. He visited Bethesda and went from
there to Hermannsburg on horseback, a distance of 700 miles. The
staff at Bethesda was increased. Wettengel went to Hermannsburg
and Siebert, on account of ill-health, to Germany. Mr. Hillier,
who was on the station for health reasons, became teacher. The
serious financial position in 1902 w T as somewhat relieved by special


collections which provided £7OO and by a grant of £doo from the
Church in Bavaria* Missionary Bogner of Bloomfield was placed
in charge of the external affairs on the station. Droughts and the
menaces of rabbits and dingoes decreased the flocks. As the
'aborigines were on the decrease, men who were able to do good
work became scarce. Missionary Reuther retired into private life
in 1906. The native helper, John Pingilina, one of the first com
verts who had also rendered assistance at Elim (Hope Valley) and
Bloomfield, died. The lay helper, Jacob, died after forty years of
faithful service. The end of the mission seemed at hand, but it
was delayed for a short time. Hermann Vogelsang—a son of the
lay missionary Vogelsang—took over the school. An improve-
ment in the external affairs of the mission set in, and a debt of
£3,000 was wiped out. In W. Riedel the Dieri received another
missionary. He restored order in the neglected congregation, masr-
tered the language quickly, and edited a new Bible history for the
natives which, however, did not appear in print. Missionary
Bogner, though he had left to serve congregations in the south,
willingly assisted the mission by numerous trips to the station. In
spite of all this the mission was heading towards its end. Renewed
difficulties in external affairs and the rapid dying out of the small
tribe were the primary causes. There were only one hundred and
fifty natives left in an area of one hundred miles around the
mission, whereas forty years previously the same area was populated
by several thousands. In 1911 there were fifteen deaths on the sta-
tion as compared with one birth. The missionary stood at the
giave of his people. His suggestion to settle the younger people
in the south passed unheeded. Missionary Riedel accepted a posi-
tion in the south. “Father'’ Vogelsang, who had served the mission
in the same spirit as Jacob, died in February, 1914, aged eighty-
five vears. The debts increased to £5,000. Pastor Kaibel at the
j 7
synod prior to the Great War declared that it was impossible to
maintain both Bethesda and Hermannsburg. Synod collected an-
other £SOO and the Government also assisted with a grant of £SOO,
but by October the position was as bad as before. On account of
the War no synod could be held. Pastor Bogner and G. Jaensch,
a member of the Murray Bridge congregation, offered to take over
the mission with the accumulated debts. They undertook to main-
tain the natives, but synod was to be responsible for the main-
tenance of the teacher. The offer was accepted and thus the mission
station at Bethesda in 1915 passed out of the hands of the synod.
Good seasons and high war prices made it possible for the two
brethren to pay off the debts. After some time Jaensch withdrew
from the partnership. Bogner continued to manage the station


until the Government deprived him of the main part of the run by
transferring it to a returned soldier. The school was closed by
the Government in 1917, the year which saw the closing of all the
Lutheran day schools in South Australia. Unable to continue,
Bogner offered the sta ion to the synod. The synod would have
accep’ed the offer on the condition that the Government take over
the responsibility for the maintenance of the aborigines. The
Government was not prepared to do this. Natives able to work
found employment on sheep and cattle stations. All requests that
they should go to Hermannsburg were in vain. They wanted to die
in the territory of their tribe. A number of them kept up corres-
pondence with “Mother” Vogelsang, who had gone to the south.
A result of the correspondence was that a Bethesda Society was
formed and that now the Finke River Mission Committee sends up
Hermann Vogelsang about twice a year to minister to the
spiri'ual needs of the remaining Christians. In the meantime the
relentless desert wind sweeps over the mission buildings covering
them with sand. To-day a hole in the gable serves as entrance to
the one-time missionary’s residence. The desert is burying the
work of the mission in that area.
111. —The Lutheran Mission Stations in Queensland: Hope Valley,
Bloomfield, and Mariyamba.
1. Fifty years of mission work in Hope Valley , Queensland,
The beginnings of the Hope Valley mission date back to
1885, when Missionary Flierl of Bethesda, commissioned by the
Neuendettelsau Mission Society to establish a mission in New
Guinea, was delayed at Cooktown. On hearing that the Queensland
Government was desirous of establishing a mission station among
the natives loitering around Cooktown, he immediately communi-
cated with the Government which within six weeks despatched
building material to the aboriginal reserve at Cape Bedford.
Climatic and soil seemed so favorable for the growing of cocoanuts,
bananas, and sweet potatoes that, when South Australians heard
of the founding of the mission station called Elim, they energetically
supported it. But just then the order preventing Flierl from land-
ing in New Guinea was withdrawn. Flierl naturally wanted to
leave, but was under obligation to remain five years. The diffi-
culty was solved when the Immanuel Synod made available for
Hope Valley Missionary Meyer of Bethesda and the native
Christian, Pingilina. (He found the language, Koka Yimidir, simi-
lar to his own). In 1886 Neuendettelsau took over the mission and
sent Missionary Pfalzer. When in 1889 he went to New Guinea
Missionary Schwarz was sent. He has now been in charge of the


station for fifty years. Meyer and Pingilina were transferred to
Bloomfield. The mission station itself was removed from Efim to
a place called Hope Valley, and in 1892 the first native, a girl, was
baptized. For seventeen years Missionary Poland was a great help
to Schwarz. Hope Valley was a constant source of anxiety to Neuen-
dettelsau. The many attempts to start agriculture and other indus-
tries proved a failure, with the result that the mission had to rely
largely on outside support. This was forthcoming also from the
Immanuel Synod. Then came the terrific cyclone of 1907 which up-
rooted trees and demolished fourteen buildings on the mission
properly. However, the (Queensland Ooveinment assisted in the tash
of restoration and tlie United German and Scandinavian Lutheian
Synod, too, rallied to the support of the mission. This was mainly
due to the interest Pastor Theile aroused in that synod, especially
after his visit to Hope Valley in 1911. In 1912 Queensland and
South Australia combined to purchase a motor boat, in order to
serve the outlying station of Wyarego. That year also marks the
inauguration by Pastor Theile of the Christmas cheer, a system
under which goods are collected in all the congregations and sent
by the mission friends to Hope Valley, New Guinea, and Hermanns-
burg. The Great War isolated Hope Valley from* Germany, but the
two synods did not leave it in the lurch. By 1916 the debt had risen
to £I,OOO, but the beche-de-mer industry established by the mission
was largely instrumental in wiping it out. When the U.E.L.C.A., in
conjunction with the lowa Synod, U.S.A., officially took charge of
'the New Guinea mission, Hope Valley was included in the transfer.
At that time there were two hundred natives on the reserve. Mission-
ary Schwarz proved an untiring worker. Although granted leave to
travel on furlough to Germany, he only got as far as Brisbane when
he deemed it necessary to return. In 192 *an assistant was sent out
from Germany, namely, Missionary Medingdoerfer, but owing to
failing health he had to relinquish his position in 1932, and after a
short pastorate in New South Wales he returned to Germany. When
the New Guinea mission was once more handed over to Neuen-
dettelsau, Hope Valley was left to the U.E.L.C.A. The generous
contribution of the Queensland Government in support of the three
hundred aborigines on the reserve amounts to £B3O annually. In
1937 the last heathen was baptized. The Church raises approxi-
mately £4BO per annum for Hope Valley.
2. Fifteen years of unsuccessful missionary enterprise by the
Immanuel Synod at Bloomfield.
This story is one of shattered hopes and disappointed endeavor.
The Queensland Government had established a station at Bloom-
field and was seeking to obtain missionaries for it. As the station


was not far from Hope Valley it appeared as if Neuendettelsau
might take it over. Neuendettelsau, however, advised the Immanuel
Synod to do so. As conditions in this paradisaical region seemed
to indicate that the mission w T ould be self-supporting, the Immanuel
Synod joyfully assumed charge. But neither this hope nor the
missionary expectations were realized. Missionary Meyer and
Pingilina began the work, but the former had to leave when he was
accused of receiving payment for indented labor. In good faith
he had accepted £ls from a recruiting officer as a gift to the mis-
sion. His innocence was proved, but it was thought advisable to
remove him. This w T as the outcome of a visit of Pastor Rechner
which nearly caused him his life. The small boat which took him
from Cooktown to Bloomfield was caught in a storm and tossed
about in a way that he regarded the night he spent in it as the
w r orst in his life. Meyer was followed by missionaries Hoerlein
and Bogner. Both had to leave on account of the ill-health of their
wives. Finally, Missionary Mack arrived. This frequent change
in the personnel of the mission was not conducive to thorough
work. The helpers proved unreliable. The attempts to grow maize,
sweet potatoes, and bananas were unsuccessful, and what was pro-
duced, such as honey and coffee, was unsalable. Although the
Government supported the mission with £l5O per annum, and the
Bethesda mission contributed liberally from its funds, the synod,
on receiving the report of Pastor Kaibel, who had visited the sta-
tion, finally decided to abandon the work. The station was offered
to Neuendettelsau which combined it with Hope Valley. The last
missionary, Mack, sailed for America. Such was the end of an
enterprise begun with great hopes and much energy.
5. Fifteen years of missionary enterprise by the United German
and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland at Mari
Yamha , 1887-1902.
The missionary enterprise undertaken in Queensland by the
Immanuel Synod of South Australia had aroused interest in mission
work amongst the Queensland Lutherans. Furthermore, most of
the pastors of the United German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod
of Queensland had been trained in a mission seminary (Hermanns-
burg). It is therefore not surprising that in 1886 this synod de-
cided to begin a mission. The Government placed at its disposal
a reserve of thirty square miles inhabited by the Mari tribe. As the
territory was only seventy miles north of Mackay the mission could
rely on active support from that congregation. The first missionary
was C. A. Claussen of Hermannsburg, who at that time was in New
Zealand. He worked faithfully, but after a short term of faithful
wwk he had to leave on account of failing health and died in 1889.


He was followed in quick succession by Missionary Doblies of
New Guinea and Missionary Krause of Hermannsburg. In 1894
Missionary Hansche arrived. He remained until 1888 and was
assisted for brief periods by Missionary Mohr. The task of the
missionaries was an extremely difficult one. It was aggravated by
discord amongst the staff, the members of which consisted of
Germans and Danes, by the nomadic habits of the natives, and the
proximity and attractions of “civilisation.' 7 Furthermore, the fact
that the tribe was rapidly dying out because the mothers killed
most of the baby girls made mission work amongst them appear
hopeless. Since 1898 no missionary was stationed there. The
lay helpers, H. Mewing and Freiboth, remained a little longer. On
top of all this came financial worries which finally led to the
abandonment of the mission. Seven souls had been baptized and
these, together with thirteen others, were transferred to Hope Val-
ley. One lasting benefit of this unsuccessful enterprise was the
awakening of a more active interest in mission work among
Queensland Lutherans.
IV.—Over Forty Years of Mission Activity among the Aranda Tribe
by the Immanuel Synod and later by the U.E.L.C.A. at Hermanns-
burg in Central Australia.
Right in the middle of Australia, situated in barren country on
the banks of the Finke River, stands the Hermannsburg mission
station, the only haven for the natives for many hundreds of miles.
The native mission reserve and the land acquired by the mission
covers an area of 1,200 square miles in a region inhabited by the
Arandas, a tribe which still shows signs of vitality. The mission
was started by the Hermannsburg Mission Society in conjunction
with the E.L.S.A. in 1877 (see chapter 9). Eighteen months
previouslv the first caravan under the leadership of Pastor Heiden-
reich, together with Missionaries Kempe, Schwarz, and Schulze,
with 3,000 head of stock (constituting the share of the E.L.S.A.
of the Killalpaninna station) had left the south, but was delayed
by a drought which decimated the herds. This first period of the
mission was characterized by solid elementary work in the erection of
buildings, study of the language, and evangelization of aborigines.
It came to an end, when the E.L.S.A., having severed its connection
with the Hermannsburg Mission Society, was no longer prepared to
carry on the work alone. Full of faith the Immanuel Synod at
Light’s Pass in 1894 decided to purchase the station, in spite of
the fact that it had already the Bethesda and Bloomfield mission
stations on its hands. In October, 1894, the two missionaries of
Bethesda, Reuther and Strehlow, together with the lay-men, Linke
and Graetz, arrived at Hermannsburg.


1. The Finke River Mission under the direction of Missionary
Strehlow, 1894-1922.
The new arrivals found the station in a state of neglect. The
natives did what they liked and were indeed as sheep without a
shepherd. A firm hand was required to bring about order. Mis-
sionary Strehlow was just the man. With an iron will he insisted
on discipline and soon his word was law amongst the aborigines.
He gave medical assistance to them, looked after the stock raising
activities of the station, and was like a real patriarch. Strehlow
had several assistants: —Missionary Wettengel who, however, re-
turned to Germany in 1906, and Hillier, the teacher, until 1910
The latter was followed by Missionary Liebler who left in 1914.
After the church schools in the south were closed in 1917, A. H.
Heinrich went north and did good work on the station as teacher.
After twenty-five years of activity Strehlow had baptized one
hundred and seventy-three persons. A new church was built in
1898. In spite of his varied tasks as missionary and manager of
the station, he found time to engage in scientific work. He made
further studies of the Aranda language, compiled a small grammar
and a large dictionary, translated the New Testament into that
language and also published a seven volume work on the folk-
lore oi that tribe. (Parts of the New Testament were later printed).
Great as were the problems on the field, equally great were the
difficulties which faced the committee in the south. By 1896 the
debts had risen to £4,000. Then came a long period of drought in
which thousands of sheep were lost. As sheep and cattle raising
playea an important part in keeping the station going, men were
required to look after this work and supervise the aborigines. And
when stock arrived on the markets their condition after the long
journey was poor and prices offered were low. In addition there
was the problem of transporting to the station the many tons of
Hour and groceries required, a problem accentuated by the heavy
freight charges (£lB a ton from the railhead at Oodnadatta to
Hermannsburg, a distance of 400 miles of mostly sandy and gibber
country). Consequently the committee was constantly harassed
with financial worries. In all the twenty-five years of this period
the station had only one good year, 1921, when the sale of stock
realised £3,500. But the upkeep of the station cost £3,000 per
year.
Unfortunately the period of Missionary Strehlow’s work now
drew to a close. He was badly in need of rest, but did not want
to leave the station until a successor could be found. This was an
impossibility after the War, as Germans were debarred from enter-


ing the country and as the Church had only just begun to train
its own pastors. In 1922 he fell seriously ill and was forced to
depart, but died after reaching Horseshoe Bend, only one hundred
and sixty miles from the station. Pastor Stolz, at that time the
chairman of the committee, arrived but a few hours before he died.
His death placed the seal on the twenty-eight years of untiring and
faithful labor for his Lord and Saviour. A solitary tombstone
erected by the Church marks the site of his grave.
2. The period after Strehlow’s death and since the arrival of
Missionary Albrecht.
After Strehlow’s death there was no missionary on the station
for three years. It was a dark period for Hermannsburg, the only
bright spot being a spiritual awakening amongst the Aranda and
Loritja tribes called forth by the death of their beloved missionary.
The care of the orphaned congregation passed into the hands of
Heinrich, the teacher, who rose to the ocrasion. He was assisted by
a few native Christians, the chief one being a blind native called
Moses. Nevertheless, in 1923 J. Riedel, pastor at Pinnaroo, who
had been sent up for four months, baptized forty-four souls, an
extraordinarily large number for Australian circumstances. In the
same year native Christians for the first time undertook to bring
the gospel to outlying tribes. The industrial side of the mission
was also reorganized by a Lutheran station owner in Central Aus-
tralia, Johansen. Much was hoped of this move, but his attempts
to make the natives independent proved a failure. In the mean-
while the debts had risen to £3,500, and; to make matters worse,
the mission had become the subject of keen criticism, especially
in Government circles. Those days anxious ones indeed, but
the Church knew its duty and did not despair, and finally God
sent the missionaries so badly needed, F. W. Albrecht, a German-
Pole who had studied at Hermannsburg in Germany, and whom
the Government, because of his nationality, gave permission to
land. Firm, hardy, untiring, conscientious, faithful, gifted with
organizing ability, and possessing love for those entrusted to him,
Albrecht was the right man in the right place. He arrived in
1926 and barely one year later began to preach in Aranda. In
1932 Missionary Petering, the first missionary to graduate from the
Immanuel Seminary, was sent up as assistant, and two years later
W. Ratz, a pupil of Immanuel College, assumed the duties of
teacher. The arrival of these tw o men enabled Missionary Albrecht
to do mission work among the aborigines beyond the confines of
the station. He directed his attention particularly to Alice Springs,
now r the railway terminus. Here many natives who were either
unwilling or unable to provide for themselves had congregated to


receive the meagre Government rations. They had previously been
cared for by the Aborigines’ Friends Association, who, however,
after withdrawing their missionary, invited Missionary Albrecht to
take over the work. Here, as well as in the west of the station,
native helpers were stationed. Unfortunately the Roman Catholics*
with their unlimited means, have now entered the field at Alice
Springs. To enable the missionary to cover greater distances in
his work amongst the scattered outlying tribes the South Australian
district of the U.E.L.C.A. in 1937 purchased a small truck. It was
a jubilee gift to mark the sixtieth anniversary of the founding of
the station. A very critical year was 1929. For five years one
of the worst droughts in history raged without interruption. Of
3,000 head of stock only a few hundred remained, and, what was
worse, scurvy broke out amongst the natives, causing many deaths.
On the advice of a number of medical men who happened to be
on the station at that time oranges and lemons were sent up, and
this alleviated the situation. The debts, too, which in 1926 had
risen to £4,200, w-ere a constant cause of concern, so that the ques-
tion whether the work should not be abandoned was raised occa-
sionally. But the Church was loyal to its obligation. In 1927 it
collected £2,786 and in 1929, due to the generosity of several mem-
bers, an extra two hundred and ten square miles were purchased.
Unfortunately the Australian Government has to this day not ful-
filled its just obligations towards the aborigines and its contribu-
tion to the bodily welfare of the three hundred natives on the mis-
sion reserve amounts only to £4OO per annum. On the other hand,
the mission station, since the railway has been extended to Alice
Springs, is receiving ever greater publicity, especially as a tourist
centre.
Of particular blessing to the mission was the visit of two Mel-
bourne ladies, Misses V. and U. Teague. Due to their energy in
arranging art exhibitions and enlisting the generous co-operation,
particularly of the Melbourne “Argus,” later assisted by the Ade«
laide “Advertiser, the £3,000 necessary for the purchase of pipes
to convey water from the Coporilja springs to the station, a dis-
tance of four miles, was soon raised. In October, 1935, the water
began to flow at the station, amidst shouts of joyful thanks to God
and man. What had been the dream of many had, by the mar-
vellous hand of God, become a reality. The desert literally blos-
somed as the rose, God in His mercy had come to the rescue of
this little tribe. The congregation at Hermannsburg consists of
two hundred and sixty-five souls, including forty-four children
attending school.
The mission is under the control of a committee nominated *by


the South Australian district, but elected by the general synod
and in the first place responsible to that district. Pastor Stol/
was its first chairman. In 1925 he was succeeded by J. Riedel.
V.- - The Part Played by the U.E.L.C.A. in the New Guinea Mission.
Whereas work amongst the Australian aborigines has, on the
whole, had meagre results, God, in order to encourage the Aus-
tralian Lutheran Church, has permitted it to take part in the work
in New Guinea, a work crowned with great success. Mostly this
participation has been unofficial except for the post-war period,
1921-32. Nevertheless, the Immanuel Synod can be considered as
being god-parent, as it were, to this enterprise; for, when Flierl
first came forward with the idea of carrying on mission work
amongst the natives of German New Guinea, the synod at Light 3
Pass in 1885 supported it enthusiastically.
On July 12, 1886, Flierl landed in New 7 Guinea. It is note-
worthy that both he and his co-w 7 orker, Missionary Tremel, as
well as the missionaries Zwangzer, Lehner, and Wacke, later
arrivals, married Australians. Missionaries Tremel and Vetter
found their last resting place in Australia. Especially in the pro-
viding of lay helpers Australia played an important part. From
Yorketown came Gottlieb Keppler, together with his wife and his
sister Rosette; from Point Pass Paul Helbig and his wife. Others
were Samuel Jericho, who captained the mission boat “Bavaria,”
and W. Schulz. The practical nature and energy of these men
made them valuable additions to the mission staff. Financially,
too, there w r as a constant stream of gifts flowing to the New Guinea
mission, mostly from the Immanuel Synod. Personal visits to
Australia by missionaries also helped to strengthen the bonds of
sympathy and fellowship.
The period during the War, however, made it plain why God
right from the start had connected the Lutherans of Australia with
this enterprise. Of course, the lowa Synod, U.S.A., did the lion’*
share in rescuing this mission, but not only was the geographical
proximity of the Australian Lutheran Church of importance, but
that Church also produced the man whom God placed at the helm
of the New Guinea mission. That man was Pastor Theile. His
capacity for work, as also for organization, his Australian
nationality, as also his love for the mission, fitted him admirably
'* ' V
for his task. He interviewed the Government, reported to the
Church, collected and dispatched the moneys which the Church so
generously offered. In five years £5,400 were collected in Aus-
tralian mission circles and, including the moneys from lowa,
£23,000 passed through his hands in support of the Neuendettelsau
Mission as well as of Hope Valley and the Rhenish Mission. The


Church also looked after those missionaries who were interned in
Australia. After the War provision had to be made so that the
missionaries and their families who had been in the tropics for
ten years and more could recuperate. Two rest homes were pur-
chased; one in Toowoomba, Queensland, the other in Light’s Pass,
South Australia. The education of the missionaries’ children had
likewise to be thought of. Some were sent to the Immanuel Col-
lege, others to Germany. .There did not appear to be any possi-
bility of the missionaries remaining in New Guinea. The Govern-
ment at that time did not permit them to do so. In fact it had even
offered the mission to other Protestant Churches, none of which
however, were prepared to take it over. The problem of
carrying on the mission was solved, when at the foundation synod
of the U.E.L.C.A. at Ebenezer (1921), in the presence of Fr.
Richter, D.D., the President General of the lowa Synod, it was
decided to “take over, maintain, preserve, and manage the New
Guinea mission in conjunction with the Synod.” The Govern-
ment approved of this step, but on the condition that the mission
property be transferred to Australian-born trustees. Pastor Theile
was appointed full-time director. A great responsibility was thrust
on to the U.E.L.C.A. In 1925 the Government declared that the
German missionaries could remain. God had heard the prayers
of the faithful, for the U.E.L.C.A. and lowa Synod could not have
filled the gap if the German missionaries had been forced to leave
the field. The U.E.L.C.A. sent many a lay helper to New Guinea:
From South Australia, Agnes Rechner, J. F. W. Schulz, Victor
Koschade, J. Lindner, and A. Obst; from Victoria, Paul Deutscher
and Carl Holtkamp; from Queensland, Theo Radke, C. Claussen
and H. Miers. Others followed, so that in 1925, out of a mission
personnel of eighty-eight, nineteen were Australians.
In 1928 the process began which restored to Neuendettelsau
and Barmen what they had previously lost. The Government had
removed the restrictions against them. In May, 1929, the repre-
sentatives of Neuendettelsau. Barmen. lowa, and the U.E.L.C.A.
held an important conference at Brisbane. The result was that
Barmen took over its former district (Madang) and Neuendettelsau
and lowa jointly controlled the Finschhafen portion. Director
Theile was appointed the executive for the three bodies concerned.
When Barmen later withdrew, the American sister Church took over
Madang, and the U.E.L.C.A., to give Neuendettelsau full control,
withdrew as an obligatory co-partner. That was the end of the
U.E.L.C.A.’s participating in the control of the New Guinea mis-
sions. But, of course, the U.E.L.C.A. still supported the work to the
best of its ability. Its contributions, including the Christmas cheer,


in 1922-24 averaged £3,700 per annum, and in 1928-30 £2,300
annually. A considerable number of Australians went over, so
that there are now twenty-nine Australians on the field, which
number constitutes about one fifth of the total staff. Director
Theile, who had done so much for the mission, was in 1933 ap-
pointed General Representative of the German society and the
American Lutheran Church, and in 1934 an honorary member of
the Neuendettelsau Mission Society. The latter honor came also
to the President General, Pastor Stolz, in recognition of what the
U.E.L.C.A. did for the New Guinea mission.
At the beginnings of the New Guinea mission the sainted Pastor
Auricht, enthused by faith, said:—“We shall live to see the natives
of New Guinea come to Christ not in tens, but in hundreds, not in
hundreds but in thousands, nay in ten thousands and in hundreds
of thousands/* How wonderfully these words of faith have come
true!
VI. —Other Mission Activities.
In this paragraph mention is to be made of the financial sup-
port which was rendered by Australian Lutherans to other missions.
The Victoria Synod gave to various mission societies. The lion’s
share (£l5O-£3OO per annum) went to the Basel Mission Society.
The Gossner Mission in India, as well as the stations of the Moravian
Brethren in Victoria and Queensland, also received occasional con-
tributions. The E.L.S.A. a.a.G. supported the mission in India of
the Ohio Synod. The Syrian Orphanage in Jerusalem had friends
in several Lutheran synods, especially in the Victoria Synod. In
one year, owing to fire destroying that institution, as much as £3OO
were sent. Worthy of mention is the active support which the
Immanuel Synod gave to the mission among the Jews. First it sent
its contributions to the Rhenisch-Westphalian Jewish Mission and
since 1887 some £3O-£SO annually to the Leipzig Jewish Mission of
Professor Delitzsch. It is held that the Immanuel Synod was the
only church body which made missions among the Jews an official
undertaking of the Church. Professor Delitzsch once wrote to
Pastor Rechner:—“Your letter and contribution has meant a great
strengthening of faith in our work of hope. . . . Continue to praise
the Lord, ‘ba Urim,’ in the land of light of the south—Australia.”


Let ail our schools, dear Lord, be places
Where Thy good Spirit works and kindles light.
And where our youth their Lord embraces.
Their Saviour in His mercy and His might.
That there be faithful pastors and the more
• Who for Thy holy Church pray and implore.
—Bogatzky.
CHAPTER EIGHT.
The U.F..L.C.A. was able to establish its own college and to train
suitable young men for the holy ministry.
r i I HE necessity of having an institution of higher learning was
recognized from the very beginning of the Lutheran Church
in Australia—at all events in South Australia. In supporting the
immigration of more pastors, Kavel stated that they were necessary
for the training of pastors for the young Church. Both he and
Fritzsche took the training of youths for the ministry in hand, and
with typical German thoroughness devoted twelve to fifteen years
to the training of one class. Ruins of the first Lutheran seminary
at Lobethal may be seen to this day—a mute witness to the earnest-
ness with which the work was carried on even in those days. Un-
doubtedly streams of blessings have come from the work of faithful
men who were received from overseas because there was no local
training institution. And yet —how r different would the history of
the Lutheran Church in Australia have been if the possession of
its own seminary had obviated the calling of men from different
'schools*’ overseas —if capable young people could have been
trained as teachers —if ambitious youths and maidens could have
been retained within the Church by giving them higher education
in its own institutions!
As early as 1865 the E.L.S.A. made a move in this direction,
but in vain. A similar move was made by the pastors of the
Tanunda-Light’s Pass Synod (then in union with Victoria), which
resulted in the addition of a room to the manse at Light’s Pass
(still in existence) ; students were solicited; but as Staudenmayer
left, nothing came of the idea. Equallv barren of results was the
copimission given by the Immanuel Synod after the union with


Victoria to Pastors Auricht and Reusch, as was also the later pro-
posal to train teachers (1876) under the gifted Pastor von.
Schramm. The F.L.S.A. purchased a high school at Hahndorf, but
this had to be given up in 1885. In 1890 Pastor Peters founded
a college at Murtoa. This was transferred in 1905 to Adelaide
(after having been in recess for two years). Under a new prin-
cipal it exists to this dav under the name of Concordia College and
Seminary.
In the Immanuel Synod it was the energetic Pastor Leidig
whom the Lord used to bring about the founding of the urgently
needed college. The desire to provide the children of this far-
flung parish with adequate confirmation instruction, as well as
facilities for training Lutheran day school teachers, led to com-
bined efforts of pastor and parish. He submitted this plan to*
the special synod which had been convened at Light’s Pass in 1894
to take over the Hermannsburg mission station. Taking over that
mission was an act of faith. To this was added the new venture
at Point Pass, which the synod supported with a grant of £SO. The
plain little building was dedicated by the President, Pastor Recliner,
on February 27, 1895. That was definitely a milestone in the
history of the Lutheran Church. The preservation of the customs
as well as the language of the fathers, as well as general education,
was an avowed aim of the college. Development in a new direction
was indicated when Pastor Leidig sent his gifted and well-
instructed first pupil, F. 0. Theile (now Director of Lutheran Mis-
sions, New Guinea), over to the Neuendettelsau mission seminary,
Germany. Despite the fact that besides Pastor Leidig there was
only one other teacher (the teacher of the Lutheran day school,
Krichauff), the project grew quickly. On May 11, 1900. a new
eight-roomed building was dedicated.
The synod took over the college by stages. The first was reached
at the Appila synod, 1901, when the “shilling fund’’ was inaugurated,
and this at a time of great dearth. Parents and the young people
co-operated in the work. The final stage was reached at the synod
at Natimuk, Victoria in 1907. Pastor Leidig assisted the college
by devoting to it the proceeds of lectures during his trip to Germany.
Existing debts were taken over by the synod and trustees were
appointed. The expansion of the college led to suggestions that
it" should be transferred to Tanunda (1910). As a transfer to the
mother-district of the Lutheran Church in South Australia had
much to commend it, a subscription for this purpose raised £2,000.
But as the relations between the- principal—for no other than
Pastor Leidig was contemplated —and his college on the one hand,
and between him and his parish on the other, were so intimate that
proposal was not carried out. The greater part of the collected


sum, known as the Tanunda Fund, was finally used for the Adelaide
project, the rest for works stipulated by the donors at the time.
New additions now became necessary at Point Pass. They were
•carried out during the War years, when high prices ruled (£1,477).
This proved only a stop-gap. In 1918 Pastor Leidig’s health broke
down. In 1921 he retired to Tanunda. The Point Pass parish
wanted his successor to take over the directorship of the college
•only temporarily, while room and yet more room was wanted.
These factors combined to make members of the newly-founded
IJ.E.L.C.A. responsive when a splendid opportunity presented it-
self to satisfy most of these needs by the purchase of Angas College,
North Adelaide.
In 1920 the college was able to look back upon twenty-five years
of blessings received and given. It narrowly missed being closed
in 19] 7 under the same laws which deprived it of the opportunity
•of training teachers by closing the schools which they were meant
to serve. A number of such teachers had been trained. Since 1919
also a number of future pastors went out from the college to com-
plete their training in Germany, and America, and were now able,
after capable instruction at home and abroad, to serve their Church
in the requisite two languages. The Christian atmosphere of the
college in most cases left an indelible impression on the minds
of the youth who were trained there. The brunt of the work fell
upon Pastor Leidig and his self-sacrificing wife who offered them-
-selves completely to this cause. Many capable assistants beside
Krichauff aided Pastor Leidig: the young pastors Lehner, Breier,
Hebart, W. and J. Riedel, the German philologist Schomann, also
some who had been trained by the college itself, teachers such as
F. Kuss, Schwartzkopf, Keller, and Doecke. But the driving force
of the whole was Pastor Leidig, whose discipline was very strict,
while his wife was the personification of motherliness. All through
the years they served willingly, and without charge. Otherwise
the expenses could never have been kept down to their low figure
(£IBO in the first few years, under £SOO in 1914; never over
£1.000). Both have now gone to their reward, but their works do
them, and the U.E.L.C.A. will ever hold them in grateful
remembrance.
At the amalgamation the idea of a theological seminary was in
the foreground; it was felt that it was not right that students for
the ministry should leave these shores to study in Germany or
America fas W. Fritsch, J. Doehler were forced to do; also E.
Auricht, E. Wiencke, G. Doehler, B. Reuther, 0. Adler). Five
students were then ready to begin their theological training: J. and
C. Stolz, M. Loehe, E. Materne, J. Sahel). The first joint pastors’


conference before the amalgamation synod decided to establish a
seminary at Tanunda. Some weeks after the founding of the
U.E.L.C.A. this project was carried out, and the Wartburg Seminary
opened on Ascension Day, 1921, in the erstwhile home of Pastor
Reusch. The two local pastors, Held and Hebart, together
Pastor Riedel, who had transferred from Low Bank, were the first
tutors. Pastor Loehe, of Natimuk, Victoria, was to be the first
principal. The laity supported the work liberally, especially by
the means of the so-called Red Card system. The holders of these
red cards made annual contributions.
In the meantime Angas College had come into the synod’s field
of vision. Originally this institution was the well-known Whinham
College. Then, through the generosity of a descendant of Mr.
George Fife Angas, it became an interdenominational missionary
training centre. Out of gratitude to its benefactor it was called
Angas College. It had now to close down. Through Pastor
Sprengel who had been a student in the Angas College it came
to the knowledge of the U.E.L.C.A. that it was for sale. The foun-
dation synod of the U.E.L.C.A. (Ebenezer, South Australia) dis-
cussed the project and resolved that an attempt be made to raise
Ihe required purchase sum. This resolution was confirmed by a
referendum resulting in a five to two majority in favor of the
purchase. When the promised moneys did not exceed £9,000 the
enthusiasm shown was in danger of waning. But the offer of Vic-
toria to raise a further £3,300 in contributions and loans finally
led to the purchase of the college at £13,500. Thus a fine old
property, solidly built, situated on an area of tw 7 o and a half acres
in North Adelaide, overlooking the City, passed into the owner-
ship of the U.E.L.C.A. The necessary alterations and renovations
brought the total cost to £15,000. An addition which soon became
necessary added another £I,OOO to this sum. By 1925 a total of
£13.568 had been contributed. In spite of the fact, however, that
the Tanunda Fund (£1,000) was paid into the college purchase fund,
as well the £575 received for the college buildings erected at a
cost of £3,000 at Point Pass, the Immanuel College is not yet debt-
free. It was a great day indeed, when the two institutions, Immanuel
College, Point Pass, and Wartburg Seminary, Tanunda,' were for-
mally reopened in Adelaide as “Immanuel College and Seminary,
at a festival service on February-23, 1923. The vice-president, Pastor
Siegle, spoke on Matt. 1, 23: “Immanuel—God with us!” and in-
ducted the principal, J. P. Loehe, into his responsible office. The
teaching staffs of both institutions were also housed in the newly-
acquired buildings.
The transfer to a central situation increased the number ol
students greatly, from twenty-seven in 1923 to ninety-two in 1938.


The training which the Immanuel College offers is varied. Students
are prepared for University matriculation, or for entry into the
seminary. Commercial courses, and lately a teachers’ training
course, provide for the needs of those who wish to take up these
spheres of work. The girl students are under the supervision of
a matron in a rented property nearby, and participate in the col-
lege life and work generally. As far as practicable, board is
granted to University students, who thus have the benefit of
Christian companionship. The training of pastors involves a ten
year course in college and seminary.
The Immanuel College and Seminary is Australian in intention
and outlook. Its recognition by the State involves it in the obligation
to prepare for the University examinations, and the pastors who
are trained by it have to serve Australian congregations. At the
same time, it is very much alive to the great and increasing value
of German, both for general education and especially for theology.
The results in comparison with the general average are gratifying,
while gifted pupils have succeeded in winning a number of
bursaries.
Under God, these results are attributable to a devotqd and
efficient staff. Director Loehe has borne the increasingly heavy burden
of the rapidly expanding college and seminary since 1923. He is
ably assisted by Pastor Riedel in the seminary, and by the teachers
G. Keller and A. Doecke, A.U.A., A.F.1.A., A.A.1.5., in the college.
Also Emanuel Leidig. M.A., youngest son of the founder, Pastor
Leidig, and Miss T. Rohde, 8.A., were on the staff for a time. On
the staff at present are former pupils: Pastor E. Auricht, M.A.;
Wilfred Schneider, M.A., Dip.Ed. (Lond.) ; while S. Hebart, M.A.,
who is completing special research work at the Erlangen University,
Germany, will shortly rejoin the staff. An intermediate course
between college and seminary was instituted for the specialized
training of students of theology in German and other subjects,
this is kn own as the pro-seminary, and has at its head the capable
Pastor M. Muetzelfeldt, former director of the educational work
of the Kaiserswerth institutions, Germany. He is also responsible
for the training of Lutheran day school teachers.
Difficulties are met with, of course. Cheap high schools are
established in country centres by the Government, and are apt to
win against the college among those who have not yet recognized
the fundamental importance of Christian education. Lutheran
church people are not of the wealthiest. The fees had to be raised
from £34 to £5O. Thev are still far lower than is usual. About
£1,600 per annum has to be found by the Church to cover the dis-
crepancy between income and expenditure. Scholarship and endow-
ment funds have not yet been created. Consequently the two govern-


ing bodies, the College Council and the Board, are hampered by
deficits.
But blessings there have been —abundant blessings. Twenty-
four pastors and one missionary have been trained; one from New
Guinea returned to work there. Hundreds of sons and daughters
of the U.E.L.C.A. have received their most vital training at the
college. The experience that “God has been with us” during the
last forty years allows the future to be faced with the confidence
that He will be “with us yet.” His grace and blessing will enable
the motto of the college to be realized: PLUS ULTRA—EVER
HIGHER.


The art of printing is the highest
and last present by which God
furthers the cause of the gospels
it is the last flame before the ex-
tinguishing of the world.
—Luther.
CHAPTER NINE.
The U.E.L.C.A. was permitted to further God’s cause by means of
publishing and spreading Christian literature.
LUTHERAN theologians are wont to associate the art of printing
with the wings of the angel who courses through heaven with
the everlasting gospel (Rev. 14, 6). Australian Lutherans
have good cause to offer praise that his wings were placed also
at their disposal. From the earliest years there was a fairly general
and anxious enquiry for books of Christian knowledge; especially
coveted, of course, were Bibles, hymnals, and devotional publica-
tions. Books in fact were the necessary forerunners of the gospel
proper in some fields, as Pastor Goethe declared.
In the earliest days the pastors themselves shared the responsi-
bility of providing their congregations with books; later several
laymen helped. In South Australia there were Pastors Rechner
and Auricht; more recently the latter’s son. In Victoria Pastors
Goethe and Berlitz and Brother 0. Hiller; in Queensland Pastors
Langebecker, Hiller (Boonah), and Koehnke. During the
first decade of this century the pastors’ conference of the Immanuel
Synod established its own book-business, first at Light’s Pass where
Pastor Stolz had charge of it. It was later removed to Stonefield
(Pastor Breier) and finally to Tanunda (Pastor Bogner, Auricht’s
firm). The pastors’ conference of the Immanuel Synod a.a.G., too,
had its small book-business, as did also the pastors’ conference in
Queensland after the amalgamation. In South Australia the two
were incorporated into the one establishment which was eventually
offered to the Church. When the general synod at Walla Walla,
1928, accepted this offer the Church came to have its own book
depot in North Adelaide, where it was originally under the capable
management of J. Saegenschnitter, a former Lutheran day school


teacher, and latterly it is under the management of Pastor Meth-
sieder, who has had wide business experience. In like manner the
pastors conference of Queensland handed over its business to the
Church and permitted its incorporation in the book depot of the
U.E.L.C.A. in 1932. To this source may be traced innumerable
blessings which have been lavished upon the Church.
In the earliest days there was even a Lutheran colporteur who
worked in conjunction with the Victoria Synod. He was J. E.
Schmidt, a man who deserves not to be forgotten. According to
die “Christen-bote,” he was a man of robust energy and of a fer-
vent spirit; with this went a ready eloquence, an aggressive self-
confidence, and an untiring ardor. In the newly-established
parishes at tea-meetings, and he was ever a wel-
come guest. Money was collected for him and he was provided with
a two-wheeled cart for which he himself constructed a sail, so that
he might avail himself of the assistance afforded by the wind. In this
\oah s ark ’ he made extensive tours from place to place, cover-
ing some four hundred miles on one trip. Through the gold-fields
of Victoria, over the high mountains of New South Wales, through
valleys and forests he went, wherever settlers were to be found. The
ark was well stocked with German, English, Italian, Danish, and
other Bibles, catechisms, Bible histories, books of sermons, and
others. Over long distances he himself wheeled his cart with its sail
to help it along. Those who scoffed at him were in the end often
stirred deeply by his eloquence and moral suasion. He escaped
the allurements ot loose women and, as reward for his virtue, found
on one occasion in a valley, a gold half-sovereign mounted on a
dung-hill. He sold between five and seven hundred books on a
single tour. Then he made the return journey to Germany with a
request for more literature. He visited Pastor Harms, the Moravian
Brethren, friends at Basel and in Berlin, and returned richly blessed
with leaves of the Tree of Life.’ In 1863 his w r ork came to an
untimely end because of a breach between him and the synod. In
view of his independent spirit this is not surprising. '
Something also not to be forgotten is the predicament in
which the Lutheran Church in Australia found itself when, after
the War, the importing of German books was prohibited. In 1919
the presidents still had to approach the Government seeking per-
mission to import German Bibles. Another factor was the pre-
vailing depression, so that through the inflation, prices soared so
high that books were almost beyond the purchasing power at least
of pastors and students.
In the same wav as books also Christian periodicals
brought inestimable blessings to the Church. Already in the first


years of his ministry, (the early fifties) Pastor Goethe ventured on
the publication of a'paper, “Her Pilger (The Pilgrim) in Victoria.”
The final number appeared during the third year after its inaugu-
ration. In 1860 he published the “Christenbote.” Pastor Herlitz
carried on the work after Pastor Goethe had left. Pastor Herlitz
was anxious, as he himself said, to imbue this paper with Lutheran
doctrine in its purity, and to arouse through it an interest for
mission work; at the same time he would display a wise tolerance
and avoid entering into petty disputes. However, these wise pre-
cautions did not prevent him from admitting into his style an
occasionally sarcastic tone. It was a monthly paper eventually
expanded to sixteen pages, and a paper which possessed qualities
that placed it above a number of similar German papers of that
lime. It included reports from the Church and the mission field,
and touched on important movements in world politics; it catered
for children and the ageless lovers of narrative and fiction. In
all this Herlitz displayed to advantage a facile pen. He
edited the paper for forty-three years without a break, and left
upon it the impress of his personality, though towards the end it
became somewhat stereotyped. In 1909 Pastor Basedow
brought out the “Pilger” for the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. This was
comparatively short-lived, since Pastor Herlitz offeied his papei
to the sister synod, and as a result the 4 Christenbote appeared in
Adelaide until, through the pressure of the War psychology (Ger-
man language was prohibited) it was converted into the smaller,
but now fortnightly “Pilgrim.” This was later incorporated in the
“Lutheran Herald/
Of more serious pretensions, more distinctly Lutheran, showing
much tact in emergencies, and more ardor in fostering
mission-mindedness was Auricht s KJrchen-und Missions-Zeitung.
(A forerunner of this was, perhaps, a Kirchen-und Missions-
blatt,” “Church and Mission Paper” of 1862). Auricht’s paper
first appeared in 1865 as a monthly, later as a fortnightly publi-
cation. It reflected as in a mirror the Kavel-Immanuel Synod
trend, representative of its wide interests and activities. It was
strongly influenced by well-known personages; in the very be-
ginning by pastors of the E.L.S.A. who, however, withdrew their
interests and set up a paper of their own. Then Pastor Reusch
was co-editor for two years and later under Kaibel its contents were
greatly enriched. Next w r as Pastor Leidig, who left his impiint
on the paper more and more, and from the date of Auricht’s death
till 1911 was sole editor. From 1911 and throughout the War,
Pastor Stolz was the editor, who had behind him an efficiently
organized working-staff. When the paper was published in English
the work was carried on by Pastors Kuss and Jericho until it be-


•came a part of the Lutheran Herald, It is interesting to note that
i astor Auricht not only wrote his paper, but also set and printed
it. At first he had a room built on to the horse stable to be used
lor the purpose, though later a separate building was erected.
In time the son of the founder became the printer and publisher.
the Lutheran Herald, which was the outcome of the amalga-
mation of the two papers, was edited by Pastor Basedow till 1928.
it was an admirable fortnightly paper of sixteen pages, and passed
into the hands of some 1,500 readers. When the German “Kirchen-
olatt appeared after the ban on publications in the German lan-
guage had been lifted in 1925, the number of readers slightly
diminished, though it again improved later, so that now the
"Lutheran Herald" and “Kirchenblatt” have 1,400 and 900 readers
respectively. Both papers are now edited by Pastor Stolz, the
President General.
Of inestimable value also were the Christian almanacs. The
first of these was set up by Pastor Goethe in 1853. It seems, how*-
ever, to have ceased to appear after 1867. Pastor Auricht pub-
lished an almanac in the years 18/0, 1872, and 1873. (In the one
•of 1872 it was stated that at that time Lutherans in South Australia
-numbered 15,412, comprising eight and a half per cent, of the total
population). After 1884 Auricht’s almanac under the joint editor-
ship of father and son appeared continuously. As a result of the
War it became the “Christian Book Almanac.” (1918, 3,400
-copies I. After the amalgamation the U.E.L.C.A. was anxious to
have an almanac of its own. The first number in German appeared
m 1927, and eventually Auricht’s English one became the possession
-of the U.E.L.C.A. Incorporated in it was also an almanac pub-
lished by the Queensland pastors’ conference. These almanacs
radiate a healthy Christian-Lutheran spirit and hold an honored
pxace in most of the bookshelves of Lutheran homes. (The present
-edition is brought out in 3,000 English and 2,000 German copies).
The books that have appeared hitherto were almost
-exclusively printed by Auricht’s Printing Office, Tanunda.
them were catechisms and Bible histories (German
and English), both in much improved editions; a book of
Bible texts, Sunday school hymnals, festival hymnals, the
Lutheran “Children’s Friend,” and “Kinder Blatt,” as well as a book
•of funeral hymns; there was an order of lav reading services and a
pamphlet, “Was hindert die • Einigung?” (“Statement of
Differences”) both in German and English, as well as other books,
also a church, school, house book in Aranda. In the publishing
of the Australian Lutheran Hymn Book (E.L.S.A.) the U.E.L.C.A.
has also had a hand.
Thus the last flame before the extinguishing of the world has
shown, and is still showing, to Australian Lutherans the path of life.


Let us do good unto all men, es-
pecially unto them who are of the
household of faith. Gal. VI. XO.
CHAPTER TEN.
The U.E.L.C.A. was privileged to render aid in needy cases.
HTHE historical review of the Church’s activities would not be
complete without recording what was done in regard to special
works of love.
»
The U.E.L.C.A. has a Superannuation Fund for retired pastors.
It owes its origin to Pastor Leidig, who made more than one thing
possible even in the face of opposition. Time and again thQ synod
had turned a deaf ear to the pleadings of the pastors for the
inauguration of such a fund. Members held that pastors were lack-
ing in faith. Undaunted by the negative vote at the 1908 synod
Pastor Leidig induced two generous brethren to give a donation
for this purpose. This he reported to the next synod. He declared
that the Superannuation Fund had come into existence and asked
lor a yearly collection. What could synod do but accede. By
1920 the fund had grown to £SOO. The Immanuel Synod a.a.G.
also had founded such a fund a few years earlier. The amalgama-
tion of the synods led to the merging of the two funds. Till then
this fund of altogether £BOO was a South Australian undertaking
only. But gradually the other districts became participants by
paying a proportional entrance fee. The goal of making the fund
a federal one was reached in 1928. The fund is supported bv
contributions of pastors and congregations and gradually grew to
£2,164. Recent increases in the number of emeriti who under the
scheme are entitled to a pension of £IOO annually have led to the
pastors raising their contribution from one to two per cent, of their
salary and the congregations taxing themselves with a propor-
tionate rise.
The pastors’ conference of the U.E.L.C.A. owns a Ministers’
Widows’ Relief Fund. It was inaugurated early in the eighties of
the last century by the pastors of the Immanuel Synod. The help


it was able to render in the first ten years was but small (a little
under £2 per annum). But the fund grew, especially by the in-
coming of the fund of the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. (begun in 1916)
and by the pastors of the other districts gradually joining in. To-
day it amounts to £3,000 and pays widows a pension of £SO per
year.
During the War the Immanuel Synod began the Martin Luther
fund to commemorate the quadri-centennial of the Reformation. It
was resolved to take up an annual collection on or about Reforma-
tion Day. At the first synod after the War (1920) the fund which
had grown to £250 was set apart for assisting needy students
of theology. The 1921 merger caused the fund to grow much
more quickly. Its capital now stands at £1,200. The greater part
of this sum, together with moneys of the Superannuation Fund,
is mostly invested in the President General's residence. Annually
about £2OO was paid out. The Church rejoices to note that this
(und was instrumental in enabling a considerable number of young
men to study for the ministry.
The Synodical Mutual Aid for rendering mutual assistance in
cases of fire on church properties, officially established in
1937, is slowly gaining ground. The First and Interstate Call
Fund which pays the travelling expenses of pastors to their first
charge and to interstate parishes, and into which each parish extend-
ing a call has to pay £SO equalizes the expenses of calling pastors.
Fhe South Australian district has a Church Building Fund, Queens-
land has the special funds of a Church Extension and a Home Mis-
sion League.
As to assisting needy cases beyond Australia it may be recorded
that from earliest times open hearts and hands were manifested in
the support of distress among the Lutheran Church of Prussia, from
which the first Lutherans had sprung. Time and again aid w 7 as
required, and not only for those of the household of faith. A
famine in Upper Silesia in 1880, floods in the Rhineland (1883)
and in the Vistula area (1903), and a famine in China (1908) gave
occasion to Australian Lutherans to send sums varying from £4O
to hundreds of pounds. If anything the General Synod (Herlitz)
outshone the other sections of Lutherans in this respect.
The terrible distress in Germany, especially due to the hunger
blockade of the allies, and the inflation, naturally induced Austra-
lian Lutherans to render help. The main organizer of this work of
love was Pastor Ortenburger of Appila who, together with his wife,
devoted himself so wholeheartedly to this work that £20,000 in
cash and a like sum in goods were sent to Germany. He kept in
touch with the recipients of the gifts he sent, charitable institutions


and private individuals, so that eventually he corresponded with
1,500 persons, including Ida von Hindenburg. In Queensland Pastor
Koehnke did a similar work, though on a much smaller scale. As
a last example of the U.E.L.C.A.’s works of love it may be recorded
that over £4OO were given in aid of the transportation of Lutheran
refugees from Russia at Charbin. Considerable amounts also went
to the famine-stricken or persecuted fellow Lutherans in Russia
and to the Ukrainian Lutheran Church.
This review gives no cause for idle boasting. Lutherans of
South Australia, although not belonging to the upper ten thousands,
are more well to do, for instance, than those of Germany. In com-
parison to what the Lord has blessed them with, they ought to have
done much more. May they never cease to open their hearts to
the needs of brethren in distress the world over and thus to mani-
fest that they are members of Christ’s Church Universal.
* * * *
Of the whole of the activities of the U.E.L.C.A., as far as these
stand the test of the all-seeing eyes of the Lord, it must be said:
It is His grace that Australian Lutherans were able to do what
they did.




11l
The Characteristics of the U.E.L.C.A
Romans, VII, 6
But now we are delivered
from the law, that being
dead wherein we were held:
that we should serve in
newness of spirit, and not in
the oldness of the letter .




INTRODUCTION.
TN a comprehensive treatise on the U.E.L.C.A. it is necessary that
'*■ its distinctive characteristics, due to its fundamental basis, its
historic development, and its specific experiences, be described.
For the sake of convenience the individual words in the official
designation of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church in Aus-
tralia will supply the headings of the succeeding chapters. Be-
cause of its paramount importance the designation “Church” shall
be dealt with first. This chapter, however, shall confine itself to
the characteristic liberty of the Church. Part 111 of this book
will, therefore, show in five chapters that the U.E.L.C.A. is a free
Church , a United Church, an Evangelical Church , a Lutheran
Church , and an Australian Church.
If some more or less familiar matters are recorded in this Part,
it is done with the purpose of making the reader realize that what
Australian Lutherans take for granted was attained only after long
and severe struggles.
God’s W r ill with thee;
That thou be free
Through His great name
Of earth and heaven fame.
CHAPTER ONE.
The U.E.L.C.A. is a 4 FREE Church.
I. It is free from the tutelage of the State .
*
The Church, the creation of the Holy Ghost, the body of Christ,
is not of this world and, therefore, lives its own life, is subject to
no earthly power, but follows its own inherent, eternal laws. But
it lives in this world, and its members, inasmuch as they are flesh


and blood, are subject to the laws and order of this world, also
of Governments as powers ordained by God for the natural sphere.
From this follows that there is a constant contact between the
Church and the world, also the Church and the State. The relation
between Church and State is endangered by mistakes on both sides.
In the first period of the Christian Church the attitude of the State
towards the Church quickly developed into fierce opposition and
bloody persecution. Nevertheless, the Church lived and thrived
according to its own inherent divine power and life. When the
Emperor Constantine embraced the Christian faith the relation be-
tween State and Church became very friendly, State and Church
were wedded together. In the oriental Church (Constantinople)
this led to an overlordship of the State over the Church, and in
the occidental Church (Rome) to an over lordship of the Church
over the State. The Reformation restored to the Government its
independence and established the principle of complete separation
of State and Church. But now the pendulum swung back into the
opposite direction of State dominance over the Church (cf. Part I,
chapter 1). One of the evil consequences of state control over
the Church was the Union decree which led to persecution and
eventually to the emigration of the persecuted.
In Australia separation of State and Church was proclaimed
from the very beginnings and is now firmly entrenched in the con-
stitutions of this land. Lutherans cannot be too thankful for this.
Religious liberty and freedom of conscience, the very things which
fed their fathers to Australia’s shores, are thereby ensured. Deep
gratitude will be theirs also over the fact that the Government,
knowing the beneficial influence of the Church’s work upon the
nation’s life, manifests to all Churches an attitude of respect and
benevolence and takes the Churches under its wings. Except for
the short period during the War the Lutheran Church shared in
this privilege. Proofs of this are, the granting of the marriage
licence to pastors, concessions on railways when travelling to con-
ferences, the invitations issued to State and Federal receptions, the
right of “private entrance” at levees, the decorating of its leaders
with medals.
The fact that in this point very different conditions obtain in
more than one country may lead Lutherans to pray that their
liberties and privileges remain unimpaired. Even if this were not
the case the members of the Lutheran Church are for conscience
sake loyal subjects and patriotic citizens of the Commonwealth
and Empire of which they are an integral part.


2. It is free to give itself a constitution according to its inherent
life and peculiar requirements.
What constitution was to be adopted by the Lutheran Church
in Australia? The Lutheran Churches of Germany, being Statq
Churches, could not provide a model. Kavel had thus to break
new ground. His main object was to form a constitution of such
a nature that the preaching of the Word in its truth and purity
and the administration of the Sacraments according to the institu-
tion of the Lord be safeguarded. To achieve this he naturally
turned to the New Testament. He believed that in it he had dis-
covered a complete apostolic church constitution. This he adopted
for the young Australian Lutheran Church. Credit must be given
him that he aimed at making the Church as nearly apostolic as
possible, that he embodied the office of the Holy Ministry and the
right of the congregation as the two poles in his constitution, that
he revived church discipline and instituted the office of elders. The
latter especially was very necessary under conditions in Australia,
where the pastor is often absent from his congregations for some
time. Kavel, however, erred in two respects: —It is impossible to
draw ready-made rules from the New Testament for the setting up
of a complete constitution. At most it lays down general prin-
ciples. Kavel placed his Apostolic Constitution practicallv on the
same level with the Confessions and this with such emphasis that
it was a contributing factor in causing the schism which exists to
this day, even though its original causes have long been removed.
In this point he lacked the spirit of true liberty. Under God’s
guidance the necessary corrective factors were brought into operation
with the result that the Australian Lutheran Church in the spirit of
liberty adopted for itself a synodical constitution in which both
the ministry and the congregations combine as co-equals in the
governing of the Church and in the carrying out of the Church’s
work. The apostolic pattern for this is to be found in Acts 15, 22:
“It pleased the apostles, and the elders with the whole church. . . .”
That this is poles apart from a hierarchical form of church govern-
ment is evident. Neither has it anything to do with democracy
in the political sense. This synodical constitution existed before
the era of democracy and was shaped on what seemed Biblical and
apostolic precedence. This constitution has proved eminently prac-
tical under Australian conditions. That is seen from the fact that
also the E.L.S.A. which originally followed opposite directives
gradually adopted a similar constitution, especially when the Mis-
sourian tendencies made themselves felt.
The spirit of liberty which governed the development of this
constitution causes members of the U.E.L.C.A. in true Christian


freedom to submit to its rules, and will lead them to evolve im-
provements as necessity for such arises.
3. It is free in regard to self-maintenance.
That the Church is obliged to provide the finances for its main-
tenance may savor of the very opposite of freedom. Would it not
be well if a return to state aid for religious purposes were obtained?
In the early stages of Australian history state aid for religion
actually did exist in a varied degree in the different colonies. In
South Australia, where the principle of complete separation of State
and Church was one of the original clauses of the charter, an agita-
tion for state aid set in during Governor Robe’s term of office, 1845-
1848. In 1850 the young state contributed £2,000 to the salaries
of pastors and £2,500 to the building of churches. It is self evident
that Kavel never accepted any state aid. He viewed with horror
any entanglements with the state (cf. the scruples of his Church in
I lie matter of accepting the marriage licence). There are no
records extant to prove that any of the other Lutheran congrega-
tions ever participated in this state aid. The chief beneficiaries were
the Anglicans. The year 1851 saw the end of state aid in South
Australia. In the elections for the Legislative Council Baptists,
Methodists (not Wesleyans), and Lutherans, under the leadership
of George Fife Angas, fought against it. They won the day. Much
more and much longer the State of Victoria was involved in grant-
ing such aid. Here the Lutherans, too, accepted large sums. For
instance, in 1861 Pastor Goethe received £l2B/6/8 towards Ris
salary. At an earlier period he received £1,500 for the building
of the Lutheran Church in Melbourne. As late as 1870 the Govern-
ment spent £50,000 for religious purposes. Only in 1871 did state
aid cease in Victoria. In New South Wales and Queensland there
seems to have been nothing beyond grants of land on the part oi
the Government for church purposes.
It is that the Churches are free in regard to self-
maintenance. State aid spells state control and is, therefore, the
thin edge of the wedge which eventually leads to the infringement
of religious liberty. Self-maintenance must not be regarded as a
burden but as a privilege. This is the case when it is understood
lhat ail contributions in the interest of the Church are in reality
thank-offerings to the Lord.
The historical records of the Australian Lutheran Church reveal
bow the church members provided for the external needs of their
congregation and Church. To the incidents recorded in Part 1 and
Part II some more may be adduced. In the early days a call,
offering a salary of £BO, was extended to a pastor from Germany.
In Victoria pastors received higher salaries, most likely due to


state aid* In 1858 Pastor Goethe received £4OO, pastors in country
towns £3OO. But salaries soon decreased. In 1913 synod was asked
to declare £l5O as the minimum salary of a pastor. In South Aus-
tralia £l2O was the general rule. In Queensland the salary was
even lower. To the fixed salary were added the incidentals, fees
for baptisms, marriages, and other official acts, special festival
collections, providing of firewood, in some cases also of a bushel
of wheat per household, and free use of land belonging to the con-
gregation. Teachers received a much smaller annual salary, be-
ginning with £2O and emoluments in the early days. With the
decrease in the purchasing power of money the raising of salaries
became necessary. An amount of £2OO to £250 and emolu-
ments for a pastor s salary is now the rule. It was not
easy for pastors to make ends meet, especially as the means
of conveyance bad to be provided out of the income. Not
even now is it the accepted rule that a parish provide
for the expensive running of the car. The meagre income made
it almost compulsory for the pastor, much to the detriment of the
congregations, to look to other sources of income (keeping of fowls
and cows). Much heroism shown in an inostensible way by pastors
—and their wives—is revealed by these statements. On the other
hand it must also be mentioned that in young and small parishes
great sacrifices were and are demanded and gladly made. Con-
spicuous instances are the Appila parish in its earliest days, con-
sisting then of eleven families and raising the required £l2O
stipend, and the Doncaster parish of to-day of but one hundred and
six communicant members, who pay a stipend of £2OO. Mention
must also be made of the fact that on the whole members have re-
lieved the situation by gifts in kind and by willingness to come
to the pastor’s financial assistance in emergencies.
As to ways and means of raising the stipend the general practice
is to make a levy, sometimes graded, on the members, ranging from
10/- to 20/- in larger parishes and to 40/- in smaller ones. For
special requirements, such as church buildings, voluntary subscrip-
tions are the rule. At present the envelope system is gaining favor
with gratifying results (one field on Eyre’s Peninsula, South Aus-
tralia, on an average raising 50/- per member). Other, less
churchly ways, are not wholly unknown. In the times of the
General Synod there spread from Melbourne to other congregations
of that body the practice of raising moneys for church purposes
by means of tea meetings, bazaars, and the like. The proceeds ol
these not infrequently reached a sum in three figures. The
I .E.L.C.A.. however, strongly advises against such practices. On
the whole the Lutheran Church regards it as an honor to raise


all the required sums by direct giving. Very little of the £21,000
annually required for local congregational expenses and of the
£B,OOO for the enterprises of the Church is raised in other ways.'
In order to distribute the burdens more equitably it is to be hoped
that a pooling of contributions and the paying of salaries from a
central fund will be adopted eventually, also a budgetting of the
annual requirements for the Church’s general works on the basis
of the numerical, financial, and spiritual resources of the congre-
gations.
Although the local treasurers and those of the districts and the
general treasurer had and still have many an anxious hour they
will bear testimony that, in spite of all trouble, they experienced
time and again that the members did not leave them in the lurch
(the Church never defaults!). To the question, addressed by Christ
to His disciples: “Lacked ye anything?” the treasurers are able to*
reply, “Nothing.”
Providing for the self-maintenance of the Church does not only
prevent encroachment on its liberties, but is in itself a means of
making members free from “the mammon of unrighteousness.”
4. It is free in regard to membership and to participation of its
members in its works.
Even if born into membership individual members are fre-
quently placed before the necessity to decide whether or not they
will remain loyal to their Lutheran Church. There are so many
other Churches whose places of worship are close by and who
offer many inducements to accept membership in them (cf. Part
111, chapter 4). Of course, there are not a few who by force
of tradition and habit remain members, but on the whole member-
ship is due to the fact that in liberty the individual member has
decided to remain a Lutheran.
The same is true of active participation in the enterprises of
the Church. There is no coercion into giving and working for the
Church. All that the Church and its leaders do is to point out the
needs of the Church and how necessary are its enterprises. By
gentle persuasiveness the hearts are won for the various branches
of the Lord’s cause. This encourages co-operation between leaders
and individual members in the congregations as well as in the
general body. Thereby interest in the works of the Church is
fostered. The more one puts into an enterprise, the greater will be
the interest taken in it. Of course, the U.E.L.C.A. still falls far
short of the ideal. Other Church bodies may outshine it. But as


long as theie is in its leaders and in those led by them the motive
power, w The love of Christ constraineth us,’* the principle of
voluntaryism wi 11 triumph.
The U.E.L.C.A. is only a small Church, hut because of its
fieedom as < hai acterized in this chapter, it proves to be an integral
part of the Church Universal in the sense of Gal. 5, 1, which de-
clares the members of Christ’s household to be truly free.


And the glory which Thou gavest
me I have given them; that they
may be one. John XVII t 22.
CHAPTER TWO.
The U.E.L.C.A. is a “VISITED" Church.
THE word “United” in the official designation 'U.E.L.C.A. is a
monument of God s grace which led out of disunion into union.
It; is a promise of greater things, when after coming together with
the E.L.S.A. it will be possible to drop the attribute “United ’ and
assume the name: The Evangelical Lutheran Church in Australia.
1. It is a miracle of God that Lutherans have come together.
It was no wonder that unity was lacking during the first stages.
The immigrants who formed the material out of which the Lutheran
Church in Australia was built were not a homogeneous body. They
were a true replica in miniature of the conditions obtaining at that
lime in the Fatherland in racial, political, cultural, and religious
respect. There were amongst them Germans of various types: Low
Germans, High Germans, Hanoverians, Bavarians, Saxons,
Swabians, Mecklenburgers, Pomeranians, and also Wends and
Poles; free-church people and those from the State Churches;
Lutherans, or members ot the Union Churches, Moravian Brethren.
Modernists, and Biblicists, Reformed, Pietists and worldlings. They
brought with them their peculiar traditions and customs, church
books, hymn-books, and others. To the diversity of the building
material came the diversity among the builders. There were trained
pastors and wholly untrained, men who had proved to be difficult
characters in the home Church, and others without any elasticity,
who wanted to force their Australian congregations into the mould
of their respective Mother Churches. When later connections with
different seminaries in Germany were established, the pastors com-
ing from these brought with them special church ideals and pro-
vided their synods with more pastors of their respective brand. Add
to this the human, sinful element, and it will be seen that, as much
as disunion was to be deplored, it was only natural, and that it


needed the Lord Who in His smithy forged and welded the
Lutherans together into the “United” Evangelical Lutheran Church
in Australia. He it was Who led to the formation of parishes and
synods, Who gave men of vision who with might and main worked
for union. God it was Who by the World War severed overseas
connections which prevented the Lutheran synods from coming to-
gether, and Who through the-joint work in the support of the New
Guinea missions and the establishment of a seminary bound them
together ever more and more. To those who saw the former dis-
union and the way in which the Lord overcame it, the “United”
in the name U.E.L.C.A. represents a veritable miracle.
2. Much blessing has already come of the union.
It is recognized as the most important blessing that in the united
body each section with its own peculiar charisma is complement-
ing the other. The Neuendettelsau pastors brought into the union
the spiritual inheritance of the great churchman, W. Loehe: —The
clear conception of the Church '’’which is His body, the fulness of
Him that filleth all in all,” Eph. I, 23; the feeling of deep reverence
toward the sacramental in the life of the Church, combined . with
the profession in word and deed: “Lutheran altars for Lutheran
Christians only”: the emphasis of proper dignity in the service
of the sanctuary; and zeal for mission work. The Hermannsburg
pastors, having this missionary zeal and loyalty to the Lutheran
Confessions in common with the former, added to these the gifts
suited especially for practical church work. The chief contribu-
tion of the pastors from Basel was: A strong Biblicism, a genuine
pietism, and the emphasis of personal communion with the living
Christ—traits peculiar to the mystical tendency of the Swabians.
These were combined with a dread of formalism, the “letter that
killeth,” the regarding as fruits what may be mere activity. It is
evident that a give and take had to be practised. On the one hand
it was necessary to avoid the idea that in regard to Bible and Con-
fessions, Christian faith and Lutheranism, spiritual life and church
activity, the one excluded the other. On the other hand, it was
necessary to stress the fact that the Confessions are not “the letter
that killeth,” but living testimonies of the ever present Christ and
the faith in Him, that justification without sancification is no
reality, that no work done in the Church is pleasing to the Lord
if it is not the fruit of faith and love in Him. The contributions
which these different types of pastors, owing to their peculiar ex-
perience and development, have made have been a real source of
blessing to the U.E.L.C.A.
Other blessings were that with united strength the works of
the Church could be energetically pursued, overlapping, especially


in home mission fields, could be abolished, and that a theological
seminary for the uniform training of pastors could be established.
The latter is one of the chief factors in welding the component
parts of the Church together.
3. The designation 44 United ,r is a clarion call to achieve ever
greater unity.
It is natural that the work of achieving complete unity took
time. A process set in somewhat similar to that necessary in mar-
ried life, where both husband and wife find it necessary to adjust
themselves to each other. It imposes sacrifices on both parties.
The main work in this respect was done in the pastors" conferences.
That was not always easy. Many a clash occurred. Oft-times
sparks flew, as the process of forging was still going on. Thanks
lo the grace of God the union has been intact for seventeen years.
Ibe danger zone is passed. A wonderful harmony has been
achieved. Whilst in the earlv vears great care had to be taken that
J J CJ
each section w r as duly represented in the offices and boards, the
stage has now 7 been readied where not the school but the ability of
the man alone is the deciding factor.
There are still nasty scars of former disunion; in numerous
places there exist still two, and even three different congregations.
At ernpts to remove these scars have been made. They were marked
with success in outlying districts, but not so in the old centres. Im-
patience and force will not bring about the desired end. Time will
completely eradicate the marks of former schisms which to-day
still disfigure the face of the U.E.L.C.A. What the present genera-
tion does not accomplish the next one wall assuredly do.
4. The Lord has graciously protected the L.E.L.C.A. from a new
division . r ■.
After the U.E.L.C.A. had existed for seven years a very dangerous
stage was reached. A rift seemed to run through the whole struc-
ture from top to bottom. This was due to outside interference. In
Germany the Protestant Churches had formed a federation, the
'‘Deutsche Evangelische Kirchenbund” (German Evangelical Church
Federation). It established a diaspora department which busied
itself with trying to bring Lutheran Churches overseas under its
care. As it was not a purely Lutheran organization its approaches
were and could not be acceptable! This was expressed officially in
a resolution of the Walla Walla general synod, 1928. When in
spite of this attitude Dr. C. Schneider, as an ambassador of the
Gustav Adolph-Verein (Association), a unionistic diaspora organi-
zation. in close touch with the Deutsche Evangelische Kirchenbund,
arrived, he given to understand that he was not wanted. The


U.E.L.C.A. was certainly not adverse to endeavors by the Church
in the Fatherland to establish contact. Isolation will never do for
a small Church. But the hand that was stretched forth was not
that of the Lutheran Church. And the heart that moved that hand
was not that of the Mother Church. The Lutheran Church of
Germany knew that the U.E.L.C.A. was not a Church practically
doomed, as was hinted in the instruction given to Schneider by the
organization he represented.. However, he was treated in a cour-
teous manner during his stay. His lectures were thankfully listened
to. But the mutual confidence between the component parts of the
U.E.L.C.A. was gravely shaken and for a time the Deutsche Evange-
lische Kirchenbund and the question of affiliating with it became
a Shibboleth. The danger passed over. That was due in part at
least to the way in which Schneider wrote about Australian Luther-
anism in general and on the U.E.L.C.A. in particular. The picture
he painted was such a one as might be obtained with the aid of
concave and convex mirrors. It aroused fierce protests within and
without the U.E.L.C.A. and has thus helped gradually to regain
the shaken confidence amongst brethren and to preserve the Church
united.
That this may be so in the future, and that those still holding
aloof may be drawn in, is the fervent prayer of all well-wishers of
the Lutheran Church.


But we preach Christ crucified,
1 Cor I, 23.
CHAPTER THREE.
The U.E.L.C.A.is a truly “ ”Church.
ALL Protestant Churches in Australia claim to be evangelical.
But this term befits only that Church which places Christ and
Him crucified into the centre of its message, which preaches not
the natural goodness of man, but his natural corruption, and which
through its message of the Saviour of sinners leads to evangelical
liberty and the joy of sonship with God. Proof will now be offered
that this may be said of the U.E.L.C.A.
1. The U.E.L.C.A. with its message takes its stand not at the
periphery, hut in the centre ,
The man in the street, as a rule, has a fine sense of reality and
usually is not far out in his opinion. It is, therefore, significant
that he interprets wittily the language of the bells of the different
Churches in this way i —The Roman Catholic bells proclaim,
are the Church”; those of the Church of England retort, “No, you
are not”; the Congregational bells announce merrily, “Indepen-
dent”; the Methodists beg, “Collection, please”; the Baptists insist,
“You must be dipped”; the Lutherans bellow forth, “Fundamen-
tals.” With gratitude to God it may be truly said that throughout
the hundred years of its existence in Australia the Lutheran Church,
and this in all sections, has firmly stood on the solid ground of
the fundamentals, and therefore never ceased to proclaim Christ
as the One who died for the salvation of sinners. This is all the
more astonishing as the Lutheran Church was surrounded by
Churches which to a marked degree gave way to modernism. Very
little is as yet noticeable among these of the influence of Karl Barth,
the Reformed theologian who brought about a return to funda-
mentals in Germany; much less of the wonderful revival of
Lutheran theology in the land of the Reformation. It is not an
isolated testimonv that comes from an English state school teacher


who said that his father, a retired missionary, preferred to attend
Lutheran services because there Christ and nothing but Christ is
preached. Besides the aberration from the central gospel truths
there is noticeable among the Anglo-Saxon Reformed Churches in
Australia a tendency to substitute peripheral matters for the mes-
sage of sin and grace. Evidence of this is found in the daily papers
with their announcements of services and subjects of sermons, and
the report on sermons delivered. Specimens culled include:*—-
Springtime, abstinence, political questions of the day, church sur-
roundings, the springtime sacrament of beauty, and others. When
the kingdom of God is made the subject of a sermon one is quickly
directed to the achievements of science and to the objects of over-
coming war and other present-day ills. Under these conditions it
is evident that the Lutheran Church still has a great duty to per-
form in Australia. Wonderful opportunities are now open to it.
The use of the English language in the services, and the possibility
of bearing witness through the press and over the air, are means
of reaching the masses.
To preserve the heart of the gospel message it is also necessary
faithfully to strive against any secularization of the Church and its
work. Ihe U.E.L.C.A. is firmly resolved to do this. At the general
synod in lanunda, 1931, the President General gave expression
to the attitude of the U.E.L.C.A. in the words of M. Reu, D.D.
(Second Lutheran World Convention, Copenhagen):—
“The upholding of the inward character of the Kingdom of God is
all important. When does the Kingdom of God come? This question
is nowadays answered louder and louder in this way: When in the
world general peace has been established, when wars have been
banished altogether. When the Churches come together in one great
ecumenic organization, when social injustice is done away with and
perhaps the greatest scourges of mankind, plagues and incurable
diseases, will be a thing of the past-then a paradisaical state of
things, the Kingdom of God will have come to earth. And how is
this brought about? By strenuous efforts of human and perhaps
Christian energy, by planning, conferring, organizing. Just so does
God not make His Kingdom come. Everything human, all organizations
and unions, associations and co-operations, meetings and sessions,
executives and wmrk reports are futile attempts (Machwerk), if the
Holy Ghost does not as an all enlivening breath pass through all
human efforts. Luther’s Catechism gives a totally different answer.
It says’, “The Kingdom of God conies to us when our heavenly Father
gives us His Holy Spirit, so that by His grace we believe
His Holy Word and lead a godly life here in time and
hereafter in eternity.” I do not deny that the Church has
a social duty, but this can only be fulfilled if, and in as
far as the members have been awakened through the Spirit of God
to faith, burning in love. I, too, know of a paradisaical state of
things in the future, —not as the end of natural development of the
good in the world, but it is established through God’s judgment and
the breaking off of this natural human development when Christ


comes again, ‘to'judge the quick and the dead.’ For this I am wait-
ing in blessed hope. Until*then must God’s Kingdom bear the charac-
teristic of the kingdom .of the cross and must not know any other
means but the Word, and the Sacraments.”
Arid, adapting l)r. 'Ken’s words to Australian conditions, the
•President General further said:—“O Lutheran Church, do not give
up this treasure which has been placed into thy cradle. Do not listen
to the sjren sopg of Reformed friends. Do not suffer by Reformed
activity to be robbed of what is one of thy most valuable inheritances.
We in Australia; rire Standing in the thick of the fight and feel the
strangling and, enervating power of this movement and know of what
we are talking,”:, , ;i _
%*' The U.E.L.C.A. preaches the message of the Saviour of sinners,
and not the' natural goodness of man.
Modernism is not the only point wherein the Australian
Lutheran Church differs fundamentally from the Protestant
Churches around it. Among these is a very pronounced tendency
to trust in the natural goodness of man and his ability to achieve
an ever greater moral perfection. What happened in a Congrega-
tional Church is not an isolated instance. Preaching on “In Him
was life and the life was the light of men," the preacher managed
to ignore Christ, and to speak as if the “Him” of the text referred
to man, and the hearers were asked to let the rays of wisdom,
beauty, art. mother love, and other love inherent in them, shine
forth. The radio services—as the author knows from his own ex-
perience during his prolonged illness —bring much that may help
to an energetic Christian life, but very little —except the preacher
be a Lutheran —of consolation for a sinner when face to face with
eternity. How different the Lutheran Church which is not ashamed
to proclaim the Scripture truth of man’s corruption, of original
sin, as also of the atoning work of Christ, all this with the senti-
ment dominant: “All glory be to God on high."
The tendency in other Protestant Churches to overrate man’s
doings comes to light also in their conception of the Sacraments.
In general these Churches do not appreciate that God is active in
the Sacraments. The main stress is rather placed upon what man
does. It is only a logical consequence when it happens that Bap-
tists cannot see the necessity of Holy Baptism in the case of persons
wdio in other ways confess Christ.
The totally different attitude of the Lutheran Church in the
question of man’s goodness and works is revealed in its rejection of
the lodges as is expressed in its constitution. The Christless teach-
ings of the lodges that man can be good by his own strength are
certainly the very opposite of the gospel of Christ. The U.E.L.C.A.
advises against Girl Guides and kindred movements which aim
at moral improvement by their respective principles and not by


ihe gospel of Christ. Ihe U.E.L.C.A. s sole object is to give all
glory to Christ, the Lord, and to His redemption.
3. The U.E.L.C.A. with its message aims at Christian liberty as
opposed to all legalism.
There is a pronounced difference between the Reformed type
of Christian life and that of the Lutheran Church. The former is
characterized by a servitude to rules and laws which must be ful-
filled to the letter; the latter by the inward freedom of a child in
its father s house. Owing to its legalistic environment the Lutheran
Church has every reason to warn against a tendency to turn
Christian liberty into a new bondage. For all that he is to do, or
not to do, the Lutheran knows only one motive, the thankful love
to God for the salvation experienced. The legalistic, “touch not,
taste not, handle not” (Col. 2, 21), has to give way to the apostolic
injunction, “All things are yours; ye are Christ’s,” 1 Cor. 3, 21, 23.
Owing to this conception the U.E.L.C.A. does not agree with
the Prohibition movement and the way in which it is supported by
the Reformed Churches, which even condemn the use of fermented
wine at Holy Communion. The U.E.L.C.A. rather emphasizes that
a moderate use of God’s gifts reveals a higher moral standard than
total abstinence. At the same time the Lutheran Church condemns
the drinking evil as strongly as any other Church.
It took.the Lutheran Church in Australia some time to decide
against the legalistic attitude towards the Sunday. The strict
English way of keeping the “Sabbath Day” made a deep impression
upon the first Lutherans here. Followers of Kavel went so far as to
protest against the teaching on Sunday and its observation as pre-
sented in the Augsburg Confession (Article 28) and Luther’s Large
Catechism. The legalistic manner in which the Reformed Churches
seek to prove their attitude, the climax of which is reached by the
Seventh Day Adventists, has led the Lutheran Church in Australia
back to the genuine Biblical attitude. In support of this view
Pastor Herlitz can be cited. When the Council of Churches pressed
him to support “Sabbatarian measures,” he strongly protested
<1902). The present catechism of the U.E.L.CjA. in its treatment
of the Sabbath affords evidence of its genuine evangelical attitude.
In short, the U.E.L.C.A., in common with the whole Lutheran
Church, draws a solitary furrow, but it is satisfied that it is truly
Sniptural to pieach Christ and the liberty wdierewith He has made
us free.”
4. The U.E.L.C.A. stresses as the object oj its message the joy
of sonship and not the pleasures of social life.
. This is another distinctive attitude of the Lutheran Church and
233


of the U.E.L.C.A. All its work among young and old has no other
goal than to fill the hearts even here on earth with the joy that
puts all other joys in the shade, and that sanctifies every joy
afforded by temporal gifts—the joy of being adopted children of
G°d.
It is not saying too much that other Churches stand in danger
of turning the Church, God’s institution for the salvation of souls,
into an institution to provide entertainment. Balls, bridge parties,
masquerades, and the like, belong to the regular functions of some
Churches. Bazaars, strawberry fetes, tea meetings, and dances are
held for the purpose of raising funds for the Church! The social
life and amusements offered by other Churches are no mean temp-
tation to the young. And there is the danger that for fear of losing
them the Lutheran Chuich may be led to adopt like seculai
measures. Its past history must ever impress it with this one duty:
“Do the work of an evangelist”; “let the dead bury their dead,
hut go thou and preach the kingdom of God’; prove that the
Church of God is not the playground of pleasure-seeking church
members, but the temporary abode of joyful children of God. Only
then will the U.E.L.C.A. remain what it was in the past —truly
evangelical


Since the Lutheran Church pos-
sesses the Word and the Sacra-
ments in their purity, she is the
fountainhead of the Truth. . .
The children of this Church hold
watch at this fountain, in joyous
complacency, with shining faces,
and with keen-edged swords, know-
ing that this spring is the one
from which all those that are saved
must draw.
—W. Loehe.
CHAPTER FOUR.
The U.E.L.C.A. is a “LUTHERAN” Church.
\
W HY name a Church after a man? The name “Lutheran” was
not a matter of choice, but originally w T as used as an epithet
against the Lutherans by their opponents. It has become, as the
clear-sighted champion of the Lutheran Church, W. Loehe, ex-
pressed it, an “unhappy cognomen of all the glorious titles of
the Church/’
The U.E.L.C.A/s Lutheran character has become evident in the
pages of this book. What is still to be said is this: —
1. Owing to its history and necessary struggles against unionistic
tendencies it is obvious that its standpoint cannot but be defi-
nitely and pronouncedly Lutheran .
The Lutheran Church in Australia was born out of opposition
to the Union movement. Its fathers and founders suffered perse-
cution rather than become disloyal to its Confessions. To safe-
guard their Lutheran inheritance they emigrated to Australia. They
had not long been here, when they were forced to decide again,
whether they would countenance unionism or not. The early
beginnings of the Lutheran Church in Victoria and Queensland
were not distinctly Lutheran. Even Pastor Berlitz in his earlv
days (1866) emphatically proclaimed a unionistic standpoint:—
“We shall never give up the principle that members of Reformed
Churches without objection shall be admitted to our Communion
altars.” The fear that unionism might gain the upper hand in the
Australian Lutheran Church prompted the Fritzsche-Hermannsburg


line to dissociate itself from the Victoria Synod in 1874. Ihe
same fear on the part of the Kavel-Auricht followers caused the
schism of 1884, when the Immanuel Synod, after having somewhat
deviated from its original course, definitely returned to it. By the
negotiations for union in 1912 and 1920-1921 this course eventually
became the course of the U.E.L.C.A
Uncompromisingly the U.E.L.C.A. rejects both Romanism, with
its over-emphasis of the Sacraments and the sacramental in the
Church, and Calvinism, with its lack of emphasis and under-
estimation of the Sacraments, and of what God does in them. It
not only positively asserts the Lutheran faith, but negatively also
rejects any doctrine contrary to the Word of God and the Lutheran
Confessions, believing with Pastor Auricht that “the fiery emblem
on the brow of false unionism is tacit acquiescence in error.” The
U.E.L.C.A. knows what it does and means what it does when at
every synod it publicly and with one mind confesses its faith in
the Lutheran, Biblical doctrine on Holy Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper. It has developed a genuinely Lutheran consciousness.
2. This Lutheran standpoint is natural and essential for a Church
surrounded by different denominations.
The 29,000 members of the U.E.L.C.A. live scattered over vast
stretches of the Australian continent, dispersed among its 6,750,000
inhabitants. Around them they see a great number of Churches of
various types. Of them it may be said, “he that offers various
things will surely offer something for everyone/* What is to pre-
vent members from choosing a Church according to their individual
taste? There is also the danger that the numerical strength and
social standing which membership in them gives may mean a
special inducement to link up with them. This is especially so
in the case of the Church of England, which bears something of
the glory hailing from the State Church of England. In regard
to this Church Lutherans are easily misled. This is due to the
fact that in church style and arrangement (altar, pulpit), and in
rites (Confirmation) and usages (Church Year), the Church of
England has much in common with the Lutheran Church. In true
conservatism it, too, has taken over all this from the ancient
Church. The possibility of their children receiving Confirmation
in that Church especially helps to quieten the conscience of
Lutheran parents. The great leniency in the question of wordly
pleasures, and the lack of church discipline are constantly exerting
an enticing influence upon Lutherans.
For several decades the German language was a veritable harrier
against defection to other Churches. That barrier is broken. Even


if it could be strengthened, as the Deutsche Evangelische Kirchen-
bund and others in Germany expect of the Australian Lutheran
Chuich, it is clear that this will not suffice. Ihe only effective de-
terrent against leaving the Lutheran Church is that the Church and
its members are imbued with true Lutheran consciousness. There is
evidence that even those church builders who came to Australia
with a more or less unionistic tendency soon found out that, if
a Lutheran Church is to survive in Australia, it must he pronoun-
cedly Lutheian. Where this was not so, as for instance in some
city congregations in Victoria, Lutheranism practically ceased to
exist as soon as the language barrier was obliterated. It is one
of the most important duties of the Lutheran Church so to instruct
its members that they clearly see the differences separating them
from other Churches, and thus to make them truly loyal to the rich
inheritance of their fathers.
>. Loyalty to the Lutheran Confessions has not caused the
L .E.L.C.A. to become fossilized.
Ihe U.E.L.C.A. believes that the promise of Christ, “The Spirit
of truth will guide you into ail truth,’ holds good until the final
consummation of God s plans. In the Scriptures the Church
possesses all the divine truth, but it is necessary that the Church
he led ever deeper into understanding the Biblical truth, so that
theological problems hitherto not convincingly clear will become
solved. The Biblical Word is so rich that, as new errors crop up,
new light and new understandings emanate from it. This “guiding
into all truth by the Holv Ghost was not completed, when the
Chinch laid down its faith in the formulas of the glorious ancient
and ecumenic creeds. Aor was it the case when the result of the
i ediscovery of the gospel at the time of the Reformation was em-
bodied in the Lutheran Confessions, nor when the profound theo-
logical works of the 17th century were compiled. These treatises
which have preserved the inheritance of the Reformation through
ihe autumn of Pietism and the winter of Rationalism certainly
are deserving of due credit. When the fathers of the Australian
Lutheran Church protested against “dead” orthodoxy they
had not in mind these grand theological treatises, but
that type of Christian belief which does not manifest itself in a
tiue Christian life. A cause of rejoicing also is the reawakening
of the Lutheran Church and theology during last century, and more
so the return to the life and power distinctive of the Reformation
in the present-day Lutheran theology of Germany. Although the
I .E.L.C.A. emphatically rejects theological modernism it does not
permit the wholesale denunciation of all theologians of modern
times as modernists The U.E.L.C.A. does not believe in a theology


“bottled up,” ready for use for all times, but in a progress ol
theological effort lor the better fathoming and ever deeper under-
standing of the Word. It does not believe in doctrinal perfec-
tionism, but holds itself open to what the Word of God under the
-uidance of the Holy Ghost has to say under present conditions
D
for present-day needs.
The initiated will see in the above a presentation of the chiet
difference between the U.E.L.C.A. and the E.L.S.A., namely, the
attitude towards “Open Questions.” By “Open Questions” is meant
such questions upon which different answers, supportable by Scrip-
lure. may be given, which differences do not necessitate severance
of church fellowship.
The rigid attitude of the E.L.S.A. and the more live, historical,
elastic attitude of the U.E.L.C.A. are due to a different approach
to the Lutheran Confessions. The E.L.S.A. in common with the
Missouri Synod of America believes that all and every doctrine
mentioned in the Symbolical Books is binding. The U.E.L.C.A.,
on the other hand, regards only that as binding which in thesis
and anti-thesis was accepted in the then existing controversies as
the true doctrine. It regards the attitude of the E.L.S.A. towards
the Confessions as unhistoric, legalistic, totally at variance with
the idea of the writers of the Confessions. To these and to the
U.E.L.C.A. they are “declarations of the faith, as to how at any
time the Holy Scriptures have been understood and explained in
the articles of controversy.” These pronouncements the U.E.L.C.A.
adopts joyfully as its rule of faith because they are in accord-
ance with the Holy Scriptures. Besides these pronouncements the
U.E.L.C.A. of course accepts everything in the Confessions which
stands the test of being truly scriptural. This attitude does not
make it necessarv to protest, as Pastor K.avel did, against ceitaiu
passages in the Confessions, and makes it possible for the
U.E.L.C.A. to stand four-square upon the Confessions. It is a
cause for gratification to the U.E.L.C.A. that Fritzsche, according
to documentary evidence just come to light, shared this attitude.
4. The fact that the E.L.S.A. refuses the U.E.L.C.A . the hand of
fellowship does not deprive the latter of its Lutheran character.
The attitude of the E.L.S.A. as described in the previous para-
graph is the most serious obstacle in the w 7 ay of reuniting the
Lutheran forces in Australia. It is due to this that the E.L.S.A.
lias stood aloof from all other Lutherans since 1874. Since the
incoming of the “Missourians” it gradually developed the pre-
sumptuous standpoint that only the Missouri Synod of America and
its appendages, of which the E.L.S.A. is one, are the only true-


Lutheran Church in the world and that all the other “Lutherans'
are heretics with whom even to pray would be sinful. That this
is so may be gauged from the following declaration which ap-
peared in the Lutheraner of America and which was reprinted
by the “Kirchenbote” of the E.L.S.A. (1904, No. 18): “All that
to-day throughout the whole world is called Protestant or Evan-
gelical Lutheran, except the Evangelical Lutheran Synodical Con-
ference (Missouri Synod of U.S.A.) and those that hold with it,
is one cake, one pulp, yea, one doctrinal pulp. ... On the one
hand we have the large Protestant World Church, including the
great number of manifest deniers of the Deity of Christ. These
are intimately related with the kingdom of Antichrist. On the
other hand we have the Church of the true Word and Sacraments.
This is at present confined to the Evangelical Lutheran Synodical
Conference of North America and the Evangelical Lutheran Synod
in Australia” (E.L.S.A.). The “Kirchenbote” expressly states:
To the Protestant World Church also belongs the Immanuel
Synod.” Such a presumptuous attitude naturally leads to the
definition of a member of the E.L.S.A. as one “who believes him-
self inerrant and perfect in doctrine,” and also leads to a very keen
scented hunting aftei heresies and to passing fierce judgments upon
those that think and hold otherwise. The "’Kirchenbote” of the
E.L.S.A. furnishes an almost unlimited supply of cases in point.
Such condemnations by the E.L.S.A., repeated in a similar way
in reference to the U.E.L.C.A., do not deprive the latter of its
Lutheran character. It is obvious that too often these hits against
errors which the U.E.L.C.A. does not dream of holding are nothing
but “beatings in the air”; that the “Missourians” mistake their
own explanation of the Word for the Word itself; that their claim,
church fellowship is possible only when full unanimity has been
attained in subject matter and phrase, does not prevent them from
subscribing to passages in the Confessions which are not wholly
in conformity with one another (“The Pope.” a part of “Anti-
christendom,” “the Pope the Antichrist”). It is further evident
that the E.L.S.A. itself has undergone more changes in its theology
than any other section of the Lutheran Church in Australia:—ln
1846 chiliasm was a cause for severing church fellowship, from
1864-1874 it was not; since then it is so again; from then on the
“Missourian” doctrine of predestination was adopted gradually.
Likewise the doctrine of the Holy Ministry underwent radical
changes. Till the end of last century praying wdth other Lutherans
was practised. Now it is declared a sin. Formerly it was not
dreamt of in the E.L.S.A. that betrothal constitutes marriage, now
this doctrine is regarded as important enough to hinder^church
239


fellowship. At one time in the E.L.S.A. catechism a doctrine of
Christs humiliation was propagated which even the Basel pastors
denounced as un-Lutheran.
5. The U.E.L.C.A. maintains close fellowship with the Lutheran
Church of the world and thereby avoids the danger of isolation.
From the very beginnings the Lutherans of Australia saw the
need of keeping in touch with the Lutheran Church at large. When
founding the Lutheran Church here Pastor Kavel expressly de-
clared that it was to be a branch of the Lutheran Mother Church.
Up to the time of the World War Lutherans, other than the E.L.S.A.,
were in constant connection with the Lutheran Church in Germany.
Pastors came from there, or, since the nineties of last century, re-
ceived their theological training there. Through them the Aus-
tralian Lutheran Church remained in touch with the rich spiritual
and theological life of the home land of the Reformation. The
seminaries where they were trained supplied Lutheran Churches in
North and South America also. That broadened the vision and
stimulated interest in the Lutheran Church at large. The develop-
ment of the Lutheran Church in America was of special interest
to Australian Lutherans, as in U.S.A. conditions similar to here
prevailed, though on a larger scale. When it became necessary
to introduce English, the Lutheran Church in Australia naturally
and gratefully accepted the English Lutheran literature provided
by the Sister Church of North America.
Thus fellowship with the German and American Lutheran
Churches proved a source of rich blessings. It was a great grief
that the Great War brought about a complete rupture of relations
with the fellow believers in Germany. As soon as conditions per-
mitted the threads were taken up again. By correspondence and
by the visit of a representative of the Martin Luther-Bund, Dr.
F. Eppelein, these connections were considerably strengthened. The
co-operation on the New Guinea mission field had the same effect.
D.Dr. Fr. Ulmer, the President of the Martin Luther-Bund, was
able to provide the much desired additional tutor for the Immanuel
Seminary in the person of Pastor Muetzelfeldt. The desire to have
an official channel for the influx of the rich spiritual and theological
life of the Lutheran Church in Germany was the chief reason for
the U.E.L.C.A.’s seeking federation with that organization (1935).
As part of the Lutheran Church at large the U.E.L.C.A. wel-
comed the formation of the Lutheran World Convention in
1923. From its inception the LI.E.L.C.A. was in contact with its-
leaders who kept the U.E.L.C.A. in touch with happenings within
the Lutheran Church of the world. In 1935 affiliation was effected.


This affiliation does not impair the independence of the U.L.L.C.A.,
nor its right to decide with which Lutheran Churches it is to main-
tain church fellowship.
May these connections with the Lutheran Church of the home-
land of the Reformation and of the whole world become ever more
beneficial for all concerned. Lor the U.L.L.C.A. in its isolated
position the maintenance of such fellowship is not only a duty
hut a vital necessity. It is an essential safeguard against stagna-
tion and a means to keep the U.L.L.C.A. truly Lutheran.


The sermon of the Church has as
its aim, not the furtherance of any
nationalism, but the proclamation
of the Gospel. In doing this it will
make use of the language which
will be best fitted to touch the
hearers’ hearts. This is a genu-
inely Lutheran principle.
—D. Dr. Werner Elert.
CHAPTER FIVE.
The U.E.L.C.A. is an “AUSTRALIAN” Church,
npHE Lutheran Church in Australia began as a German Church,
and a predominantly German Church it remained for approxi-
mately seven decades. Since the beginning of this century a very
pronounced anglicizing process began. It was greatly accelerated
during and after the War. Having lived and labored here for a
century, the Lutheran Church has become deeply rooted in Austra-
lian soil. Its members, living, as they do. among a
British population, have become an integral part of the Australian
nation. The designation as a German Church has long become a
misnomer. If any national designation is in place in the official
title it cannot be anything else than ’’Australian. ’
Reviewing the process of “naturalization’' it must be stated: —
1. It was only natural that the Lutheran Church upheld the
German language for a considerable time .
The followers of Kavel and Fritzsche came to Australia with
the firm object of building up a Lutheran Church in this new land.
For this reason they did not scatter, but established settlements of
their own. In them they led a secluded life, having but little
contact with the people of British stock around them. These
villages were so absolutely German both in regard to language and
to manner of living (building of houses, farming, customs) that
visitors from Germany imagined that they had stepped into a
village which by some miracle had been transplanted to Australia.
English people living in close proximity to these German settle-


merits invariably learned German. Even later immigrants as well as
those who removed to other states quite naturally flocked to
German settlements or banded together to form such. Like
attracted like.
These German fathers of the Australian Lutheran Church were
also German in sentiment. It is quite touching to notice how in
spite of the fact that their king had made them sorely feel his wrath
at what he called their obstinacy in rejecting his Union Church
plans, they cherished a deep love for him and his successors, and
took a keen interest in the rise of Germany, especially at the time
of the Franco-German War. The peace festivities at the conclusion
of that war brought together a great concourse of Germans and
were celebrated with great enthusiasm. Reference to this event
was made in the pulpits. In the archives of the U.E.L.C.A. there
is preserved a peace festival sermon preached by Pastor Meischel.
Notwithstanding what has just been said, the early Lutherans were
by no means lacking in true loyalty to the country and to the
Empire of their adoption. It was not merely for utilitarian reasons
(to enable them to become landowners), but for conscience’-sake
that Kavel’s followers in one body took the oath of allegiance. It
was the happy time when the two sentiments, love to the Fatherland
and loyalty to the British Empire, could dwell peacefully together
in Ihe same heart. The two nations were on friendly terms, and the
relations of the Royal houses of both Empires were most intimate,
due in part to the marriage of an English princess to the heir-
apparent to the German throne. A poem of * that time, composed
by J. A. Giersch, is evidence of the fine combination of love in both
directions. After praising God for the downfall of Napoleon TIL.
it concludes with these words: —
But we are in Australia, and never dare forget
To offer fervent prayers for our beloved Queen.
The German sentiment of these early Lutherans had nothing
whatsoever to do with pan-Germanism. The German Government
did not make the slightest attempt to foster pan-Germanism in
Australia. It completely ignored its former nationals. And if
it had made a move in this direction the Lutheran Church as a body
would have negatived such an approach in the most emphatic way.
German consuls in their endeavors to instil appreciation of German
cultural values into Australian Lutherans always had to exercise
great care not to offend the feelings of the Lutherans who even in
o O
those days were true Australians.
2. The adoption of the English language by Lutherans did not
spell the death-knell of the Lutheran Church in Australia.
It only natural that English, the language of the country,


should gradually be adopted by the Lutherans in Australia. In
new districts and in the cities they were scattered amongst
Britishers. The Lutheran day schools saw to it that their pupils
were not handicapped in life by lacking the knowledge of English.
The greater number of Lutheran children received their education
in the state schools. The rate of progress in becoming English
varied greatly. It became pronounced first in Victoria. In
Queensland, as stated previously, it was accelerated by the fact that
the children of Low Germans never became proficient in the High
German. The World War and its fierce hatred of everything
German, even of the non-political Lutheran Church of German
origin, the banning of the German language from the schools and
public life, were the main factors in speeding up the anglicizing
process.
At that time the thought was freely expressed that the giving up
of the German language would mean the end of the Lutheran
Church in Australia. Those who disliked the Lutheran Church
and saw in it, entirely without foundation, a bulwark of German
nationalism hoped that this would be the case. Those who loved it
as their Church, “their fathers’ and their own,” feared it. Neither
these fears nor these hopes came true. The youth of the Australian
Lutheran Church, receiving its ministration in English, does not in
any great numbers forsake the Church of their fathers, but is deeply
interested in its Church, is imbued with a Lutheran consciousness,
and is eager to continue to build on the foundations which the
fathers laid. It is the general experience that, where of necessity
English was introduced in the work of the Church, the drift of the
young people awav from the Church was stopped, and their hearts
were won.
Nor did the change of language mean a loss to the Lutheran
spiritual inheritance. Here, as in other countries, it has been
proved that, although translations often mean a loss, especially in
hymns, the English language is well fitted to become the vessel for
the message of the Lutheran Church. Listening into confirmation
classes, Sunday schools, and into services, even the most ardent
champion of he good old times will admit: thelanguage is different,
but the message is the same; the young English congregations are
“spirit of our spirit.”
The use of the English language in the Lutheran Church, in
more than one way is a gain, and presages greater progress.
Its adoption opened the mouth of the Lutheran Church and enabled
it, as a truly Australian Church, to reach the hearts of the
unchurched masses with the full gospel message.


3. In its attitude towards the language question the U.E.L.C.A. is
guided by its sole obligation: to preach the gospel.
The Church in its work does not aim at nationalism, but only
at the preaching of the Crucified and Kisen Lord as the Saviour
of a lost world. For this reason, and for this reason alone, the
U.E.L.C.A. made use of the German language when that language
was best understood. Where it continues to use German it does so
for no other reason. For the same reasons it adopted the English
language. This attitude it shares with the Lutheran Church
throughout the whole world. Wherever it works it shows a high
respect for the race and language of the respective people, adapts
itself to theii peculiar needs, and is imbued with but one desire,
for Christ’s sake, to become something to everybody, as St. Paul
became a Jew r to the Jews and a Greek to the Greeks. Proof of
this is that of all the Churches the Lutheran Church is the most
polyglot. Its Catechism has been translated into one hundred and
forty-five different languages. I here are, how 7 ever, several weighty
leasons why the German language should not be discarded alto-
gether. This language is the key to vast treasures of devotional litera-
ture. It is the means of communication for world Lutherans ( just as
it is the means of communication in (he musical world). There is
also a constant rivulet of German immigration coming to Australia.
W lio is to take caie of them if not the Lutherans! This work can
be done efficiently only by means of the German language. For
many years Lutheran pastors in Australia will be required to
preach in German. Where are such pastors to come from if there
aie no moie homes in which it is spoken? The German language
is the means of access to the greater and most valuable portion of
Lutheran theological literature. Therefore the Lutheran Church
insists that students of theology become proficient in German in
order to become ever more efficient in the preaching of the gospel.
But the importance of the German language in the work of the
Australian Lutheran Church is stressed for no other purpose than
that of preaching Christ and Him Crucified. This does not detract
in the least from the U.E.L.C.A.’s character of being trulv an
“Australian” Church.


IN CONCLUSION.
development of the Australian Lutheran Church over a
period of one hundred years has been under review. Peculiar
was its small but virile beginning, blessed from Above its progress.
To-day it may confess courageously;
“] shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the
Psalm 118 , 17.
A hundred years the Lord has preserved this small Church, and
this despite the fact that it was uprooted from its natural soil, and
had to strike root in a totally different environment. The vine,
planted into this continent, did not die, but spread its branches
near and far, and brought much fruit.
“This is the Lord's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes." Psalm
118 , 23.
For a hundred years the Lord with His Word and Sacraments,
“with His gifts and Holy Spirit,” has been with Australian
Lutherans as He has been with their fathers. A hundred years He
has borne them despite their sins—sins serious enough to cause
Him to cast them away altogether. Yet He has granted them not
only to live in His kingdom but also to serve Him in it. Blessed
from Above this small Church was permitted to become a blessing
to its children and to heathen far away. In humility and thank-
fulness it confesses: —
“By the grace of God I am what / am: and His grace which was
bestowed upon me was not in vain.' 1 Cor. 15 , 10.
JNot as a Church that fainteth and is weary” does the
U.E.L.C.A. from the pinnacle of its first century look backward
upon its course and forward towards its future. Revived, if not
to say rejuvenated, it celebrates its centenary. The amalgamation
of various small groups, the establishment of the college and
seminary, the decision to adopt the English language, too, in the
work of the Church —so hard for many in its midst—all this
combines to fill the heart with great joy, fresh courage, holy zeal,
and new strength. Its experience has been: —
246


7 key that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run , and not be
weary; theiy shall walk and not faint. Isaiah 40, 31.
Ihere are, of course, dark shadows in the picture of the
L.E.L.C.A. How can it be otherwise! There is no person nor
organization which does not show shadows. But instead of
picturing them it behoves the L.E.L.C.A. in its centenary year to
look away from itself and to the grace and mercy of God,
and to praise Him that at the beginning of a new century it may
believe: The small LLE.L.C.A. has a future, yea, it stands at the
beginning of a new and promising road which will lead to its
exercising ever greater influence.
The L.E.L.C.A. is a living Church. Despite increasing world-
liness there is still much spiritual life in it. As a rule its members
are regular attendants at divine worship; they come to sit “at
Jesus’ feet,” as did Mary in Bethany. The Lord’s Supper is in
most cases regularly partaken of (ninety per cent, of communi-
cants in (Queensland —this is an increase in comparison to the
figures of previous, years, two hundred per cent, in the southern
districts). Daily devotions are conducted in many homes; active
interest is shown in congregational and synodical enterprises. It
may be said that about one-third of all members are engaged in
active church work, in committees, in boards of management,
choirs, Sunday schools. The womenfolk take an increasingly
active part in church work. Volunteers for service in mission and
Church are always available. Strong protests against worldliness
are still raised. This book has given ample evidence of the
manner in which the members sacrifice of their earthly possessions
and the pastors on the whole never tire in their work. In all
humility it may be said that such signs of spiritual life have their
origin in the communion of the members with Christ, the Vine.
Without Him they can do nothing. To abide wholly in Him offers
the only but sure guarantee for a continued blessed existence of the
L.E.L.C.A. If it abide in Him the L.E.L.C.A. in its second century
will experience as in the first:—
I HAVE CHOSEN YOU, AND ORDAINED YOU, THAT YE
SHOULD GO AND BRING FORTH FRUIT, AND THAT
YOUR FRUIT SHOULD REMAIN. John 15, 16.




ADDENDA A
The Parishes of the U.E.L.C.A.


The parishes appear in alphabetical order. Abbreviations:
—Sunday School; LDS —Lutheran Day School; LL —Luther
League; LYPS—Lutheran Young People’s Society; E.L.S.Q.—
Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland; U.G.S.L.S. —United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Queensland; com.—
communicant members.
In some instances the information available was rather limited,
especially as to the foundation member:?.


SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DISTRICT
ADELAIDE (ST. STEPHEN’S) PARISH.
Organized in 1862, pastor resident in Adelaide.
Adelaide, St. Stephen’s Church. Emigrants from Hanover arrived
in 1848. They settled in Klemzig, vacated by Pastor Kavel and his
Klernzig congregation in 1844, when they left for Langmeil. The
new immigrants did not favor Kavel’s Constitution and selected one
from their midst, F. Borgelt, as pastor. Services were conducted
in old Klemzig Church, and at the same time services were conducted
in the “ Bible Christian ” chapel, Adelaide. At death of pastor
another layman was elected as pastor (C. Maschmedt). In 1860, as
a result of a rift, caused by peculiar astronomical »views expressed
in preface of a hymnbook, published by Maschmedt, services were
then held in Zion’s chapel, Pulteney St. (Seceding party retained
use of Christian Bible chapel. This party became 'Bethlehem
congregation, E.L.S.A.) St. Stephen’s Church, Pirie St., was
dedicated March 9, 1862. Foundation members: C. Maschmedt,
Brueggemann, Fischer, Baechtel, Borgelt, Sudholz, Ruwe, Kiessling,
Meinke, Weber, Woelke, Sawert, Lierich, Schmidt, Richter, H. Grey-
mann, G. Haverland, G. Grosse, D. Dittrich, W. Bresser. New St.
Stephen’s Church, Wakefield St., was dedicated February 11, 1900.
Congregation joined Immanuel Synod a.a.G. in 1893. Pastors: F.
Borgelt, 1848-56; C. Maschmedt, 1856-91; P. Niquet, 1891-92; J.' G.
Hegelau, 1892-96; Dr. E. J. Eitel, 1897-1905; W. Basedow, 1906-37;
W. Fritsch, since 1938. Congregation at Klemzig dissolved in 1878.
S.S. probably started in Pastor Maschmedt’s time, reorganized by
Dr. Eitel, L.L., for a while in Dr. Eitel’s time, organized again in
1906 by Pastor Basedow, and, with few interruptions, in existence
ever since. English services introduced in 1915. Statistics: Souls,
334; com., 257.
ALEXANDRA PARISH.
Organized in 1936, pastor resident in Strathalbyn.
Salem Peace Church. Founded by Pastor Teichelmann (Morphett
Vale) in 1856. Foundation members: G. Jaensch, W. Thiele, F. W.
Kurtzer, G. Frahn, J. G. Neumann, F. W. Klenke, W. Klaebsch, J.
Reimers, H. Dolling, C. Sawade, G. Wundersitz, A. Bruns, C. Thiele,
J. Klaebsch, A. Wundersitz. Pastors: C. G. Teichelmann, 1856-58;
C. F. A. Strempel, 1858-83; K. Dorsch, 1883-88; F. Koschade, 1889-
1929; T. G. Obst, since 1930. Church built 1890-91, dedicated 2nd
Sunday a. Epiphany, 1891. Congregation belonged to E.L.S.A.
till 1888, then joined Immanuel Synod. English services introduced
1925-26. L.L., together with Callington, organized in 1930. S.S.
commenced in Pastor Koschade’s time. Statistics: Souls, 107; com., 84.
Callington, St. Peter’s Church. Founded by Pastor Teichelmann
in 1856. Foundation members: Baum, Grimm, Sommer, Loechel,
Janetsky, Wiedemann, Muess, Edert, Kramm, Altmann, Paech, Thiele,
Trimper, Otto, Wirth, Braendler, Samuel, Kuchel, Stein, Ritter,
Jaensch, Gehricke, Korring, Schenkel, Werner, Haebich, Kutscher,
Schlamelcher. Church built 1864. Pastors: C. G. Teichelmann,
1856-58; A. Fiedler (Hahndorf), 1858-73; C. F. A. Strempel, 1873-83;
K. Dorsch, 1883-88; F. Koschade, 1889-1929; T. G. Obst, since 1930.
Till 1889 congregation belonged to E.L.S.A., then joined the Immanuel
Synod. L.D.S. for a short time, about 1865, Teacher Mueller and
another. English services introduced 1925-26. S.S. opened in Pastor
251


Koschade’s time. L.L., together with Salem, organized in 1930.
Statistics: Souls, 46; com., 34.
Victor Harbor, Holy Trinity Congregation. Services conducted by
Pastor Stolz (Adelaide) at Mt. Compass 1934-36. Organized by Pastor
Obst on November 8, 1936. Foundation members: O. Wehrmann,
N. Thiele, F. Dreyer, O. Kuchel, H. Jenke, Haemmerling, Paschke,
Hueppauff, Frahn, Mattiske, Dier. Pastor: T. G. Obst since inception.
S.S. opened 1936. Statistics: Souls, 23; com., 16.
Preaching Places: Langhorne’s Creek, Strathalbyn, Mt. Compass.
APPILA PARISH.
Organized in 1877, pastor resident in Appila.
Appila, Trinity Church. Services commenced in home of Bro. E.
Joppich in 1873. First church built in 1875. Foundation members:
J. C. Pech, E. Joppich, J. Wegner, G. Becker, A. Brauer,
A. Winnecke, C. Pahl, W. Reichelt, G. Roocke, G. Klemm, J. S.
Jaeschke. Pastors: Rechner, 1873-77; L. Kaibel, 1877-91; A. Orten-
burger, 1891-1928; E. G. Stolz, since 1928. Present church dedicated
July 28, 1901, First manse built 1877, present manse 1907. L.D.S.
1876-93. Teachers: H. Becker, Barbeck, Miss Bohlensdorf, Meier,
Miss C. Andrae, G. Festersen, Miss E. Wurst, A. Yenny, Trotter;
1902-17, teachers: H. Jericho, H. Spangenberg, G. Dohler. Reopened
in 1938 under Miss D. Gehling. Christenlehre (young people’s Bible
class) started 1896. English services commenced 1930. Statistics:
Souls, 207; com., 149.
Willowie, Bethlehem Church. First settlers arrived in 1876;
services commenced in 1877 in the homes of members (A. Bartsch,
G. Mueller). Church dedicated February 4, 1883. Foundation
members: G., W. and A. Mueller, A. Koch, W. Staude, P. Reichstein,
H. Reichstein, A. Bartsch, A. Keppert, W. Gade, A. Schiller, C. Jacobs,
W., C. Jacobs. Pastors: L. Kaibel, 1878-91; A. Ortenburger, 1891-
1928; E. Stolz, since 1928. S.S. commenced 1892. English services
introduced 1928. L.L. organized 1929. Statistics: Souls, 105; com., 77.
Caltowie. Organized probably in 1877 by Pastor Ey, served by
the Pastors: R. Ey, Thiessen (both of E.L.S.A.), C. Siegle, C. F. Braun
(both of Immanuel Synod a.a.G.). Then joined Immanuel Synod.
Pastors: A. Ortenburger, M. Kuss, J. Schaber; E. G. Stolz, since 1928.
English services introduced'in 1935. Statistics: Souls, 22; com., 19.
BETHANY PARISH.
Organized in 1844, pastor resident in Bethany.
Bethany, Herberge Christi Church. Founded in 1842 by twenty-
eight families, 117 souls, who with Pastor Fritzsche, came to Australia
on the “ Skjold.” Their pastor served them from Hahndorf and
Lobethal until 1844, when H. A. E. Meyer, a Dresden missoinary,
became first resident pastor of Bethany. First service conducted in
the open. Then primitive huts of settlers were used in turn for
worship, until home of Bro. Grosser became meeting-place for two
years. First church dedicated July 1, 1845. In this church schism
of 1846 occurred, which has not been healed completely to
this day. In 1875 Bethany church was the scene of the farewell
to the mission party which, accompanied by the local pastor, Heiden-
reich, went to Central Australia and there, on the Finke River,
founded Hermannsburg mission station. Second church was built in
1883. In it foundation synod of E.L.S.A. a.a.G. took place in 1904, as


also the closing convention of that synod and the amalgamation
convention—U.E.L.C. A. and E.L.S.A. a.a.G.-in 1926. Pastors:
/r* .?• ltzsche ’ 1842-44; H. A. E. Meyer, 1844-62; G. A.
Heidenieich, 1866-1910; H. Schmidt, 1910-11; W. Roehrs, since 1913.
;,°S at /? Q n members: Hueppauff, Hamdorf, Schrapel, Mafcschoss,
iVlilich, Gaeu, Ahrns, Grosser, Bradke, Schwarz, Pech, Kliche, Fellen-
berg, Laubsch, Klaebe. L.D.S. -soon after foundation till 1917.
R ° ebr ; Top P’ Koithan, 1887-88; A. Hensel,
1888-191/. S.S. since 1917. English services introduced 1924.
Statistics: Souls, 518; com., 375.
Krondorf, St. Peter’s Church. Founded bv Pastor J. Heinze.
Foundation members: Hentschke. Thiele, Doppel, Grocke, Heppner.
Congregation later joined the Bethany parish and is at present served
three-iour times a year; the members attend services at Bethany.
Statistics: Souls, 61; com., 40.
Schoenborn, Bethlehem Church. Founded bv Pastor Meyer in 1855
Congregation was served by pastors from * Bethany. Foundation
members: Mmge, Lehmann, Schwarz, Schmaal, Lemm, Hentschke,
Hocklas. First church built in early days; present church dedicated
January 30 1927. L.D.S. Teachers: Hoff, Buchholz, Bartholomaeus.
Rosenberg, Wachtel, Laubsch, Schwarz, Schulz. Statistics: Souls,
92; com., 74.
Stock well. Si. Ihomas’ Church. Branch of Ebenezer congregation
Several services were conducted by Pastor Staudenmayer (Light’s
lass). Congregation 'organized by Pastor Maschmedt in 1865.
Foundation members: C. J. Fiedler, G. John, W. Klinger, A. Schneider.
T. Pieusker, G. Nitschke, J. Sachse, A. Falland, A. Preusker, Peter
Zwar, W. Loeffler, C. W. Gehling, Wiesner. First church, which also
served as school, was erected in early days one mile out of town.
Pastors: C. Maschmedt, 1865-91; F. Hossfeld, 1892-1928; W. Roehrs,
since affiliation with L.E.L.C.A., 1929. Church built in Stockwell
1904; spire added in 1929. L.D.S. early in sixties. Teachers: Franz
Neuwad, H. Roever, G. Fiedler. English services since 1935. Statistics-
Souls, 199; com., 131.
BERRI PARISH.
Organized in 1926, pastor resident in Berri.
Berri. Services commenced by Pastor Meier (Loxton) in 1923.
Organized in 1926. Foundation members: P. M. Wilksch, B. H.
Jungfer, H. W. v. Bertouch, J. M. Doecke, A. Mueller, E. v. Bertouch,
A. Wuttke, O. Fiedler. Church built in 1929. Manse purchased in
1933. Pastors: J. Meier, 1923-26; A. Fehlberg, 1926-32; S. Gross,
since 1932. S.S. established in 1926. English services introduced
1926. L.L. organized 1934. Statistics: Souls, 107: com., 70.
Renmark. Organized by Pastor Fehlberg, sen., in 1931, with
members previously belonging to Paringa congregation. Foundation
members: O. A. Linke, C. F. G. John, A. W. Trimper, H. Schumacher,
E. and A. Falland, W. Krueger, W. Kroschel, G. Ruediger, J. Hamdorf,
P. Walter. Methodist church bought 1931. Pastors: A. Fehlberg,
1931-32; S. Gross, since 1932. English services introduced in 193 L
S.S. opened probably in 1925. L.L. organized in 1933. Statistics:
Souls, 122; com., 86.
Paringa. Organized by Pastor Kuss (Loxton) in 1911. Foun-
dation members: K. H. Schmidt, K. A. and C. A. Walter, H. Ulrich
W. Stoeckel, W., A., C. E. and T. E. Frahn, W. and A. Schumacher’
R., W., B. H. and E. A. Hoffmann, Mrs. E. Stafford, Miss M. Rover.
Church built 1912. Pastors: M. Kuss, 1911-21; J.. Meier, 1922-26;


A. Fehlberg, 1926-32; S. Gross, since 1932. English services intro-
duced 1931. S.S. opened in 1932. Statistics: Souls, 52; com., 39.
Bambill (Vic.). Founded by Pastor Jericho (Jepant, Vic.) in
1931. Foundation members: G. A. Bothe, E. A. Moil, A. G. Glatz,
C. A. Budich. Belonged to Victoria District till 1934. Pastors: A.
Jericho, 1931; A. Fehlberg, 1931-32; W. Loehe (Warracknabeal, Vic.),
1932-33; E. Fischer (Warracknabeal, Vic.), 1933; S. Gross, since 1934.
A house bought and transformed into church, dedicated 1936. English
services since inception. Statistics: Souls, 27; com., 19.
Lyrup. Services commenced in 1935 by Pastor Gross. Congregation
organized in 1936. Foundation members: J. B. Tschirpig, O. Burge-
meister, F. Pfeiffer. English services since inception. Served since
foundation by Pastor Gross. Statistics: Souls, 13; com., 8.
Mildura (Vic.). Services commenced in 1936 by Pastor Gross.
Congregation organised in 1937. Foundation members:- V. Kranz,
K. Bothe, A. Petschel. English services since inception. Served since
foundation by Pastor Gross. Statistics: Souls, 11; com., 8.
BLYTH PARISH.
Organized in 1938. pastor to reside in Blyth. Pastor designate.
H. Stiller.
Blyth, St. Peter’s Church. Founded by Pastor Niquet (Light’s
Pass) probably in 1867. Foundation members: A. Mangelsdorl,
Neumann, B. Odevahn. First services were held in home of Bro.
Odevahn, then in a shed in Blyth. Church dedicated June. 1884, spire
added in 1886. Pastors: P. Niquet, till 1890; C. F. Braun, 1890-1937.
English services introduced in 1929, conducted by E. Stolz, pastor of
Appila. Statistics: Souls, 54; com., 38.
Condowie, St. John’s Church. Founded in seventies by Pastors
Rechner, Auricht, and Niquet. Foundation members: G. Welke and
Sons, C. Ottens, G. Mattner, Dohnt. First church built on Plains,
was dedicated in October, 1882, by Pastors Koschade and Doehler;
second, more in centre, built 1922. Pastors: L. Kuss, 1881; A. Doehler,
1882-95; A. Sabel, 1895-1937. Pastor resident in Condowie, 1882-89.
Then congregation served from Yorketown; joined Nain parish in
1895. L.D.S., 1879-86. Teachers: G. F. Welke, Miss E. Krause. S.S.,
1912-15, and since 1923. English services introduced 1931. Statistics:
Souls, 137; com., 114.
Hoyleton, Ebenezer Church. Founded by Pastor Niquet end of the
sixties. Foundation members: Klinger, Simon, Wettern, Mangelsdorl,
Baum, Severin. First church built towards end of sixties; present
church dedicated September 17,1922. Pastors: P. Niquet (Light’s Pass);
C. Siegle (Point Pass), 1894-1911; K. Gutekunst (Eudunda), 1911-14;
E. Bemmann (Bethel, later Adelaide), 1914-31; W. Riedel (North
Adelaide), since 1931. L.D.S. for two years; teacher, Schoetloeffel.
English services since 1929. Statistics: Souls, 42; com., 26.
Balaklava, Zion’s Congregation. Founded as a result of several
families leaving E.L.S.A. congregation at Balaklava. Organized in
1932 by Pastor Riedel. Served by Pastor Heidenreich and others till
1931, since then by W. Reidel. Foundation members: Pfeiffer, Mueller,
Lange, Wandel. S.S. and English services since inception. Services
are held in Rechabite Hall. Statistics: Souls, 30; com., 18.


EDEN VALLEY PARISH.
Organized in 1912 y pastor resident in Angaston.
Eden Valley, St. Peter’s Church. Founded by Pastor Osier in
1858. Foundation members: Mangelsdorf, Kernich, Dietrich, Hartwig,
Klingberg, Heinrich, Heppner. First church built in 1862, present
church dedicated December 5, 1912. Pastors: Ph. Oster, 3 858-64; A.
Hensel, 1864-73; E. D. Appelt, 1873-88; P. B. Hoefner, 1888-95; J.
H. S. Heidenreich, 1895-1911; F. J. Lehmann,. since 1911. Seceded
from E.L.S.A. 1902. L.D.S., probably opened 1863. Teachers: Lemke,
Rohde, Hensel, Meier, Bartholomaeus, Wachtel, Tamke, Miss Joergen-
sen, E. Kernich. L.L., together with North Rhine, organized in 1928.
S.S. opened in 1916. Statistics: Souls, 191; com., 150.
North Rhine, St. Peter’s Church. Founded in 1850 by settlers from
Langmeil. Foundation members: Sommer, Latdorf, Bittner, Hoff-
mann, G. Rothe, R. F. Graetz, Obst, G. Schubert, Muenchenberg, T.
Pursche, G. Schulz, Helbig, Baehnisch. First church built in 1855,
present church dedicated April 22, 1866. Pastors: A. Kavel, till 1858;
C. Auricht, 1858-61; J. G. Rechner, 1861-1900; J, Stolz, 1900-24; J.
Riedel, 1924-27; F. Lehmann, since 1927. Congregation belonged to
Langmeil parish till 1861, to Light’s Pass parish till 1924, to Sedan
parish till 1927, since then to Eden Valley parish. L.D.S., 1855-1917.
Teachers: Helbig, Techow, Schubert, Giersch, Strempel; O. Riedel,
1889-1917. S.S. opened in 1916. L.L. organized in 1928. Statistics:
Souls, 183; com., 124.
Neukirch, Pilgrims’ Church. Founded probably in 1854. Foun-
dation members: Hampel, Hoffmann, Thomas, Staehr. Church built
1859, Pastors: H. A. E. Meyer, till 1862; E. D. Appelt, 1863-68;
G. A. Heidenreich, 1869-1909; H. Schmidt, 1910-11; F. J. Lehmann,
since 1912. Congregation belonged to Bethany parish till 1862, to
Neukirch parish till 1868, to Bethany parish till 1911, since then to
Eden Valley parish. L.D.S. 1859-1917. Teachers: Lehmann, F.
Rechner, Krichauff, Bergmann, Paul, Mrs. Lehmann. S.S. opened in
1916. L.L., together with Ebenezer, founded in 1913. Statistics:
Souls, 120: com., 90.
St. Kitts, St. Peter’s Church. Founded in 1866 by Pastor Appelt.
Foundation members: Jericho, Biele, Freund. Gersch. First
church built in 1869; present church dedicated November 13, 1910.
Congregation belonged to E.L.S.A. till 1903. Pastors: E. D. Appelt,
1866-87; J. E. G. Bode, 1887-92; J. P. Loehe, 1892-95; G. A. Heiden-
reich and J. H. S. Heidenreich, 1895-1909; H. Schmidt, 1910-11; F. J.
Lehmann, since 1912. For a number of years L.D.S. Teachers: L. A.
Becker, Miss Joergensen. S.S. 1912. Statistics: Souls, 87; com., 60.
Penrice, Salem Church. Services commenced in 1912. Congrega-
tional church bought and dedicated September 14, 1919. Pastor: F. J.
Lehmann since inception. S.S. commenced in 1919. Statistics: Souls.
112; com., 76.
EDITHBURGH. PARISH.
Organized in 1926, pastor resident in Edithburgh.
Edithburgh, St. John’s Church. Congregation organized in 1874,
Foundation members: R. Voigt, H. Heinrich, A. Heinrich, L. Gencke,
F. Henschke, W. Preuss, G. Preuss. Services at first conducted in
homes of members. Church built in 1883, destroyed by fire October
5, 1918. New church dedicated July 17, 1920. In 1905 congregation
seceded from E.L.S.A. and joined E.L.S.A. a.a.G. Pastors’: A. Strempel,


7 x ; t?'r. Ey? 18 ™-78; Niemann, 1878-79; J. H. Hoopmann, 1879-
1905; J. H. S. Heidenreich, 1905-25; F. Lienert, 1925-32; A. Fehlberg,
since 1933. Manse bought in 1924. L.D.S. for a number of years
Teachers: Molkentin, Miss Heinrich. The school was closed when*
state school opened. L.L. organised by Pastor Lienert in 1927-28.
S.S. commenced in early years. English services introduced in 1925.
Statistics: Souls, 95; com., 75.
Yorketown, Heaven's Gate Church. First services conducted
by Pastor Dost (independent) in home of Bro. Chris. Geitz in 1871
Foundation members: Chr. Domaschenz, C. Kollosche, C. Geitz, W.
Koop, J. T. F. Lehmann, Budach, Kubale, Miatke, Hentschke, C.
Twartz, Grassmeier, Heibich. These settlers came from Concordia, near
Gawler, in 1871. In 1872 some settlers arrived from LighPs Pass
and were served by Pastor Rechner. They were: H. Fiedler, G. Zippel.
W. Launer, Aldenhoven, Friebe, Roehl, Schilling, Altmann, 0. G.
Rechner, Bothe. Both parties applied to Immanuel Synod for a
resident pastor and received Pastor Koschade. Manse built in 1877.
Church dedicated October 13, 1878. Pastors: Dost, 1874-77; F.
Koschade, 1877-88; C. A. Doehler, 1889-1922; C. A. Weckert, 1922-26*
F. C. Lienert, 1927-32; A. Fehlberg, since 1933. (J. Doehlei assisted
1920-22). Religious school conducted by Mrs. C. A. Doehler every
Tuesday and Saturday for thirty-five years. Sunday school opened
August, 1890. L.L. organized in 1927. English services introduced
1922. Congregation joined Edithburgh parish in 1926, previouslv
congregation was part of the Immanuel Synod parish, Yorketown—
South Kilkerran-Tiparra. Statistics: Souls, 78; com., 64.
EUDUNDA PARISH.
Organized in 1900, pastor resident in Eudunda.
Eudunda, St. Paul’s Church. Pastor Maschmedt (Klemzig) con-
ducted services in Eudunda from 1870 fill 1886. First congregation
was organized by Pastor Heinze (Nain). The church (Trinity)
was dedicated in 1884, but was soon sold to the Church of England
Foundation members: H. Schwarz, C. Thiele, W. and A. Voigt,
Hentschke, W. Bartsch, Kunoth, C. Voigt. Lutherans from Ebenezer
organized St. PauTs congregation in 1886 with Pastor Drauz (Point
Pass) as pastor. Foundation members: A. Friebel, B. Hilbig, A.
Werner, A. Neumann, J. G. Wiesner, W. Kinter, H. A. Lutz A*
Pfitzner, C. Rawolle, G. A. Hilbig, W. Kriebel, J. G. Werner, D. Both.
First church, bought from Methodists, was considerably damaged by
storm. New one built in 1893. Manse built in 1908. * Congregation
belonged to Point Pass parish till 1900, then with Sutherlands and
Farnma, formed Eudunda parish. Pastors: F. Drauz, 1886-96; C.
Siegle, 1897-1900; K. Gutekunst, 1900-14; J. Simpfendoerfor, 1914-20-
A. Fehlberg, 1920-24; T. Renner, since 1925. English services com-
menced during war years. L.L. organized in 1932. Statistics: SouP
224; com., 173.
Sutherlands, St. John’s Church. Services commenced in 1880.
congregation organized in 1888, church dedicated in 1890. Founda-
tion members: A. Schiller, H. Menz, G. Boehm, A. Noack, C. Polst
F. Thiele, W r . F. Thiele, G. Thiele, R. Menz, G. and H. Kernich, G.
Schiller, C. and F. Schiller, A. Noack. Belonged to Point Pass parish
till 1900; then part of new Eudunda parish. Pastors: F. Drauz.
1888-96; J. G. Hegelau, 1896-97; C. Siegle, 1897-1900; then served bv
pastors from Eudunda. English services introduced in 1935 L L
organised in 1935. Statistics: Souls, 109; com., 83.


Beale’s Flat, St. Paul’s Church. Originally belonged to E.L.S.A,
with Pastor Hossfeld, severed its connection with the synod in 1895,
joined the U.E.L.C.A. in 1929. At first settlers attended services on
.Tablelands; church built about 1870, then Pastor Rechner’s church
—built 1874—was used, then built a church of their own, building
also used as school; present church was built in 1893. Pastors: E. Eh
Appelt till 1887; J. E. (x. Bode, 1887-92; F. Hossfeld, 1892-1928; T.
Renner since 1928. Congregation belonged to Dutton-Gnadenberg
parish till 1928, then joined the Eudunda parish. Foundation mem-
bers: H. Huckauff, A. Promnitz, Kernich, Woithe. L.D.S. about 1870-
■1917. Teachers: Rosenberg, Schlueter, Bart&ch, Paul, Edward
Schwartz, 1891-1906; A. G. Kalms, 1907-17. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 96;
com., 67.
Earnma (formerly E riedrichswalde), Redeemer Church. Settlers
from Germany arrived in years 1856-60. Congregation organized by
Pastor Meyer (E.L.S.A.) in 1858. Foundation members: J. C. Pfitzner,
J. F. Pfitzner, C. A. Deckert, G. F. Scholz, J. C. Keller, J. C. A. Keller,
J. K. W. Keller, J. K. E. Siegert, W. T. Graetz, C. Wurst, Reichelt,
Lmke, Zerna, Schulz, E. Wurst. Schism in 1872 produced two
congregations: the Immanuel (E.L.S.A.) and Redeemer (U.E.L.C.A.).
The Immanuel church was built in 1872. The u Redeemer ” congre-
gation was organized in 1874, with the following as foundation
members: H. Hauschild, J. Heinze, F. Heinze, E. Gierke, T. Pfitzner,
F. Pfitzner, Kokegei. Church built in 1911. Pastors: H. A. E. Meyer
(Bethany), 1858-62; E..D. Appelt (Neukirch), 1862-68; R. Ey (Carls-
ruhe), 1868-74; J. Reusch (Tanunda), 1874-85; F. Drauz (Point Pass),
1885-93; J. G. Hegelau, itinerant pastor, 1893-97; C. Siegle (Point
Pass), 1897-1900. Then part of new Eudunda parish and was
served by its pastors. For many years L.D.S. in Tarnma. Teachers:
Lehmann, Milde, Bartholomaeus, Wanke, A. Rohde, Wachtel, Rothe,
Festersen, Rieger, O. Lange. English services introduced in 1923.
Statistics: Souls, 51; com., 41.
Bower, Immanuel Church. Organized in 1892 by Pastor Loehe
(Steinfeld). Foundation members: F. Nordhausen, C. Thiele, Chr.
Baehnisch. R. Weiss, H. Frahn, W. Wolf, W. Haemmerling, G. Obst.
Services were at first held in home of Bro. Nordhausen. Church
built in 1899. Belonged to Steinfeld parish till 1921, then as a result
of dissension in congregation was added to Nain parish, since January
1, 1938, served by pastor at Eudunda. Pastors: P. Loehe, 1892-1902;
P. Breier, 1902-21; A. Sabel, 1921-37; T. Renner, since January 1,
1938. L.D.S. 1912-17. Teachers: B. Goedecke, G. Dohler, Raethel,
B. Goedecke. English services introduced in 1938. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 90; com., 63.
EYRE PENINSULA, NORTHERN PARISH.
♦
Organized in 1931, pastor resident at Kimba.
Warramboo, St. Paul’s Church. Founded by Pastor Stolz (Cleve)
in 1927, church dedicated 1930. Foundation members: F. Wagner,
G. Klante, O. B. Havelberg, F. Wedding, C., H r and G. Havelberg.
Pastors: C. Stolz, 1927-31; G. Fehlberg, 1931-34; H. Stiller, 1934-38.
Statistics: Souls, 23; com., 18.
Cungena. Services commenced by various pastors of Immanuel
Synod. Organized by Pastor Stolz, 1925. Foundation members: (X
H. Gerschwitz, W. W., F. W. and G. Gerschwitz, W. Walters. Ser-
vices conducted in homes. Pastors: As Warramboo. Statistics: Souls.
34; com., 12.


Pallinga-Ballumbah. Founded by Pastor Stolz in 1926. Foundation
members: B. Schubert, G. Kobelt, H. Wohlmg, H.S tubing. Servic
held in halls. Pastors: As Warramboo. Statistics: So^»
Preaching Places and dates of opening: Yanmee, 1928, . Koongowa,
Cootra East, 1932; Cootra West, Kimba, 1929; Kelly, Buckleboo, 1929.
EYRE PENINSULA, SOUTHERN PARISH.
Organized in 1925, pastor resident in Cleve.
\
Yadnarie, St. John’s Church. Services commenced in 1910 by
Pastor Siegle. Served by Pastors: C. Siegle, K. Michel, E - Sprengel
C. Stolz since 1925, assisted by P. G.Fehlberg, 1931-34. .T
members: C. H. Weiss, A. Krueger, W Jericho R. Kobet H. and L
Stubing, 0. Kobelt, Briese, Dreckow, B. Schubert. Churchi built
1928. English services since 1924. S.S. since 1929. L.L. organ e
in 1934. Statistics: Souls, 66; com., 39. a . , T
Cummins, St. Paul’s Church. Served by Pastors: C. Sie a le, i.
T-fphart E Snrengel* C. Stolz since 1925; G. Fehlberg assistant,
193 b 134. Church built in 1927. Foundation members: F. Wagner,
P Mickan, D. Mickan, G. and P. Mickan, R.. Mickan, H. Koch, R.
Pfeiffer R. and P. Noske, J. Schondorft, and mother, A. Dahhtz, W.
Jericho W Walter. S.S. opened in 1924; L.L. 1930; English services
introduced 1924. Statistics: Souls, 85; com, 60
Crossville. St. Paul’s Church. Served by Pastors C. Siegle, K.
Michel, E. Sprengel; C. Stolz since 1925. G. Fehlberg assistant,
1931-34. Church built 1927. Foundation members: W. Beincke, G.
Hausehild R Kobelt, O. & C. Bartel, W. Schumann, R. Traeger, H.
Sil w. FGeschke, E. Kraehe, B. Bartel, C. A. Traeger, Schiller,
. Klingberg. S.S. opened 1928, L.L. 1934. Eng'ish services since
1924. Statistics: Souls, 67; com, 56. „ x 0 , . .
Lock, Our Redeemer’s Church. Work begun by I astor Stolz in
]9 9 6 Congregation organized in 1931; served by Pastor Stolz,
(assisted by G. Fehlberg, 1931-34) Foundation members: E.Hup-
patz, C. Carrick, A. Sheppard, A. M. Byron R. Huppatz O. He.zel,
B. Hetzel. Mother Hetzel, E. A. Tiller, 1. Johns, A. Attick, Mrs. W.
Klopper, J. Hansen, F. Hansen, W. T. Havelberg, S.S. opened 1932.
L.L. 1938. English services introduced 1929. Statistics: Souls, 70,
corn 43* ,
Cowell Christ’s Church. Services commenced at Mitchelville in
1925, at Cowell in 1932, organized in 1933. Church presented by
Bro. Hermann Heinrich, Sth. Kilkerran, dedicated 1933. Pastor: C.
Stolz since inception. Foundation members: C. Beincke W. Kuediger,
J. Beincke, A. A. & K. Beincke, Mrs. Serfield, H. Y. & A Kuediger,
C Kranz English services since 1930. Statistics: Souls, 20; com., 16.
Port Neil, St. Andrew’s Congregation. Organized 1938 by Pastor
Stolz. Foundation members: L. Schuster, A. Ottens, H. Jericho, E.
Barnes, F. &E. Noske, E. &H. Jericho, Miss Rohrlach, S.S. opened
1938
Preaching Places: Bramfield, 1926; Ediliilie, 1926; Mangalo, 1927,
Port Lincoln, 1927; Cleve, 1928; Darke’s Peak, 1930; Murlong, 1935;
Peachna, 1937: Kilroo, 1938.


FREELING (HERBERGE CHRISTI) PARISH.
Organized in 1910, pastor resident in Freeling.
Freeling, Herberge Christi Church. Organized in 1903 as a result
o.t schism in St. Peter’s (E.L.S.A.) congregation in Freeling (due to
expulsion of Pastor Heidenreich from E.L.S.A.). Foundation mem-
bers; C. Schaefer, E. Hanisch, A. Heinecke, J. Neldner, C. Dahlen-
burg, W. Koch, A. Kuhlmann, H. Mattiske, H. Both, F. Gneil, F. V.
Dahhtz, F. Both. Church dedicated January 10, 1904. Pastor: J. H.
S. Heidenreich since inception. English services introduced 1924.
Statistics: Souls, 152; com., 99. (Herberge Christi—Christ’s Abode).
Gieenock, e^er s Church. In fifties of last century Pastor
Muecke served a congregation in Greenock, even built a church, but
lor lack of support the church was sold to Roman Catholics. Present
congregation organized in 1897 as a result of secession from
Daveyston congregation. Foundation members: J. V. Traeger
Ehx, Chr. Elix, W. Elix, H. Richter, A. Traeger, G. A. Block, E. Geier,
iwia n’ ' lx ’ J- G. Schulz. Church dedicated April 22,
1910. I astor: J. H. S. Heidenreich since foundation. L.L. organized
in 1938. English services introduced in 1920. S.S. since 1928
Statistics: Souls, 188; com., 155.
Gawler, Zion’s Church. Organized in Buchsfelde in 1863 by
Pastor Roediger. Pastors: J. Roediger, 1863-96; P. B. Hoefner 1896-
1900; Ph. Scherer, 1900-26; J. H. S. Heidenreich since 1926. Con-
gregation of North Gawler organized by Pastor Held in 1920, served
by Pastors E. Sprengel and W. Riedel till 1927, then amalgamated
vyith Buchsfelde in 1927. Foundation members: Roediger, Burrow,
Sachse, J. H. Graetz. Ihe united congregation has since been served
by Pastor Heidenreich. Church in North Gawler built by Bro.
Burrow. English services introduced in 1924. S.S. since* 1936.
Statistics: Souls, 115; com., 88.
Gomersal, Church of the Good Shepherd, Zum guten Hirten
Church. Formerly Neu Mecklenburg, because foundation members
were immigrants from Mecklenburg. Founded in 1860. First church
dedicated November 20, 1864. Foundation members: J. Koch, E. W.
Wehr, H. J. T. Lienert, C. A. H. Gebert, C. F. R. Puettmann, A. E. E.
Becker, H. Y. B. Marquart, J. H. J. Dahlenburg, C. L. Lienert, H. C.
J. Lutze, J. C. Dahlenburg, H. F. C. Dahlenburg, H. Loestrow, F.
Bluecher, F. Schmaal. Pastors: G. Dost, 1864-67; J. Roediger, 1867-
96; J. H. S. Heidenreich since 1896. Second church dedicated August
2, 1925. L.D.S. for number of years, closed before 1896. Teachers:
Nadebaum, Buergy, Haselag, Tepper, Pagenstecher, Buchholz. S.S.
commenced in 1930. English services introduced in 1929. Congre-
gation not affiliated with U.E.L.C.A. Statistics: Souls, 70; com., 48.
FREELING (ST. PAUL’S) PARISH.
Organized in 1908, pastor resident first in Bethel, since 1916 in
Freeling.
Freeling, St. Paul’s Church. Several services held in 1902 by
Pastor Kaestner (Tanunda), the members belonging to Tanunda
parish. Congregation organized April 5, 1903. Foundation members:
A. Leske, J. Leske, G. Leske, A. Leske, J. Thamm. Services' held
in Methodist Church, then Herberge Christi (Heidenreich’s) Church.


Church dedicated February 14, 1909 P. G.
(Tanunda), 1903; J. Meier (Light’s Pass), 1904-07, E. Bemmann
Bethel), 1908-1916; E. Sprengel, 1916-26; E Rohde since.l 926.
English services since 1926. S.S. opened 1926. L.L. organized 1926.
Sta ßethel. Moravian Brethren, together with their pastor
( Srhondorf) settled between Nuriootpa and Light’s Pass. Wishing
io Sp "S m.m£. close together, Pastor Schondort bought three
square miles of land near Kapunda on November 14, 1855, and
named the settlement Bethel. First settlers arrived m 1855. Con-
gregation was organized on March 1, 1857. Foundation members:
Goedecke, Linke, Gruhl, John, Hombsch, Kornetzky, Kirsch, Arnold.
First church, which also served as school, dedicated December 2 ,
1856, present church June 2 1895. Cong:negation joined
Immanuel Synod a.a.G. 1907. Pastors: C S D | e mmann
-.orr 77- T A Tarobi 1877-91; P. Buck, 1892-1906; L. Lemmann,
1907-23; E. Sprengel,’ 1923-26; E. Rohde since !926. Day school,
1857-1917. Teachers; P. Schondorf assisted by-Calker 1857-71,
Pastor and Mrs. Jacobi. 1877-91; Pastor and Mrs Buck 1892-1906,
Miss Joergensen, 1906-08; Miss M. Bruehl, 190i-l(. S.S. and L.L.
early times. Statistics: Souls, 83; com., 71.
c Peintlial one and a half miles from Bethel. First settlers m
1856:' Doecke, Kubasch. Congregation March 3, 1872-1909. Church
dedicated 1872. Served by Pastors: Reusch, Braun, Drauz Hegelau,
Siegle, Gutekunst. Joined the Bethel congregation m 1909. L.D.b.
founded because Schondorf’s school had insufficient room for all
children. 1860-1908, then amalgamated with Bethel school, leachers.
Pe KapundZ’ SL 6 Prul’sTbuich. From 1880 till about 1900 Pastor
services in homes near Tarlee. In 1906 more members settled m
Kapunda district. These were served by Pastors Leidig, Sabel, and
Stolz Congregation organized June 18, 1907. Primitive Methodist
Chapel bought, renovated, and dedicated March 8, 1908. Pastors:
J Stolz, 1907-10; T. Hebart, 1908-28; E. Rohde since 1928 In 1928
.members of Bethel who lived in Kapunda and were served by Bethel
pastor, amalgamated with St. Paul’s congregation. L.D.S. 1912-15.
Teachers: Miss A. Doehler, R. Altus. English services and S.S. since
1928. Statistics; Souls, 110; com.. 83. . , ,
Wasleys, St. John’s Church. First German settlers arrived prob-
abiv in 1860 and built a church at Magdala, calling Dr. Muecke to
serve them. In Pastor Roediger’s time services were held in home
of a member. Pastor Rechner, jun., used an English church for his
services. Pastors: Dr. C. Muecke till 1869; J. Roediger 1869-93,
F Rechner till approximately 1906; then C. Siegle, Basedow, Bem-
nann, E. Sprengel, 1916-26; E. Rohde since 1926. Present church
dedicated September 4. 1910. English services since 1926. S.S. since
1935. Statistics; Souls, 57; com., 32. . .
Daveyston. St. John’s. Congregation organized probably in the
fifties by Dr. C. Muecke (Tanunda). Services at first held m Schoen-
thal. then in Daveyston school. Church dedicated April 7. 1878, by
Pastors Roediger and Heinze. Foundation members: F. A. Ihiele, A.
Block. F. Heinrich, F. Wagner, O. Havelberg. A. Pfeifter, C. Thiele,
Domever. Voss, Feuerherdt. Pastors: Dr. C. Muecke (Tanunda) ti
1870; J. Roediger (Gawler), 1870-94; F. Rechner (Tanunda), 1894-


1904; P. Buck (Bethel), 1904-07; Ph. Scherer (Cambrai), 1907-08; K.
Gutekunst (Eudunda,) 1908-15; J. Simpfendoerfer (Eudunda), 1915;
E. Sprengel (Freeling), 1915-25; E. Rohde (Freeling) since 1926.
Congregation joined U.E.L.C.A. under Pastor Rohde.
HAHN DO RF PARISH.
Organized in 1885, pastor resident in Hahndorf.
Hahndorf, St. Paul’s Church. Hahndorf was established in 1839
by fifty-two families, twenty from Klemzig and the remainder emi-
grants on the “Zebra,” under Captain Hahn (hence the name of the
township). These settlers were served by Pastor Kavel (Klemzig).
First services were held in the open air. First church was built in
1840. As a result of schism of 1846 a small portion left the congre-
gation in that year to be served by Pastor Fritzsche (Lobethal). In
1851 another rift occurred, forty-eight families preferred to have a
candidate Ruppracht as their pastor. The seceding party secured
the church, Pastor Kavel with the thirty families who remained faith-
ful to him conducted their services in the manse. In 1855, as a
result of a verdict of the Supreme Court, Pastor Kavel’s congregation
lost the manse also. The greater portion of the congregation then
left and founded Nain and Gruenberg congregations. These mem-
bers wanted to be nearer their pastor, who in 1846 had left Klemzig
for Langmeil. The small congregation which remained built the
first St. Paul’s Church in 1858. As a result of advancing age, Pastor
Kavel entrusted the Hahndorf congregation to Pastor Staudenmayer
(Light’s Pass). Staudenmayer secured Pastor Keppler for Hahn-
ddrf, and inducted him there in 1860. Keppler resided there till
1864, then left for Light’s Pass to assist Pastor Staudenmayer, but
continued to serve Hahndorf till he left for Germany. Early in the
fifties another, a free German Protestant, congregation came into
existence. This was served by Pastor Kappler (Adelaide,
later in Mount Gambier) and built a brick church. From
1858 Pastor Fiedler, who resided in Hahndorf, served this
congregation. When Keppler left for Germany Fiedler also
became pastor of his congregation and served the combined
congregation till 1874, when he also returned to Germany. Follow-
ing Fiedler’s advice to join one of the Lutheran synods, this con-
gregation joined Pastor Strempel’s congregation (E.L.S.A.) and for
some years there was only one Lutheran congregation in Hahndorf.
But not feeling at home in the E.L.S.A. congregation most of the
members severed their connection and were served by pastors of the
Immanuel Synod in the St. Paul’s Church. Their first resident pastor
was Pastor Kuss, sen. (February 6, 1881 to July 13, 1884). As a
result of the schism of 1884 the congregation joined the Immanuel
Synod a.a.G. Pastor Kuss therefore left Hahndorf, and Pastor Braun
took his place. He served the congregation from August 17, 1885,
to 1937, and was succeeded by Pastor Petering on April 3, 1938.
Foundation members: F. Boerke, J. E. Gallasch, J. G. Hirte, H. S.
Martin, J. W. Minkwitz, J. C. Paech, J. G. Paech, J. G. Schach, F. W.
Wittwer, G. Wundke, C. A. Wuttke. Present church built in 1890. L.L.
organized in 1938. In previous years for some time a Bible class
was conducted by Pastor Braun. S.S, was founded by Pastor Reusch
in 1884; one of the lay readers, Brother J. E. Gallasch, had conducted


one in 1851 and the following years. English services were intro-
duced in 1926. Statistics: Souls, 236; com., 193. Q , O .
Lobethal, St. Paul’s Church. Lobethal was founded in 184- by
fimip-rants on “Skiold.” First services were held in the open air,
STn homes of numbers. The church “zum Weinberge Christi”
(Christ’s Vineyard) was built in 1844-46. The first pastor was G. D.
Fritzsche. He lived in Hahndorf 1841-42, then settled in Lobethal.
In 1853 dissensions arose in Lobethal, caused by the firm attitude
of Pastor Fritzsche against dancing. A number of members seceded
and formed the St. Paul’s congregation - and were served by Pastor
Fiedler (Hahndorf) till 1874, when he left tor Germany. The church
(St. Paul’s) was built in 1858. Owing to advancing *f e ’
Pastor Fritzsche felt that he needed assistance and 1 astor
Loessel. Phil.D. (Hamilton, Victoria) was called. Aftei 1 astor
Fritzsche’s death, difficulties, having arisen between Dr. Loessel
and the leaders of the synod, caused the majority of the
congregation to rescind the call extended to Dr. Loessel.
His followers left the congregation, founded a congregation
of 'their own, and built a church—the third Lutheran c ure in
Lobethal. In 1874, after Pastor Fiedler’s return to Germany, this
congregation amalgamated with the congregation of Dr. Loessel, \
served the combined congregation till his death in 1879. In I°7
Pastor Lebrecht Friedrich Ehregott Krause became pastor of the
™m Weinberge Christi” congregation. As a result of trouble with
his synod he was expelled from that body. This expulsion caused
another dissension (the third one) in that congregation. The fol-
lowers of Pastor Krause formed another congregation in 1876. In
the same year pastor and congregation were accepted into member-
ship by the Immanuel Synod. Their church “zum fi Kr T. P f B TO Pastor
(Church of Christ’s Manger) was dedicatee! in 1876. In !879 Pastor
Krause, in accordance with Dr. Loessel s request, conducted
funeral, and took over his congregation. This action cans
trouble in Krause’s congregation. The' was that he
was expelled from the Immanuel Synod. The zum- Knpplein
Christi” 1 congregation was then served by pastors of the Immanuel
Synod and later placed under the care of Pastor Kuss and then of
Pastor Koschade. Pastor Krause and St. Paul s congregation joined
the Immanuel Synod a.a.G. in 1884. Krause died in 1885. He was
succeeded by C. F. Braun as pastor of St. Paul’s. After the amal-
gamation in 1921 the “zum Kripplein Christi” congregation united
with St. Paul’s and sold its church to the Church of Eng and Pastor
Braun served the combined congregation (St. I aul s) till 1907, whe
he was succeeded by Pastor Petering. Foundation members:
Baehrendt, H. C. Baumguertel, Bock, Burmeister, Dohrenwendt, F. J.
Gerhardt, Gerhardy, W. Hasse, Holzberger G. Hittmann EA.
Taen&ch J. H. Kohlhagen, J. A. Mueller, E. T. Mueller, H. Polle, J.
W. Preuss, J. Schlein, F. Stahlroth, J. D. Weinert, T. Wernert. In
1864-65 Pastor Loessel served St. Petri congregation at Woodside,
some of the members joined St. .Paul’s, Lobethal. S.S. was' opened
bv Pastor Braun in 1885. English services were introduced in 1929.
L.L. organized in 1938. Statistics: Souls, 126; com., 92.
LANGMEIL PARISH.
Organized in 1846; pactor resident in Langmeil, Tanunda.
Langmeil, Church of Thanksgiving. Founded by Pastor Kavel


(Klemzig) in 1842-43. Foundation members: J. F. A. Fiedler, C.
Lange, C. Schubert, G. Bothe, F. Fischer, J. G. Grocke, J. G. Schulz,
J. W. Helbig, G. Seelaender, W. Bartel, J. G. Klemke, J. S. Stiller,
J. G. Schrapel, C. Auricht, W. Wilksch, C. Rothe, J. G. Mattner,
A. Muenchenberg, C. G. Heidrich, J. G. Graetz, C. Hahn, J. F.
Schwartz, G. Lindner, C. Kriebel, K. F. Dietrich, K. Keller, E. G.
Kernich, M. Tilt, W. Milde, F. S. F. Aldenhoven. First church built
in 1846, present church dedicated November 25, 1888. Pastors: A.
Kavel, 1846-60; J. C. Auricht, 1860-1907; T. Hebart since 1909.
L.D.S.: 1845-1917. Teachers: F. Kavel, A. Schulz, Andresen, A.
Geyer, Miss E. Geyer, J. P. W. Schulz. School reopened in conjunc-
tion with St. John’s in 1938 with E. Prenzler as teacher. Important
events: Amalgamation synods, June 25, 1864, and August 23, 1874;
mission party farewelled for Cooper’s Creek October 9, 1866; Mis-
sionary Flierl’s consecration for New Guinea November 8, 1885;
special synod accepting General Synod into Church Federation, 1920.
Manse built in 1921. L.L. in conjunction with St. John’s since 1913.
S.S. since 1917. English services introduced in 1935. Statistics:
Souls', 397; com., 312.
Angaston, Zion’s Church. Founded by Pastors Stolz (Light’s
Pass) and Meier (Light’s Pass) in 1910. Foundation members: C.
Gabel, J. Standisch, T. Dohnt, T. John, C. Standisch, A. Bartsch,
Feist. Church dedicated on December 14, 1913. Dual congregation
(one part belonging to Immanuel Synod and the other to Immanuel
Synod a.a.G.) till 1921, since then amalgamated. Pastors: J. Stolz,
J. Meier, Hebart, Held; T. Hebart since 1924. Statistics: Souls, 77;
com., 49.
Gnadenberg, Zion’s Church. Founded by Pastor Meyer (Bethany)
in 1856. Church built in 1860. Foundation members: A. Henschke,
J. G. Fiedler, J. G. Schneider, P. Fechner, H. Rohrlach, J. F. W.
Schupelius, C. A. Weckert. L.D.S. for number of years. Teachers:
Gellert, A. Giersch (1870), Miss A. Andree, von der Heide, Lemke,
A. Lindner, Zibell. Closed more than fifty years ago. Children then
attended L.D.S. of Gruenberg. Congregation belonged to Neukirch
parish, 1861-69, Dutton parish 1869-1928. Congregation left E.L.S.A.
when Pastor Hossfeld was expelled from that synod (now non-
synodical congregation). Pastors: E. D. Appelt, 1861-1887; J. E. G.
Bode, 1887-92; P. Hossfeld, 1892-1928; T. Hebart since 1928. S.S.
together with Gruenberg 1917-30, since then own S.S. L.L. together
with Gruenberg since 1929, Statistics: Souls, 201; com., 140.
LAURA PARISH.
Organized in 1922, pastor resident in Laura.
Laura, Easter Church. First service conducted by Pastor Orten-
burger in 1891 in chapel of Primitive Methodists, This chapel was
purchased in 1909, rebuilt, ana dedicated. Foundation members:
J. Beincke, A. Gallasch, A. Hartmann, B. John, B. Nenke, C. Noske,
H. Rohrlach. Congregation belonged to Appila parish, then added
to newly formed Laura parish in 1922. Pastors: A. Ortenburger,
1891-1922; M. Kuss, 1922-24; J Schaber, 1925-26; C. A. Weckert
since 1926. S.S. opened in Pastor Ortenburger’s time. English ser-
vices since 1923. L.L. since 1927. Statistics: Souls, 58; com., 41.
Wirrabara, Zion’s Hill, First services held in Institute. Church


dedicated October 3, 1921. Foundation members: T. Joppich, C. Janz,
E. Keller, H. Vogelsang. Congregation branch of Appila. S.S. since
inception. L.L. organized in 1927. Pastor Kuss introduced English
services. Pastors: A. Ortenburger till 1922, then served by pastors
from Laura. Statistics: Souls, 66; com., 55.
Peterborough, St. Peter’s Church. In 1876 the first Lutheran
settlers came into the district. First services held in home of Bro.
Koch in 1877. Foundation members: H. Przibilla, H. Rohde, J. H.
Koch, F. W. Hennig, J. W. Koch. In 1882 a rift occurred, thereafter
till 1920 two congregations. The one belonged to the E.L.S.A. and
since 1902 to E.L.S.A. a.a.G. Pastors: Thiessen, 1877-84; W. Fuhl-
bohm, 1884-1902; J. H. S. Heidenreich, 1902-06; P. Hass, 1906-20;
W. J. G. Schultz, 1921-26; C. A. Weckert since 1926. The other con-
gregation belonged to Immanuel Synod. Pastors: L. Kaibel, 1882-
92; A. Ortenburger, 1892-1904; T. Hebart, 1904-20. Congregations
then amalgamated. Pastors resident in Peterborough: W. Fuhlbohm,
T. Hebart (till 1908, then Langmeil), Schulz. Both congre-
gations built church in 1885, enlarged it 1895. S.S. opened soon
after dedication of church, closed during War, opened 1922. L.D.S.
Teachers: Gaettner, Miss Galle, Festersen, Heinrich. School built
1888. Statistics: Souls, 69; com., 43.
Quorn, St. Paul’s Congregation. Founded by Pastors Thiessen and
Heidenreich in 1897. Pastors; W. Fuhlbohm till 1902; J. H. S.
Heidenreich, 1902-06; P. Hass, 1906-20; W. J. G. Schulz, 1921-26;
C. A. Weckert since 1926. Foundation members: T. Mattner, A. Noll,
M. Britza, F. Mattner. Statistics: Souls, 10; com., 10.
Preaching Place: Hawker.
LIGHT’S PASS (IMMANUEL) PARISH.
Organized in 1858, pastor resident in Light’s Pass.
Light’s Pass, Immanuel Church. Founded by Pastor Kavel in
forties' of last century. First church built in 1850, second church
dedicated November 29, 1886. Spire added 1930. Foundation mem-
bers: Boehm, John, Dittrich, Joppich, Klemke, Obst, Jaeckel, Bothe,
Scholz, Polst. Pastors: A. Kavel till 1857; W. Staudenmayer, 1858-
65; P. Niquet, 1865-88 (J. Spanagel assistant 1887-88); J. Spanagel,
1888-1900; J. Meier, 1901-22; F. W. Matschoss, 1923-31; F. A. Hart-
mann since 1932. L.D.S.: 1850-1909. Teachers: J. G. Rechner, 1850-
60; Chr. Meier, 1860-65; J. Lowke, 1866-1909. S.S. in conjunction
with neighboring congregation from 1917 till 1936, since then own
S.S. L.L., organized in conjunction with neighboring congregation
in 1926, for some years. Statistics: Souls, 234; com., 164.
Gnadenfrei, St. Michael’s Church. Founded by Pastor Kavel
probably in the fifties. Foundation members: Busch, Qualmann,
Mueller, C. Kuhn, C. & W. Kriebel, C. & G. Keller, G. Triller, G.
Scheibchen, Schaeche. First church built in the early days. Present
church dedicated Sentember 29, 1873. Spire added in The
congregation probably severed its connection with Langmeil in the
1860 schism and joined Light’s Pass' (Immanuel). Pastors: A. Kavel
till 1860; W. Staudenmayer and Keppler till 1865; from then on
served from Light’s Pass. L.D.S. opened probably in the fifties.
Teachers: F. Krause, Koehnicke, P. Dallwitz 1871-87. The school
became a “provisional school” (state) in 1880; religion and German
taught till 1916, then forbidden by Government. Teachers: G. Boerke,


-1888-92; H. Doering, 1892-1905; P. Gehling, 1906-12; P. Brus, 1913-
16. S.S. was organized by Pastor Meier. English services intro-
duced in 1935. Statistics: Souls, 148; com., 114.
Ebenezer, St. John s Church. Founded by emigrants from Saxony
(Mends) 98 persons in 1851. fill 1864 belonged to no synod,
then joined Light’s Pass (Immanuel) and Tanunda-Light’s Pass
Synod. Foundation members: J. Kleinig, J. T. Hempel, Lieschke,
M. Wenke, P. Hennersdorf, J. Mickan, A. Mickan, J. Zwar,’ Schneider!
First church built in 1857, present church in 1904. Pastors: H. A. E.
Meyer (Bethany), C. S. D. Schondorf (Bethel) —he dedicated the first
church-W. Staudenmayer, C. Maschmedt (Klemzig), then from 1865
.served from Light’s Pass. L.D.S. was opened in the fifties. At be-
ginning school was conducted in home of Dallwitz, teacher; school
w as built in 1871. Teachers: J. Dallwitz; A. Dallwitz, 1863-1908*
B. Wilksch, 1909-1917. S.S. commenced in 1901. Ebenezer-Neukirch
L.L. organized in 1913. Foundation synod U.E.L.C.A. held at
Ebenezer in 1921. Statistics: Souls, 160; com., 126.
LIGHT’S PASS (ZTJR ENGEN PFORTE—STRAIT GATE) .PARISH.
Organized in 1861, pastor resident in Light’s Pass.
Light s I ass, zur engen Pforte Church. Organized No-
\ ember 16, 1860, as a result of dissension in Immatiuel
congregation. Foundation members: J. C. F. Obst, G. Steicke, C.
Weber, G. H. FriebeL G. F. Schmidt, C. G. Heidrich, j. G. Seelaenderj
T. B. John, G. Kruschel, C. Pfeiffer, G. Schilling, J. S. Klemm, W. H.
Scholz, J. W. John, J. G. Haeusler, J. W. A. Kubisch, F. W. Loeffler,
J. C. Lange, C. G. Friebe, C. F. W. Schaedel, E. F. J. Fiedler, J G,
Haemmerling, F. W. Nitschke, O. R. Hoffman. J. F. Grocke,’ J.’ G*.
Kruschel, G. Schilling, C. F. Dittrich. Church dedicated August 4,
1861. Spire added in 1887. Pastors: J. G. Rechner (formerly teacher at
Light’s Pass), 1861-1900; Jobs. J. Stolz, 1900-30; P. Hass,'l93o-36; R.
B. Reuther since 1936. L.D.S.: 1861-1917, reopened in 1936. Teachers:
G. J. Rechner, 1861-62; R. Hoffmann, 1862-63; Molkentin, 1864-70;
A. Bergmann, 1870-1900; J. F. W. Schulz, 1900-04; G. A. Keller,
1904-13; B. Schwartzkopf, 1914-17; F. Jacob since 1936. School
dedicated May 2, 1865, new one built in 1914. Manse erected 1907-08.
S.S. commenced in 1917. L.L. organized 1926. English services
introduced 1935. First meeting of General Synod held here in March
1876. Statistics: Souls, 316; com., 232.
Gruenberg, Zum Kreuze Christ! (Cross of Christ) Church.
Founded by members from Hahndorf in 1854. Foundation members 1 :
J. C. A. Altmann, G. Linke. S, Bartsch, Heppner, Schirmer, T.
Hentschke, S. Jaeschke, Rohrlach, Rueger, Walter, Klemm, Schil-
ling, First services held in homes of brethren Schirmer and Bartsch.
Church built in 1859, also used as school. Present church dedicated
October 16, 1864. Pastors: A. Kavel till 1858; C. Auricht, 1858-61*
then pastors of Light’s Pass. L.D.S.: 1854-1917. Teachers: Heppner
1854; Geyer, 1855-60; D. H. Lemke, 1860-62; Dittmer, 1862-67; D. h!
Lemke, 1867-75; R. Rieschiek, 1875-87; J. Rechner, 1887-90; Tamke',
1891-98; F. Jacob, 1899-1917. School and teachers’ residence built
in Moculta, 1882. S.S. opened in 1917. School and teachers’ resi-
dence sold to Government, 1931. English services commenced 1937
Spire built 1914. Schism synod 1884, and last convention of


Immanuel Synod, healing breach, 1921, held in this' church. Statistics:
Souls, 231; com., 169.
Nain. Founded by members from Hahndorf in 1851-52. Founda-
tion members: Jaensch, Nitschko, Schwarz, Luestner, Ludwig, Welke,
Zilm, Linke, Wallent, Reimann, Dohnt. Pastor Kavel served them,
later assisted by Pastor Auricht, then Pastor Staudenmayer. Church
built 1856. In 1861 as a result of synodical schism a rift in the con-
gregation occurred, with the result that another church (zum
schmalen Weg—Narrow Path) was built in 1861. This con-
gregation was served by Pastor Auricht (Langmeil) till 1893. Pastor
Keppler served the other congregation till 1862, then Pastor Heinze
till 1889, then Pastor Loehe till 1892. Both congregations united in*
1893 under Pastor A. Sabel. He served congregation till 1937.
Pastor Reuther since 1938. L.D.S. since foundation of congregation
till 1917. Teachers: Jaensch, Welke, Suesz, (K. Heinze, Nicolai,
Taeuber in Heinze’s house), Tamke, Schumann, Buchholz, Homann,
Kurz, Boerke, Jesnofsky, Schumacher, Homann, Schwartzkopf, Hein-
rich. S.S. commenced in 1916. English services introduced in 1936.
Statistics: Souls, 139; com., 95. Congregation at present attached
to no parish.
Preaching Place: Truro, 1937.
LOW BANK PARISH.
Organized in 1914, pastor resident in Low Bank.
Low Bank, St. Paul’s Church. First services by Pastors Breier
and Bogner 1899. Congregation organized 1902. Foundation
members: Bros. Friedrich, Wilhelm, Johannes, and Heinrich Paeschke
from Towitta, R. Nitschke from Nain, A. Kalisch from Steinfeld,
C G Schmidt from Brownlow. Church erected 1913, enlarged 1938.
Pastors: W. Riedel, 1914-21; L. Kuss, 1922-33; G. Fehlberg, since
1934. S.S. opened 1909. English services introduced 1933. L.L.
organized 1934. Statistics: Souls, 123; com., 88.
' Ramco, St. Paul’s Church. First services' held by Pastor Loehe
(Steinfeld) in 1901, later services conducted by Pastors Breier and
Bogner; then Pastors: W. Riedel, 1914-21; L. Kuss, 1921-33, G. Feh -
berg, since 1934. Foundation members: A. Hartwig and family, Fr.
Modistach. Church built 1925. English services introduced 1933.
L.L. organized 1934. Statistics: Souls, 90; com., 69.
Blanchetown, Advent Church. At one time two congregations,
one “Augsburg” served by Pastor Hoefner, the other served by
Pastor Loehe. The two amalgamated after Pastor Hoefner’s depar-
ture to Queensland in 1901. Church dedicated in 1902. Pastors. P.
B. Hoefner; J. P. Loehe till 1902; A. Sabel, 1902-22; L. Kuss, 1922-
33; G. Fehlberg since 1934. Congregation belonged to Steinfeld
parish till 1902, then till 1922 to Nain. since 1922 to Low Bank parish.
English services were introduced in 1934. Statistics: Souls, 33; com.,
25.
Nott’s Well, Kreuzkirche (Church of the Cross). Lutheran
settlers from Gruenberg; at first belonged to Blanchetown, but due
to distance and the church proving too small, a congregation was’
organized in Nott’s Well in 1902. Foundation members: K. Grocke,
H. & B. Wilksch, W. Kroschel, W. Schilling, P. Grocke. A. Schilling,
E. Kroschel. Church dedicated in 1911, enlarged in 1929. Till 1922
congregation belonged to Nain parish, since then to Low Bank.


Pastors: A. Sabel till 1922; L. Kuss, 1922-33; G. Fehlberg since 1934.
L.D.S. 1911-17. Teachers : Miss L. Wilksch, H. Bartsch, L. Saegensch-
nitter, 1915-17. English services introduced in 1933. L.L. organized
1934. Statistics: Souls, 64; com., 54.
Morgan, St. Andrew’s. Founded at Bindley by Pastor Roediger.
Pastor Siegle commenced services in Morgan; no services in Bindley
since 1920. Pastors: J. Roediger, 1891-96; P. B. Hoefner, 1896-1901;
Ph. Scherer, 1901-02; C. Siegle, 1902-12; K. Michel, 1912-13; J. Zwar,
1913; J. Simpfendoerfer, 1914-21; A. Fehlberg, 1921-32; G. Fehlberg
since 1934. Foundation members: R. Wohling, Brandt, Behmann,
A. Briese. Young people attend 8.8. of Glen Bee. English services
were introduced in 1921. S.S. since foundation. Statistics: Souls,
37; com., 26.
Glen Bee, St. John’s, formerly Wood’s Flat. First service con-
ducted in 1909. Congregation organized in 1913. Pastors: J. Bogner
and A. Sabel, 1909-14; W. Riedel, 1914-21; A. Fehlberg, 1921-32; G.
Fehlberg since 1934. English services introduced in 1936. 8.8.
organized 1936. Statistics: Souls, 30; com., 24.
Waikerie, Redeemer’s Congregation. Services commenced in
December, 1935, organized in 1938. Statistics: Souls, 7; com., 7.
Cadell, Nazareth Congregation. Services commenced August,
1936, organized in 1938.
Preaching Places: New Well (1927) and Swan Reach 1938).
LOWER MURRAY PARISH.
Organized in 1936, pastor resident in Karoonda.
— .
Bow Hill, St. John’s Church. In 1880 a number of Butheran
families settled in this district. Services were held in Teal Flat. In
1890 Butherans also settled at Bow Hill. First church erected in
1891-92, present church in 1911. Foundation members: Fiedler, Wey-
land, F. Droegemueller, A. Dohnt, C. Hartmann, F. Semmler, M.
Bartisch, W. Grosser, C. Droegemueller. Pastors: P. B. Hoefner,
1890-1900; Ph. Scherer, 1900-19; F. J. Behmann, 1919; W. Roehrs,
1920-29; J. Doehler, 1929; T. G. Obst, 1930-36; E. B. Bienert since
1936. S.S. Statistics: Souls', 75; com., 53.
Tailem Bend, St. John’s Church. Services were commenced in
1899 by Pastor Koschade at Westbrook, then at Moorlands. Con-
gregation organized on November 29, 1929. Foundation members:
Doecke, W. Paech, Mrs. Miatke & Sons, T. Jaensch, P. & R. Neumann,
W. Wirth, J. A. Jaensch, W. Obst, F. Kuchel, Schubert, Grosskopf,
Kuffke, Grosse, Holsch, Church dedicated December 28, 1912.
Pastors: F. Koschade, 1900-30 (assistants: J. Doehler, 1922-29; W.
Riedel, 1929-30); T. G. Obst, 1930-36; E. B. Bienert since 1936.
English services introduced in 1922. S.S. commenced in Pastor Obst’s
time. 8.8. organized 1935. Statistics: Souls, 42; com., 33.
Perponda, Redeemer Church. Services were commenced in 1927
by Pastor Doehler. Congregation organized on April 20, 1930. Foun-
dation members: R. H. Moeller, A. T. Schiller, H. A. Rohrlach, H. H.
Doecke, E. R. Peltz. Pastors: T. G. Obst, 1930-36; E. B. Bienert
since 1936. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 32; com., 18.
Preaching Places: Galga and Wanbi.


LOXTON PARISH.
Organized in 1909, pastor resident in Loxton.
Loxton, St. Peter's Church. Congregation organized in 1897 by
Bro. E. J. P. Kaesler, Synod entrusted Pastor Kuss (Mannum) with
this congregation. Foundation members: E. J. P. Kaesler, J. Drabsch,.
A. Stanitzki, J. G. Arnold. Services were held in the homes of the
brethren Drabsch and Stanitzki. Church built in 1904. School and
manse built in 1910. Present church dedicated March 7, 1926. Pastors:
L. Kuss (Mannum), till 1910; M. Kuss, 1910-21; W. J. Meier, since
1922. L.D.S., 1909-15. Teachers: Pfeiffer, F. Kuss, Miss A. Kuss,.
G. Dohler (E. Wiencke assisted). S.S. Statistics: Souls, 343; com.,.
241.
Bookpurnong, Zion's Pilger (Pilgrim) Church. Congregation
organized in 1909 by Pastor Kuss (Mannum). Services at first held
in home of Bro. C. Nitschke. Church, which also served as school,,
built in 1913. Present church dedicated September 7, 1924. Pastors:
L. Kuss, till 1910, then pastors from Loxton. L.D.S. for a while;
teacher, W. Beissel. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 75; com., 64.
Bugle Hut, St. Martin's Church. Church dedicated March 30, 1924.
Founded and served by Pastor Meier (Loxton). S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 72; com., 5L
Taplan, St. John’s Church. Church dedicated October 14, 1933.
L.L. organized May 10, 1934. Founded and served by Pastor Meier.
5.5. Statistics: Souls, 101; com., 65.
Myrla. Services are conducted in home of member. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 27; com., 16.
MURRAY BRIDGE PARISH.
Organized in 1884.
Pastor’s residence: Hahndorf, 1881-84; Mannum, 1884-1922; Murray
Bridge, since 1922.
Murray Bridge, Christuskirche (Christ Church). Organized in
Jupe, 1882, by Pastor Kuss, of Hahndorf. Foundation members. Chr.
Kuchel, G. Jaensch, W. Jaensch, A. Kuchel, A. Hirte, G. Kuchel, S.
Kuchel (sen. and jun.), G. Liebelt, W. Miatke, Minge, F. Ritter, J. G.
Nicolai. The first church was dedicated on Exaudi, 1896; the second
in 1938. Manse was built in 1922. Pastors: L. Kuss, 1882-1922; J.
Doehler, since 1922. A private L.D.S. was conducted by J. G. Neumann
from 1884-1915; for thirteen of these years the school was conducted
for the Government. S.S. since 1920; L.L. organized in 1924. English
services were commenced in 1915. Statistics: Souls, 447; com., 337.
Palmer, St. Paul's. Founded by Pastor Dr. Loessel, Phil.D. First
service, May 22, 1869. Church built 1873. Foundation members:
Drabsch, Seidel, Guenther, Spehr, Ey, Popke, Dohnt, Kau, Paech,
Reschke, Fendler, Ostermann, Magen, Wagener, Liebelt, Bormann.
Pastors: Loessel, 1869-79; L. Kuss, 1881-1922; J. Doehler, since 1922.
5.5. since 1925; L.L. (Mannum-Palmer) organized 1932. English
services commenced in 1925. Statistics: Souls, 58; com., 40.
Mannum, Zion's Church. Organized probably in 1884; the mem-
bers had previously belonged to Palmer. Foundation members:
Drabsch, Schulz, Awage. Church ‘dedicated in 1893. Pastor Kuss
came to live at Mannum after leaving Hahndorf in consequence of the
schism of 1884. The manse was the property of Pastor Kuss. Pastors:
L. Kuss, 1884-1922; J. Doehler, since 1922. S.S. since 1922. L.L.
(Mannum-Palmer) organized in March, 1932. English services were
commenced in 1922. Statistics: Souls, 84; com., 62.


NORTH ADELAIDE PARISH.
Organized in 1630, pastor resident in North Adelaide.
North Adelaide. Founded in 1930 by Pastor Stolz, sen First
ff F^rua r y 9, 1930 in Rechabite Hall. Since March 22, 1931,
j" °i d Qoo Ch p rch ’, Wellington Square. Congregation organized
Juj.e , 1903. Foundation members: Fienemann, G. Graue, A. Koch
. Muenchenberg, W. Riedel, E. Starke. Pastors: J. Stolz, 1930-36*
E Wiencke since 1936. S.S. since 1930. L.L. organized 1937
Statistics: Souls, 133; com., 107.
Preaching Places:
/ A Vall ey. Formerly a congregation, founded by P. Kappler
< A /^ a^ de) * Served b v Adelaide pastors till 1906. Church dedi-
cated May, 1885. Church sold 1906. Services commenced by Pastor
Stolz on August 3, 1933.
Morphett Vale. July 30, 1933.
Semaphore. May 5, 1935.
Magill. January 17, 1937.
PINNAROO PARISH.
Oiganized in 1909, pastor resident in Pinnaroo.
I innaroo, Bethlehem Church. Services commenced by Pastor
j“‘ home of Bro J. Pahl in 1905. Foundation members:
J 1 ’ G - Kr aehenbuehl, W. Lehmann (all from Blanche-
town), H. Klinger, F. Nordhausen. Pastors: F. Kosohade iCalline--
1930’ ° r° 9 f>fi J t Riedel; 190 tf/ E h-. H ' Proeve > 1924-29; K. Gielow.
1930-3.) C. I fitzner, since 1934. Church dedicated July 22, 1909'
K fe. and English services were commenced in Pastor Proeve’s time.
Murrayville-Pinnaroo L.L organized 1930. Manse built soon aftm-
faster Riedel s arrival. It was destroyed by fire 1933 and a new one
built in 1934. Statistics: Souls, 93; com., 71.
Lameroo, St. John’s Church. Founded in 1908 by Pastor Braun
(Hahndorf). J oundation members: F. W. Eime J. E. Altus 4 Altn^
J. Steicke H Phiele, E C. Thiele A. Sachse, C. Schiller, J. Kakoschke,’
J. b. Stamtzke. Church dedicated March 9, 1913. Till 1921 served bv
different pastors of Immanuel Synod a.a.G., then served by pastors
in Pmnaroo. S.S. commenced in 1923. L.L. 1932. Statistics: Souls,
yo, com., 00.
Parrakie. Founded by Pastor Koschade in 1908. Foundation
members: G. Hemzel, O. C. Heinzel, P. Gregurke, J. F. G. Kernich,
G. Schmidt, H. Wittwer. Services were held in homes of members'
from 1909 on served by pastors, Pinnaroo. English services intro-
duced m 1925. S.S. commenced 1936. Statistics: Souls, 50; com., 26.
Buccleuch, St. John’s Congregation. (Formerly Peake-Sherlock.)
Founded by Pastor Leidig in 1909. Pastor Koschade conducted a few
services, then from 1909 on served by Pinnaroo pastors. Foundation
members: O. and H. Diener, F. Staehr, A. Fischer, J Keller Reich
steiip G. Niksch, E. Mann, E. HenzeL Services’are held in hah
English services introduced in 1927. S.S. since 1925. Statistics!
Souls, 40; com., 27.
Murrayville, St. Peter’s Church. Organized June 11, 1911 bv
o a u St ?f H ™ den o ei , c C Fou . ndation members: G. Schultz, F. Schultz, H.
Schultz, Mrs. Schultz and son, J. Pahl, F. J. Auricht, T Geier I H
Kuchel, P. R. Kalms, C. A. Pahl, G. Lindner, W. G. Auricht.’ Con-
gregation Joined Bethany parish E.L.S.A. a.a.G. in 1913, but since 1921
had resident pastor till in 1929 it joined Pinnaroo parish. Pastors:


F. J. Lehmann, 1911-12; W. Roehrs, 1913-20; P. Hass, 1921-30; K.
Gielow, 1930-33; C. Pfitzner, since 1934. Church dedicated July 10,
1924. English services introduced 1924. Murrayville-Pmnaroo L.L..
organized 1930. Statistics: Souls, 71; com., 55.
Peebinga. Founded by Pastor Proeve in 1926, is served by pastors
of Pinnaroo. Foundation members: F. Nordhausen, E. Herbig, H. Pan!,.
W. Lehmann, B. Zaenker. S.S. since 1934. Services conducted m
hail. Statistics: Souls, 11; com., 9.
Preaching Place: Karte, 1938.
POINT PASS PARISH (IMMANUEL).
Pastor resident in Point Pass. _ .
Organized in 1876, then consisting of the congregations: Point
Pass, Robertstown, and Neales. (This congregation was added to the
Steinfeld parish in 1892.) The following congregations were added
to the parish: Baldina (1878); Peep Hill, TothilPs Belt (1906); North
Anlaby (1909); Julia (1910).
Point Pass, Immanuel Church. First settlers from Light’s Pass in
1868 Services were conducted in homes of members by the Pastors
Rechner, Reusch, and Appelt (E.L.S.A.). First church was dedicated
on Ascension Day, 1871. At that time Appelt’s followers' left and built
a church at Emmaus. Second church dedicated on April 9, 1876; the
spire was added in 1913. Foundation members: G. Schild, Gertig,
Gerlach, C. Walter, G. Jochinke, G. and C. Jochinke, D. Schulz, Pfeiler,
G. Schuetz, H. Schuetz, G. Woite, W. Pfeiffer, K, Menzel, J. Niemz,
J. C. Leditschke, Wittwer, A. Preusker, Schaefer, Damschke, H. A.
Friebel, J. A. Otto. Pastors: J. Stolz, 1876-85; F. Rechner, 1886-91;
F. Leidig, 1892-1921; W. Schmetzer, 1921-29; E. H. Proeve, since
1929. L.D.S.: First school was held in homes of members, from
1871-83 in the first church, from 1883-92 in school erected in township
of Point Pass, from 1884-92 in conjunction with the St. Peter’s con-
gregation. The school was then closed and The building was later
sold to the Government. In 1893 the Lutheran day school was re-
opened. The old church had been renovated for the purpose and
served as school till 1909, when a new school building was erected ana
used till 1917 Teachers: J. L. Haeusler, H. Spangenberg, H. Doering,
Dittmer, Friedrichs, Raasche, Krichauff, F. Kuss, Miss A. Doehler, B.
Schwartzkopf, A. Doecke. College: The Immanuel College was dedi-
cated in 1895, the second building in 1899, an addition in 1914. S.S.:
Was opened soon after the closing of the Lutheran day is
conducted in German up to present day; from 1921-38 in conjunction
with St. Peter’s Sunday school. Teachers: Mrs. Leidig, A. Doecke,
H. Vogelsang, Misses Schmidt. In conjunction with St. Peter’s L.L.
since 1935. Statistics: Souls, 144: com., 96.
Robertstown, Zion’s Church. First settlers arrived in 1868. First
service held in 1871. Up to 1875 the services were conducted by the
Pastors Niquet, Rechner, and Reusch. The church was dedicated in
1875. Foundation members: J. E. Wilksch, C. Proposch, J. C. Wolf, M.
Proposch, C. Milde, C. Wilksch, E. and H. Kotz, G. Eckert, A. Schmidt,
And. Schmidt, C. and W. Schmuecker, A. Werner, G. and W. Traeger,
G. Gollnisch, A. Mader, A. Huppatz, B. Klingberg, Pfitzner (sen.) C.
Pfitzner, W. Liebeknecht. Pastors: J. Reusch, 1875-76; J. Stolz,
1876-85. L.D.S. was held in the home of Bro. G. Ruediger,
1870-71, in Zion’s Church 1875-87, and then at St. Johns
Church 1888-1917. Teachers: P. Dallwitz, E. Rieschiek, O. F. Schu-
mann, Schumacher, Schubert, Andres. O. Tschirn, J. Gersch, Miss M.-


Vogelsang, H. Gersch, B. Luestner, B. Reuther. From 1885-87 there
were two schools; Mr. Schumann taught at the Zion’s Church and
Mr. Schumacher at the St. John’s; the two amalgamated after the
departuie ox Mr. Schumacher under Mr. Schubert. S.S. in conjunc-
tion with St. John s since 1919. L.L, since 1934. English services
since Statistics: Souls, 67; com., 61.
Peep Hill, St. Michael’s Church. First services conducted by Pastor
Heinze (Nain) in 1879 at home-of Bro. Sander, Government Well, then
in school. When Heinze withdrew the pastors from Point Pass carried
on his work; first J. Stolz, then F, Rechner. In his' time congre-
gation was organized. Church was dedicated in 1890. Other pastors
t P ?l nt Pass * Foundation members: J. G. Dohnt, E. E. Geyer,
J- T. G. Henschke, A. T. Jenke, J. A. Otto, J. G. Schubert (sen.), F .W.
Schubert, J. G. Schubert, F. Schubert, E. A. F. Tscharke, A. Thiele,
r. Zerna, J. F. L. Sander. L.L. commenced in 1938. Statistics: Souls,
93; com., 70.
Julia, Himmelfahrt’s Kirche (Church of the Ascension). First
.settlers in 1906. They attended the services at Point Pass. Congre-
gation organized January 1, 1910; services at first in homes of mem-
bers, then in barn of J. F. Obst. Church dedicated in 1911, addition
m 1928. Foundation members: J. T. Henschke, J. F. Obst, H. B
Traeger, H. Luestner, J. G. Reuther, W. A. Elze, C. W. Thiele, B.
Stolz, J. G. Mader, F. A. Thiele, E. W. Wohlfeil. Pastors: As at Point
lass. L.L., as also English services, commenced in 1938. Statistics*
Souls, 113; com., 80.
Preaching Places: Burra, since 1936; Hansborough also since 1936.
Baldina, St. Paul’s. (1878-1929). Organized by Pastor Stolz.
Church dedicated 1879. Foundation members: G. Mann, Linke, Herm
and H. Deckert, G. Keller, G. and K. Frost, W. Heinrich, E. Heimish,’
H. Frahm, E. and W. Haemmerling, Kikebusch, G. Rohde, K.
Stasinowsky, R. Klaebe, A. Schmidt, H. Luck, G. Roocke, Ackermann,
A. Przioilla, H. Pittman, D. Arnold. After the church was demolished
services were held in the homes of different members. Pastors: J.
Stolz, 1878-85; A. Doehler, 1885-89; then as at Point Pass. L.D.S.
existed for a number of years. Teachers: F. Rechner (father of
las tor Rechner, Light’s Pass), G. Heinzel, F. Budrian, Miss Geyer.
this congregation, although it had a promising beginning, dwindled
away as a result of droughts and failures of harvest, which forced
the settlers to leave the district. A number went to Victoria.
Burra. Probably in 1847 the Burra Mining Company brought out a
party of smelters from the Harz Mountains, in Germany. They were
served by Pastors Kappler (Adelaide) and Fiedler (Hahndorf).
Among them were the following brethren: Oppermann, Geyer, Fuss,
Zoller Bros., Loewe, Bartholomaeus, Bohrmann, Loth, Mueller. Soon
after the closing down of the mines—probably in 1875 —the congre-
gation also dissolved. Their church, situated near Courthouse and
built on block presented by a Mr. Powell, was later rented to a lodge
nnd was destroyed by tire after one of its meetings).
POINT PASS (ST. PETER’S) PARISH.
Organized in 1885, pastor resident in Point Pass.
Point Pass, St. Peter’s Church. Organized by Pastor Reusch
(Tanunda*) toward end of 1884 as result of separation in Immanuel
congregation caused by synodical schism of that year. At first
services were held in school, then a Lutheran day school. Church
■dedicated December 6, 1885. Foundation members: J. C. Leditschke.


J. T. Mickel, J. G. Damschke, G. Jansen, J. C. Pfeiler, G. Jochinke,,
H. A. Friebel, C. F. Leditschke, J. C. Schaefer, J. W. Gerlach, P. H-
Wuttke, C. Pfitzner, H. Pfitzner, F. and G. Gerlach, W. G. Scholz,.
J. W. Schultz, C. F. Maywald, J. F. C. Traeger, A. Schroeder, F. W.
and T. Gehling, J. Lipschinski, C. Morick, H. A. Kuehl, J. C. and H.
Walter, H., A., C. Jochinke, W. Fettke, W. Pickert. Pastors: J. Reusch,.
1884-85; F. Drauz, 1885-96 (at times' assisted by P. Hegelau); C.
Siegle, 1897-1912; K. Michel, 1912-13; J. Zwar, 1913-32; J. E. Materne
since 1934. Lutheran day school, in conjunction with Immanuel congre-
gation, 1884-92. Teachers; H. Doehring, Dittmer, Friedrichs, Raasche,,
The building was later sold to the Government. S.S. organized in
Pastor Siegle’s time, then with Immanuel congregation 1921-37, now
on its own, conducted entirely in English. English services were
introduced under J. Zwar. L.L. with Immanuel congregation since
1935. Statistics: Souls, 143; com., 112. Manse built in 1887 with
an addition in 1910.
Robertstown, St. John’s Church. Organized by P. Reusch for same'
reason as Point Pass. First services were held in homes of members
and in Bro. Rieschiek’s wheat store. Church dedicated November 22,,
1885, Foundation members: E. Wilksch, J. T. Hempel, J. G. Wittwer,.
E. Keller, E. Rieschiek, A. Werner, J. Ross, G. Sachse, F. Gaerth, M.
Dahlitz, G. Ruediger (sen.), G., A. and W. Ruediger, C. Damschke,.
N. Westphalen, A. Heinrich, G. Lehmann, C. and E. Hetzel, C. Burow,
A. Dommenz, F. W. Schmuecker. Served by same pastors as Point
Pass. L.D.S. 1885-1917, from 1888 on together with Zion’s' congrega-
tion. Teachers: Schumacher, Schubert, Andres, O. Tschirn, J. Gersch,
Miss M. Vogelsang, H. Gersch, B. Luestner, B. Reuther. S.S. together
with Zion’s congregation since 1919. L.L. also together with Zion’s
congregation since 1935. English services were introduced in 1934.
Statistics: Souls, 178; com., 120,
(Pastor Maschmedt (Klemzig) served a small congregation at
Spring Hut Creek, near Robertstown, in the home of Bro. Preusker
(1876-86); advancing age caused him to withdraw; the members then
joined the St. John’s congregation.)
'Geranium Plain, St. Stephen’s Church. The first services were
conducted by Pastor Drauz in home of the Haeusler family. The
congregation was organized by Pastor Siegle in 1897. Church’
delicated October 28, 1900. Foundation members: C. Voigt, A.
Wilksch, E. Haeusler, G. Wittwer, C. Leditschke, A. Sachse, W. and G,
Neindorf, A. Redemski, W. and A. Haeusler, H. Kuehl, L. Rusiack,
C. Werner, E. Knispel, Gertig, W. Wilksch. Since foundation served
from Point Pass. Statistics: Souls, 91; com., 55.
(St. Paul’s, Geranium Plain, was founded by Pastor Leidig towards
end of last century. Church was dedicated in 1900, served by Pastors
G. F. Leidig till 1921, W. Schmetzer 1921-22, then amalgamated with
St. Stephen’s congregation. Foundation members: W. Hensel, R. and
E. Heinrich, J, Wilksch, G. Niksch.)
(Bundey, Immanuel Church, 1881-1925, was served by Pastors J.
Stolz, A. Doehler, F. Rechner, F. Leidig, W. Schmetzer. Foundation-
members: G. Winter, G. Jaensch, G. Wilksch, G. Heinze, A. Gregurke,
G. Kubel, E. Baenlsch, W. Geister, J. Vogelsang, E. Gertig. L.D.S..
for number of years. Teachers: Welke, Schwartzkopf, Hartmann.
Droughts caused most of the settlers to leave district, the remainder-
joined Geranium Plain in 1925.)
Apoinga. Services were conducted at Tothill’s Belt in home of
Bro. G. Mann by Pastors Leidig and Schmetzer from 1906-22; con-
gregation then amalgamated with North Anlaby. First service
conducted at Apoinga on July 10, 1936. Congregation organized
February 2, 1937. Foundation members: J., W., B. and A. Heinrich*


H. Milde, A. Mickel, H. Kernchen —the majority had been members-
of North Anlaby, previous to 1922 of Tothill’s Belt. Served by Pastor
Materne since inception. Statistics: Souls, 31; com., 28.
North Anlaby, St. Trinity Church. Organized in 1909 by Pastor
Leidig. Church dedicated July 2, 1911. Foundation members: G.
Mann, F. Mattner, H. Milde, F. and H. Liebeknecht, F. Ross, F. Kielow,
Kotz, Heinrich. Pastors: F. Leidig, 1909-21; W. Schmetzer, 1921-27;
J. Zwar, 1927-32; J. E. Materne, since 1934, Dissensions in congre-
gation in 1927, which almost wrecked it, caused it to leave Immanuel
parish and to join the St. Peter’s parish. The organizing of congre-
gation at Apoinga has considerably weakened it. Statistics: Souls,.
9; com., 8.
SEDAN PARISH.
Pastor resident in Sedan. Organized in 1924, then consisting of
the congregations Sedan, North Rhine, Rhine Villa, Hildesheim. Later,,
as a result of the union of the U.E.L.C.A. with the E.L.S.A. a.a.G. in
1926, North Rhine was added to the Eden Valley parish and Sandleton,,
Black Hill, Forster included in Sedan parish.
Sedan, Zionspilger Kirche (Pilgrims of Zion). In 1870 a Lutheran
settlement was formed in the Hundred of Bagot, which a little later
was named Sedan. Most of the settlers came from Langmeil, a few
from Bethany, the rest from other congregations. The congregation
was organized in 1871. The first services were held in the honie of
Bro. J. W. Pfeiffer. The first church was dedicated on November 23,
1873. There w r ere 16 foundation members. Some of them were the
brethren J. W. Pfeiffer, J. W. Buergemeister, E. J. P. Kaesler, J. F. E.
Schwarz, J. F. T. Schumacher, M. Zippel. The congregation was
served from Langmeil, Tanunda, till 1924. New church dedicated
November 25, 1923. Pastors: J. Chr, Auricht, 1870-1907; L. Kaibel,
1908-18; T. Hebart, 1920-24; J. Riedel, since 1924. L.D.S. 1876-1917.
Teachers: O. Grote, 1876-84; B. S. Rothe, 1884-89; O. Wachtel, 1889-94;
W. L. Zadow, 1894-1917. S.S. since 1917. L.L. since 1937. English
services commenced in 1938. Statistics: Souls, 302; com., 211.
Cambrai (Rhine Villa), Hoffnungs Kirche (Hope Church). Result
of secession, first from Rhinethal (E.L.S.A.) congregation, owing to
the expulsion of its pastor, P. B. Hoefner, from that synod, then of
secession from Pastor Hoefner’s successor, Ph. Scherer. Organized in
1903 and joined the Immanuel Synod. First services were held in the
Institute. Church dedicated on March 27, 1904, vestry added 1909,
gallery 1912. Served from Tanunda till 1918, from 1922-24 in the
Murray Bridge parish, from 1924 in Sedan parish. Pastors: L. Kaibel,
1903-18; L. Kuss; J. Doehler, 1918-24; J. Riedel, since 1924. L.L.
since 1926. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 114; com., 99.
Hildesheim. Organised probably in 1887, church built in 1890,
used conjointly with the E.L.S.A. congregation. Pastors: L. Kuss,
1887-1922; J. Doehler, 1922-24; J. Riedel, since 1924. The congre-
gation belonged to the Mannum-Murray Bridge parish till 1924, when
it was added to the newly formed Sedan parish. Statistics: Souls,
23; com., 19.
Sandleton Pilgerkirche (Pilgrims Church). Organized in 1895 by
members who remained faithful to Pastor Hoefner after his expulsion
from the E.L.S.A. Church built in 1895, present church in 1914.
Foundation members: W. Saegenschnitter, H. Saegenschnitter, J.
Pfeiffer, F. Frost, W. Nicholai, W. Krieger, J. Schwertfegar, L. Koop,
A. Baude. Pastors: P. B. Hoefner, 1895-1900; Ph. Scherer, 1900-11;
F. Lehmann, 1911-27; J. Riedel, since 1927. L.D.S., 1885-1909.


Teachers: Max Wittig, 1895-1903; Louis Alpers, 1903-08; Fritz
Budrian, 1908-09. Statistics: Souls, 44; com., 29.
Black Hill. Organized in 1895 by members who remained faithful
to Pastor Hoefner after his expulsion from the E.L.S.A. Services are
held in Black Hill Institute. Pastors: P. B. Hoefner, 1895-1900; Ph.
Scherer, 1900-27; J. Riedel, since 1927. Statistics: Souls, 23; com., 14.
Forster. Organized probably in 1889, remained faithful to Pastor
Hoefner also after his expulsion from the E.L.S.A. Church built in
1904. Pastors: B. P. Hoefner, 1889-1900; Ph. Scherer, 1900-27; J.
Riedel, since 1927. English services since 1927. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 41; com., 26.
SOUTH KILKERRAN PARISH.
Organized 1926, pastor resident in South Kilkerran.
/
South Kilkerran, St. John’s Church. Founded by Missionary
Kuehn (Moravian Brethren) and Pastor Niemann (E.L.S.A.) in
1872-73. Third congregation (Immanuel Synod) founded by Pastor
Doehler (Condowie) in 1882. The Moravian Brethren congregation,
together with that of E.L.S.A., dedicated church 1876. E.L.S.A. con-
gregation built their own church 1901. Foundation members of
Moravian Brethren congregation: G. Hilbig, F. G. Hasting, C. B.
Hasting, A. Hasting. Pastors: Kuehn, L. A. Jacobi, till 1891; P.
Buck, 1892-1906. Then joined the E.L.S.A. a.a.G., served by Pastors:
Heidenreich, Hass, Schultz, Lienert, till 1926. Then joined the
Immanuel congregation. Foundation member of Immanuel Synod
congregation: W. Heinrich. Pastors: A. Doehler, 1882-1892 (assisted
during last years by C. Weckert, 1922-1926); J. Sabel, .since 1927.
Present church dedicated September 6, 1906. L.D.S. from 1877-79.
Teachers: Becker and Rissmann. E.L.S.A. school, teacher, G. Marx,
1879-1889; 1889-1906 school belonging to the three congregations
(E.L.S.A., Immanuel Synod, Moravian Brethren). From 1906 on,
E.L.S.A. congregation own school. Immanuel Synod and Moravian
Brethren school, 1906-08. Teachers: A. Lehmann, Miss L. Hasting;
again 1914-17, teacher J. Gersch. S.S. since 1918, L.L. organized 1922.
English services introduced in E.L.S.A. a.a.G. congregation in 1922,
in Immanuel Synod congregation in 1924. Statistics: Souls, 241;
com., 168.
Tiparra, St. Paul’s Church. Congregation founded in 1883 by
Pastor Doehler. Foundation members: J. G. Schilling, W. Altmann
(from Immanuel Synod), G. Sachse, F. H. Jericho, W. Schloithe (from
E.L.S.A.). Church dedicated October 10, 1901. Pastors: A. Doehler,
1883-1922, during last years assisted by Pastor J. Doehler; C. A.
Weckert, 1922-26; J. Sabel, since 1927. L.D.S. (in Jericho’s home);
1901-04. Teachers: F. Schmidt, A. H. Vogelsang. 1907-09 teachers:
Miss A. Kuss, Miss I. Klemm. English services and S.S. commenced
1927. L.L. organized 1938. Statistics: Souls, 44; com., 25.
Kadina, Immanuel Congregation. Services commenced by Pastor
Stolz (Light’s Pass) in 1913, but stopped owing to War. Congregation
founded April 16, 1933 by Pastor Sabel (South Kilkerran) and since
served by him. Foundation members: J. Schirmer, Mrs. Fiedler, G.
and H. Fiedler. S.S. and English services since inception. Statistics.
Souls, 27; com., 15.
Preaching Place: Sandilands, since January 21, 1928.


STONEFIELD PARISH.
Organized in 1890, pastor resident in Stonefield.
Stonefield (Steinfeld), St. Stephen’s Church. Founded by settlers
from Nain and Light’s Pass. Services since 1882; at first
conducted in home of Bro. Linke. Foundation members: A.
Linke, W. Linke, Gogoll, R.- Liebig, G. Kubisch, F. Kalisch,
Krolling. First church dedicated March 29, 1885, present church
dedicated November 12, 1911. Pastors: A. Doehler, since 1882;
J. P. Loehe, 1890-1902; P. P. Breier, since 1902. L.D.S. till 1917.
Teachers: A. Meyer, 1892-97; P. Henschke, 1898-1904; P. B, Zerna,
1904-17. S.S. opened in 1917. L.L. organized 1933. Statistics:
Souls, 182; com., 126. (For several years Pastor Buck, Bethel, served
the families Vogt and Mathias, members of the Moravian Brethren,
in Steinfeld district.)
Brownlow, St. PauTs Church. Founded by members from Neale’s.
Foundation members: F. Schmidt, A. Biar, F. Roocke, W. Materne,
H. Materne, C. Nitschke. Church built in 1894. Pastors, as Stone-
field. L.D.S. 1903-11. Teachers: Albers, 1903; H. Vogelsang, 1904-11.
S.S. since 1917. Statistics: Souls, 89; com., 63.
Neale’s Flat, St. Stephen’s Church. Founded by members from
Light’s Pass in 1871. Foundation members: F. Obst, K. Obst, G.
Heidrich, H. Tscharke, F. Schmidt. First services held in homes of
members. Church dedicated September 20, 1874. In 1876 congrega-
tion joined Point Pass parish, in 1890 the Steinfeld parish. Pastors:
G. J, Rechner (Light’s Pass), J. C. Auricht (Langmeil); J. Stolz,
1876-85; F. Rechner, 1886-90: J. P. Loehe, 1890-1902; P. P. Breier
since 1902. The congregation had no L.D.S.; the children attended
the school of St. Paul’s congregation at Neale’s. S.S. since 1917.
Statistics: Souls, 81; com., 56.
Dutton, St. John’s Church. Founded in 1865. Foundation members:
F. A. Habel, G. Klau, Ossig, Wohlfeil. Services held in home of Bro.
Habel, sen.; church dedicated 16th Sunday a. Trinity, 1871. Pastors:
E. D. Appelt, 1869-87; J. E. G. Bode, 1887-92; F. Hossfeid, 1892-1928;
P. P. Breier, since 1929. When Pastor Hossfeid was expelled from
E.L.S.A. the congregation also left that synod; joined U.E.L.C.A. in
1929. From 1869-1928 congregation belonged to Gnadepberg parish,
with pastor resident in Dutton, in 1929 joined the Steinfeld parish.
For a number of years the pastors, Dr. Muecke and Roediger, served
some members in the Dutton district. L.D.S. 1875-1917. Teachers:
Oster, Leptin; Starick, 1882-92; C. F. Beck, 1892-97; Miss H. Tamke,
1897-1903; Boehm, 1903; B. Dallwitz, 1904; A. B. Schulz, 1905-10;
J. G. Saegenschnitter, 1910-17. S.S. commenced in 1917. Statistics:.
Souls, 92; com., 60.
TANUNDA PARISH.
Organized in 1867, pastor resident in Tanunda.
Tanunda, St. John’s Church. Pastor A. Kappler (Adelaide) held
services in Tanunda from 1849 till early in the fifties. As a result
of synodical schism of 1860 several families left Langmeil and were
served by Pastor Staudenmayer, and from 1864 till he departed for
Germany, by Pastor Keppler. In Pastor Keppler’s time a dissension
over Hallett’s Valley cemetery. The Hallett’s Valley party was
served by Pastor Maschmedt (Adelaide) till 1865, then returned to
St. John’s. Congregation organized early in the sixties. First church
(formerly a wheat store) dedicated in 1864. Present church built in


1868. Spire added 1886-87. Manse Duilt in Foundation
members: J. T. Heinrich, E. Schulz, Kleemann and suns, Christian,
S. and G. v. Bertouch, Hetzel, Rieschiek, E. Heinrich, G. Schrapel,
Mattiske, Hampel, Traeger, Lutze, Nitschke, Scholler. Pastors: A.
Kappler, W. Staudenmayer, Keppler, C. Maschmedt, P. Niquet, 1865-
1867; J. Reusch, 1867-97; P. G. Kaestner, 1899-1908; A. Hiller,
1909-11; R. Held, since 1911. The congregation belonged to the
Lights Pass (Immanuel) parish till 1867. S.S. opened with Langmeil
in July 26, 1874. L.L. organized in 1913. English services intro-
duced in 1932. Last convention of the General Synod held in St.
.John’s church. Statistics: Souls, 330; com., 280.
Xuriootpa, St. Peler’s Church. First services were held in the
home of Bro. F. Roennfeldt near Greenock by Pastor Dr. Muecke.
Congregation organized in 1862. Foundation members: C. Krieg,
Schaedel, F. Roennfeldt, H. Scholz. Services were held in the public
. school. Church dedicated November 10, 1867, spire built in 1927.
Pastors: W. Staudenmayer, till 1865; P. Niquet, 1865-67; J. Reusch,
1867-97; P. G. Kaestner, 1899-1908; A. Hiller, 1909-11; R. Held, since
1911. Congregation belonged to Light’s Pass parish till 186 7, since
then to Tanunda parish. L.D.S. was opened soon after dedication of
church; existed till 1917. Teachers: Droegemueller, R. Rieschiek,
Zimmermann, C. Krichauff, A. Schulz, Miss E. Geyer. S.S. since
foundation of congregation. L.L. organized in 1914. English services
introduced in 1928. Statistics; Souls, 375; com., 320.
Lyndoch, St. John’s Church. A branch- of the Hoffnungsthal
(E.L.S.A.) congregation, organized in 1879. First church built in
1880, present church dedicated October 9, 1927. Foundation members*
A. Teusner, C. Hanel, C. Leske, W. Menzel, F. Menzel, Muehlnickel,
C. Dahlitz, C. Kramer, E. Kaufmann, H. Klauber, C. Haeusler, H.
Teusner, C. Kies, J. Noske, A. Leske. Pastors: C. Auricht, J G
Rechner; J. Reusch, till 1897; P. G. Kaestner, 1899-1908; A. Hiller
1909-11; R. Held, since 1911. S.S. opened in Pastor Reusch’s time
till 1914, reopened in 1922. English services introduced in 1937.
Statistics: Souls, 130; com., 110.
Tanunda, Tabor Church.
Non-synodical. Founded in 1850 by Pastor Muecke, Phil.Dr.
Pastors: Dr. C. Muecke, 1850-70; J. Roediger (Gossner Mission),
1870-95; F. Rechner, 1895-98: F. Hossfeld, 1898-1937. Now served
by pastors of the U.E.L.C.A. Church built in 1850, Spire dedicated
November 2, 1910.
VICTORIA DISTRICT
DIMBOOLA PARISH.
Organized in 1878. pastor resident in Dimboola.
Dimboola, St. John’s Church. Organized Easter, 1876, by Pastor
Hiller (Murtoa). Foundation members: W. and H. Koehler, R. Thomas,
P. Koop, E. Seliger, C. Menzel, H. C. Dahlenburg, C. A. Petschel, H.’
Hirth, C. Krieg, J. Klowss. Church at Wail, on Dimboola Plains,
dedicated 1877, transferred to Dimboola in 1902. Manse at first at
Wail, then Pastor Hampe built his own house at Lochiel. Present
manse in Dimboola. Lochiel congregation joined Dimboola 1937.
Pastors: C. G. Hiller, 1876-77; J. F. Frank, 1878-1880; C. G. Hiller,


1881- G. D. Hampe, 1882-94; C. H. Fischer, 1895-97; J. G. Hegelau.,
1897-1902; G. D. Hampe, 1902-10; F. Bay, 1910-20; T. Kenner, 1920-
25; W. J. G. Schultz, since 1926. Statistics: Souls, 106; com., 78.
ISi Ni, St. Paul's Church. Founded by Pastor Frank in 1878.
Soon a small church erected. A new church dedicated in November
1886. Pastors: J. F. Frank, 1878-80; G. D. Hampe, 1882-1910; F.
Bay, 1910-19; T. Renner, 1920-25; W. J. G. Schultz, since 1926.
Statistics: Souls, 95; com., 64.
Katyil, Trinity Church. First services held by Pastor Frank..
Congregation organized in 1882. * First church built in 1882. Present
church built later. Pastors: J. F. Frank, 1880-82; G. D. Hampe.
1882- F. Bay, 1910-19; T. Kenner, 1920-25; W. J. G. Schultz,
since 1926. Statistics: Souls, 32; com., 28.
Nhill. Continuation of Winniam congregation. Services com-
menced in 1934. Statistics: Souls, 19; com., 13.
DONCASTER PARISH.
Organized in 1876, pastor resident in Doncaster (formerly Waldau).
Doncaster, Trinity Church. First Lutheran settlers arrived at the
end of the forties from Prussia. Services were held in the homes of
members, usually in home of Bro. C. Aumann, sen. First church
dedicated by Pastor Goethe, January 26, 1858. Second church dedi-
cated by Pastor Herlitz, April 21, 1892. Foundation members: „G.
Thiele (first Lutheran-settler in Doncaster), Walter, sen. and jun.,
Straube, sen. and jun., J. G. Simon, Chr. Finger, Gottfried,
Thiele, A. Aumann, C. Aumann, sen. and jun., C. F. Tucheband,
H. Finger, H. Frommhold. A. Fuhrmann, E. Wittig, A. C.
Lenkersdorf, C. F. Hanke, W. Hanke, IV. Zander, A. Zander,
V: Gunther, C. Gunther, G. Berger, F. Meyer, F. Stecher,.
J. G. Leber, J. Pump, G. Uebergang, G. Schuhkraft, A. Kozel,
and others. Pastors: M. Goethe, 1858-67; H. Herlitz, 1868-76; M. von
Schramm, 1876-1908; R. Held, 1908-12; G. Hegelau, 1912-15; A..
Fehlberg, 1915-20; J. Simpfendoerfer, since 1920. L.D.S. 1860-64,
1873-84. Teacher: M. von Schramm (1860-84). School was held in
church till 1864, from 1865-73 in school on Doncaster Hill, then a
subsidized school. The new Education Act of 1873 caused von
Schramm to resign and build a school on his property. Here he
conducted school till 1884. S.S. opened in 1879. L.Y.P.S. organized
in Pastor Fehlberg’s time. Statistics! Souls, 132; com., 108.
GROYEDALE PARISH.
Organized in 1855, pastor resident in Grovedale.
Grovedale, St. Paul's Church. (Formerly Germantown). First
Germans (eight families) landed in Geelong on December 19, 1849,,
and bought land in Grovedale. They met in their pioneer homes for
services. School erected in 1854. This was used also for services.
Pastor Goethe commenced services in Grovedale in winter of 1853,.
on June 24, 1854, for the first time in newly erected school. Manse
built in 1855. Church built soon afterwards. Foundation members:
S. Bieske, S. Kaerger, S. Behnsch. Teacher: J. Stanger. Pastor
Haussmann first resident pastor; resigned in 1861 because of dis-
satisfaction in the congregation. During vacancy, before successor.
Pastor Herlitz, arrived, Goethe entrusted the congregation at Grove-
dale to Jacobsen, who, as discovered later, was a dismissed student of


Hermannsburg mission seminary. When Herhtz arrived in 186- the
greater part of the congregation had Jacobsen as their pastor
seceding party had also secured the church and manse. Herhtz had
to conduct services in the school. Those that remained faithful bui
a new church, dedicated in 1870, bought the one time Germantown
Hotel for £4OO, and turned it into a manse. Pastors. M. Goethe,
1853-55; J. G. Haussraann, 1855-61; H. Herhtz, 1862-66, G. Heyer,
1868-1920; R. T. Rohde, 1921-24; J. Sahel, 1925-26; H. Proeve 1929-
1937; E. Fischer, 1937-38; H. Mmke, since 1938. S.S. and L.Y.P.S.
L. 1854-64. Teachers; J. Stanger, 1854-58; R. Renzow, 1858-64.
'' a He ml i go, Christ’s’ Congregation. Bendigo goldfields, discovered in
1851. In the gold rush many Germans came to Bendigo. First
service conducted by Pastor Goethe, February 24 1856 in All Saints
Church of England. Congregation organized February 25, 1856. hirst
services held in Church of England school. Manse built in 1806-
Church dedicated September 23, 1865. Destroyed by fire August 8,
1925. Services now held in A.N.A. Hall. Manse was sold
M. Goethe, 1856; W. Gehncke, 1856-5 /; J. J. Burkhard, 07 - G0 >
v Thun 1860-62; F. Munzel (Castlemame), H. Hemtz,
1868-69;’ F. Leypoldt, 1869-1930; H. Proeve, 1930-37; E Fischer
1937-38; H. Minke, since 1938. L.D.S. for many years; school erected
probably 1859, served as church till church _ erected. Teachers. P.
Burkhardt, N. v. Thun, M. Marquard. Statistics: fouls, 29; com., 25.
Preaching Place: Geelong; services commenced 192b.
JEPARIT PARISH.
Organized in 1907, pastor resident in Jeparit.
Jeparit, St. John’s Church. First services were held i.n Tarranyurk
school, then in Jeparit. Congregation founded in 1908-09. . Founda-
tion members: C. Volkmann, L. Reichenbach, A H. Heinrich, J P.
Breuer, P. Fischer, J. Werner Church dedicated March 19, 19ML
Pastors; A. Fehlberg, 1907; A. Jericho, since 1911. Pirst manse
purchased for Pastor Fehlberg New built in 1925 English
services introduced in 1918. S.S. opened 1928. L. . g
1926. Statistics: Souls, 155; com., 93. .
Arkona, Immanuel Church. Services were conducted m the district
for a number of years by Pastors Frank, Hampe,
Kaibel, Lehner, Loehe, Hebart. Congregation organised 1892. Church
dedicated March 3, 1907. Foundation members:!. Both . d
Sieber, C. F. Schulze, J. Khnge, F. Hedt, E. J. Bothe, J. J. bchneifler,
r T Block C Werner, F. Nitschke, T. W. Unger, G. Schilling, G.
Se4an 0 ’Pohlner H.’Rogasch, C. O. Volkmann. Pastors; A. Fehl-
berg 1907-11; A. Jericho, since 1911. English services introduced in
1916.' S.S. opened 1916. L.Y.P.S. organized 1919. Statistics: Souls,
111 ySTiU. 6 ’ Centenary Jubilee Church. Services conducted by
Pastersl'llegelaul Went/el (E L.S.A.) J. P. Loehe Synod).
Foundation members: W. Altmann, A., H., i. Lmke, A. Graetz, A.
Gebert, H. Haeussler. Pastors; A. Fehlberg, 190 ell, A. Jericho,
since 1911. Church built in 1938. English services introduced 1930.
q q opened 1932. Statistics: Souls, 45; com., 35.
Rainbow. First services conducted by Pastors Kaibel, Lehner,
Loehe. Foundation members: C. Krause, R. Rogasch, G. Hoffmann,
P Fincher A. Wedding, R. Wedding, Sieber, Drendel, R. Lmke, F.
Voisrht C. Molkentin, Mrs. Klemm, J. Andrae, F. Liesfeid. Pastors:
A Fehlberg 1907-11; A. Jericho, since 1911. Services are held in a
4urch belonging to another denomination. English senvees since
1915. SS. opened in 1930. Statistics: Souls, 80; com., 62.


MURTOA PARISH.
Organized in 1875, pastor resident in Murtoa.
Murtoa, St, John’s Church* First Lutheran settlers arrived in
1871 from Hamilton. Founded in 1873 by Pastor Hiller (Hamilton).
Foundation members: F. Adler, J. Adler (sen. and jun.), Anders, P.
Anders. F. Degenhardt, G. Degenhardt, C. Deutscher, J. Deutscher,
Gardy, C. Gulbin, A. Herrmann, C. Huf, Leicht, W. Petering, C.
Petering, C. Presser, C. Schaeche, E. Schaeche, F. Schulz, H. Schulz,
Tschirner, M. Uhe, H. Vollprecht, J. Walter, Walter, jun., Winter,
First services were held in thatched schoolhouse. Church dedicated
October 19, 1877. Pastors: C. G. Hiller, 1873-1917; C. Siegle, since
1917. Pastor Hiller came from Hamilton to live in Murtoa in 1875.
S.S. and L.Y.P.S. Statistics: Souls, 231; com., 172.
Hamilton. In 1852 twelve families left Rosenthal and Hoffnungsthal
lor Hamilton. Pastor Schuermann (missionary in Port Lincoln,
S.A.) accepted a call in 1853. First church erected in 1854. Foun-
dation members: M. and A. Deutscher, J. Gude, J. Huf, J. Hundrack,
G. Petschel, J. Rentsch. Disagreement with Pastor Schuermann
caused some families to leave congregation in 1857 and to found the
South Hamilton congregation. Foundation members: F. Bienke, C.
W. Huf, S. Gerlach, J. G. Schneider, A. Deutscher, P. Zieschang, M.
Deutscher, J. K. Schneider, W. Bieske, A. Greiser, W. Petschel. Thev
were served by Pastors: Goethe, Herlitz, Leypoldt, Niquet, Burghardt,
Haussmann. Services were first held in home of Bro. W. Petschel
Church dedicated March 10, 1861, by Pastor Haussmann. Pastors:
Dr. Loessel, 1862-63; C. G. Hiller, 1865-1917; C. Siegle, since 1917.
L.D.S. before 1871. Last two teachers: Gross, Stanger. Statistics:
Souls, 55; com., 42.
Friedheim, Holy Trinity Church. First Lutheran settlers arrived
in 1876 at Bangerang, later Friedheim. Foundation members: A.
Schultz, G. Hauesler, H. Schultz, J. Adler, C. Hoff, E. Tubbach, Mrs.
Nitschke, J. K. Schultz, W. Vollbrecht. Church dedicated on Trinity
Sunday, 1884. Pastors: C. G. Hiller, 1876-1905; J. G. Hegelau, 1905-
1910; C. G. Hiller, 1910-12; J. Schaber, 1912-20; T. Renner, 1920-25;
W. J. G. Schultz, 1926-31; W. Loehe, 1931-33; E. Fischer, 1933-38; C.
Siegle, since 1938. S.S. since 1883. English services introduced
probably 1919. L.Y.P.S. organized 1929-30. Statistics: Souls, 58;
com., 46.
Warracknabeal. Services commenced in 1931 by Pastor Loehe.
Foundation members: F. Schaeche, H. Jaeschke, C. Biese, A. Seelaen-
der, C. Boehm, G. Haeusler. Pastors: W. Loehe, 1931-33; E. Fischer,
1933-38; C. Siegle, since 1938. Statistics: Souls, 25; com., 22-
MOUNT GAMBIER PARISH.
Organized in 1860, pastor resident in Mount Gambier,
Mount Gambier, St. Martin’s Church. Was organized by Pastor
Kappler in 1860. Working among German settlers, he found many
families with children of all ages not baptized and the marriage of the
parents not blessed by the Church. Foundation members: T, Stude-
mann, H. Ruwe, J. C. Ruwoldt, C. F. Sturm, A. Reinecke, E. H.
Schmidt, j. Vorwerk, E. Unger, C. T. Lindner, M. Years, Ad. Reinecke,
R. Sassanowsky, J. Lange, J. Schmidt, J. P. L. Schinkel, H. Sassan-
owsky, J. G. Lindner, C. Krummel, W. Wehl, F. C. Ruwoldt. First
services were held in the “ National School.” Church dedicated October
5, 1862. Spire added in 1905. A small congregation of Pastor


Meischal joined St. Martin's after his death. First manse was built
in 1862, the new one in 1928. Pastors: A. Kappler, 1860-77 (during
vacancy served by pastors of Immanuel Synod, Rechnei, Hemze,
Auricht); F. W. Matschoss, 1878-1923; E. Auncht, 1923-25; E.
Sprengel, since 1926. Congregation without synodical connection till
1877 then joined the Immanuel Synod; severed its connection m 1884,
owing to synodical schism, rejoined in 1913. Joined the \ictona
District in 1932. S.S. organized by Pastor Hemze in 1878. Sunday
School hall dedicated February 15, 1925. L.Y.P.S. organized February
7, 1924. Statistics: Souls, 320; com., 254.
Millicent, St. Paul’s Church. Services were commenced in 1874
by Pastor Kappler in the home of Bro. Maroske, later m home of
Bro. Holzgrefe and Exchange Hall. Congregation organised in 1878
by Pastor Heinze. Foundation members: A. G. Spehr, H. Holzgrete,
S. Holtkamp, A. Sippel, N. Arman, A. Nitschke, O Ey, V. \ orwerK,
A Aberle, F. Werchon, A. Altschwager, F. Nitschke, L. Spehr, 1.
Obercheu, R. Buhlmann. Church dedicated 1884. Pastors: F W.
Matschoss, 1878-192.3; E. Auricht, 1923-25; E. Sprengel, since 1926
L.Y.P.S. organized in October, 1934. Statistics: Souls, 110, com., 82.
NATIMUK PARISH.
Pastor resident in Natimuk.
Natiruuk, St. Paul’s Church. Founded in 1872 by Pastor Schuei-
mann (E.L.S.A.). Services were held in homes of H. Schmidt and
J E Boehm. Foundation members who had come from Mount
Gambier (most of them from Pastor Meischel’s congregation), were:
J. E. Boehm, C. Spehr, W. Stephan, E. Haustorfer, J. Klowss.. hirst
resident pastor, Schoknecht, commenced services in 1874. Church
dedicated Easter Sunday, 1874. Soon afterwards residence bmlt for
pastor. A small congregation, served by Pastor Hiller 1875-7/, and
Pastor Frank, 1877-79, amalgamated with St. Paul s. In 1880 church
enlarged (cross shaped). Internal dissensions, caused schism. ihe
party that retained church and manse joined Immanuel Synod, served
by the pastors: L. Kaibel, 1891-99; S. Lehner, 1900-02; J. P. Loehe,
1902-22; G. Dohler, 1923-28; W. Pritsch, 1929-1938; E. Fischer, since
1938. New manse built in 1923. For some years a L.D.S. Teachei.
J. S. Molkentin. English introduced in Pastor Kaibel s time. L. Y.i .b.
organized by Pastor Dohler. Statistics: Souls, 128, com,, 95.
St. John’s. Founded by Pastor Hiller (Murtoa). Church
dedicated 1889, badly damaged by storm in 1897. Joined the Immanuel
Synod in 1894. Pastors: C. G. Hiller, to 1889; C. H. hischer, 1890-
1894; L. Kaibel, 1894-99; S. Lehner, 1900-02; J P. Loehe, 19
r nobler 1923-28- W. Fritsch, 1929-38; E. Fischer, since 1938.
L.Y.P.S. organized by Pastor Dohler. General Synod, 1934, held in
Horsham. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 90, com., 60. . _
Green Lake, St. Mark’s Church. Services conducted m Drung
Drung 1872-79. Church dedicated 1872, later transferred to Green
Lake New church dedicated March 28, 1926. Pastors. C.G. Hiker,
1872-90* C H Fischer, 1890-96; J. G. Hegelau, 1897-1910; P. Stierle,
1911-12* J? Schaber, 1913-25; G. Dohler, 1925-28; W. Fritsch, 1929-38;
F Fischer since 1938. Statistics: Souls, 51; com., 40. . ,
Bordertown. Services commenced in 1932 by Pastor Fritsch,
Congregation organized in 1937. Statistics: Souls, 30; com.,
Preaching Place: Frances. First serviced in district by Pastor
Leidig. Services at Frances commenced by Pastor Doehler, Murray
Bridge.


NEW SOUTH WALES DISTRICT
ALBURY PARISH.
Organized in 1936, pastor resident in Albury.
Albury, St. Luke’s Church. Services conducted in Albury by Pastor
bnnprendoerfer, later discontinued. Recommenced by Pastor Stolz,
December 19, 1926. Congregation organized February 22, 1927.
Foundation members: O. Schnelle, W. Krause, F. Gollasch, G. Arnold,
J. Wiesner, R. H. Schubert, H. Paech, L. Stanton, C. Koetz, Mrs. C.
Bockmann, Mrs. E. C. P. Greschke, H. Obst, J. Lieschke, F. Schnelle.
Pastors: J. T. P. Stolz, 1926-36; J. H. Linke, since 1936. Foundation-
stone of church laid October 28, 1938. S.S. opened 1935. L.Y.P S
organised May 1, 1938. Statistics: Souls, 100; com., 69.
Jmdera, Bethlehem Church. First Lutheran settlers arrived in
1868 from South Australia. Church dedicated November 10, 1872;
enlarged 1906. Foundation members: J. G. Scholz, Briese, Funk,
Burdach, Huebner, Bartsch, T ensch, Molkentin, Haberecht, Hermann,
Pollack, Just, Grosse, Luebke. Pastors: I. Egen, 1872-86; G. Simpfen-
doerfer, 1886-1933; J. T. P. Stolz, 1925-36; J. H. Linke, since 1936.
S.S. opened July 25, 1931. L.Y.P.S. organized July 2, 1930. Statistics;
Souls, 87; com., 67.
Bethel, Trinity Church. Founded by Lutheran settlers from South
Australia in 1869. Lay reading services were commenced by Bro.
A. Mickan. First church dedicated on Palm Sunday, 1871, by Elder
J. G. Klemke (Walla Walla). Foundation members: A. Mickan and
sons, J. and A. Mickan; G. Terlich, W. Terlich, C. Terlich and sons,
G. and Gotth. Terlich; P. Schwartze, Jarick, sen., F. Jarick, J. Heincke,
Seiler. Elder Klemke served the congregation till i 872, then Pastors •
L Egen, 1872-86; G. Simpfendoerfer, 1886-1933; J. T. P. Stolz,
1925-36; J. H. Linke, since 1936. Second church dedicated October
3, 1926. English services introduced in 1925. L.Y.P.S. organised
1937. Statistics: Souls, 64; com., 50.
Brocklesby. (Formerly in Moorwartha, since 1900 in Brocklesby).
Foundation members: Schweetz, Just, Weule, Karrer. Services held'in
Union church erected with help of congregation in 1901. Pastors as
Bethel. English services introduced in August, 1925. Statistics:
Souls, 23; com., 20.
Baranduda. Founded in 1879. Foundation members: G. Schubert,
A. W. Bartel, C. Fietz. Services held in Union church erected with
help of congregation in 1913, till June, 1938, when congregation
decided to attend services at Albury. Pastors: I. Egen, 1879-86; G.
Simpfendoerfer and others, 1886-1925; J. T. P. Stolz, 1925-36: J.’ H.
Linke, 1936-38.
Wangaratta. First service August 7, 1933. Congregation organized
in 1935. Foundation members: H. Dallwitz, K. J. Lieschke, Fischer,
Peake. Services held at first in home of Bro. Lieschke, now in
Presbyterian church. Pastors: J. Stolz, 1933-36; J. H. Linke, since
1936. Statistics: Souls, 34; com, 23.
Yackandandah. Years ago services were conducted by Pastors
Simpfendoerfer and Bemmann, but were discontinued, the members
attending services at Baranduda. Services recommenced by Pastor
Stolz in 1935, held in Methodist Church. Foundation members: P.
Simpfendoerfer, H. Heinrich, R. Schmidt, E. Simpfendoerfer, A. Boeh-
ringa. Pastors: J. T. P. Stolz, 1935-36; J. H. Linke, since 1936.
Statistics: Souls, 16; com., 15.


MILBRULONG PARISH,
Organized in 1905, pastor resident in Milbrulong.
Milbrulong, Bethlehem Church. Pounded by P. Bemmann (Pleasant
Hills) in 1891. Church built in 1900. Foundation members: G. H.
Bender, H. Obst, P. Gollasch, E. Hoffmann, F. Schirmer, G. Krause,
F. Pertzel, C. Richter, A. Molketm, W. Bender, A. Krause, lastors.
E. Bemmann, till 1905; R. Monz, 1905-07; E. Gutekunst, 1908-11, A.
Hartmann, 1912-20; W. Fritsch, 1920-29; T FuWbohm,.since 1929.
Manse built 1913. English services introduced in 1923. b.b. statistics.
S0U Uranquinty, m Trinity Church. Church dedicated May 8, 1922 by
Pastor Fritsch. Foundation members: Kroker brothers, G. Kotn, ti.
Koth, F. Siebels, W. Schulz, A. Jarick, H. Kohlhagen, Salan. Pastors:
W. Fritsch, 1922-29; T, Fuhlbohm, since 1929. b.b. Li.i.r.b.
Statistics: Souls, 66; com., 48.
Wagga Wagga, St. Paul’s Congregation. First service conducted
bv Pastor Fritsch in Freemasons’ Hall, Tarcutta Street, in September,
1925. Congregation organized October 18, 1925. Foundation mem-
bers’: W. Schulz, R. Kleinig, Gestier, Salan, A. Schulz, Koetz. Pastors:
W. Fritsch, 1925-29; T. Fuhlbohm, since 1929. L.Y.P.S. organized in
1933. S.S. commenced in 1930. Statistics: Souls, 81; com., 64.
Mittagong, St. Peter’s Church. Church dedicated January 31,1912.
Foundation members: J. Gursansky, C. Damschke, G. Semler,
Damschke, F. Semler, E. Graetz. Pastors: A. Hiller, A. Hartmann
W. Fritsch till 1929; T. Fuhlbohm, since 1929. Congregation ceased
to exist during the War, reorganized after Whr by Pastor Hartmann,
formerly belonged to Pleasant Hills parish, joined Milbrulong parish
when English services were required. Statistics: Souls, 24; com., 20.
S.S. L.Y.P.S.
Preaching Place: Mittagong Union.
PLEASANT HILLS PARISH.
Organized in 1888, pastor resident in Pleasant Hills.
Pleasant Hills, St. John’s Church. Settlers from Wala Walla
parish took up land towards end of 1883 and beginning of 1884, ana
gathered together in their homes for reading services. Congregation
las founded by Pastor Egen (Walla Walla). Foundation members:
G Terlich M. Kotzur, M. Pumpa, G. Scheuner. Church dedicated
October 1 1888 Pastors; I. Egen, till 1886; G. Simpfendoerfer,
?886 88- C H Fischer, 1880-90; E Bemmann, 1890-1907; T. Goehner,
ISollloj A. Hiller,l9ll-19; A. Hartmann, 1920-32; P. Medlngdoerfer,
1932-34; A. Loehe, since 1934. L.D.S. 1888-90. Teacher. P. Fibche.,
then again, 1909-10, teacher Kroffke. S.S._ established in 1926.
L.Y.P.S. organized in 1934. English services introduced 1926.
S^kdgeh ilk Tminanuei Church. (Formerly Dudal CoomaJ Settlers
from Walla Walla parish arrived in 1883. These met for reading
services Congregation founded by Pastor Egen. Foundation mem-
bers: Klemke brothers, M. Urban. First church built m 1886; second
one dedicated March 18. 1892. Pastors as I leasant Hills. L.D.S. ioi
a while probably in 1886. Teacher, Kroffke. English services intro-
duced in P l9is, as result of the War; discontinued for a while, then
reintroduced. S.S. opened in 1931. Statistics; Souls, 72; com., 58.
Henty, Trinity Church. In 1893 Bro. A. _ Roehrich, from Walla
Walla, settled at Henty, served by Pastor Simpfendoerfer on week
days. From 1895 on this preaching place was served by pastors from


Pleasant Hills. In 1897 members assisted in building Union church.
Closed as result of War; reopened as preaching place in 1921 by Pastor
Hartmann, members belonging to Edgehill. Congregation organized
in 1935. Church dedicated October 19, 1937. Pastors: G. Simpfen-
doerfer, 1894; E. Bemmann, 1895-1907; T. Goehner, 1908-10; A. Hiller,
1911-16; A. Hartmann, 1921-32; F. Medingdoerfer, 1932-34; A. Loehe,
since 1934. English services introduced in 1915. S.S. established in
1931. L.Y.P.S. in 1935. Statistics: Souls, 124; com., 90.
Mangoplah. First settler in 1882, Bro. K. Klimpsch. Congregation
organized in 1912 as 1 part of Milbrulong parish. Through rearrange-
ment became part of Pleasant Hills parish in 1920. Church built in
1920. Pastors: A. Hartmann, 1912-32; F. Medingdoerfer, 1932-34;
A. Loehe, since 1934. S.S. opened in 1927. Statistics: Souls, 46;
com., 40-
Urangeline, St. Matthew’s Church. Lutheran settlers arrived in
1928. Congregation founded by Pastors Hartmann and Stolz; served
by both for a while, then joined Pleasant Hills parish. Pastors as
Pleasant Hills. Church dedicated October 22, 1929. The church,
being the first church at Alma Park, was presented by that congre-
gation. Foundation members: Wentzke, Kreuzberger, Zweck, Walters,
Graetz, Mrs. Pietsch. English services introduced in 1929. S.S.
opened in 1931. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1938. Statistics: Souls, 63;
com, 42.
SYDNEY, GENERAL SYNOD HOME MISSION FIELD.
Work commenced in 1928.
Sydney, Trinity Congregation. In 1928 some members seceded
from the German congregation in Sydney because English services
were denied them. These with others petitioned the General President
to arrange for services. Pastor Stolz from Walla Walla organized
congregation on June 3, 1928. Foundation members: A. Scholes, H.
Schmidt, J. E. Kleinig, A. Kohn, A. Gabriel, J. E. Kindler, B. Wenke,
H. Doyle, C. Scholes. Up to 1930 the congregation was served by
different pastors of the U.E.L.C.A. Pastors: S. Gross, 1930-32; F.
Lienert, 1932-36; K. Gielow, since 1936. S.S. since inception.
Sydney, St. John’s Esthonian Lutheran Congregation. Organized
by Pastor Gielow in 1934. Religious and Esthonian school. Statistics
of both congregations: Souls, 262; com., 228.
TEMORA HOME MISSION FIELD.
Organized in 1925, Pastor resident in Temora.
Temora. —The first services were conducted by Pastor Hegelau.
Congregation organized in November, 1906. Foundation members:
H. Will, A. Mangelsdorf, Kielo, Pietsch, Dr. Finzelbach, Hellner, P.
Reinhold, C. Schmalkuche, J. C. G. Obst, V. Bertelsmeier. Church
dedicated March 26, 1909. Congregation belonged to Milbrulong
parish, 1908-12; then from 1912-19 resident pastor, with short
interval till 1921. Then again served from Milbrulong till 1925.
Pastors: R. Monz (Milbrulong), 1906-07; E. Gutekunst (Milbrulong),
1908-12; A. Hartmann (Milbrulong), 1912; K. Fiedler, 1912-19; A.
Hartmann (Milbrulong), 1919-20; W. Fritsch (Milbrulong), 1920-25;
J. E. Materne, 1925-34; J. Monz, since 1934. S.S. organized by Pastor
Fritsch. L.Y.P.S. since 1935. Statistics: Souls, 121; com., 85.
(Pastor Fiedler also served Gilgandra and Alectown, but discon-
tinued this field owing to War. From September 5, 1909, to April 1,


1934, a congregation at Boganville, residence of Bro. A. Mangelsdorf..
Members: A. Mangelsdorf and sons, C. Steinhardt and sons. After
departure of Pastor Materne the congregation amalgamated with
Temora.)
Ungarie. First service conducted April 11, 1926. Congregation
organized in 1936. Foundation members: E. Burdach and sons, H.
Bartsch, P. Wungluck, L. Block. Services are conducted in Presby-
terian Church. S.S. since 1931. Pastors: J. E. Materne, 1926-34;
J. Monz, since 1934. Statistics: Souls, 28, com., 19.
Preaching Places: Beckom. First service conducted May 23, 1926...
Services conducted in home of Bro. A. Launer. Bectric. Services-
commenced in 1935 by Pastor Monz. Goolgowi. First service con-
ducted January 1, 1932. Services held in Goolgowi Hall. Golgedrie-
Services were commenced in 1936.
WALLA WALLA PARISH.
Organized in 1872, divided into two fields in 1936. Pastor resident in?
Walla Walla.
Walla Walla, Zion’s Church. Founded by Lutheran settlers who>
came from Ebenezer and Light’s Pass in South Australia. They
named the new settlement Ebenezer, but later changed name to
Walla Walla. Organized on first Sunday in February, 1869. Foun-
dation members: J. G. Klemke and sons, T. G. C. Klemke; M. Wenke
and sons, Joh., Jac., and E. Wenke; A. Lieschke and sons, Joh., A.,.
Jac., and E. Lieschke; J. G. Klemke, jun., and sons, G. A. E,, and J.
Klemke; W. Fischer and sons, W., H. Fischer; P. Hennersdorf, F.
Schmidt, W. Luehrs. First church dedicated 1872, second dedicated
May, 1899, third October 26, 1924. First manse built in 1873, present
manse in 1904. Congregation was at first served by J. G.
Klemke, an ordained elder, 1869-72; then by the following pastors:
I. Egen, 1872-86; G. Simpfendoerfer, 1886-1933; J. T. P. Stolz, since
1925. L.D.S., 1875-84. Teacher: F. Zilius. School built 1883. 5.5.,,
1869-73, then since 1886. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1925. English ser-
vices introduced in 1925. General Synod of 1928 held at Walla Walla.
Statistics: Souls, 633; com.. 468.
Alma Park, Salem Church. (Formerly Wallendool). First Lutheran
settlers (M. Kotzur, J. H. Kotzur, J. Lieschke, A. Lieschke) held lay
reading services in their homes, but were members of Walla Walla.
Congregation founded by Pastor Simpfendoerfer in 1886. First church,
dedicated July 19, 1892, second one on March 15, 1925. First church
was presented to synod and re-erected in Urangeline in 1929. Pastors:
G. Simpfendoerfer, 1886-1933, assisted by E. Bemmann durmg the
years 1898-99; J. T. P. Stolz, since 1925. L.D.S., January 14, 1895-1900.
Teachers: G. Schwartzkopf, January 14, 1895-96; E, Geisler, July 2,
1896-1900. S.S. opened March 14, 1926. English services introduced
in 1926. L.Y.P.S. organized September 9, 1928. Statistics: Souls,,
203; com., 134.


QUEENSLAND DISTRICT
ALBERTON PARISH.
Organized in 1924, pastor resident in Alberton.
Alberton, St. Peter’s Church. First settlers came from Bethania
in 1868, among them W. Harch; F. Rachow, F. Billiau, W. Bahr, G.
Wolff. Miers, and others. First church built in 1869 (Elkana), second
in 1886. The congregation was served from Bethania till 1889, from
Eagleby till 1904, from Beenleigh till 1912. Since 1913 pastor resident
in Alberton. Manse built in 1920. Pastors: C. G. Hellrnuth, 1867-76;
M. Eberhard, 1879-89; J. Koehnke, 1889-1912; M. Reuther, 1913-14;
L. Doehler, 1915-23; E. Wiencke, 1924-36; F. Lienert, since 1936.
Congregation joined U.G.S.L.S. in 1889. L.D.S. for a number of
years. Teachers: G. Wolff, W. C. Thiedecke, J. Saenger, S.S.
L.Y.P.S. since 1932. Statistics: Souls, 182; com., 154.
Pimpana Island, Bethlehem Church. First settlers arrived in 1870
from Bethania. Among the first, C. F. Kleinschmidt, C. Huth, W.
Huth, J. Billiau, W. Brehmer, H. Mewing, E. Heck, Bressow, F.
Denkmann, G. Gross. First services conducted in Bro. J. Billiau’s
Tome. Church dedicated on December 10, 1882; the second church on
August 9, 1908. The congregation, one of the foundation congrega-
tions of the U.G.S.L.S. Served from Bethania till 1900, then
pastor resident till 1907, then from Beenleigh till 1924. Since then
from Alberton. Schism of 10 families (shooting tragedy) in 1893
led to founding of Steglitz congregation (E.L.S.Q.). Last convention
of U.G.S.L.S. prior to entering U.E.L.C.A. held April, 1921. Pastors:
C. G. Hellrnuth, 1870-76; M. Eberhard, 1879-83; A. Sueltmann,
1884-1907; J. Koehnke, 1907-24; E. Wiencke, 1924-36; F. Lienert,
since 1936. L.Y.P.S. since 1926. English services commenced in 1924.
S.S. Statistics: Souls, 275; com., 200.
Norwell, St. John’s Church. Organized in 1914. First services
■conducted in home of Bro. G. C. Sempf. Church dedicated on July
19, 1914. Pastors: M. G. Reuther, 1914; L. Doehler, 1915-23; E.
Wiencke, 1924-36; F. Lienert, since 1936. Served from Alberton since
inception. S.S. L.Y.P.S. since 1936. Statistics: Souls, 148; com., 100.
Preaching Places: Oxenford since 1926. Southport since 1927.
BEENLEIGH PARISH.
Pastor resident in Beenleigh.
Beenleigh, St. Peter’s Church. First settlers, German immigrants,
“arrived in 1863. Served by Pastor Haussmann. In 1866 he founded
the Bethesda mission station near Beenleigh. He also served German
settlers. A church was erected, services held till 1883, when mission
station was sold by creditors. Good Templars’ hall in Beenleigh was
purchased and equipped as church, dedicated in 1884. First manse
erected in 1884, in 1903 a new manse built. In 1925 third General
Synod held at Beenleigh. Pastors: J. G. Haussmann, 1867-1901; C.
E. Treuz, 1902-06; E. Hiller, since 1907. Statistics: Souls, 153;
com., 117. S.S.
Mt. Cotton, St. Paul’s Church. First settlers in 1872, among them
‘Stern, Sommer, Benfer, Holzapfel, Heinemann. These first attended
Pastor Haussmann’s services at Bethesda (Beenleigh), then in Bro.
Heinemann’s barn. Church dedicated in 1875. Pastors: J. G.


Haussmann, 1875-1901; C. E. Treuz, 1902-06; E. Hiller, since 1907.
S.S. Statistics: Souls, 128; com., 92.
Steglitz, St. John’s Church. In 1893 ten families seceded from
Pimpama Island; they were F. Kleinschmidt, sen., A., F. and H.
Kleinschmidt, W. Ludwig, H. Devantier, W. Lubach, W. Kropp, R.
Hinze, W. Koeppen. Church dedicated on July 29, 1894. Joined
parish in 1910. Pastors: J. G. Haussmann and I. Egen, 1894-96; I.
Egen, 1896-1910; E. Hiller, since 1910. Statistics: Souls, 109; com.,
77 SS.
’ (Gilston. First settlers about 1880. Served by Pastor Haussmann,
1880-1901; C. E. Treuz, 1902-06; E. Hiller, 1907-19. Congregation
disbanded. Church sold.)
BETHANIA PARISH.
*
Pastor resident in Bethania.
Bethania. Immigrants from Germany on the “Susannah
Godefroy” settled there in 1864, nucleus 11 families from Greiffenbach
in the Uckermark. First service under gum tree, then in Bro. J. G.
Schneider’s home and later in Bro. Holzheimer’s home. Congrega-
tion was organized and built its first church during 1864-67. Present
church built in 1872. Among the foundation members were the fol-
lowing: J. G. Schneider, Chr. Berndt, A. Holzheimer. Manse built in
1879, second manse in 1901, enlarged and renovated in 1915. A
foundation congregation of U.G.S.L.S. (1885). First pastor to
visit the congregation was Pastor Haussmann. In 1865 his visits were
no longer desired. Services and religious instructions were then con-
ducted by elders, official acts by Pastors Schirmeister and Heiner. In
1867 Pastor Hellmuth called. Pastors: C. G. Hellmuth, 1867-76; M.
Eberhard, 1879-83; A. Sueltmann, 1884-1900; O. Theile, 1901-23; R.
B. Reuther, 1923-36; A. R. Reuther, since 1936. L.D.S. established
before 1867. Teachers: Arnold, J. G. Gross, H. Fien. Reopened in
1903. Teacher, J. F. W. Schulz, 1903-09. English services introduced
in Pastor Theile’s time. S.S. Statistics: Souls', 176; com., 129.
Beenleigh. “To the Cross” Church. In 1881 the following seceded
from the Philadelphia (Eagleby) congregation: F. Stollznow, C.
Eichmann, J. Noethling, H. Schaefer, G. Wolff, E. Lorisch; these with
other Lutherans formed a congregation. First services were held in
Good Templars’ Hall at Beenleigh. Church dedicated on September
14, 1884; enlarged in 1912. The first services were conducted by Pastor
Hellmuth, then at Maryborough. Joined Bethania parish in 1884.
Pastors: C. G. Hellmuth, 1881-84; A. Sueltmann, 1884-1900; O. Theile,
1901-23; R. B. Reuther, 1923-36; A. R. Reuther, since 1936. S.S.
Statistics: Souls, 191; com., 141.
Eagleby, St. John’s Church (Philadelphia). First settlers attended
services at Bethania, then built church of their own. In 1876 present
church built. Severed its connection with Bethania in 1883 because
latter demanded the resignation of Pastor Eberhard, but rejoined in
1904. Pastors: C. G. Hellmuth, 1867-76; M. Eberhard, 1879-89; J.
Koehnke, 1889-1904; O. Theile, 1904-23; R. B. Reuther, 1923-36; A. R.
Reuther since 1936. L.D.S. for a while. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 151;
com., 120.
Logan Reserve, Bethel Church. The settlers originally members
of Bethania. Church dedicated on October 9, 1898. First pastor, A.
Mohr, previously L.D.S. teacher at Bethania, also gave instructions
once a week at Logan Reserve. After his departure in 1898 congre-
gation joined the Philadelphia parish and in 1923 the Bethania parish.


In 1936 the church demolished by storm, but re-erected same year.
Pastors: A. Mohr, 1898; J. Koehnke, 1898-1922; R. B. Reuther,. 1923-36;
A. R. Reuther, since 1936. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 88; com., 67.
Preaching Places: Canungra since 1933; Tambourine since 1933.
BRISBANE NORTH PARISH.
Pastor resident in North Brisbane.
North Brisbane, St. Andrew’s Church. First services were con-
ducted by Pastor Gerler (Zion’s Hill) in one of the English churches
in the year 1856. Regular services since end of 1857. Congregation
organized in 1858 by Pastor Schirmeister; a Government grant of li
acres of land on Wickham Terrace for church purposes was received.
First church built in 1861, the present church dedicated on April 30,
1882. The congregation a foundation congregation of E.L.S.Q. (1885).
In 1912 affiliated with State Church of Prussia, severed its connection
with E.L.S.Q. and became one of the foundation congregations of
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia; joined U.E.L.C.A. in
1927. The valuable property caused two serious dissensions, first in
the sixties, second in 1928. Both were settled by appeal
to court, each time in favor of the congregation. On each occasion
the congregation was for a while without its church. Pastors: C. F.
A. Schirmeister, 1858-87; E. O. Maier, 1888-1905; E. Hiller, 1905-06;
C. E. Treuz, 1906-16; J. Frank, 1916-20; R. Monz, since 1920. S.S.
L.Y.P.A. Statistics: Souls, 120; com., 70.
BRISBANE SOUTH PARISH.
Pastor resident in South Brisbane.
South Brisbane, Nazareth Church. The first services were con-
ducted by Pastor Schirmeister. In 1857 a grant of land for church
purposes was received from Government. Congregation organized in
1861 by Pastor Haussmann. Foundation members: G. Appel, F,
Wecker, F. Hornung, F. Finckner. In 1862 first church erected in
Cordelia St., enlarged in 1881. Present church in Hawthorne St.
dedicated on May 10, 1896. The old church removed from Cordelia
St. and re-erected alongside of present church as hall. Dedicated in
1896, also manse. New hall dedicated on November 15, 1936. General
Synod held at South Brisbane in 1937. Pastors: J, G. Haussmann,
1861-66; G. Hampe, 1866-68; C. F. A. Schirmeister, 1868-81; E. O.
Maier, 1882-86; I. Egen, 1886-91; E. Becker, 1891-1900; M. Doblies,
1902-04; J. H. Asbeck, 1904; E. Becker, 1905-08; W. Poland, 1909;
L. Krause, 1910-31; M. Loehe, since 1932. Congregation, a foundation
congregation of the E.L.S.Q., severed its connection in 1891, joined the
U.G.S.L.S. in 1897, left it in 1905, and rejoined it in 1909. S.S.
established in 1881. The present L.Y.P.S. was organized in 1932.
Statistics: Souls, 350; com., 275.
Eight Mile Plains, St. John’s. Lutheran services commenced by
Pastor Reuther (Bethania) in 1929. Congregation organized by Pastor
Loehe on April 13, 1935. Foundation members: C. Stiller and family
and others. Statistics: Souls, 37; com., 27.
BUNDABERG PARISH.
Pastor resident in Bundaberg.
Bundaberg, St. John’s Church. First Lutheran settlers from
Germany and Maryborough. Services commenced in 1877, first in


empty shop, then in Pioneer School. First church erected in Tantitha.
St. in 1882. Second church erected in George St. in 1891. Manse
built in 1892. In 1897 congregation left U.G.S.L.S. in loyalty to
its pastor, C. F. Schmidt, who had been excluded from that synod
owing to his objection to Pastor Becker, but rejoined in 1909, when
that resolution was rescinded. Pastors: C. G. Hellmuth, 1877-83;.
Joh. Koehnke, 1883-84; A. Giezendanner, 1884-86; C. F. Schmidt,
1889-1914; M. G. Reuther, since 1915. L.Y.P.S. and S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 547; com., 356.
Baffle Creek, St. Paul’s Church. About 1910 settlers arrived.from
Germany and the Logan. First services in home of Bro. A. Klein-
schmidt. First served by pastors of E.L.S.Q., from 1915 on by Paster
Reuther. Congregation organized on December 5, 1915. Foundation
members: A. Kleinschmidt, Silcock, Sbresni, Dangeleit, Willert,.
Wendtland. Church dedicated on July 17, 1921. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 87; com., 51.
Preaching Places: Gin Gin, served with Wallaville by Pastor
Reuther since 1915. Since 1937 Wallaville is served by Pastor Stolz
(Mundubbera). S.S. Statistics: Souls, 54; com., 32. Bucca, served
by Pastor Reuther since 1933. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 55; com., 29.
Winfield, served by Pastor Reuther since 1933. S.S. Statistics: Souls,.
36; com., 24.
DOUGLAS PARISH.
Pastor resident in Douglas.
Douglas, Jesus’ Church. Lutheran settlers arrived in 1875. First
services conducted in their primitive homes. At times attended ser-
vices at Meringandan (Pastor Langebecker). In 1877 Meringandan.
and settlers at Douglas called Pastor Hartwig. He accepted call and
lived on farm at Douglas. Foundation members: Briese, Ehrlich,.
Hannemann, Pukallus, Goebel, Hartwig, Krause, Lau, Schultz, Von-
hoff, Krantz, Raatz, Puschmann, Prisbe, Nitz, Polzin, Perina, Tegg.
Services at first held in home of Pastor Hartwig, then in state school..
Congregation organized in 1886. Church built in 1888. In 1897 a
dissension arose, with result that Hartwig withdrew. The congregation
then joined U.G.S.L.S., and was served by pastors of that synod.
Pastor Hartwig founded a second congregation at Douglas in 1901
and served it till 1921, when the two congregations combined. Pastors::
A. D. Hartwig, 1878-97, 1901-21; J. F. Holtermann, 1897-99; A. Mohr,
1899- M. Doolies, 1900-01; A. Mohr, 1901-02; J. Thun, 1902-09;
W. Poland, 1910-33; A. Simpfendoerfer, since 1933. L.Y.P.S. since:
1934. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 195; com., 125.
Bergen, Peace Church. Lutherans first belonged to either Douglas;
or Djuan congregation. First service conducted in 1900 by Pastor
Doblies in manse, then at Bergen. Church dedicated on March 16,
1901. Congregations since inception was affiliated wih U.G.S.L.S.
English services introduced in 1910. Pastors: M. Doblies,
1900- A. Mohr, 1901-02; J. Thun, 1902-09; W. Poland, 1910-33; A.,
Simpfendoerfer, since 1933. L.Y.P.S. since 1934. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 115; com., 85.
Djuan, Holy Trinity Church. Lutheran settlers arrived in 1892.,
They were served by Pastor Hartwig. Joined U.G.S.L.S. in
1901. Pastors: A. Mohr and M. Doblies, 1899-1902; J. Thun, 1902-09;.
W. Poland, 1910-33; A. Simpfendoerfer, since 1933. L.Y.P.S. since-
-1935. ' S.S. Statistics: Souls, 90; com., 68.
DOWNFALL CREEK, GULUGABA.
Downfall Creek, St. John’s Church. Between 1909 and 1911
Lutherans from South Australia settled in district. Services were


held in homes of members, since 1915 in the home of Bro. A. Hoff-
mann. hirst pastor to visit Downfall was A. Hartmann (Highfields)
Congregation organized and joined U.G.S.L.S. in 1911. Church,
IQQI T? n . land P A res ? T nfced by Bro. J. Stiller, dedicated on Novembers,
i 93 2 0 o^ : A - Hartmann, 1911-12; various pastors, 1912-20; G.
Heuer, 1920-38. At present served by Pastor Simpfendoerfer (Doug-
Jas). English services introduced in 1934. Since 1937 L.D.S.
(correspondence school supervised and religious instruction given).
Statistics: Souls, 55; com., 37.
DUGANDAN PARISH.
Pastor resident in Dugandan; parish organized in 1890.
Dugandan, St. Paul's Church. First settlers came from Walloon-
Marburg-Mmden District. First services held in home of Bro. W
Gruenow. Congregation organized December 26, 1888. Church dedi-
cated May 24, 1889. Foundation members: W. Gruenow, C. Wichmann,
C. Retschlag. Manse built in 1890. Joined the E.L.S.Q. Pastors*
C Berndt (Mmden), 1883-89; H. Wallatt. 1889-1904; C. Seybold,
1900-16; R Monz, 1916-19; A. Hiller, since 1919. L.Y.P.S. 7 S.S.
Statistics: Souls, 234; com., 184.
Hoya, St. Matthew's Church. First service conducted in home of
Bro. W .Gesler April 23, 1880, by Pastor Heiner (Ipswich). Church
dedicated on January 24, 1882; new church dedicated October 9, 1907.
Foundation members: W. Gesler, G. Wissemann. Foundation con-
gregation of U.G.S.B.S. Dissensions in 1890 caused it to leave
that synod and also to join Dugandan parish. Pastors: E. Heines
C. Prenzler, 1883-90; H. Wallatt, 1890-1904; C. Seybold,’
1905-16; R. Monz, 1916-19; A. Hiller, since 1919. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 50; com., 34.
Mt. Alford, St. John's Church. Settlers members of Dugandan
First service held on April 5, 1908, in School of Arts. Church dedi-
cated on April 28, 1909. S.S. commenced in 1908. Pastors: C Sevbold
1908-16; R. Monz, 1916-19; A. Hiller, since 1919. Statistics: Souls’
70; com., 44.
ENGELSBURG PARISH.
Pastor resident in Kalbar.
Engelsburg, St. John’s Church. Lutheran families, settling in the
hassifern District in the eighties, at first attended services at Hova.
Congregation organized in 1880 and erected a church, known ‘as
Domjahn's Church.” In 1885, in Pastor Prenzler’s time, a dispute
arose which resulted in two congregations. Prenzler's followers held
services in Bro. Iker’s home, and then built St. John's church, dedicated
on October 28, 1885; the other congregation retained Domjahn's church
and was served by Pastor Heiner (Ipswich). Strife in 1897 in Pastor
Prenzler's congregation produced a third congregation, which called
Pastor Hartwig, but continued to worship in St. John’s. Th. Frank,
pastor of Domjahn's congregation, brought about peace. On Ascension
Day, 1900, the three congregations united in service in St. John's
church. The other church was sold. In 1901 church rebuilt, enlarged,
and dedicated on Easter Monday. New church dedicated on Jmrn 8
1930. Pastors: E, Heiner, 1880-83; C. Prenzler, 1883-1900; E. Heiner’
1885-99; A. D. Hartwig, 1897-1900; T. Prank, 1900-07; R. Monz’
1907-20; F. Finger, since 1920. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 315; corn., 245.’
Milbung, St. Luke's Church. Settlers at first attended services at


Hoya. Church dedicated on October 23, 1885, enlarged in 1891* new
church dedicated on April 10, 1907. Manse built in 1902, destroyed
by fire in 1922; new one built at Kalbar. Pastors: E. Heiner, 1885-99;
T. Frank, 1900-07; R. Monz, 1907-20; F. Finger, since 1920. S.S.
opened in 1900. English services introduced in Pastor Monz’s time.
Statistics: Souls, 201; com., 143. L.Y.P.S.
Reserve. Lutheran settlers arrived here in the sixties. Church
dedicated on March 31, 1869, new one in 1918. Pastors: E. Heiner,
1869-99; T. Frank, 1900-07; R. Monz, 1907-20; F. Finger, since 1920.
S.S. Statistics: Souls, 77; com., 44.
Aratula. First settlers found distance to Engelsburg too great, and
organized a congregation, and built a church. They were served by
Pastor Monz. New church dedicated on May 6, 1914. Congregation
joined U.E.L.C.A. in 1921. Pastors: R. Monz, 1914-20; A. Hiller,
1920-23; F. Finger, since 1923. S.S. Statistics: Souls', 98; com., 75.
GOOMBUNGEE PARISH.
't
Pastor resident in Goombungee. Parish organized in 1890.
Goombungee, St. Matthew’s Church. Settlers from Toowoomba
arrived in the seventies and eighties. First services held in the home
of Bro. Wiecks by Pastor Guhr in 1888. Church dedicated on October
28, 1890. Manse erected in 1896. Congregation was affiliated with
E.L.S.Q., then in 1909 joined U.G.S.L.S. English introduced in
Pastor Fischer’s time. Pastors: W. Guhr, 1888-1908; G. Fischer,
1909-23; H. Proeve, 1924-28; H. Prenzler, since 1928. LY.P.S.
organised in 1934. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 97; com., 61.
Doctor’s Creek, St. Paul’s Church. Services were held as early as
1888. First services held in the open air, then in home of Bro. L.
Spiess. Congregation organized in 1902. Church dedicated November
29, 1903. Pastors: W. Guhr and J. Thun, to 1903; A. Hartmann,
1903-05; G. Fischer, 1906-23; H. Proeve, 1924-28; H. Prenzler, since
1928. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1932. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 99;
com* 64.
Boah Peak, Christ Church. Settlers came from Highfields and
remained members of that congregation. First pastor to serve
Lutherans there was Pastor Goessling (Highfields). Services were
held in the homes of brethren, R. Bruggemann and A. Schmidt.
Church dedicated on February 6, 1905. In 1912 a cyclone destroyed
the church; new church dedicated on April 28, 1912. Pastors: J. F.
Goessling, to 1903; A. Hartmann, 1903-05; G. Fischer, 1906-23; H.
Proeve, 1924-28; H. Prenzler, since 1928. L.Y.P.S. since 1933. S.S.
Statistics: Souls, 97; com., 65. . , , , _
Coalbank, St. John’s Church. First service conducted by Pastor
Fuhlbohm (Toowoomba) in home of Bro. R. Cooke. During War ser-
vices discontinued. Congregation organized on August 27, 1929.
Church dedicated on January 4, 1931. S.S. organized in 1929. Pastor
Prenzler served congregation since inception. Statistics: Souls, 105;
com., 58.
Preaching Places: Nut Grove. Services commenced in 1935.
Jandawae.
HATTON VALE PARISH.
Organized in 1890. Pastor resident in Hatton Vale.
Hatton Yale, St. Paul’s Church. First settlers arrived in 1870.
Services commenced in 1876 by Pastor Berndt (Minden), held in
homes of members. Church erected in 1881, enlarged in 1895, rebuilt


in 1930. Manse built in 1890. Pastors: Chr. Berndt, 3870-89; H.
Wallatt, 1889-90; M. Millatt, 1891-1923; R. Rohde, since 1924. Eng-
lish services introduced in 1924. Joined E.L.S.Q. in 1890. L.Y.P.S.
organized in 1931. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 200; com., 134.
Plainland, St. John’s Church. In 1878 twelve German families
from West Prussia and Brandenburg arrived. In 1880 first service
held in home of Bro. Kachel by Pastor Goessling (Kirchheim). First
church built in 1884, second church dedicated in 1897. Pastors: J. F.
Goessling, 1880-1900; M. Doblies, 1900-01; S. Hoerlein, 1902-08; H.
Wallatt, 1908-23; R. Rohde, since 1924. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 177;
com., 139.
Hillside, St. John’s Church. In 1889 eight families seceded from
the Minden congregation. These remained faithful to their pastor,
Chr. Berndt, who had to relinquish his Hatton Vale parish upon joining
the Congregational Church. Services were conducted in the home of
Bro. G. Rose. Church dedicated on December 10, 1891. After the
retirement of Pastor Berndt the congregation rejoined the parish in
1893. The church was enlarged and a belfry erected in 1913. Pastors:
Chr. Berndt, 1889-92; M. Millatt, 1893-1923; R. Rohde, since 1924.
L.Y.P.S. organized in 1936. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 127; com., 98.
Lockrose. Lutheran settlers arrived in first decade of present
century. These were at first members of Hatton Vale. Church dedi-
cated on November 10, 1909. Pastors: M. Millatt, 1909-23; R. Rohde,
since 1924. Statistics: Souls, 127; com., 98. S.S.
Preaching Place: Thornton, commenced 1932.
HIGHFIELDS PARISH.
Pastor resident in Highfields.
High fields, Christ Church. In 1870 German families settled around
Highfields. First services were held chiefly in home of Bro. A. Dune-
mann. .Pastor Burghardt (Toowoomba) and Hartwig (Douglas) served
these settlers. Congregation organized in 1876. Church built in 1879,
demolished in 1907, new one dedicated on July 14, 1907, renovated in
1925. Manse erected in 1883. In 1899 dissension arose, with the
result that another congregation was formed and another church.
Trinity Church, erected. Christ congregation joined the U.G.S.L.S.
in 1895, left it in 1898, when Pastor Backen (E.L.S.A.) took
charge of it, but rejoined it in 1900. Holy Trinity congregation also
became member of ‘U.G.S.L.S., and called Pastor Burghardt.
After his death in 1917 Trinity congregation united with Christ
congregation. Pastors: W. Burghardt and A. D. Hartwig, 1870-83;
W. Burghardt, 1883-95; C. Claussen, 1895-97; G. Backen, 3898-99; J. F.
Goessling, 1900-05; A. Hartmann, 1905-12; A. R. Reuther, 1913-36;
G. Venz, since 1936. (Pastor Burghardt served Trinity congregation,
1900-17.) English services were introduced at the* beginning of
Pastor Reuther’s term. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1934. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 218; com., 160.
Glencoe, Bethlehem Church. Settled by Lutherans in the late
seventies. First services held in home of Bro. Stanke by Pastor Hart-
wig, who also organized the congregation. Church built in 1880; new
church erected in 1908. Joined the U.G.S.L.S. in 1905. Pastors:
A. D. Hartwig, 1880-83; W. Burghardt, 1883-90; W. Guhr, 1890-1905;
A. Hartmann, 1905-12; A. R. Reuther, 1913-36; G. Venz, since 1936.
English services introduced in 1915. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 142;
com., 98.
Meringandan. Congregation founded by Pastor Langebecker
(Toowoomba) in 1870. A small church was built; replaced by a larger


one in 1896. The congregation appears to have been organized very
loosely, different pastors, even a Methodist serving it. Only in 1918
was it duly organized. The congregation, however, did not affiliate
with synod. Pastors: T. Langebecker, 1870-73; W. Burghardt, 1874-
1889; W. Guhr, 1889-1915; A. K. Reuther, 1916-36; G. Venz, since 1936.
Statistics: Souls, 75; com., 55.
Crows Nest, St. Luke’s Church. Services commenced by Pastor
Reuther in October, 1925 in home of Bro. F. Voll. Congregation
organized on December 22, 1925. Church dedicated on October 24,
1926. Joined synod in 1927. Church enlarged 1935. S.S. organized
in 1926. Pastors: A. R. Reuther, 1925-36; G. Venz, since 1936.
Statistics: Souls, 139; com., 87.
IPSWICH PARISH.
Pastor resident in Ipswich, organized in 1929.
Ipswich, St. John’s Church. Congregation organized in 1860. First
services conducted in Church of England. Sunday school, brick
church, built on block granted by Government; dedicated on June 26,
1864. Among first members: Dr. E. von Lossberg, G. R. Weise, J.
Fleischmann, G. Presser, J. J. Schorbach. The second pastor was E.
Heiner, who, at the request of Dr. Lossberg, had been sent out by
the Margurg Consistory, Germany. He had a difficult post. The lay-
preaching element among the German settlers caused him grave
trouble. When he joined the E.L.S.Q. his congregation did not
approve and joined the U.G.S.L.S. First manse erected in 1887,
the second in 1929. Pastors: C. F. A. Schirmeister (Brisbane), till
1866; E. Heiner, 1866-85; J. Koehnke, 1886-89; J. F. Holtermann,
1890-97; W. Fuhlbohm, 1901-05; H. Wallatt, 1905-08; W. Poland, 1909;
I. Egen (Nundah), 1910-23; L. Doehler (Lowood), 1923-29; G. Dohler,
since 1929. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1929. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 204;
com., 140. Brotherhood Society.
Stone Quarry, Bethlehem Church. First services conducted in 1870
by JPastor Heiner (Ipswich) in the home of Mrs. George Kelly. First
church dedicated April 19, 1871, second church on April 4, 1898. First
trustees: G. R. Weise, J. Larther, J. Guth. Pastors as Ipswich.
Statistics 1 : Souls, 40; com., 34. S.S.
Rosevale, Laurentius’ Church. A foundation congregation of the
U.G.S.L.S. Severed its connection in 1905, in 1909 joined
E.L.S.Q. Church dedicated October 5, 1881. In 1928 church destroyed
by fire; new church built on ground leased from Bro. W. Bochert,
dedicated on May 12, 1929. First trustees: P. Dreier, J. Humberdross,
K. Spann, F. Schoenfisch. Pastors: J. F. Goessling, 1881-1900; M.
Doblies, 1900-01; W. Fuhlbohm, 1901-04; M. Doblies, 1905-26; F.
Finger and R. Rohde, 1926-29; G. Dohler, since 1929. S.S. Statistics:
Souls, 92; com., 61.
Rosewood, St. Matthew’s Church. Services commenced in 1928.
Pastor Proeve (H.) conducted the first service in Bro. A. Desjardin’s
home on July 15, 1928. Since 1928 Rosewood entrusted to Pastor
Dohler (Ipswich). Congregation organized on December 9, 1929.
Foundation members: A. Desjardin, F. Ruthenberg, C. Kamp, W.
Baker, W. Schiefelbein, Mrs. E. Maroske. Church dedicated on
August 17, 1930. S.S. Statistics': Souls, 46; com., 28.
KINGAROY PARISH.
Pastor resident in Kingaroy. Organized in 1924.
Kingaroy, Bethany Church. Before 1900 Danish Lutherans settled
in the Kingaroy district, erected a church (Edenvale), and were served


by Danish pastors. Early in century German Lutherans came. They
were first served by Pastor Goessling, living there in retirement
(1905-08). After departure of Goessling pastors of the
U.G.S.L.S. visited the district in turn. Work was later entrusted to
Pastor Wittig (1911), but did not prosper, and for a time was discon-
tinued. When Albert Reuther was stationed in the Wondai-Kingaroy
district as' itinerant pastor (1915) a congregation was formed (Octo-
ber 17, 1915). The services were held first in the Danish church,
then in home of Bro. Liesegang, then again in the Danish church.
Foundation members: J. Liesegang, J. Radunz, W. Schmidt, F. Schil-
ling, F. Carl, and others. Pastor Prenzler first resident pastor. Int
1924 Danish congregation amalgamated with new congregation.
Manse purchased in 1928. New church in Kingaroy township dedi-
cated on November 29, 1936. Pastors: A. E. Reuther (Murgon),
1915-20; T. Fuhlbohm (Toowoomba), 1920; H. Prenzler, 1923-28; H,
Minke, 1928-32; H. Schmidt, since 1932. S.S. organized in 1923.
L.Y.P.S. in 1931. Statistics: Souls, 169; com., 112.
Taabinga, St. Paul’s Church. First Lutherans arrived in 1908.
Services were conducted by Pastor Doblies (Rosevale) till 1911, then
by pastors of the E.L.S.Q., then by pastors of the U.G.S.L.S.
Pastor Wittig served the congregation, 1913-15; Pastor E. Reuther,
1915-20; then pastors of Kingaroy. Congregation was organized on
August 4, 1917. Foundation members: C. Fleischfresser, W. Steffens,
O. Fleischfresser, P. Spann, H. Fleischfresser, F. Tegge, A. Desjardin.
H. C. C. Spann. Services were conducted in homes of Bro. A. Des-
jardin, 1909-17; C. Fleischfresser, 1917-21. Church dedicated on
August 21, 1921. English services introduced in 1915. L.W.P.S.
organised in 1931. ' S.S. Statistics: Souls, 128; com., 74.
Home Creek, Bethlehem Congregation. Since 1908 services were
conducted by pastors of the U.G.S.L.S., but after some years
discontinued. Pastor Prenzel took them up again. Congregation
organized on March 2, 1925. Foundation members: A. F. Sakrzewski.
W. Richters, M. P. Nielsen, J. W. Horobin, H. Rackemann, H. C
Reinke, C. E. Seiler, E. Rackemann, A. A. Stuemer, J. Mickan, G.
Rackemann. Services held in homes of Bro. Rackemann (1923-27)
and Bro. J. W. Horobin (since 1927). Congregation joined synod in
1934, Pastors: H. Prenzler, 1925-28; H. Minke, 1928-32; H. Schmidt,
since 1932. S.S. since 1925. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1930. Statistics:
Souls, 75; com., 42.
Yarraman (Coburg congregation). Services commenced in 1931
by Pastor Prenzler. Organized in 1936. Joined synod in 1936.
Pastors: H. Prenzler, 1931; H. Schmidt, since 1932. Statistics:
Souls, 59: com.. 31. SS,
Preaching Place: Bell, services commenced in 1934.
LOWOOD PARISH.
Pastor resident in Lowood. Organized in 1923.
Lowood, Bethel Church. First German settlers arrived in 1875.
Served by Pastor Heiner (Ipswich), soon after small church erected,
replaced by a larger one in 1896, present church dedicated on August
2U 1910. rvioved on wheels into township. 1938. First elders: Bandidt,
Weise, Marbach. Congregation foundation member of E.L.S.Q.,
severed its connection in 1902 and joined the U.G.S.L.S. Manse pur-
chased in 1923. Pastors: E. Heiner, from inception till 1896; A. D.
Hartwig (Douglas), 1896-1902; S. Hoerlein (Plainland), 1902-06; H.


Wallatt (Plainland), 1906-23; L. Doehler, since 1923. S.S. Statistics.
Souls, 224; com., 137. ,
Kirchheim, St. Paul’s Church. German immigrants settled on
edge of Rosewood scrub between 1865-73. Services' were conducted
in homes of members by Pastor Heiner. Church erected in 1874,
enlarged in 1889, destroyed by cyclone in 1924, new one dedicated
on April 13, 1924. Foundation congregation of U.G.S.L.S., seceded
in 1886 to E.L.S.Q., but rejoined in 1915. Pastors: E. Heiner, till
1873; C. Gaustad, 1873-79; J. F. Goessling, 1879-96; J. Frank,
1888-1913; J. Koch, 1914-15; L. Doehler, since 1915. S.S. organised in
1932. Statistics: Souls, 33; com., 21. , , _ ,
Mt. Beppo. German settlers in Mt. Beppo first served by Pastor
Heiner Church built in 1888, enlarged in 1930. Pastors: E. Heiner,
1888-95; I. Egen (Nundah), 1895-97; A. D. Hartwig (Douglas), 1897-
1921; L. Doehler, since 1923. S.S. organized in 1927. Statistics:
Souls, 103; com., 60. . .
Preaching Places: Murrumbah, services commenced in 193/;
Kipper Creek, services commenced in 1937.
MACKAY PARISH.
Pastor resident in Mackay. Organized in 1883.
Mackay, St. Peter-Paul Church. First German settlers in 1863.
More settled in 1871-73. These mostly from West Prussia. In 1.871
congregation organized by Pastor Gaustad. He also served the
Danish settlers. Later Pastor Hansen served the Danish congrega-
tion and Pastor Haussmann, jun., the German. These two congrega-
tions built church in Peel Street, Mackay, dedicated by Pastor
Haussmann probably in 1879. In 1898 old church destroyed by
cyclone, new one dedicated on June 18, 1898. This one almost destroyed
by cyclone in 1918, but re-erected. Both congregations were foundation
congregations of the U.G.S.L.S. The Danish congregation later
left synod. Manse built in 1884. Pastors: C. Gaustad, D. Hansen and
John Haussmann, 1871-83; G. Heuer, 1883-88; D. Hansen, M. Doblies
and C. G. Hellmuth, 1881-91; L. Krause, 1891-1909; W. Schmetzer,
1911-19; H. Proeve, 1920-24; M. Loehe, 1925-32; H. Minke, 1932-35;
J. M. Larsen, since 1935. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1929. S.S. Statistics 1 :
Souls, 191; com., 104. . , . IQOK w
Biloela, Trinity Congregation. Services commenced in 1925 by
Pastor Loehe (Mackay). Congregation organized August 2, 1936.
Joined synod in 1937. Pastors: M. Loehe, 1925-32; H. Mmke, 1932-
35; J. M. Larsen, since 1935, assisted by J. G. Stolz since 1938.
Statistics: Souls, 34; com., 18.
Preaching Places: Finch Hatton, Mt. Martin, Wagoora, Targmme.
i
MARYBOROUGH PARISH.
Pastor resident in Maryborough. Organized in 1867.
Maryborough, St. Matthew’s Church. First German settlers
arrived before 1860. First pastor to visit Maryborough was J. G.
Haussmann in 1864, found many aborigines and Germans. In 1867
Pastor Copas stationed at Maryborough. Services were mainly con-
ducted in home of Bro. G. Thurecht. Congregation organized in
1867 Church (St. John’s) dedicated in 1868. Dissension in con-


gregation caused Copas to leave Maryborough in 1872. In 1877 he
returned to Maryborough, conducted services in his residence, and
organized congregation. This congregation erected St. Matthew’s
Church, dedicated on February 10, 1878. St. Matthew’s enlarged in
1884. New manse built in 1908. In 1908, during Pastor Frank’s
term, the two congregations amalgamated. St. John’s Church was
transferred on to property of St. Matthew’s and is there used as a
hall and school. Congregation joined the E.L.S.Q. in 1907, but
severed its connection in 1912 and became foundation member of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia. In 1923 it joined the
Queensland district of the U.E.L.C.A. Pastors of St. John’s: F,
Copas, 1867-72; C. G. Hellmuth, 1876-85; C. F. Schmidt, 1885-1908.
Pastors of St. Matthew’s 1 ; F. Copas, 1877-1906; T. Frank, 1907-23;
G. Fischer, since 1923. English services were introduced in Pastor
Frank’s time. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1931. S.S. Statistics; Souls,
325; com., 235.
)
MUNDUBBERA HOME MISSION FIELD.
Organized in 1936, pastor resident in Mundubbera.
Mundubbera, St. John’s Church. Lutheran settlers came from
Germany in the years 1907-10 under “Apostle” H. C. Niemeyer of
the Apostolic Church. Were served by Pastor Frank (Maryborough).
Congregation of Mundowran organized August 18, 1912. Services
were held in home of Bro. F. Zumbansen. Joined the E.L.S.Q. in
1912, seceded immediately and joined the Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australasia. Church dedicated January 27, 1915. In 1929
church moved from Mundowran to Mundubbera, rededicated July 13.
1930. Pastors: *T. Frank, 1912-16; different pastors', 1916-23; H.
Prenzler, 1923-28; H. Schmidt, 1928-32; A. Simpfendoerfer, 1932-33;
G. Venz, 1934-36; J. G. Stolz, since 1936. S.S. since 1929. L.Y.P.S.
organized in 1934. Statistics: Souls, 141; com., 82.
Monto, St. Paul’s Church. First service November 16, 1930, con-
ducted by Pastor Schmidt (Nambour). Congregation organized
November 22, 1931. Joined synod in 1932. Church dedicated Sep-
tember 29, 1935. Pastors: H. Schmidt, 1930-32; A. Simpfendoerfer,
1932-33; G. Venz, 1934-36; J. G. Stolz, since 1936. S.S. organized in
1936. Statistics: Souls, 106; com., 51.
Preaching Places: Wallaville, 1936; Goodnight Scrub; Callide,
1937; Cordalba, 1936; Gayndah, 1936; Langley, 1938.
MURGON PARISH.
Pastor resident in Murgon. Organized in 1921.
Murgon, St. Matthew’s Church. Lutheran settlers arrived in 1908.
First service held in 1910 by Pastor Frank. Later Pastor Wittig
occasionally conducted services. In May, 1915, Pastor Reuther
(Albert) commenced regular services. These were held in homes of
members. Congregation organized on November 29, 1915. Founda-
tion members: J. Polzin, E. Hopf, W. C. Rose, W, F. Gesler, A. C.
Zerner, A. Sippel, A. and W. Beitzel, G. and H. Goschnick, G. Rose.
Joined the U.G.S.L.S. in 1920. Church dedicated on February 1,
1920. Manse purchased in 1921. New manse erected in 1929.
Present church dedicated on March 29, 1936. Pastor: A. E. Reuther,


since inception. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1929. S.S. At Murgoii in
September, 1929, at Sunday School Teachers’ Convention the Lutheran
Young People’s Association of the Queensland District, U.E.L.C.A..
was organized. S.S. Statistics: Soms, 290; com., 204.
' Mondure, St. John’s Church. First service held in 1908 in Bro.
H. Marquardt’s home, then in Union Church at Chelmsford. In
October, 1911, Pastor Wit tig entrusted with this field. Congregation
■organized in 1911. Foundation members: C. Zillmann, H. Marquardt,
J. Adler, F. W. Bielke, H. C. Schulz. A. G. Radke, C. Schloss, sen.
and jun.. F. Schloss, W. F. Muller, J. Schorback, C. Rosenblatt, R.
Guse, W. Beduhn, E. Devantier, W., A., H. Ferd. and Frank Wessling,
Mrs. Bond. Church dedicated on May 19, 1912. In 1914 congregation
joined U.G.S.L.S. Church enlarged in 1927. Pastors: M. Wittig,
1911-15; A. E. Reuther, since 1915, L.Y.P.S. organized in 1929. S.S.
Statistics: Souls, 149; com., 100.
Cloyna, St. Luke’s Church. First service conducted by Pastor
Frank (Maryborough) in 1910 in home of Bro. G. Dowse. Congrega-
tion organized on July 30, 1911. Foundation members: C. F. Eisen-
menger, E. Holzwart, G. Beitzel, F. G. Rewald, W. G. and H. C.
Eisenmenger, W. Kuhn, W. Bick. W. Venz. Church dedicated on
June 22, 1911, enlarged in 1933. Joined U.G.S.L.S. in 1920.
Pastors: T. Frank, 1911-13; M. Wittig, 1913-15; A. E. Reuther, since
1915. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1929. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 213; com.,
144.
Goomeri, St. Mark’s. First service conducted by Pastor Reuther
in Goomeri on September 25. 1923. in home of Bro. W. Christiansen.
Congregation organized on November 18, 1928. Foundation mem-
bers: F. Schuler, A. Pieper, W. Christiansen, F. Schelbach, R. Radke.
Joined synod in 1932. Pastor Reuther served the congregation since
inception. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 26; com., 19.
Preaching Places: Windera and Wondai (1938).
NAM HOUR HOME MISSION FIELD.
Organized in 1928. Pastor resident in Nambour.
Nambour, St. Luke’s Church. First service conducted in the dis-
trict on May 9, 1916, in home of Bro. H. C. Clem at North Arm by
Pastor Doehler (Alberton). These services were continued and in
time other centres were added. First service conducted in Nambour
on September 27, 1925, by Pastor Wiencke. Congregation organized
on October 28, 1928. Church dedicated on November 24, 1929.
Pastors: H. Schmidt. 1928-32; A. Simpfendoerfer, 1932-33; G. Venz,
1934-36; H. Minke, 1936-38; A. Schubert, since 1938. L.Y.P.S.
organized in 1934. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 93; com., 61.
Witta, formerly Teutoburg. Pastor Becker (South Brisbane)
organized congregation in 1892. Bro. C. Thiedecke gathered settlers
for services on Sundays and also organized school. Dissension over
title to church ground resulted in second congregation being formed.
This one was served by Pastor Egen (Nundah) from 1895-1902, when
the two congregations united. First church erected in 1893, new
one dedicated January 11, 1911, reconditioned church dedicated
February 28, 1926. Different pastors served congregation till 1902,
then pastors: F. O. Theile, 1902-04; P. B. Hoefner, 1904-10; L. Krause,
1910-25; O. Adler, 1925-27; H. Schmidt, 1928-32; A. Simpfendoerfer,
1932-33; G. Venz, 1934-36; H. Minke. 1936-38. In 1927 congregation


S d S e Vr°es?nTior h T e^ i& h io ? L - Y - RS - organized in 1932.
. J , ]( pastor A. Schubert. Statistics: Souls, 55: com 45
ber of vear? 6 nmstll a o tor Eg t", (Nu ? dah) served settlers for num-
bed on week-day In 1925 Pastor Wiencke again
Li 1927 added i S T regu,arly b Y different pastors.
in iyzi added to Nambour home mission field. CorarreraHm,
organized in 1929, joined synod in 1930. Pastors: H. Schmidt 1928-
f : Minfr^ e fi n t erfer ’ Adler ’ 19; «- 34 ; G- Venz 1934 36;
H. Mmke, 1936-,,8; now A. Schubert. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 62; com.,
Paul ; s Ch“ rch - Services were conducted by
1 a.dor iheile in homes of brethren, A. Radke and H. Stegemann at
of b Bro S C 3' Schmldt^r 06 “ B ®f uidesert 011 May 6, in home
oi mo. l Schmidt. Congregation organized on August 5 1928
C Schmidt m rT b Ta m Rad 1 ke ’ T ' Lud wig, W. H. Ludwigi
hour fidd in I C 936 reh p de ? lCate n °£, N .? vember 5 ’ 1933 - Added to Nam-
oour field m 1936. Pastors: O. Theile, till 1923; R. B. Reuther 1923-
f> H Schmidt, 1929-32; M. Loehe, 1932-36; H Minke 1936 38
PA P.S. organized in 1934. Statistics: Souls. 82; com 62
1931 mg P ' aCeS: Be,li Park ’ since 1928; Yandina Creek, since
NUNDAH PARISH.
Organized in 1925. Pastor resident in Nundah.
1838 mil«t,n ( =f d t ;S *' l>ai 'ur Church. Formerly German Station. In
1838 mission station established on Zion’s Hill. The church on the
station-probabiy first church in Queensland-was frL 1842 on also
Pastor CWbf'mTh h6 \ G el™ an Settlers - U P°« tb e advice of
iastoi Goethe (Melbourne) the congregation joined Evangelical
Lutheran Synod of \ictoria in 1856. Dissension in the congregation
imniigrants Sf ma , °l 1 C w dltl ° ns l n congregation caused German
of y tT' Wuerttemberg, to found the congregation
n Station, foundation members: G. Fischer M Kuebler
D Mildermuth. J. Deuble. C. Goeldner, Schulz, Thiele, Grauf’
Blinzinger, and others: Church built in 1866, new church in 1877
neS wiS 1933 ‘ i Congregation severed its com
lection with E.E.S.Q. m 1894, joined U.G.S.L.S. in 1900. Pastors-
fchmneister, till 1866; F. Copas, 1866-67; W. Burghardt.'
fsßv'a?’ w S’ Hartwj#, 1873-77; E. O. Maier, 1877-86; I Egan
J: 9 7W. burghardt, 1894-99; P. B. Hoefner, 1901-23; O. Adler,’
since 1920. English services were introduced in 1923, soon after
fouls, WofLm"^ 6, ' YJ ’ S ' organi zed in 1929. S.S. Statistics:
, Zi ‘ i T r ul ' Sf ' John's Church. Foundation date unknown. First
church built probably in 1865. About ten years later new church
sVoh a T d p n 1 v 32 l First members: Fester, Zillmann, W. Werda,
C. Stabe, C. 1 rackart, C. Beckmann, O. Mueller. C. Hoehns, W.
Duckwitz, C. Kolberg, C. Otto, H. Carsberg, and others. Led by Mr.
brandenberg, who conducted a L.D.S. in Zillmere, a party seceded
and formed another congregation, but reunited in 1877 under Pastor
Maier, Pastors: C. F. A Schirmeister, till 1866; F. Copas, 1866-67;
W. Burghardt, 1867-73; A. D Hartwig, 1873-77; E. O. Maier, 1877-
r 188fi ‘ 9 1 4 „ : 0f' Burghardt, 1894-99; P. B. Hoefner. 1901-23;
9‘ V' A , ( , er ’ smc ? , 1925 - L - Y - P - s - organized in 1929. S.S. Statistics:
ooujs, 91; com., iS.


Nundah St. Paul’s Church. Founded as a result of secession:
from German Station and Zilhnere in 1894 F °™dation
C Srhulz W. Braun, C. Kunde, C. Murr, F. Staib. G. hiscnie, J*
Fischle, R. Buse, B. Buse. H. Buse, E. Wruck, and ot^er
dedicated on May 12, 1895, renovated in 1930. Manse built m 1920,
English services introduced m 1925. Pastors: I. Egen, 1894- ,
O H. Adler, since 1925. L.Y.P.S. organized in 1929. S.b. Statistics.
Souls, 94; com.,, 72.
Preaching Place: Mt. Samson (19oo).
PROSTON HOME MISSION FIELD.
- V V
Organized in 1936. Pastor resident in Proston.
Proston, Redeemer Congregation. Services commenced in A 92&
u v poet or Prenzler. Congregation organized in 1936. Joined synod
in ,ame vear Services are conducted in the Methodist church.
Pastors! H. Prenzler, 1925-28; H Minke, 192 f A. E.
1930-32; H. Schmidt, 1932-36; A. Schubert, since 1936. S.S. organized
in 1925. Statistics: Souls, 110; com., 49. Pastor
Hivesville. First service conducted March 20. 1921, by 1 astor
Reuther (Murgon) in Kinleymore haih Pastors: A. E.Reuther, 192 -
. u Prenzler, 1925-28; H. Minke, 1928-29; A. E. Reutner, IJ3U
09! H* Schmidt 1932-36; A. Schubert, since 1936. Statistics: Souls,
s|; * The above two congregations served by Murgon,
11 Gympie > Holy Trinity Congregation. Field explored by Pastor
Reuther (Murgon) in 1935. First service Congregational church
on November 24, 1935. Congregation organized July 12, 193b. Jomea
synod in 1937. Congregation at present served by Pastors Schub ,r
and A. E. Reuther. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 51; com., 81.
TOOWOOMBA (HUME STREET) PARISH.
Pastor resident in Toowoomba. Organized in 1920.
Toowoomba, Hume Street, Trinity Church Organized on Sep-
tember 27, 1887, in Shire hall, Middle Ridge, Toowoomba. Founda-
tion members had been members of the Independent German Church
in° Perth Street; they had been forced out of church by the trustees.
Church dedicated on November 6, 1887. Manse erected in 1888.
Erection of belfry in 1913 caused serious dissensions in congregation,
with result that large number of members seceded. Congregation
since ?ts inception affiliated with U.G.S.L.S. Pastors: J. Koehnke,
IRR7-88- C Heuer. 1888-1920; T. J. Fuhlbohm, 1920-29; H. Rogge,
since 1930. English’ services introduced soon after induction of Pastor
Fuhlbohm. S.S. Statistics: Souls, 100; com., 78.
Wilsonton, St. John’s Church. In 1889 the Independent German
Church in Perth Street. Toowoomba, was offered for sale. Some of
former members together with some members Gf Philhp Street con-
gregation formed the Wilsonton congregation and bought the build-
ing and re-erected it at Wilsonton dedicated onNovember 24, 1889.
■Joined the U.G.S.LS. in 1901. Pastors: G. 1889-1920 J
Fuhlbohm, 1920-29; H. Rogge, since 1930. S.S. L.Y.P.S. organized in
t93 kulph at Pastor Ilartmann (Doctor’s Creek) was the first pastor to
serve this district, held services in the home of Bro. Beckmann.


mr h plltors : ed A. o,l HL r tmann WOK- 91 r V°Z d U ' G ' S ' L - S - to
Reuther, 1913-14; T. Fuhlboh’m 19142 V H Fl V her ' 19 ,°6-13; M.
•S.S. Statistics: Souls, 128; com 86 ’ R ° gge ’ slnce 1930 ‘
:SSi wrb* s r “■» *»
s.:;#£rSSS'«
organized m 3935. S.S. Statistics: Soulff 160; com. 103.
TOOWOOMBA (PHILLIP STREET) PARISH.
Organized in 1863. Pastor resident in Toowoomba,
Toowoomba, St Paul’s Church. ~The German settlers around
vr s ' h ‘™« e , ES
04 arm ai in 1857. He also procured two acres of land in
i i IP i cc 0 Q 0t a f a gTant rom the Government. First church erected
Present h ’ Sch ° o1 ’ anci mans «-
tion member FT 90 * lB a‘a manse erecte <J in 1897. Founda-
LuthCTam b A^sO^asia^u^rejoined^ Q V^n^l92o^
KaeteW ““ fi ."« <" 3
in 1895. S.S. Brotherhood Society! °laty4lcs:
«u “S, wL P c«me„?e"d't I927™'SngSSo“orsanu^l'l
KKJS3; ■?. *455? F
11, 1928. joined synod fa 1929. Pastor Gu"ctonrt 1 “£ d seTOd7o"
gregation since inception. Statistics: Souls, 26; com., 18 d
Preaching Place: Blanchview.
B..™rs c .fa i, p X"Gir„. c r„. of Home B » rf;




ADDENDA B
Pastors of the Present U.E.L.C.A
and of Bodies Incorporated
in the U.E.L.C.A.




PASTORS IN OFFICE
South Australia.
Albrecht, hriedrich Wilhelm. Born October 15, 1894, at Kroczvn
mear Karmen, East Poland. Christian School, HermanAsbmt 1914.’
, > , udles interrupted by War. Hermannsburg mission seminary’ 1919-
- , mmngehstic work m Keide 1924 Wartburg Seminary, Dubuque,
U.fe.A., 1925. Landed m Sydney October 18, 1925. Ordained in
J U ETe°d^’p°Mat A f tral T’ w a £ Ch 14 i 1926 > b y Pastors: Jobs. J. Stolz,
J. Riedel, F. Matschoss, 1. Hebart, R. Held, Missionary L. Wagner
In Hermannsburg since April 14, 1926. s
Auricht, J. E. Born November 7, 1896, at Sedan S 4
mmanuel College, Point Pass, 1914-17; St. Peter’s, Adelaide,’ 1918;
Wartburg Seminary Dubuque, lowa, U.S.A., 1919-22. Ordained Mt!
Gambiei (also installed) April 8, 1923, by pastors': C. F. Braun, J.
Doehler. Mt. Gambler, 1923-25. Assistant teacher, Immanuel Col-
lege, Rorth Adelaide (also attended Adelaide and Melbourne Uni-
versity), gained B.A. and M.A. degrees, 1926-29. Teacher
at Immanuel College since April, 1929.
Breier, P P. Born January 1, 1880, at Altenstadt, Illertissen,
Germany, preparatory School, Gymnasium, Kempten. Neuen-
Tooi®
1901 Ordained Point Pass (Immanuel) June 23, 1901, by pastors:
a A + Ur i Ch is’ Loehe, L ‘ Kuss ’ A ‘ Sabel - J- Stolz, Lehner.
Assisted Pastor Leidig in college and parish till April, 1902. In
Stonefield since Exaudi, 1902. Secretary of S.A. District Synod since
1933. Book Steward of Immanuel Synod Book Depot for several
years.
Doehler, Johannes G. C. Born July 23, 1894, at Yorketown, S.A.
Immanuel College, and Point Pass, 1910-14; Neuendettelsau mission
seminary 1914-15; studies interrupted by being interned in Germany
during War. Wartburg Seminary, Dubuque, lowa, U.S.A., 1919-20.
Ordained first Sunday in Advent, 1920, in Yorketown, by pastors:
J. P. Loehe A. Doehler, Koschade, Hebart. Assisted "in Yorketown
parish and home missionary, 1920-22. Murray Bridge since 1922.
secretary of the U.E.L.C.A. since 1925, Vice-President of S.A Dis-
-1928 Syn ° d Smce 1934, Chairman Lutheran Book Depot Board since
Fehlberg. A. Born January 15, 1880, in Carwitz, Pommern,
Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1906. Ordained
Natimuk, Vic., February 23, 1907, by _ pastors: Kaibel, Koschade,
J. I. Loehe. Jepant, \ic., 1907-11; Bismarck, Tasmania 1911-15-
.^ onca f te ri Vi c- 1915-20; Eudunda, S.A., 1920-24; Berri, S.A., 1
32; Edithburgh, S.A., since 1932.
Fehlberg G. E. S. G. Born October 13, 1907, in Jeparit, Vic.
Immanuel College Point Pass, 1921, and Immanuel College and
Seminary, North Adelaide, 1926-31. Ordained May 31, 1931 in Berri
by pastors; A Fehlberg, J. Meier, Missionary Saueracker. Northern’
Field, Eyre s Pensmla, June /, 1931-34; Low Bank since May 13, 1934.
Fritsch. Walter W. Born April 25, 1892, at Winiam, near Nhill,
\ic. Immanuel College, Point Pass', 1912-13; Neuendettelsau missioA
seminary, Apnl-June, 1914; interned Ruhleben, Germany 1914-17-
private tuition, Neuendettelsau, 1917-18; Wartburg ' Seminary’,


tt a a iqiq -20 Ordained at Melbourne, October 31, 1920,
Dubuque, L.S.A., 1919-2 • , , a; m rjfendoerfer. Temora, N.S.W.,
by pastors: K. Gutekunst, G. J. Snnptencloe 1929 . 38; Ade-
-1920-21; Milbrulong, N ; S.W., 19 21 29, Secretary N.S.W. dxs-
laide (St, Stephen’s) since ?926-2^
trict, 1922-26; President N.S.W. distnct, at Horsham, Vic.
Gross, Samuel Oswald. Born > 1924-29. Ordained
Immanuel College and Seminary, Nor r . ie t ’ W . Basedow, W.
at Horsham, Vic 12, 1930 Jf since May 8, 1932.,
Fritseh, J. P. Loehe. Sydney, her &t Langenthal,
Hartmann, Franz Adam, born Ma conf^rmatkm entered Gym-
Grossherzogtum Hessen, Germany. A Univer sities Erlangen,
nasium at Bensheim, studi Oberkirchenrat in Baden. Assistant
Giessen, Heidelberg. Examined by r^ r £ Schleswig, Feb.-June, 1903.
teacher at Lutheran seminary Ordained November 29, 1908,
Landed in Australia October 2o 1903 Ordain Creek> Qld .
by pastors: Heuer, Goesslmg, Ho , an and Scandinavian
(ks home missionary of the United H ighfields, Qld., 1905-12;
Lutheran Synod of Oueens and) • N.S.W., 1920-32; Light’s
»««• S W H e 9l Svl,'Sa Spr..idem, N.S.W. distrlC,
1923-29; President, iPP.ttt. d'strKP 1881, at Weingarts-
Hcbart, Theodor J. H. O. Attended Knabeninstitut
srreuth, Bamberg, Oberfranken, j . miggion sem inary, 1898-
Lucius, Eschzell, Hessen. Neu orda i ne d at Point Pass
1902. Landed at Ade aide, May 2b, iwt p Lejdig> L Kaibel-
(lm.). June 8, 1902. by '„ d par ish till December 31, 1908.
Assisted Pastor Leidiig ™ coUege and ]P| since January 8, 1909.
Petersburgh, J904-09, L g chairman of College Board.
Vice-President, S.A district. Wesen »
Author of Die V.E.L.K.A.., Born’July 28, 1868, at Bethany,
Heidenreich, J. Heinrich S. 1886-92; Erlangen
S.A. Hermannsburg. Schuerenschule a 1 5 2? 1g94- Ordained
University, 1892-94. Returned to Austi -a. ha, J Heidenreich,
at Bethany. S.A October 14 v by a fi,' of his father, 1894-
p. F. Hossfeld, P. Hoefn • . isj nr th • Peterborough, Canowie Belt,
1910. Served con S re S atlo Reeling since 1910. President of
Quorn, Hawker. 1897-I'9o°- resident, S.A. district, 1928-33; Presi-
B.L.S.A. a.a.G., 1910-26, Vice P res ’ ident of U.E.L.C.A. since 1928.
dent, S.A. district, since 1983. \ F 18 8 4 . at Fischhausen, near
Held, J. A. Richard. Bom Marcn , . Aspirantenschule
Loenigsberg, in Prussia, Ge S l ‘Lj’ha~ e nstift in Pomerania, 1900-03;
of the Berlin Missionshaus, Bugenhagenstitt 10 1908 , by
Basel mission seminary, 1903-08. uroainea ki eser in S tadt-
Praelat Roemer, Stadtpfarrer erz, d ; n Melbourne in June,
kirche of Nagold in Wuerttemberg pregideht Genera ,
1908. 1908-11 in Doncaster, •, Acting Director of Wartburg
H. Berlitz. Tanunda since Ju of S.A. district, 1925,
Seminary, Tanunda, vice
1933-34;' President S. A. ‘ 23, 1890, in Tanunda, S.A.
Lehmann, Franz J. Born Jam. y paul , g Sem mary, Mmne-
Immanuel College, Point 1 ass, ■ • A anada home mission field in
sota, U.S.A., 1907-11. Arcala ordained
1911 (three months). ® etm ’^ dp „ reic h j U n. Since then pastor of
October 22, 1911, by S A. district 1926-27.
Ed^enell! VF BorV Angnst 23, 1913, at Sheoak Log. Immanuel


College and Seminary, 1927-35. Ordained June 28, 1936, in Gomersal
by pastors: J. H. S. Heidenreich, J. P. Loehe, W. Roehrs. Serving.
the Lower Murray parish since June, 1936. , ~ ,
Loehe, Johannes Paul. Born August !8, 1869, m Neuendettelsau,
Bavaria, Germany. Mission seminary, N euende ttelsau,
Landed in Adelaide September 24. 1889. Ordained in Pomt •
(Im.) November 17, 1889, by pastors: G. J. Rechner, C. Auncht, A.
P. Rechner, L. Kaibel. Assistant pastor in Point Pass, 1889-90.
Steinfeld, S.A., 1890-1902; Natimuk, Vic., 1902-03. Since 1923
Director of Immanuel College and Seminary. President General of
rD T \ 1921-25.
Materne, Johannes Ernst. Born July 22, 1902, at Greenock, S.A.
Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1916-20; Wartburg Seminary,
Tanunda, 1921-22; Immanuel Seminary, North Adelaide 1923-26.
Ordained in Nain, July 19, 1925, by pastors: J. P. Loehe, F. Leidig,
a s a bel R Held W. Riedel. Temora, N.S.W., home mission held,
August 8, 1925 to April 1, 1934; Point Pass (St. Petri) since April
15 1934.
' Meier, Carl Wilhelm Julius. Born November 15, 1875, in Itzehoe,
Province Holstein. Prussia, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1894-
1900. Ordained in Kirchheim unter Teck, Wuerttemberg January
6, 1901, by Stadtfarrer Osiander, Stadtvikar Klinger, Vikar .
Mueller. Landed at Largs Bay, S.A., February 15, 1901. Lig .
Pass, 1901-22; Loxton since November, 1922. - .
Mnetzelfeldt, Karl. H. Th. Born April 30, 1881, m Hermanns-
burg, Hanover, Germany. Attended the Gymnasium at Llberfe d and
Osnabrueck till 1901. Student of theology and philosophy in
Goettingen and Rostock till 1905; theological school, Bethel 1906
theological seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Prussia
in Breslau, 1907; first theology examination there in 190, ieachet
at Evangelical Paedagogium in Godesberg a.Rh. Attended L
versify Bonn, 1908-09; Rostock, 1909; passed State examination in
philology (pro. fac. doc.). Head teacher Evangelical Padegogium,
Codesberer till 1913 From Easter, 1913-14, teacher Staedtisches
Oberfyzeum and Seminary for Ladies at Duesseldorf. Served in the
World War, gained the Iron Cross' II and I c.ass. Aftei Wa
Studienrat, October, 1923-April. 1934, Director of Oberlyzeum and
Seminary for ladv teachers at Kaiserswerth, also Superintendent ot
Schools'of the Deaconess House at Kaiserswerth. I resident of
Society of Positive Evangelical Teachers.of Religion and also of the
Union'of Ladies’ Colleges, executive member of the Union of La an-
gelical Schools, member of the Inner Group of the Conference foi
Lutheran Church Union. Wrote several books on religious education
and on evangelical schools—in Australia the pamphlet Why
Christian Day Schools?” Passed the second theological examination
in 1934. Was ordained in the Lutheran Church at Duesseldorf, May
13 1934 Came to Australia. Arrived in Adelaide, August 5, 1934.
Since teacher in Immanuel College and director of 1 ro-Semmary,
Adpltiids.
Obst, T. Gerhard. Born January 20. 1907, at Brownlow Centre,
SA. Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1921-22; Immanuel College and
Seminary. North Adelaide, 1923-29. Ordained at Bower, December
22 1929^bv pastors: R, Held. A. Sabel. W. Riedel S. Gross. Pastor
of Salem-Callington since Januarv 26, 1930; relinquished failem
Bend. Bowhill and Perponda in 1936; took over Victor Harbour, 193,.
Petering, Werner E. Born at Murtoa, Vic., May 4, 1906. Immanuel


College, 1921-22; Immanuel College, North Adelaide, 1923, 1925-26;
seminary, 1927-31. Ordained in Murtoa, Vic., by pastors: C. Siegle,
W. Fritsch, W. Loehe, May 5, 1932. Hermannsburg mission station,
Central Australia, July 26, 1932-38. Hahndorf since April 3, 1938.
Pfitzner, Carl J. Born July 20, 1906, at Eudunda, S.A. Immanuel
College, 1920; Immanuel College and Seminary, North Adelaide,
1927-32. Ordained at Eudunda, December 17, 1933, by pastors: W.
Riedel, T. Renner, E. Proeve. Inducted at Pinnaroo, January 28, 1934.
Proeve, Ernst H. Born July 30, 1896, in Drayton, Qld. Hermanns-
burg, Germany, Christiansschule, 1912-15. Assisted in hospitals dur-
ing War. Hermannsburg seminary, 1919-24. Ordained October 26,
1924, by Superintendent Ehlers, Pastor Kiehne, Missionary Petersen.
Induction, Pinnaroo, S.A., Exaudi, 1925; Point Pass, October 6, 1929.
Secretary of S.A. district, 1930-33.
Renner, Martin Theodor. Born June 11, 1891, at Gnadenfrei, near
Greenock, S.A. Basel mission seminary, 1913-19. Ordained June 22,
1919, in Basel, by Pfairer W. Burkhard, Kirchenrat Sarasin, Missions-
inspektor W. Oe'ttli. Returned to Australia in 1920. Induction, Dim-
boola, Vic., June, 1920; Eudunda since August 2, 1925.
Reuther, R. Berthold. Born August 5, 1897, at Bethesda (Killal-
paninna) mission station, S.A. Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1915-
19; Wartburg Seminary, Dubuque, U.S.A., 1919-22. Ordained at
Point Pass (Im.), April 22, 1925, by pastors: Jobs. J. Stolz, W.
Schmetzer, J. Zwar. Bethania, Qld., 1923-36; Light’s 1 Pass (Zur
engen Pforte) since 1936.
Riedel, Johannes. Born March 8, 1885, in Altenplos, near Bay-
reuth, Bavaria, Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1904-
OS. Arrived at Adelaide October 26, 1908. Ordained at Point Pass
(Im.) November 15, 1908. Assisted Pastor Leidig in college and
parish till August, 1909. Pinnaroo, 1909-24; Sedan since August 6,
1924.
Riedel, Wolfgang. Born March 17, 1881, at> Altenplos, near Bay-
reuth, Bavaria, Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1900-
04. Arrived at Adelaide November 26, 1904. Ordained at Point
Pass (Im.) December 4, 1904, by pastors: C. Auricht, L. Kaibel, F.
Leidig, johs. J. Stolz, P. Breier. Assisted Pastor Leidig in college
and parish till 1907. Bethesda mission station, Cooper’s Creek,
1908-September 24, 1914; Low Bank, 1914-May 20, 1921; tutor at
Wartburg Seminary, Tanunda, 1921-December 5, 1921; tutor at
Immanuel Seminary, North Adelaide, since 1923. Wrote Statement
of Controversy.
Roehrs, H. F. Wilhelm. Born April 28, 1887, at Langeloh,
Province Hanover, Germany. Christian School, Hermannsburg, St.
Paul seminary, Minn., U.S.A., 1910-13. Ordained in St. Paul’s col-
lege church on Easter Day, 1913, by Dr. H. Ernst, Prof. W. Schmidt,
Pastor Cornils. Arrived in Adelaide August 26, 1913. Inducted in
Bethany August 31, 1913. Editor of “Kinder Freund” since its
inception.
Rohde, Edwin. Born Janary 28, 1890, in Keith, S.A. Basel mis-
sion seminary, 1909-14. Ordained August 2, 1914, in Degerloch,
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Missionary on Gold Coast, 1914-18;
missionary for Jews, 1918-20. German Evangelical St. Paul’s Church,
London, 1920-25; Freeling (St. Paul’s) since 1926.
Sahel, Johannes P. Th. Born February 20, 1904, at Tanunda, S.A.
Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1918-21; Wartburg Seminary,
Tanunda, 1921-22; Immanuel Seminary, North Adelaide, 1923-25.
Ordained at Nain July 19, 1925, by pastors: J. P. Loehe, F. Leidig,


R. Held, A. Sabel, W. Riedel. Induction at Grovedale, Vic., July 31,.
1925, at South Kilkerran, S.A., May 1, 1926.
Stiller, Hugo. Born April 12, 1908, at Tanunda, S.A. Immanuel
College and Seminary, North Adelaide, 1926-33. Ordained at Lang-
meil May 6, 1934, by pastors: J. H. S. Heidenreich, T. Hebart, Mis
sionary Dr. Plierl.' Inducted Northern field, Eyre s Peninsula, May
27, 1934. Pastor designate Blyth parish, S.A.
Stolz, Christoph W. Born July 14, 1903, at Lights Pass, S.A,.
Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1917-20; Wartburg Seminary,
Tanunda, 1921-22; Immanuel Seminary, North Adelaide, 1923 .
Ordained at Light’s Pass (Zur engen Pforte) July 1 2 , 1925 W
pastors: Jobs. J. Stolz, J. P. Loehe, W. Rmdel, F. Leidig. On West-
Coast since July 31, 1925, 1925-34 the whole West Coast field, since
1934 the Southern field. _ . , ~
Stolz, Ernst Gottfried. Born February 27, 1906, at Light s Pass,..
S. Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1921-22; Immanuel College and
Seminary, North Adelaide, 1923-28. Ordained May 17, 1928, by
Pastor Jobs'. J. Stolz, at Light’s Pass (Zur engen Pforte). Inducted
at sfoTz'r Johannes Julius. Born May 17, 1878, at Point- Pass, S.A,
Private school in Adelaide, 1894; Neuendettelsau mission seminary,
1895-99; Erlangen University, 1899-1900. Returned to Australia
June 10, 1900. Ordained at special synod of Immanuel Synod, Sep
tember 13, 1900. .Inducted, at Light’s' Pass (Zur engen Pforte)
October 21, 1900. First assistant of his grandfather, G. J. Kechner;
after his death—in 1900—his successor. Transferred to North Ad-
elaide in 1930, founded the North Adelaide home mission field and
•its pastor till September, 1936. Editor of Kirchen-und Missions-
Zeitung since 1911 till after the War. Editor of Lutheran Herald
and Kirchenblatt since 1928. Vice-President S.A district, 1921-25,
President S.A., 1925; President General of U.E.L.C.A. since 1920.
Weckert, Carl A. Born April 13, 1897, at Schoenborn, neai
Tanunda, S.A. Concordia College, Adelaide, 1913-14; Hermannsburg,
Germany, 1914-16; Kroop. 1918-21. Ordained at Langmeil. September
15, 1922, by pastors: F. Koschade, T. Hebart, R. Held, Voiketown,
1922-26; Laura since 1926. „ , T v
Wiencke, W. Edwin. Born July 9, 1897, at Sedan, S.A. Immanuel
College, Point Pass, 1912-15; Adelaide High School, 1916. Assistant
teacher Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1917-19. Wartburg Seminary,
Dubuque, lowa, U.S.A., 1919-22. Ordained at Athol, Kansas, L .S.A.,
July 9, 1922, by pastors: H. Mueller, G. Kolb, J. Schiller. Hooker,
Oklahoma, U.S.A., 1922-23; Alberton, Qld, 1924-36; Adelaide
since September 1, 1936. Secretary, Queensland district, 1928-31.
Victoria.
Fischer. Eric W. Born March 29, 1909, at Toowoomba Qld.
Immanuel College and Seminary, North Adelaide, 1924-33. Ordained
at Maryborough, Qld., June 11, 1933, by pastors: G. Fischer, M.
Reuther, A. E. Reuther. Home mission, Vic. (M arracknabeal), 1933-
37; Grovedale, 1937-38; Natimuk, since August, 1938.
Jericho, Ernst Adolph. Born March 29, 1886, at Tiparra, _ S.A.
Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1905-07; Neuendettelsau mission
seminary, 1907-11. Ordained at Tiparra, May 21, 1911 by Pastor F.
Leidig. Inducted at Jeparit, Vic., July 16, 1911. Vice-President \ic.
district. 1923-24; President of Vic. district since 1924.
Minke, Karl Heinrich. Born November 22, 1900, in Ahaus, West-


phalia, Germany. Arrived in Lowood, Qld., in October, 1910. Immanuel
College, Point Pass, 1922; Immanuel College and Seminary, North
Adelaide, 1923-28. Ordained at Lowood, Qld., July 29, 1928, by
pastors: A. R. Reuther, F. 0. Theile, R. Rohde, L. Doehler, A. E.
Reuther. Kingaroy, Qld., 1928-32; Mackay, Qld., 1932-35; Nambour,
Qld., 1936-38; Grovedale, Vic., since 1938.
Proeye, Hermann Wilhelm Ileinhold. Born December 5, 1888,
near Toowoomba, Qld. Christian School, Hermannsburg, Germany,
1912-July, 1914; St. Paul Seminary, Minnesota, U.S.A., 1914-16'.
Ordained in St. Paul, Minn., U.S.A., in 1916, by Prof. Dr. H. Ernst.
Returned to Queensland in 1916. Home missionary of Evergreen-
Kulpi district till 1919; Mackay, Qld., 1920-24; Goombungee, Qld.,
1924-28; Grovedale, Vic., 1929-37.
Schultz, Wilhelm Johann Georg. Born August 27, 1886, at Walton
(Gomersal), S.A. Proseminary St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.A., 1907-11;
Luther Seminary, St. Paul, Minn., U.S.A., 1911-14. Ordained and
inducted at Edgar, Wisconsin, U.S.A., May 28, 1914, by Pastor C.
Schmalz. There till 1920. Returned to Australia early in 1921.
Peterborough, S.A., 1921-26; inducted at Dimboola, Vic., August 26,
1926.
Siegle, Christian J. Born July 16, 1864, at Gross Heppach. near
Stuttgart, Germany. Mission seminary, Basel, Switz., 1883-89.
Ordained July 21, 3 889, in Stadtkirche in Waiblingen bv Dekan Gess,
Lie. th. P. Zeller, Pastor Roemer, Landed in Adelaide, September,
1889. Caltowie, S.A., 1890-97; Point Pass, S.A., 1897-1912; Edillillie,
West Coast, S.A., 1912-17; Murtoa, Vic., since 1917. President, Vic,
district, 1923-24; General Vice-President of U.E.L.C.A., 1921-28.
Simpfendoerfer, John. Born Julv 19, 1891, at Walla Walla,
N.S.W. High School Korntal, near Stuttgart, Germany, 1907-09;
mission seminary, Basel, Switz., 1909-13. Returned to Australia in
1913. Ordained in Melbourne by Pastor Herlitz, July, 1913. Home
mission and itinerant work in S-A., 1913-14; Eudunda. S.A., 1914-20;
Doncaster, Vic., since October, 1920. Secretary Vic. district, 1920-24,
since 1927; Treasurer of U.E.L.C.A. since 1928.
Sprengel, Erich F. W. Born May 10, 1883, in Hanover, Germany.
Attended Leibnitz Real Gymnasium, Hanover. Studied in Baden and
Vandsburg. West Prussia. Citv missionary and Ge y neinsclmt N'STvre-
diger in Frankfurt a/Main. Posen, and Neusalz, Silesia. 1908-13.
Angas College, North Adelaide, 1913-16. Ordained in Hahndorf. S.A.,
March 15, 1916, bv Pastor Brann. Fueling. S.A., 1916-96; Mount
Gambler, since 1926, Vice-President, Vic. district, since 1935.
New South Wales.
Fuhlbohm, Theodor J. Born Ma reh 30, 1887, in Amnia. S.A.
Studied at Hermannsburg mission sominarv, and St. Paul. Minn.,
U.S.A. Returned to Australia in 1914. Ordained at Toowoomba,
Old., August 12, 1914, by pastors: Heuer, Hoefner. G. Fincher,
Poland. Called to Kulpi, Old., in 1914: interred ioio_ip. indneted
Toowoomba (Home StreetL 5. 1920; Milbmlong, N.S.W.,
September 1. 1929. President N.S W, district, since 1933.
Giolow, Kurt. Born in Esthonia Attended Gymnasium. Served in
the Great War, 1914-17, in the Russian Armv, than against the
Bolsheviks. <^ a iiori -Pr»r Australia in 1927. Immanuel Seminary,
North Adelade, 1928-29. Ordained at Melbourne Februarv 9, 1980. by
pastors: T. Frank, Levnoldt, H. Proeve. Pinnaroo, S.A., 1930-33;
Sydney, since 1934, Esthon. cong.; since 1936 Aust. cong.


Linke, J. Heinrich. Born September 23, 1909, at Moculta, S.A.
Immanuel College and Seminary, North Adelaide, 1925, 1929-35.
Ordained in Gruenberg, S.A., by pastors: Jobs. J. Stolz, K. Muetzei-
feldt, T. Hebart, B. Reuther. Induction at Jindera and Albury,
N.S.W., June 21, 1936.
Loehe, Adolph J. Born at Natimuk, Vic., March 6, 1911.
Immanuel College and Seminary, North Adelaide, 1923-33. Ordained
and inducted at Pleasant Hills, N.S.W., June 10, 1934, by pastors.
T. Fuhlbohm, J. T. P. Stolz.
Monz, Johannes. Born May 30, 1910, at Coulson, Qld. Brisbane
High School, 1925-27; Immanuel College and Seminary, North Ade-
laide, 1928-33. Ordained in Brisbane (St. Andrew’s), May 20, 1934,
by pastors: R. Monz, F. O. Theile, L. Krause. Temora, N.S.W., since
1934. Secretary of N.S.W. district since 1935.
Stolz, Johannes T. P. Born April 23, 1902, in Light’s Pass, S.A.
Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1917-19; Adelaide High School, 1920;
Wartburg Seminary, Tanunda, 1921-22; Immanuel Seminary, North
Adelaide, 1923-25. Ordained in Light’s Pass (Zur engen Pforte),
July 12, 1925, by pastors: Jobs. J. Stolz, J. P. Loehe, W. Riedel, F.
Leidig. Inducted at Walla Walla, July 26, 1925. Secretary, N.S.W,
district, 1926-35; Vice-President, N.S.W. district, since 1936.
Queensland.
Adler, Otto H. Born September 13, 1899, at Murtoa, Vic. High
School, Warracknabeal, Vic., 1916; Concordia College, Unley, S.A.,
1917-21 ;Wartburg Seminary, Dubuque, lowa, U.S.A., 1921-24.
Ordained at Murtoa, Vic., January 11, 1925, by pastors: C. Siegle, G.
Dohler E. Auricht. Inducted at Nundah, Qld., February 8, 1925.
Dohler, Gerhard. Born in Yorketown, S.A., February 6, 1896,
Studied at Immanuel College, Point Pass. Teacher of Lutheran daj
schools at Bower, Loxton, Appila, S.A. Wartburg Seminary,
Dubuque, lowa, U.S.A., 1919-22. Inducted at Natimuk, Vic., April
29. 1923. Secretary of Vic. district, 1924-27. Inducted at Ipswich,
Qld., April 14, 1929. T , . QQf
Doehler, Ludwig. Born at Yorketown, S.A., July 1/, 1890.
Immanuel College, Point Pass; Neuendettelsau mission seminary,
1909-12. Ordained October 19, 1913. Arrived in Qld. m 1913.
Kirchheim, 1913; Yorketown, S.A., 1914. Inducted at Alberton, Qld.,
February 28, 1915; Lowood, July 29, 1923.
Finger Franz Ferdinand Wilhelm. Lorn August 12, 1893, a. Jon-
caster Vic. Basel mission seminary, 1911-16. Language teacher at
Basel,’l9l6-19. City missionary, Basel 1918-19. Ordained m Mel-
bourne April- 11, 1920, by pastors; K. Gutekunst, E. Hiller, G.
Simpfendoerfer. Milbong parish, Qld., since July 1 1920 Secretary,
Queensland district, 1931-33. Book Steward, Branch Lutheran book
Del Fisc^r lb Friedrich Carl. Born Februarv 16. 1876, at Lobethal,
SA HeLiannsbYg mission seminary, 1808-1 «*)6. Returned to
Australia March 6, 1906. Ordained May 27, 1906, at Boah Peak,
Old., bv pastors: Hoefner. Heuer. Theile. F-m missionary m old.
(UGS.L.S.). 1906-08, with residence at Doctors Creek, Goom-
bungee, 1909-23: interned, 1916-19: Maryborough, smce Julv 1, 1 ÜB.
Gutekunst, Ernst. Born Mav 29, 1883. in Nagold, Wuerttemberg,
Germany. Mission seminary, Basel, 1902-08 Mav 0,
1908, in'Nagold. Arrived in Australia in 1908 MilbindnnEr, N
1908-12. Inducted at Toowoomba, January 21, 1912. Secretary, Qld.


♦district, 1921-23. Vice-President of Qld. district, 1930-37; re-elected
1933. Editor of “Lutheran Children’s Friend” since inception.
Heuer, Georg. Born October 22, 1854, in Westerholz, near
Wahrenholz, in Germany. Hermannsburg mission seminary. Arrived
in Qld. in March, 1883. Mackay, 1883-88; Toowoomba (Hume Street),
November, 1888-1920; -Guluguba, since 1920. In 1913 honored by
German Government with Cross of the Order of the Eagle (Class IV).
Interned during War for seven weeks. President of the United
German and Scandinavian Lutheran Synod of Qld., 1900-07, 1911-21;
Vice-President of the Qld. district, 1925-30.
Hiller, Anton. Born at Murtoa, Vic., January 22, 1879. Basel
mission seminary, 1900-06. Ordained at Wilhelmsdorf, Wuerttem-
berg, Germany, June 17, 1905, by Pastor Kuebler. Then undertook
educational tour to Paris, London, and Edinburgh. At latter Uni-
versity passed the Vacation Course. Missionary in South Mahratta,
India, till 1909. Tanunda, S.A., 1909-11; Pleasant Hills, N.S.W., 1911-
19. Inducted at Dugandan, Qld., November 19, 1919.
Hiller, Eugen. Born February 24, 1870, at Hamilton, Vic.
Studied at Basel mission seminary. Ordained June 25, 1893, in
Wilhelmsdorf, Wuerttemberg. Missionary on the Malabar Coast,
India, 1893-1905; North Brisbane, .1905-06; Beenleigh, since 1906.
President of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Queensland, 1912-
21; Vice-President of Qld. district, 1921-22; President, Qld. district,
1922-28.
Larsen, Johannes M. Born at Madias, India, July 2, 1903.
Gymnasium, Flensburg, and Altona. Took the Artium Course at
Roende, Denmark. Trinity Theol. Seminary, Blair, Nebraska, U.S.A.,
1926-30. Ordained and consecrated as missionary by Bishop V.
Ammundsen, February 8, 1931. For health reasons he left mission
field, India, in 1934. Inducted at Mackay, June 9, 1935.
Lienert, F. C. Born at Sheoak Log, near Freeling, S.A.,
December 15, 1890. Luther Seminary, St. Paul, Minn., U.S.A., 1910-
18. Ordained at Edgar, Wise., U.S.A., by Pastor Schultz, June 23,
1918. Benkelman, Nebr., U.S.A., 1918-24; Edithburgh, S.A., 1925-
32; Sydney (Trinity), 1932-36; Alberton, since September, 1936.
Statistician of U.E.L.C.A. since 1928; Vice-President of N.S.W., 1934-
36.
Loehe, F. Max I. Born at Tanunda, S.A., May 26, 1900. Immanuel
College, Point Pass, 1915-18; Wartburg Seminary, Tanunda, 1921-22;
Immanuel Seminary, North Adelaide, 1923-25. Ordained in Adelaide
(St. Stephen’s), August 2, 1925. Inducted at Mackay, Qld., August
16, 1925; South Brisbane, May 12, 1932. Editor of “Lutheran Youth”;
Secretary of Qld. district since 1933.
Monz, Rudolf. Born March 6, 1879, in Kreuznach, Rheinland,
Prussia, Germany. Assisted in Inner Mission Work. Basel mission
seminary, 1898-1904. Ordained December 11, 1904, in Kirrweiler,
Alsace-Lorraine, then belonging to Germany. Milbrulong, N.S.W.,
1905-07. Inducted at Milbong, Qld., .November 19, 1907; North
Brisbane, March 7, 1920.
Prenzler, Heinrich W. L. Born- October 21, 1893, at Kulgun, Qld.
Hermannsburg mission seminary, 1912-22 (studies interrupted during
War). Ordained in Grosse Kreuz Kirche, Hermannsburg, December
10, 1922, by Superintendent Ehlers, pastors Kiehne, Meyer. Returned
to Qld. in March, 1923. Edenvale (Kingaroy), 1923-28; Goombungee,
since July, 1928. Vice-President, Qld. district, 1937-38.
Reuther, Albert E. Born May 11, 1892, at Bethesda mission


station (Killalpaninna), S.A. Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1905-
OS; mission seminary, Neuendettelsau, Bavaria, 1909-12. Assistant
pastor in Alsace, 1912-May, 1913. Ordained, July
Zuerich, by pastors: K. Wagner, P. E. Stolz, 0. K. Pakarainen, K. Jc
Kivekas, A. W. Kuusisto, J. E. Kallio, J. W. Wallinheimo. Landed
at Perth, W.A., August 21, 1913. Home missionary in Western Aus-
tralia for eighteen months. In Murgan since May 8, 1915, home mis-
sionary for six years, then resident pastor.
Reuther, Arthur Richard. Born February 22, 1891, at Bethesda
mission station (Killalpaninna), S.A. Immanuel College, Point Pass,.
1905-08; mission seminary, Neuendettelsau, Bavaria, 1909-12.
Ordained and inducted at Highfields, Qld., March 9, 1913, by Pastor
Heuer; Bethania, June 28, 1936. Secretary of Qld. district, 1923-28;;
President of Qld. district, since 1928.
Reuther, Martin G. Born February 28, 1890, at Bethesda mission
station (Killalpaninna), S.A. Immanuel College, 1905-08; mission
seminary, Neuendettelsau, Bavaria, 1909-12. Returned to Australia
March 1, 1913. Ordained at Point Pass (Im.), S.A., March 12, 1913,
by pastors: F. Leidig, Jobs. J. Stolz, T. Hebart, P. Breier. Assisted
Pastor Leidig in college and parish till July, 1913. Alberton, Qld.,.
1913-14; Bundaberg, since January 1, 1915.
Rogge, Hans Gottfried Elimar Martin. Born at Cloppenburg,.
Oldenburg, Germany. Attended a grammar and secondary school..
Served in Great War, 1914-16, then wounded and put out of action;
studied at German University, 1916-18; then again at Front till end of
War. Inflation caused him to discontinue studies. Sailed for Australia
in 1927. Immanuel Seminary, North Adelaide, 1928-30. Ordained Sep-
tember 7, 1930, at Bethany, S.A., by pastors: Jobs. J. Stolz, J. P.
Loehe, W. Riedel, W. Roehrs. Inducted at Toowoomba (Hume
Street), September 21, 1930. __ _ .
Rohde, Rheinhold Theodor. Born February 18, 1877, at Karlsruhe,.
Waterloo, S.A. Basel mission seminary, Switzerland, 1901-06.
Ordained at Wilhelmsdorf, Wuerttemberg, Germany, January 6, 1907,.
by Pastor Kuebler, Missionary Kuehnle, Dir. Ziegler. Missionary at
Duala, Kamerun, West Africa, 1907-10, 1912-17. Deported to London
as prisoner of war in 1917. Pastor of German congregation in Lon-
don, 1918-20. Returned to Australia in 1921. Grovedale, Vic., 1921-
24. Inducted at Hatton Vale, Qld., May 29, 1924.
Schmidt, Frederick Herbert. Born at Bower, June 14, 1900.
Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1919-22; Immanuel Seminary, North
Adelaide, 1923-28. Ordained May 6, 1928, in Brownlow, S.A., by
pastors: P. Breier, Jobs. J. Stolz, W. Riedel. Inducted at Nambour,
Qld.. August 28, 1928; Kingaroy, June 19, 1932.
Schubert, Alfred H. Born July 5, 1909, at Tanunda, S.A. Immanuel
College and Seminary, North Adelaide, 1929-36. Ordained at
Gnadenfrei, S.A., May 31, 1936, by pastors: P. A. Hartmann, T.
Renner. Inducted at Proston, Qld., July 5, 1936. Since 1938 in
Simpfendoerfer, August G. Born June 27, 1904. at Brettach o/a.
Neckarsulm, Wuerttemberg, Germany. Migrated to Australia in 1925,
landed at Melbourne September 28, 1925. Immanuel College and
Seminary, North Adelaide, 1926-31. Ordained at Walla Walla,
N.S.W., April 26, 1931, by pastors: G. Simpfendoerfer, J. T. P. Stolz.
South Brisbane (locum tenens), 1932; Nambour home mission field,
1932-33. Inducted at Douglas October 8, 1933.
Stolz, Joachim Gerhard. Born June 3, 1911, at Tanunda, S.A,


immanuel College and Seminary, North Adelaide, 1926-36. Ordained
June 7, 1936, in North Adelaide, by pastors: Jobs. J. Stolz, J. P.
Loene, T. Hebart, K. Muetzelfeidt, E. Stolz, G. Obst. Inducted at
Mundubbera, Qld., July 3, 1936.
l nene, F. Olio. Born April 22, 1880, at Sommerfeldt, near Palmer,
S.A. Immanuel College, Point Pass (first student); mission seminary,
Neuendettelsau, Bavaria, Germany, 1897-1901. Ordained June 23,
1901, in Point Pass (Im.) by pastors: C. Auricht, F. Leidig, L. Kaibel.
Inducted at Bethania, Qld., September 11, 1901. Resigned in 1923
in order to devote full time to Lutheran mission, New Guinea, and
has since lived in Brisbane. Director of Lutheran mission, N.G.,
since 1922. Secretary of United German and Scandinavian Lutheran
Synod of Queensland, 1903-21; President of Qld. district, 1921-22.
Wrote: “One hundred years of the Lutheran Church in Queensland.”
Venz, George Paul. Born April 11, 1909, at Kalbar, Qld. Immanuel
College and Seminary, North Adelaide. 1926-34. Ordained June 3,
1934, at Kalbar, by pastors 1 : A. R. Reuther, F. Finger, A. Simpfen-
doerfer. Inducted at Nambour, Qld., June 10, 1934; at Highfields
Julv 12. 1936.
PASTORS EMERITI.
South Australia.
Basedow, F. Wilhelm. Born March 22, 1867, at Tanunda, S.A.
Basel mission seminary, 1888-93. Ordained June 25, 1893, at
Wilhelsmdorf, Wuerttemberg, Germany, by Pastor Georgi. Mission-
ary in Cameroons, Africa, 1893-96, 1899-1903. Mission services in
Australia, 1903-06. Inducted at St. Stephen’s, Adelaide, February
11, 1906- At Adelaide, 1906-37. Secretary of U.E.L.C.A., 1922-25.
Editor: “Der Pilger,” 1910-11; “Der Christenbote,” 1911-17; “The
Pilgrim,” 1917-21; “Lutheran Herald,” 1921-28; “Kirchen Blatt,”
1925-28, Living in retirement in Adelaide.
Braun, C. Friedrich. Born February 6, 1857, at Karls, Stuttgart,
Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1877-84. Ordained at Heilbronn
August 17, 1884, by Dekan Weitbrecht; pastors: Demmler, Staehr.
Landed in Adelaide October 13, 1884. Assistant of Pastor Reusch
‘(Tanunda) till 1885. Inducted at Hahndorf August 17, 1885. At
Hahndorf, 1885-1937. President of Immanuel Synod a.a.G., 1897-1921;
President of General Synod, 1916-21; President of S.A. district,
U.E.L.C.A., 1921-25. Living in Nuriootpa.
Hass, Peter Heinrich. Born May 31, 1859, in Kreis Eckernfoerde,
Schleswig Holstein, Germany. Descendant of French Marquise
family. Great grandfather fled to Germany owing to French Revo-
lution. Attended high schools at Eckernfoerde and Rendsburg.
Migrated to America in 1882. Theological Seminary, Afton, Minn.,
U.S.A., 1883-86. Ordained May 2, 1886, by Professor Duborg.
Inducted at Wells parish, Minn., May 2, 1886. At Wells, 1886-94;
Greenville, Wis., 1894-1901; Granton, Wis., 1901-06. Sailed for Aus-
tralia in 1906, advised by doctor, owing to wife’s ill-health, who
dPd on third dav of vovage, Peterborough, S.A., 1906-20: Murray-
ville, Vic., 1920-30; Light’s Pass, S.A., 1930-36. Vice-President of
E.L S.A. a.a.G., 1912-26. Living at Murrayville, Vic.
Koschade, Friedrich. Born Octobe- 1- 1848, at Warsaw. Poland.
Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1873-77. Landed in Melbourne
November 10, 1877. Colloquium held at Light’s Pass December 7,
1877. Ordained at Tanunda (St. John’s), December 9, 1877, by
pastors: J. G. Rechner, Chr. Auricht, J. Reusch. Inducted at Yorke-
town December 16, 1877. At Yorketown, 1877-88; Callington, 1889-


1929. Preached farewell sermon April 1. 1929. He commenced ser-
vices in Natimuk, Vic., and Pinnaroo district. Living- in retirement in
Callington, S.A.
Kuss, Ludwig. Born in Weissenhoehe, Posen, Germany. Neuen-
dettelsau mission seminary, 1876-80. Landed in Port Adelaide
October 29, 1880. Ordained February 2, 1881, by Pastor Auricht.
Hahndorl, 1881-84; Mannum, 1884-1922; Low Bank, 1922-33. Held
his taiewell service at Low Lank January 1, 1934. Living- in Mhirrav
Bridge, S.A. •
Matschoss, Friedrich W. Born August 30, 1857, at Scharmitz,
Silesia, Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1874-78. Assist-
ant preacher in Lyons, Southern France, 1878. At the request of
J. Flierl, D.D., decided to go to Australia. Sailed with him in 1878.
Landed in Adelaide August 17, 1878. Ordained in Tanunda (St.
John’s) with J. Flierl, September 8, 1878, by Pastor Auricht. Inducted
at ML Gambier October 6, 1878. At Mt. Gambier, 1878-1923; Light’s
Bass (Im.), 1923-31. Living at St. Peteis, Adelaide.
Sabel, Adolf P. Ih. Born July 15, 1872, at Erlangen, Germany.
Attended Gymnasium at Erlangen and Bamberg. Neuendettelsau
mission seminary, 1888-92. Landed in Australia October 7. 1892.
Ordained at Nain December 18, 1892, by pastors: J. G. Rechner, C.
Auricht, J. P. Loehe. Assisted in Light’s Pass parish December,
1892-February, 1893. Was to be missionary In Bethesda, but then
called by Nain. Inducted September 2, 1893. In Nain till 1937. From
Nain served congregations at Condowie, Blanchetown, Nott’s Well,
and Bower, and others. Since retirement living in Semaphore, S.A.
Scherer, Philipp. Born in 1871 in Hessen, Germany. Hermanns-
burg mission seminary, 1895-99. Arrived in Australia in 1899.
Ordained in Rheinthal in 1899 by Pastors Hoefner and Hossfeld. At
first assisted them. Succeeded Pastor Hoefner when latter accepted
call from Queensland. Served congregations' at Sandleton, Black
Hill, Forster, Bow Hill. Retired in 1936. Residing in Cambrai, S.A.
Victoria.
Hegelau, Job Gottlieb. Born January 5, 1864, in Waldhausen,
Germany. Received his theological training in Basel mission semin-
ary, 1885-90; ordained July 20, 1890, in Heidenheim, Wuerttemberg.
Arrived in Australia in 1890. Assisted Pastors Reusch (Tanunda)
iand Drauz (Point Pass), 1891-92. Adelaide (St. Stephen’s), Novem-
ber 6, 1892-96. Itinerant pastor of Victoria and N.S.W., with resi-
dence in Horsham, 1897-1909. He travelled as far as Temora, N.S.W.
Toowoomba, Qld. (St. Paul’s), 1909-11. Doncaster, Vic., 1912-15.
Living in Melbourne
Queensland.
Krause, Ludwig. Born April 18, 1858, in Poland. Received his
theological training at Hermannsburg mission seminary. Landed in
Brisbane, 1890. Ordained in Bethania, Qld., December 3, 1890. Mis-
sionary at Mari Yambi, Nth. Qld., 1891. Pastor at Mackay, 1891-
1909: South Brisbane, 1910-31. Retired, but still serving as city and
seamen’s missionary in Brisbane.
Millatt. M. Was itinerant evangelist in Tilsit, East Prussia,
Germany. On the recommendation of his friend, Pastor Wallatt, he
was called to Old. Arrived in November, 1890. Ordained January
29, 1891, by Pastor Maier, and inducted at Hatton Vale. Joined


Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia in 1912. Interned 1916-
19. Retired as result of dissensions in parish in 1923 and has since
lived on his private property in Plainland. ~ . ,
Poland, Wilhelm G. Born May 17, 1866, in Bronn, Oberfranken,
Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1884-88. Missionary at
Hope Valley, 1889-1909. Pastor at Ipswich, 1909-10; Douglas, 1910-
33. Residing in Crow’s Nest, Qld. , .
Wallatt H. Evangelist in Eastern Germany, Lithuama, and in;
the Memel district. Arrived in Queensland in 1888. He continued
his evangelistic activities, and gathered a number o ermans i
Boonah district, who were without church connection. Was called by
these, ordained by pastors: Heiner, Maier, J. Frank, and inducted at
Dugandan in 1889. He retired in 1904. In 1905 he accepted a call
to Ipswich, in 1906 to Lowood, in 1908 to Plainland, again retired
in 1923; is now living on his property in Plainland,
DECEASED PASTORS.
South Australia. ,
Borgelt, Friedrich. Arrived in Australia beginning of 1848 with
party from Hanover on ship “Washington ” Elected by congrega-
tion to be its pastor. Ordained and inducted by Revs. Stow and Evan
from Congregational Church in 1848. Pastor of Klemzig, 1848-56.
Died August 28, 1856. Buried in Klemzig cemetery,
Kavel, August Ludwig Christian. Born in Berlin September 3.
1798. Attended Gymnasium in Berlin, 1812-17; Berlin University,
i 017.01 Tutor 1821-26. Inducted at Klemzig December 17, 1826.
Pastor in Klemzig,lß26-35. Influenced by Dr. ScheibeFs writings and
Correspondence Jth him, he resigned from the Union Church Easter
1835 Ordained by the Lutheran pastors Wermelskirch and Lasius
in Posen and accepted into Lutheran Church, Served Lutherans in
Klemzig and district in homes, 1835-36. Beginning of 1836 he pro-
ceeded to Hamburg to arrange emigration of his congregation to
America. Since no opportunity was offering he travelled to England
to interview Mr. George Fife Angas. In England, 1836-38. Landed
in Australia on “Prince George” vflth other Lutherans, November 20,
1838. First service conducted Port Adelaide in Mr. Tod ® ’
November 25, 1838. Klemzig, 1838-46; Langmeil, 1846-60. Founder
of Lutheran Church in Australia. Author of different pamphlets and
leaflets. Died February 12, 1860. Buried in Langmeilcemetery.
Staudenmayer, W. Arrived from Germany end of 1857. Colloquium
beginning of 1858. Inducted at Lights Pass' January 3, 1858, y
Paftor Kavel. Soon differences between Pastor Kavel and himself
arose over questions of Constitution, which produced a synodical
schism after Pastor Kavel’s' death. 111-health compelled him to return
to Germany in 1865. Died in 1 876 in Wuerttemberg. «Vic-
Kannler A. Born in 1802. Sailed for Australia in 1848 on Vic-
toria” with’2l6 Lutherans. Pastor of Hope Valley also services:
in Tanunda and in Burra. In Mt. Gambier, 1860-77 Died at Mt,
Gambier June 8, 1877. Buried at Mt. Gambier June 5 1877.
Loessel, Karl Heinrich, Phil.Dr. Born at Casse October SO, :812.
Pastor of Union Church, but left for conscience. sake. Came to
Australia in 1862. Hamilton, Vic., 1862-63; Lobethal, S.A., 1863 7~,‘
Died December 24, 1879. Pastor Krause conducted funeral. Buried
at Lobethal in cemetery of St. Paul’s Church. 15M
Krause, Lebrecht Friedrich Ehregott, Born October 19, 1803, at


an der Oder, Silesia, Germany. Gymnasium St. Elizabeth,
Breslau, 1817-24; Breslau University, .1824-27; Universities Greifs-
wald and Berlin, 1827-29. Bassed his first theological examination
October 31, 1830, second April 14-15, 1831. Ordained by Ur. Scheibel
May 24, 1835. Inducted at Militsch, Silesia, on May 28, 1835.
Migrated to America with a congregation as a result of persecution.
The last congregation he served in America was at Dundee. Arrived
.at Lobethal November 24, 1871. Died 1885. Buried in St. Paul’s
cemetery, Lobethal. Pastors' Reusch and Niquet conducted funeral.
Stolz, Johannes Martin. Born September 28, 1847, at Rothenburg
Bavaria, Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary,
1873-75. Arrived in Australia as first Neuendettelsau pastor on
December 31, 1875. Ordained at Langmeil on March 5, 1876, by
pastors: P. Niquet, Heinze, Rechner, Auricht, Reusch. Inducted at
Point Pass April 9, 1876. At Point Pass, 1876-85. Died at Point
Pass November 23, 1885. Buried there (Im. cemetery) November 25,
1885.
Heinze, Karl Friedrich Wilhelm. Born October 16, 1827, at
Bentschen, Pr. Posen, Prussia, Germany. Migrated to Australia with
his parents with Pastor Fritzsche in 1841. Landed at Port Adelaide
■October 28, 1841. His mother died on voyage. After living a short
while at Klemzig, his parents' settled at Bethany in 1842. Studied
under Pastor Fritzsche, 1843-52. Teacher at Rosenthal, 1852-61;
Nain, 1861-62. Called by Nain congregation after Pastor Keppler’s
departure. Ordained August 11, 1862, in Congregational Church in
Rundle Street, Adelaide, by Revs. F. W. Cox, W. Harcus, J. Jeifries.
Inducted at Nain August 17, 1862. At Nain, 1862-90. Died at Nain
June 27, 1891, and buried in cemetery alongside of his church, June
30, 1891. Joined Immanuel Synod with his congregation in 1875.
Jakobi, Anton. Born June 21, 1841. Arrived in Australia, June
30, 1876. First assisted, later succeeded - Pastor Schondorf of the
Moravian Brethren at Bethel, S.A., 1877-91. Died at Bethel August 2,
1891, and buried in Bethel cemetery.
Maschmedt, Johann Christian. Born in October, 1823. Migrated
to Australia in 1846. Foundation member of St. Stephen’s
tion at Klemzig-Adelaidfc. On death of Pastor Borgelt he was
elected to fill his place. Ordained by Revs. Stow and Evan of Con-
gregational Church and inducted June 21, 1857. He served St.
Stephen’s congregation at Adelaide, 1857-91; also served congrega-
tions at Hope Valley, Stockwell, Tanunda, Eudunda, and Roberts-
town. Died September 8, 1891, buried in Payneharn cemetery. Funeral
conducted by Pastors Braun, Niquet, and Drauz.
Reusch, Johannes. Born February 14, 1843, in Neuhausen,
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1862-67. Ordained
March 31, 1867, at Nagold, Wuerttemberg; inducted at Tanunda in'
same year. Pastor at Tanunda, 1867-97. Died May 19, 1897, buried
in Langmeil cemetery May 21, 1897, by pastors Spanagel, Siegle,'
Dr. Eitel. President of Immanuel Synod a.a.G., 1884-97.
Drauz, Ferdinand. Born September 12, 1861, at Heilbronn,
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1879-85. Ordained
March 1, 1885, in Brettach, Wuerttemberg. Arrived in Australia ort
ship “John Elder” in April, 1885. For few months assistant of Pastor
Reusch. Ordained at Nuriootpa on July 2, 1885. Point Pass, 1885-96..
Died at Eudunda September 17, 1897. Buried in Eudunda public
cemetery, September 19, 1897, by Pastor Siegle.


Roediger, Carl August Julius. Born September 15, 1827, in Berlin.
Pupil of Pastor Gossner in Berlin. Arrived in Australia m eariy
flfties; ordained on Ascension Day, 1854. Lived at Gawler. Served
congregations at Gawler (Buchsfeide), Tanunda (Tabor), Gomersal,
Daveyston, Wasleys, Morgan, and Dutton. Resigned as result of
failing eyesighi. Died November 19, 189 L
Schondorf, Christoph Samuel Daniel. Born September 6, 1814, at
Schwerin, Mecklenburg, Germany. Attended high schools in home
town and in Kathenau. Joined the Moravian Brethren Society,
August 13, 1839, in Berlin. Teacher in Pabiamce in Russia, 1845-59.
Itinerant preacher in Switzerland, 1850-53. Ordained October 13,
1853 bv Bishop Matthisen. Landed in Port Adelaide March 19, 1854.
Commenced services at Light’s Pass April 9, 1854. Last service in
Light’s Pass May 18, 1856. Served Bethel 1856-76. Lived in retire-
ment on his own property m Bethel. Died February 2, 1898. Buried
in Old Moravian cemetery, Bethel, February 24, 1898, by Pastor C.
Sieule
Rechner, Gustav Julius. Born December 29, 1830, at Liegnitz
Silesia Germany. Migrated to Australia on ship “Victoria. . Landed
at Port Adelaide November 7, 1818. Teacher in Light’s Pas's June
10 1850-60. At time of synodical schism called by “zur engen
Pf'orte” congregation. Ordained at Langmeil February 2, 1861, by
Pastor Auricht. Pastor at Light’s Pass, 1861-!900 President of
Immanuel Synod; chairman of mission committee, 1874-1900. Died
at Light’s Pass August 24, 1900. .
Niquet, Johann Peter. Born December 21, 1811, in Chailotten-
hurg Germany. Sent by Pastor Gossner, Berlin, with Haussmann
and others to found mission at Moreton Bay (Qld.) in 1837. In 1848
in company with Haussmann he travelled to Sydney to take theo-
logical course in Dr. Lang’s college. Was ordained by Dr. Lang.
Called to Ballarat by Pastor Goethe in 1856. Pastor at Ballarat,
1856-64; Light’s Pass (Im.), 1865-88; Adelaide, 1891-92. Alter death
of wife in 1893 he went, to reside with his son-m-law, 1 astor
'Matschoss, in Mt. Gambier. Died there in March, 1903.
Auricht, Johann Christian. Born April 12, 1832, at Chlastawe,
near Bentsehen, Posen, Germany. Migrated to Australia with parents
on ship “Oatherina,” landed at Port Adelaide January 25, 1839. Pupil
nf Fritzsche 1843-46; of Kavel, 1846-58. Examined by Staudenmayer
Mav 11, 1858. Ordained August 1, 1858. Assisted Kavel till 1860.
Pastor at Langmeil 1860-1907. Founded the church paper “Kirchen-
und Missions-Zeitung” in 1865, edited it till 1907 President of
Immanuel Synod, 1900-07. Died at Hahndorf February 4, 1907.
Buried in Langmeil cemetery.
Kaestner, Paul Gustav. Born March 31, 1873. Received his theo-
logical training in mission seminary, Leipzig. Pastor at Tanunda
GSt. John’s) 1899-1908. Died August 12. 1908, as result of accident.
Buried in Langmeil cemetery.
Eitel. Ernst J., Phil.Dr. Born in January, 1837, at Esslingen, in
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Attended Pedagogium at Esslingen six
years; theological seminary, Schoenthal, four years; then entered
Tuebingen University, gaining Phil.Dr. degree at age of 22 in 1860.
Assistant pastor in Wuerttemberg for twelve months, then entered
the Ba-el mission in China, served it for sixteen years as superin-
tendent. of mission schools. In 1870 published Sanskrit-Chmese work
on Buddhism. In 1878 appointed head of Education Department m


Hongkong, held this position till 1897. For two years private secre-
tary to the Governor of Hongkong (Sir John Pope Hennessey).
Editor of “China Review” for eighteen years, author of different
books on Chinese subjects. Introduced religious education in educa-
tion system at Hongkong. Came to South Australia in 1897. Pastor
of St. Stephen’s, 1897-1906. Inducted by Pastor Braun May 23, 1897.
Lecturer on German language and literature at Adelaide University.
Died November 10, 1908. Buried in North Road cemetery, Adelaide.
Heidenreich, Georg Adam. Born September 28, 1828, at Tiefenort
in Sachsen-Weimar-Eisenach, Germany. D.Dr. L. A. Petri, Hanover,
awakened in him living faith. Hermannsburg mission seminary,
1862-66. Ordained by Oberkonsistorialrat D. Niemann in Hanover,
March 19, 1866. Sailed for Australia in same year on ship “Sophie.”
Landed in Australia, August 27, 1866, with three others' from
Hermannsburg—first ones to be sent by the seminary to Australia.
Pastor at Bethany, 1886-1910. For many years member of church
council of E.L.S.A. Superintendent (Probst) of Finke Mission, 1875-
94. Expelled from E.L.S.A. at synod, Eudunda. 1902, for being faith-
ful to his 1 promise to support the Finke Mission. President of
E.L.S.A. a.a.G., 1902, (1904)-10. Died August 8, 1910. Buried
August 10, 1910, in Bethany, S.A.
Kaibel, Ludwig Carl. Born November 2, 1850, at Kassel in Hesse,
Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1873-76. Landed at
Melbourne February 6, 1877. Ordained at Light’s Pass (Zur engen
Pforte), March 25, 1877, by pastors: Heinze, Niquet, Rechner,
Auricht. Inducted by pastors Rechner and Auricht at Appila, April
15, 1877. Pastor at Appila, S.A., 1877-91; Natimuk, Vic., 1891-1900.
President of missions of Immanuel Synod, Tanunda, 1900-18. Pastor
of Rhine Villa, 1903-18; Sedan, 1908-18. Undertook trip to Bloom-
held mission station near Cooktown, Old., and three trips to Bethesda
and Hermannsburg. During missionary Strehlow’s trip to Germany,
six months at Hermannsburg. Vice-President of Immanuel Svnod,
1900-18. Associate editor “Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung,” 1884-99,
1907-11. Died at Tanunda September 26, 1918. Buried in Langmeil
cemetery.
SHehlow, Carl Friedrich Theodor. Born December 23, 1871, at
Fredersdorf in Uckermark, Brandenburg, Germany. Neuendettelsau
mission seminary, 1888-91. Ordained at Light’s Pass Julv 3, 1892.
Bethesda (Killalpaninna), 1892-94; commenced work at Hermanns-
burg October 12, 1894. Hermannsburg, 1894-1922. Died at Horse
Shoe Bend October 20, 1922, buried there October 21, 1922. Funeral
conducted by Pastor Jobs. J. Stolz. Wrote several books on legends,
customs of natives, printed by Voelker Museum at Frankfurt o/M.
His vocabulary of Arunta* language comprised 150 written foolscap
pages’. Translated in coniunction with J. G. Reuther New Testament
into Dieri. Translated New Testament into Aranda, parts of which
were printed after his death.
Lei dig, Georg Friedrich. Born December 16, 1870, at Marktsteft
on Main, Bavaria, Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1887-
91. Landed at Largs Bav with Missionary Bogner on September 24,
1891. Ordained at Light’s Pass' on October 31, 1891, by pastors:
G. J. Rechner, Auricht, Loehe. Missionarv in Bethesda, 1891-92.
Pastor at Point Pass (Im.), July, 1892-1921. Died in Tanunda
August 11, 1925, buried in Langmeil on August 13, 1925. Founded
Immanuel College, Point Pass, in 1895. President of Immanuel Synod,


1907-21. Associate editor Kirchen-und Missions Zeitung, 1899-1907;.,
editor to 1911. _, 0
Doehler, Karl Albin. Born July 19, 1854, at 1 lauen, Saxony,.
Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1878-81. Landed in
Australia November 22, 1881. Ordained Epiphany, 1882. Pastor at
Candowie, S.A., 1882-89, also served the congregations at Baldma,.
Bundey, Steinfeld, South Kilkerran, and Tiparra; Yorketown, February
10, 1889-1922. Retired in 1922. Died at Yorketown June 1, BLW.
Buried June 3, 1927. ,
Bogner, Johann Matthias. Born December 26, 1860, at Kalben-
steinberg, Mittelfranken, Bavaria, Germany. Neuendettelsau mission
seminary, 1887-91. Landed at Largs Bay with Leidig on September
24, 1891. Ordained October 31, 1891, at Light’s Pass, by pastors:
Rechner, Auricht, Loehe. Missionary in Bloomfield, Qld., 1891-1*4,.
then in Hermannsburg, later in Bethesda. Also assisted with ser-
vices in various congregations, especially in Low Bank, and Lyre s-
Peninsula. Died St. Peters on April 26, 1930. Buried in Langmeil
cemetery April 27, 1930. . _ , 0 .
Zwar, Johannes Ernst Carl. Born June 5, 1881, in Tanunda, S.A.-
Basel mission seminary, 1903-08. Ordained July 19, 1908, in Schon--
dorf. Missionary on Gold Coast, West Africa, 1908-12. Returned to-
Australia in 1913, landed at Port Adelaide April 28, 1913 Inducted
at Point Pass May 25, 1913. Pastor at Point Pass, 1913-32 Died
in Adelaide, result of operation, December 17, 1932. Buried at Point
Pass (St. Petri) cemetery December 18, 1932. Secretary of
district, 1921-30; Chairman General Finance Board, 1925-31.
Bemmann, H. W. Ernst. Born March 10, 1866 in Berne, Switzer-
land. Basel mission seminary, 1884-88. Ordained November 11, 1888,.
Tutlingen, Wuerttemberg, Germany. Reached Australia end of 1888.
Itinerant pastor of Victoria (Wimmera and Gippsland), 1889-90,
Pleasant Hills, N.S.W., 1890-1907; Bethel, S.A., 1907-22; city mis-
sionary in Adelaide, 1922-34. Died April 1, 1934, buried in West
Terrace cemetery April 3, 1934. . .
' Hossfeld, Franz A. Born May 29, 1862. at Erfurt, Thuenngen,
Germany. Studied at Quedlinburg, Berlin, Hermannsburg mission
seminary. Arrived at Adelaide August 12, 1892. Ordained Sep-
tember 29, 1892, at Gnadenberg, by pastors: Oster, Strempel, Dorsch..
Pastor Dutton, 1892-1928, then retired to Adelaide, but continued to--
serve Tanunda (Tabor) till his end. Died at Adelaide September 5,
1937, buried in Tanunda, Tabor cemetery, September 7, 1937. Ex-
pelled with Pastor Hoefner from E.L.S.A. in 1895 as a result of
fidelity to his Hermannsburg seminary. Joined Immanuel Synod in,
1909.
Victoria.
Goethe, Matthias. Born at Neuendorf, near Coblenz on Rhein,.
March 29, 1827. Was educated for the priesthood, joined Protestant
Church in 1848. Whilst in England engaged bv Dr. Lang for college-
in Sydney, left for Australia on ship “Clifton,” and landed nr
February, 1850. Teacher of mathematics and modern languages.
Attended to spiritual wants of Germans in Sydney. For health-
reasons resigned in 1852. Undertook trip to Melbourne, Victoria,,
heard that spiritual wants of Germans had been unattended since-
departure of P. Kappler. Hold first service in Melbourne December
25 1852 Organized congregation within three months. Inducted
at’ Melbourne on Good Friday, March 23, 1853, by Rev. Hamilton


XPresbyterian Church), Dedicated first church in Melbourne June 11,
1854. Also served Lutherans' at Germantown, Ballarat, Castlemaine,
Sandhurst. Called first synod meeting on May 12, 1856. Synod of
Victoria organized on that day. Undertook trip to Queensland in
October, 1856, for purpose of obtaining pastors for congregations in
Victoria. Took trip to Germany in May, 1857, returned end 1858.
Worked tor union of Lutheran Church in Australia, for that purpose
visited synod at Bethany in 1860. Founded the church paper, “Der
Pilger in Viktoria/’ in July, 1853, which ceased in 1856. In 1860 he
founded ‘Christeubote,” which he edited till his departure from Vic-
toria. President of Synod of Victoria, 1856-67. Left Melbourne for
California, U.S.A., end of 1867 for health reasons. In Sacramento
he again founded a congregation with Christian day school, there
1868-75. Again for health reasons he moved to Mexico City. There
founded first German evangelical congregation. Died there on
October 27, 1876, and buried in English cemetery by Rev. Butler.
Schramm, Max von. Born in 1828 in Silesia. Attended Gymnasium
at Neisse. Carne to Australia in the fifties, there he left the Catholic
Church and joined the Lutheran. In 1860 the congregation of Don-
caster decided to open a Lutheran day school, von Schramm, teacher,
1860-84. Congregation called him as their pastor in 1876. Examined
July 28, 1876. Was ordained November 5, 1876, by pastors: Herlitz,
J. Frank, and Leypoldt in Melbourne. Pastor of Doncaster, 1876-
1908. Died November 18, 1908, buried in Box Hill cemetery Novem-
ber 21, 1908. City and'immigrants’ missionary since 1887.
Herlitz, Hermann. Born in Neisse, Silesia, Germany, June 10,
1834, of Jewish parents. Became Christian in London. Received
theological training in Basel mission seminary, 1859-62. Ordained
August 17, 1862, at Durlach, Baden. First Basel graduate
to enter service of Australian Lutheran Church. Arrived in Aus-
tralia in 1862. Pastor at Grovedale, 1862-68; Melbourne, 1868-1914.
President of Victoria Synod, 1868-1914; President of General Synod,
1876-1914 (with the exception of three years). Editor and publisher
of “Christenbote,” 1867-1910. Retired in 1914 to live with his son
in a Melbourne suburb. Died June 9, 1920.
Heyer, Georg. Born August 27, 1843, in Melsheim, Alsace.
Attended Basel mission seminary. Ordained April 13, 1868, in
Canstadt, Wuerttemberg. Pastor at Grovedale, July, 1868-August,
1920. Died May 15, 1921. Buried in Grovedale cemetery. For many
years treasurer of Synod of Victoria; since 1914 Vice-President.
Hiller, Carl Georg. Born December 20, 1837, at Holzgerlingen,
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1858-64. Ordained
August 17, 1864, in Ravensburg, Wuerttemberg. Landed at Mel-
bourne January, 1865. Inducted at Hamilton bv Pastor Goethe
February 26, 1865. In 1875 he went to live at Murtoa, but con-
tinued to serve Hamilton. In Wimmera district he did pioneer work,
founding congregations at Murtoa, Greenlake, Natimuk, Dimboola,
Horsham, Friedheim, Vice-President of Victoria Synod for many
years; President of Victoria Synod, 1914-16; President of General
Synod, 1914-16. Resigned in 1916. Died at Adelaide June 23, 1921,
buried in West Terrace cemetery.
Hampe, Gottlieb Daniel. Born November 19, 1834, at Erdeborn,
near Eisleben, Germany. A sermon by Pastor Ahlfeldt, Leipzig, in
March, 1857, changed his life. Soon after admitted to “Rauhe Haus,”
near Hamburg; later transferred by D. Wichern to “Johannisstift”
in Berlin. In 1866 he read an appeal by Vater Gossner for young


Christian men to work as pastors in Australia; together with
Pfrunder and Copas he offered himself for this work. They were
consecrated by D. Wichern. Sailed for Australia in 1866, landing in
Brisbane in September, 1866. Ordained by Pastor Schirmeister in
1875. Served at South Brisbane, 1866-68; Vvarrak, 1868; Toowoomba,
assistant of Pastor Langebecker, 1868-72; Independent German
Church, Toowoomba, 1872-77; Grafton, N.S.W., 1877-82, from there
he also served Sydney. Dimboola, first as itinerant pastor, then as
resident pastor, Lochiel, 1882-1910, then resigned and returned to
Germany. Died there September 1, 1917.
Leypoldt, Friedrich. Born April 15, 1844, at Echterdingen,
Stuttgart, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1863-69. Ordained
July 25, 1869, in Boeblingen, Wuerttemberg, by Dekan Burg. Sailed
for Australia in ship “Lincolnshire” in September, 1869. Pastor in
Bendigo, 1869-1930; also served Castlemaine till 1928. Died at
Sandringham February 27, 1933. Buried at Bendigo March 1, 1933.
Frank, Theodor. Born March 18, 1875, at Castlemaine. Basel
mission seminary, 1893-99. Ordained March 5, 1899, in Oberurbach,
Wuerttemberg. Returned to Australia 1899. Pastor at Kirchheim,
Qld., 1899, locum tenens for his father during latter’s absence in
Germany; Milbong, Qld., 1900-07; Maryborough, 1907-23; Interned,
1916-19. Melbourne, 1923-34. Foundation member Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Australasia in 1912. Left the U.E.L.C.A. with
Melbourne congregation in 1934 to join the “Deutsche Evangelische
Kirchenbund.” Died October 21, 1934. Vice-President of Victorian
district, 1924-34.
Bay, Friedrich. Lorn March 29, 1880, at Wachbach, Wuerttem-
berg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1904-09; ordained December
12, 1909, in Maria Kappe'l, Wuerttemberg. Pastor in Dimboola, 1910-
20. For health reasons returned to Germany in 1920. Died at
Nassachmuehle in Wuerttemberg April 3, 1937, buried at Diefelsberg
April 6, 1937.
New South Wales.
Woerner, Gottlob Wilhelm. Born January 2, 1841, in Wildberg,
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1860-66. Ordained
March 11, 1866, in Brackenheim. Inducted at Ballarat November 4,
1866, by pastors Goethe and Herlitz. Pastor at Ballarat, 1866-73;
Sydney, 1873-79. Died at Sydney August 9, 1879.
Simpfendorrfer, Gottlob. Born March 19, 1858, at Brettach,
Oberamt Neckarsulm, Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission
seminary, 1879-85. Ordained at Brettach i by Dekan Goessler on
March 1, 1885. Landed at Melbourne on Sunday Jubilate, 1885.
Itinerant pastor, Victoria, 1885-86; Walla Walla, 1886-1933. Died
July 8, 1933, at Walla Walla, buried in Walla Walla cemetery July
10, 1933. Vice-President of N.S.W. district, 1929-32. President of
N.S.W. district, 1923-26, 1932-33.
Schenk, Georg. Born September 8, 1860, at Preuschdorf in Alsace,
then as now belonging to France. Received his theological training
in Basel mission seminary, 1877-83; ordained July 29, 1883, in
Reutlingen, Wuerttemberg. Arrived in Australia December 31, 1883.
Itinerant pastor, Victoria, 1883-84. Inducted at Sydney March 29,
1884, by Pastor Herlitz. Pastor at Sydney, 1884-1932. President
of • N.S.W. district, 1922-23. With his Sydney congregation left
U.E.L.C.A. in 1923. With Sydney joined the “Deutschen Evange-
lische Kirchenbund” in 1928. Resigned 1932 and returned to Germany


and Switzerland. Died September 22, 1938, in Freiburg (Baden), his
remains cremated and interred in Rookwood cemetery, Sydney.
Queensland.
Koehnke, Johann Friedrich. Born December 2, 1853, in Dampen,
near Kaltenkirchen, Holstein, Germany. Mission seminary,
Hermannsburg. Left with a party of eight Hermannsburg graduates,
among them his brother Joachim, on November 5, 1882, for Aus-
tralia. Arrived in Queensland in March, 1883. Inducted by Pastor
Hellmuth in Bundaberg as first resident pastor. Died there of typhoid
fever July 8, 1884.
Schirmeister, Carl Franz Alexander. Born July 22, 1814, at
Neustadt (Eberswalde), Prussia. Received theological training
University, Halle. Tutor in home of Baron v. Puttkamer. Then
studied under Pastor Gossner in order to become acquainted with
mission work. As leader of a small party he landed on Chatham
Islands in 1847. For health reasons forced to leave islands in 1857.
On the advice of Dr. Lang, Sydney, he went to German Station,
Moreton Bay, in 1857. Here he worked among German settlers,
founded St. Andrew’s congregation in North Brisbane in 1858, remain-
ing its first pastor till death. Foundation member of E.L.S.Q. in 1885;
its first president till death. Died October 8, 1887. Buried in Toowong
cemetery.
Hellmuth, C. G. Born May 3, 1827, at Seess (Altenburg),
Germany. Received theological training in Hermannsburg mission
seminary, completed, course in 1866. Ordained in Christuskirche at
Hanover March 19, 1866, by D. Eduard Niemann. Sailed on ship
“Sophie” for Australia, landed in Adelaide August 24, 1866. Pastor
in Lobethal, S.A. (E.L.S.A.), 1866-68; Bethania, Qld., 1868-76; Mary-
borough (St. John’s), 1876-85. Then retired, but assisted where
necessary; e.g., Mackay for eight months. Died at Bundaberg on
August 14, 1895. Buried in public cemetery at Bundaberg.
Claussen, Andreas Christian. Born June 6, 1846, Yardland,
Tondern, Northern Sleswig, Germany. Received theological train-
ing Hermannsburg mission seminary. Was sent to New Zealand to
do mission work among Maoris. Ordained Nelson, New Zealand,
by pastors: Heine, C. and H. Dierks. In 1887 the U.G.S.L.S. called
him to open mission station at Mari Yamba, near Mackay. Had to
leave station in November, 1893, owing to breakdown of health.
Pastor at Christ Church, Highfields, 1896-97. Died there August 14,
1897. Buried in Highfields cemetery.
Heiner, Ernst Christian Friedrich Theodor. Born April 3, 1827,
at Zueschen, Waldeck, Germany. Attended Gymnasium at Korbach,
studied theology University of Jena. At termination of his studies
became teacher of languages in private school for two years, then
for four years' second pastor of congregation at Sachsenberg. Was
induced by Dr. Lossbergs, Ipswich, Qld., to come to Australia in
1866. Pastor at Ipswich, 1866-85; served congregations at Reserve
and Brisbane Valley from Ipswich, 1885-99. Foundation member
<E.L.S.Q. His congregations at Ipswich and Stone Quarry did not
approve of synod, was forced to resign in those congregations. First
secretary of synod; its president, 1887-89. Died February 5, 1901;
buried in public cemetery at Ipswich.
Haussmann. Johann Gottfried. Born October 29, 1811, in Saxony.
Attended the mission class of Pastor Gossner in Berlin. In conse-
quence of an urgent request by Dr. Lang to Pastor Gossner to send


missionaries for mission among Australian aborigines, Pastor Hauss-
mann and six others were sent. Party left Hamburg September 7,.
1837, travelled via Hull (England) and Greenock (Scotland), where
they embarked on “Minerva/’ landed in Sydney January 23, 1838,
arrived at Moreton Bay March 30, 1838. Helped to found mission
station at Zion’s *tPill near German Station —Nundah. Station
abandoned in 1850. Haussmann then went to Sydney to attend Dr.
Lang’s college—there met Pastor Goethe, then teacher. He was
ordained in 1852 (Presbyterian Church). Then served as' itinerant
chaplain among English and German settlers. Called by Pastor
Goethe to Victoria in 1855. Pastor of Germantown —now Grovedale
—July 23, 1855-61. Returned to Queensland in 1861, organized South
Brisbane congregation in 1861, its pastor 1861-66. In 1866 founded
“Bethesda” mission station near Beenleigh, also centre of worship
for German settlers of district. Station sold in 1883. Then pastor
of Beenleigh (St. Peter’s), 1883-1901. He and congregations joined
Victoria Synod in 1883, joined the E.L.S.Q. in 1890, after this synod
had affiliated with General Synod. Died at Beenleigh December 31,
190 L Buried in Beenleigh public cemetery.
Maier, Ernst Otto. Born April 13, 1853, at Koengen, Wuerttem-
berg, Germany. Attended high school at Esslingen. Basel mission
seminary, 1872-77. Ordained July 1, 1877, at Esslingen. Sailed for
Australia on ship “Corinth,” landed in Brisbane November 9, 1877.
Pastor German Station, 1877-86; Charters Towers, 1886-88; North
Brisbane, 1888-1905. Foundation member of the E.L.S.Q. Its presi-
dent, 1889-1905. Died March 15, 1905; buried in Toowong public
cemetery.
Copas, Friedrich. Born July 2, 1839, at Triebsees, Germany. Had
assisted in the “Johannisstift” in Berlin. In 1866, together with
Pastor Hampe, answered an appeal by Pastor Gossner for young
Christian men to work as pastors' in Australia: consecrated by Dr.
Wichern. Landed in Brisbane on September 18, 1866. Pastor of
German Station, 1866-67; Maryborough, 4867-1906. Foundation
member of E.L.S.Q. Died December 13, 1906, as result of an opera-
tion. Buried in public cemetery, Maryborough.
Hoerlein, Johann Sebastian. Born at Bruennau, Unterfrauken,
Germany, March 17, 1871. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1888-
91. Ordained May 19, 1891, at Langmeil by pastors: Rechner and
Auricht. Missionary at Bloomfield, North Qld., 1891-1901. Pastor
Plainland, 1901-08. Died suddenly on evening of Sunday he preached
farewell sermon —August 30, 1908. Buried in Gatton public cemetery.
Sueltmann, August. Born January 26. 1831, at Mellin in
Salzwedel, Altmark, Germany. He received University training.
Ordained in Magdeburg on December 17, 1862, by D. Lehnhardt, and
was then pastor in Union Church of Prussia. Joined Free Church
of Hanover. Teacher at Hermannsburg mission seminary; then
pastor of small congregation in Hanover. Inducted at Bethania, Qld.,
September 11, 1884. Pastor of parish (Bethania, Beenleigh, Pimpama
Is.), 1884-1900; Pimpama Island, 1884-1907. Foundation member and
first president U.G.S.L.S., 1885-99.. Died May 18, 1909. Buried in
Bethania cemetery May 19, 1909.
Langebecker, Theodor F. Born June 15. 1845, at Havelberg, near
Potsdam, in Prussia, Germany. Educated in Gymnasium at Potsdam,
in mission seminary of Pastor Gossner. Member of party sent to Aus-
tralia by Gossner Mission Society as result of an appeal by Pastor
Haussmann. Landed at Brisbane September 18, 1866. Assisted by


Pastor Haussmann at Bethesda for six months. Ordained by Pastor
Schirmeister, Pastor of St. Paul’s, Toowoomba, 1867-74; resigned
on account of eye trouble, went to Germany to seek medical aid.
After a stay in Europe for one and a half years, he went to Sacra-
mento, California, there pastor—successor of Pastor Goethe—for
seven and a half years; recalled to Toowoomba in 1883. Served there
till his death, July 13, 1909. Buried in Toowoomba public cemetery.
Foundation member of E.L.S.Q.; its president, 1905-09.
Thun, Julius. Born July 11, 1878, at Klobschin, Western Prussia,
Germany. Received his theological training in Lutheran seminary,
Kropp. Germany. Sent to Australia by “Lutherischen Gotteskasten” in
July, 1902. Landed at Brisbane July 16, 1902. Ordained shortly
after. Pastor of Douglas parish, 1902-09. Died July 19, 1909; buried
in public cemetery, Douglas.
Schmidt, Martin Christian Friedrich. Born June 17, 1852, in
Guenterberg, the Uckermark, Germany. Widowed mother and he came
to Australia 1863. Trained by Pastor Hellmuth to become Lutheran
day school teacher. Teacher in Philadelphia, Eagleby, 1873-78; Mary-
borough, 1878-81. Returned to Germany, studied Hermannsburg
mission seminary, 1881-85. Ordained June 7, 1885. Pastor of St.
John’s, Maryborough, 1885-1914; Bundaberg, 1889-1914; resident in
Maryborough, 1885-91; from then on in Bundaberg. Foundation
member of U.G.S.L.S. Excluded in 1897 because he disagreed over
admittance to holy ministry of Becker, but rejoined in 1909. Died
September 4, 1914; buried in public cemetery, Bundaberg.
Fuhlbohm, Friedrich Wilhelm Christoph. Born March 26, 1848,
at Schweinke in Hanover, Germany. Hermannsburg mission semin-
ary, 1875-82. Ordained October 18, 1882. With a party of seven
Hermannsburg graduates—among them the pastors Joh. and Joch.
Koehnke, Heuer, Prenzler—left Germany November 5, 1882, and
landed Adelaide January 7, 1883. At first assisted Pastor Georg in
Emmaus, then pastor at Appila-Petersburg, 1884-1901; Ipswich,
1901-05. Then retired and settled on farm near Pittsworth, where
he died, August 7, 1916. Excluded from E.L.S.A. in 1899.
Burghardt, Friedrich Wilhelm. Born June 14, 1844, in
Paschrundia, Silesia, Germany. Sent to Queensland by Gossner
Mission Society. Landed at Brisbane September 18, 1866. Pastor
German Station, 1867-74; Toowoomba (St. Paul’s), 1874-82; High-
fields (Christ Church), 1882-95; German Station, 1895-1900; High-
fields (Holy Trinity Church), 1900-17. Joined the U.G.S.L.S. in
1890. Died at Highfields May 22, 1917. Buried in Highfields
cemetery.
Guhr, Gottlieb Wilhelm. Born July 29, 1842, in Tannenberg,
Langenbislau, Silesia, Germany. Sent to Queensland in 1866 by
Gossner Mission Society. Party landed Brisbane September 18, 1866.
Assisted Pastor Haussmann on mission station, Bethesda, near Been-
leigh, till 1870, then given charge of Lutheran day school, St. Paul’s,
Toowoomba. Ordained by Pastor Schirmeister in 1887. As itinerant
pastor he served congregations at Meringatrdan, Westbrook, Aubigny,
Goombungee. Glencoe. Retired in 1908. Died April 28, 1919; buried
in Meringandan cemetery.
Hartwig, August Daniel. Born October 25, 1850, at. Fuerstensee,
Pommern, Germany. Migrated to Australia with his parents in 1864.
Accepted call from congregations German Station and Zillmere in
1873. After two years of private study, examined bv Pastors Hauss-
mann, Gaustadt, Burghardt, in 1875, and then ordained by Pastor


Haussmann. During stay German Station founded small congrega-
tion Caboolture. Pastor at German Station till 1877, then accepted
call to Douglas, resided there till his death. From Douglas he served
congregations at Meringandan, Highfields, Glencoe, Goombungee.
After serious illness in 1883 he gave up congregations with exception
of Douglas', which he served till 1897. Retired as result of dissension
in congregation. Then served congregations at Lowood, Fairney
View, Mt. Beppo (1897-1921) and second congregation at Douglas*
(1901-21). Died December 16, 1921; buried in Douglas public
cemetery December 17, 1921.
Prenzler, Christoph Wilhelm Conrad. Born May 22, 1849, at
Hermannsburg, Germany. Mission seminary, Hermannsburg, 1877-
82. Ordained October 16, 1882. Arrived in Adelaide January 7, 1883.
Pastor in Fassifern district, lived at Hoya, near Boonah. Dissen-
sion lost him congregation in Hoya in 1890. Then lived on his farm
at Teviotville. In Engelsburg he lost part of congregation at forma-
tion of synods in 1885, another part in 1897 as result of dissension,,
remainder amalgamated with Pastor Frank's congregation in 1900.
Served small congregation in Teviotville till 1914, then retired. Died
May 17, 1922; buried in Milbong cemetery May 19. 1922.
Hoefner, Peter Bonifacius. Born June 6, 1856, in Stettfeld*
Bavaria, Germany, of Roman Catholic parents; after losing both of
them in early infancy he was reared by Lutheran foster parents. He
later joined the Lutheran Church. Pastor Wucherer —co-laborer of
W. Loehe—instrumental in awakening faith. Theological training in
mission seminary, Hermannsburg. Sent to Australia in 1888. Pastor
in Murray Flat, S.A. (served congregations at Rhinethal, Sandleton,
Forster, Black Hill, Augsburg, near Blanchetown, Bow Hill), 1889-
1901; German Station and Zillmere, Qld., 1901-23. Belonged •to
E.L.S.A. till 1897, then excluded for remaining faithful to Hermanns-
burg mission seminary. Died March 22, 1924; buried in Nundah
cemetery March 24, 1924.
Koehnke, Joachim. Born December 7, 1855, at Campen, in
Holstein, Germany. Hermannsburg mission seminary, 1877-82. Left,
for Australia with seven other Hermannsburg graduates on Novem-
ber 5, 1882. Landed at Brisbane in March, 1883. Pastor at Too-
woomba (Perth Street), 1883-86; Ipswich, 1886-89; then served
congregations in Logan district, Eagleby (Philadelphia), 1889-1904;
Alberton, 1889-1913; Logan Reserve, 1899-1924; Pimpama Island,
1907-24. Lived in his own residence near Beenleigh. Retired on
account of demand of English services in 1924. First secretary
U.G.S.L.S.; its president, 1907-11. For some years after the War he
supervised the Queensland relief work for Germany, for which he was
rewarded with the Red Cross from the German Government. Died
at Graceville, near Brisbane, where he lived in retirement, April 26,
1930. Buried in Bulimba cemetery.
Frank, Johannes F. Born January 4, 1842, at Ober Urbach ii>
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1863-69. Ordained
July 25, 1869, in Boeblingen in Wuerttemberg. Missionary in Central
India. Founded the mission station at Keypur. For health reasons
left mission field in 1871 and came ‘to Australia. Pastor in Castle-,
maine, Vic., 1872-78; Dimboola, 1878-80. Called to Queensland ip
1888. Pastor at Kirchheim, 1888-1913, then retired. For many years,
secretary E.L.S.Q.; its president, 1908-12. Left synod in 1912 to
found Evangelical Lutheran Church of Australasia. During War
he served North Brisbane and Maryborough. Retired to Sherwood,


near Brisbane. Died February 16, 1927; buried in Kirchheim
cemetery.
Egen, Theodor Immanuel. Born July 10, 1846, at Pfinzweiler in,
Schwarzwald, Wuerttemberg, Germany. Mission seminary, Basel,
1866-72; ordained July 21, 1872, in Neuenberg, Wuerttemberg.
Arrived in Australia in 1872. Pastor at Walla Walla, N.S.W., 1872-
86, then accepted call to German Station, Qld., served congregations:
German Station—now Nudgee Road —1886-94; Zillmere, 1886-94;,
South Brisbane, 1886-91; Nundah, 1894-1924. As itinerant pastor
served congregations at Teutoburg, Caboolture, Lacey’s Creek, Steg-
litz, Pittsworth, and others. Retired 1924. Died at Nundah February
20, 1932. Buried in Nundah public cemetery.
*Fritzsche, Gotthard Daniel. Born July 20, 1796, Liebenwerda,
Dukedom of Saxony. Attended Gymnasium at Dresden, 1809-19.
Studied theology at the University of Breslau especially under
Scheibel, After successfully concluding his studies he became private
teacher in the home of a pious squire, Rappard, in Pinne. The latter’s
wish, that Fritzsche become the pastor of Pinne, was not granted
because Fritzsche refused to enter the ministry in the Union Church.
But he was accepted and ordained as pastor of the Evangelical
Lutheran Church in Prussia by Pastor Wermelskirch. At that time
this Church existed only in secret. He did the work of an itinerant
pastor until the year 1840. All these years he was constantly
“wanted” by the police. He always escaped their vigilance. When
under this constant strain his health began to give way and upon the
urgent request of Pastor Kavel he went to Hamburg and with his
congregation left Cuxhaven on July 12, 1841. He arrived in Aus-
tralia on October 21 the same year. Here he became the pastor of
the Lobethal congregation (Christ’s Vine Yard Church), serving also
the congregation at Bethany and others. He died October 26, 1863,
at Lobethal, where his mortal remains rest close to the church.
PASTORS WHO TEMPORARILY SERVED CONGREGATIONS
South Australia.
Buck, Paul. Pastor of Moravian congregations Bethel and South
Kilkerran, S.A., 1892-1907. During last years' also pastor of free
congregation, Daveyston. Then returned to Germany. Retired at
Gnadenberg, near Bunziau, in Silesia, Germany.
Fiedler, AdelberL Arrived in Australia in 1858. Pastor of
German Protestant congregation in Hahndorf, previously served by
Kappler (Adelaide). Also served congregations in Lobethal,
Adelaide (Angas Street), Callington, and Burra. When Pastor
Keppler left Hahndorf in 1864 his congregation joined congregation
of Fiedler. Returned to Germany in 1874. There pastor of Lutheran
Church of Hanover.
Keppler, W. Born in Wuerttemberg, Germany: Called by Pastor
Staudenmeyer. Landed in Australia April 8, 1860. Inducted by
Staudenmeyer at Hahndorf on April 30, 1860. Pastor at Hahndorf
till 1864, then transferred to Light’s Pass to assist Staudenmeyer in
Fritzsche, although at hrst left out from this list, was included with
good reasons:—Fritzsche is one of the founders of the Australian Lutheran
Church ; he exerted a great influence upon the development of the Church, which
although not always beneficial, was at the same time a necessary corrective. The
standpoint which he eventually adopted in reference to the Lutheran Confessions
is that of the U.F.L.C.A.


work at Tanunda (St. John’s), Gnadenfrei, Nain. Soon afterwards
left for Germany.
Kuss, Martin. Born April 16, 1887, at Mannum, S.A. Neuendet-
telsau mission seminary, 1906-09. Pastor at Loxton, 1910-21; Laura,
1922-24. In 1921, with Pastor Jericho, editor of “The Church and
Mission News.” Ceased to be pastor in 1925.
Michel, Karl Friedrich. Born March 6, 1885, at Beilstein, in
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Educated at Basel mission seminary,
1905-09. Ordained November 21, 1909, in Beilstein. Sailed for
Australia, 1910. Itinerant pastor for Im. Syn. a.a.G., Cleve, Eyre’s
Peninsula, till 1912. Pastor at Point Pass (St. Petri), 1912-13. Left
Australia for Germany on April 22, 1913. Pastor in Brazil, 1924-31;
now pastor at Niederhall, Wuerttemberg, Germany.
Muecke, Carl. Born July 16, 1815, at Bueden, near Magdeburg,
Germany. Educated Gymnasium, Zerbst; attended University, Bonn;
then Berlin. Was promoted to Phil.Dr. November 12, 1847. Migrated
to Australia in 1849, after having taken part in 1848 revolution. For
short while farmer at Gawler. Pastor at Tanunda, 1850-70. He
served congregations at Tanunda (Tabor), Schoenfeld, Daveyston,
Wasleys, Greenock. Then for some time editor of “Australische
Zeitung.” Died at Hahndorf, January 4, 1898.
Ortenburger, J. L. Adolf. Born March 1, 1871, at Ortenburg,
Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1888-91. Ordained
North Rhine, April 19/1891, by pastors: Kaibel, G. J. Rechner, Auricht.
Pastor at Appila, 1891-1928. Farewell service, March 11, 1928.
Returned to Germany and lives at Neuendettelsau. Teacher of
Symbolics at Neuendettelsau mission seminary. Organized and carried
on till 1928, in conjunction with his wife, Relief Work for Central
Europe on large scale after War and supervised it till his departure
to Germany.
Rechner, A. Friedrich. Born at Light’s Pass. Attended Gym-
nasium, Guestrow; University, Leipzig, in Germany. Ordained at
Light’s Pass, S.A. Pastor at Point Pass (Im.), 1886-91. Then teacher
of German language, St. Peter’s College. German lecturer at Univer-
sity. Adelaide. Later pastor in Tanunda (Tabor, Kreuz Kapelle);
then resigned from ministry. Died in W.A., 1938.
Reuther, Joh. Georg. Born September 3, 1861, at Rossstall,
Mttlfr., Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1886-88.
Missionary at Bethesda (Killalpaninna), 1888-1906. Together with
missionary Strehlow translated New Testament into Dieri; printed by
Br. & Forgn. Bibl. Soc. Then retired to live on farm at Julia, S.A.
Died as 1 result of drowning accident, February 27, 1914.
Schaber, Johannes. Born September 30, 1887, at Bernhausen,
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1907-12. Ordained
August, 11, 1912, in Bernhausen. Pastor in Vic. Resided in
Horsham, 1913-25 (served congregations at Green Lake, Lochiel,
Winiam, Vic.); Laura, S.A., 1925-26. Returned to Germany. At
present pastor at Dietersweiler. Secretary of U.E.L.C.A., 1921-22.
Schmetzer, Wilhelm. Born July 8, 1882, at Auerbach, near
Leutershausen, Germany. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1906-10.
Arrived in Qld., February, 1911. Pastor at Mackay, March 12,
1911-19; Point Pass (Im.), S.A., 1919-29 (1919-21, assistant of Pastor
Leidig in college and parish). Director of Immanuel College, Point
Pass, 1921-22. Farewell service, July 28, 1929. Now pastor in
Unter-Schwanigen, Bavaria, Germany.
Schmidt, Georg Heinrich. Born October 31, 1883. Educated at
Hermannsburg mission seminary, also in Ohio. Pastor at Bethany,


1910-11. Then resigned. Foundation member of Trin. congr., Sydney.
Died at Sydney, July 24, 1938.
Spanagel, Jakob, Born on October 28, 1860, in Reutlingen, Wuert-
temberg, Germany. Basel mission, seminary, 1882-87. Ordained
March 20, 1887, in Reutlingen. From 1887-88, assistant of Pastor
Niquet. Pastor at Light’s Pass (Im.), S.A., 1887-1900. Then resigned
and lived at Light’s Pass, where he died, October 14, 1928.
Victoria.
Burkhardt, Johann Jakob, Member of Melbourne congregation.
Resided at Saltwater River. Assistant pastor at Bendigo, 1857; then
ordained. Served Melbourne during the absence of Pastor Goethe in
Germany. Then pastor at Bendigo till 1860.
Fischer, Hermann. Born January 10, 1857, at Bittenfeld, in
Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1876-81. Ordained
October 23, 1881, in Bremen. Missionary in West Africa, 1881-87.
Pastor at Pleasant Hills, N.S.W., 1888-90; Green Lake-Friedheim, Vic.,
1890-96. Then joined Church of England. Now residing at Woody
Point, near Brisbane.
Gehricke, Wilhelm. Sent to Qld. by Pastor Gossner with Mission
party in 1884. Assisted at Zion’s Hill till 1856; then proceeded to Vic.
as result of Goethe’s visit. Pastor at Bendigo, November, 1856-April,
1857. Then returned to German Station in Qld.
Gutekunst, Karl Eugen. Born July 25, 1872, at Nagold, Wuert-
temberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1895-1900. Ordained
September 2, 1900, in Nagold. Pastor at Eudunda, S.A., 1900-14;
Melbourne, 1914-23/ Then returned to Germany; pastor at Oettlingen,
Baden. Now retired, living at Nagold, Wuerttemberg. President of
Victoria Synod, 1917-21; of Victoria District, 1921-23.
Loehe, Wilhelm Hermann Albrecht. Born July 21, 1907, at Nati-
muk, Vic. Immanuel College, Point Pass, 1922; Immanuel College and
Seminary, North Adelaide, 1923-31. Ordained April 10, 1931, at North
Adelaide, by Pastors Jobs. J. Stolz, J. P. Loehe, W. Riedel, E.
Bemmann. Home missionary in Vic., 1931-33; pastor at Dannevirke,
New Zealand, 1933-35. Then resigned from ministry and returned
to Australia; now studying at University, Brisbane.
Lehner, Stephan. Born May 17, 1877, at Nuernberg, Germany.
Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1896-99. Ordained at Point Pass
(Im.), October 31, 1900. At first assistant Pastor Leidig in college
and parish. Pastor at Natimuk, Vic., 1900-02. Since then missionary,
New Guinea.
Munzel, Friedrich. C&me to xAustralia in 1862, pastor of Castle-
maine, Maldon, Yandoit, and in the same year was also asked to serve
Bendigo. Resigned in May, 1868, and as a result of medical advice
left Australia and probably returned to Germany.
Stierle, Gottlob. Born May 16, 1885, at Neidlingen, Wuerttenberg,
Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1905-10. Ordained October 16,
1910, in Neidlingen. Pastor of Green Lake, 1910-11. Returned to
Germany. At present pastor at Woessingen, near Bretten, Baden.
Thun, Nikolaus von. Pastor at Bendigo, 1860-62.
New South Wales.
Fiedler, Karl. Received theological training in Kropp seminary,
Sleswig, Germany. Pastor at Temora, 1912-19. Then returned to
Germany. Later pastor at Santa Augusta, Brazil. Now at Hochdorf,
in Thueringia, in Germany.
Goehner, Theodor. Born May 27, 1870, in Thunnlingen, Wuerttem-
berg, Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1902-06. Ordained May 17,


-1908, in Calw, Wuerttemberg. Pastor at Pleasant Hills, N.S.W,„
1908-11. For health reasons returned to Germany. Served in army
during World War. Pastor in Brazil, Ijuhy Fachinal, 1920-23. Now
living Tuebingen, Germany.
Medingdoerfer, Friedrich. Born November 17, 1899, Wald, Mttlfr.,,
Bavaria, Germany. Served in War, Belgian prisoner of war for about
two years. Studied Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1921-27.
Arrived in S.A. same year. Ordained January 15, 1928, at Lowood,
Qld., by Pastor Hiller, chairman Board of Foreign Mission, assisted
by pastors: L. Doehler, E. Rohde, E. Wiencke. Missionary, Hope
Valley, 1928-32; pastor at Pleasant Hills, N.S.W., 1932-34. Resigned
owing to illness, and after living at Light’s Pass, S.A., for two years,
returned to Germany, 1936. Now living in Neuendettelsau, Germany.
Queensland.
Anger, Carl August. Sent to Qld. in 1863 by Gossner Mission
Society. Ordained and inducted in St. Paul’s, Philip Street, Too-
woomba, May 10, 1863, by Pastor Schirmeister, but soon had to
relinquish position, which caused dissension, with the result that
‘"lndependent German Church” was founded, with house of worship
in Perth Street, Toowoomba. Pastor of this congr., 1864-72. In 1897
he was ministering to adherents in Crow’s Nest and Haden Districts,
but the Registrar-General refused registration as minister of religion.
As'beck, J. H. Educated at mission seminary, Hermannsburg„
Germany. Pastor in America. Came to Qld. in 1904. Pastor in
South Brisbane till November, 1904. Then returned to U.S.A., where
he died November 1, 1909.
Becker, Erwin. Studied University, Berlin, without sitting for
examination. Came to Qld. in 1891. Examined and ordained by
Pastor Sueltmann in September, 1891. Pastor Nazareth Church, South
Brisbane, which under him joined U.G.S.L.S., 1891-1900, 1905-08.
Then returned to Germany. In years 1900-05 he was out of ministry.
Secretary synod, 1892-99; its president, 1899-1900.
Berndt, Chr. Selected for the ministry by Pastor Haussmann in
1876. Ordained by him in 1879. Served congregation at Minden (St.
John’s); founded congregation at Hatton Vale. As a result of con-
troversy with Haussmann, the latter caused his name to be struck oif
roll of registered Lutheran pastors. He was then registered as pastor
of Congregational Church of Queensland. The consequence was that
he lost his congregations. The party remaining faithful to him built
church at Hillside. This “Congregational Lutheran Church” was
dedicated December 10, 1891.
Doblies, M. Educated at seminary in Breklum, Sleswig-Hoistein,
Germany. Came to Australia with the object of becoming a mission-
ary. Joined Missionary J. Flierl in New Guinea in 1886; left in 1887.
Pastor at Mackay, 1888-90, then assisted when required, e.g., Mary-
borough and Rockhampton. Then itinerant pastor of U.G.S.L.S. Then
pastor at Plainland and South Brisbane till 1904, when he took charge
of Rosevale without knowledge of synod officials; was excluded from
synod in 1905. Joined E.L.S.Q. in 1909, together with congregations
at Rosevale and in Pittsworth district. Resigned in 1926 and left
for Germany. • , .
Eberhardt, M. Born in Germany, March 7, 1854, at Laage,
Mecklenburg-Schwerin. Received theological training at Lutheran
seminary, Mendota, 111., U.S.A. Arrived in Queensland in 1879.
Pastor at Bethania, 1879-83; Eagleby, 1879-89; Alberton, 1879-89:
Pimpama Isl., 1879-83; Charters Towers, 1889-90. His inclination


to introduce Romish practices produced trouble in every congregation
he served. He then seceded from Lutheran Church and joined Rom.
Cath. Church. He left Australia in 1892 for Germany and America.
Gaustadt, C. Missionary of the Gossner Society in India. Came
to Australian for health reasons in 1869. Assisted Pastor Heiner in
serving at Mackay and other centres. Pastor at Kirchheim and
Minden, 1873-79. Then left for New Zealand, where he died.
Giezendanner, Johann Anton.. Educated at Roman Catholic college,
Sevenhill, in S.A., but was refused ordination for not accepting in-
fallibility of Pope dogma. In Melbourne Pastor Herlitz examined and
ordained him. Was sent by Herlitz to the “Independent German
Church,” Perth Street, Toowoomba, Qld., in 1878; later pastor at
Bundaberg. Had to leave there in 1886.
Goessling, J. F. R. Born February 25, 1838, at Bockhorn, near
Oldenburg. Educated at Hermannsburg mission seminary. Came to
Australia on ship “Sophie.” Landed in Australia, August 27, 1866.
Missionary at Bethesda (Killalpaninna), S.A., in 1867. Then pastor
in Gerogery, N.S.W.; missionary among Maoris in New Zealand,
1876-79; pastor of Kirchheim, 1879-86; Plainland, 1886-1900; High-
fields (Christ Church), 1900-05. Then retired, but continued to assist
where required, e.g., South Brisbane. Commenced work in Kingaroy
district and served congregations at Deep Gully and Mt. Sylvia.
Foundation member of the U.G.S.L.S. Seceded from synod in October,
1909, and with congregations at Deep Gully and Mt. Sylvia joined
E.L.S.A. Died January 29, 1917, buried in Lutheran cemetery at
Plainland.
Hansen, Ditlef. Came from Denmark to Qld. as a missionary..
Ordained by Pastor J. C. Pedersen and stationed in Maryborough in
1881. From there he served Scandinavians at Tiaro, Nikenbah, and
Pialba. Foundation member of U.G.S.L.S. At Mackay in 1888, then
name struck off list of pastors of synod. Returned to Maryborough;
there he later opened a small business, but continued to care for the
spiritual welfare of his countrymen.
Haussmann, John. Son of Pastor Haussmann. Received Uni-
versity training in Germany. Returned to Qld. with party sent by
Gossner Mission in 1866. For a while pastor at Rockhampton and
Mackay; later, for a short time, Presbyterian clergyman. Died soon
after 1900.
Hansche, Ernst R. Born September 10, 1863, at Dresden, Ger-
many. Neuendettelsau mission seminary, 1891-94. Ordained at
Cottbus, Silesia, by Superintendent Fengler. Came to Qld. in 1894.
Missionary at Mari Yamba on Proserpine River, Nth. Qld., 1894-98.
Then returned to Germany. Later missionary in New Guinea; then
pastor in U.S.A.
Heyde, Carl Ludwig. Selected for the ministry and sent by Pastor
Schirmeister, May, 1864, to take charge of St. Paul's, Toowoomba.,
Left for Sydney in March, 1866. There organized the German
Lutheran congregation and became its first pastor. Left again in
1868
Holtermann, Joh. Friedrich. Born January 13, 1861, in Hemslingen,.
Hanover. Mission seminary, Hermannsburg, 1884-89. Then left for
Australia. At first assisted in S.A. and Vic. Came to Qld. in 1890;,
pastor at Ipswich, 1890-97; Douglas, 1897-99; Springside-Black Plains,
1900-04. He then went to reside on his farm at Linthorpe. From
there he continued to serve Black Plains for a while, then retired. In
1912 he seceded from U.G.S.L.S. and joined E.L.S.A. Died November
6, 1937. Buried November 8, 1937, in Lutheran cemetery at Aubigny.
Koch, Johannes. Born September 8, 1887, at Tailfingen, Wuert-


temberg. Basel mission seminary, 1907-13. Ordained June 29, 1913, in
Tailfingen. Arrived in Australia early in 1914. Served parish of
Marburg-Kirchheim-Minden till 1920. In Brazil, 1922-25; in U.S.A.
since 1926, now at Lake Elmo, Minn., U.S.A.
Larsen, Jens Christian. By birth a Norwegian. Ordained in
Norway. Came to Brisbane in June, 1889. Pastor in South Brisbane,
serving Scandinavians in that locality. After a short stay he returned
to Norway.
Mohr, A. Was sent from Hermannsburg. At first Luth. day
school teacher in Bethania, Qld. Ordained by Pastor Sueltmann in
1895 and sent as missionary to Mari Yamba to assist Missionary
Hansche. Left the station a year later. Then assisted Sueltmann
by serving congregation at Logan Reserve. Inducted as its pastor in
1898, but left in same year for Germany. Returned in 1899 and
became pastor of congregations at Douglas and Djuan. Again left
for Germany in 1900, but returned and continued to serve the Douglas
parish. In 1902 he once more left for Germany. In the following
years he recrossed the ocean several times. After each return he
offered his services, but without success. Died at Stuttgart, Germany,
during World War.
Pedersen, J. C. Came from Santos, in Brazil, where he had been
a seamen’s missionary. Pastor of Danish congregation at Brisbane,
August 30, 1880-December, 1886. He organized church work among
Scandinavians in Qld. Mainly due to his influence that Danish pastors
and congregations joined the U.G.S.L.S. at its foundation. 111-health
forced him to return to Denmark.
Seybold, Wilhelm Christian. Born October 13, 1879, at Kirschen-
hardthof, in Wuerttemberg, Germany. Basel mission seminary,
1898-1905. Ordained April 2, 1905, in Erlstatten, Wuerttemberg.
Arrived in Qld. in June, 1905. Pastor of Dugandan parish, 1905-16.
Then interned and at conclusion of War deported to Germany. In
America since 1922. At present pastor at Republic City, Kans. U.S.A.
Treuz, Karl Ehregott. Born May 21, 1875, at Bitz, Wuerttemberg,
Germany. Basel mission seminary, 1894-1901. Ordained in 1902.
Arrived in Qld. in July, 1902. Pastor at Beenleigh, 1902-06; North
Brisbane (St. Andrew’s), 1906-16. Interned and at conclusion of War
deported to Germany. For several years secretary of E.L.S.Q. In
1912 he joined the State Church of Prussia and withdrew from synod.
Foundation member and first president of Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Australasia. In 1920 went to Brazil; then returned to
Germany. Now pastor in Geislingen a.K., in Wuerttemberg.
Wittig, Max. Luth. day school teacher at Sandleton, S.A.,
1895-1903. Then entered service of Methodist mission in German New
Guinea. Later returned to Germany. Came to Queensland in
October, 1911. Ordained at Plainland, October 8, 1911. Home
missionary of U.G.S.L.S. in Kingaroy-Wondai district, 1911-15. Then
left for America. Died in South America.


FROM DEPTH OF FAR SILESIA
From depth of far Silesia
Across the ocean bound,
A little band, of exile men
Lay in the Plymouth Sound.
No dreams of gold and conquest
Had lured them thus to roam;
No pressure of hard poverty
Had urged them from their home.
The fields that fed their fathers,
Hnough for them had grown,
And they no longings for the world
Beyond their homes had known.
They did but seek for freedom
To pour their prayers to heaven,
To harken to the voice of God; —
That freedom was not given.
Then, as one man, the people
Hollowed their pastor forth,
Hearer one atom of God’s truth.
Than all most dear on earth.
On the same spot where long ago
The Pilgrim Fathers lay,
These stood for God and conscience sake,
As resolute as they.
For the first time beholding him,
Whose toils for them had won
Freedom to serve their God in peace
Beneath the southern sun.
Strangers in land and language,
What claim they of his care?
Christians, and for Christ’s sake -oppressed,
What labors could he spare?
He knew that they had suffered,
He knew they would be free,
“And what you do to these the least
Yet do it unto Me.”
They stood with hearts o’erflowing
That little rescued band,
Strong men and grey haired sires, and babes
Thronging to kiss his hand.


And tears from young and aged,
Fell thick as summer rain,
And eyes wept sore with thankfulness,
That had not wept for pain.
May these soft drops be heralds
Of a most blessed spring,
Whose toils shall harvests of rich fruit
For heavens own garners' bring.
His eyes, who ne’er forgetteth
A single sigh or tear
Poured forth in faith and for His sake —
His gracious eyes were there.
Faith never missed her triumph,
The rainbow lights her now,
The clouds that shroud the noon, shall weave
A crown for evening’s brow.
Behind the storm is sunshine
As though no storm was near,
In God’s own time, he knows how soon,
That sunshine shall appear.
By Miss Bundle, later Mrs. Charles, authoress of the
“Schoenberg Cotta Family.”
(See page 34)


ON THE THRESHOLD OF THE SECOND CENTURY.
r centenary of the Australian Lutheran Church has been cele-
brated by many a festive function. In many congregations
special services were conducted, and parishes combined for regional
festivals. There were also district celebrations. The Victoria
District celebrated on the 21st Sunday a. Trim, November 6, at
Horsham; the New South Wales District on the Ist Sunday in
Advent. November 27. Queensland celebrated earlier than other
districts, it commemorating especially the coming of the Gossner
missionaries, in conjunction with its synod on Sunday Jubilate,
May 5, at Nundah-Zion’s Hill. Special festive functions
were also held in November, the chief one in Beenleigh on November
27 (Ist Sunday in Advent). The South x\ustralian district celebrated
at Angaston and Langmeil-Tanunda, on Saturday, November 19, and
on Sunday (23rd Sun. a. Trim), November 20. This, though in the
first place the function of the district, was in the nature of a general
U.E.L.C.A. celebration. Unfortunately, there were no representatives
of overseas Lutheran Churches present. But evidences of the
communion of saints were indeed not lacking. Those that sent
greetings were: —the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Prussia,
the Leipzig Lutheran Mission, the Basel Mission, the Hermanns-
hurg Mission, the Neuendettelsau Mission, the Martin Luther-
Bund, the Lutheran World Convention, the Council of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany, the Evangelical
Lutheran Churches of Bavaria and Wuerttemberg, the Lutheran
Churches of Sweden, Denmark, Esthonia, Roumania, Yugo-
slavia, the American Lutheran Church, the Evangelical Lutheran
Augustana Synod of U.S.A., the United Lutheran Church of
America, the National Lutheran Council of U.S.A., the Evangelical
Lutheran Tamil Church of India, the Mission of the United American
Lutheran Church in China, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of
Japan, the Lutheran Mission Finschhafem The Papuan native
Lutheran Church of New Guinea, and the Koko Yimidir (Hope
Valley) and Aranda (Central Australia) voiced their greetings
through the mouth of Pastor Theile, Director of the Lutheran
Mission, New Guinea. Truly a large cloud of witnesses! The
presence of the sainted witnesses was certainly not missing either.
A monument over the original tombstone in memory of the founder.
Pastor Kavel, was unveiled. The secular press took recognition of
these functions. National stations spread descriptions by broadcast.


And now the U.E.L.C.A. is entering upon its second century.
The spirit in which it does so is concisely expressed in the conclud-
ing remarks of the short review of the history of the first hundred
years as published in the Christian Book Almanac for 1939. These
remarks may serve as a fitting conclusion to this book:
“The Course is Set; the Task is Clear.
“‘The course is set. It is the course of the golden mean, of full
four-square loyalty to the glorious inheritance of the fathers,
enshrined in the Confessions of the Lutheran Church, of holding
ourselves open to comprehend ever more the riches of the Biblical
truth; a course which, in our history, has exerted the greatest power
of attracting, and which keeps us in step and in fellowship with the
Lutheran Church at large. The task is clear, that we remain true
to our history, true to ourselves, which, in the final analysis, means
faithfulness to the Lord who, in a hundred years, has shaped us
according to His good pleasure into a Church which endeavors to
combine the right faith with the right faith, or, in other w r ords,
a correct belief or faith with a living faith. The task is clear that we
continue steadfastly along the course set, firmly being convinced
that the course of the U.E.L.C.A. is the only genuinely Lutheran
course. The Lord who rules even in small things has, without pre-
meditation on our part in this direction, prevented us at our last
general synod from altering our official designation, so that in the
usual abbreviation of the name of our Church in its German
spelling, V.E.L.K.A., we, by reversing the two syllables of the name
get the name of its founder, Kavel: VEL-KA, KA-YEL—and have
therefore in our name a constant reminder of our duty to retain
that what was essential in the founder’s trend and strain. There
must be no deviation, neither to the right nor to the left. Much as
we desire union with the E.L.S.A. and with others, we dare only theft
entertain it, if it can be done without altering our course. If an
alteration of this course were to be made, a union now, and under
such conditions, would later necessitate a going out of the union by
those who scent that the course intended and set by the Lord was
altered.
“ Fulfilment of our task along the course set demands two things:
firstly, the guarding ot the Biblical Lutheran truth for ourselves
and for those after us; secondly, tke passing on of this truth to all
among whom the Lord causes us to work. As to the first, it is our
duty to remain on guard around the fountain of this Biblical
Lutheran truth, from which, as a careful study of the Biblical
Lutheran doctrinal position will reveal, that stream of living water
has been flowing and is flowing and will be flowing into the


Church —that stream which keeps it alive. May we be loyal
in this work by standing around this fountain-head 'in joyous
complacency, with shining • faces, with keen-edged swords’ (W.
Loehe). As to the second, it behoves us to make full use of the
means at our disposal. Nothing sensational, nothing in the line of
stunts is needed. All that is necessary is faithful use of the means
of grace, Word and Sacrament; in regular morning and evening
devotions in the home; in church attendance as regular as clock -
worg; in faithful preaching and hearing of the Word as a word
which, although a word of old, has a special message for every time
and need and problem; in faithfully administering and participating
in the Sacraments; in basing the training of our young in the home
and in the school on the Word of God; in leading our adolescent
members into the experience of the joy in their Lord, which, on the
one hand, will make them shun the vain pleasures of the world and,
on the other, will sanctify all their earthly joys. Faithfulness in
the use of the means of grace will make us willing gratefully to
follow up all avenues for spreading the Gospel in its true Biblical
Lutheran conception. Wonderful opportunities are available, the
press —our own (church papers, publications, Book Depot) and the
secular, as far and as long as its columns are open to us, —the radio,
the language of the country, the language of the fathers, the lan-
guages of the Esthonians, Aranda, Koko Yimidir and any other'for
which the Lord opens our mouths.
"We must value the opportunity and the ability to use different
languages, especially as it is a real 'gift of tongues.’ Languages and
nationalisms, subservient to the eternal gospel, are means of further-
ing the gospel cause . . .
"The fulfilment of our task necessitates that in the home, in the
congregation, in the Church and its works, we sacrifice of our time
and means all that is required; that we pull ourselves together; that
we exert every ounce of strength; that wholeheartedly we dedicate
OURSELVES to the Lord. As people wdio know themselves wholly
dependent upon Christ, who know T that from Him alone comes all
their strength, we enter upon the second century of the Australian
Lutheran Church with the words upon our lips, wdth the words vibrat-
ing through our whole being:
7 will go in the strength of the Lord God : / will make mention of
Thy righteousness , even Thine only' (Ps. 71, 16.)”


*
\ . . ■ ■ , t
Mf 1 ’
OO/STOWrt. ||
a mR $iw*^ucESpLs QLR cN
i [ f^y^'\_^h ,S6qNE
1-6 = KARTEN=MAPS IN BlLDERANHANC«5EE ILLUSTRATIONS
+ * STATION U.E.L.C.A. /(pS==g^
* = NEBEN5TATION =OUTSTATlON U.E.L.C.A.
O* HAUPTGEM= RESIDENT PASTOR E.LS.A. VJ TRSf*]R[)l IH .
• = NEBENGEM = AFFILIATED CONOR. HOQPRT^^Jjf


/ «- 'ki
/ y ■••; ;p‘ ■ 2?
|||iPP *®rl
' 'Wm I *>,
S'i iW ' . a
|l j| 4 & t
mm
JJU,,n "®’ .
'
mm \
I ,
\jV^f.,<jlV/
riff C I ' Spw«| M
, ' ; ilmj t iL 'Jiili- :l »'' '::f
4%• lir
ri j "wSjjijji - ■■ liii?i
■ ''MMmI \\
“-hi ,; ‘. I I ■; I Tpiil:/;
V ; V 1 (i : - ::
•- . .a ; ;=.. ;; -- *W :
v . ’„T: I,. %
■""iliiiii:
v < .- • *-•
■■%%&'■ ■;<; (
'& : :iU:
■; ' I' ' J
1 & Mw im&v M
» %<^w' I J>
1N»«~. rST *
||P :: ' j
'
AUGUST LUDWIG CHRISTIAN KAVEL
Pastor at Klemzig and Langmeil, S.A. Founder
of the Lutheran Church in Australia.
Dr. J. G. SCHEIBEL
Spiritual Father of A.L.C.
GEORGE FIFE ANGAS
The Benefactor of the Lutherans.


% ''■''-'%$&&■£# »• ’ 5* |tf| «|J? ;
Church at Klemzig, Germany.
Bridge over River Oder at Tschicherzig, place of embarkation,
June 8, 1838.


.y.y.'y.y^
.k.H* .jHp ;.. #
Klemzig, S.A.
First Lutheran Church, Langmeil, S.A.
First St. Andrew’s Church,
North Brisbane.
First Lutheran Day School,
Langmeil, S.A.


11 MPpiiPpi— ■ ■ KttgfiHI
"'{' v * ' • ' *
«" 1 if i 5 g 5 j l | | ffi f * W
4 «•■ * J. . «-x; ;:: V : :-x ijx% ;} | :$ J | ] | I ®
'
. f
Pastor Kavel’s tombstone and centenary monument.
Pastor Fritzsche's grave,
Lobethal, S.A.
Light’s Pass,
S.A., in the
early times.
Church at Bethania, Queensland,
built 1872.


in 11 * t t wwi > a w w s 1 1 r _
V,#» ; * 'i ,
f~i * i A
«
' '- N; ' . .y' .' 1 ';
|
Ji&.
Bethany, S.A., 1850.
First Church, North Rhine, S.A.
Place of Landing, first Lutherans,
Logan River, Qld.
First Church, Ebenezer, S.A.
St. John’s, Maryborough, Qld.
First Church, Alberton, Qld.


Jlr ’* §K i|%,
11® « —
-*■*
jPI| W
m. m I WMWw%vm
tMj&ymtmv. *mt M %Q &***>
Jk ~V# Ji '
JP
sKl 7 v
J|p|| 1
Jap
MS&
J ■
1
JB
ip jsj& «
%P%W'-
/ ‘Mbs?
«B jA H
Jr
m m - I : ||
'" " mmKBg
aHHp
MATTHIAS GOETHE,
Pastor of Melbourne. Founder
Lutheran Church, Victoria.
PASTOR NIQUET,
Light’s Pass, S.A.
P. SCHIRMEISTER,
First President Evang.
Lutheran Synod Qld.
PASTOR HAUSSMANN,
Queensland.
PASTOR REUSCH,
Tanunda. First Basel Pastor in
S.A.
PASTOR HERLITZ,
President of Victoria and General Synod.


/ Jf \
/ I. \
\ tr Jl /
nrm
M
y
|pl?:d||AH&hJp
*
/ f v\
■ ; ..;
PASTOR AURICHT,
Langmeil, S.A., President
Immanuel Synod.
PASTOR HEIDENRICH,
First Hermannsburg Graduate,
First President E.L.S.A* a.a.G.
PASTOR STOLZ,
First Neuendettelsau
Graduate*
PASTOR RECHNER,
President Immanuel Synod,
Chairman of Mission Committee*


D \ «Tni’ nil i t.’i>
|||
fl|KK9g.
wpr t^m
Wk
mmmm. v mzmmk.
WmL/ ••; % •
:■ . & .^fec- r
f \ " " I*
W% ; Miz-i ', ' '
IgK IjLf
WSkT'^*
1 I-
PASTOR LEIDIG,
Founder of Immanuel College, President
Immanuel Synod.
PASTOR HILLER,
First President, Queensland
District, U.E.L.C.A.
PASTOR LOEHE,
Last President Immanuel Synod;
First President Gen. U.E.L.C.A.
PASTOR BRAUN,
Last President General Synod; First
President, S.A. District, U.E.L.C.A.


J„
T ,
N ' 7" W "V
X > *
Langmeil Church of Thanksgiving.
Point Pass Immanuel Church and Manse.


y I •
V '
i& ■ ■ . 4 ■ • ■ . I
1 ■■
I.. ’ _ ’
«<j9ijfeiti# . & k y i|*|s| M ■ *** BfcjfcBgBg
$ •. S *»*> ~ ' fffiiitft ■ <r6jMSwflMi|^t'-, ■ •ranRjjyB*
p* ■■ - <*w9wir. r
Church at Ebenezer, S.A., where Foundation Synod U.E.L.C.A.
was held, 1921.
St. John’s, Tanunda, where last convention of General Synod was
held, 1920.


v ‘^* v ■
*'. *$j$r ' * '■■■ * *p* ; *• m p : ■■ .■. .. £ ''
" muffm IS -. masL Si# flhk •
•:•>,••■ .•■ ISpB&sife liippfr mmm. MKSL jHralkJtfVlk. f
m. l JB^PPL.
_™i. |f *fllBBF -MBBiSbi '*JBBf! Mb ’■ ,|wBp . aBBI^ :
r . tMSL. 'JSHhmHRhk -■ qPwi| : $Sr * /mfflBBi.l "
.. ,.«f , gBSSftP-. f ■•■:•»■•:• raajMBMS&SfiV ... **;;. it™-. ; ife«J
’PETi. *^ffe ,: ' », ; y “'i. * JMf ; a.
Jp: *;£* _ ' <;■ "" »■' •■• lWx?i® ■ ' . / . *"?*' ,'t , ■. ', •
mm'*' ’ JL "■ „. ' Sir v '^Wfc-
Mpp HP *||B|lfP' M, .y^...... T .., : . ....
V> .,;. .„. -t ' ,.«i, ■■ :..I.M£^.:. >> ’" »TW«iiiUl8Wt .. ■ , • . v ;<W. ■' .... ■ ■■ ■■■■..« ,... "•-■::<«
■'• m : .* ■ : .-;. f V - M|^ •••-
PASTORS, FOUNDATION SYNOD. EBENEZER, S.A., 1921.
Top row: J. Meier, A. Ortenburger, J. Riedel, J. Bogner, M. Kuss, Paul Breier, W. Schmetzer, E. Sprengel, J. Doehler, George, F. Matschoss, J.
Simpfendoerfer. Middle row: A. Fehlberg, A. Sabel, Jobs. J. Stolz, K. Held, W. Riedel, F. Leidig, F. O. Theile, A. Hiller, Th. Hebart, J. Zwar, A.
Jericho. Bottom row; E. Bemmann, W. Basedow, Mrs. Richter, F. Braun, J. P. Lcehe, F. Richter, D.D., K. Gutekunst, C. Siegle, L. Kuss, A.
Poehler, G. Simpfendoerfer.


- ill
?*/ - ' * , m&S.
ip '
*: |,I'.
* lifet ‘
v /■i—f |
Immanuel College, Point Pass, S.A.
Immanuel College, North Adelaide.


v ' *31
< %- t ill- ** *
=x *~ ' J|||i .. W I Jp 'W/W&- ||||||||
m Ijjfc JP’ C • jB
v <^ /
Jf • |
|||>
• ; 'i-- m
'J,‘ ' '. ■ v.- ?
Jy; £.;PillpM
TEACHING STAFF, IMMANUEL COLLEGE AND SEMINARY.
lop row: S. Held, Pastor Auricht, M.A. ; A. Doecke, A.U.A.A., F.1.A., A.A.I.S. ;
(J. Kurtz; P. Pfeiflfer. Second row: G. A. Keller, Head Teacher; Pastor Muetzel-
feldt; Pastor Hoehe, Principal ; Pastor Kiedel; W. Schneider, M.A., Dip.Ed.
Topp, teacher, Bethany, S.A.


.’ i^^f r m|P mm
I Wmwmj^ I
|||| '« , : y '. .',< « , ’' y \s4%/- *' S< /■■ Jfa5—ea< t
/!|s - : 'v. : & ■■ SBH
J| |k # v^'-SS■;S&3^V;J
ImmwL %**. . ||| ||| ■ IBIHmilil.y hi
| itm'® > ' ; % T - ■ J « Jg^||
I^B 1 ' "****’" JSBBBiiSlifrj |«. % < he JMm*. I
'- ,; ” • '* ;< "' ■ - I-
*'**^<***00
* '
TUTORS OP THE IMMANUEL SEMINARY.
Pastors: K. Muetzelfeldt, J. P. Loehe, W. Riedel.
Immanuel Seminary, North Adelaide.


. ' ‘ I
dk jPJj? ■g>-idfejK J||| * l^lllk
*“ • >1®
<**
v * .;;
''ISC,'/
liiiiic H r ;
{>&■'; 'ii”.j.i .v'.v J... 4 ' % :•••:.: . • •* fSS* :yf ; •5: : - : --.-^-|;.?
■ ' ■ .;*■». .' J&»«k f*£*-- *•> ■ ■ . " ■ : V.- .:-:>• • ., ■••. ••:• •.
«.^PW|W^» : ~ •«* * , «”w« > v _
■> *•* f ill " IlliiliS' r '* SlStfli^l^^r
"X.
Departure of Mission Party, October 9, 1866.
Bethesda, Killalpaninna Mission Station in its hey-day.
Hope Valley Mission Station, Queensland.


f . v 1 -..v-.--. r -- Tr -> r .- t \
/ •■• ■• ■ • ■■■"■ ■ ■**• ■• •■'■■• ■•■••■•'•• \
‘M ' !
A.
■ «► ,
K #v
Jswa&fflsm
J. FLI£RL, D.D.,
Pioneer Missionary.
Missionary Strehlow,
Hermannsburg.
Missionary Schwartz,
Hope Valley.
E. 0. THEILE,
Director Lutheran Missions.
Missionary Albrecht,
Hermannsburg.


N
' 4
Jp|||g|:. v J||B
OFFICERS OF THE U.E.L.C.A.
JOBS. J. STOLZ,
President General.
J. H. S. HEIDENREICH,
General Vice-President, President
S.A. District; former President
E.L.S.A. a.a.G.
J. SIMPFENDOERFER,
General Treasurer.
J. DOEHLER.
General Secretary.


> S' | ,,^p.....
•k
: jj^' /
1:... W$&»***~ Jm Ssir^f 4 '-:'
f ||i * ' 1 * 11 '
M ' Mgk.
If
mm jjjjk ,JB
OFFICERS OF THE U.E.L.C.A.
A. JERICHO,
Pastor, Jeparit; President
Victoria District.
A. R. REUTHER,
Pastor, Bethania; President
Queensland District.
TH. FUHLBOHM,
Pastor, Milbrulong; President
N.S.W. District.
TH. HEBART,
Pastor, Langmeil, S.A. Author of
History U.E.L.C.A., in German;
Chairman College Board.


A | : f i Hi jyt - jHT*« jHF %yy f
ISy?* \ \$ k ' Pf *$i ' x \]l \ a ~\ $f <*■ A 1- - s*$f y jlllftipUjL *
IlipTffiwfy x PWiL Ail -~ *■- 9B ~~ Bi||9Bl HBBBi 1 liiiiL&Ji|PiP ■ ■*■ |B 02 ' W
j|ii % ihb
"&"' >y 0 .i%: 'pWSiimL pSwi» *
<IIHI..»« —~ ■ W ~-vt»*l | “»» • ~»>: ~-~ "" lr: “- J< *“ V ™ :.
I ■ * ■■■:■■-■ ■■' •,•••■•■••: -'.x ■■ <■
... , PASTORS, GENERAL SYNOD, SOUTH BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND 1937
lop row: A b.mpfendoerfer G . Obst, Th. Renner, F. Lienert, H. Stiller, H. Schmidt, A. Schubert, C Pfitzner, E Fischer O Theile E Mate,™
Bottom row; E. Proeve. O. Adler, J. G. Stolz, J. Monz. A. Loehe, S. Gross, G. Dohler, J Larsen,' G Venz


: * ' '
(See names opposite)


* : ’ . maSm
———i - >
Hermannsburg Mission Station, Central Australia.
Old Folks’ Home, Salem, Toowoomba, Queensland.
PASTORS NOT AT THE GENERAL SYNOD, SOUTH BRISBANE.
M rS ir^n W +f A w Sa » e1 ’ J’ K °o Ch^ e ’ Ph. Scherer. Second row H Linke
M. Millatt, W. Basedow, K. Monz. Third row: L. Kuss, A. Fehlberg H Proeve
C. Weckert. Centre: E. Lienert. Fourth row: P. Hass, F. Hartmann ’ H Wallatt'
F. Matschoss. Fifth row: E. Wiencke, B. Keuther, L. Krause, W SchUtz sixth
row: J. Meier, C. Stolz, P. Breier, L. Methsieder.


Jam
MBKT
■ym& x jjgk.
' _ ■
■■■';M£- .» £ >
/y^m |
?!■
/
inf ■*
|Hk >4i^H
G. SIMPFENDOERFER,
Pastor Walla Walla, N.S.W
G. HEUER,
Pastor, Toowoomba; former Pres.
United German and Scandinavian
Lutheran Synod of Queensland.
R. HELD,
Pastor Tanunda; former S.A.
District President.
L. DOEHLER,
Pastor at Lowood, Qld.
E. BEMMANN,
Pastor, Pleasant Hills, N.S.W.;
City Missionary, Adelaide.


. t \ l j _- ■-,- - . "■■ ■ ■ ... ■
W Jill \ BLy ™ C&°J&r& 6y ° *o*e%r*?ZT + •B*0*E' V HILL “I
/IrJAfnnn-r* rv \ nOVLETOtjp ] S3 3ftf=$tC/U>£ LL /Of t
yjr%* T X/ \ X *<£J b s* Apowms -- * <cd$r
((S' /f^[K^~\—P^ A ‘ J' * JUUAi \ IP'
Vyi ° T/parqa SSS/jO \ \ 1 , f j POUND j£ 0 tl%AAA,~c* (
\\| jS) OT \ X pllwsck %% ncales , Lf ,r Z' \
//r MAITLAND fff\ \ 4 J HA pun oa + 0/ > £ b/toh/nlow /) „„ „,. V % l / Rup • \
fff /// Bfi/oc&C, * A*°V*W T ™$° If «4 a>3Dfyuj&/( \ ArIokpurnonc
JJj 0 5 H/LHCRPAH / \ \ STON£F/ £LD &BLAA/CMPTOH/A/ 1 MOORQOM (f I^TffLDPO
/// **°*o aS ANAf Ml 2 £ ta J T‘. 1 ] *• tJL
I rn ( i%yg t ” a U +(ttsf n/ ]A/ Ji \ + &‘*\M l lRLR } /uo^si'U
\ ll O I \W BucH5r£LDiv- jM£C*LeHeu§j&£ w " a o* r *''**'”i ani H ,Ll " I MQNTUNCi] [ U
Pi I I T'”*' i / ~*r
ill \A , ))> V/^ »»"*-* ,I *
J Ji OM/NLATOH |) I v \ f ME PLEASANT* WLL&* S —^WRNBi
Iff u, X// < outer I / 3*0*000®/ I +. M Yv f /J/
))> £ // yjH, /
* /i i > aK ** i faffl&£LA/OE/'*ooosit>£ / / peep/ no a
9o yORKSTOH'*/ / H£cro*y,Z L £ t mac, ill j/ J
twrwwJl t.. CIJrN fifJ , / / \,os/ / /7/
\l \ <jiT / J Jr\ M r 0APA£P^ ff QtfOHVOiROVt j
(\CT MWr rwi£ V pA y 's® j |
v) N^X W *^*— — /?^<E'
\sy/ 0 III \ <: V,X-^P^^ z ' f/v uhds „...._
xy 9iwm* $ J s^ r^*sV f>^^V%^^8t)ca^c^
[“ ~ n /// \ # 1 0^ &H IT +
\south pusmt ip yfip i
S'tcKim'K-caoHctmufl/LLU. ) '
*‘P*LDic.rPiAT2*PK £f) cHino, Piftct " r/jr P °^ r Y'' X. I
® z HAUPrc,EMEtrtDt’Jfcsic>rriT?psroft EL2P J Sj V/Ctor harbor \. r -o 'X.
@ =PtB£N& CWLIHP£ rPp£HCHIHC, PlRCC S2Wjf \ '“■
ZaHLLN'ItlLiLtN v>0 v QOELRIDE j M/L. ALBERT /JVJ 1
fruta. ** ts *,m fiHtvot IlCCCfL V v^« C oo^|
L —•/“ ■ Vx v \ r_(
- COOWLPWN&


$ &0QHH8IE ~ ~~~ ——— Vs ■
9
[\l v , l OWri „\ORROROO
V ’9*™* V c *
|J?I W/./?05£ \
ewlleq \/%^^
lOl Eftoo CEfiruf&f QJ fcy/lE/l-
/ /S4 \ oAPP/LM /
//jfT® a\< LPoe/lr. /&cJl&3*J/y
'M
lit a 1 I
||l CLORXrE TOWN spaio/NO
;)Po° £**~tf?En h/ll I \
V h I ,03 Bn'HXWOnrH W
C p4pp£{- 0
I Cj \


* BAMSILL a.not fY} IL DURftF ° 1/17 YbTrcrTr \ /. v/v/Z?\ 'S' f\/V } k^nrtO.RRR rT a'£ < &
VRA/RC “/"OWE XV / ?2<Y / V^vc/y^/ 3 \ £00/7 7 \ \ MUWUfTRfiH
1 ® ""X \ / ruuvh! \ \ /-/// r n
NETHLRW® S + yFLLA/vtup LRC{U ' L | / 1 \
rE T ° N \ //V ( \CHF)f?LJOf/ / I \ j 'X. HVRSEfROO I
* ,avl* x±® &&WRRRACHNRBERI- X \ ) / \ I
’XHllr \ / t'« m A sH^pg^J-
X (; 87 BOOL a V \ I / Vf-
/ V 22J\ fmwp V sy X
I I \ J \ \ ° El 07ORE \ /
\| I + X \ „ \ ) / k Ef C/SR id/OR TM
| 1 J&priuFtTon j J V /
• n( /c \ \ 070/7 CR/Soivf
(§) -hr&R/VCESt r 0p *Cr/ s yJHORSHAW X / >v / y
3 /, t , \5 \donoluv . IX
« /“ I ~7 V O GREEN l£R£X< , \ \ /
VICTOR Iff \ X — /._ /
I J r / L// i in ; \ \s7ru/eii 7sY C/AS j
S|V 1 O ~GEWE/rtP£ • CortCiPE&QTiort. (J.E L. C fi, / , eQy X. Iseyo/our
X \ | t~F/f£D/C,TFWTZ=fy£Qaflrt(jPiHC£.. " . \©/ I \. j
| ®--HPVPrc,EW£inp£=REflP£riTFftsroK EL.S.fl. ,3/ /^<y*y T c VlE$yO£& <? LRaAce'e/EIO Y £R
£ H j &*<*"**:""*■ " X V2yV co/ 7^^-£
| / I ZftHU-r/ fflEiLer/ mu sX/u/ion/i /?/?/? r \ fJ +
/ I ./Thus F*om rr/cL80u/w\./ y® c T «5
( ’EcostertoKj f X ) \ ,w T f 1 ? y : V/
\ \ ®o COLEEI/1//VE / ' \ ¥\ \ (/" / q\> ,^/
.iV-V , \ \ X^rMt.V^ r , ,rf\S' J
J\\ w I 1 tj ®\fHAE)/LTOE/ \ I \ Oo^XX^S.
r C|/?A7i9/£-/7 \ \ /


■ " | A f (G BiODoh ' BOGO-PRR.I © J
TULLHmoec<\ I /y |
' N v j ( (SEumvN&LHit CESSHOf'K'J /
® LRKE CRffonUbO £ FORBES j /f////
/ Bwmr? XroRDj/ly
I C ° Sr * f
—rrrrr~a — \ p^RRmq^^J^^^\^[/nA/fv
± _^wee^« l1 - £ YUn u Y
\ y amS***//
I \&BRRyiLDMfffl y
y t BRREU»fi \nGID&IHBljHC, ( jrfy I
j GRlEFI^ N ]p rRW&l£i/ /y//LL J /i/Y
JJI
©cooiamon j —
***/// ( y )j*QK)
StfCfjliBCRRR yZ/^Z
X j \ CRPirflC /if/
fft/wff / N. TERRITORY J J)
% \ 'v i Sfr — ]
>L ~ 5) y| A/CW 50^/77/
ft***'*# VV' 0 > * JJj o •G'f.mt'Hoi* CoM6*cc,/me*. UE.LCR.
(I® \ I t m P*to'6rn*rj *
Hww /y ° /,/ *£ V \ /Aw ® 'luma'* ewe . Ro/otur far se EL.S.R
***. iL V y III Q-fUiinec*riHPC'Rieiir.niiio,pLna »
f * (j / J7/ 5YDNEY-ALBURY 4O0ENCL.M.
Cro HI A V I ■■' -I


V *\ vN \\\ ill
\ 2 62 J&QHDOWaC 'ji ill
—A. *%cHirvcf/iLLin \ ]]) \ if f( /
\ / J \ \\\ \ li 11
A JVs\\\ lj
GoomBonceE? V "si // I I
///
5 QUEENSLAND (
&=Cirm[i*Df =C*fc«e<i/iTforv i/EE LCJA V | | %. t
*" PitEiHc,TPaiTz-fkntaiivc l fliice * A 1# I
®-HnmGimdrtD£ jisjD£rirftisron LL SQ j 2Q V I j
@'NeM:*um£im-PitciKiimHiicf ” fl (
Z/mu/i ' Mtiud w* Bwssffnc / ' \. SI /
fol/REi - M/LEi rtOrt BruSHUE /
\ S J|\|)
J oaoK/v/j /\
/8z ( \ I
wo/vooh/ e I .
P w!0 '“" ,/ '*' 3CU//we*iV a JV)
/ \ \° YRNDINR CE-
5 HOWE\CREEH /2 \j \
\ IWBIL e /VAMBOUR* (
rauBMoa* \<iN0aROy*7oq 65 V \\',
*WM6fl? te“ £ \ \\\
\ / °w/tta\ \
o TC/REEM * \ j 25 (t£u roBUR.c j \ 111
1 _ \
\ hmzzLVEQn* ( ll m\ \\\
f \ V\' \V \\\
A'/PPEJtctS \ \
qflnrtS rf \ *"rae*>o + 30 \
* tMl ' Syurapovc V lacev\ creek* V
nAGLAOAnte n \VP rt *‘ „<rK- V V \
NARKo\' aS Sc° pL . \ ± wrsB/>?so/vy2z\+/>))
EVERC,REE* p -roP 6 I oMURRUMBfIP EfLLMERE Q. 9 fC (
wO C A/£S7- V AuNDAHpS Vk X
\ J °3£RG E AJ ' 35
\ \
D49 BOAHPEAHo f cooE7Gu/voee clrR£H00ip& lowood ®(j £
C,RUNUo\» ) / LDS t-OCPPOSEi
/ roo IA/OO/Vf&AJ®/0/ eW'PH' S &9Lt ,
,— ® en/nmoon ® ® rope lev ®&ruaRrtroP wop tooarj reserve c
p>rrsh/oRTRat / mtsuLms reserveoj A
w 7 ® Lvmw C I
®f/ERDlRaTO* HILL n ,, T '® O« 0S V^ T F ) I t
} i™* 0 * . \ oxeN^ao
\ Unoe/sborof |+ BERUPESfrrt \£
\ ' Y *J Jo MOYA «7 r amHORlNE
\ C\ ( *srnr(rHOR.P£ rrrtula A OUQArvoA^ ariuNG,RR %
r, r^ \**'t&.*8ft 60/ /O OUOWOAM 5 OUTHP6tf
/GLEE/RRBOfY \/j/f(D BALD mt cvl +-
i £\ & WLV mr 64 pM-r ALFORD WNEH \/!E\R


-
\wRG00fifK , rQ a
S QUEENSLAND
t n r n/> nr,A "Vfil S-GMcmc-COKfu-sa™
\ "
\ AS ) <F) -PR UPTC.EfTJ£ //Y PE -fteS/pENf pASCOR £.L.SM,
\ |j "
\ ij 2/mtcrt Muler von BP'SBRRF.
\ I Figures ~-FVJ/les frdw Brfrrhe %
\ TP
'\9 / !*Z°^ L r f! r \ + EEL £ \(t
(COLLIDE) \ CREEk\^\
\ w//vf/e.ld<£
''''J/WO/yro BuruOABERC /? \s\
1 yBuccty \ A) I
\ , GIN CIK ±J, n „
\ q LANGLEYS p/ Q^lPLLfiViLLF
\ GOODHJSHT SCRVBZ V.
/ CORDPLBifc si? \
I \
l - n Ve/Vc^^>c.
I QigERRMR y °^v
®REjD£C* _


*
■ ■
*t" *">
■/' "''''%
£ N
•• " '"' \
✓? r~>,
✓r _tn
”
EhHHI
r .
Christ Church, Evangelical Lutheran, Murray Bridge, S.A.


i j
iilillll'ia
p
p||| ||||ppif Pi . ,■***
Hip.'.ll *y &M BflB| : > | l^r*PH
St. Peter’s, Loxton, S.A.
St. John’s, Engelsburg, Qld.
Zion’s Church, Walla Walla, N.S.W


•t
just I
• ., : ... ** /:
wy'#yyy%y&# ::^
Christ Church, Highfields, Queensland.
St. John’s, Horsham, Victoria.
St. John's, Mt. Alford,
Qld.


X W™ ~ "- JzMl' j&\ »f,
|| ' rm^ * I t Mi '***
» mtiS i % v
< I I I || |pp '.wjuv • /
4 M j j|j
■ ;•■•■• : | • ••*
' .' "■• "' |: ;
•*> *$S88S-# ' V ___ ir nor • _cinfi: • " £
1 i ’
_ niMf*» ig^.
p
pp&*
St. John’s, Dimboola, Vic.
St. John’s, Murtoa, Vic.
Holy Trinity, Toowoomba, Qld.
Old Bethel Church, N.S.W.


[ EISA | U.E.LCA [
"23 Melbourne Congregation -§
55
■ |||||| M
bIb m
BBB o fl { c
fH; §
BB j>
BBSIS -
■ OB q
I g| Sydney Congregation |
CT3hhBH H •**
t>M I a;
■ I Cti I ~g
mts? I „.§
|B IIF MB I g I
Jj| IBB g b
Mbs «•*»< «M
# g
H I - J3 o
B fS I o • 2
B1 K QJ SI fft
_ I '“*** 2
mm I 1&SM- I «n
P“ o a
■' IB e. : / f ’■: :v>®, ••«< C
I vk -*-* _ r*
•JCS rd U3
BBB » " gf” O ' .S* j5
* ■ I BiB S lE ■
I 8 FWBW ? j> | m
■ L
1 5 HH 1
bHB Mm a
Mm 4 i HHb
B| ■•>
S Hi I ;
0| V §
■ -c? ft >»
H BB o £ B m
■ m BH </3 I H; •£
jJf BbhH
BH <p c ii: &u
H .# B| cs I p B a
■B a» *
i xj? ■£ >
§ imm % m uj
||||| w
■ SHB pj td
I M B
I Ab m B e
JU 9H * l-«
I jO -o
I .■ m ||| I I io
I *_i z 10 3r, 0 **
. | Of H c
I ■ ■ I OB 1_r| C
I H g
I MC cSbl __
I ■ rifi' o ■
■ bK
I * ** ■ Q I"
I m K _ I g) : I
“So H; § *-* «e pt®t*
I SB + 8 TTl
CH OO 0 U3 II
i H c I «#* I I
B —g >s
s B e « I’e I i XI
I HH 8 g p I JUT I
I ■ “ o S' cl
si « : : '|*'E
• iJl ’ IT
§► I ? "S 1
U4 B „>: r K T5 P 4 Js:
■ M UJ < II 1
co B I 41 |
” C B I f JLI
I
CO B 0 b I I
flU £ *s ll
jm a &
I I
I a "T
i «» ■ 111
I <wrl * | Ii ■"
ff m .Si I L i
B 1 H fill
’’Q’ j V
B 9 / '-g ril ;
<B S H: ‘-O |Ij
- b p I lg>
u3b "o .1 3
o — -c Z
c 0 £ SP J Oil
t#5 S 5 W*« 5
coIB S c 2P H S’,
{g c B|
fill tXf> I C. *-jr i ■
<C I
*v B ii a !
o |B il v >
| [H, :
jBy c is &■
j3Bi it *^
-■Lil/i
w ?! btoi
i* w
r* a: S3 _*•
3 D X <
."3
g 3 D
BbIb • ,i: . J.-P-/ J !
"
1940
193&—Centenary.
! 1937 General synod,’ Brisbane.
1936 Golden Jubilee, New Guinea Mission.
1935 Federation with Martin Luther-Bund.
Affiliation Lutheran World Convention.
1934 General synod, Horsham, Victoria.
1933
1932 Federation of Emanuel Evangelical Lutheran
Convention for New Zealand and U.E.L.C.A.
1931 General synod, Tanunda, S.A.
1930
1929 President General Office, full time office.
Parish of Dutton joins U.E.L.C.A.
1928 General synod, Walla Walla.
1927
1926 E.L.S.A. a.a.G. and U.E.L.C.A. merge.
1925 Kirchenblatt published.
General synod, Beenleigh, Queensland.
1924
1923 Immanuel College and Seminary, North Ade-
' laide, opened.
General synod, Melbourne.
1922 Angas College, North Adelaide, bought.
1921 U.E.L.C.A. founded, Ebenezer, Sth. Australia.
Lutheran Herald published.
1920 General Synod joins Church Federation.
President Herlitz t-
1919
1918 German church papers forbidden; appear in
English.
1917 Lutheran day schools in S.A. closed by
Government.
1916
1915
1914
1913
1912 First motor car in service of Lutheran Church,
Appila, S.A.
1911 Silver Jubilee, New Guinea Mission.
1910 Church Federation founded.
1909
1908
1907 Moravian Brethren, S.A., join Lutheran
Church;
President Auricht t* Leidig President, Im-
manuel Synod.
1906
1905
1904 E.L.S.A. a.a.G. founded.
1903
1902 Pastors Heidenreich expelled from E.L.S.A.
1901 Pastor Theile inducted Bethania, Qld.
1900 President Rechner t*
1899
1898
1897 Pastor Reusch, Tanunda, S.A., t-
1896
1895 Hermannsburg mission station taken over by
Immanuel Synod.
1894 College, Point Pass, S.A., founded.
1893 St. Stephen’s, Adelaide, joins Immanuel Synod
a.a.G.
1892 E.L.S.A. severs connection Hermannsburg,
Germany. First Koko Yimidir baptized.
1891
1890 E.L.S.A. College, Murtoa, Vic., founded.
1889
1888 Golden Jubilee, Lutheran Church, Australia.
Langmeil Church of Thanksgiving dedicated.
1887 First Aranda baptized.
1886 Missionary Flierl founds Hope Valley and New
Guinea Mission.
1885 Two Lutheran synods formed in Queensland.
1884 Separation of Immanuel Synod and General
synod, at Gruenberg synod.
1883
1882
1881
1880
1879 First Dieri baptized.
1878 Missionary Flierl to Bethesda.
1S77 E.L.S.A. founds Hermannsburg mission station
1876 General Synod founded.
1875 Pastor Stolz arrives from Neuendettelsau.
1874 Immanuel Synod founded. Separation from
E.L.S.A.
1873 Kirchenbote published.
1872
1871 Pastor Krause inducted, Lobethal, S.A.
1870
1869
1868 Pastor Herlitz inducted, Melbourne.
1867 Pastor Goethe leaves Melbourne.
1866 Mission at Cooper’s Creek begun.
1865 Kirchen-und Missions-Zeitung published, Au-
richt.
1864 Confessional Union established.
1863 Fritzsche t-
1862
1861
1860 Kavel J. Christenbote published.
Staudenmayer separation, S.A.
1859
1858 Auricht ordained.
1857 Staudenmayer arrives S.A.
1856 Goethe founds Victoria Synod.
1855
1854
1853
1852 Goethe begins work, Melbourne.
1851 Rift at Hahndorf, S.A.
1850
1 1849 Lutheran immigration to Victoria.
1848
1847
1846 Schism between Kavel and Fritzsche.
1845 Hahnd oi f synod, Chil lasm.
1344 Kavel transfers to Langmeil.
1843 Langmeil founded.
1842 Lobethal and Bethany founded.
1841 Fritzsche and congregation arrive.
1840
1839 First Lutheran synod, Glen Osmond.
1838 Lutheran Church in Australia founded.
1837 Gossner s nds Missionaries, Qld.
1836 Kavel in London.
1835 Kavel 1 e ves Union Church.
1834 I
1833 Fritzsche ordained.
1832 Pastor Auricht born.
1831 |
1830 Union Church in Prussia established.


DATE DUE
Tna
■




