

Visit of (Sdarles Eraser
(THE COLONIAL BOTANIST OF NEW SOUTH WALES)
TO THE SWAN RIVER IN 1827, WITH HIS OPINION ON THE
SUITABLENESS OF THE DISTRICT FOR A SETTLEMENT.
Together with
Copious Notes by J
G. Hay.
To which is added
‘lade Journal of Ji.ftl.S. “Sueeess”
(Captain James Stirling, R.N.)
ON THE ABOVE OCCASION.
V, K. JONES a CO. PRINT, PERTH


j
i


VISIT OF CHARLES FRASER
(The Colonial Botanist of New South Wales)
To the Swan River in 1827, with his ©pinion
on the Suitableness of the District
.
for a Settlement.
TOGETHER with
COPIOUS NOTES BY J. G HAY.
TO WHICH IS ADDED
The Journal of H.M.S. “Success”
(Captain James Stirling, R.N.)
On the above occasion.
Published by J. G. HAY, 182 Pier Street, Perth,
Western Australia.
1906.




PREFACE.
The original papers, now published for the first time in Western
Australia, speak for themselves,
The journal of the Clerk of H.M.S. “ Success” has never before
seen the light of day, and much interesting matter is pleasantly
related therein.
Attention may be drawn to one or two items not hitherto
known.
The original intention of the expedition was to suggest Buckland
Hill as the site for a town for the proposed settlement. This, how-
ever, was superseded by Captain Stirling, on his arrival with the first
immigrants, in the ship “ Parmelia,” in June, 1829, by placing the
capital, Perth, about twelve miles from the port, at which he settled
the town of Fremantle. The elucidation of the naming of Perth after
the birthplace of Sir George Murray, the then Secretary of State for
the Colonies, in honor of whom also towns in New South Wales,
Tasmania, and Canada were named, and the origin of the naming of
Mount Eliza after Lady Darling, should set aside many absurd stories
for these nomenclatures.
Another fact that is not generally known is that Chenopis atrata
(the black Swan of Australia), which was first observed by Vlaming,
at the river he named after the bird, on the sth of January, 1697, was
not confined to that portion of Australia, but was once common to
the whole southern coast from east to west, as also Tasmania and
the islands of Bass’ Straits. It is not a true swan, but belongs to an
allied genus now, unfortunately, almost annihilated. It has been
collected and brought together in numbers to the Swan River at Perth,
where it is protected by legislation from being destroyed.
Finally, I have to thank the Department of Lands for facilities
given me to search their records, and especially have I to thank Mr
Joseph Hope, the Chief Draughtsman, for assistance freely rendered
me on this and other occasions.
I have also to express my thanks to Mr. Malcolm A C. Fraser,
the Registrar-General, for the loan of some of the Plates used in
illustration.
One day, I trust publishing a small history of Western Australia,
in the meantime, this little brochure, I hope, may not be unaccept-
able to some as a first instalment.
J. G. HAY.
Perth, 1906.


>
ut.uk/ y
g|BIb^
<*
Mb '-.
P/■ w
!>!?SiS8l4- , *5lT l 8l6' .ji ail
VSK& " ~~
- .*- r* %& '*-*v
Sffi|' < ''' JSHml/' :,
: %-i-ri?
.,/ % ■’•;* * - . .
- _ ,£'&'*■ *'*&$*•*
View of Perth
from the Lower Terrace of the King's Park.


The Visit of Mr. CHARLES ERASER, Colonial Botanist of
New South Wales, with Captain STIRLING, in H.M.S.
“Success,” to the Swan River in 1827, with his Report
on the Botany, Soil, and Capabilities of the Locality.
(A Paper read before the West Australian Natural History Society
by Mr. J. G. Hay, 20th March, igo6).
The visit of the Colonial Botanist of New South Wales, with
Captain Stirling, in H.M.S. “ Success,” to the Swan River in 1827
was pregnant with considerable importance, as it was mainly on Mr..
Fraser’s report that the subsequent settlement was directed.
Previously to 1826, the British practically made no claim to
Western Australia, being content to allow that portion to remain
under the name of New Holland.
If reference be made to Captain Phillip’s instructions, it will be
seen that he was directed to occupy all that portion of New Holland
lying eastward of the 135th degree of longitude ;■ and although, only
a few years after, Captain Vancouver (1) took possession (on
Michaelmas Day, 1791) of the land he discovered and named King
George the Third Sound, yet no occupation of this territory was
immediately effected.
It was only after the expedition of 1800-4, ordered by Napoleon
(2), had usurped Flinders’ discoveries, and named the whole southern
coast “Terre Napoleon,” and other French ships had visited these
(1.) Captain George Vancouver, with H.M.S. “Discovery” and “Chatham,
was on a mission to the north-west coast of America, when, with a crew stricken-
by dysentery, he made the southern coast, at about Chatham Island, and left it at
Termination Island.
(2.) Napoleon’s expedition, sent out under the French Republic, consisted
of the “ Geographe,” Commodore Baudin, and the “ Naturaliste,” Captain
Hamelin, who was afterwards sent back to France with despatches when a second
visit to Western Australia was made with the “Geographe,” accompanied by a
schooner bought in New South Wales, and christened by the French the
“ Casuarina,” into which Lieutenant Freycinet was placed in command.


shores, that the British authorities, being alarmed, at last directed
the occupation of King George’s Sound, which was accordingly
carried out on Christmas Day, 1826 (3).
Following this event, the Governor of New South Wales directed
Captain Stirling to take the Colonial Botanist with him, for the
purpose of reporting on the suitableness of the Swan River neigh-
borhood for a settlement.
The “Success,” leaving Sydney on January 17, 1827, was
accompanied by a cutter, named the “ Currency,” intended to be
employed in coast survey, but which, meeting with mishaps, had to
return to Port Jackson.
After a preliminary visit to Hobart, the “ Success ” arrived off
Rottnest on the sth of March, 1827 ; and, three days after, the ship’s
gig and cutter entered the Swan River for the purpose “ of examining
the banks, the depth of water, to fix on an eligible spot for a
settlement, to ascertain the productions of the country, the nature of
the soil, and the practicability of shipping.” Considering the short
time occupied in all this work (not a month in the whole territory), it
can scarcely be said that anything like an exhaustive examination of
the country was made, and certainly not one that would justify the
laudatory terms that were afterwards used to attract the settlers.
The report on which the colony was founded is not in the
possession of the State, but a copy of a semi-official journal kept by
Mr. Augustus H. Gilbert (clerk of the “ Success ”) is preserved; and
from a paper compiled on the botany of the Swan River, etc., by Mr.
Charles Fraser, for his friend Dr. Hooker, and published in the first
volume of the “ Botanical Miscellany,” in 1830, we learn much of the
prevailing flora seen by the visitors.
Some slight mistakes were made such as calling the Red Gum
(Eucalyptus calophylla ) Angophora ; but, taken in all, the description
of a totally different series of shrubs to those common on the Eastern
Coast of Australia, may be called fairly accurate. Mr. Fraser, in the
course of his paper, says ;
“ The soil on the South Head is a barren sand, producing a
considerable variety of interesting plants, amongst which I observed
(3.) General Darling sent Major Lockyer from Sydney, with a detachment of
the 39th Regiment and a party of convicts, to King George Sound, numbering in
all about 70 persons. They landed 25th December, 1826.


Anigozanthus Rufus , Anthocercis lit (area, two species of Metrosideros
(4); a charming species of Prostanthera (5), producing large quantities
of rich blue flowers ; a species of Gnaphalium (6), with procumbent
stems, the white flowers of which give a snowy appearance to many
parts of the cliffs; and a beautiful species of Dryandra (7). The
appearance of the Gnaphalium above mentioned is in some measure
confirmatory of the sandy character which the French give of these
hills
“ On tracing the river a quarter of a mile from its entrance, on
the south bank (8), I observed quantities of a species of Brunonia (9),
growing in great luxuriance on the margin of a salt marsh, its flowers
of a brilliant sky-blue. Here I likewise gathered a magnificent
species of Melaleuca , with scarlet flowers (10), and two species of
Metrosideros , with various other plants, which, from their being
neither in flower nor in fruit, I could not attempt to describe.
“ Half a mile from the entrance, I found the soil, although
-apparently sterile, to consist of a fine light-brown loam, containing a
small proportion of sand, and capable of producing any description
•of light garden crop. This character not only applies to the
immediate bank as far as the reach (11) below Pelican Point (12),
but likewise to the hills as far as my observation led. These hills
present the appearance of a petrified forest (13), from the immense
■quantity of trunks which protrude for several feet above the surface ;
(4.) Dr. A. Morrison, the Government Botanist, to whom lam indebted for
•these botanical notes, says : —“ Metrosideros , at the time Fraser wrote, was a name
applied to a great variety of myrtaceous plants, now known under the genera
Melaleuca, Kunzea, Callislemon, Angophora, Eucalyptus , Syncarpia, and
Exanthostemon. Probably he referred to paper-bark trees.
(5.) Most likely Hemiandra pungens.
(6.) Calocephalus Brownii.
(7.) Dryandra floribunda probably, a shrub or small tree.
(8.) The position of Phillimore-street, Fremantle.
{().) Probably Dampiera Linearis.
(10.) More than one such.
(11.) Blackwall Reach.
(12.) Pelican Point. This is evidently intended for Point Walter. Fraser
wrote this paper in Sydney, two years after his visit, and a number of errors
.principally small, occur in its pages.
(13.) The petrified appearance may be observed at several localities, notably
at Cottesloe, Mount Eliza, and Arthur’s Head. It is due to the shrubs and small
trees being buried by drifting sand, then calcified by the lime (dissolved out of the
sand by the rains) taking the place of their decaying tissues.


their decomposed state renders them of benefit rather than otherwise
to the soil. Here I observed a brown snake, similar to that of Port
Jackson, and it is remarkable that this was the only snake seen
during the survey (14).
“ At the distance of one mile from the mouth of the river (15),
the genus Eucalyptus appears, although in a stunted state. I was
much astonished at the beautiful dark-green and vigorous appearance
of the trees, considering that the season had been evidently unusually
dry ; but the cause must arise from the great quantity of springs
with which this country abounds. On penetrating two feet into the
earth, I found the soil perfectly moist, and I feel confident that, had
I penetrated a foot deeper, I should have found water. On the
beach I observed several small pools of water and many moist spots,
which, in seasons of unusual humidity, must be the seat of active
springs issuing from the calcareous rocks that bound them. The
luxuriance of the vegetation on the immediate beach is truly
astonishing. It consists principally of syngenesious plants, and a
species of Hibiscus with peltate leaves (16). Here I observed a
beautiful pendulous Leptosper?num, resembling in its appearance, and
the situation which it prefers, the weeping willow (17). An
arborescent species of Acacia (18) was likewise seen associated
with it.
“ While examining the productions of a mass of cavernous
limestone rocks on the beach, I was astonished by observing an
extensive spring issue from beneath them, in width about 7 feet,
running at the rate of 3 feet in a second. The water was brackish,
but it is evidently fresh at some periods of the tide. Its elevation is
about 3 feet above low-water mark, yet at its lowest ebb its current
was at the above rate The water was found, on being analysed, to
be of the same quality as that ac Harrowgate (19).
(14.) Snakes. On the occasion of the French visit in June, 1801, the report
states: —“Snakes die common enough on Rotlnest Island. Many are not less than
4ft. to sft. long, with a diameter of i|in. to ain. Their color is greyish, but we
did not observe if they were venomous.” This was probably the brown snake
(Diemenia superciliosa ), the color of which varies. It may be presumed that they
would also be on the mainland, as brown, black, and brown-banded are to be
obtained about Perth to this day, though not so numerous as in the Eastern
States.
(15.) This would be the position of the present railway bridge crossing the
river at Fremantle.
(16.) Hibiscus Huegelii , hut leaves not “ peltate.”
(17.) Agonis flextiosa. The peppermint tree.
(18.) Acacia cyanopkylla.
(19.) This mineral spring would be about the position of the Port Brewery,,
near the railway bridge ; but the water is not similar to Harrogate.


“The soil on the North Head is sandy ; its productions much
the same as that of the south. Two hundred yards from the beach
the soil changes to a light-red loam, improving, as the hills ascended,
to that of a fine virgin earth (20). The valleys separating these
hills along the coast are of the richest description, as far as my
observations led, and inland extending to Pelican Point (21), beyond
which their character was not ascertained. These hills (22) are
admirably adapted for the site of a town, their elevated situation
commanding a view of the whole of Canning Sound (23), with the
adjacent coast, the interior for some distance, and the meanderings
of the river. Their lying open to all breezes, too, is an additional
advantage.
“The limestone with which these hills are studded renders them
admirably adapted for the production of the vine ; and, as they are
free from timber and brushwood, they may at once be brought into a
state of cultivation.
(20.) This very fulsome account was not borne out by Captain Fremantle
R.N., who, in a despatch to the Admiralty, dated Bth October, 1829, said ;
“ The soil of the sea coast was generally sandy ; but on arriving at the fresh water
in the Swan and Canning rivers the banks were rich, and the soil capable of
producing anything.” Vlaming’s description of the same spot, visited on the sth
January, 1697, Is still more pithy. The Dutchman says: —“As regards the
country it is sandy, and in the place where we were had been planted with a good
many shrubs, among which were some quite three and four fathoms (vademen)
thick, but bearing no fruit, in short, full of prickles and thorns. Several of these
yielded gum nearly like wax, of a brownish-red color.”
(21.) Now known as Crawley Point.
(22.) These hills are Buckland Hill and those in the neighborhood, but the
•evident intention of fixing a town there was abandoned by Captain Stirling in 1829,
for the provision of two towns, as mentioned in Captain Fremantle’s despatch of
■Bth October, 1829: —“The Lieutenant-Governor had fixed on a site for a town
about 12 miles up the Swan River, on the right bank, just below the islands, where
he intended removing to immediately with the whole of the party landed on
Garden Island. The town is to be called Perth, There is also another town to be
built, at the mouth of the river, for the convenience of the shipping in Gage Roads,
near the spot where the party from the ship first established themselves” The
■capital, Perth, was so named after the birthplace of Sir George Murray, the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, who had granted Stirling’s request of giving
him Garden Island, and 90,000 acres besides, for his visit to the Swan River in
1827. The seaport town was called after Captain Fremantle, R.N., of H.M. S.
“ Challenger,” who arrived at the mouth of the Swan River on 2nd May, 1829,
and hoisting the British Hag on the South Head, took form il possession, in the
name of His Majesty King George IV., of all that part of New Holland which is
not included within the territory of New South Wales. Exactly one month
after, Captain Stirling arrived with the first settlers in the hired transport
“ Parmelia.”
(23.) Canning Sound, in 1827, gave place, in 1829, to Gage Roads and
Gockburn Sound.


“The trees and shrubs seen on these hills consisted of stunted
Eucalypti and Leptospertna , and a beautiful species of Calytris, or
Cyprus , of the finest green color, producing large warted cones.
“ On traversing the beach, I was agreeably surprised at the great
degree of fragrance imparted by two graceful species of Metrosideros,
then in flower, which exceeded anything I ever experienced. On the
beach I observed a magnificent arborescent species of Rhagodia (25),
20 feet in height, immense quantities of Gnaphalium , two species of
Helichrysum (26), and a beautiful species of an unknown plant.
There were no marine productions observed upon the shore (27).
“From Pelican Point (28) to the entrance of the Moreau the
country is diversified with hills of gentle elevation and with narrow
valleys, magnificently clothed with trees of the richest green. Here
the genus Bnnksia appears in all its grandeur, consisting of three
species, of which B. grandis is the most conspicuous (29). The
principal timber is Eucalyptus. The shrubs consist of a species of
Dry an dr a, two species of Hakea, one of Grevillea (30), and a
pendulous species of Viminaria (31) of considerable height, richly
clothed with yellow and crimson flowers, associating itself in the most
graceful manner with the weeping Leptospermum formerly alluded to,
Xanthorrhcea Hastilis (32) is abundant, as is Zamia spiralis (33).
(24.) Calytris. Callitris robusta.
(25.) Rhagodia , 20ft. high, may have been Rhagodia Billardieri, common
also on the south-eastern coasts.
{26.) Helichrysum cor datum.
(27.) The French said :—The beach was covered with a very large number
of gelatinous and transparent white molluscs, abandoned by the tide, and which
are doubtless the food of the birds frequenting these shores.”
(28.) Pelican Point, now known as Crawley, is opposite the entrance of the
Canning River, and Fraser again, no doubt, means Point Walter, on the same
side as the Canning.
(29.) Banksias. The three commonest are B. grandis , B. Menziesii, and
B. attenuata.
(30.) Dryandra, Hakea , Grevillea. More than one species of each found in
the neighborhood.
(31.) Viminaria denudata . Same as in the East
(32.) Xanthorrhcea Preissii, not Hastilis.
(33.) Zamia spiralis. The western plant was found afterwards to be a
distinct species, and was named by Miguel Macrozamia (or Encephalartos ) Fraserii t
after Fraser himself.


while Anthocercis littorea is seen to attain a height of xo feet. The
shores are covered with rushes of great height and thickness,
concealing many beautiful syngenesious plants, but they are occa-
sionally flooded. Here I observed the common Casuarina (34) of
Port Jackson, though with a stunted habit. These beds of rushes are
probably the rendezvous of the dugong, mentioned by Mons. Peron,
but of which we saw none (35).
“On examining the shoal water of Pelican Point, I observed an-
aquatic stoloniferous species of Goodenia , with which the sandy
bottom is covered.
“The soil between the above points resembles, in its surface, the
sandy soil of the shores of Port Jackson more than any hitherto seen ;
but, on digging a few inches, it is found to contain a considerable
proportion of loam. The valleys and headlands furnish an excellent
soil, more particularly that of Garden Point (36). Here we planted
several bananas, and seeds of all sorts of culinary vegetables. This
point produces an immense quantity of herbaceous plants, amongst
which I observed a pulverulent species of Goodenia and a species of
Centaurea.
“The botany of Point Heathcote (37) is splendid, consisting of
magnificent Batiksias and Dryandras, a remarkable species of Hakea ,
(34.) Casuarina. If the same shrubby species as that common at Port
Jackson, it would be Casuarina distyla.
(35-) On the return of the French boating expedition from exploring the
Swan River, the party was for 13 hours up to the waist in slime and water,
dragging the boat over the mud-flats at Heirisson’s Islands, in cold and rain. The
following graphic account was given by Mons Bailly :—“ In the midst of all these
troubles and dangers, which had come upon us without ceasing, night descended.
We were preparing to get ashoie to dry ourselves and restore our spent vigor, when
all of a sudden a terrible howl freezed us with terror. It resembled the bellowing
of an ox, but much louder, and appeared to come out of the neighboring reeds.”’
This occurred at what is now the foot of Plain or Bennett streets, and was not
ascribed by name to any animal. May it have been the sea lion or sea bear,
Arctocephalus (or Otaria ) Forsteri, which has been known to frequent reeds for a
lair ? Probably the animal was as much frightened as the French.
(36.) Garden Point. This is now known as Point Lewis on the maps, and is
the present termination of the Mount’s Bay-road tramline. The banana grove's
existing in this locality are the product of the plants placed there hy Fraser. A
second garden was also planted, probably at the site of the present gardens, which
Stirling named, after himself, Stirling Square. These take the place of botanic
gardens elsewhere.
(37.) Point Heathcote is the Eastern Cape of Frenchman’s Bay, about a
quarter of a mile north-west of what is known now as Coffee Point.


s
d
M
<
£
cM
CQ
cu
cM
M
C
CM
s
*3 Stt
w -2
Z rA--
3 «
S £
o c >
< s *
y
< ♦i’S
>-3 *W)J?
< -~Q
S £ ~
H
C/3
D
< ~
, « in
r -1 M
C/3 <*
Cd
T3.S
‘cm oo
S*j
o m
O .
£*S
cM bfl
>v
K
csT
£
.5?
’oj
K
o
bfi
<
d
o
60
*cM
d
CM
s


two species of Grevillea , a species of Leptospermum , and a beautiful
dwarf species of Calytris. Here we came to great abundance of fresh
water on the beach, by scratching the sand with our fingers, within
2 inches of low-water mark. The beach at Garden Point is of the
same character, and I doubt not hut within the heads will be found
of the same description. This was afterwards found to be the case,
not only on the river, but on the beaches of the islands of Buache
and of Berthollet (38).
“The view from Pelican Point (39) is exceedingly grand. The
contrast between the dark blue of the distant mountains and the vivid
green of the surrounding forests is such as must in a peculiar manner
strike the attention of a person long accustomed to the monotonous
brown of the vegetation of Port Jackson. It is, indeed, materially
different from anything I have yet seen in New South Wales.
“From Point Heathcote to the islands (40) the country seems
to improve, as far as I could judge from the immense quantity of
herbage it produced.
“Point Belches (41) on the opposite shore, the only spot on that
shore examined, was found to produce Bnnksias and Eucalyptus.
The shrubs consisted of a beautiful Jsopogon, a species’of Acacia y
and a Jacksonia with crimson flowers (42), together with the general
productions of the opposite shore. The soil is sandy. The cliffs
(43) —of very considerable elevation—on the northern shore, are
formed of fossil-limestone and sandstone. The view from this
point of the meanderings of the river and the Moreau (44), with the
(38 ) A garden was planted on Buache, and Stirling, in 1829, changed its
name to Garden Island. In like manner he called Berthollet “ Carnac,” after one
of his lieutenants. The whole group was called “ Isles Louis Napoleon ”by the
French in 1801.
(39.) Pelican Point, now known as Crawley, is a long sandspit, and the
reference of Fraser more accords with Point Walter (named after Stirling’s uncle,
Sir Waller Stirling) than with any other. Point Walter has a fairly high ridge,
commanding a good view.
(40.) Heirisson’s Islands, named after the midshipman in charge of the
French boating party who explored the river.
(41.) Point Belches is the extreme northern point of South Perth, or what was
afterwards called Mill Point, at the Narrows. It was named after Lieut. Belches,
of H.M.S. “Success.”
(42.) Jacksonia funillata.
(43.) Mount Eliza; so named, in 1827, by Stirling, after Lady Darling, the
wife of the Governor of New South Wales.
(44.) The French did not explore the Canning River, but named its entrance
“ Entree Moreau.” They at first set it down as being another communication
with the sea. Stirling, in 1829, named the tributary river after Canning, the
Prime Minister of England.


surrounding country and distant mountains, is particularly grand
(45). This seems to be the extreme easterly boundary of the lime-
stone (46).
“The islands (47) on the flats are composed of a rich deposit
carried down by the floods. Their margins are covered with
Metrosideros and Casuarina (48), and their interior with seaside
succulent plants. On one side of these islands I caught sight of a
plant with an arborescent habit, which, on examination, proved to be
a species of Zamia with spiral fruit, differing only from Z. spiralis in
habit. Here the equatorial Goodenia , formerly alluded to, disappears.
The difficulty (49) which the party now experienced from having
mistaken the channel, and in having, consequently, to drag the boats
over the mud, were great, but by perseverance were overcome. From
the extensive beds of oyster shells (50) which lie a foot deep in the
soft mud, our feet became dreadfully lacerated. These flats are
extensive, but by employing flat-bottomed boats they may be easily
•crossed (51).
“At Point Fraser (52) the bank may be said to terminate, and
the channel appears to be that of a beautiful inland river. From the
entrance to this spot it may more property be called an estuary. The
flats, or levels, at this spot are very fertile, composed of a rich alluvial
deposit, but evidently occasionally flooded, drift timber having been
seen 5 feet above the surface. Here are extensive salt-marshes,
(45.) The view from the King’s Park, on Mount Eliza, is the finest of its
kind in all Australia. In no other city is there such a combination of city, suburb,
and river, backed by a mountain range. It certainly is a view that no visitor
should miss.
(46.) This has since been found not correct.
(47.) These islands (Heirisson’s) it is intended one day to convert into
recreation gardens. One of them has already been chosen by some of the black
swans for a nesting ground. These swans were obtained from other localities
under Sir John Forrest’s administration, and after a little nursing at the Mill Pond,
South Perth, were liberated on the river. They are now again thoroughly at home
on the river named after them, by Vlaming, on the sth of January, 1697.
(48.) Casuarina glauca .
(49.) The French, with one boat, had a greater difficulty; whereas the
English party had two boats, and consequently a greater number of hands.
(50.) These shells make excellent footpaths in Perth.
(51.) A canal was cut through the isthmus of Burswood Island in 1830, and a
dam constructed to divert the water in such a manner as to keep open a channel.
This canal has long since been allowed to close up, and barges and boats have to
make the circuitous course round the three sides of this so-called island. Another
canal, some years ago, was cut through the mud-flats, and is still used.
(52.) Point Fraser (named after the Colonial Botanist of New South Wales)
is the south-eastern extremity of the City of Perth. The Swan River here takes a
northerly sweep.


.admirably adapted to the growth of cotton (53). This has already
been produced at Sydney, and pronounced by the ablest judges in
Britain to be of very superior quality. There can be no question but
that, both as to soil and climate, the banks of the Swan River would
prove better adapted to the cultivation of this plant than Port
Jackson, and the seed that should be tried is that of Sea Island
Cotton.
“ The hills on the bank of the river are exceedingly barren,
resembling those of Port Jackson, but producing a magnificent
species of Angophora (54), which seems to assume the same situation
in the botany as the genus Eucalyptus does in that of Port Jackson.
Banksia grandis was here seen to attain the height of fifty feet, and
its trunk frequently exceeded two feet and a half in diameter.
“ Amongst the new botany of this tract may be enumerated a
species of Metrosideros of great elegance, forming thickets on the
flats, and intermingling with two other species of the same genus,
but of less beauty ; its flowers of the most brilliant scarlet (55); the
general height of the tree, 6 feet. There were also a pink-flowered
handsome species of Centaurea, a remarkable dwarf species of Hakea ,
two species of Daviesia and Dryanda Armata.
“ I observed a species of Psittacus {56), in large flocks, whose
(53.) The cultivation of cotton at the close of the eighteenth century was
enthusiastically taken up by one Baron De La Clampe, a retired French officer of
the ancient regime , who after serving in India against the English, and being
taken prisoner, desired to emigrate to New South Wales rather than join the army
of the P'rench Revolutionists. Mons. De La Clampe’s plantation at Castle Hill,
in New South Wales, was visited by Mons. Peron in 1802, and fine specimens,
similar to Nanking cotton were then inspected.
(54.) Eucalyptus calophylla, the red gum of Western Australia. An excusable
mistake by Fraser, as a strong resemblance exists to the apple-tree gums of New
South Wales.
(55.) Metrosideros , with flowers of a brilliant scarlet, would be probably
•either Melaleuca laterilea or Beaufortia squarrosa.
Psittacus. Mr. A. W. Milligan, the Western Australian ornithologist,
says : —“ The ground-feeding cockatoo I take to be Cacatua Leadbeateri , or
Leadbeater’s cockatoo. It is possible, however, that it may be Licrnciis nasica
known as the corella), which also feeds upon and digs into the
ground.’' On referring to Gould, that celebrated ornithologist says :—“ Cacatua
Leadbeateri. The pink cockatoo of the colonists of Swan River. This beautiful
species of cockatoo enjoys a wide range over the southern portions of the Australian
continent. It never approaches very near the sea, but evinces a decided preference
to the interior' of the country. It annually visits the Toodyay district of Western
Australia, and breeds at Gawler, in South Australia.” Of Licmetis he says :
“ Licmetis nascius. The habitat of the present species would appear to be confined
to Victoria and South Australia, where it inhabits the interior rather than the
neighborhood of the coast. Like the Cacatua galerita (great sulphur-crested
cockatoo), it assembles in large flocks, and spends much of its time on the ground,
where it grubs up the roots of orchids and other bulbous plants, upon which it
mainly subsists, and hence the necessity for its singularly-formed bill.” And of
the other species he says “ Licmetis pastinator. Western long-billed cockatoo.
All ornithologists now admit that there are two species of the genus Licmetis,
one inhabiting the western and the other the eastern portions of Australia.”


voice is more plaintive than that of the white cockatoo. It feeds on
the roots of orchideous plants, to obtain which it scratches the ground
to a considerable depth.
“ While attending to a boat in the r-iver, which the party was
dragging over the mud, I distinctly heard the bellowing of some huge
animal, similar to that of an ox, proceeding from an extensive
marsh further up the river (57). (Could this be the dugong ot the
French ?)
“ Immediately afterwards, I was visited by three natives, armed ;
they made signs for me to depart, but offered no violence. On
hearing the voices of the party they retired in the woods.
“One mile up the river from the last point is a small creek (5&)
of fresh water, issuing from an extensive lagoon clothed w ith
arborescent species of Metrosideros of great beauty. Ihe banks are
covered with the most interesting plants, amongst which I observed
two species of Calytris , a species of Acacia (59) with a scolopendrous
stem, and several Papilionaceous plants. Ihe Angophoras on the
flats are gigantic. These flats are formed of tolerable loam, of great
depth, and capable of producing fair crops.
“ The Zamia seen from the islands was here observed to attain
the height of 30 feet. Xanthorrhcea arborea, too, was of equal size,
and, associated with the splendid Banksias, imparted to the forest a
character perfectly tropical.
“ I was astonished at observing the facility with which water was
obtained in this apparently sterile tract, for on digging to a depth of
3 feet it was found in abundance, and of the best quality.
“ Proceeding up the river from the above-mentioned creek, the
country assumes a distinct appearance from that seen below. On the
left is an extensive marsh (60), bordered by thickets of Casuarma,
surrounded by a flat of the richest description, rivalling in point of
soil that of the Hawkesbury. Here I first observed the Bronte, or
kangaroo-grass of New South Wales, in great luxuriance (with the
exception of some seen on the banks at Point Fraser). Bastard and
blue gum (61) is seen here in considerable quantities and of great
size. The opposite bank is high, and covered with Eucalyptus and
Banksia. The soil is a light sandy loam.
(57 ) This would not be very far from the lair of the animal that so startled
Mons. Hcirisson’s party in 1801.
(58.) Claise Brook. Now the main sewer of iPerlh, the site of the septic-
tank treatment of sewage.
(59.) Acacia diptera.
(60.) Walter’s Brook, named by Stirling after his uncle. This is now thfr
city boundary, dividing Perth Irom Maylands.
61.1 May refer to the flooded gums of this State.


“ From the above point the country resembles in its features that
■which borders all the rivers of New South Wales the course ot which
is west of the Blue Mountains, varying alternately on each bank into
hilly points and extensive flats. The hills are covered with magnifi-
cent Angophoras , Zamias, and Xanthorrhcea. Ihe soil is a rich red
loam of very great depth, throwing up a luxuriant herbage, amongst
which I observed Anigozanthus rnfus , Clematis anstata , and a beautiful
species of Borya (?) The flats, which are composed of the richest
brown loam, equal to any on the east, are thinly studded with
gigantic blue gums, and occasional stripes of suffrutescent Acacias
and papilionaceous shrubs, occupying in this country the same
situation in the geography of its botany as the green wattle in New
South Wales. Banksia and Zamia are still seen on the high
lands.
“ It is worthy of remark that, in New South Wales, the presence
of Banksia , Zamia , and Xanthorrhoea are considered sure criterions
of a bad soil; and, such being the impression on my mind, I
pronounced all the land on which they were seen to grow' to be
sterile, until I examined a ridge on the banks, producing them in
great luxuriance, w r hen, to my astonishment, I found the soil to
be a red earth of great depth, producing the most luxuriant Brome
.^rass.
“In proportion, as we ascend the river, the flats increase in
breadth and luxuriance, each being backed by a terrace of forest land
of the finest description, extending for miles from the river, and
resembling in character those seen on the banks of the Macquarie
River, west of Wellington Valley. On further observation, towards
the source of the river, these flats were seen to extend to the base of
the mountains, interspersed with stripes of good forest land, on which
I observed a considerable portion of stringy bark (62). The variety
of plants seen on this tract was great; amongst the new' ones I
observed I may enumerate seven species of Hakea , a species ot
Lambert ia (63), four species of Isopogon, three species of
Leptospermum, a species of Petrophila , and a liliaceous plant not
seen in flower. Banksia grandis was remarked in a stunted
•state.
“ I’he base of the mountains (which was named Darling’s
Range, in honor of General Darling) is covered with fragments of
quartz and chalcedony. The soil is a red sandy loam. Here I
observed a species of Hakea with holly-shaped leaves (64). further
up the soil improves to a light-brown loam, but, from its rocky nature,
(62.) No stringy bark exists, but this would refer to the jarrah ( Eucalyptus
marginata).
(63.) Lambertia muUijlora , with yellow flowers.
(64.) Hakea with holly-shaped leaves would be either H. glabella, aistata,
■or amplexicaulis.


r ■ ■ ■
■1
I
Ml
i ' W
*
,
*, - |
.-iM
i ' ■
>■'! » L
f --•>
jJgSfT 3
'
(k
| v
|yjppr.' r •
ft
F - T -TT-- „ -
1 ■ ( : -
Kl
- .
■ '1
Wpl •
m
■ihhhhh
i
West Australian
Aborigines
I. Fitzroy River Native, Age, 25 j Height
5ft. 9in. 2.
4.
Broome Woman in Mourning (hairldressed with clay, wilgie and fat), 3. Kimberley Natives.
Man, Broome, Age, 25 ; Height, 5ft. gjip. * ? r ?


is incapable of cultivation. I saw a beautiful species of Dryandra,
and a species of Hakea and several syngenesious plants. The
summit of the mountain is studded with noble Angophoras. Here,
too, I found a beautiful species of Arthropodium (65) with filiform
leaves, an arborescent species of Hakea (66), a species of Dryandra ,
and two species of Isopogon. The view from this summit is extensive,
resembling that seen from Princess Charlotte’s Valley, which I
witnessed in 1817 (67) —vide Oxley’s Journal —but divested of the
permanent swamps. The highest part of the range is of ironstone,
but it is remarkable that there is no underwood. The ranges are of
equal height, so that no view could be had to the eastward.
“ At the source of the river I observed thickets of an arborescent
species of Acacia , and gigantic thistles (67) n feet in height. Here
I found a magnificent species of Hibiscus (69) with brilliant sky-blue
flowers, and a species of Euphorbia (70). The ridges on the banks
are perforated with immense numbers of deep pits, the origin or
cause of which we could not at first ascertain. They proved to be
made by the natives for the purpose of catching land tortoises, with
which these ridges abound.
“ We found the river to be navigable until it almost ceases to be
a stream, or where there is not room for a boat to pass (71). The
water is fresh 16 miles below its navigable source, and that’at the end
of a very dry season; what, therefore, must it be in the wet season ?
(72). Mons. Freycinet (73) states that he found no fresh water,
although he was in the country during the rains, a decisive proof that
we must have penetrated at least 25 miles higher than he did. We
saw nothing of the lake (74) laid down by him, and judge it to be a
(65.) Arthropodium Preissii .
(66.) Hakea glabella.
(67.) Fraser was formerly a private soldier in the army, and Oxley alludes to
him as “ Fraser, our soldier-botanist.”
(68.) These thistles must have been introduced, probably by the French in
their exploration of the Swan.
(69.) May be Hibiscus hakeaefolius.
(70.) Euphorbia. May refer to Phyllanlhus calcinus , which is quite a
common Euphorbiaceous plant.
(71.) The furthest portion of the Swan shown on Stirling’s map is its-
junction with Ellen’s Brook (named after his wife). The river now is navigable
beyond this.
72. This is extraordinary, as that part of the river shown by Stirling as
“ river-water fresh here ” would scarcely be as far as the present site of Guildford,
where it is only fresh with the winter rains.
(73.) There is no mention in Peron’s Journal of Mons. Freycinet (who was a
lieutenant) being in Midshipman Heirisson’s boat.
(74 ) The French, on their map, showed a “ pond ” of fresh water on the
west side of the river, close to its bank, at the termination of their survey. This
would be about the site of Guildford.


swamp. The supply of water from underground springs into the
river must be immense, for it is impossible that the springs at the
source could furnish such a quantity of fresh water (75). The tide
at the entrance of the Swan River was not observed to rise above
2 feet, even at spring tides and at the source it was hardly
observable.
“ The climate during our stay was the most delightful I ever
experienced, the thermometer seldom ranging above 85 deg. ; the
nights agreeably cool. The sea-breezes set in at two hours after
sunrise, and cease at sunset, when they are immediately succeeded
by the land-breeze, which, even in February (76), is so agreeable that,
while surveying the river, we preferred sleeping in the open air to
lodging in tents.
“ The quantity of black swans (77), pelicans, ducks, and aquatic
birds seen on the river was truly astonishing. Without any exaggera-
tion, I have seen a number of black swans which could not be
(75.) The river has a much longer course than was suspected for many years.
It may be said to rise some distance to the east of Pingelly, and taking a northerly
course flows through Beverley, York, Northam, and Newcastle, under the name of
the Avon ; from Toodyay it takes a westerly course, through the Darling Range,
down to Guildford, etc.
(76.) This is a serious mistake by Fraser, as the English party visited the
Swan River in March, 1827 —not February, as stated. The summer ends in
March, while the temperature in February is the hottest in the year. The exact
dates are as follow:—January 17 : H.M.S. “ Success” sailed from Sydney, and
on the 27th anchored in the Derwent, in Van Diemen’s Land. February 8 ; Left
the Derwent, and on March 5 arrived off Rottnest Island, March 8 : The first gig
and cutler entered the Swan River, which was examined by the 14th; and, after
another day spent by the gig in exploring the Moreau (Canning River), the
remainder of the lime, to March 20, was employed in surveying the islands of
Rottnest, Buache, and Berthollet. March 21 : Stood to sea, and after examining
Geographe Bay and Cape Naturaliste, anchored at King George Sound on April 2.
April 4 : Stood to sea, with a strong breeze from the S.W., and at 10 p.m. on the
15th anchored at Port Jackson.
(77.) The black swan (Chenopis atia/a) is not a true swan, but an allied
form. It was first observed by Vlaming on January 5, 1697, when he named the
river after them. It is not, however, exclusively confined to this part of Australia.
These birds were nearly exterminated from the river, but having been obtained
from other places are now again seen upon the waters of the Swan. Gould says :
“ Our celebrated countryman and navigator, Cook, observed it on several parts of
the coast. I may state that the black swan is generally distributed over the whole
of the southern portion of Australia, the islands in Bass’ Straits, and the still
more southern country of Tasmania, wherever there are rivers, estuaries of the sea,
lagoons, and pools of water of any extent. In some instances it occurs in such
numbers that flocks of man\- hundreds may be seen together, particularly on those
arms of the sea which after passing the beach-line of the coast expand into great
sheets of shallow water, on which the birds are seldom disturbed either by the force
of boisterous winds or the intrusions of the natives. In the white man, however,
the black swan finds an enemy so deadly that in many parts, where it was formerly
numerous, it has been almost, if not entirely, extirpated.” Of pelicans, the only
species found in the Stale (Pelecanm conspicillaius) is still to be seen on the river,
while ducks frequent its reaches above Heirisson’s Islands.




estimated at less than 500 rise at once, exhibiting a spectacle which,
if the size and color of the bird is taken into account, and the noise
and rustling occasioned by the flapping of their wings previous to
their rising, is quite unique in its kind. We frequently had from
12 to 15 of them in the boats, and the crews thought nothing of
devouring eight roasted swans in a day.
“ The animals are the same as in New South Wales—the
kangaroo (78), emu, native dog, etc. Fish were abundant, and the
Sound swarmed with tiger sharks (79).
“ The few natives which we saw were not disposed to behave
ill; on the contrary, they seemed much alarmed at first, but soon
gained confidence. We gave them some black swans, which they
eagerly accepted, and we dressed several of them in the old jackets of
our marines. They had, indeed, a most ludicrous appearance, and
seemed like men in shackles. It is worthy of remark that these
savages have no means of navigation, and rather show a horror of the
water. Their arms are the same as those of the natives of New
South Wales, their clothing and appearance equally loathsome.
“ The advantages which this country holds out to settlers above
those in New South Wales—besides the important circumstance of its
vicinity to India, the Spice Islands, Java, the Mauritius, and the
Cape of Good Hope, and independent of its situation as a place of
call for East India and China ships—are, in the first place : The
great ease with which a settler can bring his land into cultivation,
the forests averaging not more than eight to ten trees per acre;
(78.) Kangaroos, emus, etc., after nearly eighty years’ occupation, have
naturally been driven further afield, and are still plentiful in some parts of Western
Australia. Pish, also, are abundant, although the grounds have been heavily
worked by Greeks and Italians for some years past, while the river itself has been
almost denuded of its finny inhabitants by the reprehensible allowance of net-
fishing. Another factor is the use of trawls for prawn-catching, the constant
dragging over the bottom destroying the ground piscine food and disturbing their
breeding-grounds. Amended legislation for the preservation of food fishes is
urgently needed.
(79-) Gunther says : —“The tiger shark (Stegostoma tigrinum ) is one of
the commonest and handsomest sharks of the Indian Ocean. The ground color is
a brownish yellow, and the w'hole fish is ornamented with black or brown transverse
bands or rounded spots. It is a littoral species, but adult specimens, which are
from 10 to 15 feet long, are not rarely met far from land. It is easily recognised
by its enormously long blade-like tail, which is half as long as the whole
fish.” At Sydney the carpet shark, or wobbegong (Crossorhinus barbaius), is
often erroneously called the tiger shark; and, as the fish are still to be found at
Rottnest, it is possible Fraser meant these, and not the true tiger shark of the
Indian Ocean. The French also noted the very large number of sharks that hung
round their ship off Rottnest in 1801. They are far less plentiful now.


Beagle Bay Natives Under the Care of Catholic Missionaries.


secondly, the facility with which he can bring his produce to maiket,
either by land or water, the coast being easy of access on an) part
near the river, and no impediments (80) existing in the interior;
thirdly, the great abundance of fresh water of the best quality, an
advantage which New South Wales, east of the Blue Mountains, does
not possess, excepting on the immediate banks of rivers and creeks ,
fourthly, the great abundance of limestone.
“ Ten miles from the entrance of the Swan River, the Moreau of
the French branches off to the south, according to the report of the
party who went to explore it. It seems of equal extent with the
Swan River, and the country on its banks is of the same
description.
“ The island of Berthollet, distant one mile from Buache, is a
barren inhospitable spot, producing abundance ol hares, seals, and
mutton birds. Its shores present many tesselated cliffs of limestone,
resembling the turrets of a Gothic cathedral. There is no water on
this island.
“ The island of Buache is composed principally of low ridges of
light sandy loam, traversing the island from north to south, and
terminating on the south with high cliffs or banks of sand, the loftiest
parts of which are thickly covered with Cypress ( Calytns), and the
surface, towards the sea, is considerably interrupted by limestone
rocks. The soil, though light, appears to me —from the immense
thickets of a species of Solarium (81) which it produces, and which
attains the height of 10 feet—to be capable of producing any
description of light garden crops. The interior of these ridges are
singularly divided by transverse dykes or banks, forming deep pits,
which receive all the water from the ridges, the dykes preventing its
escape otherwise than by absorption. The pits are covered with
gigantic Solatia, and a beautiful species of Brunonia. fresh water
may be found on each of these islands by digging 2 feet deep. Ihe
north side of the island is in many places covered with extensive
thickets of arborescent Metrosideros, and the soil I found to be of a
very fine brown loam, studded with detached blocks of limestone,
and susceptible of producing any description of crop. In one of
these thickets we sowed various sorts of culinary seeds and introduced
several plants of the banana.
(80.) This is not the fact. The sandy nature of the land is a serious
impediment in the matter of roads for carriage of produce and goods, and road
material in the country generally is absent where agricultural development is
practical.
(81.) May be Solatium simile.


“ The coast towards Point Cockburn is thickly studded with
Cypress ; the soil a light sand. Here we found abundance of fresh
water on the beach, as well as in Cypress thickets beyond the
influence of the sea My observations did not extend beyond Port
Cockburn ; but, from the appearance of the country, I doubt not its
being of the same quality as that already described.
“ Between the isles of Berthollet and Buache is the entrance for
ships drawing more than 16 feet of water into Port Cockburn (82).
Vessels drawing less than 16 feet can run directly across the Sound,
from the entrance of Swan River to Port Cockburn. Vessels ot
any burthen can proceed up the Sound to the entrance of the river,
where there is good anchorage, with plenty of room to beat out
should the wind come to blow hard from the north-west.
“It is remarkable that on the shores of the Sound, at the
entrance to the river, there is not a perpendicular height of 5 feet
from the line of low water to that of vegetation, a proof that there is
never any heavy weather in the Sound. There is no surf, and boats
may land on any part of the main. On the bar, at the entrance,
there is only 1 fathom of water (83), but that is always smooth.
Port Cockburn is only distant eight miles from it, where there is
room for the largest fleet, with 7 fathoms of water within 20 yards of
the shore, and this perfectly land-locked.
“ Proceeding from the mouth of the river along Baie Geographe
the appearance of the country is particularly pleasing.
“ The shore seems well clothed with timber, and the foliage is
of the richest green. The observations taken here confirm me in my
opinion that the principal part of the timber consists of Eucalyptus.
I saw no trace of Banksia or of Casuarina.
“ Fro«n the shore the country is seen to rise gradually into gentle
undulating hills, separated apparently by valleys of considerable size,
the whole terminated by a magnificent range of hills, thickly covered
with heavy timber extending all along the bay.
“At the head of the bay the feature of the country changes,
exhibiting bold hills, with large masses of granite, in many instances
jutting into the sea with considerable grandeur. The hills, too, are
clear of timber, with the exception of some stunted Eucalyptus , and
are divided by beautiful winding valleys, in each of which is a small
(82.) Now called Rockingham.
(83.) At a heavy expense this bar has been removed, and a channel of 34
feet provided into the Port of Fremantle.


stream, and a soil of richest loam, throwing up immense quantities of
herbaceous plants, amongst which I observed thistles (84) of n teet
in height. I found the soil, on examination, to exceed 10 teet in
depth. On digging the sand on the beach we found abundance of
fresh water, while the soil with which the hills are covered is of the
finest description to the very summit.
“At Cape Naturaliste the character of the soil continues without
any visible change, but in the geological structure there is a very
great difference. Here are immense cliffs, presenting at their base
large beds of granite and schistose rock, passing alternately into each
other, and observing in their dip an angle ot 1 sdeg. 'They were seen
occasionally to enclose immense masses of pudding-stone, and an
extraordinary aggregate containing petrifactions ot bivalve shells and
other marine productions, every part of which was covered with
minute crystals of lime. Large masses of felspar were seen traversing
these beds in various directions, and of various thickness. Ihe
granite rock was succeeded by a bed of micaceous schist, in an
advanced stage of decomposition, over which were observed several
caverns, which were found to contain rock-salt in crystallised masses
in large quantities. The rock is decomposed pudding-stone, con-
taining various sorts of granite, the salt having penetrated the most
compact parts of the granite. The base of the cavern is a coarse
sandstone, the whole covered with limestone. The southern extreme
of the cape consists of lofty cliffs, presenting two ranges of superb
caverns, the lowest of which we explored (85). The great or outer
cavern is about 40 feet high at the entrance, 40 feet in breadth, and
about 90 feet in depth. Into this cavern the sea rolls at high water,
over immense blocks of granite, in awful grandeur. 'The stalactites in
the cavern are many of them from 20 to 25 feet in length, covered
with minute Cryptogatnic vegetables of fantastic colors and form.
The walls are clothed with the same substances, which give to the
whole an extraordinary appearance. The second cavern is distinct
from the first. The entrance is about 20 feet in height and 20 in
breadth, increasing in height and breadth further in. The stalactites
and stalagmites are abundant, and of the purest white. The
former were observed to exceed 15 feet in length. There was a
remarkable circumstance observed at the entrance of the cavern, the
stalactites being all bent outwards, as if a gale of wind was perpetually
(84.) At the locality referred to Riedle, the chief gardener of the French fleet,
in 1801, sowed vegetable seeds, and it is probable that here, as at the upper reach
of the Swan, some thistle seeds were accidentally introduced.
(85.) Adjoining the marine caverns of Cape Naturaliste is a series of lime-
stone caves, extending about 50 miles to the neighborhood of Cape Hamelin,
which have been opened out by the Government. In some respects they rival, if
not surpass, the Jenolan Caves of New South Wales.


blowing through the cavern. The three succeeding ones are of minor
importance, but all containing stalactites.
“ Ihe appearance of the cliffs and caverns from the sea is
exceedingly grand. It is impossible to pass along the beach 14 yards
without crossing a stream which issues from caves of limestone, and
which forms banks of shells, seaweed, stones, and whatever substances
may come within their reach, incrusting them in a most beautiful
manner.
“ Such, indeed, were the attractions of the country that we all
felt sorry on leaving it.”


H.M.S. “ Success,


An Account of the Expedition of H M.S.
“ Success,’’
Captain James Stirling, RN., from Sydney, to the Swan River, in 1827.
By Augustus H. Gilbert, Clerk of H M.S. “Success.”
H.M.S, “Success,”
Sydney, 30th April, 1827.
We sailed from Sydney on Wednesday, 17th January, having on
board as passengers Mr. Fraser, Colonial Botanist, and Mr. Garling,
of this place, in company with a cutter attached to the “Success” by
the Governor, for the purpose of being employed in surveying the
coast and to carry provisions to King George Sound, where an infant
settlement has been formed, and which I shall speak of in the course
of my letter. On the Friday following we parted company, finding
she sailed so indifferently that we ran away Irom her under double-
reefed topsails and top-gallant sails, while she had all sails crowded.
On Sunday we encountered a severe gale of wind, which, lasting
only twenty hours, did us little or no injury, and from this time we
had light winds, and nothing of any interest occurred till the 27th
January, in the evening of which day we came to an anchor in the
River Derwent, Hobait Town. The capital of Van Diemen’s Land
is situated about thirty miles from the entrance of this river, at the
base of a lofty mountain. The next morning we weighed, and ran
up to this town. The different views in passing up the river were
most interesting. The little farms and fine ripe cornfields that
adorned either side of this beautiful river reminded me strongly of
England. The variety of tints the extensive forests afforded at that
season of autumn, together with the romantic appearance of the


cloud-capped mountains, particularly the one under which the town
is erected, gratified the taste of every lover of the works of Nature in
the most ample manner.
The town is well planned, and is extensive, considering the short
time that it has been in existence (about thirteen years), and appears
to be rapidly increasing. This town possesses some natural advan-
tages over Sydney, which renders it a more desirable place of
residence ; it is not subject to those sudden changes from heat to
cold, and the soil is far superior and much deeper than at Sydney.
All the necessaries of life are to be procured here in abundance,
particularly vegetables, which flourish during the whole of the.year.
They have not erected a market place, which is an evil much
complained of by the inhabitants, making the price of provisions,
although abundant, excessively high, little or none being brought in
from the country ; there is one now, I believe, in contemplation,
which will shortly be built. During our short stay we had many
visitors, and we received several invitations, the inhabitants being
much pleased with our arrival, and anxious to show us every attention.
Among those who came on board was the son of one of the principal
chiefs of New Zealand. He was brought on board by Captain
Wilson, late of the Hon. East India Company’s service, now a
merchant of this place. This young chief had the misfortune to be
wrecked in New South Wales, in one of Mr. Wilson’s vessels, and
only escaped with his life by being an excellent swimmer. He had
an intelligent open countenance, and appeared quickly to comprehend
the use of the different things on board on being explained to him.
On the Wednesday following we went down the river to await the
arrival of the cutter, and came to an anchor between Beanis Island
and Pierson’s Point, sixteen miles from the town. As there was now
no probability of getting to the town, we went ashore at these places
shooting, there being many kangaroos, quail, parrots, a beautitul
species of pigeon, etc. We thus passed our time agreeably till the
Bth February, when the cutter arrived, having experienced a heavy
gale of wund for ten days. She had carried away her boom and gaff
in two places, and was otherwise considerably damaged. Several
head of stock, including two cows, which she had on board for King
George Sound, died. We immediately sent the carpenter and sail-
maker on board ; and, having completed the necessary lepairs by
evening, we weighed and stood out to sea in company with her. We
had a fine moderate breeze at first, but the next day it changed to a
fresh beating breeze with occasional squalls. The cutter continued
in company till the 13th, when, finding that she proved a great draw-
back to our progress, we hove to, and sent a boat on board with
orders for her to make the best of her way to Swan River. If,
however, she could not round Cape Leeuwin on the 15th March, on
that day to bear up for King George Sound ; and, if she could not
reach that place by the 20th, to shape a course for Sydney. We now
filled and made sail, and lost sight of her. On the 4th March we


weathered Cape Leeuwin, and on the sth arrived off Rottnest Island,
a place described by the French as being a terrestial paradise (1) but
we found it a barren place, not possessing the slightest inducement
for anyone to settle, the whole island being almost entirely composed
of sand, covered with brushwood. There is a vast number of the
small species of kangaroo on this island. The next day we sailed
toward the Swan River, distant about ten miles, and came to an
anchor, off the mouth of the river distant three miles. We sent a
boat into the river, and on its return the crew gave us an unfavorable
account of the entrance, there being a bar of sand and rocks, with
scarcely sufficient water for a boat to pass over in safety, but imme-
diately over this bar they got into deep water, having from 4 to 10
fathoms (2). They shot several black swans, a remarkable bird found
in great numbers there. This bird is about the size of the white swan,
and perfectly black, with the exception of the quill feathers at the
tip of the wings, which are white. The bill, legs, and eyelids are
red, and they fly in flocks. They are rather gross, but otherwise good
eating. The next day (Wednesday) we proceeded to the island of
Berthollet (Carnac), when we moored ship. This island is a mere
mass of rock, intersected here and there with brushwood, the resort
of sea birds, breeding here in vast numbers, every part of it being
covered with holes similar to a rabbit warren. The next day
(Thursday, March 8) being fixed for the expedition up the river, the
first gig and cutter were ordered to hold themselves in readiness. At
8 o’clock they accordingly started from the ship, the boats being
victualled for a fortnight and well armed. The object of this was to
proceed, if possible, to the source of the river, to examine the banks,
the depth of water, to fix on an eligible spot for a settlement, to
ascertain the productions of the country, the nature of the soil, and
the practicability of forming a harbor tor shipping; and lam happy
to state that our expectations are fully realised, and that our report
has given so much satisfaction to the Governor that an immediate
settlement is to be formed there. The boats proceeded about
twenty (3) miles up the river the first day, when they were prevented
going further by meeting with the flats, that here extended themselves
the whole width of the river, and one and a-half miles in length.
They were reduced to the necessity of taking everything out of the
boats, and landing them on one of the many islands that are formed
in this part of the river by the floods, and to drag the boats over by
main force, there not being sufficient water to float the gig. In doing
this the party were above their knees in mud, and obliged to walk
over extensive beds of oyster shells, which lacerated their feet very
much. The next day (Friday), however, they got the boats over and
( 1) Rottnest Island was not called by the French a terrestial paradise, but a very correct
description of the island which is diversified by hill, valley, and salt lakes, was given by them.
(2) Immediately over the bar the depth of water was about three or four fathoms, and this
was followed by a number of sandbanks, some of which, near the railway bridge, still exist.
( 3) Really twelve miles.


continued their course up the river. It is strange that immediately
on getting over these flats they found deep water of nearly 8 fathoms.
The river, after running two miles to the eastward, takes a N.N.E.
serpentine direction. The scenery was delightful —the trees growing
to the water’s edge, the transparency of the river, the mountains and
plains alternately appearing, and the picturesque points and bays,
formed the most interesting scenery possible, and this place only
requires a little assistance from art to render it one of the most
delightful spots on earth. On Sunday they first observed the natives,
two children were playing on the shore, who, immediately on per-
ceiving the boat, ran off, but in a few minutes they could see about
two hundred watching them from behind trees and the tops of the
hills. We continued our course for some time without noticing them,
and the natives kept moving along the shore with their spears in their
hands, making signs for our people to come on shore. They having
followed for some time, we put on shore, and all the natives on this
retreated towards a hill near the spot except five rather elderly men,
who immediately laid down their spears and made signs of friendship
by holding their arms over their heads, etc. Mr. Belches, third
lieutenant, went out to meet them, but upon another following him
they showed strong symptoms of alarm, snatched up their spears, and
would have fled had not the person instantly returned to the boat.
By making signs of peace, and giving them some presents, they soon
became more easy and familiar. They seemed particularly fond of
bread and sugar, but they could not relish the salt meat. These
people are about the middle size, possessing rather intelligent coun-
tenances than otherwise, and live in the most simple state possible;
they walk upright, are small made, their thighs being no larger than
the calf of a leg of a common-sized man ; this may be owing to the
small quantity of animal food they take, living chiefly on roots and
berries, and their possessing no effective instruments for sporting,
fishing, or hunting. They go in tribes of twenty or thirty, and each
tribe has its chief (4), whom they obey and respect. They speak an
uncouth and harsh language (5), and when they express either admira-
tion, surprise, or pleasure they vociferate several times the word
“Quabba.” They have only these weapons, at least we only saw
these amongst them—namely, the spear, knife, and tomahawk (6).
The spear is formed of a species of reed that grows in abundance
here. These spears are from 8 to 11 feet long, and they fasten
a small piece of wood at the end of it to form a barb ; this
wood they sharpen with stones to a point, and secure it to
the spear with the gut of the kangaroo, and strengthen it
with the gum that is found here in large quantities. They throw
them with great force and correct exactness. The tomahawk
(4) The aborigines of Australia have no chiefs in the proper sense of the term. Their
most expert and powerful warriors are feared and obeyed, bat can scarcely be said to govern.
(5) Some authorities consider the aboriginal dialects to be soft and mellifluous.
(6) In addition to these are others, notably the boomerang, womerah and nullah.


I. N atives Preparing for Corroboree at Broome.
Aboriginal Weapons Exhibited at Perth Museum.


—
r „.
MtatosJTCM.’
— ! —---
Wf ,
*
1. *J
'-P-3
ii ■ ;C
£ , 'y^
. ■ Ifcy •/r„
p If*
■* sSHL^'
Hit J3Nk
f
“ :5^i
P* H
W-tf^m
m.
t&m
p!^
V ;4 I
||||
swfeas^k
W <J
i; yr i|
C^lli
S™ :
a f ■
* V- /'■•*■
.’Ltz viS^oOE.
L" f ‘ 1 /
** wS \^ [i - 3BB& %' t
gn
f V V
* /. ■'£' $p
hBp A *«>> I
'" .
V 4 *
HKSw^
frv \
' /f * ; - Af*<?
» ** ; -CC 0«l
vhesk#
- * J>
r Dk
;• .>;> *i
. >v *
flS®T* } 4
W.’.
r*ir *
&*>
w
T
Ml J StMtML.
T - # .
R
r
> !, «•
.--- ♦ »- gj jg.^fi^..< Ip' ;
"|.- \,
*' *. > , \S&
'*/ . $ ; - &S -t
jar»-.' »
-ii&f , - v jll
:/yvdtmp.
Eucal vPtus Calophylla, the Red
Gum of Western
Australia,
Erroneously Called Angophora by Eraser.


is simply formed of a small piece of wood, about 18 inches
long, with a stone at the end, fastened only by gum. The knife is
also formed of stone, sharpened by others, but this is the meanest
apology for a knife I ever saw. The natives are almost perfectly
naked, having merely a band about 3 inches wide round their waists,
made of the bark of a tree. The chiefs paint themselves with a sort
of red clay, and twist their hair, which is long (7), round their heads,
binding it with the feathers of the cockatoo and swan. The chiefs
have likewise feathers through their ears, and a single quill feather
through the septum of the nose (8). On Monday, March 12, we reached
the source of the river, which latterly had become so harrow that we
were obliged to boat the mast and pull, the trees overhanging on
both sides so as to prevent our sailing. Here we encamped (9) for that
and the following day, and passed our time in examining the country.
We shot as many swans and ducks as we required, and Mr. Fraser
made a large collection of various plants. On Wednesday, having
got the things into the boat, we commenced our passage down the
river. The boats had not proceeded far before both got staved from
the large quantity of stumps of trees that had fallen into the river.
We repaired this damage and reached the flats. The captain here
ordered the first gig to proceed up another of the rivers (10) and
ascertain the depth of water and how far it extended, but not to
proceed further than to be enabled to be on board by sunset the
following evening The cutter continued her course down the river,
and reached the ship a little after midnight in safety. The gig
returned the next night at 10 o’clock, having proceeded as far up the
riyer as they could consistently with the order to be on board by
sunset. It is worthy of remark that the whole way the gig went she
had 5 fathoms water, and it was equally deep and broad at the place
from which they commenced their return as at first, while the water
was extremely salt. On the gig’s returning down the river she fell in
with another party of natives, who were more timid than those we
had observed up the river. The boat was obliged to pull on and off
the shore for some time, and make every token and sign of friendship
before these natives could be prevailed on to remain while they
landed. At last one or two remained, when one of our people landed
and gave them some presents. They soon became more friendly.
One of the boat’s crew gave the chief a jacket, and another a pair of
trousers, and it was strange to observe him endeavor to put it on as
the other had put on his jacket, thrusting his arms through the places
. (7) The hair of the natives of Australia is short and curly as a general rule ;in some in-
stances the tail of the dingo has been introduced and wound round the top of the head, which no
doubt deceived the visitors.
of the*nose^ SUa " y Smal * b ° ne ° f the kangaro ° or a piece of wood is Passed through the septum
/?), This camp was at the 1 junction of Ellen’s Brook, named after Mrs. Stirling. There
is a sketch of the camp at the Public Library, but the trees are not true.
(10) Canning River,


for his legs. It was curious, also, to observe the natives put their
fingers and rub them on our people’s skin, and then look to see if
anything came off, being fully persuaded they were painted. The
natives opened their waistcoats, and laughed much when they
observed that their breasts were the same color as their hands and
faces. Our people secured several spears from them and parted good
friends. We were employed from this time in surveying the islands
of Rottnest, Buache, and Berthollet, with the adjacent rocks, and the
coast on each side of the river. I had almost forgot that we made
two gardens about fifteen miles (n) up the liver, and another on
Buache, and sowed several descriptions of garden vegetables and
corn. We left on Buache a cow, three goats, and three sheep with
young, etc.
Our expectations of the advantages of a settlement at Swan
River are now fully confirmed, and although it would be impossible
for vessels of above ten tons burden to enter the river at any state of
the tide in safety, at the present entrance, it would be practicable at
small expense to cut a canal at about four miles (12) from the mouth
of the river to the sea. The distance necessary to be cut is only one
quarter of a mile, and would immediately lead into water of 12
fathoms (13) both in the river and in the sea. The land is rocky (14),
and would afford excellent sides to the canal. The climate is most
delightful, the soil is good, and in many places exceedingly rich, and
capable of producing any of the European vegetables and fruits as
well as tropical.
The prevailing botany of this place, as I have collected from Mr.
Fraser, consists of the following genera, viz. : — Eucalyptus , Banksia y
Dryandra , Cosuarina, Leptospermum, and a species of Zamia. The
hills near the beach immediately north of the entrance are sandy, but
on proceeding two hundred yards the soil changes to a rich red loam
of very considerable depth (15), improving as the hills are ascended to
the richest virgin loam, and capable of producing any crop. The
hills continue of the same description for seven or eight miles,
beyond which their character was not observed. The stony nature of
these hills render them admirably adapted for the culture of the vine.
The islands (16) on the flats are composed of a muddy deposit,
evidently brought on by the floods; their banks are covered with
thickets of Casuarina and Metrosideros , and their centres with sub
(11) Eleven or twelve miles.
( 12) Two miles.
(13) The deepest water in Rocky Bay and for some distance on the sea coast is only four
fathoms. The greatest depth in the Swan is seventy feet near the Chine in Freshwater Bay, and
not very far from Blackwall Reach. Although the coast is known to be rising, it is incompre-
hensible to account for such considerable discrepancies, both in the given depths and the dis-
tances. In another direction also, Stirling figured the height of some hills and mountains ab-
surdly. Mount William he called 3,000 feet, nearly double its known altitude.
(14) Rocky Bay. (15) Grossly exaggerated. (16) Heirisson’s Islands.


\
1
I **.' ; - '"
.
•
•• ■ ■ -r- - ■ »* •• 1
■■ — —L-— t g- '*». f>im ' ■*•'
•»- ■ "'*■-«- vr -» l ""~ - ” ' -t1g£f**~' ~~"ZS •''
W/ ' j
View of Albany and King George the Third Sound.


marine succulent plants. At Point Fraser there is a material change
observable in the botany ; a magnificent species of Angophora (17) is
seen on the summit of the ranges; the Casuarina on the banks
assume a more arborescent character than any seen hitherto on the
river; Banksia grandis, forming a superb feature in the botany of this
part, often exceeding 40 feet in height; the Zamia is seen attaining
the height of 30 feet; its beautiful pinnated leaves, associated with
the superb Xanthorreas , so abundant here, imparts to the forest an
appearance perfectly tropical. Proceeding up the river, the
country opens into immense plains of the most fertile description.
The soil is a rich brown earth, extending to the base of the moun-
tains. The forest land between the river and the ranges is covered
with the most magnificent shrubs and stupendous Angophora (17),
occupying the same situation in the geography of the botany of this
country that the iron bark does on the Eastern coast. Stringy bark
(18) was likewise seen on the ranges in considerable quantities.
From this time to the 20th we were employed in surveying the
islands of Rottnest, Buache, and Berthollet, but my limits will not
allow me to give you any particulars respecting them. On the 21st
of March we weighed and stood to leeward, steering towards Jurien
Bay ; but, the wind shifting, we bore up for Geographe Bay. On the
24th we made the bay, and as we sailed along the shore towards it
we observed a party of about thirty natives on the beach. They
likewise saw us, and seemed very anxious not to be left behind, and
kept pace with the ship, although going five knots, till 2 o’clock,
when we anchored in the bay, thus having walked at least thirty
miles. They then seated themselves in a body at the base of a
mountain, abreast the ship. We collected some presents, such as
knives and pieces of stuff, handkerchiefs, beads, etc., and also some
bread, sugar, etc., and sent them on shore. The natives seated
themselves to await the boats approach, and on its arrival made every
sign of friendship and invited our people on shore. We accordingly
landed, and by distributing the presents and dancing completely won
the savages’ hearts. At last two chiefs ventured to come on board,
and they were struck with astonishment at the size of the ship and
the many different things they observed on board, more particularly
the galley fire, at which they expressed the liveliest pleasure,
vociferating, “ Quabba, quabba !” After we had rigged them out in
mariners’ jackets, trousers, etc., we landed them, much gratified with
their visit and in perfect amity with us.
We then shaped a course for King George Sound, and after
having been beating for several days to windward oft Cape Leeuwin
we, on the 2nd of April, reached our destination, and came to an
anchor off the entrance of Port Royal. Ihe settlement consists of
(17) Not Angophora , but Eucalyptus calophylla, the red gum of Western Australia.
(lB> The jarrah, Eucalyptus marginata■


about seventy persons, who landed there on the 25th December,
1826. They have erected several little cottages, or rather huts, made
of wood and plastered with mud, but even in the commandant’s
house the wind blows through in every part. The expectations
formed of King George Sound have by no means been realised ; the
soil is wretched, and with the utmost care and attention they have
not hitherto been able to bring anything a few inches above the
ground. The town is situated at the foot of an immense mountain.
The harbor is excellent, and there is sufficient water for a three-
decker up to the town. The people had only thirty days’ provisions
at half-allowance at the time we arrived, and it was thus fortunate
that we touched there, for we found, to our surprise, that the cutter
had not reached there. We had but a month’s provisions remaining,
and we had a voyage of upwards of two thousand miles to go before
we could again be supplied, The captain, however, consented to
give them all over a fortnight’s provisions for the ship’s company,
and thus supplied them for two months at the same allowance. The
day after the people arrived here, from some misunderstanding, the
natives attacked a party of six or seven men, who had strayed a short
distance from the spot they had fixed on for forming their town, and
obliged the party to make off with all speed back again. One man
was severely wounded, being speared through the thigh and the back.
Another spear was sent through the fleshy part of the arm, which
entered his side, thus pinning his arm to his side. In this condition
he managed to reach his companions. He still exists, but is entirely
maimed for life. We brought him to Sydney. The natives are in
other respects perfectly harmless; they have ingress and egress to
any of the huts, and never attempted to take anything unless given to
them. They appear to be very ill-used by the sealers, who frequent
this part of the coast, by forcibly taking their women away, and
shooting them for the slightest offences. Just before our arrival the
commandant had caused seven sealers to be apprehended for taking
four natives to Michaelmas Island (a small barren rock in the
Sound), killing one, and leaving the others there with the evident
intention of starving, and for violently taking two of their women
away and landing them on some part of the mainland directly away
from the tribe they belonged to. They are to be tried for murder the
first opportunity that offers to bring them to Sydney. Here, as well
as at Swan River, they are naked, with the exception of a seal
or kangaroo skin, which they throw over their shoulders and which
reaches no lower than their waist. There is no other apparent
difference between them.
The scenery as we entered the Sound was bold and magnificent.
The lofty mountains in various shapes, the curiously-formed islands,
and the sea breaking violently on the rocks, give it a most striking
effect; but there is, at the same time, a barren appearance in the
landscape that soon fatigues the eye of the spectator.


I had procured some specimens of a most curious plant that
flourishes in this part of the globe only. It is called the pitcher-
plant, and grows in the marshy ground here ; it consists of thin stalks
about 2 feet high, which produce at the top small wild flowers,
similar to the lily in form, only much smaller and possessing no
smell. On the stalk, just above the soil, grow several (three to seven)
small bulbous flowers, shaped similar to a pitcher, with a cover or top
to them. When there is rain, or heavy dew, these covers lift up, and
receive all the moisture that falls into them ; on its leaving off
raining, the covers shut down, and thus prevent the water escaping.
The pitchers thus contain sufficient to supply the plant with nourish-
ment the whole of the dry season, each pitcher containing from one
to three spoonsful of water.
On the 4th of Aptil we stood to sea, with a strong breeze
from the S.W., and at to p.m. on the 15th we anchored within the
heads of Port Jackson, and found that the cutter had reached this
place a week before us, having, while off King George Sound, carried
away her rudder in a gale of wind, which obliged her to bear up.
On the (19) King’s Birthday (April 23) the Governor (20) gave a
splendid ball and supper, to which we were all invited, but I have
no room left for particulars.
On Saturday, the 28th of April, the first regatta witnessed took
place. It was got up on board us by Captain Stirling and
Captain Ross, of the “ Rainbow,” and on that day we had all the
beauty and flower of Sydney on board, together with the 57th Band,
and between the races quadrilles were the order of the day. Captain
Ross’ boat won the pulling match, and our cutter the sailing.
Captain Stirling gave an excellent cold collation, and the party did
not break up till late in the evening. The river (21) presented one
of the gayest scenes possible, and everybody was delighted.
(\g) George IV. was born August 12, 1762, but on his accession to the throne, in 1820,
directed St- George’s Day to be observed as his birthday.
(20) General Sir Ralph Darling.
(21) Parramatta River.


1508 00247683 1


