

The Story of
E. WEBB & CO.
BATHURST
100 YEARS
1051 - 1951
Times Print, Bathurst


ONE HUNDRED YEARS
E. WEBB & CO.
This is the story of the first depart-
ment store in the Australian inland. It is
the story of enterprise, endurance, far-
sightedness and inspired leadership. It is
by no means merely the story of a busi-
ness firm. In our hectic days of far-
flung trading, State-wide commerce, inter-
state enterprise and national companies,
moulded upon foreign pattern, the tradi-
tional British undertaking of stability
rather than expansion seems to have come
out of fashion.
Here in the Australian inland, how-
ever, solidity has outlived volume. Among
the multitude of shops and emporiums,
warehouses and stores that came and went,
few have lived long enough to afford to
stop and look back without losing sight
of the future.
E. Webb Co., the senior of the in-
land trading houses, has now reached the
point where it can, with gratitude for the
years that passed and with confidence in
the days ahead, tell the story of the oldest
department store in the inland of Austra-
lia. It is an Australian story. It is the
story of Bathurst.
The site of the present city of Bath-
urst, the cradle of the nation, Australia’s
first inland settlement, was discovered by
Deputy Surveyor-General George W.
Evans on Thursday, December 9, 1813.
It is 99 miles distant from Sydney by


“HATHROP” —RESIDENCE OF THE LATE HON. E. T. WEBB


THE LATE HON. E. WEBB
Founder of the business
air, 150 miles by rail and 130 miles by
road. Situated in the midst of the table-
lands at a mean altitude of 2260 feet
above sea level, the district boasts the
healthiest climate in Australia. It is the
lovely country which “Banjo” Paterson
describes in his record of Evans’s dis-
covery :
“He saw the land that it was good,
“A land of fatness all untrod,
“And gave his silent thanks to God.”


It was named by Evans “Bathurst
Plains”, after the then Secretary of State
for the Colonies, the famous Tory states-
man Henry Bathurst, the Third Earl of
Bathurst.
Instructed by Governor Lachlan Mac-
quarie, Lieutenant William Cox built
along the trail blazed by Blaxland, Went-
worth, Lawson and Evans from Penrith
to Bathurst, the first inland road in Aus-
tralia, 101 miles long, with 28 men, six
soldiers and one officer, in just under six
months. The astounding feat completed,
Macquarie himself travelled to Bathurst,
determined the site of the first inland
settlement in Australia and, on May 7,
1815, founded the settlement of Bathurst
with the first Divine Service ever held in
the inland. He immediately imposed a
ban of settlement in the district to fore-
stall a land rush.
When, in 1829, the ban was lifted,
William (“Parson”) Tom and his family
proceeded westward across the Macquarie
River to their Crown grant of 640 acres
at Springfield. This man, William “Par-
son” Tom was the first white settler to
cross the Macquarie. There is a direct
connection between him and the house
of Webb EJ Co.
Edmund Webb, an enterprising young
man,, descendant of a long line of ex-
tremely successful businessmen, arrived in
Australia in 1848. Upon learning that
there was a vacancy for a mercery hand
at Bathurst he secured the position and
arrived in Bathurst in 1849. The town
consisted at that time only of a few


straggling buildings, tbe more important
of which were the Governor’s dwelling,
the gaol, and the military barracks.
Edmund Webb’s employer was a gentle-
man by the name of Mr. Burnsides, who
appeared to do good business. So well
did he do that Edmund Webb approached
him on his 21st birthday with the sug-
gestion to accept him as a partner with
the £2OO he had saved. Burnsides only
laughed and declared that £4OOO would
be nearer the amount needed.
This incensed the young man, who
courageously announced that he would
open a store of his own in competition
to his former employer. Thus was
founded in April, 1851, the enterprise
which today, one hundred years later, is
well known in New South Wales as the
State’s first inland department store,
E. Webb 8 Co.
Many businessmen have tried to seize
the skirts of happy chance at the aus-
picious moment of a sudden upsurge. Few
escaped when a sudden boom equally sud-
denly subsided. One, Edmund Webb,
rode with the flood to fortune.
On Monday, April 7, 1851, one of
the sons of the previously mentioned first
white settler to cross the Macquarie, young
William Tom, discovered a nugget of
pure gold at the junction of the Lewis
Ponds and Summerhill creeks. This find
caused the most spectacular rush of for-
tune-seekers Australia has ever experi-
enced. Charles A. Fitzroy, the Govcr-
nor-in-Chief of the Territory of New
South Wales, on May 22, 1851, issued


THE STORE IN 1851


THE LATE E. T. WEBB
a memorable proclamation in which he
said that "gold exists' upon and in the
soil of the County of Bathurst, and else-
where within the said Territory, and that
many persons have commenced, or are
about to commence, searching or digging
for the same”.
Thousands began to tramp over the
Blue Mountains to the Bathurst district,
but the tremendous uplift given to Bath-
urst by the discovery of gold in payable
quantities was too sensational to last, of
itself. Its enduring benefit was abso-
lutely dependent upon the support of a


NEW PREMISES IN 1862


sound commercial background. The
miners at the spot where the first nugget
was found, which had appropriately been
named "Ophir”, could not live upon gold
alone; they had to be fed and clothed,
and the sure and regular supply of life's
essentials was the responsibility of the
merchant.
The rapidly rising tide of demand
found Edmund Webb ready and well pre-
pared. It was to Springfield in 1854, where
he found his wife, Selina Tom, one of the
daughters of the first settler, that Edmund
Webb came to lay the foundations for
his personal happiness; it was here that
his brother-in-law, William Tom, to-
gether with his friend and associate John
A. Lister, brought the first fruits and
proof for the discovery of payable gold.
In 1852 Bathurst was declared a town.
Ten years later, in 1862, the first
premises of the'firm of Edmund Webb in
George Street, halfway between Russell
Street and Howick Street, proved too
small, and the drapery section of the pre-
sent building in George Street, opposite
Machattie Park, was erected. Even here.
Edmund Webb took no chances. While
earth movements have caused nearly every
building in Bathurst to show larger or
smaller cracks, the solid edifice of E. Webb
8 Co. shows no sign of damage. This
is because Edmund Webb arranged to
have his first large building erected on the
unusual but secure base of huge logs
embedded in lime concrete. The street


THE PRESENT STORE— 1951


before his emporium, like other streets
of the time, was a quagmire in wet win-
ters, the consequence of heavy bullock
dray traffic. River boulders carried to
the street Were laid together in such a
way that they formed a street foundation
which remained hard and solid.
In those days, Bathurst’s gaol occupied
the space before the emporium now known
throughout the British Empire as one of
it most lovely parks. This gaol, to
which the firm of E. Webb 8- Co. sup-
plied water and charcoal under one of its
earliest contracts, lay in full view be-
fore the windows of the building its
occupiers. As public executions took
place rather frequently, the son of the
founder of the firm, the late E. T. Webb,
then a little boy, was expressly forbidden
to loiter near the windows. However,
boys will be boys, and curiosity caused
disobedience, and this in turn caused a
number of good hidings.
When, in 1862, Bathurst was pro-
claimed a municipality, Edmund Webb
headed the poll for aldermen of the first
Council of Bathurst. He later filled the
mayoral chair on five different occasions.
This extraordinary feat, a splendid tes-
timony to the founder’s popularity and
passionate interest in civic affairs, was
repeated by his son, Mr. Edmund Tom
Webb, who remained a member 'of the
city’s council for 44 years and was
Mayor of Bathurst five ’times.
An old advertisement in 1863 dis-
closes that bushrangers stole a whole load


of goods when being transported from
Sydney, the carrier having been an ac-
complice. The police located the goods
at Sally’s Flat, on the road to Hill End.
The firm of E. Webb 8 Co. offered the
whole of the valuable grocery and drapery
recovered: among them were two tons
of good sugar offered at fid per pound,
together with the chance of finding 32
ounces of gold which Joseph Foot, of
Winburndale, one of the culprits, had
hidden in one of the sugar bags.
There is no business firm in the Aus-
tralian inland that has managed to main-
tain such happy relations with its em-
ployees as the firm of E. Webb Co. The
founder, Edmund Webb, as well as his
son and his grandson, the present prin-
cipal of the firm, have been excellent
judges of character. Hence all assistants
of the enterprise were wisely chosen and,
as a result of mutual respect between em-
ployer and employee, relations have pre-
vailed which may well be described as
ideal. Many of the assistants of the firm
spent a lifetime in its service. One em-
ployee of E. Webb & Co. has looked
back on a period of 61 years of un-
broken service with the firm, but there
are dozens of others who have served
for more than 25 years.
If confidence and trust were so evi-
dent between the principal and the staff
of E. Webb B Co., this was also shown
in the relations of the firm with its
customers. Hundreds of these, their


MR. E. G. WEBB
Present Manager


WILLIAM TOM, WITH THE FIRST CRADLE MADE IN AUSTRALIA


children and grandchildren following,
have remained loyal to the enterprise for
the entire duration of its existence. One
particular family, the Wests of Mac-
quarie Plains, have dockets issued by
E. Webb Co. in 1851, and still do
their business with the firm.
The City of Bathurst, with which
the fortunes of E. Webb 8 Co. are inti-
mately connected, celebrates in 1951 the
Centenary of Australian gold. From the
straggling township of a few houses and
barracks it has grown to the importance
of a district capital. Its magnificent tree-
lined streets and avenues, laid out by
Richards, the surveyor of Melbourne,
contain not only the most beautiful homes
and gardens this side of the Blue Moun-
tains, but the finest schools, hundreds of
shops and business firms and impressive
modern edifices. Two daily newspapers,
a broadcasting station, a good airport, two
racecourses, two cathedrals, a famous
museum, the largest public library in the
Australian inland, the largest and most
picturesque of the Australian immigration
centres and, last but not least, the only
carillon in the interior of Australia,
characterise Bathurst as the most impor-
tant district capital in the State of New
South Wales.
Of the existing department stores,
E. Webb 8 Co. is the oldest. Its motto
is service, its pride tradition. And it is
in this tradition that Mr. Edmund Guy
Webb, the present principal, congratulates


his customers and his staff on the unique
occasion of the hundredth birthday of his
firm, the warehouse of the cradle of the
nation.
