

THE
TOKEN OF THE COVENANT,
THE SUBJECTS,
THE MODE, AND THE NATURE
AND DESIGN OF BAPTISM.
Go ye, ihe.)ejore y and teach ail nations , baptising them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe alt things
whatsoever 1 have commanded you." — Mat xxvhi., 19, 20,
WILLIAM M‘INTYEE, A.M.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
MAITLAND :
ARMSTRONG AND MACLARDY, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
“ ENSIGN ” OFFICE, HIGH STREET.
MDCCCLXI,




THE
TOKEN OE THE COVENANT
THE SUBJECTS, THE MODE, AND THE NATURE
AND DESIGN OF BAPTISM.
0° yf, th ’ re.fore , andteaeh all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son , and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you.” — Mat, xxviii,, 19, 20.
BY THE
EEV. WILLIAM M’INTYRE, A.M.
MAITLAND :
ARMSTRONG AND MACLARDY, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
“ ENSIGN” OFFICE, HIGH STREET.
MDCCCI XI.




THE TOKEN OF THE COVENANT.
1. In the present discourse T shall endeavour to present and vindicate
what the scriptures teach with respect to the subjects, the mode, and
the nature and design of baptism. It will, of course, be impossible,
within the limits of one discourse, though it be extended to the utmost
length that can be regarded as at all allowable, to bestow anything
like a full and exhaustive treatment on these topics. I hope, however,
that, by a careful selection of materials, and a strict economy of time
in using them, I shall be able to furnish the intelligent hearer with the
means of attaining to a scriptural belief, or of justifying and defending
such belief already adopted.
I. SUBJECTS OF BAPTISM.
2. We are first, then, to inquire who are the proper subjects of
baptism. Some hold that certain adults only—adults who make a cre-
dible profession of faith in Christ—are to be baptised ; and others main-
tain that such adults, and also the infant children of baptised parents,
who make a credible profession of faith in Christ, are to be baptised.
These latter are called “pedobaptists,” —pedo denoting child or infant,
—because they hold and practise infant baptism : and the former “ anti »
pedobaptists,” bacause they reject the baptism of infants; or
“ anabaptists,” because they baptise again,—ana means again,—per-
sons who were baptised in infancy; but more commonly, however,
“ baptists,” a name which cannot be conceded to them, if it is meant
to imply that they alone baptise and are baptised with a legitimate and
valid baptism. In this sense it must be classed and repudiated with
such designations as catholic, Unitarian, churchman. Pedobaptists
and anti-pedo baptists, it will be seen from the statement just given
of the positions they respectively maintain, hold in common that certain
adults are to be baptised. On this point they are at one. Pedobap-
fists, however, hold further, and antipedobaptists deny, that certain
infants also are to be baptised. Thus the point at iVue, —the only p dnt
at issue in the controversy between them with respect to the subjects of
baptism is, whether the infant children of baptised parents who make
a credible profession of religion are to be baptised.


3, Accordingly, arguments to prove that adults are to be baptised
are wholly irrelevant. That adults are to be baptised does not need
to be proved in this controversy, for it is held in common by both
parties. Still the opponents of infant baptism deal largely in arguments
of this class. They adduce passage after passage to show that adults,
such adult* as have already been described as proper subjects of baptism,
are to be baptised. For this purpose they quote Mark xvi. 16, “ He
that believeth and is baptised shall be saved Acts ii. 41, “ They that
gladly received the word were baptised Acts viii, 36,37, “ The eunuch
said, See, here is water, what do hinder me to be baptised ? Philip
said. If thou belivest with all thy heart thou mayest and similar pas-
sages. Such passages, no doubt, prove that certain adults are to be
baptised, but then this is nothing to the purpose. The maintainers of
infant baptism, as well as the opponents of it, hold that such adults as
are intended in passages of this class are to be baptised; and, surely,
it is a strange mode of refuting their views on one point, to adduce
proof that they are scriptural on another. The point to be proved
is that infants are not to be baptised, and that infants are not to be
baptised in no way follows from the dSctrine, that certain adults art
to be baptised. If I maintained that the Chinese ought to be ex-
cluded from this colony, it would surely be no valid argument in sup-
port of this position, that Europeans ought to be admitted into it.
The duty of excluding the former in no way follows from the
duty of admitting the latter; and as little does the duty of excluding
infants from baptism follow from the duty of admitting certain adults
to it. Those who resort to such reasoning, if they perceive that it is
thus irrelevant, having really oo bearing upon the point at issue, are
guilty in resorting to it of great disingenuousness ; and, if they do not
perceive its irrelevancy, they betray a strange want of logical dis-
cernment and discrimination.
4. Leaving, then, the baptism of adults unchallenged, we direct
and confine our attention to the only question which at present claims
it, the question whether certain infants, —the infant children of bap-
tised parents who make a creditable profession of religion,—are to be
baptised. It is admitted, and can easily be proved, that under the
present dispensation, baptism is the ordinance of admission into the
visible church, or to the position of members of it. It was by baptism
that those who were converted on the day of pentecost were admitted into
that position, “ They that gladly received the word were baptised, and
the same day there were added unto them,” —that is, unto the visible
church by being thus baptized,—“ about three thousand souls.” Ac-
cording, to hold that baptism is not to be administered to anv infants,
is to hold that no infants are to be admitted to church membership.
Is it, then, the doctrine of Scripture that no infants are to be so
admitted ?
5. To prepare the way for answering this question as referring to
the present dispensation, it will be proper to inquire whether under
the preceding dispensations infants were admitted to church member-
ship. In prosecuting this inquiry it is sufficient to ascend to the time
of Abraham ; and to that patriarch we find the following language ad-
dressed by God. It occurs in Genesis xvii, 7-14 :—“I will establish
my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their
generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and
to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee and to thy seed after
thee the land"wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for
an everlasting possession ; and I will be their God. And God said


unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy
seed after thee in their generations. This is my covenant which ye
shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee ; Every man
child among you shall be circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the
flesh of your foreskin ; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt
me and you. And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised
among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in
the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy
seed. He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy
money must needs be circumcised, and my covenant shall be in your
flesh for an everlasting covenant. And the uncircumcised man child
whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off
from his people; he hath broken my covenant. 1 '
6. The covenant intended in this passage is the covenant of grace,
for it is only in that covenant that God promises, as he does here, to
be a God to any of our fallen race. This, indeed, is the great crown-
ing promise of the covenant of grace, to which all its other promises
may be regarded as tributary, and in the consummated fulfilment of
which the fulfilment of them all is comprehended. It is of course
the covenant of grace that God makes with his people under the
gospel dispensation, and that covenant, as it is described in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, viii, 10, a passage quoted from Jere-
miah, xxxi., 33, is identical with the Abrahamic covenant
now under consideration. “ This is the covenant that I will make
with the house of Isreal after those days, saith the Lord, 1 will put my
laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts ; and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people.” Here we have the
same promise, only in an expanded form, —“ I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a people,” and, therefore, the same covenant.
The other promise—“ I will put my laws into their mind, and write
them in their hearts," included in the description, served only to
secure the necessary qualifications on their part for being “ a people”
to God, and is not, therefore, to be regarded as a distinct and separate
promise. In the Epistle to the Galatians, the Apostle Paul distinctly
identifies the covenant under consideration as the covenant of grace,
“Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith
not, and to seeds as of many, but, as of one, and to they seed, which
is Christ. And, this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed
before of God in Christ, the law, which was 430 years after, cannot
disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect.” Gal. iii. 16,
17. Here he describes the covenant made with Abraham as the cove-
nant confirmed of God in Christ, which of course was the covenant of
grace ; in which light we are also required to view it, from the fact,
that the “ seed” of Abraham, to which the promise of it was made,
“ is Christ,” that is, Christ mystical or Christ and believers as united
to him. The covenant made with Abraham being thus the covenant
of grace, the blessing promised in the covenant of grace, and
bestowed in fulfilment of its promise, on all that believe, is called
“ the blessing of Abraham,”—“ That the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ.” Gal. iii 14.
7. Of the covenant made with Abraham, which, we now
seen, was the covenant of grace, and, therefore, of the covenant of
grace under the patriarchal dispensation, God constituted circumcision
“a token” and “ a sign.” “ It shall be a token,” he said to Abraham, in
a passage already quoted, “of the covenant betwixt me and thee.”
We read also, Rom. iv. 11, that Abraham “ received the sign of circum-


cision.’’ Accordingly, when God, by instituting circumcision, caused
it to be applied to Abraham and his seed, he, as it were, inscribed his
covenant upon them, so that it was “in their flesh,” He, therefore,
said to Abraham, when enjoining circumcision, “ my covenant shall be
in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.” Thus, when they were
circumcised, they were brought, outsvardly, within the bonds of the
covenant of which circumcision was the “ token,’’ —into the position
of persons in covenant with God, that is, of members of his visible
church.
8. It will not be denied that God had a church on earth in the
time of Abraham, and his visible church in all ages is composed of
those with whom he has outwardly entered into covenant, and whom
he has thus brought outwardly into such a relation to himself that
he “is a God unto them.” Now circumcision was the “ token’’ by
the application of which Abraham and his seed were outwardly re-
ceived within the bonds of the covenant which God made with them,
that is of the covenant of grace, and thus constituted members of the
visible church, as then organised.
9. Under the Mosaic economy, circumcision continued to occupy
the same place as the rite of admission to church membership.
10. An attempt has been made to divest circumcision, as far as
possible, of this character, partly by presenting a low view of its own
nature and import, and partly by presenting a low view of the church
to the membership of which it was the ordinance of admission. With
this aim circumcision has been described as “ a sign of carnal descent,
a mark of national distinction, and a token of interest in those temporal
blessings that were promised to Abraham.” We have already seen
that, according to God’s institution, it was “ a token of the covenant,”
which he made with Abraham and his seed, and that covenant was
the covenant of grace; and, though we did not possess this informa-
tion with respect to it, we could not regard it as being, according to
this depreciating estimate of it, “ a sign of carnal descent; ” for it was
to be applied not only to the natural descendants of Abraham, but, also,
to all other members of his household, whether “ born in his house, or
bought with his money of any stranger, which was not of his seed.”
Neither could it be considered as a mere “ mark of national distinction.’*
Such a view of it is fordidden by the relation in which we have seen it
stood to the covenant of grace; and, besides, the use of it was not
confined to the descendants of Abraham in the line of Isaac. As re-
gards the remaining particular of the description, to say that
circumcision was “ a token of interest in those temporal blessings
that were promised to Abraham,” is only to say, in a very partial
manner, however, and with an unseemly want of thoroughness and
cordiality, that it was a token of the covenant which God made with
Abraham, and which, in addition to its great promise,—“ I will be a
God unto thee and to thy seed,” contained what may be called a supple-
mentary promise of temporary blessings. That it is “ a token of the
covenant” is God’s own description of it; and it is, surely, wiser and
more becoming to accept his description of it, than to cast about for
another to get rid of the argument which the application of it to infants,
as the sign of the covenant, affords in favour of the baptism of
infants.
11. With the same design of invalidating the claim of circumcision
to rank with baptism, as having been, during the patriarchal and
Mosaic dispensations, the initiatory rite of the visible church, alow
view has been presented also of the church, particularly as it existed


under the latter of those dispensations. “It was,” it has been said, “an
ecclesiastico-political institution.” Without stopping to inquire what,
exactly, this strange language means, we must peremptorily refuse to
have anythmg to do with the hybrid sort of thing which it is evidently
intended to denote. The church in question either was a church—the
Tisih e church of God-or it was not. If it is held that it was not, let
this be said without boggling or half utterances ; and if, on the other
hand, it is held that it was, let this be admitted ungrudgingly and in its
totality. And this admission cannot be evaded. The church of which
we speahjmas the visible church of (fbd, the only church he had on
earth from the time of Abraham to that of Christ, and circumcision
was the rite of admission to its membership.
12. We have already, by vindicating the claim of circumcision to
be regarded as the “token” and “sign” of the covenant of grace,
by which all to whom it was applied were admitted out-
wardly to the privileges and brought under the obligations of that
covenant, sufficiently defended its spiritual character and significance.
It may be proper, however, still further to unfold and confirm the view
of it thus presented. Let it be observed then that, in a passage already
pai tly quoted,—Rom. iv. 11.—the Apostle Paul describes circumcision
as the seal of the righteousness of faith.” As a “seal” it confirmed
the covenant in which this “ lighteousness ” was provided, and thus
gave assurance of the “ righteousness ” itself to all who by “ faith ”
accepted the covenant. It thus bore a most decided spiritual character
and served a most important spiritual purpose. And its spiritual sig-
nificance is asserted and explained by the same Apostle, when he says
■—liom. ii. 28, 2D, —“He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither
is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the
spirit and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.” It
is here emphatically taught that the outward rite of circumcision is the
symbol of an inward circumcision—circumcison “of the heart, in the
spirit, whose praise is of God.” There could not be a more decided
testimony to the spiritual significance of the ordinance.
13. Let, then, the view of circumcision which the scriptures thus
present be freely and fully embraced. Let there be no exercise of
argumentative precaution— no influence allowed to the apprehension
that by an unqualified and irrevocable admission of that view you may
surrender the power of maintaining a favourite position. Leave
logical consequences to be afterwards determined, and do now what is
now to be done—adopt the estimate of the ordinance under consideration
to which the scriptures conduct you, without reserve or modification.
V\e ask, then, was not the covenant that God made with Abraham, and
which contained the most glorious promise that can be made to human
beings, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed,” and which the
apostle Paul describes as the “ better covenant, of which Christ is the
7 n H , eh - Tj’ 6 and 10 ’)~and as “ confirmed of God in
Whilst, —(6af. m., 17,)—was not this covenant the covenant of
grace. Were not those on whom the “sign of cirumcision ” was
impressed admitted, outwardly, to the privileges of this covenant, the
covenant of grace, or, in other words, to the position of persons in
covenant with God, or of members of (he visible church? And.
while circumcision was thus the rite of admission to church member-
ship, was it not rich in spiritual significance ? I will suppose that the
answers are given to these questions which the scriptures supply,—
that it is distinctly recognised and held that, under the patiiarchal'and


Mosiac dispensations, circumcision was the divinely appointed sign
and token of the covenant of grace, a seal of the rightousness which
that covenant provides, and the rite of admission to the position of
members of the visible church. And, in giving these answers, it i*
important that we, as it were, mark down and record that they are our
answers, and that they embody the scriptural view of circumcision, so
that, with the full recognition that we have reached this point, we
shall, in the further prosecution of the enquiry in which we are en-
gaged, proceed from it as a point we have reached.
14. Viewing circumcision, tflen, as the initiatory rite of the
visible church, —the rite of admission to its membership,—we have
now to observe further with respect to it, that it was applied to
infants. It is very true that obvious and plausible objections to this
application of it might be urged. It might be objected, for example,
that, as circumcision was the sign of the covenant, an infant, being
incapable of entering into covenant with God, is not a proper subject
of it; or it might be urged that, according to the express testimony
of the apostle {Gal. v., 3.), circumcision imposes an obligation “ to do
the whole law,” and that it ought not, therefore, to be applied to
infants, inasmuch as they are incapable of incurring and of discharg-
ing this obligation. Plausible, however, as these objections are, —
and they are plausible, and others equally plausible might be framed,
—it is clear they are all devoid of validity; for, in instituting the
ordinance God expressly and authoritatively required that it should
be applied to infants : and in this, as in every case, “ the foolishness
of God is wiser than men.” (1 Cor. i., 29.)
15. As the bringing of objections has been thus foreclosed at
this point, they have been brought at another, or a course equivalent
to the bringing of them at that other point has been adopted. To
that course we have already directed attention, pointing out that, in
pursuing it, the mode of procedure is, first to disparage circumcision
itself as much as possible, and then to disparage as much as possible
the church, to the membership of which it gave admission, that thus
the ordinance might appear under such a character that the application
of it to infants might involve no violation of a theory that would be
seriously violated by the application topnfants of such an ordinance as
it really was. This is a desperate expedient, and the cause must be
desperate that is felt by its advocates to impose a necessity of
resorting to it.
16. But whatever objections might be urged against the circum-
cision of infants, and whatever efforts may have been made to get rid
of the precedent which it furnishes, and of the practice which it estab-
lished as divinely prescribed, it was appointed by God that infants
should be circumcised. In instituting circumcision he especially re-
quires, “ every man-child among you shall be circumcised ; he that is
eight days old among you shall be circumcised; every man-child in
your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money
of any stranger, which is not of thy seed,” And, as circumcision was
the token of the covenant of grace and the rite of admission into the
visible church, infants, when circumcised, were admitted to the out-
ward privileges of the former, and to the membership of the latter.
Such, as regards this admission, was the manner of dealing with them
from the time of Abraham to that of Christ—a period of some two
thousand years. Such, as regards this admission, was the manner of
dealing with them during Christ’s personal ministry, and to the very
close of the Mosaic dispensation.


17. Suppose, then, that we lived at the close of that dispensation,
that the last hours of it were passing over us, and that, fully aware of
the transition character of the period, we were waiting for the intro-
duction of the new and more advanced dispensation that was to succeed
it; and suppose that, while we were in this attitude of intelligent ex-
pectation, we heard their commission issued to those who were to con-
duct the operations of the new dispensation, and in the commission
observed these words, “ go ye therefore and disciple,” for so the word
is literally rendered, “ all nations, circumcising them—should w T e,
knowing thatcircurncision had all along hitherto been applied to infants,
and that the application of it to them had always been, and was still,
and that most justly, regarded as a privilege ; —should we in those cir-
cumstances, and in the absence of all intimation authorising, not to say
requiring, us to do so, understand that the application of it was no
longer to be extended to them ? Impossible. The facts and influences
operative in thecase—the circumcision of infants all along hitherto under
the authoritative requirement of God, their circumcision leaving but
little room for the circumcision of adults—the high value justly attached
to the privilege of enrolling infants by circumcision among the mem-
bers of the visible church—the character of the new dispensation as
distinguished not more or less, or in any respect, by a curtailment of
privilege, but uniformly, so far as it would affect privilege at all, by a
great enlargement of it—and, in consequence of all this, our own
associations derived from the past, and our anticipations with respect
to the future, would all conspire to preserve us, and could not fail to
preserve us effectually, from understanding or rather misunderstanding
the injunction—“ Go and disciple all nations, circumcising them ”
as requiring the withholding of circumcision from infants, and would
infallibly shut us in to understand it as requiring that it should be ap-
plied to them; —nay would so mould and determine our ideas and
views that to understand it otherwise would not so much as occur to
us. If you fully, in imagination, place yourselves in the position we
have supposed, the positionof believing Jews, who, knowing that a new
dispensation was immediately to be introduced, and understanding and
appreciating its distinctive character, and if for the time you make
their views, associations, impressions, and anticipations your own, you
cannot but feel this.
18. And, then, there was nothing, as we have already remarked,
in the injunction itself which we have supposed, that in any way an-
nounced or even intimated that infants were now to be deprived of
their divinely-conferred and long-enjoyed privilege of admission to the
membership of the visible church ; and, clearly, it would require a very
distinct intimation of the will of the church’s lawgiver to induce those
who had been always accustomed to such admission of infants, and
who valued it, to withhold from them the rite of admission. A Roman
poet said tauntingly, with respect to something that he regarded as
incredible, “ let a circumcised Jew believe it; ” but a believing Jew
might well say, with respect to the withholding of the initiatory rite
from infants, without a distinct intimation of the divine will to that
effect, “ the uncircumcised gentile may believe it; I cannot and will
not.” Nothing but a divine enactment could bring a Jew to entertain
for a moment the idea of such a treatment of infants.
19. It might no doubt be argued that the injunction was “disciple
all nations, circumcising them,” and that it was thus implied that none
were to be circumcised but such as were first discipled, and that infants
therefore, as they could not be discipled, ought not to be circumcised*


but this reasoning would have no weight with an intelligent Jew.
If he condescended to reply to it, he would remind the opponent of
infant circumcision, at whose strange misdirected zeal he would feel
no little surprise, that, when gentiles were admitted to church mem-
bership under the Mosaic dispensation, it was necessary first to “ dis-
ciple ” them, but that, at the same time, when parents were admitted
their infant children, notwithstanding the alleged incapability of infants
to be discipled, were admitted along with them, the males by circum-
cision, baptism, and sacrifice, and the females by baptism and sacrifice.
And, following his antagonist to the language of the injunction, he
might ask him, “ are not infants a part and a very large part of the
whole which we call a nation, and, therefore, how cafi this whole be
discipled, if a large part of it, that which infantscompose, is left, and in-
evitably left, undiscipled ? But, when a nation is discipled, it is dis-
cipled,—not a part of it, but the whole, infants and all; otherwise the
nation would not be discipled, for the adults of a nation are not the
nation, but only a part of it ; but it is the whole, and not a part, that
we call the nation. Therefore, when a discipled nation is circumcised,
—its infants as well as its adults, —none are circumcised but those who
were first discipled ; for the nation was discipled, and the infants are
comprehended in the nation no less than its adults.” And, he might
add, addressing his gentile opponent, for none could oppose infant
circumcison but a gentile, “ you have much reason, friend, to suspect
that your ideas of discipling, according to which infants cannot be dis-
cipled, must be erroneous, for, if infants cannot be discipled, neither
can a nation, for infants form a component part of a nation, and yet
the injunction is disciple all nations. According to your views, what is
thus enjoined is impracticable, for, according to them, nations cannot
be discipled. Would it not be wise to reconsider them ? For is it not
more likely that you have fallen into error in adopting them, than that
the commission which they exhibit as impracticable isreally impractic-
able ?” Thus the argument against infant circumcision that it might
be attempted to derive from the words of the supposed injunction, dis-
ciple all nations, circumcising them, would be wholly worthless.
Treating it as worthless, if it should be used, an intelligent believing
Jew would, as we have seen, as a matter of course and inevitably un-
derstand that injunction as prescribing the circumcision of infants no
less than that of adults.
20. Let us now substitute for the case which we have supposed
the case that actually occurred. To believing Jews who were aware
that a new dispensation, of which the introduction would be attended
not with any diminution or curtailment, but with a great extension
and enlargement of privilege, was on the eve of being introduced, and
who understood that baptism was to take the place of circumcision,—
for, doubtless, they were put in a position to execute their commission
intelligently,—to such Jews.our Lord said “Go ye, therefore, and dis-
ciple all nations, baptising them.” Now, what difference would it
make as to the application of the rite to infants, that the rite to be
applied was baptism, and not circumcision, as in the case we supposed ?
If, in the case supposed, those, to whom the commission “ disciple all
nations, circumcising them,” was given, would conclude, inevitably and
justly, that as infants were all along circumcised, and thus admitted to
the membership of the visible church, under the former dispensation, and
as there was no intimation in the commission of any new restriction of
the application of circumcision, infants were still to be circumcised and
thus admitted to the membership of the visible church, —equally, in


the actual case, those to whom the commission “ disciple all nations,
baptising them” was given, would conclude, inevitably and justly,
that, as infants were all along circumcised, and thus admitted to the
membership of the visible church under the former dispensation, and
baptism was to be substituted for circumcision, while there was no
intimation in the commission of any new restriction of the application
of the initiatory rite, infants were now to be baptised, and thus
admitted to visible church membership under the new dispensation.
21. Antipedobaptists call upon us to produce an express precept
enjoining the baptism of infants; but those to whom our Lord said
“ disciple all nations, baptising them,” received, when these words were
addressed to them, an expeess command to baptise infants. They
knew that circumcision, as the initiatory rite of the former dispensa-
tion, was applied to infants, and now, when they were commanded to
administer baptism as the initiatory rite substituted for circumcision
under the new dispensation, they were clearly commanded to baptise
infants. It was virtually said to them, “ circumcision is now to be
superseded as the rite of admission to the membership of the visible
church, and baptism to be substituted for it; go ye and disciple
all nations, admitting them to the membership of the visible church
by administering baptism to them in place of circumcision.” Such, as
was formerly shewn, was the sense in which they would inevitably
understand the part of their commission now under consideration, the
sense which it really bore, and in which, therefore, it was intended they
should understand it; and it thus conveyed to them an express com-
mand to baptise infants as well as adults.
22. Their commission changed one clause, so to speak, of the
law respecting the initiatory rite, —the clause which determined the
form of the rite. This clause it changed by substituting baptism for
circumcision, leaving the law otherwise as it was. Accordingly, the
only deviation from the existing practice which it prescribed or
authorised was this substitution ; and therefore, in acting under it,
they were to adhere to the existing practice, except only that they were
to baptize instead of circumcising. The law formerly required, and it
required still, —for as regarded this requirement it was not changed,—
that the initiatory rite should be applied to infants as well as to adults,
and therefore they were to apply it to infants as well as to adults;
and the law as now changed substituted baptism for circumcision, as
the initiatory rite, and, therefore, they were to baptise and not to cir-
cumcise.* This was, clearly, the meaning of their commission ; and
in this sense, brought up as they had been as Jews, with the views
and associations of Jews with respect to the application of the
initiatory rite to infants, and possessing now the intelligence with
respect to the character of the new dispensation as bringing along
with it a great enlargement of privilege, which the personal teaching
of Christ and the grace and inspiration of the Spirit imparted, they
would inevitably understand it.
23. Antipedobaptists, however, contend that they could not and
did not understand it in this sense : —that they understood it as so
restricting the application of the initiatory rite that it was not to be
applied to infants. But where is this restriction enacted or announced?
We have already seen that there is not a trace of it in the commission.
* As regards the application of baptism to females, it followed, even from the spirit
and effect of circumcision, that, the initiatory rite admitting of such application, it should
he applied to them. Accordingly, the commission under consideration did not expressly
prescribe this application of it.


There is there, indeed, a change of the rite,—the substitution of
baptism for circumcision, —but no other change, no restriction of the
application, no limitation of the subjects of the rite. The puerile
attempt to find such a restriction and limitation in the fact that the
nations were to be first dicipled and only then baptised, has been
already sufficiently exposed. But there is nothing better that can be
substituted for it. There is not a shadow of evidence that the limita-
tion of the subjects of the initiatory rite for which our opponents
contend was ever enacted by Christ. If it was enacted, where is the
enactment, or any record of it? Nowhere. They constantly enunciate
and reiterate that, in the case of positive institutions, of which baptism
is one, we must at every step have the authority of an express precept
or a plain example; and, in accordance with this dictum, let them
produce either precept or example for the limitation of the subjects of
the initiatory rite for which they contend. The initiatory rite was
applied to infants under the former dispensation,—and if, as they
maintain, it is not to be applied to them under the present dispensa-
tion, where is this restriction of the application of it commanded?
And, if it is nowhere commanded, as it certainly is not, where is it
exemplified ? It is nowhere exemplified either. What evidence is
there, then, that it was ever enacted ? Oh! we have no precept or
example for applying the initiatory rite to infants, and that is evidence
enough in the case. W'hat 1 demand fresh authority for continuing
a practice once appointed by God, and never abolished! God once
enacted that the initiatory rite should be applied to infants, and this
enactment he has never repealed. There is nothing in the legislation
of the New Testament by which it is repealed. That legisation, indeed,
substitutes baptism for circumcision, but it does no more. The
law with respect to the subjects of the initiatory rite it leaves as it was.
That law has thus descended to us unchanged from the time of
Abraham. This being our position, it is really absurd to call upon
us, as our opponents are in the habit of doing, to px-oduce precept or
example from the New Testament for applying baptism to infants.
It is upon them it devolves to produce precept or example from the
New Testament, and not upon us. They hold that the initiatory rite
is not to be applied to infants under the present dispensation, but it
was applied to them under the former dispensation ; and it is for them
to produce precept or example for the change.
24. Instead, however, of producing either, they maintain that
circumcision was not an initiatory rite, and that baptism has not come
into its place. We have already vindicated the claim of circumcision
to be regarded as the initiatory rite of the patriachal and Jewish'dis-
pensations. Those to whom it was applied were outwardly received
under that covenant in which God had promised to be a God to
Abraham and to his seed, and a covenant that contained that promise
could be no other than the covenant of grace; they were thus admitted
outwardly into the relation to God of his covenant people, and, if he
had a church on earth during the patriarchal period, or at any other
time, it was composed of those who sustained that relation to him.
The church that he has now on earth is composed of them. Thus,
then, circumcision, inasmuch as those to whom it was applied were
admitted, outwardly, to the relation to God of his covenant people,
and therefore of members of his visible church, was clearly on
initiatory ordinance.
25. We have also shewn that circumcision exhibited spiritual
truths, and scaled spiritual blessings. It is therefore unnecessary for


us to take notice in detail of the offensively disparaging statements
that are made with respect to it by opponents of infant baptism. All
such statements are repelled by the fact that it served important spiritual
purposes. To one of them however we may advert in passing. Circum-
cision is represesented as “ requiring neither intelligence, faith, nor any
moral qualification.” This is a most extraordinary representation, or
rather misrepresentation. When Abraham received the sign of cir-
cumcision and thus accepted the covenant, of which it was the divinely
appointed token, was it not required of him, from the very nature of the
transaction, that he should lay hold on the promise contained in that
covenant, “ I will be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee.”
And how can it be said that circumcision required no moral quali-
fication, when the apostle expressly testifies, “if thou be a breaker of
the law thy circumcision is made uncircumcision,” Rom. ii, 25. This
is surely a very emphatic requirement of moral qualification. That the
Jews themselves held that circumcision required intelligence, faith,
and moral qualifications is evident, from the fact that they held it to be
necessary that a proselyte, before they received him by circumcision,
should have competent knowledge of the true God, should profess
faith in him. and should promise to worship him, and to abstain from
idolatry.
26. Our opponents further deny that baptism came into the
place of circumcision, and endeavour thus to get rid of our argument
that, as circumcision, the initiatory rite under the former dispensation,
was applied to infants, baptism, which has been substituted for cir-
cumcision as the initiatory rite under the present dispensation, is also
to be applied to them. But we have already proved that circumcision
was the initiatory rite under the former dispensation, and it is admitted
and has been shown, that baptism is the initiatory rite under the pre-
sent dispensation. It therefore follows that baptism has come into
the place of circumcision.
27. And with this conclusion the representation of scripture
harmonises. “ In whom,” says the Apostle Paul referring to Christ,
Col. ii. 11, 12, “ in whom ye are circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by
the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism, wherein also
ye are risen with him.” Here he sets forth the spiritual import of
circumcision. The outward circumcision in the flesh symbolised an in-
ward spiritual “circumcision made without hands,” which consists in
the “ putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh.” And the
believing Colossians he represents as having experienced this
circumcision in their having been buried with Christ in
baptism, that is, in their having undergone an inward spiritural
baptism. In other words, he represents them as having been
circumcised in having been baptised- He thus exhibits baptism
as occupying the place and accomplishing the design of circumcision.
I hat he thus represents baptism as the substitute, and in a manner
continuative of circumcision, will appear with increased clearness, if
we examine more narrowly the train of thought in the passage. The
apostle, then, teaches that believers “ put off the body of the sins of the
flesh or, according to the more approved reading, “ put off the body of
the flesh,” called elsewhere “ the old man.” This “ putting off the
body of the flesh” is the following up of the crucifying of the flesh.
There is, first, the crucifying and death of the flesh, and then the
putting oft of “ the body” ol it, and a consequent entrance on a new life.
This, according to the apostle, is spiritual circumcision,—what the


outward circumcision symbolised. Or it may be viewed as a spiritual
baptism, for in such baptism the subjects of it are buried with Christ
and also risen with him ; and thus in spiritual baptism or what the out-
ward baptism symbolises, as in spiritual circumcision or what outward
circumcision symbolised, there is first the death of the flesh proved
to be real by its being followed by burial; and then there is the
putting off of the body of the flesh, the leaving of it in the grave, and
a consequent resurrection to, and entrance upon, a new life. According
to this representation, baptism symbolises exactly what circumcision
symbolised, and thus the former ordinance occupies precisely the same
place which the latter ordinance occupied. We may observe here, in
passing, how utterly unscriptural the views are which the disparaging
statements with respect to circumcision, to which we have already
adverted, embody and imply. According to the apostle’s theology,
—the scriptural theology—circumcision bore a lofty spiritual character
and symbolised the richest spiritual blessings.
28. Baptism, then, occupies the same place as circumcision occu-
pied; and, therefore, we again call upon those who maintain that it is
not to be applied to infants as circumcision was, to adduce, according
to their own dictum,a precept or an example in support of their doctrine.
But no ; they cannot adduce either. They undertake however, to prove
otherwise, that infants are not to be baptised. According to their own
dictum it is necessary for them to adduce a prohibitory precept
or example for this purpose. We shall not, however, insist upon this,
for we do not subscribe to their dictum ; we are, therefore, ready to
hear the different proof which they offer to lead. This is it, then:
“Faith and repentance are necessary qualifications for baptism, and
infants are incapable of these.” This is very plausible ; but let us
have the passages on which the argument is founded. The following
are two of them, and may suffice :—Mark xvi. 16, “ He that believeth
and is baptised shall be saved and Acts ii. 38, “ Repent and be bap-
tised, every one of you.” According to the first of these passages, the
order is, to believe first and then to be baptised ; and according to the
second,to repent first and then tobe baptised. Thus faith and repentance
should precede baptism. Yes, in the case of adults; for it is to adults
only that these passages refer. They prove nothing, therefore, with
respect to infants. They prove that, in the case of adults, faith and
repentance, are necessary qualifications for baptism ; but they do not
prove that they are necessary qualifications for it in the case of all;
and, therefore, they do not prove that infants, because they are
incapable of faith and repentance, are not to be baptised. If these
passages applied to infants, the first of them, “ He that believeth and
is baptised shall be saved,” would prove that infants cannot be saved.
It makes believing necessary in order to salvation ; but infants are
incapable of believing, and, therefore, according to the logic of our
opponents, they cannot be saved. Our opponents, however, do not
draw this conclusion, and will not accept it; but they must accept it, or
else abandon their interpretation of the passage, If the passage teaches,
as, according to their interpretation, it does, that none but such as
believe are to be baptised, it teaches also, and, indeed, still more clearly,
that none but such as believe shall be saved. Thus, if it teaches that
infants, because they are incapable of faith, are not to be baptised, it
teaches, also, that infants, because they are incapable of faith, shall not be
saved. Strange, that Antipedobaptists will not see this! What a striking
illustration is afforded by the fact that they do not see it,of the partiality
and one-sidedness of view which an erroneous doctrine produces.


29. As we cannot obtain from the opponents of infant baptism
any proof of their doctrine, we shall proceed, not exactly to prove but
to confirm our own. We have already proved it by shewing that the
application of the initiatory rite to infants was instituted by God, and
has not been abolished. But, though no further proof of it is necessary,
it may be advantageous to show, in confirmation of it, that it entirely
harmonises with scripture representations. With this view, we
request attention to the manner in which the scriptures mention the
baptism of families. An instance occurs in the Acts of the Apostles
xvi. 14, 15.—“ A certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of
the city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us ; whose heart the
Lord had opened that she attended unto the things that were spoken
of Paul. And, when she was baptised and her household, she be-
sought us, saying, if ye have judged me faithful to the Lord, come
into my house and abide there. And she constrained us.” Here it is
only with respect to Lydia herself we are informed that she was con-
verted, but baptism was administered not only to herself but also to
her household. The words of the narrative are, “ she was baptised
and her household.” If baptism had been administered to each mem-
ber of her household on antipedobaptist principles, the administration
of it could scarcely have been related in such terms. If the fact of
the case was that she was converted, and that, on her being converted
and professing faith in Christ, not only herself was baptised but also
her household, the narrative is exactly such as we would have ex-
pected. But, if each individual was baptised, according to antipedo-
baptist principles, on his own of faith, the narrative certainly
does not present the case in this light. It mentions only Lydia’s
conversion, and then with her conversion connects not only her own
baptism, but also that of her household, without the slightest intima-
tion that the members of her household were themselves converted.
This certainly has a very pedobaptist look, and has no resemblance
whatever to an antipedobaptist account of antipedobaptist proceed-
ings.
30. In the same chapter, verses 30—34 we have a similar account
of the baptism of a household, of that of the Philippian jailor. “ Sirs,”
this was the inquiry ef the jailor, “ What must 1 do to be saved?
and they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be
saved, and thy house. And they spake unto him the word of the Lord,
and to all that were in his house. And he took them the same hour of
the night, and washed their stripes ; and was baptised, he and all his,
straightway. And when he had brought them into his house, he set
meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.”
It is only of the conversion and faith of the jailor himself that we have
evidence in this narrative. It is stated of him that “he took them,”
Paul and Silas, —“the same hour of the night, and washed their
stripes.” He thus afforded a practical proof, and made an open practical
profession of his faith ; and, on his having done so, baptism was
administered, not only to himself, but also to his entire household,
he “ was baptised, he and all his, straightway.” It is true that “ they
spoke the word of the Lord,” not only “ unto himself,” but also “ to all
that were in his house but, then, we are not informed what recep-
tion any, except himself, gave to the word thus spoken. The authorised
version, indeed, of the last clause of verse 34—“ rejoiced, believing
in God with all his house,” —conveys the impression that “all his house”
believed in God. But the literal reudering of this part of the
narrative is, “ he rejoiced with all his house, having believed in God.”


Thus it is only himself that is represented as “ having believed and
even as regards the rejoicing, no more is stated, than that he rejoiced
domestically, for “ with all his house" in our translation is the ren-
dering of one word in the original, that word being an adverb which
may be translated domestically, and which immediately follows and
qualifies the word for “rejoiced.” It is not said that he rejoiced and
all his house, but that he rejoiced domestically, that is, expressed his
joy by some act or service in which he called upon his whole house-
hold to take part. This statement affords no evidence, and none is
afforded in any other part of the narrative, that his household believed.
Though, “having believed in God,he rejoiced domestically," it in no way
follows that, because the rejoicing was a household or family rejoicing,
the members of his household had also “ believed in God,” and had
thus in their own spiritual history and experience the same cause of
rejoicing, that he had in his. If he had recovered from some severe and
dangerous illness, he might, very properly, have “rejoiced domes-
tically,” or “ with all his house;” but surely, none would infer from
the household character of the rejoicing, in this case, that the members of
his household had experienced a similar recovery ; and, when it is
stated that, having believed in God, he rejoiced domestically, it can
quite as little be inferred from the household character of the rejoicing,
that the members of his household exercised a similar faith. And,
then, as to the statement that “the word of the Lord” was spoken “to all
that were in his house," do our opponents need to be told that many of
those to whom the word of the lord is spoken continue in unbelief?
31. In short, the view presented by the narrative is, that the
jailor believed, and that, on his believing, baptism was administered
not only to himself but also to “all his straightway ;” that is, that the
pedobaptist mode of procedure was adopted in the case, —the same
mode of procedure exactly as was adopted under the Mosaic economy
in admitting proselytes. If the antipedobaptist mode of procedure
had been adopted in baptising the jailor’s household, and the baptism of
it had been related by an antipedobaptist historian, the narrative would
certainly have been very different from that of Luke. Such an
historian—an historian writing under the bias of antipedobaptist
views, and relating an administration of baptism in accordance with
those views—would never have framed a narrative which records
only the faith of the jailor himself, and which conveys that, on his
having furnished evidence of his faith, both himself and all his were
baptised “ straightway.” Luke has penned precisely such a narrative;
but, most assuredly, if he had been an antipedobaptist, and had been
recording antipedobaptist proceedings, he would have written
very differently. His narrative would, in that case, have
borne that not only the jailor himself, but also “ all his” believed,
and that he and they were baptised on a profession of faith made
by them individually. He would have felt it the more necessary
to bring it clearly out that baptism was administered to each
individual on a profession of faith made by himself personally, as the
universal and well-known mode of procedure in the analagous case
of the admission of proselytes was that when the head of a family
was found qualified for admission, the rite of initiation was applied
not only to himself but also to the members of his household.
32. We have not insisted on the high probability that there were
infants in some, if not in all, of the families of which the scriptures
record that they were baptized, the record in two at least of the cases
clearly indicating that they were baptised on a profession of faith


made by their respective heads. Our argument has been that, while
the scripture mode of relating that families or households were bap-
tised is throughout in exact harmony with pedobaptist views and
practice, it cannot be reconciled with those of antipedobaptists. There
is, however, a high probability that there were infants in some at least
of the families in question. Besides, the practice of baptising families
on a profession of faith made by the heads of such families, which the
cases under consideration, when viewed in the light in which,
we have seen, the scripture narrative presents them, clearly established,
involves the baptism of infants. The practice of baptising families on
a profession of faith made by the heads of them is recorded ; families,
therefore, are to be baptized on such profession ; but infants form often
a part of families, and therefore, as families are to be baptised, infants
are to be baptised, for the families of which infants form apart would
not be baptised, if the infant members of them were not baptised. The
practice established, is the practice of baptising families on a credi-
ble profession of faith made by the heads of them, and not the practice
of baptising a certain class of families on such profession, for nothing
whatever is mentioned to distinguish the families baptised from other
families. Now the practice of baptising families clearly comprehends
in it the practise of baptising infants, for in many families there are
infant members; and, therefore, if the infant members of families, the
heads of which make a credible profession of faith, are not baptised,
the practice of baptising families on such profession, unequivocally
established by the authoritative example of the apostles, is abandoned,
and a course at variance with that practice is adopted,
33. Further and strong confirmation is afforded to our doctrine
by the manner in which the apostle speaks in the following passage
of the bringing in of the Gentiles and the restoration of the Jews,
Rom. xi. 17, 18.—“ If some of the branches be broken off, and thou,
being a wild olive tree, wert graffed in among them, and with them
partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree, boast not against
the branches ; but if thou boast thou bearest not the root but the root
thee.” And again, verses 23, 24, “They also, if they abide not
still in unbelief, shall be graffed in, for God is able to graff them in
again; for if thou wert cut out of the olive tree, which is
wild by nature, and wert graffed, contrary to nature, into a
good olive tree, how much more shall these which be the
natural branches be graffed into their own olive tree ?” Here
the “good olive tree” clearly represents the visible church;
and, when “some branches” are represented as “broken off” from
the olive tree, the meaning evidently is, that some of the members of
the visible Church were cast out by the rejection of the Jews. All
the members, however, were not cast out ; the church was not dis-
solved ;it still continued. Into the church which thus continued, or
into the olive tree, still standing, though some branches were broken
off, the Gentiles were graffed. Now, infants were members of the
church as it existed under the Mosaic dispensation, and, therefore, as
it was into this church that the Gentiles were admitted, infants
were members of the church into which they were admitted, and,
consequently, of the church as it existed after their admission. And,
further, when it is stated that the Jews shall be graffed in again—
graffed into their own olive tree—the church into which they shall
be admitted, to be their own olive tree, must recognise the membership


of infants; for the membership of infants was recognised by the
church from which they had been cast out.
34. What the apostle in this passage contemplates as already
effected, our Lord predicts in Mat. xxi. 43 —“the kingdom of God
•hall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the
fruits thereof.’’ Here the church, spoken of figurately by the
apostle as an “olive tree,” is designated “ the kingdom of God”—a
designation strictly appropriate. This “ kingdom of God,” our Lord
predicts, should be “ taken from ” the Jews and given to a nation
“ bringing forth the fruits thereof.” It was not to be destroyed,
to cease, or to be essentially changed ; it was only to be transferred
from one nation to another,—still continuing the same kingdom.
While the prophecy implies that it was to remain unchanged as to all
that was essential to it, it particularly indicates that it was to remain
such that it could “be given to a nation.” God had given it to the
Jews, as a nation, —to their infants as well as to their adults ; and now
he was to give it to another “ nation,” that is, to the Gentiles; and,
gn being thus given to another “nation,” it must as before be given
to infants as well as to adults, for, if not given to infants, it would not
be given to “ a nat'on,” —infants forming a very considerable part of
of every nation, Besides, into the church which was taken from the
Jews infants were admitted as members, and, as it was the same
church that was taken from the Jews that was to be given to the
Gentiles, therefore into the church that was to be given to the Gen-
tiles infants were to be admitted as members. According to anti-
pedobaptist principles this prophecy, and there are not a few such,
cannot be fulfilled. They do not admit of the giving of the kingdom
of God to “ a nation they admit of the giving it only to those
who make a personal profession of religion, and those who make
such a profession or are capable of making it do not in any case form
the whole of a nation.
35, Christ himself holds such language with respect to infant
children as implies, if it does not expressly recognise their Church
membership. He does so in the following passage :—“ He took a
child, and set him in the midst of them : and when he had taken him
in his arms, he said unto them, ‘ whosoever shall receive one of such
children in my name, receiveth me.’ ” The word rendered ‘child’ in
this passage denotes a little child, and that the child spoken of was
a little child is further indicated by the fact that Christ “ took him in
his arms.” Referring, then, to this little child, Christ says to his
disciples, “ whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name,
receiveth me.” Now how could one receive a “little child in Christ’s
name, if little children could have no visible connection with him ?
But how could a little child or any one else have a visible connection
with Christ otherwise than by visible church membership ? To
reciye one “in Christ’s name ” is to receive him as “belonging to
Christ ” (see v. 51); but that we may be in a position to receive any
one as belonging to Christ, he must visibly belong to him, and those
who so belong to him are just the members of the visible church.
Accordingly that we may be in a position to receive little children as
belonging to Christ—and he himself represents it as our duty to
receive some little children as belonging to him—such little children
must be members of the visible church.


36. In Marla x. 14, Christ uses language, with respect to little
children, very similar to that which we have now examined.
“ Suffer,” he says, “ the little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.’’ The declaration,
“of such is the kingdom of heaven,” means that “the kingdom of
heaven,” belongs to “such” little children as “they were bringing to
him” at the time, —that it is theirs, belonging to them, not, indeed, ex-
clusively, but in common with others. If the meaning were that the
kingdom of heaven belongs to those who are “such” in disposition as
the children referred to, the fact stated would clearly have no force,
as a rerson why those little children should be suffered to come to him,
—it would have been irrelevant to say “suffer little children to come
unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.” Our Lord, then,
testifies that the kingdom of heaven belongs to such little children, a*
those to whom he referred; and, from this fact, in whatever sense,
“ the kingdom of heaven” is to be taken, it follows that such little
children should not be excluded from the membership of the visible
church. If by the kingdom of heaven we are to understand the
kingdom of glory, then, surely, those to whom it belongs, are not to
be excluded from the visible church, the corresponding kingdom on
earth ; and, if we are to understand by it the visible church itself,
Christ’s kingdom, as it is administered on earth, then, surely, those to
whom it belongs are not to be excluded from it. Christ himself
regards and treats little children as capable of occupying a place
among those to whom the kingdom of heaven belongs ; and how then
can they be incapable of being admitted amongst them by the outward
rite of admission ? Are higher qualifications necessary to constitute
them fit subjects of the outward rite of admission, than are necessary
for the actual occupation of the position to which outwardly admission
is given by thatrite? If they may be actually among those to whom
the kingdom of heaven belongs, may they not be treated, outwardly,
as being among them ? It would be a strange anomaly if they might
not; but this anomaly the antipedobaptist system presents. The
truth is that the views our opponants with respect to the relation of
infants to the covenant of grace and the outward administration of it
are grievously erroneous, as is painfully manifest, when we contrast
their treatment of little children and their statements respecting them,
with the treatment given to them and claimed for them by Christ, in
the instance before us.
37. With the procedure towards infants which Christ thus required
and exemplified, and with what we have seen the scriptures so abun-
ly teach with respect to their relation to the covenant of grace, and to
the outward administration of it, the exhortation addressed by Peter to
those that were “ pricked in their hearts” on the day of pentecost fully
harmonises. Having “ said unto them, repent and be baptised every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost,” he adds, in enforcement of
this exhortation, “ for the promise is unto you and to your children.”
He evidently refers to the great promise which God gave to Abraham
when he instituted circumcision, “I will be a God unto thee and to thy
seed.” And, in testifying that this promise was still in force, did he
not intimate to them that the outward rite of admission to an interest
in it, was still, as hitherto, to be applied to their children ? If He did
not intend to convey this intimation, the reference to the promise as


being not only to themselves but also to their children was calculated
to mislead. And why was it made ? How could the fact that
the promise was to their children enforce the exhortation
addressed to them, if in no part of their compliance with it
they required the warrant and encouragement of a promise to
their children? If they were only exhorted to repent and to be
themselves baptised, they required no promise to their children to
be in a position to comply with the exhortation. It is only on the
supposition that, as a matter of course, their own baptism would be
followed by the baptism of their children, that there could be any
propriety in the reference to the promise to their children. A partially
instructed Jew, when exhorted to repent and to enter the Christian
church by baptism, would naturally enough inquire in his own mind,
* but, if I submit to baptism, what is to be done with my children ?’
This inquiry the apostle anticipates and satisfies. “ The promise,” ha
announces, “ is to your children, as well as to yourselves, and, there-
fore, if you are baptised, they shall be baptised as your children. They
shall be treated in this respect, as they were treated under the former
dispensation, and in accordance with the promise, “ I will be a God
unto thee and to thy seed.”
38. We shall only adduce one other passage, 1 Cor. vii , 14,
which affords direct and strong confirmation to the doctrine of infant
baptism. “ For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your
children unclean, but now are they holy.” When both the parents
were unbelieving, and therefore heathen, their children were also
heathen, and therefore “ unclean,” unfit to be admitted to the member-
ship of the church; but, when one of the parents believed, their
children were “ holy,” not of course in respect of personal character,
but relatively, as being set apart, and thus brought into a position to
be admitted into the church. This seems to be the only sense of
which this passage admits, and, thus understood, it makes immediate
reference to the baptism of infants, for it is only by baptism that
infants are admitted to the membership of the visible church
39. Other passages might be adduced, but we shall only further,
in support of infant baptism, refer to the fact that the Jewish converts
never complained of the treatment given to their children under the
new dispensation. If their children were not baptised, they would be
excluded from the position occupied by children under the former
dispensation ; and it cannot for a moment be imagined that their
parents would submit quietly, without murmur or complaint, to this
exclusion of them.
11. MODE OF BAPTISM
40. We now proceed to the second of the topics we proposed to
consider, —the mode of baptism ; and let us first determine the state
of the question. Some, then, maintain that immersion is the only
legitimate mode of baptism ; in opposition to these we hold that
baptism is scripfurally and validly administered not only by immersion
but also by sprinkling or affusion. We do not deny that immersion
is a legitimate mode of baptism ; our opponents hold that it is and we
agree with them. But we hold that sprinkling or affusion is also a
legitimate mode of administering the ordinance, and this our opponents
deny. The question, then, is, is sprinkling or affusion a legitimate


and valid mode of baptism : this question presents for determination
the only point at issue. It may be remarked here that, though it so
happens among us that those, who hold that infants are not to be
baptised, hold also that sprinkling or affusion is not a legitimate mode
of baptism, still there is no connection between the two positions; and,
accordingly, there have been persons who held the former but
rejected the latter of them. The antipedobaptist dogma, therefore,
and the dogma that baptism is not legitimately administered by
sprinkling or affusion are not to be regarded as so connected, as parts
of one system, that what affords support to the one affords also some
support to the other. On the contrary, they are so entirely detached
from each other, logically, that the establishment or refutation of either
would leave the claims of the other to belief wholly unaffected.
41. Those who deny that sprinkling or affusion is a legitimate
mode of baptism mantain that the Greek words for baptise and
baptism signify respectively, immerse, plunge, dip, and immersion,
plunging, dipping, and are so restricted to those significations, that
the use of them to denote the administration of baptism and baptism
itself proves that the only proper mode of baptism is immersion.
They make a similar assertion with respect to the meaning of the
Greek word bapto, from which the word for baptise— baptizo —is
derived. Let us examine what ground they have for this restriction
of the meaning of these words, and for the argument which they
found upon it; and let us begin with bapto as the primitive or parent
word. Our examples of the use of it we shall give only in literal
translations, putting the corresponding word or words in italics. This
will be most convenient for most readers ; for the passages in Greek
would interrupt their progress, like so many fences across their path,
while they would yield them no compensating advantage. The
following then are examples of the use of bapto* :—“ Being pressed,
it stains the hand.” Here there is no plunging, nor the least approach
to it. “ The pool was stained or tinged with blood.” Here again
plunging is out of the question ; or, if there be plunging, it is the
“ blood,” with whcih the operation is performed, that is plunged in the
“ pool,” on which it is performed, and not the “ pool " in the blood,
as, according to the meaning to which our opponents restrict the
word, ought to be the case. “ Staining or smearing (his face) with
tawny colours.” The person doing this would not dip his face in
those colours, but would apply the colours to his face. In
the septuagint translation of the Old Testament this word
is used in Daniel iv., 33, (Greek 30) —“His body ”—Nebuched-
nazzar’s—“ was wet with the dew of heaven ; and again in
the next chapter, verse 21, where the same words occur. This
“welting” was, of course, effected by the descent of the “dew”
upon Nebuchadnezzar’s “ body,” and not by the immersion of his
“ body ” in the “ dew.” Whatever the dew wets, it wets by
falling on it. From its entire economy there can be no immersion
in it. If it were collected in some bath or cistern so that
immersion in it could take place, it would assume the character of
water and would be divested of that of dew. But it was not by
immersion in such dew-water that Nebuchadnezzar’s body was
wet. “He was driven from men and did eat grass as oxen ; and,”
of course, in the circumstances into which the divine judgement thus
* See Ewing’s Greet Lexicon under the woid


degraded him, “the dew of heaven” fell on him, and “his body
was wet ” with it, or from it, as it is expressed in the Greek, that
is, from the action of the dew upon it.
42. From the parent, which clearly will not accept
immerse as its distinctive and exclusive meaning, we proeeed
to the offspring, the Greek word for baptise. Our opponents
maintain, that the distinctive and exclusive meaning of this
word is immerse, and argue that, therefore, as it is the word employed
in the scriptures to denote the administration of baptism, the
scriptural mode of administering baptism is immersion. It wholly
vitiates this argument, whatever force it might otherwise have, that
the alleged fact on which it is founded is not the actual fact in the
case. Immerse or plunge is not the distinctive and exclusive meaning of
the word inquestion. That word occurs in the following passage in w'hich
plunge cannot well be the meaning of it. “ She—Judith—went out
in the night, into the valley of Bethulia, and washed (baptised herself)
in the camp in (or rather, at*) the fountain of water.” Though w r e
retain the translation, “ in the fountain,” it does not at all follow that
the operation performed was that of plunging in it. She might be
said to perform it “in the fountain,” though she only stood at the
side of the fountain, and took from it with her hand or
otherwise the water which she used in performing it. And while
the language does not necessarily denote, if it at all denotes,
plunging, it does not appear that the circumstances would admit
of it. We at once meet with the difficulty that she could not
well plunge in a fountain; and, though it were practicable, it
would have been improper to have plunged in a fountain from
which water was drawn for drinking, the only fountain apparently
available for the purpose. Besides, it would have been necessary
for her to undress in preparation for plunging; but how could
she undress, with any propriety or decency, at a fountain in a
camp occupied by some two hundred thousand soldiers? No
modest woman would undress or perform an operation that required
undressing in such circumstances, and we may rest assured that
Judith did neither. Whether her nightly lustrations were intended
to promote personal cleanliness or to secure ceremonial purity,
plunging was not necessary to accomplish her object; and are we
gratuitously to suppose that she performed an unnecessary operation,
which, supposing it practicable, would have been grossly indecent
in a crowded camp? Such a supposition cannot for a moment be
entertained. Here then is an instance in which the Greek word
for baptise does not signify plunge or immerse. The circumstances
will not permit us to attach that meaning to it, and we doubt
much if the construction in which it occurs will ; while the use of
the preposition epi with the genitive is in perfect harmony with
the view that she stood on the side of the fountain and took from
it the water used by her in the operation which she was performing.t
43. In Ecclesiastic us xxxiv., 30, the word under consideration
is applied to one “ that is washed (Greek baptised) from
the pollution of a dead bodynow was the washing in such
a case as this effected by plunging? The answer to this question
* The preposition used is “ epi,” of which the primary meaning is 11 upon.” It is
here followed by the genetive.
f See Winer’s Gram., Sect. 51. Dr. Donaldson’* Greek Gram., Sect, 483. a.


is furnished by Numbers xix., 13. There we read—“ Whosoever
toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not
himself, defileth the tabernacle of the Lord; and that soul shall
be cut oft from Israel; because the water of separation was not
sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean ; his uncleanness is yet
upon him. \\e are thus taught, in the plainest manner, that it
was by sprinkling and not by plunging that one who had contracted
uncleanness by touching a dead body was purified ; and one thus
purified is viewed in the passage which we have quoted from
Lcclesiasticus as being baptised. In other words according to the
phraseology of that passage one is baptised by being sprinkled.
-Referring to this and other instances and modes of purification
the apostle, Heb. ix., 10, calls them “divers baptisms,”— the word
rendered “washings” in our translation being the Greek word for
baptism.. VV e have just seen that, according to the usage exemplified
in Lcclesiasticus xxxiv., 30, he that was sprinkled with the water
of separation and thus purified was baptised; and in the passage
now before us, this purification, by sprinkling and not by plunging,
is called a baptism, for it is included in the “divers baptisms”
spoken of, and is, indeed, mentioned as one of them in the immediately
succeeding context,—verse 13.
44. It is a similar baptism—baptism not by the application of the
baptised to the water, but by the application of the water to the
baptised, that is intended in Luke xi., 37, 38. We are informed in
that passage that our Lord, having been invited by a Pharisee to dine
with him, “ went in and sat down to meatand that, “ when the
Phausee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed (Greek
baptised) before dinner.” He did not expect that Christ would
baptise by plunging or immersing his whole body in water. The
traditions and customs of his sect and nation did not require such a
baptism under the circumstances. What they required, and he
accordingly expected, was that his guest would “ wash his hands ”
before “ he sat down to meat,” for “ the Pharisees and all the Jews,
except they wash their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the
elders; and it was customary among them to wash the hands by
poming water upon them. We have thus the most conclusive proof
that, according to Luke s phraseology, for it is clearly in the
evangelist s own words that the cause of the Pharisee’s wonder, naraelv,
that Christ had not “ first baptised before dinner,” is stated, —a person
has been “ baptised,” when water has been applied, for the purpose
of puiification, even to a small part of his body, as, for example, to
his hands, and thus applied by affusion. But leaving out of view the
mode of application, let it be distinctly observed that the fact is in
evidence, that, according to the evangelist’s phraseology, a person has
been “baptised,” when, for the purpose of purification, water has been
applied even to his hands. Now, clearly, a person thus baptised has
not been plunged,— he has been baptised without having been plunged.
Even though it may have been by plunging that his hands have been
washed, still he himself, the subject of the baptism effected in the
case, has not been plungedhe has been baptised without having
been plunged, water having been applied only to his hands. Here,
again, the assertion of our opponents, confident as it is,—and, of
course, it is very confident,—is flatly contradicted by usage, and by
scripture usage too. Ihe evangelist informs us that the Pharisee


marvelled that the Saviour “was not first before dinner baptised ”bj
washing his hands; but if baptising were just plunging and nothing
else, he would not be baptised, that is to say he would be
plunged, however often he washsd his hands and in whatever
way he washed them. But baptising is not plunging exclusively;
it is the application of water, in whatever way, for the
purpose of purification, and, therefore, he to whose hands it has been
applied for this purpose has, according to the scripture mode of
viewing the matter, been baptised.
45. In the following passage cases of baptism are referred to, that
were of very frequent occurrence among the Jews at the time of which
the evangelist writes. “ When they come from the market, except they
wash, (Greek baptise), they eat not. And many other things there
be which they have received to hold, as the washing (Greek
baptisms) of cups, and pots, brazen and of tables.” The
“brazen vessels” intended were probably such as were used for
culinary purposes; and the word rendered tables means properly
couches, beds, and it is the couches on which they reclined
at table, large enough to accommodate several persons, that
seem to be particularly meant. Now such brazen vessels could not
be conveniently “ washed ” or baptised by being plunged in water,
and plunging could still less be resorted to in “ baptising ” couches.
Such a mode of treating such articles of furniture, as any one on
the least reflection must perceive, would be quite impracticable
among ourselves, and, though not impracticable, would in many
instances be open to grave objections ; and it was equally impracticable
and objectionable among the Jews in the time of our Lord.
46. In Mark i. 8, we read that one of the declarations that John
the Baptist made, as he “preached,” was, “ I indeed have baptised you
with water, but he, (Christ), shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost.”
The idea of being plunged in the Spirit seems gross and irreverent,
and certainly receives no countenance from scripture representation,
but is indeed inconsistent with it. The Bible teaches us to conceive
and speak of the Spirit as being “ poured forth ” upon those to
whom he is communicated; and we have the clearest evidence that
when it was predicted and promised that Christ should “ baptise
with the Holy Ghost,” what was intended was, that he should
“pour forth” the Spirit on the subjects of that baptism. Christ
himself immediately before his ascension reiterated and renewed the
announcement of the Baptist, “ John truly baptised with water,” he
said to the apostles, “ but ye shall be baptised with the Holy Ghost not
many days hence.”— Acts i. 5. And, when this promise was fulfilled
on the day of pentecost, Peter testified with respect to the fulfilment of
it, “this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel; And it
shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out my
Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams; and on my servants and on my handmaidehs I will pour
out in those days of my Spirit.”— Acts ii., 16-18. Thus we have
express testimony that Christ “ baptised them with the Holy Ghost”
by “ pouring out on them of his Spirit;” he baptised them by affusion.
And here the inquiry suggests itself, —when John said I baptise you
with water but he that cometh after me shall baptise you with the
Holy Ghost, is it to be supposed that the mode of the baptism


which he administered was different from that of the baptism which
it symbolised. The baptism symbolised was by affusion, and is it to
be supposed that the baptism which symbolised it was not by affusion
but by immersion ? This want of correspondence would be wholly
inconsistent with the relation which they bore to each other; and we
shall by-and-by find that there are strong grounds for concluding
that John’s baptism,—the symbolising baptism in the case,—was by
affusion.
47. It is thus evident that the assertion of our opponents with respect
to the meaning of the word for baptise and of the kindred word for
baptism is as baseless as it is confident, and that the application of
those words to the ordinance under consideration affords no
countenance whatever to the doctrine, that the legitimate mode of
administering it is immersion. And neither do the prepositions,
rendered into, in, out of, from, that are used in connection with the
words in question. Thus when it is stated that Philip and the
Ethiopian eunuch " went down into the water,” and that, when
Philip baptised the eunuch, they “came up out of the water,” (Acts
viii., 38, 39), the language does not at all require that we should regard
the eunuch ag having been baptised by immersion ; for the prepositions
rendered into and out of may be rendered with equal propriety
unto or to and from. The former of them is used in the narrative of
the raising of Lazarus from the dead, —“Jesus, therefore, again groan-
ing in himself, cometh to the grave,” John xi. 38. Here, clearly, the
meaning of the preposition is not into but to, as our translators have
rendered it; for the Saviour only came to the grave, he did not go
into it. The latter of these prepositions is used in John vi. 23, —
“Then came other boats from Tiberias.” They had not been on dry
land in the city, so that they came out of it; they only eame from it.
But retaining the rendering of the authorised version, the narrative
does not by any means necessarily convey that the eunuch was im-
mersed. Though the water were only ankle deep, if they alighted
from the chariot and stood in it, it might be said that they went down
into, and afterwards came up out of the water.
Whether we translate the prepositions by into and out of, or by
to and from, 1 apprehend the narrative would not suggest immersion,
except to a mind preoccupied with the idea of it or prepossessed in its
favour. There is no hint, it will be observed, of any undressing and
putting on of bathing clothes, or of the subsequent and reverse process
of putting off the bathing clothes and then dressing ; and yet, if there
had been an immersion, such changing of garments could scarcely
have been dispensed with. And then it is a source of difficulty, on
the supposition that the going down into the water implied immersion,
that Philip went down into the water as well as the eunuch, that thus
Philip as well as the eunuch was immersed, and that the eunuch,
being immersed already, could not be immersed to be baptised, unless
Philip, himself immersed, raised him bodily ©ut of the water, and then
plunged him into it, an operation that would require considerable
strength, and, on certain not improbable suppositions, greater strength
than the operator could exert. These are very awkward difficulties,
which, however, all disappear if we take the view, that the Ethiopian
treasurer was immersed neither before he was baptised nor during
the administration of the ordinance, but that, having gone down into
shallow water or gone down to the water, that is, to the edge of it, h«
was baptised by affusion.


43. There is still another preposition which our opponents have
pressed into their service, and of which, therefore, we must take some
notice, —the preposition rendered in in the following passage, “ They
were baptised of him in Jordan” (Matt. iii. 6). This preposition
might with equal propriety be rendered at. But the statement
that they baptised in Jordan,” taking it as our translators give
it, conveys no intimation that in being baptised they were immersed
in the river. This mode of expression is equally appropriate on the
supposition, that John, standing with them at the side ®f the river,
raised from it with his hand or otherwise the water with which be bap-
tised them. In perfect harmony with this view of the circumstances,
it is stated towards the close of the brief history of John’s baptism,
given in this chapter, (verse 16), that “Jesus, when he was baptised,*’
in Jordan, (see verses 6 and 13) “ went up straightway from the
water. Our translators say “ out of the water,” but the preposition
here is not ek, the preposition rendered out of, on which we formerly
remarked, but apo which means from. The impression which this
representation conveys is, that our Lord was not in the water, but only
at the edge of it.
49. In this connection it is proper to refer to certain figurative
expressions, employed to describe the effects of the inward spiritual
baptism, which are adduced as favouring the view that the legitimate
mode of baptism is immersion. One of these expressions, “ buried
with him in baptism, occurs in a passage already quoted and ex-
amined.— Col. ii., 12. It is used also in Rom. vi., 4. From this
phraseology it is argued, that the mode of baptism must be such that
it will impart to the ordinance a resemblance to burial, and that
immersion alone fulfils this condition. But, in the latter passage, those
who are said to be buried with Christ are, immediately afterwards
and with reference to the same effect on their character and state, said
to be “ planted together in the likeness of his death and no one mode
of administering baptism can impart to it a resemblance both to
burying and to planting. We are thus led to seek the source of those
figurative expressions, not in the direct resemblance of baptism to what
they denote, but in the connection of what they denote with what
baptism primarily symbolises. Baptism thus symbolises union to
Christ. Those who are baptised are “ baptised into Christ.”— Rom.
vi., 3; Gal. iii., 27. And then, of course, being united to him, they
are associated with him in ail the great transactions of his mediatorial
history. They are buried with him, they “ are risen with him,” {Col.
in., ],) they “ suffer with him,” they “ will reign with him.”—2 Tim.
ii., 12. 1 bus it is because they are united to him in baptism, or, in
other words because outward baptism symbolises, and inward baptism,
accordingly, implies union to him, that they may be said to be buried
with him in baptism.
60. Thus all the arguments in favour of immersion fail, and tho
examination of them has afforded us ground for regarding as scrip-
tural, if not exclusively scriptural, a different mode of baptism. Wo
shall now advert to one or two considerations, that serve to render
it certain, that, at least on some occasions, baptism was administered
by the Apostles or with their sanction otherwise than by immersion.
On the day of pentecost, “ they that gladly received the word were
baptised and the same day there were added unto them about throe
thousand souls. —Acts ii., 41. Thus, on one day, and probably after
id-day, about three thousand persons were baptised, and thus added


to the church. Peter began his address about nine in the morning,
{Acts ii., 15,) and the sacred historian, after giving a summary of the
apostle’s address, adds, “ and with many other words did he testify
and exhort.’’—(v. 40). The other apostles also, we may feel assured,
took part in the proceedings. It would have ill comported with the
zeal with which the Holy Spirit had just inspired them, and with the
encouragement afforded them by the awakened curiosity of the
assembled multitude, and by the profound earnestness of so many of
those who composed it, if they had remained silent and inactive. There
was, doubtless, much of what Luke calls testifying and exhorting, and
we may warrantably conclude that the baptising of the converts could
not well have been begun before noon. Now, when all the circum-
stances of the case are considered, it must, we think, appear incredible
that some three thousand persons were baptised by immersion under
those circumstances between mid-day and nightfall. Of course the
idea will not be entertained for a moment that they were immersed in
their ordinary apparel. Neither will it be supposed that they had
bathing clothes with them. They must therefore have gone home for
them. Much time would thus be lost, and such an episode Would ill
agree with the solemnity and earnestness of the proceedings which it
would interrupt. But overlooking this, —and we must overlook a
great deal, if we would make baptism by immersion fit into the history
of the pentecostal revival, —we presume they would not put on their
bathing clothes at home, walk in them to the place of baptism, and
after they were baptised, walk home in them wet. They would take
them with them, doubtless, to the place of baptism; but, having taken
them there, where would they put them on ? Can our opponent*
inform us? We apprehend not. It would be no easy matter to
accommodate three thousand persons with dressing rooms, in the
immediate neighbourhood of a place where they could be immersed,
and that too in a city to the inhabitants of which everything connected
with the intended baptism was very generally offensive. But suppose,—
for we may suppose anything, and may therefore suppose this, —that
the converts found ways and means of putting on bathing dresses,
would there be nothing unseemly in men and women appearing in such
dresses in the presence of each other and of numerous spectators, some
of them, we may suppose, not remarkable for the friendliness of their
feelings or the delicacy of their deportment ?
51. But, passing from the preparation for immersion to the im-
mersion itself, how was water obtained in Jerusalem for the immer-
sion of three thousand persons against whom, as apostates from the
national religion and cause, the rulers and the great bulk of the people
were incensed ? Jerusalem was supplied with water chiefly from
cisterns, in which, from their construction, though there were no other
obstacle, the converts could not be immersed. There were, indeed,
some pools or reservoirs, but these were public property, and though
it were not improper to use them for such a purpose, —and we con-
ceive it would be improper,—is it at all likely that the apostles would
be allowed to use them for the immersion of their converts ? Besides,
they were so deep that they did not admit of the operators going
down, like Philip, into the water with those to be baptised ; and, even
though this part of the rubric of immersion were violated, and the
operators remained on dry ground at the side, immersion in them,
particularly the immersion of so large a number of persons in rapid
succession, would be attended with extreme danger. Baths would


afford the only remaining resource, and evidently they would afford
a very insufficient one.
52. But let us make our escape from the difficulties of procuring
•water for immersion, and contemplate the difficulties of the operation
itself; and these, certainly, are very formidable. The state of the case
is this, —there were three thousand persons to be immersed by
some twelve operators, or two hundred and fifty by each operator,
between mid-day and nightfall, that is in saven hours.* Now
seven hours for the immersion of two hundred and fifty persons
by a single operator, would afford only one minute and rather less
than forty-one seconds for the immersion of each. But would this time
be sufficient? And, if we allow for interruptions, the time for each immer-
sion would be still less, not more than a minute and a half, and pro-
bably not so much. Now, though a vigorous active man might,
perhaps, immerse one person in this time, or a few at the rate of one
in a minute and a half, could even such a man immerse without in-
termission, two hundred and fifty persons at this rate, that is to say,
could he immerse at this rate without rest or intermission for seven
hours ? r Let us realise the process. The operator stood in the water,
or, rather he took the candidate for baptism, and both went into the
water ; he then immersed and immediately raised to an erect attitude
such candidate, encountering, in some instances, in the first part of the
operation an instinctive, involuntary opposition, and having, particu-
larly in the case of females, to guard against unseemly mishaps ; and
immersion having been effected, both came out of the water. All this,
we are required to believe, the operator did without intermission two
hundred and fifty times, and each time in a minute and a half. But
was it practicable ? Could it have been done ? And, if it could have
been done at all, could it have been done without great danger to the
health of the operator? Suppose such an operator as Paul. The great
apostle, it seems, was a very little man, and. from the abundance of
his labours, and the extent to which they were prosecuted in cold and
nakedness, in hunger and thirst, and amid multiplied privations and
Bufferings, his physical condition ceuld not well have been such as
would fit him for much muscular exertion. Could such an operator
have immersed his two hundred and fifty in seven hours, going through
the process we have described in the case of each of them ? We be-
lieve no operator could have done it; and, supposing it practicable,
it would certainly have been extremely hard work, work so hard and
so much of the character of “ bodily exercise ” and exertion, that the
performance of it could scarcely present the aspect of the administra-
tion of a divine ordinance.
SS. From this review of the case it does not appear that the pen-
tecostal converts could have been baptised by immersion ; and we are,
therefore, not only justified in concluding, but shut in to conclude that
they were not thus baptised. And this conclusion, if it required,
would receive confirmation from the fact that “ immersion is liable to
many incidents of a distressing kind, so that one wishes that no light
minded, irreligious, profane person were ever present ” when it is
practiced ; and, doubtless, many such were present when the three
thousand converts were baptised on the day of pentecost.
54. All the considerations that have now been urged, as proving
that the pentecostal converts were not baptised by immersion, apply
dresses" 9 haT * de<lucte(i hour in procuring and putting on bathing


with undiminished force to John’s administration of baptism, except
those derived from the circumstances under which in the former case
water was to be procured. We would call, however, special attention
to the expense of time, the labour, and the exposure on the part of the
operator with which the administration of baptism by immersion is
necessarily attended, as proving that John did not baptise by immer-
sion. “There went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of
Jerusalem, and were all baptised of him in the river of Jordan.’'
(Mark i. 5). Now, how could a single individual baptise such multi-
tudes with a form of baptism that required so much time, that imposed
so much labour, and that was attended with so much exposure as im-
mersion. To imagine that a single individual could do this, or would
attempt to do it, is really preposterous, It is not for a moment to be
supposed that the crowds that resorted to him could remain for the great
length of time he would require to baptise them by immersion and
for some at least of those crowds, it would have been ne-
cessary to have remaind for the whole of that time, if
immersion had been the mode of baptism adopted. We may,
therefore, warrantably conclude,—nay, we must conclude, that immer-
sion was not the mode adopted by John. He could wot have baptised
by immersion the multiludes that resorted to him ; and, of course, he
did not do what was impracticable,—he did not baptise them by im-
mersion. There is nothing in the language employed by the evangelists
in the history of his baptism, that in any way implies that he immersed
the subjects of it; and the statistics of it are such that the idea of his
having administered it by immersion is altogether inadmissible. He
could not have done it.
55. But, though the statistics of the case leave us no esnape from
this conclusion, our opponents will not accept it. To accept it would
be to surrender the exclusive claims they set up for immersion, and
that they will not do. John must have baptised by immersion whether
he could have done it or not. And is it not evident that it was thus
he baptised, when we read that he “ baptised in Enon, near to Salim,
because there was much water there,’’ (John iii., 2,3,) while, if he
had baptised by sprinkling, he would not have required much water?
No, he would not have required much water, but the multitude that
“came and were baptised” would. No considerate person would
assemble and retain for days such multitudes where water was scarce.
And it may be observed here, —although our argument does not need
the support this observation may afford, —that, according to the
original, Enon, offered the advantage not of “ much water” but of
“ many waters.’’ The word Enon denotes fountains, and it may be
inferred that a locality bearing such a name abounded in springs.
There were thus “ many waters there,” affording an abundant supply
for man and beast of one great necessary of life, but, probably, no
facility for immersion.
56. We now leave the doctrine that immersion is the only legitimate
mode of baptism to those who are capable of holding or determined to
hold it, not only without but against evidence. None else can hold it.
It has, however, this advantage, such as it is,—it enlarges and extends
the external rite ; it imparts body and bulk to it, and thus contributes
somewhat towards satisfying that craving for the outward and the
ritual in religious abservances, of the existence and strength of which
the past history and present state church furnish ample and
melancholy proof. To the adaptation to the carnality of the human


mind, by which it is thus distinguished, it owes, we are convinced, not
a little of the limited acceptance with which it meets. To carnal ap-
prehension a mere sprinkling with water is nothing, and, though you
urge that it is the sign of spiritual blessings, this, to carnal appre-
hension, in no way redeems it; something more operose is demanded,
something that addresses itself mote largely and powerfully to the
senses, something more palpable, more impressive physically, in short
the utmost in this direction of which the nature of the ordinance
admits—immersion. Let us. however, acknowledge to the credit of
those who now make this demand, that they have receded considerably
from the demand of some of their predecessors, for these required trine
immersion,—not only that the subjects of baptism should be plunged
over head in water, but that they should be thus plunged three times.
111. NATURE AND DESIGN OF BAPTISM.
57. The nature and design of baptism have been already incident-
ally indicated to a considerable extent. But partly to meet a
rationalistic objection brought by our opponents against infant
baptism, and partly to exhibit the practical bearing of the pedobaptist
doctrine and to enforce the obligations that attach to the corresponding
practice, we shall now add a few remarks under this head.
58. The objection which we seek to repel is conveyed in such
questions as these, —what good does baptism do to infants ? What
are they the better for it? Do not baptised infants grow up in sin
the same as unbaptised infants? We have beard similar questions
asked with respect to other ordinances, as, for example, what are those
who partake of the Lord s Supper better than we who do not partake
of it? What are many of those who go to church better than we who
do not go to it? Are they more upright in their dealings or more
humane, —more just or more generous ? Such questions are an appeal
from revelation to reason. Revelation prescribes the observances
against which they are directed, and this prescription, they imply, is
very well, but, still, are the prescribed observances sufficiently recom-
mended to reason ? Thus we are fully justified in describing the
objection conveyed in such questions as rationalistic j and our oppon-
ents in urging it act the part of rationalists.
59. But, if the appeal is to be made to reason, let it be made
fairly ; and, that it may be fairly made, the point submitted must be,
not what effects actually attend the observance of the ordinance
against the claims of which the appeal is directed, but what are the
effects to the production of which, from the nature and design of the
ordinance, the observance of it is fitted to conduce, and with which, it
may be warrantably expected, the due observance of it will be
attended It may be true, and so far as it is true it is much to be
deplored, that in multitudes of instances infant baptism is attended
with no beneficial results, the subjects of it being as much neglected
and growing up as ungodly as any unbaptised infants. But this fact
in no way affects the claims of infant baptism ; for its claims, as already
staled, are determined, not by the actual results in given cases and in
certain circumstances, but by the results to the production of which it
is fitted to conduce. From these the actual results mav be entirely
different, such actual results being due to influences extraneous to the
ordinance to fR design.


What, then, is the legitimate influence of infant baptism on
tne spiritual interests of the subjects of it? This is the point to
be decided in an appeal from revelation to reason with respect to
the claims of infant baptism. r
60 We have already seen that baptism signifies and represent*
spiritual blessings,—union to Christ and participation in the benefit*
of his death ; and, when applied to infants, it signifies and represent*
such blessings as capable of application to infants, and as tendered to
them through their parents or tendered to their parents for them
Will any one say that, as regards design and tendency, it is no advao-i
tage to infants that God deals thus with their parents on their behalf
that he calls upon their parents, affords them encouragement and lays’
them under obligatioffto desire and expect for them,—and to desire and
expect for them while they are yet infants and incapable of acting for
themselves in this momentous matter,—all the blessings of that well
ordered and sure covenant of which baptism is the token ? Beautiful
and benificent arrangement! How like God, and how grateful to the
heart of the pious parent ! We seem to hear in it the Saviour’s words
uttered by him anew, “ suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.” Yes suffer
them to come to the loving compassionate Saviour. Let the’church
suffer them to come to him by admitting them to baptism; let their
parents suffer them to come to him by bringing them to be baptised •
let both suffer them to come by pleading on their behalf earnestly and
in faith the glorious promise to which baptism is attached (Acts ii
39, Qtn xvi, 7-10), “ travailing in birth until Christ be formed in
them,” (Gal. iv. 19), and by discharging towards them their respective
but concurrent obligations. If parents and the church proceed thus
we shall have fewer impugners of infant baptism, and such as may
still impugn it will not venture to represent it as useless. 1
61. In this ordinance God says to parents “ I will be a God unto
your children. He thus calls upon them and imposes upon them a
solemn obligation to lay hold on this promise on behalf of their chil-
dren, and, clinging to it, pleading it, and expecting the fulfilment of it
to use with diligence and perseverance all the means of
obtaining the fulfilment of it which he has prescribed. And if
parents respond aright to this call and discharge this obligation shall
they do so in vain ? Will not God, in that case, fulfil his promise, and
be indeed a God unto the.r children ? To infants, to whom, while they
are yet infants, or subsequently, such a blessin g flows from baptism
is baptism useless? But at present we are concerned with the design
of baptism and not with the actual result of the administration of if
and, inasmuch as God, by means of baptism, deals with parents on
behalf of their children in the manner we have indicated, this ordi-
nance, it is evident, has the most advantageous bearing on the eternal
interests of the infants to whom it is applied.
And God deals in like manner with the church on behalf of
infants, and lays it under a similar obligation, when he directs it to
administer baptism to them. He requires of it that it give to them
the full benefit of its solicitude, its prayers, and its ministrations, desir-
ing and expecting for them the fulfilment of the great promise that be
“ will be a God unto them.” Thus, again, baptism has the most
advantageous bearing on the eternal interests of the infants to whom
i) is applied.


APPENDIX.
62. The advocates of immersion, who hold, let it be remembered,
not merely that immersion is a legitimate mode of baptism, but that it
is the only legitimate mode of baptism, are in the habit of parading, in
support of their dogma, a long list of quotations from some of the most
distinguished of their opponents. To this method of maintaining their
position there is, at the outset, the obvious objection, on logical grounds,
that such quotations, presenting only at the best wbat uninspired men
have said, are not evidence in the case. Though they were fully to the
effect that immersion is the only legitimate mode of baptism, as the
adducing of them in support of this position implies they are, they
would be no proof that immersion is the only legitimate mode of bap-
tism, and would furnish no ground for our believing that it is. But
they are not to the effect that immersion is the only legitimate mode of
baptism ; and, therefore, to adduce them as supporting this view is
disingenuous and disgraceful. What! Such men as Luther,, Calvin,
Cranmer, Hervey, Doddridge, Whitefield, John Wesley, and Chalmers,
—and these and others are quoted,—testifying and, therefore, holding
that immersion is the only legitimate mode of baptism, and yet, in the
face of this conviction, administering baptism themselves otherwise than
by immersion ! This is palpably a foul slander. Such men were in-
capable of acting such a part; of acting it, —and that they did so, is
the implied allegation,—deliberately, uniformly, to the close
of their lives, and in a matter so solemn as the administration of a
divine ordinance. But the dishonesty of the procedure on which we
are remarking does not consist merely in adducing, as witnesses for
immersion as the only legitimate mode of baptism, men who testified
by their practice and taught that it is not the only legitimate ntode of bap-
tism. The following instance affords painful proof that it is carried still
further. One of the witnesses cited is Thomas Scott, the commentator;
and his testimony, as quoted,is, “immersion is doubtless baptism,” Now,
it is true that Scott uses these words, v but, then, they do not bear the
meaning which the immersionist in quoting them expects will be at-
tached to them. Scott does not say that baptism is immersion ; that
is, that baptism is, always and in every instance, immersion—this and
nothing else ; and, yet, our opponents adduce him as bearing this testi-
mony. What he says is that immersion is baptism, and this, though
we are required by those who quote his words to think so, in no way
implies that sprinkling is not baptism. They propose the question “is
baptism immersion or sprinkling,” and they adduce Scott as testifying
* Life of Kev. Thomas Scott, by Key. John Scott, j >. 167. London, 1822.


that it is immersion, and not, sprinkling, while his words even, as quoted
by themselves, have, as we have just shown, no such meaning. Rut
what will (he reader think when we inform him —and this is the point
to which we wish to call special attention—that after the words which
they quote, “immersion is doubtless baptism,” Scott immediately adds,
“ and so is sprinkling or pouring.’’ This part of his evidence they
suppress, and by a quotation thus garbled, which even Avhen garbled
does not assert their doctrine, they endeavour to gain the support of
a name deservedly held in high estimation. The cause must indeed be
wretched that imposes upon its advocates the necessity —a necessity,
however, which ought not to be accepted—of resorting to such ex-
pedients.
The preceding specimen might suffice; but we will adduce
another instance of similar dishonesty of quotation. The following
garbled quotation is given from Ewing’s Greek and English Lexicon.
“ Baptizo, in its primary and radical sense, I cover with water. It is
used to denote, Ist, I plunge, or sink completely under water.” By
this quotation Mr. Ewing is represented as stating that “the primary
and radical” meaning of baptizo is immerse, and thus, by inference,
that immersion is the only legitimate mode of baptism. But to make
the quotation serve this purpose, the omission of a clause is necessary,
and, as if a papist and not a protestant conducted the operation, the
necessary omission is quietly made. The reader is led to believe, —
shameful deception!—that Mr. Ewing, in defining baptizo, expressed
himself thus, “in its primary and radical sense, I cover with water,”
and on this point added no more; but he does add more, and adds
what he himself regarded as being, and what really is an essential part
of his definition. After the words quoted, “in its primary or radical
sense, I cover with water,” he proceeds, “or some other fluid, in
whatever manner this is done, whether by immersion or affusion,
wholly or partially, permanently or for a moment.” Thus, while, by
the deliberate mutilation and garbled quotation of his definition, he is
made to testify that of the Greek word for baptise the primary mean-
ing is immerse, the testimony which he actually bears is, that im-
merse is not the primary meaning of it. To speak plainly, for the case
demands plain speaking, can those who thus grossly abuse the confi-
dence which they claim to be reposed in them as faithful reporters of
what they profess to quote, and abuse it for such a purpose, be regarded
in any other light than as practising deception and uttering falsehood?
For our part we emphatically say, “No.” And we say further that
those who circulate, as we understand some do, publications, in which
the vile artifice now exposed is employed, make themselves parties to
the deception and falsehood which it involves.
This falsifying of testimony presents also other forms. Of one of
these we will give an example. At the close of the array of quota-
tions, of which we have just submitted a specimen, it is stated, “ the
names of Adam Clarke, Burkitt, and» a host of others, might be
added.” Now let the reader judge from the following bona fide un-
garbled quotation whether Adam Clarke, for example, can be honestly
referred to as testifying that “ immersion ” is “ the only Christian
baptism.’’ We quote from his note on Mat. iii. 6.—“ In what form
baptism was originally administered has been deemed a subject worthy
of serious dispute. Were the people dipped or sprinkled f for it is
certain bapto and baptizo mean both. They were all dipped, say some.


Caia any man suppose that it was possible for John to dip all the in-
habitants of Jerusalem and Judea, and of all the country round
about Jordan ? Were both men and women dipped, for certainly
both came to his baptism ? This could never have comported either
with safety or with decency. Were they dipped in their clothes f
This would have endangered their lives if they had not with them
change of raiment; and, as such a baptism as John’s, however ad-
ministered, was, in several respects, a new thing in Judea, it is not at
all likely that the people would come thus provided.” Farther on he
says, “those who are dipped or immersed in water, in the name of
the Holy Trinity, I believe to be evangelically baptised—those who
are washed or sprinkled with water, in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, I believe to be equally so ; and
the repetition of such a baptism I believe to be profane." Such is
Adam Clarke’s deliberate testimony, and, yet, immersionists refer to
him as testifying that that “immersion” is “the only Christian
baptism.”
The following extract from a pamphlet entitled, “ Confessions of a
convert from baptism in water to baptism with water,” of which a
reprint has been recently issued in Sydney, will form an appropriate
supplement to Dr. Clarke’s remarks on John’s baptism ;—“ Having-
satisfied myself on this point”—that the population of Judea, at the
period which immediately preceded our Lord’s ministry, was not less
than a million and a half, and that at least one-third of this number,
or half a million, were baptised by John, —“ I proceeded to compute
the period which must have been consumed in their immersion. From
having frequently witnessed the practice, I knew that baptism by this
mode could not be administered to an individual, wiih suitable delibe-
ration and gravity, in less time than two minutes, and with the utmost
despatch consistent with decorum, that more than thirty could not be
immersed in an hour. Assuming this to be the average rate at which
John performed the service, and supposing that he thus spent ten
hours of every day, I was conducted to the conclusion that he might
baptise two thousand weekly, or about one hundred thousand in a
year: from which it was evident, that had he spent no part of this
time in travelling, preaching, or other employments, but continued
almost without intermission in the water, he must have devoted
five years of labour to this single work. I was confounded at
the result of this calculation, for I knew, from previous thought
and reading, that his public ministry could not have exceeded
a year, and was probably restricted to a still less period.
This enquiry shook my previous faith in the Divine authority of
immersion ; and it also recalled to my recollection a conversation
which 1 bad heard, a few months before, between my uncle and my
father on the subject of John’s baptism, in which the question was
proposed, whether, supposing that John’s disciples were immersed,
they submitted to this process* in their usual dress or naked ; or, if
not, whether they had brought changes of raiment with them for the
purpose, and had constructed sheds or pitched tents on the banks ot
the river, in which they could privately prepare for the service ?My
excellent parent perceived the difficulty in which he would be involved
by adopting either of these hypotheses ; and, therefore, like the Pha-
risees, when pressed with another perplexing question respecting the
same baptism, he prudently replied that he could not tell. My uncle


however, would not be satisfied with this evasion, and proceeded to
show that each of the suppositions were equally improbable. He
added, moreover, what struck me at the time, that as there must
have been women as well as men who crowded to John’s ministry,
nothing could be more unlikely, more contrary to the usage of the
country and the people, or more revolting to the feelings and habits
of Eastern females, than to have consented to be publicly plunged by
a man in the presence of a gazing multitude.’’
We intended to make some further remarks in this appendix, but
having already exceeded the limits which we prescribed toouiselves,
we omit them.
We regret that, partly from ill health and still more from the urgent
claims ot various duties, the publication of this tract has been so long
delayed.
—Bs*t3iigf£tJ£§
PRINTED AT THE “ ENSIGN" OFFICE, WEST MAITLAND.




E E E A T A.
Line 6 from the end of paragraph 10, page 6, for “temporary”
read temporal.
Line 6 from the end of paragraph 36, page 19, for “views our
opponents ” read views of our opponents.
Line 6, paragraph 52, page 28, for “ saven ” read seven.
Line 9, paragraph 55, page 29, for “ multitude ” read multitudes.


