

EI. „* , r ' 1 7 v •• t - 4 , * ’., t * , ,^|
- i ' ■•-;. _" ; _ | m
\ ‘ : ' H 7
* ; ®’ '« *■« l A ,, ->1111| " *$$**■ IGSi.
« A m
tl J I SSfi g| I > a ■' w— «
W[BjjB- |§p iS& ?B§|r jjmjSjF rofe, 3g JM» gp 8 3 1 v£ ’*>* J ~'§-,
WMHBhHT 11 III
hmf m 3ft / %hj J k | 8 jik li| mm mk m '
hlHj* |||L » K ' ■ iH ,v -|P| • jp f w
p pr ' f p gr m i|iSi










1 > . I' f ' r ! ths V 1 * ‘ 55 £ * r'JJt’' **S' ? W& m l *> ■Si’ * ? $ 7 .J •& r £ >\


THE STORY OE nUSTRHLin
Its Discoverers and Founders.
by
ALFRED 5. REAYOIi,
ex-Prcsident of the Historical Society of Victoria.
Author of :
“THE OVERLANUERS”
“THE STORY OF THE MAEEEE”
“BEACKFELEOWS OF AUSTRALIA”
“STUART MURRAY ON IRRIGATION IN VICTORIA”
Joint Author of :
“PASTURES NEW”
“THE FIRST CENTURY”
“PASTORAL PIONEERS OF PORT PHILLIP AND VICTORIA”
I love a sunburnt country,
A land of sweeping plains
Of ragged mountain ranges,
Of droughts and hooding rains
I love her far horizons,
I love her jewel sea,
Her beauty and her terror,
The wide brown land for me.
Dorothea MacKellar,


PREFACE
writing of Australian history is always a source of profound pleasure
to the historian, of supreme gratification if he be an Australian.
Historically recent, it yet gives a clue to the mystery surrounding the
formation of the older nations; while all through the story there is a continual
recurrence of events which must make every Australian and indeed every
Briton, proud of their race- The replacing of a primitive people, quite
admirable in themselves but just as useless to the rest of the world, by a
new nation that is already of major importance in several primary products
and is shaping to be the dominant power in the Southern Hemisphere, has
been done as decently as possible notwithstanding what some sensational
writers may say. The founders of Australia merit no charges of cruelty or
torture; the worst that can be laid to their charge is kindness, mistaken
kindness it is true. All research work in our early history simply gives
one more to admire in their pluck, their gay insouciance and above all their
sense of duty, of obligation, to the rest of the community. Lack of vision
has been laid to their charge; but if such were justified, the intensity of the
calls to work at the time would excuse it. It is however without foundation.
There is far more perception of the possibilities of the future revealed in
early intimate documents, letters and diaries, than is shown by our
legislators and writers of to-day- A sturdy belief in the future is the
prevailing sentiment, even in the recurring times of depression and loss.
One cannot of course invent a history of Australia. Authorities have
to be consulted and drawn upon. Acknowledgments are made to A. W.
Jose, the Australian Encyclopaedia; James Colwell, The Story of Australia,
Past and Present; G- A. Wood, and many other writers and especially to
the Trustees of the Melbourne Public Library and their officers for access to
the wonderful historical collection housed in that great institution.
THE WRITER.


CONTENTS
Chapter I.
THE GREAT SOUTH LAND
Chapter 11.
THE QUEST OF THE SPICE ISLANDS
Chapter 111.
THE DUTCH ARRIVE
Chapter IV.
AUSTRALIA SIGHTED. THE DUTCH DISCOVERIES
Chapter V.
TASMAN, THE EAST OF THE DUTCHMEN
Chapter VI.
CAPTAIN COOK, THE GREAT
Chapter VIE
THE COMING OF THE ENGLISH
Chapter VIII.
EARLY TROUBLES. THE NAVAL RULE
Chapter IX.
THE MILITARY TROUBLES
Chapter X
THE BEGINNING OF REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT
Chapter XL
HOME RULE
Chapter XII.
THE FINDING OF THE INLAND
Chapter XIII.
EXPLORING THE ARID REGIONS


CONTENTS —(Continued)
Chapter XIV.
FINISHING THE JOB
Chapter XV.
SQUATTING
Chapter XVI.
THE STORY OF THE SHEEP
Chapter XVII.
HORNED CATTLE AND HORSES
Chapter XVIII.
WHALING DAYS
Chapter XIX.
THE PREDECESSORS OF THE WHITE MAN
Chapter XX.
THE ERA OF GOLD
Chapter XXL
THE TERRITORIES
L’ENVOI


FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA
and their Descendants
AUSTRALIA
THE GREAT SOUTH LAND
. . . A sunburnt country.
A land of sweeping plains
Of ragged mountain ranges
Of droughts and flooding rains.
CHAPTER I.
A USTRALIA has been called the sixth continent. It certainly is the
largest island in the world and the only island continent; but it is not
the Southern Continent as it used to be called. That honour must now be
reserved for Antarctica, for Admiral Byrd’s recent discovery that East
Antarctica is joined to the Marie Byrd Land of West Antarctica, makes it a
continent of some four and a half million square miles, as contrasted with
Australia’s three millions- It is well to remark here that in all these
discussions Tasmania, the old Van Diemen’s Land is counted in with the
mainland as forming part of the Continent, which is the Australian
Commonwealth. Still patriotic Australians may pride themselves on the
fact that Australia possesses just one half of Antarctica. Great Britain and
New Zealand claim a goodly portion of the rest. Australia then with its
possessions, ranks, in area, ahead of Europe and fifth of the six major
divisions of the globe.
Although the Great South Land was undoubtedly known in a vague
sort of way to the ancients, by which term we somewhat arrogantly mean
ihe Greeks and Romans, forgetting that very fine civilisations in Africa,


Asia and the Orient extend back as far as six to seven thousand years.
Naturally enough in the barbaric days oi Europe, little knowledge existed
and when civilisation did come, many things prevented the old world
knowledge coming with it. From the early days of that greatest of
philosophers, Aristotle, to the Christian fathers, there are frequent references
to the Great South Land- Evidently these came through the earlier civilised
nations. One Roman writer speaks of the animals of this far land using
their belly as a pouch “it opens and shuts; there is nothing in it; but it is
rough and hairy so that the young creep into it.” This implies more than a
casual knowledge though it has to be remembered that New Guinea and
some of the adjoining islands can boast of many marsupial species. Ihe
early knowledge of Australia will be referred to again later.
Although it is our own country and it is a proverbially dirty bird that
fouls its own nest, Australia lacks much in her climate and in the fertility
of her soils. This is reflected in the incidence of her population of which
over eighty per cent, live in the eastern states, in fact though these states
nominally cover one-third of the continent, the eighty per cent, referred to
are crowded into ten per cent, of its surface. Actually nearly two-thirds of
the people live in towns and cities, the metropolitan percentage approaching
fifty- Even in populous Victoria, the rural dwellers are seven only to the
square mile. Two other states only exceed one person to the square mile,
New South Wales with three and Tasmania, the tight little island with four.
It needs three decimals to express the Northern Territory density, .006
persons to the square mile. The density of population is largely governed
by the annual rainfall. Practically the whole of the continent, south of the
tropic of Capricorn in South Australia, Central Australia and Western
Australia excluding its south-western area, with that part of New South
Wales west of the Darling River and the Cooper’s Creek district in south-
western Queensland, altogether over fifty per cent., enjoys, if such a term
may be permitted, a rainfall of under fifteen inches- Extreme variability is
another feature of our rainfall. Even in senate Melbourne, where the
expectation of rainfall is the same every day in the year, the annual precipi-
tation ranges from 14 to 42, a variability of three to one, while in several of
the months there are records of no fall at all.
Although Australia is not relatively mucn smaller than Europe, some
twenty per cent., and although she is completely surrounded by water,
Europe which in a sense is merely a peninsula of Asia, is blest with more
than five times the length of coast line, with its concomitant number of
harbours and its sea food, fish and shell-fish, productiveness. There is no
corresponding equivalent in the interior conditions. 'The European rivers
impartially distributed, discharge into the surrounding seas, just upon fifty
per cent, of the rainfall falling upon the land surface. The Australian rivers,
which reach the sea all but one of short runs from the coastal ranges.


discharge but hve per cent, of a rainfall, which is in itself less than an average
of twenty inches yearly. The one exception to the short ocean-supplying
sireams is me iviurray Kiver wlncn drains, as an engineer would put u, a
seventn oi me entire continent. Ihe rest of the Australian rivers never
i eaeii me sea, ai infrequent intervals, they roil down, covering stretches,
miles, scores of miles, wide with turbulent yellow waters, where for years
there has been nothing but sun-baked, sun-cracked clay plains or undulating
stretches of sand and mulga, finally losing themselves in the salt lakes or
piayas of trie and wastes of the great Australian desert. Then spring up
flowers, herbage of all sorts; the aboriginal, soon sleek and fat, hardly stirs
himself to gather his daily food, his gin doing the little bit necessary. A
few months and the desert, temporarily expelled, returns to its sway.
Australia is a land of long droughts and great floods, of unimpressive
ranges and wide spreading plains. In the centre of South Australia, the
land surface is below the sea level, and many ill-considered projects have
been put forward for the cutting of canals to form inland seas with far-
fetched idea of ameliorating the central Australian climate. Apart from
physical and financial difficulties, both overwhelming, of such a scheme there
is no reason to believe that there would be any appreciable result. The gulfs
of St- Vincent and Spencer form analogous water surfaces, and no influence
of moment on the climate of the adjacent lands can justly be attributed to
them. On the whole therefore, Australia is a land of high temperatures, low
elevations, still lower rainfalls and open spaces. On the map, nearly half
of it is shown to be in the tropical area, yet its climate is far from justifying
such classification, save in some insignificant corners in the north. Certainly
no part has yet been found where the white man does not live pleasantly and
what is greater importance, produce sturdy children. No less than one third
of its whole extent is less than 500 feet above sea level; two thirds being
below 1000 feet, and one per cent- only exceeds 3000 feet.
The forests that break the monotony of Australia’s land surface, are
the fossils of the old and new worlds. The eucalypts, or gum trees in the
vernacular, which range from the world’s tallest trees in the rain forests in
the south west, the Denmark country of Western Australia; in the south-
east and east in the Gippsland gullies with its tree ferns and lyre-birds, and
in the brush forests up to Cape York, are the dominating feature, even in
their xerophilous or scrubby forms, knowm as Mallee. But even they fail
wffien the rainfall shrinks below ten inches; then comes the chance of the
universal acacia; known as Mulga in its two general forms of broad and
narrow leaved, it forms a good standby as a drought reserve fodder, even in
areas of less than five inches yearly with sometimes no rainfall at all for a
year or two. The acacia or wattle has been called the universal tree and it
justifies that epithet. No part of the continent is without some or other
members of the family, except perhaps on that vast sheet of almost bare


limestone, known as the Nullarbor Plain on the transcontinental lailwa}.
there in patches and on its margins, the acacia still struggles- 1 hese
places have been called Sumarbor by Dr. L,. Keith Ward. Equally continent
wide with the acacia, are the myoporinae, the boobyalla and so-called sandal-
woods, and the proteaceae, the needlewoods, quandongs, grevilleas and wild
cherries. All these flourish, if the word be allowed, in aridity alongside the
porcupine grass —the miscalled spimfex of explorers’ tales —the bug-bear of
che horseman and equally disliked by the bare-shinned blackfellow, though
it contains for him a prolific source of food, mainly snakes, lizaids and
insects.
Still with all these obstacles of climate and of soil, Australia has its
wide open spaces which may be filled- It has been the practice of late _years,
to adopt a pessimistic tone and to apply the harsh doctrines of economics
to Australian conditions. In such comparisons human adaptability and
invention have been disregarded. If similar standards has been applied for
instance in the early years of Victoria, the most successful of the Common-
weaitn States, would have had to be abandoned. ISome of the more opti-
mistic have appraised Australia’s bearing capacity, at one hundred million
souls. Others even more sanguine have doubled that figure while the long
faced pessimists have estimated as few as twenty millions. Even the
optimists however base their figures on the results from the eastern areas
of reasonably good rainfall- None is so sanguine as to predict any future
for the enormous arid areas of the interior.
From the Anglo-saxon point of view it is a matter of congratulation
that almost without exception the Australian shores are forbidding and
unattractive; certainly and very definitely so on its northern, western and
southern littoral. From the period far bacK in the tertiary period of our
geological history, when Australia had assumed its present form, its shores
have been desolate and dangerous to navigation. So our continent lay asleep
awaiting its Prince Charming to awaken it from its long slumber. It is
not known when the aboriginals first came or how they discovered the
land for they were the original discoverers is now pretty generally admitted.
For a long time, it was considered that the Tasmanian blackfellow, definitely
recognised as a different and apparently lower type than our aboriginal had
been the first comer- Spreading over the continent without let or hindrance,
he arrived at its southern shores in time to cross Bass Strait, the land-
bridge to Tasmania still being in existence, and fill that island. Though
this must have taken an enormous period of time and of struggle against
new and continually changing conditions, he remained at the end of these
experiences and after many tens of thousands of years isolation in Tasmania,
the most primitive representative of homo sapiens. His weapons were, a
stick, rudely scraped, used as a club, a throwing stick, a longer one, hardly
straightened with a point scraped after burning, used as a spear and some


of the crudest stone implements known. The invading Australian race must
have exterminated him without absorbing him, a thing incredible, as
according to Dr. Ramsay Smith and other authorities, that race is homo-
geneous. The recent investigations of Professor Frederick Wood-Jones
and the Adelaide University expeditions confirm this statement, as to the
homogeneity and in addition show such a purity of race, according to blood-
tests that the Tasmanian precedence has to be dropped as lacking confir-
matory and supporting evidence.
We have now to agree that the Australian aboriginals as the race has
been named by anthropologists —one or two have used the word natives
while in common parlance they are simply called blackfellow—were the
first arrivals and therefore the discoverers. Where they came from is not
a matter for agreement yet. Their purity of blood indicates a not distant
connection with earliest man while other evidence points to Asia as a
possible, even probable, starting point. Though discovered when can only
be guessed, probably some hundreds of thousands of years ago—the Great
South Land still slumbered. Jacky Jacky was not the Prince Charming


THE QUEST OF THE SPICE ISLANDS
Forth sped thy gallant sailors, blithe and free
Fearing nor foeman’s hate, nor iron clime
Nor Lima’s flame, nor Plata’s fever-slime
So they might give thee far Cathay in fee.
CHAPTER 11.
FROM remote ages, certainly well before the Christian era, the spice
resources of the East Indies had been exported by the Chinese and
the Hindus. Caravans went overland from the Celestial Empire to the
Levant and Hindu boats sailed up the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea to othei
entrepots. This trade of great extent in the luxurious days of the Roman
Empire, fell off with its decline and fall. Venice struggling through the
Dark Ages, until it achieved supremacy in European commerce, renewed the
Oriental connexion- It is through this that Europe got its first definite
story of the South. One of the great Venetian houses was that of Polo.
Two brothers, Matteo and Nicolo, in the course of their business a isited the
Chinese court, the Emperor there being the great Kublai Khan of the
Mongols. It was the thirteenth century; the Dark Ages had rolled away;
Europe was stirring, ready to cast off its bonds and enter upon the Rena-
scence period.
Kublai, a ruler of great breadth of vision—his people at that time
were leaders in civilisation—sought visitors from the Papal Court for the
exchange of religious views and knowledge of the arts. On the brothers’
next visit, Nicolo took his youthful son, Marco- Incidently it may be
stated that the journey, executed in quite routine way, took three and a half
years, and the party included a large retinue ot servants and guards. The
route was that of the caravans, by way of Acre and Bagdad to Ormuz and
thence well away from the Himalayas direct to China. Marco, a fine
youth, attracted Kublai’s attention, and was appointed to his personal staff,
in that position, he was enabled to absorb a mass of information about the
various countries and peoples with which the Khan had relations. He
even accompanied delegations to Hindustan and Tibet. All the time he
committed the facts he heard, travellers’ tales many of them, to writing-
The two elder Polos meanwhile accumulated much wealth —it was a land
of gold, precious stones and pearls—and desired to return to their beloved
Venice. The Khan was obdurate but fortune or chance intervened. One
of the Mongol princesses, bethrothed to a Persian prince, had to journey to
that country for the marriage ceremony. The land way was blocked for
such valuable merchandise, there being wars and revolutions amongst the
Tartars. The Polos, skilled navigators and sea-faring men, advised by


Marco, who had just returned from the Golden Chersonese or Malay
Peninsula, and who advocated the sea route to the Persian Gulf, offered
their services. They were placed in command of a fleet of fourteen vessels,
each having four masts and capable of being navigated with nine sails, and
there were at least four or live that had crews of two hundred and fifty or
two hundred and sixty men- So the Polos escaped from their too admiring
benefactor. The voyage to Sumatra, or Java Minor, as Polo termed it,
occupied three months. Here head winds detained them a further live
months, that was but a foretaste. Eighteen months were occupied travers-
ing the Bay of Bengal. Then the princess was handed over safe and sound
and the Polos got home by way of the Black Sea and Turkey in the last
years of the thirteenth century. A merchant or monk could travel anywhere
then-
The story would have ended as many similiar ones had, were it not
that Marco threw off the merchant’s gabardine and assumed the mail of a
warrior in the attempt by Venice to avenge the massacre of the Venetians
at Constantinople by the Genoese. Caught in the disastrous tight at
Curzola, Marco was thrown into a Genoan prison. There meeting a brother
adventurer from Pisa, he told at his leisure, of which he had plenty, the
long story of his Asian adventures. Published to the world in manuscript
printing was still over a century away thougn Marco is said to have intro-
duced the block method of printing after the Chinese fashion —the awaken-
ing peoples of Europe learnt of the wealth of Cathay (China) and Cipango
(Japan); of Cambaluc (Peiping) in which dweir 1,600,000 families and of
Kinsay (Hangchau) or the City of Heaven with its twelve thousand bridges
and where the daily consumption of pepper was 43 loads of 223 lbs. each.
He described the Spice Islands in recognisable detail and the voyages by
the Chinese merchants thereto which took about twelve months in the
operation. Although he had not been there in person, he described Java
fully and here comes the blunder which affected men’s thoughts and
certainly their maps for some centuries. As given by all manuscripts and
books, Polo wrote “when you leave Java and sail for 700 miles on a course
between south and south west you arrive at two islands, a greater and a less.
They are called Sondur and Condur. As there is nothing about them worth
mentioning, let us go on 500 miles beyond Sondur and there we find another
country which is called Locach. In this country the brazil which we make
use of, grows in great plants; and they also have gold in incredible quantity.
They have elephants and much game-” But this was not all “when you
leave Locach and sail for 500 miles towards the south, you come to an island
named Pentam . . . When you leave Pentam and sail about 100 miles, you
reach the Island of Java the Less . . . This island hath great abundance of
treasure with costly spices, lignaloes and spikenard and many other things
that never come into our parts.”


it will be at once seen that, premising the original starting point to
be java as stated, tne auove mentioned isianas, notwitnstanding tne eieptiants
and the spices, that Polo is describing Australia. So thought the ancient
map-makers; Locach, sometimes by a typograpnical error, Beach, is shown on
their maps and globes. When the Dutch navigator, Houtman, chanced on
the north-west coast of New Holland in 16i9, he logged that he suddenly
came across the southland of Beach.’ Ihe whole thing is a misunder-
standing. The jumping oft place was not Java at all- It was Cochin China.
Docach with its elephants thus becomes Siam, Java Minor is Sumatra and
the whole story falls into line. Marco Polo had heard nothing of New
Guinea even, much less of the Great South Land, Australia.
So far the merchants and trade. Now is the turn of the Church.
Giovanni di Monte Corvino, passing the Polos on their home journey, built
churches in Pekin and admitted to the Church thousands of converts- In
1316, Odoric di Pordonone, a Franciscan friar went direct to Java the Less
or Sumatra. His accounts corroborate those of Marco Polo, so exactly that
there has alw T ays been some doubt as to Odoric’s reliability. He was fol-
lowed by Nicolo di Conti in 1444, who repeated the Polo fables. Our fourth
man—it was now 1502; Columbus had discovered the \\ est Indies and the
Portuguese had reached India —Ludovico di Varthema, who certainly gave
his own, and quite accurate, accounts of the Spice Islands. Varthema
added that the Captain of the vessel on which he sailed to the islands told
them that away on the other side of Java, the day lasted four hours only
and the weather was the coldest in the world. Certainly the Polynesians
under Huite-rangi-ora, the world’s greatest navigator, had in 600 A.D. reached
the permanent ice cliffs of Antarctica, and some of his story may have
reached the Arabians, the next great navigating people. Really little reliable
was yet known ; a completely imaginary southern land, the fruit of an error,
was on the maps and that was all.
Our steps may now be retraced a little. Travellers, commercial or
religious, dependent upon the pagan nations for transport, had served their
purpose. In China the Mongols with their enlightened rule had been over-
thrown —the foreign devil was expelled—and in between, the Ottoman
Turks had started the Mohammedan over-running of the older civilisations.
The Venetians and the Genoese, purely traders and shopkeepers had failed
to maintain the essential Eastern trade- Spices were not luxuries; they
were necessities. Europe not only needed the products of the East—its
commerce expanding with increasing skill in production was producing
more wealth —and it required more of them. Portugal stepped into the
breach. It had thrown off the hated pagan moorish yoke. With its wonder-
ful wealth of shore line and harbours, it already possessed a sea faring, sea-
loving people and withal intensely religious and devoted to their church.


Prince Henry, always known as the Navigator, mough he never went to
sea, the second son of the great Don Joam L, was inflamed with the spirit of
the crusaders. The truths of Christianity, of the church, had to be taken to
the unbeliever, with the sword if necessary. So the ships were equipped,
with men trained to the sea and educated into the new knowledge, and with
instruments, the compass and the astrolabe, continually being impro\ed.
Stories of the Christians under Prester John in Central Africa hemmed in by
blackamoor pagans and of the Christian colonies still surviving in India
surrounded by idolaters, as the Bhuddists were always called. Search was
made of the west coast of Africa in the vain hope of a river, that ships could
sail up to Prester John’s kingdom. The unexpected result was the doubling
of the Cape, by Bartholomew Diaz in 1846, and by Vasco da Gama. Da
Gama pushing on, obtained Arab pilots on the East African coast and reached
India. He found no Christians awaiting him. The crusading spirit for a
time in abeyance—successful trading had been the Portuguese experience all
along the African coasts —a career of conquest, wringing out precious pro-
ducts from the coloured inhabitants began. Eirst Socotra, Ormuz, Goa,
Ceylon and Malacca fell under their domination; the spice islands followed,
and for a century the Portuguese dominated the greatest colonial empire
the world has known.
The Spaniards came also to the East Indies though by the other, the
westward route, round the Horn and across the Pacific. Sanguinary conflicts
ensued until Charles I- of Spain and V. of Germany sold his rights, if any, in
the Moluccas. Later on the Spaniards, after discovering New Guinea, but
missing Australia, founded its Philippine colonies, the navigation being
direct from the Mexican coast where shipping towns were established.
Although the Portuguese had descended to trade, they retained some of their
crusading ideas. Hand in hand with treaties for the exchange of goods for
commodities, were endeavours to convert the Rajahs or Sultans to the true
faith. These resulted in many misunderstandings and ruptures. Still all
the sixteenth century, the Portuguese maintained their commercial
supremacy, the Spaniards occupying only a minor part of the stage.


THE DUTCH ARRIVE
O! Far away and far away
The Happy Islands lie.
CHAPTER 111.
distribution of the East Indian commodities, spices and other good
things throughout Europe, what may be termed the retail part of the
business, was entrusted to the more humble Dutchman. These worthies,
great seamen, made a very good thing out of it and waxing fat—in their
purses—kicked up, rebelling against their oppressors, the Spanish kings, who
had held them in subjection over a century. This was brought to a climax
when on the death of Henry the Cardinal in 1580, Spain in the person of
Phillip 11. took possession of Portugal- Gone was the lucrative trade of the
Dutch. There was but one thing to do and that was to get their own spices.
In 1595, attempts were made to discover a north-east passage, a route north
of Asia. Holland’s best talent was called on. Jan Huig Linschoten, who
after thirteen years in the Portuguese East Indies returned home and pub-
lished, both in Holland and England, full accounts of their resources; Pieter
Planck, a celebrated cartographer who charted the Spanish discoveries as
far as that jealous nation permitted them to become known ; William
Barentszoon, a famous navigator who discovered Spitzbergen and left his
bones on Nova Zembla; and Jakob van Heemskirk, who later on. 1607,
bearded the Spanish at Gibraltar and destroyed his fleet- They all failed.
The second attempt was on orthodox lines and was at once successful.
Three large shins and a pinnace, an imposing fleet, set out under the leader-
ship of Corneiliszoon Houtman. Houtman had previously been in Portugal,
spying out the route. He there fell into the hands of the Inquisition but
was ransomed by a large payment. Houtman was the supercargo, a position
which in the Dutch commercial eye, made him the chief officer of the fleet,
though even he was subservient to a council of which he was the head
certainly, but in which every captain and supercargo had a sav. Still higher
above him were the sealed orders of the Company of Adventurers, which its
constituent merchants poetically called the Company of the Lands Far Awav-
To complete the mixture of autocracy and democracy, the crews could be
called to perform the duties only specified in their articles. Anything beyond
that had to be a matter of negotiation with the Council. Jans Janszoon
Molenaar was Admiral, under Houtman of course. His vessel was the
Mauritius of 400 tons and 84 men, then came the Holland, equal in tonnage
and men, under Janszoon Dignumszoon ; the Amsterdam, 200 tons and 59
men, commmder Janzoon Jakobszoon Schellinger, and the last but not


the least, from an Australian point of view, the Duifken or young pigeon,
under Simon Lambertszoon Mau. The last, a pinnace of 30 tons and 20
men, a mere cockleshell of a boat, was to be tne first known vessel to reach
the Great South Land. It was however first 10 return to Europe and make
another voyage out to the Indies- That time it formed the least unit of
Steven Van dcr Hagen’s second fleet and was under the command of Willem
Janszoon, who commanded it on the notable voyage to the Gulf of
Carpentaria in 1606.
A brief resume of Houtman’s voyage will shed some light on the
difficulties of navigation at that time. The fleet left Texel on the 2nd April,
1595, three months later it doubled the Cape, having made a few calls of an
unfriendly nature upon the Portuguese islands in the Atlantic on the way.
On the 3rd September, San Lourenco, better known later as Madagascar,
was reached with almost all the complement down with the scurvy. Dignum-
szoon of the Amsterdam died. Before they finally departed from Madagascar
eight months elapsed and it was on the 11th June, 1596, before the hills of
Sumatra were sighted. Trading relations, though with some differences of
opinion, were established with Java. At Joartam, Schellinger was presented
with a bird, new to Europeans, the erne or emeu, found on the island of Banda
adjoining New Guinea. It was therefore almost certainly Bennett’s Casso-
wary (Casuarius Bennetti). It was described as a bird twice the size of a
swan with black feathers like those of an ostrich, no tongue, no wings, no
tail. Its very long" feet were effectively used in kicking like a horse. It
swallowed its food whole in pieces as large as one’s fist and was particularlv
partial to red hot coals, though it evinced its eclecticism by equally enjoying
lumps of broken ice. Emeu apparently comes from the Portuguese; ema
being the word used by them in South Africa for the ostrich and is therefore
not of native origin.
Then Molenaar died. Houtman was charged with poisoning him;
but was acquitted by the Council. The Amsterdam was abandoned and
burnt. They eventually arrived home on the 16th of August 1597, nearly
two and a half years after their departure, with 89 men left out of the original
247- The stay-at-home merchants, nevertheless, hailed the voyage as a great
success and immediately despatched another fleet of eight bottoms from
Amsterdam. Some Zeeland adventurers fitted out a small fleet under Hout-
man, while their Rotterdam confreres sent five vessels under Jansz Mahn
to attempt the Magellan route, Cape Horn and the Pacific. These five ships
bore the names, Hope, Faith, Fidelity, Love and the Joyous Message; but not-
withstanding such an augury, one only, Faith, limped home without having
entered the Pacific with 36 survivors out of the 550 men who left Holland.
But others were more successful. Van Neck, Waerwijk, Van der Hagen,
Schouten, Willekens, Pieter Both, Van Caerden, Heemskirk and Harmansen
all made highly lucrative voyages. The Spaniard was aghast. This nation


of shop-keepers, the beggars as the Comte de Barlaimont had contemptuously
named them, had dared to invade the Spanish sphere. Hit in his pride—and
his pocket—and furious with rage he put on the seas a powerful fleet, thirteen
men-of-war. They were thoroughly trounced by the merchant men. Don
Andrea Fertado de Mendoza, attacked the Dutch at Bantam. Harmansen
through better seamanship and with better seamen, defeated the Don though
greatly outnumbered- Finally in March 1602, the Netherlands East Indies
Company united the various interests and was granted supreme powers under
a2l years charter. Its capital was one million sterling. Its first fleet of 15
sail manned by a thousand men contrasts markedly with Houtman’s one
thousand tons and 247 men. The Company was highly successful. In 1605,
it declared a dividend of 15 per cent, followed in the succeeding years by
75, 40, 20, 25, and in 1610 50 per cent-


AUSTRALIA SIGHTED. THE DUTCH DISCOVERIES.
I hey saw the coast stretch away to the north
And then, they came to the loveliest land
With trees and rivers and golden sand.
CHAPTER IV.
IN December, 1603, Van der Hagen made his second voyage, with thirteen
ships including the Duifken. New Guinea was now, nearly 100 years
after its first sighting, quite well known on its northern coast line, and it had
acquired in some manner, a reputation as a golden land. Further explora-
tion seemed justified. Things were flourishing and profits were being made
at an amazing rate. The little Duifken was despatched under Jans Janszoon
on a voyage of exploration. Returning in June, 1606, after an absence of
seven months, Janszoon declared he had sailed along the west and south
coasts of New Guinea for some 800 miles, as far south as 14 degrees nearly.
Janszoon missed the Torres Straits, not at all a difficult thing to do, for his
southing took him half way down the eastern shores of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria. He found “this extensive country for the greatest part desert; but
in some places inhabited by wild, cruel, black savages, by whom some of the
crew were murdered; for which reason he could not learn anything of the
land or waters as had been desired, and by the want of provisions and other
necessaries, he was obliged to leave the discovery unfinished; the furthest
point of the land was called Cape Keer-weer (Turn again).” So Australia
was first seen, or it may be better to say, was recorded to have been seen,
some time in March 1606. Torres, who had abandoned De Quiros at the
Solomon Islands, had sailed through the Strait some six months later; but
hugging the southern line of New Guinea, he just failed to sight Cape York.
Australia’s most northern point of land. Much cannot be claimed for Jans-
zoon- He had failed to recognise the importance of his discovery and his
report of the country generally did not hold out any hopes of trade and profit.
The Netherlands East Indies Company was not going to throw good money
after bad. Even his Keer-weer was contemptuously dismissed by Flinders,
who wrote “I could see nothing like a cape here.” The cape, like many
others on the charts of the early explorers was simply that projecting
appearance seen at the junction of any straight line of beach or coast with
the horizon, a point that recedes as fast as one thinks to approach it. Point
Hicks of Captain Cook’s Victorian landfall in 1770, belongs to the same
category.


Janszoon’s discovery was premeditated even though not understood.
There now comes a series of haphazard landfalls, which however did not
throw considerable light on the Australian Continent, though did not make
it any the more attractive. The old track around the Cape, then up the
eastern coast until the Arab route to the Maldives was reached, was extremely
slow. Eighteen months were taken from Amsterdam to Batavia. A
certain captain, named Brouwer, used common sense, and set off direct from
the Cape to Java. His voyage took six months. Even the somewhat con-
servative Company took notice- Its admirals were directed to take the
new route, and in 1616, ten years after the Duifken’s landfall, Dirk Hartog,
in the good ship Eendracht (or Unity) took such a southerly route that he
came upon various unknown islands which were uninhabited. A map
charted by Hessel Gerritz some vears later, has—“Tlandt van de Eendracht
opghedaen bij Dirk Hartogs met t’ Schip d’Eendracht in October Ao 1616.
There is no other record of this voyage than that found in 1696 by
Willem de Vlamingh on Dirk Hartog Island —a pewter plate nailed to a
post on which was scratched, “1616, den 25 October is hieraen gecomen het
ship D’Eendracht van Amsterdam de opperkopman Gils Miebais van Luck
shipper Dirck Hatich van Amsterdam de 27 dito teseil geghn na Bantum de
onder coepman Janstins de opper stuierman Pieter Doores van Bil anno
1616.” (on the 25th October the ship Eendracht (Unity) from Amsterdam
landed here, supercargo Giles Miebais of Liege, Captain Dirk Hartog of
Amsterdam, 27th do. sailed again for Bantam, the under supercargo Jan
Steyn, the chief pilot Peter Doores from Bienne). This plate taken bv
Vlamingh is now in the State Museum at Amsterdam. He left another in
its place, with an added inscription relating his own visit. Freycinet took
this one to France in LSI 7, where it vanished.
Hartog’s landfall was pure chance and so were those of the Zeewolf
on the coast about Dampier’s Archipelago and of the Mauritius, a bit farther
south near the Ashburton in the year 1618- In the year following, navigators
now well aware of these discoveries and probably hoping to chance upon the
Beach or Locach of Marco Polo, kept on further cast. In July, 1619. a fleet
of no less than eleven ships under supercargo Jakob Dedal were on their
way to Batavia running on an easterly course between 32 and 33 degrees,
somewhere 20 degrees south of their true course, when they sighted land
well south of Perth. Taking this to be the south land of Beach, Captain
Houtman unsuccessfully endeavoured to land; then turning north, beating
up against adverse winds, they came upon a collection of rocky islands and
reefs, which appear on the charts as Houtman’s Abrolhos or Rocks. For
some quaint reason most books state that abrolhos is Portuguese for “open
your eyes” in other words, “Keep a sharp look-out.” However admirable
the idea, the word simply means, in both Portuguese and Spanish, sharp
pointed rocks. It is just another of schoolday illusions dispelled- Houtman
sighted land again in 27 degrees south latitude, so that, what with Hartog
and Houtman and the others, it was now quite certain that an uninterrupted


numl.md coastline extended from somewhere south of Sumbawa to 33
degrees south. Some at least of the reports, made without landing were
distmctingly optimistic.
I hen in March 1622, the Leeuwin, a Dutch boat whose name has been
ma e immortal as Cape Leeuwin, got so far south that it made the coast
about Albany or King George Sound. In 1627, Hessel Gerritz, map maker
o the Dutch East Indies Company, published a map showing all these
discoveries, Eendracht Land, Dedal’s Land and Leeuwin Land. An English
s ip, the Inal, was wrecked on one of the islands of the Dampier Group.
The Masters of the Company, safe in Holland were perturbed, they wrote
overnor eneial Coen, the greatest of Dutch administrators, on the urgent
ece.sity of obtaining a full and accurate knowledge of the true bearing and
conformation of the said land. Coen drafted instructions which are admir-
able in their fulness, but which must have given the commander many a
earache. “You are to discover and survey all capes, forelands, bights,
lands, islands, rocks, reefs, sandbanks, depths; shallows; roads; winds and
currents and all that pertains to the same so as to be able to map out and
duly mark everything in its true latitude, longitude, bearing and confor-
mation. You will, moreover, go ashore in various places, and diligently
examine the coast in order to ascertain whether or no it is inhabited, the
nature of the land, and the people, their towns and inhabited villages, the
divisions of the Kingdom, their religion and policy, their wars, their rivers,
the shape of their vessels, their fisheries, commodities and manufactures, but
especially to inform yourselves, what minerals, such as gold, silver, tin, iron,
lead and copper, what precious stones, pearls, vegetables, animals and fruits,
these lands yield and produce.” That was not all. Careful journals were
to be kept so that due and perfect knowledge of the situation and the natural
features of these regions, might yield some return to the Company for its
outlay. After naming any discovery formal possession was to be taken by
the erection of a stone column on which were to be recorded in bold legible
characters, the year, the month and the day of the week and the date, the
persons In whom and the hour of the day when such possession had been
taken. They were to endeavour to enter into friendly relations and to make
covenants with all such kings and nations as they happened to meet with
and to try to prevail upon them to place themselves under the protection of
the Dutch Government. Special search for gold was enjoined, as well as
for sandalwood, nutmegs, cloves and other spices.
The first venture was nearly being the last. Jans Carstenszoon was
despatched in 1623, with the Pera and the Arnhem, to follow up the dis-
coveries of Janszoon in the Duifken. They sailed until they reached the
mouth of the Gilbert River, well south of the latitude of Wellesley Island-
Here the Arnhem deserted, at least so Carsterszoon reported. More probably
blown out of their course they made for home; but on that course, they


discovered Groote Eylandt and named the mainland, Arnhem Land, which
designation it still retains. Carstenszoon made a careful survey of the
eastern shores of the gulf. He captured after a violent struggle in which
some were shot, one of the aboriginals, whom he took to Java. Still, in spite
of special kindness and fair semblance, complains Carstenszoon, thev
received the Dutchmen as enemies everywhere. He is responsible for the
first detailed and definite report on Australia- It is not flattering. Ihe land
between 13 degrees and 17 degrees 8 minutes, is a barren and arid tract,
without any fruit trees, and producing nothing fit for the use of man; it is
low-lying and flat without hills or mountains, in many places overgrown
with brushwood and stunted wild trees; it has not much fresh water and
what little there is has to be collected in pits dug for the purpose; there is
an utter absence of bays and inlets with the exception of a few bights not
sheltered from the sea wind ; it has numerous salt rivers extending into the
interior, across which the natives drag their wives and children by means of
dry sticks and boughs of trees. The natives are, in general, utter barbarians,
coal black; they are utterly unacquainted with gold, silver, tin, iron, lead
and copper, nor do they know anything about nutmegs, cloves and pepper.
It may safely be concluded that they are poor and abject wretches, caring
mainly for bits of iron and strings of beads. Their weapons are shields,
assegais and callaways of the length of one-and-a-half fathoms made of light
wood and cane, some with fish bones and others with human bones attached
to their tops; thev are verv expert in throwing the said weapons by means
of a piece of wood half a fathom in length with a small hook tied to it in
front which thev place upon the callawav or assegai. In our judgment this
is the most arid and barren region that could be found anywhere on the
earth. The inhabitants too are the most wretched and poorest creatures I
have ever seen. And thev were cannibals.” All this did not exactly serve
to recompense the Company for its outlay.
No more official expeditions were to be undertaken for some time;
but the discoverers perforce were still to be heard from. The Gulden
Zeepaerd (the Golden Seahorse or Hippocampus) under Francois Thyssen
having as a passenger Pieter Nuyts, one of the Company’s directors, kept
too far south on her easting from the Cape, and having reached 133 degrees
east longitude, made north striking the mainland at Fowler’s Bay. The
islands of St. Peter and St. Francis, guarding that harbour, were named,
probably after the Director and the Commander. Return was then made
along the coast to Cape Leeuwin, and Batavia reached in April 1627 after a
ten months’ voyage from Europe. There is no record of this voyage other
than the charts, which show the Land of P. Nuyts discovered by the Gulden
Zeepaerd of Middelburgh (Island of Walcheren, Zeeland) on the 26th
January 1627, a day of some significance in the Story of Australia.
This would end the talc of discovery were it not for the famous voyage
of Pelsart in the Batavia and the Cornells mutiny. Pelsart in his pinnace


'O) aged to Java for succour, saw the whole coast at close quarters. His
teport settled its prospects of colonisation. \et there is something of
interest, of great interest. Pelsart introduced to the world for the first time,
the Kangaroo family; “a species of cat which are very strange creatures;
they are about the size of a hare, their head resembling that of a civet-cat;
the fore-paws are very short, about the length of a finger ; its hind-legs are
upwards of half an ell and it walks on these alone.”


T ASM AN. THE LAST OF THE DUTCHMEN.
And over the loping leagues of green
A lone land waits with a hope serene.
CHAPTER VI.
SOME fifteen years were to elapse. Anthony Van Diemen had worked
his way up to the Governor-Generalship. Consulting a well-known
pilot, Frans Visscher, Van Diemen equipped an expedition with an equally
well-known captain, Abel Janszoon Tasman, in command. He was given
the ship “ Heemskerck,” with sixty men and the flute, the “ Zeehaen,” fifty
men. The general plan as laid down in the Governor-General’s directions
was, to make a start from the Isle of Mauritius, thence after victualling to sail
south to the unknown South Land or to the high latitude of 54 degrees,
whichever came first. Then he was to take advantage of the trade wfinds
and sail east to the longitude of the eastern extremity of New Guinea, or of
the Solomon Islands, about 155 degrees; this accomplished, a northerly
direction to the Solomons was indicated with more than a hint that the
discovery of a short route to Chili was highly desirable. The fleet set out
on the 14th August, 1642, Mauritius was left on the Bth October and on the
6th November they attained their highest latitude, 49 degrees, all in the open
seas. The weather was so abominable that a council of officers was called on
the Heemskerck; the weather w r as too rough for those on the Zeehaen to
join. Visscher put forward a new plan, which was, to return to 44 degrees,
to follow that parallel to the 150 th longitude, then to go north to 40 degrees
and make their easting on it. The proposal was adopted, after writing the
scheme and enclosing it in a waterproof case which was dropped overboard
for the Zeehaen to pick up, whose officers signified their approval by signal.
This course if followed rigidly would have led to the missing of Tasmania
altogether; but Tasman actually kept about the 42nd line. On the 24th
November, the rugged west coast land behind Macquarie Harbour was
espied. The two outstanding mountains they saw have since been called
Heemskirk and Zeehan. Tasman missed, by bad weather, the Derwent and
Hobart waters and going up the east coast, landed at Prince of Wales Bay.
No contact was made with the native inhabitants; no investigation as to the
insularity or otherwise of this new land was made. All that was done was
to leave the name, Anthony Van Diemen’s Land on the map. Tasman then
resumed his easterly course, keeping to the 42nd degree line, struck New
Zealand, where he did come in contact, or conflict, with the Maoris, and going
north by Tonga and through the Fiji’s, went home by the northern shores
of New Guinea. Save for the mapping of the southern part of Tasmania,
the expedition was resultless, as far as we are concerned. No part of the
Australian mainland was even sighted.


Van Diemen, who had an insatiable hunger for discovery was extremely
displeased, but not dismayed. Tasman and Visscher however were again
chosen. This time search was to begin at New Guinea to ascertain finally if
it were part of the Australian mainland —-Torres’ voyage was unknown to
the Dutch—and then to test the possibility of the Gulf of Carpentaria
extending through the continent with a final determination of the coast line
right round to Eendracht Land. This voyage was performed in 1644. The
1 orres Strait still was shown on the charts as a deep but shallow inlet, the
Drooge Bocht; the Gulf of Carpentaria was shown as such; Arnhem Land
and the coast line including Bathurst and Melville Islands, taken to be part
of the continent, were well surveyed as far south as the Tropic of Capricorn.
This sums up the result of Tasman’s second voyage though Dirk Hartog’s
Island was not reached. Dutch exploration has come to its end. The
Board of Directors were sick of the continual expense of these exploring
voyages, being convinced that no slaves, spices or gold were to be obtained
in New Holland. Their eyes were fixed on the Spice Islands themselves
with occasional glances towards Formosa and Japan. Besides, Van Diemen,
the mainspring of the whole concern died. The position was—New Hol-
land was an island, of enormous extent it is true, but still an island. Its
coast line was sufficiently well known on the north, west and south ; the
eastern shores which could not extend further than the 160 th east meridian
remained unknown; that was all.


CAPTAIN COOK* THE GREAT
How shall we honour them, the brave
Who sailed the world around for us,
Who dared the wrath of wind and wave
And fought and starved and drowned for us.
CHAPTER VII.
'VIEW HOLLAND, for now the Lone South Land was no longer nameless,
was to slumber on another century. Dampier’s visits in 1688 and
1699, added nothing to our geographical knowledge: but they did enrich our
literature with some oft quoted phrases. His description of the natives of
North-\\ estern Australia, has become a classic. “They are the miserablest
people in the world. The Hodmadods (Hottentots) of Monomatapa, though
a nasty people, yet for wealth are as gentlemen to these; who have no houses
and skin garments, sheep, poultry and fruits of the earth, ostrich eggs, etc.,
as the Hodmadods have; and setting aside their human shape, they differ
but little from brutes. They are tall, straight-bodied and thin, with small
long limbs. They have great heads, round foreheads and great brows. Their
eyelids are always half-closed to keep the flies out of the eyes; they being so
troublesome here that no fanning will keep them off, they will creep into
one’s nostrils, and mouth too, if the lips are not shut very close . . . They
have great bottle-noses, pretty full lips and wide mouths. The two fore-
teeth of their upper jaw are wanting in all of them. . . Neither have they
any beards. They are long-visaged and of very unpleasing aspect, having
not one graceful feature in their faces. Their hair is short, black and curled
like that of the negroes; and not long and lank like the common Indians.
The colour of their skins, both of their faces and the rest of their body is
coal black like that of the negroes of Guinea. Their costume consists of
a piece of the rind of a tree and a handful of grass or bough . . . They have
no houses, but live in the open air without any covering; the earth being
their bed and the heavens their canopy. Their only food is a small sort of
fish which they get by making weirs of stone across little coves or branches
of the sea. For the earth affords them no food at all. There is neither
herb, root, pulse nor any sort of grain to eat that we saw; nor any sort of
bird or beast that they can catch, having no instruments wherewithal to do
so. Their weapons were wooden swords and a sort of lance.”
In 1768, the astronomers predicted a transit of Venus; the Royal
Society petitioned the Government to send a ship there to observe the
phenomenon. The Government agreeing, the Admiralty selected James
Cook as an officer possessing the necessary qualities of mind and knowledge
of navigation and astronomy, with him went a young man of means, Joseph


Banks of Revesby, Lincolnshire, who provided the scientific equipment. He
took in his suite, Dr. Solander the botanist, three artists, a draughtsman and
some servants. Banks was a great friend of Lord Sandwich, a neighbouring
county man and what was more to the point, First Lord of the Admiralty.
Through his influence, the expedition was largely composed to suit Banks’
views. A\\ hitby coal barque of 368 tons named the Earl of Pembroke and
cat-built, that is of shallow draft with round bluff bows, was purchased and
renamed the Endeavour. The choice, which was due to Cook, was excellent.
On the 26th August, 1768, the Endeavour set out; the transit of Venus was
timed for the 3rd June of the following }’ear. It was not until the 13th April,
1769, that Cook arrived at Tahiti. He named it Otaheite, completely ignor-
ing the name of Cythera given by its discoverer, Bougainville. There was
just time to prepare for the observations, which were successfully carried
out in perfect sunshine. The Admiralty instructions to Cook were to the
effect that on completion of his astronomical observations, he was to sail
westerly along the 40th parallel or a little south of it; and to survey New
Zealand and determine whether it formed part of a great southern continent
as Dalrymple and many other arm-chair geographers postulated. Having
determined that problem, Cook after taking counsel with his officers, decided
to continue his westerly route to New Holland in order to explore its eastern
parts.
The insularity—in three parts like all Gaul —of New Zealand being
settled, Cook left there on the Ist April, 1770. On the 20th—the correct
date, the logged one having to be corrected for the crossing of the 180 th
meridian and the nautical day’s habit of beginning at noon—Zachary Hicks
the senior lieutenant, observed land. It was the Victorian coast near Cape
Everard. The most southerly point of land in sight was named after the
lieutenant; but this point, Point Hicks, is of the Cape Keer Weer character,
and although furious controversy has raged—on strictly academic lines —as
to its identity, there is no chance of its being properly placed upon the map.
Cook had, by reason of continued southerly winds, been carried somewhat to
the northward and thus narrowly escaped establishing the insularity of Van
Diemen’s Land and the existence of the strait which Bass was to discover,
28 years later and which was to immortalize his name. Cook following
course decided upon, turned north and followed the coast line past Gabo
Island, attempting unsuccessfully at times, to land, until Botany Bay, at first
named Stingray Bay, was reached. Here a week was spent, Banks and
Solander in their element, loading the vessel with botanical specimens.
Port Jackson was passed, sufficient of it being observed to justify the name,
port, and the clapping of the name of a secretary of the Admiralty after it.
On the 13th May, Cook anchored in Bustard Bay and made his second land-
ing. Much bothered and perplexed by the numerous reefs and shoals, he
stood on his northerly course until on the 11th June, the much-feared came
to pass. The Endeavour struck on a coral reef. Though badly damaged,


she was got off and safely careened in the mouth of the Kndeavour River,
where now Cook Town stands.
Repairs were effected and after a stay of over a month, Cook con-
tinued his homeward journey. Banks and Solander and indeed the whole
complement carried away nothing but pleasant recollections of their enforced
stay. Friendly relations were for the first time established with the natives.
Although Cook examined them carefully to compare them with Dampier s
western men—Banks endeavoured to rub through the crust of dirt on one
to ascertain the real colour of his skin —he still held they were apparently the
most wretched people on the earth, though their features were fai from
disagreeable and their speech soft and tunable. He recognised however that
they were ‘‘far happier in reality than Kuropeans, being wholly unacquainted
with the necessary conveniences so much sought after in Kurope, they are
happy in not knowing the use of them.” Cook got through the maze of the
Barrier Reef, once going outside but soon returning, and reached Batav ia on
the 11th October, 1770. The geographers’ doubts as to the strait between
New Guinea and New Holland were for ever set at rest. Banks reported
unfavorably on reaching the home land in July, 1771. His most favorable
summing up. ‘‘Upon the whole, New Holland, though in every respect tne
most barren country I have seen, is not so bad but that between the pro-
duction of sea and land, a company who had the misfortune to be ship-
wrecked upon it might support themselves even by the resources we have
seen ; undoubtedly a longer stay and a visit to different parts would discover
many more.” Cook, probably through his early farming associations, had a
clearer vision. “This eastern side is not that barren and undesirable country
that Dampier and others have described the western side to be. We are to
consider that we see this country in the pure state of nature; the industry of
man has had nothing to do with any part of it, and yet we find all things that
nature has bestowed upon it in a flourishing state. In this extensive country
it can never be doubted but what most sorts of grain, fruit, roots, etc., of
every kind would flourish here were they once brought hither, planted and
cultivated by the hands of industry, and here is provender for more cattle
at all seasons of the year than ever can be brought into the country.” Not
enthusiastic, all this; but good sound common sense all the same.


THE COMING OF THE ENGLISH
And Australasia float with flag unfurled
A new Britannia in another world.
CHAPTER VIII.
CIR JOSEPH BANKS—he was made a baronet in 1781 and a K.C.B. in
1795 after being President of the Royal Society —has been entitled the
father of Australia; but the title more probably belongs to James Mario
Matra, or Magra which has a more familiar sound as he was first known.
Banks certainly had suggested a penal colony at Botany Bay in 1779, but it
ended at a suggestion. Matra who had been a midshipman with Cook on
the first or Australian voyage in 1783, laid before the British Cabinet a
proposal for establishing a settlement in New South Wales, in some measure
to atone for the loss of our American Colonies, in which he had been born.
More optimistic than the rest he added “Part of it (New South Wales) lies in
a climate parallel to the Spice Islands and is well fitted for the production
of that valuable commodity, as well as the sugar cane, tea, coffee, silk, cotton,
indigo, tobacco and other articles of commerce that have been so advan-
tageous to the maritime powers of Europe.”
None of the schemes put forward were welcome. There was much
more important things happening nearer home. Peace was being made
with France, but peace could not be given that distressed country; the fore-
shadows of the Revolution were being cast. As usual with Government
matters, urgency and not expediency gained the day. The American
Colonies, just lost and justly so, had been founded by convicts and they had
continued to receive, to their own profit and that of the contractors who
conveyed them across the Atlantic and sold them to the planters. Great
Britain had to keep her erring children and keep meant cost, running into
tens of thousands a year. An experiment was made on the African West
Coast at Gambia with disastrous results. Ihe Banks-Matra proposals w 7 ere
again considered and partially adopted.
The political history of Australia now 7 begins. It w 7 as August, 1786;
Botany Bay was the site for the new 7 colony; but the colonists were to be
convicts and convicts only. Lord Sydney, at all times a true follower of
the “better not” school, turned a deaf ear to the pathetic appeals of the
American loyalists for the permission to found a new nation, with settlers
“of the better sort.” No vision of the future came to him. For founding
the Australian Commonwealth, no credit can be awarded him, or his col-
leagues. Its greatest city and harbour bear his name, that is enough. As Dr.
Woods puts it—“ Thus born in sin and shapen in iniquity, the first Australian


colony came ignominously to \\ e look in vain in speeches and writ-
ings of politicians for a sign that they were aware of the momentous
importance of their opportunity, or that they were moved by any desire
nobler than the desire to get rid of sinful and diseased people whose sin and
disease were the consequence of their own misrule. . . Nor do abler politicians
than Sydney appear to have had deeper thoughts. . . And yet in the paltry and
evil scheme devised by Lord Sydney, there were thoughts that made possible
the future growth of nobler ideas.”
The story of the settlement of our continent may now begin. It is a
story of pioneering, of individual effort rather than that of an official organi-
sation. On the contrary, the story is one of long-continued conflict with the
authorities, to obtain the privilege of success or failure by the unaided and
unrestricted efforts of the settlers, according to their own lights. Efforts at
orderly settlement, at controlled development, all failed; the common-sense
of the people ruled and succeeded. T here are many who feel that a return
to self-reliance would be welcome now - . Of course, there were some who
had visions. Erasmus Darwin, grandfather of Charles of the origin of
species, wrote that prophetic poem:
Where Sydney Cove her lucid bosom swells
Courts her young navies and the storm repels . . .
There shall broad streets their stately wall extend
The circus widen and the crescent bend;
There, rayed from cities o’er the cultured land,
Shall bright canals and solid roads expand.
Embellished villas crown the landscape scene,
Farms wave with gold and orchards blush between;
While with each breeze, approaching vessels glide
And northern treasures dance on every tide.
The decision to send a fleet to Cook’s New South Wales, meant a
search for a leader. Sydney, though not at the Admiralty, Lord How - e was
the First Lord, chose a nautical man, and a good choice it was. Arthur
Phillip born in London forty-eight years before, began his naval career at
Greenwich at the age of thirteen. He had some years of experience in the
Mercantile Marine. By the time he was twenty-three, he had reached the
grade of lieutenant in the navy. He w - as commander at forty; captain three
years later - rear-admiral at sixty-three and vice-admiral at seventy, an honour
he held for six years. He married at the age of twenty-five, while still
lieutenant, and for a time lived the life of a country gentleman at Lynd-
hurst in the New Forest. When Spain fought wdth Portugal in 1774, Phillip
volunteered to fight for the latter, obtaining the rank of post captain. When
four years later, France declared war on England, he threw - up his Portu-
guese commission, returned to England, was appointed at first to the com-
mand of the Basilisk, and then was appointed post-captain of the frigate
Ariadne. Later on he obtained the Europe. In 1748, he was again on


half pay. His experience in voyages to Greenland, America and the West
Indies, probably led to his selection, though the command of a convoy of
transport convict ships to the opposite side of the globe and to a country of
sterile sands and hostile natives, was probably not considered a desirable
office and was not eagerly sought after. No one, official that is, foresaw
the enormous importance of his mission.
The selection of Captain Phillip soon justified itself. Phillip was a
man in a thousand. He immediately, the 24th October, 1786, hoisted his
flag on the Sirius, 520 tons, somewhat aptly named as the dog-star has always
been esteemed the bringer of heat. Then began a time of toil. He had to
do something without a precedent; to provide for some fifteen hundred
people for a voyage of about eight months; to land them in a unknown
country, to house and feed them there; and to establish law and order where
none existed. Such things as saddles for exploratory expeditions, gifts for
native chiefs, tools of all sorts, seeds and plants of all kinds, clothing
building materials, and in fact everything that one finds nowadays in
the catalogue of a universal provider, from a needle to an anchor in short
had to be obtained. Unfortunately, from Phillip’s point of view but perhaps
fortunately as things ultimately turned out, he was not allowed to choose
men with skill as artisans or with a knowledge of farming. Finally on the
13th May, 1787, Phillip sailed as Commodore of the First Fleet, with his
dormant commission as Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief in his
despatch case. With the Sirius were the armed brig, Supply, 170 tons, the
transports, Alexander, 452 tons, Lady Penrhyn, 333 tons; Charlotte, 335
tons; Scarborough, 430 tons; Friendship, 274 tons and Prince of Wales, 350
tons and the store ships, Fishburn, 378 tons; Golden Grove, 375 tons and
Borrowdale, 275 tons. The total tonnage was almost 4,000. There were
nearly 800 convicts, of whom 200 were women. There were 200 marines
with their officers, twenty-eight of whom were married; at any rate that
number of wives with seventeen children, accompanied them. All told, from
Governor Phillip down to the baby, there were some 1500 souls.
With Phillip were Robert Ross, Lieutenant-Governor and Com-
mandant of Marines (he returned to England in 1791) ; John Hunter, captain
of the Sirius; John White, Surgeon who returned in 1794; David Collins,
Secretary and Judge-advocate, who later was unsuccessful in settling Port
Phillip but successful at Hobart; and Watkin Tench, Captain-Lieutenant of
Marines. All five published narratives of the early days of the settlement
to the great satisfaction of the historian. Others of importance were the
Rev. Richard Johnson, the Chaplain (he returned in 1800) ; Augustus Alt,
Surveyor-General who died in the colony in 1815; Lieutenant Philip Gidley
King, one of the most prominent of our early citizens; Lieutenant Heffiry
Lidgbird Ball in command of the Supply; Second Lieutenant William Dawes,
Australia’s first astronomer, ethnologist and scientist (he returned in 1791, a


sequel to a quarrel with Phillip) ; and last but certainly not least, Lieutenant
George Johnston, aide-de-camp to Phillip, who was to figure prominently
in the later administrative troubles.
Phillip showed that not only was he a great organiser, but a greater
navigator. He took his nondescript fleet of eleven sail to Rio de Janeiro
pausing at week at Santa Cruz, Teneriffe, in three months. There he loaded
115 pipes of rum, an ominous action—rum was to be the greatest hindrance
to the progress of the new colony —15 pipes of wine for the sick, fruit and
plants, such as coffee, indigo, cotton, and cochineal, which it was thought
would suit the Sydney climate. Rio was left early in September and the
Cape of Good Hope in the middle of November. Here the stay of a month
enabled a large choice of plants to be made. Coco-beans, bananas, oranges,
lemons, tamarinds, guava-seeds, fig trees, bamboos, sugar-cane, vines, quinces
apples, pears, strawberries, oaks, myrtles, and as grain, rice, wheat, barley
and maize. Of the stock taken on board at the Cape, forty-four sheep, four
cows, one bull calf, one stallion, twenty-eight pigs, four goats, with some
turkeys and fowls were landed. Several of the officers, who had visions of
smiling homesteads, also took on stock. One went further, he bought a
piano, Australia’s first. It later came into the possession of the Macarthur
family. The sheep may be ruled off the account; they all died in a very
short while by dingoes and other causes. More will be said on the stock
question later.
Shortly after departing from the Cape, Phillip transferred to the
Supply with King and Dawes. He took this step, the Sirius being a slug-
gish sailer, hoping to reach Botany Bay first, in time to make a thorough in-
spection. Although the coast of New South Wales was sighted on the 3rd
January, 1788, it was not until the 18th that Botany Bay was reached. With
him were the Alexander, Scarborough and Friendship. Two days later the
Sirius with the balance of the convoy came in. It was truly a wonderful
voyage. The general health of all, especially of the convicts, was better
than on the fleet’s departure. Thirty-two deaths only occurred on the
voyage and two-thirds of these happened before Santa Cruz was reached, that
is in the first month of the eight months’ voyage. Daniel Southwell, a mid-
shipman, wrote; —“The Governor is certainly one of a thousand, and is
very considerate in everything and extraordinarily clever in every contrivance
and method to render the ship healthy and airy.” Everyone was in the
highest spirits on landing; but disappointments soon succeeded. Phillip
reported; “The best situation that offered was near Point Sutherland where
there was a small run of good water; but the ground near it, as well as a
considerable part of the higher ground, was spongy and the ships could not
approach this part of the Bay. Several good situations offered for a small
number of people; but none that appeared calculated for our numbers, and
where the stores and provisions could be landed without a great loss of


time. Ihe Bay itself was not safe even for vessels of moderate draught,
a heavy sea rolling in with an easterly wind.
On the 22nd January—Phillip lost no time—the Governor went
round in a boat to examine Port Jackson, of which the entrance only had
been seen when Cook sailed past eighteen years before. If it was not
satisfactory, Broken Bay was to be looked into; but there was no need,
1 hillip reported that he “had the satisfaction of finding the finest harbour in
the world, in which a thousand sail of the time may ride in the most perfect
security, the different coves were examined with all possible expedition. I
fixed on the one that had the best spring of water, and in which the ships
can anchor so close to the shore that at a very small expense quays may
be made at which the largest ships may unload. This cove I honoured with
name Sydney. Phillip intended to call the township Albion: but usage
early made it Sydney. Returning after a close examination, lasting two
days, of all the coves, Phillip found the Boussole and the Astrolabe under
Pa Perouse, beating into Botany Bay. He was however too impressed to
get to Sydney Cove to pay much attention to his visitors, who stayed in the
Bay a little over six weeks, leaving behind them their chaplain, Pere le
Receveur, who died in February. A monument marks his, the first
European, interment on the continent.
The Fleet moved into Port Jackson on the 26th January, the date
now observed as Australia’s National Day. The Union Jack was raised on
a staff at the site of the present Government House; volleys were fired by
the marines and in true British fashion, toasts were drunk to the King, the
Royal Family and the New Country. In a little over a week, all were landed.
The Chaplain held the first religions service in Australia in Macquarie Place
on the 3rd February, the Bible and Prayer Book then used being now in St.
Phillips Church, Sydney. On the 7th February all hands were mustered.
The Judge Advocate read the Governor’s Commission and the formal pro-
clamations of the Colony. This, the 7th February, is the real official birth-
day of Australia.


EARLY TROUBLES*
Back the clustered scrub was driven and the sun fell on the lands
And the mighty stumps were riven ’tween his bare, brown, corded hands.
CHAPTER IX.
ALL were very busy. There are several accounts of these first days, the
worst first. Major Ross, a thoroughly disgruntled growler tells us that
Phillip ordered a number of convicts to be landed every morning to fell trees
and construct saw pits. Tents were erected, some as hospitals, the sick list
constantly increasing owing to the ravages of scurvy. The spirits were bad;
the rum in particular being extremely offensive; still its discontinuance would
have been disastrous. The country was impossible. Ross considered it
would cost less to feed the convicts on turtle and venison in London than to
transport them to Port Jackson. Collins writes: The spot chosen for this
purpose was at the head of the cove, near a run of fresh w'ater which stole
silently through the very thick wood, the stillness of which had then for the
first time since the Creation, been interrupted by the rude sound of the
labourer’s axe and the downfall of its ancient inhabitants—a stillness and
tranquility which from that day were to give place to the voice of labour, the
confusion of camps and towns, and the busy hum of its new possessors.
Captain Tench said : To an indifferent spectator the scene would have been
highly interesting and amusing. In one place, a party cutting down the
woods; a second, setting up a blacksmith’s forge; a third, dragging along a
load of stones or provisions; here an officer pitching his marquee with a
detachment of troops on one side of him and a cook's fire blazing up on the
other.
It was soon discovered that the Colony would not be self-supporting.
Phillip had some more organising to do; but in reporting on this and other
aspects of the new settlement, he opined that he did not doubt but that this
country would prove the most valuable acquisition Great Britain ever made.
This opinion has been fully justified since. Building was brisk. Strangely
enough the first undertaken was the Observatory on Dawes Point. A wharf
was constructed. Phillip drew up an admirable plan for the town. “In lay-
ing out which I have endeavoured to place all public buildings in situations
that will be eligible hereafter, and to give sufficient share of ground for the
stores, hospitals, etc., to be enlarged as may be necessary in the future. The
principal streets are placed so as to admit a free circulation of air and are two
hundred feet wide. ... If it meets with your Lordship’s approbation the


land w ill be granted with a clause that will ever prevent more than one house
being built on the allotment which will be sixty feet in front and one hundred
and fifty feet in depth. 1 his will preserve uniformity in the buildings, pre-
vent narrow streets, and the many inconveniences which the increase of
inhabitants would otherwise occasion hereafter.”
However, Sydney was laid out, even if not entirely in accordance with
Phillip’s plan. Phillip reached out; a new settlement was formed in
November at Rose Hill, now Parramatta, where a farm was laid out and
cleared. It was a farm without a farmer. Attempts at cultivation yielded
promise but little else. The cows were allowed to and no one was cap-
able of tracking and recovering them. Phillip was at his wits’ end. Stores
were rapidly diminishing; all depended upon the store ships arriving as
arranged. Meanwhile, King was sent to Norfolk Island, in the “Supply”,
with a party of convicts, but no help was received from that quarter. Lord
Howe Island was discovered. In September, 1788, a census showed 933
inhabitants. The “Lady Juliana” store ship arrived in company with the
Justinian in July, 1790, and for the moment, the dread of famine was lifted.
In 1791, nearly four years after its foundation, the New Colony began
to feel its feet. Some of the transported men had gained their freedom and
wanted to go on the land. James Ruse obtained the grant of a piece of land
in December, 1789, and made a success of his farm. He goes down to fame
as Australia s first man on the land. There were others. Tench, who pub-
lished a second work on the settlement, waxes rather sarcastic. “In a colony
which contains only a few hundred hovels, built of twigs and mud, we feel
consequential enough to talk of a treasury, an admiralty, a public library
(mirabile dictu) and many other similar edifices, which are to form part of a
magnificent square.” Thirteen emancipists had been given allotments of
land at Prospect Hill; some of them were determined to succeed, and did.
The settlement at Sydney had long been considered only as a depot for stores;
there were there a few scattered old huts and some unsuccessful gardens. All
the strength then, the end of 1791, had been concentrated at Rose Hill.
Actually there were over 1600 persons there and 1200 only at the Cove, offi-
cials and men and women at work in the factories. There were about as
many at Norfolk Island, making the whole population of New South Wales,
some 4,000 people. At the end of the following year, 1792, Phillip who had
been suffering greatly in his health, returned to England on leave, having
laid the foundations of the greatest of Britain’s overseas dominions and hav-
ing laid them wisely and well. As he put it in one of his notes in preparing
for the equipment of the fleet: “I would not wish convicts to lav the founda-
tion of an empire. . . . The laws of this country will of course be introduced
in New South Wales and there is one that I would wish to take place from


the moment His Majesty’s forces take possession of the country; that there
can be no slavery in a free land and consequently no slaves.” As we have
seen, Phillip had had some experience in the West Indies. He intended to
return if health permitted; but it was not to be. He died at Bath on the 31st
August, 1814, and was buried in the Church of St. Nicholas at Bathampton.
There were worse things than famines or floods. In 1790, owing to
continuous complaints from the officers and the men of the Marines, the home
Government decided to form a special New South Wales Corps. Major
Grose was the unfortunate choice for its chief and organiser. Although men
of the Corps arrived in the year mentioned, the Major did not reach Sydney
until the 14th February, 1792. He became administrator as Lieutenant-
Governor by virtue of his commission and during his term of two years,
terminating on the 16th December, 1794, he did his best to undo the good
work done by his predecessor. The civilian magistracy was abolished; the
employment of convict labour to grow food for general use was done away
with and the convicts assigned to his officers to work for their profit ; rations
distributed in times of dearth instead of being on an equality basis were half
only for convicts; land grants were given haphazard and all Phillips’ carefully
conceived scheme of town planning destroyed; and that curse of early Aus-
tralian days, the rum traffic, was introduced.
Captain William Paterson, who succeeded Grose as Commander of the
Corps and consequently as Lieutenant-Governor, did nothing in particular.
The misdeeds of Grose were not intensified, but no attempt at reform was
made. He simply carried on until the arrival of Australia’s second Governor.
Captain John Hunter, on the 7th September, 1795. At once, Hunter who held
strong views on officers holding His Majesty’s Commissions engaging in
trade, became embroiled with the New South Wales Corps. His principal
opponent was Captain John Macarthur, to whom, however much Australia has
to admit indebtedness for his services in the wool industry, the principal
blame for the ensuing troubles must be allotted. Hunter endeavoured to
restore the civil magistracy. He did bring out a number of free settlers and
thus set Australia’s feet upon the upward path of primary production ; but he
failed to curb the activities of the Rum Corps, as it became known. Mac-
arthur, whose father was in the Jacobite rising of 1745, was a born fighter.
Though championing the cause of the Corps, he was concerned in and gener-
ally the origin of many internal dissensions within that body. At anv rate,
he was able to nullify all Hunter’s efforts at reform and reduce expenditure.
Finally Hunter was recalled, not for his reforming acts but for his failure to
give them effect. During his regime some exploration was effected, Bass and
Flinders in particular, and the Hunter River Coal Mines were opened. King,
Captain Philip Gidley King, who while Lieutenant-Governor at. Norfolk


Island was one of the worse sufferers from Grose’s ill-nature and malevolence,
succeeded Hunter in 1800; but he, though fortified with extremely definite
instiuctions from the British Government, could not make headway against
the combined opposition of the Corps. His retirement in 1806, at his own
desire he had in fact almost begged for permission for three years before
being relieved led to the most exciting and revelatory episode in our early
history.
But before dealing with the Bligh rebellion, some description of events
outside of the military and administrative squabbles may be given. Continu-
ous efforts were made by officers from Governor Phillip downwards to
penetrate the hinterland from Sydney but with little effect. King writing at
the end of his term of office was extremely pessimistic as to future possibi-
lities. As far as i espects the extension of agriculture beyond the first range
of mountains, that is an idea that must be given up. As the rocks to the west
of that range wear a most forbidding aspect which men, animals, birds and
vegetation have been ever strangers to, a better proof of which may not be
adduced than the remark of one of Caley’s party in returning, who exclaimed
on seeing two solitary crows that ‘they had lost their way’.” Still Bass had
discovered the strait named after him and with it the southern coast line of
Victoria, a discovery pregnant with future possibilities. Flinders’ dis-
coveries, with those of Grant and Murray had further enlightened the authori-
ties on the possibilities of Victoria. An attempt under Governor Collins, for
the advocate-general of Phillips’ time had reached that eminence, had, for-
tunately from a \ ictorian point of view been a failure; but a failure that led
to the establishment of \ an Diemen’s Land, or Tasmania as it was always
fondly called by its settlers, a name officially adopted by the authorities at the
cessation of transportation in 1853. King’s regime was also distinguished by
the foundation of Australia’s wealth, the wool industry, by his chief opponent,
Captain John Macarthur and by an equally important event, the commence-
ment of Australian journalism. King assisted George Howe to bring out the
“Sydney Gazette” and the New South Wales Standing Orders in 1803.
The Governor following King, William Bligh, a Cornish man, had
experienced more than most, the adventurous side of life. Brought up to the
sea, he entered the navy at eight years of age, and before he was eighteen was
appointed Master of the “Resolution,” one of Cook’s ships in his third and
fatal voyage. A few years more and he became a lieutenant, taking part in
the Dogger Bank and Gibraltar engagements. The command of the
“Bounty,” 215 tons was entrusted to him in December, 1787. with instructions
to go to the Society Islands, Tahiti, to procure breadfruit plants (artocarpus
incisa) to be transplanted in the West Indies. Accounts differ; but there
can be no doubt that island life, even if it meant breaking with all that the


men had been trained to respect, was so alluring in comparison with the
wretched life on board, aggravated by discipline which can only be classed as
tyrannical that either mutiny or desertion, was the inevitable outcome. It
gave Bligh an opportunity to cover himself with well-merited fame. Turned
adrift by the mutineers headed by the senior master’s mate, Fletcher Chris-
tian Bligh with eighteen men, all petty officers, in the ship s launch, some 23
feet in length. In that open skiff, Bligh navigated 3600 miles in 44 days, pass-
ing through the dreaded Torres Straits to reach Koepang, since famous in
aviation records, in Timor. One man, Nelson the botanist, died there and
three others in Batavia which they reached by ship. Most of the mutineers
remained on Tahiti, where thev were seized and taken to London under most
brutal conditions by Captain Edwards of the “Pandora.” Several w r ere
hanged. Christian with eight companions and a number of Tahitans of both
sexes, sailed to Pitcairn Island wffiere they remained, unknown, until 1809.
In 1856, the descendants to the number of 200 were transferred to Norfolk
Island whence all convicts had been shifted to Tasmania. There they still
remain.
Bligh by reason of his experience and achievemetns, was considered by
Sir Joseph Banks to be the man for the job. On his recommendation, he got
the appointment. On his voyage out, in a fleet of transports convoyed by the
“Porpoise,” he had a little mutiny of his own superseding Captain Short of
that ship. Short was subsequently honorably acquitted. Bligh landed at
Sydney on the 6th. August, 1806 and w r as soon embroiled with the Corps.
Macarthur was again prominent. He certainly w r as no longer an officer having
resigned in England over a year before; but his influence and friendship with
the officers were strong. Sydney, or New South Wales, celebrated its twen-
tieth birthday, 26th January, 1808, by deposing Bligh—so the operation was
described by the Corps—and installing Major George Johnston as adminis-
trator. Colonel Paterson, the Senior Military officer in Australia, then at
Port Dalrymple, refused to interfere. Colonel Foveaux on his arrival from
England in July took up the reins of office, handing them over six months later
to Paterson. Bligh remained in custody until February, 1809, when he left
for England. Johnston was cashiered and Macarthur was forbidden to return
to New South Wales for eight years.


THE MILITARY REGIME.
cs. \ our never-never country’—yes, your ‘edge of cultivation’
And ‘no sense in going further' till I crossed the range to see
(iod forgive me. No. 1 didn t. It’s God’s present to our nature.
Anybody might have found it but—His whisper came to Me.
CHAPTER X.
1^0 UR naval men had been Governors and their stories were of continual
conflicts with the Military, a position simply aggravated by the inter-
regnums ol military administrators. Plainly a change was due. Castlereagh,
then 1808 at the head of the Colonial Office, decided on a military head to deal
with these stubborn military men and to render the task more facile,
instructed his new Governor to ship, on his arrival at Sydney, the whole of
the New South \\ ales Corps, including every officer, back to England. His
new Governor wffio was to reign for twelve years with the greatest of glory
was Lachlan Macquarie, son of Lauchlan Macquarrie, Chief of the clan (each
had his own idea as to spelling). Born in 1761, he entered the army in time to
participate in the American Revolutionary A A ar. '[ hen the West Indies and
India gave him more experience. Following on that, in 1801, he acted as
adjutant-general in the conquest of Egypt from the French. For a while in
London, he was sent back to India gaining experience in Persia, Armenia and
Russia. In 1805, he was gazetted Lieutenant-Colonel of the 73rd and in
1807 married Elizabeth Henriette Campbell of Mull. Mrs. Macquarie was in
her womanly w r a\ to prove herself as valuable to the young city and its society
as Macquarie himself. With his regiment he arrived in Port Jackson on the
28th December, 1809, and soon things began to hum. The Corps w r as sent
packing. Macquarie broke through the rigid boundary between the free
settlers and the emancipists. To quote from the Australian Encyclopaedia,
it w 7 as a fixed principle with him that men whose sentences had expired or had
been remitted for good conduct should be helped to forget their past. In
other words, a man in the new 7 Colony w 7 as to be judged only by his acts in
that colony and not elsewhere. Macquarie though generally justified in this
attitude, both morally and by its results, carried it a bit far in discouraging,
as he did, an influx of free settlers who would tend to disturb the balance he
was endeavouring to arrange. Still much may be forgiven a man of his
advanced views and actual achievements. As he wrote later: “1 found the
colony barely emerging from infant imbecility, and suffering from various
privations and disabilities; the country impenetrable beyond forty miles from
Sydney; agriculture in a yet languishing state; commerce in its early dawn;
revenue unknown; threatened wdth famine; distracted by faction; the public
buildings in a state of dilapidation and mouldering to decay; the few roads


March 1810
October 1821
Increase
Population
. 11,590
38,778
3ij times
Cattle
. 12,442
102,939
8 „
Sheep
. 25,888
290,158
11 „
Pigs
9,554
33,906
„
Horses
1,134
4,564
4 „
Hand under tillage
. 7.615
32,267
4 „
Customs revenue
. 8,000
40,000
5
and bridges formerly constructed rendered almost impassable; the popula-
tion in general depressed by poverty; no public credit nor private confidence;
the morals of the great mass of the population in the lowest state of debase-
ment and religious worship almost totally neglected.” Some figures he
adjoined emphasized the tale.
Evidently stock-raising was beginning to forecast its future domina-
tion.
Despite all the real achievements of the Highland Governor, he had
many detractors and backbiters. There were men even more mischievous
than Grose. One from England named Bigge, we shall have more of shortly.
Another from the same country was an exception, Francis Howard Green-
way, an important architect in Bristol and Bath, in which last town he had
gained the favour of Arthur Phillip then nearing his end, became bankrupt
and was sentenced to 14 years transportation for concealment of effects. A
letter from Phillip secured him a ticket of leave. He was certainly a man of
fearless vision. His first proposals were for construction of a lighthouse on
the North Head, then, practically inaccessible, and for a bridge across the
harbour to the North Shore from Dawes Point, combined with a fort on
Observatory Hill and redoubts. These ambitious projects were too much for
Macquarie; but there were others less lofty. Greenway was appointed civil
architect and assistant to the inspector of Public Works. To him are attri-
buted ; the Hyde Park Barracks, later occupied as an Asylum for aged women
and later the District Court; St. James Church; St. Matthews Church at
Windsor; the Government House in the inner Domain, now the Conserva-
torium for Music. The list could be stretched out indefinitely. Macquarie
had other architects and engineers. Roads—that over the Blue Mountains
by William Cox, following on the discoveries of Blaxland, Wentworth and
Lawson, is an outstanding example—totalling nearly 300 miles in length,
were made. Barracks, stores, gaols, toll-houses, hospitals, offices, schools,


churches, quays and wharves, not only in and around Sydney but in Tas-
mania, form an endless list. All parts of the colony were visited by
Macquarie, generally in company with his good lady, and his name remains
everywhere to keep green his memory.
The opponents to the emancipists kept pegging away in England and
at England from the Colony. It had its effect. The Colonial office—•
Bathurst was responsible—sent out John Thomas Bigge in September 1819,
an ex-chief Justice of Trinidad, a slave colony, to make enquiries. Clothed
with powers higher than those of Macquarie himself, he quickly made a mess
of everything. No greater calamity had happened to the growing commu-
nity than his arrival. It was the apotheosis of bureaucracy, the evil which has
always had to be fought in Australia and one that apparently will always
have to be. Macquarie had resigned in 1817 after some acute trouble arising
from conflicts with Judge Bent over the admission of emancipists as
solicitors; but Bathurst refused to consider it. It was accepted however in
November 1821, and finally in February 1822, he left the scene of his triumphs
and successes, after experiencing for eighteen months “many indignities and
mortifications.”
Major-General Sir Thomas Makdougall Brisbane, another military
Scotsman, but a lowlander this time, succeeded Macquarie. Rather more of
a scientist than a soldier, he was as big a failure as his fellow Scot was a
success. Even though bound down by his instructions to give full effect to
Bigge’s recommendations he could do nothing right. With him had been
sent Major Frederick Goulburn, younger brother of Henry Goulburn, Chief
Secretary for Ireland. He was as great an instance as Bigge of bad choice
by the Colonial Office. Both were recalled in 1824, much to the relief of the
settlers, who, despite all administrative blunders, were marching on to pros-
perity. The tune played by Macquarie was still attractive. Many free
settlers were coming in. “Squatting” had begun. The population went up
20,000 to 53,000 in five years, of whom only one-third had been transported.
The colony was freed from the autocratic rule of a governor, a system
objectionable in every way whether under good or bad official.


THE BEGINNING OF REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
Would ye fashion a nation, whole and true
Goodly proportioned, sound at core?
CHAPTER XL
ir T' H E lEst Legislative Council of Australia was created in December 1825,
u hen Brisbane was awaiting Bourke’s arrival to relieve him of his
vice-regal duties. It consisted of seven members, the maximum allowed by
the Act. Its members were the Lieutenant-Governor, the Chief justice, the
Archdeacon, the Colonial Secretary and three leading citizens, John Mac-
arthur of whom we have heard much, Robert Campbell, Sydney’s leading
merchant, an old opponent of Macarthur and not very friendly even at this
time, and Charles Throsby, a very successful explorer on a small scale and the
discoverer of the Murrumbidgee. As the first instalment of self government
vouchsafed Australia, some description of the Council’s powers, or rather its
limitations, should prove of interest. The Governor presided and he was
the sole person who could initiate legislation. An ordinance that is an act of
council, could be proclaimed by the Governor even though a majority of the
Council opposed it. He needed only one favouring vote, if he cared to flout
the majority. Further in case of national necessity, such as rebellion he
could proclaim any ordinance which he had submitted even if unanimously
opposed. Ihe Chief Justice had however had to certify that any ordinance
was not incompatible with British law. The home parliament could amend
and the Crown could veto. All told, it was an extremely small modicum of
self go\eminent. Ihe Council was simply a taxing body and little else. A
measure of trial by jury was also conferred, though in civil cases only. A
man $ life or his liberty was still at the mercy of a court martial, composed of
a judge and sc\en military or na\ al officers, fl asmania had been separated
and had its own council.
A little liberalising came in 1828. The number was increased to 15,
with a greater proportion of non-official members; the Governor’s autocracy
was abolished; and the veto of the Chief Justice was abolished; trial by jury
was made more general. In fact by 1839, it became absolutely general’ The
proportion of free settlers arriving was increasingly large and when in 1840
transportation ceased altogether, it became imperative to grant a further
modicum of responsibility to the settlers, now almost wholly A. F. “arrived
free or B. C. born in the colony. William Charles Wentworth, son of
D’Arcy Wentworth, a surgeon in the Second fleet and Colonial Surgeon and
Chief of Police under Macquarie who held him in the highest esteem, was as


we have seen, somewhat notable as an explorer—he showed the way to open
tip inland Australia—as a protagonist of the rights of the people against
officialdom ; as the publisher of Australia’s first free newspaper, the “Austra-
lian, in 1824; and as the founder of the Australian Patriotic Association,
this body, in which he was associated with Sir John Jamison, another
opponent of Government House rule, was effective in bringing into being the
Constitution Act of 1842, in which Victoria as the Port Phillip District, and
\ an Diemen s Land which had been separated since 1825, were both involved.
1 he new council was to consist of 36 members, 24 of whom were to be
elected by the towns and rural districts, and the balance, only one half of
whom could be officials, to be nominated by the Governor. This was not of
much importance, as the elected representatives of the people or of that part
of it which could boast of £2OO value of freehold property or paid £2O per
year rent, were in the majority. Kven the Governor’s officials and those
public men who could be nominated with decency, were infected with the
young Australian’s national ideals. Gipps, the worst Governor Australia had
suffered under since Grose, could do nothing, though he tried within the
limitations now imposed upon him, all the mischief he could contrive. He had
written a few years before “I will not allow them, the squatters, to secure any
title at all to the land they occupy, or to occupy land where they please or to
sell their rights of station. Ihe new council with six Port Phillip represen-
tatives, five rural and one urban (Melbourne), Sydney had two and the rest
of the colony sixteen, came into being on the Ist August, 1843. Wentworth
was returned at the head of the poll for the tow r n of Sydney, strangely enough
as he was the leader of the squatters. Then came a bad time for Gipps
particularly as Robert Lowe, afterwards \ iscount Sherbrooke, came on the
scene, first as a nominee of the Governor, but soon after as an independent
representative of the electors. Gipps afforded plenty of opportunity for the
two to criticise his acts and then Gipps committed his crowning act of
asininity by dealing out an almost fatal blow to the pastoralists just recover-
ing from the staggering effects of the 1840-1 debacle.
The dawn-period of squatting, as it was first contemptuously designated
by the officials controlling Australia’s destiny; but which was to prove
Australia’s mainstay and its directing force throughout its history, began wfith
the crossing the barrier of the Blue Mountains in 1813. If the Lord Chan-
cellor sits on a wool sack in the House of Lords as a reminder that England’s
greatness was founded on wool, much more should the speaker of each Austra-
lian parliament—there are enough of them —sit on wool stuffed cushions. The
Governors and their subordinates did all they could, legitimately and at times
illegitimately, to crush this new 7 industry chiefly through envy of the civilians’
success and partly because it appeared beyond their power to control and load


with official hindrances and regulations. But there were the people and “vox
populi vox dei.” One representative of the King in acknowledging defeat,
pithily wrote “Needs must when the devil drives.” \ arious expedients by
way of ordinances were tried but proved increasingly unsuitable. It was not
until 1833, a score of years after the surmounting of the Blue Mountains
barrier that recognition came. Sir George Gipps wrote a description of the
system. “Beyond the boundaries of location —that is outside the nineteen
counties surrounding Sydney—the country was roughly divided into districts
in each of which there was a Commissioner of Crown Lands —known for a
generation as a C.C.L. —who was the Chief Magistrate of it and had undei hiS
command a small force of mounted constables who to distinguish them from
the more regular mounted police were called by the name of Border Police.
The land was neither sold nor let on lease ; but licences were granted at the
discretion of the Crown Lands Commissioner, for the occupation of such
portions of lands as might be desired by proprietors, on each of which licences
a fee of £lO was payable annually and an assessment under a local ordinance
was levied on the stock depastured there.” The annual assessment was one
halfpennv for each ram, ewe, wether and weaned lamb ; one penny half penn\
for every bull, ox, cow, steer and calf; and threepence for each horse, gelding,
mare and foal.
Such a shadowy tenure was in the highest degree unsatisfactory.
There was no such thing as ownership of the land or the improvements.
There were no legal boundaries; none that could be recognised in law at any
rate. The pastoralist or as he soon preferred to designate himself, the
squatter, was at the mercy of the C.C.L. who could put any other grazier in
upon a station or shift the licensee to some other spot at his pleasure. As a
natural consequence there were favourites and more than suspicions of
favoritism. As an instance of the official view of the man who was building
up the country’s prosperity the C.C.L. when issuing a licence to depasture
Crown Lands appended the following highly offensive certificate: “I, being a
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the District of do certify that I
have reason to believe this applicant to be of sober, honest and industrious
character and habits and a person to whom a licence to depasture stock beyond
the limits of location may with safety and propriety be given.” All this was
bad enough, but in April, 1844, though the existing ones were to be in force
until 1846, Gipps gazetted new regulations imposing additional fees of £2/10/-
for each 1000 sheep carrying capacity over 4000 which were covered by the
£lO payment. It has to be explained that control of the lands of the Crown
still remained in the hands of the Home Government, with the Governor as
its agent. The stock assessment being a tax was under the control of the
Legislative Council. This action on the part of Gipps was really a tactical


move to assert his power as representative of the Crown both to land control
and to the revenues from it. But the turn of the Council soon came. The
Assessment ordinance expired in June, 1846. It refused to enact a new one.
Gipps who, as Westgarth, the Victorian historian put it, rather mildly
in fact, was possessed of a military inflexibility which though useful in its
proper place, was not always adapted for the official administration of civilised
society, had actually done the best thing possible for the grazing industry.
Injured in their feelings, and in their pockets, the squatters formed the
Pastoral Association, which had two main objectives:—(l) To obtain a
guarantee against such arbitrary changes in the future, and (2) to secure the
occupants of the pastoral lands against the uncertain action and unconstitu-
tional influence of Commissioners of Crown Lands. In Port Phillip, an
official name detested by the settlers, they advertised; “The squatters of Aus-
tralia helix will meet on horseback upon Batman’s Hill on the First of lime
for the purpose of forming a Mutual Protection Society. From the Murray
to the sea-beach, from the Snowy Mountains to the Glenelg, let no squatter
be absent.”
1 he Association went right over the Governor's head; Archibald, the
brother of the great Ben Boyd of Royal Bank and Two-fold Bay notoriety was
sent to England. The House of Commons itself was appealed to and, as
always in our history, that authority overrode the bureaucrats. The most
optimistic demands were more than conceded. The Imperial Act (9 and 10
\ ictoria Cap. 4) to regulate the disposal of the waste Lands of the Crown
was passed in April 1846. It conferred on the depasturing licensee, a four-
teen years’ lease with a pre-emptive right of purchase at the minimum price
of £1 per acre, of any land within his boundaries. There were exceptions;
any land required for public purposes, roads, railways, military defence,
churches, schools, public buildings, cemeteries, recreation, quays or wharfs,
mining for coal, lead, copper, or other minerals; and finally, facilitating the
improvement and settlement of the Colony. Gipps left the Colony a beaten
man and a sick one, in July 1846, before he knew of the over-whelming
success of his opponents. He died in February 1847, shortly after his arrival
in the old country. As an instance of the popular attitude, the following
quotation from the “Atlas” of the 11th July, 1846, may be quoted: “This day
is one likely to be memorable in the annals of New South Wales for it is the
day on which His Excellency, Sir George Gipps, leaves our shores for ever.
After eight long years of despotism and mismanagement, the incubus that
sat so heavy on us is removed and we can breathe freely once more. We have
often said, and what is more, have often proved that Sir George Gipps is not
only the worst Governor that we ever had, but the worst that could possibly
have been selected, and that assertion we now deliberately but not maliciously
nor sorrowfully repeat.”


Another military officer, Sir Charles Augustus hitzKoy succeeded
Sir George Gipps; but his military career was largely at the Horse Guards
though he was a staff officer at Waterloo. First as Lieutenant-Governor of
Prince Edward Island and then at the Leeward Isles, he became noted fen his
powers of conciliation and was so selected to win back for the Crown the good
feelings of the colonists, so embittered by the despotic rule of Gipps. hitzßo}
whose new title was Governor-General of all Pier Majesty s Australian
Possessions, and Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief of New South
Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, and South Australia and their Dependencies,
conciliated rather by doing nothing than by any overt acts, though he nad
plenty of opportunities. The insistent claim for separation by the I ort
Phillipians, the growing and overwhelming opposition to transportation, the
new constitutions and, not least, the discoveries of the gold regions, all
afforded him chances of interference which in the temper of the settlers as left
by Gipps, would have still further alienated the colonists from the mother
country. Fitzßoy’s masterly inactivity—it may have been supreme tact-
allowed, nay, encouraged the growth of parliamentary government and that
meant encouragement for the pioneers, a class which up till this, had been
snubbed and discouraged to the limit, and what was more galling and hinder-
ing, robbed in every way. Gipps was the last straw, and the camel’s back of
officialdom was broken though its restoration has been many times attempted
and still will be many times.


HOME RULE*
Then I break away
A vibrant, vital force, and I am free.
CHAPTER XII.
UNDER Fitzßoy’s benign rule, came the Constitution Act of 1850, “for the
better government of Her Majesty’s Australian colonies (13 and 14
Viet. Cap. 59). New South Wales, Victoria, Van Diemen’s Land, South
Australia and Western Australia were each to have its own separate Legisla-
tive Council, with the power of imposing Customs duties. The Councils were
still uni-cameral bodies; but they were empowered to draw up new constitu-
tions, which of course would be bi-cameral on the British model. The task
set was not easy. There were many conflicting interests and many widely
differing ideas. Parliamentary Government was still in its infancy, and was
without traditions and customs. In the new colony of Victoria, so named
with the gracious consent of Her Majesty by the Committee on Trade and
Plantations, there was continual turmoil in the Council. Still the new Con-
stitution, to be approved practically in its entirety by the British Parliament,
was drawn up by 1854. It provided —those for the other colonies were iden-
tical in principle—for two houses, an upper representing property and a lower,
with paramount authority in financial questions, representing the people.
Whatever differences existed at the outset have now been almost entirely
eliminated. In all the States —that is the present status of the erstwhile
colonies—-the Executive is based on the British model. All have female and
manhood suffrage together with payment of members and three years life for
the lower house. There was still a lot to learn politically. In \ ictoria for
example, there were eight different ministries in the first ten years, nine in
the second, and since then, 1875 to 1935, the number has been five each decade.
During the period of learning to govern themselves, there were in
Australia some peculiarly interesting crises, not paralleled in other parts of
the world. In New South Wales, during the “Unlock the Lands” agitation
Sir Charles Cowper carried a bill to open to selection any farm lands. Selec-
tion before survey was the tag given to it ; it was a very popular cry at that
time. The Upper House, almost wholly squatters or their friends and
sympathisers, promptly threw out the bill. Cowper, following English
precedent, induced the Governor, Sir John Young, to appoint sufficient new
members —the Legislative Council was nominee, not elective —to give him a
majority; but when the bill was again submitted, the President, Sir W. W.
Burton and most of the members walked out and the meeting lapsed. The


deadlock lasted until the expiration of the members’ terms; it was at that
time five years, and as they had been appointed in 1856 their time was almost
up. William Charles Wentworth stepped in as the new President, and the
bill was passed by a new house. In Victoria a series of crises of the utmost
bitterness characterised the introduction of protection. Sir Charles Darling,
in opening the fourth Victorian Parliament on the 29th November, 1864, spoke
for his Ministry. “It is proposed by my advisers that the revenue collected
through the Customs House shall be levied partly by reduced duties upon
objects already chargeable and partly by duties, moderate in amount, on
various commodities which as yet have been altogether exempt from taxation.
The effect, it is conceived, will be to decrease the burden of taxation borne by
the mining and other industrious classes and to distribute it more equitably
among all classes of society.” A mild introduction to such an important
innovation. George Verdon, so long connected with the Melbourne Art
Gallery, and the English, Scottish and Australian Bank, was the Treasurer in
James McCulloch's Ministry; he introduced the Tariff Customs Duties Bill,
the duties proposed immediately coming into force. It passed the Legisla-
tive Assembly: but knowing its certain fate in the Upper House, McCulloch
had “tacked” it to the Appropriation Bill providing for the ordinary annual
services of government. The Council promptly rejected the composite Bill.
AA ith no money to pay the public creditors, McCulloch borrowed from the
London Bank. That institution then sued the Government for the debt, and
getting a verdict, Governor Darling authorised payment from the consoli-
dated revenue. This system was continued. The Council again rejected the
Tariff Bill. A general election returned McCulloch strengthened by the almost
universal opinion of the country. The Council finally capitulated. At a
conference between the two Houses a few concessions let the bill through and
protection became the policy of Victoria. This was in April 1866; twelve
months of confusion. New South Wales lingered a long while in the Free
Trade fold ; but before Federation, it had conceded some measure of the
system. AVith Federation all Australia became protectionist, increasingly so,
until it leads the world with some signs of revolt from the rural producers
during the time of depression.
Darling was recalled by a British administration wholly free-trade in
its sympathies. The greatest demonstration of the public ever known was
made on his departure. The Assembly voted a grant of £20,000 to Lady
Darling. This was included —not as a “tack”—but as an ordinary item.
The Council not admitting any obligation to Sir Charles, rejected the bill.
Sir J. FI. Manners-Sutton, who had arrived just after the unlocking of the
deadlock tried to remain neutral, but in vain. He was severely rapped over
the knuckles by the Colonial Secretary, the Duke of Buckingham. However
McCulloch was allowed a dissolution and came back even stronger, sixty


supporters to eighteen opposition. Manners-Sutton still acting under home
orders, endeavoured to thwart the will of the people, though unwillingly. It
is difficult to say what would have been the outcome. The Colonial
office, probably as the result of outside pressure, gave way. Darling was
granted a pension of £lOOO a year, which he enjoyed for two years only. The
A ictorian Parliament continued the pension to his widow and provided a sum
of £aooo for the education of her children. So somewhat ingloriously ended
A ictoria’s second dead-lock. The third was worse in its personal applications.
In 1877, Graham Berry, then in his second term of office as Premier, got a bill
for payment of members through the Assembly and also included in the
estimates an item to provide the £3OO a year proposed to be paid. The
Council rejected both. Supply had already been voted until March 1878; but
on the plea of economising, an order-in-council was passed dismissing
peremptorily nearly one hundred and fifty of the leading members of the Civil
Service. These were Judges of County Courts, Courts of Mines and of
Insolvency, police magistrates, wardens of goldfields, the Chief Engineer of
Railways and a number of executive heads of departments. The day, the Bth
January, was at once known as Black Wednesday and it is still a bitter
memory. The Council had again to pay some regard to the great weight of
public opinion. In April, the bills were passed. Governor Bowen who had
assisted Berry to give effect to the wishes of the electors expressed through
the ballot box, was also punished by the Colonial Office. He was transferred
to Mauritius, a very minor post; but he could not be kept down. His work
at Hong-Kong, particularly during the Franco-Chinese war, gave him
important tasks such as Malta. He died in 1899. Instances of these pro-
longed and bitter struggles between the opposing forces of property and the
people could be multiplied and for other states. They all tended to evolu-
tion of better methods of government and particularly served the framers of
the Commonwealth Constitution, who inserted special provisions to meet
deadlocks.


THE FINDING OF THE INLAND.
Gallant is Spring along thy laughing hills
With Wattles loveliest scent and gleam of gold.
CHAPTER XIII.
npiHE exploit of Gregory Blaxland, along with Lawson and Wentworth in
crossing the seemingly unsurmountable mountain barrier which cut off
Sydney from all expansion, has already been told. George William Evans,
assistant surveyor at Launceston, was called back to Sydney and sent to
extend Blaxland’s work. He discovered the Macquarie and in 1815, the
Lachlan. Evans from many points of view should rank as our pioneer
explorer. He was the first to actually cross the Great Dividing Range—
Blaxland had halted just short of the last ridge—and to discover an inland
flowing stream; the first to sec the mountains of the interior and to see with
astounded eyes, a snow clad Australian peak; and he realised as no other for
a long while, the potentialities of the inland “limitless plains, running to the
very horizon, fat pasture grounds for uncounted flocks.” A remarkably
different version from Oxley’s repeatedly expressed opinion that the interior
was unfit for the purposes of civilised man.
Then in 1817, Oxley the Surveyor General, with Evans as second in
command traced the Lachlan down but failed to reach its junction with the
Murrumbidgee. The year after, they traced the Macquarie until it also lost
itself in extensive swamps. Taking an easterly route, Oxley found the
Castlereagh, the Naomi and the Hastings and finally reached the coast at
Port Macquarie.
Earlier even than this, in 1814 a great man, Hamilton Hume, then a
youth of seventeen comes on the scene. With his younger brother John, he
opened up the Wingecarribee district. Four years later, Hume with Charles
Throsby, later of the first Council, who had in the interim, extended the
settlement considerably southwards, and James Meehan of Port Phillip and
the Yarra fame, discovered Lake Bathurst. In 1819 Throsby connected the
coastal discoveries with Bathurst and a little later Meehan went from Moss
Vale to the Lachlan. Wild discovered Lage George and Thorsby went still
further and reached the Murrumbidgee about the site of the present Federal
Capital. Hume then joined with Berry in some coastal trips, an association
which led to the great Hume-Hovell expedition two years later. There were
many others. Like Hume, they were not exploring for discovery’s sake ; but to
find grazing room for their rapidly expanding herds, and flocks. An event of


major importance however was the discovery in May 1823, of the Monaro
country, hist called Brisbane Downs, by Captain Mark Currie with Brigade-
Major Ovens and Joseph Wild. A little more enterprise on the part of the
settlers who flocked into this desirable district from that time on and Victoria
would have been first settled in the Omeo and Mitta region. As it was
Macfarlane s and Pendergast s stocking of the Omeo-Benambra plains ranks
second only to the Hentys.
Meanwhile Alan Cunningham, April to June 1823, discovered a route,
Pandora’s Pass he named it, to the Liverpool Plain seen by Oxley in 1818.
Oxley again appears on the scene. Leaving Sydney in the “Mermaid,” a call
was made at his early discovery, Port Macquarie, where a convict station had
been established. Jhe 1 weed River was discovered and named in October
1823, and Port Curtis entered. Returning, Moreton Bay was examined and
a white man, Charles Pamphlett, discovered living with the blacks. It
appeared that four men, so they said, were sailing in a small boat from Sydney
to V ollongong to obtain timber. Heavy contrary winds drove them to
Moreton Bay, where they landed on Stradbroke Island. Finnegan, the only
other survivor, showed Oxley the river which he named the Brisbane as his
right as discoverer, though to Pamphlett and his mate, the real credit is due.
A settlement was made at Moreton Bay in the following year; but it was soon
transferred to the present site of Brisbane. Oxley had now completed his
life’s work. He died in his home at Sydney in May 1828, at the early age of
47, after having done much excellent work for the public benefit. His judg-
ment of the capabilities of land for settlement may have been, was in fact,
faulty; but his keenness and accuracy as an explorer were admirable.
His exit from the exploring scene was timed for the entrance of a par-
ticularly outstanding personality. Alexander Hamilton Hume, to give him
his full name, was the eldest son of Alexander Hume, superintendent of con-
victs. Born at Parramatta in 1797, he was one of the earliest of Australia’s
native-born heroes. His life from very early years was associated with the
bush and what may be termed his official career as an explorer began, as we
have seen, as early as 1814. Each year thence onwards was marked by some
fresh discovery. Governor Brisbane, who was keen on fresh discoveries —-
they were being reported to him almost weekly—conceived two schemes.
One was a direct journey from Lake George to Spencer Gulf, and the other
the landing of a party at Wilson’s Promontory or Cape Howe, to travel over-
land to Sydney. Hume wisely refused to consider either project, but backed
by his former comrade, Alexander Berry, who had become a very wealthy
man, merchant and landowner, an arrangement was made to start from
Hume’s own run near Lake George and head for Western Port, the name
then given in Sydney to the whole of the coast line discovered by Bass in 1798.


Berry found the money for stores and Brisbane, although the expedition was
the outcome of his own suggestions, rather grudgingly furnished a tent, two
tarpaulins, six muskets, powder and ball, pack-saddles and six slop suits for
the men, three of Hume’s assigned servants and the same number of Hovell s.
Berry and Brisbane were responsible for the addition of William Hilton
Hovell, a retired sea captain of some ability but wholly unsuited to be under
the leadership of young Hume.
Hume’s farm was left on the 12th October, 1824, the party consisting of
eight men with two drays, five bullocks and three horses. Reaching the
Cooradigby River by the 26th, the drays were abandoned and the pack-
saddles brought into use. Hume riding ahead of the party on the 16th
November, saw through the trees down the gully, a wide flowing sheet of
water. To this stream he gave the name of the Hume in honour of his father.
A few days were lost, hunting for a crossing place which was eventually
found just above the site of the Hume Reservoir, so that it is now buried
from the sight of man, perhaps for ever. Then the Mitta Mitta, the Kiewa
or Little River, the Ovens after Brisbane’s private secretary, the Goulburn
after his official secretary, were crossed, and after much trouble the Dividing
Range also and the open plains of the Werribee, called by the party, the
Arndell, were crossed, to reach Corio Bay or Geelong on the 16th December.
Their stores were low; a retreat was made ; Christmas dinner was eaten on the
Goulburn from which a more northerly, more sensible and much easier route
was taken to their original crossing of the Ovens. Home was reached on the
24th January. The result was negligible as far as settlement was concerned.
No one followed in their footsteps.
Cunningham in 1827, came upon the Darling Downs by an inland track
across the Naomi. Gwydir and Maclntyre (Dumaresq) reaching the Con-
damine. The discovery of these rivers, like the Macquarie, the Lachlan and
the Murrumbidgee all flowing into the interior with no known outlet though
the coast had been w T ell surveyed, led to the revival of the inland sea theory
or as a rival hypothesis, an outlet in some of the imperfectly charted inlets on
the north west coast. So comes into the picture one of the best of the official
explorers, Charles Sturt, another of the military men to whom Australia owes
so much. He was born at Benares some two years before Hume. After a
long career, the Peninsula, Canada, Ireland and France, he came to Sydney
with his regiment, the 39th, in 1827. Becoming an aide-de-camp, Darling
sent him, with Hume as his partner, to follow down the Macquarie and find
what happened to its waters and those of all the other streams. It was a
period of drought and when on the 18th January, 1829, Sturt came suddenly
upon the Darling River which he named, the water was found to be brackish.
The Murrumbidgee then had its turn. Sturt left, with George McLeay, later


on to be knighted, but then just twenty years of age and Fraser, the Govern-
ment botanist, on the 3rd November, 1829, to follow that river down to its
ultimate end; something that had not vet been done with any of the inland
water courses. A boat was taken and launched on the Murrumbidgee below
the junction of the Lachlan on the 7th January, 1830. A week later; but
Sturt may be allowed to tell his own story. “On a sudden the river while
sweeping round in tortuous course to every point of the compass, took a
general southerly direction. We were carried at a fearful rate down its
gloomy and contracted stream. At 2 p.m. Hopkinson called out that we
were approaching a junction and within a minute we were hurled into a broad
and noble river.” This he named the Murray after Sir George Murray, who
in 1828 was Secretary of State for the Colonial and War Department. Sturt
did not recognise that it was Hume’s river and little wonder. Later he urged
the use of the name Hume for the river above the junction confining the
name Murray for that below. After many exciting incidents, Lake Alexan-
dria was reached on the 9th February, after passing the Darling, the Rufus
named after McLeay’s nickname, his hair being bright red, and the Lindsay;
the two last are now known to be merely the return mouths of ana-branches.
Sturt made no examination of the surrounding country, roughly one hundred
and fifty feet above the river which twists about on a flood plain between the
high ground. Little time was spent. No way out to the open sea could be
found. It was a struggle for life to return to the depot. It became heroic.
The depot was reached in forty days —it took just a week less to go down
with the current —and found abandoned. They struggled on for another
seventeen days. Messengers were sent ahead and returned with help just as
the last ounce of flour was eaten. Sturt lost his sight and though it returned,
it was always impaired.
Major Thomas Mitchell, the surveyor general, much annoyed at the
choice of Sturt for this expedition, made one of his own in 1831, without much
result, but in 1835, he set out —Richard Cunningham, brother of Allan was
lost on this trip—and reached the Darling which he followed down for some
three hundred miles, convincing, everyone but himself that Sturt was right.
Several encounters with the natives caused him to return. Leaving Sydney
again in March 1836, on his famous Australia Felix expedition, he followed
down the Lachlan hoping it would prove to be Sturt’s Darling; but it was soon
found that Sturt’s statement that it joined the Murrumbidgee was a fact.
Pushing on with his party, he arrived at the Darling-Murray junction, and
again found that Sturt was right. Turning on his heel he retraced his steps
up the Murray. Mitchell, of a completely different character from Sturt, had
a good deal of trouble with the blacks. He was afraid that his party, which
was almost a company, twenty-five whites and three blacks, was being stalked
by a tribe of natives that had come over specially from the Darling River
where there had been an affray between them and the Major the previous


year. He even pretended to recognise some particular individuals. Ihe
truth was that while the Major was riding ahead from Lake Benonee on one
of his reconnoitring expeditions, his men led by the Major’s own aboriginal
guide, Piper, had interfered with the women of the tribe. It all resulted in a
large number of blackfellows being slain at a place between Euston and
Wentworth named Mt. Dispersion. Colwell in his Story of Australia sums
up rather succinctly “As a matter of fact Hume and Sturt were invariably
correct; Mitchell often blundered.”
Pushing on, Mitchell reached the false junction of the Murrumbidgee
and crossed to the Victorian bank. Then by way of Swan Hill, the Little
Murr ay and the Gunbower Creek, both of which he mistook for the Goulburn
River of Hume, he came to Mt. Hope and travelled south westerly across the
Loddon, the Avoca, and the Richardson to the Wimmera. His surmises as
to the courses of these rivers were all ill-judged and led to a good deal of
trouble for his followers later on. All through Mitchell rhapsodised over
this new country which he christened Australia Felix, a name much more in
favour with the early settlers than the more prosaic official Port Phillip
District. Looking out westward from Pyramid Hill he wrote: “The view
over the surrounding plains was exceedingly beautiful as they shone fresh and
green in the light of a fine morning. The scene was different from anything
I had witnessed before, a land so inviting and still without inhabitants. (It
was to remain without despite this fanciful word painting until the last stage
of the pastoral occupation of Victoria). As I stood, the first intruder on the
sublime solitude of these verdant plains as yet untouched by flocks and herds,
I felt conscious of being the harbinger of mighty changes there ; for our steps
would soon be followed by the men and animals for which it seemed to have
been prepared.” Even Mitchell became tired of his own panegyrics. He
wrote: “it was no longer necessary to note the goodness or the beauty of any
place in particular.” Still when he came to the Wimmera “the richness of the
soil and verdure on its banks and the natural beauty of the scenery, could
scarcely be surpassed in any country” while at the Glenelg “the country on the
banks of this stream was, as far as I could see the finest imaginable either for
sheep or cattle or for cultivation. The land was everywhere alike beautiful;
all parts were verdant.” It was early in August and there had evidently been
a record autumn. The Glenelg, at first hailed as the oft-predicted navigable
river, proved a disappointment. Then going east, the first indubitable marks
of civilised man were found, an empty glass bottle and a broken clay pipe.
Soon they saw the buildings of the Henty settlement, now nearly two
years of age, and a brig, which was the “Elizabeth” of Launceston, lying at
anchor. Mitchell had been forestalled. He made his way back to the Gram-
pians and from Mt. Abrupt, kept an almost straight line from there via Castle-
maine, where Expedition Pass still preserves its memory. A brief solo rick to


Mt. Macedon, which he named, showed him the infant settlement huts, tents
and ship sails. Mitchell was well behind the event. Three months had elapsed
since Magistrate George Stewart had arrived at the Settlement, as a first
instalment of official control. Lonsdale was then packing up for a permanent
transfer with a horde of surveyors, customs officers, police and soldiers.
1 here were some 30,000 sheep and 250 people at Port Phillip and others were
pouring in all the while. Just ahead of the Major on his homeward route,
settlers were frantically mustering their herds to-drive them overland to the
fresh fields and pastures new of Port Phillip. Mitchell’s party actually passed
the first of the overlanders. Mitchell’s report to the Governor was published
in November The land he had discovered, which of course did not include
the north east, already traversed by Hume and Hovell and to be crossed by
Hawd on, Gardiner and Hepburn in a few weeks, was “open and available in its
present state for all the purposes of civilised men. We traversed it in two
directions with heavy carts, meeting no other obstructions than the softness
of the rich soil and in returning over flowery plains and green hills fanned by
the breezes of early spring. I named this region Australia Felix the better to
distinguish it from the parched deserts of the interior country.” Those
parched deserts he w T as to enthuse over ten years later in equally unjustified
eulogy, after his expedition to Cooper’s Creek in 1845. Arthur Jose, one of
the best of Australia’s recorders, errs badly in claiming that it w T as Mitchell’s
discoveries, not Henty’s or Fawkner’s or Batman’s that settled Victoria
during the next 15 years; squatting, not whaling or small farming, was the
colonising agent in those days. Colwell in his valuable Story of Australia
falls into the same error. His version is “As the Government made known
this rich discovery, settlers from New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land
began to pour in a continual stream to Port Phillip Bay, there to fatten their
sheep on the broad plains. Within twelve months after Mitchell’s discovery,
settlers were laying the foundations of what is now the city of Melbourne.
It is clear that both writers w 7 ere Sydney men and knew little of Victoria and
its early history. There is not a tittle of evidence that any settlement was
induced, or even accelerated, by the Major’s glowing statements. His Austra-
lia Felix w r as for the most part to remain uncolonised for many years. The
attention of almost all the new men, particularly those from across the Straits,
was concentrated on the lands around Western Port Bay, Port Phillip Ba}~ and
the Western District as it w 7 as rapidly becoming known, adjacent to Geelong.
Mitchell was a very fine official. As a surveyor-general, which then meant
engineer-in-chief also, he w T as quite good though a little autocratic and
domineering. Plis Australia Felix explorations however, and the same is true
of practically all the official ones, led to little expansion of settlement; that
was almost wholly the work of the pioneers, the private persons who, in their
own interests certainly, pushed outside the limits of official settlement driven
by an urge for the open spaces with plenty of feed and a scarcity of Govern-
ment interference.


EXPLORING THE ARID REGIONS,
The land lies desolate and stripped
Across its waste has thinly strayed
A tattered host of eucalpyt.
CHAPTER XIII.
rpo return to the tale of exploration. 1 here was really not much left,
certainly not much of more than geographical interest. There was the
arid centre, quite properly described as the Great Australian Desert; the land
south of that down to the Great Australian Bight, almost equally deficient in
rainfall; the great north-west, of which even now more might be known, and
the western di\ ision of Queensland, also suffering under dry conditions.
George Grey, the great pro-consul whose forte lay in desperate political situa-
tions and who was certainly given plenty of opportunity to prove it, now comes
on the scene. His explorations though of great romantic interest, really
formed part of the coastal survey by the “Beagle” under Captain Wickham,
who had in 1837 replaced P. P. King on that boat which had during its work
on the South American and Australian coasts, such distinguished men as
Commander Robert, afterwards Governor of New Zealand; Owen Stanley, of
Port Essington; Conrad Martens, our first artist, and Charles Darwin. Wick-
ham did some exploration, discovering Port Darwin and Bynoe Harbour 1839.
The “Beagle” was not finished. In 1841, under Lord Stokes, she was to find
the Flinders and Albert Rivers and Stokes Plains of Promise; but most of
her work was hydrographic surveying, that is filling in the details of the
already known coasts. But to return to Grey; he made three expeditions in
all, discovering the remarkable aboriginal rock paintings on the Glenelg River
and doing little else, save that. Eyre, Edward John, a young man of twenty-
two years of age, had made a mark in his overland expedition from Port
Phillip to Adelaide in 1838 —he discovered Lake Hindmarsh and nearly lost
his life in the Mallee Scrub. In 1840, Eyre, now resident in Adelaide, pro-
moted an exploring expedition to the northern areas, subscribing from his
own pocket the major part of the funds. The result of the first part of his
work was to put Mounts Deception and Hopeless on the map; names which


amply indicate the fruitlessness of his trips. As far as Eyre was concerned,
advance northwards was prevented by an enormous hypothetical horseshoe-
shaped salt lake made up of Torrens, Blanche, Callabonna and Frome. Eyre
then turned westward on that mad but heroic journey along the cliffs of the
Great Australian Bight, and the desolate southern shores of Western Australia
to King George Sound, Albany. Had it not been for the remarkable chance
of lighting on a French bay-whaling station in Thistle Cove, just east oi
Esperance Bay, under Captain Rossiter, of the well-known South Sea Island
family, who did everything in his power for Eyre, who was in extremis, there
would have been a tragedy. A fortnight’s good food and assiduous kindness
restored his health. Eyre and his faithful black boy, Wylie, then resumed
their ride, two hundred and fifty miles to go; but no longer waterless. Albany
was reached at last on the 7th July, 1841, after some five months of constant
hardship hut “one feels an exceeding great pity that so much heroic suffering
should have been spent on the execution of a purpose, the fulfilment of which
promised little of economic value.” Eyre did no more exploring, though he
several times sought further employment of that character. In 1845 he left
Australia for London to publish his Journals of Expeditions of Discovery and
did not return. He was not happy in his subsequent position as Governor of
Jamaica. He retired on pension in 1874, dying in 1901 at the age of 86.
Central Australia, the unknown and mysterious, attracted the imagina-
tion of all those who had time to imagine. Eyre’s work was inconclusive,
Frome the surveyor-general, who followed him a little after, did little to throw
more light on the subject. Sturt again came on the scene. He made a pro-
position, a little ahead of its time, to explore all the remainder of unknown
Australia. In the first place, the hostile north of South Australia was to be
circumvented by a flank attack, using the Darling River to get up into the
tropics. Approval was given for this part of his scheme. On the 10th
August, 1844—a general holiday was proclaimed and an official breakfast with
nearly 300 guests given—Sturt set off at the head of a remarkable cavalcade,
88 horses, 30 bullocks, 200 sheep, 4 hunting dogs, 2 sheep-dogs, 1 boat and
boat carriage, a horse dray and a spring cart. There were 17 men in all, no
blackfellows. Two, McDouall Stuart, draftsman and Robert Flood, stock-
man, were to distinguish themselves in later work; one, James Poole, second
in command, whose health was indifferent before the start, did not return.
Eyre rode with Sturt as far as Lake Victoria; he had previously been with
one policeman only as far up the Darling as Mitchell’s furthest south in 1835.
From Lake Victoria to Laidley’s Ponds (Menindie), was an easy matter.
yf'iLirig a main camp at Lake Cawndilla for a while, Stint, Dr. Biowne and
Flood went ahead to reconnoitre. The Barrier Ranges, now Broken Hill,
were searched, their mineral nature being recognised by Sturt, but his samples
were lost. Pushing on a fine waterhole near a peculiar mountain range, now


Alt. Browne and Mt. Poole was found. The main camp was shifted to this
spot, christened Depot Glen. It was now the 27th January, 1845. Here
Sturt was trapped; no water could be found in any direction ; retreat was cut
off and six months had to be spent. “The ground,” Sturt says, “was
thoroughly heated to a depth of three or four feet . . . under its effects every
screw in our boxes had been drawn . . . horn handles and combs were split
into fine laminae. The lead dropped out of our pencils . . . our hair, as well as
the sheep’s wool, ceased to grow, and became as brittle as glass. We found it
difficult to write or draw, so rapidly did the fluid dry in our pens and brushes.”
Rain fell in July. The party was cut down to nine, the rest being sent back
to Adelaide. Sturt spent the next five months executing some rapid dashes
into the interior; but was blocked each time from reaching his objective, the
centre of Australia. He left on the map however, Sturt’s Great Stony
Desert. It is rather surprising to read that on the return of Sturt’s party to
Adelaide on the 19th January, the remainder of the sheep followed the drays
from habit as quietly and regularly as a rear-guard of infantry. Sturt’s eye-
sight was almost destroyed and his health much impaired by the hardships
endured on this and his previous expeditions. He was now 50 years of age.
Continuing his official duties, registrar general, colonial treasurer, and, later,
colonial secretary for six years, he retired on a pension in 1851. Returning
to England two years later, he lived a retired existence until his death in 1869
at the age of 74. The British Government somewhat tardily proposed to
create him a K.C.M.G., but too late. His widow was authorised to bear the
title to which a small pension was attached.
Ludwig Leichhardt now makes his bow. It is difficult to make a
proper valuation of this man. J. F. Mann, of the Sydney Survey Department
who was one of his party on the second abortive expedition, held rather strong
views. “As a leader Leichhardt was deficient in almost every requirement for
such an important post. He possessed neither patience, temper nor ingenuity.
The organ of locality was apparently absent.’’ Yet it is recorded: “Leich-
hardt has written his story deep on the popular memory; his name is
embalmed in poetry; he has a literature all to himself. Great Geographical
Societies gave him their gold medals, and enthusiastic Parliaments voted him
their money and a yet more enthusiastic public practically doubled the
amount.” Looking back after ninety years, it appears that Mann was right.
Friedrich Wilhelm Ludwig Leichhardt was exceptionally fortunate in com-
pleting his first expedition though it took him fifteen months to cover a
distance of about 2000 miles. Besides the leader, the party comprised, six
white men, a negro and two aboriginals. Gilbert, an ornithologist was
killed by blacks. Leichhardt on his return to Sydney at the end of March
1846, was received as one risen from the dead. Certainly he was able to
report a vast extent of settleable country, and therefore has to be given a
high niche amongst the explorers.


Leichhardt, nothing daunted by his experiences, or perhaps having
learnt nothing from them, set out again in November, 1846, on a most fool-
hardy journey; nothing less than a direct west route from the Darling Downs
right across the continent. He knew nothing of the country, nor for that
matter did anyone else. Sturt’s furthest north, did not quite reach the line;
but Sturt was then on his homeward route and no one had yet learned of his
results. He had with him seven white men including Surveyor Mann, and
botanist Daniel Bunce, two aboriginals, 270 goats, 180 sheep, 40 bullocks, 15
horses and 13 mules. It was “more like an expedition intended to found a
new colony than a group of adventurers.” The men all returned in eight
months; the stock had all strayed.
But whatever else may be said in blame of Leichhardt, his pertinacity
cannot justifiably be assailed. He again collected a party —none of his
former comrades would accompany him—six, of whom the second in com-
mand, was his brother-in-law Classen from Germany, Hentig, another German
and three British men completed the party; none of whom was a bushman.
Again an enormous mob of animals impeded progress. His last letter came
from a station on Muckadilla Creek, belonging to Mr. McPherson, dated the
3rd April, 1848. Since then nothing whatever has been heard, or found, of
them. All sorts of rumours, quite circumstantial in detail, have arisen; but
investigation, careful and costly, has dispersed all of them


FINISHING THE JOB.
Over hills and over plains
Quiet, vast and slumbrous reign
CHAPTER XIV.
THE centre still defied the inquisitiveness of man. E. B. Kennedy, who
had been an assistant surveyor in the Portland Bay District, Port Phillip
with C. J. Tyers and afterwards had accompanied Mitchell in his Victoria
River trips in 1845-7, set out in April, 1848, to explore a very different part of
Australia, Cape York Peninsula. Kennedy’s party comprised twelve white
men ; ten lost their lives. Little was accomplished; but an opportunity was
given on the part of the aboriginal, Jacky Jacky who was with Kennedy to
display wonderful heroism in his attempt to save his master’s life. Oddly
enough, Stapylton who had been Mitchell’s second in command on his 1836,
Australia Felix expedition was also killed in Queensland by the blacks. The
peninsula was afterwards explored by unofficial expeditions. Dalr\ mple,
Cunningham, Somers and Cobbold, in their own interests certainly examined
and opened up the country up to the Burdekin. While on the Cape York
question, the Jardine brothers must be mentioned. Aged twenty and twenty-
two, Alexander and Frank, set off from Rockhampton vchere their father had
been the police magistrate, to his new location at Somerset in the Albany
Passage, a settlement formed by the Imperial Government as a coaling
station and refuge. They got through in four months, losing nearly thirty
horses out of over forty : but the obstinate peninsula was conquered. William
Hann did some further work there in 1872, leading to the opening of the
Palmer River goldfield. William Hann, who, though born in England,
arrived in Victoria as a child, was one of those quiet bushmen who did more
than any of the more famous explorers to open up the back country. His
name is known in every part of northern Australia.
The time of the centre was approaching. Sturt’s flank attack had not
dispelled the great salt horse-shoe of Torrens cutting off all access to the
interior. A number of minor official and semi-official expeditions: Babbage
who appeared to be very dilatory, Goyder, later surveyor-general and author
of Goyder’s line of rainfall as limiting settlement, A. PI. Freeling, surveyor-
general and A. C. Gregory in bis second search for Leichhardt, showed that
the encircling lake was merely as scattered scries. These researches


extended from 1856 to 1859. The way to the centre was open. Hart in
1857 and the indomitable John McDouall Stuart, whose experience with
Sturt had not satisfied him, in 1858, worked out the country west of Lakes
Eyre and Torrens. The seasons had improved. Dr. Mueller, afterwards
the ever-popular Baron, who had been in Gregory’s first Leichhardt search
expedition in Northern Australia, kept preaching the crusade to Central
Australia. In 1860, McDouall Stuart assisted by his Adelaide friends Finke
and Chambers, penetrated the South Australian Desert, discovered a river
which he named the Finke and a remarkable sandstone formation which
received the name of Chamber’s Pillar. Crossing the MacDonnell Ranges
he reached the geographical centre. A hill there he christened Central Mt.
Sturt, which was later altered to Stuart. It is said that Governor MacDon-
nell was the agent. Another story is that the printers did it by pure accident.
At any rate, everyone is pleased that Stuart’s name should be so perpetuated.
An attempt was made quite recently by the Commonwealth to alter the time-
honoured name of Alice Springs to Stuart; but this did not please anyone, and
the town is still known as the Alice. Stuart pushed on to latitude 19—
Gregory in his first Leichhardt expedition had reached 20 south—so that there
was an overlap and from one aspect the continent had been crossed. Stuart
returned to Adelaide and started out again at the end of November, 1860, a
few months after Burke had left Melbourne. Repulsed again, he returned
for fresh equipment and made his final dash, his sixth counting all attempts
or his third major expedition. This time success crowned his assiduity.
Stuart buried an air tight tin case at Chamber’s Bay with the following
record, which fully describes the trip. “The exploring party under John
McDouall Stuart, arrived at this spot on the 25th July, 1862, having crossed
the entire continent of Australia from the Southern Sea to the Indian Ocean,
passing through the Centre. They left the City of Adelaide on the 26th
October 1861, and the most northern station of the Colony on the 21st day of
January, 1862. To commemorate this happy event, they have raised this
flag bearing his name. All well. God Save the Queen.” It was signed by
all members of the party. Stuart wrote somewhat gloriously and who may
blame him. “Thus have I, through the instrumentality of Divine Provi-
dence, been led to accomplish the main object of the expedition. . . . through
one of the finest countries man could wish to inhabit, good to the coast and
with a stream of running water within half a mile of the sea. ... If this
country is settled it will be one of the finest colonies under the Crown, suit-
able for the growth of any and everything. What a splendid country for
cotton.” Notwithstanding this nearly 74 years have passed and the con-
ditions remain unaltered. In fact, the work of Stuart wonderful as it was,
in crossing Australia from Adelaide to the Adelaide River was really a
calamity as it fixed that line in the public mind as the proper trans-continental
route. Sturt and the Victorian Exploration Committee (Burke and Wills
Expedition) were better advised in following the Darling River route to the
heads of the inland rivers rising in the Northern Territory and the Barkly
AUSTRALIA


Tableland. This route will eventually prevail and the existing" Oodnadatta
to Newcastle Waters road put in the discard.
Stuart naturally thought he was the first to cross Australia; but he was
merely the second. In August 1860, the great Burke and \\ ills expedition,
actually the child of Baron Mueller’s creation, set out in full panoply and
amidst popular acclaim. After a series of mishaps or rather blunders, almost
inconceivable, Burke with A ills, his draftsman, two men King and Gray, a
horse and six camels set oft in an impetuous dash, wKolly characteristic of
Burke the leader, from an immense waterhole, Napper Merrie on Cooper’s
Creek, across the 500 miles to the Gulf of Carpentaria. It is difficult to sur-
mise the motive of this excursion. Two months saw them in the mangrove
swamps of the Flinders estuarial waters. They were salt and rose and fell
with the tide. On the 21st February, 1861, the four, thoroughly exhausted
and ill, retraced their steps to the depot on Cooper’s Creek, taking two months
also to return there, three emaciated men just able to stagger. Gray had
been left behind in a shallow grave, a victim to dysentery and insufficient and
improper food. Brahe who had remained with the main party with instruc-
tions to remain three months and had stayed a month over that, had left that
morning. Burke who seem fated to blunder as a matter of course, did not
follow Brahe; but set off to pick up Gregory’s route of 1858 down to Strez-
lecki Creek to Fakes Callabouna and Blanche on to Mt. Hopeless where it
was understood there were settlers. It was soon found to be an impossible
task. Then came an aimless series of wanderings. Burke for several
reasons had alienated the natives, who had been very helpful, and did eventu-
ally preserve the life of the sole survivor, John King. The whole affair was
a pitiful display of incompetence on the part of the Melbourne Committee and
of the leader, Robert O’Hara Burke, who appeared to be actuated solely by a
desire to be the first to cross the continent; such matters as discovery of
settleable lands, or the mapping of natural features or even any regard for the
interests of the members of his party, were foreign to his nature. The tragic
series of blunders proved costly. Public money and private subscriptions
were spent to the extent of nearly £60,000, easily the largest expenditure ever
made in Australia on any expedition, and with nearly the least results. It is
in many ways comparable with the Scott Antarctic expeditions. The out-
standing features were the work done by William John £Vills, and his heroic
death.
Burke’s failure to return and the absence of any report from the expedi-
tion on which the attention of all Australians was concentrated, aroused
apprehension. Relief search expeditions were organised in various quarters.
Melbourne sent out Alfred William Howitt, one of Australia’s great men,
scientifically and administratively. This time the selection was as wise as
the other was foolish. Howitt reached the depot in ten weeks, where the
blacks led King, in a very low state, to Howitt. He survived some ten years


to enjoy the pension granted him by the Victorian Government. The bodies
of Burke and \\ ills were iljound ‘and later taken to Melbourne where they
■were accorded a public funeral. The well known monument by Charles
Summers, which used to so long dominate Collins Street, and now watches
o\ ei Spiing Street was erected. Gordon wrote a poem on this monument,
entitled “Gone.”
In Collins Street standeth a statue tall
A statue tall, on a pillar of stone,
Telling its story to great and small
Of the dust reclaimed from the sand-waste lone;
Weary and wasted, worn and wan
heebie and faint, and languid and low,
He lay on the desert a dying man;
Who has gone, my friends, where we all must go.
South Australia chose a rather remarkable man, John McKinlay, a
Scottish \ outh who had come with his brothers to an uncle, a prosperous
squatter at Dungog and who still a youth, had made one of a procession of
young men who settled the lower Murray; Ross of Meilman; Morey of
Boomiaricool (Euston) ; John Hawdon of Kulnine; and McKinlay of Ki.
Tatei McKinlay got Take Victoria Station. He w r as a splendid bushman and
was well equipped by the South Australian Government. He w r ent almost
straight to the northern over-flows of the Cooper, where he found Gray’s
gi a\ c. Being informed of Howutt s discovery, McKinlay pushed on right
through Queensland to the Bow r en and Burdekm Rivers, then being stocked
up. Although he did not find Burke, he did find a lot of splendid grass
country. Ihe South Australian Government awarded him a bonus of £lOOO.
Banquets, receptions and gold watches showered on McKinlay. Another
Scot, Landsborough, was sent by boat to the Gulf of Carpentaria. He dis-
co\ ered the Herbert and Gregory Rivers and much fine land. Eventually he
reached the A\ arrego and from there returned to Melbourne, where he also
was duly feted. He left numerous trees marked L, which have since been
the origin of many Leichhardt stories. The Queensland Government sent a
fourth relief party under Frederick Walker. He zigzagged Queensland from
east to west. Between them all, there w T as little left to search or to discover
save in the western half of the continent.
Tn 1861, Frank T. Gregory made a number of discoveries on the north
western coast, discovering the Fortcscue, Ashburton, Oakover and the De
Grey rivers, as w r ell as much pastoral country. For some years after,
exploring remained in abeyance. Then came a great revival. Ernest Giles,
in 1872, the trans-continental telegraph line being just completed, set out on
the first of his attempts to cross to the settled districts of Western Australia.
He was not to succeed until 1875, with the aid of camels supplied by Elder.
In the meantime, Colonel Warburton, formerly Commissioner of Police, but
at the time commanding the South Australian Volunteer forces, supported bv


Thomas Elder and Walter Hughes, two of South Australia's leading citizens,
led an expedition from Central Mount Stuart to reach Perth; but managed
only to reach the Oakover in extremis. Warburton, a military man also bf
the Burke type, failed to make any observations of value. In fact, he damned
the whole country, much of which has since been successfully settled. Still
the wastes had been crossed. W. C. Grosse had an attempt at the general
objective, which was a direct continental route to Perth; but was driven back
as had been Giles on two successive attempts. John Forrest, who had four
years before made a trip along the Great Australian Bight, not along Eyre’s
coastal line, but further inland, to Adelaide, was selected along with his
brother, Alexander, to improve upon Warburton’s line. Starting from the
Murchison, he managed, rather providentially aided by unusual rains, to reach
Giles’ early track and win through to the telegraph line in September, 1874,
after a five months struggle. Practically nothing now remained. Small
bits of blank on the map were filled in by Tietkins. Giles’ second, David
Carnegie, Ernest Favenc the writer, Harry Stockdale, David Lindsay, F. H.
Mann and F. S. Brockman. The last named in fact, did his work on the
northern coast line of Western Australia in this century, so that the term
pioneer seems rather out of place. The discovering, exploring and reporting
had been done ; the occupying and developing had to be done.


SQUATTING*
Though rude our roof, it is weather proof,
And at the end of the days
We sit and smoke over yarn and joke
By the bush fire’s sturdy blaze.
CHAPTER XV.
SOME description has already been given of the official attitude towards
squatting, and of the legal shackles placed upon it. Now some
description of the life itself in the clays of the pioneers will be attempted. It
was a rough life though with many compensations. Adam Lindsay Gordon
showed a keen appreciation of its brighter side.
Twas merry in the glowing morn, among the gleaming grass
To wander as we’ve wandered many a mile.
And blow the cool tobacco cloud and watch the white wreaths pass
Sitting loosely in the saddle all the while.
’Twas merry mid the blackwoods when we spied the station roofs
To wheel the wild scrub cattle at the yard
With a running fire of stock-whips and a fiery run of hoofs
Oh! the hardest day was never then too hard.
For successful squatting, natural water supplies of a permanent nature
were as essential as feed itself. There was no justification for the expendi-
ture of any money on improvements when not the slightest security of tenure
was obtainable. So the homestead was put up nearby a waterhole. Living
made under these conditions was hard but the colonists were accustomed to
that from 1788 onward. A custom, which can best be described as a gentle-
man’s agreement, one which was beyond the control of the Commissioner of
Crown Lands but he generally had sufficient sense not to interfere, was that
a newcomer never “sat down” or squatted nearer than six miles from an
existing hut or out station. This radius of three miles was fixed by the
system of shepherding, which reads to-day almost like a romance. Just as
costly improvements, buildings, water supply, etc., were out of the question, so


was fencing. Even on the best sheep to the acre country, the actual run was
at least ten acres to the sheep and in many parts it was thirty. The area was
fixed by the shepherd and his flock’s ability to go out and come home. A few
“crawlers” as old and sick sheep were termed —it was then used as a term of
opprobrium by shepherds, a usage still in vogue in unpolished circles —greatly
reduced the carrying capacity of an out-station. Flocks, at first shepherded
in the rough hilly country of New South Wales, were as low as 300, the
maximum possible being considered to be 520. When the squatters burst
through into the grassy plains of the interior and of Port Phillip, the figures
remained unaltered until the cruel forces of necessity brought the figure up to
1200. Anticipating a little; when the goldfields took away all the pastor-
alists’ men ; when they “sloped” as the slang of the day had it, to the diggings
it was not long before it was found that the flocks did better for themselves
without the shepherd. Expenses were thus cut down; increase in flocks was
greater and the wool quality even improved. So fences had to come.
Peter Cunningham, who had been surgeon on transports to Port Jack-
son for a number of years, became a settler early in the nineteenth century.
In 1821 he published a book, “Two Years In New South Wales”, embodying
his own experiences and containing much useful knowledge and hints for new
settlers. He describes the shepherding system as follows : —“The sheep here
are divided into flocks of about three hundred breeding ewes, or four
hundred wethers in each. Every flock has a shepherd who takes his sheep
out to graze before sunrise in the morning, and brings them in after sunset at
night (some graziers would not allow their sheep out until the dew was off
the grass). He keeps always before the flock to check the forward among
them from running onward and wearying out the old, sick and lame making
all thus feed quietly, so as to keep them in good condition. In summer, he
sees too that they have water during the heat of the day; and in drawing up
under a tree for shade when it is too hot for feeding, he passes occasionally
gently among them, spreads them out and makes them take a fresh position
in as small groups as possible under another tree, because when they remain
crowded too long together in one place, they are apt to become broken-
winded. . . . Three flocks are always penned together in contiguous hurdles
under the charge of a watchman who counts them regularly in at night and
the shepherds again count them out in the morning. The watchman has n
small weather-proof watch-box to sleep in and is assisted by a watch-dog; he
keeps up a good fire which generally deters all native dogs from approaching
the fold. The hurdles are made of light swamp oak, ironbark or gum,
measuring seven feet long with five bars so close together that a young lamb
cannot creep through, and usually cost about 1/6 apiece. All branches of
trees are carefully removed from the hurdled grounds before the sheep are
driven in to prevent any of the latter being staked; the hurdles too are never
pitched where ant-hills are or under a tree with rotten boughs upon it, while


the trees with black bark are carefully denuded thereof to prevent discolora-
tion of the wool. Sheep are subject to few diseases in this climate; and
(what is extraordinary) are not at all liable to fly-blow even though wounded
In the shearing. This freedom of the sheep from that pest, the fly-blow, so
common in England, is the more extraordinary as meat is blown here by our
bottle-flies as soon as killed. By far the greater portion of our sheep are still
cross-bred. In fact until within these few years, Mr. John Macarthur was the
only gentleman in the colony possessing the pure bloods; but importations
have latterly taken place to such an extent that the pure Merino breed will
be able through their rapid increase to supply all our flocks with choice rams.
1 he average present weight of the fleece of our crossbred ewes and wethers
is three pounds, but of the pure bloods only about two pounds—the ewe fleece
of the latter seldom exceeding one pound and a half.” Another settler, the
Rev. David MacKenzie in his “Ten Years in Australia” dealing with the
country in the late thirties, describes squatting thus: —“To squat is common,
is right, is fashionable. Then comes the other question : What it is to squat
and what you may, or can, or might, could, would or should do, in order that
you may or can squat? Push beyond the farthest out-stations, make all
possible search and enquiry as you proceed, and as a means of further secur-
ing the object of your excursion, stipulate to give a trifle to some stockman
connected with one of the farthest out-stations on condition that he shall
accompany you and endeavour to find for you a suitable place for your flocks
and herds. This successfully accomplished you set ofif with your flocks of
say 600 each. For these will be needed in each case, a shepherd and a hut-
keeper who is a watchman by night. The daily duty of a shepherd ends
about sunset when he either counts his flock over to the watchman or, as is
most commonly the case, drives his sheep without counting into the hurdles.
From the time that they are driven into the hurdles until after breakfast next
morning, the sheep are under the care of the watchman who sleeps in a wooden
box placed near the folds so as to prevent the attacks of native dogs, etc. It is
also the duty of the watchman to shift daily the hurdles or to keep the fold
well swept. Dirty yards are the prolific source of disease. Ffurdles can
now be bought for £5 per hundred; about 48 hurdles, that is twelve square,
are sufficient for a flock of breeding ewes. Each shepherd is allowed to have
one dog and a watchman two, though some of the largest stockholders in the
Colony allow none. Shearing is commonly done in large sheds. A man
who is at all expert at this sort of work, can shear about 60 sheep a day, for
which he is paid at the rate of from two to three shillings per score, with
board and lodging; one man is employed gathering the fleeces as they are
shorn, another is folding them up and handing them to a man who is pressing
them into a large bag called a woolpack, capable of containing under ordinary
pressure, about 250 lbs. of wool, or about 100 average fleeces. This woolpack
is put empty into a strong square box made of wood on which a man is
employed in tramping and beating with feet, pole or spade, each fleece as it
is put in the pack. When filled, these packs arc called bales. One of our


ordinary wool-drays drawn by eight bullocks will carry fifteen to twenty bales.
The drays carry back supplies such as tea, sugar, tobacco, soap, salt, slops,
etc. sufficient for twelve months.”
MacKenzie then deals with the question of buildings. “First a hut for
your men and another hut for yourself. These two huts you and your hut-
keeper, with the assistance of two of the black natives, may build in three or
four days. It will perhaps appear incredible to you that a dwelling-house
twenty feet long, twelve or fourteen feet wide and with the walls six or seven
feet high, should be put up in two days. Yet, I can assure you such a
wonderful achievement as this, has often been accomplished, and your sur-
prise will probably cease when I tell you that the walls and roof of such a
house are bark and that it is quite common to see a sheet of bark eight feet
wide and nine feet long. One blackfellow can cut off the trees with his
tomahawk, twenty such sheets a day. In addition to the hut, the following
articles are generally allowed to every sheep station, one musket, one iron pot
(three legged), one frying pan, one spade, one bucket, one wood axe, one beef
cask, one sieve, one steel hand mill, with which to grind the wheat, and some
weighing machine for issuing the weekly rations; also one hammer, one or
two gimlets and a few hurdle nails. Every shepherd is expected to provide
himself with a blanket, two quart-pots, pint pot and clasp knife.”
Little space is accorded the fair sex in early accounts of the squatter’s
doings. There is good reason for this. An early writer, no less a person than
J. AVood Beilby, author of the “Dog in Australia” and other works, held in
1849 the Western Strathdownie Run on the Lower Glenelg in Victoria. In an
interesting series of articles in the “Port Phillip Gazette” he described his
“Wanderings in the Western Wilds or Rough Notes of a Journey in Search of
a Run.” This journey in which he ran considerable risk of perishing by thirst
was through a large part of the previously impenetrated Mallee scrub. Beilby
after passing through what he terms the Lesser Mallay, now known as the
Little Desert, came upon some married occupants of runs and was so hospit-
ably treated that he rhapsodised over the drawbacks of a society without the
female sex. “It is pleasing after a long interval of the usual monotonous life
of bachelor squatters to embrace an opportunity of making intimate acquaint-
ance with families of intelligence and refinement. , . It often excites surprise
that so small a proportion of thriving squatters marry. The cause is usuallv
referred to the uncertainty of their prospects in reference to squatting regula-
tions and the frequent depressions in the market value of their produce ; but I
conceive the reason to be a more simple one, namely the actual difficulty of
making acquaintance with young females in domestic life. Single squatters
enjoy few opportunities of cultivating social intercourse with the opposite sex
of their own rank in the bush and, during their periodical visits to town, are too
apt as a class, to conduct themselves in a manner inimicable to their reception
in terms of intimacy with families having more regard for the sterling nqoral


worth of their friends and connections than for their pecuniary prospects or
superficial recommendations. Ladies are thus seldom met with except in
scenes of fashion and gaiety, which, whilst we are momentarily captivated by
personal charms and accomplishments, have of themselves a tendency to con-
vince us that their votaries are scarcely suitable to the position of companions
and help-meets through all the hardships, cares and ills of a bush life. . . .
We want wives as intellectual (not blue-stocking) companions, sound counsel-
lors, warm sympathisers, apt instructors and bright examples, not as mere
playmates or even efficient housekeepers; though the latter is a desirable quali-
fication as a lady entering upon a permanent residence in the bush ought to be
competent and willing to do anything usually falling to the lot of female ser-
vants, in case of temporary deprivation of such, or finding, as is very
frequently the case, that a new servant requires to be taught every part of
her duty. There are some squatters no doubt who, though in comfortable if
not affluent pecuniary circumstances encourage, if they do not compel, the
ladies of their families to dispense with menial assistance and inure them-
selves to servitude, not only in the usual routine of general house servants,
but sometimes as tailors or even field labourers.”


THE STORY OF THE SHEEP.
A hundred flocks o’er smiling pastures roam
And hark! the music of the harvest home!
CHAPTER XVI.
A LREADY the tale of the early clays of New South Wales and its tribu-
lations under its first naval governors has been told; and a little added
of the first victories of the people, the granting of the representation, and the
wresting of the right to “squat” on the lands claimed by the Crown as its
Personal property; a fiction, like the right divine of Kings, forced upon the
populace by sheer dint of re-iteration. It cannot too often be hammered
into the minds of Australia that its greatest asset is its wide spreading plains
of grass; of salt bush; of mulga on which its 120 millions of sheep live and
grow wool. One man forecast, and with justification, so great an expansion
of the continent’s people that our exports of wheat, butter, meat and other
products may dwindle with the consequent increased local consumption to
insignificant amounts; but our wool can never be so used. It may be
exported as a manufactured product; but Australia must always produce for
the rest of the world. It not only excells all the rest in quality of wmol, but
also in production, both per head and in total. Although the pastoralists of
Australia own but eighteen per cent, of the world’s flocks, they produce nearly
thirty per cent, of its clip, that is in weight. If quality be taken into account,
the disproportion m Australia’s favour is greater. So Australia must always
remain a wmol exporting country.
I here is no victory over the opposing forces of nature credited to man
so great as that of breeding fine wmol. Whatever wonders may have been
achiexed in the mechanical world, such as the modern printing press, or in
the electrical world of wireless and television, they do not reach the level of
wool-breeding. Not only has that result been reached by the life-long con-
centration of many brains, solely devoted to the unique aim ; but its main-
tenance requires as great attention and devotion. Truly the retention of the
high standards achieved requires as much vigilance as the breeding itself.
Nature is always on the alert, never sleeping, to retrieve her losses. Hence
the necessity of keeping the industry aside altogether from any Governmental
or departmental interference. It is solely due to personal pride of achieve-
ment, to the sense of successful rivalry, that the great success, is due and not
to the purely material financial return.


It has already been told that Governor Phillip’s sheep, some forty-four
only, were all lost, and consequently that wise ruler cannot be accorded any
credit in regard to wool. The Daedalus sent in 1792 by Vancouver, then on
the north west coast of America, to carry stores to the New Holland settle-
ment, picked up at Monterey—along with some other stock —twelve ewes and
six rams. Four ewes only survived to be landed. They, undoubtedly of
Spanish merino blood, have not been recorded as leaving any strain behind
them. A few words about the Merino, easily the leading breed as far as
Australia is concerned and for everywhere as to quality of wool, may be
pardoned. A migrant from Asia, they developed in Spain for more than
twenty centuries and were a considerable factor in that country’s wealth and
power. Their export without the King’s warrant was a capital offence, and
if the King desired to make a right royal and munificent gift to a neighbour-
ing monarch, it took the form of a few sheep of the merino breed.
Although the vogue of the merino was in full swing in 1788 when
Australia began, there were no direct importations from Spain, or at least no
records of such, prior to the settlement of Port Phillip in 1836. Notwith-
standing most of the really fine-woolled sheep which were the basis of great
Australian flocks were of undiluted Spanish blood.
The reasons for this are the gradual dispersion of fine Spanish blood
over the continent in the latter part of the 18th century. As early as 1766,
Prince Xavier of Saxony, one of the Spanish House, and fairly close to Carlos
lIP, the reigning monarch in Spain, was able to get some of the best Spanish
merino stock, particularly from the stud of Cardinal Negretti. Xavier
distributed these around Saxony and soon bade fair to outshine Spain itself;
but the merino was the outcome of years of hardship and much difficulty in
getting its food. The pampering methods of the Saxon flock-masters,
housing, hand feeding and rugging, deteriorated the frame and lowered the
stamina of the once-while hardy animal. Still the blood was kept pure and
it had a large influence in building up the Australian flocks. Prussia, Russia,
Austria, all followed suit and generally with disappointing results. Want of
experience—the Spanish had fifty to sixty generations of it—-and unsuit-
ability of pastures combined again with pampering, were the cause. France
was a little later. The Royal flock at Rambouillet began with the approach-
ing end of royalty in 1786, and by 1800 became famous. Italy was even
earlier. In England King George HI. had imported merinos from Spain in
1787 and again in 1791, those in the latter year coming from the Negretti
flocks. A Merino Breeders’ Society was formed in 1811. Sir Joseph Banks
was its president, at one time it had at least one member who grazed over
6000 sheep. Mr. Thomas Henty, a name to be connected with the early days
of all our colonies, Western Australia, Van Diemen’s Land, Victoria, and
particularly New South Wales, though a banker was one of the most success-
ful breeders.


Lieutenant John Macarthur, of whom so far we have heard not much
to his credit, was one of the earliest—the earliest actually—of the officers of
the New South Wales Corps to make a success of agriculture. He also was
the superintendent of the Government Farm at Toongabbie. Macarthur has
left his own story of his wool breeding start. “In the year 1794 I purchased
from an officer, 60 Bengal ewes and lambs which had been imported from
Calcutta; and very soon after this I procured from the captain of a transport,
two Irish ewes and a young ram. The Indian sheep produced coarse hair
and the wool of the Irish sheep was then valued at no more than ninepence a
pound. By crossing the two breeds 1 had the satisfaction to see the lambs
of the Indian ewes bear a mingled fleece of hair and wool. This circumstance
originated the idea of producing fine wool in New South Wales. In the year
1796 (I believe) the two sloops of war on the station (the “Supply”, Captain
Kent, and the “Reliance”, Captain Waterhouse) were sent to the Cape of
Good Hope, and as the commanders were friends of mine, I requested them to
enquire if there were any wool-bearing sheep at the Cape. At the period of
their arrival at the settlement there was a flock of Merino for sale, from which
about twenty were purchased. Of these I was favoured with four ewes and
two rams. ... In 1801, I took to England specimens of the pure Merino wool
and the best of the cross-breed; and having submitted them to the inspection
of a committee of manufacturers, they reported the Merino wool was equal to
any Spanish wool, and the cross-bred of considerable value. Thus
encouraged I purchased nine rams and one ewe from the Royal flock at Kew,
and determined to direct my attention to the improvement of my flocks. I
only landed here five rams and one ewe from the sheep purchased from the
Royal flock. It is from this source alone my present stock has been raised.”
1 here has been some dispute as to the details of the foregoing statement; but
no exception can be taken to the concluding statement. The Camden flocks
were bred from the Royal Kew merinoes. They still survive there, and a
flock without any intermixture and with many attractive qualities, though
too light in the clip for commercial purposes is now, after many shifts of
residence to be found at Ercildoune”, Major H. A. Currie’s home. The
Gordon merinoes from the Cape went also to two famous breeders, the Rev.
Samuel Marsden and William Cox. Marsden soon worked over to breeding
mutton sheep. Captain Cox, for he was another officer of the New South
Wales Corps, did better with the few Gordons he obtained from Captain
Waterhouse. By introducing fresh blood from time to time, the Cox strain
became so outstanding that at the Paris Exhibition of 1878, E. K. Cox
obtained the Grand Prix for wool grown at Mudgee. From the Coxes
originated the famous Rawden stud.
Still the Macarthur example was followed. Mr. Thomas Henty sent
out ten young rams to Sydney. One at the figure of £l5O went to William
Cox. Henty continued to send out sheep until finally in 1829 he sent his
sons, following a little later himself. Their adventures are well known.


Then came the turn of the companies. The Van Diemens Land Company,
whose local representative was Edward Curr, the father of Separation for
Victoria, spent over £20,000 in the five years following 1825, in purchasing
merinos, principally ewes. As they cost over £l5 each, after all charges
were met, the total importations were a little over 1200. 1 hey had a great
influence on Tasmanian flocks and perhaps even more on those of 1 ort
Phillip. Its importations of pure bred cattle were as important to Austra-
lia. The Australian Agricultural Company about the same time brought
out 700 merino sheep. The conditions of transport in those days of sail with
five to six months voyages at best and unsuitable food, need to be born in
mind to realise what that seemingly small figure really does mean. Three
hundred were Saxon Electoral blood, an equal number from Rambouillet and
one hundred and twenty from the English breeders. Over seven hundred
were safelv landed. There were any number of individuals also concerned
in the merino boom of the late thirties. A few names, picked at random, of
the importers of pure bred merinoes prior to the Port Phillip era, 1835, are of
interest, William Archer, Gillis and Horne, George Parramore, Captain Bell,
William Dawson, James Bettington, James Walker, William Riley, Richard
Jones, Walter Davidson, Willis and Mclntyre and Edward Davey Wedge.
It was not only the male sex, however, that can claim recognition in the
great work of building up the Australian merino wool industry. Two
families are concerned in the following romance. Furlonge, a bonnet laird
near Glasgow and Templeton, a banker in the city, were related. Templeton
died leaving his affairs, due to the speculations of his accountant, in a parlous
state. Forlonge’s eldest son was threatened with consumption. Sir Thomas
Brisbane who came from Dargs in Ayrshire, was a friend of the family. He
had just returned from his governorship in Australia and was enthusiastic on
wool growing. He urged in the strongest terms emigration to the south
land for that purpose, and for the effect of the climate on William Forlonge’s
trouble. Incidently it had the desired effect. Mrs. Forlonge and her two
sons went to Germany to learn merino sheep breeding. In this they spent
four years. Then travelling from stud to stud, the mother and her boys
picked out a hundred of the best they could get and drove them on foot across
Germany to Hamburg, where they shipped their precious charges to Hull.
Such unheard of proceedings caused much attention and at least once they
were arrested. Their first lot was sold to the great Arctic explorei, Sn
William Parry for the Australian Agricultural Company. Parry took them
to New South Wales where they formed later the basis of the Peel River
Stud. Mrs. Forlonge and Andrew returned to the Continent and picked up
another hundred. William then took these to Australia. Pausing at Van
Diemen’s Land, Governor Arthur persuaded young Forlonge to stay in the
island where a grant of land in the midlands named Kenilworth was given
him. Andrew returned to Saxony and accumulated another 130. Those he


Year
Sheep
Number
per Head
of Population
Wool
Clipped
Lb. per Sheep
Wool Produced
Total
Lb.
1836
41,000
183
m ..
50,000
1840
782,000
76
..
900,000
1860
5,781,000
11
4%
24,300,000
1910
12,938,000
10
8
102,000,000
1933
17,196,000
9
10
171,000,000
took to Sydney, in a brig chartered by Mrs. Templeton, who, with her eight
children and Mr. and Mrs. Forlonge accompanied him. It is difficult to allot
the credit fairly ; both women were outstanding examples of pioneers. The
Forlonge sheep left their stamp on more than one famous flock. There is at
Seven Creeks, the run first taken up in 1838 by Mrs. Janet Templeton and later
long in the hands of the Forlonges, the grave of the woman who trudged so
many weary German miles to gather the Saxony merinos for Australia. Two
great women.
Page after page might be written of the origin of the many great flocks,
tracing their foundation here and there. The gradual uprising in the sixties
of the Western District fine wools to the surprise and somewhat to the annoy-
ance of the older flockmasters of New England, was not so much due after all
to the continual buying of outside blood as to continual culling of undesirable
and selecting of desirable characteristics. There are still many to the fore
who will recollect the interminable discussions and even quarrels over the
introduction of the Vermont strain from the States. The “devil’s grip” and
other faults transmitted by them have not yet been completely eliminated.
Rambouillet sheep were imported from time to time. In the late seventies, an
agricultural professor from the National Agricultural Institute of France
hi ought out some rams and with much criticism of the local merino thought
he could sell many of them. He failed. There is, as in all wool questions, a
difference of opinion as to the value of the French sheep; but certain it seems
that the later days of the Rambouillet were their worst. The greatest
evidence that the development of merino wool has been local though from
imported stock in the first instance, lies in the following figures of the wool
results in Victoria.
During the pastoral period, 1836-1851 with nearly a hundred sheep for each
person, the yield of wool was below two hundred weights for each; now with
under ten sheep a head, the yield is nearly one hundred pounds; which simply
means the yield has increased five fold by careful selection and breeding.
Dach colony has had its period of supremacy. First of course, New
South Wales; but the mother colony was quickly supplanted by Van Diemen’s


New
South
Wales
Tasmania
West Australia
Victoria
H.
C.
S.
H. C.
S.
H
C.
S.
H. C.
S.
1800
.2
1
6
1830
.. 12
263
536
3 86
681
1850
.. 132
1739
7367
18 83
1822
2
11
141
17 347
5318
1900.
...481
1983
40021
32 166
1684
68
339
2434
392 1602
10842
1920
.. 663
3375
33852
39 208
1571
179
850
6533
488 1575
12171
1933
.. 529
3141
50000
30 251
2000
157
857
10305
373 1901
17196
South Aust
ralia
Queensland Northern Territory
Australia
H.
C.
s.
H. C.
S.
H
C.
S.
H. C.
S.
1800
.2 1
6
1830
15 349
1217
1850
. . 6
60
984
3 72
1078
178 2312
16710
1900
.. 167
215
5235
457 4078
10339
12
258
48
1609 8641
70633
1920
.. 268
376
6360
741 6455
17405
38
660
6
2416 13499
77898
1933
.. 190
313
7941
452 5535
19256
33
780
20
1764 12778
106718
Maxima:
2527 14441
112927
Year:
(1918) (1921)
(1932)
H — H
orses.
C — Cattle.
s
— Sheep
Land, which in turn had to yield the palm to its offspring, the Port Phillip
District of \ ictoria. Then, although the finest of fine wool championship
remained with the Western District, the Riverina forged to the front with
heavier cuts and bigger frames, more robust constitutions. Great was the
rejoicing north of the Murray and equally strong the fury of the Western
District breeders. Charges of Lincoln impurity and other admixtures were
hurled at the Riverina men, forgetting that the best foundation blood there
came from \ ictoria itself. South Australia had to have its turn next and still
rules. The names of Murray, Mount Crawford and Rhine Park; of Hawker
of Cal cannia and Anama; and of the Canowie Pastoral Company; are known
throughout the Continent. The days of the wrinkly sheep which had such
an enormous, almost incredible, development, are over and the large framed
plain-bodied type is gradually replacing it. Other breeds are being evolved.
The Corriedale, once a crossbred, is now a distinct type, and one that bids fair
to be heard of in the future as a wool-producer. The exigencies of a people
call for varieties of sheep known as mutton breeds, but these, though intern-
ally necessary for a community, have nothing to do with the national pros-
perity due to wool production.
The following Table shows the movements in stock.
AUSTRALIA’S STOCK PROGRESSION:
(All Figures in Thousands)
No allowance is made in the stock figures for slaughtering for local consumption and
export. Though the reduction in cattle is of a seasonal character, that of horses is
definitely due to the introduction of the internal combustion engine in the farm and
on the land.


HORNED CATTLE AND HORSES.
Hark! the bells on distant cattle
Waft across the range.
CHAPTER XVII.
IN 1813 there were 21,000 horned cattle, and in 1821, 68,000. They were
mainly of the Bengal buffalo variety with smooth skins, short snail horns
and humpy shoulders. The Rev. Mr. Marsden had imported polled Suffolks
while John Macarthur, along with his brother Hannibal, had the Red Devon
and Lancashire breeds, which with their long spreading horns yielded the
bulk of the working bullocks which up to 1820 and later did all the work of
the farms and the roads. Horses, both blood and Arab, were of fair quality
but all light and not suitable for farm use. W. Throsby already referred to
as an explorer was also a very successful beef breeder both for himself and
Sir John Jamison, some of his bullocks off his Bong Bong estate killing at
1400 lb. No one at this time contemplated the development of dairying in
Australia for export. In fact, the continuance of the importation of both
butter and cheese seemed then inevitable; but butter was exported as early as
the late seventies. In 1933, no less than 420,000,000 pounds of butter were
made in Australia. Victoria leading with 145,000,000 pounds and every
state contributing, even the Federal Capital territory, except that Cinderella,
the Northern Territory. The two land companies with which Australia was
blessed —some used a word with an opposite sense—the Australian Agricul-
tural and Van Diemen’s Land Companies, both rendered yeoman service to
the colonists by their extensive and repeated importations of well bred stock.
Still all these cattle were of the beef type, Herefords predominating. Any
importations of dairying cattle were but a few from the Channel Islands,
Jerseys and Alderneys.
It was the Victorian breeders in Shorthorn and other breeds—Merinos
and Lincolns also add to their laurels —who virtually made Victoria the stud
farm for the whole of Australia. It was through their efforts that when
dairying, fostered by the bonus system and establishment of creameries came
into being in the late eighties, the annual return per head was £7/10/-. This
contrasts with the figure about the same time of £2/10/- for Colorado when
that state started milking. The Shorthorn herds of Victoria were begun by
the Bolden Brothers, Armyne, George, Lemuel, Sandford, and the Rev. John
Satterthwaite, all good club men who came of a well-known stock breeding


family of Lancashire who used both the Booth and Bates strains. Other
names of those who followed and did greater work were Thos. Robertson, W.
J. Clarke, Neil Black, Robert Morton, Thomas Manifold, Jeremiah Ware,
Robert McDougall, C. B. Fisher, Samuel Gardiner and Thomas W.
McCulloch. 1 here were some fancy prices:—Fisher obtained 4000 guineas
from Gardiner for the Duke of Tregunta Bth, imported by him; Morton
of the Mount Derrimut herd got at auction 16C0 guineas for the Earl of
Geneva in 1875, and by private contract in the same year, 2500 guineas for
the imported Oxford Cherry Duke. This was excelled at the sale of the
F. F. s. Messrs. Robertson, in the following year when the Roan Duchess, a
heifer, brought 2,200 guineas, the highest price ever given for a heifer in
the world.
Stations were divided into dairy, heifer and cattle stations. Not
that there was any milking done—milk and butter were unknown for many
of the early years (butter for the women folk when they appeared on the
scene came potted from Ireland) —a dairy station was where the sedate
bovine matrons had and reared their calves. The females when weaned
were drafted to the heifer station where they remained until of age to return
to the dairy station where the bulls roamed uncontrolled. The steers were
sent to the cattle station, the principal station with the homestead, to be
later sold as bullocks for the town markets but mainly for boiling down.
The annual branding and marking was always superintended by the owner,
though exception may be taken to the statement by one writer that on these
occasions the owner cut and branded himself.
Green hide was almost universal in use in the early days. There was
justification for the old saying, embalmed in song, that green hide and
stringy bark are the mainstay of Australia. “In this colony, everything is
held, tied or mended with green hide. Our loads of wool and hurdles are tied
by green hide; our bullocks and horses are roped with green hide; our
horses are tethered and our bullocks hobbled with green hide; our saddles
and bridles are mended with green hide; our milch cows are leg-roped with
green hide; our calves are tied up with green hide; our broken fences are
mended with green hide; our bucket and pot handles are made of green
hide; our spurs are tied on with green hide; our stock and bullock whips
are made of green hide; our door-hinges and hasps are made of green hide;
our house frames and roofs are secured with green hide; our harness and
bullock chains are mended with green hide; our wheat is led home tied
with green hide; our wheel washers are made of green hide; green hide
instead of canvas covers the stretchers on which we sleep. Of green hide
we make sieves; of green hide many a convict has been taught obedience.
But time would fail me to enumerate half the virtues and uses of green hide.
Suffice it to say, that green hide, horses and stringy bark are the grand
support and stay of Australia; without them the whole fabric would totter
and fall."


In 1813, there were 19(30 horses, the number increasing to 4000 by
1821. Cart horses were almost unknown though fine carriage, gig and
saddle horses were common. The Arab stallion, Model, who had been a
long while in the Colony, was considered the best sire in the early years;
but the English thoroughbred came quickly to the fore, such horses as
Steeltrap and Bay Camerton obtaining the popular favour. Prices were
high. A good hack brought at least £4O and anything fit for a race course
ran from £l5O to £2OO. It was quickly found that Australian bred horses
became remarkably hardy and able to sustain great journeys without undue
fatigue. This was early recognised outside Australia. A writer in the
early forties states that there was then a great demand from India for the
Australian horse, already known as a Waler. Shiploads of them had already
been sent thither selling remarkably well, at an average of £BO, while the
expense of freight, fodder, etc. was only £2O. There were at the time of
writing 1844, three agents of the East India Company in New South Wales
buying horses for its service. The bullock which had been used for all
purposes of draught both on the farm and on the road was being superseded
by the horse team and as a consequence, cart horses were greatly in demand.
The colonial horses were remarkable for their toughness and capacity
for enduring fatigue and hunger. “I have often ridden the same horse fifty
and sometimes sixty miles without a bite of food of any kind; and I
repeatedly rode the same horse a journey of four hundred miles in ten days
during which time he ate nothing except the wild grass he picked up at night
while I was sleeping at the foot of a tree.” Probably the toughest horses,
whether on mountain work or on the plains, came from the Monaro country,
although the horses bred by the Millers on Pine Plains were hard to beat.
Both districts were rich in lime; but one explanation is that the horses were
not broken in so earlv as became the fashion later.


WHALING DAYS.
Ihe Captains sailed to Southern Seas, and sailed the Spanish Main
And some sailed out beyond the World and some sailed home again.
CHAPTER XVIII.
VVV I A PING is really a modern pursuit, a word which seems quite
appiopriate. Bay-whaling is as old, it is true, as European occupation
of the east coast of America north of New York; but it was not until 1712,
that a Nantucket coastal or Bay whaler, when blown out to sea, chased and
took a sperm whale. This just about put an end to the Bay fishing, the
sperm oil being so much superior to that of the black fish. England soon
joined in. London, Liverpool, Leith, Dundee, Whitby and particularly Hull,
soon became whaling ports. The northern Arctic, on the edge of the ice,
Greenland etc., were the favourite localities; but soon the Southern Atlantic
came into the picture. Samuel Enderby and Sons, of London was probably
the leading firm of whalers. In fact it was the oil boat, that is a boat
conveying oil from the Nantucket whalers catches to London, of that firm
which took to Boston, the famous chests of tea which were thrown into the
sea by the angry colonists. The consequent revolution destroyed for the
Americans their new whaling industry. The British whalers spread all over
the Southern Atlantic and soon cast covetous eves on the Pacific. The
Enderby firm writing in 1789, year one of Australian settlement, stated that
one of the whaling captains who had been on a trading trip to China, had
seen more Spermaceti whales around Java and in the Straits of Sunda, than
he had ever seen before. The East India Company—one should write the
Honourable East India Company—held a monopoly of trading in the Seas
east of the Cape. This had been granted by the British Government and
governed its subjects, if no one else. Enderby pointed out that an unlimited
right of fishing in all seas should be granted the whaling industry; that
the British adventurers —the term still survived and it is a pretty one—
would soon explore the most distant parts and the settlements of New
Holland would be often visited as there were many whales in these seas.
His firm was fitting out 2 ships of 300 tons each to sail in March and wanted
permission to send them to the East. Apparently permission was given
for the seas south of the Line, for, a little later, he wrote the same Govern-
ment official, suggesting extension of the right to fish north of the equator,
even as far as 24 degrees north latitude. He wrote “on the success of our


ship depends the establishment of the Fishery in the South Pacific Ocean
as many owners have declared they shall wait till they hear whether our
ship is likely to succeed there. If she is successful, a large branch of the
fishery will be carried on in those seas. If unsuccessful we shall pay for
the knowledge.”
The “Emilia,” for that was the vessel’s name, was the first whaler to
round the Horn, no mean job, from East to West and enter the Pacific to
carry death and extinction to the cetaceans of that Ocean. Enderby and
Co. quite properly were here the pioneers as elsewhere. She returned in
quite a short time, the end of the following year, filled to capacity with sperm
oil. To quote again from Enderby’s letters. “From her (the “Emilia’s”)
account the whales of the South Pacific Ocean are likely to be most profitable.
The crew are all returned in good health, only one man was killed by a
whale.”
Herman Melville, that great writer of great epics of the Southern
Seas, wrote, in that finest of sea classics, Moby Dick or the White Whale.
“That great America on the other side of the sphere, Australia, was given
to the enlightened world by the whaleman. After its first blunder-born
discovery by the Dutch, all other ships long shunned these shores as
pestiferously barbarous; but the whale ship touched there. The whale
ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony (1850). Moreover in
the infancy of the first Australian settlement, the emigrants were several
times saved from starvation by the benevolent biscuit of the whale ship
luckily dropping an anchor in their waters.” The great part, whaling—
and sealing—played in our early development particularly in Victoria, though
Sydney, Hobart and Eaunceston were all vastly concerned, was hardly
recognised by our early—and even late —historical writers. Jose, in the
Australian Encyclopaedia, certainly devoted some attention to the subject
but the Portland Bay Settlement of Noel F. Eearmonth and the official
history, Victoria its First Century are the first to give it the prominence it
merits. Australia’s history is therefore based on a foundation of whale
oil and seal skins, later ousted by wool, which was for a while superseded
by gold, then reverted to wool and wheat, added to after a while by the non-
fervous metals, copper, zinc, lead and even cadmium, while the precious
metal silver and the greatest mineral, coal, played no unimportant part.
Certainly recent happenings, arising from the silver lead mines of Broken
Hill, indicate the advent of a steel age for Australia. All that is wanted now
is oil.
It was not only whaling that attracted the hunters. The greatest
name in Australian Story, Captain Cook, becomes now involved. Much
interested were the geographers in Captain Cook’s narrative of his discoveries
on his return from his first voyage when he found our country. That was
June, 1771. Dalrymple and others pointed out that Cook’s voyages did not
exclude the probability of a great Southern Continent, though they certainly


pushed that mythical land still further towards the South Pole. Cook
himself writing in his log, March, 1770, “Thus far our navigation has been
unfavourable to the notion of a Southern Continent for it has swept awav
at least three-fourths of the positions upon which it has been founded.”
He considered there were reasons for thinking that “there is no continent
to the north of 40 S.; of what can be farther to the southward than 40 I can
give no opinion.”
Ihe British Government then decided upon a special expenditure. The
instructions may be boiled down to simply circumnavigate the globe at the
lowest possible parallel that is the furthest south. This meant at between
60 and /0 south, a theoretical distance of 10,000 miles only. Two ships
selected by Cook as suitable for ice work, were secured and named the
Adventure and the “ Resolution.” On the 17th January, 1773 the
Antarctic circle 66° 30 A was first crossed by human beings. He did not
discover Antarctica the most southern continent but he did discover a lot of
space where it was not. He reached in his two years in the pursuit of this
elusive land as far south as 71' 10/ and was at times within 50 U> 70 miles of
the actual land. He was quite convinced from the number of icebergs
continually met with that the continent did exist, but his sound common
sense summed up the situation. “I have now made the circuit of the
southern ocean in a high latitude and traversed in such manner as to leave
not the least room for the possibility of there being a continent which has at
times engrossed the attention of some of the maritime powers for nearly two
centuries past and been a favourite theory amongst the geographers of all
ages.” But though he had thus disposed of the continent for ordinary
trading purposes he had reported an abundance of seals in Southern New
Zealand and South Georgia amongst other places. This set the ball rolling
afresh. Sealing in the Southern Atlantic and later in the South Pacific was
to attract a swarm of ships and to the discovery of all the islands Cook had
missed.
In the year 1830, the Enderbys sent out two vessels, minute things to
face the storms and ice of the Antarctic; the “Tula,” a schooner of 150 tons
and the cutter “Lively,” 50 tons under John Biscoe. The primary object was
plain exploration and discovery, though they were supposed to return, if at
all, loaded up with oil and skins. The “Tula” did get back. Eventually
on the 25th February, 1831, the convoys sighted land just on the Circle.
This was the first time Antarctica was seen by man. Biscoe failed to land
though he tried for over five weeks. Writing on 4th April, he logs “the
vessel now a complete mass of ice and only three of the crew who can
stand, I find myself, though very reluctantly, compelled to give up any further
pursuit this season.” That land is now chartered as Enderby Land and
forms the western portion of the Australian Dependency, Antarctica, a land
which extends through nearly 120' of longitude, one third of the parallel
from the line of Eastern Africa to that of Eastern Australia with a coast


line coinciding to a remarkable extent with the Antarctic Circle. The
‘'Lively” fared worse, separated from the "Tula,” she sought and obtained
succour in Westernport with three only surviving from her crew of ten.
All things considered, Biscoe’s is the outstanding achievement of the Great
South Land, if not for any part of the globe. Two years later, another of
Enderby’s men, Kemp, in another "Tula” as far as size is concerned, but
named the "Magnet,” saw land a bit East. It is now known as Kemp
Land. And the story is still Enderby’s. In 1838 John Balleny, with a
fleet similar to that of Biscoe, a schooner "Eliza Scott” and a cutter "Sabrina,”
discovered the Balleny Islands near Victoria Land, Cape Adare and th'e
Ross Sea. Sabrina Land was seen and then homeward bound the "Sabrina”
foundered with all hands. This ended the sealing period with its discoveries.
Anything further for quite a long period belonged to official expeditions in
which the Americans and French shared with the British. Over forty
years later, IT. J. Bull a Norwegian Melbournite induced the great Norwegian
whaling man Svend Foyn to send a boat south, the Antarctic. From it
stepped ashore at Cape Adare, in 1894, the first man to set foot on the
Southern Continent.
We may return for a while to our own continent, now the Southern
one. The rush, more British than American, that followed the Emilia’s
intrusion into our waters was only incidental in Australian history. But
the transports that brought out Great Britain’s underworld were often
commanded by men who were or had been whalers. One of them, the
"Britannia,” master, Thomas Melville, was actually a whaling ship in her
ordinary vocations. He wrote a letter from Sydney, Port Jackson, in
November, 1791 to his owners, who it is not surprising to learn were S.
Enderby and Sons. Some extracts are of interest. After telling that 21
convicts only and one soldier died on the voyage while there was one birth,
he wrote that he tried to run close to the Isle of Amsterdam to discover
whether the sealing business might not have carried on there but the bad
weather prevented him. "The day before we saw two shoals of Sperm Whales
Then a single large one off Maria Island but then within 15 leagues of
the Sydney parallel, close to the shore, we saw Sperm whales in great plenty.
We sailed through different shoals of them from 12 o’clock in the day until
sunset all around the horizon as far as I could see from the mast head. In
fact, I saw very great prospects of making our fishery upon this coast and
establishing our fishery here. Our people were in the greatest spirits at so
great a sight and I was determined as soon as I got in and got clear of my
live lumber to make all possible despatch on the Fishery on this coast.” He
interviewed Governor Phillip, who on being told of the whales arranged for
quick unloading. Melville set out post haste, in company with the "William”
and "Ann” Captain Eli Bunker, a famous whaling captain. All the boats
in harbour followed their example, the “Mary Anne.” "Matilda,” "Sala-
mander” and others. But the "Britannia” killed the first four whales on
the Australian coast. Bad weather prevented greater success at that time.


fW v 1 r ma> hark back t0 Ca P tain Bunker here. On his return from his
visiting Net TT *f d !S chaTgmg his ship, he announced his intention of
Kina-— Jt V Zealan( ' waters and accepted a commission from Governor
teach its cIH T u New Zealand flax P lants a "d Maoris to
his mission St li°h a " T - ° r th ‘ S He W “ S t0 gCt £100; but he fa iled in
vovatre was' th i ! W “ S ‘ Whaler ‘° visit New Zealand waters and his
■ g WaS ‘ he first commercial venture to that Dominion. Some 20 boats
were e„ gag e the fishery. 4 hailing from Port Jackson. Sam Enderby
“Rattler” b ° at f agam COme into the Future, with their whale ship, the
D h “ nder TJ the command of an R. N. Lieutenant named Colnett
Galanaeos Th discovere d the whales around the
I,? g T 115 area 50 years after was t0 become the greatest of sperm-
gr°lmdS ' A , 1800 ’ the trade became 50 S reat that Enderby and
Champions sought the removal of the embargo preventing them carrying
goods to I ort Jackson on the outward voyage to the South Seas, Governor
mg strongly supported this request and it was granted. This was not
only a direct advantage. There was another side to the question. Spain
had allied herselt with France against England. The whalers worked
m her east, nearer to South America and were not particular whether they
chased and captured a Spanish vessel or a black fish. Prizes were sent to
1 ort Jackson, one in particular the “Nostra Senhora de Bethlehem” captured
oft 1 eru, was laden with grain. The colony was at the point of starvation
" ICn ., thlS mmaculous arrival occurred. Of course there was another tale
to tell. Many whalers were captured by the Spaniard, driving some at
least to concentrate on the New South Wales fisheries, the result being a
great concourse in and around New Zealand. New Zealand had thus some
40 years of history without any authorised form of Government or control
completely unlike any other English Colony.
° Ur ()lcl triend Captain Bunker—he became a very prominent settler
m Sydney afterwards, and also took part with Lieutenant Bowen in the
foundation of Tasmania, dying in Liverpool, the Sydney one, in 1836
brought out m 1799, the “Albion” in no more than three months and fifteen
days, a record for a whaleship. He brought in a letter from the Captain
of the whaler the “Speedy,” who with the “Venus,” “Britannia,” “Albion,”
“Alexander,” “Greenwich” and the “General Boyd,” the last the only
American, were at that time whaling on the coast. He described the fishing
as good if only the weather would permit fishing; he had four fish, ten
tons of oil, and he was keeping going at least another eight months unless
he filled sooner. One fleet sailing home in 1804 comprised five sail carrying
£70,000 worth of oil. Sydney flourished, 70,000 gallons of spirits and
30,000 of wine were landed there in 1801-2 for a population of about 5.000
mainly convicts. Still the whaling, deep sea whaling, gradually was drifting
away from Sydney to New Zealand and the Pacific Isles, places much more
acceptable to the whaling men.


The story of Governor Collins’ futile attempt to settle at Sorrento is
well known. With him was William Collins, a connection who figured
largely in the Port Phillip episode. On the shift to the Derwent, William
was made Harbour Master. It was he who started whaling which was to
become a staple industry and to lead to the invasion of Victoria. Collins’
plan which he drew up in elaborate detail was to use regular whaling ships,
hunting the sperm whale in summer and in winter and spring whaling for
black fish in the coastal waters. It was soon found however that the ship
was simply a hindrance; shore stations with whale boats suited better. This
was a reversion to the earliest methods, earlier even than the American.
The first Australian bay whaling station was established at Ralph Bay in
the east side of the Derwent. Jorgensen the romantic man of Tasmanian
history claimed to have killed the first Whale in the Derwent in 1804.
He was a whaler. Afterwards he returned to Europe, became King of
Iceland, not for long; was a secret service agent or spy for the British,
taking part in Waterloo; but he returned to Van Diemen’s Band in a
Government ship and at the Government expense. There he did some
very excellent exploration work in the North West and altogether proved
an admirable settler. He lived until 1841.
Whales were so numerous in the Derwent that Knopwood reckoned
it was dangerous to row out in the centre of the river. In fact their snorting
or blowing kept the Governor awake at times. Up till 1845 this was alright,
but the goose that laid the golden eggs was gradually being killed. In 1841
there were 35 whaling stations on Tasmanian shores; after 1845 practically
none. The stream of expectant mothers and mating couples had ceased.
It was not that they had realised they were not welcome. They had ceased
to exist. The black fish, or right whale, is now protected by all the whaling-
nations.
Captain James Kelly of Port Davey and Macquarie Harbour fame,
became Harbour Master in 1819. He was a currency lad born in Sydney
in 1791. Later he formed a whaling firm in company with Hewitt. Kelly
and Hewitt were working Portland Bay long before the Hentys thought of
Australia. Later came Reed’s men, then John Griffiths and Alec. Campbell,
Chase, John and William Mansfield, the Mills Brothers, J. 8.. Charles
Frederick and John, Hart, Sinclair, Davy, Peter Coakley, Dutton, Nicholson
and Chamberlain. Many others came from time to time. The Victorian
fishing began to decline seriously in 1840 and ceased altogether by 1860.
At Twofold Bay the Davidsons and their aboriginal crew, aided bv the
killer whales kept up the game more or less for sport until the death of the
last killer, affectionately known as Old Tom in September, 1930. Twofold
Bay had started whaling in 1827 when John Irvine commenced. He was
followed by the Imlay Brothers, who were the first settlers there. Victoria
is interested as the Imlays along with the Irvines, who it is thought were
related, held runs in Gippsland and on the Upper Wimmera.


THE PREDECESSORS OF THE WHITE MAN
—THE AUSTRALIANS.
Ours was the land, all ours, mine and my people’s; the tribes’
To roam at will, to dwell, to hunt and to fish in.
CHAPTER XIX.
A BOUT the origin of the primeval inhabitants of the Lone South Land,
there is much dispute, not quite so bitter perhaps as that over the
Calavenas skull, immortalised by Bret Harte; but still sufficiently dogmatic
and somewhat acrimonious at times. Very many, some even preposterous,
theories as to origin have been advanced, but Dr. Ramsay M. Smith, in the
Commonwealth of Australia Year Book No. 19, definitely plumped for homo-
geneity of race, thereby tattering almost the whole of the hypotheses. This
was in face of A. W. Howitt’s masterly resume of the position in his presi-
dential address to the Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, Sydney Meeting, 1897. There he definitely asserted the impossibility
of the Tasmanian aboriginal reaching that island by any other path than the
dry land. Consequently the Tasmanian entered Australia while the land
bridge to Asia via Timor or New Guinea still existed; spread over the
continent and entered Tasmania dry shod across the present Bass Strait,
followed by the pursuing Australian, who reached the Strait to be foiled by
its subsidence. Notwithstanding Ramsay Smith’s ex cathedra pronounce-
ment, Sir Baldwin Spencer as late as 1914, wrote in the Australian Hand-
book, prepared for the British Association Meeting in Australia, that “there
can be no doubt that in past times the whole of the continent including
Tasmania, which at that time was not shut ofif by Bass Strait, was occupied
by one race. . . It is often, indeed usually, assumed that (1) at a later period
an immigration of a higher race took place and that (2) this race blended
with the older inhabitants of the continent to produce the present Australian
race. In regard to the first of these assumptions everyone is agreed; but in
regard to the second there is grave room for doubt. Spencer decides there,
that it is most probable that the lower race would be exterminated, just as the
Moriori was in New Zealand by the incoming Maori. The validity of this
opinion is much impaired by the supporting allegation as the Moriori was far
from being wiped out. In at least one tribe, the blood remained almost pure
Moriori, while there is more than a trace in many others.


In a scholarly article, and as one might expect an authoritative one,
written this year, Professor Frederick Wood-Jones is equally emphatic.
(“The Book of Melbourne, 1935, British Medical Association.”) Quoting
verbatum. “They have therefore been forced to postulate the Tasmanians as
earlier inhabitants of Continental Australia, according to this hypothesis the
Pre-Dravidian migrants were a second wave breaking into a continent already
occupied by an oceanic negroid stock. This oceanic negroid stock are sup-
posed to have been driven south and so into Tasmania by the advancing
Australians. This hypothesis remains unsupported by any ascertainable
evidence, and an impartial review of the known facts leads inevitably to the
conclusion that the Australian was the first man who ever occupied the island
continent.” So there we may leave it.
Now for the man himself. Brown in skin colour with considerable
variation and generally much lighter when brought up in white man fashion
and wearing clothes; born white or yellowish, a colour retained in the soles
of the feet and palms of the hands. Skin smooth, somewhat downy, but
rarelv extremely hairy; hair, brown to black, reddish at the tips, wavy to
curly but never frizzy like that of the Tasmanian or Papuan; eyes, dark
brown, with the whites inclined to be yellow with yellowish brown blotches ;
all four limbs longer than ours, but not ungracefully so ; senses of hearing,
smell and sight extremely acute; voice pleasant in tone though somewhat
husky, the vowel sounds being similar to ours, but the consonants are some-
what different and of lesser importance, f. j. q. s. v. x. and z being practically
unknown. Their heights vary, as do many other characteristics with the
ease with which food is obtainable and with its quality. Their diet, where
possible, was a carefully balanced ration and was eaten at regular intervals
though, especially in the more inhospitable areas, they had a considerable
power of endurance, being able to go without food as long as three days. The
average height of a male is 5 feet 6 inches, the woman being an inch or so less.
On the Murray River, where food, meat as kangaroos and opossums, game as
ducks and other water fowl, fish in inexhaustible quantity and vegetables as
the root of the reeds and rushes as well as many spinaches, abounded, very
many men were well over 6 feet and it is stated that in some instances 7 feet
was exceeded. Judging by the degraded specimens seen on railway lines
and at sports grounds, it is rather surprising to hear Wood-Jones say: “No
more beautifully balanced human figures than those of the natives in the prime
of life can be found amongst any race,” and he is absolutely justified. Men-
tally, if their confidence; can be gained they are keen thinkers, even keener
observers; proud of their feeling of superiority but tolerant to the white man
who appears to them somewhat irresponsible; and above all kindly, courteous
and generous.
Their social organisation is, speaking broadly, of the dual system
common to primitive man the world over with exogamous marriage customs.


1 heir food is simply anything and everything edible. In fact they have
learned, how is not clear, to prepare quite palatable meals from various
poisonous vegetables by elaborate systems of grinding and soaking. Their
methods of cooking are varied and efficient. Meat or fish, cooked in a heated
oven blackfellow fashion, is more palatable and juicy than prepared in any
civilised way. The work of obtaining and preparing foodstuffs, except the
products of the chase, is largely the work of the women. The spare time of
the men, of which there is plenty in a good season, is devoted to the prepara-
tions for ceremonies, which are mainly devoted to the masculine side of life.
1 hese ceremonies, which are definitely of a religious nature, are carried
out with the greatest of ritual and secrecy with the primary object of increas-
ing the supply of foodstuffs. Almost equally important are those which
may be termed tutorial classes and serve to initiate the males to be fit and
proper men, to carry on the tribal traditions and laws of conduct, and others
connected with births and deaths. All these are under control and manage-
ment of what may be termed a committee or council of elders, for there is no
such thing as a chief or King, as frequently described.
Again quoting Wood-Jones, —“Ceremonial is to him what the theatre,
the art gallery, the library and dances, card parties and field sports are to us.
From those secret rites, in which no woman or uninitiated man may witness,
to the corroborees in which the singing and dancing are shared and enjoyed
by all, ceremonial provides the great life interest of the Australian native.
Deprive him of his tribal ceremonies and his greatest interest and enjoyment
In life are gone. The detribalized native, bereft qf his tribal ceremonies, is
an apathetic and moribund derelict, lacking all knowledge of his own people’s
moral code, and unfitted to embrace a new one that is beyond his compre-
hension.”
What is to become of him ? There are, including half-castes, whose
future is a painful thought, some 80,000, of whom 37,000 or so are living the
lives of their fathers, and 10,000, full-blooded, are in compounds or stations
controlled by the Missions or the Governments. The Governments, Federal
and State, have refused to appreciate the gravity of the problem. The methods
adopted by them and still employed, by the Missions though perhaps now with
greater discretion, are those of direct rule, the methods in vogue at the out-
set of settlement in the continent, which are always at the time, acclaimed as
leading to wonderful results in educating the blackfellow and inducing him
to adopt white customs and knowledge. And always with the same result,
the gradual extinction of the race with mistaken kindness. To the stories
so often heard of wholesale massacres, by the sword, the gun and thie
poisoned flour, little or no credence may be attached. Punitive expeditions
under official sanction and with official leaders, have been plenty enough; but
they cannot be classed as massacres or murders. Indeed the tally of whites


killed by the blacks all things considered, may be quite proudly regarded by
them. Australia’s duty appears to be the seeking of the best advice obtain-
able from those trained in the psychology of the primitive mind, and having
obtained it, to give it full and unfettered effect.
Apart from problems of blood tests, it is now universally admitted
that the Australian aboriginal is one of our own family, a distant cousin
belonging to an older branch that left the ancestral hearth long before our
forefathers. Although he has remained so long without perceptible progress
being in an environment not demanding any special evolution, he rapidly
adapts himself to British language and ideas. The Sydney anthropologist,
Stannard, writing in September, 1935, stated that after his three years’
experience in the Northern Territory, he had the conclusion forced upon him
that the white occupants of that land were wholly dependent upon the black
to maintain that occupancy.
THE TASMANIAN ABORIGINAL RACE.
The story of the white man’s contact with the Tasmanian blacks is not
easy to write. That a race, characterised by many attractive qualities, should
be completely swept off the face of the earth in less than three quarters of a
century is a source of sorrow to both the ordinary person and the anthropolo-
gist from whom was taken away an unequalled chance of solving many of the
problems surrounding our primitive ancestors. It is probable that there were-
some thousand only inhabiting Tasmania, certainly their numbers were well
under 2000. The Europeans arrived to stay in 1804. In twenty years they
were reduced to 340 all; in 1844, only 60 remained; and three years later,
when the remnant was removed to Oyster Bay, the roll call was 45; and thirty
years later there was none. Truganini or Ealla Rookh, well known to
Melbourne residents in the forties, was the last of this interesting race dying
at Hobart on the Bth May, 1876, aged, so she was accustomed to assert, 73
years, just the period of white occupation. She had no less than five hus-
bands, the last being Billy Lanney, some thirty years her junior. He died in
1869, the last male, though there were tales at the time that he was the off-
spring of the union of a Sydney native and a Tasmanian woman.
Peron, the recorder of the rather uninteresting voyage of Baudin, 1800
to 1804, was the first to give much attention to the Tasmanian aboriginal.
He writes, comparing them with the Australian mainland natives. “They
have almost nothing in common in their manners, their customs, their im-
portant arts, or their implements of the chase or fishing, their huts, their
canoes, their weapons, or in their speech, or in their whole physical constitu-
tion/, cranial formation, proportions of their features, etc. This complete
want of resemblance is seen also in their colour; the aboriginals of Van
Diemen’s Land are much darker than those of New Holland; it is evident


also in a characteristic which every one is agreed to consider the most
important of those which serve to distinguish the different human races. I
mean the nature of the hair. Ihe inhabitants of Van Diemen’s Dand have it
shoit, woolly and frizzy; those of New Holland have straight, long and stiff.”
1 heir weapons as compared with the infinite variety of those of the mainland
aie spears, simply ti-tree sticks without barbs, merely pointed by fire, and
dubs or waddies without shape, merely roughly scratched to afford a better
grip. I heir implements were crude stone implements with chipped edge
good enough for all the work required of them. They wore rugs or skins,
made of reed and bark, and threaded small bright shells into necklaces. Paint,
icd and blacK, was freely employed. Bundles of logs or saplings were bound
together to form catamarans as canoes of bark or dugout logs were unknown
to them.
At the outset, the two races clashed. The officer in charge of Bowen’s
troops, deadly afraid of a large hunting party of the natives said to be several
hundreds in number, ordered his men to fire. Several were killed. This was
the beginning. What with convict stockmen and worse bushrangers, it was
a long story of death. In 1830, Governor Arthur began the famous Black
\\ ar. Over 0000 men, soldiers and settlers marched in a line across the
Island to drive the aboriginals into the East Bay neck. The cost was enor-
mous and the whole bag, a woman and a child who had been captured in
slumber. Finally George Augustus Robinson, a bricklayer who had already
devoted his life to the native, brought in the remnant, probably with the best
intentions, as in all cases of contact between the whites and blacks, but with
dire results. On several of the Bass Strait islands there still exist many
half-castes, the offspring of the sealers of the early days of last century and
lubras from the Victorian mainland and gins from Tasmania.


THE ERA OF GOLD.
When, sudden as straw in a blaze
I’m blamed if we didn’t strike gold
Such gold, too, the nuggetty kind
Like plums stuck in duff, they was thick.
CHAPTER XX.
OF course, gold was first discovered by the aborigines just as they were
the original discoverers of Australia. No less than a score of nuggets
have been discovered upon the sites of native camping places. In one case
where two nuggets were so found, at a place in the Victorian Mallee, the un-
lucky finder applied for a mining lease, paid the survey fees and sank a deep
shaft, being in the end a big loser on the transaction. But to the black-
fellow gold was of no value, of no use: to him the most valuable mineral was
the tough greenstone outcrops or pebbles from which he could fabricate a
useful stone tomahawk. So much for King Billy. None of the early dis-
coverers of Australia suspected the existence of the yellow metal. The
Spaniards or Portuguese, before 1600, for they probably had chanced on the
Australian mainland though they kept the news to themselves: the Dutch in
1606 and onwards; Tasman, in 1644: Dampier in 1688, and finally our own
great navigator, James Cook, in 1770, all in those days and since the earliest
days of man’s civilisation, ravenous for gold, all forgot on those occasions to
hunt for it. It was to be quite a long while after the settlement of the
first fleet in 1788, half a century exactly, before any was definitely found, and
three-quarters of a century before gold mining began. Naturally enough,
with the surroundings of Sydney, the Hawkesbury sandstones, and Wiana-
matta Shales, there was no possibility of gold discoveries but by 1813 Blax-
land, Wentworth and Lawson had crossed the Blue Mountains and opened
up the way to the fertile interior. Evans and Oxley had, just after, traversed
from Bathurst and had tracked down the Lachlan, Macquarie and other auri-
ferous streams. Hume and Hovell in 1824 had traversed the to-be rich
Ovens diggings, while Major Mitchell and his party had crossed over the
Forest Creek and Mclvor fields. Not one discovered gold. There were
certain indefinite accounts of convicts bringing in samples of gold in hope of
being rewarded: but in all cases the sole reward was a few dozen lashes for
attempted imposition. Similar tales were rumoured of shepherds in Victoria.
It was not until 1839, just over 50 years from the start, that Count Strzlecki


lepoited in a letter to Captain Philip King that he had found gold in quartz
in the \ ale of Clwydd. He added that though unable to find the veins from
which they had been shed, he was quite satisfied the country generally was
auriferous. Iwo years later, the Rev. W. B. Clarke, a name which should be
held in revered memory by every patriotic Australian, produced similar speci-
mens. Strangely enough, he stated these had been found in the ranges near
Parramatta, but the word “near” must be held to have a very wide meaning.
The actual site was on the Macquarie River, a notably auriferous stream,
somewhere near Hartley Vale. The Governor, Bourke, on public grounds of
interference with the settlement, and of fear of trouble with the convicts,
induced him to keep silent. Strzlecki was similarly treated. “I was
warned,” he writes, “of the responsibility I should incur if I gave publicity to
the discovery since, as the Governor argued, by proclaiming the Colonies to
the gold regions, the maintenance of discipline among 45,000 convicts would
become almost impossible and transportation would cease to be a punish-
ment.”
In 1844, Sir Roderick Murchison, at a meeting of the Royal Geogra-
phical Society in Condon, called attention in no uncertain way as to the
possibility, nay probability, of the auriferous nature of the Great Australian
Cordillera, as he designated our Great Dividing Range. In making this pre-
or assertion, he was relying upon his own observations of auriferous
tracts in the Ural Mountains and even more upon the accounts of Count
Strzlecki who had by this time reached the old country, taking home his
specimens with him. Clarke’s assertions and investigations were at this time
unknown to Sir Roderick. The reverend gentleman renewed the attack in
1843—in 1844 to be again snubbed by authority, this time Governor Gipps—
and in 1848 with more specimens, but was as usual shooed off the field.
Meanwhile Murchison also was reiterating his prophecies. However, the
whole question of gold in Australia was overshadowed by the discovery of
gold m California. To California went a stream of Australians, Australians
born and Australians by adoption. Vessels were chartered for the throng.
Melbourne published maps of the Californian goldfields with instructions how
to reach them. Disappointment awaited many. Some returned, some with
acquired knowledge of the practical, actual occurrence of gold. So the scene
was set. But before proceeding with this phase of the matter the scene as set
in Victoria may be described.
On the stage now come the returning adventurers from California.
Edward Hammond Hargraves was one of these. Taught by his actual
experience in California, he decided to prospect. Amidst the jeers, the
ridicule of his friends, he bought a horse and equipment and set off on his
romantic journey. He had, with his previous knowledge of the bush, already
selected his spot, and made direct to Bathurst where he went to a place 30
miles away, the junction of the Summerhill and Lewis Ponds Creeks. There


on the 12th February, 1851, he discovered the precious metal. However
much one may admire the scientific explorer, the theories of the geologist and
while admitting their high claims to honour and public consideration , yet to
the community, the tangible demonstrations of the digger are of more direct
benefit. The credit of the discovery of gold in Australia must therefore be
awarded to Edward Hammond Hargraves. By the following June, the
Turon, the first real goldfield had been discovered and in the following month
Louisa Creek. But this is all New South Wales. \ ictoria is the more
important although it must be acknowledged that the discovery of Dr. Kerrs
aboriginal shepherd of a cwt. of gold in one mass at Ophir is something to
talk about.
The news of the Hargraves’ discoveries aroused at once the appre-
hensions of all property holders and business men. The squatters saw their
lands disappearing, the townsmen saw their shops empty, the farmers and the
bushmen didn’t care. They simply rolled up Matilda and went to the fields.
A meeting was hurriedly called in Melbourne. A meeting with a Chairman
and resolutions viewing with apprehension or appealing to right thinking-
persons and if possible a deputation to follow, is the British panacea for all
ills. At first efforts were made to decry the Turon field. “The Times,” a
Melbourne paper, on the 21st May said that there was not much probability
of the new discovery proving so extensive as to interfere with the flock
masters’ labour; but in a couple of days there was a complete change of tune.
There were 200 people on the field, and it was evident that the labour market
would suffer severely from the mania. Vainly it was announced that gold
had been discovered at Mt. Disappointment and at the Pyrenees, an embrac-
ing name which covered the whole district north of Buninyong, and up to
the Wimmera; copper at Deep Creek and plumbago, lead ore, and platinum
in undisclosed localities. The meeting was called. Messrs. Thos. McCombie
newspaper man and one of our historians, Westgarth, our first historian
founder of the Chamber of Commerce and a leading merchant, J. Pascoe
Fawkner, the founder of Melbourne, Dr. Greeves, a leading medico, Henry
Miller, our first financier, Hull, also a prominent merchant, Hodgson, a lead-
ing settler and Mr. Hood, the leading chemist, were elected a committee. A
subscription list was opened. £2OO was offered as a reward. On the 11th
June, 1851, a party of seven under M. Berteaux, with H. Frenchham, a
reporter of “The Times”, Bennett, Walsh & Son, Stanway, Barry and Dr.
Ronald, set out to discover the new Eldorado. The country was fossicked as
far as Mt. Disappointment. Some mica was found, nothing more. Return-
ing to Anderson’s Creek on Major Chas. Newman’s run, now Warrandyte,
they worked again for nothing and execrated the name of Stephen who had
claimed to have discovered gold there. Frenchham and Walsh were the only
ones to stick to it. On the 14th June they came in under big headlines “Gold
Discovery,” but alas! Sydney Gibbons and Hood, both chemists could find no
trace of gold in the specimens. Meanwhile Louis John Michel, originally (if


Surrey, and a publican of Williamstown, with Habberlin, Furnival, Melville,
Headon and Greenrig had got a start in May prospecting the same locality,
Anderson’s Creek. They found and exhibited actual gold specimens. This
was confirmed by a visit by Dr. Webb Richmond on July sth and later by a
visit of a large party headed by Crown Lands Commissioner Fenwick, who all
obtained specks of gold. A small rush took place, but with scant success
until the news of Hiscock’s discovery at Runinyong led to its almost complete
abandonment.
Jas. Esmond, like Hargraves, an adventurer to California from Austra-
lia, on his return went with a party to Donald Cameron’s station, now Clunes
and discovered gold. He showed his specimens to Messrs Clarke and Patter-
son at Geelong on the same day, July sth, as Michel had demonstrated his.
Esmond’s discovery brought out William Campbell, Member of the Legisla-
tive Council for the Loddon District, and like Cameron, a squatter there. On
the same day he disclosed the fact that towards the latter end of 1849, he,
with Cameron and his superintendent or manager had discovered gold on the
run, but had suppressed the fact out of consideration for Cameron. This was
the find announced in the “Argus” of 31st January, 1849, but afterwards
successfully hushed up. Campbell, actually on the 10th June, 1851, had writ-
ten to Mr. Jas. Graham, another M.L.C., telling him to announce the dis-
covery. He however did not do so until the sth July, so that three discoveries
were announced on one and the same day, four days after the separation of
Victoria from New South Wales. The palm, however, must be accorded
Michel. He not only announced but disclosed the actual place. Esmonds
did not do so until the 22nd, while Campbell’s was too belated. A Royal
Commission was appointed in October, 1853, to consider Hargraves’ petition
for a reward, a petition backed up from Sydney by the Governor-General,
Sir Charles Fitz Roy, consisting of Messrs. Wm. Nicholson, M. Nicholson,
H. F. Strachan. Hodgson, the Auditor-General, Graham and Greeves, decided
in favour of Michel's claim as the first actual discoverer of gold in Victoria.
He was awarded £lOOO. A like sum was given Mr. Thomas Hiscock whose
discovery of gold at Runinyong on the Bth August, led to the finding of Ralla-
rat by Rrown and Regan and Dunlop’s party; £lOOO also to Mr. Campbell
as the original discoverer of Clunes, and to Mr. Esmonds as the first producer
of alluvial gold. £5OO was awarded Dr. Rruhn who had done much pros-
pecting and had spread the story of the Clunes discovery. On the larger
question £5OOO was recommended for Mr. Hargraves and £lOOO for the
Rev. W. R. Clarke. We have thus accounted for Anderson’s Creek, Clunes,
Runinyong and Rallarat, but a greater field was to be announced. Rallarat
certainly was very rich. Esmond who had abandoned Clunes, got 30 lb. of
gold in two days. Ry the middle of November there were over 5000 people
on that field; but a Mr. Chas. Peterrs, a hutkeeper on Rarkers Creek on the
20th of July, had found alluvial gold on that Creek; before September the
secret had leaked out and a rush in earnest began. Forest, Campbells and


Fryers Creek yielded equally astonishing results, and early in November came
Bendigo. Next month the population was 20,000. Ballarat was abandoned,
less than 300 remaining. £200,000 a week was turned out. Followed in
quick succession the Goulburn, Kilmore, Omeo and in a short while, the
Ovens, Yachandandah, Beechworth, with an almost equally great rush to the
Mclvor, Heathcote. Cater came the Moliagul, Mt. Korong and Avoca digg-
ings. This might conclude the story of discovery but that some account of
the Miner’s Right, that prolific source of trouble throughout, must be given.
At first, there was merely a theory that gold belonged to the Crown hut no
hesitation was evinced in simply taking it when found. Licenses had been
habitually issued for the depasturing of Crown lands, for cutting timber, for
selling spirituous liquors and so on. On the 15th August, 1851, Governor
Latrobe proclaimed that all gold whether on Crown or private lands was the
property of the Queen, and anyone disturbing the soil in search of such gold
without Government authority would be prosecuted civilly and criminally.
Three days later, regulations for the issue of licenses to dig were issued. The
fee was fixed at 30/- per month as in New South Wales. The size of claim
was left to the local Commissioner. It varied from 8 feet by 8 feet to 20 by 20.
When the first Legislative Council met in November, a conformatory Act to
restrain by summary proceedings unauthorised mining on waste lands of the
Crown was passed. Notice was given in January, 1852, that it was intended
to increase the fee to £3 per month, but an immediate storm led to wiser
counsels. The administration was abominable. The police for the most
part, bad characters, were ruled by irresponsible young men. Men, Britishers,
were hunted like dogs by these tyrants. The cry of Joe, the name by which
they were known after Charles Joseph Latrobe, was a signal for diggers to
scatter in all directions or to retreat into the drives at,the bottom of the shafts.
Licensed inns were not allowed, and sly grog shops were numerous.
The first rebellion came through this. A perfectly law abiding store-
keeper at Bendigo had his premises burned down and destroyed by the police
on perjured evidence. A mass demonstration caused the weakling Latrobe to
send his new Chief Commissioner, Wright, who compromised on a payment
of £3OO to the victim. Drinking licenses were thereafter issued. In July,
1853, another mass meeting was held in Bendigo. A petition was drawn up
with 5000 signatures protesting against the 30/- fee and the usual deputation
presented it to Latrobe, Ist August.
The formal official reply was given. The diggers then decided to tender
10/- only for the September’s license; warning was given that any digger pav-
ing the 30/- would be marched off the field. Red coats in numbers were sent
up, but what were they to do. 'The miners simply tendered them half
sovereigns which were of course refused. There was no justification for shoot-
ing them down and no possibility of putting 12,000 men in gaol for being with-


out licenses. A special committee of the Legislative Council was appointed
and an amending act passed making the license fee 30/- for the remaining
three months. A further Act was passed in December fixing fees at £l, £2,
£4, £8 for 1, 3, 6 and 12 months respectively. Peace lasted only for a while.
Then came our own little rebellion, the Eureka Stockade affair, but it resulted
in the Goldfields Commission and the Miner’s Right £1 per annum, no longer
demandable by the police: but simply an evidence of the digger’s ownership
of his claim. Later it was reduced to 2/6, again increased to 5/- and finally
made 2/6 at which figure it has stood for over a generation.
A few words on the Colony in the early gold years. The migrant arriv-
ing after some months on a sailing boat with a paucity of food and a plenitude
of hardships whiled away by singing “Cheer Boys Cheer, There’s work for
Honest Labour, in the New and Happy Land,” or by observing icebergs, for
the ships went down occasionally as far as 57 degrees southing to get the trade
winds, found a city already in being. Gas was being laid on, as well as the
Yan Yean. The early arrivals met the squatters and blackfellows, the later
ones the successful diggers on the spree, driving in open carriages with their
newly made brides, and all found the town full. Lucky was the man to secure
accommodation in a room already packed with a dozen others. Shops were
let at £lOOO to £2OOO per annum. Bread was 2/- the four pound loaf; mut-
ton 6d per lb; the four roomed cottage was £4OO per year; wood rose from 5/-
to £4 a load and water from 1/- to 5/- a barrel. The Governor and the Bishop
had to groom their own horses. ’The year 1851 had been fairly dry, but with
1852 began a series of very wet seasons. Cartage to the fields rose to £l2O
per ton. The poor intending digger, in his new blue serge frock or smock,
fustian unmentionables, a cabbage tree hat (the universal wear), half boots,
and a quart pot or jackshay belted on, humping his swag, arrived on the fields
in an indescribable state. There it was all bustle, cracking of bullock whips,
rocking of cradles, chaff everywhere for the new chums, who saw with sur-
prise, circuses, forges, shops, signs of surgeons, carpenters and lemonade
settlers mingled with an occasional hair cutter and tooth puller. Gold was
selling at £2/15/- to £3 per oz., but per contra, water was lOd. to 5/- a bucket,
flour £2O a cwt. and other commodities in proportion, notwithstanding that
all goods except liquors, tobacco and coffee were duty free.
To pay these prices, in 1853, 66,000 diggers won 3,090,000 oz. or roughly
£2/10/- per week, hardly tucker at the prices then ruling. Wages were better
having gone up from twelve shillings pre gold to £4 and £5 per week. Con-
ditions were rough at first. Early diggings were known as Chokem Flat,
Deadman’s Gully, Murdering Creek, and so on. Each man had his gun or
pistol and at dusk there was a continual popping as the diggers let off their
weapons to convince any evil-minded individuals that they were armed and on
the alert.


In the first three years the population increased three times from 70,000
to 235,000. Wealth increased ten times, but the usual retribution followed.
In 1852, imported goods sold at up to 1000 per cent, over cost; in 1854 they
were being sold at under cost and by auction at any price obtainable. The
following figures tell the tale. In 1838, imports 71,000 were over three times
exports, resulting in 1841-3 in the greatest crash Victoria has ever known, not
excluding the present. Imports in 1850 were a third less than the exports,
£745,000 to £1,042,000. In 1852, it was still better, they were but little over
one half, £4,068,000 against £7,451,000, but in 1853 the position was nearly
reversed. £16,000,000 of imports and £9,000,000 only exported. Then
came another crash the inevitable result of spending more than one’s earnings.
The somnolent languorous days of squatting had departed. In the
words of the Commission enquiring into the claims for the discovery of gold.
“The discovery of the Victorian gold fields has converted a remote dependency
into a country of world-wide fame: it has attracted a population extraordinary
in number with unprecedented rapidity. It has enhanced the value of property
to an enormous extent: it has made this the richest country in the world, and
in less than three years it has done for this Colony the work of an age and
made its impulses felt in the most distant regions of the earth.”


THE TERRITORIES* Internal and External*
They found the great and empty lands
Where natives might be born.
CHAPTER XXL
TJHE Commonwealth consists of six states, perhaps seven, if the Northern
Territory be one, and no less than seven territories apart from it. The
oldest is Papua transferred from the administration of Queensland in 1906.
Next comes the Federal Capital Territory of 912 square miles transferred by
New South Wales in 1910. Norfolk Island formerly administered by New
South Wales became Federal territory in July 1914. Jervis Bay with 28
square miles was surrendered by New South Wales a year later. New Guinea
is held under a mandate from the League of Nations issued in December 1920.
At the same time the phosphatic island of Nauru was mandated to His
Britannic Majesty. By agreement between the British, Australian and New
Zealand Governments, the Commonwealth has administered this territory for
the last sixteen years. The last of our seven territories is Antarctica
established in 1933 by an Act of the Australian Parliament.
Papua has a history of Governmental muddle and mal-administration.
Bligh appears to have proclaimed part British Territory; but certainly
in 1846 officially annexed the Southern coast line. His action was disavowed.
Admiral Moresby, then Captain, hoisted the British flag at Port Moresby in
1873; but again the British Government would have none of it. The Russian
scare of the early eighties once more directed attention to the island. Colonel
Mclvor, an adventurer or filibuster, annexed the whole island; but he also was
repudiated. Mclvor was the first to point out that the “real enemy in the
Pacific” was Germany. The Premier of Queensland, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith,
took the decided step in quite his best Mcllwraithic manner of annexing all the
island east of the part claimed by the Dutch in the name of Queensland. The
British Government, then of little Englanders under Gladstone, repudiated the
Australian action as unnecessary, there being they affirmed no German inten-
tion to interfere. When Bismarck in 1884 cast a bombshell by announcing


his annexation of the northern portion, Britain was then forced to take what
was left. In 1888, the protectorate was converted into a Crown Colony and in
1906 was officially declared a territory of the Commonwealth. During the
fift_\ \ eai s of Australian control, the territory has been fortunate to have had
a \ er y gieat man, Sir John Hubert Plunkett Murray, in real charge for over
thirty \eais, first as chief judicial officer and since 1907 as administrator. To
him is due the introduction of indirect rule in its highest development, with the
result that the native Papuan lives a life of peace and industry and increases in
number and in human value.
1 he Mandated 1 eintory of New Guinea, which consists of the north-
eastern part of New Guinea, the Admiralty Islands, New Britain, New Ireland,
New Hanover the most northerly of the Solomon Islands, and a host of minor
islets. The Germans were not notably successful in the colonising efforts
though at the time of the seizure by the Australian forces, there was evidence
that the lessons had been taken to heart and future progress was promised. It
cannot be said that the Australian efforts have been much preferable. The
tendency is to direct rule with a white domination which is pcriously near
slavery for the coloured subject race.
Nauru, one of the Marshall Islands, formerly a German possession, is a
phosphate island as is also the British Ocean Island, Ellice Group. The* two
are worked together, and on the average annual output of half a million tons
of tri-calcic phosphate, the basis of superphosphate, for the last five years,
theie would appear to be at least a couple of hundred years to go before the
deposits are exhausted.
Norfolk Island would need a volume to itself to deal with its exciting
and varied history. A lone island in the Western Pacific, almost inaccessible
save from the air; unknown to man until Captain Cook landed on it in October
1774; and from 1788 for some twenty years, the home, if a word meaning so
much to the ordinary man can be used, of some of the worst of the convicts
and of a garrison not much better. Abandoned from 1808 to 1825, it again
became the isle of the damned. Governor Darling in 1827 avowed his
intention to make the settlement there a place of the extremest punishment
short of death. All women were withdrawn. Witnesses tell differing
stories; all agree in describing the island as a hell and the convicts as the most
debased of mankind; but some describe the officials as humane and well-
meaning. One description is vivid. “A paradise endowed with choicest
gifts of climate, scenery and vegetable production; by art, society or policy,
a hell disfigured by crime, loathsome vice and misery . . the clanking of iron
the dull echo of the lash, with execrations both loud and deep, make men’s
flesh creep and fill their minds with horror and despondency.” Marcus
Claikes hor the Perm of his Natural Life’ was almost already written for
him. In 1856 this human hell was vacated and the remnants of the Pitcairn


Mandated Territory of New Guinea . .
93,000 square miles
Papua
90,540 square miles
Norfolk Island
13 square miles
Nauru
8 square miles
Antarctica . . . . . . approximately 2,000,000 souare miles
islanders were transferred there. All this time the administration was local
under direction from Sydney, save for the period 1844 to 1856 when it was a
dependency of Tasmania. The Commonwealth took it over as a territory in
July 1914, and administered it through the Department of Home and Terri-
tories with an administrator and chief Magistrate until 1929, when it came
under the newly created Territories Branch of the Prime Minister’s Depart-
ment. It has a population of a little over one thousand and a revenue from
Customs and sale of liquor, which is a Government monopoly, of a little over
ToOOO, just sufficient to meet the cost of the officials inflicted upon it.
It has already been decided that the Northern Territory is a State. It
ha.s at least representation at Canberra even if without voting power It had
a long history from 1803 until 1909, nearly half a century of mismanagement,
misunderstanding and resulting heavy cost to the colony of South Australia,
who mistakenly insisted upon its ownership. The result has been the use-
less transcontinental railway and an effort at settlement made at the wrong
end. The pastorahsts of Western Queensland and North Western Australia
could have peopled it in the normal way of expansion, had such been facili-
tated. Instead attempt was made through the Great Australian Desert,
Northern South Australia with its wholly inadequate rainfall and at the tropi-
cal end, Port Darwin, by people who had learnt nothing of tropical settlement.
As it is all the settlement worth while has been made from Queensland. The
1 erntory has a destiny to be worked out; but it will be by pastorahsts and not
by Government schemes.
The two internal territories, definitely so, are Canberra and Jervis Bay,
the latter being simply an appanage of the former. It, the Federal Capital,
is still in the experimental stage and may not yet achieve its majority. So far
it has created an atmosphere of distrust. That is all.
Australia with its area of three million square miles has nearly as great
an area in its external territories.
L’ENVOI.
Within the limits allowable an attempt has been made to shadow forth
the birth of Australia and to portray some of the difficulties, the handicaps,
which befell the founders. The pioneers were not all British though mainly
so; but they made Australia a British land. So early as 1823, William
Charles Wentworth, the father of Australian democracy wrote:


And, O Britannia! should’st thou cease to ride
Despotic Empress of old ocean’s tide;
Should thy tamed lion —spent his former might—
No longer roar the terror of the fight—•
Should e’er arrive that dark disastrous hour,
When bowed by luxury, thou yield’st to power—
When thou; no longer freest of the free
To some proud victor bend’st the vanquished knee,
May all thy glories in another sphere
Relume, and shine more brightly still than here;
May this, thy last born infant, then arise
To glad thy heart and greet thy parent eyes;
And Australasia float, with flag unfurled,
A new Britannia in another world.
Wentworth recognised the essentially British nature of our country, much
more British than the American Colonies were then and incomparably more
so than they have become.
All save one of the Australian states began as official colonies; Queens-
land, New South Wales and Tasmania as one in the beginning, as already
described; Western Australia as a private enterprise under Government con-
trol in 1829; and South Australia with a similar origin some seven years later.
Western Australia which had lagged far behind its eastern sisters—after a
score of years of settlement it had barely as many people as had South Aus-
tralia and Victoria in a tenth of that time—was constituted a penal settle-
ment in 1849, and so remained until 1868, by which time, a moderate amount
of progress had been made and some prosperity attained. The discovery of
gold in 1886 at Kimberley and the world-famed finds of a few years later at
Coolgardie did with Western Australia as with Victoria and made it one of
the leading agricultural states. South Australia though steadily forging
ahead in agriculture also owed its great advancement to metal discoveries
within its first six years. Frances Dutton and Edward Bagot, both names of
reverence to good South Australians, found payable copper ore at Kapunda,
and three years later, the world famous Burra Burra mine was opened. That
it produced five million pounds in value of copper is sufficient to indicate its
importance. Moonta and Wallaroo surpassed this; starting in 1860 and runn-
ing for nearly seventy years, over £20,000,000 of the red metal was raised and
nearly £3,000,000 paid in dividends. Gold has been of little importance ; but
the great Barrier Range deposits of silver, lead and zinc, although across the
border in New South Wales have been in reality, South Australian golcondas.
Queensland cannot briefly be dismissed. A country lying north of 29
degrees—more than half of it in the tropics—not far short of one fourth of the
whole continent, and enjoying nearly one third of its total rainfall with its
own ianging from five to one hundred and fifty inches, averaging over
twenty-five inches; with magnificent artesian water resources underlying
moie than half of the State; with both the coastal and inland ranges rich


in precious and industrial metals; and capable of producing everything that
man requires in tropical and temperate products, can boast its potential
supremacy over all other countries of the world. Western Australia with
its third of the continent and an average rainfall of twelve inches only, can
never, even with its golden wealth, hope to challenge Queensland. The
beginnings were a penal settlement at Brisbane in 1824, converted to a free
settlement in 1840, and finally separated from New South Wales as
Queensland on the 6th June, 1859. The endings one can imagine only in
an optimistic mood.
Tasmania which satisfied Governor Collins when Victoria failed to do
so, had really been started by Lieutenant Bowen four months before Collins
shifted over from Port Phillip. Hobart was named by Bowen, lengthened to
Hobart Town, sometimes Hobarton, by Collins and officially reduced to
Hobart again in 1881. A year later than Bowen, Colonel William Paterson
of the Bligh episode fame founded the Port Dalrymple settlement on the
Tamar making his town at Launceston. Governor King desired to call it
Patersonia but Paterson retaliated with Launceston. Northern Tasmania
was designated the County of Cornwall, and its Town, Launceston, Governor
King’s birth-place. The condominium lasted for eight years. The Colony
was proclaimed independent in 1825, and had its own legislative council. By
the early thirties the island had become overstocked and in 1835 an associa-
tion of stock holders sent John Batman to Port Phillip resulting in the sett-
ling of that colony. Governor Arthur tried hard at the time to make the new
settlement part of Tasmania but failed. Attempts have been made since to
reverse this procedure and join the island to the mainland state. Tasmania
however remains the mother colony, the parent state, of Victoria, not New
South Wales so often so-called.
Victoria, alone of the States, was the spontaneous effort of the people
and naturally enough immediately incurred the hostility, the deadly enmity
of the official bureaucrats, as put in the “Story of Melbourne.” :X:
“Cradled in strife, nurtured in conflict and reared in the midst of resis-
tance to all constituted forms of authority, Victoria has reached its centenary,
still fighting; and in that atmosphere of turmoil it has achieved and retained
an independence which promises well for its future as the dominant state.”
The story of Victoria is the story of Australia as it gradually fought its way
to freedom and walking like a lion from its slumber, threw off the chains which
had enshackled it during the early years of naval and military autocracy. The
conflict still rages; Federation so ardently desired and yet so fearfully con-
summated has created another would-be autocracy, almost an aristocracy, of
politicians, officials and boards. Australians may however be trusted to deal
with this in their own good time and convert an evil into a blessing.


So endeth the sketch of the “Story of Australia”, Time’s last effort, as
Bernard O’Dowd sonnetizes it.
Last sea-thing gredged by sailor Time from space,
Are you a drift Sargasso, where the West
In halcyon calm rebuilds her fatal nest?
Or Delos of a coming Sun-God’s race?
Are you for light, and trimmed, with oil in place,
Or but a Will o’Wisp on marshy quest?
A new demesne for Mammon to infest?
Or lurks millenial Eden ’neath your face?
The cenotaphs of species dead elsewhere
That in your limits leap and swim and fly,
Or trail uncanny harp-strings from your trees,
Mix omens with the auguries that dare
To plant the cross upon your forehead sky,
A virgin helpmate Ocean at your knees.


FOUNDERS
AUSTRALIA
AND THEIR DESCENDANTS
REGISTERED COPYRIGHT




%«BN.
Hr A
‘ w . ML la
W M%;
'ISr '
wff* m
Tfc I
SllEiSff W-
|h ' * ■
§ j |
> v
j||g fe, jgPSBPr t? i^PrB^J
The late Mr. John McTaggart
The late Mrs. J. McTaggart.
The McTAGGART FAMILY of Wooltana Station
South Australia
Mr. John McTaggart was born in 1838
on a sheep farm in Argyllshire named
Blarentibert, where he remained with his
father —Lachlan McTaggart, until he was
twenty-four years of age.
He arrived in South Australia in 1852,
in the ship “Bangal Merchant”, in company
with Archibald Johnson, and a few months
after they landed, he married Miss Mary
McCallum—Mr. Johnson’s niece, at Port-
land.
Mr. McTaggart started with practically
nothing as far as finances were concerned,
but although the Victorian gold diggings
were in full swing, they failed to attract
him. He preferred to take a situation as
overseer for Archibald Johnson at , Mt.
M airhead, where he remained for two years.
He had at that time saved enough money
to be able to buy a flock of wethers from
Mr. Johnson, whose goodwill he always
enjoyed. I hesc he was permitted to fatten
on Messrs. John Livingston and Duncan
McCallum’s run, known as Curratum—l2
miles from Mount Schank, which the two
pastoralists mentioned had acquired by
transfer from Mr. Johnson.
Curratum is of special interest, as
Adam Lindsay Gordon called there on his
way to the wreck of the steamer “Admella”
and picked up an aboriginal boy guide there,
while Captain McEwan, part proprietor of
the “Admella” and two other survivors of
the wreck were nursed at the homestead
for a month.
Mr. McTaggart then travelled his
sheep to Adelaide, and sold them to the
Messrs, Fisher (who were at that time the
only stock agents in the city) at a good
profit, and the transaction helped to give
him his real start in life.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


“ Wooltana.”
Mr. McTaggart’s next venture was the
purchase of 1300 ewes, which he kept in
the South-east. In 1836, with his brother-
in-law —Mr. John McCallum —he set out
for the far north, looking for country, and
decided to form a Station at Y\ ooltana,
about 200 miles North-east of Port Augusta,
and 33 miles from Yudanamutana, the
locality having the advantage of being
watered by the Manalana and Morenia
Creeks. In 1857 Mr. McTaggart travelled
his sheep all the way from Mt. Gambier to
Wooltana.
Mrs. McTaggart and her four young
children were transferred from Port
Augusta to the new Station by means of a
bullock dray, and with only a slab hut to
shelter them at the end of the journey. The
nearest white woman was at Arkaba, 140
miles south. Later, a substantial and com-
fortable home was built.
At that time, John McTaggart had the
distinction of being the “furthest north
pastoralist to graze sheep, in fact, he got
so far awav from the older settled parts of
the State, that contact with people who
kept records, seems to have been completely
lost.
This courageous Highlander started
his northern career with the exercise of
proper caution, and being dependent at the
start upon surface waters, his early opera-
tions were naturally of a restricted
character.
Fortunately, he had picked some of the
most healthy country in the world for stock
raising, but there were many counteracting
influences to be combated.
Mr. McTaggart was wholly interested
in sheep, and would not have cattle on his
run. He found the aborigines of great
assistance in helping him to shepherd his
flock from wild dogs.
'The price of wool got as low as four-
pence a pound, and then when the rabbits
came along, they reduced the carrying
capacity of the country from SO to 20 or 30
sheep to the mile. However, in spite of
these setbacks, Mr. McTaggart had stocked


I x
' f '- .X .
Air. Lachlan McTaggart.
Mrs. Lachlan McTaggart.
up to 6,000 when the memorable drought
of 1863-5 smote him, and he was forced to
quit. Pic had lost 4,000 of his sheep, and
the disaster would probably have been com-
plete, but for the good offices of George
Melrose, of Rosebank, Mount Pleasant, who
rented him some of his more favoured
country, and thus enabled the remnants of
the flock to survive. He often spoke of
Mr. Melrose’s kindness on that occasion as
Ins salvation.
The drought broke in January 1866,
and then tremendous floods occurred, and
the pastures were soon in order again, but
Mr. McTaggart was heavily in debt to
Messrs. Elder, Smith & Co. Wool was
still low, and the market for sheep was
poor. It looked a hopeless prospect to
return to Wooltana, but Elder, Smith and
Co., were practical in their sympathy, and
true Scottish grit and determination did
the rest. The firm had faith in him, and at
the time, when Mr. McTaggart suggested
that Sir Thomas Elder should take on
Wooltana, the latter replied: “Keep going.
'The place is of no use to me. I could not
get anyone to carry it on as cheaply as
you are doing.”
Mr. McTaggart made the stipulation
that the financial accommodation should be
sufficient to permit of him keeping a tutor
for the education of his children; this was
agreed to, and the firm never pressed him
to reduce the overdraft, which, at that time
was more than the station and stock were
worth.
There was an appreciable improve-
ment in the price of wool after the Franco-
Prussian war, and Mr. McTaggart had
great improvements in the way of fencing,
well sinking, and extending the area of
Wooltana, until the stocking reached the
maximum figures of 30,000. The area of
Wooltana was 400 square miles, and in
addition 600 square miles of Paralana was
acquired from the Hawker Estate in 1907.
Mr. McTaggarat held Wooltana until
his death, and was the only early pastora-
Hst, with the exception of the Warwick


family of Holowiliena Station, who re-
mained in occupation of the country in that
district. Some of the lessees failed through
discarding sheep in favor of cattle.
Mr. McTaggart used to cart his wool
by bullock team to Port Augusta, and in-
variably undertook this part of the busi-
ness himself —no light task in view of the
fact that an outward and return journey
would take two months. During the big
drought, he set out wool carting with ten
bullocks in a team, and did not get one of
them back to the station. Drays and
rations were left all along the road.
He could remember John McKinlay’s
expedition, sent out to search for Burke
and Wills, calling at the station in the lat-
ter part of 1861, and staying for the night.
He remembered too, a stockman being
speared by the blacks at an out station of
Paralana, four miles from Wooltana, be-
sides which the offenders burnt a hut.
However, he always got on well with the
natives, who used to say with gratitude,
that he fought fair like the blacks fought —-
with a waddy and not firearms.
P T pon his retirement, his son Lachlan
took over the management of Wooltana,
and John McTaggart went south, dividing
his time between Dashwood’s Gully and
Gilberton. He died at the latter place on
September 25th, 1907, at the age of 80
years.
Beyond serving a term in the Kondo-
paringa District Council, he never took any
part in public life.
After the death of her husband, Mrs.
Mary McTaggart lived on for some years
at Caldina, Walkerville Terrace, Gilberton,
and eventually died at the age of ninety-
two years.
Mrs. McTaggart enjoyed a wonderful
life of activity, almost to the last, and on
her ninetieth birthday, when a representa-
tive of the Register called on her, he found
her bright, keenly alert and with the mer-
riest of expressions, which did not belie the
swift witticisms which were exchanged
with the members of her household. At
her age —still enjoying life keenly, fond of
motoring and delighting in a game of
bridge—it proved, in spite of being unable
to walk during her last few years on ac-
count of having rheumatism, that what-
ever may have been the hardships and dis-
comforts of pioneering—the life had been
a decided aid to longevity and good health.
She died at the age of ninety-two in 1921.
Mrs. McTaggart could have written a
book upon her experiences in the early days
of pastoral life in the north, but like most
people who fought great odds and won,
she was diffident concerning those heroic,
lonely years, and declared that the}' were
nothing. But considering that there were
no white people at Wooltana in 1857, and
the uncivilised native tribes had charge of
the country, it was a fearsome experience.
One shepherd was murdered on a adjoin-
ing Station, and a second one badly speared,
but Mrs. McTaggart nursed him back to
health, with primitive remedies.
The first huts were built with tiny
windows to allow of firing a weapon
through, but too small to admit an abori-
gine. Later on, when the natives realised
that the new race was kindly disposed, they
.gradually ceased hostilities.
Mrs. McTaggarat came out from
Argyllshire in Scotland, in the sailing ship
“Hydaspes,” in December, 1851, with her
parents, and they went from Port Adelaide
to Guichen Ray soon afterwards. It was
from there that she went to Portland where
she married John McTaggart in 1852. Thev
went to reside at Mount Muirhcad Station,
and while there, four of their children were
born.
From Mount Muirhead, Mr. McTag-
gart went north, to look for land, and took
up Wooltana in 1856. A year later, the
plucky wife braved unknown dangers and
hardships to make the dreary journey from
Mount Gambier to Port Augusta, and
thence by bullock dray to Wooltana.


Wooltana.
Of this trip Mrs. McTaggart said: “It
might easily have been worse.” Her parents
and one married sister (the late Mrs. Pat-
terson) accompanied them. “It was a
slow journey, but we were all young and
happy,” she said, “and quite enjoyed the
new experience. The farthest north white
woman we came across was at Wonoka
Station, now called Hawker, which was
i4O miles south of A\ ooltana. Rut even
if we had to battle along, it was no more
than all early settlers in any land have to
do—so why grumble and make things
worse ?”
Airs. McTaggart had ten children, but
only four survive: Mr. Lachlan McTaggart,
of Coromandel A alley; Mr. John D. McTag-
4 r art, of Nonning Station; and the Misses
Ah J. and N. L. E. McTaggart, of Gilber-
ton. There are also twenty-two grand-
children, and eighteen great-grandchildren.
Mr, Lachlan McTaggart, J.P., was
)orn in 1854 at Mount Muirhead, and edu-
'ated privately on the station. He joined
ns father in pastoral pursuits, and for
iwhile became mail contractor over some
4) miles of country on horseback.
During the nine years he was so en-
gaged, he saved some £3OOO, and decided
to go to Western Australia, but his father
pursuaded him to stay at Wooltana, and
sold him a third interest in the propertv.
John Me 1 aggart retired, leaving Lachlan in
charge, and he managed the station until
191(S when it was sold to wind up the estate.
Lp to 30.000 sheep were shorn annu-
ally at A\ ooltana, all of the Merino type.
I his was one of the few families in the
north—up to 1918, who retained their ori-
ginal holding, and this long period of over
60 years constitutes, with one exception a
record in that part of the State.
1 lorses of the Clydesdale breed were
raised at Wooltana in addition to cattle,
after Mr. Lachlan Aid aggart took charge.
Lachlan McTaggart follows his father’s
reputation in being termed the “grand old
man of the north.” The family fought and
won through many droughts.


jfc H
'"V ; ' iiP$ v *£“
/ ' JH&
He retired with Mrs. McTaggart to
Coromandel \ alley, near Adelaide where
he purchased the homestead formerly
owned by his father-in-law Alexander
Murray, who was also an early pioneer of
South Australia.
This beautiful property is situated in
delightful surroundings, and is an ideal
place of retirement, where Mr. McTaggart
still runs a few sheep for amusement.
He is one of the oldest Justices of the
Peace in the State. Mr. McTaggart, with
his father, has seen great changes in the
pastoral life of South Australia during the
past 80 years, and his reminiscences of the
carlv days would fill a large volume.
Mr. and Mrs. J. N. Mcßain
Mr. N. J. Mcßain
JOHN NORMAN McBAIN,
“Lalawa,” Coonawarra, South Australia
John Norman Mcßain was born at
Lake Plains, near Melang in 1864, and is
the son of the late Murdock Mcßain, who
came to Australia in the early fifties. He
was accompanied on the trip by his father,
Norman Mcßain from Scotland, and
landed at Port Adelaide.
On arrival the family joined a brother
who was already out here and Murdock
and his brother John, who were blacksmith
and wheelwright respectively, worked at
their trade for a year at Aldinga. They
then went to Lake Alexandrina with their
father and purchased land from the father
of Sir Lancelot Stirling, which was retained
by Norman until his death. During this
time the sons engaged in manufacturing-
farm machinery and general blacksmith and
wheelwright work. After the death of
Norman, Murdock carried on the farm and
stayed there until his death in 1911. Nor-


“Lalawa,”
The Mcßain Homestead.
man married Miss Margaret Moor of the
Shetland Islands and there was a family
t nine children and of which six survive,
and Mr. John Norman is the eldest son.
fie was educated at Angas Plains and
hen joined his father with whom he was
associated up to the time of his death.
John Norman Mcßain married Miss
Jessie McGillivary, daughter of the late
James McGillivary of Maaoupe Park, Pen-
da, and there is one son, Norman John.
James and Mary McGillivary came to
South Australia from Invernesshire in 1853
landing in \ ictoria. After six years in Vic-
toria they decided to come to South Aus-
tralia and took up land in 1864 at Penola,
which they named Maaoupe Park, after
the Maaoupe Station of which it formed a
portion, 4 here was a family of three sons
and four daughters, of whom Mrs. J. N.
Mcßain is the second eldest. Mr. McGil-
livary went in for grazing and wool-grow-
ing and was a well-known breeder of sheep
in the district. He died on the property in
1 44 and she predeceased him in 1893.
In 1906 Mr. J. N. Mcßain purchased
land adjacent to Maaoupe Park on which he
first engaged in mixed farming and built
the present homestead.
Mrs. J. N. Mcßain has been connected
with the district all her life.
Sheep of the Merino type are run on
the property.
The son, Mr. Norman John Mcßain,
born in 1909, and educated at Prince
Alfred College, Adelaide, of which he was
Captain of the School and Editor of the
school magazine. He was a keen foot-
baller and captain of the College team.
Later he studied at the Adelaide University.
He is now devoting himself after a course
at the Roseworthy Agricultural College, to
the intense cultivation of fodder pastures
in which he has been most successful. He
is keenly interested in improving the grasses
suitable to the district.
1 he family has been associated with
the district for over seventy years.


|| / --"-# iL
m .^liifc* 11111
The late Mrs. William Richardson, Senr
William Richardson, Senr.
The RICHARDSONS of “ Dalveen,” Woodchester,
South Australia.
This was one of the first families to
settle in the Strathalbyn district. The
founder of this branch of the Richardsons
was William Richardson, who landed at
Port Adelaide in 1838. Prior to his arrival
in Australia he had purchased land through
the South Australian Company in London.
His friend Mr. I also purchased
land at the same time, both being under the
impression that the properties were adjoin-
ing. On arrival Mr. Richardson found his
was at Balhannah, near Strathalbyn, and
Mr. Lawson’s was at Padthaway some 200
miles apart. William Richardson soon
started agricultural operations and was
associated with the district up to the time
of his death.
John Richardson, one of the sons, was
born at the homestead, and finished his
education at Whinham College, Adelaide.
He then joined his father in the homestead
property where he stayed until the death
of William Richardson in 1883. He then
went to Queensland, and was employed on
Tnnamincka Station, then owned by the
late Hon. William Campbell, of Victoria.
On leaving this property he joined Mr.
John Conrick at Nappamerill Station. He
stayed in Queensland for nineteen years,
during which time he was engaged mainly
with cattle.
Pie had the honour of erecting the fence
surrounding the tree under which the ex-
plorer Burke, of Burke and Wills expedi-
tion, died.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


£ ' &
> «s
hL ■
-,_ ,f w ’ JHJr '
——•- ■’ '■’ u^ : ' • '" V
HU j
Mr. John Richardson
Mrs. John Richardson and Son
Roth Mr. and Mrs. Richardson have
been actively associated with all move-
ments for the welfare of the district. He
Mr. Wm. A. Richardson
has been a member of the Agricultural
Society for 35 years, and a member of the
Horse Committee for the same period.
Mrs. Richardson was the first Hon.
Secretary of the local branch of the Liberal
Union when it was formed, and in many
other directions has helped in the district’s
progress.
A\ illiam Angas Richardson, their son,
has the distinction of being a life member
of the Mount Barker Agricultural Society
since infancy, as his uncle nominated him
as such before his first birthday. He has
attended every Show of that Society during
his membership until last year.
He married Miss Cross, daughter of
Harold Cross of Woodchester—also of
pioneer stock.
There is no family in South Australia
more closely associated with the early days
of the State than the Richardsons.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


m.. k : .
■ V I
iw
**»■ ■■■■■>-
pr -
$mw% w i I Mf-'"/^' 4k®
ww
The late Wm. Richardson
He returned to Strathalbyn where he
joined his brother for a while. During this
time he accomplished the feat of transport-
ing a mob of 1300 cattle from the North
East of Victoria to the Adelaide market.
Two of the bullocks ' \\ hi sky and
“Brandy” from this mob, won first prize for
Mr. Richardson, as fat bullocks at the
Adelaide Royal Show.
Tie later purchased the property known
as “Angas Bank,” originally owned by
Alexander Starck. This was recognised
as one of the model farms of the district,
in which he carried on mixed farming,
cattle and lamb raising, and horse dealing.
In this he was most successful, and has
Mrs. Wm. Richardson
judged stock at the various agricultural
shows throughout the State. He has won
many prizes in the show ring with various
stock, and with one pair of ponies, “Comet”
and “Venus”, received over 100 prizes.
On the death of his brother he pur-
chased the original family property of
Dalveen, which is now occupied by his son,
William Angas Richardson, who is the
third William Richardson to own the home-
stead.
Mr. Richardson married Miss Mary
Robertson Smith, youngest daughter of the
late Robert Smith of O’Halloran Hill, thus
joining two pioneer families.
ROBERT SMITH of O’Halloran Hill. South Australia
Robert Smith arrived in South Aus-
tralia in 1839, landing at Holdfast Bay,
He was only eighteen years of age at the
time, and after gaining local experience on
the land, purchased a property at O’Hal-
loran Hill. This was virgin country and
had to be cleared. He named his farm
“Bath Bank” which was recognised
throughout the State as one of the finest
farms in South Australia. His wife was a
daughter of William Johnston who, with
his wife and family landed at Holdfast Bay
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


■ IS
t ?Bgz& ?|Sp||
it
% j&s* - •>
> «w 3L
* '*“ u * 00 *^ l * m *^
\
M ’
W m
Mr. William Johnston
Mr. Robert Smith
Mrs. Robert Smith
in 1839. Mr. and Mrs. Smith had a family
of seven children, all of whom were born
at “Bath Bank”. Three of these survive,
Mrs. E. Pinch, Mr. W. Smith and Mrs. J.
Richardson. Robert Smith was an excel-
lent judge of Clydesdale horses, and made
two trips to Scotland to purchase this class
of stock, the progeny of which arc distribu-
ted throughout the Commonwealth.


J0&
/
■ ,'i%
l*P^ ; l *
WB
Flic late John Neilson
The late Mrs. John Neilson
THE NEILSON FAMILY of South Australia.
The late John Neilson, with his wife
and daughter, sailed from England on the
“ Arradnah,” arriving at Holdfast Bay in
1838.
He took up land at Burnside, and later
at Hallett’s Cove (now Morphetvalc) and
finally at O’Halloran Hill.
The late Mr. Neilson was engaged in
agricultural pursuits and was one of the
first to grow wheat, hut mixed farming was
the main occupation.
There was a family of eight of whom
only two survive, and they arc Mrs. Harris
of Gawler, and Mrs. Geddes of Adelaide.
Mrs. Geddes was the youngest daughter
and married Charles Geddes of Port Piric,
the founder of the firm of Geddes & Co.,
Timber Merchants, and a native of the
Orkney Islands. Mr. Geddes came to
South Australia in the seventies and the
firm is still carried on in Port Pirie. He
died in 1911 and Mrs. Geddes is now living
in retirement in Adelaide.
The late Mr. Charles Geddes was a
very public spirited man and was Mayor
of the town on two occasions, lie was
prominent in all movements for the wel-
fare of Port Pirie and was Chief of the
Caledonian Society. His memory is
honored by a stained glass window in the
Congregational Church, Port Pirie.


... JR
/w- IemkH'
i*w33H lBP^^"®“)aa£
Mr. Charles Gedde
Mrs. Charles Geddes
The late Mr. John Neilson died at
O’Halloran Hill in 1873 at the age of sixty-
sight; his wife, Mary McNab of Cromarty
surviving him by some twenty-four years.
He was a well-known identity of the
highest ideals and integrity, greatly
esteemed by all people of the O’Halloran
Hill district. He was a Councillor of the
Boughton District and an elder of the John
Knox Church, Morphetvalc, and a staunch
Presbyterian all his life.
The FOREMAN FAMILY of South Australia
The late James Foreman arrived in
Australia from Essex, England, in 1838 —-
landing at Port Adelaide. Plis brother
George and sister Mrs. Barrett, each with
their families travelled on the same ship.
Shortly after arrival, James took up
land at McEaren’s Flat where he started
farming. He was an expert ploughman,
md in those days the farmers held ploughi-
ng matches for prizes, and in these James
excelled himself.
He retained his original property until
his death in 1858. There was a family of
three sons and one daughter. The youngest
son, Richard George, born in 1855, soon had
to start work, and at the early age of ten
years was employed on a farm, receiving
only his keep for work. Later he joined
his uncle William Polkinghornc in road con-
tracting, and then with his grandfather who
was engaged in building contracts.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


j&igmsgk S
■ ■ " ’■ k
If
Mr. and Mrs. R. G. Foreman
He returned to farm life and worked
for Mr. Smith, one of the State’s earliest
pioneers, and after whom the district of
Smithfield was named. After two years
with Mr. Smith, during which time he
gained experience in all farm work, includ-
ing ploughing, stripping, clearing, etc., he
decided to apprentice himself to the trade
of stone mason. He joined a builder at
Moonta, with whom he stayed some three
\ ears, and came to Adelaide and finished his
apprenticeship with an Adelaide firm of
builders.
At this time Mr. Foreman was still in
his teens, and for one so young had gained
a varied experience which stood him in
good stead in later life.
He started at Jamestown on his own
account as a building contractor, and wdiilst
here he met Miss Hannah Gentry whom he
married. There was a family of eleven
children, four of whom survive.
Mr. Foreman studied Architecture, and
this combined with his knowledge of build-
ing, fitted him for the many important
works he carried out in South Australia,
Victoria and Western Australia. Whilst
in the latter State he remodelled the Frec-
mantlc Town Hall, and many other import-
ant buildings. Fie acted as surveyor and
supervisor of buildings for the Municipal-
ity of Freemantle and Albany for a while
and was the recipient of many expressions
of eulogy for his work.
He retired in 1929 after a lifetime of
strenuous and unremitting work, and has
the respect of a large circle of friends
throughout the three States.
For his work on behalf of his local
Lodge of the Masonic Fraternity, Mr. Fore-
man was made a life member.


I* I. \ N () I'
B A It'M AM it U 11
MUH HUM II 1 i) (. V, K \) i S T H J (‘ T
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Ill I«| iiHi-tid till S.il. I.» Wlton ... Ml,.I. JJJ'I
At MHBOUMNI ,
rx. B () R A M A (V A Di ' H (f N /i
WHVrtOUlNw
8UCK£T ,SLAN °
BARHAM RUN \> *
CONTAINING II4656 ACRES " U’
Aw// Hf! fkainx fo (hr fnrh I
f A/. //A(/i,s (mini /’fttl tit \
yjjg IhrM// l.»t»d I
INDEX /
h-fhrU /!,(..«! r,t * y* I


■
The late Mr. K. R. I). Green
The late Mrs. E. B. 1). Green
THE GREENS OF “BARHAM” STATION, N.S.W.
EDWARD BERNARD DRURY GREEN.
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, E. B. D. Green, was born
at Cork. Ireland, of English parents on
January 31st, 1809. His father was an
officer in a British regiment stationed
there.
After finishing his education he fol-
lowed the family tradition by joining the
British Army in the 4th Regiment of Foot
named the King’s Own. He came to Aus-
tralia with his regiment in the thirties,
when he resigned his commission and
decided to enter pastoral pursuits. He was
possessed of considerable capital, a great
deal of which was lost owing to the liquida-
tion of the bank in which it was lodged.
The first property he acquired was
“Barham” Station (named after his wife’s
maiden name) in New South W ales on the
Murray River, comprising some 115.000
acres, devoted exclusively to cattle raising.
The present Township of Barham was sub-
sequently formed on part of the Estate.
Eater an adjacent run adjoining it on the
north named “Bercmegard” Station, of
90,000 acres was purchased and devoted to
sheep raising. At the same time he also
owned a property named “Ki-illawarra”.
now known as “Keillawarra” Station, on
the Ovens in Victoria. This property was
devoted to the breeding of horses for his
mail contracts. He then took up the
Fifteen Mile Creek or “Greta” Station near
Glcnrowan. \ ictoria, made famous by the
Kelly gang of bushrangers.
At his “Bogolong” Station, between
Yass and Gundagai, he had a fairly good
library which seems to have attracted the
notice of Eadv Franklin (wife of Sir John
Franklin, lost whilst trying to find the
North-west Passage) who was the guest
of Mrs. Green at this homestead for a week
during her over-land trip to Sydney in 1836.
It was at her suggestion that the name of
the station was changed from “Bogolong”
to “Bookham.”


I'hc late Mr. Edward R. S. Green, Junior.
The late Mrs. E. B. S. Green, Junior
During his stay on the “Barham” pro-
perty the blacks were most troublesome,
two of his men being speared, one of
whom died. On two occasions his stock
were speared and, to stop the blacks coming
across the ford, he erected a fort with loop-
holes to fire from to scare them off. This
fort was later known as the “Port Hole.”
Friendly relationships were established
with the blacks in due course and on one
occasion during a heavy flood a black gin
saved Mrs. Green’s life by getting her on
to 'the roof of a building and staying with
her for two days until rescued.
Bushrangers were most active at this
time but always treated Mr. Green and his
family in a friendly way. They would say
“Give us food and a bottle of grog and we
won’t hurt you.” The neighbouring sett-
lers suffered badly at their hands, and one
in particular, Charles Nelson Matcham,
nephew of Lord Nelson, incurred their ill-
will by his harshness towards assigned
servants, with whom the bushrangers were
always in sympathy, so much so that they
tied him to a tree, leaving him exposed to
rigorous weather. On being liberated he
was taken to “Barham” Station and cared
for by Mrs. Green.
GREENSBOROUGH.
Later he took up land some 16 miles
from Melbourne and this he called Greens-
borough, which to-day, is a flourishing
township bearing that name.
During this time he made extensive
purchases of freehold land and various city
properties, including the corner block of
Swanston and Bourke Streets, Melbourne
on which was erected the Royal Mail
Hotel. He also owned several blocks
running east in Bourke Street up to and
adjoining the Tivoli Theatre. Other city
properties include Green’s Buildings, 62-66
Swanston Street, and adjacent properties
off Flinders Lane, these still being in the
E. B. Green Estate. An interesting occur-
rence was the meeting between Mr. E. B.
Green and a Maltese named Azzopardi,
who rented a cottage on half an acre of land
at the back of the Post Office, just off Little
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


Mr. E. B. Green.
Son of the late Mr. E. B. S. Green, Junior.
Bourke Street. He gave Mr. Green a room
which served as an office, and a shed in the
yard was converted into a four-stall stable.
Mr. Green occupied these premises for a
few months after which, in evidence of his
regards for Azzopardi, he bought the pro-
perty for £9O for him, the amount to be
repaid at his convenience. Things pros-
pered with Azzopardi and soon after the
discovery of gold he built a printing office
on part of his block and, owing to the in-
flated values of land, he sold the remainder
to the Government for £15,000, the land
being required for the extension of the Post
Office.
THE MAIL CONTRACTS.
Mr. E. B. Green was one of the ori-
ginal contractors for the carriage of mails
from Sydney to Melbourne. This was an
enormous undertaking which entailed the
provision of a great number of horses and,
as previously stated these were bred on his
Ovens property. He held his first mail
carrying contract for some five years, and
during this period he had to visit England,
leaving a manager in charge, who. through
incompetence, did not keep to the schedule,
with the result that the contract was lost.
When Mr. Green returned he forestalled the
man named Walsh who had secured the
contract by purchasing all available fodder
on the mail route, with the result that
Walsh could not carry out his contract.
The Government fell back on Mr. Green
who demanded, and received, his own price,
carrying on his original contract. The
Royal Mail Hotel, Bourke Street, Melbourne
was built by Mr. Green as a depot for both
mails and passengers. In 1839 the first
Overland Mail was delivered in Melbourne.
The settlers in the North Eastern District
as far north as Albury, thought they could
improve the system of getting their corres-
pondence instead of by casual travellers,
returning drovers and forwarding on from
one settler to another; occasionallv by the
blacks, which was risky, so a few of the
residents round about the Murray decided
to have a mail service of their own. A
settler named Howel, owning a small
station at Howlong, a township near
Corowa. promised to provide a trustworthv


I #* X
* %::
€^>
•> >fc.
& «
& ■ » jHH|
* wl
•■’
: " '
Mrs. Norman Page.
and reliable person in his stockman, John
liurke, a courageous man and a good rider.
This arrangement was made prior to 1839
and the conditions were that the settlers
along the route provided him with rations,
saddle horses and subscribed a few shillings
each as salary. The mail was due once a
tortnight in Melbourne, and the service
was successful for eighteen months or
more. Between 1841 and 1842 an improve-
ment in the mail service put a stop to the
above methods.
NOTES FROM
Mr. E. B. S. GREEN Junior’s DIARY.
‘‘One day Mr. E. B, Green, a military
man who arrived in Sydney in 1831 with the
4th Regiment which was stationed at Par-
ramatta, New South Wales, received a
letter from an intimate friend, James Ray-
mond, who was Postmaster-General at
Sydney, calling his attention to an adver-
tisement in the Sydney paper and Govern-
ment Gazette, that tenders were invited for
the conveyance of an overland mail be-
tween Svdnev and Melbourne (then called
Port Phillip, being portion of New South
Wales before separation) daily. Mr. Green
put in a tender and it was accepted. Green
at this time had a small cattle and sheep
station near Yass and, later, the property
mentioned towards the beginning of this
biography, named Killiwarra near Wan-
garatta. He then came on to Melbourne,
the Sydney mail line was going on
smoothly about that time. Tenders were
called for a mail service to Portland Bay
via Keilor, Bacchus Marsh, Ballan, etc.
He was successful in obtaining that 200
miles, then a branch mail from Fierv Creek
to Mt. Gambier and also from the Grange.
Mr. Green sublet the contract from French’s
Station (now known as Hamilton) to Bel-
fast or Port Fairy, to Mr. William Rut-
ledge, merchant and proprietor of the great
potato growing district of Farnham Park.
Green ran a mail from Kilmore to Maiden’s
Punt (Moama) so altogether he had a run
of between 1,100 and 1,200 miles. The
contract between Melbourne and Geelong
via the River Ex (now called the Werribee)
added another 45 miles to the above figures.
Previous to Green getting the mail to Gee-


■'0$!$ *A ■ JR?
I WSiu); * .
1 i
I A / i
> « — II
Master Brian Page.
long, one by the name of Wright ran a
cart from Market Square, Melbourne to
Timms’ Store, Geelong three times a week.
The fare being £2 each way and parcels at
the rate of 2/6 each. The carts were made
to carry three passengers, one in front with
the driver and two behind, something after
the style of the dog-cart. These vehicles
were constructed in Melbourne by the firm
of Edmund Ashley and Richard Beales, the
latter of whom became Premier and one of
our most esteemed citizens, a sound, honest
politician. We had a few of his sort in the
early days, viz.: Sir Charles Sladen, William
Nicholson, Francis, etc. With reference
to the carrying of passengers it was
optional with the contractor whether he
took them or not, and depended entirely
on the state of the roads, penalties being in-
flicted if behind time unless a good reason
was forthcoming, such as flooded rivers and
creeks, when that was the case the blacks
were of great assistance with their bark
canoes, but after a time every punt had a
boat attached.
There were a good many military men
scattered about the Colonv in the early
days, the most prominent was Captain
Lonsdale, Chief Secretary to the Acting
Governor, C. T. Latrobe, and it was said
that Lonsdale was really the Governor.
Latrobe was formerly a schoolmaster. An
old comrade of Mr. Green, Captain Fyans,
with whom he spent many happy days at
his place, Fyansford, Geelong. Colonel
Snodgrass, father of Peter Snodgrass and
Lady Janet Clarke, who assisted to capture
Sullivan’s Gang of bushrangers on Dr.
Ronald's Station, Yan Yean, Whittlesea,
was also assisted by Mr. Alex Hunter who
married a Miss Bostock of Port Fairy, and
probably some relation to the present
Mayor of Geelong, The above personali-
ties were in the 4th Regiment together, at
the same time there was also Major Fire-
brace, who resided near Beveridge or Rocky
Waterholes. Captain Cowan, who \ived
many years in Geelong, and was well
known as a daring steeplechase rider. There
was hardly a better known man than Mr.
Green, the pioneer mail contractor, on
account of his frequent visits up and down
the routes, superintending the mails.”


Hr. (ireen owned and lived at Barham
House, Grey Street, St. Kilda, now known
as Eildon, and this stood in thirty acres
of park lands. During this time he pre-
sented the land on which Christ Church
now stands to the Church of England. He
also purchased land at the first subdivision
of land at Prahran.
Mr. E. B. Green’s three children, all
sons, were Edward Bernard Samuel, the
eldest born at Parramatta, New South
A ales and was 21 years older than his next
mother, who although born in Australia
was taken to England by his parents when
i few months old. The youngest brother
was born in England and never visited
Australia. The eldest son, Edward was
married at Parramatta and died at the age
of 93 years. The youngest son died first,
he second son next, and the eldest last,
and all died within twelve months of each
other.
Mr. E. B. S. Green was educated at
King’s School, Parramatta and after finish-
ing his education became a pastoralist and
lived on his father’s property at Patter-
son River, a tributary of the Hunter River,
New South Wales, where most of his
family were born.
Upon the death of his father he retired
to Victoria where his main interests were
centred. He was a keen sportsman and a
great lover of horses, of which he always
possessed a number of the best available,
mostly trotters. He was a most retiring
man and did not seek public life. He was
one of the first to import pointer dogs to
Victoria, being a keen shot and winner of
many trophies. He married Miss Lucy
Lee of Sydney, who was also a resident of
Parramatta, being the daughter of one of
Wellington’s officers at Waterloo, and who
also was with Wolfe and Abercrombie at
the storming of the Heights of Abraham,
Quebec. He also fought through the
Peninsula Campaign. There was a family
of ten children, seven daughters (one of
whom died in early life) and three sons.
The name of Barham has been featured
right through the family. Mr. E. B. Green
died at “Barham,” St. Kilda Street, Brigh-
ton, Victoria, on the 20th of February, 1925,
in his ninety-third year, and his wife died
on the 25th of March, 1927.
Mr. Green’s energies were not absorbed
bv the management of his station proper-
ties. He was honorary treasurer of the
Melbourne Hospital in the late forties, and
concerned himself with the commercial life
and interests of Melbourne. He was at
one time a director of the Bank of Victoria
and of the Victoria Insurance Co.
CHARLES PRICE of Hindmarsh Island,
South Australia.
Few men can claim a better right to
be called a “ Founder of Australia ” than
the late Charles Price.
It was in 1853 that he, with a delicate
wife and six children, left their country
home in Hereford, England and sailed for
Australia. Being landed gentry in Eng-
land, used to every comfort and possessed
of ample capital, it was a big venture to
brave a long sea journey to a strange land.
They embarked at Gravesend on January
27th, 1853, in the ship “Annie Cropper”.
The journey to Melbourne, Victoria, occu-
pied some four months, arriving on May
24th. They transferred to another ship
and sailed for Adelaide, arriving at Port
Adelaide on June 3rd. There they were
met by a friend, Samuel Goode, father of
Sir Charles Goode. The ladies and child-
ren were driven to Adelaide in a spring


I
Jfe «t ;. a | . I ■
!*' . 15
■AV •
ml
The late Mrs. Jane Barker
Mrs. J. Fairfax Connigrave
(Twin daughters of Charles Price)
The late
Dr. W. Bonwill Shanasy
(great-grandson)
Mrs. W. T. Shan as v
(granddaughter)
Charles Price, of Hindmarsh Island
Miss Mary B. Shanasy
Miss Valerie B. Shanasy
(great-great-granddaughters)


cart, but Mr. Price and his eldest son
walked. Shortly after arrival Charles
Price established his family at Walkerville.
1 hey brought two servants with them who
soon cleared oft to the Victorian goldfields.
C harles Price was anxious to get to
llindmarsh Island to take up land near his
friends the Goodes who were already estab-
lished on the Island. The journey to the
Island in those days was a terrible exper-
ience for Mrs. Price who had never pre-
viously roughed it, but eventually the
family arrived on the area purchased by
Charles Price. A canvas house was first
erected and a start made in clearing the
property. V heat was planted and grew
prolifically and realised up to 30/- per
bushel. Realising what a wonderful future
was promised for the raising of stock on
such a fertile area, Charles Price decided to
return to England to purchase sheep, and,
in this venture, the pastoral industry is
much indebted to him. Pie brought out
sheep of the Shropshire type in the late
fifties and they stood the journey well. B\*
easy stages they travelled from Port Ade-
laide to the Island and within a few vears
had multiplied considerably. So successful
was this venture that he decided to try his
fortune further by importing cattle. To
this end he made another trip to England in
1867. With his knowledge of the Austra-
lian requirements he decided to import
cattle of the Hereford breed and, being so
well known amongst the gentlemen farmers
of England, he was offered the pick of the
best herds. This importation of cattle in-
cluded a well known bull named “Bringe-
wood” which sired many prize winners
throughout Australia. This was the foun-
dation of the breed in South Australia, the
progeny of which were eagerly sought
after. Naturally Charles Price was proud
of his animals which he had acquired at
great cost of time and money, all of which
was amply justified in the final results.
Charles Price was one of the most success-
lul pastoralists of his day and, by his cour-
age and grit in the face of many early diffi-
culties, has truly earned an honored place
as a “Founder of Australia.”
11 is twin daughters, the late Mrs. Jane
Barker and Mrs. J. Fairfax Conigrave, each
wrote some interesting stories of their
father’s early pioneering work on Hind-
marsh Island. The latter is still writing at
the age of 94.
■A daughter of Mrs. Barker married the
late Dr. W. Thco Shanasy who was a
Doctor of Dental Science of the Californian
University, and one of the leaders of his
profession in Adelaide. He was lecturer
in Dentistry at the Adelaide University.
He died in 1922. The son of Dr. and Mrs.
Shanasy, Dr. \\ . Bonwill Shanasy was
educated at St. Peters College, Adelaide,
where he gained high scholastic honours
and went to the Trinity College of Den-
tistry, Melbourne University with a view to
studying for a dental degree. He decided
to take up medicine and took his degree
at the Adelaide University. His first
practice was at Teatree Gully where he
worked up a large practice and organised
and established the local hospital. He was
a great favorite in the district and died in
1926 at the early age of 31 years. He left
two daughters, Mary Bonwill and Valerie
Bonwill, who represent the fifth generation
of the Price family in Australia.
Mrs. V . 4'. Shanasy did splendid ser-
vice with the Australian Red Cross Society
throughout the Great War and is now
living in retirement at Childers Street,
North Adelaide.


V** j f
The late Mrs. Ann Morris.
,
\ W
ugl I n
Sir John Hindmarsh
The late Thomas Morris.
Che MORRIS FAMILY of “ Bowoka,” South Australia
This family has been associated with
South Australia since the foundation of the
State. The first Governor, Rear Admiral
Sir John Hindmarsh, on his appointment
brought his nephew H. T. Morris with him,
and Thomas Morris came later. These
gentlemen were the founders of the Aus-
tralian branch of the family.


1
■sagup JB *^gygjg|^gg
/Hr’
[ *%| iytk^'A
m-w /«
' "' k
Ml . *<**&$ A^
«d9|y wK , jL
Jr, • $ mL i
| jBf £ w
& ,«*
$£
'* §5i^S8r
Mr. H. W. Morri
Mr. Hugh Allan Morri
When Thomas Morris arrived in Aus-
tralia he soon engaged in pastoral pursuits
with a son of Sir John Hindmarsh, in the
South Eastern portion of the State. He
later acquired Bow r oka Station. In the
meantime he married Miss Ann Hutchison,
whose parents had arrived in Victoria in
1839. There was a family of six sons and
six daughters, and ten of these children
survive. The family were all born at
Bowoka, and all the sons became interested
in the pastoral life of the country.
One of Thomas Morris’ earliest jobs
was to drove a large mob of cattle from
Sydney to South Australia —some 900 miles.
This was a remarkable feat for one so
young in those days when there were onl\
tracks to follow.
Thomas Morris was born at Maid-
stone, England in 1826, and died at Kalan-
gadoo Station on 18th May, 1894 after forty
nine years residence in the Colony. Mrs.
Morris was born at Hillstown, Scotland, in
August 1834. and died at Kalangadoo on
September 27th, 1904.
Henrv Warded Morris, j.l*. was born
on the family property “Bowoka” in 1857,
and after finishing his education joined his
father and became associated with pastoral
pursuits until his retirement in 1926. He
took over the old homestead property in
addition to Conmurra Station.
Merino sheep, cattle and horses were
bred on the several properties, and H. A\ .
Morris has for many years been a prolific
prize winner with his sheep and cattle at
the various shows throughout the State.
For 51 years his services as a judge have
been utilised all over South Australia, and
to-day he is the oldest judge of horses in
the State. As a breeder of thoroughbred
horses Mr. Morris has been most successful
both in the show ring and on the turf.
Many silver cups adorn his sideboard as
testimony to the quality of stock he has
bred and raced.
From his earliest days H. \\ . Morris
has been interested in sport. At school he
was a well known athlete, and won the
silver cup for running.


z< %wt-
;
r 1 ' -•> t f %
Mr. J. T. Morris
Woolmit/’ The Homestead of H. Allan Morri
He gave a great deal of time to pro-
moting the welfare of the various districts
with which he was associated, and served
on the District Councils of Penola, Kings-
ton and Robe. He is one of the oldest
Justices of the Peace in South Australia.
He was for many years associated as Chief-
tian of the various Caledonian Societies in
the South East.
Mr. Morris married Miss McCallum of
Kalabro Station, Victoria, and there is one
son. He is now living in retirement in
Adelaide.
Hugh Allan Morris, J.P., was born in
I<S7O at Bowoka, and educated at Whin-
ham College. On his return from school
he joined his father for a while, and then
went to the Northern part of South Aus-
tralia in the Cooper district, on Mun-
dowdua Station. 1 his property was some
6000 to 7000 square miles in area devoted
exclusively to cattle raising.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


After some five years in this district
Mr. Morris returned to the South East and
acquired “Woolmit” Station and a portion
of the original family estate of Bowoka;
situated some 25 miles from the town of
Robe. This country was particularly suit-
able for sheep, and the quality of wool
grown on “Woolmit” and “Bowoka” was
well known : so much so that on one occa-
sion Mr. Morris won every prize for sheep
at the Kingston Agricultural Show.
The property was held until 1911 when
it was sold for farming purposes. Mr.
Morris was also interested in Penola and
fvalangadoo Stations which were later cut
up into smaller blocks and sold.
H. A. Morris took a keen interest in
public affairs and was Chairman of the
Pacepede District Council for some years.
.■ le was for many years prominently con-
nected with the various Agricultural Socie-
ties, but he is better known for his keen
interest in the racing world of South Aus-
tralia. He is Chairman of Tattersall’s Club
of South Australia, of which he has been a
committeeman for many years. In addition
he is a member of the leading racing clubs
of the State.
As a breeder of thoroughbreds, Mr.
Morris has been particularly successful and
has won many of the State’s leading stakes.
Mention should be made of his well-known
steeplechaser “Adit” which was successful
in steeplechases in South Australia, Vic-
toria and New South Wales —winning over
£5OOO in stakes.
Mr. Morris will also be remembered as
a breeder both of Clydesdales and ponies.
Pie retired in 1911 and lives in Ade-
laide where he leads an active life, being
still interested in pastoral properties.
'There arc two daughters: Mrs. Jef-
feries of England, and Mrs. Ranks of
Goolwa, and two grandchildren.
The Morris Family are one of the few
who held their original holdings for over
80 years, and are one of the oldest in the
State.
The Hutchisons, of Moonee Ponds, Vic.
The late Mr. and Mrs. W. Hutchison
came to Victoria from Edinburgh, Scot-
land, on the ship “St. Mungo,” arriving at
Williamstown on Christmas Day of 1839,
after a voyage of some 209 days, during
which the ship’s fresh water supply ran out
and they had to put into Rio de Janeiro
to replenish same. Melbourne then had
only been founded some four years, and the
whole area around what was then a very
small village was covered in scrub and
timber.
After a while, Mr. Hutchison decided
to take up an occupation lease at Moonee
bonds, then an area of land in its wild state,
which, to-day is a thickly populated suburb
of Melbourne. Cattle raising was engaged
in until the death of Mr. Hutchison in 1841.
'here was a family of five daughters and
a son.
On the death of her husband, Mrs.
Hutchison decided to take up a large area
of country in the Western District, and
“squatted" at a place named Mundarra.
The story of her trip from Moonee
Ponds to Mundarra is one full of exciting
incidents and hardships. Great danger
was experienced, as the aborigines of that
district were very treacherous.
Mrs. Hutchison later sold the Mun-
darra property for some £5OO and then
took up another property over the South
Australian border. About this time she
married Andrew Dunn, who had come to
Victoria on the same ship as the Hutchison
family. Andrew Dunn became one of the
largest land owners in the south eastern
district of South Australia.


A daughter of Mrs. Hutchison, Ann,
who was only four years of age when the
family arrived in Victoria, married the late
'Thomas Morris, a nephew of Rear Admiral
Sir John Hindmarsh, the first Governor of
South Australia. Mr. Morris was born at
Maidstone, Kent, England, on the 30th
August. 1826, and died at Kalangadoo,
South Australia, on the 18th May, 1894, a
colonist of 49 years. Mrs. Morris was born
at Hillstown, Scotland, in August, 1834,
and died at Kalangadoo on September 27th,
1904. Of this marriage there were six
sons and six daughters, ten of whom sur-
vive.
The majority of this family, all of
whom were born at the family station,
“Rowoka.” in South Australia, are residing
in that State, with the exception of Mr.
John Thomas Morris, who, after many years
of station life in South Australia, came to
Victoria some 30 years ago and purchased
land at Edenhope, in the Western District,
not far from the original property taken up
by his grandmother, Mrs. Hutchison.
Mr. Morris’s property was known as
Lake Wallace North, which he held until
1906, and was engaged exclusively in wool
production. Having sold this station he
came to Melbourne with the intention of
retiring, but after a while purchased land
in Gippsland and engaged in fattening cattle
and sheep, which he carried on until his
retirement in 1929. During his residence
in Gippsland Mr. Morris took an active
interest in all public affairs, being a mem-
ber of the Korumburra Shire Council for
many vears, during which period he occu-
pied the Presidential chair. He married
Miss Reid, of South Australia, a member
of one of the pioneer families of that State.
Before leaving South Australia, Mr.
Morris was a member of two shire councils,
and has always taken an active part in
promoting the welfare of the district in
which he lived. Few men have travelled
so extensively throughout the hinterland of
Australia as Mr. Morris, and he has done
some great pioneering and prospecting
work throughout Central Australia and
Western Australia. He took an active
part in the rush to Western Australian
goldfields when gold was discovered there
in the nineties. Mr. Morris is considered
a very keen judge of both cattle and sheep,
to the production of which he has devoted
most of his life.
Mr. and Mrs. Morris arc now living in
retirement in East Malvern, Melbourne.
JOHN PALTRIDGE, J.P., Mount Barker
The above established the firm of John
Paltridge and Co., Auctioneers and Land
Brokers. He was connected with the open-
ing up of the Mount Barker district in the
early days and his business was the first
of its type in that town, lie was a most
public spirited man and a leading light in
all movements for the benefit of the district.
John Paltridge married Elizabeth
Chapman and there was a family of three
sons and four daughters, Harry, George,
Frederick, Amelia, Amy, Elizabeth and
Jessie. The eldest son, Harry, was edu-
cated in the district and then entered the
firm, being articled to the surveying pro-
fession which was combined with his work
in the business of the Company. Later, he
established his own business with which
he was associated until his death at the
age of 34 years. A great deal of work was
done by him for the improvement of the
district.
He married Miss Hannah Wilson
Richardson, daughter of William Richard-
son of “Dalveen,” thus joining two pioneer
families. There was a family of four sons
and four daughters, George, Irene. John,
Agnes, Bessie, Helen, Frederick G., and
Harry S.
Mrs. Paltridge is now living at Hyde
Park, Adelaide.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


"
M ' ,' , • • k
£ }
I t
w
The late Thomas Paltridge.
The Late Mrs. Thomas Paltridgc
Thomas Paltridge, the father of John
Paltridge, was a bootmaker by trade but
could not obtain tanned hides in the early
davs. His first tannery was started in an
old beer barrel, the first hide costing him
2/6, from which he produced the leather
necessary for his purpose. 1 his start from
small beginnings became one of the biggest
tanneries in the State, situated at Mount
Barker and which was in existence for
many years.
The Paltridge family is one of the best
known throughout the Mount Barker
district, having been associated with that
town for so many years.
By his marriage John Paltridge became
associated with the Richardson family and
his grandchildren represent the fourth
generation of both families.
Mr. Harry Paltridge.


The late George Mackinlay.
William Mackinlay
THE LATE GEORGE MACKINLAY
The late George Mackinlay left Leith,
Scotland in 1837 arriving in Australia early
in 1838 in the ship “Lady Kehnaway.”
Being a carpenter by trade he soon found
employment in Sydney, and later engaged
in contracting at Bathurst, New South
\\ ales. He then came overland to Port
Phillip and went on to the Glenelg district
and engaged in pit-sawing with a mate
named George Parfrey. He stayed here
some time and married Martha Barr.
When the gold rush started in 1851
he, with George Parfrey, went to the dig-
gings, but met with little success.
Deciding to turn his attention to farm-
ing, he acquired land at Black Forest.
Campbellfield, Victoria. Here several of the
family were born and reared. Selling this
property he purchased land at Warren-
dyte, Victoria, where he stayed until 1877.
Hearing of the new areas of land being
opened np for settlement in New South
Wales he decided to go there. He selec-
ted land some 12 miles from Tern ora and
this property is still in the family. It was
virgin country in those days, heavily tim-
bered, all of which had to be cleared bv axe
and fire. It was a truly pioneering ven-
ture with all the hardships attendant there-
to to be endured. The nearest town to
the selection was W agga Wagga some 56
miles distant. The travelling to and from
this town entailed a five days’ trip. There
were no made roads or bridges. Severe
droughts combined with the wild dog and
kangaroo pests made the work of establish-
ing a farm very hard. To-day this pro-
perty named “Linton is recognised as
one of the best improved wheat and graz-
ing areas in that part of New South Wales.
It was at “Linton” that George Mackinlay
died in 1902 at the age of 84 years. Mrs.
Mackinlay died there in 1911 aged 81 years.
There was a family of eleven children, five
of whom survive, the eldest, William, being
82 years at the time of writing. The
family were named William, Martha (de-
ceased), Robert (deceased), George (decea-
sed), Margaret. Mary (deceased), Robert
2nd (deceased), Katherine (deceased),
Ellen, Jessie and John.


jfii' w^'M]a' » fippp
v a9& -^Ml
Mr. A. Murray, sen.
Mrs. A. Murray, sen
The MURRAYS of Coromandel Valiev
South Australia.
Alexander Murray was born in Scot-
and in 1803 and, with his family embarked
,n the ship “India” at Greenock, Scotland,
>n October sth, 1839, landing in Adelaide
»n the 17th February, 1841,
Alexander Murray kept a most detailed
liary of this trip. The ship was only about
00 tons and, whilst clearing the English
'hannel, ran into a gale and lost her upper
aasts together with two hands. This was
most eventful voyage. Arriving at Ade-
line, Alexander Murray soon purchased
md at Morphetvale, which he farmed for
few years later acquiring land at Coro-
manclel \ alley, which he named “Craiglee”.
This property became famous for its fruit,
being peculiarly adapted for the purpose.
In 1852 Alexander Murray accom-
panied by his son, Alexander, made the
journey to the Bendigo goldfields, but
owing to meeting with little success did not
stay long.
In the meantime fruit became plentiful
on the “Craiglee” property and the manu-
facture of jam for the Adelaide market was
commenced, which eventually worked up
to a large business.


* I
Mrs. A. Murray, jun.
Mr. A. Murray, jun
The opening then occurred for the
manufacture of biscuits, and to further this
object Alexander Murray made a trip to
Glasgow, Scotland, and purchased the
machinery necessary for this commodity.
This was the commencement of that well-
known firm of Alexander Murray & Sons,
Biscuit and Jam makers. This firm was in
existence for many years, their products
being in demand over a wide area. In the
meantime Alexander Murray junior married
Elizabeth Gumming of Glasgow, who
arrived in South Australia in 1846.
Peter Gumming was a Scottish merch-
ant and chartered the ship “Royal Archer”
which he loaded with a cargo of soft goods
and started a wholesale soft goods business
on the site now occupied by Miller Ander-
son & Co., and the Theatre Royal. Later
he added a retail branch of the business
which was cventuallv sold to Miller Ander-
son. The wholesale side was retained by
Peter Gumming.
Alexander Murray senior was interested
in public life and served as Member for
Sturt in the House of Assembly during the
Speakership of the Hon. George Kingston
1867-68.
Alexander Murray junior purchased a
property adjoining “Craiglee”, Coromandel
Valley which he named “CraigburnV He
had a family of three sons and one daughter,
Mrs. Lachlan McTaggart of “Craiglee.”
Mr. Murray senior died at Coromandel
Valle}' in 1880.
Mr. Murray junior was born in
Glasgow on April 9th 1835, and died i
December 1898.


’
v i %/ipi
V . -
'
Mr. Robert Smith.
Mrs. Robert Smith.
Mr. William Johnston
Father of Mrs. R. Smith.


fa. » .
Bf ll||i
9 mgL ; |a|pi
- 1 ff
I jjr- I IlV-'
Mr. William Smith.
Eldest son of Robert Smith.
Mrs. J. L. Pinch.
Eldest daughter of Robert Smith
The SMITHS of O’Halloran Hill
South Australia.
The founder of this family was Robert
Smith who was born at Beith, Scotland, in
1821. After acquiring knowledge in his
native land of farming, he decided at the
early age of eighteen to migrate to South
Australia. He arrived on the ship “Wel-
come”, landing at Holdfast Bay in 1839.
For some time he worked for various
people with a view to gaining colonial
experience, and eventually purchased land
at O’Halloran Hill where he established
the well-known farm “ Bath Bank”. At
the time of purchase this property was
virgin country, part of which was heavily
timbered. The preparation of the land
prior to cultivation was a matter of hard
toil but “Bath Bank” became known as the
model farm of the district. This property
was in the hands of the family until
recently.
Robert Smith established a great re-
putation for his work in connection with
his Clydesdale stud. He was one of the
first men to specialise in this breed of horse,
and made two trips to Scotland to bring
out the best Clydesdales available, the pro-
geny of which arc distributed throughout
the Commonwealth.
In addition to his farming and horse
breeding activities, he took a very keen
interest in the public life of his district.
For many years, Robert Smith was a
member of the local district Council, a
Justice of the Peace and one of the original
members of the South Australian Agricul-
tural Society.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


jg//MfF >m ,, f
i/ ' " #|' ? »#k
■
„^rir
p% IK v s ,
fc# / < f
' V
v - - J > WrS&r
* « &*»-m
■» ' 't |P
JL
BP
9fe jflf
-»l ; l» jbii?
Mr. Robert Pinch
Fourth generation
Master E. W. Pinch
Fifth generation
i he late Mr. Edward Pinch.
Robert Smith married Margaret Johns-
ton, daughter of William Johnston, founder
of the Oakbank Brewery. This brewerv is
still retained by the Johnston family.
Robert Smith was the father of seven
children, three of whom survive; Mrs. J.
L. Pinch of Malvern, Mr. William Smith
and Mrs. John Richardson of Strathalbvn.
It will thus be seen that the Smith family
have been associated with the State of
South Australia for nearly 100 years, and
are truly termed “Founders”.
The eldest daughter, Janet Love Smith
married Edward Pinch who was also an
early arrival in this State. Like his father-
in-law he was a practical farmer and culti-
vated some large areas under wheat. At
his Georgetown property 40 bushels of
wheat per acre were harvested. He finally
settled at Bagot’s Well, where he was a
member of the Kapunda District Council
until his retirement to Glenelg where he
was a member of the Corporation of that
Municipality. He died at the early age of
fifty-two.
1 here was a family of nine children,
Robert Smith, Bessie Wasley, Edward
Berrison, William Johnston, Margaret
Johnston (deceased), Richard Roy, Archie
Galbraith, Allan Love and Doris Mary.
Mrs. Pinch is now living at Malvern,
Adelaide.
Master E. W. Pinch represents the
fifth generation of this family in Australia.


(kk %
/ I / \
J \
jp
The late Mr. Thomas Hilder
The late Mrs. Thomas Hilder
REMINISCENCES OF THE HIEDER FAMILY OF
OLD VAN OILMAN’S LAND AND TASMANIA
(By Richard Hilder)
Thomas Hilder, born 31st March, 1816
at Church Farm, the home of the Hilders
in Cockfield Parish. County Suffolk, Eng-
land. In early life he was persuaded of the
advantages of a free life in the Island
Colony of Van Dieman’s Land where farm
laborers and land settlers were sadly
needed.
An opportunity offered for a three
years engagement by Captain Whiting,
whose landed estates were situated on the
River Tamar, Island of Van Dieman’s Land.
The terms of employment were £lO for
the first year, £2O for the second year and
£3O for the third year, commencing when
leaving England with a free passage to the
Island Colony per the brig “Arab” of 300
tons register. On the outward passage the
brig called at the Island of Tristan-de-cuna
and Cape Town. After a five months voy-
age passengers, crew and also live-stock
were delighted to sight land on the shores
of Van Dieman’s Land, March Ist, 1841.
and the following day the “Arab” entered
the Tamar River and Thomas Hilder met
his employer. Times were bad and the
engagement was cancelled. Thomas Hilder
spending 10 years with varying employ-
ments during which period he visited Port-
land Bay and Port Phillip, Victoria. In
1851 —1852 he was a gold digger on the
Bendigo goldfields.
In July 1853 Thomas Hilder married
Elizabeth Hayhoe, of Cataract Hill, Laun-
ceston, whose parents also came from Suf-
folk, England, (ship and date uncertain),
but Elizabeth Hayhoe was born November
7th, 1836, at Evandale, Van Dieman’s Land.
Immediately after marriage Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Hilder sailed from Launceston per
schooner “Wave” of 28 tons register with
Capt. John Hill as commander, for Emu
Bay on the North-west coast of the island


% 0<m m ‘* as
K /V M V, iWl
Mr. and Mrs. R. Hilder
and became pioneer settlers on a 50 acre
farm of good soil facing Bass Strait, and
one mile west of the surveyed town of
Burnie. Here the many hardships of pio-
neering farm life was met with unflinching
courage. Thomas Hilder being of progres-
sive temperament aided his fellow land-
holders of the settlement and occupied a
few minor public positions. He died in
March 1894. Elizabeth Hilder was inde-
fatigable in generosity and good Christian
heeds, a real mother in Israel to young
people and to many persons in distress.
she died, aged 47, in October, 1883. Their
:hildren, of which four sons and three
laughters are still living were: Alfred, Ann
Elizabeth, Richard, Thomas, Susan, Esther,
Vlary Jane, Charlotte, Eliza, Martha Jane,
Robert, Frederick Henry and Ruth Agnes.
I homas Hilder was an adherent of the
hurch of England, and Elizabeth Hilder of
he Methodist Church. As there was no
dethodist Church available till after the
'irth of the youngest child all were baptised
n the Church of England.
Alfred Hilder became a distinguished
finer. Richard Hilder followed farming
ursuits for half a century. Thomas Hilder,
mior, became a successful land proprietor
and saw-miller. Robert Hilder has fol-
lowed farming pursuits since manhood.
Frederick Henry Hilder succumbed to
brain fever in childhood. Ten of Thomas
and Elizabeth Hilder’s thirteen children
married and now (1935) their direct de-
scendants number about 150 and are scat-
tered about in New Zealand, Western Aus-
tralia, New South Wales, Victoria and Tas-
mania. A creditable increase since the
year 1853.
RICHARD HILDER’S RECORD.
Born of pioneering parents at Emu
Bay on July 24th, 1856. Compelled through
stress of financial affairs to commence labor-
ious farm work at 10 years of age without
further education. In early manhood he
became a teetotaler and a member of the
Manchester Unity Independent Order of
Oddfellows and per night school and per-
sonal effort further educated himself while
engaged in the most arduous occupation of
a pioneering landholder of the second gen-
eration in the district of Emu Bay on the
North-west coast of Tasmania.
At the age of 23 he married Amelia
Hales, aged 20, whose parents, James and
Eliza Hales, were both born in England,


James Hales at Lowestoft and Eliza at
Twickenham Ferry. They were married
at Melbourne in July 1853, and in 1855 they
removed from Melbourne per the schooner
“Margaret Chessel” of 52 tons register
under Commander James Patterson, to
River Forth on the North-west coast of
Yin Dieman’s Land and became pioneer
landholders. There Amelia Hales was
born on the 29th September, 1858.
Immediately after marriage, Richard
and Amelia Hilder took possession together
of a partially cleared 53 acre section of re-
markably good (though heavily timbered)
land situated on Mooreville Road in the
district of Emu Bay and one and a half miles
from the somnolent township of Burnie.
Hard work was the lot of the young couple,
who were both ardent members of the Pri-
mitive Methodist Church at Burnie, which
was established in 1869. Richard Hilder,
apart from being a Good Templar and an
enthusiastic Oddfellow, in 1881 became a
fully accredited local preacher, and in this
capacity was abundant in labour as a pio-
neering Methodist local preacher. Through-
out 30 miles of Tasmania’s fine north-west
coast for many years he travelled on foot
or horseback or horse conveyance 1000
miles per year conducting services in bush
homesteads, state schools and churches at
twenty-eight different places.
This particular duty precluded Richard
Hilder from other public positions though
frequently pressed to do so. Amelia Hilder
was a gracious helpmate to her husband
and like her husband’s mother, a sincere
friend and helper to all young people or
distressed folk and in later life she suffered
much ill health and passed to her Heavenly
reward on October 13th, 1928. Their
family comprises*—Marion Eliza, Martin
Joseph, Olive Elizabeth, Hannah Amelia,
Winman John, Milton J. T., Doris, Basil
Richard, Arden A. H., Alfred Robert. M. J.,
W. J. and M. J. T. Hilder settled in the
North Island of New Zealand and with
their families still remain. The three eldest
daughters married (one now deceased) and
the youngest is a professional nurse.
The three youngest sons enlisted in the
A.I.F. 15th Battalion (1915). Private B.
R. Hilder falling at Gallipoli, August Bth,
1915, only 65 days after leaving Melbourne.
S. B. Arden Hilder was badly wounded at
Messines, France, June 1917. Driver A.
R. Hilder survived the hostilities after two
years' service in France. Both are settled
now at Yolla and Burnie, Tasmania. The
direct descendants of Richard and Amelia
Hilder number 40 in New Zealand, Victoria
and Tasmania.
Richard Hilder at the age of 67 vears
developed a long delayed literary instinct
which keeps him in healthy activity at the
age of 79 years.
JAMES PINKER lON (A Pioneer of 1839)
A PIONEERING FAMILY.
James Pinkerton left Glasgow for
Australia on Bth July, 18,19, in the barque
“Superb”, 635 tons register, Neil Shannon,
Commander, for Port Phillip in the Colony
of New South Wales. With him were his
wife, two sons and three daughters, his
single sister Jane, his widowed sister Mrs.
Mark Ecken and her two daughters and
his wife’s maiden sister Jessie Gardner.
Immigrant vessels had left Glasgow for
Australia, but no passenger vessels. A
gold watch and chain was presented to
James Pinkerton, and a public holiday
given in Glasgow to see these enterprising
men and women leave their native land for
Australia, the other end of the world.
When in mid-ocean the Captain sighted
what he took to be a pirate boat. The
women were all ordered below, and the
men lined up on deck with firearms, but
there was no trouble, and the “Superb”


I he late James Pinkei ton
pursued her course. A long wait at the
ine, where the vessel was becalmed for six
weeks, resulted in 'a scarcity of food, and
all were rationed, many getting very tired
of the stale ship biscuits.
At last land was sighted, and the vessel
put to at Port Adelaide. The Captain’s boat
was lowered, and with the Captain and
Second Officer, James Pinkerton, his wife
and his eldest daughter Elizabeth went
ashore, the Captain taking a bottle of wine
with him. The Captain made a short
speech and then opened the bottle to drink
success to their venture, when it was found
that he had forgotten a drinking cup or
glass, so Mrs. Pinkerton’s shoe was brought
into requisition using the heel to drink
out of.
Peter Snodgrass (father of the late
Lady Janet Clarke) boarded the vessel at
Adelaide, and on reaching Port Phillip
Heads undertook to pilot them in, but on
the sands they went, and waited some hours
until the tide took them off. Finally the
"Superb” anchored in the Bay on 4th
December 1839. Very few of the ladies
left the vessel until the men folk landed
and found accommodation. The Pinkerton
family remained on board for two weeks
until two little rooms were run up for the
ladies, the men folk going to an inn where
they had to put up with the floor and din-
ing-table to sleep on.
The ladies had a novel experience
landing. A small lighter took them from
’he vessel, and as they got into shallow
water, boats were lowered to go further;
then sailors got out and carried the ladies
ashore at what was known as Diadart’s
Beach, and from where they were conveyed
ii]) to Melbourne in bullock drays, the only
means of travelling.
James Pinkerton soon procured land
on the Koroit Creek out in the Keilor Dis-
trict, calling it Chamois Ponds, but this
name was seldom used, being nearly always
known as “The Creek.” Here he did re-
markably well with sheep, but the procur-
ing of labour was a great trouble. In
many instances one was compelled to take
a man, his wife, and a lot of children. Div-
ing was very high—Flour £25 per ton,
Rutter, 5/- per lb ; Eggs, 7 /- per dozen ; and
two small onions for 1/-. Potatoes were
about the only vegetable; young nettles,
milk thistles and another weed called Native
Spinach were greatly used.
1 he homestead was made of wattle and
daub, lined with hessian, some of the better
rooms being lined with green baize. The
home was erected by unskilled labour. The
blacks were very numerous, coming to the
station in numbers. The dogs on the
homestead could scent them and set up a
great barking. Instructions would always
be given for a large quartern pot that was
on the bank of the river and used for sheep
dip to be cleaned. A mat of rice was put
in, with a quantity of sugar, and when
cooked the blacks came to eat it, their
spoons being pieces of bark. The lubras,
numbering about 30, who had any
clothing on, went up to the homestead,
stood in a line, and had a big spoonful of
white sugar put in their black hand.s.


They usually came once a year on their way
to have a friendly corroboree with another
tribe.
In 1848 the house was burnt to the
ground, and the property sold. James
Pinkerton then bought from John Sherwin
the property on the Werribee River, near
Mount Cottrell- and called it “Yaloke” —
the native name for woody. 'The ruins of
the old homestead are still standing near the
river, about one mile from this sacred spot.
Here also for some time James Pinkerton
did well, but adverse times came with fire
and drought and flood, and then the rush
to the goldfields, and labour was not to be
had for love or money. Finally, his pro-
perty fell into the hands of Big Clarke.
With the remnants from the old home
fames Pinkerton joined Thomas Kissock
(his son-in-law) and his family in 1862 at
Bacchus Marsh, where he lived until his
death in March 1869, aged 79, being buried
in the Bacchus Marsh Cemetery.
Archibald James Campbell, James
Pinkerton’s eldest grandson, from time to
time visited this burial ground and kept it
from being obliterated. He was many times
accompanied by his two brothers, William
Richard Gray Campbell and Thomas Grice
Campbell, and his own eldest son Archi-
bald George Campbell. The latter with
cousins erected a mound of stones over the
spot known to be occupied by the graves.
At the present time there are 187 liv-
ing descendants of James Pinkerton, 18
grandchildren, 77 great-grandchildren, 90
great-great-grandchildren, and two great-
great-great-grandchildren.
This little family history has been
written bv Margaret Kissock, the eldest
grandchild living.
THE LATE THOMAS KISSOCK
One of Victoria’s earliest arrivals,
Thomas Kissock was born on the family
estate “Richorn”, Kircudbrightshire, Scot-
land on October 13th, 1806. The Kissock
family has been associated with that part
of Scotland for many generations.
Embarking on the ship “Cybele” he
arrived in Port Phillip in 1841 landing at
what was then known as Liardet Beach,
now Port Melbourne. Thomas Kissock
soon engaged in the Stock and Station busi-
ness with which he was associated for
many years. At the time of his retirement
he was the oldest practicing Stock and
Station Agent in Victoria. He was asso-
ciated with the well-known Kirks Bazaar
and also the firm of Tide for a long period.
As an early arrival in the settlement
'Thomas Kissock saw Victoria grow from
small beginnings to the dignity of a separate
Colony and later to a most important State
of the Commonwealth. During that long
period he, being so closely associated with
the pastoral industry, knew intimately all
those early squatters and, with them, may
be truly termed a Founder of Australia.
He was highly respected by all who
knew him for his sterling worth and, in a
new country he sturdily upheld the Scot-
tish traditions of honesty and uprightness.
He died at the ripe old age of 94 years.
His wife was a daughter of James
Pinkerton who came to Port Phillip in 1839
thus joining two families whose association
with the State covers nearly 100 years.
'The descendants of both the Pinkerton and
Kissock families are numerous and scattered
throughout the Commonwealth.


->
jibi JL m
-l?fe- : ’ iw 1
Jr-A s?‘ '"•
Mr. Richard Bower.
RICHARD BOWER of Port Adelaide.
Richard Bower was born at Port
Adelaide in 1864, being the son of the late
Amos and Mary Bower, and nephew of the
Hon. David Bower. At the age of 13, after
being educated at Port Adelaide, he started
work at cabinet making, but when he was
14 his master closed the business and
Richard Bower joined the employ of Rich-
ard Honey, who was then the largest timber
merchant in South Australia.
Richard Bower worked his way up
from a boy to the position of foreman of
the carpenter’s and joiner’s shops. Upon
the death of Mr. Honey, 39 years ago, Mr.
Rower purchased a share in the firm and
has been associated with it for 57 years.
He is now the senior partner and, with his
uncle, who arrived at Port Adelaide in 1847
the Bower family has been associated with
the timber industry in Port Adelaide for 88
years. This is a unique record in South
Australian business circles.
Mr. Bower married Miss Annie Rem-
phrey of Alberton and there is a family of
two sons and one daughter who are all
married. There are eight grandchildren.
Having been trained by his uncle, the
Hon. David Bower, in public service, Rich-
ard Bower has given much of his time to
public welfare activities, being particularly
interested in the Port Adelaide Institute;
this is one of the finest of its type in South
Australia.
In 1930-31. he was President of this
Institute after occupying all the preced-
ing offices for two years in each. He has
been a bowler for 32 years, being President
of the Semaphore Bowling Club for five
years and is a member of the Executive of
the South Australian Bowling Association.
He has played in most cities throughout
the Commonwealth and New Zealand.


■i:
' A
Jm
Mrs. Richard Bower
During 1934 Mr. and Mrs. Bower took
an extensive tour to the East, visiting Java,
Malay, Strait Settlements, Siam, China and
Japan.
“Tol-Pedn”, the seaside home of the
Bowers is situated on the Esplanade, Largs
Bay, with a magnificent view over the Bay.
This is one of the picked positions in this
well-known seaside resort.
Mrs. Bower is a keen croquet player
and was successful in winning the South
Australian Championship in 1932-3-4, for
which she was awarded the Cup. In 1934
the British Gold Medal for South Australia
was won by Mrs. Bower. The local Metho-
dist Churches have a hard worker on their
behalf in the person of Mrs. Bower.
Mr. Bower was for many years a non-
commissioned officer of the Australian Gar-
rison Artillery, volunteering for service dur-
ing the Great War.
His uncle appointed his as supervisor
of his Woodville Estate as they were closely
associated in the timber business and public
welfare work.
The firm of Lion Timber Mills, Port
Adelaide and Adelaide of which Mr. Rich-
ard Bower is the senior partner, is one of
the leading businesses of its type in South
Australia.
The late Cyril Melville David Bower,
eldest son of Richard Bower, born at Alber-
ton in 1893, was educated at Prince Alfred
College and, after leaving there entered his
father’s business, becoming a partner in
the firm.
Under the able tuition of his father, he
soon adapted himself to the work and be-
came his parent’s right hand and associate,
in addition he was his constant companion
and fellow bowler.


IB j|
jgH|n|
Sl liili
The late C. M. D. Bower,
(son of Richard Bower).
Richard Bower, Junior,
(grandson of Richard Bower)
He was a bowler of note in Australia,
and won the Championship of the Sema-
phore Club in 1928-9, which title he re-
tained for five years in succession, and
also reached fourth place in the Australian
Championship, when competing in that
event.
Naturally an artist, he produced some
good work in both oil and water color
painting.
He married Miss Hughes, of Hind-
marsh, and their family of three sons and
one daughter represent the fourth genera-
tion of the Bower family in Australia.
The passing away of this most popular
man at the early age of 40, was mourned
by a host of friends, as he was universally
loved and respected by all with whom he
came in contact.
David Bower, second son of Richard
Bower is now associated with his father in
the firm of Lion Timber Mills, Port Ade-
laide.


HgPMfc.
DAVID CHAMBERS (Pioneer)
Of this family the first to arrive in
Australia was Charles Henry Chambers,
eldest son of David Chambers, Solicitor,
of Margerafelt, Londonderry, Ireland. He
reached Port Jackson in 1826, and practised
as a solicitor in Sydney. His brother,
David Chambers, solicitor, arrived at Port
[ackson from London, per S. “Eliza”, in
1830.
He practised in the Supreme Court,
Sydney, being Co-temporary with William
Manning (Registrar of Supreme Court),
and W. C. Wentworth (Proctor), F. and S.
Stephen. William a’Beckett (Barrister and
afterwards first Chief Justice of Victoria),
and W. Holden —his partner.
Among his intimate friends were W.
H. Mackenzie and Thomas Whistler Smith.
He and William a’Beckett built houses side
bv side at Newtown, then a country suburb.
In 1833 David Chambers was appointed
Crown Solicitor by Governor Bourke and
Under-Sheriff in 1834 and held other public
appointments.
At the first meeting at the Court House,
King Street, Sydney, 26th January, 1833, “to
prepare a petition to His Majesty, William
IV., praying that a Representative Assembly
might be granted to the Colony of New
South Wales, Mr. Mdnoid, Sheriff, was
Chairman, Sir John Jamison spoke in favour
also Mr. W. C. Wentworth. Mr. James
McArthur thought the time was not ripe
and Mr. David Chambers moved an amend-
ment. Mr. F. Stephens read the petition.
Mr. John Gurner was then Chief Clerk of
the Supreme Court.”
Mr. David Chambers drew up an
account of Mr. W. C. Wentworth’s first
journey over the Blue Mountains.
David Chambers married in Sydney
and visited England with his family 1846 —
1847, and died in Melbourne 1848.
His eldest daughter, M. Lillias, married
Frederic Race Godfrey. (Pioneer) at St.
Kilda, Melbourne, in 1854.
His second son, Arthur Leslie Cham-
bers was a well-known grazier in New
South Wales for many years, and left a
son, Col. Philip Arthur Chambers, 12th
Aust. Light Horse, Gallipoli and Palestine
and now owner of Mclntyre Park Station,
Inverell, New South Wales, is married and
has two sons, Philip David Selwyn, 8.A.,
Christ Church, Oxford, and John Arthur,
King’s School. Parramatta.
A third son of David Chambers, Senr.,
was Hugh John Lecky Chambers also a
solicitor, who arrived with his parents and
their family at Port Jackson in 1839. He
practised in Sydney and Melbourne where
he was well-known. He married Margaret,
daughter of John Hawdon (Pioneer), of
Banyule, Heidelberg, and had three sons
and three daughters, all resident in Vic-
toria. His grandson, Vivian John Cham-
bers of Bois Park Station, Nelia, Queens-
land, is married and has two daughters
Margaret Lillias and Jean.


FREDERIC RACE GODFREY, M.L.A., j.P
(The Godfreys of Boorl)
Henry Godfrey (pioneer and first sett-
ler at Boort), second son of Colonel John
Race Godfrey, M.N.1., was born at Madras,
1824, educated in England, arrived at Port
Phillip (passenger per S. “Constance”).
1842. He invested considerable patrimony
in a sheep station, comprising an area of
180 square miles, in the Loddon district,
and named the station Boort, i.e., “smoke,”
from the camp fires of the aborigines. In
1847 his younger brother, Frederic Race
Godfrey, reached Port Phillip (per S.
“Duke of Roxburgh”) and also invested
capital, and became partner with him in
Boort. Henry Godfrey went to England
in 1830. F. R. Godfrey took sole charge
of the station until 1857. He was a pio-
neer in irrigation, for he had a cutting
made to the Keningapanule Creek from the
River Loddon. Thus the Boort Swamp,
generally dry in summer, became a lasting
sheet of water. This was enlarged by
later settlers, and is now a fine lake, near
to which is situated the town of Boort.
The lake often abounds, as in his days,
with black swan, pelican, wild duck and
other game. In 1857 Henry, having married
in England, returned to Boort, with his
wife and two sons. F. R. Godfrey married
in 1854, Margaret Lillias, eldest daughter
of David Chambers (whose biography
appears herein) and in 1858 took his wife
and three children to England for two
years. In 1863 the brothers sold Boort to
Messrs. Black. Dr. Fairy, and Stewart.
Henry subsequently purchased “Nanguina”
Station, New South Wales, and leaving a
manager there, he left Australia, and sett-
led at Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, Eng-
land. Frederic Godfrey bought “Pevensey”
Station, Hay, .SAW his brother-in-law,
Frank a’Beckett Chambers, being his part-
ner and overseer.
For 17 years F. R. Godfrey lived with
his family at Mt. Ridley, Craigieburn
(leasehold from Capt. Pearson). He was
member for Fast Bourke in the Legislative
Assembly of Victoria, 1874-1877, and
specially advocated protection of the abo-
rigines by Government. He was elected a
member of the Royal Acclimatisation and
Zoological Society of Victoria, 1862, and
president thereof in 1873- and during seven
other periods. He, and Mr. Albert A. C.
Le Souef, were original settlers at Gem-
brook, where they established a Govern-
ment reserve for the Acclimatisation
Society. He was a member of the Mel-
bourne Club from 1856 to 1909; a lay
member of the Church Assembly and
Council of the Diocese 1864, and onwards;
also a Lay Canon of St. Paul’s Cathedral
from 1869 to 1910. his being the first
appointment by the Cathedral Chapter;
also Chairman of Committees (Church
Assembly and Synod) from 1883, for many
years: a lav clerk (Hon. Reader), and
Vice-President of the Cathedral Choir
Association ; also Vicar’s Churchwarden of


All Saints, St. Kilda, of which parish the
Rev. J. PI. Gregory was vicar. F. R. God-
frey was a founder and original Director
of The Trustees, Executors and Agency Co.
Ltd., Melbourne, founded 1888. and Chair-
man of Directors, 1895-1909; also Presi-
dent of the Melbourne Hospital Committee
during 17 consecutive years.
He acted on the Commission for the
Reservation of Wilson’s Promontory as a
sanctuary for native animals, birds and
plants; a member of the first committee of
the Felton Bequest. Melbourne Art Gal-
lery, 1904-1909: a Justice of the Peace at
St. Kilda and elsewhere for many years;
Founder and first Vice-President of the
Philatelic Society of Victoria, August,
1892.
Among his intimate friends were:—Sir
William a’Beckett, and all his family; Dr.
Godfrey Howitt ; Bishop Perry, Mr. W. H.
Mackenzie, of Sydney; Charles Ryan, of
Derriweit, Mt. Macedon; Albert A. C. Lc
Souef, first Director of the Zoological
Gardens. Melbourne; Sir William Stawell,
Colin Simson of Mungadel, Hay; the Hon.
Murray Smith, M.L.C.; Hon. Thomas Fer-
rier Hamilton, M.L.C. : William Raleigh,
Gembrook; Dr. A. Davenport, St. Kilda;
and man}' others. With his wife and six
children he travelled in Europe, 1879-1882,
and paid four subsequent visits to England.
He was twice married, and died at his
residence, “Graylings”, Alma Road, St.
Kilda, 11th September, 1910, in his eighty-
second year.
“ This is the sum of things- -that we
A life-line live great-heartedly;
S’ee the whole best that life has meant,
Do out our work, ami go content.”
—A. W. Jose.
Flis second son, the late Frank William
Albin Godfrey, M.B. (Edin.), became an
eminent surgeon and practised for over 30
years at Scarborough, England, where he
held many official posts.
The third son, John Race Godfrey, 8.A.,
Cambridge, after completing his educa-
tion, joined the Mines Department of New
South Wales, in which he became Inspector
of Mines, and recognised as one of the
leading authorities on mining in Australia.
He is the author of several works in Min-
ing Engineering.
'The eldest daughter, Mary Lillias,
married the late Canon Drought, M.A.,
Prizeman, Trinit}' College, Cambridge, and
had two sons, the eldest of whom Charles
Frederick, had a brilliant scholastic career
and in 1914 was gazetted Captain in the
7th Batt. Lincolnshire Regiment and made
the supreme sacrifice in France in 1915.
The second son, Rev. John Smerger
Drought, 8.A., Melb. University, received
his commission in the Royal Garrison Artil-
lery, 8.E.F., in which he attained field
rank and was awarded the M.C. He is
now Vicar of St. Dunstan’s, Camberwell,
Victoria, has. two sons, Peter Charles and
Thomas Godfrey.
Ethel Augusta and Winifred Olive
Helen, the younger daughters of Frederic
Race Godfrey, reside in Melbourne.
William Godfrey, third son of Colonel
j. Race Godfrey, educated in England,
arrived at Port Phillip per S. “Copen-
hagen’’, in 1857. A merchant in Mel-
bourne. and member of the Melbourne Club
from 1878 to 1906. He married in 1871,
and died in 1906—leaving one son, William
S. P. Godfrey, Royal \ ictorian Institute
of Architects, whose son. William P. Race
Godfrey, architect, is B.A. Melbourne
University.


ti&P*** 0 * ' * £*?.- vV
A
~ 4gr
M *>
mg < A
m j* -
George Fullerton Cleland.
Leslie Glen Cleland.
HE CLELANDS of Adelaide, South Australia
John Fullerton Cleland, son of William
Cleland, a Calcutta barrister, came from
Taunton, Devonshire, in 1852, landing at
Port Adelaide, and on arrival was met by
his sister and brother-in-law, Samuel, later
Sir Samuel Davenport. He secured the
position of Registrar of Births, Deaths, and
Marriages in Adelaide.
His eldest son, Dr. William Lennox,
was born in Hong Kong, and his second
son, George Fullerton, born in England in
1852, which was the same year that the
family came to Australia. There were four
sons born at Beaumont, the family estate
near Adelaide. George F. Cleland was
educated privately and, after finishing his
studies, joined his uncle, Sir Samuel Daven-
port. in the olive oil and wine-making busi-
ness. Later he founded the firm of G. F.
Cleland & Sons, with which he was con-
nected up to the time of his death, at the
age of eighty, in the year 1932.
He was Chairman of the Burnside
District Council and Stirling Council for
many years and founder of the United
District Councils Association, of which he
was the first President. A great deal of
his time was devoted to municipal matters.
Following in his uncle’s (the late Sir
Samuel Davenport’s) footsteps, he was
President of the Chamber of Manufac-
tures. He was President of the Vigneron’s
Association and a member of the Board of
Agriculture and the Council of the Royal
Agricultural and Horticultural Society.
He married Amy Giles, daughter of
Henry Giles, of Giles & Smith, the well-
known mercantile firm of Adelaide, and
there was a family of four sons and seven
daughters.


x '
,-" y '
/ !■
|||_ I
__
I
laiiyiiifefek.. e
Jfe- »y^BB
John Fullerton Cleland.
Edward Planta Nesbit.
Grandfather of Mrs. L. G. Cleland.
R. C. Cleland.
Great-grandson of Founder.
Edward Vincent Nesbit.
Father of Mrs. L. G. Cleland
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


Henry Giles.
Father of Mrs. G. F. Cleland
The eldest son, Henry Fullerton
Cleland. died at the early age of twenty-
five. Mr. Leslie Glen Cleland. the second
son, is head of the Fullerton Clelands and
the senior of the firm of G. F. Cleland and
Sons, Ltd. He was born in 1880 at Beau-
mont and educated at Prince Alfred College
After completing his education he joined
the firm and has been connected with it
ever since. The firm was established in
1880.
The third son, George F., born in 1892,
is also a member of the firm.
The fourth son, Harold Myles, was
horn in 1898, joined the A.1.F., and was
killed at Villiers Brettoneux in 1918. Both
L. G. and G. F. Cleland are members of
the Chamber of Manufactures.
L. G. Cleland married Fleta Nesbit.
daughter of Edward V. Nesbit, a well-
known business man of Perth, a son of the
late Edward Planta Nesbit, who was an
early arrival in South Australia and opened
<>ne of the first private schools at Angaston,
and later at Pennington Terrace, North
Melaide.
There is a family of one son, Robert
Glen, and two daughters, Lesley and Helen
Fleta.
R. G. Cleland is in the business, mak-
ing the third generation to be connected
therewith. He, like his father, was
educated at Prince Alfred College.
R. G. Cleland is one of the leading
amateur riders in the State and in this he
has been most successful, both as an
amateur and as an owner. He was success-
ful in winning the Grand National Hurdle
Race of South Australia in 1934 with “Malt
Prince,” and was second the previous year
in the Grand National Steeple with “Best
Man.” He is a keen follower of the
hounds and is always well mounted. In
1932 he won four races on the one horse,
riding “Burnouse” to victory in the Murray
Bridge Hunt Club Cup, The Drag Cup. the
Point to Point, and the Australian Hunters
Steeplechase, thus becoming recognised as
the leading amateur of the State for that
year.


•"i
'?f' :: "'{<',*&* ■• •■■ v -.» .■■ > '-- . V 'I^'^' J
I \
The late Sir William Milne.
The late George Milne
THE HOUSE OF MILNE,
Wine and Spirit Merchants, Adelaide
The name of iMilne has been associated
with the Wine and Spirit trade of South
Australia almost from the earliest days of
the Province.
The late Sir William Milne, whose
career as one of the leading statesmen of
South Australia is given here, was the
founder of the Mouse of Milne. He was
horn at Glasgow, Scotland, on May 17th.
1822. being the son of William Milne, a
Glasgow merchant in whose office the
future knight passed some years. At the
age of seventeen lie left Scotland for South
Australia, arriving in the Province on
October 29th. 1839, by the barque
“Palmyra.’’ The prospects of the Colonv
at this time were anything but bright and
after two or three years’ experience of
pastoral life young Milne went to Tas-
mania for a while and was engaged in the
Commissariat Department at Hobart.
After three years he returned to South
Australia, where he established a wine and
spirit business, and subsequently took over
the business of the late Patrick Auld, meet-
ing with such success that in 1857 he sol 1
the business and retired, devoting his later
years to politics.


%.. I
>
’'f$
.jk yn|...
Roy Melville Milne
Some years later his eldest son.
William Milne, commenced on his own
account. It may be fairly said to the credit
of William Milne that in a few years the
business of Milne & Co. took a front rank
in the trade of South Australia, which has
been maintained with added prestige up to
the present time. His untiring industry
and courtesy, combined with frequent
visits to the Old World to establish busi-
ness relations, placed his house on a sound
basis. In 1881 his brother George and the
late Henrv A. Price joined him in partner-
ship and these three gentlemen traded
together as Milne & Co. until 1888, when
V . Milne and H. A. Price retired.
George Milne then assumed sole con-
trol and, under the old name of Milne and
Co., operated with enterprise and success.
This was the beginning of the vast expan-
sions and greater proportions the firm
attained, lie established a branch of the
business in Western Australia and to-day
this is one of the leading houses in that
State.
Being impressed with the possibilities
of the manufacture of pure grape brandy,
George Milne in 1897 added to his interests
the business and stock of the Thebarton
Distilling Company, situated at Southwark,
which originated in 1891, and by the
expenditure of several thousands of pounds
this distillery has become one of the lead-
ing establishments. In connection with
distilling it is of interest to record that the
late Sir William Milne was the first pioneer
distiller in South Australia, having im-
ported and erected the first still on his
vinevard at Sunnyside, Glen Osmond, in
1867.


In 1902 George Milne placed his twin
sons, Roy Melville and Clive Gordon, in the
business, and in 1910 they were admitted
as partners in the firm.
In 1906 George Milne added the manu-
facture of rum, gin, and whisky to his var-
ious interests, and these spirits have won
a high place not only at the various agri-
cultural shows throughout Australia, where
they have been awarded the highest prizes
but also among connoisseurs of Australian
spirits throughout the Southern Hemi-
sphere. In 1915 the firm purchased the dis-
tillery at Coonawarra, near Penola, which
was established by the late John Riddock
and later acquired by Messrs. Elder, Smith
& Co. It is at Coonawarra where the well-
known Milne’s Brandy is produced. The
wonderful success achieved by Milne’s
Brandy is ascribed to the fact that seventy-
five per cent of this spirit is made from
wine produced from grapes of the same class
grown on the same soil.
George Milne was a keen sportsman
and a great lover of the thoroughbred horse
His colours, gold and white, were often first
past the judge’s box. One of his horses,
Armada, was a persistent winner at many
of the South Australian race meetings. He
was a keen judge of horses and always kept
a number in training.
George Milne was an outstanding per-
sonality in the business world of South
Australia, and at his death in 1934 left a
business with wide ramifications through-
out the Commonwealth.
His son, Clive Gordon, died in 1933,
and Roy Melville Milne purchased the
business from his father’s executors. Roy
Milne was born at Glenelg and educated
at St. Peter’s, Adelaide, and in England.
On taking his place in the firm he threw
himself wholeheartedly into the business and
to-day, although only a young man, has sole
control of two manufacturing and two dis-
tributing companies. His knowledge of
the trade has been widened by his many
trips abroad and he is recognised as one of
the leaders in the trade in the Common-
wealth. For six years Roy Milne has been
President of the Wine and Spirit Merchants'
Association of South Australia, and his
many interests leave him little time for any-
thing but his business, to which he has
devoted his life.
Roy Milne is also a keen lover of the
thoroughbred. On his father’s death he
purchased the horses from the estate and.
following a very old English custom, races
under his father’s colours, white and gold.
In this he has been very successful,
especially with his two-year-old colt, Lord
Kildare, which has started a promising
career by winning several races. Allenby
is also another youngster with a future.
Few businesses of this size in Aus-
tralia are controlled by the grandson of the
founder and Mr. R. M. Milne is maintain-
ing the standard of the products of the firm
as initiated by his predecessors. The name
of Milne is synonymous with quality.
THE HON. SIR WILLIAM MILNE.
A Brief Resume of His Public Work for South Australia
When responsible Government was in-
augurated in South Australia, Sir William
Milne was elected one of the pioneer mem-
bers of the Assembly, being chosen for
Onkaparinga on March 9th, 1857, which
constituency he represented until 1868. A
year later he received election to the Legis-
lative Council, and retained his seat until


Phe Head Office, Grenfell Street, Adelaide
1881, during which period (in 1876) he had
the dignity of Knight Bachelor conferred
upon him in recognition of his splendid
services to the Province. Sir William
Milne entered upon Ministerial office first
on August 21st, 1857, when he held the
Crown Lands portfolio for a short period.
He was again Minister of Crown Lands in
the Hanson Ministry, from July sth, 1859,
to May 9th, 1860; in the Ayers Ministry
from July 22nd to August 4th, 1864; in
the Boucaut Ministry from March 28th,
1866, to May 3rd, 1867. He was Com-
missioner of Public Works in the recon-
tructed Cabinet of the Hon. G. M. Water-
house, from February 19th, 1862 to July
4th, 1863, and in the Blyth Administration
from August 4th, 1864, to March 22nd, 1865 ;
and Chief Secretary in the Hart Government
from May 30th, 1870, to November 10th,
1871, and in the succeeding administration
of Sir Arthur Blyth from November 10th,
1 71, to [anuary 22nd, 1872. While Com-
missioner of Crown Lands he initiated legis-
lation which resulted in the transformation
of many swamp and lagoon areas in the
South-East into rich alluvial country, and
agricultural settlement received a great im-
petus. He rendered valuable assistance in
the passing of the Bill providing for the con-
struction of the Overland Telegraph Line
to Port Darwin, and to connect by cable
with the electric systems of the world, being
Chief Secretary at the time this work was
being carried out. Upon the death of Sir
John Morphett he was elected President of
the Legislative Council on June 25th, 1873.
which post he filled for several years. Sir
William was a speaker of considerable
force, and his departmental work was
characterised by industry and thorough-
ness. He was a trustee of the Savings
Bank, and in the commercial world he rep-
resented several wealthy absentees. For
a long period he held the position of Chair-
man of Directors of the \\ allaroo and
Moonta Mines Company, and of other min-
ing companies. Sir William Milne spent
his last years in retirement, and died at
Mount Lofty on April 23rd. 1895.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


Robert Gardiner,
of Mount Schank and Nangwarry Stations,
South Australia.


Robert Melville Gardiner.
THE GARDINERS of SOUTH AUSTRALIA
This family has been associated with
Australia for some 112 years. The founder
of the Australian branch, Robert Gardiner,
was born in Scotland in 1812 and at the
early age of ten ran away from home, join-
ing a ship sailing for Van Dieman’s Land,
arriving there in the early twenties. He
was engaged in whaling in Tasmanian
waters for some years, and as a youth was
one of the first to visit the southern shores
of Victoria prior to settlement in that State.
On April 10th, 1834, he married Susan
Cardiner, who was born in 1818 in Van
Dieman’s Land, and there was a family of
eight children. In 1860 Robert Gardiner
leased the Mount Schank station, near
Mount Gambier, where he built, in 1862,
the fine homestead which still stands.
Mount Schank was some 100,000 acres in
area and, later, Nangwarry Station, with
50,000 acres was added. Sheep and cattle
were grazed in large numbers on these
properties, the latter of which is still in the
the hands of the family.
During Robert Gardiner’s long associa-
tion with the district of Port McDonnell,
he did much to promote its welfare and
progress.
He was a Councillor of the Port
McDonnell District Council for many years
and on seyeral occasions was Chairman.
He was a generous contributor to all local
movements, presenting the large organ in
the Mount Gambier Presbyterian Church,
of which he was an active member. He
gave that beautiful fountain standing in


: <
Mrs. M. Helpman.
the Town Hall Square at Mount Gambler.
H/is memory is cherished by all with
whom he came in contact. Robert
Gardiner died in 1889 at the age of
seventy-seven. Prior to his death his sons,
Robert Melville, and Abram, had taken
over control of the properties. In the
meantime, Mount Schank was relinquished
and, later, part was cut up for soldier
settlement.
The Nangwarry run, as previously
stated, is still owned by the Gardiner family.
Robert Melville Gardiner, the eldest sou,
carried on his father’s public work in the dis-
trict up to the time of his retirement in
1896 He was a Justice of the Peace for
many years and occupied his father’s seat
on the District Council. Robert M. Gar-
diner was an ardent lover of the thorough-
bred and always kept a number of horses in
training. He was most successful as an
owner and his colours were well-known
throughout the South-Eastern part of South
Australia. He had many wins to his credit
and the cups and trophies of winners make
a fine display. His horse, Shylock. was a
consistent winner on the turf.
Robert Melville Gardiner married Cath-
erine Glendinning Graham, a daughter of
Samuel Graham, of Dumfries, Scotland, and
there was a family of one son and four
daughters, two of whom survive. R. M.
Gardiner died in 1935 at the age of eighty-
four. Mrs. R. M. Gardiner died in 1918.
Mary Gardiner, Mrs. Helpman, was
born at Mount Schauk and received her
education in Melbourne. She married Mr.
Helpman, of Mount Gambler, and there are
two sons, Robert Murray and Maxwell
Gardiner, and a daughter Sheila Mary
These represent the fourth generation of
the Gardiner family in Australia


0'm
Mr. Robert Murray Helpman.
Some fourteen years ago Mrs. Help-
man took up the breeding of toy dogs as
a hobby and in this short period has made
the Mintara Kennels the leader for Pek-
inese and Pomeranian in Australia. Mrs
Helpman holds the record for breeding six
Commonwealth Grand Champions. This
has not been surpassed by any other kennel
in the Commonwealth for any breed. The
foundation sire of the Pekinese was Com-
monwealth Grand Champion “San Ram of
Mintara” and Commonwealth Grand Cham-
pion “Kelvin Leprechaun” of the Pomer-
anians. Over twenty champions have been
produced from the Mintara stud, the pro-
geny of which are distributed all over Aus-
tralia. The fame of these strains is such
that Mrs. Helpman cannot supply the de-
mand. She imported the best blood from
English kennels and on her recent visit to
Great Britain brought back five of the finest
dogs available.
Mrs. Helpman has proved this to be a
most profitable hobby.
Robert Murray Helpman has made a
name in theatrical circles in Great Britain
as a ballet and revue dancer. He is the
first Australian to achieve so high a posi-
tion in this sphere. His art was recognised
shortly after his arrival in England and has
secured him very lucrative contracts
Although only a young man he became a
star after his first performance, and he will
go far in his profession.
Few families have had such long asso-
ciation with three States as the Gardiners,
who have connections with Tasmania, Vic
toria and South Australia dating back to
the early twenties. They may rightlv be
termed “Founders of Australia.”


J m m
f I JB
Phe late Mr. Thomas Clarke
The late Mrs. Thomas Clarke
The CLARKE FAMILY of Geelong
'Thomas Clarke was born at Fer-
managh, Ireland, in 1838 where he was
educated and then joined his father who
was a farmer and acquired his knowledge
of farming which stood him in good stead
in his pioneering work in Victoria.
At the age of eighteen he decided to
try his fortune in Victoria, where his
brother was already established. Landing
at Point Henry, Geelong, he joined his
brother and they decided to go to the Bal-
larat gold diggings. Here they had many
interesting experiences and some success.
'The gold they won was re-invested in other
gold mining ventures with fluctuating
success. In the meantime 'Thomas had
sent the passage money for his mother and
youngest brother to come to Victoria. By
some mischance they landed in Queensland
and Thomas arrived there only to find that
both mother and son had been massacred
by the blacks.
Thomas married in 1867, his wife hav-
ing come to Australia in 1852.
After some years he took up farming
pursuits in various parts of Victoria and
was most successful. He owned land in
the Wimmera and Donald districts and in
the seventies, engaged in the erection of
buildings in Ballarat, where the children
were educated.
In the late nineties, Mr. and Mrs. Clarke
accompanied by their daughter enjoyed a
trip to the Old Country and finally settled
in Geelong. Mrs. Clarke died in 1933, at
the age of 97 years, and was followed in
1935 by Mr. Clarke at the age of 96.
Both Thomas Clarke and his wife were
revered by all for their sterling qualities
and kindness to others. Thev were staunch
adherents of the Presbyterian Church and
were closely associated with St. George’s
Church, Geelong.
They are survived by their son and
daughter, Mr. T. H. Clarke, of Carboon,
New South Wales, and Miss Florence E.
Clarke, of Geelong, Victoria.


$£ 4K" ?
M., ; 99&!^F
J J -
Fhe late R, H. White
Mrs. E. I. Whitt
Mrs. E. I. WHITE of Adelaide
Few women are better known in
Methodist circles in South Australia than
Emily Illeret White.
Her father and mother, Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Wincey, were natives of Guernsey,
Channel Isles, where Henry Wincey was
born in 1829. They were scions of
Huguenot families which escaped from the
Massacre of St. Bartholomew in the 16th
century. Mrs. White is the possessor of
heirlooms of the family, prior to their exile
from France.
Henry Wincey and his wife landed in
South Australia in 1851 and shortly after
arrival went to Port Gawler where they
opened a public school. The health of
Mrs. Wincey necessitated removal to a
cooler climate, and Mr. James Matheson
induced Henry Wincey to come to the
Mount Gambicr district where he opened a
school at Yahl near Mount Gambier.
James Matheson provided a home for the
Wincey family during this time. Some time
after arrival at Mount Gambler Mrs. Win-
cey died, and Henry Wincey carried on the
school until his daughter was old enough
to assist him.
Emily Illeret Wincey was born at
North Adelaide and, at the age of twenty-
five, married Richard Henry White and
came to Adelaide with her husband and
father.
Henry Wincey was a charming man
whose influence on all with whom he came
in contact was remarkable. As a teacher
he was well known and his memory is
cherished by all who knew him.
Richard Henry White was one of the
most outstanding personalities in Adelaide.
Born at Redruth. Cornwall, England, he
entered the employ of Messrs. Cornish and
Co., Iron and Tinplate Workers, etc. Here
he acquired a thorough knowledge of his


r
The late Henry Wincey
The late Mrs. Henry Wincey,
and her daughter Mrs. E. I. White
trade which fitted him for the responsible
positions he later attained. lie started
work at 1/6 per week and at the age of
twenty-four reached as high as he could go
with his firm. At this time he was given
the opportunity of a position with the well-
known firm of Harris Scarfe and Co. Ltd.,
Adelaide. His first post with the firm was
Manager of the Dispatch Department.
Seven years later (in 1885), the business
known as the Australian Implement Com-
pany was established by the firm at the
corner of North Terrace and Bank Street,
and Mr. White was chosen as manager.
From the date of his appointment until
October, 1925, he continued to act in that
capacity, during which period he saw the
business grow from a small shop to one of
the greatest magnitude. On his retirement
as manager of the Company in October,
1925. as a token of the great respect and
esteem in which he was held by his staff
they tendered to him a farewell dinner and
presented him with an illuminated address
signed by 132 members of his staff, a gift
he treasured very highly. He had started
from small beginnings as a boy of fourteen
years of age, at a small wage and, by sheer
ability and force of character climbed to
the top of the ladder. He was recognised
as one of Adelaide’s keenest captains of
commerce for some years, and as a man
of integrity his advice was sought in many
spheres outside of his daily duties.
Soon after taking up the managership
in 1885 he observed the possibilities of the
development of the dairy industry, and
toured the whole of the State lecturing on
the advantages of the cream separator and
the establishment of butter factories in
suitable districts. As the result largely of
his efforts the foundations of the dairying
industry were placed on a firm footing.
Later there came to his knowledge the
existence in America of a seed drill which
had been introduced to replace the broad-
casting of wheat and similiar grain by
hand. With his foresight he saw the great
possibdities in this machine, and for seven
strenuous years he worked throughout the
whole of the State persuading and demon-
strating to the farming community a
machine of this type, and pointing out its
advantages, and also stressing the advan-
tageous use of superphosphates, until he
eventually saw his efforts rewarded by
South Australian farmers becoming the
most efficient and successful probably in
Australia. Strangely enough, the first
shipment of seed drills was sent a softgoods
house in Adelaide about the year 1887, and
it was a soft goods house which ap-
pioached Mr. W lute asking whether he
could do an\ thing with them. Phev were not
fitted with the attachment for mixing super
u ith the wheat, and it took several years to
clear this first shipment. In the meantime,
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


P ||||||
The late John White. The late Mrs. John White.
(Parents of R. H. White).
however, his company had received a
communication from the manufacturers of
a seed and fertiliser drill combined, and
the risk was taken of importing nine
machines. After great difficulty these
machines were disposed of, and finally,
when the prejudice of the farmer was over-
come, such was the degree of success at-
tained that his company sold more than 400
of them in one year. It was always his
desire to introduce such types of machines
as would give the maximum efficiency under
the conditions under which they were re-
quired to work, such as would enable the
farming community in this State to be
successful to the highest possible extent.
The career of Richard Henry White
provides a wonderful example of grit, deter-
mination and integrity. The story of his
life was associated in no small degree with
the development of South Australia. In
addition to his success in business, Mr.
White devoted a great deal of his life to
religious movements and was prominently
associated with the Methodist Church and
in the early days the Young Mens’ Christian
Association. In all this he was ably assisted
bv his wife, and a lasting monument to
their practical Christianity has been pro-
vided by their gift and endowment of the
Australasian Chapman-Alexander Bible
Institute. This building, set in spacious
grounds at North Unley was the home of
Mr. and Mrs. White which they donated for
this purpose. It is devoted to the training
and development of all classes of workers
for the Protestant denominations. The
adjacent property now known as Wesley
College was also donated bv Mr. and Mrs.
White.
As the } T ears roll on the training re-
ceived at both the Institute and Wesley
College by the students will have a great
influence in the religious world of Austra-
lia and keep fragrant the memory of Rich-
ard H. White.
For many years Mr. White was an
active member of the Pirie Street Metho-
dist Church, but at the time of his death
was more closely associated with the Unley
Methodist Church. He died at Unley on
July sth, 1929 and is survived by his wife
who is carrying on the work initiated by
her husband. Methodism lost a great son
of the Church at his death but his muni-
ficent contributions towards its upkeep
will keep his name green throughout the
years to come. Mrs. R. H. White’s beauti-
ful tribute sums up a wonderful life in a
few words when she said. “He was a good
man, a true man. He was a man who
could never be bought.”
Mrs. White, in addition to her religious
and philanthropic activities has composed
some very fine prose, an example of which
is “A Flower Mosaic Posy.”
Convalescing after a severe illness and
in need of something to occupy her mind.
Mrs. White developed a latent talent and
painted some very fine studies in oil.


“Wekewauban,” presented by Mr. and Mrs. R. H. White, to the
Australasian Chapman-Alexandcr Bible Institute.
Bortion of the Grounds of “Wekewauban.”


■"■■•■• ■• • ;;;f
n
*% V A
1 ■ M
VHB -4 *^1.
' mSJllk \i'Wf **15|2o|
1^^,' a, ,f ' y
gSSl '•*'
* ■*» Bf
. 4C. Mm-' r m
Mrs. John Johnston
Mr. William Johnston
The late John Johnston, of Adelaide.
John Johnston was born at Campbell-
own, Scotland in 1820 and with his parents
md six brothers and a sister landed at
foldfast Bay from the ship “Buckingham-
hire” in 1839. Almost immediately the
amily took up farming at Wilkmga and
ater went to Oakbank where two brothers
ounded the Oakbank Brewery.
John Johnston was a tailor by trade but
before establishing his own business in Ade-
aide worked with his family on the farm,
n 1848 he married Agnes Hunter also of
Scotland, Mrs. Johnston predeceased her
usband by some 36 years. A year or two
fter his marriage he built premises in Currie
Street, Adelaide and this property is still
ii the hands of the family. Here he carried
n his trade for many years. There was a
amily of ten; Janet Love, William, John,
vgnes, Margaret, Elizabeth, James, Robert,
mdrew and Alexander, of whom Margaret
nd Elizabeth survive.
In 1854 John Johnston built a home
“Glenside ’ at Glen Osmond where he had
purchased a large area of land. This home
is also in the hands of the family to-day.
During his long life John Johnston was a
staunch adherent of the Presbyterian Church
of which he was an elder for over fifty years.
John Johnston was a man of sterling
character and his life was devoted to making
the paths of others easier. He was a rev-
ered parent, an upright and useful citizen
and a loyal Churchman.
He died in 1907 and his surviving
daughters, Margaret and Elizabeth reside at
the Glen Osmond property.
There are six surviving grandchildren
and eight great-grandchildren who repre-
sent the fifth generation of this family.
The Johnston family has been associ-
ated with the State for nearly one hundred
years and have won an honoured place in
the roll of “Founders of Australia.”


mBL<*% \ p| jMHR
\ I i I
>.5 *¥* p®
'-■■ .. jl ' m :|ii p ***
Mr. John Johnston and Sons.
Mrs. R. A. Watts and her sons.
Granddaughter and Great-grandsons of John Johnston.


The late Mr. W. O’Shanahan.
[he 0 Shanahan Family, of South Australia
William O’Shanahan, the founder of
this family in Australia, was born in Ire-
land in 1821, and as a young man arrived
in Western Australia, later coming to
South Australia; here he joined the Police
Force with which he was connected up to
the time of his retirement.
In the early sixties, William O’Shanahan
was in charge of the Tungata police depot
during which time the natives were very
troublesome and some exciting times were
experienced before they were finally sub-
dued.
He accompanied the then Commis-
sioner of Police, Major Warburton, on an
arduous expedition of exploration from
Port Lincoln right through to the Great
Australian Bight
This early expedition traversed coun-
try not previously seen by white men, and
it took many months; during the trip the
Lacks caused much trouble and the party
underwent many hardships from scarcity
of water and food.
On his return he married Catherine
Gherty, daughter of the Sergeant of Police
at Port Lincoln.
About this time he purchased land at
Tod River where the family was reared.
Part of this property was later purchased
by the Government for the Tod River
Reservoir; this reticulation scheme for the
distribution of water throughout Eyres
Peninsula has made the district safe for
settlement as previously the water short-
age made this area unsafe. William
O’Shanahan was later stationed at Mount
Gambier, but left the family on the Tod
River estate. In the seventies he was ap-
pointed Sergeant in charge of the Port
Augusta district, and, later, at Blenman,
during the opening up of the copper mines
in that district.


. ■
The late Mrs. W. O'Shanahan.
On his retirement, he returned to the
Tod River property where he stayed until
his death which occurred in 1888.
There were two sons, and four daugh-
ters, namely : James, John Francis, Annie,
Teresa, Catherine and Agnes, of whom only
James and John survive.
James was born in 1860 and educated
at the Mcßride Academy, Adelaide. He
then returned to Tod River and after the
death of William O’Shanahan the two sons
took over the property. Mrs. William
O’Shanahan died in 1912 at the age of
seventy-two. Few men have done more
for their district than James O’Shanahan.
He was elected to the District Council in
1890 and, but for a break of two years, has
sat continuously ever since.
He has occupied the Chairmanship of
this body for twenty-five consecutive years
—an unique record for South Australia—
and has been a Justice of the Peace for
many years. In 1935 he was honored by
receiving the King’s Jubilee Medal for his
District Council work.
When he first joined the Council there
were few roads and no railways on Eyreis
Peninsula and James O’Shanahan has been
active in every movement for opening up
the country; his special work has been in
connection with road making to facilitate
the settlers in getting their produce to the
nearest ports and railheads.
When the Parliamentary Party were
investigating the railway proposals, he
accompanied them throughout their tour,
and his activity did much to make the lay-
ing of the lines an accomplished fact.
In reference to the establishment of
the Tod River Water Scheme, James
O’Shanahan was a prime mover in this very
successful work: prior to the building of the
Reservoir and the distribution of water, few
settlers could establish themselves with
any security owing to lack of water.


jgWf gk.
♦ M
W\ f
J^iHi
•4 <k V V:.
'gt >Y|| ft j$ # J* .•;■■■
' ? 5l B >- w £; Jyp> £
*# SL fyWm- sr , ' jjg^ip
‘’*#s8SBBf % kiy§ IM j|m * ,**7
rm ‘ 7|J /,.'
P * * ■
Cr. James O’Shanahan, J.P.
The first meeting of the Board was
held at the home of James O’Shanahan, and
he has the pleasure to-day of seeing the
scheme an unqualified success.
The then Member of Parliament for
the district—J. G. Moseley, J.P., who ini-
tiated and worked so hard for the estab-
lishment of the Tod River Water Supply,
gives due credit to James O’Shanahan for
his advocacy in this direction.
James O’Shanahan has given a lifetime
to public work on the West Coast. When
the ten Councils of the Peninsula formed
a District Council Association he was
unanimously elected first Chairman, which
office he held for four years. He is keenly
interested in promoting facilities for higher
education and is a consistent donor of prizes
for students at the Port Lincoln High
School.
Although seventy-five years of age at
the time of writing, James O’Shanahan is
still giving much time to public service and
on his property is chiefly interested in
breeding a good type of merino sheep. He
is an ardent horticulturist and his garden
is a joy to behold. His spare time—if any
—is utilised in fighting the rabbit pest.
The O’Shanahans occupy an honored
niche on the roll of “Founders of Austra-
lia.”


' J *•£'* jji
jtfj&jk ■» "'Ik. y
wfOfejg .£ • u| jffi M | X yt| > I vV, fl|
J| 3l j|
. is*» -^F 1 tf jP|S i|| , wP
N|;': ,% 1 * ** /» x 1 • .,irS : ' *•" "
lift.** ■** tSL • < f : ,„•*■ im #; -■*“* ■" —>y,y~ ♦ **mm.
The Hughes Family of Woodside.
The Hughes Family of “Bleakside,” Woodside,
South Australia.
Laurence and Mary Stodart arrived in
South Australia with their children, in the
ship “Palmyra,” landing at Holdfast Bay
in 1839. They then travelled to the Nairne
district.
The township consisted of two cot-
tages, one of which he acquired. He then
purchased land and commenced to build a
residence, but died before it was completed.
Their daughter, Mary, married William
Frederick, son of George Robert Hughes,
who arrived in South Australia on the ship
“Diadem,” in 1840.
The Hughes family stayed in Adelaide
for some time, where George Robert
Hughes carried on his trade as a tailor.
He, with his family, later removed to
Nairne. His son, William Frederick, was
a stonemason and builder, but, after his
marriage to Mary Stodart, he purchased
land in the Woodside district. This pro-
perty, “Bleakside,” is still in the hands of
the family. Of their twelve children, five
survive—John, Laurence, Andrew, Mar-
garet and Jane.
William F. Hughes was a well-known
identity of Woodside, which district he
served faithfully as a Councillor and Chair-
man of the Onkaparinga District Council,
Justice of the Peace, and other public
offices. He died on his Woodside property
at the age of 93 years, after nearly seventy
years’ association with the district. His
wife predeceased him at the age of 85.
An incident in the career of W. F.
Hughes is the fact that he was foreman
under Mr. Roger the contractor, for the
erection of the Cape Willoughby lighthouse
on Kangaroo Island. This was a notable
event in South Australia as it is one of the
principal lighthouses on the South Austra-
lian Coast.
John Benham Hughes, eldest surviv-
ing son of the late W. F. Hughes was born
at “Bleakside,’’ Woodside, in 1857, and,
after being educated locally, worked on
tire family property for some years. He
later acquired land at Woodside, and after-
wards a grazing property in the Murray
River district.


: ' "• • .. , ■ • I
’
■
V-pip' lllllr
x .;'', l|iif>' -fogB&g
'
The late Geo. Robert Hughes.
J. B. Hughes established one of the
earliest Dorset Horn sheep studs in South
Australia. This stud was commenced with
pedigreed stock from the well-known Mel-
rose Stud. J. B. Hughes proved a success-
ful flockmaster, and the progeny from his
stud won many prizes and realised high
prices.
J. B. Hughes married a daughter of
the Reverend John Macbean thus joining
two pioneer families. He, like his father,
has taken an active interest in public life,
being a Councillor of both the Onkapar-
inga and the Caurnamont District Councils.
He was Chairman of the latter Council, on
which he served for eight years. Every
movement for the progress of the districts
has received his unstinted support. He
has occupied many prominent posts in the
Woodside district, being President of the
Onkaparinga Agricultural Society, and a
committeeman for many years.
The Hughes family hold an unique re-
cord in public life, as the father and three
sons have each served as Councillors in
their local district councils.
J. B. Hughes retired from active work
in .92 3. and is now living at Malvern,
Adelaide. 'The Hughes family have been
associated with the State for nearly 100
years, and few families have rendered such
continuous public service.
Laurence Stodart Hughes was born on
the Woodside property and after receiving
his education locally, engaged in farming
pursuits at Woodside, and, later on, the
Murray; here he followed his father in giv-
ing much time to public work, being a
Councillor for many years.
He married Amy, daughter of John
Paltridge, of Mount Barker, thus uniting
two pioneer families, and he is now living
in retirement at Mount Barker; both Mar-
garet and Jane Hughes were born at
Woodside, and they also are now living at
Mount Barker.
Andrew Smillie Hughes is the young-
est son of the late W. F. Hughes. He
was born on the family property “Bleak-
side,” in 1865. He was educated locally,
and has ever since lived at “Bleakside,”
which he took over on the death of his
father.
“Bleakside” is mainly used for the
grazing of sheep of the crossbred variety,
and the wool grown on the property has
realised high prices.
A. S. Hughes, by marrying Ruby
Violet, daughter of the late George Dunn
of “Gumbank,” Charleston, joined two of
the oldest families in South Australia.
There are two surviving children Richard
Andrew, and Elizabeth Jane.
Andrew Smillie Hughes, like his
father and elder brothers, has rendered
great public service to his fellow citizens.
For several years he was a Councillor of
the Onkaparinga District Council. He has
been President of the Onkaparinga Agri-
cultural Society, and for many years a
Committeeman of the Onkaparinga Racing
Club —one of the most historical racing
clubs in Australia. He has not missed a
meeting on the course for sixty years.
He is Chairman of Trustees of the
local M.U.1.0. Oddfellows and has held
offices in most of the local societies; as
Secretary of the local Agricultural Bureau


The Andrew Hughes family.
he rendered signal service. In his public
and social work A. S. Hughes has been ably
supported by his wife.
Their second son, John Philip, died at
the age of nine years, in the year 1935.
Mrs. A. S. Hughes.
The great-great-grandchildren of the
late W. F. Hughes represent the sixth
generation of both the Stodart and Hughes
families in South Australia.
Dorset Horn Stud Ewes, bred by J. B. Hughes, Woodside.


Mr. George Turner and Family
The Turner Family of Kangaroo Island.
Thomas Turner and his wife Sarah
came to Australia in 1858 with five child-
ren—Alfred, Eliza, John, Hannah and
George—on the ship “Clara” arriving in
December of that year at Port Adelaide. On
arrival Thomas Turner was engaged as a
shepherd on a station owned by Mr. Grant
in the North. After some time he came
to Cape Jervois and worked as a farm-hand
there for a while and later rented a block
of land of about 160 acres and engaged in
mixed farming until the time of his death.
There were three sons —John, Alfred
and George—who in 1882 purchased part
of the present property now occupied by
George and his family on Kangaroo Island.
When this land was first taken up it was
all virgin bush and took many years to
clear. To-day this property named “Sil-
verton Park’’ is one of the best developed
on the island, and this is one of the few
families who still retain their original
holding. General mixed farming and graz-
ing is carried on and the original property
has been incresed from 400 acres to about
3,000.
George Turner was born in Sutton,
Kent, England in 1852 on June sth, being


George Turner’s Residence at Kangaroo Island
six years of age on his arrival in South
Australia. At the age of eight he took his
place working on his father’s farm, and he
has seen great changes in farming life, from
bullocks for ploughing to the present day
tractors. He married Mary Amelia Roper
of Delamere, and there was a family of
sixteen —William of Shoal Bay, Kangaroo
Island, Sarah, now Mrs. Edward Hall of
Angle Vale near Gawler; Emma, Mrs. A.
D. Bell of Smith’s Bay, Kangaroo Island;
Eliza, Mrs. B. H. Bell of Wisanger, Kan-
garoo Island; Annie, who died at the age
of nineteen; Jane, Mrs. W. Barret of River-
ton ; Kate, Mrs. E. Burden of Ereeling
(died in 1929) ; Florence, Mrs. H. B. Schae-
fer of Balaklava; Lucy, Mrs. W. R. Boxer
of Wisanger Park; Ellen, Mrs. Len Hawkes
of Tumby Bay, West Coast; George, of
Smith’s Bay, Kangaroo Island; Rose, Mrs
Tom Jacka of Mintaro; Pearl, Mrs. L. E.
Jacka of Point Pearce Mission Station;
Charles, on part of the original property
at Wisanger; Jessie, Mrs. H. Jacka of
Merildon and Harcourt on the original pro-
perty at Wisanger. There are 76 grand-
children and 28 great-grandchildren.
Mrs. George Turner died on Novem-
ber 29th. 1932.
George Turner has been postmaster of
the district for many years, and was an
original member of the school board with
which he was associated for many years,
lie, with several local residents, erected and
fitted up the first school of which he was an
original trustee, a position he still retains.
He retired from active work some years
ago and enjoys keeping in order the lovely
garden laid out by Mrs. George Turner in
front of the homestead.
All the sons are property owners adjoin-
ing the original homestead. One son.
George, served overseas with the A.I.F. in
France for four years, returning in 1919.
1 his family is held in the highest respect
and esteem by their fellow Islanders.
ROUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


GEORGE |
*w MmMmi m* %: ' * ..., mm
I 11 I '■ ll
I I M RS GEORGE DORWARD JR, |BL:.:. LIONEL DORWARD I
• 5 [ |||p|||pippps?Sg^^^
|||| H
MASTER PERC1VAL GORDON DORWARD
"THE DORWARD5 OF PORT LINCOLN" ”~~~”~T~
—LU ML&//!0*mz.'. — — —*— ■■.■^.;,i,—Lii—
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


The Dorwards, of Port Lincoln
George Dorward, J.P., the founder in
Australia of this family, was born in Forfar-
shire, Scotland, in the year 1842. Me arrived
in South Australia in 1863 by the sailing
ship “Seashell” from South Africa, and after
a few weeks joined Dr. Brown on his Koppio
Station near Port Lincoln. He later decided
to launch out by himself and started con-
tracting for fencing, road making, etc. in
which occupation he was engaged for 25
years. About that time he purchased
land and commenced farming and at the
same time opened a general agency and
auctioneering business; in all these enter-
prises George Dorward was successful.
Pie was one of the first to demonstrate
the agricultural possibilities of the district,
and entered into public life, being a member
of the District Council for many years, and
occupying the Chair on several occasions.
Before the formation of the District
Council he was a member of the old Roads
Board. He passed away in the year 1923
leaving two sons and four daughters to
mourn his loss.
George Dorward, Jnr., the eldest son of
the above, was born at Port Lincoln in the
year 1880, and, after private tuition at the
homestead, finished his education at Port
Lincoln and then decided to engage in farm-
ing and pastoral work. He inherited his
father’s love for the thoroughbred and as a
youth helped in training the string of horses
always run at “Clifton.”
He was a keen sportsman and took part
in foot races at the sports meetings in the
district with successful results. He took
over the property after the death of his
father and has proved himself both as a
farmer and grazier.
“Clifton is some 950 acres in extent and
up to two sheep to the acre have been run
on the property. Some very fine wheat and
barley crops have been sown and harvested,
and over fourteen bags of wheat per acre
have been taken off. George Dorward is
a great believer in the use of super phos-
phates in conjunction with proper fallowing,
and the productivity of the soil at “Clifton'
has been considerably enhanced by the appli-
cation of scientific methods and by the in-
stallation of up-to-date machinery. “Clifton’
is a splendid property beautifully situated
about seven miles north of Port Lincoln.
George Dorward married Miss M. E. A.
Carr of Port Lincoln and there was a family
of four boys and one g:rl namely Allan.
Lionel, Gordon, Ernest and Norma. The
eldest son, Allan, after finishing his edu-
cation. joined the Adelaide Steamship Com-
pany, and was with them for five years.
Like his father he was a very keen sports-
man and as a runner he had few equals.
Pfe won many foot races and was in train-
ing for some of the State riming contests
when, at the early age of 19 years he was
stricken with meningitis and died.
Of the three surviving sons, Lionel and
Gordon are both married and their children
represent the fourth generation of the Dor-
ward family in Australia. Lionel married
Miss Hurrell of Boston Island and they
have a daughter, Valecia. Gordon married
Miss Borman of Mannum and they have two
daughters, Eileen and Patricia, and one son
Percival Gordon.
George Dorward, like his father, carries
on the family tradition in racing his own
horses. In this sport he has proved his
judgment and we mention only three of the
“Clifton” horses “Hard Times,” “Lucifer.”
and “Fighting Mac” each of whom have
won cups at various meetings. “Lucifer”
gained the distinction of winning the Port
Lincoln cup on four occasions and this
magnificent trophy adorns the sideboard
at “Clifton.”
George Dorward is a keen supporter of
all local movements for the welfare of the
district., The Dorwards have been associa-
ted with the Eyres Peninsular for upwards
of 70 years and have won an honoured
place on the roll of “Founders of Australia.”
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


-y : '^p
i "4 L 1>
ll|r tl m
■f
Mr. J. G. Moseley, Son and Grandson
James Grey Moseley, J.P.
(The Moseley Family of South Australia.)
Mr. James Grey Moseley was born at
Gawler in 1847 and is the third son of the
late Henry Jackson Moseley, one of South
Australia’s early pioneers, who came to the
State in 1836 on the sailing ship “Tam o’-
Shanter” settling at Glenelg, where he re-
mained until the time of his death. Mr. H.
J. Moseley returned to England in the for-
ties and chartered a sailing ship, the “Wal-
visch,” loaded with building materials with
which he built the first church in Adelaide
and the Pier Hotel at Glenelg.
Mr. J. G. Moseley was educated at the
Glenelg Educational Institute, under the late
Mr. J. M. Mitchell, subsequently pursuing
his studies under private tuition. In 1863
he filled the position of storekeeper and
bookkeeper on Mr. Henry Scott’s station
“Yadlamalka” in the north of the State. He
witnessed the depletion of sheep, cattle, etc.,
during the prolonged drought which exten-
ded over five years and in 1868 relinquished
his position in order to go into partnership
with his brother. Eight hundred and fifty


A muster on “Yardea” Station.
square miles of country in the Gawler
Ranges were taken up by the partners and
considerable capital was expended in im-
provement with varying success. After
three years they abandoned the enterprise
owing to the continued drought in the dis-
trict and Mr. Moseley accepted the manage-
ment of his former employer’s property near
Clare, known as “Black Point Station.” Two
years later he became manager of “Yadlam-
alka” on behalf of Mr. Scott, and he held
this position for seven years. At the end
of that period the two brothers again inves-
ted in pastoral interests, this time venturing
to the far nor’-west of Port Augusta, where
the only other territory taken up was the
Elizabeth country, managed by Mr. G.
Richardson for Mr. W. Fowler. They
settled on 900 square miles of pastoral coun-
try, now known as the “Coondambo” Sta-
tion, and were fortunate in finding splendid
supplies of fresh water, which led to the
surrounding country being promptly settled
and secured by Messrs Price Maurice, Henry
Scott, Bowman brothers, A. M. Woolridge.
and other squatters, and upon the arrival
of 150 starved out natives from the Mus-
grave Ranges when all waters had dried dur-
ing the year 1883, a police camp was formed
and Mr. G. J. Moseley was appointed a
Justice of the Peace. Mr. Moseley and his
brother eventually disposed of their interest
to Mr. Robert Bruce in 1884 and purchased
“Yadlamalka,” soon developing its resources
by energetic enterprise. Water was brought
from the hills, seven miles distant, by means
of piping which he purchased during a visit
to England at a cost of £I,OOO. This
supply of fresh water had not been procur-
able on the property previously but now it
caused the number of sheep carried to be
doubled, which was about 10,000. “ Clear
View” Station, near Port Augusta, was used
by Mr. Moseley as a depot for stocking hP
sheep and cattle at the foot of Horrock’s
Pass, midway between Wilmington and
Port Augusta, comprising 11,000 acres of
land on perpetual lease. This run was the
first in the north to be fenced by wire-nett-
ing and Mr, Moseley is recognised as the
pioneer in the use of this expedient for the
exclusion of wild dogs and rabbits from the
pastoral tracts.
In 1904 purchase was made of “Yardea’
and surrounding territory including the
“Pondona,” “Yartoo” and “Paney” Stations,
an area of 1,000 square miles and adjacent to
the “Thurlga” run, 700 square miles in ex
tent and then owned by Mr. A. Tennant.
The two proprietors conjointly arranged
with the Government to provide wire-nett-
ing under the terms of the Act and the out
side boundary of the whole area was en
closed by an excellent vermin-proof fence
five feet high. The area was far too large
in this hilly country to effectually deal with
the dogs and rabbits, and a subdivision into
four areas was subsequently made. The ex-
termination of the pests was pursued with


great energy, 800 dogs being destroyed in
four years and rabbits reduced to a minimum
Mr. Moseley then purchased “Thurlga” and
secured a portion of Mount Tve from the
Government, forming a splendid run of 1,540
square miles, the whole of which was fenced
with wire-netting at a cost of £16,000. The
total number of stock carried on the three
stations was 30,000 sheep, 1,300 head of
cattle and 300 horses. Mr. Moseley has
now relinquished the management of his
property and is living in retirement at “Clo-
velly,” Rose Park, Adelaide.
In 1870 he married Miss Jessie Craig,
daughter of the late William Craig of Glas-
gow and there was a family of one son and
four daughters.
Miss Moseley—sth generation
fames George Moseley, bis son, was
born in 1871 and after being educated at
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide, went on
the station and has been engaged in station
life ever since. He married Miss Mabel
Constance Herrington of Kensington Park,
daughter of the late E. H. Herrington, thus
joining two pioneer families. '1 here is a
family of three sons, namely Ronald James
Stuart, Gordon Herrington and Lancelot
Craig.
The late Mr. E. H. Herrington came to
Australia in the fifties and was on the staff
of the “Argus,” Melbourne, later on the staff
of the “Register,” Adelaide. He was elec-
ted to the House of Assembly and was Com-
missioner of Crown Lands for a while.
R. J. S. Moseley served with the A.I.F.
through the Great War and returned safely.
He married Miss Majory Melville \\ hiting
and their daughter, Claire Elizabeth repre-
sents the fifth generation of the Moseley
family in Australia.
In 1910 Mr. Moseley was elected as a
member of Parliament for the Flinders Con-
stituency which included a large portion of
Eyre Peninsula, he held this seat for 22
years. Huring this time he saw the neces-
sity of a water supply in this district and
on November 11th, 1914, during the Peake
Administration, moved in the House that
the Tod River Water Scheme should be
started. The following year Mr. Jackson,
Commissioner for Public Works, promised
a full enquiry and after much delay a Bill
was passed on November 7th, 1916, which
provided for this work to be carried out.
It was an enormous undertaking as
there were some 1,600 miles of mains to be
laid and over 1,000 miles of reticulation pipes
to serve an area of 9,230 square miles. The
holding capacity of the Tod River Reservoir
is some 2,400 million gallons. This scheme
is one of the largest of its type in the world
for the number of miles the water is carried.
It has turned what was practically a
wilderness into a most prosperous district,
carrying a large number of stock and en-
abling closer settlement to became success-
ful. Several million pounds was expended
on the work and the results obtained have
amply justified the outlay. It has increased
the population in this part of South Aust-
ralia many times and the number of pros-
perous farms opened up through the con-
tinuity of water supply bear eloquent testi-
mony to the persistence of Mr. Moseley.
IPs work in this direction will ever be re-
membered and the prosperity of Eyre Pen-
insula is a lasting memorial to his lar-
sightedness.


I „ if .
*** -m jl, „
*•
Groups of interested spectators at the turning on ceremony of the Tod River Water Scheme.
A further proof of J. G. Moseley’s
desire to increase the prosperity of the Eyre
Peninsula was the initiation of a scheme to
enable struggling farmers to acquire stock
for their holdings. He lent £3,000 without
interest to a fund to purchase store sheep
to be distributed to the settlers for grazing
and wool growing. This scheme was so
successful that the loan was returned within
a short period and the flocks increased so
abundantly that the necessity for freezing
works soon arose. These were established
with the help of J. G. Moseley and up to
50,C00 export lambs are treated annually for
shipment overseas.
Having made a success of his own pas-
toral work, Mr. Moseley has enabled the
settlers in his constituency to become self-
supporting as the result of his practical
knowledge and assistance.
Presentation of Memento to J. G. Moseley, at the Ceremony of the turning on of the Tod
River Water Scheme, West Coast, South Australia.


■
M ■ || |h| hJI
- i ■ Stt
Mrs. Mary Tucknott
The Tucknott Family, of South Australia.
George Tncknott arrived in South
Australia with his wife and family on the
ship “Buckinghamshire” in 1839. He died
shortly after landing and his widow was
left to rear a young family in a strange
country. The sons engaged in farming
and pastoral work at an early age. Samuel
Ettridgc Tncknott was employed by the
late Henry Holroyd, of Port Lincoln, on
his station property. In 1863 Samuel mar-
ried Mary O’Rielly, who had arrived in
Australia from Ireland on the ship “Stain-
houl” in 1857. Shortly after his marriage
he purchased a small farm of 300 acres
at White’s Flat on Tods River. He was
the first settler in this district to acquire
land under the Torrens Act. There was a
family of eight children, four of whom sur-
vive: Bessie, Henry, Margaret and Emma.
Samuel Tncknott died at the early age
of forty-four, leaving his widow to face
the future with a young family. Mrs.
Tncknott was a most remarkable woman,
and by her foresight and initiative was able
during her -18 years of widowhood to in-
crease the original holding from 300 to
2,000 acres. She was known as the “Grand
Old Lady” of the district, being admired
and revered by all with whom she came in
contact. Mrs. Tncknott died in 1927 at
the age of ninety-two years, having lived
to see the district from uninhabited virgin
scrub to a prosperous community. The
Tod River Reservoir adjoins the property
and this water supply has greatly enhanced
the welfare and prosperity of the district.
Two daughters, Bessie and Emily, still
reside at the old homestead which is named
“Toolillic.” This home was built some 70
years ago and is in a splendid state of pre-
servation.
TTenrv Tncknott, the eldest surviving
son, married Kate Higgins and they have
a family of two sons, John and Roy. John
has a son and daughter who represent the
fifth generation of the family in Australia.
'flic Tucknotts have been associated
with the State for nearly 100 years and can
be truly termed “Founders of Australia.”


B Wk
s , > "-.„ !'• I
'•-'■Ki:' r x J"W~ • % fM:
"
m / VjrM i 'Q Jr
W JL mm jf
Wr jSsmw s@K ’ dt ? ; Jm-
MmW Mm mF A* m wjmtr
JBIH mFM:y.. wm
M&:.. . JWMBr jffBBBPpr '' \^HT
Infrr
iiraHf jdKgBSfi* * *€mH fe
i W &MmBmF: - J|
I Jk M Jm Bjfl
M ,... ;vV / Jr" ~**|ii|fc 9
HBr - 'jlwff ’ - !!^%ife 1 .iaH KSL jS
* <£*5* ' v^9S^BhBc|
The late Thomas Clarke
THOMAS CLARKE
Incorporating the History of the Clarke Family
Every nation owes its position in world
affairs to the calibre of its citizens, and
Victoria is indebted to the early pioneers
of the Empire who left their traces deep in
the soil of Australia.
1 his book abounds with names, and
illustrious histories of those who made their
mark in this country which is little over
100 years old. Yet Australia has rapidly
advanced as the decades passed by, pro-
ducing a virile stock which has in nowise
usurped the place the pioneers hold in the
esteem of present generations. Thomas
Clarke joins this select band who came to'
\ ictoria nearly 80 years ago, and occupied a
prominent position in the gradual develop-
ment of the land of his adoption, assuring
a safe, well ordered community for those
who followed.
1 homas Clarke (the central ligure in
this history) was the eldest son of Thomas
Claike. He was born in Countv Fer-
managh, Ireland in 1838.


• W m
•t"ir *4
I Hr
IBRiiH&'- WCm" ■ SaB^H^K
di
,
% Rk I
J' 3s
ap ' 0
C • < - «h|| jv*
-m^sk: ■ *Pki mKmm :
.1 JBM I-
%- ~^k
I ' '*' ‘ - ';/.. . *“ ■*.. A. 1^'
The late Mrs. Thomas Clarke
Thomas Clarke, the elder, was a farmer
in Ireland, and in his youth he was a mem-
l>er of that famous regiment which is
Ireland’s pride, The Inniskilling Dragoons,
with whom he fought under the command
of Field-Marshal the Duke of Wellington
at \\ aterloo.
J homas Clarke, his son, was educated
m Ireland, and later commenced work on
his father’s farm, receiving a sound agricul-
tural training which in later life proved
exceedingly useful to him.
At the age of 18 years his adventurous
spirit prompted him to set out for Australia,
and braved the long sea journey, eventually
landing at Point Henry, Port Phillip Bay,
in the year 1856, and from there he made
across country to join his brother on the
Ballarat goldfields. He remained there for
several years, accumulating considerable
wealth in goldmining, but speculation in
other shares proved unfavourable, and he
determined to go back on the land.
He married Agnes Edmond, (Mrs.
Weston) the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Fisher, a farming family, of Larbert,
Scotland, and this lady merits a few words
extolling her courage. It is worthy of note
that Mr. Robert Fisher was Precentor of
Larbert Presbyterian Church of Scotland
for 32 vears.


Miss Fisher’s brother had originally
booked his passage to Australia, but cir-
cumstances prevented him from accepting
the opportunity, and Miss Fisher being of
that sturdy type so acceptable in a new
country, availed herself of the chance to
come to Australia, the land of which she
had heard so much. Courage was needed
to visit, unaccompanied, a land in the pro-
cess of development, but supported by her
knowledge of the Empire makers in the
men and women who had preceded her,
and prepared for the rough and not the
smooth path, she bravely faced the unknown
dangers inseparable in founding a new race
in a new country. Miss Fisher arrived in
the year 1852, (joining he married sister
who had landed previously in Victoria,)
and, on her marriage to Mr. Thomas Clarke,
accompanied him to his land selection in
the Ballarat district. Subsequently this
young couple transferred to a farm in the
Wimmera district when those parts were
opened for settlement.
It is worthy of note that Mr. and Mrs.
Clarke travelled this long journey by road,
taking with them all their worldly possess-
ions transported in waggons. A journey
occupying a few hours in these times then
called for a trek of many days spent on
unmade roads, amid dust, flies, bush and
wandering tribes of blacks. They drove
with them a flock of sheep, and Mr. Clarke
was one of the first men to introduce cross-
bred sheep to the Horsham district.
The vast tracts of land, newly opened
for settlement, proved ideal for the produc-
tion of wheat and wool. These sturdy
settlers possessed none of the advantages
associated with modern times. Quickly
moving trains, made roads, modern farm
machinery and paternal Government boun-
ties were unknown. A strong right arm,
the grim determination to overcome all
difficulties which lay in the path, the firm
belief that every adversity presented an
opportunity, compelled success —and Mr,
Clarke prospered in rich Wimmera.
The failing health of Mrs. Clarke,
owing to the great heat, persuaded him to
locate a colder climate, and he removed to
Windermere in the Ballarat district where
he purchased an extensive freehold pro-
perty. This he sold to advantage, and re-
moved to Ballarat. In this city he com-
menced contracting and house building, and
erected some of Ballarat’s finest homes,
which still stand in this beautiful city of
wide streets, statues, lovely trees and lake-
side charm.
In the late ninties Mr. and Mr>.
Clarke, accompanied by their daughter,
enjoyed a pleasure trip to the Old Country.
Much was to interest them, and varied were
the pleasures to be gained in the happy trip
from Australia to England. The prospect
of seeing old friends, though somewhat aged,
the pleasure of walking old places familiar
to them, recalled loving memories.
But their home was home in Australia,
and on their return to Victoria Mr. and Mrs.
Clarke immediately decided to go back to
the land. They commenced sheep grazing
at Cope-Cope in the Donald district, and
from this centre the family retired to Gee-
long, yet even here the active nature of Mr.
Clarke would not let him rest. He was a
man who could never be still, the thought
of remaining idle was repulsive to him. A
life of useful purpose remained to him, and
whatever his hand found to do, that work
was performed with a will which was
characteristic of the man, and once again
he launched out as a builder and contractor.
The loss of his beloved wife on the 11th
March, 1933, was a tremendous blow to
him. She was the last of a family of thir-
teen, and entered into her rest at the grand
old age of ninety-seven years.
Mrs. Clarke remembered well the re-
grettable loss of life at the Eureka Stockade
on December 3rd. 1854, at which she was
an eyewitness, and she recited a graphic
story :
“Ten thousand gold diggers are said
to have gathered on Bakery Hill, and
demanded as their right, the privilege
of every citizen to have a voice in
making the laws they were called upon
to obey. Full and fair representation
was asked for. Manhood suffrage.
Abolition of the property qualification
for members of Parliament. Payment
of members and the short duration of
Parliament.


The diggers were strictly within
their rights in forming a League to
agitate for these alterations. The
Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, looked
upon this as no ordinary tumult, but a
deliberate attempt to introduce ‘Lynch
Law’ into the goldfields. He hurried
up troops to Ballarat, assembling no
fewer than 450 military and police into
camp. Several attempts at reconcilia-
tion were made. The Riot Act was
read, and the troops swept the field.
At 3 o’clock in the afternoon an im-
promptu meeting was held on Bakery
Hill. Peter Lalor, an Irishman, was
the guiding spirit. He called upon the
Diggers to form into companies and
drill. He was appointed commander,
and directed that all who were pre-
pared to fight should swear to be faith-
ful to their standard—The Southern
Cross.
Strong arms carried bundles of slabs
intended for mining shafts, and built
up a palisade for defence when the
military attacked. On receipt of news
of these determined preparations, Sir
Charles Hotham dispatched all remain-
ing troops from Melbourne. Several
companies of 12th and 40th regiments
with four pieces of artillery were hur-
ried to Ballarat, Captain Thomas being
in command of the military.
The fateful morning arrived and de-
tachments extended into skirmishing
order. A volley of rifle bullets rattled
through the palisades, and several
soldiers dropped. A bugle sounded,
and a sharp volley rang out from the
long line of red coats. The order to
fix bayonets and charge was given. A
soldier picked off Lalor as he stood at
his post in the stockade, and he fell
apparently dead, and the soldiers
charged the stockade with a loud cheer.
The fight was soon over, the Diggers
having guns, but no bayonets, a wild
scatter took place, and in ten minutes
the battle was concluded. Many of
the Diggers escaped, but 125 were cap-
tured, and about 40 men lay in pools
of blood within the stockade.
Peter Lalor was covered in the con-
fusion by his companions with loose
palisades, and when the troops had
gone he managed to crawl out and
escaped into the ranges where a doctor
amputated his left arm.
The total number of killed on each
side was 28, and many were severely
wounded.”
A brother-in-law of Mrs. Clarke was
also present at the Eureka Stockade. He
was working a claim outside the territory
where the disturbance took place. There
was a boy in the party of 14 years of age,
and his particular job was to go into the
the forest and cart the timbee slabs for re-
inforcing the mines, and his horse and dray
were seized by the miners who were pre-
paring the defence of the Stockade.
Eventually he obtained permission to
visit his home, and promised that he would
return, but was persuaded by Mrs. Clarke
to remain outside until the following morn-
ing. On his return to the Stockade he dis-
covered that his horse was missing, and it
is believed that on this horse Peter Lalor
made his escape.
Sadly oppressed by the death of his
wife, Mr. Clarke passed peacefully away on
January 24th, 1935, at the age of 96 years-
This wonderful old couple had been united
in the bonds of holy matrimony for over 60
years, and the closing hours of their exist-
ence was made bright by the knowledge
that both of them had played such an im-
portant part in formulating the history of
this great Commonwealth. Both had
striven, undeterred by the fierce struggle
against the forces of nature which would
have broken those of less strength. Both
have erected for themselves a monument
which will remain—a living memory—for
the youth of to-day and those to follow.
Mr. and Mrs. Clarke were blessed with
four children. Three of them reached
maturity, Thomas Henry Clarke married
Miss Margaret Crosby, of Cope-Cope, and
they possess one child in Stanley Thomas
John Clarke who, in turn, is the father of
two children, Beverley and Albert.


Christina Clara became Mrs. Alfred
Jones of Ballarat. She has passed away
leaving behind her one daughter, Olive
Ruby, who is now Mrs. Elector Yeomans.
Florence Ethelyne Clarke is residing at
“Delcompu,” Pakington Street, Geelong.
Miss Clarke nursed her mother for many
years, and her activities now' centre around
her Church, and there her quiet retiring
nature reveals itself, for she who gives best
profits most.
Miss Clarke recently set an example
of civic pride by donating to the City of
Geelong one of the bronze lions to adorn
the Geelong City Hall as a lasting memorial
to the memory of her mother and father.
Such a gesture reveals a beauty of
thought which is deeply appreciated by
those who know her best. It is a monu-
ment emblematic of the lion heart revealed
by men and women of all ages who will
not pass this way again, but have left be-
hind them the indelible imprint of achieve-
ment.
The Malpas Family of Willunga,
South Australia
This family arrived in South Australia
in 1840 from London on the ship “Lysander”
John Malpas was accompanied by his wife
and family and established a home at Magill
near Adelaide. Their arrival in South
Australia w r as preceded by a son, George
Malpas who arrived in 1839. Thus this
family has been associated with the State
for nearly one hundred years.
Henry, son of John Malpas, established
a store at Willunga in 1850 and, in 1852 was
appointed postmaster which position he held
for twenty-one years. After a successful
business career he retired in 1896.
He married Mary Ann Allen, daughter
of the late Joseph Allen of Willunga.
Captain James Stanley Malpas, son of
Henry Malpas was born at Willunga in 1873
and educated at Prince Alfred College, Ade-
laide, and then took a special course in
viticulture at Roseworthy College. He took
over his father’s property consisting of rich
agricultural land and engaged in farming.
He early took a keen interest in military
matters and at the outbreak of War received
a commission in the A.1.F., and embarked
with the 27th Battalion in 1915, serving
through the Gallipoli campaign where he
attained the rank of Captain. He was in-
valided from Gallipoli to Malta and Aus-
tralia and returned to France in charge of
the 12th reinforcements of the 27th Bat-
talion which he rejoined on August 2nd, 1916
On November sth of that year he was
wounded at the battle of Flers and decor-
ated with the Military Cross. After a while
in hospital in England, Captain Malpas re-
turned to Australia where he was attached
to Mitcham Camp and later did cadet work
until 1919. In 1920 he took up farming
operations again at Willunga. Prior to the
War, Captain Malpas was a member of the
\\ illunga District Council and has always
taken an active part in all matters of local
welfare. He is Honorary Secretary of the
Willunga Bowling Club.
Percy Godfrey Malpas, son of Henry
Malpas third son, Godfrey, is a vinegrower
in the Willunga District. ' He served in the
Ist Divisional Signallers, A. I. F., through
the Great War. His son Allan Godfrey,
represents the fifth generation of the Malpas
family in South Australia.
During their long association with the
State the Malpas family has won an hon-
oured place on the roll of “Founders of
Australia.”


;V - - -
|M .; ,
Mr. H. Malpas.
Mrs. H. Malpas.
Captain James Stanley Malpas, M.C.


The late Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Middleton
and two eldest children.
The Middletons of Salisbury South Australia.
\\ illiam Middleton, a native of Bar-
nard Castle, Yorkshire, with his wife, two
sons, John and Thomas and a daughter,
Isabella, left England on the ship “Doug-
las,” in 1849 arriving at Port Adelaide in
January of 1850. Owing to an outbreak
of cholera on board, Mrs. Middleton, with
many other passengers died on the voyage.
The ship was called the “death ship” be-
cause of the large number who died and the
Douglas’ was lost on the return voyage
to England.
The family carried letters of introduc-
tion to the pioneer Congregationalist min-
ister of Adelaide, the Reverend Quinton
Stow.
Shortly after arrival William Middle-
ton with his family went to Salisbury where
he purchased land in 1850, portion of which
is still retained by his grandchildren.
Mixed farming was engaged in and the
heavy hauling and ploughing being done
by means of bullocks. William died in
1852 and wais one of the first to be buried
in the Church of England cemetery at
Salisbury.
1 homas Middleton married Miss Brown
who landed from Llandoles, North Wales
in the ship “Victoria Regia” in 1854, and
there was a family of five, Eliza lane (Mrs.
Cowling), George Evan, Arthur Thomas,
Emily Louisa (Mrs. W. Griggs) and Ada
Laura, all of whom survive. The two sons
and Miss Ada L. Middleton still reside on
the property.
John, a brother of Thomas, was a
Founder. Trustee and Deacon of the Salis-
bury Congregational Church with which he
was connected for many years. He died
in 1901 at the age of 86.
Isabella, their sister died at the age of
18 years after being in the Colony for only
six years.
'The children of Thomas were all born
and reared on the property and his sons,
George and Arthur and daughter, Ada
Laura still farm the land taken up by their
88
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


".'ll
;|w ' dfr^Nllfin
Smm
Mr. George Evan Middleton
grandfather. Thus the Middletons have
been associated with the district for some
eighty-five years.
All the family arc ardent supporters of
the Salisbury Congregational Church. The
present church is erected on part of the
family estate. Thomas Middleton died in
1903 aged 75 and his wife in 1921 aged 87.
Mrs. W. Grigg’s two sons, Clarence
Middleton and Harold Thomas served over-
seas with the A.T.F. Clarence was twice
wounded in France and on his return re-
entered the Education Department. He is
now Head master of the Mt. Gambier High
School and his children represent the sixth
generation of the Middleton family in Aus-
tralia. Harold T. Griggs, his brother is a
practicing architect in Currie Street, Ade-
laide.
This is one of the oldest of the original
Salisbury' families.
Mr. Clarence Middleton Griggs


-mm
D - B 1 L & . ' 1 M ■ 1 I
THE OHALLORANS OF O'HALLORAN HILL, SOUTH AUSTRALIA"
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


IThe O’Halloran Family, South Australia.
Major Thomas Shuldham O’Halloran.
the founder of the O’Halloran family in
South Australia, embarked from Plymouth
on July 30th, 1838, in the ship “Rajasthan”
and arrived at Holdfast Bay on November
15th, 1838. He brought with him his wife
children and servants.
Major O’Halloran’s diary, a treasured
possession of his family, gives a clear and
crisp account of their movements during
those first few weeks.
Under the date November 16th, 1838,
the Major wrote: “Anchored at Holdfast
Bay.” On the 21st, “Encamped at Glenelg
with family.” On January 7th, 1839, he
moved to O’Halloran Hill, and the diary
entry on the 14th was “Moved from tents
into cottages.” On the 20th, “Prayers
read for first time under our roof.” “On
April 18th the family “Dined in large house
for first time, Col. Gawler (Governor), Sturt,
Hall, McEaren, and Cakler present.”
Major T. S. O’Halloran was the second
of eight sons, seven of whom were army
officers and one a naval officer, of Major-
General Sir Joseph O’Halloran, G.C.8.,
whose splendid service with the Bengal
Army won for him distinction and honour;
having been forty times under fire during
his fifty-thiee years of service in India. On
his coat of arms was a lizard, as one had
saved his life by creeping across his face as
he slept, during a midnight advance of
Gurkhas in India.
It was Major Thomas Shuldham, his
son, who brought the sign of the lizard to
South Australia, and Lizard Lodge stood
on O’Halloran Hill; it is now a remount
farm.
Major O’Halloran’s grandfather was Dr.
Sylvester O’Halloran, M.R.1.A., celebrated
physician, historian and antiquarian.
In 1809, at the age of twelve years, T.
S O’Halloran was an ensign in the West
Middlesex Militia. In 1812 he was re-
moved with the Royal Military College from
Marlow to Sandhurst. In 1813 he was
gazetted to the 17th Foot, and in the same
year, at the age of 16, he sailed for India
with his regiment, and for the next three
years went through the Nepaul war.
It was at the age of 41 that he sold his
commission and came to Australia with his
second wife His first wife died in 1823,
in barracks at Calcutta.
At the time that he moved to O’Hal
loran Hill, Major O’Halloran conducted
Divine Service there; this was in January
of 1839, and on February 10th, 1849, Christ
Church, O’Halloran Hill was opened and
consecrated by Bishop Short.
Soon after his arrival, on February sth
1839, Major O’Halloran was sworn in as a
Magistrate, and on 27th of the same month
he was signed on as a Justice of the Peace
and special Magistrate of Province.
On February 25th, 1840, he was gazet-
ted Major Commandant of the South Aust-
ralian Military Forces, and later in the same
year he was appointed Commissioner of
Police.
In 1846, on the 19th February, Major
O’Halloran presided at a dinner given to
Captain Sturt on his return from the Inte-
rior; there were 260 guests present on the
occasion.
Captain William O’Halloran, a brother
of the Major, arrived from England in 1840,
and later became Auditor-General.
When 24 men, women and children
survivors of the “Maria” wreck, were mur-
dered on the Coorong by blacks, an expedi-
tion was sent from Adelaide to avenge them,
and Major O’Halloran was their leader. He
went out against the Big Murray natives
who had perpetrated these murders, arres-
ted the ringleaders, held his own court mai-
tial, and hanged two of them at the scene of
their crime. The natives kept away from
this strip of the Coorong for years.


Some of his contemporaries were in-
censed by these summary executions, but
posterity has applauded his promptness in
stopping what might have been wholesale
massacre, first of whites, and eventually of
natives. He had come from India, where
discipline was strict and justice quick, and
acted accordingly in the interest of the
young country of his adoption.
In April of 1841, he commanded a simi-
lar expedition against the Big Murray and
Rufus blacks, and a second move against
them was made the following month.
Another expedition was made in Nov-
ember of the following year against the Port
Lincoln tribes. At that time Port Lincoln,
“The South Australian Riviera,” was an
armed camp. Blacks carried on a guerilla
warfare with the few whites there, and there
were bloody battles fought. White men, an
old woman and a little boy were speared and
battered to death.
It was a difficult task to undertake
these later expeditions, for the Police Com-
missioner’s powers of reprisal were limited,
and the soldiers and voluntary Police had a
hard time, equipped in the heavy uniforms
of the time, and stiffly booted and spurred,
their swords being torn from their grasp as
they laboured through the bushes, they were
indeed handicapped, and poorly equipped to
catch the natives. However, they achieved
their objects by halting the feuds between
white an 1 black in Port Lincoln.
It was thankless work too, as there was
so much criticism levelled against the meth-
ods which were necessary to subdue the
blacks.
When he retired as Commissioner of
Police, he was presented with a silver snuff
box by the Mounted Police, and a farewell
address by the Foot Police.
In 1843 Major O’Halloran was nomina-
ted a non-official member of the Legislative
Council for the Province of South Australia,
after having served for eight years as senior
non-official member, and the Constitution of
1851 came into force, he was returned as a
member of the Legislative Council, and
stood at the head of the poll of twenty-
seven candidates, receiving 3,499 votes.
Major T. S. O’Halloran was on the first
committee appointed to draw up a plan and
prospectus for St. Peter’s College, in 1847,
and one of the first governors of this insti-
tution of which not only South Australia
but the Empire has reason to be proud.
His neatly written record ends with two
notes in pencil on the flyleaf. The first,
dated February 28th, 1862 read: “Sent into
Government my resignation as a J.P. and
special magistrate for this Province.” Be-
neath it is: “June 9th, 1863, Resigned my
seat as member of the Legislative Council
for this Province.”
Thomas Shuldham O’Halloran died
seven years later, in 1870 at the age of 73,
and was buried in the family vault at O’Hal-
loran Hill.
At the time of his death, he was as up-
right as when he first took oath to serve
George HI. as a twelve year old ensign in
the Middlesex Militia. To the end, he never
sat down to a meal before he said: “The
Queen, God bless her!”
His life was one of loyal service, and
it is to such men as he, that much of the
success and progress of South Australia is
due.
His son, T. J. S. O'Halloran was a well
known stipendiary magistrate of South Aus-
tralia for many years, and his grandson a
leading King’s Counsel now.
The fourth generation of the O’Hal-
loran family in Australia is upheld in the
male line by Mr. Derek O’Halloran, son of
the Rev. F. G. O’Halloran of Western Aus-
tralia, who is a brother to the K.C.
Mr. Thomas Joseph Shuldham O’Hal-
loran was born at Dawlish, England, on 27th
April, 1835, and he came to South Australia
with his parents three years later.
AN hen twelve years of age, he began his
education at a private school at Magill, and
later he attended St Peter’s College, and was
a member of the original sixth form. While
at the College, he won the Young Exhibi-
tion. After leaving school, he entered the
treasury as a cadet, and remained in the
Government offices for two years.


In 1865, he went into the National Bank
as a teller, and subsequently rose to be man-
ager of country branches before he severed
bis connection with the bank in 1872.
\\ hen he left the Strathalbyn bank, he
was presented by the clients with a sil-
ver tea and coffee service, valued at £55,
and a family bible, for his services as a lav
reader. On leaving Mount Barker he was
again the recipient of a gift, but the one
which he perhaps valued most, for its ex-
pression of goodwill, was a silver tea caddy,
given to him in 1906 for his services as arbi-
trator in the Renmark strike, this presenta-
tion was made jointly by the employers and
the men.
After the death of his father, he was
appointed a stipendiary magistrate, and
served in this capacity at Mount Gambier,
Lawler, Kapunda and Port Pirie.
In 1878 he was appointed to Mount
Gambier, but very soon afterwards he was
sent to Mount Barker. In 1887 he was
transferred to Wallaroo, and he presided on
the bench there until 1905, gradually extend-
ing his sphere of jurisdiction and circle of
friends to Southern Yorke Peninsula and
Port Lincoln.
A court was opened at Fowler’s Bay,
and another at Franklin Harbor, and so Mr.
G’Halloran presided over courts extending
from Renmark and Morgan on the east, to
Fowler’s Bay on the west.
Pie had a reputation for sound judgment
and unswerving loyalty to the ends of jus-
tice. He dealt with his cases with the wis-
dom of Solomon, and with kindly under-
standing.
During the war period, Mr. O’Halloran
was an active and enthusiastic helper at the
Cheer-up Hut, where he spent most of his
Sundays helping with the entertainment and
catering for the soldiers, with whom he was
exceedingly popular. It was said of him:
If ever a man did, he justified every day of
his existence.”
As a member of the Anglican Synod,
and a lay reader for many years, he did much
splendid work. For a long period he con-
ducted a service on Sundays at the Con-
sumptive Home, the Adelaide Hospital and
the Destitute Asylum.
Mr. O’Halloran married a daughter of
John Woodforde, M.D., who came out as
Medical adviser to Colonel Light in 1836,
in the ship “Rapid” and was afterwards the
first Coroner.
Mr. O’Halloran died at North Adelaide,
in his 87th year, on January 9th, 1922, leav-
ing three sons and four daughters: Mr. T. S.
O’Halloran, K.C., the well-known Adelaide
Barrister; Mr. J. O’Halloran of Northam,
Western Australia; and the Rev. George
O’Halloran of Western Australia. The
daughters are Mesdames W. A. Ross;
W. S. Milne, and H. A. Sweetapplc, and
Miss Meliora O’Halloran, all of North
Adelaide.
Dudley Bruce Ross, LL.B., son of Mrs.
W. A. Ross was born in 1892, educated at
St. Peter’s College and Adelaide University
where he took his LL.B. degree and then
joined the A.1.F., serving with the Artillery
in France. He has one son, William Alex-
ander and three daughters, Elizabeth, Susan
and Noel.
William Somerville Milne and Margaret
Milne are the children of Mrs. Francis
Milne. The Rev. W, S. Milne was also
educated at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide.
Frederick George, Faith, Barty, Maida,
Patricia and Judith are the children of the
Rev. George O’Halloran.
Mrs. H. A. Sweetapple has two chil-
dren G. A. Sweetapple, F.R.C.S. (Edin.),
M.B. (Sydney) and Marjorie Roberts. Dr.
Sweetapple maintained the family tradition
in reference to St. Peter’s College where he
received his early education. He has one
daughter, Judith, and Mrs. Roberts has two
daughters, Diana and Christina


#**
l«
*
f . , V V
BE 5jrv"
K > > l|||
%±jja? Jeflc*
v j^PiNI
AJr
f fM Jc S A •
jr
» x
. fWt j / j l
f i#
' Jj J » ? >
>;#\, C|p
:UH| f 4 \ -^k
;
f 9
I
The late Thomas Edwards.
Mr. George Thomas Edwards.
The late John Edwards.
Mr. Thomas Evan Edwards,


Mr. G. T. Edwards and Family.
The Edwards of “ Mount Annan,” Oakbank,
South Australia
The founder of the Australian branch of
the Edwards —Thomas, arrived in South
Australia from Shropshire with his wife
and family on the ship “Lord Ashbourne” in
1850. He purchased a farm at Kensington,
South Australia which he worked until 1852
when he purchased land at Oakbank. He
lived here some years, and was one of the
foundation members of the Anglican Church
of St. Thomas at Balhannah. He died in
1892 at the age of ninety years, his wife
Elizabeth predeceased him in 1874 at the
age of 80 years. His son John was thirteen
years of age when the family landed in
South Australia and after finishing his edu-
cation at the Pulteney Street School joined
his father in farming pursuits. He became
one of the leading agriculturists in the
Oakbank district and took an active interest
in all local affairs, serving on the Onka-
paringa District Council and a Director of
the local Butter Factory. In 1862 he mar-
ried Sarah Jemima, daughter of John Wil-
Hams of Daisy Hills, near Balhannah. Their
family consisted of thirteen children, Mrs.
Edwards died in 1898 and John Edwards in
1916 at the age of eighty years.
Their son George Thomas Edwards who
inherited the property from his grandfather,
was born at Mount Annan in 1882, and re-
ceived his education at Hahndorf College
under Mr. D. J. Byard, took over the farm,
where he has been ever since, being the
third generation on the property. His son
Thomas Evan who is associated with him
makes the fourth generation in a direct line
on the same farm.
George Thomas Edwards is associated
with all movements for the welfare of the
district. He is a foundation trustee and
Chairman of the Memorial Hall, for which
he gave the land, as did his grandfather for
the first Onkaparinga School.


. • - V - ',- ■ -. . <* '- .
__; . ; _____ i " ‘
“Rose of Mount Annan”
Champion Milking- Shorthorn Cow, Mount Barker Show, 1930.
Bred and exhibited by Mr. G. T. Edwards.
He is a committeeman of the Onkapa-
ringa Agricultural Society, and also a Foun-
dation member of the Bowling Club, mem-
ber of the Shorthorn Society and also of the
Onkaparinga Facing Club and Tattersalls
Club, Adelaide. He has established a splen-
did herd of Australian Illawarra milking
Shorthorns from some of the best blood
imported into Australia. Many prizes have
been won at the Royal Adelaide and many
other Agricultural shows. The progeny of
the herd are in demand throughout the
State.
George Thomas Edwards married in
March 1912, Beatrix Mary, daughter of
Thomas Wynes of Wayville, near Adelaide.
The Wynes family were early settlers of
Port Adelaide, having lived there for over
eighty years. Mrs. Wynes was a daughter
of William Pengilly, of Fullarton who was
for many years City Gardener for the Ade-
laide Corporation. He and his wife came
from Cornwall and were very early settlers
in the Colony.
Mrs. G. 'l'. Edwards is an active mem
her of the Country Women’s Association,
and is keenly interested in charitable work
for the relief of distress, especially in the
unemployed relief community farms and the
aboriginal settlements.
There are two children in their family
I homas Evan, born December 1912 at Oak-
bank and received his education at Scotch
College, Adelaide and is the fourth genera-
tion of the Edwards to be associated with
the Mount Annan property in a direct line.
Ihe daughter Adelicia Barbara was
born in November 1916. and after finishing
her education at the Methodist Ladies’ Col-
lege, Adelaide is now actively associated
with her mother in her charitable interests.
Situated on the banks of the Onkapa-
ringa River, Mount Annan homestead is a
delightful old house nearly 100 years old,
and although it has all modern conveniences
still retains the old world atmosphere by the
presence of the bay trees, lilacs, gooseberries
and damson, most of which are the original
plants brought from Shropshire, England
in 1850.
Ihe Edwards have won an honoured
place on the roll of “Founders of Australia."


j **%& jpte pjftBjHI
mm 4 ***\ m
The late John Davison
; he Davison Family and the late Francis James Leary
Since the year 1849 the name of
Davison has been intimately connected
with the history of Victoria. In that year
John Davison, accompanied by his young
'vh'e Frances, came to this State on board
ihe sailing ship “Darpent,” and such voyage
constituted their honeymoon, for they had
been married immediately prior to setting
out for their new home of adoption. At
this time they were each aged twenty-one.
They were landed at Point Henry, a
boat being sent out to bring them to Gee-
long— at that time a tiny township. After
having been here a comparatively short
period the new settlers took up land at
belmont, but not before having tried their
buck at the diggings, where they met with
but indifferent success-
However, the venture on the land was
more successful and Mr. Davison gradually
found himself in an increasingly fortunate
position. In addition to the farm, Mrs.
Davison had opened her own school and,
on account of her excellent education and
accomplishments, her establishment on the
corner of Moorabool and Little Ryrie
Streets was an unqualified success.
During these years the couple had four
children. It was becoming apparent to the
now prosperous couple that there were
opportunities in abundance in the town of
Geelong for an alive Estate Agent and
Auctioneer and, accordingly, they sold their
property and opened this type of business
in Malop Street, later moving to the site
where the “Geelong Advertiser” buildings
now stand- This transfer took place on
the 26th May, 1859, and on the following
day their fifth child, Caroline Hebe, was
born. Concentrating on the importation
from the Last of tea, sugar and spices their


* . . - - ' - 1\
gy _. : ? ' w/m
f
I #
■ f.
The late Mrs. Davison,
business reached enormous proportions,
and Mr. Davison, from taking keen interest
in municipal affairs, found himself elected
to the Geelong Council and retained his
seat therein for many years.
During these years his name became
one of the best known and most respected
in the whole of the Geelong districts, and
he took deep interest in the question of the
gardens and public parks—in fact, it is not
claiming overmuch credit to state that the
public of to-day can well feel grateful to
his memory for many of the advantages
they are enabled to enjoy in this direction.
During these times of prosperity the
couple had four more children, and, in the
meanwhile, Mrs. Davison disposed of her
school when the need for such assistance
had passed.
However, in 1893, Mr. Davison died at
the age of 65, and when his affairs were
investigated it was discovered that he had
suffered entirely unforeseen losses which
materially affected the financial standing
of those whom he left behind.
It was at this time that the training
imparted by their mother in earlier davs
stood the daughters in good stead. Three
of them .in Fanny, Hebe and Jessie, opened
a school assisted by their mother and
prospered to a remarkable extent. Their
success was such that they worked up to
the position when they counted their future
assured and, after a few years, when Jessie
married and retired from the undertaking
the other two daughters carried on.
This state of affairs existed until 1905,
when their mother passed away.
In the following year Hebe retired
from active participation in the school,
following her marriage to Francis fames
Deary and, on her retirement, Fanny carried
on for a short time, but then closed the
school and retired. Fanny died in the year
1929 in Geelong.


Mrs. F. J. Feary.
Francis James Leary came to Victoria
from England in the year 1859 with his
parents. At that time he was but four
years of age, and, after a comparatively
short time his father passed away, com-
pelling him to earn his living when still a
DA At an early age he went as a clerk
with the late Mr. Hendy, founder of the
firm of Hendy, Leary & Co., and by his
earnest application and industry ultimately
worked his way to a partnership in the
firm. On the death of Mr- Hendy he carried
on as the virtual head of the firm, although
at no time did he enjoy robust health. The
business prospered with the growth of the
city of Geelong and his fortunes grew
accordingly.
However, in 1922 Mr. Leary passed
away after having become one of the most
respected citizens in Geelong. Through-
out his life he had been an enthusiastic
worker on behalf of St- Giles’ Presbyterian
burch and many charitable causes. Detest-
ing publicity he nevertheless came to hold a
reputation for his unstinted giving in cases
of misfortune, and his name will live for
many years in the memory of those to whom
he was best known.
Of the family of John and Frances
Davison there are at the present time four
living, in Mr. H. E- Davison, of Melbourne,
Mr. F- F. Davison, of Nedlands, West
Australia, Mrs. Jessie McLean, of Mel-
bourne, and Mrs. Caroline Hebe Learv, of
Geelong.
Mis. Leary is the last of this old and
well-respected family residing in the dis-
ti ict where the family name grew from
such a small beginning to one of distinction
and honor, and now, at the age of seventy-
five, can look back upon a life which has
been an active and full one, coupled with
the respect of her fellow citizens among
whom she has lived for so many vears.


The late Thomas Bond Hawson
The late Captain Hawson
The Hawson Family of "Polda” Station
Eyre's Peninsula, South Australia.
The Hawson family is the most historic
on the Eyre Peninsula. Captain Cowell
Hawson with his brother and their families
arrived at Port Lincoln in 1839 on the
schooner “Abeona.” She carried a large
cargo of cedar wood which was used in the
construction of their first home which was
established at Ivirton Point. These were
the first white people to establish themselves
on the West Coast. They took up about
6,000 acres including the site of Port Lin-
coln and in the same year the Government
carried out a survey of the Port Lincoln
district.
The blacks at this time were very nu-
merous and treacherous and a son Francis
aged thirteen was speared by natives whilst
he was alone at the homestead. He fought
the intruders off with his gun and tried to
remove the spear from his back, but it was
barbed and he then placed his back to the
lire and burnt the shaft- He lingered for
eight days and then died.
Captain Hawson lead an expedition into
the interior and opened up some of the
country naming several fresh water rivers
and creeks. He contributed with others,
towards the cost of Darke’s expedition and
accompanied him as far as Wedge Hill, in
1844.
This family was the first to ship cattle
to the Peninsula. Captain Hawson acted
as Harbour Master and Port Master for
Port Lincoln for a while and with his
brother took up various sections of land
and engaged largely in sheep farming.
George G. Hawson, second son of
Thomas Bond Hawson who, with his bro-
ther, Captain Hawson, landed on Eyre’s
Peninsula in 1839, was boj-p at Little


i f
• *41 «
i
Mr. G. G. Hawson.
Swamp, Port Lincoln in 1853. As a youth
he was early trained in pastoral work and
at the age of twelve travelled cattle from
Port Lincoln to his uncle’s property, Polda
Station. This property came into G. G.
Hawson’s possession on the death of Greg-
ory Hawson in 1894. G. G. Hawson was
a most successful pastoralist and Polda wool
has always maintained high prices for its
quality.
G. G. Hawson married in 1886 Adelaide,
eldest daughter of the late Robert Standlev,
one of South Australia’s earliest pioneers
and had two sons and two daughters.
Gerald Stanley, his eldest son, was killed
in action serving with the A.I.F. in France,
m 1917- Arthur Lawrence Hawson, J.P.,
the second son was born in 1889 and has
been engaged in pastoral pursuits. He took
over the management of “Polda” in 1921.
Mabel, the eldest daughter, married K.
S Jacobs, in 1919 and Florence married W.
H. Barry, in 1914-
"Polda” contains 34,000 acres and is
devoted to sheep of the merino type.
Mr. A. L. Hawson
A. L. Hawson takes a keen interest in
the progress of the district, and is a keen
golfer.
The Story of Frank
Hawson, the Boy Hero
by Ken. Robertson-
Ninety-live years ago, on October sth,
1840, Frank Hawson, the 1 )oy hero who. in
his own words, was “not afraid to die,” was
mortally speared by blacks while guarding
his father’s hut at Little Swamp, about four
miles from Port Lincoln.
This was the first murder of a white
person on Eyre Peninsula, and so deeply did
it shock the tiny village settlement that
Governor Gawler, to prevent indiscriminate
punitive measures being adopted by the
settlers, considered it necessary to issue a
proclamation against retaliation.
The story of the heroism of this boy
of ten is a glowing page in the history of
Port Lincoln,


Mr. Gerald Hawson.
When Frank’s father, Henry Hawson,
decided to set sail from Newfoundland in
his brigantine “Abeona,” with his wife and
famihq two y'ears before the “Buffalo”
dropped anchor in Holdfast Bay, little did he
dream that he was fated to play a big part
in shaping the destinies of a settlement then
unborn. Navigated by his eldest son,
Captain H- C. Hawson, the “Abeona,” which
was of 100 tons, arrived at Albany", West-
ern Australia in 1836, and the family’s
peregrinations eventually brought it to
Adelaide, where a temporary home was
made.
Quite early, Henry Hawson identified
himself with the movement to establish a
settlement on the shores of Boston Bay;
he was one of the two original trustees of
the Port Lincoln Survey Association and
was among the prime movers in the negotia-
tions for the special survey.
The first contingent of Port Lincoln
settlers left Port Adelaide in the “Abeona,”
with Captain H, C. Hawson still in com-
mand on March 11th, 1839, and arrived in
Boston Bay on Tuesday, March 19th.
Among those on board were B. Pratt
Winter, who was to survey the site for the
town, and Robert Tod, leader of the party
which was destined four days later to dis-
cover the Tod River- This stream, after
the passage of many years, has become the
fount of one of the largest reticulation
schemes in the world.
Henry Hawson and his family lost no
time in blazing the trail which was to be
followed by his descendants. A house was
built at Kirton Point—possibly the first
in that locality —and a station property was
acquired at Little Swamp. On the fringe
of the swamp was built a two-storied house,
“Towalla” in which the family lived for
many years, and which is still occupied to-
day. Close by are the inevitable mulberry
trees which mark the homesteads of so many
of our pioneers. Many beautiful old gum
trees surround the dwelling, which is in
a good state of preservation. A feature of
the building which arouses curiosity to-dav
is a row of tiny apertures in the outer walls
of the upper storey; these were to enable
the inmates to defend themselves in the


4>
The Homestead, “ Polda ” Station
event of attacks being made by the blacks.
It was while this house was being built that
Frank’s tragic death occurred.
The boy, with Edward, an elder brother
was living in a tiny hut hard by, engaged,
it is believed, in the building of the station
homestead. On the morning of October
sth, Edward set off on horseback for Port
Lincoln, travelling a rough bush track which
to-day has disappeared, for in its place
stretches a ribbon of bitumen. Frank was
left in charge of the hut and contents.
About 10 o’clock a party of a dozen natives
appeared, and asked the boy for something
to eat- The only thing in the hut was
bread and rice which he gave them, but
this was insufficient to satisfy their demands
and they attempted to force an entrance
into the hut.
Here was a situation which might have
struck terror into the heart of an adult,
but the boy did not falter; fastening the
door on the outside, he stood with a gun by
his side and his father’s sword in his hand.
According to the story which he told Dr. J.
B- Harvey, the Government Resident and
Medical Officer, who later attended him in
Port Lincoln, he did not attempt to use the
weapons. One of the native children offered
the white boy a spear to throw, and while
in the act of hurling it he received two 7 ft-
shafts in his chest. He did not fall, but
seized the gun, and shot one of his assail-
ants, who fell, but scrambled to his feet;
again and disappeared. The wounded
native’s companions followed him, but later
on they returned and appeared to be on the
point of throwing another spear. Frank
lifted the gun a second time, whereupon the
aborigines decamped.
Up to this point the boy had shown
exceptional courage, but it was when the
danger of the moment had passed that his
indomitable spirit found its highest level.
First he attempted to remove the spears
which were still sticking in his chest, but
his efforts were unsuccessful. Then he
endeavoured to cut and saw the shafts, but
in this, too, he failed. In desperation he set
out on the four miles walk to Port Lincoln,
but the excruciating pain forced him to
abondon the attempt. Returning to the
hut, he sat on the ground, and, thrusting the
shafts of the spears in the fire, tried to burn
them.


’
v.-w-r
*• -
V * ’**' - - . 4 ~’" J .
L ~ '
The Homestead, “Polda” Station
And thus the wounded boy was found
by his brother when he returned from Port
Lincoln at 10 o’clock at night. Edward
sawed off the protruding portions of the
spears, and, placing the lad on horseback,
took him into the township.
Dr. Harvey, in a despatch to Governor
Gawler dated October 7th, 1840, tells the
rest of the story: —”Yesterday I was called
to attend Mr. Hawson’s son—l found him
with two spears in his chest, both of which
were barbed, and one of which had passed
through to the back. I saw that death
would instantly follow the withdrawal of
them. I therefore thought it better to ask
the attendance of the surgeon of the French
ship “L’Anglae” who gave the same opinion.
We were under the painful necessity of
permitting him to die a lingering, but not
a painful death, in preference to a hasty and
violent one. I have remained with the boy
till now, and I am writing this in Mr.
Hawson’s house, the boy not having yet
breathed his last.”
“The poor boy has borne this heavy
affliction with the greatest fortitude assur-
ing us that he is not afraid to die.”
The lad died a few days later.
Frank was buried near the homestead
on Kirton Point, a portion of the familv
property. Subsequently it was discovered
that the grave was in the roadway in
Trafalgar Street. In 1911 the Port Lincoln
Progress Committee, wishing to give the
boy s remains a permanent resting place,
organised a public appeal, and sufficient
money was raised to have an obelisk erected
in Hawson place, and the remains were ex-
humed and interred beneath it. The in-
scription on the monument includes the
words Although only a lad, he died a hero.”
A few years ago the Kirton Point Pro-
gressive Association, to mark the site of
the original grave, placed over the spot a
raised natural granite slab.
A short stone s throw from here were,
until a few months ago, the ruins of a dwell-
ing which many believed to be the original
home of the family, but no evidence has
been adduced to prove this belief. The
remains of this house have been removed
and the cellar filled in.


'I'
■ JL ' :
A JpPT* Mm ? //•
J-A
The late Donald John Coghill
Mrs. H. H. Dann.
The late Donald John Coghill and Mrs. H. H. Dann
The history of New South Wales since
the year 1814 is closely associated with the
name of Coghill. In that year the late
Captain John Coghill arrived from England
and founded a family whose name was des-
tined to play no small part in the history
Australia. In the prosperous times
that followed his arrival he purchased the
magnificent Station “Bedervale” near Bath-
ursfi which was gradually added to until
it reached no less than 33,000 acres. The
history of “Bedervale” was closely associa-
ted with the pastoral development of New
vSouth \\ ales, and formed an important link
oetween the pioneering days of the early
colonists and the more settled period of the
Hstoral industry.
It is a matter of interest to record the
fact that the first overland journey to
A ictoria in 183/, made by the famous Capt.
Hepburn was in partnership, and in the
company of, at least two or more members
of the Coghill family.
Donald John Coghill joined his uncle—■
Capt. Coghill—in the late thirties, having
made the journey from the Old Country
at the early age of thirteen. Donald proved
himself adapted to the work on the station
to an exceptional degree and became one of
his uncle’s most useful assistants. So true
was this, indeed, that, when the Captain
made the trip to England some years later
he was left as joint manager of the entire
property in conjunction with his cousins.


After several years with his uncle
Donald decided to branch out for himself
and crossed to Victoria. He settled in the
Castlemaine district where, in partnership
with the late Mr. Brodribb, he purchased a
fine property at Sutton Grange and they
traded under the name of Coghill and
Brodribb.
In 1858 he married Miss Elizabeth
Matilda Burns, who was born in Launceston
in the year 1837. The marriage took place
at Elphinstone, the ceremony being per-
formed by the late Rev- Lowe who was
Presbyterian minister there at that time.
Owing to the death of his partner the
property was sold in 1867 and Donald took
his family to Queensland where he took up
extensive holdings. However he happened
to strike a drought of exceptional severity
and after about two years he had lost his
entire stock. He returned to Victoria and
thanks to his remarkable reputation for
probity and uprightness of character, a
Iriend came to his assistance with a loan of
£5OO free of security. With the aid of
this capital he settled in Echuca where he
opened a forwarding agency and, at the
same time, his wife opened a school of her
own to assist her husband in his times of
stress.
During these years both Mr. and Mrs-
Coghill were enthusiastic workers for the
church and charitable institutions and, with-
in a short time Mr. Coghill was elected to
the Council, which position he retained to
the time of his death.
Mr. Coghill passed away in his early
fifties in the year 1875 and it is of interest
to note that his widow outlived him by
fifty-two years, having attained the ripe age
of ninety years.
On the death of her husband, Mrs.
Coghill caused the business to be sold to
Permewan Wright & Co., of Melbourne, and
went to Castlemaine for a short time and
then to Melbourne, where she lived until
her sons were settled on the land when
she settled at “Lunina,” Beringama, on the
Upper Murray and, from time to time
visited her family, which comprised three
daughters and four sons. There were in
all seven children of the marriage of whom
three sons and two daughters survive in
George, (Melbourne) ; Stuart Burns, (Ber-
ingama) ; David Henry, (Tatong) ; Mrs.
Clare E. Bramley, (Guy’s Forest) ; and the
second eldest daughter, Kate, who married
Henry Harvey Dann of Geelong, in 1899.
H. H. Dann was a son of a very widely
known and respected citizen in Thomas
Dann who had been one of the pioneers of
the Clyde and Geelong districts. Mr. Dann,
senior, had been joint founder of one of
the largest grain and fodder firms in
Victoria, namely, Harvey, Dann & Co. Pty.
Ltd. whose name was a household word
even in those early days not only in his
own home districts but also throughout the
Commonwealth and overseas. His death
occurred in 1900. His son Henry Harvey
had been born in 1862 and was educated at
the Clyde State School, E. R- Lennon’s
famous school and, later, at Ballarat College.
He had been in his father’s business from
his first experience of working for his living,
and made it his life study. He died at the
age of 68 in the year 1930 leaving his widow
a.nd two children, a son and daughter—Elsie
Noel Dann and Thomas Clyde Dann. At
the present both these children reside with
tbeir mother—now aged 73—at their home
in Geelong.
The purpose of this publication is
mainly the placing on record of the histories
of the pioneering families of this State, and
it is a matter of deep satisfaction to be
enabled to include this brief outline of not
one but two of the oldest and most respected
names 'Coghill and Dann. The present
genciation has every right to feel pride in
the achievements associated with the names
of their forefathers both in Victoria and also
in New South Wales-


"
' ■ ** *4
The late Mr. T. C. Harwood
The late Thomas Charles Harwood
The biography of the late Thomas
Charles Harwood supplies an excellent
illustration of the manner in which our
early settlers progressed in professional life
in a similar manner to their fellow pioneers
in both agricultural, pastoral and business
pursuits.
Born on the seventh day of May in the
year 1825, the late Mr. Harwood was a true
“Cockney” for he was born “within sound
of Bow Bells” and was the elder son in a
family of two sons and six daughters.
Prior to undertaking the great adven-
ture of the journey to this country he was
in practice as a Solicitor at St. John's
Wood, London, as indeed was also his
brother Joseph. During this period of his
career he was married and, at the time of
his coming to Victoria, in 1851, the couple
had a daughter who was born in the year
1849.
The young newcomer allowed himself
to be lured to the diggings, but, in a very
short while, he re-entered the legal profes-
sion by setting up in practice in Geelong.
Throughout the ensuing years his pro-
gress was phenomenal and, following a
period during which he was in practice on
his own, he went into partnership with the
late C. A. Woolley and such partnership
was retained until that gentleman retired
and went to England to live. Thereafter
the late Mr. Harwood was again in partner-


The late Mrs. Harwood
ship, this time with the late E. Sandford
until the latter gentleman withdrew in
order to take up important work in the
Titles Office.
After practising for some time alone the
late Mr. Harwood went on a trip to Eng-
land where he remained for about three
years, leaving his practice in the charge of
the late Mr. William Higgins. Following
his return he took into partnership his son-
in-law, the late Mr. F. R. Pincott and at a
still later date this partnership purchased
the connection of the old established firm
of Taylor, Buckland and Gates.
During these years the late Mr. H. P.
Douglas, D. F. Griffiths, and E. E. Wilson
also became partners in the firm
The late Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Charles
Harwood had a family of seven daughters
and five sons of whom three survive at the
time of our going to press in the Misses
Leila Emily Harwood, Rosa Eleanor Plar-
wood and Mabel Alice Harwood. Of these
the last named is resident in Sydney whilst
he former are in residence at their home
“Comely Bank,” Newtown, Geelong.
At the time of his death in the vear 1912
the late Mr. Harwood had attained a posi-
tion or respect, esteem and prominence
which was a fit reward for his life of ser-
vice and uprightness of character. He was
tor some years a member of the Legislative
Council and occupied the position of Chair-
man of Committees in that body. In addi-
tion to many othei positions of importance
he was a well-known and prominent Free-
mason, and he was also for many years
to the time of his death Chancellor to the
Bishop of Gippsland.
It is a matter for regret that there is
no member of the family remaining in this
State to carry on the ancient and honoured
name but it can truthfully be claimed that
his name will be remembered in Geelong
and District for generations to come as
representing the best in citizenship and
service.


i «
L. ’
W^UBmsk
The late C. J. F. Campbell.
Air. W. A. Campbell
The Campbell Family, of New South Wales
and South Australia
One of the most distinguished pioneers
of Australia was C. J. F. Campbell. He
was a scion of one of Scotland’s oldest
families, the Campbells of Melfort, Argyll-
shire. The chief of this clan is the present
Duke of Argyll. The branch of the clan
to which C. J. F. Campbell was directly
descended was the Campbells of Lochend,
formerly of Ardeonarg and Kilpunt, Perth-
shire.
It was in 1821 that John Campbell and
his wife Annabella established the Austra-
lian branch of the family in which year
they arrived in New South Wales. They
were granted a large area of land and lived
at Bungarabee, between Parramatta and
Penrith and their estate was devoted to
stock raising. Their eldest son. General Sir
John Campbell was knighted for special
military services in India. John Campbell
senior, died within six years of the landing-
in Sydney and was the first man interred in
the Parramatta Cemetery. His wife died
one year previously. Charles James Fox
Campbell, another son came with his parents
from Scotland in 1821. After finishing his
education he devoted himself to pastoral pur-
suits. Dalmahoy, another son, became a
Stock and Station Agent in a large way in
Victoria.
Bungarabee is now a show place about
seven miles out from Parramatta and con-
tains twenty rooms and forty loose boxes.
The place was used for breeding re-mounts
for the Indian Army between 1821 and 1826.
He was a close friend of Captain
Charles Sturt and accompanied him for a
short distance on one of his many histori-
cal expeditions. On his memorable jour-
ney of 1845-6 into the interior he named a
creek Campbell’s Creek after his friend.
In 1838 C. J. F. Campbell removed to South
Australia travelling with one of the over-
land pioneering parties with stock from
Sydney to Adelaide in that year. On arri-
val in South Australia, Mr. Campbell estab-
lished a town house at Campbelltown, on
the River Torrens. Campbelltown is now
a flourishing suburb of Adelaide. He en-
gaged extensively in pastoral work and was
a keen sportsman; a pack of staghounds
were kept at his estate “Lochend” to hunt
kangaroos and wild dogs. His son Wil-
liam possesses a horn given to his father
as Master of Hounds. Mr. Campbell was


Mrs. W. A. Campbell
an immensely powerful man and on one
occasion carried a pony on his back for fifty
yards of a one hundred yards race and then
won.
Mr. Campbell married Martha, sister
of that well-known pastoralist, Philip Levi.
In pastoral circles C. J. F. Campbell
was associated with other notable men such
as C. B. Fisher and G. F. Angas. His first
venture into the pastoral industry of South
Australia was a partnership with Mr.
Robert Robinson, known as Encounter Ray
Bob, who subsequently settled in New
Zealand where he amassed a large fortune
and because of his habit of paying cash for
everything was called Ready Money Robin-
son. These two men took up the Hill River
country years before the advent in that dis-
trict of C. B. Fisher and J. H. Angas and
in 1844 they had 1,400 head of cattle on it.
Situated on the Murray, the North West
Bend Station was the most notable of Mr.
Campbell’s properties. It had an area of
361 square miles, and at the time of Mr,
Campbell’s death in 1859, it carried about
14,000 sheep, 3,000 cattle, and 90 horses.
Mr. Campbell’s untimely death occur-
red on March sth, 1859, on his North West
Bend Station, at the age of forty-eight
pears. He was drawing a cork from a
bottle when the latter burst causing a slight
injury to one of his hands, which was fol-
lowed by erysipelas. His sons were Philip
Charles John, Frederick Lionel, Edmund
Dalmahoy and William Alexander of whom
the latter survives.
William Alexander Campbell, the fourth
son of the late C. J. F. Campbell, was born
at the family seat “Lochend”, Campbell-
town in 1857. He was educated under J.
L Young at the Adelaide Education Insti-
tute and later at St. Peter’s College, Ade-
laide. In 1873 he entered pastoral life
under his cousin N. E. Phillipson who was
manager of Beltana Station for Sir Thomas
Elder. After two years at Beltana he went
to Blanchewater and later to Lake Hope,
these properties also belonging to Sir
Thomas. Then decided to go to the North
Western portion of South Australia where
for ten years he was engaged in pioneering
work. During this time he was associated
with some of those hardy men who opened
up this new country.
In 1905 he retired from active work
and took a trip to Scotland in connection
with his interests there, making contact
with relatives of the Campbell family
thronghout England and Scotland. After
his return to Australia for a while he made
a second trip to Scotland in 1908 where he
stayed until 1920.
He married Miss Phillipson, daughter
of one of the oldest pioneer families in Ade-
laide. This family arrived in 1838 and ac-
quired large areas of city property which
is still in the hands of the family.
Another branch of the Campbell family
owned the station country on which Can-
berra, the Federal Capital is situated.
St. John’s Church, Canberra was erec-
ted by the Campbell family of Yass and is
to-day one of the oldest Church of England
buildings in Australia.
The Campbells are “Founders of
Australia” in every sense of the word.


*■ lfe.TT \ g5;|
« v '
B| 31'
fi % M 8j~ -*■ IMfe^
py*tf^^Sife -,ti< * fe 4 iir “ w: w '
The Daw Family of South Australia
The founders of the Daw family, John
\\ ickham and his wife Helen Orianna (nee
Compson) came from England in the
“Winchester” in the year 1838.
Mr. Daw attended the first land sale
in London of South Australian land and
purchased 1,000 acres at £1 per acre,
situated four or five miles south of Adelaide.
(On this property he and his wife, on their
arrival in the State, immediately settled,
pitching their first camp on the spot now
known as Daw’s Corner, St. Marvs. Later
a cottage was built some distance from the
‘Corner” and occupied until the family
requirements outgrew its size, when a
larger home was erected on the site of the
original camp. The cottage and surround-
ing acres were sold to J. W. Babbidge who
eventually demolished the cottage and built
the well-known Babbidge Castle—possibly
the first concrete structure in the State.
John Wickham Daw presented to his
parish the land on which St. Mary’s Church.
South Road, stands and in its churchyard
he and his wife were laid to rest in the years
1871 and 1872 respectively.
Children of Frank C. Daw and W. A. Robertson
.vho represent the 4th generation of Daw and ths
6th generation of Dunn,
A family of six sons and one daughter
settled in various parts of South and
Western Australia John at Kapunda,
Henry, Edwin, and Emily (Mrs. Water-
man) in Adelaide, Joseph at Bridgetown.
W. A., E rank at Esperence Bay, W. A.
whilst Alfred Compson, the youngest son,
settled at Mount Barker taking up land and
establishing himself in business.
He did a great amount cf public
service for Mount Barker and occupied
many public positions including that of
Justice of the Peace. He held a seat on
the local council for many years and for
50 years was a warden at Christ Church.
In 1880 he married Clara Elizabeth
McKenzie—a descendant of the Dunn
pioneers—and reared a family of six
daughters and four sons, namely Lucy
Compson, Matron of the Adelaide Hospital,
Marjory Compson, wife of W. A. Robertson
of Chowilla Station, River Murray, Alfreda
Compson, now Mrs. Robert Clezy of Karra-
coorte, Mary Compson who married Hetley
Waters of Renmark, Joanna, now Mrs. Roy
Gooden of Heathpool, Adelaide, Dorothy
Compson, wife of W. E. Cornish, Castle-
maine, Victoria, Frank C. of “Fairview,”
Lucindale, Reginald C., Pingelly, W.A.,
Alfred Compson of Bridgetown, W.A. and
David Compson of Adelaide.
The grandchildren of Mr. and Mrs.
Daw, of whom there are twenty, represent
the sixth generation of the Dunn family
who have been resident in South Australia.
It is interesting to note that on Mr. A.
C. Daw’s property which had been heavily
top-dressed with stable manure, the first
Subterranean Clover Seed was collected
and put on the market as Mount Barker
Clover.
Mr. Daw died on 17th December, 1924.
His widow is residing at Mount Barker.


% *"■■
'jrVnm
* |«fcF f
I ■ ||
• *
.„rmm>**
jH ■ m ,J|L
y ■ ;mh*^
y S-Wm .'/ ■ * {Ka Hfc"
bBSp. i Mi&S a
\ * Japp " J|
«.
Mpr |*7 ...
-*✓
fir V- ■* . u >< it
»|<
P * ■'■~~'ki ' ■* '* '■; I
r/Tfi |S^‘“’
iJi 1 I , w
:.Mg M K M «?
Sp M * * «& 9|.
i IB # -*»<# v K K'
1/ J Iff y : MtS6t-
mw m Pg#~ /
Mr. A. 0. Daw, J.P.
Frank C. Daw,
Eldest son of A. C. Daw.
Mrs. A. C. Daw
Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Daw
(founders of the family)


The late Charles Beal
The late Charles Beal
A true pioneer since 1838 and founder of the
Town of Winchelsea.
It is proposed by the Historian to allow
this biography to assume an unusual form
as to the principal matter contained herein.
It is so very seldom that the opportunity
occurs to reproduce the very words used,
and impressions gathered, by our earliest
of pioneers from the day of their embarka-
tion for Australia almost to the time of their
passing, that those responsible for the pub-
lication of this Work feel nothing but pleas-
ure at the present task.
The following extracts from the diary
of the late Mr. Charles Beal werp written
down by his daughter—Miss Annie Beal—
at his dictation and furnish a great deal of
illumination pertaining to the olden days to
those of us who have the desire to read,
mark, learn, and inwardly digest the true
meaning of that most glorious word in Aus-
tralian history—namely, “PIONEER.”
The late Mr. Charles Beal was born in
the year 1821 on the fourth day of May, at
Sandwich in the County of Kent, England
He was the second son of Thomas and
Eliza Beal and his father was a corn and
hop merchant of Mark Eane, London.


‘:, t .;'. mi
i v -^■.x'^t#
' ' Afrr
'
m
W H| Hg H
;. i. nX/tir
The late Mrs. Amy Beal,
And now follow extracts from the diary
already mentioned —
“Not settling down to office work, at the
age of nearly seventeen I made up my mind
to come to Van Dieman’s Land and started
from London on the twenty-third day of
February in the “Wave”—3so tons, Captain
E. Goldsmith, with about fourteen passen-
gers and live stock, consisting of two horses,
two bulls, one cow. twenty-two sheep,
twelve pigs and two dogs. The horses
were housed on the deck with the cow, and
two bulls in the long boat on studs. The
pigs were under the long boat on each side
of the fresh water casks which were stored
and served to keep the pigs in the sty. The
latter were kept clean by the water washing
over the decks as it did almost continu-
ously. The sheep were in pens made on
deck as also were the dogs. The hay was
under tarpaulins on deck. One horse died
on the voyage but the other animals all
arrived in good health.
“On the passage we put in to Symons
Bar for water after having passed close to
the ship “Devonshire” homeward bound
from India. On board was my eldest
brother whom I had not seen for two years
—I mention this as a singular coincidence—
after seeing him I felt homesick but it soon
passed away. We reached Hobart Town
on the seventeenth of July, 1838, making
one of the quickest passages on. record.


Having letters of introduction to the
Governor, Sir John Franklin, and other
gentlemen, expected to obtain work easily
but labour was so cheap that, after nine
months stay in Hobart Town, hearing much
about Port Phillip, determined to go there
and start again.
“After fourteen days passage our schoo-
ner, the “Adelaide,” 180 tons, Captain Smith
(afterwards lost in the “Maria” with wife
and all hands), duly arrived with her twenty-
hree passengers. On the voyage over we
were stuck amongst seaweed in Bass Strait
for two days. Arriving in Port Phillip
hey made fast to the ti-tree at the juncture
t the \ arra and Saltwater rivers. It took a
fellow passenger (Thomas Wells) and my-
self two hours to break through the scrub
and arrive in Melbourne on the third day of
April, 1839.
“My first situation was as clerk at forty
pounds per annum to E. M. Sayers & Co'.,
Importers of timber and produce from
Fan Dieman’s Land There were but few
licenses in Collins Street—“ The Club,” built
by John Pascoe Fawkner on the site of the
present Union Club Hotel (now the A.M.P.
buildings—Ed.), The “Lamb Inn,” now
Scott s Hotel, but at that time built of wea-
therboard, wattle and dab, and, to get to it
you had to go up six feet of stone steps.
1 he present billiard room at Scott’s is the
original level. “The British” in King Street
and the “Horse and Jockey” in Little Bourke
Street completed the list. The Police office
was in Market Square and Captain Lons-
dale—Supt. of Port Phillip—lived on the
Wrra near where the present Richmond
stands. The Commissioner of Crown Lands
Hr. Powlett, and the Postmaster, Mr. Kelsh,
lived in a small cottage in Little Collins
Street, containing four rooms. Mr. James
Smith—actuary of the Savings Bank —con-
ducted service in a weatherboard building
with no flooring, on the site of the present
St. James. The land offices were near
Spencer Street,.made of dab and wattle and
sod with no floor and deal boards for tables,
whilst the principal officers were Messrs.
Hoddle and Doctor McArthur.
“The merchants of note were W. F. A,
Rucher & Co., P. W. Welsh & Co; Strau-
ghan & Co.; Hine & Co.; and McCabe & Co.
The doctors were McCrae and Cousins who
were also Government Doctors—(there then
follow details of locations of the banks and
churches which would take too much space
for the present publication).
After staying nine months in Mel-
bourne I came to Geelong in 1840 and was
employed as clerk to Mr. Mack at the
# Wool Pack”—there were only two Inns
m Geelong, this one in North Geelong and
another in South Geelong called the
Retreat. The journey took two days in a
little craft called the “Devonshire.”' The
first day found us at the juncture of the
arra and Saltwater Rivers, the next night
at Point Henry on the Bar and the next
morning at Corio. This vessel carried the
mails and a bag was hung up into which all
the letters were put with money for postage.
Captain Sutton made a list of names who
wanted him to call at Melbourne offices.
Ihe vessel did not run regularly and the
passengers had to cook for themselves and
sleep on the cargo if the cabin was full—
which, as it only contained two bunks, was
very often. In Corio there were three
stores kept by Messrs Timms, Champion
and Grey. Doctor Clarke was also there.
The Customs Officer was Mr. Butterworth.
There was a Wesleyan Chapel in Yarra
Street. There were no brick buildings, the
Watchhouse at South Geelong, near the
Barwon was of logs. The Breakwater was
being made. Captain Fyans was P.M. and
C. C. Laird was Superintendent. Mr. Addi-
son was J.P. The Presbyterian Minister.
Reverend A. Lowe, lived at South Geelong


and held services in the Derwent Company’s
stores. David Fisher was their superinten-
dent. Doctor Thomson lived over the
Barwon, he who afterwards acted as first
Mayor of Geelong. Mr. W. Roadknight
also lived at South Geelong, having a
Station to the westward of Geelong, and was
Superintendent for Mr. Henry Hopkins of
Plobart Town.
“In December, 1842, I joined Mr. Tre-
beck and went to the Barwon (now called
Winchelsea) and built the Barwon Hotel
but, just as it was finished a bush fire swept
across the plains and destroyed almost all
of it but we again started building and this
time it was finished without any mischance
befalling it and two years later we
obtained a license. It was very hard
work for many years. About 1846
Messrs Thomas Austin, Henry Hopkins
and a few neighbours and ourselves built
the first stone church in the interior (it is
now used as a Sunday School, we thought
it a grand building) and it was formally
opened by Bishop Perry and used by clergy-
men and other Protestant denominations.
I still remember the happy days spent there
and feel proud that the old firm of Beal &
Trebeck founded Winchelsea. In 1853 we
rented from Charles Ayrey the Mount Gelli-
brand station for which we paid Government
£1 per year and an assessment paid half-
yearly for sheep, twopence; horses and
cattle, sixpence per head. The station was
fully stocked and the lease was for seven
years.
“In May or June, my father, mother and
sister came out. My parents lived with
me until their deaths and my sister till 1854
when she married Trebeck—a few days later
I married Miss Amy Murch. In 1860, Tre-
beck and I separated—the property was
divided —he went to Sydney and I purchased
the station for £14,000 from Ayrey and
Nichol who were Executors for Charles
Ayrey. In December, 1860, Julia Ayrey
(daughter of the late Charles Ayrey) who
was under our charge, married P. F. Mac-
donald and went to live in Queensland.
In the same year —1860 —the Govern-
ment opened all the land leased and not sold
.ipon the run as a farmers’ common for Selec-
tion. I lost nearly all the Station but after
some years got together 6,600 acres which
I still hold. For some time I rented from
Mr. J. F. Straughan, Mount Mooleric Estate
which contains Mount Gellibrand and was
originally in the present Gellibrand Estate
—bought in 1860 by Mr. Straughan when
it was sold by the Government.
“My nearest neighbours were Messrs
Dennis brothers, (Alexander and William)
whom I have known for many years, a very
worthy and good family, I may here state
they arrived in Port Phillip in 1840. The
first lady settled in the district was Mrs.
Hugh Murray, in 1838.
“In 1868 I was appointed a Justice of
the Peace and territorial Magistrate (under
Sir Charles Sladen’s ministry), and I joined
the Shire Council of Winchelsea in 1865 and
left after three years to join the Shire Coun-
cil of Colac in August, 1869. After having
been President of the Shire for two terms I
received an Address on my retirement in
1882. I let my station to Messrs. Trang-
mar and Austin for seven years and retired
to borne, where I had built a home a few
years before and enlarged it on our arrival,
on August 4th, 1886.”
And so finishes this wonderful old record
of Old Victoria. What memories must
such as these lines revive in the minds of
some of our old citizens.
The late Mr. Beal was made a member
of the Royal Geographical Society and a
Government Commissioner of the borne
Water Trust in 1887. As he was returning
to borne from a meeting of the Commission
held at Winchelsea on Thursday, the
twelfth day of January in the year 1888. he
met his death in a coach accident as a result


of the failure of the brakes to act on the
last hill within a short distance of his home.
This accident, occurred on Saturday, 14th
January. The late Mr. Beal had a family
H nine children of whom five daughters
survive. At the time of his death he was
aged sixty-six years. So much could be
written of his activities that it is totally im-
possible to enumerate his wonderful value
to his adopted country. It is good to be
able to record that the names of both the
late Charles Beal and his wife Amy, are to
be commemorated in the Church at Birrc-
gurra by virtue of the following tablet which
carries its own message to a world which
certainly needs every aid in remembering for
all time such as those whose names appear
thereon—
To the Glory of God
and
In memory of Sir Charles Sladin and
Charles Beal,
both Founders of this Church.
This Bell, an historic relic of the first
Christian Mission to the Victorian Abori-
gines at Buntingdale, near Birregurra, is
given by the Family of the late Charles and
Amy Beal.
The five surviving daughters mentioned
above are as follow —
Mrs. Alice Edith Kenrick, wife of
Captain Hubert Kenrick, R.N.R., who was
awarded the 0.8. E. for outstanding services
to the Trade JJivision of the Admiralty dur-
ing the Great War. Their son, Mr. Wynn
Kenrick, has also a daughter, thus making
the fourth generation of the Beal family in
Australia. The family are at present in
residence at “Wynn Hall,’’ Ruabon, North
Wales.
Miss Annie Eliza Beal who is in resi-
dence at “ Yamowin,” borne, and who
has so kindly made available to the historian
the diary herein quoted.
Eleanor Amy—Mrs. Alec. Thompson—
of Melbourne. A son of this union, the
late Alexander Charles Thompson, was bur-
ied at sea after a brilliant career in the first
Flying Corps, during which he was men-
tioned in despatches and won for himself a
reputation in keeping with the honoured
stock from which he was descended.
Miss Ada Murch Beal, of “Llandoo,”
Eorne.
Mrs. Blanche Beatrice Settle, of Cam-
berwell. Of her union there is one son—
also a returned member of the A.l.F.—who,
in turn, has one son and one daughter. The
family are in residence at Camberwell.
Throughout the territory covered by the
activities of the late Charles Beal, his name
lives and will continue to live as one who
gave of his utmost in the cause of his fellows.
We are pleased and, indeed, proud to be
enabled to thus enter his name on the Roll
of “The Founders of Australia.”


■. -- . spspp;'- i '
’ - --- ■ i** /t
_ ., , V./ r.iDt I o THE LATE M * s J W CAIRE
The late Mr J W CAIRE J P
■ ,\ *t* "'" • " '* ' A -.-. ' .ME |
Mrs W. J A LYKKE
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


The History of the Black Family,
of South Australia.
W. E. Black arrived in South Australia
in February, 1837, on the ship “Coroman-
del,” and shortly after arrival on February
22nd, 1837, his wife gave birth to a son who
has the distinction of being the first white
boy born in South Australia after it was
proclaimed a Province. This boy was
named William Josiah. His mother died
shortly after this event and W. F. Black
married Caroline Warren, a native of Eng-
land and there was a family of six children.
W. F. Black died in 1884 at the age of
75 years. His daughter, Louisa, married
J. W. Caire of Port Adelaide whose father
was an early arrival in South Australia.
After finishing his education J. W. Caire
entered business in Port Adelaide and was
associated with that town for many years
serving as a Councillor and Mayor of the
Corporation for several terms. During the
visit of the present King and Queen in
1901, J. W. Caire, as Mayor of Port Adelaide
had the honour of entertaining the Royal
Visitors and presenting them with the
casket on behalf of the Corporation and
people of Port Adelaide.
There was a family of five children, J.
W. Caire, deceased; Mrs. W. J. Lykke of
Myponga; Mrs. J. Crocker, of Alberton;
Mrs. J. D. Taylor, of Cheltenham, and W.
N. Caire, of Port Adelaide.
Louisa Caire married William John
Lykke, son of B. F. Lykke of Alberton.
Their son, William John Athol Lykke,
well known entertainer and radio person-
ality, is now associated with the Australian
Broadcasting Commission at their Adelaide
Stations 5 CL and 5 CK. He married
Lizette Foglia, a well known Adelaide
violinst, and they have a son, Athol Wil-
liam John, who represents the fifth gener-
ation of the Black family in Australia.
Having been associated with the State
for nearly 100 years, the Black family has
always been prominent in public activities
and occupies an honored place in the roll
of “Founders of Australia.”


1 ■ — . 1 - 1 > ■■
HL ap k R
I flj jKJBt"
. • .
Mrs JOHN GOW Mr. JOHN GOW. C.E. *
Cy/
JOHNSTONS
c f
OAKBANtA


The Johnstons of Oakbank, South Australia.
William Johnston with his wife and
family sailed from Greenock, Scotland on
the ship “Buckinhamshire” arriving in South
Australia in 1839. There was a family of
eight, William, Archibald, James, John,
Alexander, Robert, Andrew and Margaret.
James Johnston was born in Campbell-
town, Scotland in 1818 and on arrival in the
Province established in conjunction with his
brother, Andrew Galbraith Johnston, the
Oakbank Brewery, Oakbank. These two
brothers continued in partnership until 1886
when John Disher Johnston, son of James
Johnston, was admitted into the firm. In
the same year A. G. Johnston died and, when
James died in 1891, their respective sons,
Andrew Deans and William Galbraith joined
the firm which, in 1901, was merged into a
limited liability Company trading as J. &
A. G. Johnston Limited. This was one of
the first breweries established in South
Australia.
James Johnston, snr., married Marga”et
Disher of Liberton, Edinburgh, Scotland
and there was a family of fourteen, twelve
of whom, William, John, Elizabeth, Janet,
Margaret, Robert, Andrew, Mary Wilson,
Alexander, James, Frederick and Ernest
reached mature years. Only Alary and
Frnest survive.
Alary Wilson Johnston married John
Gow, C.E., a native of Scotland whose career
is given here. There is a daughter Mar-
garet Bruce who married H. A. Shierlaw
and has a family of five, John and Norman
(twins), Joseph, and Mary and Alison
(twins). These children represent the
fifth generation of the Johnston family in
South Australia. Few families have had
a longer association with the State than the
Johnstons of Oakbank, whose early interests
in that district are still retained by the
family.
The famous Onkaparinga Racecourse
is situated on part of the Johnston property
at Oakbank. In both the commercial and
sporting life of the State the Johnstons
occupied a prominent position.
Mr. and Mrs. J. Gow are now living in
retirement at Victor Harbour, South Aus-
tralia.
John Gow was born at Kirkaldy, Scot-
land in 1860 and served his articles in a
Civil Engineer’s office and at the age of
twenty-one arrived in South Australia. He
entered the Surveyor-General’s office (con-
tract department) in 1881 and in 1883 joined
the Hyrdaul'c Engineer’s Department. Here
he devoted himself to Deep-Drainage work
at Adelaide, Port Adelaide, Semaphore and
many Adelaide suburbs. He was also
employed on surveys for water supplies in
various districts including Barossa (Mar-
tin’s scheme) Barossa, Warren, Happy Val-
ley, Milbrook and Mount Remarkable.
He supervised most of the Port Ade-
laide Deep Drainage Scheme including the
pumping station. John Gow for ten years
was resident Engineer of Sewers and con-
structed water supplies at Mannum, and
Hawker, and a reservoir at Hindmarsh
Valley to supply Victor Harbour, Elliot,
Goolwa and Encounter Bay. He retired
from the Government service in 1927.
In every branch of sport, including fish-
ing, golf, shooting, etc., John Gow has taken
a prominent part.


' ■ '■)
—
Mr. Herbert Allen, J.P.
Mrs. H. Allen.
The Allen Family, of “Waverley Park,”
Willunga, South Australia
This family has been associated with
the State since 1847 when John Allen with
his parents arrived on the ship “Duchess of
Northumberland. ’ John Allen first entered
commercial life in Adelaide and then took
up farming pursuits at Willunga. When
the Victorian Goldfields were discovered he
with a party went to Bendigo to the d'g-
gings and his success in gold finding en-
abled him to return to Willunga and pur-
chase land there in 1855. Slate deposits
were found on portion of the property which
John Allen developed and worked up a
large connection in this product, supplying
the Adelaide market. He later disposed of
his quarries and devoted himself to agricul-
ture in which he was very successful. He
was a most public spirited citizen and served
as a councillor of the local District Council
and was a Justice of the Peace for many
rears, Pfe married Jane, daughter of the
late Will iam Reed who, like John Allen.
was a native of Cornwall.
Herbert Allen, J.P., is the third son of
the above and was born at Willunga in 1864.
.Alter finishing his education at Whinham
College, Adelaide, he returned to the family
property and has been eng’ag'ed in farnfi’vr
and grazing ever since. Like his father
ITerbert Allen has given much time to public
affairs. He was a member of the Willunga
District Council for four terms. He has an
unique record in being a life member of the
local Rifle, Bowling and Football Clubs. He
donated the ground for the Bowling Club of
which he is a Foundation Member. He is
connected with all the sporting bodies in the
district and is a trustee of the Recreation
Ground, also of the Willunga Agricultural
Society. For twenty years he was Presi-
dent of the local Cricket Club, also of the
local branch of the Liberal Union.


Herbert Allen married Caroline Lass-
cock, daughter of Thomas Lasscock of WiL
lunga, who with his wife arrived in 1848 and
there are four daughters, Ruby Maud, Mar-
garet Rose (Mrs. McCallum of Carpa),
Kathleen (Mrs. R. Oliver of McLaren Vale),
and Bessie Jean (Mrs. Bagster of Salisbury).
The nine grandchildren are Archibald
Herbert and Keith Oliver; Allen and Anth-
ony Bagster, Nella, Betty Rhonda and Kath-
leen McCallum. These represent the fifth
generation of the Allen family in Australia.
Mrs, Allen is a keen croquet player.
The Allen family hold a record in the fact
that the grandparents on both sides cele-
brated their diamond wedding anniversaries.
Waverley Park, their home, is cele-
brated for its delightful surroundings and
has been the subject of many paintings and
sketches for its scenic beauty. The home-
stead is one of the oldest in the State.
This family has won an honoured place
in the roll of “Founders of Australia.”
The Johnstons of “ Pirramimma,” McLaren
Vale, South Australia.
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, William Johnston, arrived
in South Australia on the ship “Bucking-
hamshire” from Campbelltown, Scotland,
in 1839. He was accompanied by his wife
and family, two of whom, James and And-
rew, founded the well-known Oakbank
Brewery at Oakbank, South Australia.
James Johnston married Margaret
Disher of South Australia and they had a
large family of whom two survive.
Alexander Campbell, son of James
Johnston, was born in 1868 and received
his education first at Hahndorf College,
Adelaide, and, later, at Scotch College,
Melbourne. After some years of commer-
cial experience in Adelaide, A. C. Johnston
in 1892 purchased part of the present pro-
pertv of Pirramimma.
At this time there were only a few
acres planted with vines which was later
increased both by purchase and planting
until it became one of the largest privately
owned vineyards in the State, it being some
200 acres in extent.
The property is situated in a wonder-
fully fertile valley about a mile from the
township of McLaren Vale. The output
of wine from “Pirramimma,” has, for the last
twenty years been exported to the well-
known firm of W. & A. Gilbey Ltd., of
Great Britain.
A. C. Johnston married Miss Emy
Hammond Smith, daughter of the late
Alfred and Emma Smith. Mrs. Smith was
a daughter of James Partridge, C.E., who
arrived in South Australia in 1847 under
engagement from the British Government
as trigonometrical surveyor to the South
Australian Government. His experience
in this profession was gained with the
Royal Engineers in England, and he re-
tained his post under the South Australian
Government for some thirty years.
Mrs. James Partridge, nee Hammond,
was a daughter of the Reverend William
Hammond of Sussex, England.
Mr. and Mrs. A. C. Johnston’s children
are Alexander Hammond, Joyce Margaret
and Digby Hammond.
Alexander Hammond Johnston was
educated at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide,
and then joined his father on the property
of which he is now manager. He married
Constance Joyce, daughter of Mr. and Mrs.


F. L. Lillecrapp of Eden Valley and East
Adelaide, South Australia—thus joining
two pioneer families of South Australia.
Their son Alexander Angas represents the
fifth generation of the Johnstons in Austra-
lia.
Joyce Margaret married Richard
Forster Trott of Adelaide and McLaren
Vale, South Australia, eldest son of Mr.
and Mrs. F. T. Trott of Exeter, Devon-
shire, England. Their son is named
Richard Gregory.
Digby Hammond Johnston was also
educated at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide,
and is now secretary of the firm of A. C.
Johnston Limited.
Alexander Campbell Johnston was a
man of outstanding personality, and, in
addition to making a success of his own
work, devoted a large portion of his ener-
gies to promoting the prosperity of the
McLaren Vale district, which he loved so
well.
For some years A. C. Johnston was a
member of the Directorate of J. and A. G.
Johnston Limited Oakbank Brewery, Oak-
bank, South Australia; and also of The
Lion Brewing and Malting Company, North
Adelaide, South Australia. After his death,
which occurred in 1932, his son, Alexander
Hammond, was invited to both positions,
and he is now a member of these Director-
ates.
Alexander Campbell Johnston was a
Councillor and President of the local Dis-
trict Council, and for years was a Justice
of the Peace. He took an active part in
advancing the welfare of McLaren Vale.
Every movement in this direction received
his practical support; in addition, he was a
keen sportsman, his activities covering a
wide range including cricket, golf, tennis,
fishing, etc., and he was a noted gunshot.
“Pirramimma” is now merged into a
private company trading as A. C. Johnston
Limited.
Few families have had a longer or more
honorable association with South Austra-
lia.
“Pirramimma” The Residence of A. C. Johnston, Hsq.


I T-, . , v LLM JOHNSTON \ Ms JAMES PARTRIDGE
I M«» E M SMITH N’E£ PARTRIDGE- £ f - I .. A , - , , _,
Mr$ A C JOHNSTON
iOHNstoN ipp? r
M« A H JOHNSTON M« O H JOHNSTON Master ALEX ANGAS JOHNSTON
The Johnstons of ‘'Pirramimma.’’ McLaren Vale, South Australia
The Johnstons of “Pirramimma.” McLaren Vale, South Australia


f'_%' Jl 4 : 1 fBks
~ f* Jp p jjpgaBBfo
JB % VgaWf
y-.,_
The late Thomas Mudge.
The late John Mudge.
The Mudge Family, of the West Coast,
South Australia
Of the early families who pioneered the
far West Coast of South Australia, the name
of Mudge stands out prominently.
John Mudge was one of the first police
constables at Streaky Bay and on his retire-
ment from the force conducted the blinders
Hotel in that town. In addition he had
acquired a large area of grazing land. His
wife was one of the first white women to
reside in the district and was renowned for
her work amongst the sick of the district.
She was at all times ready to answer the
call to relieve suffering and many journeys
were made by her in bullock drays o\ er
rough roads on her errands of mercy.
Thomas Mudge, their son, was born at
Streaky Bay in 1868 and after completing
his education joined his father in his various
enterprises. Together they converted some
2.000 acres of Mallee scrub country into
arable land. This was the first area to be
prepared for the plough and is the pioneer
farm of the district. On the death of his
father, Thomas, in conjunction with other
members of the family increased their hold-
ings and engaged in extensive grazing and
agricultural operations besides acquiring the
freeholds of other hotels in the district.
In 1890, Thomas Mudge married Cath-
erine Ester Grace daughter of Mr. S. Mont-
gomerie and there was a family of seven
children.
Thomas Mudge was a most public
spirited man and besides being a Councillor
of the District for some years was active in
promot ng the progress of the district. He
was a well-known and highly respected citi-
zen and died at the early age of sixty-one
years.
Thomas in partnership with his brother
Charley conducted Mail contracts for 25 to
30 years up until 1915, between Pt. Lincoln
and Streaky Bay (184 miles), twice a week;
Streaky Bay to Fowler’s Bay (180 miles),
once a week; Streaky Bay to Denial Bay
(80 miles), once a week; and from Streaky


Mr. J. Alwyn Mudge.
Bay to Yardea Station (108 miles). This
line of coaches took between 100 and 120
horses to run the various contracts. When
chaff became so expensive to buy in the
1914 drought they put on the first Motor
Mails.
M rs. Thomas Mudge died in 1935 at the
age of sixty-six. She was a much loved
woman and her charitable disposition en-
deared her to all with whom she came in
contact.
There are eight grandchildren who rep-
resent the fourth generation of the Mudge
family in South Australia.
John Alwyn Mudge, J.P., eldest son of
Thomas and Catherine Mudge was born at
Streakv Bav in 1891 and finished his edu
cation'at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide. In
1916 he joined the A.I.F. and served _ m
France until the end of the Wai returning
to Australia in 1919. He rejoined his
father in his various enterprises and married
Jessie Hillam, daughter of the late G. W.
Murray of Yalata Station. G. W. Murray
was a pioneer pastoralist of the West Coast.
In the early days Yalata Station covered
a vast area and under G. W. Murray’s man-
agement up to 140,0C0 sheep were shorn.
He was known as the “White Chief” of the
West Coast where his w r ork amongst the
blacks in enhancing their welfare will
always be remembered. His paternal care
towards early settlers in the far West Coast
did much to make their lot easier in the
early days.
The Mudge family have been associ-
ated with the district for over eighty years.
They have the distinction of being the lar-
gest cereal farmers in Australia. In one
year they cropped 7,7C0 acres of wheat and
2.000 acres of oats. This is generally con-
sidered to be the largest area put in crop by
any one concern in one season in the Com-
monwealth. They control some 30,000
acres of country.
J. Alwyn Mudge, like his father takes a
keen active interest in the welfare of the
district, and is a Justice of the Peace.
The other members of the family are
Ethel Margaret (Mrs. Ron Ballenger),
Thomas Oliver, Agnes Bell, Grace Emily
(Mrs. Dudley Hughes), Murray Spottis-
woode and Cyril Thevenard.


. .
The late John Bascomb.
Mrs. Bascomb, Senr.
The Bascombs of “ The Station,” Mount Wedge,
South Australia.
The Bascombs are one of the pioneer
families of the West Coast of South Aus-
tralia. John Bascomb, Senior, of Terre
Station, Mount Wedge, came to the State
in the early fifties, and eventually settled
on the West Coast. He was killed at Terre.
His son John was born at Mount Wedge
and educated at the Glenelg Grammar
School where he stayed until 1882. On his
return to the station he studied pastoral
work under his father for three years, and
then became manager of ‘Tungatta Station’
for the late Henry Pucknott, where he re-
mained some seven years. In 1896, in con-
junction with his brothers, “The Station.
Mount \\ edge was purchased, and he be-
came the owner of same in 1908. This pro-
perty lies 21 miles north-east of Elliston, and
was one of the early sheep stations to be
established on the West Coast.
John Bascomb, jnr., was a well-known
identity throughout the West Coast, most
of which he knew intimately. As a sports-
man he achieved an enviable reputation, and


■
John Bascomb and Family.
was a cricketer of fifty years standing. He
won, in 1881, the Goodfellow and Hele gold
medal for batting and bowling, and in 1504
he carried off the gold medal for the best
batting average of the Talia United Cricket
Club, of which he was captain for many
years.
His colours on the turf were most suc-
cessful, as he always had a string of good
thoroughbreds in training. John Bascomb
"was a Justice of the Peace and a Coun-
cillor of the Elliston District Council, and
did much to promote the welfare of his dis-
trict. A man of strong personality and
foresight, he was the leading light in pro-
moting an Air Service between Adelaide
and the West Coast.
“The Station,” Mount Wedge is about
20,000 acres in area devoted to wool grow-
ing; up to 23d per lb. ha*s been received for
wool from this property. The homestead
is equipped with all modern conveniences
and was one of the first to be fitted with
electric light.
John Bascomb’s second wife was Miss
Dunnage, daughter of Colin Campbell Dun-
nage, of Parkside, Adelaide, and there is a
family of three—Jessie, John and Lucy
Flinders. John Bascomb died in 1929 at
the age of sixty-five years.
John Bascomb, his son was born in 1917,
and educated at the Unley School and then
finished at the Urbrea Agricultural High
School and Roseworthy College, and is now
on the property.
The family has been associated with the
district for over seventy-five years, and has
won an honoured place on the roll of
“Founders of Australia.”


4pr
The late Mrs. Wilson
The late H. M. Wilson.
The late Hugh May Wilson of Shelford.
The late Mr. Htugh Wilson was born
at “Bredisholme,” Tanarkshire, Scotland, in
the year 1817 and, as a youth, journeyed
to Linlithgow where he was employed at a
mill as a pattern drawer—that is, a designer
of patterns for printing on calico. After
a few years at this work, and partly for
health reasons, he was sent to Paris for fur-
ther study in this line of activity.
However, he became dissatisfied with
the conditions of employment subsequent
to his return to Scotland and, in the year
1849, he sailed from the Port of Leith, Scot-
land, in the barque “Sarah” for the young
outpost of the Empire—Australia. The
“Sarah” was of six hundred tons, and the
journey occupied nearly four months, finally
arriving at Sydney in December of the
same year under the command of Captain
Wilson —such being a coincidence and no
relationship existing between the late Hugh
Wilson and the Captain.
The new settler was accompanied by his
sister Margaret and brother James, and some
conception of the conditions of travel in
those days may be gleaned from the fact
that there were no less than twenty-three
deaths from cholera during the voyage.
Being disappointed with the conditions
in Sydney, the party journeyed to this State
very shortly after their arrival per medium
of another sea voyage on the sloop “Agnes”
from Launceston, lasting three weeks.
Immediately on his arrival in Geelong, the
late Mr. Wilson obtained work for a local
storekeeper at a salary of twenty-six pounds
per year and, after some months of service
was informed by his employer that he had
given such satisfaction that he would re-
ceive an increase in salary of two pounds per
annum.
These conditions not measuring up to
the expectations of the young man, he re-


signed from the position and proceeded to
Shelford in the year 1851, and entered the
business community by taking over the local
store, and it was here that he was fated to
spend almost the entire balance of his life-
time.
The only period during wlr’ch he was
absent from Shelford was when he spent
about a year at the Ballarat diggings and
left his sister in charge of the busmess. His
activities at the diggings resulted in his
return with about two thousand pounds and,
with this capital, he built a store and hotel
at Teesdale. The new proposition was not
altogether a success following the inaugura-
tion of the Railway service between Geelong
and Ballarat and, after a few years, he sub-
let and later, sold the property.
A hen he left the Teesdale busmess he
immediately re-took possession of his Shcl-
ford property which had in the intervening
years remained under the management of
his sister and, in 1854, sent to the Old
Country for his other sister Euphemia, aged
twenty-two and his affianced bride, Joanna
Smart Nimmo, aged twenty-five, to come
out from their homes in Linlithgow and join
him.
This the two young women did, arriv-
ing on the “Medway”, a ship of 653 tons
under the command of Captain A. Mack-
wood, and on the twenty-second of Feb-
ruary, in the year 1854.
The couple were married immediately
on the arrival of the “Medway” and pro-
ceeded to Shelford where the family has
been represented to the present day and the
store still in the possession of members of
the family.
Of the union of the late Hugh Wilson
and his bride Joanna Smart Wilson, there
was a family of three sons and three daugh-
ters the particulars in brief of whom follow:
Miss Catherine Nimmo Wilson of
“Auverne,” Aberdeen Street, Geelong
The late Hugh May Wilson, of West
Australia.
The late Miss Margaret May Wilson
of Sh el ford.
Eliza Russell, who became Mrs. W. \ r .
Armstrong and is in residence at “Auverne,”
with her sister Catherine.
The late John Thomas Wilson, of Shel-
ford.
Ihe late Robert Alexander Wilson of
Shelford.
In all, there have been seven grand-
children of the union and there are also sev-
eral great-grandchildren at the present time.
It is a matter of record that, although
the late Hugh Wilson had no other given
name, he found there were so many people
named Hugh Wilson that, for convenience,
he adopted the second name of “May” and
his wide circle of friends at all times knew
him as “Hugh May Wilson”, the May hav-
ing been the maiden name of his late mother.
The late Mr. H. M. Wilson passed
away in 1894, in his seventy-eighth year,
whilst his widow survived him bv several
years and ultimately died at the age of
seventy-eight in the year 1905.
There are no records available pertain-
ing to the sister Margaret or the brother
James other than that the former became
Mrs. Andrew Cross of Davlesford.
The late Mr. H. M. Wilson represented
a class of early settler who did a great deal
more than appears on the surface towards
the building up of the wealth of this State
at a time When business undertakings were
in their infancy.


% * I
- *t
1
Mr. and the late Mrs. Sheridan
Mrs. Usher
Patrick Sheridan, “ Clareview,” El listen
South Australia,
In March, 1866, Michael and Mary
Sheridan, with Patrick Grady (father of
Mrs. Sheridan) and their four children,
sailed from Plymouth, England, on the ship
“Charlotte Gladstone”, arriving at Port
Adelaide in June of that year. Transhipp-
ing at Port Adelaide to the steamer “Lubra”
they landed at Port Lincoln, where Michael
Sheridan was employed in station work for
awhile, and later was engaged in road
making throughout Eyre Peninsula.
His son Patrick was born in County
Clare, Ireland, in 1860, and at an early age
started work with his father in road mak-
ing, later being employed in this and con-
tracting work, for many years.
At the age of sixteen, Patrick Sheridan
came to what is now known as Colton,
which at that time was not surveyed. He
was engaged in contract work on the pro-
perty of the late Dr. Browne. The whole
district was then virgin bush, and it was
about this time that the engineers surveyed
the Hundred of Coltan—the first to be sur-
veyed on this part of the West Coast.
Patrick Sheridan decided to settle here,
and purchased “Clareville”, a property of
640 acres, which he cleared and fenced and
devoted to mixed farming. This was one
of the first selections to be taken up. Dur-
ing the time he was getting his farm ready
for production Patrick Sheridan worked at
outside contracting for the Elliston District
Council for .some time,


The late Michael Sheridan
In 1891 he married Miss Margaret
Parte, daughter of the late Thomas Harte.
Ihey had a family of five, four of whom
survive:—Lincoln, Nora (Mrs. J. J. Nor-
ton. of Modbury) ; Patrick Gladstone and
Lena Agnes (Mrs. S. North of Pygery).
Patrick Sheridan is one of the few sur-
vivors of the first settlers in this district.
In addition to his “Clareville” farm, he is
interested in another property near Wir-
rula, North East of Streaky Bay. His two
sons, Lincoln and Patrick are working this
iand.
Mrs Sheridan died in 1911. There are
ten grandchildren who represent the fifth
generation of the Grady and fourth genera-
tion of the Sheridan families in Australia.
Patrick Sheridan is still working the
“Clareville” property at the age of seventy-
six.
His second wife was Miss Grace Fairley
Usher, daughter of the late John and Mary
Ann Usher of Colton, who were also pio-
neers of the district.
Mrs. M. A. Usher, the mother of the
present Mrs. Sheridan was a renowned
mid-wife of the West Coast. Left a widow
with a large family and no resources she
became mid-wife of the district and travelled
many hundreds of miles in all sorts of
primitive vehicles to help the new-comers
into the world.
Her patients were scattered over a vast
area and she was called at all hours to
attend her work.
At the same time she reared her family,
money was scarce in those days and re-
muneration for her work small.
To increase her income she also worked
by the day for the settlers as a washer-
woman, often walking miles to and from
her work with a child carried on her back.
A family of eight survived her.
Mrs. Usher was married at the Police
Station, Streaky Bay by Archdeacon Two-
penny, there being no church there in those
days.
She assisted over 200 children into the
world. Mrs. Usher saw the district in its
early days when the blacks and droughts
were obstacles to be overcome.
She died in 1926 at the age of 77 and
was mourned by several grandchildren of
those she attended at birth.


The late William Eckersley
The late William Eckersley of Gooroc, St. Arnaud and
Ballarat
with which is incorporated a brief history of his family.
To do justice to the particular branch
of the Eckersley family with which this
history mainly deals, it is best to introduce
to these lines the foundation of the Postle-
thwaite family in Victoria prior to arriving
at the point when these two old families
were united by virtue of inter-marriage
between members of the second generation-
The first member of the Postlethwaite
family to settle in this State was the late
John Postlethwaite, veterinary surgeon, who
came from his home in Westmoreland, Eng-
land, in the year 1858. He was an only son
of Isaac Postlethwaite, one of the old
squires of England, and, although skilled in
his calling, had joined his father in farming
operations on the family holdings prior to
making the voyage to the new land of
Australia.
Landing at Point Henry, he immedi-
ately proceeded to Mount Franklin in the
Smeaton district where he acted for a few
years as manager of a station property for
Mrs. Menzies—whose family name has been
perpetuated in the hotel in Melbourne so
well known throughout Australia. It is
worthy of recording that, during his jour-
ney out from England aboard the famous


Ip** -Jgll -V
Mrs. Mary Eckersley
sailing ship “Lightning” as a saloon pas-
senger, the veterinary surgeon attached to
the staff on the ship died and the late Mr.
Postlethwaite was offered —and accepted—
the position.
After a few years at Mount Franklin,
the late Mr- Postlethwaite took up land on
bis own account under the provisions of the
Duffy Act at Smeaton and proceeded to
work this holding until the year 1868 when
he was joined by his family from England
comprising three daughters and one son—
his wife, whom he had also left behind him
when he made his journey out, having died
in the year 1865. These children were :
Isabella Middleton, later Mrs. John
Eckersley, who died at the early age of
twenty-two years.
Annie Withers, who married Mr. John
Eckersley following the demise of her sister.
Of this union there was a family of three
daughters and two sons as follows: Thomas
Henry, Arthur John Lewis, Harriet Mary,
Gertrude Louisa (later Mrs. William Jones),
Mabel May (Mrs- D. L. Young).
Mary, Mrs. William Eckersley, of whom
further particulars follow at a later stage
of this history.
Lewis, married Louisa Bath, daughter
of the late Henry Bath of Ballarat and there
have been seven children of the union as
follows: Lewis Middleton, Robert Henry,
Raymond John, Claude Bath, Arthur
Elerick, Gladys Isabelle and Thomas Clyde.
Throughout the ensuing years the late
Mr. Postlethwaite remained on his property
until he attained the ripe age of eighty-nine
years and passed away in the year 1912.
His youngest daughter, Mary, was born
at Cocker House, Westmoreland, in the year
1856, close to the birthplace of the famous
poet Wordsworth. Aged but twelve years
when making the journey with her sisters
and brother from the Old Country, the
voyage was one calculated to strike terror


The Homestead, Gooroc, St. Arnaud.
into the hearts of the bravest- The ship
‘ The Tornado,” was a four masted sailer
and, with such a name, it was typical that
they should have struck storms of excep-
tional ferocity. They were battened down
below decks for three days and three nights
in succession, the bulwarks were washed
away as were also the masts. The pas-
sengers were made to drink three table-
spoonsful of porter daily to conserve their
strength. Mary and one of her sisters were
tied together at one stage when it appeared
certain that one and all would perish in the
raging seas. However, the ship—-tossed
about like a matchbox—somehow managed
to weather the storms and temporary masts
were erected by the crew when the turmoil
subsided. Their next troubles came from
the opposite extreme for they were be-
calmed for weeks at a time. Their supply
of fresh water was exhausted and they were
compelled to rely on the condensers. Even
with this supply all on board were rationed
on a most strict basis. After four-and-a-
half months of perilous travel they at last
reached these shores and the family were
re-united.
After eight years with their father
Lewis and Mary branched out on their own
accounts and selected land—32o acres each
at Coonooer Bridge, near St. Arnaud and
for the next five years worked in the true
pioneering fashion to build up their hold-
ings. It is impossible to do justice to the
spirit shown by these two battling against


almost insuperable obstacles but, by sheer
B 1 it, the\ eventually won out. In five years
hey had cleared half of their total holdings
and had well fenced the whole. In addi-
tion, the young girl found time to walk six
mles on Sunday to teach at Sunday School
Tactically carrying the entire responsibility
of that institution on her own shoulders,
I heir work was never ending and con-
tinued almost throughout the nights and
c. i\ s ti uly such efforts as the Founders of
Australia were called upon to expend for the
benefit of our modern generation. In the
} ear 1881 Miss Mary Postlethwaite was
married to Mr. William Eckersley, J.P. of
Giooroc, St. Arnaud, who was a son of the
1 te \\ illiam Eckersley who, in turn, came
from his home at Berry, near Manchester,
England, in the year 1862. Plis father
brought out his wife and six children with
him in the latter year and took up five
hundred acres of land in the Smeaton dis-
trict. It is a matter of interest to record
that the famous Berry Consols Extended
Gold Mine is situated on the property and
that one of the grandsons—Mr. James Me
Eorie is at present active on the mine in
collaboration with others interested.
On her marriage, the couple settled on
ber husband’s property at Gooroc, ten miles
bom her own holding and forthwith put the
same energy and ability into this holding as
lad been the case in the preceding years.
Commencing with six hundred and forty
acres, the property grew through the years
11,1 they had no less than four thousand
acres. A sectional view of the beautiful
homestead is reproduced in these pages.
They passed through the entire range
of farming activity and towards the
latter poition of their sojourn concentrated
more on the grazing industry. Mrs. Mary
Eckersley has a fund of anecdotes at her
disposal pertaining to the old days of striv-
ing and it is easy to visualise the trials and
tribulations through which our early pio-
neers passed on their way to their subse-
quent prosperity.
1 he late Mr. \\ illiam Eckersley, in
addition to being honoured by his fellows
in being appointed a Justice of the Peace,
won the sincere esteem and respect of all
with whom he was brought into contact for
his conscientious adherence to the highest
of principles. Some idea of his character
may be gleaned from the following brief
particulars. He was a preacher in the
Methodist Church for forty-two years;
Circuit Steward of Charlton Methodist
Church for twenty-nine years; Correspon-
dent to the Board of Advice for thirty years ;
First President of St. Arnaud Shire Hall
and Councillor for many years.
An example of the esteem with which
his fellows regarded his character, it may be
quoted that he was on many occasions
called upon to act as arbitrator whenever
disputes arose between citizens of the sur-
rounding districts. This course was fol-
lowed by many in preference to going to
court or taking legal advice—surely a
wonderful tribute to his ability and
character.
The late Mr. William Eckersley passed
away in the year 1932 having reached his
seventy-eighth year. He and his had the


comfort of having retired from activities on
the St. Arnaud property in the year 1913
when they settled in the present beautiful
family home “Albion,” 201 \\ endouree
Parade, Ballarat.
Of the union of Mr- and Mrs. William
Eckersley there was a family of three
daughters and one son as follows;
Miss Edith Emily Eckersley who is in
residence with her mother in Ballarat, and
of whom further particulars follow at a later
stage of this history.
Annie Winifred, Mrs. R. H. Strong of
Geelong.
Elizabeth Mirian, Mrs. J. F. Parish of
“Walland,” St. Arnaud.
Mr. William Herbert Eckersley, J.P., of
Ballarat, of whom further particulars also
follow.
There are at the present time ten
grand-children.
Of those named above, Miss Edith Emily
Eckersley has for several years shown her-
self well worthy of the traditions founded
by each of her parents. For several years
a Deaconess of the Pleasant Street Church
her work on behalf of her less fortunate
fellow creatures has been—and still is—an
example to all who may have in their power
to alleviate the sufferings of humanity. She
has been for many years a staunch helper
of the Ballarat Base Hospital and her name
is one to which affection and esteem has
become attached by one and all.
Also, Mr. William Herbert Eckersley
has, like his father before him, followed
primary pursuits as a Grazier on his pro-
pertv “Wetherby” near Ballarat, such pro-
perty being originally owned by the well-
known Heinz family of that city. As a
mark of respect his fellows paid him the
compliment of appointing him a Justice of
the Peace, thus in a further degree pointing
to him as a worthy scion of his late father.
Mr. W. H. Eckersley married Miss Phyllis
Twibell of Tasmania and there are three
daughters and three sons of the union.
Mrs. Mary Eckersley has, in addition
to her activities already named, taken a deep
interest in historical and biographical writ-
ings and can boast of no less than a thous-
and publications pertaining to this branch
of literature. Pier health is excellent and
constitutes a monument to her early days of
hard experience.
It is a matter for gratification that one.
such as Mrs. Mary Eckersley, who has given
of her best endeavours, in the days now
past, towards our present happy position in
the world, should be able to rest in quiet
retirement and ease having earned —and re-
ceived—the affection of all who know and
appreciate her deeds and character.
In concluding this brief outline of the
history of one of the true pioneering families
of Victoria, we can but echo the wish of
all with whom the members of this family
have been brought into contact—namely,
that the future of Australia may never rest
in the hands of citizens less better equipped
to serve her needs and, should this wish bo
granted, little fear need be entertained for
the future prosperity of our young and vig-
orous continent.


JOHN BARTON HACK.
It has been said that John Barton
Hack experienced vicissitudes, the like of
which would have utterly crushed many a
less brave and determined man. His
capacity for taking hard knocks would have
done credit to a champion pugilist,
although the comparision ill fits one who
came from good old Quaker stock. A few
months before his death, fifty years ago,
Mr. Hack published an autobiography, and
so it is comparatively easy to trace his
remarkable career. He, with a consider-
able family, was engaged in a lucrative
business in the south of England when in
1836 his health became seriously impaired.
"A few months in Madeira,” was the doc-
tor’s recommendation, but at Portsmouth
he happened to board H.M.S. “Buffalo,”
then fitting out to take the first Governor
of South Australia to the new Province. On
that vessel he met Captain Lipson, Naval
Officer and First Harbour Master of South
Australia, who was full of the prospects
of the Antipodes. Mr. Hack had alreadv
read Colonel Torrens’ book on South
Australian colonisation and had interviewed
Edward Gibbon Wakefield at the Commis-
sioner’s office, Adelphi Terrace, London,
and Captain Hart, who had purchased the
ship “Isabella” for Mr. Griffiths, of Laun-
ceston, and was about to take her out. A
quick decision saw him and his wife, his
six children, and his brother Stephen on
fioard the “Isabella” outward bound. The
vessel was boarded unexpectedly at the
eleventh hour by Sir John Jeffcott, South
Australia’s first judge (afterwards drowned
at the Murray mouth), who had to be
accommodated on a sofa in the saloon. He
made the best of the inconveniences, “and
proved to be a pleasant and gentlemanly
man.”
Van Dieman’s Land was sighted on
January Ist, 1837, and the “Isabella” pro-
ceeded up the River Tamar to Launceston,
where the Captain of the ship “John Pirie,”
chartered by the South Australian Com-
pany reported having spoken the “Buffalo”
while she was beating up St. Vincent’s Gulf
for the historic landing of the first Governor
and the official staff at Holdfast Bay. The
“Isabella” spent a month at Launceston, and
was then laid on for Port Adelaide, and by
her Mr. Hack shipped 350 ewes, 45 wethers,
6 heifers, 1 bull, a team of 10 red Devon
bullocks, a large waggon and dray, plough,
seed wheat, poultry, goats, provisions, two
Manning cottages of two rooms each pur-
chased in London, and other goods. A
fierce westerly gale in Bass Straits caused
considerable mortality among Mr. Hack’s
stock. The “Isabella” dropped anchor
several miles south of where the “Buffalo”
and the ship “Coromandel” were lying at
Holdfast Bay, and as Mr. Hack’s sheep were
now very weak and were insured with the
owner of the vessel, the captain resolved to
land them and the rest of the stock opposite
to the ship. He promised to send ashore
a quantity of netting Mr. Hack had pro-
vided for a fold, but omitted to do so, and
during the night the sheep broke away and
most of them were lost irrevocably. The
other stock were landed in fair order, and a
cow obligingly calved and insured fresh
milk for the new-comers. The settlers who
had arrived by the other vessels mentioned
were encamped in the sandhills at Glenelg,
and a sensation was caused among them
when Mr. Hack’s big team of bullocks,
drawing his goods, appeared on the scene.
A pair of bullocks, a few sheep, a mule and
a donkey belonging to Governor Hindmarsh
were the only other livestock then in the
Province. A few days later another vessel
arrived from Cape Colony with a consign-
ment of fine cows and heifers, most of which
Mr. Hack purchased subsequently for £27
each. One of the first persons he met on
landing was John Hallett. At this time the
survey of Adelaide had not been completed
and Mr. Hack was appointed a member of
the committee that named the original
streets of the capital. One of the two Man-
ning cottages brought from England was


| . m T . ■ . t - lC al 0n aC k'
The late John Barton Hack.


Mr. B. J. Hack.
set up at Glenelg, and the other on North
Terrace, upon the site of the present radway
station, the latter being used mostly as a
depot for storing goods.
Mr. Hack had determined upon making
the pastoral industry the outlet for his
energy, and his name went to a land ballot,
the result being that he drew three pre-
liminary sections at Yankalilla. For all
practical purposes, he wrote, these sections
might as well have been in Van Dieman’s
Land at the time, and although Yankalilla
township was surveyed two years later, his
“useless” country had then been sold. The
bullocks had proved a wise investment, and
for some months Mr. Hack made £ls a
week carting from Glenelg and Port
Adelaide to the capital. Pie next appears
as the owner of a sheep run, the locality
of which was vaguely described as “in some
fine valleys about ten miles from Adelaide,”
where a stockyard and dairy were erected.
The record of special surveys gives a better
idea of where the newcomer actually
“squatted.” He took out four thousand
acres to the south of the Dutton survey at
Mt. Barker, and a similar area on the Gawler
River. Dairying was conducted at the
latter place, and the butter was readily dis-
posed of in Adelaide. Undaunted by his
previous harsh experience in the importa-
tion of stock, Mr. Hack ordered another
consignment from Tasmania, that was
shipped in the old “Isabella.” During this
voyage the vessel was wrecked at Cape
Nelson, and he lost four hundred sheep,
twelve bullocks, and four cows. There was
also considerable mortality among sheep
shipped by the “Siren.” Captain Hart
was also a heavy loser by the wreck, but
Mr. Hack placed him in charge of a schooner
he bought for £1.5C0 to trade with Sydney
At Colonel Light’s request the latter under-
took to dig the canal at Port Adelaide, but
the call of the bush was insistent, and his
next bold step was to purchase eight hun-
dred cattle in the Eastern States. Mr.
Hack was soon milking 150 cows on his
Echunga property alone, and he removed his
family thither. Yankalilla was now re-
stored to his good graces, and he formed


r-
Mrs. Frank Bonython.
another station there for breeding and fat-
tening cattle. On April 9th, 1838, a meet-
ing was held at the Turf Hotel, Adelaide,
when it was decided to form a Joint-Stock
Cattle Company, of which Mr. Hack was
elected one of the first directors, his col
leagues being Messrs C. Crisp, W. Ferguson,
W. B. Randell and R. Cocks. Tenders were
called immediately for one hundred heifers
or cows and two of the best Durham bulls,
“of prime blood,” that could be obtained in
New South Wales. Whale-fishing also came
under the boundless enterprise displayed by
Mr. Hack.
It will thus be seen that Mr. Hack’s
business ramifications were very extensive
and it was inevitable that he should be
hard hit by the financial crisis which
afflicted the young colony during Governor
Gawler’s regime. The autobiography says
that in 1840 his balance sheet showed a
credit of nearly £30,000, and then every-
thing was lost. One of the principal
causes of this disaster was the failure of
the whale fisheries. Mr. Hart had pur-
chased the Encounter Bay Station of
Captain Blenkinsop, who, with Judge
Jeffcott, was drowned at the Murray mouth
Then he took a share in the South Aus-
tralian Company’s whale stations, with
Captain Hart as manager. Oil prices
slumped badly. The oil stocks were buried
in sand, but considerable leakage occurred
through the late arrival of a cnaitered
vessel, and more money was frittered away
in litigation. “I began the world afresh
without capital,” wrote this fine old


■
•^wii
i
W - <5?% *•'
I *
\ I , •
Mr. Clive Langdon Bonython
Mr. John Barton Bonython.
pioneer of indomitable spirit. He reverted
to the bullock team, and carted the first two
loads of copper ore from the Burra to
Adelaide, continuing carrying operations
for a year or two. His next role was that
of manager of the North Kapunda copper
mine and of another property at Allen s
Creek, neither of which was a success. In
1848 he commenced business in North
Adelaide as a timber merchant, builder and
contractor, in partnership with Mr. R. S.
Breeze, and helped to erect Christ Church.
Eventually the concern was wound up,
with heavy losses, consequent upon the
exodus of population to the Victorian gold
diggings. Off to Bendigo went Mr. Hack
and his four sons, and they returned with
40 lbs. of gold. The next occupation of
the father was that of “loan broker and
accountant to the rising lawyer in Adelaide
(Mr. Atkinson), and later he was accountant
to Messrs Hart and Hughes, at the New
Port Mills. The lure of broad acres again
asserted itself, and Mr. Hack purchased a
run opposite to McGrath’s Flat on the
Coorong for £2OO. He built a house and
dairy, partly with wreck timber found on
the beach, and made excellent cheese, which
was difficult to market. Dairying was
abandoned, and Mr. Hack took up some
scrub country about forty miles inward
from the Coorong, and, in partnership with
Mr. G. M. Smith, purchased three thousand
ewes from Dr. W. J. Browne, of Moorak.
They were aged ewes which developed foot-
rot, the country was poorly watered, and
once again John Barton Hack, “took the
knock.” A period of accountancy with
John Hill & Co. and John Rounsevell and
Co., and in private practice, followed.
Finally, Mr. Hack settled down in the
service of the Railway Department, and
from 1879 until June 30th, 1883, he held
the re sponsible position of Controller of
Railway Accounts, when he retired on
eight months’ leave of absence. Shortly
before his death on October 4th, 1884, he
wrote pathetically; “Being now seventy-
nine years old I have only to wait for my
final retirement from the scenes of a very
chequered life, in which, I trust, 1 have
made very few enemies and many friends.”


The Sons of Mr. Clive Bonython
(sixth generation).
Sheep, cows, bullocks, timber, whales,
butter, cheese, precious metals, and rail-
way accounts had failed to win for him
abiding riches, but, as was said at the time
of his death, he was always scrupulously
conscientious and honest “ to the thou-
sandth part of a farthing,” and it is doubt-
ful whether South Australia ever had a more
enterprising or more determined colonist.
How true it is that he was a man of many
parts is shown by the fact that the Directory
of 1840 shows his name on the boards of
management, or the committees, of all the
institutions except one there mentioned. He
was one of the first Grand Jury list, was
Chairman of the Chamber of Commerce, a
member of the committee of the Botanic
and Horticultural Garden Board, Auditor
for the Literary and Scientific Association
and Mechanics’ Institute, Vice-President of
the Agricultural Society, of which he was
first Chairman, a director of the Adelaide
Auction Company, a member of the Asso-
ciation for the Prosecution of Felons, and
a director of the Joint-Stock Pastoral Com-
pany. Part of North Adelaide, where Mr.
Hack established a garden, once bore the
name of his birthplace, Chichester, and
Barton Terrace perpetuates one of his
Christian names. His remains rest in the
Woodville Cemetery. Theodore Hack,
legislator and municipalise was one of his
sons. FI is brother, Stephen, with whom
he migrated from England, made a name
for himself in the field of exploration.
Ihe eldest of Mr. J. B. Hack’s sons,
A\ illiam, carried on his father’s pastoral
interests.
V\ illiam s eldest son, Barton John
Hack, was born in 1855 at Finnis, South
Australia, and on the death of his mother,
lived with bis grandfather who placed him
in the Government Railway Department,
with which he was associated until his
retirement, after forty-nine years in the
service. He married Christina Anderson,
daughter of the late Robert Anderson,
who was Government Architect in South
Australia for many years.
The only child of Mr. and Mrs. B. J.
Hack, Irene Ethel, married the late Frank
Godolphin Bonython, son of Sir Eangdon
Bonython, one of South Australia’s best-
known men. There are two sons, Clive
Eangdon and John Barton Bonython.
Clive Bonython is the father of twin
sons, Richard Martin and Francis Godol-
phin, who represent the sixth generation of
the Hack family in Australia.
Mr. and Mrs. B. J. Hack are now living
in retirement at Glenelg, South Australia.
1 hey celebrated the fiftieth anniver-
sary of their wedding on August 7th, 1934.


■
The late Mr. William Wilson
The History of the late William Wilson
with which is incorporated a brief outline of the Story of
His Family from the year 1855 to the year 1935.
Typical of the best type of our old
pioneering settlers of eighty years ago was
the Founder of the family reviewed in these
lines. The late William Wilson was born in
the year 1833 at Rudge Hill, Somerset, Eng-
land, and, immediately following his mar-
riage in the city of Bristol, booked passages
on board the “Ravenscragg,” for his newly-
made bride and himself, to the land of
promise—Australia.
The end of their long honeymoon trip
saw them landing at Point Henry, from
which port they proceeded to the township
of Geelong, where they remained for about
five or six years- Unfortunately, records of
their activities during these first few years
are unavailable, but for the fact that they
resided in Autumn Street. West Geelong,
and during such period there were three
sons born to them in Gabriel, Frederick and
George, all of whom have since passed away.
From Geelong the family journeyed to
the Ballarat diggings, where they com-
menced their experiences living in a tent,
whilst the late Mr, Wilson set about the
task of building a home. After a compara-
tively short effort in mining activities, he
went to work for one of the business men


The late Mrs. W. Wilson
of Ballarat in Mr. Kelsall, with whom he
remained for several years. It was not
until the family had been in these parts for
sixteen years that they removed to Cobden,
whilst Mr. Wilson selected three hundred
and twenty acres of land at Scott’s Creek,
about fifteen miles from Cobden-
During their sojourn in Ballarat a
further six daughters and two sons were
born, the particulars of whom follow :
Jane, who was the late Mrs. J. G. Boyes,
of 1 erang; Ellen, who is at present resident
in Geelong; Annie, (deceased); Frank, (de-
ceased) ; Alfred who is now in residence in
Gippsland; Emily, now of Melbourne;
Mathilda, who died in infancy; Charlotte, of
whom further particulars follow at a later
stage of this history.
As a result of the fact that his parents
were on the land in the Old Country, it was
but natural that the late Mr- Wilson should
desire to follow in their footsteps and he
was, in fact, most enthusiastic in this direc-
tion. As there was no facility for his familv
when he commenced operations at Scott’s
Creek, he left his wife and children at
Cobden pending his building a home on the
property, and when this task was at last
accomplished the family was again reunited.
\\ ith true pioneer spirit and pluck
he battled at the enormous task of clearing
and stocking his holdings, and too great a
ci edit cannot be joined to his name for the
efforts of those earlier years. Through them
all he was consistently helped and encour-
aged by his life’s partner and the elder
members of his family. In this direction he
was foi tunate, for such assistance was a
sheer necessity during the pf non


productive work which were associated with
the conversion of wfild bushlands into a pro-
ducing farming property.
It should here be mentioned that this
same property is still in the possession of a
son of the Frederick above mentioned—this
is the present Mr. Frank Wilson. Appro-
priately enough, the property was named in
these early days “The Farm,” and by such
name it is still known.
In the early eighties Mr. and Mrs.
\ ilson, accompanied by their youngest
daughter, Charlotte, took up their residence
in Camperdown, and some members of the
family continued to work on the homestead
at Scott’s Creek. For many years he carried
on in business in Camperdown as a skin
buyer and dealer, and continued with these
activities until early in the present century.
In the year 1899 he lost his wife, who
passed away after attaining the age of sixty-
eight years. Throughout their struggles she
had stood by his side and loyally assisted
him in a manner admired by one and all for
notwithstanding that she had no experience
ol hardships in her early life, she undertook
the heavy tasks so common to our early
womenfolk, in a manner typical of her
character.
In the early part of this century, as
recorded above, the late Mr. Wilson re-
turned to the farm, and, following varying
experiences for a while, he, in company with
his daughters Annie and Ellen, joined his
daughter Charlotte, who was by this time
established in Geelong. Here he remained
until his death at the ripe age of ninety-one
3 ears, on the fifteenth day of July, in the
year 1924.
His life during seventy years in this
State was a monument to the trials, hard-
ships and rewards of our early colonists, and
he passed away after having earned the
admiration of all with whom he was brought
into contact, and the love and affection of
his family. It is to such as he that Victoria
owes her present growth and prosperity.
The youngest daughter, Charlotte, from
her earliest years, decided on a scholastic
career and, with the same determination as
had stamped both her parents, has through
the years made her way in her chosen pro-
fession in a manner to be expected of such
stock as that from which she is descended.
Receiving her first appointment as a
junior teacher at the age of seventeen years
to the Camperdown School, the following
tells its own story of conscientious service:
From Camperdown appointed to Golden
Point as eighth assistant, then as head
teacher at Nullawarree North. Then head
teacher (relieving) at Weerite. Head
teacher at Gellibrand River Fast, later
amalgamating this with Moorbanool and
running both as part time schools. From
these, head teacher at Tittle River, where
she was stationed for a few years. By this
time she had progressed in the Education
Department so that she was classified fourth
assistant at Mount Pleasant, and from there
to Kensington (Melbourne) as third
assistant.
From the above the last transfer was
effected when Miss Wilson was appointed
as Second Assistant to the Swanston Street
School, Geelong where she has remained to
the present time. In 1929 Miss Wilson
was honoured in being appointed to the
special 2A class, which is the highest pos-
sible classification for a female teacher in
the Primary Schools Division of the Vic-
toi ian Go\ eminent Education Department.
It is worthy of note that for this Division
of the Service there are only twenty-six
teachers admissable, so that it" can be fully
appreciated that Miss Charlotte Wilson has
brought still further credit to a family name
wdiich has already earned the respect and
esteem of the community.
This same spirit was strongly in evi-
dence in the case of Mrs. J. G. Boyes, who,
with the onus of a husband who unfor-
tunately enjoyed poor health, proved herself
a wonderful mother and wdfe during many
severe struggles to play the dual role of
mother and bread-winner for herself and
her family. Mrs. Boyes passed away in the
} cai 1934, after winning the admiration of
all who were acquainted with the wonderful
job she had made of her responsibilities
throughout her lifetime.


In a similar manner, Ellen, the second
daughter, from her early twenties to her
middle forties devoted her life to home-craft
on behalf of her uncle, the late Gabriel
Wilson, who owned “The Pines,” Ballan-
geich (about twenty miles from Warrnam-
bool), and who came from the Old Country
a year after his brother William After
some years travelling in this State, New
Zealand and Tasmania, he ultimately
settled in the district and on the property
above named. He passed away in the year
1909 at the age of seventy-eight years, and
was still another example of the best type of
our early pioneers.
At the present time, Miss Ellen Wilson
and Miss Charlotte Wilson are in residence
at 124 McKillop Street, Geelong, where the
latter established her home fifteen years ago.
During the Great War, 1914-18, seven
grandsons, Oswald, Hope, Stephen, (sons of
Frederick), and Turner, Wesley, Clement
and Colin (sons of Frank) joined the Aus-
tralian Forces and fought overseas for King
and Empire. Two —Turner and Stephen—
paid the supreme sacrifice on the battlefield
of Flanders-
Australia in general, and Victoria in
particular, is more than justified in acknow-
ledging with gratitude the debt owing to
such citizenship as is chronicled in these
lines.
The late Hon. H. F. Richardson, M.L.C.
Long and faithful Public Service is a
true indication of the best in citizenship
and, judged by these standards, there can be
no name more deserving of inclusion in
this publication than that of the late
Member for the South Western Province in
the Legislative Council. Setting an example
to his son, the late John Richardson—-his
father—represented the electors of East
Geelong as M.L.A. for no less than thirteen
years prior to payment of members.
Born on the Bth November, 1854, and
educated at Geelong College, the late H. F.
Richardson started as indentured clerk in the
Geelong branch of the Liverpool & London
& Globe Insurance Coy. at a salary of £2O
p.a. in 1873.
On the death of his father in 1876 he
took over the duties of Secretary and Trea-
surer of South Barwon Shire Council, and
retained such position for more than 18
years. Besides this position, he also found
time to take over other important duties of
a public character and, in addition, estab-
lished a prosperous Produce business.
It was while he was Secretary of the
South Barwon Council that he resigned
from his position as an Insurance Clerk and
founded his highly successful Insurance and
Commission Agency which has remained
throughout the years to the present day.
On the 16th February, 1881, he married
Edith Harriet, second daughter of an ex-
Mayor of Geelong, viz., William Sommers,
J.P.
In 1886 he established the Geelong Pro-
duce Exchange in a portion of Exhibition
Buildings (of which he was Manager), and
this has since developed into the largest
Produce Auction Sale Rooms in the State.
1884 saw him elected to the Geelong Town
Council and from then on, for many years
he remained a member—occupying the posi-
tions of Mayor and Alderman—where his
services were invaluable to Geelong. To
endeavour to enumerate the many and
varied valuable services to his home city of
Geelong would be impossible. His activi-
ties can be traced through such stupendous
undertakings as the abolition of market
dues, the Juvenile and Industrial Exhibition,
the A.Is.A. (of which he was a foundation
member), Municipal Association (of which
he was President, vice-president, Treasurer
and Executive Committeeman for thirty-one
>ears), the Barwon Bridge, and has been


jS £3 *9
The late John Richardson.
publicly referred to as the father of the
Country Roads Board. It is an extra-
ordinary performance to be able to claim
over 53 years of Municipal activities, and
vet this is but a fraction of the credit to be
la i d to the career of this magnificent citizen.
One has but to enter his private office
to obtain some idea of the esteem in which
Mr. Richardson was held . Around the walls
therein are numbers of illuminated addresses
from different public and semi-public bodies.
1912 saw him elected an M.L.C. and he re-
tained his seat to the time of his retirement
only shortly prior to his death. Having held
the positions of Honorary Minister, Minister
for Forests, and Leader of the Council, it
will be seen that his endeavours were no
less appreciated in the political than the
Municipal field.
Mr. Richardson was also mainly respon-
sible for steps being taken for the censor-
ship of films and his efforts were finally
rewarded by the passing of the Censorship
oi Films Act.
Throughout his life he was a con-
scientious member of the Baptist Church
and, in 1904, was President of the Baptist
Union of Victoria, in which capacity he
represented them at the first Baptist World
Congress held in London in 1905. Fie was
further, a member of the Committee who
framed the Constitution of the Baptist
World Alliance.
It is of further interest to note that
arising from the above trip, Mr. Richardson
came back thoroughly enthusiastic over the
need for underground sewerage for Geelong
and it was partly from this source that the
city ultimately obtained this convenience.
The up-to-date and beautiful “Erskine
House,” at Rome—undoubtedly one of the
biggest and most magnificent holiday re-
sorts in the State is still another monument
to the sound business methods adopted by
Mr. Richardson, since he built it up to its
present eminence during 30 years as Manag-
ing Director.
At the risk of being accused of “paint-
ing the lily” insofar as the achievements of
the subject of this article, it cannot be
omitted to be mentioned that the removal
of the “Breakwater,” the construction of
the lock below Sparrovale Farm and the
consequent making of the Barwon River
navigable for pleasure steamers from Gee-
long to Barwon Heads, will be directly
traceable to his personal activities, when
finished. Perhaps the most extraordinary
feature of this amazing personality is the
fact that, notwithstanding his varied and


\
The late Hon. H. F. Richardson, M.L-C.
never-ending public duties, he still found
time for sports of various kinds. In suc-
cessive periods of his career he was an
active member of the Mercantile Cricket
Club—playing on the old Argyle Ground,
he rowed with the Barwon Rowing Club
and was one of the originators and founda-
tion members of the Belmont Bowling and
Croquet Club. In addition he was an
active and enthusiastic member of the Gee-
long Detachment of Mounted Rifles.
Mr. Richardson had the satisfaction of
knowing that the grand traditions of his
house bid fair to be upheld by those whom
he left behind, as there are three sons and
a daughter—Mrs. G. R. Lemon (who resides
in Sydney) —living. Of these, the eldest
son—Mr. S. J. Richardson —is a member of
the Newtown and Chilwell Town Council
and an ex-Mayor of that Municipality, thus
making the third generation to have credited
to their name outstanding services to the
public. In addition, his youngest son, Mr.
K. E. Richardson (who served as a Lieu-
tenant in the 17th Lancers during the
Great War) is a partner in the business
founded by his father.
The late Mr. H. F. Richardson died
on the twenty-eighth day of October in the
year 1935 within eleven days of his eighty-
first birthday, and was laid to his last rest
in the Eastern General Cemetery at Geelong
on the thirtieth day of that month.
The funeral service—conducted by the
Reverend A. D. Shaw—was attended by a
very great number of well-known and
influential citizens. Tribute was paid to
his sterling qualities by several of our best
known people both in a private and repre-
sentative capacity. So great was the con-
course which gathered to pay his memory
honour that it would be impossible to itemise
the complete list but, among them, should
be mentioned such as the President of the
Baptist L nion of Victoria, Representatives
of the Government, Legislative Council and
the President of the Council, the Rural Dean
of Geelong and a large number of Councils
and other public bodies.
1 hroughout the entire districts sur-
rounding Geelong flags were flown at half-
mast to mark the passing of a grand citizen
and Australia can well feel proud of such
as the subject of this sketch—a few of whose
works in the service of the community are
here placed on record.


#
'Ijtop . afc-ml. %
; . |W| JL m
Hon. David Bower, M.P.
Joseph Bower, J.P.
The Honourable DAVID BOWER, M.P., of
Woodville, South Australia.
The Honourable David Bower was
born at Huddersfield, England in 1822 and
was a carpenter by trade. As a young man
David Bower sailed from England fot
Australia in 1841, landing at Port Phillip,
Victoria. Here he stayed for a while and
then decided to see New Zealand. Pos-
sessed of little capital he set to work to
acquire money, and started to trade with
the Maoris. With his savings he was able
to purchase a schooner which he loaded
with timber and sent her to Sydney, New
South Wales and instructed his agent to
dispose of both ship and cargo. Following
shortly afterwards in 1846 he found his
agent had realised on the schooner and
cargo, but had used the money and became
insolvent. David Bower’s five years labor
was hopelessly lost and he had to make a
fresh start. This lesson stood him in good
stead in future years. He made his way
to Port Adelaide on the first paddle steamer
to sail from Sydney to Port Adelaide, the
“Juno” in 1847. This ship called at Boyd
town, Melbourne and Portland en route to
Adelaide. His first venture was to open a
timber business in St. Vincent Street, Port
Adelaide. So successful was he that when
the copper mines were opened up he estab-
lished branches in Wallaroo and Moonta
which, in about 1871, he sold to Messrs.
Rossitor and Davies.
David Bower was a most far-sighted
business man and, seeing the possibilities
of land development in the vicinity of Port
Adelaide, purchased large areas of land in
that district.
One of the most historic homes in
South Australia, named “St. Clair”, was
erected on what later became known as
the Woodville Estate by the late R. S.
Clarke in 1850. This later was purchased
by Mr. Torrens, so well-known in South
Australian history, who disposed of it to
another notable South Australian, the late
R. Barr-Smith. Mr. Barr-Smith resided at
“St. Clair” until 1869 when he sold the
property to Lewis Hanson.


■ %
OIL • *fc, >
David Joseph Bower.
David Bower purchased “St. Clair”
together with some 350 acres in 1874.
Prior to Mr. Torrens’ acquisition of
“St. Clair/’ Mr. I. B. Hughes was the
owner and the estate was run on the lines
of an English village. In fact everything
in connection with the estate in those days
was known as the village. He gave the
church named St. Margaret’s, after his
wife, and erected a blacksmith’s shop and
carpenter’s shop and several residences of
various sizes up to eight rooms. It carried
the name of the Woodville village for many
years.
When David Bower purchased the
estate he soon started to improve the lay-
out and one of his first actions was to
plant additional trees on the “St. Clair”
property and later, when a Member of Par-
liament, had much to do in creating that
splendid avenue which adorns the Port
Road. His main desire was to retain the
whole of the estate in the hands of the
family during their lifetime, although a
portion of the estate was disposed of later
to Holden’s Motor Body Works and the
Port Adelaide Racing Club.
Prior to settling at Woodville, David
Bower lived for a while at Wallaroo, and
Douglas Bower Robert.
he was the first Member of Parliament for
that Constituency which then included Port
Adelaide and, when the latter became a
separate Constituency he became its first
member. During his political career he
was never defeated at the poll. He was
Commissioner of Public Works in the Bray
Ministry and when in that office had much
to do in the erection of the old Port Ade-
laide Railway Station. Although an ex-
ceedingly busy man with many interests
to control he gave all his spare time to
public service. In addition to his political
work he was most active in Port Adelaide
and Woodville affairs, especially in con-
nection with Public Institutes and was a
generous contributor to the cost of erect-
ing the present building at Port Adelaide.
He also was the first President of the
Woodville Institute, laying the foundation
stone after giving the land and endowing
the institution. He held the Presidency
for some twenty-one years. He was fol-
lowed in his office by Charles Rawlings,
the first Secretary, who held the office for
twenty-six years, and was followed by
David Bower’s nephew, Joseph Bower. J.P.
who still retains this office. These three
gentlemen have held the office of President
since its inception in 1877.


The late David Bower, J.P.,
Brother of Joseph and Richard Bower.
V\ hen Woodville was created a District
Council, David Bower was one of the first
to be elected to the Council and was the
second Chairman in 1874-5. He was also
a member of the Port Adelaide Council and
served as Mayor. During his mayoralty he
caused the Corporation Wharves to be
built and, to ensure the financial success of
this Municipal venture, personally leased
them for twenty-one years at a fixed amount
to cover the interest and sinking fund
requirements.
Being of a most generous disposition
he gave much to relieve distress in his dis-
trict and his benefactions were many and
often. He made an annual Christmas gift
of money to every deserving family in want
at Port Adelaide for many years. David
Bower was a man of outstanding person-
ality, and, although not an orator acquired
great influence throughout the State of
his adoption, which he used for the benefit
of those whom he considered worthy. He
married Miss Mary Honey who was a native
of Launceston, Cornwall, England. There
was no issue of this union. He died in
1899 after a life spent in usefulness to the
end, being predeceased by his wife. Mr.
and Mrs. David Bower adopted three of the
daughters of Mrs. White, sister of Mrs.
Bower, one of whom on the death of Mrs.
Bower remained with David Bower until
his death. At his request this lady
assumed the name of White-Bower. Two
nephews, Joseph Bower and David Joseph
Bower Rowley, sons of his brother Amos,
and his sister Mrs. Rowley respectively
were also adopted. These two stayed with
David Bower at “St. Clair’’ until entering
business, when a third nephew, Amos
Arnold Langley Rowley, joined his uncle
with whom he stayed for several years.
David Bower died a wealthy man and
left his estate in trust for his neices and
nephews as beneficiaries, and on their deaths
the estate is to be distributed equally
amongst the issue of the beneficiaries.
The name of David Bower will always
be remembered for his splendid gift to
commemorate the Jubilee of Queen Vic-
toria in 1887. This took the form of the
“Bower Homes” which he erected and en-
dowed in perpetuity, for the benefit of aged
sailors, near Port Adelaide. His nephew,
Richard Bower, of Port Adelaide, is one
of the trustees of these Homes, and a
proviso in the endowment is that each


“ St. Clair ” Homestead.
Mayor of Port Adelaide should be chair-
man of these Homes during his term of
office.
HISTORIC “ ST. CLAIR.”
From 1864 to 1869 Mr. R. Barr-Smith
resided at “St. Clair”, after which he pur-
chased Mr. Torrens’ property at Torrens
Park, Mitcham.
While the house was vacant, an enter-
tainment was held there, and a report of
the concert appeared in “The Register” on
May 31st, 1869. This stated that “a num-
ber of lady and gentleman amateurs gave a
musical and literary entertainment at “St.
Clair” house (late residence of Mr. R. Barr-
Smith), in aid of funds- of St. Margaret’s
Sunday School, the result of which was
highly gratifying, there being between 300
and 320 people present. The Rev. H. M.
Pollitt presided. The programme consis-
ted of songs, choruses, recitations, and
readings.”
In the same year Mr. Lewis Hanson
purchased the Woodville Estate, “St. Clair”
and held it for about five years.
A description of Woodville Estate as
it was then is contained in an advertisement
in “The Register” of June 18, 1873, when
the place was first put up for auction.
The notice is a follows: —“To capita-
lists and others. The splendid Woodville
Estate. Townsend, Botting and Co. are
favoured with instructions from Mr. Lewis
Hanson, to sell the splendid Woodville
Estate, together with the whole of the
dwelling house and buildings erected there-
on. This property comprises nearly 350
acres lying on both sides of the Port Rail-
way, the Woodville Station being nearly in
the centre of the property. It consists of
Sections 405 and 407, less 20 acres, and
Section 2071, Hundred of Yatala, and
allotments Nos. 2, 3, 13, 14, 16, 21, to 37
inclusive, 39 to 44, 83 to 88, 91 to 102, and
part allotments 12 and 90 of subdivision of
Section 405, laid out as the Township of
Woodville.
“Part of the property is let to 28 re-
spectable tenants, at an aggregate rental of
nearly £B9O per annum, which might be
easily improved. Three of these tenants
occupy nearly 83 acres with rights to pur-
chase for sums amounting to nearly
£5,500.
“The property, with the exception of
about 16 acres, is under the Real Property
Act.”
The sale was apparently not a success,
for the following day a notice stated that
the property was passed in at £B,OOO.
Mr. David Bower secured the estate in
November, 1874, for £IO,OOO. This in-
cluded “St. Clair” and a large number of
houses surrounding it. “St. Clair” was
subsequently gutted by fire, but Mr. Bower
did not worry. He took off the upper
storey, put on a new roof, and repaired
the house. A reproduction showing an
angle view of this historic home is pro-
duced, but docs not show the extent of
the house or the numerous outbuildings
surrounding it.


“Blinkbonny,”
Mt. Lofty Residence of Joseph Bower, J.P.
JOSEPH BOWER, J.P., Woodville, South Australia.
Joseph Bower is the son of the late
Amos Bower and nephew of the Hon.
David Bower, M.P,
At twelve years of age in 1874, Joseph
Bower was adopted by his uncle with
whom he lived until he decided to enter
business. He went to AVestern Australia
in 1886 and later entered into partnership
with another in a contracting business in
1887 and after some years eventually de-
veloped into a flour milling business. This
later became a most prosperous concern
which was carried on for several years
until finally acquired by his partner. Dur-
ing this time he married Miss Agnes Hyde
of Western Australia and there is a family
of six daughters and a son. All the child-
ren are married and there are fourteen
grand-children.
Like his uncle, Joseph Bower has given
much time to local welfare movements
being especially active in promoting the
work of the local Public Institutes. In
addition he has been prominently associa-
ted with the Liberal and Country League
of which body he has been an Executive
member since its inception and has been
for the whole of that time either President
or Vice-President of a district committee
of this League. He still retains these offices-
He has naturally been closely in touch
with all developments of the Woodville
Estate for over sixty years, and to-day lives
on a portion of the Estate of which he is a
beneficiary. He has watched the district
grow from a village to its present pros-
perous position as a leading Municipality.
He always took a keen interest in
sport and as a rifleman he has competed in
the leading- rifle shooting contests through-
out Australia. In Western Australia he
won the Championship badge for rifle
shooting and in New South AVales carried
off a large number of prizes.
As a youth Joseph Bower was a foot-
baller of note, having played for the Port
Adelaide team. In this he was followed by
his son who also was a playing member of
this well-known Club. Joseph Bower was
a member of the Australian Garrison Artil-
lery for three years and was one of a gun
team which competed for and won the effi-
ciency prize for the year. Turning to bowls
in later years, Mr. Bower has made a name
for himself in this game in every State,
having captained a South Australian rink
throughout the Commonwealth on several
occasions.
For some years Joseph Bower resided
in the Mount Lofty Ranges where his resi-
dence was one of the horticultural show
places in the district. A view of this resi-
dence is shown here. In addition to its
wonderful gardens and trimmed fences, one
of the finest private bowling greens in the
State was maintained. Governors and
notable people have enjoyed many pleasant
games of bowls here.
He has been a Justice of the Peace for
many years. David Joseph Bower, his son,
joined the A.I.F. before his eighteenth
birthday and served until the end of the
AA ar and, six months after the Armistice,
he was engaged in special work on the
Belgium Front recovering war materials.


The late Joseph Crompton, Founder of the Firm.
The Cromptons, of Stonyfell.
The late Joseph Crompton was a native
of Liverpool, England, where he was born
in 1840, and, as a young man, arrived in
Melbourne, Victoria. Going to Adelaide in
1863, he joined Henry Septimus Clark, of
Burnside, who had established the Stony-
fell vineyard in 1858; some of the vines
planted at that time are still bearing fruit.
After this partnership was formed, the
area of vines was increased from three
acres to thirty-five.
In 1866 he married Miss Susan Mary
Clark who, with her parents, arrived in
Australia on the ship “Fatima” on June
11th, 1850. H. S. Clark died in 1867 and
Joseph Crompton and his wife went to live
at Stonyfell. They had a family of twelve,
nine of whom survive.
In 1874 the Stonyfell Olive Oil Com-
pany was formed, and it has the distinction
of being the oldest limited liability com-
pany in South Australia. The original
shares in this company were £lOO each,
and taken up by Joseph Crompton, various
members of the Clark family, and friends.
Later, Crompton & Sons, Limited, Mer-
chants, was formed, and this concern has
wide ramifications throughout the Com-
monwealth.
In 1866 the vineyard was sold to H. M.
Martin and Henry Dunstan. This business
is still in existence.
Joseph Crompton died in 1901, and his
wife in 1932.
Henry Woodhouse Crompton, eldest
son of Joseph Crompton, was born in
Adelaide in 1867, and educated at Prince
Alfred College. After leaving school he
joined the firm, with which he has been
connected ever since.
Henry Woodhouse Crompton married
Miss Kate Brooke-Smith, daughter of the
late James Smith, of “Amwell,” Hawthorn.
Melbourne. James Smith was a well-
known identity in Victorian literary circles,
editing that monumental undertaking, “The
Cyclopaedia of Victoria,” and was the
author of many other works. He was a
leader writer for many years on the Mel-
bourne “Argus” and also the “Age”.
Mr. and Mrs. H. W. Crompton have
a family of three sons and two daughters.
The sons are connected with the business,
thus being the third generation so engaged.
The grandchildren of Henry Wood-
house Crompton represent the fourth
generation of the Crompton family in
Australia.


r -- Mam
IfHL „ I
I
% IW** r--
% ... *
1||| : 9ffW» m
%
.
H. W. Crompton.
Launce Crompton.
Joseph Crompton.
C. W. Crompton.


THOMAS HISCOCK.
Discoverer of Gold in Victoria
Prior to the discovery of gold, Vic-
toria was just emerging from a pastoral
portion of New South Wales to a separate
State. It was on July Ist, 1851, that Vic-
toria celebrated its severance from New
South Wales. On August 3rd of the same
year Thomas Hiscock made the first pay-
able discovery of gold in the new colony,
and altered the whole economic outlook of
this part of Australia.
Born in Berkshire, England, in 1809 he
married Phoebe Blanchard at Reading in
1833. With his wife and two sons, Thomas
and John, he sailed for Australia in the
ship “ Caroline,” landing at Geelong
in 1841. On arrival he obtained work at
his trade of blacksmithing, and in 1844 sett-
led at Buninyong as a general storekeeper
and blacksmith. Several children were
born there. Another English family, named
Thomas, had also settled in this district, and
later the two sons of Thomas Hiscock
married two of the daughters of the Thomas
family.
In 1851 gold was discovered in New
South Wales, and the people were flocking
there in such numbers from Victoria as to
cause alarm to the newly formed Govern-
ment of Victoria —so much so that the
citizens formed a gold discovery commit-
tee to deal with the situation. Money was
subscribed and a reward of £2OO offered
to the finder of payable gold on the Vic-
torian side of the border. This incentive
brought many searchers for the precious
metal, and in July, 1851, James Esmond
found gold at Chines. On August the 3rd,
1851, 1 homas Hiscock found a specimen
in an outcrop of quartz at Buninvong. This
was the start of the great Ballarat gold rush
at Golden Point, and was the fore-runner
of many other districts being opened up.
Hiscock communicated his discovery
to the editor of the “Geelong Advertiser”
on August the 10th. This paper urged the
claims of Hiscock and Esmond as the first
to discover gold in Victoria with a view to


Ilf ■*> *!*.f | ' '•wh - -
flip “mI® r% ~Jr ?'• I *1
4| ; &:jA t ' Wm
Wm 1 v V m,
laBn* jMLJf v«M a flBm, JM
jmippffi MM' - # * mMSS*Ja mm&
, ,
The Golden Wedding Group of
Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Bromley, George John, and Henry Edward Hiscock
the Government awarding the £I,OOO grant
for such discovery. In the opinion of Mr.
Alfred Clark of the “Geelong Advertiser”
the discovery of Ballarat “was but a
natural consequence of the discovery of
gold at Buninyong”, and agreed to recom-
mend that the sum of £LOOO be given to
Mr. Thomas Hiscock as the substantial
discoverer of the Ballarat deposit.
The leading people of Geelong and
Western District afterwards raised a pri-
vately subscribed sum of £4OO, which, with
two inscribed gold cups, were presented to
Messrs. Hiscock and Esmond at a well
attended banquet in Geelong in 1855. Thus
the name of Hiscock is ever to be associa-
ted with the history and subsequent pros-
perity of the State of Victoria.
Thomas Hiscock, senr., died in 1855 at
the early age of 46. His grave in the
Buninyong Cemetery is marked with a fine
memorial of York stone, on which is in-
scribed :
“Hiscock. thy name and fame shall yet
arise,
Tho’ crumbled in the dust thy mortal
frame
Like all true merit which is seen to rise
Surmount the world with never ending
fame.”
To indicate the spot where he made his
discovery of gold, an obelisk of granite was
erected in June, 1879, by the Buninyong
Borough and Shire Council. The place
where the obelisk is erected is named
Hiscocks.
After his death his widow and family
took to farming pursuits at Burrumbeet,
where they had purchased land.
There was a family of two sons and
three daughters. Thomas, born October,
1834, married Elizabeth Thomas. John,
married Maryanne Thomas, no issue.
Emma Jane, married George Cogle. Their
descendants are four sons, four daughters,
twenty-four grandchildren (one killed at
the War). Elizabeth, married Evan
Buckley Hughes. Their descendants are
six sons, three daughters, twenty-seven
grandchildren (one killed at the War) and
twelve great-grandchildren. Jessie, mar-
ried John Shillington, their descendants
being one son, six daughters, thirty
grandchildren, and fourteen great-grand-
children. The eldest son, Thomas, married,
as previously stated, Elizabeth Thomas,
and had a family of four sons and six
daughters, all of whom married, and the
fifth generation are now living in Victoria
as follows: —
Thomas Bromley, who married Ellen
Meakins, is a highly respected business
man in Essendon. He was the Founder
and President of the Buninyong Old Boys’
Association, Melbourne Branch, in 1913.
His association with the Church of England
at Royal Park covers over 50 years, during
which time he has occupied many offices in
the Church, including that of Superintendent
of Sunday Schools. He has a family of one
son, four daughters, ten grandchildren, and
two great-grandchildren.


a?? .
The Thomas Hiscock Obelisk at
Buninyong.
George John, who married Mary Ann
Nantes, has been associated with the
well-known firm of Robison Bros. & Co.,
Engineers, South Melbourne, for forty-
seven years as chief of the Forging Depart-
ment, and for thirty-two years Examiner of
Blacksmithing in Technical Schools for the
Education Department of Victoria. There
is a family of one son and two daughters
(one deceased), two grandchildren, and one
great-grandchild.
Henry Edward married Sarah Ann
Coxall, and is prominently associated with
the North Eastern district as the proprietor
of the “Benalla Standard” for nearly fifty
years. He is also a Director of the
Country Press Co-op. Co. Ltd., Melbourne.
He has a family of eight sons (one
deceased), two daughters, and five grand-
children. One son served at the War.
Alice Elizabeth married Augustus
Stredwick, a well-known chemist of Kyne-
ton. Mrs. Stredwick died in 1900, leaving
a family of four sons (two deceased), two
daughters, and three grandchildren. One
son made the supreme sacrifice at the War.
The late Alfred William, the youngest
son, married Rose South. He was engaged
in commercial pursuits in the City of Bal-
larat, where he died in 1930 at the age of
65 years, leaving a family of five sons, four
daughters, and six grand-children.
Phebe Blanche married Hugh Trezise,
who was in the Postal Department at Bal-
larat, having a family of one son, three
daughters, and four grandchildren.
Edith Jessie married Ernest Wyatt,
a well-known master printer of Colling-
wood, Victoria, and there is a family of
four daughters and a son, and one grand-
child.
Mabel married Henry Manley, who is
proprietor of the Mincha Butter Factory,
Mincha, Victoria, and has a family of five
sons and one daughter.
Emily Mary married Arthur Mitchell
Armstrong, the proprietor of the “Kyne-
ton Guardian”, Kyneton, and there is a
family of four sons, and one grandchild.
Bessie Kate married William Burrows,
of Doncaster, and there is a family of eight
children, five sons and three daughters, and
six grandchildren.
Messrs. Thomas 8., George and Henry,
grandsons of Thomas Hiscock, the discov-
erer of gold, have each with their wives
celebrated their respective golden weddings.
This is rather unique in one family. These
gentlemen have each made their mark in
the business world of the State.
1 his is one of the few families in
\ ictoria to reach the fifth generation.
The wife of George J. Hiscock, who was
a cousin of Mr. W. A ills, the explorer, has
died in her 83rd year, in the 57th year of
her marriage, and was a colonist of 82 years.
Amongst the vocations of the descend-
ants of Thomas Hiscock are: The Press,
Medicine. Chemistry, Dentistry, Civil En-
gineering, General Engineering, Law, Bank
Cleiks, leaching, Artist, Manufacturing,
Industrial, Motor Engineering, Farming,
Orchardists, etc. The eldest grandson has
now reached the age of 80 years.


The late Mr. Donald Campbell.
A Brief Outline of the History of the
ate Donald Campbell and the late John Archibald
Campbell, of Victoria and New South Wales.
Whilst this publication aims at the
chronicling of the foundation and subse-
quent history of our earliest families, it is
but natural that, where the family con-
cerned possesses a genealogical tree and
history in the Old Country in which pride
can with justification be felt, such matters
shall be recorded herein.
Such an one is the family now reviewed.
The Campbell family for centuries has rep-
resented the best in citizenship in the
British Empire. It has been intimately
connected with the farming and grazing
interests in Argyleshire for generations and,
in company with many Scottish names, has
on the other side of the world, equally as
much as in Australia, represented all those
ideals with which the name of the British
Commonwealth of Nations has become asso-
ciated.
The first of this family to come to Aus-
tralia from Argyle was the late Donald
Campbell who made the hazardous journey,
in the year 1836 to Sydney. It is worthy of
record that Mrs. Donald Campbell, born
1816, was the daughter of Mr. Duncan Sin-
clair, grazier, of Ballibeg, Parish of Inni-
shael, Argyle, Scotland, and she arrived and


f
■ •• *' <•*%. ::i %
S|' i ; y ,/
The late Mr. J. A. Campbell.
married in Melbourne on Black Thursday,
6th February, 1851 —and in this union was
an amalgamation of two of Scotland’s old
families,
The late Donald Campbell arrived in
New South Wales, and overlanding sheep to
Port Phillip, in his first venture, took up
land in Gippsland, whilst later —in the year
1846 —he was in residence at Bullock Creek
a Station property—and later again pur-
chased “Glengower Estate” near Clunes.
The last named property was purchased
from the late Captain McLachan.
His first son, Donald was born at Bul-
lock Creek and was drowned in the Lodden
River at Glengower in the year 1860. His
second son, the late Mr. John Archibald
Campbell, was born at Bullock Creek
Station in the year 1854, and was destined
to become one of the leading graziers and
pastoralists in Australia. Receiving his
education at the Ballarat and Scotch Col-
leges, he finished with an extended com-
mercial course in The London Bank. All
his life he laboured on the improvement
both of his properties and stock and in both
of these directions attained a degree of
success which reflected the greatest credi
on both himself and those members of his
family who, in later years, collaborate*
with him in his responsibilities.
Following the completion of his edu-
cational activities, he purchased a property
at Murrill Creek, New South Wales, and
later entered into partnership on the
“ Dungalear ” Station in the late seventies
with his father-in-law Mr. John Gordon,
who arrived in the Colon}" in 1835. The
last-named property came into his sole
possession in 1885, by purchase, when Mr
Gordon settled in England.
This Station “Dungalear”, situated at
Walgett, New South Wales, progressed
through his lifetime to become the most
improved and efficient property of the kind
for many miles around and, furthermore,
the quality of the output in Merino wool
became famous not only in fhig country,


“Dungalear” Homestead
but overseas also. Little doubt can legiti-
mately be entertained that the late Mr.
John Archibald Campbell was one of the
pioneers in the wool industry (and more
especially insofar as _ the finest grades of
pure merino are concerned) and the name
of Campbell will ever be an honoured one
in Australia for this reason.
It is worthy of recording that the
“Uungalear” Station has remained the
property of the Campbell family to the
present time. However, in addition to his
responsibilities on his own propertv, the
late Mr. J. A. Campbell also undertook the
supervision of “ Tubbo ” Estate in the
Riverina, which was at that time one of
the largest in that portion of New South
Wales territory.
It seems redundant to reiterate the
foresight of such as the late Mr. Campbell
but, if further proof of his judgment and
ability were needed, it may be mentioned
that under his guidance Tubbo became one
01 the finest wool producing areas in the
Commonwealth.
In addition to his active participation
in the wool industry, he was an enthusi-
astic breeder of pure bred cattle and horses
and, in this direction he also, reached an
exceptional degree of success. It is on
record that he was the breeder of the Grand
National Hurdle Race winner, “Wingarara,”
and many other high-class performers.
In addition to having been one of the
Founders of the Pastoralists Association of
Victoria in the year 1890, the late Mr. J.
A. Campbell occupied the position of Pres-
ident of that body for the years 1902 to
1906. He was a member of four Pastoral-
ists’ Federal Councils, the first of which in
1891 successfully established the definition
of “Freedom of Contract.” He was Presi-
dent of the Sheep Breeders’ Association
of Victoria for many years and was an
active supporter and worker for the annual
exhibitions held in Melbourne.
As the years passed his accumulated
knowledge of such matters as the fore-
going was called upon by many quarters
and he, amongst other activities, occupied


:• - - -. ■ : ;■ • iv y^1. s fr. < ,*>i. ji
‘ /V r * I jj |
Section of “Dungalear” Woolshed
a seat on the Melbourne Board of Advice
pertaining to the nation-wide known firm
of Dalgety & Company Limited.
In still another direction was his know-
ledge recognised and fully availed of, for
he became President of the Pastoralists’
Union of the Southern Riverina where his
forceful —and indeed masterful —addresses
were appreciated for the wealth of practi-
cal knowledge contained. His experience
was ever at the disposal of his fellows and
they one and all were ever willing to take
full advantage of his advice.
When Great Britain purchased the
whole of the Australian Wool Clip during
the war period, he was chosen as a repre-
sentative of the graziers on the Central
Wool Committee to control the appraise-
ment of the wool clip.
The late Mr. John Archibald Campbell
married Miss Jane Gordon, daughter of Mr.
John Gordon, of Borabola, near Wagga and
Barellan near Narrandera. There was a
family in all of four sons and four daughters
of whom the late Lieut. Donald Gordon
Campbell served in France and made the
supreme sacrifice at Mouquef Farm pn the


Early Wool Transport ‘'Dungalear” Station.
Somme on the 3rd of September, 1916, and
the late Lieut. Walter Stanley Campbell,
M.C., was also killed in action at Lesbouefs
cn the Somme, on the 7th October, 1916.
Mr. John Alan Campbell, the youngest
son, purchased “Dungalear” from the Trus-
tees of his late father’s estate and carries
on the management of this property in
addition to that of his other holding “Soho,”
Drysdale, in the State of Victoria.
The late Mr. John Archibald Campbell
died on the 9th day of December in the
year 1916 whilst in residence at “Ottawa,”
Toorak, Victoria and his widow is in resi-
dence in Melbourne at the time of our going
to press.


I 111 i — , in |
y' ' y t' >tT* i • f
Mr JOHN MILNE M« WILLIAM MILNE
‘ I » ■*’’ '
M " M
Mrs R, L. SCOTT
Tnt uir Mr * Mr-*, DISHER and auNocHaontN
THE MILNE FAMILY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
THE MILNE FAMILY OL SOUTH AUSTRALIA
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


The Milne Family of South Australia
The story of Sir William Milne’s
career has already been given in detail in
earlier chapters of this work. He, with the
Wisher family, sailed from Glasgow in the
ship “ Palmyra,” landing at Holdfast Bay
on October 29th 1839.
The Disher family comprised John, his
wife Elizabeth and seven children. They
settled on the land at Nairne, South
Australia, being the first to establish a home
in that portion of the State.
The late Mrs. Disher died at the age of
92 years, at Woodside, being survived by
four of her children;—R. Disher of New
Zealand, J. W. Disher of Charleston, Mrs.
James Johnston of Oakbank and Lady
Milne. At the time of her death there
were 174 descendants of the Disher family,
most of whom lived in South Australia.
No family has a greater right to be in-
cluded in the South Australian section of
“ Founders of Australia.”
The eldest daughter, Eliza Disher, was
married to William Milne in 1841, at Holy
Trinity Church, Adelaide, by Dean Farrell,
and they had a family of eleven : —Eliza
(Mrs. Phillips), Ellen (Lady Bundey),
Margaret (Mrs. F. Price), William, Mary,
Barbara (Mrs. E. Ayers), John, George,
James, Florence (Lady Lancelot Stirling)
and Blanche Maud (Mrs. Lomax Scott).
Blanche Maud married Robert Lomax
Scott, a well known pastoralist of Victoria
and New South Wales, who died at the age
of 71 years, in 1935. Robert Lomax Scott
owned the largest sheep station in the
Western District of New South Wales,
“Belalie” on the Warrego River carrying
100,000 sheep and in the year 1894 during
the shearers’ strike some 130,000 sheep were
shorn. There are three children :—Lomax
Milne Scott, Lilian Maud (Mrs. M. Hodge)
and Olive Jean (Mrs. E. Ragless).
Mrs. Hodge has two children, Matthew
Scott Hodge, and Patricia Scott Hodge
These children represent the fifth genera-
tion of the Disher, and the fourth generation
of the Milne families.
Mrs. R. Lomax Scott is now living in
retirement at Mount Lofty in the Adelaide
Hills.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


■■ ■ — —
I*' '--
* ' M». CHARt Cy NEWMAN | | Mr H A. NEWMAN | \ < M“, TamCS |
-I | I , I |
The H. A. Newman Family of "Blackford”
Charleston, South Australia
Few families have had a longer con-
tinuous association with one district than
the Newmans. The late Charles Newman
was born at Somersetshire, England, on
March 9th, 1821, and arrived in South Aus-
tralia by the ship “Catherine Stewart
Forbes” on the 21st of October, 1837, a few
months after the Proclamation of the
Province. He died at Charleston on
September 7th, 1900. His career in South
Australia is best given in his own words,
which we reproduce later on.
Charles Newman married Mary Dunn,
daughter of William Dunn of Charleston,
and their family were : William, Jane
(Mrs. Pope), George and Herbert Alfred,
of whom the latter survives. Charles
Newman was a clever and most public
spirited man, and did much for his district.
Herbert Alfred Newman was born at
Charleston in 1863, and after finishing his
education locally, joined his father on the
property, which he took over on the death
of Charles Newman. He, like his father,
has taken an active interest in local affairs.
Both father and son occupied seats on the
local District Council for many years, and
of which Herbert Alfred was Chairman for
seven years. He has devoted much time to
the local Methodist Church, being superin-
tendent of the Sunday School for 25 years.
He married Alice, daughter of Richard
James, of Charleston, thus joining two
pioneer families.
H. A. Newman is the oldest native
born resident of Charleston. “Blackford”
contains some 800 acres of rich agricultural
soil, which has grown some remarkable
crops. A feature on the property is an
enormous pine tree with a circumference
of 17ft. bin. at the butt. The clover pad-
docks of “Blackford” are renowned for
their splendid crops. The Newman family
occupies an honored place on the roll of
“Founders of Australia.”
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


RECOLLECTIONS OE LONG AGO,
By Charles Newman.
South Australia in 1837.
I he Arrival of the Pioneers
No wharf or jetty could be seen
Along that desert strand,
The tents were few and far between,
Among those hills of sand.
The men with wives upon their backs
Made for the distant shore,
Like donkeys with their heavy packs
I’d often seen before.
On Sunday, October 21st, 1888, was the
nity-first anniversary of my landing in South
Australia, the ship which brought me out being
the “Catherine Stewart Forbes ” (Captain Fel,
Commander).
We sighted land, Kangaroo Island, on Sun-
day, October 17th and went into Kingscote for
orders early on Monday morning. Among the
passengers were several under engagement to
the South Australian Company, myself included.
L hen we left England we were told that in all
probability we should land at Kangaroo Island
to look after sheep, but on our arrival we were
informed that there were only three sheep on the
Island. Probably these were the three of which
the late Mr. Bull wrote in his early experiences.
As we were seven in number (three shepherds,
three assistants and one overseer) the thing
looked rather ludricrous. Finally we received
marching orders from the then Company’s head
manager, Mr. David McLaren, to go on to the
Main Land, making a start on Tuesday morning
the 19th, and dropping anchor in Holdfast Bay
in the afternoon of the same day. When the
sailors were letting the anchor run a little too
fast, the Captain, standing on the poop, repeated
these words three times: “Check the cable!” I
have often thought since then that if some of
our fast goers were to act on the Captain’s ad-
vice and check the cable in another direction,
there would not be so many poor unfortunate
sots seeking refuge at our Inebriate Retreat.
On the 20th Mr. Lillecrapp, the overseer,
went up to Adelaide for further orders, and on
f hursday, October 2lst, we were sent off in the
Long boat; as she grounded in about three feet
of water there was nothing for it but to take
an unwilling bath.
On reaching the sandhills we saw three bul-
lock teams waiting for us and among the drivers
was that Magee who afterwards brought him-
self into such notoriety by being the first man
hanged in the Colony.
The earliest sign of civilisation we saw on
our way to Adelaide was a number of huts called
Buffalo Row after the vessel in which the people
came out. I said to the lad who was with me
(mind, we were both from Somersetshire, dres-
sed in smock frocks reaching down to the cal-
ves of our legs) “Sam dost thee zee them pig-
stys down there, I wonder where the voaks do
live.” These huts were made of reeds from the
River Torrens, and the site was near where the
jail now stands, no doubt to have easy access to
water. Finally we made a 'halt on North Ter-
race, in front of a weather-boarded house. I
looked gloomily at the rude structure and said
to the driver “Is this the house we have to live
in? ’‘No,”- said the bullpuncher, “that’s the
Company’s bank.”
At this time there was a small cart or truck
brought out, drawn by one man, into which our
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


luggage was transferred, and with a little of our
assistance in the haulage business, we were taken
up to where the Company’s bridge is now erected
over the Torrens, and there assisted to make
and burn the first kiln of bricks in the Colony;
they were what is called sand stocks, and as they
have the Company’s initials S.A.C. pressed into
them, no doubt in the course of time will have
historical importance, for I believe there are
many of them in the Company’s old bank on
North Terrace, afterwards called Trues Hotel.
People reading this might be somewhat
puzzled about the South Australian Company
and the South Australian Banking Company, as
the latter was then called, but at that time the
managers of both Companies acted conjointly
in the management of both concerns. I well
remember a man belonging to one of the survey
parties standing on the corner of our kiln with
his flagpole, to mark the line that divides the
Company’s section from the Parklands (now
called Hackney); we were taking out bricks at
the time, and, as there was a hot wind blowing
at the time we completely covered him with red
sand.
In 1838 the winter proved too wet for brick-
making, so I went to live with Peter Cook, the
butcher, where I became a sort of town directory
for as there were only two butchers’ shops in
Adelaide, I knew almost everybody. I well
remember standing at Sladen’s house on North
Terrace while going one of my rounds with
orders and thence watching my old acquaintance
M agee passing down where the gate to Govern-
ment House now stands, on his way to be
hanged. He was sitting in a cart dressed in
either a white shirt or jumper, with the usual
rabble following in his wake.
The place of execution was a large gum tree
under North Adelaide Hill, not far from the
Torrens dam. He was tied to one of its branches
and the cart drawn from under him. We hear
a good deal about that old gum tree at Hold-
fast Bay, where the proclamation flag was hois-
ted, but has this old tree no historical import-
ance, or was that spectacle of too grim a nature
for history to perpetuate? No doubt it was one
of the clumsiest and most painful executions
ever performed in the Colony, both for the cul-
prit and spectators, for the latter saw Magee
writhing and twisting about long after life should
have been extinct.
Here is a little incident which will surprise
some modern Kangaroo hunters; a man named
Sladen used to bring the hind quarters of kan-
garoos to Peter’s shop, who retailed them at a
shilling a pound. He also bought eggs at six-
pence each and sold them at seven pence. In
1839 I went back with the Company again and
was employed as night watchman on a sheep
station at Coromandel Valley, which derives its
name through some of the Coromandel sailors
hiding themselves there until their ship had left
the Colony.
In the latter end of April, in the same year,
the Company selected their special survey on
the sources of the Onkaparinga and we were
shifted at once on to their new purchase, where
we had many troubles to contend with. The
blacks were defiant, and the wild dogs impudent
with cold and hunger, particularly in lambing
time, and as we had nothing but netting for yards
we had to make fires at night to scare them
away. We had only been there just long enough
to build a hut, when Joe Stagg and Goften (who
afterwards came to such a tragical death) called
upon us with saddles on their backs and asked
for a night’s lodging, having lost their horses
at Mount Crawford, where no doubt they were
spying about with a view to stealing cattle. I
knew Goften at once, for he had been engaged
with another man to put up the fence dividing
the Company’s section from the Parklands. We
stayed up late that evening, and Stagg told some
curious stories about how many blacks he had
shot in Van Dieman’s Hand.
On one occasion, he, with some others, had
been out all day looking for blacks, but had
failed to run them down so they camped for the
night. Next morning about daylight they heard
a blackfellow whistle —apparently for his dog:
(the blacks used no fire at night for fear of
being seen by the enemy). They crawled up as
close to the black’s camp as was safe without
giving alarm, and then rushed on them, killing
everybody they could lay hands on—men, women
and children, without the slightest regard to
age or sex. Thus a lot of long sentenced crimi-
nals were allowed by the Government to murder
women and otherwise abuse them and their
children according as their low blood-thirsty
natures dictated without being answerable to
anyone for their foul deeds. The blacks were
outlawed at the time for having treated the
whites in like fashion. Here were the sins of
the fathers visited upon the children with ven


geance, and that with the sanction of a British
Government. Perhaps this will explain what
Stagg said on the gallows before he was hanged
for the murder of his mate Goften: “I know I
deserve hanging, although I am innocent of the
crime for which I am about to suffer.” That is
the only person, I believe, who has been hanged
up to this time, where there has been a doubt of
guilt. In this case there was a policeman who
had a good deal of suspicion cast upon him, of
tic name of Lomas. The evidence was purely
Licumstantial, but as Stagg was a most notor-
ious bad character he got very little sympathy
from the general public.
On another occasion we had to leave the
h it while we took the sheep to be shorn, while
were away Green and Wilson, two famous
horse stealers, came and robbed the hut, taking
a aj all our flour, sugar and tea, besides a clean
shirt of mine. Their camp was near where the
\\ oodside mines are now situated. One morn-
n g they left, telling Mrs. Green who was with
t. Lin, to remain until they returned. However,
a cr waiting two days, she left, and found her
way down to Leggets, who was shepherding
where Inverbrackie is now. I might mention
here, although we recovered part of the tea, we
n \ er used it, on account of its having been
stowed away in one of Mrs. Green’s stockings.
Not very nice was it?
About this time I was minding sheep near
waere Charleston stands now, when a police-
man approached me and asked if I had seen a
strange man pass that way during the past day
or so, because he was looking for one of three
" > had turned bushrangers, and who were last
seen near Crafers. These were Curran, Hughes
an-1 Fox, the last named being still at large.
He said the man was a vandemonian. I answered
that there was a man about a mile up the valley
with a survey party, but I don’t think he will
■m:t you for he said he came out in the ship
h itherine Stewart Forbes” the second time she
arrived here. However after asking about
Hit, complexion and so one, the trooper re-
plied: I think he will do.” and in about an hour
1 saw him and the Crafers barman who accom-
panied him to identify the fellow going back with
|lif r prisoner. Mr. Bull was mis-informed when
he affirmed that Fox was taken near Crafers.
A little incident in connection with Fox is
perhaps worth recording. A shepherd named
ftone had heard much about the dreadful bush-
rangers, and was very afraid they would give him
a call. During his excitement a man came to
his hut and asked for a drink of tea, but Bone
was not satisfied to give him tea only, but asked
him to spend the night as a sort of protection.
The man consented to do so, and after taking
breakfast next morning continued his journey
up the valley. Afterwards it was ascertained
that it was Fox.
When I was in my twentieth year I was put
in charge of a flock of sheep with a man ten years
older than myself as mate who only received two
thirds of my wages; considering my youth, such
an appointment was at that time equal, if not
superior, to a man being appointed to the Com-
mission of the Peace now.
I held that position for about four years,
when the Company sent most of their sheep to
Mount Gambier, only keeping back one very
superior flock, which they gave into my charge.
These I held for another year when I declared
my independence and gave up my charge, much
against the overseer’s wish.
T was now about 25 years of age, and had
saved sufficient money to buy a section of land
very near, if not quite equal to any section in
the Onkaparinga Valley, but by the time I had
bought everything necessary to< carry on the
farm, my finances had become so low that I
often found my purse empty. I commenced
farming like many others, selling wheat at three
shillings a bushel, but as soon as the Victorian
diggings were discovered the price gradually
went up to five shillings a bushel, and continued
to rise until it reached twenty-three shillings. I
sold several hundred bushels at that price, and,
if I remember rightly, I got twenty-four shill-
ings for one load being, I believe, the highest
price obtained in the Colony, the late firm of
Beeby and Dunstan being the purchasers.
But as I have now come to the time of the
Victorian diggings, I am reminded that the
period of authentic Colonial history has been
reached, and what has transpired since is now
common property.
My subsequent experiences have been the
experiences of thousands. Like the Colony I
had my ups and downs, but by the exercise of
habits of diligence and economy I have been
able to hold my own during adverse times and
circumstances, and like many sensible persons
whom T have met I am still of opinion that with
fair treatment South Australia is not an unsuit-
able place as a home for hopeful hearts and
willing hands.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


| T- : i. * • t Mb i Mbs W DUNN Mb DOUGLAS DUNN
| jdfl v ‘^■P ai l **' nS -> Ms" *’ pjjjV t Sb
i i J
M,» V. E. DUNN —*" Twt L»r« GEORGE DUNN '“*' M»s. GEORGE DUNN M , v e DUNN |
■ s-,rR ' ' * ■ ""''' ■ '' ' v. r,- i-FR I
I mf/»/mssww//r//s/j» rATHER Mfvs o^ NN - .III 1U W AIuUJInmum■ 11n-,im r .- flT| mnninaimimnim, gp*****”*— *>»—*• M THefJ of; _
Mbs, J W DUNN j Master M W DUNN Mr J W DUNN
. !
THE DUNNS OF “ GUM BANK,*’ CHARLESTON, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
THE DUNNS OF “GUMBANK.” CHARLESTON, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


The Dunns of “Gumbank” Charleston, South Australia
William Dunn arrived in South Australia
with his wife and family on the ship
“Brightman” on October 10th, 1840. A
brother had arrived previously and William
joined him in pastoral pursuits at Charle-
ston. William Dunn, after a successful
career died on April 12th, 1879. He was
born at Bideford, Devonshire, England in
1 "97. Elizabeth, his wife, was also a native
of Bideford where she was born in 1805 and
died at Charleston on November 24th, 1875,
George, their son, was born at “Gum-
bank” on the 14th July, 1843 and after
receiving his education locally joined his
father on the property and was engaged in
grazing and farming up to the time of his
death on April 18th, 1906. George Dunn
was a well-known identity in the Charleston
district where his public work is still
remembered. As a flockmaster he estab-
lished an enviable reputation and the “Gum-
bank” merino sheep were renowned for
their quality. “Gumbank” wool maintained
consistently high prices in the local market.
George Dunn did much to enhance the pro-
gress of the district and every movement
towards this object received his active sup-
port. For many years he was a member of
the local district council and was one of the
founders of the local butter factory.
His wife, Eliza Jane, was the daughter
of James Wardlaw Disher, who arrived in
South Australia in 1839. Their family
consisted of Lionel William Garie, James
Wardlaw, Douglas Robert (deceased),
Helen Marion, Victor Ernest, Mary Eliza-
beth (deceased), Laura Amelia, and Ruby
Violet. L. W. G. Dunn married Ethel
Sarah Crase and has a son Douglas Ward-
law Dunn.
Helen Marion married Gerald Albert
William Pope and they have three sons,
Robert Wardlaw, Geoffrey Gerald, and
Henry James.
James Wardlaw Dunn married Amana
Matilda Salmon and has two surviving
children Mary Patricia and William Ward-
law.
Victor Ernest Dunn married Kathleen
Margaret Disher and they have five child-
ren, George Wardlaw, Joan Margaret, John
Mackinnon, Helen Mary, and David Mal-
colm.
Ruby Violet Dunn married Andrew
Smillie Hughes and their two surviving
children are Andrew Richard and Elizabeth
Jane.
The great-great-grandchildren of Wil-
liam and Elizabeth Dunn are Malcolm
Wardlaw Dunn and Pauline Dunn.
“Gumbank” is still in the hands of the
family, being owned by Messrs. James
Wardlaw and Victor Ernest Dunn who are
maintaining the quality of the flock estab-
lished by their grandfather, William Dunn,
whose great-great-grandchildren represent
the fourth generation of Dunns on the pro-
perty.
Ihe eldest son, Lionel, is living in
Adelaide and his son Douglas has a boy,
Douglas Malcolm.
The parents of William Dunn came to
South Australia in 1845, so the last men-
tioned child Douglas Malcolm, represents
the sixth generation of the Dunn family in
Australia. This is unique in South Aus-
tralian circles.
Few families have a better right to be
enrolled amongst the “Founders of Aus-
tralia” as each generation of the Dunns has
contributed towards the building up of the
progress of South Australia.
Miss L. A. Dunn resides in the delight-
ful old homestead “Gumbank” erected on the
English style by William Dunn in the
early forties. This is one of the earliest
houses erected in this part of the State.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


~—ni fjf m
Tmi iat* JOHN INKSTER. SNR Ml>? JOHN INKSTER snh.
* SWWW.AwWA8WJ*RWRIRflg«W8WAABBRMKMEaWR«<»wa"WtTO . i . \
''' ; x 4 £|9
■ i I ||| i AUST. ART. K.i.A. 1916
Mrs A. J. INKSTER ’ M«. A J. INKSTER
I Mr C. H. INKSTER xr j ,ar.nt. os mrs ! x j Tm » lati a - h 'NKSTER «.r. |
Li 1— _J
THE INKSTER FAMILY OF THE WEST COAST, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


The Inkster Family of the West Coast
South Australia.
The late John Inkster, senior, of “ The
( iiilly,” Hlliston, was a native of the
v hetland Islands, Scotland, where he was
born in the year 1826. At the age of
twenty-seven he came to South Australia
on the ship “ Steadfast.”
He soon made his way to the Victorian
gold fields where he met with fair success,
and later made a second visit there. He
then farmed at Riverton, South Australia,
for some twenty-five years, and afterwards
took up land at Waterloo Bay—now named
Elliston.
His first area was nine hundred acres,
to which he added considerably. He
engaged in both agricultural and pastoral
work and was not only one of the early
settlers, but also a most successful one.
His interest in the district was maintained
throughout his long residence there. He
was a Justice of the Peace for many years.
In the year 1857 John Inkster married
Barbara, second daughter of the late
Matthew Cheyne of Riverton, and there
was a family of twelve, seven of whom
survived his death which occurred in the
year 1910 at the age of eighty-four.
One son, Arthur Hugh, who died in
1906, represented the district in the House
of Assembly for two Parliaments.
The eldest son, Councillor Andrew
John Inkster, J.P. of “ Three Lakes,”
Elliston, was born at Riverton in 1862.
After finishing his education he was
employed on his father’s property until
1893, when he acquired land on his own
account. He devoted most of his energies
to agriculture, in which, like his father, he
has been most successful. Up to seven
bags of wheat to the acre have been har-
vested at ‘‘Three Lakes.” Sheep of the
Merino breed have been grazed on the pro-
perty" for many y'ears.
Few men have given more time to the
public life of their districts than Andrew
John Inkster. He was elected to the
Elliston District Council in 19C0, and has
sat continuously since. This is an unique
record for South Australia. For the last
twenty-four years he has been Chairman of
the Council. He is the senior fustice of
the Peace, and has been most active in
promoting the progress of the district
which he has seen grow from a vast area of
virgin bush to its present prosperity. He


helped to build both the Elliston Anglican
and the Methodist Churches.
Andrew John Inkster married Catherine
Cheyne, and there was a family of eleven ;
Marjorie (Mrs. R. F. Agars), Andrew,
Mary (Mrs, Underwood), Doris, Katherine
(Mrs. Mortimer), Taura (Mrs. Munro),
Isabel (Mrs. Batstone), Arthur, William,
Joyce and Cedric. Andrew joined the
Australian Imperial Force in the Great
War, and made the supreme sacrifice in
France in 1916 at the early age of twenty-
one years.
“ Three Lakes ” is ideally situated
about five miles north from Elliston, and
contains some three thousand six hundred
acres.
In the early days of the district,
Andrew John Inkster did a good deal of
exploration work, which fitted him for his
task as a Councillor in opening up the
country. He was mainly instrumental in
getting the local hospital established, and a
resident medical man for the district.
There are twenty-three grand-children
who represent the fourth generation of both
the Inkster and Cheyne families in South
Australia.
Charles Henderson Inkster, J.P. “ The
Gully,” Elliston, South Australia, son of
the late John Inkster, was born in the year
1874, on the family property at Riverton.
He received his education at Elliston and
then joined his father, and has been engaged
in agricultural and pastoral work ever since.
He took over “ The Gully ” in 1900,
cultivating and grazing an area of some
3,600 acres.
Tike his father and brother, Charles
Henderson Inkster has taken an active part
in the public life of the district. He has
served about twelve years as a Councillor
and was created a Justice of the Peace in
1909. The local Institute has occupied a
lot of his time, he being Secretary of the
same for seven years, and President for five
years.
As an agriculturist and pastoralist,
Charles Henderson Inkster has had a
successful career. Up to six bags of
wheat to the acre have been taken off, and
22d per lb received for wool from the
property.
Every movement for the welfare of the
district has received his active co-operation.
Charles Henderson Inkster married
Miss Lucy McNamara, daughter of Michael
McNamara of Victoria, and their son, John
Charles, was born in 1921.
Few families have a greater right to he
included on the roll of Founders of
Australia.


■BT* ' x » ■' - M
' ' m
Mr. William Ferguson
Mrs. William Ferguson
FERGUSON FAMILY of Myrtle Bank
and Moolooloo.
\\ illiam and Rosina Ferguson, the
founders of this family in Australia, were
both born in Dumfriesshire, Scotland, and
sailed for Australia on the S. “Buffalo” in
company with the first Governor of South
Australia, Captain (later Rear Admiral Sir
John) Hindmarsh and his staff, landing at
Holdfast Bay on December 28th, 1836.
The first child was born before landing,
otherwise it would have been the first white
child born in South Australia. On arrival
they walked to Adelaide, and then William
Ferguson took up an area of land and
engaged in farming, eventually purchasing
that well-known property, “Myrtle Bank,”
Where the fine residence built by the Elder
family was erected. He is recognised as
being one of the first agriculturists in South
Australia.
1 here was a family of two sons,
William Andrew and John Thomas, and
four daughters.
William Andrew, the elder son, was
born in the year 1850, and was educated
at St. Peter’s College, being one of the first
students there. After finishing his edu-
cation he engaged in pastoral work as
manager for his brother-in-law, Mr. Ten-
nant, of Moolooloo. This was a very large
area. He took over part of this property
on his own account in the early ninties,
known as North Moolooloo. This property
covered 140 square miles, used exclusively
for sheep-raising.


4 yi#J$4*
# * *
i
s %. £_
fj h I ft Pm | am «fi. j|f ■' %
W
Mr. William Andrew Ferguson.
Mrs. William Andrew Ferguson.
Mr. J. T. Ferguson.
William Andrew Ferguson married
Rachel Rosina Bell, daughter of Thomas
Bell, of Dumfriesshire, Scotland, who had
previously come to South Australia to join
Mr. and Mrs. William Ferguson, of “Myrtle
Bank, some years before. This marriage
took place in 1892. There w r as a family
of one son, \\ illiam Bell Ferguson, and


®F® t ’iB ;^’o.
.f.mmga —.— ji^K^PscS
|g| JH
iwMMM - **!*»,
V : m M '
Bp
w
g.-c f #» B»£ yM
lv
■V
9$
Mr. William Bell Ferguson,
Mrs. R. L. Dawes.
Mrs. L. V. Ragless.
two daughters, Christina Forsyth, now
Mrs. R. R. Dawes, and Dorothy Carrington,
now Mrs, D. V. Ragless, of Balcanoona
Station. William Andrew Ferguson died
in 1924.
\\ illiam Bell Ferguson was born on
the station “Moolooloo,” and was educated
at Prince Alfred College, then returning to
the property. He joined the A.I.F. and
served overseas for four and a half years,


— ' '* ~
Master Robert Bell Dawes,
Master William Richard Ferguson
“Moolooloo” Station.


and on his return became manager of
Moolooloo, and later took over the pro-
pel t_\ wheie he still resides. He married
Lena Ruby Ragless, daughter of Richard
Ragless, of Witchilina Station. There is one
son, \\ illiam, and two daughters, Jean and
Helen. Christina has three sons, Robert
Sell, Lionel, and Alan. Mrs. Ragless has
two children, Richard and Margaret. These
children represent the fourth generation,
and Master Robert Bell Dawes is the fourth
Robert Dawes in succession.
1 his is one of the oldest families in
the State, with which it has been associated
for one hundred years. During this long
period the family has been actively engaged
in the agricultural and pastoral life of
South Australia.
Mrs. W. A. Ferguson and her grandchildren.


, ' ' - , ' J , ,
,-»• ~ ■ I ;\ . /\ ■ cs-'fvv ■ ■■ • * •
- ■•■ v- 1—.
“Myrtle Bank” Homestead.


A Brief History of
1 he late John Allen and Mr. William Allen,
of Moolap, Geelong, Victoria
The history of the family now under
review forms a typical example of the won-
derful perseverence and pluck possessed by
our early settlers at a time when pluck and
sheer spirit made it possible for such as
they to make good progress under difficul-
ties almost impossible to be understood by
we of a later generation.
Before commencing the story proper,
it is of interest to emphasise a few of the
points contained herein. The efforts in
those early days at mining, brick-making,
farming—on less than ten acres of land—-
and, later, the ultimate successes achieved;
the forsaking of all chance of education at
the age of eight-and-a-half years by a lad
anxious to help his parents during a time
of difficulty, and the man-sized job made of
his responsibilities by that same lad, need no
emphasising to impress upon the modern
mind the sheer quality of our ancestors.
That prosperity has accrued to such as
the present head of this family is but true
justice and the lessons of loyalty taught by
his efforts as a boy have been again re-
peated in the service extended by the
daughter who has seen fit to stand side by
side with her parents right up to the pre-
sent day.
The late John and Mary Allen came
from their home in Bedfordshire in the year
1851, aboard one of the early sailing ships
plying on the route in their generation. The
journey, as was so common at that time,
occupied no less than six months from the
day of their departure from Birkenhead to
their arrival in Australian waters.
In Bedfordshire they and their family
had been farmers for many years and it was
owing to the failure of a bank in the Old
Country that they decided to make the
adventurous journey to the new land. The
journey was not without experience for the
couple brought aboard with them their two
sons William—aged two years, and John,
but the latter was unfortunately destined
never to reach these shores for he was
buried at sea during the voyage.
Arriving in Victorian waters, the medi-
cal inspection revealed that there were
measles among the passengers and, as a
result, the ship and all aboard her were
placed in the quarantine grounds which
were in those days situated at Sorrento, as
it is now named, and there they remained
for the required period of probation.
Following the release of the ship’s pas-
sengers, the late Mr. Allen proceeded with


Ifcsw I I
f*kiJb
The late WILLIAM JOHN ALLEN Miss ESTHER MAY ALLEN
.
The late JOHN ALLEN Mrs. MARY JANE ASH T„ r LATE M rs MARY ALLEN
The late Mrs SARAH ANN CENDIE Mrs, AL.CE ELIZABETH LUGG Mk WILLIAM ALLEN


his wife and son to Geelong which was, at
that time, the most important settlement in
these parts. In those days there was an
emigrants’ home situated in Little Malop
Street, and to this building the little family
—together with one or two friends made
during the voyage from England—went.
\\ ith practically no delay Mr. Allen started
work with a Mr. Atkins who was at the
time proprietor of Macks Motel and, at the
same time, held a position under the govern-
ment as an overseer in charge of Crown land
near the wharf.
It seems almost impossible to realise
that the young settler was employed by Mr.
Atkins on the land near the wharves teach-
ing the sailors in port to grow vegetables
and kindred activities—nevertheless, this
formed his occupation. Following six
months at these labours Mr. Allen, in com-
pany with three fellow passengers from
England named Cooper, Brooks and
Lowndes, decided to try their luck on the
diggings booming throughout the State,
However, after only a short while —■ during
which they were so unfortunate as to see a
fellow-worker killed almost before their
eyes—they gave up their work at Ballarat
and returned to Geelong.
The next work undertaken by Mr. Allen
was during the harvest near what is now
Prince’s Bridge, Geelong, and, following the
completion of that contract, he —in company
with Lowndes and Edwards (also a fellow
passenger aboard ship) started in business
as brickmakers near the new cemetery at
West Geelong and from the beginning of
their activities met with a considerable
degree of success.
During these early days of their work
they sent a large part of their bricks out to
Moolap for works in that locality and, as a
result, Mr. Allen on one momentous
occasion decided to take a stroll out to the
parts where the loads were being sent.
Little as he thought at the time, this stroll
was destined to be the foundation of his
future success in life for, during his trip, he
made arrangements to invest in ten acres
of land which seemed to him favorable for
his new occupation.
However, at the urgent request of his
old workmate Brooks—whose name alreadv
appears in these hues—he sold two-and-a-
half acres of this land, thus leaving him with
seven-and-a-half acres, and this land still
forms portion of the family holdings which
now comprise several hundred acres—cer-
tain it is that this first investment in broad
acres formed the foundation of his prosperity
and also his son in later years.
It should be mentioned at this stage
that this same Mr. Brooks had in earlier
years married a sister of Mr. Allen who had
also died and been buried at sea during the
voyage out from the Old Country. At a
later period Mr. Allen re-purchased Mr.
Brooks’ holding, thus bringing back into his
possession the original ten acres adjoining
White Horse lane which he had bought in
the first instance.
Mr. Allen and his family were com-
pelled to live in a tent for no less than two
years during which time he discovered that
the bricks from his new holdings were not
as successful as had been the case in West
Geelong. However, he contrived to build


a brick house during these times of trial and
they ultimately moved into it and, at the
same time, carried on farming operations
and also carted wood from his land into
Geelong.
The farming and wood carting and sell-
ing came to be his principal work and at it
he flourished. From time to time he was
enabled to invest in more and more land at
Moolap —amongst which was another acre-
age with another and better house already
built and, to this the family was able to
transfer their home. Little imagination
need be used to visualise the magnificent
efforts of not only Mr. Allen but, also, his
wife and son during these times of hard
and courageous endeavour. As the years
passed his holdings increased by ten acres
here and ten acres there until he owned
between three and four hundred acres of
farming properties.
During these years he found time to
assist his Church to a very great degree and
his efforts on behalf of the Wesleyan Church
at Moolap were freely acknowledged by
those in authority in a very fine letter to his
widow on the occasion of his death.
The late Mr. John Allen passed away at
the age of seventy-three on the first day of
September in the year 1897, honoured by all
who knew him intimately and who apprecia-
ted his sterling worth as a citizen and a
pioneer.
The late Mrs. Mary Allen survived her
husband by many years for she made the
last journey when in her ninety-second year
in May, 1916.
In all, there was a family of two sons
and three daughters of whom one son died
as already recorded in this history.
William, the surviving son, was born on
the fifteenth day of September, in the year
1849, and was thus in his third year when
the family made their journey to this
country.
As a result of an illness of his father,
William, when aged but eight years, left
school and undertook work which is almost
inconceivable in the present day of educa-
tional facilities. At that age he not only
drove loads of wood from Moolap to Gee-
long on his own responsibility but he also
sought and found purchasers at satisfactory
prices for such loads. On the recovery of
his father’s health, he drove a second lorry
load of wood or produce into the market of
Geelong and shouldered his share of the
work in every way as though he were three
times his actual age.
Through the ensuing years he loyally
stood by his father both on the farm and in
business matters and his career since those
early days has shown he was an apt pupil.
Success has come his way and none can
begrudge him his very considerable degree
of prosperity.
On the death of his father he inherited
the property and, continuing in his father’s
footsteps, he has more than doubled the pro-
perty in the intervening years, besides hav-
ing improved them in many ways. He has
undertaken many branches of mixed farming
including the growing of oats, hay, wheat,
barley and peas and, whatever he has under-
taken, he has done well and successfully.


In March, 1878, Mr. William Allen
married Miss Sarah Sharpe and of this
union there has been a family of four
daughters and one son to reach maturity
the particulars of whom with the number
of their children, follow:
The late Mrs. Sarah Ann Dendle of
Mannerim. Ten children.
Mrs. Mary Jane Ash of I _,eopold. Five
children.
Mrs. Alice Elizabeth Tugg of West
Geelong. Two children.
J'hc late Mr. William ]ohn Allen
married Miss Ida French of Geelong and
there were no children of the union. Un-
fortunately, tragedy overtook the couple
for, in December 1916, Mr. W. J. Allen met
his death by drowning as a result of an
accident at Moolap. He was known and
recognised as a worthy son of a worthy
family and his success in life was assured at
the time of his untimely passing.
Miss Esther May Allen, the youngest
child of the union, has throughout her life
to the present time shown the same spirit
of wonderful loyality to her parents as that
which was evidenced in her father during
his early years. Through these years she
has remained with her parents and has been
a real source of comfort and assistance both
in their home life and, later, in the business
side of her father’s activities. For some
time past she has shouldered the main tasks
pertaining to the properties in a manner
which speakes clearly of efficient brain and
a loyal spirit. It is a true manifestation
oi her father recurring after many years.
In the year 1918, Mr. William All en pur-
chased his present home at 100 Fyans Street,
Geelong, and with his wife and youngest
daughter, retired to live there in peace for
the evening of his life. All his properties
have been leased and he enjoys a well-
cained lest at his present age of eightv-
seven years.
hrom his ample experiences during the
days of early striving, Mr. Allen has a fund
of anecdotes pertaining to the early periods
of our history among which are included
early days when the blacks were there in
abundance and when there w r ere four hotels
on the Oueenscliff Road at Moolap alone.
The family here reviewed has proved
itself during the past eighty-five years as a
true pioneer family wdio have done more
than then shaie in building the National
wealth to its present position among the
Nations of the World and to such as these
we bid welcome to the pages of the present
publication.


' II I ' ■ " ■
__ I 111
SjjJSBl* ** ■HsMiil # JmStf'* '“n
S fejjfcV r .- ■
Mr J M LINKLATER Mrs J M LINKLATER
~ -R*- - j*k |p
M HBBhk - —• &*
i , *i
ill JmJ. i HI Br •
I Msss ELMA M LI N A LATER Ml TAMES LINKLATER f i f II Miff BESSIE LINKLATER
BL, - - JSt
,- ■ WWli.ilBIIOIJI '.:,: 'WWW |BHBPPp| *—»■»■- ' ft j I JflB
Mr EDWIN LINKLATER Master LAURIE TWIST
grandson OI edw.n i.inklater M,,s EDWIN LINKLATER
THE LINKLATERS OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA


The Linklaters of South Australia
The founder of the family in Australia
was Janies Munro Linklater who was born
at Kirkwall, Orkney Isles, Scotland in 1809
and married Mary Flett, also of Kirkwall
in 1839. The same year they embarked
on the ship “Indus” for South Australia
landing at Holdfast Bay in February 1840
His brother-in-law, William Flett, was also
a passenger and en route they decided to
join forces on arrival in the new country as
merchants. James Munro Linklater had
most of his capital invested in merchandise
which he brought as cargo on the “Indus.”
Shortly after arrival the partners estab-
lished themselves in premises in Currie
Street Adelaide and continued there until
the death of William Flett in 1854. James
Munro Linklater then purchased premises
in Bindley Street, Adelaide and the business
was carried on there until 1868 when it was
sold.
During this time J. M. Linklater turned
his attention to the pastoral industry and in
conjunction with his sister’s husband, H. A.
Crawford took up a large area of country at
Streaky Bay on the West Coast. Here a
Sheep Station was established named
Kirkla.” This run was carried on for
many years and at his death was sold on
the basis of 14/6 per head of sheep of which
there were between thirty and forty
thousand. J. M. Linklater had a family of
eight, James, Jane, Thomas, William, Mary,
Edwin, Magdalene and Alice; of these only
Edwin survives.
J. M. Linklater died in 1882 after a long
a ml honourable career in the commercial
and pastoral life of the State. . He was a
very public spirited man and occupied many
public positions including a seat on the
Marine Board, Commissioner of the State
Savings Bank Chairman of the South
Australian Insurance Company, etc-
Edwin Linklater the youngest son of
James and Mary Linklater, was born in
Aledaide in I<S49 and after finishing his
education at Young’s School joined his
father for a while and then took up farming
pursuits in the Hundred of Willochra with
tair success and after some fifty years
association with the Wilmington district
retired in 1927. In 1876 he was appointed
a Justice of the Peace.
Mrs. Linklater is the daughter of the
late William Kelly of One Tree Hill district
also a pioneer family and the children of
Edwin and Elizabeth Linklater are William,
James, Lima, Bessie, Elsie, Edith Mrs.
Twist and Marjory. At the outbreak of
Btc Cieat W ai, Lima and Bessie being
trained nurses volunteered for service with
the A.I.F. and served on various fronts
throughout the War.
James joined the A LE. serving with
the 32nd Battalion in France when he was
wounded and invalided to Australia in 1918.
Ihe Linklaters have been associated
with South Australia for nearly one hundred
years and have won an honoured place in
the roll of “Founders of Australia.” Edwin
and Elizabeth Linklater are now living in
retirement at Brighton, South Australia
I heir seventeen grand-children represent
the fourth generation of the Linklaters in
Australia.


jB|
Ji
JTfeSfc, :..:w' ; marar;
• •
I mn I
j| BiC _ lsnj
W .'Vm- I
f m *-v 'Mj|
f: * Jm..-'***'’ jJtSl?
j M81| J| . .
|i M
Andrew Thomson
The Second
Andrew Thomson.
The First
The Thomsons of Kapunda, South Australia
The founder of this family in Australia,
Andrew Thomson, was born in Buckhaven,
Fife, Scotland in 1834 and after finishing
his education was brought up to a com-
mercial career under the late William
Murray, father of David and \\ illiam
Murray, founders of the firm of D. & W.
Murray Limited of Adelaide, warehouse-
men. In 1854 Andrew Thomson sailed
from Scotland for Melbourne, Victoria,
and after some time spent on the Victorian
gold diggings joined the firm of D. and W.
Murray Limited in Adelaide. After twelve
months with the firm Andrew Thomson
established himself as a general storekeeper
at Kapunda, South Australia in 1860.
From then up to the time of his death he
devoted himself to his business and the
progress and welfare of the district of
Kapnnda and his work in this direction had
a profound influence on the civic life of
the district. He was one of the first
Councillors of the town of Kapunda, and
took a keen interest in the Kapunda
District Hospital of which he was
Chairman of the Board of Management.
He was a keen Congregationalist and did
much for this Church during his long
association with the district. In 1859 he
married Jane, daughter of the late John
Osborne of Norwood, Adelaide who also
arrived in South Australia in 1854 and
there was a family of three sons and four
daughters. Prior to this he brought his
mother and sisters to Australia from Scot-
land.


* !
-. ■- a
~ - -
life
if %
R § wS$L MR- % ■
V W? I
I I \|[L i j
I- iVHp jE
Im^UI
Andrew Thomson.
The Third
Andrew Thomson.
The Fourth
Andrew, his eldest son was born at
Kapunda in 1860 and was educated at
Whinham College, North Adelaide. He
then joined his father in business where he
gained a thorough insight into commercial
life. Subsequently he took over the
management of the Kapunda Brewery with
which he has been associated ever since.
Andrew Thomson married Matilda
Jane, daughter of James Tucknott of Port
Lincoln. Their family consists of Andrew
Murray, Sydney Osborne, Mayoh Miller,
James Percival, Mary Isa (Mrs. L. G.
Shannon), David Gordon and Frederick
Allan.
There are fourteen grandchildren who
represent the fifth generation of the
I homson family in Australia.
This is one of the oldest business
families in Kapunda which still maintains
the early commercial association established
by the founder of the family in that town.
Three of the sons of Andrew the
second, Sydney, Mayoh and Percival all
served in the Great War with the A.I.F. in
Gallipoli and France.
David Gordon Thomson like his grand-
father is an active Committeeman of the
Kapunda District Hospital.
Few families have had a longer con-
tinuous association with one district and
they occupy an honoured place in the roll
of “Founders of Australia.”


f a;
IBKilBP
y mim
i'
. ,> f *_ ,•
The late Mrs. R. B. Dawes, Sr.
The late R. B. Dawes, Sr.
The late Alexander Bell
Mrs. Alexander Bell


L 8 * fifif
--
Mr. R. B. Dawes, Jr
Mrs. R. B. Dawes, Jr.
Ihe DAWES of Victoria, New South Wales
and South Australia.
The founder of this family in Aus-
tralia, Robert Benjamin Dawes, came to
A ictoria with his wife in the early ’forties
and went to Kimbolton Station, which was
in the hands of both the Dawes and Patter-
son families for many years.
Robert Benjamin, eldest son of Robert
Benjamin Dawes, was born at Kimbolton,
A ictoria, in 1854, educated in Victoria, and,
after finishing his schooling, took up pas-
toral pursuits, getting his early training with
his father, who was connected with the late
Air. Patterson, senr.
Later R. B. Dawes, junr., was asso-
ciated with Mr. Patterson as a partner in
the largest holding of station country in
Tew South AVales and South Australia.
“ 1 ilcha” and “Boulka” were part of
Re property situated in South Australia
'c Inch Henry Crozier managed for some
years.
R. B. Dawes married Isobel Dorcas
Bell, daughter of the late Alexander Bell,
whose father, Alexander Bell, senr., was an
early arrival in Australia and a well-known
land-owner in Victoria. Alexander Bell,
junr., was also interested largely in pastoral
pursuits.
There is a family of one son, Robert
Lionel Dawes and three daughters, Evelyn
Jessie Jean, now Mrs. Ashton ; Vera Mary,
Mrs, Bulbeck of Clare; and Beulah Enid,
Mrs. Basil Jones of Renmark.
There are five grandchildren, the
eldest, Robert Bell Dawes, represents the
fourth generation of this family in Aus-
tralia. Mr. Robert Benjamin Dawes died
on September 25th, 1899, at the early age
of forty-eight, in Adelaide, and Mrs. R. B.
Dawes is now living in retirement at Mit-
cham, Adelaide.


%
Mr. Richard Dawes.
Mrs. Richard Dawes.
Mr. Harry Dawes, the second son of
R. B. Dawes, senr., was also connected
with pastoral and mining life, and is now
living in retirement at Adelaide.
The third son of Robert Benjamin
Dawes, senr., Richard Dawes, was also
born at Kimbolton and engaged in pastoral
life, being manager for Mr. Harvey Patter-
son on some of his station country in New
South Wales, later of Myrtle Springs, and
finally of Wirilla, near Georgetown, South
Australia. He retired to Adelaide for a
while and then bought Koolooloo on the
Murray, near Swan Reach. He died in
1931 at the age of seventy-one. He was
well known throughout the State and
married Catherine Mina Bell, sister of Mrs.
Robert Dawes.
William, the fourth son, was interested
in Topi Station, near Broken Hill. He died
in 1929.
Robert Lionel, son of R. B. and Mrs.
Dawes, junr., has a property near Swan
Reach, named Yanmooloo, where he is
engaged in wool raising and mixed farm-
ing. He was born on September 25th,
1899, educated at St. Peter’s College, and
then joined the A.I.F. at the age of
eighteen. He married Christina Forsyth
Ferguson, daughter of William Ferguson
of Moolooloo Station, thus joining two
pioneer families. They have three children.
Robert Bell, Lionel, and Allan. These
represent the fourth generation of the
Dawes, Bell, and Ferguson families in
Australia.
Few families throughout Australia
have had such a long and continuous asso-
ciation with the pastoral life of the
Commonwealth, and they occupy an
honoured place in the roll of Founders of
Australia.
A brief record of Mr. R. B. Dawes’
work in pastoral activities is interesting
reading from “Dalgety’s Review,” pub-
lished shortly after his death.


__ m ‘
I
Robert Lionel Dawes.
Master Robert Bell Dawes
“VAN DAM A” STATION, MILPARINKA
The Largest Pastoral Property in New South Wales
Under the auspices of the South
Australian Government, in 1844 Captain
Charles Sturt made an expedition into
Central Australia, the success of which has
deservedly caused him to be regarded as
the greatest of Australian explorers. He
left Adelaide with a fully-equipped party,
consisting of sixteen men, including the
afterwards celebrated McDouall Stuart (as
draftsman), Poole (as second in com-
mand), and Brown (as surgeon). The
party proceeded by easy stages up the
Murray and along the Darling to the
present site of Menindie, when a move was
made in a northerly direction. The
character of the country passed was inhos-
pitable; feed was scarce, and the water-
holes were fast drying up. For weeks
they travelled over miserable waste, cross-
ing in the journey the Barrier Ranges
and Broken Hill, quite oblivious of the
argentiferous wealth that lay buried be-
neath their feet, the discovery of which in
later years converted an arid and sparsely-
populated area into a thriving and pros-
perous settlement and enriched Australia
to the extent of millions. The character of
the country suddenly changed, and they
were overjoyed to find themselves in a
place where water was abundant, with
beautiful green grass and pleasant shelter.
This spot, now famous as Depot Glen, was
made a camping place, and here Sturt de-
cided to rest man and beast until he could
find a better track to the north. Every
creek and watercourse was examined and
followed by Sturt in the hope of finding
an outlet, but with no success. He soon
realised the unpleasant fact that Depot
Glen was merely an oasis. It was mid-
summer. The heat was intense. All the
surface water in their rear he knew would


have evaporated, which left the party in
the unfortunate predicament that they
could neither advance nor retreat. A large
excavation was dug out of the side of the
hill as a place of shelter, and here for six
months the brave little party led a dreary
and monotonous existence. “Under the
effects of the intense heat,’’ Sturt wrote,
“every screw in our boxes had been drawn,
and the horn handles of our instruments,
as well as our combs, were split in fine
laminae. The lead dropped out of our
pencils, and our nails became as brittle as
glass.” To add to their misfortune Poole
died. He was buried in the glen, and his
companions built a pyramid of stones on a
neighbouring hill, which now bears his
name, to perpetuate his memory, regarding
which Sturt said: “That rude structure
looks over his lonely grave, and will stand
for ages as a record of all we suffered in
the region to which we were so long con-
fined.”
Adjoining the scene of Sturt’s long
detention are corners of properties owned
by Messrs, R. B. Dawes & Company, com-
prising “‘ ‘Yan (1 a m a,” “Warratta,”
“Mokeley,” and “Fort Grey,” in New
South Wales, and “Tilcha” and “Lake
Boulka” in South Australia. This vast
property is situated at the extreme north-
west corner of New South Wales, at the
junction of the three States of Queensland,
South Australia, and New South Wales.
The area, 2,242,939 acres, is made up as
under —Leaseholds; “Yandama,” 63,580
acres; “Fort Grey,” 222,900 acres (expir-
ing 1943); “Mokeley,” 95,960 acres;
“Warratta,” 20,095 acres (expiring 1918).
Improvement Leases: Above properties,
635,623 (expiring 1943) ; “Tilcha” and
“Lake Boulka” (S.A.), 887,680 acres
(expiring 1944). Occupation Licences;
“Fort Grey” (residential area), 225,600
acres; “Wandama,” residential area, 63,860
acres; “Warratta,” residential area, 27,641
acres.
The portion in New South Wales is
the largest property in that State.
“Yandama” had a small beginning. In
the early ’eighties it was held by Messrs,
Gell & Crystal, the extent of country leased
by them comprising two ten-mile blocks
(128,000 acres). On the death of Mr. Gell
(who succumbed to an attack of typhoid
fever, and was buried alongside the
explorer, Poole, in the lonely mountain
graveyard), the property was put on the
market, and purchased by the present
owners in practically an unimproved condi-
tion. The management was entrusted to
the late Mr. R. B. Dawes, a most capable,
hard-working, and far-seeing man, who
developed the property with considerable
skill and success until his lamented death
in 1899.
The first addition made to the property
was the purchase, in 1885, of a ten-mile
block known as “Warratta,” but later on
“Mokeley,” “Boulka Lake,’’ and “Fort
Grey,” in New South Wales—each in
themselves of sufficient area to form a
good-sized station—were acquired, as well
as 1,300 square miles of country in South
Australia known as “Tilcha,” the last-
named at one time being occupied by Mr.
Harry Crozier and afterwards by Mr. W.
PI. Reid. All these stations are worked
as one holding.
The country held in New South Wales
is substantially fenced and subdivided into
conveniently-sized paddocks, which are
watered by sixty-nine tanks and dams,
ranging from 7,000 to 30,000 cubic yards
of excavation, surrounded by extensive
embankments, and fitted with twelve-inch
flumes through the banks to keep out the
silt. In addition to these tanks and dams
there are numerous wells on the property,
all fitted with steam pumps, reserve tanks,
troughing, etc. The improvements are all
of a substantial character, but at the same
time in no way elaborate, the conservation
of water being the main purpose.
Like the rest of the western division,
A andama’ has experienced severe periods
of drought. The seasons since 1894 have


been very dry, and the pastoral industry
has gone through a period of great depres-
sion. Yet notwithstanding these dis-
heartening drawbacks, the spirit of
enterprise that characterised the owners
from the beginning has been in no way
checked. They have gone on steadily
improving the property, so that when the
wheel of fortune turns and a spell of good
seasons comes again they will be ready to
reap the benefit and make full use of the
capabilities of the country. They have
never wavered in their firm belief that they
will yet ultimately be successful in their
venture, and that the lean years of
drought will be followed by years of
plenty; and, further, that the latter will
prove that they were justified in their faith
that the country was worth the large
amount expended upon it, and would
eventually prove a profitable investment.
It need hardly be said that so vast an
area comprises country of varied descrip-
tions. Undulating stony downs covered
with saltbush, Mitchell and other grasses,
and undulating sandy country with plenty
of mulga and other edible scrubs, make it
suitable for all kinds of stock. The stony
downs suit the sheep, and the sandy
country the horses and cattle.
The stock are of first-class quality.
Like wise breeders, great attention has
always been paid to the raising of the most
suitable stock. The cattle are well known
in the Adelaide and Melbourne markets for
their superior quality, and have brought
up to £ls per head in Broken Hill. The
owners, however, do not depend entirely
on raising their own cattle. Large num-
bers of store cattle are annually bought in
Queensland and fattened on “Yandama.”
The horses, both blood and draught,
are of a very high standard, and command
high prices in the district.
The sheep flock is also of a high
standard. The Tuppal strain, descendants
of \ ermonts, has been used, and the flock
consisted of fine, big-bodied sheep, carrying
heavy fleeces of wool, which always realised
satisfactory prices in the London market.
'The wool is scoured on the station and for
this purpose there is an excellent plant
adjacent to the woolshcd and situate on the
Yandama Creek, where an ample supply of
water is conserved by means of a large
stone overshot dam recently constructed.
The homestead without being preten-
tious, is comfortable and commodious. The
woolshed and all out-stations are con-
nected by telephone erected on the wire
fences, one line being ninety miles in length.
By this means the working of the vast
property is concentrated, and the manager
is able to keep in close touch with every-
thing that is going on in all parts of the
holdings. The partners in the firm of
Messrs. R. B. Dawes & Company are Mr.
John Hunter Patterson, Mr. William
Dawes, and the estate of the late Mr. R. B.
Dawes. Mr. Patterson comes of a pioneer-
ing family. His father, the Hon. J. H.
Patterson, took up country in Victoria as
early as 1836, and was the owner oif
“Green Hills,” “Toobooac,” “Moorabee,”
and other properties in that State. His
son, Mr. J. H. Patterson, as well as being
partner in “Yandama,’’ owns “Topar”
Station, near Broken Hill, and “Golgol,”
near Balranald, also one-half of the East
Loddon Estate, in Victoria. His brother,
Mr. Harvey Patterson, was at one time
owner of “Corona” and “Menamurtee”
Stations in New South Wales.
During the heat wave in 1894, the late
Mr. R. B. Dawes passed through a most
trying experience, which is merely men-
tioned to exemplify the rigours of the back
country at certain times. He left Broken
Hill homeward bound one summer’s morn-
ing, after breakfast, with buggy and pair.
About eleven o’clock, while driving along,
he became ill and pulled his horses up
under the shade of a tree. He then lost
his sight. He sat underneath the buggy
for the whole day, hoping against hope
that someone would drive past and dis-
cover him. But in vain. The horses grew


restless, and in his blind condition he
endeavoured to follow the course of the
sun and keep them under the shade of the
tree under which he was encamped. At
eight o’clock that night, when darkness set
in, his eyesight returned as suddenly as
it had left him, and he was able to drive
back to Broken Hill and get medical assist-
ance. On two other occasions Mr. Dawes
nearly lost his life—once through drinking
out of a tainted mudhole, and again
through having to endure the pangs of
thirst for a very considerable time.
In these days of socialistic cant and
humbug it will be seen at a glance that
hut for the enterprise of such men as com-
prise the firm of R. B. Dawes & Co., large
areas of country in the interior of Aus-
tralia would remain unoccupied for ages.
Individual enterprise in this instance is
developing a vast area of the driest and
most remote country in New South Wales
and South Australia. Capitalists take the
risk, and if profits accrue the country
generally benefits. If it fails, then the only
losers are the enterprising spirits who
have put their money and their brains into
the venture.
It may here be mentioned that it is
only by holding country in large areas in
this dry region that it is possible to work
with any hope of success. Patchy rains
fall on certain portions, and the stock can
be moved to these favoured areas as occa-
sion warrants. With a small holding it
seems almost impossible to resist a pro-
longed drought in the far north-west.
The Fisher and Suter Families.
Note: —For information pertaining to
the early days of the Fisher family we are
indebted to information supplied by Mr.
Alfred S. Kenyon per medium of the
“Argus” and “Australasian.”
We feel that no editorial matter could
better the opening paragraph of an article
written by the above quoted gentleman and
we therefore give it “in toto”:
“Of the pioneers of Port Phillip, David
Fisher was one of the most respected by
his fellow-colonists. He had a farm near
Hobart and later at Lovely Banks (Van
Dieman’s Land). John Batman induced
him to try his fortunes in Port Phillip.
Fisher sent three consignments of sheep
over early in 1836. The first flock of 750
sheep, in the ship “Adelaide”, was in charge
of Robert Mudie, and was landed at Point
Gellibrand (Williamstown). The second
flock, comprised of 500 head, was shipped
in the Norval, and was landed safely also;
hut the third, of 1000 head, another Norval
shipment, in charge of Robert Mudie, met
with disaster. Many were lost on the voy-
age. 1 he rest of the sheep were landed on
the eastern shore of Port Phillip. Soon
ad ter Robert Mudie was drowned, and only
about eighty sheep were saved.”
The article quoted then goes on to
tiips undertaken by David Fisher in com
pany with Gatenby and Anstev. Of his
inspection of a Station founded by his repre-
sentative . , on the Werribee, his selecting
at Inverleigh and his assisting Doctoi
Thompson to erect a hut where St. Paul’s
Cathedral now stands. His next steps were
back in A an Dieman’s Land helping in the
formation of the Derwent Company ol
which he was made manager. He then —in
the latter capacity—returned to Port
Phillip to select suitable runs for the new


■ ■■■•" " ■ - -^■■■-■--- ■ •■ -- -■■ ■■ — ■ - -■ • • - vSfflW*
r „ |
i f v \5 111
t I aK* i 1
i #****» sii
The late David Fisher.
The late Mrs. David Fisher.
undertaking. Fie obtained such well-
known properties as Mount Mercer,
Weatherboard, Native Creek No. 3, Mount
Shadwell and Warrambine.
In 1836 David Fisher erected the first
house in Geelong, and in March of the fol-
lowing year, Governor Sir Richard Bourke
and George Holden visited him. After
finalising his affairs across the Straits he at
length brought his wife and family to the
mainland. Flis history through the next
period of Victoria’s history was that of a
true pioneer—-such as we in more modern
times have come to recognise as those who
really laid the first foundations for our
modern community. He purchased Allot-
ment 14 of Block 2 in Collins Street, near
“Rialto”, for £42 and then offered such
property free to the newly-formed Estab-
lished Church of Scotland for fifteen months
and agreed to take over at cost price any
Buildings erected thereon. Ihe offer was
accepted, a weatherboard building was
erected and he subsequently took same over
at the total cost of £IOB/19/-. In passing,
it is of interest that the first service was
held in such building in July, 1838.
David Fisher died at Gorrinn. where he
was in residence with his son-in-law, James
Richardson, aged 79 in the year 1879.
So much for a brief outline of the
pioneer family established by the late
David Fisher. We now move along to a
short outline of the foundation of the Suter
family in Australia.
The late Mr. Andrew Vernon Suter
was the only son of Captain Andrew Suter,
aide-de-camp to the Marquis of Hastings,
Governor-General of India. Destined for
a military career also, his hopes were
doomed to disappointment owing to trouble
developing with his sight while studying
for his final examinations. He then came,
in the year 1845, to Port Phillip to join his


I X
[ | Ip - f» -,;/*;
\ | ;
"I *
The late Andrew Vernon Suter.
uncle, Mr. George Mercer, at Leigh Station
and this commenced a career in pastoral
directions which was destined to bring him
into line with many of our now well-known
pastoral families.
At different times he owned the well-
known Stations, Castle Maddie—in the
Portland Bay area—and Yambuck on the
Shaw River, the latter of which he sold in
the year 1886. However, the trouble with
his sight, which had played such an im-
portant part in the fashioning of his career
in years gone by, was ever growing more
serious and the late Mr. Suter at last retired
to Moonce Ponds where—prior to his de-
mise, he eventually completely lost his
sight,
Mr. Suter, who was a native of Inver-
ness, Scotland, married Miss Charlotte
Fisher, daughter of David Fisher of whom
i brief history appears in these lines and
thus, were two of our best and oldest
pioneer families united.
The late Mrs. Charlotte Suter.
Of the union of Mr. and Mrs. Andrew
Vernon Suter there was a family of eleven
children of whom the seventh child —
Isabella Innes —married Mr. John Wilson
Anderson of “Tower Hill Park,” W arrnam-
bool. Mr. Anderson is now deceased and
Mrs. Anderson is in residence at “Yambuk"
Gladstone Street, Sandringham.
And so we bring to an end this brief
history of the amalgamation of two of out-
most esteemed and honoured pioneer fami-
lies. No word appears herein of the trials
through which such families passed in the
days of the formation of the State, but it
may confidently be left for future genera-
tions to pay tribute to such memories as
theirs when tales are recounted pertaining
to the days prior to electricity, main roads,
automobiles, and so many modern aids now
available to those who follow in their foot-
steps. . , , and their labours to those
already effected in the task of building
Australia to an even better position in the
world of the future.


I jj
fm "&* 1
gMSf
The late Thomas Robertson
The late Thomas Robertson came from
his home in Ballater, Aberdeenshire, at the
age of 54 with his three sons —James, John
and Thomas. They left from Plymouth on
/th October, 1839 in the sailing ship “John
Bull” and arrived at Port Phillip on Janu-
ary 19th, 1840, having taken 105 days on
their journey.
After a short while in the young colony,
the father and Mr. Skene purchased Mt.
Mitchell Station, which was portion of the
original “Ercildounc” property, and carried
on under the name of Robertson & Skene.
The father and his three sons bought out
Mr. Skene and carried on as Robertson &
Sons. Rater they acquired “Gazette”,
“Yarram Yarram,” “Victoria Valley” and
“Pleasant Banks” properties and eventu-
ally separated—James taking “Mt. Mitchell”
John “Victoria Valley” and “Gazette” and
Thomas “Yarram Yarram.”
The father, Thos. Robertson senr., died
in 1872, aged 87. James married Margaret
Gordon and had a family of four sons and
four daughters to reach maturity. Mary,
Annie, Christina, Thomas, James, John,
Francis and Margaret. Following the death
of their father in 1893 the sons carried on
with the properties which now consisted of
“Mt. Mitchell” “Kongbool,” “Mortat” and
“Pleasant Banks.”
Some years later the four brothers
separated and the three eldest passed on,
and at present Francis R. G. Robertson is
the only remaining member of the family,
and resides at “Mortat”, Goroke.
He married Emma Ochiltree and his
family consists of James 0., Francis 0.,
Gordon 0., Geoffrey O. and Jean O. (now
Mrs. Beatson). His wife died in 1917 and
later he married Margaret Roxburgh,
daughter of Rev. Dr. Strong.
The old homestead of “Mt. Mitchell”
and some of the land has passed out of the
family’s possession—the remainder—about
9000 acres, called “East Mt. Mitchell”, was
owned by John Gordon Robertson, and on
his death in 1929, became the property of
his nephews and nieces.
The late Mr. Thomas Robertson,
(“Mt. Mitchell” Robertson).


■ ""
The late Colonel Thomas Price, C.8., D.S.O
To do full justice to the career of the
late Colonel Thomas Price would require
more space than is available in the present
issue, and so but a brief outline of his life
is here attempted.
This father was the late John Price,
fourth son of Sir Rose Price of Cornwall,
England. John Price came to Van Die-
man’s Land in the very early days as
Inspector-General of Penal Establishments
and had a most distinguished career in his
home-by-adoption until his tragic death, at
the hands of convicts in the year 1857 at
Williamstown.
John Price married Miss Franklin, a
niece of the Governor of Tasmania —Sir
John Franklin —and to this union there was
a family of four sons and four daughters
in:
Sir Frederick Price, James, Emily,
Jane (married Mr. George Knox, J.P., ol
Sydney), Colonel Thomas Price, mentioned
hereafter; Anna Clara (married the Rever-
end Roland Hayward, who was the last of
the Convict Settlement Chaplains appointed
by the Imperial Government at Port
Arthur. Her husband died in the year 1910
and Mrs. Hayward, now aged ninety years,
is in residence at Carnegie, Victoria; Julia
and Gustavus.
Of the above family, the late Colonel
Thomas Price, C.8., D.5.0., was, undoubt-
edly, one of the best known and outstanding
figures in the military history of Australia.
Born on the 21/10/1842 in Government
House, Hobart Town, Van Dieman’s Land,
full appreciation of his services to his
country can only be enjoyed by emphasis-


ing the very small influence attached to
Australian military affairs by overseas
authorities during the years in which his
principal activities occurred. He was a
member of the 103 rd Fusiliers (now the
Royal Dublin Fusiliers) and Madras Ser-
vice Corps, and on returning to Australia,
he founded the Victorian Mounted Rifles
whom he took to the South African War.
During the latter Campaign he served as
Commandant of the Commonwealth Forces
(Victorian Division) in the years 1899-1900.
Following his splendid work in this State,
he was transferred to Queensland in the
capacity of Commandant of the Military
Forces for that State.
Although of a strictly military caste,
the late Colonel Thomas Price was of a
naturally considerate disposition, and this
side of his character was amply demonstra-
ted on the now famous occasion when, his
troops threatened by rioters during indus-
trial unrest, he gave his well-remembered
order to “Fire low and lay them out.”
This order has been misunderstood by many
but the true purpose was that the ring-
leaders in the front ranks (who had caused
the main trouble) should rightfully be the
ones to suffer—and not the innocent citi-
zens at the rear who would otherwise have
been injured had the order been given to
fire high ... it should be remembered that
in those days the range of rifle fire was but
a fraction of the more modern weaoons.
The late Colonel Thomas Price mar-
ried Miss Mary Baillie, a daughter of the
late Thomas Baillie, grazier, and niece of
Sir \\ illiam Baillie —first Baronet —and
from this union there was a family of one
daughter and three sons in :
Lorna (Mrs. Ainslie Mills of Uardrv
Station) ; Brig-Gen. Thomas Rose Caradoc
ITice, C.M.G., D.5.0., late Colonel-Com-
manding Welsh Guards; Vivian, of whom
further particulars follow at a later stage
of this history; Franklin, who is resident
in South Africa.
Following the death of his first wife,
the late Colonel 'Thomas Price married
Miss Emilene Read of Melbourne. His
death in the year 1910 at Warrnambool,
was sincerely mourned by an enormous
circle of true friends who had for so many
years appreciated his sterling worth to the
community.
Vivian Franklin Lyon Rose, the second
son named above, had a distinguished career
in the Royal Indian Marine and, later, the
Royal Navy, to the time of his death from
dysentery on Active Service at Gallipoli.
For ten years prior to the Great War, he
was a Lieutenant in the Royal Indian
Marine and was invalided from the forces
in 1913. He then went to British East
Africa but, whilst in England in 1915, he
was successful in gaining his commission
as Lieutenant-Commander in the Royal
Navy and was then placed in command of
the Alexandra Docks, Newport, Monmouth-
shire. Following fine services in this capa-
city he was subsequently sent to Gallipoli
as Naval Transport Officer on North Beach,
Anzac, and it was during his heavy and
arduous duties in this sphere that he con-
tracted the sickness from which he was
destined never to recover. His death
occurred at Alexandria on the fifth day of
November, 1915.
J he late Lieutenant-Commander Vivian
T • Price, R.N., married in the year 1912,
Miss Jean Mills (who is named elsewhere
in this Work as a member of the well-known
Mills family of Uardrv Station) and to this
union there has been one daughter in Miss
\ ivian Judith Elizabeth Rose Price, who
lives with her mother at “Kimotho”, Lan-
dale Road, Toorak.


Ep * ' r aHyK *jSH
I ' jPfHHHB^LwwV. i9P
v. <3
A
The late John Rout Hopkins
Mr. Walter Hopkins
The late Henry Hopkins
The Hopkins Family of Winchelsea, Victoria
It is a somewhat difficult matter to
determine when the history of this old fam-
ily commences in this State for, although
the late Henry Hopkins never resided here,
he was the first member of the family to
take up land and to invest capital in these
parts.
To place events in their correct order
it is necessary to go back to the time when
Batman and his party found that the Imp-
erial authorities refused to recognise their
titles to the lands obtained from the blacks
as part and parcel of this now-famous treaty.
The authorities ordered that the land should
be sold to the highest bidders subject to
safeguards for Batman and his people conse-
quent on their having effected certain im-
provements on such land.
It was at this time that the late Henry
Hopkins, a prosperous merchant of Hobart
Town, purchased a parcel of land from the
Government which was destined to become
the headquarters of his descendants in days
to come. Although he at no time settled
on the mainland himself he was a liberal
subscriber towards various funds aiming at
the welfare of the young colony and, as a
result, accepted an invitation to lay the
foundation stone of the first church ever
built in Melbourne ... in fact, his name
can still be seen inscribed on the stone of
the Collins Street Congregational Church
at the present time.
llis son, John Rout Hopkins, settled in
this State in 1837 and went to “Murdeduke”
Station, near \\ inchelsea, as manager and
remained for some years. He ultimately
took over from his father the property
bought in the earliest days of Victorian his-
tory, named “Worrumbete,” afterwards re-
named by the Government “\\ ormbete.’
1 he holdings at that time were compara-
tively small but as a result of his farsighted
policy and efficient management his holdings
ultimately reached twenty thousand acres,


His activities consisted principally in breed-
ing' Stud Merino stock and he left no stone
unturned in his efforts to meet success. He
imported rams from Europe and came to the
position when his stock commanded unsur-
passed reputation.
It is typical of his calibre that, notwith-
standing' his concentration on his home
affairs, he found time and many opportu-
nities for service to his fellows to an astoni-
shing' degree. It is impossible in a work
of this nature to give in detail his activities
in this direction, but some idea may be
gleaned from the following:
He was for some years the M.L.A. for
the South Grant electorate and, later, filled
a similar office for the Geelong district. He
was a member of the Winchelsea Shire
Council for many years and occupied the
Presidential Chair for several terms. This
also applies to the Barrarbool Shire Council
and, in addition, he was also a member of
the Geelong City Council and Mayor thereof.
In Ecclesiastical circles he was a conscien-
tious worker and was a respected member of
the Synod. In sporting life he was Com-
modore of the Royal Victorian Yacht Club
and President of the Corio Bay Rowing
Club. Whilst, in his younger days, it was a
common occurrence for him to ride the 24
miles each way to Geelong so that he might
join his fellow rowers in their training opera-
tions.
From the few particulars appearing in
the above paragraph it is possible to form
some slight idea of the character, ability and
respect earned by and freely accorded to the
late Mr. John Rout Hopkins and further
comment herein is unneeded and would, in
fact, be redundant.
The late Mr. J. R. Hopkins married
Miss Eliza Anne Armytage of Geelong and
of this union there was a family in all of
thirteen children. Of these it may be men-
tioned that Henry and Ernest rowed in the
Victorian crew against New South Wales
on more than one occasion and, in each in-
stance, the Victorian crew was successful.
He died on the twentieth day of December
in the vcar 1897. Of his family there arc
at the present time three sons and three
daughters surviving as follows:
Walter, Arthur, Mrs. T. H. Rust,
Ernest, Mrs. Eeslie Staughton and Mrs, C.
W. C. Farran.
Of the above, Walter, the eldest son,
was born in the year 1855 and was educated
at the Geelong Grammar School and Mel-
bourne University, where he matriculated,
and in his early years worked with his father
on the family homestead at Wormbete,
which property he managed when his father
retired to live in Geelong and later Mel-
bourne.
During these years he demonstrated
that he was possessed of the same qualities
of character as had won esteem and respect
for his father and, in consequence, when the
latter passed away, Walter inherited the en-
tire estates. Plis first step was to allocate
portions of the estate to the members of the
family and, in this manner, deeded fourteen
thousand of the total twenty thousand acres
to them. A further sidelight to his charac-
ter may be appreciated from the fact that,
although there was a sum ot ten thousand
pounds in cash made available, he also dis-
tributed the whole of this inheritance to his
brothers and sisters.
Throughout his life he has amply lived
up to the early indications of his character
and further comment is unnecessary. As a
young man he was an outstanding athlete
and attained the unusual honor of playing
with the ’Varsity eleven and football team
and was also a member of the ’Varsity crew.
On leaving the ’Varsity he played football
with both the Geelong (whilst still at
school) and Melbourne (as did also his
brother Arthur) League teams and was one
of the best known footballers of his genera-
tion.
Like his father before him he was a
member of the Winchelsea Shire Council for
many years and occupied the Presidential
Chair for two years. Throughout the years
he was never opposed for his seat in that
body. A further angle of his character
may be gathered from the fact that he has
built cottages for every married employe


on his estate and, at the present time, among
his employees are included the third gene-
ration who have served him and his family
throughout the years.
For several years he has been a mem-
ber of the Synod and President of the Win-
chelsca Horticultural Society for more than
thirty years. In addition he has for forty-
six years been Secretary of the Church of
England and for most of that time has been
Treasurer and Churchwarden.
Mr. Walter Hopkins married Miss Mar-
garet Sophia Were, eldest daughter of Mr.
F. W. Were and granddaughter of the
Founder of the well-known firm J. B. Were
and Sons, Stock and Share Brokers, of Mel-
bourne.
Of this union there has been a family of
two sons and one daughter of whom the
two sons survive in:
Henry Were, who is also a member of
the Winch el sea Shire Council and thus rep-
resents the third generation of the family in
that body to occupy the same seat. He is
in residence on the family homestead.
John Arthur, who is also in residence
on “Wormbete.”
In concluding this brief history it is
the more easily understood in what manner
this State of Victoria has prospered and
reached her present stage of well-being when
we have had such citizens as those herein
described to carry on the good work through
the generations. Complimentary references
are uncalled for and it may be left for tire
future to accord the true perspective of the
services rendered through the years.
Sir Robert Wallace Best, K.C.M.G.
In the present publication, it is im-
possible to do full justice to a career as
colorful and outstanding as that of Sir R.
W. Best, —for Victoria —and indeed, the
whole of Australia —has received enormous
benefit from his activities during the past
half-century, and so, but a brief outline has
been attempted.
Robert Wallace Best was born in
Fitzroy in the year 1856 of Irish parentage.
His father, also Robert, and mother (nee
Wallace), came to this country in the early
fifties of last century. The young lad was
a Law student at Melbourne University for
some years and, during this period, were
formed friendships destined to last through
many years and included such well-known
names as Sir Isaac Isaacs and Mr. Justice
Higgins.
1 hen followed some years of experi-
ences gained in various legal offices prior
to his becoming partner in the legal firm of
Fink, Best and Hall (later Fink, Best and
Miller) of Melbourne.
By the year 1889 his natural ability
had brought him to the position of Mayor
of the City of Fitzroy and he was also a
Member of the Legislative Assembly. As
Chairman of many Commissions and Com-
mittees he has been associated with such


well-known names as Alfred Deakin, Sir
Graham Berry, Sir Henry Wrixon, Sir J.
B. Paterson and many others.
Amongst the many measures associated
directly or in part with his name can be in-
cluded such as: —The Old Age Pensions,
Factories’ Act, Customs Tariff Act (known
as the Best Tariff), Closer Settlement Land
Bill, Electoral Act, Customs Tariff Act
(Senate) 1908, Federal Old Age Pensions
Act.
In 1901 he resigned his seat in the
State House and was elected as one of the
first Senators for the State of Victoria,
whilst in 1905 he was sent to London to
instruct Counsel in a Privy Council case on
behalf of the Melbourne and Metropolitan
Board of Works in which he and those with
whom he was associated were successful.
The year 1907 saw 7 him accepting office
as Vice-President of the Executive Council
in the second Deakin Administration and
was also Leader of the Senate. Again in
1909 he w r as a member of the third Deakin
Administration as Minister of Customs.
The year 1910 saw 7 him created a
Knight Commander of the Order of St.
Michael and St. George, and also saw him
enter the House of Representatives as the
Member for Kooyong, wdiich seat he
retained for twelve years during which his
majorities increased with each election, in
1919 his margin of nearly sixteen thousand
being the largest in Victoria.
In 1922 Sir Robert Wallace Best retired
from active political life, following his
defeat on second preference votes, wdth a
reputation for sterling honesty and ability
second to none in the Commonwealth.
Sir R. W. Best married Miss Lang-
ridge, daughter of Mr. G. D. Langridge
who was then Chief Secretary for State, and
there has been a family of three sons and
two daughters of the union as follows:
George, Blanche, Beattie (now Mrs.
Elliott of Sydney), Arthur (now of Bris-
bane) and Sidney. Mrs. Best died in 19C0
and, in 1902 Sir Robert married Miss Maude
Croker-Smith of Adelaide, wdio is a grand-
daughter of the late George Croker-Smith,
one of the early pioneers of Tasmania. The
present Lady Best has been a loyal and
conscientious helper to her husband through
the past thirty-four years and has been un-
sparing in her efforts on behalf of Charity.
She is a Life-Governor of the Melbourne
Eye and Ear Hospital, Children’s Hospital,
Queen Victoria Hospital, and the Blind
Asylum, and has been responsible for rais-
ing huge sums for the many appeals. She
has also betrayed a keen interest in the
Scout Movement and the Ist Canteibury
Troop is known as “Lady Best’s Own.”
Of the marriage of Sir Robert and
Lady Maude Best there has been the fol-
lowing issue:—Margot (Mrs. Stott of Ade-
laide) ; Phyllis (Mrs. Athol Fleming in
residence in London) and Roberta and
Helene (now married to Dr. J. H. Mellette
of 146 Harley Street, London) who are
twdns.


The Sherriff Family, of Yorke Peninsula.
South Australia
“ Caller Braes ”
Homestead of George Sherriff.
The founder of this family in Austra-
lia, William Sherriff, arrived in South
Australia with his wife in the ship “Royal
George” in 1838. He established himself
at Morphett Vale on a farming property.
Prior to this he lived at Burnside for a
while, where his eldest son, George, was
born. The latter was trained by his father
in the art of farming and in 1872 with his
brother, James, came to Yorke Peninsula
where they purchased land, which is still
owned by the family. George disposed of
his original holding to his brother, James,
purchasing adjacent land, which he named
“Caller Braes.” This was increased by
further purchases and now contains some
3700 acres used for grazing and mixed
farming. George Sherriff took an active
interest in public life and was a foundation
member of the Dalrymple Shire Council,
being its first Chairman. He held his
seat in the Council for nearly 40 years. His
was the second appointment as Justice of
the Peace on Yorke Peninsula. He was
President of the Agricultural Society for
many years and held many other public
offices in the district. In 1885 he married
Catherine Marion Gilbrandson, grand-
daughter of the late Peter Anderson of
Morphett Vale, and their children are
Marion Dorothy, Alexander, John George
(who was killed in action in France as a
member of the 43rd Battalion, A.1.F., in
1917) and Walter James. Both George
Sherriff and his wife died in 1917 at “Caller
Braes.” Marion Dorothy still resides at
the old homestead.
Alexander married. Petty Holly of
Hackham, and their children are Ronald
George, John Alexander, Walter Ross and
Dorothy Edith Joan. Mrs. Alexander
Sherriff died in 1932.
Alexander Sherriff took over the
homestead portion of “Caller Braes” whilst
his brother, Walter James, settled on an
adjacent property named “Wirraninna."
In addition to the 3700 acres held by the
family at “Caller Braes” and “Wirraninna"
they also have grazing land farther South.
Cereal growing and wool production is
extensively engaged in. Walter James
married a daughter of William Leonard
Burton, late manager of the Bank of Ade-
laide, and they have two children, George
Burton and Gwenlynde Marian. The
children of A. and W. J. Sherriff represent
the fifth generation of Australians.
Nearly 100 years association with South
Australia has won the Sherriff family an
honoured niche in the roll of “Founders of
Australia.”
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


The Pike Family of South Australia.
The firm of Pike and Co. Limited,
Dorset Brewery, Oakbank, was founded by
the late Henry Pike in 1886. Although a
builder by trade, he learnt the art of brew-
ing in England under his mother’s guidance.
After carrying on his calling of builder and
contractor at Mount Barker for some years,
and subsequently at Oakbank, he started
brewing ales and stout in a small way.
The business went ahead very quickly
owing to the excellent quality of the pro-
ducts, and the buildings were added to,
until to-day they cover a large area, and a
large number of men are employed. Later
the manufacture of aerated waters and tonic
ales were added to the activities of the firm.
In addition pig raising and bacon cur-
ing operations were carried on with such
success that numerous prizes were won at
the Roval Agricultural and local shows.
On the death of Henry Pike, his eldest
son—the late W. H. Pike —became Manag-
ing Director, having as his co-directors
Messrs E. F. Pike and E. A. Beasley. These
gentlemen had all been trained in the busi-
ness.
The late W. H. Pike, J.P., was promi-
nent in all local affairs and held his seat as
Councillor of the Onkaparinga District
Council for many years. He was a Justice
of the Peace and a keen sportsman. He
died in 1931 leaving a family of four sons
and three daughters. During W. H. Pike’s
connection with the firm a depot was estab-
lished in Adelaide from which the products
of the firm are distributed throughout South
Australia.
The present head of the firm of H. Pike
& Co. Limited, E. F. Pike, J.P. has been
associated with the brewery since a youth.
His co-directors are Walter Reginald Pike
and Leslie Beasley, both grandsons of the
founder of the firm. The secretary, John
Stanley Pike, also a grandson of Henry Pike
served in Egypt and France with the A.I.F.
during the Great War.
There are several great-grandchildren
who represent the fourth generation of the
Pike family in South Australia.
All members of the firm have taken a
keen interest in sport, including racing,
coursing, cricket, etc. The Dorset Brewery
can put two cricket teams into the field from
the members and employees of the firm.
The firm has gained the distinction of
winning 22 first prizes with 24 exhibits
from 1896 to 1903. This unique record
shows the quality of the products of H. Pike
& Co. Ltd., of Oakbank.
E. F. Pike was created a Justice of the
Peace in 1931 and is actively associated with
all movements for the progress of the dis-
trict.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


il
j OIRtCTOR
■ e r v
'«» MANAGING DIRECTOR. 1^
Mr. R W. PIKE,
d,rector Mr J - 5 PIKE -
secretary.
\— • — — 1
The Pike Family of South Australia.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


m»*~.-
* .
&
w qllM
f, * ■ *".»&*' >
%/
Mr. E. H. Giles
Mr. K. H. Gilc
The Giles Family, of “ Penton Vale.”
Yorke Peninsula.
This family has been associated with
South Australia almost since the inception
of the Colony. William Giles sailed for
South Australia on the brig “Hartley,” and
arrived at Kangaroo Island with his wife
on October 16th, 1837. He was under
engagement to the South Australian Com-
pany of which later he became manager in
South Australia. His son, Leonard Hollway
Giles, was born at Beaumont, Adelaide, in
1841 and entered the service of that well-
known pastoral firm of “Anstey and Giles.”
In 1867, he took charge of the firm’s pro-
perty, “Fenton Vale,” Yorke Peninsula,
where he remained until his death in 1898.
“Penton Vale” was one of the first stations
established in this part of South Australia,
end its history has been recorded by several
of the early writers.
Leonard Hollway Giles married an
English lady, Miss Baily, and their family
consisted of Florence, Edward Holling-
worth, Leonard Hollway, Harold, Hugh,
Ina and Percy Cooper.
Edward Hollingworth Giles was born
on April sth, 1882, and after finishing his
education, returned to the family home. In
1899, “Penton Vale” was cut up for Closer
Settlement under the 1897 Closer Settle-
ment Act. The homestead portion of the
estate was allotted to Mrs. L. H. Giles.
This portion was carried on by the family
until after the Great War. Two sons of
L. H. Giles, Leonard and Percy, served
overseas with the A.I.F. in France and
Egypt, both returning safely.
After winding up the estate, E. H.
Giles purchased his present property which
formed part of “Penton Vale” and is used
for mixed farming and grazing purposes.
He married Miss Till of Yorketown,
and has one son, Kenneth Henry Holling-
worth, and two daughters, Muriel Hilda
and Dorothy Helen.


i % -
**> '"
f I
f
Miss Rosemary Helen Giles
Although still a young man, E. H.
Giles has had a remarkable career in public
life. At the age of 19 he was appointed
Clerk to the Melville District Council,
which position he held for 19 years. After
resigning this post, he was elected a Coun-
cillor of the Salt Creek Ward, and within
two years was Chairman of the Council.
This office he held until the Councils of
Melville, Yorketown and Dalrymple were
merged into one. He was elected the first
Chairman of the Combined Councils and
still retains his seat in same. He was for
28 years Auditor of the Dalrymple District
Council, 25 years Auditor of the Yorke-
town Corporation, and is now Auditor of
the Edithburgh Corporation.
In 1926 he was elected as a Member of
Parliament for the district, which seat he
held until 193.5 when he lost bv a narrow
minority.
He has been a member of the Liberal
League since its formation, and is now
chairman of the Yorketown Branch of the
Liberal and Country League. From 1914
to 1923 was President of the Yorke Penin-
sula District Committee and is at the
present time again filling- that office and has
held every executive office in this organiza-
tion. At the age of 20 he was Secrctarv of
the Agricultural Society, and for 18 vears
President and is now Patron of the Society.
A\ hen the \ orketown Hospital was formed
in 1908 he was a foundation member of this
institution and is now Chairman. E. H.
(files has taken an active interest in sport
and acted for 10 years as Secretary of the
Yorketown Cricket Club and was' Captain
of same. He was for many vears Secretan
of the Southern \ orke Peninsula Cricket
Association and is now President. In
addition to many offices he is now
President of the Country Cricket Carnival
in South Australia, having held this
office since its inception. For 24 years
he has been churchwarden of St. George’s
Church of England at Yorketown, and for
21 years a lay reader. He is the senior
Justice of the Peace for the district. In
Masonic and Friendly Societies he has held
high offices.
hew men have done more in public
service than Edward Hollingworth Giles,
and the family has won an honoured place
in the roll of “Founders pf Australia.”


The late R. G. Jay, M.R.C.S., J.P.
The Jays of South Australia.
This family holds an unique record in
South Australian history, as four genera-
tions in a direct line have been associated
with the medical profession. The late
Richard Gardiner Jay, M.R.C.S., J.P.,
arrived with his wife and family from
England in the early forties.
The Jay family can claim a long asso-
ciation with English history, as an ancestor
was a prominent public man at the time of
King Charles I. The family has been
connected with the County of Suffolk for
many generations. Richard Gardiner Jay
was born at Ipswich and commenced the
study of medicine at Guy’s and St. Thomas’
Hospitals in London. He qualified as a
member of the Royal College of Surgeons
and, being possessed of independent means,
decided to sail for Australia.
He married Ann Smith Jenkins and
they had a family of five sons and a daugh-
ter. A son and the daughter died in in-
fancy and the survivors were, Gerald,
Eugene, Horace Pennington and Melville
Richard Hindmarsh. On arrival he prac-
ticed in Adelaide for a while before estab-
lishing himself at Willunga where he
practiced for about thirty years. His
skill enabled him to create a very large
practice and his position in the commu-
nity prompted the powers that be to
appoint him one of the first Justices of the


The late M. R. H Jay, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.
Peace in the district. He took a keen in-
terest in the welfare of the State, and in-
vested largely in the early mining ven-
tures of South Australia. On the sudden
death of his eldest son, William Eugene
Jay, who was practicing medicine at Wal-
laroo, his father took over this practice
which he retained until shortly before his
death at Adelaide in 1878. Another son,
Melville Richard Hindmarsh Jay, M.R.C.S.,
L. was born at Willunga on Feb-
ruary 16th, 1856. At St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide, he had a remarkable scholastic
career, taking every scholarship and prize
available to him. For three years he was
senior boy at the school and a prominent
athlete. Fie then took up the study of
medicine, and served under his brother,
William Eugene Jay, who was senior house
surgeon at the Adelaide Hospital. He pro-
ceeded to London in 1876 and, following
his father’s footsteps, entered St. Thomas’
Flospital where he obtained the degrees of
M. L.R.C.P. He commenced the
practice of his profession in South West
London, but after a time decided to return
to South Australia, where he joined Dr.
Wylcle in his North Adelaide practice,
eventually taking it over.
M. R. H. Jay was for many years a
member of the honorary staff of surgeons
attached to the Adelaide Hospital. He
was Hon. Surgeon to the Convalescent
Hospital at Semaphore and a prominent
member of the South Australian Branch
of the British Medical Association, being
President in 1503. In 1909 M. R. H. Jay
relinquished general practice and together
with his son, studied diseases of the Ear,
Nose and Throat in London and Vienna.
For the remainder of his life he practiced
in this specialty. He was an early and
active member of the Adelaide Golf Club.
M. R. H. Jay married Clarissa Evelyn
Bowman, daughter of the late Edmund
Bowman, and there is one son, Hubert
Melville. M. R. H. Jay died in 1919 at the
age of 63.
Hubert Melville Jay, M.8.8.5.,
F.R.A.C.S., was born at Adelaide in 1886.
After attending Queen’s School and St.
Peter’s College, he went to the Adelaide


'
Hubert Melville Jay,
M.8., 8.5., F.R.A.C.S.
University, graduating M.8.8.5., Adelaide
in 1908. Later he became a Foundation
Fellow of the Royal Australasian College
of Surgeons, and acted as State Secretary of
same for eight years. He married Dorothea
von Doussa, daughter of the late Honor-
able Alfred von Doussa, thus joining two
pioneer families, and their family consists
of Antony Bowman, Peter Gerald, Gerald-
ine Mary, Judith Helena and Alice Eliza-
beth. H. M. Jay is now practicing as a
specialist in Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat
diseases. During the Great War he acted
as Secretary and Registrar of No. 7 Aus-
tralian General Hospital, holding the rank
of Major. At the fourth Australasian
Medical Congress held at Hobart in 1934,
H. M. Jay was elected President of the
Ear, Nose and Throat section of that body.
He is a lecturer in Otology at the
Adelaide University, Ophthalmic and
Aural Specialist to the Repatriation Depart-
ment, and lecturer to the Nurses Registra-
tion Board.
H. M. Jay is keenly interested in golf,
cricket, tennis, shooting and motor boat-
ing. It is interesting to note that the
three generations of the Jay family who
attended St. Peter’s College were all
athletically inclined. M. R. H. Jay was a
prominent athlete and his son, H. M. Jay
won the College Cup in 1903, which his
son, Antony Bowman Jay in turn won in
1932 and 1933 in addition to numerous
other prizes. This is the only record in
the annals of St. Peter’s College of father
and son winning the cup.
Peter, the second son, is now studying
medicine at the Adelaide University, being
the fourth generation of the Jay family to
take up this profession.
The Jay family has been associated
with the State for nearly ninety years and
have won an honoured place on the roll of
“Founders of Australia.”


The family of Dr. and Mrs. Hubert Melville Jay


F. Kenneth Milne, F.R.A.I.A
F. Kenneth Milne, Adelaide, South Australia
F. Kenneth Milne, Fellow of the Royal
Australian Institute of Architects, son of
John and Lucy Edith Milne and grandson
of Sir William Milne, was born at Tus-
more, South Australia, in 1885. After
finishing his education, he served articles
with the late Alfred Wells of Adelaide for
four years, and then transferred to Sydney,
New South Wales, where he was engaged
as draughtsman with Messrs. Robertson
and Marks.
In 1909 he returned to Adelaide and
commenced the practice of his profession
as an architect. Details of some of his
work are given hereunder.
F. Kenneth Milne married Hazel Muir
Fotheringham, daughter of Anthony Skeoch
Fotheringham and there is one son.
In addition to his professional attain-
ments, F. K. Milne is also well known ir.
the sporting life of South Australia in which
he takes an active part, and has recently
been made a life member of the Amateur
Sports Club of South Australia.
His son, Kenneth Lancelot, represents
the fourth generation of this well known
family, which has been associated with
South Australia for 100 years.
In the past, the work of Mr. F. Ken-
neth Milne could hardly be regarded as
academic. His buildings were original,
vigorous, unorthodox, but, of late, he has
become stylistic, but losing nothing in
vigour nor that personality that character-
ized his earlier manner. The personality
of its creator must be in all art. Mr. Milne
is no mere copyist, but translates archi-


L'ho residence of A. R. Downer, Esq., Bridgewater, Adelaide, a beautiful example of the work
of F. Kenneth Milne.
lectural style and detail in his own
characteristics.
The house, built for Mr. A. R. Downer,
at Bridgewater, in the Mount Lofty Ranges,
near Adelaide, grows suitably out of its
setting on a knoll on its hill-side, sur-
rounded by stately trees, with an old, well
matured garden below. The style chosen
is Georgian, and the detail and spirit is
maintained throughout. The walls are of
local cream stone, sufficiently varied in
colour to give texture; the roof is in grey
blue shades of slate; the timber is painted
cream, and the shutters a deep green. All
harmonizes with the surroundings, giving
an air of dignity and maturity. The exigen-
cies of the site necessitated the placing of
the entrance on one side, leaving the main
front free for living rooms, from the win-
dows of which and from the central portico,
a beautiful view is obtained over the slop-
ing gardens and pool, a willow-lined creek,
with lush meadows beyond, to the rise of a
wooded hill-side. The portico leads on to
a lawn, which continues down one side of
the house, but, in front, falls in three semi-
circular tiers, supported with rough stone
retaining walls, to the stretching garden.
The doorways, in this w r et climate, are pro-
tected with well designed porches, with
play of light and shade around the Doric
columns, and depth of shadow behind.


•'• ' ' ~
'
■■■’’* , ~. v --• - sss MS
The Portico of the residence of A. R. Downer, Esq., Bridgewater, Adelaide.
F. Kenneth Milne, Architect.
Inside the house is the same feeling of
repose and dignity, the same truthful fol-
lowing of detail and spirit. The soft
coloured walls are large panelled. Classic,
delicate basso-relievo friezes slide into
moulded cornices and Adam ceilings.
Wide, low fireplaces, in narrow, glazed
brickwork, faced with marble and wooden
mantels, carved in arabesque in low relief,
give a friendly feeling to the rooms. Par
quet floors and polished blackwood doors
give the charm of reflection. A graceful,
curving, white-painted staircase invites to
the first floor where everything is a con-
tinuation of the grace below.
The new Adelaide offices of Golds-
brough Mort & Company Limited, in North
Terrace, is another exampp of Mr. Milne’s
Georgian work, but more free and modern
in treatment. The facade is built in golden
Bondi stone. An lonic portico stretches
across the ground and first floors, pilasters
at the ends, and two pairs of coupled
columns between, giving depth of shade to
the walling behind. Between the columns
project three small balconies, protected
with bronze guards. Above the entabla-
ture rise five tiers of grouped windows in
plain walling, with a row above, over a
string course, with vertical grooving be-
tween the windows, forming a frieze to the
main cornice that tops the building. In-
side, an entrance hall, panelled in marble,
leads to the lifts, the stairs, the main hall
and offices.


f - s ~ 1
, I B B, h
I *■** __ asr 'Sg
I fi ijS " ;
8E H p*, JS***®* 1 ’ p ■
I S ? ~ .
I A *
I ■* '< ' I
Bffii j ■
The Adelaide Offices of Goldsbrough Mort & Co. I,td.
F. Kenneth Milne, Architect.


( At
-f*' *>/
The late John Esler.
The late Mrs. Elizabeth Esler
Ihe late John Esler of Bendigo
and the Mallee,
I he subject of this biography was a
pioneer in the true meaning of the term.
His history abounds in activities such as
were responsible for the building up of our
National wealth almost from the moment of
his arrival in the young Colony of Victoria.
With his wife Elizabeth, the late John
Esler came from his home in County
Antrim, North Ireland, in the early fifties
after a voyage saddened by the death of
their only child at sea—a daughter—and
during which they were becalmed for a
period of three weeks on end.
Landing at Sandridge—now Port Mel-
bourne—the young settler at first followed
his trade of a wheelwright in the growing
township of Melbourne and continued in
such activity for about a year, during which
period his brother William came out from
Ireland and joined him.
However, their leanings towards a pio-
neering life then prompted them to make
their way to the Bendigo diggings where
they started on a puddling machine and,
from the very start were successful. This
may be classed as the foundation of for-
tune for them, for from this point they pros-
pered through the ensuing years. After
a comparatively short time on the puddling
machine, they were engaged on California
Gully and, from this point, they invested in
shares in the Golden Pyke and the Rose of
Denmark, whilst John also became a Direc-
tor of the former. It is a tribute to his
farsightedness that both of these mines
for many years had paid handsome dividends
and assured him of a large income in addi-
tion to his other activities.
During these years, the late John Esler
loaned monies on a farming property at
Lockwood, about nine miles from Bendigo,
and, in course of time, he was compelled to
take over the property in lieu of payment.
I he property was at this time about two
hundred acres and he at last decided to
take up residence there. He and his family
resided at Lockwood for a few years and
then, owing to the necessity for educating


his family, they moved into Bendigo where
he built a very fine residence in Wills Street
which stands to the present day as one of
the fine residences of that city.
During their residence in Bendigo, the
late John Esler and his wife took a keen
interest in the church of their fathers and
were amongst the early members of St.
Andrew’s Presbyterian Church in Mvers
Street. Eater they became associated with
St. John’s Presbyterian Church in Forest
Street and while members of these churches
helped in their activities.
After eight years in Bendigo, the family
once again moved to their home at Lock-
wood where they remained for about a year
and then sold out. This was in the year
1881 when the ATallee was on the point of
being opened up and the late John Esler
followed the urge,which had stood him in
such good stead before, and took up 892
acres at Birchip and proceeded to engage
in farming pursuits—wheat and sheep—
under conditions which might well have
given pause to the most hardy of pioneer
stock. Their nearest township or railway
was thirty-six miles distance over unchart-
ered tracks and unmade roads. Their land
was dense with wild timberlands and it
was not until the coming of the stump-jump
plough and kindred methods that their work
was lightened from the hardest of labour.
However, his luck won through for him
and his family during the succeeding years
and his holdings grew until they reached
no less than 2,800 acres and such a thing
as financial worry ceased to exist. It is
entirely unnecessary for words to be printed
extolling the wonderful perseverence and
pluck shown under such circumstances but,
it is certain, future generations will thank
such as these for their fight against Nature
in her wildest moods.
The late Mr. John Esler died at the
age of seventy-one in the year 1891 whilst
his widow survived him by many years,
eventually passing away at the age of
ninety-one in 1918, whilst in residence with
her sons at Bannockburn.
The late Mr. and Mrs. John Hsler had
a family of three sons and two daughter-
who reached maturity as follows:
Mr. John Esler of Geelong West. The
late Miss Elizabeth Esler; Mr. Adam Esler,
of Geelong; Margaretta (Mrs. James Har-
vey, of Oakleigh) ; and Mr. Samuel Hugh
Esler, of Geelong.
Of the above, John, Adam and Samuel
Hugh remained in partnership in the Mallee
up to 1908 when the property was sold. At
that stage, Adam and Samuel Hugh in-
vested in a property at Bannockburn of 710
acres where they remained until the year
1929 when they disposed of their holdings
and retired to live in Geelong.
In 1905, Air. Samuel Hugh Esler married
Jean —daughter of Alexander Harvey, of
Swan \\ ater, near St. Arnaud and the couple
are now in residence at their home “Park
View,” 368 AT vers Street, Geelong.
- o
Mr. Adam Esler is in residence at his
home 267 McKillop Street, Geelong.
By virtue of consistent value to the
community and to their country in the
pathways of pioneering activities, we have
pleasure in including these lines in the pre-
sent publication.


S'
The late Mr. Robinson
The late George Robinson, Esq.,
and his Descendants.
The late Mr. George Robinson was a
native of Scotter, in Lincolnshire, England,
and a son of a well-known farmer and mill
owner. i\s a young man he married Miss
Emma Bennett of Blyton —also in Lincoln-
shire—whose family had for many genera-
tions been on the land in the Old Country.
Like so many other newly married
couples, they made what almost amounted
to a honeymoon trip of their journey to the
new land of Australia in the year 1852, and
ultimately landed at Point Henry from
which locality they proceeded to the Balla-
rat diggings. In turn they were at Bunin-
yon g and Italian Gully (now known as
Smythesdale) and at the latter Mr. Robin-
son was one of the original workers.
Mr. Robinson was a brother of the late
Revnolds Homes Robinson who so success-
fully established the famous Albion Wool-
len Mills in Geelong, and of whom a very
fine account was published in the Geelong
“Advertiser” dated 25th November, 1933.
It was following some years on the diggings
that the late Mr. George Robinson took
over the management of the Shannon Flour
Mills—also one of his brother’s undertak-
ings—from which position he retired to live
privately when the Mills closed.
Mr. George Robinson died towards the
close of last century whilst his widow sur-
vived him by several years. Of their family
of two sons and four daughters, Mr. George
Hardy Robinson, J.P., was born in 1862 and
received his education at the Flinders
School, Geelong.
His entire education was aimed at a
scholastic career and, with a knowledge of
his father’s history as a guide, it is not
surprising that he made a success of his
responsibilities. In the year 1926, on the
first day of July, he retired from the Educa-
tion Department after attaining the position
of Headmaster of the Elwood Central
School.


The late Mrs. Robinson
For eleven years past Mr. George H.
Robinson has been an honoured member
of the St. Hilda City Council and occupied
the Mayoral Chair for the year 1930. In
addition to these labours, he represents all
Councils south of the Yarra on the Metro-
politan Fire Brigades’ Board, and is also
President of the Austin Hospital Board.
For the past thirteen years he has filled
with dignity the office of a Justice of the
Peace.
Mr. G. H. Robinson is also the Return-
ing Officer for the St. Hilda Electorate and
South Melbourne Province.
In the year 1888 Mr. Robinson married
Miss Elizabeth Peverill of Jeffcott, near
Donald, in the Wimmera. The Peverill
family, like the Robinsons, were of pioneer
stock, having come from Nottingham in
the early fifties of last century and have
followed through the years pastoral pur-
suits.
Like her husband, Mrs. Elizabeth
Robinson has spared no pains in her endea-
vours on behalf of her less fortunate fellow
citizens. Her activities have earned for
her a great deal of appreciation from all
classes of the community. She is Presi-
dent of the Elwood Auxiliary of the Austin
Hospital and for many years has been an
active member of the Australian Women’s
National League.
Of their union, Mr. and Mrs. G. H.
Robinson have one son and one daughter
of whom brief particulars follow:
Charlotte, married Mr. H. Wrixon.
8.C.E., A.M.T.C.E.
Major R. H. Robinson, of Hobart,
married Miss Gladys Saunders of Brighton.
To this union there is one son in Phillip
Hardy Robinson.
Both Mr. and Mrs. George Hardy
Robinson have descended from true pioneer
stock and have upheld the best traditions
of the early settlers who did so much for
Australia in the early days. For this
reason we have pleasure in welcoming
them to the pages of “The Founders of
Australia and their Descendants.”


The late Thomas Wragge
and
Mr Thomas George Wragge,
A full history of the career of the late
Thomas Wragge, a native of Nottingham,
England would furnish an excellent example
of the magmficient courage and powers of
endurance possessed by the early pioneers
of Australia. However, to publish such a
history would require many times the space
available in this Work, and so, but a brief
outline is practicable.
On his arrival (with a capital of twenty-
five pounds) in Australia in the year 1840
the late Mr. Thomas Wragge obtained
a position on the Salt Water River at
Maribyrnong where he remained for about
six months and then joined the organisation
of Goldsbrough Mort and Company in the
capacity of Manager of “Burnewang”
Station. During this period his brother
William had also arrived from England,
and after three years in his position at
“Burnewang,” Thomas resigned to go into
partnership with his brother and brother-
in-law, the late John Hearn in the purchase
of “Uardry” Station of which property they
were of the original selectors.
In true pioneering fashion the new
owners set about the task of stocking their
hundred thousand acre purchase and, in
bringing stock from “Wanganella Station
—owned by the Peppin family and situated
seventy miles North of Echuca they
placed the first sheep on the Station.
After being at “Uardry” approximately
eighteen years the late Thomas Wragge
contracted typhoid fever and, following the
sale of the Station, travelled to England
where he remained for about two y r ears.
On his return he purchased another
hundred thousand acre property in “Tulla”
Station in New South Wales where he
again pioneered the establishment of merino
flocks. From this time onward his entire
activities demonstrated his intense applica-
tion and wide knowledge of the sheep
industry. His Merino flocks became
famous throughout the Commonwealth and
supplied the foundation of many well
known New South Wales flocks in sub-
sequent years. As an example of the
quality of his product—2oo bales in 1924
establish the record price—up to that time
—of 42Jd. per lb. Five years later he
added to his possessions “Yallambie” a
property at Rower Plenty near Heidleberg.
This was of six hundred and forty acres and
was purchased from the late John Bakewell.
Again, about three years later, he purchased
“Chowar” Station of a further hundred
thousand acres, which adjoined “Tulla” and
thus made his holdings in that district two
complete properties each being ten miles
square.
During these years and up to his death
in the year 1914 he alternatively resided at
“Tulla” and “Yallambie.”


—
Th,: t-ATE THOMAS WRAGGE T«. uu M. s THOMAS WRAGGE Mr, T G. WRAGGE
.. j
, fSBHHHHH
•• ■ .. v. * • , •
U ° WRAGGE M» s. M WRAGGE


■ -V?— "*' * ij I ’■'■ ■
nB pr ~ 1 1^S|
“TULLA” HOMESTEAD
In the year 1860 the late Thomas
W ragge married Miss Sarah Anne Hearn
who was a relative of the late Sir William
Clarke.
At this stage it is of interest to place
on record a few facts concerning other
branches of this family :
Following the severance of their part-
nership, the late William Wragge invested
in “Wharparella” Station on the Murray and
later added two Stations on the Campaspe
River named “Marathon” and “Restdown.”
He ultimately sold all these properties and
retired to live privately at his home
“Landsdown” in North Brighton.
Another brother, the late George
Wragge, followed Thomas and William to
Australia but entered the business world in
Melbourne as a Chemist where Francis’
Store stands in Collins Street at the present
time. He won his way to the forefront in
civic affairs and was paid the compliment
by his fellow-citizens of being elected
Mayor of the City of Melbourne.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


* 1 ' !*'%\*
WOOL TRANSPORT
Yet another member of this fine family
was the late Clement Wragge—the eminent
Astronomer—who brought still further
lustre to a family name already high in the
esteem of one and all in the community.
Reverting to the history of the late
1 homas W ragge and his descendants, there
"’as a family of eight children to reach
maturity in :
Mr. i homas George \\ ragge, Mrs. Sarah
Anne Murdoch of “ Yalambie,” the late
Miss I/Quisa Maria Jessie Wragge, the late
Miss Carrie Wragge, the late Mrs. Alice
Mary Friar, the late Mr. Edwin Sidney
Wragge, the late Mr. William Alfred
Wragge and the late Mr. Harry Wragge.
Of the above. Air. Phomas George
\\ ragge, who was born in the year 1862 at
Broadmeadows and received his education
at Scotch College, Melbourne, left “Tulla”—
which was leased to the other sons —and
invested in a very fine property of eight
thousand acres named “Narlga” Station
situated near Deniliquin in New South
Wales, where he resided for a considerable


time. He ultimately made a present of
Narlga to his sons and returned to
1 ulla where he took up residence until
the year 1922 when he built his present fine
residence, “Narlga”, 7 Coleridge Street,
El wood.
Although Mr. T. G. Wragge has, in
theory, retired, he is still Trustee of the
family Estates, and is extremely active in
this direction, making four or five visits to
the properties each year.
Occupying a high position in the
esteem of his fellows, he has been requested
to accept the office of a Justice of the
Peace but, with his interests in the North
claiming so much of his attention, he felt
that he would be unjustified in accepting
the compliment offered to him. Mr.
A ragge is a member of Elwood Bowling
Club.
The present Mrs. Wragge was Miss
Theresa Violet Brawn, daughter of the late
Charles and Claudina Brawn of Climes.
There is a family in all of four sons and
two daughters as follows:
Thomas William Eric, Allan Murray,
Leonard George, Stanley Mayhew, Edith
now Mrs. C. Hope and Miss Jean Ridge.
Each of the four sons are Pastoralists and
their children in turn represent the fourth
generation of this, one of Australia’s oldest
pioneer families.
True to the traditions of their honored
name, two of these sons served overseas
with the A. I. F., for three years in France,
whilst a third son served in the Air Force.
We have the greatest pleasure in in-
cluding the history of this fine old family
in “The Founders of Australia and their
Descendants.”
The late George Charles Newman of “Fullarton,”
Adelaide
Few families have had a longer con-
tinuous association with one district than
the Newmans. The late Charles Newman
was born at Somersetshire, England, on
March 9th, 1821, and arrived in South Aus-
tralia by the ship “Catherine Stewart
Forbes” on the 21st of October. 1837, a
few months after the Proclamation of the
Province. He died at Charleston on
September 7th, 1900. His career in South
Australia is best given in his words, which
we reproduce later on.
Charles Newman married Mary Dunn,
daughter of William Dunn of Charleston,
and their family were: William, Jane (Mrs.
Pope), George and Herbert Alfred, of
whom the latter survives. Charles New-
man was a clever and most public spirited
man, and did much for his district.
George Charles Newman, J.P. second
son of the late Charles Newman was born
at “Blackford”, Charleston, South Austra-
lia, in 1859. He was educated at Whin-
ham College, Adelaide, and at the age of
seventeen joined his brother William on
a farm near Ardrossan. This was prior to
the advent of super-phosphate, and the pro-
perty was given up after three years,
He then went to the South-East, and pur-
chased land in the Lucindale district, en-
gaging in farming and pastoral operations
with marked success.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


A irf m
The late Mrs CHARLES NEWMAN The late Mu CHARLES NEWMAN
The ut £ M« G. C. NEWMAN OLIVER Mrs q c N£WMAN
Tw, atf M„ A CARMICHAEL , ... NtuviA',
GRANDSON OF CHARLES NEWMAN MOTHfM OF mrs ,
Ihe late George Charles Newman of “Fullarion.” Adelaide


' IT"
During this period he married Maria
Mary, only child of the late Archibald and
Eleanor Carmichael of Lucindale.
Archibald Carmichael arrived in South
Australia in the “Grand Trian” in 1859 at
the age of nineteen, under engagement to
Mr. Canaka of the Northern District. Later
he was appointed overseer of “Wellington
Lodge” for the late Mr. Alan McFarlane
until 1873. In 1868 he was married to
Eleanor Letitia Byrne in “Trinity Church”
North Terrace by the Rev. Rollick. In
1873 he moved to the Lucindale district
where he became one of the best known
pastoralists in that part of the state owning
“Avenue Range” and “Fellwood,” and later
“Shepherds Rest” where he retired and
finally died in 1920 at the age of 80 years,
lie had been a councillor for Lucindale for
many years and also “Chief” of the
Caledonians at Naracoorte.
Shortly after his marriage, G. C. New-
man returned to Charleston, where he ac-
quired land adjacent to the family property
“Blackford.’’ There is a family of four-
teen, Charles Herbert of Tumby Bay,
Archibald Carmichael of Charleston,
Eleanor Letitia (Mrs. Watson of Dulwich)
Mary, (Mrs. Burnley) of Balaklava; Heir-
old Clive, of Perth; George Charles, of
Naracoorte; William Gerald, of Horsham;
Herbert Alfred of Tweedvale; Muriel
(Mrs. Burnley) of Unley; Alan, of Nairne;
Elsie of Rosefield; Eorna (Mrs. Hill) of
Moreenia; Annie (Mrs. Bourne of 800 l
Lagoon) and Florence of Rosefield.
During G. C. Newman’s residence at
Lucindale he was a Councillor of the Dis-
trict Council and a Justice of the Peace.
Like his father, he took his place in actively
promoting the progress of the Charleston
district, with which the Newman family
has been so long and honorably associated.
George Charles Newman retired to
Rosefield, Adelaide, where he died in 1929.
There are thirty-two grand-children who
represent the fourth generation of both the
Newman and Carmichael families.
The children of Mr. and Mrs. New-
man are all interested in sport, and the
number of trophies won by the several
members total over two hundred. Flor-
ence, the youngest of the family, is well-
known in the tennis world, and is also an
interstate Badminton player. Clive and
Archibald Newman joined the A.I.F. and
served throughout the Great War with the
9th Light Horse 1914-1918.
The late G. C. Newman and family


'%a VK
jsljp -A
;*£ ||lraf
Mr, H F C MMERTO'N . L ' ’ 1 M " H B EMMERTON
'' Nr;f?MAN BWOCKrs Lm,v GENGOULT smith
j
Composite block showing four generations of the Balcombe family in Australia All
reproductions, except that of the late A. B. Balcombe, are from Miniatures in the
possession of Mrs, H. E. Emmerton.


The Balcombe Family in Australia,
and the late Doctor David Reid, R.N.
To do full justice to the family history
of the late Doctor Reid—passing through
the years covered by the names of Balcombe,
Emmerton, Brookes and Gengoult-Smith—
would indeed be a task worthy of many
times the space available in the present
work.
Through the years, this family has rep-
resented the best in the community and to
itemise the activities of the various members
on behalf of their less fortunate fellow-
creatures would entail such space as to ren-
der it imperative that but a brief outline
shall appear herein, but it is earnestly hoped
such as does appear shall tend towards
doing justice in some small measure to the
names written from time to time in these
lines.
The foundation of the Reid family was
effected by Doctor David Reid, R.N., in the
year 1818 when he arrived in Botany Bay
after a typical six months journey per
medium of the only means of travel from
England in those days—namely the sailing
ship. With him were his wife, three sons,
David, John and Robert, and two daughters,
Agnes, (married Sir Francis Murphy,
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly for 17
years), and Emma Juana.
Following his settlement in the recently
formed Colony, Doctor Reid accepted a
large holding—“lnverary, in the Goulburn
district which was granted to him by the
Imperial Government in recognition of his
services in reduction of the mortality rate
in transporting prisoners to Australia. Here
he remained for a considerable time and,
later, invested in another fine property,
“Reidsdale,” near Albury.
In these early days, the line of demarca-
tion between the classes was most strongly
defined and, in the well-known and
authoritative volume —(written by Hugh
McCrae from the diary of Georgiana
McCrae)—under the title of “Georgiana’s
Journal,” frequent mention is made of such
well-known early members of the governing
circles in the pioneer days of Australia as
Lonsdale, LaTrobe, Bunbury, Reid and
Balcombe, as to demonstrate clearly that
these constituted the recognised aristocracy
of the day.
As the years passed, Doctor Reid took
a pronrnent part in the successes achieved
by our early pioneers and, when his daughter
—Emma Juana —reached mature years
she married a Mr. Alexander Beatson Bal-
combe whose family were formerly from
Saint Helena.
In passing, it should be mentioned that
Mr. A. B. Balcombe was the son of William
Balcombe, the first Colonial Treasurer of
New South Wales to be appointed by the
English Government. It was also a co-
incidence that he purchased the fine station
property, “Tichingoorook” from a Captain
Reid who was an English officer sent to
Australia by the Home Government in
charge of a batch of convicts. This Captain
Reid was not a relative in any way of the
Doctor’s. The property “Tichingoorook”
was later re-named by the Balcombes “The
Briars.” This property has been in the
possession of members of the Balcombe
family since 1846 to the present day.
In re-printing the following extract
from “Georgiana’s Journal,” it is necessary
to record that the stated age ot twenty-
three years of Mrs. Balcombe when she was
married disagrees with family records. The
latter state the age as seventeen years.
“Mrs. Balcombe told me that when
first her parents came to the Sydney
district, in 1818, cattle were so valuable
that settlers would not kill any, but, for
three successive years, subsisted chiefly
on salt pork. Mrs. Balcombe was six
weeks old when they landed, and Mr.
Oxley, then Surveyor-General, becom-
ing her god-father, gave her a cow
and a calf, worth together at that time
£2O. (The Argyle cow and calf sold
for a hundred). Her father regularly
branded the increase with little Missy’s
own initial, always exchanging the bull
calves for heifer calves, thus, when she
was twenty-three, and about to marry


Mr. Balcombe, she owned a hundred and
fifty cows. The sale of these enabled
her to build four houses, which now let
at seventy pounds per annum, and, for
the first two years, yielded £l5O rent.
It is a remarkable fact that Oxley’s
original cow was living, and had a calf,
on the eve of Mrs. Balcombe’s marriage.
On Napoleon’s arrival at Saint
Helena, before “Longwood” had been
sufficiently prepared, Balcombe pere
ceded to him his house and property
called “The Briars,” while he, himself,
with his family, found lodgings among
the neighbours, elsewhere. This act
of hospitality rendered him “suspect,”
and led to his leaving Saint Helena.
Till yesterday, Longwood had been a
stable, built fifty years before, and only
at the last moment transformed into a
dwelling house. Negroes, and the car-
penters of the “Northumberland,” fixed
a wooden floor over the mud of the
the interior neglecting to clear away the
cattle-dung. Soon after the Emperor's
entry, the planks rotted and broke, the
stinking damp soaked through the floor-
ing, and he had to move into another
room.—(“ Napoleon” by Emil Ludwig).
Napoleon liked to play with the little
Balcombe girl, and, just before she sailed
for Australia, gave her a gold watch.
The Balcombes had also in their posses-
sion the Emperor’s soup-bowl, some
china plates, pocket handkerchiefs, and
other relics. These souvenirs of their
Imperial guest still remain distributed
among members of the family,”
Of the union of Mr. and Mrs. Alexander
Beatson Balcombe there was a family oi
nine children of whom seven reached matu-
rity as follows:
The late Mrs. James' Murphy, of “The
Briars,” Mornington. To this union there
was one son in the late Mr. Alexander Bal-
combe Murphy, who, in turn, left three
young daughters, Mary, Elizabeth and Jane.
The late Alexander Balcombe married
Miss Woodville and resided at “Coradgery,”
Station in New South Wales.
The late Miss Agnes Elizabeth Bal-
combe, of Elwood.
Maria, the late Mrs, Beggs who had
one son in Mr. Balcombe Beggs.
Lucia Emily, Mrs. William Hichens
Quick, of “The Briars,” Springfield Avenue,
Toorak, of whom further particulars appear
later,
Herbert Henty Balcombe of “Corad-
gery” married Miss Weston, of New South
Wales and to this union there has been
one son, Mr. Alexander Balcombe.
Alice Mabel Maude —Mrs. Harry
Emmerton. The late Mr. H. Emmerton
was one of the leading figures of the legal
profession in Victoria whilst Mrs. Emmerton
has unquestionably been recognised for
many years as an acknowledged leader in
the best circles of the State. Of the union
of Mr. and Mrs. Emmerton there has been
one daughter in Mrs. Norman Brookes of
Melbourne who, in turn, has three
daughters in Lady Gengoult-Smith, (late
Lady-Mayoress of Melbourne), Mrs. Regi-
nald Bessemer-Clark, of London, and Miss
Hersie Brookes, of Melbourne.
Mrs. William Hichens Quick was the
fourth daughter. Her son, Lieut-Colonel
Balcombe Quick, F.R.C.S., of “Trengweath,”
Selborne Road, Toorak, served with the 2nd
Field Ambulance of the A.I.F. from 1914,
both on Gallipoli and in France. He was
awarded the D.S.O. He married Hilary,
second daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Temple
Stephens in 1927 and has one son, Nigel
Balcombe.
Her daughter, Ruth, married Mr. W.
J. Griffiths, late of London, and to this
union there are two children, William Bal-
combe and Nancy Elizabeth. Their home
in Springfield Avenue, Toorak, is named
1 he Briars” after the old family estate at
Saint Helena.
In concluding these brief particulars of
this truly pioneering family, we feel that but
scant tribute has been paid to one of our
best representatives of those who have done
so much to make Australia the power


which it undoubtedly is in the Councils
ol the Empire. 'Mrs. IT. Emmerton,
who is in residence at “Raveloe,” Domain
Road. South Yarra. has reserved for herself
a niche in the scheme of things which will
be extremely difficult —il not impossible—
to fill, for she lias ahvays been able and
willing to assist in many ways the great
many appeals for assistance both by virtue
of her practical assistance and her monetary
donations. It is to such as Mrs. H. Emmer-
ton and Mrs. W, H. Quick and those whom
they represent that we issue most cordial
invitations to be included in the Roll of the
“Founders of Australia and Their Descend-
ants.
The Devlin Family of Marcus, Victoria.
Whilst this history is concerned princi-
pally with the career of the late Thomas
Devlin, of Marcus, it is essential that, to do
justice to his memory and also to his des-
cendants, the foundation of his family, with
brief particulars pertaining thereto, must be
chronicled.
The first of this old and respected family
to settle in Australia was the late John and
Mary Ann Devlin who left their home in
Armagh, Ireland, aboard the “Marco Polo,”
(one of the old sailing vessels plying be-
tween the Old country and Australia),
either in the late forties or early fifties of
last century, accompanied by their two sons
of whom one died during the long voyage.
Landing at Point Henry, the new
settlers proceeded to Geelong and, at a
somewhat later date, made an attempt at
fortune on the diggings although with very
little success. After a short while the late
John Devlin decided that the future of this
country must lie on the land and, with this
idea in mind, took up a holding at Marcus
in the portion shown on our latter-day maps
as Brown’s Marsh.
After having been on the land for a few
years they were joined by another son and
daughter who had remained in Ireland
pending reports from their parents pertain-
ing to the new land. These two children
landed at Sydney and made the journey
from that centre overland to join the others
of the family at Marcus. hor a few years
the family prospered but they were not
fated to enjoy peace and happiness for very
long as disaster overtook them in the year
1866 when the late Mr. John Devlin met his
death as a result of being thrown from his
dray when returning from Geelong over
the terrible bush tracks which formed their
only means of transport during the pioneer-
ing days of our State.
In all there was a family of this union
of eight sons and three daughters of whom
one died during the voyage as already
recorded. Following the death of the head
of the family, the widow carried on the
property with the elder sons lor a few years
until the family was gradually scattered and
only three sons in William, Thomas and
Richard remained at home, the middle one
of whom was but five years old when his
father died.
From this point we concentrate mainly
upon the history of the late Thomas Devlin
and his descendants.
Up to the year 1886 the three sons
named carried on in partnership with their
mother on the home property and, in that
year, Thomas was married to Miss Joan
Blackwell—who was one year his junior—
of an old Ocean Grove family although at
that time the entire district was known as
Barwon Pleads. The ceremony was cele-
brated on the eighth day of November, in
the year 1886 whilst his brother Richard
also married a sister of Mrs. Thomas
Devlin’s at a slightly later date. The vear
1886 also saw Thomas and Richard branch
out on their own on a property of about
one hundred and seventy acres which they
combined to purchase—although they
worked separately from two different homes
on the property.


ilfflK j# fk «|
I -^iU
•'’ THOMAS DEVLIN |
T • s JOAN DEVLIN BEMMy Tk ..-- -, THOMAS DEVLIN
■ **&My*3F -»- : ~r
|HH|R: *
i «*«^~^
iaML" fiOSnf* v -
'; \0 IHIMil ***»
■Hk GEORGE CEV L S
119 ,*% |& r ;**■%»
MISS ROSE DEVLIN M; *» M AR ' 1 ANNi DEVLIN
Mr FREDERICK DEVLIN
The Devlin Family of Marcus, Victoria


William in the meanwhile carried on
with his mother until her death in 1904 at
the fine old age of eighty-two years.
Through the intervening years Thomas,
by virtue of sheer industry and honourable
dealings combined with a reputation for
exceptional ability, progressed steadily and
added to his properties on many occasions.
For sentimental reasons he purchased the
old family homestead at Brown’s Marsh
from his brother William when the latter
decided to retire from farming and, in addi-
tion, Thomas also purchased “Mannerim,”
a fine property of about two hundred and
fifty acres, which is one of the historic hold-
ings of the district having been founded by
the Archer family and later acquired by Mr.
T. Eastwood of Drysclale. In all, his hold-
ings increased to several hundred acres on
which he undertook mixed farming opera-
tions including orchards, cattle etc. The
late Mr. Thomas Devlin through the years
was accorded the respect of his neighbours
for his sterling worth and splendid nature.
Although under medical supervision for
many years—the last seven continuously —
he would never show anything but a brave
face to the world in which he moved and
few indeed of his many friends dreamed of
the trials through which he passed. He
always had a smile and a cheery word for
one and all and his passing at the age of
seventy-three on the seventeenth day of
Novmber, 1934 was a shock to many of his
friends.
In his earlier days prior to sickness
overtaking him he was a conscientious
member of the local Church of England of
which he was a Committeeman in addition
to being Treasurer of the Marcus School.
His activities also brought him into contact
with the outside organisations for he was a
member of both the Fruitgrowers’ Associa-
tion and the Farmers’ Union.
His widow did not survive him for very
long for, on the fourth day of February, 1935
she suffered from a sudden stroke and
passed away to join the husband with whom
she had shared so many happy years.
In all there was a family of four sons
and three daughters of their union, all of
who are in residence at Marcus at the pre-
sent time, the names of whom follow
Thomas, Rose, George, Frank, Mary
Ann, Amy and Frederick.
Of the above, Frank served for three-
and-a-half years on active service with the
eighth Machine Gun Company of the fifth
battalion after having left Australia with
the twenty-ninth battalion and later trans-
ferring.
Of general interest it is worthy of
record pertaining to these lines that two
members of this fine old family paid the
supreme sacrifice during the Great war.
These were Sergeant George Devlin and
Corporal Bert Devlin—sons of Joseph and
Richard Devlin respectively. Also, an-
other member of the family to participate in
a true pioneering effort, which cost him his
life, was the late Sergeant Henry Fraser
who was lost on Corfu Island with Captain
Howell during the first attempt to fly from
England to Australia. His remains were
never discovered and his memory stands as
yet a further monument to the pioneering
blood which flows through the veins of each
and every member of this fine old family.
We are pleased to be enabled to add this
history to the roll of “Founders of Australia”
for the country has received nought but
profit from the settlement of such families
in this outpost of the Empire.


■ ■ * • - ■ , ■ ' rt T : 3
| I k ’ \
The laie M«s DANIEL MORGAN { i The u-rt D T, MORGAN I j Twf - LArt MORGAN . r-
M« VV G MORGAN f I Mr< M G MORGAN j i M*s W G MORGAN
Tms la rt M«s SARAH GERMAIN Mn LLEWLYN MORGAN The late C G GERMAIN
The Morgan Family of the West Coast South Australia


The Morgan Family of the West Coast, South Australia
The founder of the Australian branch
of the Morgans was Daniel Morgan, J.P.,
only son of William and Gwenllian Morgan
whose properties were situate in County
Carmarthenshire, South Wales, and was
educated at Llanelly and Swansea
(Academy). He was apprenticed to the
Great Western Railway Company as an
engineer at their workshops at Swindon,
Wiltshire, England. Later he went to an
engineering firm at Glasgow, Scotland, and
also to the Hyde Park Foundry, London.
He arrived in Australia under contract to an
engineering firm at Geelong, Victoria, in
1858, but this firm was in liquidation when
he landed.
He went to the Victorian goldfields for
awhile, and then proceeded to South Aus-
tralia where his first appointment was with
the South Australian Government, being
engaged in the construction of the Glenelg
Jetty- He then went to the Government
Workshops at North Terrace.
In 1860 Daniel Morgan went to the
Murray, where he was engineer on the
snagging boat “Grappler,” which was one
of the first vessels to open up the Murray
and Darling rivers for transport.
He was engaged in this work until the
outbreak of the Maori war in New Zealand,
when he was appointed chief engineer of
the S.S. “Gundagai” which sailed from the
Murray River to Wanganui, New Zealand.
This ship was frequently the headquarters
of General Cameron, the Commander-in-
Chief of the British forces, and that well-
known divine —Bishop Selwyn—(a bitter
enemy of the General) was often a pas-
senger.
On his return to South Australia Daniel
Morgan had charge of the engines of the
“Francis Cadell” on her trial trip from
Port Adelaide to Glenelg, and remained on
the “Francis Cadell” while in South Aus-
tralian waters. Captain James King,
owner. He was later engaged in the Gulf
trade on the S.S. “Kangaroo,” and was
employed by the Government in dredging
operations at Port Adelaide. Daniel Mor-
gan was the first engineer in South
Australia to install a pair of marine engines
of over one hundred horse power.
After retiring from the Government
Service he came to the West Coast and
settled on the land near Mount Dutton
where he resided for some twenty-two
years, and he then purchased that well-
known property “Warraw” Station from the
estate of the late Mr. Price Maurice. In
1884 he returned to South Wales to visit
his people.
Daniel Morgan served for awhile as a
Councillor of the local district Council, and
was appointed a Justice of the Peace (1895)
which commission he held for many years.
He always took a keen interest in promot-
ing the progress of his district. In 1922,
at the age of 87 years, he died at “Warraw”
Daniel Morgan married in 1862 Miss
Diana Germain, elder daughter of Charles
George and Sarah Germain, born in 1843,
and who received her education at Mrs. Hil-
lier’s Boarding School, Brighton, her
parents having arrived in South Australia
in 1839, the family thus being associated
with the State for nearly one hundred years.
Charles Germain was one of the early busi-
ness men of Port Adelaide, and resided at
Findon. Pie was a foundation member of
the Freemasonry Craft in South Australia,
also a founder of the Oddfellows Lodge.
He later took up land at Mena, West Coast,
and engaged in wool growing. He died in
his eighty-third year, and his wife in her
ninetieth year.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


There were four children, the surviv-
ing’ member of the family being- Mrs. E.
Myers.
The Germains are of French ex-
traction, their ancestors having fled to
England from France during the French
Revolution.
Mrs. Daniel Morgan died in 191b at
Warraw in her seventy-fourth year.
In the early days of country exper-
ience and hardships, Mrs. Morgan on all
occasions faced difficulties with the daunt-
less spirit of the true pioneer.
Daniel and Diana Morgan’s family
consisted of six sons and two daughters—
Florence (deceased), William Germain,
Tracy Phillip, Llewellyn, Gwenllian Hilda,
David Talbot (deceased), Mostyn Trevor
and Daniel Stanley.
William Germain Morgan was born at
Findon, South Australia, in 1868, and edu-
cated at Martin Grammar School, Port
Adelaide. After finishing his education he
returned to the family property at Mount
Dutton, and has been engaged in pastoral
life ever since. He married Miss Bertha
Maud Puckridge, daughter of the late Alfred
Puckridge of Lake Wangary, West Coast;
thus joining two pioneer families.
In 1905 William Germain Morgan was
elected a member of the Port Lincoln Dis-
trict Council, and he has held the seat con-
tinuously ever since. There is a family of
two sons and one daughter, who represent
the fourth generation of the Germain and
the third generation of the Morgan family
in Australia.
Llewellyn Morgan was born at Port
Adel aide in 1874, and, after serving his
apprenticeship to the firm of Martins of
Gawler, Engineers, was for twelve years
engaged in engineering work in various
parts of Australia. He was engineer to
mining companies and has travelled exten-
sively throughout the Commonwealth erect-
ing mining machinery. In 1901 he joined
his people on the property with which he
has been connected ever since.
Miss Gwenllian Morgan, was born at
Port Adelaide and came with her parents
to the West Coast, receiving her education
at Miss Lloyd’s school at Gawler.
After the death of Daniel Morgan, the
three sons William Germain, Llewellvn
and David Talbot, with their sister Miss
Gwenllian, took over the estate which was,
and still is, known as D. Morgan & Sons.
This partnership controls some 130,000
acres of pastoral country on which sheep of
the Merino type are run. Warrow Station
is one of the most historic and oldest sheep
runs on the AVest Coast, having been first
taken up in the early forties.
The three youngest sons of Daniel and
Diana Morgan served overseas with the
Australian Imperial Force during the Great
AA r ar.
Florence, elder daughter, who died in
Adelaide, in 1923, had previously lived in
England for twenty-five years, where dur-
ing the AA’ar period, she had held a position
as drafts-woman in a Constructional AVorks.
having gained her certificates at the School
of Arts and Crafts before leaving Australia,
where she had also been a member of the
School of Design Art Club,
Tracy Philip, second son, was also it
marine engineer, having in this capacity
visited the chief ports of the world, living
in the b nited States for some years. He
subsequently came back to South Australia
to take up land on the AVest Coast.


AV' ■Ml9DO^H3 n
Ha|| || f* * 4
■:::. BE? 'si®i JIBS
The late Colonel John Longville Price, V.D
The late Col. John Longville Price, V.D.
The late Colonel John Longville Price,
born in Worcester, England, on the 24th
October, 1838, was six years of age on his
arrival in Victoria, and was educated pri-
vately under the late Reverend Scales. He
was then articled to the late Mr. Harwood,
of the legal firm of Harwood & Pincott,
Geelong, and, following the completion of
his service was admitted to the Bar and set
up in practice at the corner of Yarra and
Little Malop Streets, which buildings he
purchased. It is of interest that the first
Council Chamber of Geelong was situated
in this building.
The late Colonel Price also took a keen
interest in Military affairs, and reached the
rank of Colonel, such commission being
applicable to the British Regular Army at
Home. He was then appointed Command-
ing Officer for the entire Western District
Forces, including those in Portland, Warr-
nambool, Drysdale, Oueenscliff and Gee-
long. He was an expert rifle shot and won
a great number of trophies.
His interests in other directions were
many and varied, both as Councillor,
Alderman and Mayor—-in 1883—he faith-
fully served the City of Geelong. A keen
student of Astronomy (his favorite tele-
scope is still a treasured possession in his
home on Eastern Beach, Geelong), and as
an ardent violinist; in these and other
interests can his character be appreciated.
He was the originator of the earliest
schemes for the beautification of Eastern
Beach, and was also one of the Foundation
Members of the Royal Society of St. George.
His speech, as second President of this
Institution in Geelong, was reproduced on
white satin and forwarded to his late
Majesty King Edward, and an official ack-
nowledgment was received from England in
due course.
The late Colonel Price was responsible
for the naming of the Town of Torquay
besides being President of the Progress
Association for many years. A tribute to
his memory lies in the fact that, both in
Torquay and Geelong, streets have been
named after him. Of his union with Miss
Elizabeth Osborne Shepherd there were
five children in the late John Longville
Price, Mrs. E. G. Marwood, of Sydney;
Mrs. C. Campbell-Smith, of Adelaide; and
the Misses Lonzie Longville Price and
Elsie Myra Longville Price, the last two of
whom are in residence at the old family
home—“Longville House”, Eastern Beach,
Geelong.
The late Colonel John Longville Price,
recipient of the Volunteer Decoration,
faithfully upheld his family motto ;—“Vive
ut Vivas”—“Live that you may Live,” and
was a true example of “An English
Gentleman.”
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


I The urt AINSLIE MILLS
The lmc CHARLES MILLS, sn«, |
. . _ , Mr NELSON MILLS
Mr W. A MILLS
Mr C. G, MILLS M,t V F PP, CE
M » 9 VV M MILLS


Ihe late Mr. Charles Mills,
of “Uardry” Station, Hay, New South Wales
-1 o do lull justice to the memory of
such as the late Mr. Charles Mills, of
Lardry’ Station, the historian would run
a considerable risk of being unduly influ-
enced by the many tributes paid to him —
not only during his lifetime but —even to
the present day by those with whom he was
mainly brought into contact during his
long and honorable career as a leading
Pastoralist of Australia. Although not
born in Australia, he was at all times re-
garded as a pioneer in the sheep breeding
circles among whom he spent the major
portion of his life.
Sheep breeding was in his blood for he
was a son of the late Air. George Mills, a
well-known and esteemed sheep breeder of
Peebleshire, in Scotland, and his memories
of these earl}' days prior to his making the
journey to Australia were at all times in
his thoughts and were of considerable value
to him during the process of building his
fortunes in this country.
Born on the eleventh day of September
in the year 1832, in the neighbouring Shire
of Selkirkshire, the late Air. Alills spent his
early years at his father’s Horsebrugh
Castle Farm in Peebles, and, following
eight years education at the Edinburgh
Academy, had a further eight years practical
education in farming pursuits in Scotland
prior to sailing to Australia in the sailing
ship “Greyhound” in the year 1863.
On his arrival, he demonstrated his
shrewd judgment in that he obtained a
position in the sheep breeding industry for
the purpose of gaining colonial experience
before investing" his capital on his own be-
half without the required knowledge of
Australian conditions. This experience he
gained on Mount Pleasant Station, owned
by the late Mr. McKenzie, situated in the
A orth-eastern districts of \ ictoria and com-
prising rough mountainous country. The
property carried about 30,000 sheep and
sei ved as an excellent opportunity for the
newly-arrived settler to gain experience of
the description needed. Plis next step, in
partnership with Messrs. Neilson ’and
Smart, was to purchase two large leaseholds
in “Morton Plains” and “Watchem” in the
North-western district of Victoria, on the
fiinge of the Mallee. His keen judgment
and pluck was demonstrated in this action
for, although these properties are now
noted for their wealth, they were at that
time considered definitely risky under-
takings.
Following a few years on these proper-
ties, Air. Mills sold his holdings and took a
trip home to Scotland, which was fated to
be a memorable one for him and his for-
tunes, for he returned to Australia with a
bride-daughter of the late John Ainslie, of
Fairfield, near Edinburgh. It was appro-
priate that the Ainslie family had for many
years been noted for their successes in the
sheep-breeding industry of Scotland.
Following his return to this country,
the late Mr. Mills purchased, in 1876, and
in partnership with Messrs. Neilson and
Smith, “Uardry” Station—the name mean-
ing yellow box tree —and it was this step
which was fated to be the true foundation
of his future vast successes in the sheep-
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


breeding industry. This partnership was
a happy one for all concerned and, it was
not until the death of his fellow-helpers
that Mr. Mills bought out their interests
and took over the entire property for him-
self.
Through these years he was loyally
aided by his wife who stood by his side
through a great many trials which, perforce,
were met with, and overcome. 1 heir ex-
periences were by no means all pleasant,
neither were seasons consistently favorable,
as any Riverina grazier could testify, but
the bond of mutual esteem and affection
between the late Mr. and Mrs. Mills was
such that they could help and stimulate
each other in a manner that was of a value
impossible to estimate.
In a work of this nature, it is quite im-
possible to give an adequate account of the
activities of such as the subject of these
lines, and so, we must be content to chron-
icle the actual fact that Mr. Mills devoted
his lifetime to his work in such a manner
as to bring him to the very forefront of
pastoralists in the entire Commonwealth.
Not only did he practically place the sheep-
breeding industry on the level of an exact
science, but he imbued his sons with a
similar knowledge, so that they in turn are
recognised as worthy successors to a
wonderful father. To render it somewhat
the more easily understandable as to what
has been effected at “Uardry”, we take the
liberty of reproducing a brief paragraph
from the “Pastoral Homes of Australia”
which gives a splendid description of, not
only “Uardry” but also of the other Mills
properties “Pembelgong” and “Burra-
bogie”. The following is an extract from
their article on “Uardry”;—
“ . . . Uardry is one of the most highly
improved stud stations in Australia, am
comprises 81,000 acres, which have been
subdivided into 120 paddocks, and which
are watered by the Murrumbidgee River.
19 sub-artesian bores, 8 wells and 25 ground
tanks, many of the latter being filled by
channels from the river . . . The boundary
is netted, and the special stud paddocks have
a fox-proof fence surrounding them. There
is a straight across country frontage of 81
miles to the Murrumbidgee River, which,
with the run extending 24 miles north of
the river, gives a compact block 24 miles
by 8 ... As already stated, the Uardry
stud is absolutely pure Peppin blood, bred
within itself, as originally laid down by the
late Mr. Charles Mills many years ago. .
So much for the successful undertak-
ings of the late Mr. Mills, and we must now
do honour to his memory as a man and a
father.
As already stated, the best that can be
said of him in the latter direction is to the
effect that his family have walked in similar
pathways to those chosen by their wonder
ful father.
As a man—in the truest sense of the
word —he was not only respected and
esteemed but he was also loved as a deai
friend and a beloved gentleman. He
shunned notoriety and limelight of an}
kind whatever, but, when in the company of
those who constituted his own circle of
friends, evinced a humour which endeared
him to one and all with whom he was
brought into contact. Certain it is, that
not only Victoria —or indeed any one
State —but the whole of Australia bene-
jfitted from his having come among us,
whilst it is extremely doubtful whether he
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


at am time made one single enemy—a truly
v ondei tul tribute to be able to pay to a man
so successful as he. After having attained
the fine old age of eighty-four years, the
late Air. Mills went to his last rest on the
twentieth day of May, 1916, leaving his
widow and a family of four sons and two
daughters, the brief particulars of whom
follows:
Ainslie, who died in 1911, married Miss
Loina Price (also since deceased) of
Toorak, Melbourne. To this union there
was a family of three daughters and one
son, in—Mary, Margaret, Elizabeth and
Ainslie.
Charles George, married Miss Ffrench
of South Yarra, Melbourne, and following
her death he married Miss B. Brooks of
Melbourne. He has a family of one
daughter and two sons in—Winifred Pat-
ricia, Charles George, and Robert Ainslie.
Miss Winifred Margaret Mills resides
at “Uardry”, Heyington Place, Toorak,
who, in a differing sphere from her late
father, is upholding the true meaning of
ser\ ice as exemplified by him in other cir-
cumstances. Miss Mills is a most highly
respected and esteemed worker on behalf
of the Eady Northcote free Kindergarten,
of North Melbourne, and has clearly
demonstrated similar qualities of character
as served to endear her late father to all
with whom he was brought into contact.
Jean, Mrs. Vivian Price of Landale
Place, Toorak. Mrs. Price has one daugh-
ter in Miss Judith Price.
Nielson, married Miss Mary Gleeson of
Hay. Mr. Neilson Mills has the manage-
ment of the family properties under his
control and he and Mrs. Mary Mills reside
at “Uardry” with their son Andrew.
Ihe kite AA illiam Ainshe Mills who
met his death under tragic circumstances
as a result of a drowning fatality.
In concluding this brief outline of the
career of the late Mr. Charles Mills, we feel
that his life was emblematical of the truth
of the old adage which says“ What is
bred in the bone, comes out in the flesh”
foi he came from a fine old Scotch family
and lived up to the fine tenets held by such
as they, whether in their native highlands
or in Australia, and so we finish with the
quotation :
“Caelum, non animum, mutant”
i hey change their sky, or horizon, not
their mind.” (Hor. Ep.'l. xi. 27).
The late Doctor William Markham, of Port Augusta,
South Australia.
Possibly no member of the Medical
profession has aroused a greater degree of
love and respect than the subject of these
ines. A son of the late Stephen Russell
Markham, a scholar and landed gentleman
of Southern Ireland, the late Doctor Mark-
ham accompanied his family to the United
States of America where they settled in
Newark, in the State of New Jersey.
William received his education in the
nited States and ultimately took up prac-
tice at Newark, where, but for a visit from
his relatives, Mr. and Mrs. David Murray
of Adelaide he would have probably spent
his entire career.
However, Mr. and Mrs. Murray made
the journey to Newark especially to see
their young nephew and, whilst there, in-
duced him to relinquish his connection and
to come to Australia. On the voyage to
this country the young medico met the late
Mr. Bignell—senior partner of the firm of
Bignell & Young, departmental stores, Port
Augusta, and the latter gentleman strongly
urged him to go to the small township of
Port Augusta to begin a practice.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


'"'"’"»A»» ' #
; i' Mrs f, W FAULKNER <-*T. D M. SHUTER P W ' f A LILKNER
On landing in Adelaide, Doctor Mark-
ham was immediately in demand as reliev-
ing doctor for the Adelaide Hospital and,
following his release from that institution,
was called upon to fill the postion of locum
tenens for two or three local practitioners
prior to his having the opportunity to make
the journey to the Port ... to which
locality there was but a fortnightly boat
service.
His first impressions on arrival were
anything but congenial and it was only the
strong representations of some of the lead-
ing local citizens that induced him to
remain. Pie at length agreed to do so,
however, on the understanding that he
must have a hospital. The Colonial Sur-
geon, Doctor Paterson, was therefore
approached and he agreed to the demand
authorising Doctor Markham to select a
site suitable for the proposed building. In
face of a considerable amount of opposition
the present site was selected and the Doctor
had the privilege of laying the Foundation
Stone of the first Casualty Hospital for Port
Augusta. After about a year of operation,
during which it became apparent that the
hospital was of little benefit in the existing
form, a petition was presented to the
Government to have it converted into a
general hospital and this petition received
the favorable consideration which it quite
obviously deserved. From this point on-
wards, progress was rapid and the reputa-
tion of both the hospital and the doctor
grew for many miles of surrounding terri-
tory.
Many pages would be required to give
a full report of the wonderful work per-
formed and the esteem and respect won by
Doctor Markham during the following
twenty-one years. A talented scholar and
a grand gentleman, he was a prolific writer
of both verse and pfiose. Fie became one


of the leading members of the community
and was repeatedly urged to accept muni-
cipal honours, but his reply was ever that
his profession—added to his deep interest
in Literary Societies and pupils who were
learning dispensing and other angles of the
medical profession—completely filled his
time and opportunities for service.
His charitable works were enormous
and he was never known to make any
charge to a member of the Cloth. A fine
example of this was seen when the Bishop
of the North (later Archbishop O’Reilly)
was lying dangerously ill; the doctor tended
to him through a long and severe illness
without fee or reward and, on the
bishop presented him with two beautiful
volumes of the ‘‘Cathedrals of the World”
in which was inscribed “I do not know
which to admire the most, —his brotherly
kindness or his professional skill” . . truly
a fine compliment to any man in any walk
of life.
However, for some years prior to his
death he suffered severely from afflictions
of the eyes, and in 1892 he was responsible
for Doctor Richard Ernest Shuter coming
to Port Augusta from Melbourne to relieve
him from the heavy duties attached to the
practice. As time passed his eyes became
worse and he ultimately came to Melbourne
to be operated upon by the late Doctor
Jackson of Collins Street. The first opera-
tion was followed in fairly quick succession
by another and the sufferer at length passed
away in the year 1894 and was buried in the
Enfield Church of England Cemetery,
Adelaide.
On July 7th, 1875, the late Doctor
Markham married Miss Emily Ann McDon-
ald, daughter of Charles and Grace McDon-
ald of Adelaide, who were of early South
Australian pioneer stock, and to this union
there was one daughter, Rebecca Emily,
who later married the Doctor Richard
Ernest Shuter, already named in this his-
tory.
Doctor R. E. Shuter has had a
most outstanding career. His activities
at Port Augusta lasted for approximately
four years and, in addition to an outstand-
ing military career during the Great War,
lie was in practice in Collins Street, Mel-
bourne, as a throat specialist for several
years. From their union there has been a
family of one daughter and one son in:—
Enid —married Mr. Francis Webb
Faulkner, (a Director of Huddart, Parker)
and resides at 7 Como Avenue, South Yarra
\ ictoria. To this union is one daughter in
Miss Pamela Webb Faulkner.
The late David Markham Shuter, who
was killed in a motor accident whilst fol-
lowing his profession of wool-designing in
T orkshire, England. This tragedy occur-
red when he was but twenty-four years of
age.
Doctor and Mrs. Shuter are now in
residence at “Kintala”, Cromer Road, Beau-
maris.
This brief history would be incomplete
were it to neglect to place on record a short
outline of the very fine charitable works of
Mrs. Emily Ann Markham who, although
now eighty-two years of age, is still most
active on behalf of more than one public
charitable institution. In the year 1936 she
was the recipient of the twenty years ser-
vice medal of the Australian Red Cross, and
also holds the Gold Badge for outstanding
services on behalf of the Girl’s Friendly
Society. For a great many years the latter
institution has been her especial interest,
and her work in this direction is known to a
vast army of both workers and members of
that body. The foundation of the Port
Augusta and Camperdown (Victoria)
branches were due to her efforts and only
her extraordinary vitality has enabled her
to carry on the responsibilities which have
rested but lightly on her shoulders to the
present day.
During the Great War she was also
most active with the A ictoria League, and
in company with other willing workers,
was responsible for every unit in the A.I.F.
receiving its quota of newspapers with the
utmost regularity. It is difficult to realise
that such as she could have laboured with
such regularity and efficiency and the
affection borne for her is the best reward
possible for one of her temperament. May
she be long spared to continue her good
works.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


~^ Mtr
l-A
iTMi
r
| f^
P. Warford-Mein.
Late Dr. G. A. Mein, M.D., J.P.
The late George Augustus Mein, M.D., Edin.
The late Doctor George Augustus
Mein came to Victoria from Scotland in the
year 1853, after having attained the age of
thirty-one years. Although of the medical
profession prior to his arrival, he followed
pastoral pursuits from the inception of his
career in this country.
His first venture was when he purchased
from Messrs. Sylvester and Smith,
“Moolpa’, near Moulamein, in the Denili-
quin district and, even in this first under-
taking, he was successful as a breeder of
cattle and sheep.
In the year 1873 Doctor Mein pur-
chased “Boorooma” Station, near Walgett,
New South Wales, and he was the first
to introduce sheep to that part of the State.
From this point onwards his properties
were continuously being increased and
others of his Stations which should be men-
tioned are such as “Herbert Downs”, near
Winton, Queensland —where he concen-
trated on the breeding of fat cattle —
“Woodslee Downs”, and “Tururoa” in the
South and North Islands of New Zealand,
respectively.
His Melbourne residence was “Falkcn-
stein,” situated in Balaclava road, East St.
Kilda, and he was a notable figure in that
city’s social life. He was a well-known
and respected member of both the Austra-
lian and Melbourne Clubs —as also the
M.C.C. and the Victorian Racing Club.
He was regarded as a leading figure in civic
life and was appointed a Justice of the Peace
for New South Wales.


In the year 1861 he married Jane
Hetherington, daughter of the late Edmund
Gibsone of “Pcnton House,” Cumberland,
and from this union there was a family of
two sons and three daughters as follows :
Beatrice Helena —married Doctor James
Cox of Collins Street, Melbourne; Augusta
Nicola, deceased, who married Mr. Stuart
B. Leishman of “borne,’’ Queensland;
Annie Mary Agnes —married Mr. Alfred A.
Thom, and resides in England; Pulteney,
of whom further particular appear later,
and Douglas.
The late Douglas Warford-Mein, who
married Miss Lily M. Dalzell. 4 his son
served in the B.E.E. in the Special Reserve
South Wales Borderers, and his death in
1923 was the indirect result of his active
service. He was mentioned in despatch
23rd October, 1918.
Doctor George A. Mein died in the
year 1892 in his seventieth year after a
career in which he attained the esteem and
respect of all with whom he had been
brought into contact.
Mr. Pulteney Warford-Mein —named
above —was born in the year 1876 and, like
his father before him, followed pastoral
pursuits for several years prior to his
retirement in the year 1913. In partnership
with his brother he purchased “Bogo
Bogolong” Estate, New South Wales, in
the year 1900, and such property remained
in their possession until 1906 when, follow-
ing its sale, Mr. P. Warford-Mein took a
trip to England.
On his return, he purchased in the year
1909, the “1.Y.U.” Estate at Pakenham,
Victoria, and retained possession until his
retirement. It is of interest to record that
in the years 1894-7 Mr. Warford-Mein held
a Commission as Lieutenant in the now
defunct Reserve of Officers for which the
qualifications and examinations were parti-
cularly stringent.
Mr. P. Warford-Mein has also taken an
active interest in the Royal Victorian
Institute for the Blind, of which he has
now been on the Board for the past seven-
teen years. Like his father, also, he has
been for many years a member of both the
Melbourne and Victorian Racing Clubs-
He resides at “Milliara,” Wallace Avenue,
Toorak.
In the year 1909 he married Miss Tassie
Constance Staughton, second daughter of
the late Samuel Thomas Staughton, 8.A.,
M.L.A., J.P., of “Eynesbury,” Melton, and
“St. Neots”, South Yarra, Victoria. To
this union there has been a family of two
sons and one daughter in
The late Adrian John Warford-Mein,
8.A., Cambridge, R.A.F., who was born in
the year 1910. His death occurred in the
year 1932, while on duty, in an aeroplane
crash.
David Pulteney Warford-Mein, born
1922.
Miss Patricia Constance Warford-
Mein.
Mrs. Pulteney Warford-Mein died in
1934,
The Mein family rightfully has received
the respect of their fellows wherever they
may have been in Australia and have faith-
fully followed the teaching of their family
motto:
“Manus haec inimica tyrannis.”
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


— 1—'■— .
The late Michael Zwar and
H. P. Zwar, J.P., M.L.A.
H. P. Zwar, J.P., M.L.A.
A touch of romance is associated with
the arrival of the late Michael Zwar, and
his wife Agnes, in Australia in the year
1830. A native of Saxony, the young man
was one of the unsuccessful revolutionaries
of 1848 —at a time when Saxony was still a
Kingdom and prior to its becoming a por-
tion of the German Empire. It was as a
result of his activities in this direction that
he was compelled to leave his home at
Bautzen.
Following a six months voyage, the
voting couple arrived at Port Phillip and
took up 320 acres of land at Broadford,
Victoria, which land has remained in the
family to the present day, and he also pur-
chased a bullock team and carried on a
carting business —principally to the Ovens
mining fields . . . it is worth recording
that he carried the first flour ever taken to
that particular field.
It is typical of the character possessed
by our early settlers —both male and
female —that his young wife carried on
during his absences alone but for their first
infant son. However, as the years passed
he prospered and gradually added to his
possessions until he occupied a position of
trust and esteem among his fellow citizens.
He was a member of the first Road
Board for the Broadford district in the
sixties and, later, became one of the first
Shire Councillors when that body was
formed, and, since then to now there has
always been a member of the family in the
Broadford Shire Council.
The late Michael Zwar died in the year
1902 at the age of 71, and was predeceased
by his wife who passed away in 1892. O’
this union there was a family of six sons
and five daughters.
Henry Peter Zwar was the youngest
son and second youngest child of the family
Born at Broadford, he early betrayed pro
misc of ability beyond the average by winn
ing a Government Scholarship which en
titled him to go to Melbourne Grammar
School. He, however, was unfortunate in
that, whilst yet but fifteen years of age, he
had to return home to manage the farm
(owing to his brothers travelling to other
parts) until such time as one of his brothers
returned and relieved him.
He then went to work at the age of 18
for two of his brothers who had established
a tannery at Beechworth, his starting salan
o
amounting to fifteen shillings per week
However, by the year 1900, he was able to
buy out one of his brothers who held a
small interest in the firm and this brother —
William —then came to Preston and estab-
lished the present business.
By the year 1910, Henry Peter was able
to buy out the Preston undertaking which,
at that time, was employing thirty men.


From that time onwards, his experiences
have been a succession of progress until at
the time of our going to Press the
employees number around an average mark
of one hundred, and concentrate on the
manufacture of leathers for automobile and
furniture upholstery.
Mr. IT. P. Zwar, like the majority of
the members of his family, has taken a keen
and intelligent interest in public affairs for
many years past. In 1930 he was one of
the principal leaders in a civic campaign in
Preston and was elected to the Preston City
C ouncil, whilst in 1933 he occupied the
Mayoral Chair. Owing to his business and
Parliamentary responsibilities, he retired
from the Council in 1934.
In 1927, Mr. Zwar put up for the Legis-
lative Assembly but was defeated and in
1932 he again offered his services to the
people and, on this occasion, he was elected
to the Legislative Assembly.
During the War years and those follow-
ing, Mr. Zwar stood out from the commu-
nity for his efforts on behalf of both Aus-
tralia as a Nation and the Returned
Soldiers. He was untiring in the latter
direction, as the following lines amplv
demonstrate : —He was the recipient of the
thanks of the Nation for his four years’
honorary service during the war in an
executive capacity. He received the first
\ ictorian Certificate of Merit issued by the
Returned Soldiers in conference.
The following year he received the
Australian Certificate of Merit and also the
Australian Gold Medal of Merit for his
efforts on behalf of Returned Soldiers and
their dependants. There have been but a
very few of these medals struck and they
constitute the finest compliment possible
to be paid to a citizen.
He and the late Dame Nellie Melba
were the only two citizens ever to be
granted the Limbless Soldiers Badge.
The sixth district of the R.5.5.1.L.A.,
struck a special Medal of Merit in his
honour. He is a Life Guest of the Preston
Branch of the R.S.S.I.L.A.
No other individual —man or woman—
in the entire Commonwealth holds a
similar collection of honours as those enu-
merated above.
In addition to the above, he was, dur-
ing the War years, President of the Vic-
torian Master Tanners and the Federated
Master Tanners of Australia.
Throughout his life Mr. H. P. Zwar
has been a keen follower of all sport and
in his younger days was an outstanding
footballer. What he has undertaken he
has done well and at the present time he is
a particularly good exponent of the game
of Bowls. He is also President of practic-
ally every sporting body in Preston in
addition to being a good shot with a gun
and an ardent fisherman.
In LS9B Mr. Zwar married Miss Jean
Cunningham, daughter of James Cunning-
ham, of Beechworth, and of this union there
has been a family of two daughters and one
son in—
Beryl—married Mr. Harry Hughes
who is on the land in the Rochester district.
The couple have four children in Bruce,
Joan, Ronald and Shirley.
Miss Enid Zwar who is in residence
with her parents.
Herman —married Miss Rita Miller,
daughter of the Secretary of the Melbourne
Eye and Ear Hospital. There is a daughter
Margo, to the union. Mr. Herman Zwar
is associated with his father in the firm of
Henry P. Z war Pty. Ltd., of which he is a
Director and Secretary, For several years
he has been of immeasurable assistance to
his father and is recognised as a worthy son
of a worthy father.
Mr. Henry Peter Zwar and his family
are in residence at “Rothesay,” 260 Gower
Street, Preston, where he can well afford
to sit back after a full and successful
career.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


Alfred Stephen Kenyon J.P
Alfred Stephen Kenyon, J.P., second
son of Alfred Henderson Kenyon and
Agnes Fleming Agncw, was born in 1867
at Homebush, Victoria, then a flourishing
alluvial gold mining town. Passing his
very early years at Ararat, a more import-
ant gold mining town until 1875, he after-
wards was with his father on the land at
the heads of Concongella and Doctors
Creeks, tributaries of the Wimmera. Up
till then his education was mainly the con-
cern of his parents, but the family shifting
to Melbourne in 1881, he completed his
education at the St. Stephen’s Grammar
School, Richmond, and the University, at
which he matriculated in 1883, taking the
oath on his sixteenth birthday. In 1887 he
joined the Public Works Department as a
pupil engineer, and in the following year
transferred from there to the newly formet
Victorian Water Supply Department as a
Professional Draftsman. In 1898 at the
recovery from the collapse of the boom, he
was appointed assistant Engineer in charge
of River Gaugings and Water Distribution.
Three years later he was promoted to the
position of Engineer in Charge of Town


Supplies and Mew Proposals. In 1906 the
new position of Engineer of Agriculture
was created for him. In 1911 on the re-
organisation of the Department of Agricul-
ture, he transferred to the State Rivers and
A atcr Supply Commission as Senior
Engineer, and in 1932 was appointed Acting
Commissioner, and a little later Commis-
sioner, retiring on superannuation in
February, 1935. In 1898, with Mr. David
L. Stirling, he began an intensive search of
the southern littoral for aboriginal remains,
with a view of proving an Austral-Tas-
manic connexion. Quickly convinced such
did not exist, he concentrated on investiga-
tion of the Australian aboriginal stone im-
plements, on which subject he has written
a number of papers for various scientific
societies. This work is still continued.
Foundation Member and Past Chair-
man, Melbourne Division, Institution of
Engineers, Australia; Councillor, Treasurer
and Past President, Australasian Institute
of Mining and Metallurgy; Committeeman
and Past President, Field Naturalists Club
of Victoria; Councillor and Past President
of the Historical Society of Victoria;
Editor of the Victorian Historical Maga-
zine; President, Anthropological Society of
Victoria; Honorary Ethnologist, National
Museum, Melbourne; President, Victorian
Aboriginal Group; Secretary and Past
President, Numismatic Society of Victoria;
Numismatist, Public Library, Melbourne;
President, Section F, Australian and New
Zealand Association for the Advancement
of Sc icnce, 1937; member of the American
Association for the Advancement of
Science, the American Anthropological
Vssociation, and the American Numismatic
Association.
In his official capacity was chairman
of the Mallee Relief and Seed Wheat Ad-
vances Board, 1914-15, controlling advances
of three quarters of a million pounds, all of
which was repaid; member Interstate
Mur ray Levees Committee; member Sludge
Abatement Board; Victorian representa-
tive, Interstate Artesian Waters Conference,
1912-1927; member River and Streams
Fund Committee; and occupied numerous
other official positions. Has published
The Story of the Mallee, 1915; The
Overlanders, 1924; The Story of Mel-
bourne, 1934; The Story of Australia,
1935; and jointly with Charles Barrett,
The Blackfellows of Australia, 1934; and
with R. V. Billis, Pastures New, 1930, and
Pastoral Pioneers of Port Phillip, 1932, and
with A. W. Greig, C. Daley and C. R. Long,
Victoria, The First Century, 1934.
Married in 1895 Alexandrine Leontine,
daughter of F. Delepine, of St. Heliers,
C.1.; daughter, Justine, is the authoress of
the Aboriginal Word Book.
Has travelled extensively throughout
the whole of Australia, and particularly in
Central Australia.
Contributes articles to all the Mel-
bourne dailies and weeklies, and with R.
V. Billis has a series of articles in the
“Argus” and “Australasian” now at No.
150, the record length of any series in
Victoria.
Was in the team of the first baseball
club, the Melbourne, later the Metropoli-
tan, of the East Melbourne Cricket Club,
and of the East Melbourne Junior Football
Club.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


Mns 8 M CROSER
>■': ,AVES MURDOCK M,; '* JAMES M -
\ Mrs. WEBB and Daumcter
I *v I I ||p ' ' ■ ■
X A N D f R M KENZIE M.. A L C X AND E | |
Mu ELIZABETH Mr KENZIE . M». ROBERT McKENZIE |
• „ i ■
1 _I_


The McKenzie Family, of Yorke Peninsula.
Alexander McKenzie arrived in South
Australia with his wife in the early forties,
le first settled at \ankalilla where he
engaged in farming. Eater, when the
Vorke Peninsula was opened up for settle-
ment he, with his sons, took up land near
\ arooka and also at Minlaton. These
original properties are still in the hands
of the family.
The family of Alexander McKenzie
was John, Robert Peter, Alexander, James
David, Donald, Christina and Mary Ann.
Robert, who was born at Rapid Bay.
married Elizabeth Ann Murdock, daughter
of James Murdock (whose history appears
in these pages), and their family consisted
of James Alexander, Robert William, John
Henry and Harriett Marion. Robert
McKenzie, senior, died in 1932 aged 82.
James Alexander McKenzie, J.P., was
born at Warooka in the year iB7B and
educated at the local school. He then
joined his father on the home property until
he purchased in 1903 a farm in Kadina
district which he worked for several years.
He married in the year 1904 Emma Matilda
Koennecke, daughter of the late H. H.
Koennecke, an early settler in South Austra-
lia. They have two daughters, Elizabeth
Maud (Mrs. Webb) and Beatrice May
(Mrs. E. W. Crozier). Mrs. Webb has a
daughter, Emmie Florence, who represents
the fifth generation of the McKenzie and
Murdock families.
James A. McKenzie sold his Wallaroo
property in the year 1913 and returned to
Warooka, where he purchased land and
engaged in grazing and farming. In 1918
he was elected a Councillor of the Warooka
District Council and has retained this seat
continuously. He was for four years
Chairman of the Council.
In 1924 he was appointed a Justice of
the Peace and his activities in promoting
the progress of the district have been mani-
fold. He has occupied many public offices,
and is a keen worker for the Yorketown
Hospital, being on the Committee of
Management of this institution.
The family has been associated with
South Australia for nearly 100 years and
earned their place on the roll of “Founders
of Australia.”
The late Christian Julius Moller
of Bendigo and Murrabit.
A colorful personality during his long
experience on the Bendigo and other min-
ing fields, the late Mr. C. J. Moller achieved
a position of independence and esteem
among his fellow citizens. He was born in
Copenhagen, Denmark, in the year 1826,
and his youth was spent as a locksmith and,
later, in the Royal Copenhagen Mint.
At the age of thirty-five he decided to
try his fortunes in Australia, and, immedi-
ately on his arrival in Melbourne went to
the Ballarat diggings where he was success-
ful until he invested in shares in the “Black
Horse” mine which he was unable to retain
owing to excessive demands in calls. It is
a matter of irony that this same mine cleared
a profit of more than forty thousand pounds
later on.
The new settler then went to Eagle-
hawk, Bendigo district, where he again
became interested in mining ventures, and,
particularly, in the “United Devonshire”
mine, the shares of which reached ten
pounds apiece. At a later period he took


l lt)> r— Jill
-
»»* Mtn m
The late Mrs. Moller.
The late Mr. C. J. Moller.
up land at Murrabit, near Kerang, and
followed farming —remaining at that occu-
pation for five years —and then returned to
Eaglehawk and, later moved to Bendigo
where he established his headquarters as a
mining investor and sharebroker at which
he remained until 1904, when he retired to
Middle Park, Melbourne.
It was at the latter residence he died
in 1906, aged eighty years, whilst his widow
survived him and passed away in 1930, aged
eighty-four. The late Mr. C. J. Mollci
married in 1867, Miss Annie 1 inesdale,
whose parents came to Australia from
Northern Ireland, and from this union there
was a family of eight children: William
Charles, Eouisa Agnes (Mrs. Edgar Lam-
pard) ; Henry Christian, Albert Andrew (of
whom further particulars follow later) ;
Florence Elizabeth, deceased ; Lily Annetta ;
Violet, deceased; and Frank Lyle.
Of the above Mr. A. A. Moller was
formerly a draughtsman in the Melbourne
and Metropolitan Board of Works, having
joined that body three months after its
inception in 1891, as a cadet draughtsman,
and remained with it until 1912. He then
resigned to accept the postion of Engineer-
ing Draughtsman with the State Rivers and
Water Supply Commission in which he
remained until he retired in 1933.
He has been in residence for the pa>t
twenty-eight years at his home, 166 Barklv
Street, St. Kilda. Mr. A. A. Moller mar-
ried Ann Matilda, daughter of John 1..
Foreman, Esq., J.P., a pioneer miller of
Charlton and Wycheproof who was one of
our old families, who arrived in Victoria
in 1842. Mr. and Mrs. Moller recently
enjoyed a world trip and on their return
have taken part in many charitable and
social activities, and they both enjoy the
respect and esteem of their wide circle of
friends.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


PETER WAITE,
Pioneer, Pastoralist, Philanthropist
Just as it is difficult to estimate the
height of a mountain until you get some
distance away from it, so it is easier for
posterity to gauge the greatness of a man
when it enjoys the permanent results of his
work, than it would be for his contempor-
aries amongst whom he had to fight his way.
But no present generation is sufficiently
grateful for its inheritance. Men are apt
to take things as they find them without
contemplating how they came into exis-
tence or thinking of the ceaseless worry and
enterprise which created them. The fact
is, each generation is a trustee for those
who are to follow, and no one recognised
this more clearly than Peter Waite.
He was essentially a man who went
through life with a purpose. Born in Scot-
land in 1834 he, without any influential
backing, started work as an ironmonger’s
apprentice. He gained business experience
in Aberdeen and Edinburgh and arrived in
South Australia at the age of 25 to learn
sheep farming from his brother, James, who
had already established himself on Pan-
dappa Station, east of Terowie. There
were at that time two other Scots who after-
wards became equally famous in South Aus-
tralia—Thomas Elder and R. Barr-Smith.
They took a great interest in young Waite.
These three men, sometimes working to-
gether and sometimes with other partners,
did more to build up the sheep breeding in-
dustry in South Australia than any other
trio that can be named. All the business
gravitated to the firm which ultimately be-
came Elder Smith & Co. Ltd., of which
Peter AVaite became Chairman of Directors
for no less than 37 years.
Peter AA r aite profited from all obstacles
by overcoming them. It was done by faith,
intelligent direction and hard work. The
losses through drought, dingoes and rabbits
were enormous. In Biblical times it was
a comparatively simple matter for a shep-
herd of a small flock to procure pasture and
water for them by day and fold them at
night, all under his personal superinten-
dence. But Australia is a country of vast
expanses. It required Peter AAMite’s fore-
sight to see that the solution of one of his
difficulties was fencing. So in 1870 he sent
to England for 265 tons of wire. The posts
had to be sawn from what timber could be
procured locally, and he began by fencing
in the Paratoo run. The results repaid him
a thousand-fold. Flocks increased in geo-
metrical progression. Other graziers saw
the advantages and followed suit.
In conjunction with the firm of Messrs.
Elder, Stirling & Co., Peter AA r aite had pur-
chased the Paratoo run which adjoined Pan-
dappa, which he worked until the expiry of
the 1888 leases. He had interests in other
stations. The Beltana Pastoral Co. con-
sisted of Thos. Elder, N. E. Phillipson and
Peter AAhiite, and comprised Cordilla Downs,
Murnpeowie, Mt. Lyndhurst, Kanowana
and Beltana Runs; and the firm Elder and
A\ r aite leased Mutooroo, Lilydale and Mul-
yungarie. He also had shares in the Momba
Pastoral Co. Ltd., a company working a
million and a half acre holding in Western
New South AVales.
When Sir Thomas Elder died in 1897
the firm of Elder and Waite was formed
into the Mutooroo Pastoral Co. Ltd., and
Elder, Phillipson and Waite became the
Beltana Pastoral Co. Ltd., both being car-
ried on with Mr. Waite as managing
director. Pie was no “King William Street
Farmer,” but between 1859 and 1874 he
resided on his runs and frequently visited
them subsequently so as to give them the
maximum of supervision. As the result of
fencing and other improvements, the
Beltana runs at one time carried 363,000
sheep. Sir Thomas Elder had introduced


>1 '
jwy' j " :^
i r \i j ; : J■Af.ifo. i
y/ ' ■ mmEi^
S.. S|K
-; ||p||H|
Peter Waite,


: w ~ ’’ jpl
<*. {fMrT
i /
“Urrbrae,” South Australia
the camel and the donkey, but Peter Waite
hied both to a very large and serviceable
number. People who have money to spend
on motor trucks and sub-artesian bores can
hardly realise what our pioneers had to
contend with. Apart from slow and labor-
ious transport by horse, bullock, camel and
donkey teams, consider the stupendous
work of well-sinking. A 6ft. x 4ft. shaft
was sunk through earth and rock and gener-
ally had to be timbered most of the way
and after a depth of, per haps, 30 or 40 feet
had been reached, water as salt as the sea
might be struck and all the labour would
go for nought. Nowadays an engine driven
drill punches a 6 or 8 inch hole many feet
per day ; if salt water is struck it is cased
oh, drilling proceeds and two or even three
cuts of salt water may be similarly dealt
with and often a good potable supply is
found below, rising perhaps nearly to the
surface. Peter Waite lived long enough to
undergo the disappointment of the first and
also the exhiliration of the second
experience.
As the result of the endowment given
by Peter Waite to the Adelaide University,
the Waite Agricultural Research Institute
was established in 1925 to further education
in Agriculture and allied subjects. The
Institute received Urrbrae, 134 acres, half
to be a Public Park, and Netherby and
Claremont a total of 299 acres, and the
endowment fund (Elder Smith shares).
The South Australian Government received
114 acres adjoining Urrbrae for an Agricul-
tural High School. This w T as given them
in 1913, but owing to lack of funds, the War,
and so on, nothing was done with it for
many years, and the Government leased it
to the University for use by the Institute.
The Urrbrae gift made in 1913 also, was


subject to a life interest of use by the sur-
vivor of Mr. and Mrs. Waite; hence it did
not become available till Mrs. Waite’s death
in 1922.
Peter Waite’s benefactions probably
exceed in value £IOO,OOO.
Peter Waite’s pastoral interests in
South Australia did not prevent him taking
a hand in New South Wales matters. He
organised the South Australian lessees who
held country in West Darling (New South
Wales) and thereby created a body which
did great propaganda work in improving
the pastoral legislation for that area. This
culminated in the passing of the Western
Land Act of 1901 which in some respects
was based on the South Australian Act of
1898.
He lived to be 88, and in the evening of
his life he had time for much reading, the
cultivation of flowers, and to help many a
deserving person along life’s road. He en-
dowed Kindergartens and donated £lO,OOO
as the nucleus of an officers’ provident fund
in Elder Smith & Co. Ltd. Considering
what wonderful wealth comes to South
Australia from its export of wool, and what
a prominent part Peter Waite took in
building up such an important industry, we
owe a great debt of gratitude for the life
and example of this remarkable man.
Peter Waite married Matilda Methmen
of Fife, Scotland, and there was a family of
eight of whom a son James and tw 7 o daugh-
ters survive.
The late Frederick Porritt of Melbourne and Ballarat.
A native of London, the late
Frederick Porritt was intimately con-
nected with the printing trade almost
from the day of his birth, his father being
a member of the staffs of some of the
leading newspapers of London. He, in
turn, as a young man, worked in this line
and had the privilege of having worked
in one office side by side with Charles
Dickens. Whilst still a young man, he
married Miss Nancy Ellen Clement,
whose father was also a well-known
foreign correspondent for such papers as
“The Morning Chronicle,” “Bell’s Life,”
and “The Observer.” His brother, William
Tunis Clement being the proprietor of those
three papers.
In the year 1847, the young couple,
with their six-weeks-old daughter, Ellen,
aboard the sailing ship “Francis Ridley”
landed at Port Phillip, In passing, it
should be mentioned that their daughter
died when but five years of age. His
first venture was the foundation of the
"Collingwood Express,” with which he
seemed assured of considerable success,
until an absconding partner compelled
the cessation of activities. He then
joined the staff of the “ Argus,” with
which organisation he remained for some
years. It is also of interest that, in the
year 18a0, he was responsible for the first
issue of the “Weekly Herald”.
As a sidelight on the living conditions
pertaining to those early days of our
history, it is interesting to record that,
during these years, his parents sent out
to him from England two houses, one of
which was of iron and the second was of
tin lined throughout with felt.
Following some time with, the
“Argus” the late Mr. F. Porritt accepted
an engagement with the then flourishing
“Ballarat Star” and remained with that


im m uiit mi hi rtiii m m *>» mi Mi , :
' -^W8>>2\
; I ] '
—
Late Frederick Porritt.
organ until his death on the twenty-
seventh day of September, 1894. In all,
there was a family of seven sons and
seven daughters to his union of whom
four survive at the present time in: —
Mr. Charles George Porritt was
for many years connected with the boot
trade, and is now living in retirement at
Hawthorn, Victoria. He married Miss
Jane Malcomb of Ballarat and there has
been a family of five sons to their union.
Susan Patience. Now Mrs. T. W.
Futcher of Mitford Street, Elwood. Mr.
Futcher is a well-known manufacturer of
electrical appliances in Melbourne. Of
their family of six children, the late
Lieutenant Herbert Edison Futcher was
killed whilst on active service with the
Royal Flyng Corp during the Great War.
Lucy Elizabeth. Mrs. George Tay-
lor of Ballarat. Mrs. Taylor’s family con-
sisted of two sons and four daughters. The
eldest son, O. S. Taylor, being in England
when War was declared, joined the British
forces and served for the full duration of
the War. Is now in business in Melbourne.
Late Mrs. Frederick Porritt.
Kate Matilda. Married, firstly, Mr.
Josiah Mennear of Richmond, from which
union there was a family of two children.
Frederick Porritt Mennear, died 1918.
Muriel Annie Mennear, married William
Shiels of Robi Street. St. Kilda, two
children, Margaret Vaughan and Kelvin
Clifford. The late Mr. Mennear died in
New Zealand in the year 1910 and his
widow subsequently married Mr. Andrew
Thomson of Brighton, partner in the pub-
lishing house of Thomson, Niven & Me-
G ready of Glasgow, New Zealand and
Australia. The late Mr. A. Thomson
died in the year 1933 at the age of eighty-
eight.
Mrs. Kate Matilda Thomson is now
in residence at 127 Ruskin Street, Elwood.
Both Mrs. Futcher and Mrs. Thomson
have for many years been ardent workers
on behalf of various charitable organisa-
tions and hospitals and the A.W.N.L. and
the latter was presented with a special
service medal following her work during
the War.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


The late John Gordon.
The late Airs. John Gordon
The Gordons of “Borambola" and the
late John Peter of “Tubbo”.
Of all the families recorded in this
work, none has greater claims to the name
of “pioneer” than those described in these
lines.
To appreciate the stock from which
they are descended, we may be forgiven for
touching upon the early history of the
Gordon family prior to their settlement in
Australia.
The Gordons were of the old Covenanter
stock which was intimately concerned in
the middle ages with English history.
Following the temporary downfall of their
cause, they were compelled to flee to
Holland where they remained until two of
their members William and James-
returned to England with William oi
Orange and fought under his banner at the
Battle of the Boyne.
As reward for their services they were
given a property in County Armagh in
Ireland, namely—“Tassagh,” where they
settled for many generations. The fore-
going is ancient but authentic history and
is amply borne out in the Will of one
\\ illian Gordon bearing the date of 1690,
The year 1835 saw the late John
Gordon, second son of Samuel Gordon,
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


Mrs. J. A. Campbell, Senr.
of “Tassagh House.” decide to make the
perilous journey to the practically unknown
land of Australia. At this time he was but
nineteen years of age . . . having been born
on the tenth day of August 1815.
At this time the honourable Alexander
McCleay was Chairman of the Upper House
in New South W ales and was one of that
State’s best known citizens. He was
informed that there was a young Scotch
farmer aboard a newly-arrived ship in the
port and forthwith went to meet him to
obtain his services for his son (later Sir
George McCleay, Knighted for his work in
the exploration of the Murray) who was the
owner of several station properties.
The young newcomer was thus
appointed a steward and proceeded to
Borambola station where he joined his
new employer and thus were the founda-
tions laid for a friendship which was
destined to last through many years.
John Gordon remained with the
McCleays for approximately five vears,
during which time he made excellent use
of his opportunities to learn everything
possible pertaining to his new life. On
the expiration of this period he purchased
“Borambola” from the McCleavs —and at
a later date also purchased the “Pullitop”
property which was situated near “Boram-
bola.” '
A great deal could be written of
“Borambola” for it was recognised as a
beautiful property and was referred to by
the late Mr. Gordon as “ a gem.” It is
worth recording the following, culled from
the “Pastoral Review” dated the four-
teenth April 1925 :
“One of the earliest settled stations on
the Murrumbidgee River is “Borambola,”
which was first taken up some time back
in the thirties. The old stone homestead
is of quite historic interest, having housed


* ii|fc : ‘’iiW' , ‘ : ~ir It -;.
“Borambola” Homestead
such famous pastoral, families as the
McLeays, Gordons, Donnellys and Simp-
sons. During the days of the bushrangers
it was stuck up on several occasions; the
bullet marks from one of the encounters
can be seen on the walls to-day. At the
back of the homestead is the old station
store, constructed of thick red gum slabs,
and where, I expect, many a pound of
“nigger twist,” “black sugar,” and “post and
rail tea” have passed over the counter, and
where many a tall yarn has been told while
waiting for the mail coach to arrive.”
In the early days of his purchase of
“Boramola,” the late John Gordon placed
his brother Robert in charge and did not
take up his residence there until about 1852.
We are indebted to “Exploration and
Settlement in Australia” —written by the
late Hon. James Gormly, M.E.C., for much
useful information concerning these early
days of the Gordon family, for he repeatedly
refers to their activities in his book. The
following is interesting as an example of the
wonderful ability and character needed in
the early settlers:— (page 57)
“John Gordon, who was a good, kind,
hospitable man, resided on “Borambola”
until 1865. He was a frequent visitor to
Wagga, and when he sat on the Bench was
a just magistrate As 1 was then
collecting information about old times I got
some interesting particulars from Gordon,
lie told me that, in 1838, he was engaged in
taking a large draft of sheep from “Boram-
bola” to George McCleay’s new station on
the lower Murrumbidgee. On the second
night after starting he camped with the
sheep on the site of South Wagga. This
was nine years before the first hut was
built at the place.”


In about 1855 he sold “Pullitop” to
Messrs. John Cox and John Keane who
divided the property, Cox taking the part
now known as “Pullitop” and Keane took
the part now known as “Clifton”.
As the years passed, the late John
Gordon dealt in various properties and pros-
pered, but he ultimately sold his entire
interests and possessions to his son-in-law
—the late J. A. Campbell—with the excep-
tion of “Borambola” which he sold to the
Doncllys, and returned to London, where
ae resided privately (but for occasional
visits to Australia to visit his friends and
relatives) until his death at the age of
seventy-four, in the year 1889.
The late John Gordon married Eliza-
beth, youngest sister of the late John Peter,
and it is of interest to cull some extracts
from the same work already quoted and
written by the late James Gormly. On
page 178 appear the following lines: —
“Before John Peter went home to his
native country (Scotland), he had
become the largest pastoralist on
the Murrumbidgee.”
On the preceding page appears the fol-
lowing :
“John Peter, who had been one of the
Hon. Alexander McCleay’s station
managers, and afterwards a man-
ager for George McCleay, was a
man who caused Wagga to be
selected as the site for a police
station and had land surveyed for
a town.”
The late John Peter married Mrs.
Bourke, widow of the original owner of
“Gumly” station and, soon after his mar-
riage rapidly accumulated other properties
and was considered one of the most pro-
gressive pastoralists on the Murrumbidgee
river.
Again quoting from page 206 of the
above work; —
“In the early part of 1847, Michael
Norton stayed a night at our resi-
dence and informed my father that
he had been appointed chief con-
stable, and had been instructed to
erect a hut as a residence at a place
called Wagga Wagga, and after-
wards to get a lockup and court-
house constructed.
When those buildings were com-
pleted, a Court of Petty Sessions
was held. The local J’s P. sitting
on the bench were John Peter, of
“Gumly Gumly”; J. G. Church, of
“Pomingalarna”, and John Gordon
of “Borambola.’ ”
The late John Peter retired to live in
the Old Country in the year 1858 after hav-
ing become the richest man on the Murrum-
bidgee.
In closing the chapter referring to the
late John Peter and his career whilst in
Australia, it should not be omitted to men-
tion that he was also the owner of the
famous “Tubbo” estate in New South Wales
which is still portion of the family posses-
sions.
Of the union of the late John Gordon
and Elizabeth there was one daughter—
Jane —who married the late Mr J. A. Camp-
bell, as already recorded elsewhere in the
Work. Of this union, again, there has
been a family of eight children in all of
whom Mr. John Alan Campbell of “Dunga-
lear”, New South Wales and “Soho”, Drys-
dale, Victoria, is the youngest son.
Mr. John Alan Campbell married
Helen, second daughter of the late Mr. A.
PI. Chambers, General Manager of the
Union Bank of Australia Ltd., Melbourne,
and from this union there is a family of two
sons and one daughter in Donald Gordon,
James Gordon and Janet Gordon.
As stated in the opening paragraph of
these lines, no family has a greater claim to
the name of pioneer than either of those
here recorded, and we have pleasure in in-
cluding them in the present Work.


E ' m w.. .1 Jn& Mi
Jmmr > ,X
Ww '4 r'ji sJ^mr 1 BfiT I ' j£ Jr\
w r6 f jnJ 1 •« (Ml I / JmM iMWm.
; <(j *
JL Mr j vJh|
if Bfc. AeJfM Mr Jm , B§5b|
■ ■ |P «p-'. ■ -r- •Jnf'^^^n -jtjjjggSSBjtfjT fw
Jg ii^^^BHliBlHlw
jS V ' 1 r .,* -X> V /Ajt; ■• trV » "V 1 **„v' ♦ , '*H *
j/F *
The late Leslie Green. Mr. Frederick Green. Emily (Mrs. George Anderson)
Miss Ethel Green. The late Rev. John Green. The late Mrs. John Green. The late Joseph Green,
Mr. Harold Green.
The late Reverend John Leigh Green
The progress of a nation during its
first century is governed, not only by those
who entered pastoral pursuits or secondary
industries, hut also those who ministered
to the educational and spiritual welfare of
the community during the early y r ears of
trial and endeavour.
Such an one is chronicled herein.
To arrive at the true perspective of
both his character and capability, it is
necessary to go back to the establishment
of the family in Australia for, in doing so
we may appreciate the truth of the" oh
adage “As the twig is bent so will th<
branch grow.”
The late Charles Green and his eldes
son Thomas came to Australia in the earl;
fifties of last century to see for himsel
whether the young country was such as h
offer a future for himself and his family
Being satisfied that opportunities existed
he, shortly after arrival, sent home for hi
wife and three younger sons Charles, join
Leigh and Joseph, to join him.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


Mr. Charles Green, senior, was a true
son of Lancashire and, prior to making the
journey to the new land, had been a con-
scientious worker and local preacher in the
Wesleyan Church. It may thus be seen in
what manner the career of his third son be-
came fashioned. John Leigh, after the
arrival of the family in Melbourne, entered
Wesley College and later qualified as a
Minister of the United Methodist Church.
His sincerity and application to every duty
was, even at this early period of his life,
plainly recognisable to one and all and,
when still but a young man, he undertook
the duties of the Rushworth and Sheppar-
ton circuits.
In those days his work was both
arduous and severe. He was compelled to
hold his services under the gum trees, on
the banks of the river, and in the home-
steads of the early settlers. During these
days of trials he built for himself a reputa-
tion which never left him throughout his
lifetime.
However, his talents and character
were such that he was ultimately shifted
from centre to centre preaching the gospel
to which he had dedicated his life. After a
period at Ballarat and Geelong, he was
located at Richmond, Bendigo and various
Melbourne suburbs. Even his labours in
these districts constituted but a small pro-
portion of his travels and activities. He
was responsible for the building and open-
ing of many Schools and Churches in
the Lilydale, Healesville and Warburton
districts. His main and avowed object in
life —in addition to his duties as a preacher
of the Gospel—was to unite the various
sections of the Methodist Church in Aus-
tralia, and, how well he succeeded is known
and recognised by a vast number of the
members of the community. Certain it is
that he was not only admired by all but was
also esteemed and beloved by everyone
with whom his life’s work brought him into
contact.
Whilst Minister of the Peel Street
Methodist Church of Ballarat, he met and
married Selena, daughter of the late Mr.
and Mrs. Joseph Reading of Wallaloo
lark, Wallaloo. who loyally stood by his
side through his many years of ministering
to the s P lr,tua l welfare of the community
J'o this union there was a family of fi ve
sons and two daughters as follows:
A/r Emily married Mr. George Anderson.
M.A., L.L.M., M.Com. . . the family ar*
m residence at “Wynoona,” 36 Lansell
Road, Joorak, and there has been a family
ot lour to the union.
Frederick John, now a senior inspector
ot the Education Department.
Miss Ethel Green of Canberra.
Harold, now Assistant Statistical! for
the Commonwealth Government and sta-
tioned at Canberra.
Herbert, Leslie and Joseph (deceased).
1 he late Reverend John Leigh Green
Passed away in the year 1925 and was fol-
lowed in the year 1928 by his widow. Their
loss was certainly felt by an enormous
number of those among whom their work
was known and appreciated.
Both in his capacity as a Minister of
the Gospel and for his work in unifying the
Church, the Reverend John Leigh Green
takes an honoured place in the present
publication, for it may truthfully be said
that his life passed unconsciously into the
li\es of others, propagating good characters
and honourable citizenship.


1** •> |
%, V
<m
The late Mr. and Mrs. Erasmus Pascoe Eambiicl
NICHOLAS LAMBRICK
Nicholas Eambrick, a yoeman farmer of
Penzance, Cornwall, England, with his wife
Susanna, and a family of four sons and two
daughters left the old land in a sailing
vessel in 1840, and after a six months
voyage landed in Melbourne —then little
more than a village. Fortune was fickle,
but the family of sturdy yeoman stock
battled on and in different avocations
played their part in laying the foundations
of this fine city of the South,
Erasmus Pascoe, the third son, was
born on September 29th, 1834. Had a fair
education. As a young man he conducted
a carrier’s business between Melbourne and
the goldfields, conveying the many necessi-
ties of the miners and settlers. In this
work he had many experiences. Money
was plentiful and waste and extravagance
ruled. Often he spoke of seeing miners
light their pipes with five pound notes.
After some years he entered into partner-
ship with a timber merchant in North Mel-
bourne, but misadventure ultimately com-
pelled him to withdraw. He was then
associated with the firm of Halstead, Kerr
N Co. He was a man of clear brain, sound
judgment and sterling integrity—fearless
and outspoken in speech, brusque in manner
but generous of heart. . . For many years
he was a leader in the Wesleyan Church,
North Melbourne (now known as Metho-
dist) “Father Lambrick’’ as he was popu-
larly known was highly respected. But he
was the terror of the budding voting par-
sons, some of whom feared his criticisms


more than examinations. In 1862 he mar-
ried Amelia Bartram, the youngest daughter
of Charles and Susan Bartram, who came to
Australia from Norwich, England in 1842.
Gentle and retiring, beloved by all who
knew her, she was truly guide, counsellor
and friend to her husband and influenced
his life greatly. Hers was a life filled with
kindly deeds. She was a devoted mother
and gave many years of service to the
Methodist Church and societies devoted to
humanity.
Amelia, born March 23rd, 1864, the
eldest daughter entered the Public Service
in 1886 and was employed in various posi-
tions in the department of the Postmaster
General afterwards in the Customs
Department for a period of thirty-seven
years. In early life she was a worker in the
church, a speaker for the Women’s Christ-
ian Temperance Union and the Young
Women’s Christian Association and was
associated with Miss Sara Booth in mid-
night mission work in the slums. A
member of the Women’s Political Associa-
tion she assisted Miss A ida Goldstein in her
candidature for Parliament in 1909. Eater,
accepting the teachings of the seer and
philosopher, Emanuel Swedenborg, she
became a member of the New Church. A
past president of the Women’s International
League of Peace and Freedom—in 1926 she
was the delegate for Australia to a congress
in Dublin and was brought into contact
with many distinguished women. In 1935
she attended the congress of the National
I eace Society in London.
A member of the Adctorian Women’s
Citizen Movement, she attended the con-
gress of the British Commonwealth League
in 1935 and has lectured on her impressions.
For years she has upheld the economics of
Henry George, whose main fundamental is
The Land for the People. A member of
the Theosophical Society she has lectured
for this body throughout the Common-
wealth. Has held office in the auxiliaries
connected with the Alfred and Austin
Hospitals. Has travelled several times in
Great Britain and the Continent and Pales-
tine and has lectured extensively on her
travels.
Mary, born January 27th, 1867, became
a stewardess in the Adelaide S. S. Co., and
was for six years on the “Coogee”. Trans-
ferring to the ill-fated “Yongala” she lost
her life when it foundered between Towns-
ville and Mackay on the Queensland coast
on March 23rd, 1911, She was known as
one of the best stewardesses on the Austra-
lian coast. In character she was a replica
of her mother and her father’s favorite
daughter. She was a church worker for
many years.
Sarah Jane, born April 26th, 1869,
married AN illiam Turville of Brunswick in
1890. Her contribution to the State is four
daughters and sixteen grand children,
tier only son died in 1926. She is an
excellent wife and mother and has been a
church worker for the greater part of her
life.
Erasmus Pascoe, born August 31st,
1871, became an ironworker, learning his
trade as a moulder with George Woods &
Co. An accident to his knee compelled
him to relinquish this occupation. With a
good knowledge of timber he became asso-
ciated with Halstead, Kerr & Co., and after-
wards with Anthony & Co. He has a great
interest in sport. In 1902 he married
Letitia Stephens, daughter of Samuel and
Ann Jane Stephens of North Melbourne.
There were two daughters—one of whom
died in 1930.
Grace, born January 19th, 1878, the
most promising flower of the family died
at the age of ten years from meningitis.


ijV .
it <&*/. .
<mH| ■Hnn
The late M. B. John
Morgan Bevan John
During a long and honoured career in
the Ballarat district, the late Morgan
Bevan John won for himself a reputation for
uprightness in his business dealings, and
esteem for his true benevolence and Chris-
tianity.
Prior to his making the journey to this
country, he was an iron-moulder in his
home County of Glamorganshire, South
W ales. However, in the late sixties of last
century, he decided to come to the diggings
—of which the old world was hearing such
wonderful reports. At this time he was a
young man in his middle twenties and he
brought his wife Louisa, (nee Owen), one
son and two daughters—lsaac Bevan, Eliza-
beth Ann and Sarah Owen —with him on
the great adventure.
W hi Ist he met with a medium degree
of success at the mining venture, he con-
sidered he would be better advised to re-
enter the field of activity with which he
was more intimately acquainted. He there-
fore started with the old Phoenix Foundry
as a brass founder and remained with that
organisation for several years. This page
in his history was, however, but a fore-
runner to his subsequent success, for he
later decided to branch out for himself in a
small property in Armstrong Street, oppo-
site the Ebenezer Church, and close to the
site of the present large works bearing his
name.
His business quickly expanded and he
found it essential to remove to portion of
the present site in Lydiard Street, and this
move may be classed as the real foundation


of his fortunes. Through the succeeding
years his progress was most marked and
such progress has continued to the present
day when the works are one of the largest
brass foundries in the Southern Hemis-
phere.
Surprising to relate, however, the late
Mr. John found time for a considerable
amount of outside activities in addition to
the carrying on of his own growing business.
In the year 1910 the late Joseph E. Cowley
—owner of the well-known Cowley’s
Eureka Ironworks of East Ballarat —-died,
and the late Mr. John took a prominent
part in the conversion of the undertaking
into a Proprietary Limited Company and
himself became Chairman of Directors. He
retained the chairmanship of the company
until the time of his death in the year 1922.
In many directions he showed a similar
intimate knowledge of the business needs
of the community and became a large share-
holder in many undertakings of an indus-
trial nature. Foremost among his outside
interests should be mentioned such as the
Ballarat Gas Company and the Ballarat
Banking Company, in both of which he held
large interests.
In his private life his actions won for
him enormous esteem and affection.
Throughout his career he showed himself to
be a true and conscientious supporter of the
Church. Originally he was for eleven years
conductor of the choir at the Peel Street
Calvinistic Methodist Church, and was then
invited to take charge of the St. John’s
Presbyterian Church Choir, where he also
served for approximately the same length
of time. During these years he was closely
associated with most of the musical activi-
ties in Ballarat and was on the committee
of the old Welsh Eisteddfod. For the
whole of this period he was also an Elder
of the Presbyterian Church and was at all
times regarded as one of the leading
workers for that institution.
As a well-known teacher at the Sunday
School and a foremost charity worker his
name was pre-eminent among his fellows
and, even to the present day, he is remem-
bered with love by a large circle of the com-
munity. It may truthfully be said that he
was a fine citizen and a true Christian.
On the seventeenth day of March in the
year 1880 Mrs. Louisa John died and Mr.
Morgan Be van John subsequently married
Miss Emily Arnott of Geelong on the first
day of June, in the year 1881.
From his first marriage there was a
family in all of three daughters and two sons
of whom particulars, in brief, follow;
Isaac Bevan. Born in Glamorganshire
1864, and educated both in the old country
and Ballarat. Married Miss Florence
1 heakstone, and there is one daughter to
the union—Doris Edna. The family reside
at 228 South Terrace, Fremantle, West
Australia.
Elizabeth Ann. Born in Glamorgan-
shire. Married Mr. F. Perkins, a grandson
of the late Richard Perkins, Esq., who was
the fifth magistrate to be appointed in Ade-
laide. Mr. F. Perkins’ father —also named
Richard —was an early pioneer of the Wim-
mera districts in Victoria, and Mr. Perkins
himself also followed a similar calling.
There has been a family of one daughter
and two sons of their union. They are now
in residence at “Dairy,” Nicholson Street,
North Ballarat.
Sarah Owen. The late Mrs. Maconi-
chie died in the year 1924. Mr. and Mrs.
Maconichie lived for many years in


Melbourne and there was a family to their
union of one daughter and two sons. Mr.
Maconichie is now resident in Ballarat.
Louisa Emily. The only daughter born
in Australia. Married Mr. Edward Theaks-
ton whose father was a sea captain and met
his death whilst following his profession.
Mr. Edward Theakston has always been
connected with the shipping industry in
West Australia. There has been a family
of one son and one daughter to their union.
Mr. and Mrs. Theakston are in residence at
7 Oakover Street, Fremantle.
Morgan William Bevan. Born 1879 in
Ballarat, where he received his education —
finishing at Grenville College. From his
earliest years of business he was
intimately connected with his father and the
family undertakings. Prior to the death of
his father he assisted in the management of
the business and then became the owner
upon his father’s demise. His career has
in many ways been reminiscent of his father
for he has followed the successes attained
by the late Mr. Morgan Bevan John with
similar successes under his own manage-
ment. He is one of the best-known citizens
of Ballarat and his name is regarded with
the highest esteem and respect. At the
time of the present lines going to Press Mr.
and Mrs. Morgan William John are par-
taking of a holiday trip to England and the
Continent. Mr. M. W. John married Miss
Mary Taylor, of Ballarat and from this
union there has been a family of five sons
and one daughter in: Morgan Bevan, James
Taylor, Maisie, William, David and Tan.
The foregoing completes the brief par-
ticulars of the first union and the follow-
ing are the particulars of the issue of the
second marriage:—
Mabel Ethel. Married Mr. Frank
Presnell West. There is a family of one
son and one daughter in Laurence Presnell
and Coral Presnell. This section of the
family are now in residence at Brisbane,
Queensland.
Gladys Blodwin. Died in early child-
hood.
Bevan Arnott. Born 1893 at Ballarat
and educated locally—finishing at Gren-
ville College. Studied engineering at the
Ballarat School of Mines. Started , his
career with his father at the brass foundry
but, at the age of twenty, transferred to
Cowleys. At the age of twenty-five
he became manager of the latter and in the
year 1926 he was appointed Managing
Di rector, and Chairman of Directors. His
career —like that of his brother Morgan
William —has been particularly successful
and he has betrayed an exceptional ability
as an engineer. In this direction he has
invented two machines pertaining to the
pipe manufacturing industry, which have
been patented. In the year 1915 he married
Miss Ada Evelyn Wheeler, of Ballarat, and
to this union there has been issue of two
daughters Marjorie Bevan and Gwenyth
Bevan. The family are in residence at
“Erindale,” Webster Street, Ballarat.
In concluding these lines pertaining to
the John family it may be seen that thev
have, through the years, been part and
parcel of the progress of the city of Balla-
rat and, in that community, none will be
found who would begrudge their name due
credit for the part played in helping toward
the present prosperous position of that
city.


f ' ,% j
; * i :
| . * • > |
I I
Ihe late William Nicholas Longhurst.
The late Mrs. Phoebe Longhurst.
Three Generations of the Longhurst Family
of Ballarat.
The history of the family here recorded
forms one of the epics of the business com-
munity of the prosperous mining city of
Ballarat. The same determination and
pluck, which induced the Founder of the
clan to leave his home in England, at the
age of fourteen years, to carve a name and
fortune for himself, may be clearly traced
in the subsequent career—not only of him-
self—but, also, in the career of his son, Mr.
\\ illiam Edwin Eonghurst and his grand-
sons who are, at the present time, worthily
upholding the reputation of both their
grandfather and father in the business
comm unity.
The late William Nicholas Eonghurst,
a native of Kent, England, was left a
member of a large family of orphans when
he was but little more than an infant. This,
indeed, was so true that he never remem-
bered his parents. When he reached the
age of fourteen years, the young lad decided
to make the break represented by working
his passage —per sailing ship—to South
Africa, and to try his luck in that unknown
territory. This was in the year 1848 so
that it may well be realised under what con-
ditions the youngster was faced in his first
venture.
However, after but a very brief stay in
South Africa, he realised that his opportu-
nities were very limited in the mixed
population existing in his home of adoption,
and, following an invitation from some


' ’ * ' 1 ■■ ,, — 1 II II l|lli|i in,, ,
CLIFFORD LONGHURST Mss CLIFFORD LONGHURST S M» JACK LONGHURST. I
flHHHHHHHHHHHHHH flHHHHHHHHHHHBHHBHI
m# * *^bl,
' \0f JB ilk
WALTER E. LONGHURST M WALTER G. LONGHURST | M.-.. noPntMN r
* W HUTU'I Mi'Rf’HAP BURNS v : \ 'I


cousins who were already in Australia, and
were the owners of a sheep run in New
South W ales, —Ross Brothers—he made the
further journey and landed in Sydney in
the same year.
Ileie he worked for his cousins as a
general help and boundary-rider on their
station for four years, the conditions being
anything but what he had pictured when
making the journey from South Africa, and
at last his spirit and ambition prompted him
to join a party of friends who were taking
ship for the young township of Melbourne,
which, following the boom of the gold min-
ing industry, was beginning to be regarded
as an active man’s Mecca.
For a comparatively short while he tried
his luck on the various mining fields with
varying success. He found, as so many
others in similar circumstances had found,
that but too often it was a case of sinking
the gold won from one hole into another
hole which might take all and give nothing
m return. His fund of anecdotes of those
adventurous days was both interesting and
instructive and would be invaluable were
they but available to the present publica-
tion. However, by the end of the year
he decided to combine his mining acti-
vities with his natural business ability and
he opened a bakery, general store, and
butchering business at Daisy Hill in the
midst of the gold-mining areas. He was
thus able to close the business for certain
portions of the day and go prospecting on
the nearby fields.
His venture at Daisy Hill was fairly
successful and he ultimately disposed of
same and \\ ent to Ararat, once again engag-
ing in mining activities until the year 186.3,
when he returned to Ballarat and com-
menced to work for the late Mr. John
Taylor who owned the “Red House” store
and bakery on the corner of Raglan and
Dana Streets. Here he remained until 1867
when he again started out on his own by
purchasing the business owned by the late
Hr. Mackay and named the “Caledonian”
bakery . . . situated at Seymour Crescent,
•m Soldiers Hill, At Seymour Crescent he
prospered considerably and by the year 1872
he was able to buy the premises then
occupied by Hewson & Jenson Cordial
factory on the site of which the present
Longhurst premises are situated, at the
same time he changed the name to “The
Criterion Bread Factory.”
hrom this point his success was never
in doubt and, through the subsequent years
he added very considerably to the buildings
(and such progress has been continued by
his son), until the present fine propertv
eventuated with one of the best and most
efficient plants existing in the whole of
provincial Victoria.
It seems rather like “painting the Lily”
to place on record that, in addition to his
business organisation he found time for an
enormous amount of civic and other work
which brought to him the unlimited esteem
of his fellow-citizens. Although he would
tolerate no publicity for his philanthropic
works, his name and reputation grew apace
and, in the early nineties, this was demon-
strated by his being appointed a Justice of
the Peace. He was a staunch supporter of
the Church of England and was also a pro-
minent member of the Masonic Craft. It
was common knowledge that he never
allowed any appeal for assistance to go
un heeded.
In about the year 1865 the late Mr.
William Nicholas Longhurst married Miss
Phoebe Gibson, a native of Essex, England,
and from this union there ensued a family
of seven daughters and four sons of whom
the particulars, in brief, are appended
hereto:—
I he daughters are given first and the
sons follow thereafter:—
Louisa—who died in infancy.
Emma who became Mrs. David Chalmers
Gunn. Mr. Gunn was one of the senior
members of the firm of Permewan,
Wright and Company. There was a
family of one daughter to this union in
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


Mrs. Birdsey who is resident in Gee-
long. Mrs. Emma Gunn is now
deceased.
Louisa —Mrs. Joseph C. Saunders. Mr.
Saunders was also a prominent member
of the business community in West
Australia where he was attached to the
firm of D. & W. Murray and Company
Ltd. There has been a family of two
sons and one daughter to this union.
Phoebe —died in infancy.
Phoebe —died at the approximate age of
thirty-six in Sydney.
Maude —Mrs. H. M. Franklin. Mr. Frank-
lin is a member of the business com-
munity in Melbourne.
Edith —Mrs. William Dick. Mr. Dick was
originally a marine engineer but for
some years owned a tea plantation in
South Africa.
William Edwin—of whom full details fol-
low at a later stage of this history.
Frank—deceased.
Frederick —who is resident in West Austra-
lia.
Charles —married Miss White of Creswick
and is resident in Queensland.
Of the above family, Mr. William
Edwin Longhurst, who is the senior repre-
sentative of the family now in Ballarat, and
who has carried on the business which has
stood in the family name for so many years,
was born in Ballarat in the year 1867 and
received his education at Ballarat College.
His earliest activities were as a member of
the clerical staff with the South British
Insurance Company Limited —pending a
call to the staff of the City of Melbourne
Bank. However, when such call ultimately
arrived, he decided to enter the business
world of Melbourne and so refused the
offer. He was then apprenticed by his
father to the well-known jewellery firm of
G. W. Catanach and remained with them for
three years. His health was seriously
affected by the indoor work and, on medical
advice, he returned to his home to recuper-
ate. Following a partial recovery, he
visited some relatives on the land at Wyche-
proof where he remained for a few months
and then returned to his position in Mel-
bourne. His health again troubled him,
however, and he was ultimately forced to
forsake any thought of further work in this
direction.
He therefore returned to Ballarat where
he commenced to work with and for his
father, superintending the outside depart-
ments of the business. Here he remained
until the year 1899 when he purchased the
business of T. O’Day, who owned the
Brown Hill Bakery. His career from this
time was a particularly successful one, and,
when his father died in the year 1902, he
was in the position to be able to purchase
the entire family business. Having taken
possession of the Mair Street property he
merged the two undertakings into one with
headquarters at Mair Street. From this
point his progress has been almost like a
novel. With his natural ability, and sterl-
ing qualities, Mr. Longhurst has been able
to purchase several opposition businesses in
Ballarat in the intervening years until at
the present time his organisation must
surely be the largest in the whole of pro-
vincial Victoria and excelled by very few
even in the city of Melbourne.
Shortly after attaining the family pro-
perty, Mr. Longhurst bought out the busi-
ness owned by Mr. F. Allen in Ballarat East
and merged this also into his headquarters.
In the year 1905 there was a merging of
several prominent bakeries of Ballarat into
one entity with Mr. Longhurst as General
Manager and the Mair Street premises as
the headquarters of the company. The
undertaking, however, was not the success
which had been anticipated owing to the
impossibility of restraining others from
engaging in unfair competition and so the
organisation ceased to function. It was at
this time that the esteem with which Mr.


Longhurst was regarded stood him in good
stead for he, more than any other, was com-
pelled to rely on his old connection to enable
him to weather the crisis. In this direction
he was more than fortunate for his public
stood loyally by him and thus he emerged
successfully.
In the year 1910 he purchased a farm-
ing property at Warrenheip, of two hun-
dred acres, where he combined considerable
pleasuie with the benefitting of the many
horses employed in the business. He re-
tained this property until the year 1921
when, following a good offer, he sold out.
In 1918 Mr. Longhurst bought out
J. M. Kline’s bakery business in Victoria
Street and, within a brief time he added A.
Goddard’s “Red House” bakery—which has
already been mentioned in this article
when owned by the late Mr. John Taylor.
1 he year 1926 saw Wynne’s Autumn
Cafe (now known as the “Wentworth”),
situated in Sturt Street, added to the firm’s
activities and Mr. Longhurst superintended
the running of this business until the year
1933 when he leased it to tenants. Again
in the year 1930 the firm bought J. W.
Healey’s “Victoria” bakery of Main Road,
Ballarat East. In the year 1923 Mr. Long-
mrst’s sons were admitted into partner-
ship and the firm was converted into “W.
E. Longhurst and Sons Pty. Ltd.” and it
stands in this form at the present time.
For many years the firm has enjoyed
the privilege of exhibiting the vice-Regal
Arms as testimony of their being under
such patronage and they may claim to be
the only organisation of their kind in the
city of Ballarat thus honoured.
Like his father before him, Mr. W. E.
Longhurst has built for himself a reputation
second to none for his unostentatious
efforts on behalf of his less fortunate fellows
Both in charitable and sporting appeals, his
name is ever one of the first to be considered
by committees, to whom to appeal, and these
qualities have endeared him to a very large
circle of friends—both business and per-
sonal.
In the year 1896, Mr. Longhurst mar-
ried Miss Bertha Morphett Clifford, whose
parents died when she was but a child and
who was adopted by her uncle the late Mr.
James Lea Clifford of Bridge St., Ballarat.
Mrs. Bertha Longhurst sustained a fatal
heart attack and passed away in February,
1934. To this union there is a family in all
of four sons and one daughter of whom the
particulars—in brief —follow :
Clifford—married Alice, daughter of Mr.
and Mrs. S. Moorhouse, of Ballarat.
To this union there is a family of two
daughters in Elizabeth and June.
Jack —single—who is resident in Sydney.
Walter—married Doris, daughter of Mr.
and Mrs. Albert Nylander of Ballarat
East. To this union there is one son
and one daughter in William Edwin
and Wilma.
Dorothy—Mrs. Clive J. Burns of Geelong.
William Nicholas—died in infancy.
Of the above, Messrs. Clifford and Walter
Longhurst are both members of the firm of
“W. E. Longhurst and Sons Pty. Ltd.” and
it is confidently anticipated that they, like
their forbears before them, will carry on the
name and reputation of this, one of the oldest
and most respected families of the Ballarat
district.


i .1 ■' "i i. —
‘I *
.'.. , ' * ‘ S*"*' '-
|HL-|| I. *.
/ qRSH
M,, ALEXANDER V. BEAN ■■■B& B|—; jgB|H M, LACHLAN Me BEAN Js*
i a"-CR or M, 8-an iNR: JH >-
; " Mus ALEXANDER M BEAN
■ ..j|l
“1** ».«» 4'
Mr COLIN LACHLAN MeBEAN M " KE,TH M < BEAN


“BALDON ESTATE”
I'lic original homestead of the Mcßean Family
The McBeans of South Australia,
New South Wales and Queensland.
Lachlan Mcßean arrived in Adelaide
from Scotland in the ship Catherine Jamie-
son on December Ist 1838, and one of his
earliest places was with the late Mr. Young-
husband at Adelaide, where he held a posi-
tion of trust, and was much esteemed by
his employer. He left this place in order
t< commence cattle dealing and droving
on his own account and made several
overland journevs from Xew South Wales
and from the Darling Downs to Adelaide,
with stock. In these ventures he was
very successful, and he soon became
possessed of considerable capital. He pur-
chased the Raldon Station near Truro.
South Australia, which he converted into
a freehold of about 24.000 acres. But his
most successful venture was the purchase
of Wooroona. in the Riverina district, in
1855, fi *om the late William Degraves, who
had it from the liquidators of the Roval
Bank. 4 his fine station was bought with
12,000 sheep for £12,000, or £1 per head,
and Mr. Mcßean paid all the money in
gold which he took over from Adelaide to
Melbourne personally, most of it in a leather
belt which he wore, this being done to avoid


“CORRYTON PARK,”
the exchange. In 1863 he bought Windou-
ran and joined it to Wooroona, and the two
properties included about 130,000 acres of
freehold land. In 1873 he bought Ran-
belle, a large Queensland sheep and cattle
station, which he sold in 1877 to Messrs.
Shaw at a good profit. He also bought
Caulpaulin Station on the Darling for about
£54,000. This he held for three or four
years and then sold it to the late Eeandre
Clarke.
In 1884 he bought Goldsbrough’s
Warehouses in Flinders and Market Streets,
Melbourne, for £40,000 which properties
are still held.
In 1880 he bought the Colombo Estate,
near Urana, for his sister and nephew, Mr.
L. Mcßean Grant, later adding an adjoin-
ing property, Buthewa. In 1889 he bought
the Kirndeen Estate, near Alburv, a free-
hold of about 30,000 acres, for another
nephew, Mr. A. Mcßean.
He did many kind and praiseworthy
actions, and was much esteemed for his
straightforward business qualities. He
was a great supporter of the old firm of
Goldsbrough and Co., and when they
weie in difficulties in 1869, he had large
deposits with them, but he generously


t
f
Jm
“GLEN DEVON,”
allowed them to remain, although without
any security, and told the firm to take their
own time for payment.
He was frequently close and exacting
in small matters, but in important trans-
actions he had a bold liberal policy, and was
very quick in dealing, no matter how large
the purchase or sale might be. He died at
the age of 84 years.
In 1846, his brother, Alexander Mcßean,
arrived in South Australia at the Baldon
Estate, belonging to Lachlan, of which Alex-
ander later became the proprietor.
Alexander Mcßean, born on 25th Mav,
1817, in Scotland, brought his wife, Mar-
garet, born in 1821, to South Australia,
which in those days, 1846, was in its earlv
pioneering stage. This young couple had
been used to every comfort on their people’s
farms in Scotland and experienced all the
discomforts attendant to settling in a new
land. On reaching Baldon Estate no resi-
dence was erected, and they camped in a
tent. The natives were numerous, and
Mrs. Mcßean spent many nights alone
whilst her husband was away mustering
stock. This for a while was a nerve-rack-
ing experience for a young woman. Her


‘•PA’ LLAWARRA”
The property of Mr. Lachlan Mcßean, “Glen Devon
Mt. Pleasant, South Australia.
kindness to the blacks soon won their
respect and she and her young children
became great friends with the aboriginals.
Alexander Mcßean was renowned for
his judgment of, and the handling of stock.
His forbears in Scotland had been associ-
ated with cattle and sheep for generations
and this inbred knowledge stood him in
great stead during the building up of the
Mcßean herds and flocks. He was a fear-
less horseman and his magnificent physique
enabled him to withstand the many hard-
ships associated with the building up of the
well-known Baldon cattle and sheep station.
Alexander and his elder brother, Lachlan,
were amongst the first men in South Aus-
tralia to establish permanent properties,
which arc still retained in the family.
Alexander died at the age of eighty-five.
Xo man had a better helpmate as a
wife than Alexander Mcßean. Mrs. Me
Bean was one of the Robertsons of Kincraig.
Scotland, and as the Baldon homestead was
gradually increased to accomodate their
family of twelve, it became the scene of
much hospitality. Mrs. Mcßean was one
of South Australia’s most gracious hostesses.
She died at the age of eighty-four. It is
of interest to note that in the early days
both Lachlan and Alexander Mcßean used
to walk to Adelaide to transact their busi-
ness—a distance of some 75 miles each way
over rough country, with no roads or
bridges.
The traditions established by his parents
have been carried on by their son, Lachlan,
who has maintained and improved the qual-
ity, of the flocks on the three properties—-
Baldon. Glen Devon and Corryton Park,


Stud Ram bred by Mr. Lachlan Mcßean, “Glen
Devon,” Mt. Pleasant, South Australia,
assisted by his sons, Keith and Colin.
These two homesteads Baldon and Corry-
t°n Park, are numbered amongst the most
historic in the State.
Lachlan Mcßean, junior, son of Alex-
ander. was born in Smith Australia and
educated at Whinharn College, after which
he joined his father for two years help-
,n£ hi the management of the Baldon
Estate. Then for four years he was
associated with Goldsbrough Mort and
Company where he acquired an exten-
sive business knowledge of the pastoral in-
dustry. Returning to “Baldon Estate” he
took over its management on behalf of his
father and at his death became the pro-
prietor of the estate. Few men in the State
have a more practical knowledge of the
pastoral industry and the sheep and horses
bred on the property are of the highest
quality. His knowledge of stock has made
his services as judge at the various Agricul-
tural Shows in much demand. Lachlan
Mcßean married Lilian May, daughter of
the late Alex. Stevenson of Melbourne, and
then family consists of Keith Alexander
Jean and Colin Lachlan.
Lachlan Mcßean acquired two other
properties, “Glen Devon” where he re-
sides, and "Corryton Park.” K. A.
Mcßean is the owner of “Corryton Park”
and C. L. Mcßean is established at “Baldon
Estate. Ihe family controls 33,000 acres
of some of the best grazing country in South
Australia.
'Glen Devon” homestead is one of the
best equipped station homes in the State,
and the views from the house, situated as
it is on a rise command extensive views of
the surrounding country. The gardens
and shrubbery are a feature of the property.
hew families have a greater claim to
be termed “Founders of Australia” through
theii contributions to the building up of
the gieatest industry in the Common-
wealth.


IT”'
t
i N -
■
Charles Edward Stevenson.
Elizabeth Stevenson
(nee Tennant)
The Stevensons of West Coast
of South Australia.
The late Charles Edward Stevenson
arrived in Adelaide in the early ’forties and
became associated with the firm of Hunter
and Stevenson, Importers, Grenfell Street,
Adelaide. Later he went to Port Lincoln
and established a branch of the business at
Copperinga Mines, near Tumby Bay, where
he remained for some years and then re-
turned to the headquarters of the firm in
Adelaide until the time of his death in 1885.
Charles Edward Stevenson married
Elizabeth Haigh, widow of the late John
Fredrick Haigh of Port Lincoln, and eldest
daughter of the late John Tennant, pastor-
alist, so well-known throughout South
Australia.
Mrs. John Tennant, the mother of
Elizabeth Stevenson, came to South Austra-
lia on the ship “Duchess of Northumber-
land” in 1838. Elizabeth had two sons by
her first marriage; William and John Haigh,
both of whom were well-known pastor-
alists, and one daughter by the second
marriage, Lizzie, who married first, Arthur
Nicholas Hughes of “Booyoolee” Station,
Gladstone, who died in 1919. She later
married Doctor Robert Whitson Telford,
son of George Watson Telford of “Grogan''
Station, New South Wales, whose familv


Dr. Telford.
Mrs. L. Telford.
had been associated with Australia since the
early days.
Mrs. Telford was born in Adelaide and
brought up on the West Coast of South
Australia with which she was associated
for many years and still retains her pastoral
properties in that part of the State. The
family on both sides have had nearly 100
years association with the State of South
Australia; each generation having contri-
buted in a marked degree towards the build-
ing up of the pastoral life of the State.
Robert Whitson Telford, M.D., M.S.,
B.Ph., (Cambridge), enlisted in the British
forces at the outbreak of the War, serving
as a Colonel with the Army Medical Corps
and rendered valuable service in Egypt.
At the termination of hostilities he re-
turned to England where he practised for
some time after which he returned to Aus-
tralia. Here he engaged in medical work
amongst the lepers of Queensland. He later
came to \ ictoria and was appointed as Chief
Medical Officer of the North Western area
of that State, making his headquarters at
Ballarat.
1 his position necessitated extensive
travelling and most arduous work. During
this time he maiiied Lizzie Hughes, nee
SteA enson, of Adelaide. For ten years this
devoted couple spent themselves in philan-
thropic work and were noted for their un-
selfish devotion to making the lot of the
“under dog’’ easier.
Di. lel ford died on 28th December,
1933, and his memory is revered by all with
whom he came in contact.
Mrs. Telford, although now living in
Adelaide, still retains a practical interest
in the good work initiated in Ballarat by
the Doctor and herself.


Late Samuel Lambricl-
Late Mrs. Samuel Lambrick
Ihe late Richard Lambrick and his Descendants
Che late Mr. Richard Eambrick, a
native of Penzance, Cornwall, was one of the
earliest of settlers in the State of Victoria.
His arrival in the early thirties of last
century synchronised with the commence-
ment of the process of opening up a small
portion of the territory which, at that time,
was yet practically unknown.
Realising the possibilities of the situa-
tion, the newcomer established himself m
business as a carrying contractor in the
stretch of land now known as Collins Street
but, later, moved to Spencer Street and,
later again, founded his headquarters in
Flinders Street—where it has remained to
the present time. His organisation—
started in a small way —was destined to
grow through succeeding generations to
one of the largest transport undertakings
in Victoria and now constitutes a monu-
ment to his foresight of a century past.
After a comparatively short while he
was married to Miss Elizabeth Bosustow.
and of this union there was a family of two
children the names of whom were Samuel
and Emma.
( )f this family Samuel, the eldest son.
took over the entire responsibilities of the
business on the demise of his father and,
in his turn, assisted the growth until it
became an outstanding business institution
in Melbourne.
1 he late Mr. Samuel Eambrick married
Miss Mary Jane Murphy, who had come to
this country with her parents from their
home in Ireland some years previouslv.
From their union there was a family of four
sons and two daughters the particulars of
whom in brief follow:—


Richard, deceased, married Miss
O’Donnell, to this union there is one son,
Samuel. Ellen, now Mrs. Samuel of
Elsternwick. There are five children of
this union. Albert (deceased), Samuel,
(also deceased), Millicent, now Mrs. Lawler
of North Melbourne, and to this union
there is a family of four children, Leslie,
of whom further particulars follow here-
under.
Of the above both Richard and Albert
were actively engaged in the business prior
to their death. The late Mr. Samuel Lam-
brick died in the year 1928 and was fol-
lowed by his widow in the following vear
1929.
Mr. Leslie Lambrick, the only surviv-
ing son, has the sole control of the old
family business and has consistently fol-
lowed in his fore-fathers’ footsteps insofar
as the carrying on of the enormous under-
taking is concerned. Some idea of the size
of their operations may be gathered from
the fact that, during the war years, the
firm had more than a hundred horses in
continuous work. However, with his more
modern outlook, Mr. Leslie Lambrick has
mechanised this fleet to a large extent but
there are, nevertheless, still forty-five
horses in service. The thoroughness of the
work performed may also be judged by the
fact that, included among many enormous
contracts undertaken successfully in recent
years, was the transportation of a five
hundred ton dredging plant from Adelong,
New' South Wales to Bright, Victoria—a
distance of tw'o hundred and fifty miles.
In the year 1918 Mr. L. Lambrick mar-
ried Miss Alice Roulent, eldest daughter of
Mr. and Mrs. Stephen Roulent of Ireland
wdio were also one of our oldest pioneering
families. From this union there has been
a family of two sons Leslie and Brian. It
is somewhat of a coincidence that Mr. and
Mrs. Leslie Lambrick and their family arc
now in residence at Harcourt Street, North
Melbourne, next door to where the late Mr.
Samuel Lambrick was born. As in the case
of pastoral and professional families each
in their own sphere, so in the business com-
munitv of the State, have the Lambrick
family successfully undertaken their pro-
portion of the responsibilities of building
a Nation from unbroken and unknown
bushlands.
The late Allred Callaway of Castlemaine
Victoria, and his Descendants.
In the early fifties of last century
Alfred Callaway came from Bristol, Eng-
land. Although his father was a well-
known ship-owner and importer of Russian
wheat, the young man, with the mental
energy which seemed to distinguish this
family (one of his brothers was an inventor
of photographic processes, another a
chemist, a third the noted Dr. Charles
Callaway, President of the Rationalist
Tress Association) sought a fortune of his
own in the new country.
He settled in the tiny township of
Castlemaine, and aided by tHe loyal support
and co-operation of his wife, (nee Julia
Haves, of Dublin, Ireland) devoted his
capability and energy to civic development,
hor several years he was a member of the
Council, for four vears Mayor.


The family tradition of intellectual
enterprise and civic energy was carried on
by two sons and a daughter, all still living
in Melbourne. Of these —
William Alfred entered the Public
Service at the age of sixteen and eventu-
al! v reached the position of Under Secretary
of State. He has a son and daughter.
Henry George matriculated at the early
age of fourteen and entered the banking
service. As accountant to the Colonial
Bank, Jamieson (Vic.) in the ’eighties,
young Callaway with his manager rode
with ready revolver and a keen eye for
bushrangers, through the mountain ranges
between Gaffney’s Creek, Wood’s Point and
Jamieson, carrying gold from the A 1 Min-
ing Co., and the Alluvial and Mining Com-
panies to the Bank at Jamieson. After ten
years of banking he entered outside finance
where he was both successful and esteemed.
Foresight and ability enabled him to retire
before his fortieth year, and he appeared in
the world of sport as Victoria’s representa-
tive in interstate golf for four years. He
held the position of Honorary Secretary of
the Royal Melbourne Golf Club for over
ten years and Hon. Treasurer of the Vic-
torian Artists’ Society for ten years.
Ada Beatrice, now Mrs. C. Colies, the
third child of Alfred Callaway, was well-
known as a magazine contributor and verse
writer.
In 1900 Henry Callaway married
Marguerite Deschamp, descendant of a
Franco-Swiss pioneer family. Her mother
was Claudina Azzopardi, wife of Joseph
Clement Deschamp a leading vigneron of
Lilydale (Vic.), and her grandmother, the
late Mrs. A. Azzopardi (nee Margaret
Sandeman) came to Australia from Perth,
Scotland, in 1840.
The children of Henry Callaway and
Marguerite Deschamp are :
Marguerite (Mrs. T. O. G. Mahood) a
Melbourne artist, potter and writer on
ceramics, whose work is illustrated in the
Melbourne Centenary Gift Book and is
represented in well-known collections. Her
research and experiment in the practical
problems of ceramics have produced a type
of ware curious and beautiful, and, accord-
ing to Australian art authorities, unique.
Foreign connoisseurs have carried pieces of
this ware as far afield as Spain, France and
England.
Claudina, wife of Lieutenant-Com-
mander F. R. James of the Australian Navy.
The one child of this union is Henry Sande-
man.
Lemuel, a member of the Melbourne
Stock Exchange. Married to Winifred,
only daughter of the present (1936) Lord
Mayor of Melbourne. He has one son,
Lemuel John.
Alfred Henry, an amateur athlete,
winner of many trophies in school sport,
swimming and in ice-skating. At present
in his brother’s office.
Conclusion; A curious fact (for a new
country) in the history of this family is that
the one church (Collins Street Congrega-
tional) saw the marriage of four genera-
tions of brides in direct descent, and the
christening of four generations of infants.
From the original pioneers, family names
and traditions have been handed down to
their descendants, together seemingly with
their infinitely valuable inheritance of men-
tal vigour, executive ability and tenacity of
purpose.


,v !
|||
|u ‘/.’
* .
vjH v I
- yf^ ' : | r * * ? ''
The late Sir Henry Weedon, M.L.C
The late
Alderman The Honorable Sir Henry Weedon, K. 8., M.L.C
and
The late Cr. John Francis McCarron.
It is impossible to render full justice to
cither of the principals —concerning whom
these lines are written —in the present
work, for in writing a full biography a com-
plete book would be required for both the
late Sir Henry Weedon and the late John
Francis McCarron. We therefore propose
to deal with each separately—giving in each
case some slight conception of the value of
their services to the community.
The late John Francis McCarron, a
native of Carronside, near Enniskillen, Ire-
land, was the only surviving son of Francis
McCarron and arrived in Adelaide, South
Australia, in the year 1854 when aged but
six years, in company with his widowed
mother. In 1858 the little family came to
Melbourne and the young son received his
education at St. James School, and later
entered the printing office of Mr. Alfred
Colliding, at St. Kilda. The following
vear he went to work for Messrs. W. Good-
haugh & Company, who were the leading
printers in Melbourne in those days. His
training continued with this firm—and their
successors, Ferguson & Moore—until the
year 1872 when he and the late Mr. Bird


1 — fc
mmm, ■ - -%' Sts?
' ’ : n§f|>4 m
v VrtjgBM
** fry» ~
| |p *‘ v Jp 9H
arai M, H
* o| |f
The late John Francis McCarron.
founded the now well-known firm of
McCarron, Bird & Co., their premises being-
in Flinders Lane until the year 1887 when
they removed to the present fine premises
at “Record Chambers’’, 479 Collins Street.
It was in this same year that Mr. Bird
retired from the firm. Mr. McCarron
carried on with his two other partners Mr.
H. W. Pultmann and Mr. Andrew Stewart.
It is unnecessary to emphasise the
success which was experienced by the com-
pilin' under the wise leadership of the late
Mr. McCarron, for the firm has become
well-known from one end of the State to the
other as one of the finest in Melbourne and
has for long been a leader throughout the
trade. In addition to this organisation,
however, the late Mr. McCarron also
acquired the Sydney business of Gibbs,
Shallard & Company, and carried such busi-
ness on under the firm name of McCarron,
Stewart & Company. Although the present
lines are not intended to deal with the acti-
vities of the businesses it is but proper to
place on record two outstanding publica-
tions of which the Melbourne house was
responsible. These were the “Monthly
Australasian Insurance and Banking
Record” the only journal of its kind, and oi
which Mr. McCarron was justly proud, being
its founder, with the assistance of the late
Mr. Robert E. Wallen as Editor. The Record
is the chief authority in matters of insurance
and finance in the Australasian colonies
and has a world-wide circulation; and the
very fine historical work issued in 1888 (at
the time of the Melbourne Exhibition!
under the name of “Victoria and Its Metro-
polis.” I'he latter is a prized possession
in many hundreds of homes throughout
Victoria and has brought great pleasure to
some thousands of citizens in this State.
The late Mr. McCarron was associated
with many well-known Melbourne financial
and business undertakings either as a


Director or as a prominent shareholder.
Among these might be mentioned such as:
1 he Xcw Norfolk Brick Company Limited,
I). Stratton & Co. Ltd., the Foster Brew-
ing Company Limited, Advisor Scottish
W idows’ Fund (Edinburgh), Victoria Rac-
ing Club. Savage Club, Liquidator Real
Estate Bank, also Chaffey Bros., Fire
I nderwriters' Association, Typographical
Society, and President North Suburban
c bond Society and Royal Metropolitan
Liedertafel, and many others. His entire
activities were distinguished by shrewd-
ness, judgment and humanity.
In the year 1877 he embarked upon a
squatting venture but- —unfortunately-—he
passed through trying times in 1880 and
decided to sacrifice his holdings and con-
centrate on his interests in the metropolitan
areas. His interests were many and varied,
for lie proved himself an amateur actor of no
mean ability, and played many leading roles
during the regime of the late Barry Sulli-
van, manager of the Melbourne Theatre
Royal. His wit and natural poetry of
nature leant grace to his discourse, and he
was a popular figure wherever he was
known.
Amongst other activities he was for a
considerable time President of the Employ-
ers’ Union and, at Emerald Hill, he was the
first Treasurer of the Friendly Society Dis-
pensary, besides being one of the most
popular figures connected with the Emerald
Hill Artillery Corps. When the late
Alderman Carter retired from the Mel-
bourne City Council, a vacancy was created
for Lonsdale Ward, and the late Mr.
McCarron offered his services as a candi-
date and his election by a most substantial
majority is now history.
In the year 1866 he was married to
Ellen Bessie, eldest daughter of Mr. Edward
Tcelc of Emerald Hill, and of this union
there was a family of tw T o sons and two
daughters—of whom Miss Florence McCar-
ron afterwards became the bride of Sir
Henry Weedon.
In the years 1889-1890 the late Mr.
McCarron and his wife made an extended
tour of the world and were given a fine
reception on their return by a large number
of their friends. A grand career was ended
under tragic circumstances when the late
John brands McCarron dropped dead sud-
denly during a Ball which was in progress
at the Melbourne Town Hall on 7th June,
1900 at the age of 51 years. r \ he event was
everywhere the subject of extensive sorrow
for he was noted for his geniality, kindli-
ness and warm nature. He ever had a
gentle word for those in a less fortunate
position than himself and he was also known
for his devotion in his family circle.
A\ e now pass on to a brief outline of
the career of one of the most outstanding
figures in the history of the City of Mel-
bourne . . . the late Sir Henry Weedon.
His father, also named Henry, from the
County of Surrey, England, came to this
country in the early fifties of last century
and settled in Melbourne. Henry was
born on the sixteenth day of March, 1859,
in Collins Street, and his mother died
when he was but nine months old. His
father lived a retired existence and ulti-
mately died after attaining the age of eighty-
eight years.
J he late Sir Henry Weedon was, in his
earlier days, a contractor to the Melbourne
City Council, managing partner of the
1 alma Photographic Studios, and also
Managing Director of the Globe Motor
Company ... in addition to several other
activities in the business community. How-
ever, at the age of forty years, he retired
from business and devoted the whole of his
energies to the service of his fellow-
citizens. For the following twenty-two
years he was the most outstanding figure in
the municipal life of the metropolis. It is
a coincidence that he was elected a Coun-
cillor of the Melbourne City Council on the
same day as that on which the late Mr. J.
h. McCarron was elected, and thus was a
friendship consolidated which lasted
throughout their lifetimes.
So many and varied were his services
to the community that it is a most difficult
matter to place them on record. The year
1899 saw him as honorary auditor to the
C ity Council and this was the year when he
successfully contested the Albert Ward—


later becoming an Alderman. For the years
1906-7-8 he held the high office of Lord
Mayor and carried through his heavy duties
with dignity and honour. In 1908 his ser-
vices as Commissioner for \ ictoria at the
Franco-British Exhibition in London earned
for him his Knighthood. Knighted by the
late King Edward \ 11. 21st June, 1908, at
Buckingham Palace. Special audiences
with both late King Edward VII. and Prince
of Wales at Marlborough House. Two
years prior to this he had been the repre-
sentative of the Victorian Ministry at the
Christchurch Exhibition, New Zealand.
His interest in Parks and Gardens on behalf
of the Melbourne City Council has earned
for him a name and reputation which cer-
tainly" should never die. He was for many
years the Chairman of the Council Com-
mittee as, also, of the Alexandra Park
Trust. He was principally responsible for
the erection of the F. C. Fitzgibbon statue
near Prince’s Bridge, and he also laid the
Foundation Stone of the new block of the
Town Hall.
In the year 1905 he was elected a
member of the Legislative Assembly for
the Fast Melbourne seat and he retained
such seat until the year 1911. In 1919 he
was elected as a member of the Legislative
Council for the Melbourne Province. In
passing, it should be recorded he was created
a Justice of the Peace in the year 1892.
Appended hereto are a few of his activities
and positions which he so efficiently" filled
during a career of public and semi-public
services;—
Chairman of the old Melbourne 'Tram-
ways Trust.
Trustee of the Melbourne Public
Library.
Inaugurated first Children’s Play-
ground.
Laid out \ ictoria Gardens.
Inaugurated Statue to Marquis of Lin-
lithgow on his death (first Governor-
General of Commonwealth).
Laid Foundation Stone four Memorial
Cottages to Old Colonists’ Homes.
Trustee Felton Bequest.
Entertained Japanese and American
Fleets.
President Royal Rife Saving Society
for seven years.
President Victorian Centre London
College of Music.
Presented by Citizens of Melbourne
with two Oil Paintings of self on comple-
tion of Lord Mayoralty, and solid silver
Rose Bowl and two Candleabras and many
other trophies.
Treasurer of the Melbourne Public
Library.
Member of the hire Brigades’ Board.
Treasurer of the Melbourne Exhibition.
Manager of the new Fawkner Cemetery
Life Governor of: The Melbourne Hos-
pital; Alfred Hospital; Homeopathic Hos-
pital; Women’s Hospital; Children’s Hos-
pital; Sutherland Home; Carlton Refuge;
Deaf and Dumb Asylum and Blind Asylum.
Member of the Faculty of Veterinary
Science, Melbourne Hospital.
Committeeman of the Commonwealth
War Museum.
Most active worker during the Peace
Loan Campaign, during which he person-
ally conducted a tour of one of the tanks
throughout the length of the State.
One of the most prominent members of
the Masonic Craft in Victoria and held some
of the highest honours possible in that body
As far back as the year 1889 he was A\ or-
shipful Master of the Duke of Manchester
Lodge, and he progressed throughout the
many vears of his services. He was a Life
Governor of the Freemasons’ Charitable
Institutions. He was also a prominent
office-bearer in Trinity Church, Fast Mel-
bourne.
From the foregoing, it may be possible
for future generations to be enabled to
arrive at some small appreciation of his
many services to his fellow-men. No
printed word could give a finer insight into
his wonderful energy and consideration for
the welfare of others than a perusal ot
these few angles of his endeavours.
His death occurred during a visit by
himself and Lady Weedon to Sydney in the
year 1921, and his remains were brought to


Melbourne for interment. No finer tribute
to his character could be penned than that
which is embodied in the following few
words spoken by the late Archdeacon
11 indley in St. Paul’s Cathedral . . “lie
has been a good and faithful servant of the
city.”
It should he mentioned that Sir Henry
\\ eedon was a widower when he married
Miss 1 dorence McCarron and Mr. Alfred
Henry \\ eedon, of Sydney, is the only son.
And thus we conclude our pen-picture of
a grand citizen. Before bringing to a close
dus history, it is but just to place on record
the fine services rendered to the community
by Lady M eedon who, like her late dis-
tinguished husband, has been an untiring
worker on behalf of the community. She
has been associated for thirtv years past
with the Australian \\ omen’s National
League and has been President of the Club
for seventeen years. She was also on the
\\ omen’s Centenary Council. An Associ-
ate of the National Council of Women of
\ ictoria, Patroness of Zelman Svmphonv
Orchestra, on numerous Committees and
associated with civic and philanthropic
interests. Presented when last in England
to the kite King Ceorge the Fifth and Queen
Mary—also at Royal Garden Party.
Lady \\ eedon is now in residence at
“Craigellachic,” 273 Orrong Road, East St.
Kilda.
A\ e have the utmost pleasure in includ-
ing the foregoing records in the “Founders
of Australia and their Descendants” and
feel confident that any eulogistic references
made herein will receive the unanimous
support of all who have been brought into
contact with either of the characters por-
trayed.
The late Robert Anderson, of Melbourne.
The subject of this history—the late
Robert Anderson —came to this country at
the age of sixteen in company with his
father (who was at the time a widower)
two sisters —Esther Wilkinson Williams
and Emma Abbott —and brother —Charles
Thomas. This was in the year 1859, and
their first home in Australia was in Sydney.
However, they later settled in Melbourne
where Robert received his training as an
Accountant, and met with considerable
success in his chosen calling. His career
was a colorful one for, in addition to his
profession, he made several journeys to
England seeking a fortune which was held
in Chancery, and which was claimed to be-
long to the family. He was, however, un-
successful in his efforts owing to a legal
technicality. Among his activities in his
profession should be mentioned the fact that
he was for many years accountant to the
well-known firm of Wright & Edwards,
who were known throughout the State as
leading engineers. Through the years, he
bee ame an outstanding figure in the com-
munity and at the time of his death, at the
age of seventy-four, on the nineteenth day
of November, 1917, he was an honoured
citizen who commanded the esteem of all
with whom he had been brought into con-
tact.
The late Mr. Robert Anderson married
Miss Rachael Mary Kdwards of Sandridge
—since re-named Port Melbourne —and to
the union there was a family of nine child-
ren of whom seven survive at the present
time as follows:
Mr. Henry Charles Anderson. Married
Miss Harrison, of Melbourne, and there are
three children of the union.
Esther Eliza—of whom further particu-
lars follow at a later stage of this history.


am
*%
Fate Robert Anderson.
The late Mrs. Robert Anderson.
Agnes Mary. Resides with her sister,
Mrs. Thackeray, and undertakes many acti-
vities of a charitable nature in company
with Mrs. Thackeray.
Mr. Robert Alfred Anderson. Married
Miss Edith Stokell of Tasmania. There is
one daughter to their union in Miss Mary
Stokell Anderson. Mr. R. A. Anderson is
now a widower.
Marion Muriel. Married Mr. A. E.
.Bridger—now deceased —and is in resi-
dence with her two children at St. Kilda.
Harold Leslie. Married Miss Ethel
Matthews of Armadale. The family reside
at Camberwell and there is one daughter to
the union.
Lionel Douglas. Married Miss Mabel
Grey of Bolton, England, and there is one
daughter to the union. The family reside
at East St. Kilda.
The late Mrs. Robert Anderson died at
Woodside Crescent, Toorak, in the year
1910. Of the above family, Esther Eliza,
the eldest daughter, married Mr. James
Thackeray of London. The late Mr.
Thackeray was for nearly forty years the
owner of the well-known firm of grain mer
chants, H. R. Carter & Company, of Mel
bourne. He died in the year 1934, at the
age of seventy-one. Mrs. Thackeray has
now been in residence at “White Lodge",
Marine Parade, St. Kilda for the past
twenty-nine years. There has been a
family to her union of four children in Colin
(deceased), Harlech and Digbv, who arc
now in control of H. R. Carter & Company,
and Miss Winsome Thackeray who resides
with her mother and is well-known as the
champion ice-skater of Australia. Miss
I hackeray has been successful in mam
championships in this sport and was the
vinner of the \ ictorian Centenary Cup and
the 1935 Australian Championship. As
already mentioned in these lines, Mrs.
1 hackeray is known in many directions for
her activities on behalf of her less fortunate
fellows and holds an honoured place in the
esteem of those with whom she has through
many years been brought into contact.
FOIIN D ERS O F AU ST R\FT A


Jk£.
Jmt IJfei .- m
. ■WKfiSWg^J 4 ,y y £ I
m 1S|
u W ; II "
The late John Tennant, Snr.
I he late Mrs. John Tennant, Snr.
The Tennants of South Australia
'This family can claim to have had a
very long- association with the pastoral in-
dustry of South Australia. John Tennant,
the founder of the family in Australia, came
from Scotland in 1838; his son, Andrew, at
that time was only three years of age.
John Tennant began sheep raising at
Dry Creek and extended his operations far
and wide, selecting properties at Chain of
Ponds, Lyndoch Valley, Gumeracha, and
later in the vicinity of the Burra. John
'Pennant had wide vision and when the
West Coast of the State was opened up
established a station at Louth Bay, near
Port Lincoln. It was most difficult and
perilous to travel stock overland to that
region, for they had to be taken round the
heads of the two Gulfs through unsettled
and black-infested country. Disaster had
attended many expeditions. One winter
John Tennant courageously undertook the
journey with sheep and cattle. He pro-
ceedecl as far as the site of Quorn, where
two of his party were murdered, and num-
bers of the sheep were killed by the natives;
he was forced to turn back. The following 1
winter he again set out on the same journev
and reached his destination, with party and
stock, safely.
John Tennant purchased Tallala
Station, 15 miles from Port Lincoln and at
Tallala he ran sheep and cattle. On the
death of John Tennant his son. Andrew,
succeeded to the property and the Station
is still owned by the Tennant family who
carry on sheep breeding and farming there.
It was on this property that Andrew
Tennant received his early training for
pastoral pursuits.
Endowed with the spirit of adventure
and the courage and determination of his
race, when only 18 he took cattle further
FOUND ICRS OF AUSTRALIA.


' .f* ■■« m -
“ Tallala ” Homestead, West Coast
to the West to the shores of Lake Newland,
discovered by Eyre in 1839, close to Port
Elliston, and with John Hamp, settled at
Salt Creek, a holding that had previously
been abandoned owing to the hostilities of
the blacks. Men and stock had been
speared in the native raids of this locality,
but the two young pastoralists were not
afraid and carried on there for some seven
years. Andrew Tennant owned stations at
Mount Wedge, about 90 square miles in
all, in partnership wiith John Love, his
brother-in-law. In 1859 he took up 59
square miles at Streaky Hay and he also
had country at Coffins Bay. Later he in-
creased his holdings very extensively. The
Parliamentary returns show that in the 70’s
he had had the leases of more than 1,600
square miles for some years. In 186b
Andrew Tennant leased a large area known
as Baroota near Port Germein, but owing
to the severe drought he was obliged to
move further north. At this time he had
acquired from Thomas Elder the Orrama
and Baratta runs which had also suffered
from the effects of the drought of ’65 and
’66. This he later disposed of to Alexander
McCulloch. He then purchased the Wil-
lippa Station in the same neighbourhood and
followed by the acquisition of Moolooloo,
containing 800 square miles, Muripitina
near M amah ill, containing 1,700 square
miles, and Undoolya Station near Alice
Springs comprising 5,000 cattle, in partner-
ship with John Love. The telegraph
station at Alice Springs was on this area.


T
\ Si IffN. '
* **
\nclrcw Tennant, Snr.
Mrs. Andrew Tennant, Snr.
After ten years of varied fortune,
\ndrew Tennant relinquished Undoolya and
also another important property which he
had taken up at Lake Eyre in the far north.
He owned a vast area of the Yardea coun-
try in the Gawler Ranges, but was driven
out of occupation by rabbits and dogs. This
was prior to the country being fenced.
Eventually he acquired Thurlga Station,
and Mr. (. G. Moseley, M.P., took up a lease
of the adjacent Yardea country. These
two big pastoralists formed their country
comprising 1,2/0 square miles into a vermin
district with the result that a vermin-proof
fence was put round Yardea and Thurlga.
Finally Andrew Tennant sold his Thurlga
interest to [. G. Moseley who worked the
two properties.
Andrew Tennant owned Corraburra
Station near Port Augusta and carried on
sheep farming there until his death in 1913.
He was also proprietor of Venara Station,
some 12 miles from Iron Knob. With H.
C. and R. M. Hawker he owned at the time
of his death Carriewerloo Station, 913
square miles.
Portee on the Murray was another of
the Tennant’s Stations; this carried about
10,000 sheep and cattle. 100 head of cattle
were fattened annually. Their properties
included Saltia on the Western side of
Spencer’s Gulf; Hermitage near Riverton,
some 13,000 acres and much property in the
City of Adelaide. He was one of the first
directors of the Adelaide Steamship Com-
pany and at one period in its history sup-
plied the financial support which it required
to enable it to become thoroughly estab-
lished. He also had large interests in the
Seaham and Abermain Colleries, New
South \\ ales. From its earliest days he
was principal shareholder in the Tarcoola
Blocks Gold Mine, a venture in which he
lost heavily, proving his high sense of
honour by holding on to his shares when
by selling them he could have profited
largely.
Andrew Tennant was one of the repre-
sentatives of Flinders in the House of
Assembly from 1881 to 1887. In the tenth
Parliament, when that district returned
three members, he had as colleagues,
FOUND KBS OF AUSTRALIA


I ANDREW TENNANT Jn»> M.>s ANDREW TENNANT Jn<. ; _____
L urrrixrivrr u
Ebenczer Cooke, Patrick Boyce Coglin and
William R. Mortlock. In 1898 Andrew
'Pennant was returned to the Legislative
Council for the Northern District for which
he sat until his seat was vacated by efflux-
ion of time. He was a member of the
Royal Commission on the Pastoral Indus-
try, chosen because of his great knowledge
of the pastoral country and his wise judg-
ment and ripe experience which were of
great assistance to the Commission. He
was interested in the Turf and a great lover
of the thoroughbred. As a young man he
raced many good horses in the Port Lincoln
district. In 1866 he bought the bay horse,
“Statesman’” from Port Lincoln to Ade-
laide and ran him at Thebarton races; Joe
Boase rode “Statesman” in many of his
races. Most of the classic events in South
Australia saw Andrew Tennant’s colours
in the winning position and many cups and
trophies were won. Andrew Ten nan
established a Stud at the Hermitage Statioi
his first purchase being “My Lord”, fathc
of the brilliant miler, “Staflfa.” He als<
raced “Lady Rose” and “Lady Kintore.
“Lady Rose” won many races including tin
South Australian Derby. “Lady Kintore
won the City Handicap, Marryatville am
Rose Park Handicap, and was subsequent!;
sent, at the request of Mr. Leslie Mac Don
aid, for racing in Victoria.
For many years Andrew Tennant wa
President of the Port Augusta and Flinder
Jockey Clubs, and was closely associate
with all the metropolitan clubs as well a
many other racing organizations. He too
a keen interest in the Port Augusta Chi
and his financial support enabled that Clul
in lean years, to exist. He always made
FOUNDFR.S OF AUSTRALIA.


Princess Royal ” Homestead
practice of attending the Port Augusta
Racing Carnival annually. His liberality
in connection with the Turf was great, and
it was very gratifying when his chestnut
mare, Telicita”, won the Port Augusta
Cup.
Andrew Pennant left three sons; John
'Pennant of Princess Royal Station; W.
Tennant of Point Lowly Station and F. A.
1 ennant of Adelaide. There were three
daughters; Mrs. W. T. Mortlock of Martin-
dale Hall; Airs. Anstruther Gray, wife of
Major Anstruther Gray, and Mrs. R. M.
Hawker of Bungaree.
Andrew Tennant died in 1913, aged
seventy-nine, and Mrs. 'Pennant in 1923.
In addition to his many interests it
should be recorded that he was the first to
open up the Tarcoola and Glenloth Gold
Fields, having sent and financed the first
prospecting parties to these areas.
John Tennant, eldest son of Andrew
Tennant, was born at Adelaide in 1863 and
educated at John L. Young’s School and
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide. Leaving
the latter at the age of 17, he entered com-
mercial life in Adelaide for two years and
then proceeded to Moolooloo and Willippa
and Hermitage Stations, acquiring pastoral
knowledge. At an early age he went to New
Zealand and managed a property belonging
to his father, named “Heddonbush” in the
Southland district where he stayed until
190 L J his was a large property of some
17,000 acres shearing 15,000 sheep, and 300
head of cattle were run there also. An addi-
tional property, “Hill End” of some 12.000
acics was worked in conjunction with
Heddonbush.” During his residence in
FAw Zealand, John 1 ennant bred and raced
some very good thoroughbreds, and was a
keen follower of the hunt, always being well
mounted. The well-known horse, “Robin”
owned by John Tennant in New Zealand
won many races. Whilst on a visit to Aus-
tralia, during this time, he purchased a
noted performer, “Seawave,” which won
two Hunt Club Cups and one Drag Cup;
one of each being won in one day.
In 1898 he married Margaret Love,
daughter of the late John Love who was
connected with Andrew Tennant in many
of his pastoral undertakings. There is a
family of two children living—Andrew,
born in June, 1899, and Joan, wife of Dr!
Brian Swift of Adelaide. The elder daugh-
ter Margaret, died in 1916. Andrew mar-
ried Gwen, daughter of Sir William Good-
man of Adelaide, and during the Great
A\ ar enlisted in an English Regiment, re-
turning to Australia in September, 1919.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


j jifirr i'
i ••• ?•*
Mrs. F. A. Tennant.
Mr. F. A. Tennant.
Before leaving New Zealand, John
Tennant had acquired “Heddonbush ’ Sta-
tion bv purchase from his father and, dis-
posing of this, returned to Australia and
acquired his present property, “Princess
Koval,” near the Burra. An adjoining pro-
perty. “The Gap,” is controlled by his son,
Andrew, the two stations being worked in
conjunction. In addition to his interests
at “Princess Royal,” John Tennant is also
interested in various other properties in
the estate of his late father, Andrew. The
children, Andrew and Joan, represent the
fourth generation of the Tennant family in
Australia.
Frederick Augustus Tennant, the
youngest son, was born in 1875,, educated
at Farmings School at Glenelg, and St.
Peter’s College, Adelaide. He studied for
the Bar under Mr. A. G. Downer and was
admitted in 189/. Dike his father he is an
ardent lover of a thoroughbred, and has a
stud at Salisbury named “Grange Ormsby.”
“Star-drift” is the doyen of this stud, and
“Gilt Edge” has recently joined him. There
are 40 marcs of the best blood in Australia
running there, and the stud has been most
successful on the turf. In addition, at
Golden Glen, One Tree Hill, T. A. Tennant
lias a merino stud for the production of
rams for his several stations.
The Tennant family is one of the oldest
in South Australia and are truly among
representatives of the founders of the State.
Frederick Augustus Tennant married
Katherine Hamill of Ovingham, daughter
of Patrick Hamill, an early arrival in South
Australia; thus joining two old families.
He is Commodore of the Holdfast Yacht
Cluh, and is keenly interested in this sport.
His father’s motor yacht, “Tarcoola,” was
the first of its type in South Australia.
'Phis is an historical vessel and the original
engine is still in active servee.
The F. A. 'Pennant residence at
Glenelg, named “Sealield 'Power,” is filled
with antiques and articles of virtu, and is a
veritable museum containing as it does the
results of both Mr. and Mrs. Tennant’s
purchases throughout Europe.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


6 v-m
,_ m ■;'•/.! J||MR ' dp
PMiWK, ' wSM
f lififil * HRS' IB |
>•' JF wSm WHii
Vv i m VBI
MMMaMk ffr "7HHU
J|% ♦? ;i i * ;|mE^B
“GILT EDGE”
“STARDRIFT”


■■ fei?-,
s '" “ jfl
W^B^m
* *»««. JH^Gw
Jbm _ .*'■■•; ;.f_
.: K JKB*!*
Mrs. T. H. Rust.
Rev. T. H. Rust
Ihe late Thomas Holvoake Rust
The biography of the late Reverend
Thomas Holvoakc Rust constitutes a story
of self-effacing service over many years on
behalf of those less fortunate than himself
At the age of thirty-two he came from
England to take up the position of Chap-
lain at the Melbourne Grammar School,
and, after approximately a year, resigned
this position in 1885 to take up Parish work
at ( kaklcigh, where he remained for ten
years.
In 1895 an exchange was effected with
the Priest at St. Matthias, North Richmond
where he remained for ten months. He
then accepted an invitation to St. Martin s
Church at Hawksburn and retained such
living until the year 1906 when the Reverend
Stephen Hart —later Bishop of Wangaratta
—relieved him.
For the next ten years, until the year
1916 the late Mr. Rust spent at Lilydale
when he unselfishly relinquished his work
to act as “Locum tenons’’ at Burnley for
two years to enable the incumbent to go as
Chaplain with the A.I.F. This action was
typical of his character —for it was rccog-
nized through many years that no effort
was too great for him to undertake for the
benefit of one and all.
Again in 1918 he went to Sunbury.
where he remained until 1921, for similar
reasons as had taken him to Burnley. It
was in the latter year, when aged seventy,
that lie retired, esteemed by all with whom
he had been brought into contact.
As a result of the state of his wife’s
health, Mr. Rust, in 1924, purchased
“Ambleside”, 88 Darebin Street, Heidle-
berg, where Mrs. Rust is in residence at the
present time. It is of interest to place on
record that the late Reverend 4'. H. Rust
was ordained by Archbishop Tait of Can-
terbury and, during preparation for Holy
Orders, was a guest at the Archbishop's
home —“Addington 1 lall.’’
Following six years of failing health,
up till when he was in constant demand to
preach in various centres, the Reverend
Rust passed away in August, 1935. at the
age of eighty-three years, honored and
beloved by all.


'This history would be incomplete were
we to omit mention of his faithful and loyal
life partner. Mrs. T. H. Rust was Ethel
Dagmar Hopkins, daughter of the late John
Rout Hopkins of “Wormbete,” Winchelsea,
and was born on the 30th August, 1863, re-
ceiving her education at Wattle House
School, St. Kilda, and finishing at Mrs.
Sadlier-Forster’s School, Windsor. It was
on the second of December, 1885 that their
marriage was solemnised at Christ Church,
South Yarra, and this event marked the
commencement of a partnership destined to
react most powerfully for the benefit of
humanity.
Mrs. Rust was secretary of the Con-
valescent Home for Women for several
years, and was personally congratulated by
the Government Inspector of Charities on
the manner in which she carried out
her duties. During the land boom she
was present when Mr. Taylor, band and
Estate Agent, of Melbourne, made to Miss
Swycr—the lady Superintendent—the as-
tounding offer of ten thousand pounds cash
for the house and land occupied at that
time by the above Institution. The offer,
made in the little Vestry of Holy Trinity
Church, Oakleigh, during choir practice,
was accepted by the Committee, and the
home was moved to Clayton where the pre-
sent beautiful home was erected free of
debt.
Mrs. Rust was also a member of the
Prahran, Toorak and District Benevolent
Society for several years, and was also one
of two women elected to represent the Dio-
cese of Melbourne on the Provincial
Council of the Girls’ Friendly Society. The
Provincial Council took in everv Diocese
of Victoria, wives of Bishops having seats
ex officio on the Council.
Some idea of the esteem and admira-
tion evinced for Mrs. Kthel Dagmar Rust
may be gathered from the fact that the
Parish of Oakleigh tendered to her an
evening during which she was presented
with a beautiful standard lamp. The
Parishioners expended every effort to make
the ceremony outstanding even to the
extent of lending furniture from their homes
for the purpose of beautifying the hall.
The Member for the District, Mr. Pater-
son, occupied the chair and the entire
function was a magnificent success.
It is hoped that these lines will keep
fresh in the minds of many admirers the
memory of two lives given unselfishly to
the service of their fellow creatures.
The late Alexander Boyd of Commeralghip
and Tarrone.
The late Alexander Boyd, like so many
of our old pastoral pioneers, was a native of
Scotland and attained a considerable degree
of success in his chosen calling in Austra-
lia.
Arriving in the year 1852 in the first
place, he satisfied himself that a splendid
future lay in pastoral pursuits in the new
land of which the Old Country was then
hearing glowing reports following the dis-
covery of gold. He then returned to Scot-
land where he remained for but a short stay
and —almost by the next boat—came out
again and bought a fine property near
Echuca named “Rcstdown”. His luck,
however, was not destined to stand bv him
in this, his first venture, for, almost from
the start of his ownership, he suffered from
a most severe drought. Irony played its
part, for. when rain ultimately did fall, he
was compelled to leave his holding in a
boat!


E ■" • 11 • ■■■■
L |
" jl I
«^5t N I :
• | o j ;
— —OfPI
; I I I i
:aa»i... .a***,
wb. «r
■**tN v
i ■ :
j I '■" I I j
The late Alexander Boyd
The late Mrs. Alexander Bovd
Not to be denied, however, he then
bought “Commeralghip” near Rokewood,
and at last fortune smiled on his attempts
to build a fortune for himself in his land by
adoption. He also undertook portion of the
responsibility in buying a property named
“Narmbool” in partnership with his brother
John, and the late D. McNaught.
After some time, both “Commeralghip”
and “Narmbool” were sold and he then in-
vested in “Tarrone” in the Warrnambool
district, where he concentrated on the
breeding of sheep and cattle.
I'rom this time on he gave practically
all his attention to the development of his
property and attained a position of respect
and esteem among his fellow pastoralists.
The late Mr. Alexander Boyd married
Mi ss Susan Turner of Scotland, and the
present Mr. Alexander Boyd was born at
Geelong and received his education at the
Geelong College. He is the last survivor of
the original old family and is in residence
at 568 St. Kilda Road, Melbourne.
Both the late Mr. Alexander Boyd and
his wife are buried in the Herne Hill
Ccmetery, Geelong.
It is of interest to record that "Tar-
rone” is still in the possession of the family.


SpP <^fcr
jjgiL <*% SI
: r*>.. ** C '
'” ~ |||p
" *'*' ■»= " tjl I ■*■.. -
------
- *"* i I
sanll - * m
Wr*MfW' '
' * s ** r |
Fhe late Thomas Graves
J he late Mrs. Thomas Grave
1 homas Graves, ol Adelaide, South Australia.
I homas Graves was born in Cam-
bridgeshire, England, on March 10th.
1819, and was left an orphan at an early
age. Being compelled to trust in his re-
sources for a livelihood he began to trade
on his own account in a small way, and
was eventually engaged in the dried fruit
trade in East Cheapside, London. In
August, 1846, he took a passage for South
Australia by the ship “Lady Bruce.” and
arrived at Port Adelaide in the following
November. Shortly after his arrival in
Adelaide he met the late Mr. James Cham-
bers, and accompanied that gentleman to
the stock market, which was then held near
the Black Swan Hotel, North Terrace.
I'his was his first introduction to the busi-
ness life of the young colony, and he often
remarked in later years that he thought
most of the persons he met there were
"keen business men, from whom I learned
many things that were profitable to me
afterwards.” Early in 1848 he entered
into partnership with the late Mr. Henry
Downer, and they began business as whole-
sale and retail grocers in Hindley Street.
1 wo years later the partnership was dis-
solved by mutual consent, and the business
was tendered for. Mr. Graves was the
highest bidder, and the goodwill passed
into his hands for £Bao. There were verv
few substantial business premises in the
City at that time, and although the store
occupied by Mr. Graves was situated in the
most populous part of the city, it was of a
very primitive character and the ingress of
water in the winter and dust in the summer
often made things exceedingly unpleasant
for the unfortunate storekeeper. Shortly
after Mr. Graves became sole proprietor of
the business he arranged for a 42 years’
lease of the land, and immediately set to
work to erect a substantial two-storev
warehouse which is still standing. During


--
IB j
The late Thomas Graves, Jnr
Miss Sarah Graves.
the first few years Mr. Graves had a hard
struggle, owing to the general depression
of trade but he did not lose heart, and when
the discovery of gold in the eastern colon-
ies created a brisk demand for provisions
of all kinds he was ready to take the fullest
advantage of the opportunity to extend the
scope of his operations. When the gold
rush in Victoria set in early in 1851 Mr.
Graves saw that the time had come for
launching out on new lines. He had a large
stock of flour and other provisions on hand
and as it was impossible to convey them to
Melbourne over land he decided to charter
a vessel, and thus secure the advantage of
the high freights which were then ruling.
The cargo which this ship carried on her
first trip to Melbourne was an extremely
prosaic and miscellaneous one, but it was
the beginning of the large over-sea trade
which Mr. Graves subsequently conducted
with so much ability. The experiment was
a success, and Mr Graves continued to send
cargoes of produce and building materials
to Victoria until it became practically im-
possible to obtain sailors to work the
vessels. About this time Mr. Graves was
offered a ship complete for the same sum
as he had previously paid in freight for a
single cargo, as the vessel was useless to
the owner owing to the dearth of seamen.
In those early days there were no facilities
for landing cargoes at Melbourne, and the
goods had to be put ashore on the banks of
the Yarra, where they often lay for several
days, almost covered with mud and water.
Mr. W. Harrison, who with Mr. Graves
had been entrusted with the Melbourne
branch of the business, erected a rough, but
roomy shed on piles on the banks of the
Yarra, and in this much cargo which would
otherwise have been damaged by water was
stored until sold at highly remunerative
rates. After a time Mr. Graves found the
business in Adelaide demanded all his
energy, and he withdrew from the Mel-
bourne branch, which was successfully
carried on by his brother and Mr. W. Har-
rison for several vears afterwards.


ipp"
Percy Snow.
Mrs. Elizabeth Snow
OPENING UP OF NEW MARKETS.
From the time of his arrival in the
colony Mr. Graves had a strong conviction
that an oversea trade would prove remu-
nerative but it was not until 1852 that he
was abhe to put his scheme into execution.
In that year he chartered a vessel which he
loaded with breadstuffs for Mauritius, and
instructed the captain to bring back a cargo
of sugar. The venture proved profitable,
and Mr. Graves continued to forward flour
to Mauritius for over 30 years, often dis-
patching as many as two cargoes a month
in a busy season. A few years later he
disposed of the Hindley Street business,
took new premises in Currie Street, and de-
cided to devote practically the whole of his
time to the trade with foreign markets. He
always had three vessels under charter, and
in addition to carrying on a regular trade
with Mauritius he occasionally forwarded
cargoes to Cape Town, China, and other
parts of the world. As an instance of the
enterprise which characterised his conduct
of the business it is related that on one
occasion Mr. Graves chartered the barque
St. Magnus to convey a cargo of flour and
bran to Colombo and Mauritius. A few
weeks after the vessel sailed from Port
Adelaide, however, there was a sudden and
unexpected demand for flour in Sydney,
and the cargo, which had been bought a
few weeks previously at £lO ton, could have
been sold in Adelaide at £2O per ton. At
that time it was not possible to communi-
cate with the outside world bv cable, and
to have trusted to the ordinarv mail service
to carry instructions to the captain of his
vessel would have been useless in the cir-
cumstances. Rut Mr. Graves had set his
mind on recalling the ship and with
characteristic enterprise he chartered a
second vessel, which he dispatched with all
speed to Mauritius with instructions that
on arrival of the St. Magnus at that Port
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


'; mm
Walter Graves,
T. VV. Graves
the captain was to set sail for Australia
immediately bringing the cargo of flour
with him. A few weeks later Mr. Graves
had the satisfaction of seeing his flour re-
landed at Port Adelaide and it was sold at
a price which left a good profit after ex-
penses for chartering the two vessels had
been paid. On another occasion there was
a scarcity of sugar in the market and Mr.
Graves was anxious to communicate with
his agents in Mauritius in order to secure
the shipment of several cargoes as early as
possible. He found that there was no suit-
able vesssel at the port at that time that he
could charter, and the delay was the more
exasperating owing to the fact that a ship
was lying at the anchorage, under engage-
ment to a rival importer, almost ready to
sail. On December Bth the ship “Jane
Bell” arrived with a cargo of tea from
China, and by working at high pressure Mr
Graves succeeded in getting this landed in
two days. He immediately dispatched the
vessel to Mauritius with instructions for
the purchase of a large quantity of sugar.
In the meantime, however, the rival trader
had succeeded in getting his vessel away,
and there was every prospect of the “Jane
Bell” being outstripped on the voyage. Mr.
Graves, however, offered the captain a
bonus of £5 per day for every day that he
was in Mauritius and Port Adelaide re-
spectively ahead of the rival vessel. The
“Jane Bell” arrived at her destination on
January 29, and sailed again for Port Ade-
laide with a cargo of sugar on February 2.
On March 3 the anchor was again dropped
at Port Adelaide, and the sugar was placed
on the market several days in advance of
that imported by the rival firm. In 1862
Mr. G raves extended his operations to
Batavia, Singapore, and China. During
that year he shipped a large quantitv of
Australian butter to these ports. The but-
ter was first packed in small casks which
were subsequently placed in larger barrels,
the space between the staves of the outer
and inner casks being filled with coarse
salt. It was found, however, that the pack-
ages were too large for the Eastern mar-
kets, and the butter was brought back to


:|p— ;
V'..'
■■■■
Mrs. J. B. Stephenson.
Mrs. K. N. McMichael
Port Adelaide. The method of packing had
proved so effective that the butter was sub-
sequently sold in Adelaide at 1/6 per lb.
and realised a good profit. On another
occasion Mr. Graves shipped a cargo of
breadstuff's to the Cape of Good Hope, but
gave the captain of the vessel instructions
that, in the event of the market not being
favourable on his arrival at that port, he
was to go on to Rio de Janeiro and dispose
of the cargo there. This was done, and it
was the first, if not the only occasion on
which a cargo of South Australian produce
was shipped direct to Rio. During all
these years Mr. Graves had been regularly
receiving cargoes of almost all kinds of
commodities from New York, Calcutta,
Batavia, China, Chile, and London. Dur-
ing the American Civil War he had a ship-
ment of American goods, and, as he sold
his bills on the London market at par
'4/2 per dollar), as the currency dollar was
down to 1/10; at which price the goods
were purchased, the difference in the ex-
change made a considerable difference to
the profit on the transaction. In 1869 Mr.
Graves visited England in company with
the late Sir Thomas Elder, and succeeded
in considerably extending his mercantile
operations. On his return he was em-
powered to establish the South Australian
Land, Mortgage and Agency Company, and
brought with him £50,000 for that pur-
pose. He was joined in this enterprise by
the late Hons. W. Morgan and Alexander
Hay. It is a sad coincidence that the
founder and first manager of that Company
Mr. Morgan Hawkes, should have died
during the same week as Mr. Graves,
Mr. Graves was appointed Provisional
Director of the National Bank of Austral-
asia in 1858, and was the first Chairman of
that institution. He retained office as a
Director of the Bank for about 20 years, and
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


Robert and Anne Stephenson
(Grandchildren of Thomas Graves)
occupied a seat on the London Board dur-
ing his visit to England. He was also for
some years a Director of the Burra Burra
Mine, and has been one of the Trustees of
the Savings Bank since March, 1862, also
a Director of the Adelaide and Suburban
Tramway Company. He was a member
of the Adelaide Hospital Board for nearly
20 years, and was Chairman for a consider-
able time. lie left that office in conse-
quence of the political interference which
will ever be viewed with deep regret, if
not with more poignant feeling, and the
worry connected with the incident greatly
affected his health. Shortly after he came
back from England as already related Mr.
Graves retired from the mercantile busi-
ness. He then turned his attention to
pastoral pursuits, and was associated with
the late Mr. Hay and Mr. S. Newland in
ownership of the Marra Station on the
Darling and the Talyealye Station in the
Parra River district. He was also largely
interested in the Glenelg Railway Company
and was Chairman of the Board of Direct-
ors up to the time when the railway was
taken over by the Government. Mr.
Graves was a prominent member of Stow
Memorial Church, and always took a practi-
cal interest in religious and philanthropic
movements. He left a widow and a family
of two sons, Thomas and Walter, and three
daughters.
Mrs. Graves, nee Grossc was married
to Thomas Graves by the Rev. Quinton
Stow at the Freeman Street Chapel, Ade-
laide.
1 here was a family of seven, Elizabeth,
Henry, James, Sarah, Thomas, Blanch and
Walter, of whom Elizabeth. Sarah and
Walter survive.
1 hoinas Graves, senior, died in 19(X)
at the age of 82 and his wife at the age of
77 years.


f, VI-
m
i I n 9 |i I
[I w . \
I . \ yt: \
j J
The late Christopher Abbott
The late Mrs. Christopher Abbott.
The Abbott Family of Westmoreland, England,
Canada and Australia.
To do justice to the history of the
family here recorded, the historian is faced
with a particularly difficult task. Their
activities have been of such value to the
communities in which they have resided,
and have been so widely-spread, that con-
siderable space would be required to cover
the entire biographies. We have therefore
adopted the method of quoting from news-
paper articles, which have appeared from
time to time, in different parts of the world
and have then finished with a few notes
pertaining to the individual members of the
family in this country since the establish-
ment of the Australian branch in the year
1851.
We start with the late Sir John C.
Abbott, former Prime Minister of Canada.
The following clipping from a Vancouver
newspaper is self-explanatory:—
“The late Sir John C. Abbott was one
of the Dominion’s leading statesmen, and a
very eminent jurist. He was a graduate of
McGill University. He was returned to
the Canada Assembly in 1859 for his native
County of Argenteuil, and retained the seat
up till Confederation, when he was returned
to the Dominion House of Commons. He
retired from politics from 1874 to 1880,
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


■ 3BOTT ' T G ABBOTT
Jjji?' . , u "^^ eic S| Ef
,* if Jv ’ • \ <•'
-«•■“ — ■! "” ' ‘ Y |lli|
H ’■', , , > , ; Mf JSH^Br
Mrs. ELLA LALOR ■*• *■*■ ABBOTT
k K
Councillor JOHN ABBOTT, , r HUGH ABBOTT
FOUN D E R S O F AU S 'l' R ALT A.


when he was again returned for his old con-
stituency. On the death of Sir John A.
McDonald on the sixth of June, 1891, he
was called upon to form a new Cabinet,
which he did, and presided over the desti-
nies of the Dominion for several years in a
most judicious and careful manner . . . .
He refused the high honour of a Chief
Justiceship for private reasons . . In 1892
he was created a K.C.M.O. by the late
Gucen \ ictoria for his public services to the
Empire. He passed away on the thirtieth
day of October, 1893.
So much for one illustrious branch of
this fine old English family. We now move
on to another who, even though he did not
1 each the elevated position in life that w T as
the rewards of the above-named citizen,
nevertheless attained a position of esteem
and respect second to none in the com-
munity among whom he lived, The extract
is from the “Penrith Observer” England,
dated August 12th, 1904.
A Notable Westmoreland School Boy.”
It is rather sad to reflect that the
memory of a schoolmaster is sometimes
buried in oblivion, whilst the memory of
some of his gifted pupils is handed down to
posterity in golden letters. The death of
another Birmingham ‘Old Boy’ emphasises
the truth of this truism. Canon Freer, of
Sutbury, sometime Archdeacon of Derby,
. . . was a noble benefactor of Church
work in Birmingham . . . The fact may be
new to some local readers that, at St.
Edwards School, Birmingham, Canon Freer
as a boy was a pupil of the Rev. John
Abbott, a Westmoreland man, and an
exceedingly able schoolmaster ... a near
relative of the late Thomas Abbott, of
I hornwaite Hall, who was famed far and
wide for his genial company and his
ungrudging hospitality. Other and more
famous pupils of Mr. Abbott’s were Arch-
bishop Benson, of Canterbury, and the two
foremost scholars of the day ; Bishop Eight-
foot, of Durham, and his successor in the
same See, Bishop Westcott . . . the above
four by no means exhaust the list of celeb-
rities who had come under his tuition. Some
of Hampton's famous sons have their names
enshrined in monuments —not so Mr.
Abbott, we believe, but no matter:
‘Can storied urn, or animated bust,
hack to it s mansion call a fleeting breath.’ ’’
The late Reverend John Abbott, M.A.,
I ellow of J embroke College, Cambridge,
mathematical master at King Edward the
Sixths hiee Grammar School, Birmingham
was a grandson of one Thomas Abbott, of
1 hornwaite Hall, Westmoreland, and an
uncle of the Powley and Christopher Abbott
who first settled in Australia and whose
history appears at a later stage of this
recoi d. A\ e now pass on once again to the
late Powley Abbott of Bung Bong, Victoria,
w ho, together with his brother Christopher,
founded the Australian section of the
family. The cutting is from the “Avoca
hiee 1 ress of Victoria, and bears out the
old adage that “what is bred in the bone
comes out in the flesh”:—
1 he late Air. Powley Abbott, whose
lamented death, at the age of /9 vears, was
referred to in our last issue, was born at
Thrimby Grange, Westmoreland, his
famih being a ery old and well-known one
in the County named. He came to Vic-
toria in the year 1851, and for a few years
followed mining pursuits at Bendigo,
Beechworth, Tarrangower, and Homebush
. . . \\ hen Mr. Abbott landed on \ ictorian
soil, the spots upon which our principal
cities and towns are now established were
settlements with the habitations construc-
ted almost entirely of canvas. Air. Abbott
did not make mining his sole occupation,
and about fifty years ago he determined to
settle on the land which he acquired at
Bung Bong, where he has resided ever
since, being engaged in farming and graz-
ing. For twelve years he was a member of
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


the Avoca Shire Council which body
honoured him by electing him to the office
of President on two occasions. He was a
Justice of the Peace for many years, and
occupied a seat on the local bench on the
day prior to his death. The deceased
gentleman was widely known and highly
esteemed by a large circle of friends, who
deeply sympathise with the bereaved
widow and family ...”
Our next extract brings us to the
fifteenth day of September, 191 a, when we
once again quote from the Canadian section
as appears in the Montreal “Daily Star. : -
Harry B. Abbott, Railway Pioneer,
Dies at Vancouver.
“One of the most successful Engineers
in the Dominion. Harry Braithewaite
Abbott, C.E., well known as the first general
superintendent of the Canadian Pacific
Railway at Vancouver, and one of the most
successful engineers in Canada, died yester-
day afternoon after a brief illness at the
age of 86. He was a younger brother of
the late Sir John Abbott, K.C.M.G., third
Prime Minister of Canada. . . . Mr. Abbott
was a veteran of the Canadian Militia and
assisted in the raising of the Argenteuil
Rangers, Quebec .... he retired from the
regiment with the rank of Major . . .
And now, for the last time, we change
our situation back to Australia. I he late
Christopher Abbott, already named in these
lines, was a native of Schapp, Westmore-
land and, in the year 1851, came to Victoria
to join the firm of Connell, Hogarth and
Company, Melbourne, where a friend of his
was already engaged. However, having
taken up his duties with this firm, he, like
so many thousands of others, was claimed
by the gold rush fever and decided to try
his luck on the diggings. In this direction,
it is of interest to record that, although
travelling to the diggings, he promised the
firm he would return on demand to assist
them in a law-suit in which they were
engaged. This promise he fulfilled by
walking from Maryborough to Melbourne
in two days, a task which would be under-
taken by but few in order to fulfil a promise
of such a nature.
Following the completion of the law-
suit, however, he returned to Maryborough
and decided to enter the business world in
preference to persevering with the mining
activities. He therefore established himself
as a carrying contractor —incidentally pay-
ing the sum of one hundred and ten pounds
for a horse and dray —and commenced
carrying from the mines to the crusher, for
which he received one pound per load and
was able to carry twenty loads a day.
His next move was to purchase about
two thousand acres of land at Bung Bong
(such name meaning a plain and a creek)
where he spent the balance of his life im-
proving and stocking the property, and
adding other acreages to his possessions.
His death occurred in the year 1891 and he
was one of our true pioneers in every sense
of the word. FTis demise was followed
exactly one week later by that of his widow,
at the age of forty-nine years.
The late Mr. Christopher Abbott mar-
ried Miss Agnes Gordon, of Castle Douglas,
Southern Scotland, and to their union there
was a family of five sons and one daughter
of whom particulars, in brief, follow: —
Thomas. Educated at Maryborough
College, of which he became dux. Although
intended for a civil engineer, the loss of an
eye forced a change of plans and he entered
the Government Service. Tie married
Georgina, a member of an old Ballarat
family in Miss Montgomery, who died in
the year 1933. Of his career, cut short at
the comparatively early age of fifty-nine


years, an excellent insight may he obtained
from the following extracts from the
“Korumhurra Times” dated August 29th,
BH3, and further comment is unneeded: —
the sudden death of Mr. T. G.
Abbott, Clerk of Courts, this district has
sustained the loss of another of its highly
esteemed public men. . . Mr. Abbott was
hi ought up near Ballarat, and has been
stationed as Clerk of Courts at various
places between Hamilton and Yarram.
Always a student of \ ictorian history, he
B‘id tund of valuable pioneering reminis-
cences, and possessed a wide knowledge of
life in the early days of Ballarat, the
Western district, and Gippsland. His first
farming venture in this district was the
purchase of land at Strezlecki, which was
managed for him by Mr. E. Jenkins. After-
wards he bought a home which he has since
occupied from the late Mr. A. Radovick
The local Masonic and Mark Masonic
Lodges deplore the loss of an old and highly
respected member . . . who was the reci-
pient of Grand Lodge honours. The late
Air. Abbott was a live member of the Agri-
cultural Society, being one of its ablest
committeemen, one of its guarantors, and
always a liberal donor to the prize fund . .
i'rom the point of view of a private citizen,
bis death is deeply regretted by a host of
personal friends. His tolerant and charit-
able disposition was well-known although
Mr. Abbott belonged to that rare class of
philanthropists who are content to “do good
by stealth” ...”
The second son, Christopher Gordon
was born at “Rock Lea ”, Bung Bong, on the
twenty third day of May, 1866, and died on
the twenty-second day of December, 1934.
Following the death of his father, he carried
on the management of the home property
at Bung Bong for his brothers and sister for
about fifteen vears, when he sold out and
went to W'agga, New South Wales, and
bought a property of his own. He later
transferred to Junee, where he carried on
mixed farming, wheat growing and grazing
and met with considerable success. In 1920
he again sold his holdings and retired to live
at Melbourne, where he remained for a few
years, However, he found the call of the
kind too strong to allow him to live quietly
and he took up a block in the Moulemein
distiict in New South Wales, for grazing
purposes. Like his relatives, he betrayed
a most charitable trait of character and the
description of his elder brother could well
be atti ibuted to him. He was referred to
as one of “Nature’s gentlemen” by many
who had claimed the privilege of friendship
with him. He was married twice. The
first being to Miss Elwood, by whom he
had three daughters, and, subsequent to her
death, he married Miss Rickev, of Dean,
who now resides at 50 Guildford Road.
Surrey Hills, \ ictoria.
The third son, Councillor John Abbott,
J.l ~ mai i ied Miss Griffiths of Dandenong,
and to their union there has been a family
of five children in Arthur Gordon—who is
now a Doctor in Western Australia; Chris-
topher John, who is in business at Ferntree
Gully; Wallace, who died at the age of
twenty-five years; Jean-now Mrs. G. R.
Cussen (Mr. Cussen is a son of Doctor
Cussen) of Pakenham; Gwenda is in
residence with her parents at “Thrimby”,
Dandenong.
1 ei taming to the career of Councillor
John Abbott, we may be forgiven for re-
producing yet another extract from the
Press to serve as enlightenment in this
direction. The “South Bourke and Morn-
ington Journal” of September 12th. 1918
refers to him as follows:


“Councillor John Abbott, J.P., who, at
the last meeting of the Dandenong Shire
Council was appointed President for the
ensuing twelve months, is to be congratu-
lated. This is the second occasion on which
Councillor Abbott has occupied the Presi-
dential chair. Born at Bung Bong, near
Avoca, Cr. Abbott was educated at the local
State School and the Avoca Grammar
School. He started a commercial career in
the warehouse of Messrs. E. Stevenson and
Sons, Flinders Lane. With the intention
of entering the Law Department, he con-
tinued studies with a view to entering that
profession, but a tempting offer induced him
to remain at the warehouse until 1893, when
he entered the retail business, and soon
established a profitable store-keeping busi-
ness at Dandenong, and afterwards opened
branches at Mirboo North, Dalyston, Won-
thaggi, and Mentone, the last of which, with
Archie’s Creek, he still continues, and is
also engaged in farming with a considerable
area in the Dandenong district. He has
been identified with almost every local
public movement, and was one of the
founders of the Dandenong branch A.N.A.,
and is its second President. He has been
a Shire Councillor and Water Trust Com-
missioner since 1910, and was President of
the Dandenong Shire in 1912-13. He has
always taken a keen interest in political
matters and was prominent in the Kyabram
Reform Movement, and a member of the
People’s Party since its inception. He
was elected a member of the executive of
that body in 1914 and was unanimously
elected president at the 1915 conference. He
is a member of the local Patriotic League,
and is a citizen with a dominating desire to
promote the interests of his country and the
Empire.
We now come to the fourth son of the
late Christopher Abbott. This is Mr. James
Gordon Abbott who was born on the tenth
day of September, 1876. He received his
education at the local State School, Scotch
College and Maryborough Grammar School
and spent six years as a wool sorter with
1). &W. Gibb and Co. of Melbourne. He
was then for six years with Messrs. Grif-
fiths Brothers, and for yet another period
of six years had a store at Mirboo North.
Since those days, however, he has had
twenty years in the service of the Mel-
bourne Steamship Company at their head
office in Melbourne. Mr James Gordon
Abbott married Miss Alice Allenby, daugh-
ter of the late John and Elizabeth Allenby,
of Bendigo. . . and the latter family takes
pride from their history as being a long line
of sea Captains through many generations.
The fifth son, Mr. Hugh Abbott of
Addington, Victoria, was born in the year
1878 and received his education at Bung
Bong where he was sitting for a scholar-
ship at the age of but twelve years of age
when the tragedy of his father’s death
occurred, and he returned to the family
property and assisted in the running there-
of. remaining at Bung Bong until he reached
his twenty-first year. He then journeyed
to New Zealand where he remained with
cousins for a short time and then returned
to this State and bought a portion of the
famous Ercildoune Estate. After four
years he sold out and went to Wagga
Wagga where he remained for about two
years. In 1912 he purchased his present
very fine property “Rockvale”, near Lear-
month where he mostly concentrated on the
wool industry. Mr. Hugh Abbott married
Miss Isobel Powell Wilson, of North Brigh-
ton. daughter of the late Thomas and Ellen
Wilson. The only daughter—lsabella
Mary—is now Mrs. V. S. Lalor of 7 Hilda
Crescent, Hawthorn.
In concluding this somewhat brief
sketch of the Abbotts of Westmoreland,
Canada and Australia, we feel justified in
pointing to the lines herein as an effective
reply to those few cynics who claim that
“Australian families have no history.”
They have amply fulfilled their destiny
among the “Founders of Australia and their
Descendants.”


|k A
Late Joseph Monkhouse
Late Mrs. Joseph Monkhouse
The late Mr. John Johns of Brighton, and
The late Mr. Joseph Monkhouse.
To one who is capable of reading be-
tween the lines, the brief histories con-
tained herein can furnish an insight into
the conditions with which our early families
were confronted whilst doing their part in
the undertaking of building the foundations
of what has since grown into the City of
Melbourne.
The late Mr. John Johns, a native of
Cornwall, arrived in this State in the year
1848 accompanied by his wife Anne and
took up residence in Bourke Street, Mel-
bourne. In 1851 he invested in a block of
land in Brighton, from the late Mr Nicholas
Were, and proceeded to clear and cultivate
such land. Ihe family took up residence
on the block and ultimately settled their
permanent home thereon.
Their family consisted of eight child-
ren of whom the third child, Ellen, who was
born whilst they were still living in Bourke
Street, became Mrs. Joseph Monkhousc.


Her husband was a native of Liverpool,
England, and had landed in Melbourne in
1861, aboard the “Samerang." Following
a brief experience in the business world of
Melbourne, he, for health reasons, pur-
chased a block of land from his father-in-
law —Mr. Johns —and in 1888, founded the
business which is in the family to the pre-
sent day.
Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Monkhouse had a
family of ten children, nine of whom sur-
vive to-day—the second son Arthur, was
born in Brighton and entered the family
business from the start of his career. He
ultimately purchased the entire under-
taking, including the freehold property,
from his father, and has carried on to the
present day.
The late Mrs. Ellen Monkhouse died
in the year 1885. whilst her husband sur-
vived her bv forty-seven years, ultimately
passing away in the year 1932. Both Mr.
and Mrs. Joseph Monkhouse were recog-
nised as enthusiastic and sincere workers
on behalf of the Primitive Methodist
Church, Brighton. They arc true members
of one of our oldest families in the business
community of Greater Melbourne. Mr.
Arthur Monkhouse married Miss Carrie
Johnson, of Bendigo, and to their union
have been four children in :
Aleyne, married Miss Beryl Christie of
Brighton. There are four children in lan,
Betty, Arthur and Merle. Mr. Aleyne is
associated with his father in the family
business.
Norman married Miss Vickie Greaves
of Malvern. There are two children,
Norma and Donald. Mr. Norman is also in
the family business.
Howard, and . . .
Hilda (Mrs. L. Sullivan of Lyndhurst)
who has two daughters. Barbara and Nita.
The late Thomas Elliott of Shelford and Bamganie
The family here recorded have, for
more than eighty-five years past, been out-
standing for the services on behalf of the
communities among whom their lot has been
cast. The late Thomas Elliott—a native of
Kent —was born in the year 18.10 and, on
reaching the age of responsibility, adopted
the trade of a stonemason. In the year 1850
he decided to make the journey to the new
land of Australia, and it was during the
journey that he met Miss Ellen Ivey—-a
native of Tottenham, Middlesex —who was
destined to become his wife on the four-
teenth day of December, 1852.
The young newcomer brought out from
the old country his kit of tools and, imme-
diately on his arrival in his home by adop-
tion, commenced travelling round the vari-
ous station properties in the Ecigh Shire
and the Western District, accepting work
as and when it became available. This
state of affairs lasted for but a brief period
however, for he then decided to set up in
business at Shclford as a contractor and,
from this point onwards, he met with such
success that he became recognised as one of
the leading citizens of the district. During
the following years, he erected a great mam
bridges and built many roadways. It
should be particularly mentioned that he
built a fine bluestone residence for himself
at Shclford which stands to-dav in as good
a state as when erected, one large room
being used for many years as a courthouse
by the authorities.
In the middle eighties of last century
the late 1 homas Elliott retired from the
contracting and his eldest surviving son —


, ” ,,, '^l|
RSHH8HI ■'****•
JliilliMMk •».. : w
LFv
T... ...I THOMAS El.LIOTT r . . ,' _ T
t l " G EI.UOTT ,. || T»» i»>i GEO. M.;NAUOHTOH
— - ■• |— .
Edwin —continued to carry on in his stead,
and with his plant, under the fine guidance
of the late C. A. C. \\ ilson —Shire engineer
of the Leigh Shire Council.
In the meanwhile, the father selected 320
acres in his own name, and twenty acres in
the name of each of his five children, at
Bamganie, where he built another fine home
named “Woodleigh,” and he then proceeded
to take up sheep grazing and kindred acti-
vities. In spite of his active career in the
business world, however, he yet found time
for exceptional services on behalf of the
Meredith Shire Council, of which bodv he
was an honoured member for no less than
thirty years prior to the amalgamation of
the Bannockburn and old Meredith Councils.
Lor at least two or more terms he served in
the Presidential Chair and he was the
‘father” of the Council at the time of his
leath under somewhat tragic circumstances.
This occurred very suddenly on the Mere-
lith railway platform whilst he was await-
ing a train in the year 1916, after having
'cached the age of eighty-six.
From the union of the late Mr. and Mrs.
1 homas Elliott there was a family of five
sons and four daughters of whom: —
Air. Geoffrey Elliott, the youngest son.
was born at Shelford on the eleventh day of
January, 1875, and was educated at Shel-
ford and Bamganie. Until the death of his
father he assisted in the contracting busi-
ness and then purchased a portion of the
family estate at Meredith, where he has
resided to the present time. Geoffrey
undertook grazing pursuits on his 1200 acres
property and, in 1916, accepted an invitation
to take over the vacancy, caused by his
father’s passing, on the Bannockburn Shire
Council. He has occupied his seat at the
Council table to the present time. He was
President of the Shire during the 1922-3 and
1934-5 terms, and it is safe to claim that no
member of the community is more respected
—and justifiably so —than Mr. Geoffrey
Elliott. This can be the more readilv under-
stood from the following facts: —


For some years past he has been Presi-
dent of practically every sporting body in
the shire, including the football and cricket
clubs; the “Back to Meredith 1933’’ move-
ment —which raised a large sum of money
for public purposes, the Trustees of the
Meredith Recreation ground, Chairman of
the Cemetery Trust, the Weighbridge Com-
pany, President of the Hospital Committee
and the Leigh Cricket Association compris-
ing five clubs whose team was successful in
the country week association in Geelong
1935, and were runners-up in the 1936 com-
petitions. In fact, it may truthfully be
claimed that for some years past Mr. Geof-
frey Elliott has been regarded as one of the
most important citizens in the entire Ban-
nockburn Shire. In the year 1922 he was
paid the compliment of being appointed a
Justice of the Peace, and again in the year
1935 he was honoured by the presentation
of the King’s Medal.
It is typical of the blood of our early
pioneers that a son should so worthily fol-
low in the paths laid down by his father
before him.
Mr. Geoffrey Elliott married Miss Mar-
garet McNaughton in the year 1905. Mrs.
Elliott was the eldest daughter of the late
George and Jessie McNaughton of “Glen
Spean”, Cargarie, another of our old pioneer
families concerning whom a brief account
would be appropriate in these lines. Both
Mr. and Mrs. McNaughton were from In-
verness, Scotland. He was but thirteen
years of age at the time of the journey in
the year 1830 whilst his future bride was
but six . . when she was brought out by
her parents in the year 1853. Both the
families settled at Inverleigh and had been
friends in Scotland prior to coming to Aus-
tralia. The father of Mr. George
McNaughton set up in business as a black-
smith, and Mr McCallum settled on the land.
Mr. George McNaughton later selected at
Cargarie—later named the “Glen Spean”
Estate—from the river Spean in Inverness
and the Glen in the same locality. Both the
McNaughtons and McCallums were sec-
tions of the Cameron clan. “Glen Spean”
constituted the home of the McNaughton
family through many years and, in addition
to grazing and the usual dairying pursuits,
became known for miles around for the par-
ticularly fine cheese made on the property.
Mr. George McNaughton had a great deal
in common with the Elliott family insofar
as civic life was concerned. He was a
member of the old Meredith Shire Council
for thirty years and, on his retirement, was
presented by his fellow councillors and the
district with a beautiful silver tea and
coffee service as a token of appreciation.
He also occupied the Presidential Chair in
the year 1881, 1887, 1892 and 1893. _ (In
passing, it should be mentioned that his son,
Alexander George McNaughton, was also a
Councillor but retired when the amalgama-
tion of the two Councils took place). Mr.
George McNaughton was a man known for
his sterling qualities and abilities which he
at all times placed unreservedly at the ser-
vice of his fellow citizens. The late Alex-
ander McCallum —the maternal grandfather
of Mrs. Geoffrey Elliott —was also a Coun-
cillor of the Shire for the years 1880-1888,
and resigned in the latter year, whilst her
uncle John D. McCallum served from the
vear 1900 to 1917 and was President for the
vears 1904-5, 1915-6, and was also a Justice
of the Peace. Reverting to the late George
McNaughton, this gentleman died at the age
of 72 in the year 1909 and his wife at the age
of 50 in 1897. 'There was a family of eight
children to their union who reached
maturity.
Before bringing to a close these lines
concerning more than one of our fine old
pioneer families, it should be placed on re-
cord that the present Mrs. Geoffrev Elliott
has for many years ably stood by the side
of her husband in the many calls on their
time for services to the people of the Mere-
dith Shire —and others. In addition to the
esteem of those with whom she is brought
into intimate contact, she was the recipient
of the British Red Cross Service Certificate
and complimentary reference is made to her
work in the Meredith Branch Brochure.
Her organisation ability is known wherever
her efforts have been directed and she has
become recognised as a worthy helpmate
for her husband, who has done so much for
the district.
Mr. and Mrs. Geoffrey Elliott are in
residence at “Home Leigh,” Meredith.


The late Dr. C. Burke-Gaffney, J.P
Ihe late Doctor Charles Burke-Gaffney, J-P,
F.R.C.5.1., F.K.0.C.P.1., M.R.C.S.E., L.M.C.P., etc.
To all rules there are a few exceptions
—and this accepted maxim is applicable to
the present publication no less than to other
undertakings throughout the world. The
primary object of the present Work is to
serve as a historv of the early pioneers of
Australia both in primary industry,
secondary industry, the business world and
the professions. However, in a compara-
tively few instances we meet a history con-
cerning a citizen which was so outstand-
ingly valuable to the community of his day
that we feel no complaint could possibly be
heard in reference to its inclusion in this
Work.
Such an one is the present, for the late
Doctor C. Burke-Gaftney was an excep-
tional citizen in many respects, and left
behind him a name and reputation still
accorded the utmost respect and esteem
wherever he was known. We therefore
take licence to place on record herein his
early years prior to coming to Australia —


in addition to his subsequent career in
Bendigo and surrounding districts.
Born in the city of Dublin, Ireland, in
the year 1855, the late Doctor was a son of
Mr. Edward Gaffney, P.E., who was an
honoured Civil Servant in that city and
occupied the position as Chief Commis-
sioner of the General Government Land
and Survey Department of Ireland —such
position being one of importance and
dignity. In all, there was a family of
thirteen childen —seven sons and six
daughters. Of these, four sons were
members of the medical profession, whilst
the remaining three held high official
appointments as civil engineers. It might
well be mentioned that one brother was for
twenty-one years in the medical service of
the Indian Army with the rank of Lieu-
tenant-Colonel.
Up to the age of twenty-one yeans, the
late Doctor C. Burke-Gaffney received his
general education in Dublin, and in 1876 he
devoted his future exclusively to medical
science and commenced duties at the Royal
College of Surgeons, Ireland. In the
course of his studies for his diplomas, he
consistently passed each of his examina-
tions with first-class honours, and, from
that point onward, undertook some import-
ant offices.
He was appointed Demonstrator of
Anatomy at the Ledwich School of Medi-
cine, and, rising, was appointed Lecturer
on Anatomy at the Ledwich School of
Medicine and Surgery. His next upward
step was as Lecturer on Surgery at the
Carmichael College of Medicine. About
this stage of his career, he decided to enter
private practice but found that, although
successes seemed to come to him with little
effort, he could not escape the demand for
his services in various institutions. Follow-
ing such demands, he was honoured in the
appointment as surgeon to the world-famed
St. Vincent’s Hospital at Dublin. In addi-
tion to his other duties, he occupied that ol
Deputy-Coroner for the City of Dublin and,
in that position, received the very highest
praise from the Coroner —Dr. Nicholas C.
Whyte —and the general public, amongst
whom his abilities were most widely recog-
nised. Following a few years in his posi-
tion at St. Vincent’s Hospital, the Doctor
decided to make a bid in the young land of
Australia which, by this time, was looming
in the Old Country as the land of future
prosperity and present opportunities. In
the year 1895 a publication named “Bendigo
and Vicinity” made its appearance in Vic-
toria, and we take the liberty of reproduc-
ing the following from the pages thereof
concerning the subject of this article for it
gives a most comprehensive outline of his
abilities and attributes in as brief a space
as possible, it reads as follows; —
“ . . Besides these, Dr. Gaffney held
many other diplomas and appointments.
In short they all are; —Fellow of the Royal
College of Surgeons, Ireland; Fellow of the
Royal Academy of Medicine ; Licentiate in
Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons, Ire-
land; Licentiate in Medicine, King and
Queen’s College of Physicians; Licentiate
in midwifery King and Queen’s College of
Physicians; Licentiate in midwifery,
Coombe Lying-in Hospital; late Surgeon of
St. Vincent’s Hospital, Dublin ; Lecturer on
Surgery, Carmichael College of Medicine:
Lecturer on Anatomy, Ledwich School of
Medicine and Surgery; Demonstrator of
Anatomy, Ledwich School of Medicine:
Hon. Lecturer, St. John’s Ambulance Asso-
ciation ; Deputy-Coroner, city of Dublin;
cx-Residcnt Medical Officer, Mercer’s Hos-
pital ; Resident Assistant, Coombe Lying-in
Hospital; Special Certificate, National Eye
and Ear Hospital; Senior First Prizeman in
Surgery, Medicine, Anatomy, Physiology,
etc., Ledwich School; and Senior First
Prizeman in Clinical Medicines and Sur-
gery, Mercer’s Hospital ...”


I erhaps one of the most surprising
aspects of the late Doctor Charles Burke-
(jaffney s career is to be found in the fact
t.at, although he had such an imposing
an ay of qualifications prior to his coming
to Australia, he was but thirtyfive years of
age at the time of his arrival, so that better
understanding of his outstanding abilities
ma\ be appreciated when this fact is taken
into consideration.
It was in the year 1890 that he visited
Bendigo and, being impressed by the dry
and healthy climate, decided to make that
centre his home. He opened his surgerv
in Mitchell Street, whilst his home
"Mcrrimu was adjoining.
A ithin but a few years he had made
ni> mark in his home by adoption both in
his professional career, and in public and
semi-public directions. He was rapidly
accepted as a leader in the medical pro-
fession by both his fellow-practitioners
and the public, and after a brief stay he was
gazetted a Justice of the Peace. He was
Medical Officer for the Strathfieldsaye Shire
Council, a life Governor and member of
the Board of Management of the Bendigo
Public Hospital, Lecturer to the St. John’s
Ambulance Society, and Medical Officer to
the H.A.C.8.5., Bendigo Branch. In addi-
tion to these, he was a member of the Art
Gallery committee and gave considerable
help to various sporting bodies. He was
for some time Judge of the Sandhurst
Racing Club, President of the Sandhurst
Rowing Club, Bendigo Bicycle Club, Ben-
Ago Tennis Club, and Vice-President of
the Bendigo Amateur Athletic Club.
In his professional activities he was
no less prominent and contributed many
articles to various medical and scientific
journals.
In the year 1883 the late Doctor C.
Burke-Gaffney married Mary, daughter of
the late Mr, P. Griffin, a leading stock-
broker of Cork, Ireland, and from this
union there ensued a family of two son>
and one daughter, the particulars of whom,
in brief, follows:
Florence Charles. Born in Dublin,
Ireland, on the Bth August, 1884 and edu-
cated at Xavier College, Melbourne, and the
Melbourne and Sydney Universities at the
latter of which he graduated in 1909. Like
his father, he entered the medical profession
and joined the Royal Prince Alfred Hos-
pital, Sydney, as Resident Medical Officer.
I he year 1911 saw him proceed to Bendigo
as assistant to his father after having gained
his degrees in Medicine and Surgery. From
this onward he was in practice until the
year 1915, when he joined the A.A.M.C.,
and served abroad on active service in
Egypt and Palestine until his return to
Bendigo in 1919.
In 1924 Doctor F. C. Burke-Gaffney
married the widow of the late Mr. J. Hunter
(nee Hosking) of Bendigo.
The second son, Aylmer Edward is
also a member of the medical profession in
Queensland, and, like his elder brother, was
a member of the A.A.M.C. from the year
1916 to the close of the Great War.
Miss Eily Burke-Gaffney is at present
in residence in Tasmania.
To quote the sentiments expressed in
the publication referred to already herein.
Australia has been fortunate in holding
attractions for the class of family as that
here chronicled, and we take pleasure in
including these lines in the present Work,


/ - y -
■«f|4^-? : p .pBpBBBy^
Mr. Alfred E. Wallis.
Mr. Alfred E. Wallis of Bendigo.
It is probably quite safe to claim that
no member of the business community of
Bendigo enjoys a greater degree of esteem
and respect than the subject of these lines,
for Mr. Wallis has made a position of im-
portance for himself by his own initiative
and ability.
Son of the late John and Alice E.
Wallis —who came from Tamworth, Eng-
land, in 1852 —Mr. A. E. Wallis was born
at “Ark Hall”, Lockwood, Victoria, in the
year 1866 and. during the years of his edu-
cation, lived with his parents on their home
estate at Lockwood where dairying, agri-
culture and horticulture were undertaken
with considerable success. However, his
education being finished, the young man
joined the clerical staff of L. Macpherson
& Co., auctioneers, of Bendigo in 1882, and
in the following year joined the firm of
Sternberg Brothers of Rochester, Victoria.
1887 saw him appointed Manager and Auc-
tioneer for Macpherson, Sternberg & Co.,
at Rochester and, yet again were his abili-
ties recognised, three years later, when he
became a partner in the firm of John Wat-
son & Co., of Bendigo.


In the year 1895 Mr. Wallis took the
step which was destined to place him at
the head of his calling in Bendigo, for he
established his own business under the
name of Alf. E. \\ allis «Sc Co., and success
attended his operations through the ensu-
ing years. As Stock, Land and Financial
Agents they opened up branches in many
areas including Newmarket, and his ability
as an auctioneer comparing favorably with
the best, an excellent position in the com-
munity is occupied. In the meanwhile,
Mr. \\ allis had extended his activities in
other directions, including the purchase of
the well-known Mathoura Station contain-
ing over 42,000 acres, where he engaged in
one of the most practical and successful
land settlement schemes undertaken in
Australia. He retained approximately
13,000 acres for fat lamb and wool produc-
tion and settled a large number of farmers
on the balance, after having cut up the area
into convenient blocks suitable for the pur-
pose. There are many prominent citizens
who authoritatively state that this scheme,
if followed by the various Governments of
Australia, would provide an efficient method
of solving many of the Nation’s problems
insofar as primary producers are concerned
... in this, as in many other directions,
Mr. \\ allis has shown an efficient lead to
Victoria.
In 1922 Mr. A. E. W allis retired from
active participation in many branches of
his business and travelled round the world,
visiting many countries and adding to his
ideas pertaining to questions of importance.
It is somewhat surprising to what extent
he has been able to spread his activities,
tor, in addition to those already mentioned,
he, in 1923, erected a large two-storied
hotel known as the “Grand” in the fruit
district of Nyah West which, under his per-
sonal guidance, is one of the most up-to-
date and best-known in Northern Victoria.
Among other directions in which he has
been a leader may be mentioned the fol-
lowing :
Promoter and Managing Director of
I he Alf. K. \\ al lis Finance and Investment
Coy. Pty Ltd.; Director and Co-Promoter
of the Bendigo Lyric Picture Theatre;
Director of the Farmers’ and Citizens’
'1 rustee Company Limited, of Bendigo;
Ex-President Bendigo Base Hospital and
Bendigo Agricultural Society; Chairman of
Directors and principal shareholder of the
Bendigo Auto-Finance Company Ltd., as
also Chairman of the well-known Motor
Service Organisation of Catling Roberts
Pty. Ltd., and owner of Excelsior Washed
Sand Coy., Essendon.
Mr. Y\ allis in his younger days was an
active member of the Rochester Brass
Band for twelve years and has also taken
an active interest in cycling, foot and horse
racing. He was for some years known as
an expert in the breeding and handling of
trotting horses.
In 1899 Mr. Wallis married Miss
Bertha Louise Groening of Bendigo who
died early in the year 1925. In 1926 he
was re-married to Miss Violet Wooltorton
of Eddington. In all Mr. Wallis has two
children in Mr. Alfred Wallis of Melbourne,
and Miss Lorna Mary Wallis of Bendigo.
The home address is “Uralla,” 61 Olinda
Street, Quarry Hill.


The House of Cohn of Bendigo.
We divide the history herein into two
distinct sections, namely, a brief outline of
the family genealogical history of the late
Jacob Cohn and, secondly, a resume of the
progress of the undertakings founded by
he and his brother Moritz.
Taking the latter section, w T e are in-
debted to a trade journal for the following
extracts from their article appearing under
the heading “Historic Houses”
“One of the romances in the trade in
Victoria is the establishment and develop-
ment of the business of the ‘Cohn Brothers
Victoria Brewery Co. Ltd.’ The founders,
Messrs. Moritz and Jacob Cohn arrived in
Melbourne . . from Denmark in 1853 and,
soon after . . . set out for Bendigo ....
Their first venture was to manufacture
Raspberry Vinegar, also Cider from locally
grown apples . . . the brothers decided to
enlarge their premises and built and opera-
ted a general store . . ‘The Commercial’
on Main Road. The late Mr. Jacob Cohn
... a few years after his arrival . . built,
with a partner, the original Criterion Hotel
... on the first official visit to Bendigo of
the then Governor of \ ictoria ( the late
Sir Charles Hotham) and his wife, they
were the guests of Mr. Jacob Cohn ... in
1857 Mr. Cohn in Bridge Street erected the
first brewery in Bendigo . • . and . .later
more land was bought and the premises
extended to cope with the ever increasing
business. At the present time the buildings
cover an area of two acres.
In 1877 Mr. Moritz Cohn died and Mr.
Jacob Cohn continued until 1887 when the
business was formed into a Limited Corn-
pan v . . ‘Cohn Bros. Victoria Brewing Co.
Ltd.’ with Mr. [acob Cohn as Managing
Director and his son Mr. Magnus Cohn as
General Manager. It is interesting to note
that one of the sons, Julius, son of Moritz,
was sent to Germany . . to study Brewing
and, on his return to Bendigo in 1882
brewed the first Lager Beer in Victoria . .
This Lager had a wide sale not only in
Bendigo but also in Melbourne where the
late James Service was the first distributor.
Mr. Jacob Cohn . . . took a keen interest
in Civic and Charitable afifairs . . . and for
three years was a member of the Sandhurst
Borough Council. Later, when Bendigo
attained the dignity of a City, he was
elected Mayor and held office for two
terms. He was also, for many years, a
member of the Committees of Management
of the Bendigo Hospital and the Bendigo
Benevolent Asylum, and was President ol
both the Art Gallery and the Agricultural
Society for a number of years . . his death
occurred in 1911 . . His son, Mr. Magnus
Cohn, succeeded him as Managing Direc-
tor .-. a grandson of Mr. Jacob Cohn,
Mr. Frank Levy, who joined the firm as a
boy, in 1906, is now General Manager ot
the Company, having been appointed to
that position in 1925. In 1925 a merger
was arranged between the Company and
the Carlton & United Breweries Ltd. .. .
Cohn Bros, concentrated on their Vine and
Spirit business and aerated waters and cor-
dials and have a market throughout Vic-
toria.
At the time of the merger, Mr. Magnus
Cohn was elected to a seat on the Board
of Directors of Carlton & United Brewer
ies Ltd., and is now an active member . .
Mr. Max Cohn, son of Moritz Cohn, estab-
lished in 1896 the business . . . now regis-
tered as ‘Max Cohn & Co. Ptv. Ltd.’ Wine
and Spirit Merchants (of 588 Bourke St.,
Melbourne. Ed.) . . he is recognised as


one of the best judges of wines in the
Southern States, and, from 1896 to 1904,
acted as sole judge of wines for the Royal
Agricultural Society of South Australia. It
is mainly due to his careful handling that
the Hocks, Chablis and Clarets, bearing
the Cohn Bros.’ label have been awarded
the highest prizes, not only in Victoria and
New South \\ ales, but at Exhibitions in
London, Paris and Brussels, Messrs. Marc
and Leo Cohn, sons of the late Mr. Julias
Cohn (who died in 1919) are factorv
manager and head brewer at Bendigo; and
manager of the Swan Hill Branch (which
was established in 1923. Ed.) respectively
. . . the Melbourne house is under the
management of Mr. \ ernon Terry, assisted
by Mr. Clifford Cohn, who is Secretary of
the Company. 1 hese gentlemen are
nephew and son respectively of Mr. Max
Cohn.”
During the Great \\ ar, three members
of the third generation of the family in
Australia, Messrs. Leo Cohn, Frank Levy
and Vernon Terry, served with the A.I.F.
from 1914 until the Armistice in 1918.
And so we conclude the section per-
taining to the business side of the present
history. We now deal with the more inti-
mate and private aspect.
I he late Mr. Jacob Cohn married Miss
Rosa Levy, of Horzens, Denmark, and to
this union there was a family of five daugh-
ters and one son as follows;—
Sophia. Married Mr. Norman Howell
of Bendigo and to this union there have
been issue in Blanche, Ruth (now Mrs. I.
Cook of London), Norma (now Mrs. Doctor
Ellis Gillespie of Malvern), and Francis.
Agnes. Married Mr. Waldemar Levy
of Denmark. To this union in turn two
children in Dagmar, of Bendigo, and Frank,
who married Miss Wilmar J. Cohen of
Melbourne. To this last union there are
two children in Rhoda and Richard Xoel.
Magnus. Married Miss Anna Wischer
of Melbourne.
Henrietta. Married Mr. W. S. Calvert
of Melbourne and to the union there have
been two children in Eileen and Leonard,
the last named of whom also served with
the A.I.F. and is now on a propert}' at
Bright.
Blanche. Married Mr. W. H. Sager
of Bendigo, and late of South Africa and
Brisbane. Mr. Sager for many years was
associated with the New Zealand Insurance
Co. Ltd. and, at the time of his retirement,
was General Manager of Australia resident
in Sydney. To the union there are five
children in Harold, Gwen, Jack and Jill
(twins), and Nance. The family is now
resident in Sydnev,
Dagmar. Married Doctor Carl Dvring
of Melbourne. To the union there is a
family of four children in Carl (who is also
a member of the medical profession), Rosa,
now Mrs. N. \\ illiams of the Riverina,
Moya and Patricia.
Before closing, it is worthy of mention
that Mr. Frank Levy, General Manager of
the Company, was a member of the Light
Horse and later the Artillery, during the
Great War and received promotion to the
rank of Major, holding command of a
battery.
In conclusion, it can only be stressed
that the name of Cohn, and the connections
thereof, are held in the highest esteem
throughout the entire State of Victoria and.
most particularly does this applv to Ben-
digo and surrounding areas where the
foundation of the greatness of the family
was originally laid nearly ninetv years ago.


*
The late William Hammill
The late Mary Hammill.
The late William Hammill and his Descendants.
The late Mr. William Hammill was a
native of Liverpool, England, where he
was born in the year 1824. However, be-
fore reaching his maturity, he became a
partner in a firm of merchants trading in
Calcutta, India, and took up his residence
in that city. Here he met and married
Miss Mary Rigmaiden after he had reached
]iis twenty-first birthday.
The newly-married couple were not
fated to remain in Calcutta many years,
for, recognising the opportunities in the
rapidly rising colony of Australia, the late
Mr. Hammill set sail, in the year 1852, with
his wife, four children, and a servant, on
the sailing ship “Colloden”, and brought
with him several tons of merchandise.
The names of the above children were
William, Herbert, Frank and Constance.
Upon their arrival in Melbourne, in the
early portion of 1853, Mr. Hammill took
up residence at Collingwood, which, at that
time, occupied an honoured place as a resi-
dential area. An interesting sidelight on
the conditions pertaining in those days is
thrown by the fact that rents were so
enormous that he paid no less than £-400
as rent for one half of an eight-roomed
house for less than a year’s occupancy.


When coming to Australia, Mr. Ham-
mill brought with him a letter of introduc-
tion to Mr. Alfred Ross, who was in resi-
dence at their home “Clendon”, in Toorak,
which was at that time in the midst of thick
bush with no roads or conveniences of any
kind. During this visit, he learned that a
new wooden house was in course of erec-
tion nearby and forthwith purchased same
together with eleven acres of surrounding
land. This property he named “Spring-
field’’. Like Mr. Ross, he had no con-
veniences whatever, and had to have his
water supplies carted from the Yarra at a
cost of ten shillings for a tankful contain-
ing about five gallons. He therefore had a
well sunk to a depth of seventy-five feet
and thus overcame one of the many difficul-
ties encountered by so many of our pioneer
families.
At a later stage in his career, Mr.
Hammill went into partnership with the
firm of Greig & Murray, auctioneers, of
Melbourne, with whom he remained for the
intervening years to the time of his death
in the vear 1871. Following his demise,
Mrs. Hammill sold “Springfield’’ and moved
to East Melbourne. With her went her three
surviving children —Herbert, Constance
and Edith, the latter having been born at
“Springfield”. Mrs. William Hammill died
in the year 1908 at the age of eighty-two.
Of the above family, Herbert married
Miss Amye Cunningham, daughter of
Hastings Cunningham, and to this union
there accrued a family of two children in
Herbert Reginald Cunningham, and Amye
Doris —the last-named of whom is now
Mrs, George Gordon of “Ellerslie”, Gordon
Street. Toorak, and who, in turn, has three
children in Anne, John Eddington and
Fairlie, whilst Herbert Reginald Cunning-
ham Hammill married Miss Doris Mona
Lucas and there are three children in Suz-
anne Amye, Valorie and Herbert Reginald.
Residence: Herbert Street, St. Kilda.
Constance became Mrs. Herbert Power,
of Toorak, Victoria, and there are five sur-
viving children to the union in Constance,
Gladys, Nora, Reginald and Meta.
Miss Edith Hammill is now the sole
survivor of her generation and is in resi-
dence at “Carinya”, Brookville Road,
Toorak. Miss Edith Hammill has been
prominent in the work of many charitable
organisations and movements in Mel-
bourne for many years past. This trait of
her character was plainly demonstrated
during the Great War when she was a
highly valued worker on behalf of the Red
Cross Society. In addition to her other
activities, she has for many years been an
enthusiastic French scholar and full use
was made of her ability during the V ar in
matters of correspondence with French
soldiers at the front ... to whom she was
particularly good in the sending of news-
papers and hampers.
The Hammill family was one of the
comparatively few who not only came to
Victoria as pioneers of our mercantile acti-
vities, but who also were of immense value
in the bringing of additional —and sorely-
needed —capital to the young Colony.


The Hon Herbert Keck,. M.L.C. of Bendigo
The Hon. Herbert Keck, M.L.C
Before commencing to place on record
the history of the Hon. Herbert Keck and
his forebears in Australia, it is interesting
to report a few facts concerning the out-
standing careers of one or two of his
ancestors in the Old Country.
Firstly, the family can trace its history
back to the fourteenth century when they
transferred their domicile from the North
of Ireland to England. Through the
ensuing three centuries there were several
members who received Knighthoods and
other honours from the hands of their King
and Country for outstanding and meritor-
ious services. Among these may be named
such as Sir Edmond Keck, Sir William Keck
and Sir Anthony Keck. Pertaining to the
last-named, the following extract from the
official work —volume two —entitled “Bio-
graphy of Noted Men of England” is dis-
tinctly of interest and serves to exemplify
the subsequent successes attained by the
present head of the family in Australia for
there is no truer saying than “What is
bred, in the bone comes out in the flesh” :
“Sir Anthony Keck —1630 to 1693.
Commissioner of the Great Seal, fifth son ot
Nicholas Keck of Old Conliffe, Oxfordshire
and Long Marston, Gloucestershire, by
Margaret, daughter of John Morress. Born
at Michileton, Gloucestershire in 1630. He
was admitted a member of the Inner
Temple in 1653. Called to the Bar in 1659
and elected a Bencher in 1677 and Autumn
Reader in 1864, of that Societv. As one
of the chief Barristers of the Court of Chan-
cery he was named on the 4th of March,
1688-9 second Commissioner of the Great
Seal. Sir Maynard and Mr. Serjeant
Rawlinson were the other two. The next
day he was sworn in and knighted. He
held office until May the first 1690, when
Maynard was dismissed. Keck retired.
He was chosen M.P. for Eiverton in 1691 and
died in Bellyard Chancery Lane, 1695 .. .
A man of polite merry genius . . In 1697
there was published anonymously ‘Case
argued and discussed in the High Court of
Chancery from the 12th year of King
Charles I. to the 31st’. A manuscript note
in the British Museum—copy of the work
says that Ward Chief, Baron of the Ex-
chequer, quoted the reports as Keck’s and
states that no doubt they were compiled
from his papers.”
From foregoing, it may well be recog-
nised that the success achieved by the Hon.
Herbert Keck in his career in this country
is a natural sequence from past experiences
of others of his line who have also made
their marks through the history of the
British Empire. The foundation of the
family in Australia was effected by the kite


\\ illiam Keck and his wife who came from
their home in Chippenorten, Oxfordshire, in
1801. In the Old Country he had been in-
terested in the manufacturing industry,
and on arrival here, proceeded directly to
Bendigo where he followed mining and
general pursuits for a short time. How-
ever, he was not fated to see many years
in his new home for he died whilst still a
young man and his widow carried on with
the burden where he left off, insofar as the
rearing of the young family was concerned.
Their young infant son, Herbert, was born
in a tent in the year 1860 and was still but
an infant when his father died. He recei-
ved only a limited education as a result of
having to commence work at an age when
even the least fortunate of our present
generation are still at school but contrived
in some manner to receive training as a
monumental mason. In this direction, as
in everything he undertook in after years,
he excelled, and in 1880 received the award
in this line at the “Geelong Industrial and
Juvenile Exhibition” for “Carving in
Stone”.
However, horticulture was in his blood,
for a brother —James —was a champion
grower of Chrysanthemums and, among
other honours, won the famous Brighton
Cup in Melbourne for two years in succes-
sion. Therefore, more than half a century
ago, having lost his savings in mining in-
vestments, and being left with a total
capital of £l3, Herbert Keck invested £5
of this amount as a deposit on 20 acres of
his present land and spent the balance in
erecting a shell of a two-roomed home. Be
it ever to his credit that he had the pluck
to start thus, notwithstanding he had a
wife and two children as his responsibili-
ties. However, this step marked the com-
mencement of his successful career and
none will begrudge him his laurels.
At the present time his possessions in-
clude several properties in addition to his
home with its magnificent hundred-odd
acres under skilled horticultural develop-
ment. It should be mentioned that the
Hon. Herbert Keck, on his properties at
Elmore and elsewhere, is most successfully
interested in the growing of both tobacco
and citrus fruits. This in addition to the
100 acres of nursery activities. His public
and semi-public services are too numerous
to mention in detail but the following is
typical of the debt owing to this fine citizen :
Mr. Keck was, in 1921, elected to the
Legislative Council with a sweeping
majority as Member for the Bendigo
Province and has retained his seat —unop-
posed—to the present day. He has seen
honorable service under five Governments
—namely Lawson, Hogan, Macpherson,
Argyle and Dunstan —and holds a fine
reputation for his sheer honesty.
At the time of our going to Press, he
has 38 years’ service to the Municipality of
Strathfieldsaye Shire (on the boundary of
Bendigo) to his credit and occupies the
Presidential Chair for his fifth term in such
office —surely a wonderful record!
He is one of the original two Life
Governors, and a Past-President of the
Bendigo Agricultural Society, and, he holds
a special presentation badge from the Girl
Guides for the kindly interest and assistance
he has extended to the movement for several
years . . the presentation having been made
by Lady Somers on behalf of the members.
Of all the honours shown Mr. Keck, he
values this last as highly as any. It is
typical of his character as a clever man
who yet can find time and opportunity to
do good almost by stealth.
In 1882 Mr. Keck married M iss Annie
Pattinson, daughter of the late Thomas
Pattinson, a leading building contractor of
Bendigo and from the union there is a
family as follows who have reached
maturity:—
The late d homas Keck. Annie Prances
Victoria—now Mrs. T. Gibson, of Mel-
bourne. Harry Colcutt of Barham, N.S.W.
Elsie now Mrs. G. Suttie of Barham.
Leslie Thomson of Bendigo. Nellie—now
Mrs. A. D. Cook of Bendigo. Herbert
James of Elmore. Ruby Blanche—now
Mrs. A. Burnett of Annuella, Victoria.
Adelaide Annie —Mrs. A. Rangott of
Pyramid Hill.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


I • I I I
■" v> t *^*!s r '
Me, JOHN CROSER "’ - JHH G 1- <’ ROSER
M KjK .; *insmm -*
Elmp ■•* .jiSi
|Mr^r
: > r- .-. ft'-'v ■HHHHR' i inpl
» mu v
Mrs. G. L CROSER BB Mrs L VV. CROSEP


The Crosers of Rapid Bay,
South Australia.
William Croser with his wife, five sons
and two daughters, arrived in South Austra-
lia in the ship, “Pestengee Bomangee”, in
1851. William Croser was a native of Lon-
don and a cabinet-maker by trade, but on
arrival in South Australia found no opening
for his particular work and, with his eldest
sons, proceeded to the Victorian Gold digg-
ings. On his return to South Australia he
took up land at Yankalilla, and later at
Rapid Bay. This land he farmed until he
retired to Adelaide where he died at the
age of eighty-five. His wife died the
following year.
John, son of William, was born in Lon-
don and when he arrived in South Australia
with his parents was fourteen years old.
He learnt the art of farming on the family
property where he resided until his death.
In 1892 he purchased land in the Wimmera
district of Victoria on which he established
some of his sons. Later he acquired land
at Warooka, Yorke Peninsula. John
Croser married Elizabeth Locke of McLaren
Vale and they had a family of six sons and
six daughters, ten of whom survive.
George Limbert Croser, fourth son of
John, was born at Rapid Bay in 1876, and
received his education in that district. He
then joined his father in farming and later
went to the Wimmera property, where he
staved for some three years, after which he
took over some of his father’s land at War-
ooka, which he farmed until his retirement.
He married Janet Maria Bennett of Dela-
mere, also a member of an early South
Australian pioneer family, and they have
one son, Lindsay Wilfred. During his long
residence at Warooka, G. L. Croser gave
much of his time to public affairs. For
many years he was Councillor of the War-
ooka District Council, and represented that
body on the Yorke Peninsula Hospital
Board. He was a leading supporter and
President of most of the local sporting
bodies, and took a very active part in the
local Agricultural Society. He was par-
ticularly known throughout Yorke Penin-
sula as a judge of sheep. G. L. Croser is a
large land owner and was engaged in cereal
growing and grazing. In 1928 he retired
to live at Glenelg, leaving his son in charge
of the property. The residence erected on
the Warooka property “Barokee,” is con-
sidered one of the most modern on the
Peninsula. The gardens surrounding the
residence at Warooka are renowned for
their beauty and Lindsay Wilfred is a keen
horticulturist and has produced some splen-
did blooms and won many prizes in local
shows.
Lindsay Wilfred Croser represents the
fourth generation of the Croser family in
South Australia. He married Beatrice
Mary McKenzie, daughter of Councillor
Alex McKenzie, of Warooka, thus joining
two pioneer families.
The Crosers throughout their long
association with the State have always been
connected with farming interests, and have
won an honored place in the roll of ‘‘Foun-
ders of Australia”.


% . A ? » jSlFA
*S#- -- *> *~ ai.'
Ift ~yk *4 - |
Standing—Frederick, Arthur, Ernest (dec.), George (dec.)
Sitting—William, late Mrs. W. C. Thomas, late Mr. W. C. Thomas, Elizabeth.
The late William Charles Thomas of Beaufort, Victoria
The career of the late William Charles
Thomas serves as a hue example of the re-
wards accruing to a man possessed of the
attributes of courage, probity, and deter-
mination in the early days of \ ictorian
history. Born in the year 1837 in the
County of Cornwall, England, he came to
South Australia in the year 1844 on board
the sailing ship “Phoebe” in company with
his parents. When the gold rush com-
menced he was one of those who were lured
to the diggings and the family travelled
overland and took part in the rushes at
Forrest Creek, Daisy Hill and other parts.
Records are unavailable as to the degree of
success achieved by his father on the digg-
ings, and the earliest activities on record
as to the son’s career commence with his
entering the service of the late Mr. W.
Cadwallader —a flour miller of Talbot—in
the year 1865. This step led to his starting
in business in the same line in the year
1870 at Beaufort before the railway was
extended beyond Ballarat.
The settlement of the Wimmera in-
duced him to extend his activities to Mur-
toa in the year 1876. On the opening of
the Stawell-Horsham railway line he con-
signed the first truck load of wheat ever
to he sent from Murtoa. Again, later,
when the line from Murtoa to \\ arrackna-
beal was projected, he again showed his
foresight by deciding to erect the first com-
plete rolling mill in the State at the latter
centre.
Again his ability was demonstrated in
his determination to lay out the entire
plant —which he himself imported—accord-
ing to his own plans. In this direction
some slight idea of the magnitude of the
task may be gleaned from the message dis-
covered inscribed on a chip of deal and
evidently written by the consignors which
read: —“May the Lord God help you to
find the pieces, they are all here!’. His
progress was marked during subsequent
years when he was enabled to buy out his


_ ' - _ \ ''■*
Original Mill erected at Beaufort in 1870, with capacity of about
65,000 bushels per annum. Capacity of the present milling plants
being over 3,000,000 bushels per annum.
competitors at both Murtoa and Warrack-
nabeal in addition to erecting and buying
mills at Ballarat, Beulah and Rainbow. By
this time his product was known, not only
in Australia, but in the United Kingdom,
South Africa, Hong Kong and many other
parts of the world.
Once again his thorough business
knowledge and foresight was demonstrated
in the big drought of 1902-3 when he
decided to import several cargoes of wheat
from California and the Argentine and
erected mills at Newport in which to grist
his purchases. For some time he had had
the assistance of his sons in the business and
decided to take them into partnership with
him, and it was then that the present com-
pany came into operation under the name of
“\V. C. Thomas & Sons Pty. Ltd.” and it
is safe to claim that the firm was and is one
of the outstanding and leading milling firms
of the State of Victoria. Notwithstanding
his keen business attributes, he was a man
who won and retained the respect and
affection of all his employees and this is
amply borne out by the fact that several of
the latter were with him up to nearly half
a century. He was also the first to in-
augurate the eight hour dav in the industry
in Victoria, whilst the wages paid through-
out his mills were accepted by the first
wages board of the trade as a standard. It
is rather extraordinary that a man with such
a successful career should have found time
for activities in other directions than his
business. Nevertheless he was more than
a successful business man —he was a fine
and outstanding citizen. During his resi-
dence at Murtoa, a widely-supported peti-
tion was presented to him asking that he
should accept nomination for the Legislative
Council on behalf of the North-West Pro-
vince but, owing to health reasons, he was
compelled to refuse the honour.
He did, however, serve with distinction
for many years as an honoured member of
the Ripon Shire Council and served in the
Presidential Chair for a term. His work
on behalf of the Methodist Church as a
preacher from the year 1861 onwards, and
a committeeman in several directions, re-
sulted in his being recognised as one of the
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


outstanding supporters of that institution.
In another direction his attributes were
also recognised for he was an honoured
Justice of the Peace for upwards of thirty
years.
In the year 1861, the late Mr. William
Charles Thomas married Miss Elizabeth
Summer who, with her parents, came from
their home at Attleborough, Norfolk, in
the "Almora” in the year 1857 and the fol-
lowing is a brief outline of the issue from
this union ;
Mr. William Charles Frederick Thomas
is a member of the firm and is also a mem-
ber and past-President of the Melbourne
Chamber of Manufacturers. He was ap-
pointed to represent the employers of Aus-
tralia at an International Congress at
Geneva and was selected by the Common-
wealth Government to act as Chairman of
the Board controlling the export of Austra-
lian Dried Fruits. For his services he was
created a Commander of the British Empire
(C.8.E.). He is a member of several
Executive Boards of the Methodist Church.
On the death of his first wife (nee Miss
Georgina Hethershaw), he married Miss
Elsie Cook and their home is in Ascot Vale.
The late George Edmund Thomas
married Miss Mabel Johnston and to this
union there is a family of seven children.
Two of his sons, Frederick James and
Stanley George, arc actively connected
with the firm. The late Mr. G. E. Thomas
was the manager of the Newport branch
of the business.
The late Ernest John Thomas married
Miss Irene Muller, from which union there
was a family of two children. He was the
manager of the Ballarat branch of the busi-
ness until his death in 1920.
Councillor Arthur Alfred Thomas, J.P.,
of Essendon, is a Director of the firm.
Married Miss Ivy Schofield. He was a
member of the Essendon City Council for
some years, serving that city as Mayor for
two terms. He resigned therefrom when
he was elected to the Melbourne City
Council, of which he is still a member. Is
an active Freemason and is senior Trustee
of the Freemasons’ Homes of \ ictoria, to
which Institution he presented a pair of
furnished cottages for use of aged Free-
masons.
Frederick James Thomas was in the
service of the Commercial Bank of Austra-
lia prior to joining the firm, of which he is
a Director. He also is a prominent Free-
mason and an enthusiastic bowler, being a
member of the Council of Victorian Bow-
lers. His son, Frederick William, is con-
nected with the firm’s business. He holds
the rank of Squadron Leader in the Citizen
Air Force and has the appointment of Hon.
Aide to His Excellency the Governor of
Victoria.
Mr. F. J. Thomas married Miss Emily
Thomson and the residence is at Toorak.
Miss Emma Elizabeth Thomas, the
youngest member of the family, was born
at Beaufort and resided with her parents
until the time of their deaths at “Almora”,
200 Pascoe Vale Road, Moonee Ponds —at
which address she is still in residence. In
addition to being a member of the family
concerns, Miss Thomas has become well-
known for her efforts on behalf of her less-
fortunate fellows. For fifteen years she
has been Hon. Secretary of the Essendon
Ladies’ Benevolent Society and is a Past-
President of the Essendon Auxiliary of the
Women’s Hospital, in addition to being
\ ice-President of the Victorian Council of
the Benevolent Societies and many other
similar institutions. For the years 1925-7
Miss Thomas was the acting Mayoress for
Essendon. Miss Emma Elizabeth Thomas
has proved herself a worthy descendant of
a worthy father.
The late Mr. W. C. Thomas died in the
year 1919 after having reached the fine age
of eighty-two. His life was an example
to all of what can be achieved by upright,
conscientious living, both in one’s business
and in treatment of others. His career may
be aptly summed up in the old latin motto:
“ ad astra per ardua ”
"To achieve fame in spite of obstacles.”


Ihe late Richard Friswell of Bendigo.
1 he late Richard hriswell, a son of one
William hriswell of Shropshire and Lon-
don a Judge’s Associate, and brother of
James hdain hriswell, a well-known author,
was essentially a student when he came to
Australia in the year 1848 and landed in
Adelaide. Richard had taken courses in
Anatomy and Agriculture prior to leaving
his home and, thereafter, had assisted on
his father’s estate until reaching the age of
twenty-seven, when, in company with the
son of Judge Coombes, he decided to make
for the new land of Australia. His nephew,
Sir Charles Friswell, a great patriotic
worker, lent a fleet of six motor cars to the
Press Conference, and donated many for
use during the Great War.
Lpon arrival, he joined the semi-mili-
tary body of troopers who preceded the
regular police forces of South Australia and,
after a period of service therein, resigned
as a result of the law forbidding marriage
to members of the corps. Following his
marriage he entered the Civil Service in the
Customs House, but after the birth of his
first-born son, resigned his position to come
to the gold diggings at Bendigo and district.
In company with Doctors Hoyle and
Bcetham, he and his family camped where
the present Showgrounds are situated and
later set up his establishment —in tents —-
at White Hills. After several nearly-
profitless mining ventures, he went into
business as a carrying contractor and, in
this direction, made a success of his activi-
ties. His contracts included the supply of
timber fuel to many of the foremost mining
and industrial undertakings in Bendigo and
neighbourhood., He was a well-known
member of the well-remembered volunteer
corp, called “The Old Greys.” For his
public services he was granted 50 acres of
land which he later sold.
Ile next took up land at Grassy Flat,
near \\ hite Hills, and again his judgment
was justified, for he met with success in this
undertaking also. Although he was parti-
cularly thorough in whatever he undertook
he was essentially a student throughout his
career and was known as a quiet unassum-
ing citizen who held the respect of his circle
through the years. The late Richard Fris-
well married Mary Jane Davey of Cornwall,
England, and to the union there ensured a
family of fourteen, nine of whom reached
maturity. Of these, at the present time,
five daughters and one son survive—the
latter being Mr. Harry Hain Friswell of
Bendigo who served in the Boer A\ ar and,
although not permitted to go to the trenches
also enlisted for service during the Great
War. Of the other sons, the late James
Friswell was the second son and was born
at A\ hite Hills and assisted during his earlv
years on his father’s property. Later,
however, he entered the service of the late
Mr. Giddings, a business man of Bendigo.
He later went into business on his own at
Heathcote but subsequently returned to Mr.
Giddings. He invested in land at Axedale
and Huntley but was still in the prime of
life when he died in the year 1906 from
pneumonia and pleurisy. The late James
Friswell married Catherine Hando of Ben-
digo and from such union there was a
family of six sons and five daughters in—
Florence Fidelia, James Richard Charles,
Harry, Eva, Mary, Leonard, Wilfred, Mar-
garet, Leslie, Norman and Laura.
Of this family, Margaret, Eva and
Florence are deceased and each of the sons
are respected members of the business com-
munity of Bendigo. It is also worthv of
mention that at the present time the fifth
generation of this family are resident in
Bendigo.


The late Thomas Walter Busst of Bendigo and his
Descendants.
The family here recorded is not only
one of the pioneer families of \ ictoria but
also numbers in its members one, in parti-
cular, who has made such an outstanding
success of his career that it seems- —from
the reading thereof —that he must have
possessed an abundance of both energy,
ability and determination.
The late Thomas Walter Busst, a native
of the industrial City of Birmingham,
England, was trained in his youth as an
engineer and, on the death of his father —
who was also named Thomas Walter —
came to Australia, in company with his
widowed mother and six other children, in
the year 1854. Upon their arrival in the
tiny township of Melbourne, the family
proceeded to the mining fields of Bendigo
and district. They settled at White Hills,
where the entire family forthwith com-
menced their search for alluvial gold —
which was, at that time, comparatively
plentiful.
However, notwithstanding the suc-
cesses with Which they met, they found
that freight charges, added to the excessive
cost of food and general supplies, were so
heavy that it was practically impossible to
save from their earnings.
Unfortunately, apart from the fact that
the family eventually moved into the grow-
ing town of Bendigo, but little record has
been left of their subsequent activities but
for the following details: —
Charles —married and went to Hunt-
ley, and it was his son who, in later years,
established the Belmont Stud Farm which
has since become well and favorably known
in this State.
Horatio —ultimately married and died
at White Hills.
George—who was of a roving disposi-
tion, travelled throughout the length of
Australia and finally settled down in Mel-
bourne, where he died.
James —went to New Zealand and fur-
ther news of him has been missing through
the following years.
William —married Miss Nellie Pett and
settled in Melbourne. He was a man of
initiative and business ability and was the
originator of the world-famous B. & B wire
mattress which revolutionised the industry.
The “B & B” standing for the initials of
himself and his partner whose name was
Bills. Mr. William Busst died in Mel-
bourne in the year 1935 after having accu-
mulated a very considerable fortune.
Jane —-remained unmarried and was
recognised as a talented musician and tea-
cher. Her school for the pianoforte in
Bendigo was widely attended but she, in
company with her mother, went at a later
period to Melbourne where they were both
destined to pass away.
Thomas Walter—remained in Bendigo
where he became associated with the min-
ing industry and later was appointed In-
spector of Mines for Bendigo and districts.
He won for himself a position of esteem
and trust in the community, besides being
recognised as a keen and intelligent student
of the political needs of the community.
In sporting circles he made his mark in the
sculling and rowing circles of Bendigo and
was a life-member of the Sandhurst Row-
ing Club. Mr. Thomas Walter Busst
married Miss Margaret Kendrick, who was
born at Clonmel, Ireland, and they and
their family for many years resided at
horcst Street. Bendigo. To their union
there was, in all, a family of eleven children
the particulars of Whom, in brief, are
appended hereto:—
1 he late James A\ alter Busst—was in
the 1 reasury, Melbourne and married Miss
Antoinette Helwick. There were two
children to their union.


THE GOLDEN ROMANCE OP AUSTRALIA.
In his capacity of Mining Registrar for the entire
Bendigo Goldfields, Mr. Bu«?st has had pass through
his hands untold wealth during the past years.
In the photographs here reproduced, although only
the proceeds from one mine—the famous “Hercules”
— f ° r wliat amounts to but a few days work, the
value at to-day's ruling prices of the small parcels
' lying before him is approximately seven thousand
fl Just four and three-quartei s hundredweights of EEwl
iHk gold! Most of which came from the ‘Constella. ■H' :
■EHP *| tion” Company at Eaglehawk. At the present fib - ♦ ~j|
* J ■i market value, the above would be worth about
* I ,p| seventy-five thousand pounds sterling. ||||i
11!
-I - - — ■— — _ -=b


Jane Marie —now Mrs. John Driscoll.
The late Mr. Driscoll was a well-known
Estate Agent of Bendigo and there Was a
family of six children to the union.
Horatio St. Vincent—of whom further
particulars follow at a later stage of this
history.
Mary Monica —went to the United
States of America and further details of her
life are thus unavailable.
Thomas Walter —-was, like other mem-
bers of the family, particularly successful
in his chosen field of sport. He held the
Australian Championship for cycling in his
youth. Both he and his wife are at present
in residence in Melbourne.
Patrick John —entered the business
world of Sydney in the coach-building
industry and has now retired. Mr. P. J.
Busst married Miss Ada Holton.
William Augustine—following his mar-
riage—went to Queensland and further
details of his career are now unobtainable.
The other four children —Maude Ame-
lia, Thomas, Margaret and Annie —died in
infancy.
The late Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Walter
Busst, notwithstanding their heavy respon-
sibilities, contrived to give each of their
children a good education and, also, saw
them started in good positions with every
opportunity for successful careers. Mrs.
Busst died in November, 1920, whilst her
husband survived her until September 1924.
Their’s were full and active lives and they
had the satisfaction of leaving the country
of their adoption the better off for the fact
of their residence in the Bendigo district
for so many years.
Of the above family, Mr. Horatio St.
Vincent Busst is the senior surviving
member at the time of our going to Press.
Even more than his relatives in Australia
has he made his presence felt among the
community where he has lived a strenuous
and useful life. Certain it is, that none will
gainsay that his career has been colorful
and for the benefit of all with whom he has
been brought into contact. Whether we
take his experiences in the fields of sport
or the more serious fields of commercial
enterprise we find him a leader of his day
and in his generation.
Mr. H. St. V. Busst was born in
Bendigo in the year 1866 and was educated
at St. Kalian's and the High School,
Bendigo. Following his studies at these
institutions, he was a successful candidate
for the Public Service examinations and,
in the year 1883, entered the Bendigo
A\ arden’s Court. His natural aptitude for
his duties brought rapid advancement, and,
in 1889, only six years from the time of his
entry into the service, he was appointed
Mining Registrar for the entire Bendigo
district. To appreciate the responsibilities
of his position, and for informative reasons
also, it is interesting to give an account of
some of his responsibilities. A Mining
Registrar is the official head of the Alines
Department for the entire territory over
which he rules. He must have an excel-
lent knowledge of mining law and its manv
branches and, what is of yet greater im-
portance, must be gifted with an excep-
tional degree of saving commonsense. The
Registrar is responsible for the drawing up
of all claims, disputes, applications, etc., to
be heard before the Warden’s Court and
without his services in this direction no
case can be heard. The “Mining on Pri-
vate Property Act must also be his special
care and he is responsible that no infringe-
ment shall be committed. In addition to
these onerous duties, he must superintend
the Regulations dealing with Mining
partnerships, work in connection with the
consolidation and framing of by-laws, and
all technical work is within his jurisdiction.
AH the above and scores of other duties
and responsibilities are the task to be faced
by the conscientious Mining Registrar and
the fact that Mr. Busst has occupied such a
position since the year 1883—and still
occupies it is a testimonial in itself which
needs no further comment. This should
and must be taken into consideration with
the fact that his was the Bendigo district,
includes such territory as Eaglehawk,


Heathcote, Kilmore and Rush worth. Per-
taining to his standing in the community
we will have pleasure in reproducing cer-
tain extracts from an historical work pub-
lished in the year 1895 which speak more
clearly and emphatically than any word
composed by the present writer as to his
efficiency, character and popularity. It is
an astonishing thing that a citizen with
such responsibilities as herein enumerated
should find opportunity and spirit for any
activities in the realms of sport. Never-
theless, Mr. H. St. \ . Busst is, in his way,
every whit as surprising in this direction
as in the more serious side of life.
His appearance is that of a typical
athlete and such appearance does him but
justice. In the cycling world, like his
brother Thomas (who won the Austral
\\ heel Race in Melbourne) Mr. H. St. V.
Busst achieved considerable success. He
won many first prizes in his younger
years. In 1889 he won the M.B.C.
Stakes against all the leading cyclists of
Australia. He shone most in the days of
the old “Ordinary”, before the advent of
the smaller and pneumatic-tyred “Safeties”.
In the realms of foot-running also he won
many valuable trophies—more especially
in long distance events. On the water he
rowed number two in three successive
senior fours which won the Sandhurst’s
Rowing Club Regattas, in addition to win-
ning the maiden sculls and other events.
In later years he reached almost equal fame
as a tennis exponent. In the latter direc-
tion, the “Midnight Sun” of May the
twenty-first 1921 he is referred to in most
complimentary terms. In 1900, 1901 and
1502 he won the Northern District Cham-
pionship and in 1915 he first entered for
the Provincial Championship in which he
was successful against all comers—and this
at the age of nearly fifty years! We may
leave his tennis activities with the state-
ment that he won his last Northern District
Championship when he was fifty-five years
of age against competitors of whom he could
almost have been the grandfather!
In 1891 this remarkable man also
entered the field as a pedestrian at Stawell
where ran second to A. Carr in the 440
Yards Handicap in 47 seconds, and two
days later he was also successful in 880
Yards Handicap at the Bendigo Easter Fair
off 17 yards in 2 minutes 3-2/5 seconds. So
much for his athletic career and we will
conclude this side of our story with the
following extract from the article above
mentioned: —“ , . A man with athletic
tendencies in a community is good, but to
combine the serious side of life with sport-
ing is the kind of member wanted. Such
is Busst ...” Reverting to his profes-
sional career, we quote from “Bendigo and
Vicinity” the following:—
“Mr. Busst may be considered a first-
class all round man. Great in the field of
all athletic exercises, which prove the
strength of the body and its perfection, he
also won a place in his profession. This
is as it should be, and the pity is that there
are not more in the world of Mr. Busst’s
stamp. . . . As Mining Registrar Mr. Busst
holds good standing in Bendigo. He is the
centre of a wide circle of friends, who highly
esteem him for his genial and kindly quali-
ties, and his courtesy and urbanity in the
discharge of his official duties have won for
him the goodwill of the public.” What
more need be written of such as he? The
self-same words written more than forty
years ago are every whit as true to-day.
And so we let this aspect rest.
Horatio St. Vincent Busst married
Miss Dorothy Woodward, daughter of the
late Thomas Woodward—a prominent
mining investor of the Bendigo district.
To their union accrued a family of one
daughter and one son in Miss Phyllis Busst
and Mr John Busst, both of whom reside
in Melbourne.
It is pleasing to be able to place on
record that Mr. Busst has achieved success
in his business career on a corresponding
basis to all other sides of his life and this
is as it should be. Many of his fellow-
citizens in Bendigo have commented on the
fact that this history of Bendigo prominent
citizens would indeed be incomplete with-
out a comprehensive account of the life of
Mr. Horatio St. Vincent Busst.


'W ' I
UBi'
KpFg? . .—.,
«* ■»
The late Crawford Molhson
The late A. F. Mollison.
The late Alexander Mollison, Pioneer and Overlander
and
The late Crawford Mollison, Pioneer and Public Servant.
1 he name of Mollison is undoubtedly
linked with the true pioneering of Austra-
lia both as Public Servant, Overlander, and
Pastoralist. Going back to 1802, when one
Crawford Mollison married a Miss Eliza-
beth Fullerton and took up residence at
St. John’s Wood, London, there ensued a
family of seven children —Alexander Ful-
lerton, Patrick, Jane, James, William
Thomas, Crawford and Elizabeth.
A ith the exception of James, all the
above-named sons came to the almost
unknown land of Australia. Patrick must
have attained considerable success as a
doctor whilst still but a young man, for he
was Physician to the Governor of New
South \\ ales, and had only reached the age
of twenty-six years when he died at Port
Macquarie in the year 1834. The eldest
son, Alexander Fullerton arrived in Svdney
in May 1834 and, prior to this, had spent
some time in Jamaica and New York,
U.S.A.
In 1836 he visited Port Phillip—travel-
ling by way of Hobart, Tasmania, which
was the accepted route at that period,
hollowing his return to Sydnev he pur-
chased a run—“Uriara”—on the Murrum-
bidgee River in the same year.
However, being impressed by the re-
port furnished by Major Mitchell pertain-
ing to “Australia Felix”, he, in April 1837,
left “Uriara” in search of a suitable run in
the new territory. He took along with him
on his journeying 3,000 sheep, 634 cattle. 28
working bullocks, 22 horses, 49 servants
and two overseers. It is a sidelight on
those da\ s that portion of these servants
wcie ticket-of-leave’ men, whilst some
were old hands who were almost valueless
to him in his perilous venture and allowed
cattle and other livestock to stray. During
these months of travail, the late' Mr. A. F.
Mollison kept a day-to-day diary of events
and his accounts of the privations met
uith constitute an epic of privation—in-


eluding such as loss of stock and men,
broken waggons, bogged cattle and semi-
starvation.
The route traversed was across the
Owlong plains, down the Hume river for
twenty-five miles, across the stream where
Major Mitchell had crossed, and on to
Indigo Creek —following Eildon’s track to
the Ovens river over plain, swamp and
rocky range. He at last decided to set his
camp at Indigo Creek for the lambing sea-
son, and, the site having been selected, huts
and yards were erected and the country
cleared . , . all so very easily described
but representing the very spirit of true
colonisation !
On July 12th, 1837, he decided to travel
to Port Phillip for provisions—and here
again may be appreciated our debt to him
and his generation, for, it was necessary to
take on this comparatively small journey
eight men, two drays, twenty-five bullocks
and two horses. The Ovens river was in
flood, the waggons had to be taken to pieces
and floated across on tarpaulin punts and,
on the 26th July, they reached the Cam-
paspe river and thence turned South and
headed for their destination by way of
Macedon. They at last reached Port Phillip
settlement after a journey covering 212
niles and it was not until 7th August—
nearly a month after setting out —that he
and his party were able to depart on their
homeward journey. During his return
trip he was watchful for suitable land to
take up as his homestead. By the end of
1837 he had settled his flocks and herds on
the Coliban river and he was then joined
by his brother William Thomas—their
Station then extended to Pyalong.
The following extract from “Historical
Memoirs of the Melbourne Club’ —written
by Professor Ernest Scott—is enlightening;
“William Thomas Mollison, an original
member of the Club, was a member of the
Legislative Council of Victoria 1853 to 1856,
and of the Legislative Assembly 1856 to
1864. He was of the best-known Pastor-
alists of his time. In an account of his
squatting experiences which was published
in “Letters from Victorian Pioneers”, he
related that he joined his brother, A. F.
Mollison—who came to Port Phillip from
Hobart in 1836 —in 1838. “We lived in
reed mia-mias and tents comfortably enough
for some time.”
Pyalong was occupied as a cattle sta-
tion and W. T. Mollison was still living
there when he jotted down his memories
of pioneering life in 1854, He died 1885.”
(Correction : The late W. T. Mollison died
in the year 1886).
The following year —1838—saw their
brother Crawford (then aged twenty-one)
landing in Sydney and he almost immedi-
ately joined Alexander and William in their
pastoral pursuits. At a later stage he was
appointed Assistant Commissioner of Gold-
fields and was quartered at Bendigo under
Mr. Panton. From this stage he became
a well-respected and honoured public ser-
vant of very considerable value to the
rapidly rising community. His service as
Assistant Commissioner took him to vari-
ous quarters including Mclvor and Heath-
cote —where he also filled the role of Magis-
trate —and he was re-transferred to Ben-
digo during the famous Licence agitations.
When the Mining Board was first created
in 1858, Mr. Crawford Mollison was a
successful candidate and he was appointed
Resident Warden of the Goldfields. In
this capacity he commanded an exceptional
degree of esteem during most troublesome
times. His transfer from the Bendigo
districts was regarded as a really serious
loss by the local population. However, his
next appointment was as Police Magistrate
for the Williamstown, Footscray and South
Melbourne districts and, when he ultima-
tely was living in retirement, he was again
called upon for public service on the Licen-
sing Bench —which position he retained
until the year 1888. It was in the latter
year that, owing to ill-health, he retired
and returned to the Old Country and the
Continent for a year’s holiday. He then
returned to Victoria and took up his resi-
dence at Wrexham Road, Windsor, and it
was at this address he died in the year
1893 at the age of seventy-six.


A.. Horsley Chapman, J.P.
Mrs. A. S. Chapman
Alfred Stephen Chapman, J.P,
flK %'* i m
JjssSM
■•>«■ V.., j|r' JS^
* jm #1
f>
V. "'
Mrs. Samuel Chapman
A. E. Chapman,
Son of S. W. Chapman
F. H. Chapman, EL.B.
Son of F. E. Chapman.
A. H. Chapman, 8.E.,
Son of A. H. Chapman
Samuel Chapman
Founder of
the family in Australia
Master Peter Syme
Great-great-grandson of Samuel
Chapman


The Chapmans of South Australia
1 he founder of the Australian branch
of the family, Samuel, was born on 10th
December, 1801. I n March, 1836, he left
England with his wife, Charlotte, nee
Standley and a daughter, also named
Charlotte. 1 hey sailed in the ship “Cygnet’’
which arrived at Kingscote, Kangaroo
Island in September, 1836, after a voyage
of six months. 1 his was one of the first
group of settlers to arrive in the Province
which was not proclaimed until the follow-
ing December. Thus the Chapmans’ can
claim to have over 100 years’ association
with South Australia. Shortly after
arrival at Kangaroo Island the party went
o the mainland and after experiencing all
the hardships attendant to the work .of
pioneering, Samuel Chapman established
himself as a contractor in Adelaide. There
was a family of six daughters and a son ;
Charlotte, Helen, Marion, Alfred Stephen,
Maria, Caroline and Ada. Samuel Chap-
man was the owner of one of the original
town blocks in Adelaide. In 1851 he made
an overland trip to the Victorian Gold
Fields, but met with little success. He
died in 1882 and his wife in 1876.
Alfred Stephen Chapman , J.P. son of
Samuel, was born in Adelaide in 1842.
After receiving his education he joined the
firm now known as Elder Smith Limited
with which he was associated for over 50
years. During this long period he came
into personal contact with many of those
names which are historical in the annals of
the State. He was one of the best known
identities of South Australia through his
close association with the pastoral world.
Alfred Chapman married Annie Horslev,
daughter of William John Horsley of
England and there was a family of five
sons; Alfred Horsley, Arthur Lee. Walter
Stanley, Samuel \\ illiam, Frank Emery,
and four daughters. His eldest son, Alfred
Horsley Chapman, also joined the firm of
Elder Smith, Limited with which he stayed
for o\ er 40 years. Alfred Stephen Chap-
man died in 1912 and his wife in 1884.
Alfred Horsley Chapman married
Louisa Anderson and there is one son,
Arthur Horsley Chapman and two
daughters.
Few families have had a longer
association with South Australia and the
Chapmans occupy an honoured place in
the roll of “Founders of Australia.”


MM'\ 4Hgffife | ™M- -,H .-.HLl-S PL AYER ] | A 5 BARCLAY flyH
I j Mb CEO THOMAS PLAVER I |Ths i»rt M i« EM IL V PL A V ER | | | |
—i i


1 he Players, of Yorke Peninsula,
South Australia.
The Founder of the Australian branch
of this family arrived in South Australia
from Truro, Cornwall, on the ship “Java”,
in 18-10. He was accompanied by his wife
and family of five children, one of whom
died at sea.
On arrival, Nicholas Player went to
Black Forest and engaged in his trade as a
carpenter. Later the family removed to
Angaston, where Nicholas Player took
over the Angaston Hotel, which he con-
trolled until retirement to his home named
“Moorooroo”, which he built near the
township.
His eldest son, Nicholas, was educated
at Nesbit’s School, Angaston, and then
joined his father on contracting work. He
records that in the early forties he found
an emu’s nest and eggs in Grenfell Street.
Adelaide.
On his father’s retirement from hotel
life, Nicholas Player took over the Angas-
ton Hotel, but prior to this, his knowledge
of stock and his splendid horsemanship had
attracted the attention of George Fife
Angas, who made him head stockman on
the Angas properties. He married Mary
fane Hall of Penrice, and there was a
family of eight: Charles Nicholas, Annie
Susan (Mrs. Barclay), Edith Amelia (Mrs.
Sinclair, dec.), Henry William, Alice
Rachel Mary, Emily Mary (dec.) and
George Thomas.
In 1872 the family removed to Yorke
Peninsula, where Nicholas Player pur-
chased land adjacent to the township of
Warooka. Part of this original property is
still in the hands of the family. Nicholas
Player engaged in farming operations at
Para AVurlie Swamp. This property is
now held by his son, George.
Henry AA’illiam Player, second son of
Nicholas, purchased his present property,
named “Tintinara”, which is used for graz-
ing and farming. He also controls other
land and his holdings consist of some 1600
acres.
Charles Player, the eldest son of
Nicholas, owns part of the old “Mooro-
wie” Station, once owned by that well-
known pastoralist family named Fowler.
This property Charles sold, and purchased
some 2,000 acres at Port Rickaby, which
he is farming with his three sons. Charles
Player married Emily Newbold of
A\ arooka, a member of another pioneer
family, and they have a family of Edward
John, A\ illiam Nicholas, Clarence Charles
and Emily Jane (Mrs. Croser).
Annie Susan Player married William
Al ounghusband Barclay of Goolwa, and has
two sons, John and William.
During Nicholas Player’s association
v ith the Angaston District, he reared many
good thoroughbred horses. One, “facko”,
was a winner of many races and a cup.
Another was sold in India for £6OO. He
was a fearless horseman and a noted judge
of stock, and whilst with C. F. Angas
travelled far and wide in the latter’s stock
interests. Nicholas Player died in March,
1921, at the age of 85 years. His wife pre-
deceased him in 1902 at the age of 62.
The family has been associated with
South Australia for nearly 100 years—6o
years of which have been spent on Yorke
Peninsula.
They have always been ready to help
the progress of their district and have won
a place on the roll of “Founders of Austra-
lia”, from their contributions towards the
building up of their State.
Miss Alice Player resides with her
brother, Henry, on the “Tintinara” pro-
perty.


IBP 1 Hr'
w sLaj jmmmm
IHr « /
The late David Chambers
The late Frederic Race Godfrey
The Chambers Family, Pioneers, New South Wales
David Chambers, Senior, born 1774,
Solicitor, Belfast; son of the Rev. Joseph
Chambers, County Antrim, and grandson of
Capt. H. Chambers, Ayrshire, and a
descendant, by his mother, of the ancient
family of Kennedy, of Culzean Castle, Ayr-
shire, and also descended from Hugh John
Lecky, owner of the Giants’ Causeway,
Ireland.
He arrived at Port Jackson, 1839, with
his wife, and members of his family, and
died at Burdekin Terrace, Sydney, April,
1848.
Plis eldest son, Charles Henry Cham-
bers, born 1801, at Londonderry, Solicitor,
arrived at Port Jackson, 1825, married Lucy,
daughter of Dr. Jackson, and by her had
issue:—
Charles Henry—died young.
David Douglas, Inspector of Police for
New South Wales. Died in Jersey, Chan-
nel Islands.
Lucy. Died at Melbourne in 1899.
Margaret Elizabeth. Married Captain
Gilmore of Clifton, Gloucestershire. Had
issue two sons, John, and Crosby Gilmore,
of Hobart.
The second son of David Chambers
senior, was: —
David Chambers, Pioneer, born 1803,
County Derry, Solicitor. Arrived at Port
Jackson 1830, per sailing ship “Eliza”. He
practised in the Supreme Court, was
Under-Sheriff 1833; appointed Crown Soli-
citor by Governor Bourke, 1834; was con-
temporary and friend of William Manning
(Registrar), W. C. Wentworth, W. Holden
(his partner), William a’Beckett (after-
wards first Chief Justice of Victoria), W.
H. Mackenzie, Thomas Whistler Smith,
and many other leading Pioneers. David
Chambers was a member of the first Meet
ing at the Court House, King Street, Syd-
ney, on the 26th January, 1833, “To pre-
pare a Petition to His Majesty, William the
Fourth, praying that a Representative
Assembly be granted to the Colony of Nev
South Wales.’ Mr. McQuoid (Sheriff)
was Chairman of the Meeting, Sir John
Jamison spoke in favor, Mr. W. C. Went-
worth and Mr. James McArthur also spoke
—Mr. David Chambers moved an amend-
ment. Mr. John Gurner was then Chiet
Clerk of the Supreme Court.
David Chambers, in 1832, married in
Sydney, Mary Fheresa Winifred, daughter
of J. Dowling, Esq., of Dublin—and died in
Melbourne on the 9th February, 1848.


ha\ mg by her—who died at Richmond,
Victoria, 1859, had issue
1. Margaret Lillias. Born 14th April,
1833, at Pitt Street, Sydney. Married at
Christ Church St. Kilda, Melbourne, in
18a4, Frederic Race Godfrey, Pioneer, (of
whom see further in the Godfrey familv
section).
2. Francis a’Beckett, born 1834.
3. Blanche, born February 1835, and
died at St. Kilda, 1892.
4. Josephine. Born 1836, and died at
St. Kilda, 1877.
5. Lesslie Arthur. Born Ist April,
1838 (of whom presently).
Ihe eldest son, Francis a’Beckett
horn in Sydney on 7th January, 1834, was a
grazier and partner with his brother-in-law
I’rederic Race Godfrey, in Pevensey Station,
Cew South Wales. He married at Mel-
bourne. 1862, Victoria Alexandrina—daugh-
ter of J. Morris Townsend of Castle
Townsend, County Cork—and died at St.
Kilda in November, 1876, leaving three sons
and three daughters :
1. Henry Francis Townsend Cham-
bers, M.8., born 1865. Married Margaret
Gibaut of Jersey, and died at Jersey, 1930,
leaving one son —Francis—Major in the
Royal Artillery who served in the Great
War and who is married and has issue two
sons.
2. Charles Herbert Chambers, born
1867, at Pevensey, New South Wales, served
in the Great War- Died 1919.
3. Arthur Sydney Chambers, born
1873. Commander R.N, Died 1926.
1. Edith M. L. Chambers, born Mel-
bourne 1863- Married Admiral William
Flake Fisher, C.8., R.N., and by him had
issue one son Douglas—Commander R.N.
who, married and has two sons, Lionel and
Nigel.
2. Prances Ellen, born 1869; married
Colonel J. F. Forbes, D-5.0., Wiltshire
Regiment. Two daughters, both married.
3. Eleanor Josephine. Born 1870.
Married Colonel Herbert T. Arnold, C B.E. ;
issue one son—Lieutenant Terence Arbuth-
not, Wiltshire Regiment. Married, one
daughter.
The younger son of David Chambers,
Pioneer, Lesslie Arthur Chambers, born
Sydney, Ist April, 1838, grazier. Married
Laura Elizabeth, daughter of Philip D.
Rose, Rosebrook Station, New South Wales
and Babbacombe, Devon—died in Devon
1926 having by her had issue two daugh-
ters—Violet and Muriel—and one son,
Philip Arthur Chambers, born New South
Wales, 12th September, 1876; educated in
England; Lieutenant-Colonel, 12th Light
Horse, Gallipoli and Palestine, 1915 —1919
. . . grazier; married (Ist) Rose Mclntyre,
who died 1906—n0 issue, and (2nd) Ethel
Prince, daughter of W. C- Hopkins, Sydney,
in 1911, and by her has issue two sons—
(a) Philip David Selwyn, born in Syd-
ney, Ist May, 1912, educated King’s School
Parramatta and Christchurch, Oxford.
B.A. 1934.
(b) John Arthur Chambers, born Syd-
ney, 9th October, 1915; educated King’s
School, Parramatta.
The youngest son of David Chambers.
Senior :
Hugh John Lecky Chambers, born at
Cashelhoe, Ireland 1821; Solicitor, arrived
at Port Jackson, 1839; married at St. James,
Melbourne, July 1849, Margaret—daughter
of John Hawdon, Pioneer, N.S.W. 1830—
died 14th August, 1893 having by her, who
died at St. Kilda, 1911, had issue :
1. Ernest John Werge Chambers;
born at Banyule, Heidelberg, Victoria, 1855,
Solicitor; married Frances—daughter of
Charles H. Taylor—and died at Kew, Vic-
toria in 1934 having by her had issue one
son and three daughters.


FT is son, A ivian Havelock John, born
1884; grazier, Queensland, married Jean—
daughter of AV. Morton of Sydney—issue
two daughters, Margaret Lillias and Jean.
2. Hugh Noel Chambers, born in Mel-
bourne, 1857, died 1877.
3. Hubert Vivian, born St. Kilda 1859
and died 1877.
4. Armyne Harold, born September
1860; married Lena —daughter of George
Cropley—l9l2 and died at Camberwell
1929; issue one daughter, Florence Armyne
Joyce, born 1916.
1. Alice Werge Chambers, born 1850;
married Hon. Samuel Winter-Cooke of
Murndal, Victoria, M.L.C., and died 1913.
2. Hester W. Hawdon Chambers,
born 1851 ; married Edward Ventry Gayer
and by him had issue four sons and one
daughter-
3. Elizabeth Florence Chambers, born
1853; for many years FTead Mistress of
Fairclcight Girls’ School, St. Kilda. Died
March, 1921, at Melbourne, Victoria.
The Godfrey Family,
Pioneers.
In 1067 William Ist granted the first
Charter to the City of London. It is in
Saxon characters, and is carefully preserved
in the Guild Hall Library, and begins—
“ William (the) King friendly salutes
William (the) Bishop, and Godfrey the
Portreve, and all the Citizens of Lodnon
Land near Lydd, in Kent, was given
by William Ist to the Portreve, and part of
it is still owned by his descendants. Line-
ally descended from Godfrey the Portreve
was Godfrey le Fauconer, (temp: Henry
2nd).
Also Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey, who
was found murdered on Primrose Hill, Lon-
don, 1678, —a victim of the Titus Oates
Plot.
Also Michael Godfrey, of Hodiford
Estate, Kent, who with William Paterson,
and other patriotic citizens founded the
P>ank of England, 1694, ,to enable King
William 3rd to pay his troops in the war
against France.
Also his son, Michael Godfrey, Deputy
Governor of the Bank, who was killed bv
a French shell at the Siege of Namur, while
standing beside King William in the
trenches. (See Dictionary of National Biog.
and Burke’s Landed Gentry).
Also of the same family was Capt.
Benjamin Godfrey, H.E LC.S., son of Ben-
jamin Godfrey of Kent, born 1722 married
in London Mary, daughter of Daniel Race,
who was Chief Officer of the Bank of Eng-
land for 37 years. Capt. Bcnj. Godfrey died
1762, having by her, who died at Bath, 1802
had issue two sons —
1- Rev. Daniel Race Godfrey, D.D.,
Queen’s College, Oxford.
2. Major John Godfrey, 11th Dragoons
J.P. for Somerset. Married Sarah Bulwer.
The Rev. Daniel Race Godfrey, D.D.
married Elizabeth, daughter of the Rev.
Samuel Dewe, Canon of Rochester Cathed-
ral —issue four sons and two daughters—
Their second son, John Race Godfrey,
Lieut-Col. Madras M.N.I. (Medal 2 bars,
Burmese War) born at Bath, 1787—mar-
ried Jane Octavia, daughter of Richard
Woodhouse of Hereford, and died 1857,
leaving issue by her five sons and five
daughters.
The second son of Colonel J. R. God-
frey, Henry Godfrey, born Madras, 1824 and
educated at Exeter, England, Pioneer,
arrived at Port Phillip per Sailing Shi]
“Dulce of Roxburgh,” 1843. He invested
considerable patrimony in a large area in
the Loddon District, and named it “Boort”
signifying “Smoke,” from the camp fires of
the Aborigines.


His younger brother, Frederic Race
Godfrey, joined him as partner in 1847.
Henry married in England, 1853. Mary,
daughter of the Revd. William Polwhele,
of Cornwall. The brothers sold Boort
Station in 1863, he having, with his wife
and family (four sons) returned to England
and settled at Cheltenham. His eldest son—
1. Henry Polwhele Godfrey, born at
Exeter, 1854, arrived at Port Phillip, 1872.
and married 1882, Kate, daughter of Alex-
ander Burt, grazier, of New South Wales.
Died 1917—having by her had issue three
sons.
2.1. Frederick Polwhele Godfrey, born
1885. Married Ruby Carter, issue two sons,
two daughters.
3.1 Richard Henry Polwhele, born
New Zealand, 1909-
3.2 William Polwhele, born 1910.
3.3 Vgarita Mary—married Harold
Jenkins.
3-4 Margaret.
2.2 Richard Polwhele Godfrev, born
1890—died 1914.
2.3 Alexander Polwhele Godfrey, born
1892. A.I.F. Ist Infantry Brigade, Sydney
1914, received Commission 1916, King’s
Own Lancaster Regiment. Joined the Fly-
ing Corps, 1918. Married Winifred, daugh-
ter of Colonel Bellamy, of Devon.
The fourth son of Lieut.-Colonel John
Race Godfrey Frederic Race Godfrey,
Pioneer, was born at Bellary, India, 11th
May, 1828, educated at Exeter Grammar
School, arrived at Port Phillip per Sailing
Ship “Duke of Roxbugh,” 1847, became
partner in Boort Station, Victoria, 1847
He was pioneer in irrigation, having
made a cutting in 1851 from the river
Loddon, thereby converting the Boort
Swamp into a fine lake, on which the town
of Boort now stands. In 1854. at Christ
Church, St. Kilda, he married Margaret
Lillias, eldest daughter of David Chambers,
Pioneer, Sydney, 1830, Crown Solicitor,
1834 (see Chambers family), and by her
had issue four sons and five daughters- He
lived for seventeen years at Mount Ridley,
Craigieburn, Victoria, and was Member for
East Bourke (Legislative Assembly) 1874-
1877, when he specially advocated protec-
tion of the Aborigines by the Government.
He was President of the Royal Acclimatisa-
tion and Zoological Society, Melbourne, for
many years; a member of the Melbourne
Club, 1856—1909; Lay Canon of St.
Pauls Cathedral. Melbourne, 1869-1910; a
Founder and original Director of The
1 rustees, Executors & Agency Companv of
Melbourne; President of the Melbourne
Hospital for seventeen years; acted on the
Commission for the Reservation of Wil-
son’s Promontory; Promotor of manv
Charitable and Patriotic Institutions.
In 1870, while President of the Royal
Acclimatisation Society, he released hares
at Mount Ridley, and the first match was
held there at) his invitation, with a large at-
tendance, including Sir George Bowen, the
Governor, in 1876.
F- R. Godfrey paid several visits to
England with his family. His second wife
being Marian, daughter of Richard Walker,
of Bury, Yorkshire. He died at “Gray-
lings/’ Alma Road, St. Kilda, in 1910, His
family, by his first wife, was as follows :
1. Frederic John Race, born 1855, died
at Brighton, Victoria, 1863.
2. Frank William Albion, born at sea
1860, educated Church of England Gram-
mar School, Geelong, M.B. Edinburgh
L niversity. Hon. Surgeon Scarborough
Hospital for 30 years, married Mabel,
daughter of Dr. Hartley, of Malton, York-
shire, and had issue three daughters. He
died at Leeds, February, 1925-


3. John Race, born at Mount Ridley,
1865, educated Church of England Gram-
mar School, Geelong, and Cheltenham Col-
lege, England. B.A. Pembroke College,
Cambridge, 1888. Inspector of Mines, New
South Wales for many years-
4. Arthur Race, died young,
1. Mary Lillias —born at Boort Sta-
tion, Victoria, sth December, 1856. Married
at All Saints’ Church, St. Kilda, the Revd.
Charles Edward Drought, M.A., Trinity
College, Cambridge; Canon of St. Paul’s
Cathedral, Melbourne—and by him, who
died at St. John’s Toorak, 1917, had issue—•
2.1 Charles Frederick Drought, born
at St. Kilda on the 1 24th May, 1891 Scholar-
ship at Geelong Grammar School, and
Senior Prefect. Received Commission in
Eondon, September 1914 in the 7th Bat-
talion, Lincolnshire Regiment, B.E.F. Cap-
tain 1915; Wounded at Ypres, December
1915. Died at Ee Touquet on the 31st
December, 1915.
2.2 John Smerger Drought, born at
Woodend, Victoria, 13th January, 1894,
educated Melbourne Grammar School;
B.A. Melbourne University, 1915. Captain
Royal Garrison Artillery, 8.E.E.. (Special
Reserve) 1917; Military Cn )ss, Ypres
Salient 1917; Ordained Clerk in Holy
Orders, Melbourne, 1920; Married in Dec-
ember 1920, Gladys M iriam—daughter of
Ernest Charles Peters of Clifton, Glouces-
tershire and South Yarra, and by her had
issue :
3.1. Peter Charles Drought, born 17th
August, 1924 at Armadale. t
3.2 Thomas Godfrey Drought, born
4th December, 1925 at Toorak.
2- Ethel Augusta Godfrey, born 1861
died 1935.
3. Frederica Mildred, born Brighton.
4. Alice Ebna. Died 1876.
5. Winifred O. Helen, born at Mount
Ridley.
William Godfrey, the third son of
Colonel J. R. Godfrey, born at Bellary,
India, 1826, arrived at Port Phillip in 1857;
married in 1871 Mary Scott, daughter of
James Purves, and died at Murrumbeena in
1906 having by her, who died 1872, had
issue :
William Scott Purves, born April, 1872.
educated Melbourne Grammar School.
Member of Victorian Institute of Architects
Married Madeline, daughter of Edmund
Parkes—Superintendent of the Bank of
Australasia, Melbourne—received the
King’s Medal, 1935. Has issue one son—
William Purves Race Godfrey, born
3rd December, 1907, educated Melbourne
Grammar School; Bachelor of Architecture,
Melbourne University, 1935; married, in
1934. Eveline Patricia—daughter of Geo.
Thos. Young, of Sydney.
Charles Edward Rowlandson Godfrey
Branch-Manager in the National Bank,
Victoria, fifth son of Colonel J. R. Godfrey,
Madras Staff Corps, arrived in Melbourne
1883; married, in 1891, Isabel—daughter of
John Eangham—and by her has issue one
son and two daughters :
(a) Arthur Harry Eangham Godfrey,
born 1896, received commission A.1.F.,
1916; Military Cross; Mentioned in Des-
patches; Staff Captain in France 1918; mar-
ried at Edinburgh in 1918, Mabel, daughter
of William Barrett-Eennard, and by her has
issue :
1. John Elliott, born at Geelong, 1919.
2. Edward Arthur, born at Geelong,
1921.
3. Charles Eovett, born at Geelong,
1924.
4. Mildred Isabel, born at Geelong.
(b) Olive Irene. Married in 1932,
John Cook Science Master, Geelong
Grammar School.
(c) Helene Mabel. Married lan Grim
shaw in 1928. Issue three sons.


Ihe Faheny Family of South Australia
Francis Taheny, J.P.
Patrick Purtle of County Limerick,
Ireland, landed in South Australia from the
ship, “Dugdale”, in 1840, with his wife,
sister and brother-in-law, Mr. and Mrs.
James Hvreen.
Patrick Purtle purchased land at Pros-
pect and later engaged in farming at
Meadows. There was a family of six sons
and seven daughters. In 1872 the family
removed to Yorke Peninsula. Ann, the
second daughter of Patrick Purtle, married
Michael Sweenex of Warooka and their
daughter, Margaret, married Francis
Taheny, who is a native of Sligo, Ireland,
and their family consists of Annie Frances,
Bernard. Mary Briget, Margaret, Francis,
Eileen, Dominic and Monica. Bernard
married Mabel Hillier. They have seven
children who represent the fifth generation
of the Turtles, the fourth generation of the
Sweeney’s and the third generation of the
Taheny’s. Mrs. Francis Taheny died in
June, 1932. Her memory is revered by all
who knew her for her many acts of kindness
in helping others during the early pioneer-
ing days.
Francis Taheny, J.P., has had a long
association with the district of Warooka
and Yorketown. He served as a Council-
lor of the Warooka District Council for 36
years and was Chairman at that time. In
1918 he was appointed a Justice of the
Peace. He is the only surviving founda-
tion member of the Yorketown Hospital,
for the advancement of which he has been
most active and generous. His work for
the returned soldiers as a Repatriation
Commissioner earned him the gratitude of
all returned men of the district. Francis
Taheny received an excellent education in
his native country and on arrival in Aus-
tralia took up school teaching, but shortly
afterwards decided to engage in farming.
He took up a small area of land and so
successful was he that to-day he controls
with his family some 4,000 acres of agricul-
tural and grazing land.
No man is held in higher respect in the
district than Francis Taheny who has won
an honored place as a citizen in the com-
munity for which he has done so much.
He has been a Director since its in-
ception of the Yorke Peninsula Barley Pro-
ducers Limited, which Companv has done
excellent work towards the disposal of the
surplus barley grown on the Peninsula.
Every movement for the advancement of
the welfare of the district has received the
active support of Francis Tahenv.


'ill
i* (
m^^88hYi
The late John Campbell.
Mr. Samuel Campbell.
The late George Campbell and his Family, Mia-Mia,
Victoria.
The year 1866 saw the foundation of
the family, here reviewed, in Victoria, The
late George Campbell and his wife Sarah
came from Londonderry, Northern Ireland,
and proceeded to Axedale, between Ben-
digo and Heathcote, where they joined two
brothers of Mrs. Campbell—the Messrs.
Doak —who had already been settled in
those parts for some years. Here the
family remained for two to three years
when the late Mr. Campbell purchased
about 200 acres of land within about a mile
of Mia-Mia. It is of interest to record that
this same land is still in the possession of
their descendants to the present time.
In all there was a family of six sons
and one daughter in Humphrey, Margaret
(later Mrs. George R( ) s s), William, James,
John, George and Samuel.
Each of these sons—who were of age —
selected the maximum of forty acres, allow-
able in those days, in the Heathcote district
and, when the Duffy Land Act came into
being, these acreages were increased to 320
apiece. All these holdings were con-
sidered as one estate until such time as the
sons married when different arrangements
were finalised. It would be hard to exag-
gerate the difficulties encountered during
those years. The only transport was the
bullock dray for the products of the pro-
perty whilst they were a good four days
journey from their nearest railhead, namelv
Kyneton. However, thanks to the spirit
among the family, they were able to over-
come all obstructions in the path of pro-
gress, and through the years, made head-
wax .


The late George Campbell died aged 73
in the early nineties, whilst living with
members of his family, and his widow sur-
vived him by about three years and was
also aged 73 when she passed away.
Of the family named above, it is of
interest to place on record that two of the
sons, \\ illiam and John went home to
marry. Of these, John married Miss Jane
Campbell—also of Londonderry. His
wife’s father was also named John and had
been in Australia for a brief stay in 1853
but had returned to the land of his birth,
1 he newly-wed couple returned to Austra-
lia and, after but a brief period, John
Campbell was the victim of an accident
which prevented him from working his
land. He therefore undertook dealing in
livestock and attained considerable success
in this direction. Mr. John Campbell died
on the 30th November, 1928, at the age of
seventy-five.
Both Mr. and Mrs. John Campbell
were sincere workers on behalf of the Pres-
byterian Church (of which the former was
an elder for eight years) and other charit-
able institutions. In all they had a family
of four children in John, George, Isabella
and Jean, of whom Miss Jean Campbell is
'he sole survivor. Miss Jean Campbell and
her mother are now in residence at
Castruse, 145 Carpenter Street, Bendigo,
where they still are workers in the Presby-
terian Church and the P.W.M.U. It should
be also written that Miss Jean Campbell
has shown considerable talent in artistic
directions for her black and white work
and also her paintings, are admired by all
wno have the pleasure of seeing them.
Mr. Samuel Campbell, the youngest
son hereinbefore named, of “Meadow Val-
ley,” Heathcote, is the sole survivor of his
generation in the family. Born in the year
1865 in Londonderry, he worked side by
side with his brothers and co-operated with
them in the growth of the family estates
until the time of his marriage in 1903 to
Miss Jessie McTaggart of Talbot, Victoria.
1 o this union there was one daughter in
Alice Sarah, who is now Mrs. Russell N.
Hendy, of Echuca, and who has two child-
ren in Samuel and Jessie.
However, after but one year of married
life, Mrs. Jessie Campbell died and, in the
year 1911 Mr. Campbell married Miss
Margaret McCrae, a native of Heathcote.
Air. Samuel Campbell has, like his re-
latives wherever their lot has been cast,
attained a considerable degree of respect
and esteem among a large circle of friends
and, notwithstanding his age of nearly
seventy-two years, enjoys a vigour which is
a testimonial to a life lived under the con-
ditions of a pioneer family and with a sane
and public-spirited outlook which has ser-
ved liis fellows and, at the same time,
assisted him to retain his youth.
The late William Hobbs of Stawell.
The late \\ illiam Hobbs was born at
Bristol on the eighth day of July in the
year 1831 and followed the trade of a
joiner prior to the journey to Australia.
Gn the twenty-third day of November, 1852
he married Miss Windmill, of Glastonbury,
whose people the Downs once owned the
Abbey in the county of Somerset, and the
newly-wed couple thereupon sailed aboard
the good ship “Mary Ann” for Australia.
Some idea of the grit of which our pioneers
were made may be gathered from the fact
that his wife was then but seventeen years
of age. Their journey of five months'ulti-
mately landed them at Port Philip Bay.
During these times of gold fever, wages
were high and tradesmen scarce, whilst the
cost of living was above those ruling for
necessities even at the present time. It
was not surprising, therefore, that the new-
comer commanded a wage, at his trade, in
Melbourne, of thirty shillings per day.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


After working for others for a while, he
started in business for himself and erected
many of the old buildings in the township
of Melbourne.
However, after about two years, the
gold fever obtained a hold upon his imagi-
nation. and he thereupon threw up his con-
nection and went to the diggings at Castle-
maine and, later, followed the various
rushes from one quarter to another. Ihe
year 1836 saw him go to Stawell and this
step marked the foundation of his subse-
quent fortunes, for, from this point in his
career he progressed consistently. He
commenced by working hard and saved
enough capital to invest in a team of bul-
locks and a dray, and, soon after this, was
also able to buy teams of horses. With
this plant he entered business as a cartage
contractor to and from the mining leases.
His natural aptitude guided him in his
investments during the following years and
he became one of the main figures in the
mining industry of Victoria. To the present
day his name is associated prominently
with the olden days of Stawell during the
mining boom and his investment in such
undertakings as the No. 8. Scotchman’s
Claim, Pleasant Creek Cross Reef Company,
Newington Company, Moonlight and Mag-
dala Companies brought him wealth, respect
and influence far beyond the average. He
at all times took a most active part in each
and every movement designed for the
betterment of the Stawell district, and he
seemed to regard his wealth almost as a
solemn trust for this purpose. Certain it is
that the district received nothing but
benefit from his citizenship.
The late Mr. William Hobbs died at
his property “Avalon Park”, Longerenong,
on the seventeeth day of October in the
year 1881, and his death at such a compara-
tively early age was regarded as a tragedy
for the district.
Mr. and Mrs. William Hobbs had a
family in all of eight children as follows: —
Mary, William, Julia, Theodore, Albert,
Emily, Celia and George.
Of the foregoing, Julia, the third
daughter, married Mr. A. D. Price, head
of the well-known firm of Price, Griffiths
and Company, of Melbourne. Mr. Price,
in addition to a most successful career in
the business community of Victoria, has
taken an active part in many directions
outside his own organisation. He was
President of the Wholesale Grocers’ Asso-
ciation of Australia for four terms, Vice-
President of the Victorian Merchants’
Association and representative of the latter
organisation on the Chamber of Commerce
Council, and an executive officer of many
business and sporting bodies in this State.
Although of Publish parentage, Mr. Price
was born in the United States of America
on their National Foundation Day—namely
July fourth—and it has been semi-jokinglv
commented upon that, as he was born on
Independence Day, it is but natural that he
should reach a position of Independence in
the community. Be that as it may, there
is no doubt that he won a place in the fore-
front of the community by virtue of his
sheer ability and for many years was re-
garded as a leader among his fellows.
From the union of Mr. and Mrs. A. D.
Price there was a family of six daughters
in:—Nellie —Mrs. A. S. Tonkin, wife of the
well-knowm Romney Marsh Sheep breeder
in the Kyabram district.
Winifred —-Mrs. Vernon Cole of Sydney.
Daisy—Mrs. H. H. Burton of 9 Millicent
Avenue, Toorak, Victoria. Mrs. Bur-
ton has two daughters—Barbara and
Alison.
Esther and Constance—both of whom are
in residence in Melbourne.
Lilian- —Mrs. Harley FI. Styles of Toorak,
Victoria, who has two children in
James Alfred and Suzanne.
It is a matter for regret that sufficient space
is unavailable in the present work to trace
in detail the history of this family since
1832 to the present day for they have occu-
pied a position of respect throughout the
years and have lived up to the best tradi-
tions of the name of Pioneer.


Ihe Lewis and Argyle Families.
( )n Sunday, the twenty-eighth day of
April, 1822, the late Thomas Lewis sailed
for the almost unknown land of Australia
aboard the sailing ship “Will Shand”—
Captain Kenn, skipper.
A fascinating word picture of the trials
attached to sea travel in those far-off days
could be painted from his day-to-day diary
which has been preserved through the sub-
sequent years. However, space in this
\\ ork does not permit of a detailed account
of the voyage but one episode may, with
advantage, be reproduced. On the four-
teenth of May they were chased by a pirate
ship containing a mixed crew of Spaniards,
Portugese, Moors and Algerians . . . one
hundred and fifty in all.
Following a chase of six hours the
Master of the “Will Shand” ordered all
aboard to arm as best they could and make
ready for the fight which seemed inevitable.
It should be mentioned that the entire ship’s
company numbered but forty-two souls
including women and children. Amongst
the desperate men-folk, the late Mr. Lewis
was to be seen armed with a fowling piece
and a carving knife! The pirate came up
firing her cannon and word was sent to
Captain Kenn to come aboard —which order
was obeyed. To his astonishment, the
pirate leader examined his papers, gave him
a drink of brandy, demanded some bottles
of porter —and thus ended an exciting
episode!
His journey ended in September 1822,
and the newcomer continued with his call-
ing as a Surveyor. His career was not
destined to be monotonous, however, for,
following a dispute between his friend —
William Bryan—and a William Lyttleton
he —Thomas Lewis —delivered a challenge
to a duel on behalf of his friend. For this
offence he was brought to trial on the 9th
day of May, 1834, before Justice Montagu.
The proceedings were at a later date desig-
nated as a disgrace to British justice. As
an example of this, every time he endea-
voured to ask a question he was fined ten
pounds and the affair ended by his total
fines reaching the astonishing figure of
£l5O in addition to his being sentenced to
eighteen months imprisonment! During
his incarceration at Hobart Town gaol,
numerous petitions were signed and for-
warded to the Van Diemann’s Land autho-
rities, Covernor Arthur and finally to the
King of England himself. Many well-
known names appeared in these petitions
including such as William Gellibrand,
Henry Hopkins and John Henty. Follow-
ing the approach to the Crown, Thomas
Lewis was not only released and paid
seventeen hundred pounds compensation,
but all connected with the trial were dis-
missed from the public service. Continu-
ing the brief historical data pertaining to
this family, a son of the Thomas Lewis —
also named Thomas —was born at Launces-
ton in the year 1839 and ultimately married
Elizabeth Abbott of Launceston. This
lady was a descendant of the Archbishop of
Canterbury of the same name. To their
union, in turn, was a family of four sons
and two daughters named Vernon, Violet,
Maude, Claude, Elliott and Reginald.
Of the above, Violet married Stanley
Seymour Argyle, son of Edward and Mary
Argyle (nee Clark), of “Rock House,”
Kyneton.
The late Mr. Edward Argyle was born
in 1817 in Derbyshire, England, and came
to Australia in the early thirties of last
century. Thus were two of our real pio-
neering families united by matrimony. Mr.
Edward Argyle was known as the Original
Pioneer of Northern Victoria and he cer-
tainly deserved his reputation. He fol-
lowed in the tracks of Major Mitchell when
such tracks were still fresh and visible to
the eve, and took up an extensive holding
which he named “Duck Swamp Station”,


which extended from the Serpentine Creek,
north-westward as far as Pyramid Hill and
westward towards Kerang and Swan Hill.
He was closely associated with other pio-
neers, such as Richard Goldsbrough and the
Booth Brothers, in many other large hold-
ings in this part of Victoria. Here he
bred the finest pedigree stock money could
buy and his brand became so famous that
—throughout Victoria and New South
Wales —per medium of his Durham cattle,
the property came to be known as the
“Durham Ox” Station. A further direc-
tion in which Australia owes such a vast
debt to the late Edward Argyle, and simi-
lar characters, is insofar as he was mainly
responsible for the breeding of the world-
famous Australian Whaler Horses so out-
standing for their services during the Great
War. The breeding of these horses was
carried on at another of his properties,
namely, “Lalbert.” His grazing activities
extended through a large proportion of
V ictorian territory and he was one of the
first to export beef to England.
To the union of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Argyle there was a family of three
sons in Reginald Ivon, Charles Alfred and
Stanley Seymour.
Of these the Hon. Sir Stanley Argyle,
K.8.E., M.8., M.R.C.S., M.F.A., needs no
private historian for his name will live
in the annals of Victorian and Australian
history. Sir Stanley S. Argyle married
Miss Violet Fewis in 1895 and is now in
residence at “Halstead”, 29 Bruce Street.
Toorak, Victoria and there is from their
union a family of four children as follows:
Inez Violet —now Mrs. Esmond Fillies.
Bessie Abbott —now Mrs. Eric Hill.
Thomas, of Western Australia.
Hector, who owns, and personally
manages, a citrus grove at Kangaroo Fake,
near Swan Hill.
It is a pleasure to include such histories as
this in the present Work.
The Foley Family of Ballarat
and
Flie late George Francis Coffey of Melbourne,
The history of the Foley family would
take far more space than is available in the
present work, were it written in full, and
so, but a brief outline is attempted in these
lines.
'The founder of the family in Australia
was the late Cornelius Foley who, in com-
pany with his wife Bridget, came to Vic-
toria in the early forties of last century.
In those early days of our history, it is of
interest to place on record that the couple
were resident in Melbourne contempora-
neously with John Pascoe Fawkner and,
thus, may truthfully be named as pioneers.
However, the mere fact of having been in
these parts at such times is not the only
claim to such a name for, following a few
years in the Melbourne district, the late
Mr. Foley followed the mining industry in
both Ballarat and Bendigo. Fater, again,
when the decline in mining pursuits took
place, he selected and pioneered a farming
property in the Ballarat district.
()ur history now brings us to the
arrival, on the twenty-second day of
September in the year 1885, of Miss
Catherine Foley, daughter of the late John
and Catherine Foley of Fahinch, Countv


C hire, Ireland. 1 ler journey was made on
board the Steamship “Merkara”—one of
the early steamships to run between the
()ld Country and Australia, and a unit of
the British-India Steam Navigation Fleet.
For a short time Miss Foley resided in
Brisbane but, subsequently, joined her
aunt —Mrs, Bridget Foley—at Ballarat,
who, by this time, was a widow.
For four years, following her arrival
in Australia, Miss Catherine Foley resided
for alternate periods in Victoria and New
South \\ ales but, on the twenty-fifth day of
May in the year 1892 she married the late
George Francis Coffey at the Carmelite
Church, Port Melbourne —in those days
named Sandridge. To this union there was
issue of one daughter and one son in:
Dorothy—now Mrs. P. F. Coleman of
Melbourne —who, in turn has one son in
Kevin Francis at present a student at
Xavier College ; and,
Mr. John Joseph Coffey, of the Federal
Taxation Department, Melbourne.
At this stage, it is meet that a few
items of interest should be included per-
taining to the career of the late Mr. G. F.
Coffey.
This gentleman was a member of the family
named as the O’Coffeys of Owner —sub-
jects of Donogh, King of North Munster
in A.D. 1307—in the “History of Countv
Clare”, by James Frost, M.R.T.A., such
being a resume of Irish affairs from the
earliest days to the beginning of the
eighteenth century . . . and Owney
being one of the baronies under the
sovereignity of the above named mon-
arch.
'The late Mr. Coffey was born on the
28th August, 1856, at Fahinch, County
Clare, and was the son of one Captain
M ichel Joseph Coffey, a Crimea and Indian
Mutiny veteran. He arrived at Port
Chalmers, New Zealand, in 1874 aboard the
“Invercargill”. Following a brief exper-
ience in mining, he became associated with
the tramway construction services of
Dunedin and was actually the driver of the
first steam-driven tram to run through that
city. Fater, again, he undertook similar
work with the New South Wales railways
service. During his stay in that State, he
was for seven years an honoured member
of the Royal Volunteer Artillery Corps
and saw active service during the Russian
scare of 1877-8. In 1891 he came to Vic-
toria where he again became associated
with railway service and, following twentv-
six years service, was invalided from the
department. During his career in Vic-
toria, he was a most prominent member of
the Irish National Foresters, of which
institution he was a Past Chief Ranger of
the Patrick Sarsfield Branch, Number 9.
Following his retirement from the
Government Service, the late Mr. Coffey
resided for some years at Port Melbourne
and subsequently followed farming pur-
suits in the Ballarat district. However, his
declining years were spent with his daugh-
ter —the Mrs. P. F. Coleman, already men-
tioned in these lines—and his death
occurred on the 28th day of April in the
year 1935.
Both Mrs. Catherine Coffey and Mr.
and Mrs. Coleman are now resident in
Meibom me.
In concluding this brief history of the
Foley family in Australia it will be seen
that, both in the mining days and, later, as
primary producer, the Founder of the
family carried his share of the responsi-
bility attached to the name —sacred to all
true Australians—of Pioneer, and, as
descendents of such an one, the present
and future generations may well feel pride
in their standing in the community.


—
I P ■ '< 3' J~~~E LTON MAYQ * <T| I ' - | L>cu- ERIC £ MAYO * * -. |j \
- - ' ' I
L 1 —i
The Mayos of South Australia.
George Mayo, who was born on Bth
January, 1807, studied under Herbert
Mayo, F.R.C.S., founder of the Middlesex
Clinic, and became a member of the Royal
College of Surgeons, London, 2nd January,
1829. After practising for some years at
Devizes in Wiltshire, he emigrated to South
Australia in 1837 as surgeon of the ship
“Lady Emma.” After staying for a while
in the newly formed Province he returned
to England, but travelled back again as
surgeon superintendent of the emigrant ship
“Asia,” which arrived at Holdfast Bay in
1839. He practised his profession in Ade-
laide until his retirement. After a hospital
was established at Adelaide he became one
of the surgeons. The earliest records of the
Adelaide Hospital show that he was one of
the two surgeons in 1849. George Mayo
was appointed a member of the Adelaide
Hospital Board in 1853, at which date he
was senior member of the staff. He re-
tained his position on the Board until his
resignation in 1885. He visited England
in 1851 and on 11th December of that vear
became by examination a Fellow of the
Royal College of Surgeons, London. He is
believed to be the first Australian to receive
the qualification. George Mayo interested
himself in the volunteer militia of the Pro-
vince. On 6th October, 1859, he was
appointed Captain of the West Adelaide
Lifles, and was subsequently preferred to
Major and Lieutenant-Colonel. George
Mayo married twice. His first wife was
Maria Gandy, who arrived in the Province
with Colonel Light’s party on the ship
Rapid ■ in 1836. There was a family of
three children who survived. Marv married
the Rev. Richardson Reid of Holv Trinity


Church, North Terrace, Adelaide. Kate
became the wife of Dr. A. S. Paterson,
Colonial Surgeon of the Province, and there
was one son George Gibbes Mavo. After
the death of his first wife George Mavo
married in England on 19th February, 1802,
Ellen Anne Russell. One daughter, Ellen
Stuart, was born of the second marriage,
and she became the wife of Arthur George
de la Poer Beresford. George Mayo was a
founder and one of the first Governors of
St. Peter’s College, Adelaide.
George Gibbes Mayo, born 22nd Febru-
ary, 1845, was educated at St. Peter’s Col-
lege. Adelaide, and at the Glasgow Univer-
sity. At the latter institution he studied
under Lord Kelvin (then Sir William
Ihompson). and obtained his Diploma in
Civil Engineering. He accompanied McKin-
lay in an expedition to explore the Northern
Territory sent out by the South Australian
Government which started from Escape
Cliffs, as Darwin was then called, on 14th
January, 1866. The members of this expe-
dition suffered great privation owing to
their being held up for three months by
floods without other food than their horses.
For a considerable period the party lived
on horseflesh dried in the sun and eaten
without even salt. A crazy craft consisting
of horse skins and canvas fitted over a frame
was constructed by the party. In this they
navigated the alligator infested East Alli-
gator River. When the open sea was
reached the “ship” was blown well out
from land, but ultimately with the aid of
oars made partly from saddles, the expedi-
tion succeeded in returning to Escape Cliffs.
Later with S. Dixon, George Gibbes Mayo
travelled over the district which subse-
quently became the Coolgardie Gold Field.
The party of two prospected unsuccessfully
for coal. George Gibbes Mayo married
Henrietta Mary Donaldson, 18th September,
1877.
Their family consisted of Helen Marv
Mayo, 0.8. E., M.D., now practising in
Adelaide. She graduated at the University
of Adelaide, obtaining the Davies Thomas
Scholarship in 1901, and becoming Everard
Scholar, 1902. Dr. Helen Mayo is, and has
been since 1914, a member of the Council
of the University of which she is the first
woman member. In 1909 she was instru-
mental with others in arranging Baby
Health Centres. She is still Chief Hon.
Medical Officer of this activity. From
1911 until her resignation in 1933 she held
the position of Clinical Bacteriologist in
charge of the Vaccine Department of the
Adelaide Hospital, a department which she
organised. In collaboration with Miss
Harriet Stirling, Dr. Helen Mayo in 1913
initiated a movement which resulted in the
establishment of Mareeba Babies’ Hospital.
She is still responsible Medical Officer of
the Hospital. In 1919 she was appointed
Hon. Physician to the Outpatients of the
Adelaide Children’s Hospital and is at
present senior Hon. Physician.
Elton M ayo, ALA., born 26th December,
1880, was educated at St. Peter’s College
and the University of Adelaide. He was
lecturer in philosophy and afterwards
professor in the University of Queensland.
Subsequently he was appointed professor of
philosophy at the University of Pennsyl-
vania, LAS.A. At present he is Professor
of Industrial Psychology at Harvard Uni-
versity, Boston, LAS.A. He married,
Dorothea McConnel, eldest daughter of the
late J. H. McConnel of Cressbrook, Queens-
land. Their daughter Patricia is studying
at Newnham, Cambridge, England, and
Ruth is at school in the same country.
Herbert Mayo, K.C., LL.B., was
educated at St. Peter's College and the L’ni-
versity of Adelaide as well as Trinity Col-
lege, Melbourne University. He was ad-
mitted to the Bar in 1909 and took silk in
1930. Herbert Mayo married Clarice, the
youngest daughter of the late James Alel-
rose, pastoralist of Glenwood. Aldgate
South Australia on 17th May, 1911. Their
children are: Eric Elton Mavo. born 28th


July, 1912. Educated at St. Peter’s Col-
lege and Jervis Bay Naval College, he is
now Lieutenant in the Royal Australian
Navy and at present serving in H.M.A.S.
Australia. Clarice Elton Mayo, 8.A.,
graduated at the Adelaide University.
Diana was educated in Adelaide and at
Invergowrie Homecraft Hostel, Melbourne.
George Melrose Mayo, born 9th March, 1918
still attends St. Peter’s College. Prudence
is also still at school.
Mary Penelope Mayo, B.A. the fourth
surviving child of George Gibbes Mayo
graduated Honours Philosophy at the Ade-
laide University. John Christian Mayo, M.8.,
B.S. (Adel.) F.R.C.S. (Edin.) F.R.A.C.S.,
was born 4th August, 1891. He is the tnird
son of George Gibbes Mayo. He w 7 as edu-
cated at St. Peter’s College and the Univ-
ersity of Adelaide. Pie joined the A.I.F. at
the outbreak of war and served in Egypt and
France.
He was appointed Hon. Surgeon to the
Outpatients at the Adelaide Children’s Hos-
pital in 1928 and is now Hon. Surgeon on
the Indoor Staff. For two years he worked
with the Radium Department of the Middle-
sex Hospital, England. He has acted as
temporary Hon. Assistant Surgeon at the
Adelaide Hospital.
The late John Bon of Wappan.
The life-story of the late John Bon
and his wife Anne Fraser Bon constitutes
a vivid picture of the character of our early
pioneers.
Born at Dunning, Perthshire, Scotland,
and descended from an old Huguenot
family who sought refuge in Scotland after
the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in
the year 1685, he was a victim of the de-
pression which followed the Napoleonic
wars. Matters became so serious with him
that he found himself unable to meet his
obligations and, overburdened with debts,
found relief when a company comprising
the Right Honourable the Marquis of
Ailsa, Eady Flora Hastings, the Honourable
Gilbert Kennedy and other fellow-Scots
took up a lease of land in the Mansfield
district then a portion of the Port Philip
District of New r South Wales and after-
wards Victoria,
This was in the year 1839. Arriving
at Melbourne in the “Perfect” on the
tw r elfth of November, 1840, in charge of a
shipment of the company’s stud stock, he
immediately commenced duties under Gil-
bert Kennedy and, ere long, succeeded the
latter as Manager.
However, after a few years the price
of sheep fell from £2 to 1/6 per head and
the undertaking—trading under the name
of Watson & Hunter—ceased to function.
Meanwhile John Bon had saved enough to
purchase a lease of the Wappan section of
about twenty thousand acres —and subse-
quently other properties—and, bv prudent
management and hard work, he was able,
in I<S5B, to return to Dunning where he
immediately called a meeting of his old
creditors and, not only paid them in full
but, in addition twenty years compound
interest.
\\ hilst home on this occasion, he
married Anne Fraser, daughter of David
Dougall, M.D., of Perthshire, and. on their
return to Australia, they settled at Wappan
and it was here that their comparatively
brief wedded life was fated to be spent.


Brief it wa? for, in the year 1868, ten
years after their settlement, he suffered a
heart seizure which proved fatal. He was
one who was bound to be missed for his
character had endeared him to one and all.
Not only among his fellow white settlers
was he beloved but, also, among the unfor-
tunate aboriginals who looked up to John
Bon as their friend.
lie also proved himself a master of his
calling and his importations of the famous
Bracelet tribe, of the Booth strain of Short-
horn cattle, materially assisted to build up
his own, and many other herds. His im-
portations of Merino rams in the years 1852
and 1858, from the breeder von Steiger of
Saxony, Germany, left their imprint on
many flocks—but on none more so, than
the Peppin flock, destined to become world
famous.
At the London Exhibition, in the year
1862, he was awarded a bronze medal for
merino wool.
Following his death, Mrs. Anne Fraser
Bon undertook the responsibility attached
to the working of the property. Despite
her handicap of a young family, she more
than upheld the fame of the Wappan pro-
ducts and, season after season, topped the
Melbourne markets. The astonishing part
of her subsequent career was that—with all
her responsibilities—she yet was able to
participate to a wonderful degree in church
and public works.
One example of her nobility of character
chould be mentioned. On the advent of
the Christmas season shortly following the
Great War, she made a present of twenty
pounds to each blinded soldier in Victoria
who was in need, and this, together with
many other actions, explains the “Medaille
de la Reine Elisabeth” which was pre-
sented to her by the King of the Belgians
and which came to her accompanied by a
personal letter from that monarch after she
had presented a field ambulance to the Bel-
gian Army.
In the “Argus’’ of 13th June, 1936,
appears an article by Mr. P. Crosbie Morri-
son, under the heading “The Widow of
Wappan”, He writes: —
“ Picture her as I met her a few years
ago in her suite in the Hotel Windsor. The
atmosphere of a vanished age was all about
her. Her attire, her pictures, her orna-
ments, the album of yellowed photographs
she showed me, the funereal bas-relief boards
of the old Bible which lay on the little
table—all breathed of the days of Queen
Victoria. It was right that it should be so.
f°r she had lived through all the days of
Queen Victoria’s reign. She had been a baby
aged two months when the Crown was placed
on Victoria’s young head. Indeed, Mrs. Bon
was much as 1 had imagined Queen Victoria
herself to be—old, yet age had touched her
gently; meticulously proper to the smallest
detail; deeply and openly pious; soft, kind,
but dignified in speech; yet with an imperious
timbre in her voice and an imperious flash
in her eyes when she spoke of things that
must be done —a woman who was accustomed
to being obeyed.
Our business then was about aborigines.
Mrs. Bon was the true and constant friend
of the aborigines. To her last days she was
an indefatigable worker for their welfare.
More than 50 years ago, seeking fair treat-
ment for them, she began a movement which
resulted in 1881 in the appointment of a
board of inquiry into the treatment of abori-
gines throughout Victoria. She was the only
woman member appointed to that board, in a
day when it was still considered unusual for
a woman to take part in public affairs. But
championship of the aborigines was only
one phase of the life of this remarkable
woman.
Mrs. Bon lived through three reigns,
including the longest in British history, and
she lived to see the beginning of the fourth.
Through all that time her constant endeavour
was for her less fortunate fellow beings, and
her impression on those long years of Vic-
torian history is indelible.”
Of the union of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John Bon there was a family in all of five
children, of whom one died in infancy, and
of these Messrs. William Andrew and
David James survive.


■'■' k *,/ ;’
;4-
c^Py
v
The late Frederick Worland
The late Mrs. Elizabeth Ivy Worland
The Worland Family of Shelford and Winchelsea
Through four generations the family
here recorded have upheld the best tradi-
tions of our pioneer settlers. The same
land which came into their possession many
years ago is yet worked by descendants of
the Founder of the House and the surround-
ing districts have gained by virtue of their
having settled in their midst.
The late Frederick Worland and his
wife, Elizabeth Ivy, brought their daughter
Rebecca Ann, from their home at Ashton,
in the county of Cambridgeshire, in the
year 1854 and, landing at Point Henry,
spent a short while at the diggings. How-
ever, he foresaw the wonderful future in
store for those engaged in primary industry
and rented a farming property in the Bar-
rabool Hills where the family remained for
some few years. His energy and ability
then enabled him to take over a much
larger property at Shelford named the
“Stud Farm’’ where he engaged in mixed
farming and dairying on a large scale.
After but a comparatively short while,
however, he also selected —with his two
daughters and son—about fifteen hundred
acres at Mincha, near Pyramid Hill in the
Kerang district, and this latter property
was managed and worked by his son Fred-
erick, whilst the father carried on at Shel-
ford. Through the ensuing years the Shel-
ford property was extended and the late
Mr. W orland reached a position of esteem
and respect throughout the entire district.
Unfortunately, he was not destined to live
to a ripe age to enjoy the fruits of an active
and useful career for he died on the 24th
day of May in the year 1884 at the age of
fifty-three.
Following the death of the head of the
family, all properties were sold except the
“Stud Farm.” His widow survived him bv
seven years and died on the 18th October.
1891, at the age of sixty-one years. To the
union of the late Frederick and Elizabeth
Ivy Worland there was a family of four
sons and five daughters in all of whom the
following is a brief resume—
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


:rflter v-
■♦ '* •
WSML * **
x '% S '♦
‘
Mr. G. H. Worland
The late Mrs. Jessie Worland
Rebecca Ann—the late Mrs. George Hamil-
ton of Inverleigh.
Elizabeth —the late Mrs. A. Rankin of In-
vcrleigh and Geelong.
Maria —the late Mrs. James Langford of
Loddon \ ale.
d'hc late Mr. Frederick Worland of Shel-
ford and Loddon Vale.
Eliza —the late Mrs. C. Mills of Mincha and
St. Kilda.
Emma —Mrs. Edwin Joseph Elliott of Shcl-
ford.
Mr. George Henry Worland —of whom
further particulars follow later.
Mr. Alfred Edmund Worland of Geelong.
Mr. Reuben Amos Worland, of Perth, W r est
Australia.
Of the above family, Mr. George Henry
Worland was born at Highton on the
twenty-fifth day of (line, 1867, and from his
early years assisted on the family property.
After the death of his father he carried on
the “Stud Farm” in company with his bro-
ther Frederick until the twenty-sixth day
of July, 1894, when he married Miss Jessie
McDonald, daughter of the late John
McDonald of Winch el sea and sister of the
late James McDonald, M.L.A.
Following their marriage, the couple
rented a property at Moolap and thereafter
purchased another property from the
Government at Eurack, near Beeac in the
Colac district, and, in after years, also pur-
chased a second holding at Cressy. Both
of these properties he worked from Eurack,
although the Cressy holding was only re-
tained for two years, when he sold it and
concentrated upon his other activities.
Like his father before him, Mr. G. H.
Worland has been a man of abounding
energy for, in addition to his farming acti-
vities, he also, through several years,
engaged in travelling chaff-cutting and
threshing machines through the districts
where he became known as an efficient and
esteemed citizen among all with whom he
was brought into contact. The year 1902
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


saw him sell out of his Eurack property and
invest in his present line home “Kinross” —
which is portion of the original “Barwon
Park” property belonging to the late
Thomas Austin. Here he built his present
home and engaged in general farming and
the raising of sheep, although in latter years
he was mostly concentrated upon the latter
and the sowing of Rye grass and Subter-
ranean Clover.
From the union of Mr. and Mrs. George
Henry Worland there has been a family of
three sons in Colin Frederick, John Henry,
and James Allan.
Of these, the eldest went away, during
the Great War, with the Fourteenth Bat-
talion, A.1.F., and returned to Australia in
1919. He was wounded at Passchendale.
He is now a member of the Winchelsea
Shire Council. Mr. J. A. Worland is an
expert wool-classer and his ability in this
direction is of great value on the family pro-
perties. During the absence of the eldest
son, Mr. G. H. Worland bought 1,000 acres
of the “Barwonleigh” Station —which has
since grown to a yet larger area —and split
it between his two eldest sons whilst James
Allan was placed on the property adjoin-
ing the family homestead.
In passing, it is well worthy of note
that there are at present nine great-grand-
children of the original Founder of the
family alive. Mrs. Jessie Worland died at
the age of seventy-three in the year 1934.
Since the year 1919 Mr. G. H. Worland
has been most active in his capacity as a
Justice of the Peace and regularly takes
his place on the Bench in the Winchelsea
Court. Although now nearing his seven-
tieth birthday, Mr. Worland carries his age
remarkably well and this, perhaps, is the
more easily understood when it is remem-
bered that in his prime he was a notable
Scotch athlete, excelling in the caber and
hammer throw and the “putting the stone”
events. In these directions, he won many
trophies at Geelong, Warrnambool, Terang
and many other Sports gatherings through-
out the State of Victoria. It is but natural
that his son, Colin Frederick, has since
worthily and successfully followed in the
father’s footsteps.
In concluding these lines, it may with
truth be claimed that the history of the
family. here recorded is typical of the best
in Australian citizenship and represents in
many details the story of Australian pro-
gress which has set a pattern to the British
Empire and, indeed, the world, in the man-
ner in which a young country should and
can be successfully pioneered.
The Honourable Angus Mackay.
When Murdoch Mackay arrived in
Sydney in PS27, he was accompanied by
his wife and two sons, one three years of
age and the other an infant. Together with
three brothers, Murdoch Mackay had
served in the 78th Highland regiment, and
was a pensioner. The elder boy, Angus,
showed promise and the Rev. John Dun-
more Lang, a notable New South Wales
Colonist, took an interest in him and helped
him to obtain a good English and classical
education. When quite a young man
Angus Mackay became head master of a
public school and began to study for the
Presbyterian Ministry, but journalism
attracted him and he became a contributor
to the Sydney “Atlas” in 1847. and was
appointed editor in 1849. At the same time
Mr. Robert Lowe, the English barrister,
was a contributor to the same journal, but
subsequently returned to England and be-
came a prominent member of the House of
Commons.


The late Hon. Angus Mackay, M.L.A
The “Atlas” did not have a long life,
and Angus Mackay became a member of
the staff of Mr. Henry Parkes’ “Empire.”
in 1831, on the discovery of gold, Mr.
Mackay proceeded to the Turon, and wrote
an account of the work there. In 1853 he
came to Victoria, and was engaged by Mr.
Edward Wilson to act as correspondent of
the “Argus” at Bendigo, arriving on that
goldfield in October, 1853.
In 1855 he and Mr. J. J. Casey pur-
chased “The Bendigo Advertiser” which
had been established in 1853 by Mr. R. R.
Ilaverfield and Mr. A. M. Lloyd. Mr.
Mackay became editor of the “Advertiser”,
at the same time taking an active part in
die life of the goldfield. He was frequently
invited to stand for Parliament and in
1868, consented, and became a member of
the Legislative Assembly of Victoria in
conjunction with Mr. R. Bnrrowes. Mr.
Mackay was a strong advocate of free,
secular and compulsory education, and was
appointed on the Board of Education which
at that time administered the denomina-
tional system. In 1870 he became a mem-
ber of the McCulloch Ministry, and at the
request of the Premier, framed an Educa-
tion Bill which was read a first time in
December, 1870. This measure was the
principal issue at the general election in
1871, and the Ministry was re-elected On it,
but was subsequently defeated on a pro-
posed property tax.
A\ hen Mr. J. G. Francis formed his
ministry in 1872 Mr. Mackay was included
as Minister of Mines. The Education ques-
tion was taken in hand and, using Mr.


Mackay's bill as the basis, the Education
Act of 1872 was passed. In 1874 Mr.
Mackay became Minister of Education in
succession to Mr. Stephen, the first Minis-
ter. and held that office in the Kerferd
Ministry also.
During his connection with the
McCulloch, Francis and Kerferd Ministries
Mr. Mackay was instrumental in making
great progress with the Coliban Scheme of
Water Supply, and in November, 1877, he
had the honor of opening the sluice-gates
which allowed the water from the Coliban
to How into the Bendigo and Castlemaine
reservoirs, this being the culmination of
many years of strenuous work.
While Minister of Mines in 1873 he
passed the Regulation of Mines Act, which
resulted in the rate of accidents in Mines
being reduced by nearly lifty per cent.
This humanitarian enactment was regarded
by the Gladstone Government in England
as the most advanced legislation of its kind
in the British Dominions.
Mr. Mackay was one of the founders
of the Sydney “Daily 'Telegraph”, in 1879.
Ile represented Bendigo in Parliament
for fifteen years, and was a member of
three Ministries. Mr. Casey, his partner
in the “Advertiser” sold his interest in
1868, but Mr. Mackay continued as the
principal partner till he died on the sth
July, 1886. 11 is sons, Messrs. Robert D.,
George and Angus Mackay acquired the
remaining interest in the business on behalf
of the family, and conducted the “Adver-
tiser”, “Bendigonian” and “Riverine
Herald” (Echuca). The “Advertiser” and
“Bendigonian” were purchased by the
“Bendigo Independent” Proprietary in 1918.
The surviving members of the family
of Mr. Angus Mackay arc Messrs. G. and
A. Mackay of Bendigo, and Mrs. E. O’Sul-
livan of Melbourne.
The late Mr. Robert Mackay left one
son and one surviving daughter. The son.
Mr. Angus Theodore Mackay, is the mana-
ger of the ‘‘Riverine Herald,” and has, in
turn, two sons.
The daughter, Mrs. Lily Pennack,
married an officer in the Indian Army and
is resident in that country.
Mr. George Mackay has two surviving
daughters in Miss Mary Isabel Mackav,
who resides with her father at Bendigo,
and Mrs. Jean Cohen, widow of the late
Mr. Frank Cohen who was a well-known
Bendigo solicitor.
Mrs. jean Cohen has one son and two
daughters.
Mr. George Mackay lost his two sons
through the Great War. These were
Major Murdoch Nish Mackay, who was
killed in action, and Doctor George Eric
Mackay who died after the War of an ail-
ment contracted during the hostilities.
Mr. George Mackay also lost two
daughters prior to the M ar as, also, his
first wife who died in 1930.
Mr. Angus Mackay has two daughters
in, Miss Reay Mackay—who is with the
British Embassy at Washington ; and Miss
hlora Mackay who resides with her father
in Bendigo.
Mr. Angus Mackay lost his elder son,
Angus, who was killed in action in France.
The surviving son, Thomas Hope Hender-
son Mackay, lives in Melbourne and has
one son.
The family is now into the fourth and
fifth generations surviving and in residence
in Australia and Bendigo speaks as with one
voice m pointing to them as being repre-
sentative of the best in citizenship. We
lake pleasure in including these lines in
the present Work.


Dr. George Vause Birks.
Mrs. Geo. V. Birks.
The Birks of South Australia.
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family was Dr. George Vause Birks,
who arrived on the ship “Leonidas” (Capt.
Tadman) on December 4th, 1853, with six
sons and a daughter. He practised his
profession at Angaston, but in February,
1858, fell from a horse whilst on his way
to a patient and died shortly after the acci-
dent from concussion of the brain. His
wife was Hannah Napier. Their family
were: Charles, Alfred, John Napier, Walter
R., George Napier, William H., and Emily
I lannah.
Charles, son of Dr. Geo. Vause Birks,
was born on 13th February, 1844. His
first wife was Mary Maria Thomas, daugh-
ter of the late W. Kyffin Thomas, also a
well-known pioneer family and one of the
earliest to arrive in South Australia, of
whom more anon. Their family consisted
of Mary, Helen, who married Charles H.
Fisher; Catherine Louise, wife of Guy
\\ aterhouse; Edith Vause who married Dr.
Charles Riceman ; Margaret Eason, wife of
Col. Fowler Bronsworth; and Napier
Kyffin.
Charles started a small drapery store
in partnership with David Robin in Hindlev
Street in 1864. This business was success-
ful from the start and in October, 1871,
additional premises were acquired in
Run die Street at the corner of Stephens
Place, by the purchase of the business of
Ballantyne & Co. David Robin and
Charles Birks dissolved partnership on
March Ist, 1876. David Robin retained
the shop in Hindley Street, which was con-
sidered, at that time, the hub of the city,
and Charles Birks, father of the present
Chairman of Directors, Napier Kyffin Birks
took over the business on the present site.
Bundle Street in those days was considered
somewhat off the beaten track, but with


Ir * v *,
The late Robert Thomas
Great Grandfather of Napier Birks.
The late Wm. Kyffin Thomas.
the courage that marked all his business
activities, Charles Birks decided to estab-
lish his business there. He took into
partnership his brother, Walter, and
William Honeywill.
In 1893 Napier Birks joined the busi-
ness as an office boy and acquired a partner-
ship in 1901. William Honeywill retired
in 1907 and Charles Birks left the business
to his then partners in 1908, and Napier
Birks assumed control and F. E. Cornish
was appointed General Manager.
During this time the business was
gradually increasing, so much so, that
Napier Birks took a bold course in pur-
chasing the freehold of the land on which
the present large store now stands.
Although sole proprietor of this large and
expanding business, Napier Birks enlisted
in the Great War as a private, served in
Egypt and France and gained his Com-
mission on the field. In 1918 Napier Birks
returned from active service and in 191 (|
F. E. Cornish was taken into partnership.
In December, 1920, the business was
formed into a Limited Company with a
nominal Capital of £500,000. In 1923,
owing to the expansion of the business the
Capital of the Company was increased to
£600,000. The first Directors were Napier
Kyffin Birks, W. G. Hayes, F. E. Cornish
and E. A. Farr. Two have since died and
the present Directorate consists of Napier
Birks, E. A. Farr and C. F. Burnett.
from Napier Birks consideration,
which consisted of some £252.000 original
shares in the business, he distributed 10,000
of these amongst the senior employees and
created a Trust Fund for the general staff
by placing 50,000 fully paid £1 (original
shares in the Company to the credit of a
welfare scheme managed by four trustees
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


The late Mrs. Wm. Kyffin Thomas
The late Charles Birks
and a secretary. This was one of the ear-
liest of the profit-sharing schemes brought
in for the benefit of employees and estab-
lishing for them a feeling of partnership in
the firm and security for their future. This
Trust naturally makes for loyal service to
the firm and a greater service to the cus-
tomers of Charles Birks & Co. Ltd. It is
a well-known fact that shopping at this
great store is a pleasure, because of the
courtesy and service rendered to individual
customers by the staff employed there.
There are 600 shareholders in this
Company, almost exclusively South Aus-
tralia. The number of employees advanced
from 10 to 600, the latter number being
frecpientlv increased to 700 when the volume
of business warrants it.
The progressive expansion of the firm
necessitated increasing the floor space and
at the end of 1932 the Company purchased
the warehouse of Good Toms & Co., and the
floor space of the premises was increased
to four acres.
A feature of this business is the Picca-
dilly Restaurant which was established in
1931 and has become the Mecca for a large
clientele. The kitchen appointments and
electrical cooking devices are of the most
up-to-date and scientific in the Common-
wealth.
A bold policy was adopted during the
period of the depression through which
Australia has been passing and the
premises have been continuously improved,
showing the regard and esteem with which
the firm is held by the buying public of this
State.
The business is now in its seventy-
second year and in spite of increasing com-
petition has retained the goodwill estab-
lished in the early days and Charles Birks
& Co. Ltd. is recognised as the leading
shopping centre of its type in the State.


-Mrs. Mary Maria Birks
Napier Kyffin Birks.
Napier Birks married Lucy McDougall,
daughter of that well-known merchant, Sir
Joiin McDougall of England, at one time
Chairman of the London County Council
and they had a family of two sons and one
daughter; Leslie, the eldest son, was killed
in an acioplanc accident in 1929. Norman
Napier Birks, the younger son, is now a
Director of the firm. He married Patricia
Bruce, daughter of Frederick Bruce of
Adelaide, thus joining two pioneer fami-
lies. d hey have one daughter. Edith
Napier Birks married Thomas Cutback and
they have a family of two sons and one
daughter. These children represent the
fifth generation of the Birks family in
Australia.
Napier Birks is a man of outstanding
personality and besides controlling this
large company he is interested in two
other commercial concerns in the State.
Me showed practical patriotism at the time
of the \\ cii when he left his many interests
and joined the A.l.h. as a private and, in
passing, showed a great sense of humour
when one day he was controlling a large
staff of employees and the next day as a
private was doing the lowliest fatigue
duties possible for a new recruit.
In 1911 Napier Kyffin Birks established
the firm of Motors Limited, Adelaide, which
has worked up to one of the leading motor
tai distributing houses in the State. It
has a capital of £lOO,OOO and employs a
large stall in its salerooms and workshops.
Napier Kyffin Birks is Chairman of Direc-
tors of this Company and also Chairman of
the local Directorate of the Mercantile
Mutual Insurance Co. Ltd.
Ihe Birks family during their Ion"
association with the State and the commer-
cial life ol Adelaide have won an honoured
place in the roll of “Founders of Australia.”


I* . 4 j| B
j*
Norman Napier Birks.
Elizabeth Napier Birks,
Daughter of Norman Birks
THE THOMAS FAMILY
On the maternal side the Birks familv
have a longer association with South Aus-
tralia than most other families. From the
diary and letter of Mary Thomas it shows
that the Thomas family left England on
the ship “Africaine” on the 25th June, 1836,
arriving at Holdfast Bay, South Australia
on November 10th of the same year. This
was six weeks before the Province was
formed under proclamation by the first
Governor, Sir John Hindmarsh. This
diary is intensely interesting; it tells the
story of these pioneers landing with their
tents and belongings on the beach at Hold-
fast Bay. Robert and Mary Thomas were
met by their eldest son, Robert, who had
arrived in the Province six weeks earlier on
tlie ship “Cygnet”. They remained at
Holdfast Bay (now called Glenelg) until
June, 1837, when they moved to a town
acre block which they had purchased at
Adelaide in what later was named Hindley
Street. They witnessed the first christen-
ing ceremony held in the Colony conducted
by the Rev. C. 1). Howard.
In 1839 Robert and Mrs. Thomas took
up their residence at “Rhan-tregunwyn”
Cottage in \\ est Hindley Street. Mr.
Thomas died there in July, 1860. and Mrs.
Thomas in 1873.
\\ illiam Kyffin Thomas, son of Robert
and Mary, printed the first copy of the
Adelaide “Register'’ on June 3rd, 1836, in
England and the printing plant was brought
with them from England. This was the
first established newspaper in South Aus-
tralia and was retained in the hands of the
family until 1928. A daughter of W. Kyffin
1 homas who married the father of Napier
Hirks is the third generation of the Thomas
family and his grand-daughter represents
the sixth generation.


_~lr j
E^e
f~ O W ABBOTT t


The Abbotts of South Australia
This family has been honorably asso-
ciated with the State for over 100 years.
'The Founder, Pastor Jacob Abbott,
was a native of Burton Latimer, North-
amptonshire, England, where he was born
on 3rd December 1813. With his wife and
three children he set sail for the new Pro-
vince of South Australia on the ship “John
Ren wick” in October, 1836. Thev arrived
at Holdfast Bay (now Glenelg) on 11th
February, 1837.
As a Methodist Minister, Pastor
Abbott soon associated himself with the
few members of that body in the new land.
Amongst these were John Ridley, the in-
ventor of the first reaping machine, John
White, Edward Burgess, Joseph Middleton,
Thomas Abbott, Isaac Jacobs, Edward
Stephens, William Pearce and William
Croxall. These formed themselves into a
Committee and decided under the direction
of Jacob Abbott to build their first Church.
To Jacob Abbott is the honor of seeing this
completed, and shortly afterwards he was
appointed Pastor. After long delay in
building operations this Church was opened
in Hindley Street, Adelaide in March, 1837.
Several leaders of other denominations
were present at the inaugural services.
Later Pastor Abbott travelled through-
out the various settlements in and around
the hills within fifty miles of Adelaide,
holding services wherever possible. He
had many extraordinary experiences
pioneering the church work. Meetings
were held in the shade of gum trees
with a flour barrel for the pulpit, and rough
sawn planks laid across logs as seats for the
congregation. At Mount Barker the black-
smith’s shop was used as a meeting place,
and the anvil served the purpose of the
pulpit. Jacob Abbott later became a
pastor of the Christian Disciple Church.
He retired to Glenelg where he died at the
age of 95 years.
It is interesting to note that Jacob
Abbott with other members of his family
owned several acres of town allotments
within the City of Adelaide and that block,
forming the corner of King William Street
and North Terrace, was one of Jacob
Abbott’s first investments in city property.
Henry Giles Abbott, eldest son of Jacob
Abbott, junr., was born on the Victorian
Goldfields. He married Emily Ellis, of
Kapunda, daughter of Samuel Ellis of that
town. His son, Lindsay Gordon Abbott,
was born in Adelaide in 1891, where he re-
received his education. He then joined the
firm of PL L. Vosz, paint, glass, wall-paper
and hardware merchants, of Rundle Street,
Adelaide, with whom he stayed for some
time and acquired his knowledge of the
trade. He later joined the firm of Thomp-
son & Harvey, of Adelaide, with whom he
was with for ten years.
In 1919 Lindsay Gordon Abbott estab-
lished the firm of 1... G. Abbott N Co. Ltd.,
which has developed into one of the largest
and most progressive of its type in Aus-
tralia. In that time this firm has employed
an increasing number of people, until to-day
there is a permanent staff of nearly 100.
In addition to his own Company, L. G.
Abbott is a director of many other large
firms in South Australia and, although so
young a man, has advanced far in the com-
mercial world of South Australia.
In 1930, when the great depression was
at its peak, L. G. Abbott with eight other
business men formed the Citizen’s League
which started a movement becoming Com-
monwealth wide, and altered the whole
political situation of the Commonwealth.
The results have undoubtedly been bene-
ficial to the people of the Commonwealth.
L. G. Abbott married Sarah Mabel,
daughter of the late Peter and Harriett
Thomas of Kadina, South Australia. They
have two sons, Gordon Giles and Douglas
Whinnen who represent the fifth genera-
tion of the Abbott family in South Austra-
lia. Roth sons were educated at Prince
Alfred College and are now connected with
their father’s business.


titan % *
Mr. R. E. H. Hope
The late John Hope.
The Hope Family of "Wolta Wolta/’ Clare,
South Australia
The late John Hope arrived in South
Austrajia from Ireland in 1839. He took
up land shortly after his arrival in the State
and purchased “Wolta Wolta/’ near Clare
in 1840. This property was only a small
area at the time of purchase which he subse-
quently increased and developed into one
of the finest grazing runs in South Aus-
tralia. In addition he became interested in
several other stations both in South Aus-
tralia and New South Wales.
John Hope married in 1859, Isabel
Matilda, daughter of the Rev. R. K. IT.
Kenny, of Ireland. He made his principal
home at “Wolta Wolta” where he erected
n. line homestead which lias since been
added to considerably. Here his family
was reared. John Hope died in 1881 at
the age of seventy-three.
His second son, R. K. H. Hope, the
present owner of “W olta Wolta” was born
there in 1865. After managing the estate
lor the beneficiaries he bought them out in
1604 and continued the stud flock estab-
lished during his management. This flock
has tor many years been one of the leading
mciino studs of South Australia, acquiring
an enviable reputation. R. K. H. Hope
is recognised throughout Australia as a
judge of merino sheep and also as a breeder
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


i|||s' ’ Em
W i SR^vHffiHHfi
I c
Wolta Wolta” Homestead in the year 1909
Mr. John Standish Hope
of thoroughbred horses. Space does not
permit a detailed list of the stud stock bred
at “\\Oita \\ olta" but some of the finest
merino sheep and thoroughbred horses have
been produced from this station.
R. E. IT. Hope married Enid Frazer,
daughter of the late W. E. Frazer, of Ade-
laide, and their family consists of Ruth,
John Standish, Robert Edward Herbert,
William Kenney, Margaret Elizabeth and
Richard Sladen.
All the sons, except the youngest, are
established on properties of their own.
Richard Sladen is connected with the firm
of Dalgety and Co-, Limited.
“Wolta Wolta” has been established
over ninety-five years and few families in the
State have had a longer continuous associa-
tion with one property.
The Hopes of “Wolta Wolta” have
won an honoured place in the list of “Foun-
ders of Australia.”
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


p » Ife
m mM
% I
n 1
. ,-X - — ..^
( 1 ,r «- GCopr,F SM£PP *' rr d| I --^inr-v. . a v t s RR i F f
Hd j
( dd« of Ms" J AM ES S HERRl F F |
I A AMCS 9HERR ~~~1 * — "i
I 1 — I | 5 lKi'l|7| ' '"~' ' r "-■■ * v ' ill Mbv JAMES SHERRirF I |
i i <■ 1 i 1 1 1
.•-r-'tm 1 ,M,,m— —r mu -, m , r, p " R R , p p '
mTk J SHEW R l p F [ | ' | Miit H ALL A ALLA DAY M «- A. dERRIFF [ | M< |


James SherrifF, Yorke Peninsula,
South Australia.
James Sherriff, second son of William
Sherriff, was born in 1842, and with his
brother George, came to Yorke Peninsula,
and after working land in conjunction,
James took over the original property,
“ Koongoora” He married Miss Ellen
Bishop, daughter of Obed Bishop, and
their family consists of James, Mary, Anne
and George (deceased). James Sherriff,
senior, died in 1920 after nearly 50 years’
association with Yorke Peninsula.
James Sherriff, junior, was born in
1877 and then joined his father on the pro-
perty which he acquired in 1912. He mar-
ried Alice Louisa, daughter of Stephen
Piggott of Clarendon, and there are two
sons, Reginald Douglas and Kenneth
James. Reginald married Kath Bennet of
Warooka, thus joining two pioneer
families.
“Koongoora” is some 2727 acres in
extent, which has been developed from the
640 originally taken up by James Sherriff,
senior. In 1935 some 1000 acres were
under crop in wheat and barley. Up to 30
bushels of wheat and 13 bags of barley per
acre have been harvested. In addition over
1800 head of Merino sheep are shorn on
the property.
James Sherriff, junior, and his wife are
keenly interested in the welfare of the
district. He was President of the local
branch of the Liberal Union, and Mrs.
Sherriff. is an active worker for the Yorke-
town Hospital Auxiliary. The sons are
associated with their father on the property
which has been in the family for nearly 70
years.
Mary married Percy Francis Halladay
of Stansbury, also a member of a pioneer
family, and there is a daughter, Betty.
The late George Sherriff, junior, mar-
ried Annie Peterson, and had one daughter,
Doris.
Mi ss Annie Sherriff is residing at
Stansbury where the late Mrs. James
Sherriff died at the age of 68 years.


Jr
-«!# «MMM
i ~ j i
'witT M . Mp, J V BARCLAY I NsS?^
I wtk jBK
€ i
v "■""" *#
l| Mb. P. J. BARCLAY “j 1 *—-—■ ‘^
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


The Barclay Family, of Corny Point.
John James Barclay arrived in South
Australia on the ship “Catherine Stewart
Forbes”, in 1837, having been instructed to
form a branch of the British and Foreign
Bible Society in South Australia. He
hoisted the first Bethel Flag of this organi-
sation in the State.
He married Miss Rebecca Booth,
and there was a family of six children.
John Young Barclay, a son of the above,
was born at Bundle Street, in the first brick
cottage in Adelaide in 1843. He was en-
gaged in various occupations, and later
went to the Northern Territory on mining
enterprises. He married Miss Jessie
Fielding of Adelaide, whose people arrived
in South Australia in 1853, and their father
was a well-known tailor in Bundle Street,
Adelaide, for many years.
Early in the 70’s J. Y. Barclay took up
the “Pharos View” property at Corny
Point, which was then virgin scrub, and he
was the first settler in that part of Yorkc
Peninsula. The original area was 840
acres, which has since been increased and
is used for mixed farming.
There was a family of three sons and
three daughters. John Young Barclay,
Florence (Mrs. Mac Donald), Percy James
(killed in action in France), Jessie, Eliza-
beth (Mrs. Faggotter), Kate Margaret
(Mrs. Collins) and Roy. There arc fourteen
grand-children. John Young Barclay,
senior, died on June 26th, 1931, after giving
much of his time to the welfare of the
district. He was a Councillor of the
district for several years, and a most public
spirited citizen.
In those days when medical men were
few and far between, his knowledge of
chemistry was in constant demand by the
people of the district. He was educated
at J. L. Young’s school in Adelaide.
His widow still resides on the property
to which she was taken as a bride. J. Y.
Barclay, J.P., eldest son of the above, was
born in 1884, and educated at Corny Point
and Cotomandel Valley, after which he
returned to the farm, and has been engaged
in pastoral pursuits and farm work ever
since. Like his father, he is a District
Councillor, having already served in the
capacity for some tw'elve years. He mar-
ried Susan Alma Rowe of Kadina. Three
generations have served in municipal affairs
in their respective districts.
The second son, Percy James Barclay,
joined the 10th Battalion of the A.1.F., and
made the supreme sacrifice in France in
1918.
The family has had 100 years associa-
tion with the State, and has won an
honoured place in the roll of “Founders of
Australia.”


gjt ||jU J| 1 I ,J^


The Addisons and Morphetts, of South Australia
James Addison, a native of England,
arrived in South Australia in 1840. Shortly
after arrival in the State, he engaged in
pastoral pursuits in the Port Lincoln Dis-
trict. In 1851 he married Maria Bailey,
daughter of John Bailey, the first Colonial
Botanist in South Australia, who arrived
in 1839. The children of James and Maria
Addison were : Catherine, James, Julia,
Emil}', Emma, Mary and Frederick, of
whom James and Emma survive. James
Addison, senior, died in 1870 at the age of
51 and his wife died in 1884, aged 50.
James Addison, junior, engaged in
farming and later became connected with a
stock and station agency in Adelaide. He
married Susannah Morphett, daughter of
Richard Morphett, whose association with
south Australia is given hereunder. The
children of James and Susannah Addison
are: May, Elsie Ada (deceased), Lucy
Dora, Winifred (deceased), Allan James,
Beatrice Ruby, Gladys Eveline Julia and
Hazel Edna Verena. Lucy Dora married
John Francis Davies of Adelaide, who made
the supreme sacrifice whilst on active ser-
vice with the Australian Imperial Force
during the Great War.
Mr. and Mrs. James Addison are now
living in retirement in the home James
erected for his bride over fifty years ago.
Allan James Addison married Alice
Dyer of Adelaide and they have two sons,
Colin James and Donald Allan, who repre-
sent the fourth generation of the Morphett
family.
The Morphetts were some of the early
colonists who helped to blaze the trail.
Richard Morphett was born at Tenterden,
Kent, on November 3rd, 1821. His people
were landed gentry. After finishing his
education, he went to London to live with
an uncle, who was a tea merchant. Richard
Morphett had several years experience in
his uncle’s office. Then the young Colony
of South Australia attracted his attention.
He decided to migrate to Australia, and
arrived in the Colony in the ship, “Tagli-
one”, in 1841.
In 1843 he married Lucy Du Rieu,
daughter of Mr. Henry Joseph Du Rieu,
solicitor of London, who arrived in South
Australia with his family in the ship
“Planter”, in 1839. Richard decided to
take up farming, and he selected land at
Clarendon; he was one of the first settlers
in that district. At that time Clarendon
was densely wooded country without any
roads. The inhabitants were a tribe of
aborigines. Their camping ground was on
the site of the present recreation ground;
occasionally other tribes would camp
there. Then they would have a fight. In
1850 they had a battle and many of the
blacks received spear wounds, and eventu-
ally one native was speared to death, and
the Murray aborigines were declared the
victors and the battle ended.
Before Richard Morphett could get
fruit trees, he grew melons for jam, and
vegetables, but the blacks soon found that
they were good and began stealing them,
and, as they liked potatoes, they would
scratch them out of the ground. Richard
Morphett, with the help of his brother, J.
Morphett, and some men, cleared part of
the hills and gullies and planted crops of
wheat on the hills and potatoes on the
flats. 4'lm only method of transport to the


city was by bullock dray. It took two
days to get to the city with a load of wheat.
There were no roads and they had to travel
around the hills.
After a time, Richard Morphett bought
some fruit trees from Mr. John Bailey of
Hackney, the first Government Botanist
of South Australia, grandfather of Mr.
John Bailey, who was director of the Ade-
laide Botanic Gardens for 14 years.
Morphett planted the first fruit garden in
Clarendon. The first religious service was
held at his home, Blackwood Lodge, and
the first tea meeting was held in front of his
house under a large blackwood tree.
The first church built in Clarendon
was a Wesleyan Chapel. It was opened in
1851, and the opening services were con-
ducted by the Reverend T. T. M. Hull.
The first Sunday School was opened in the
Chapel by Richard Fox.
In those days there was no bridge over
the Onkaparinga, and when the river was
in flood the people living over the other
side could not get across until the flood
went down, when they would cross in a
bullock dray.
Richard Morphett led an active life
and took a keen interest in all local move-
ments having for their object the advance-
ment of the locality He had the satisfac-
tion of seeing it grow from a trackless
bush into a prosperous town. He was a
member of the District Council and after-
wards Auditor for 16 years. He died in
the old home at Clarendon on the 20th
July, 1902, in his 81st year having lived
there nearly 60 years.
Very sincere is the tribute paid to the
memory of one who, throughout his life-
time maintained an unblemished reputa-
tion. He was survived by a widow and
thirteen children. The sons and daughters
arc as follows: Richard, Frederick, Henry,
John E., W. Augustus, A. Louis, G. Arthur.
Mesclames G'luis, Rutter, Tilbrffok, Ed-
wards, I lilton, and Addison.
Mrs. R. Morphett continued to live in
her old home, and resided there for 75
years. She could relate many stirring in-
cidents of the early days. Those were the
days of bullock drays and rough bush
tracks, and these orchard-clad hills on the
banks of the Onkaparinga were then
heavily and densely wooded, and in the
shadows of the great gum trees roamed the
aborigines in all their wild freedom.
Pioneers, indeed, were that daring and
enterprising couple who came and saw and
conquered those hills in the dawning his-
tory of the State. To Mrs. Morphett, as
well as to her husband, who pre-deceased
her by 18 years, the beautiful town of
Clarendon with its orchard clad hills is a
memorial. It was nothing in those davs
for Richard Morphett and his wife to trudge
off to a meeting four miles away across the
hills, carrying a baby to a religious ser-
vice held in Mr. Bottrell’s house at Kan-
garilla. One often felt in listening to her
that one was back at the beginning of
things, as far as our State was concerned.
The clearness of her intellect was most
striking. She would tell how her father
saw the first railway train start in London.
She would talk of her Sunday school days.
'I he voyage out, with its storms and mutiny
and death, the landing at Holdfast Bay,
and a novel ride from there to Adelaide in
a bullock waggon.
Mrs. Morphett was a wonderful
woman in more senses than one. Rough
and hard was the struggle of those pioneer-
ing days, but it never roughened or hard-
ened her. It was difficult to connect in
any way this sweet gentle, refined lady
with bullock drays and scrub tracks. In
her presence, one felt the atmosphere of
the drawing room. She never would utter
an unkind or uncharitable word about any-
body. Her memory dwelt on the good and
pure. Hers was a beautiful and peaceful
eventide. She was in her 95th year, when
on March 2nd, 1920, she died, and was the
head of five generations, leaving seven
sons, six daughters, 79 grand-children, 105
great-grand-children. seven great-great-
grand-children, being 202 direct descend-
ants. There is to-day a sixth generation
of this family.


Ihe late Captain Duncan Longden
Soldier Statesman Pressman.
Few of our old pioneers could boast a
more varied or colorful career than the sub-
ject of this sketch. Born in Jamaica in the
year 1826, the late Captain D. Longden
was the son of a Colonel stationed in that
territory. As soon as the lad had reached
an age which rendered it possible, he was
sent to school at Bruges, in Belgium. On
completion of his education, he received a
commission in the 13th Regiment of Light
Infantry (Prince Albert’s) and later was
transferred to the Royal Fusiliers, with
whom he served in India —earning the Sind
and Beloochiston Medal and Clasp. During
these years—lB44 to 1846—he was aide-de-
camp to Sir Charles Napier, and, after about
ten years service, he retired from the Army.
In the year 1853 he was married to Agostina
Abbertini, daughter of Compte Anati who
was for many years professor of foreign
languages at Winchester College, England.
In 1854 news of the activities on the
Australian goldfields was one of the prin-
ciple subjects of conversation in the Old
Country, and the newly-married couple
decided to try their luck on the diggings.
Their journey was aboard the sailing ship
“Investigator,” and they then went to the
Maryborough field—which was at that time
booming. His fine qualities soon placed
him as a leader among his fellows, and he
was elected to the first Legislative Council
as member for the Avoca district. In
passing, it is of interest that at the time of
his death he was the sole survivor of the
01 iginal members. His attainments both
as a linguist and as a natural leader of men
caused him to enter many fields of activity,
including those of a grazier, mine manager
and speculator. In journalistic circles he
also made his mark for he was editor of the
“Geelong Times” and the “Ballarat Star”
in addition to serving on the editorial staff
of the Melbourne “Daily Telegraph.”
In the sixties of last century he sett-
led on the well-known “Chevy Estate” in
the Geelong district, and he resided in those
parts until his death in the year 1904. His
efforts on behalf of everything pertaining
to the welfare of Geelong were recognised
by one and all, and, he was at one period
President of the Bellerine Shire Council.
It is somewhat of a pity that space herein
does not permit of a detailed account of his
career in full, for he was undoubtedly one
of the leaders in his generation, but of one
thing we may be certain, namely, that he
was at all times regarded as a typical
example of a fine old English gentleman.
Of the union of the late Captain and
Mrs. Duncan Longden, there was a family
in all of five sons and two daughters of
whom Doctor Frank Reginald Longden, of
Buninyong, Victoria, is the youngest son.


I i ii pip I
The late LUDWIG FISCHER j j The we THOMAS GEMMELL | j
/' 0 w f
'j‘ '4 ' HR * *
{ The U, e Mrs V. E. H. W K R1 CHAU F F | | T„, Wt F. e7h7w. KRICHAUFF The iate Mrs THOMAS GEMMELL.
IlIL d
l Mn r C ' KRICHAUFF | III F M ‘' s F ' C KRICHAUFF | |


Friedrich Eduard Heinrich Wulf Krichauff
Among the prominent authorities on
agricultural matters and on land legisla-
tion in South Australia, F. E. PL W. Erich-
auff occupied a leading place. Lie was a
native of Schleswig, Duchy of Schles-
wig, (then Denmark) where he was born
on December 15th, 1824. In consequence
of the troubles of 1848, he came in that
year to South Australia in the ship
“Alfred”, and first settled in the Bugle
C 5
Ranges, and there employed himself in
cultivating the soil and in generally
developing the land he had taken up. In
October, 1864, he came to Adelaide and be-
came a land and commission agent, which
he carried on until 1893, when he retired.
Besides his private work, Mr. Krichauff
early began to serve his neighbors as their
representative in public offices. He be-
came a member of the Macclesfield District
Council, and was its Chairman for many
years; and he was also engaged in a simi-
lar capacity on the Strathalbyn District
Council. At the first general election after
the granting of responsible government
F. E. H. W. Krichauff, in 1857, was re-
turned to the new House of Assembly for
Mount Barker. His object in going into
Parliament was to support Sir. R. R. Tor-
rens’ Real Property Act in the drafting of
which he took an active part, in conjunc-
tion with the late Dr. Ulrich Hubbe.
Artesian boring for water was then in
its infancy, and F. E. H. W. Krichauff
visited Honolulu and inspected the bores
put down there, as well as afterwards,
those by the United States. On his return
he advocated the system for South Aus-
tralia. From 1858 to 1870 he was out of
Idi liamcnt, but in the latter year he was
i etui ned for Onkaparinga, which he repre-
sented for 12 years, and held the portfolio
of Commissioner of Public Works in the
Strangways Ministry. He resigned in 1882,
and visited Europe, Great Britain and the
United States. In 1884 he was elected to
the House of Assembly for the Victoria
District, and served that electorate for
six years. In 1891 he entered the
Legislative Council as member for the
Southern District. He retired from the
political arena in 1894. F. E. H. W. Krich-
auff was practically the originator of the
Forest Department. In 1874 he carried a
measure to prevent the introduction of
Phylloxera, and was one of the five Com-
missioners who enquired into the working
of the Real Property Act. On the estab-
lishment of the Agricultural Bureau in 1888
he was appointed Chairman of the Central
Bureau, which position he held until his
death. He was a foundation member of
the Council of the Agricultural College.
F. E. H. W. Krichauff was one of the
originators of the application of super-
phosphate to agriculture in South Austra-
lia. He married Dorothea Awoline Sophia
Fischer, daughter of Ludwig Fischer who
was also a passenger from Germany on the
“Alfred” in 1848. Their family were:
Alfred, Edward William, Frederic Charles
and Sophus Henry. The latter two survive.
His death occurred on September 29th,
1904.
Frederic Charles Krichauff, son of the
above, was born at Bugle Ranges on 27th
June, 1861, and educated at the North
Adelaide Educational Institute, conducted


by the late E. P. Nesbit, and later at Whin-
ham Grammar School. Having passed the
Civil Service examination, he entered the
Government Service in the office of the
Architect-in-chief, in February, 1878.
He became Chief Draftsman, which posi-
tion he occupied for over 20 years and re-
tired in 1920. During that time he saw the
erection of many public buildings, and
drew plans for the School of Mines build-
ing, Art Gallery, the new wing of the
Public Library, the Geographical Society’s
building and many other edifices through-
out the State. He married Elizabeth Alice,
daughter of the late Thomas Gemmell, who
arrived in South Australia in the ship
“India”, in 1840, and his wife, Bessie, nee
Inglis, of Blackburn, who arrived in the
State in the ship “Fairfield”, in 1839.
F. C. Krichauff is a keen philatelist and
v as bounder of the South Australian Phila-
telist Society in 1888, this being the oldest
Society of its type in Australia and now
numbers laO members. He is a member
of the Royal Philatelist Society of Great
Britain and is one of only two in Australia,
whose name has been added to the roll of
distinguished philatelists by the Philatelic
Congress of Great Britain for services
rendered and work done for the advance-
ment of philately. His collection of
stamps is known throughout Australia and
Great Britain and, as an evidence of his
keen knowledge of stamp collecting, he
was able, through the sale of a small sec-
tion of his collection, to build a lovely
home near Adelaide, “Karnko”, from the
proceeds of this sale. The home was de-
signed by himself and is a beautiful
example of modern architecture.
In addition to philately, F. C. Krich-
auff has been a keen photographer for
many years, and in the early days when
this art was not so well developed as now,
he had to make the most of his require-
ments and materials, float sensitized paper
on silver bath, etc. hie was a member of
the original Photographic Society of South
Australia, and exhibited both in the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition of 1886, and the
Adelaide Jubilee Exhibition of 1887 and
for examples of his work he won medals.
1 he family on both sides has an honoured
place in the roll of “Founders of Australia.”
The Piggott Family of “Rockleigh,”
Clarendon.
Charles Piggott with his wife and
three children arrived in Adelaide from
England in 1852. After some time in the
State he took up land at Clarendon, acquir-
ing some 80 acres. This original block,
together with additional land, is still in the
hands of the family. There were eleven
children, Steven, Mary, Mark, Luke,
John, Martha, James, Annie, Laura, Eliza-
beth and Charles. Of these only John and
Laura survive. Charles Piggott, senior,
died on the property in 1887, and his wife
died there in 1892.


John Piggott was born in 1856, and
was only fourteen days old when brought
to the property, which he eventually took
over on the death of his father. He was
educated locally and took up farming pur-
suits with which he has been connected
ever since. He was elected a member of the
Morphett Vale District Council in which
he served for two terms. In his youth he
was a keen cricketer, and has always taken
an active interest in the progress of the
district, particularly the local Agricultural
Society of which he is a life member.
Laura, the fourth daughter, married
Valter Herbert Lovick, son of James
Lovick, who was an early arrival in the
State, thus joining two pioneer families.
'1 hey have one son, Clarence Lindsay, who,
represents the third generation of the
Piggott family and the third generation of
the Lovicks.
During their eighty-four years asso-
ciation with South Australia, the Piggotts
have never parted with their land, and have
been continuously engaged in mixed farm-
ing, running Merino and Crossbred sheep
in connection with the property. Far
lambs from “Rockleigh” have maintained
consistent high prices.
The whole family has helped in pro-
moting the welfare of the district, and two
grandsons served overseas with the A.1.F.,
one making the supreme sacrifice in France.


r- i M '»' K VON OOUSSA
C. L. von DOUSSA


The von Doussa Family of South Australia
Emil Louis Alfred von Doussa, the
founder of the South Australian Branch of
this family arrived in Adelaide on the ship
“Hail Louise" in 1846. He was the son of
Ludwig Heinrich Albert von Doussa a
Prussian Officer in the Napoleonic Wars,
and who was ennobled by King Frederick
of Prussia for services rendered during that
campaign. He participated in the Battle
of Waterloo. Within a year of his arrival
in South Australia, Emil Louis Alfred von
Doussa married at St. James Church of
England, Blakiston, Dorothea Anna Schach
of Balhannah and they had two sons, Alfred
born in 1848, and Louis, born in 1850. After
finishing his education at St. Peters College,
Adelaide, Alfred became a partner in the
firm of Gunther & von Doussa of Hahndorf.
His father Emil had established a business
at Hahndorf which Alfred took over on the
retirement of his father. In 1901 Alfred
von Doussa was elected in the Legislative
Council, which seat he held over 20 years.
He married Helena, daughter of the late
William Doudy, and their family consisted
of Louis Alfred, who is engaged in farming
pursuits and married Gwendoline Hyman
of Adelaide, and their family of three
daughters are Kathleen, Bernadette and
Margaret; Alice who married Leslie
Cowan of Blakiston and died leaving three
sons Darcy, Colin and Michael; and
Dorothea who married Dr. M. H. Jay of
Adelaide and has two sons and three
daughters, Anthony, Peter, Geraldine,
Judith and Alice.
The Hon, Alfred von Doussa did much
to enhance the welfare of the Mount Barker
District. He was the founder and for
nearly 50 years Secretary of the Onka-
paringa Racing Club, and held many other
public offices. His career as a public man
was unique. For 55 years he was Clerk
of the Echnnga District Council, a record
in South Australian municipal annals.
Every type of sport received his active
support and his work in connection with
the Onkaparinga Racing Club is com-
memorated in the von Doussa Steeplechase
named after him. lie died in 1926 at the
age of 79.
The Hon. Louis von Doussa was
educated at Hahndorf College and in 1886
was articled to the late J. J. Bonnar and
admitted to the Bar in 1871. He com-
menced the practice of his profession as a
Barrister and Solicitor in 1872 at Ml.
Barker and Adelaide. He was a most
public spirited citizen and held many offices
including Advocate of the Diocese of
Adelaide. In 1889 he was elected as a
member for the Mount Barker District and
later to the Legislative Council for the
Southern District. He served for a term
as Attorney General and Minister of
Education in the Jenkins Ministry.
Louis von Doussa married a daughter
of the late William Bowman of Middleton
and they had two sons, Francis and Stanley,
and two daughters, Ethel and Olive.
Francis was for many years manager of
Elder Smith & Co’s Branch at Mount
Barker and Strathalbyn.
Stanley practices as a solicitor at
M annum.
Louis von Doussa died on May 29th,
1932.
William Bowman, the father of Mrs.
Louis von Doussa arrived in South Aus-
tralia from Scotland in 1839. Me was an
earlv pioneer of the Finnis District of South
Australia where he engaged in farming and
later became interested in flour milling.


Francis married in 1901 Ethel, daughter
of AVilliam Egerton Warburton, son of the
well-known explorer. Their family con-
sists of William Louis, Margaret and
Frederick.
\\ illiam Louis is the third generation
of the von Doussa family to be educated at
Peter’s College, Adelaide, and was
ai tided to his grandfather and admitted to
the Lai in 1925, and in 1932 took over the
practice of Louis von Doussa.
1 he family established a record in
South Australian legal circles as grand-
father, son and grandson, were all practis-
ing solicitors at one time.
A\ illiam Louis von Doussa married
Lands Evelyn, daughter of Charles AVilliam
Reid of Adelaide, and their family consists
of Charles Louis and Gay Mitford. These
children have the distinction of being the
fifth generation of South Australians of
both the von Doussa and Reid families.
Few families have done more for their
State in public activities than the von
Doussas who have earned an honored place
on the roll of founders of Australia.
Ihe late Reverend John Anderson
of Warrnambool
The verdict passed by his contempor-
aries on the character of the late Reverend
John Anderson was “a generous and unre-
mitting worker for the good of his fellow-
creatures , and a higher compliment has
yet to be found.
Born in Forfarshire, Scotland, the late
Reverend Anderson was educated locally
and at all times demonstrated his deep feel-
ings and religious sincerity wherever his
work found him located. Prior to coming
to this country he was in charge of the
1 olbooth Church, Edinburgh, for some time
and accepted the call to come to Victoria in
the year 1859, to take over the Presbyterian
Church at Maryborough.
1 his was at a time when the diggings
were yet booming and it required a man of
character and initiative to undertake such
a responsibility. However, he amply de-
monstrated his ability and remained at
Maryborough until the year 1862 when he
was transferred to AVarrnambool where he
immediately became one of the most popu-
lar members of the Cloth ever to be located
in the Western Districts of Victoria.
This was easily understandable for he
was o'f a tolerant disposition, although
recognised as a conscientious worker on
behalf of one and all in need of his ser-
vices. His activities were largely re-
sponsible for the advancement of AVarr-
nambool in the civic sense, as well as his
chosen walk in life. He was responsible
for the building of a very fine Presby-
teiian Church, located at AVarrnambool,
and, withal, was noted for his benevo-
lence and charity in many directions.
Ihe late Reverend John Anderson
married Miss Jane Hastie, daughter of
the late George Hastie, and niece of the
well-known John Hastie who arrived in
this State in the year 1837.
The Hastie family established many
Station properties in the Western district
of A ictoria, among which should be
named “ Punpundyal,” and later re-
named by the Russell family “Leslie
Manor”, at Camperdown. It is worthy
of record that on the death of the late
John Hastie, he left the sum of sixty
thousand pounds to the University
Presbyterian Church and the Church of
England.
To the union of the Reverend and
iMrs. John Anderson there was a family
of one son and one daughter, the particu-
lars of whom, in brief, are appended
hereto :


f t i\
The late Rev. John Anderson
John Theodore, married Miss Patter-
son, daughter of the late Harvey Patter-
son—well known grazier and sporting
leader —to this union there has been one
son in Mr. Raymond Theodore Anderson
of Sydney. Mr. John Theodore Ander-
son died in the year 1926 and was for
many years Inspector-General of * the
Insane for the State of Western Austra-
lia,
Mary Cameron, married Mr. James
Gideon Pott of “Potburn”, Ettrick,
Scotland. Mr. J. G. Pott died on active
service at Salonica in the year 1916. In
many directions Mrs. Mary Cameron
Pott has followed the example shown by
her late father for she has for several
years past given a great deal of her time
and energies to the service of those in
less fortunate circumstances than herself.
Her charitable work is well recognised
by many with whom she has been
brought into contact and, among other
activities, she occupies the position of
I’resident of the National Young
I he late Mrs. Jane Anderson.
Women’s Christian Association of Aus-
tralia
Mrs. Pott has for many years past
been in residence at “Hybla,” 2 Wallace
Avenue, Toorak.
Ihe Reverend John Anderson passed
away, while still a comparatively young
man, in the year 18/8 whilst his widow sur-
vived him by many years—making the last
journey in 1933. Following the death of
her husband, the late Mrs. Jane Anderson
resided with her daughter to the time of her
death.
I he family here recorded can, on the
maternal side, claim practically one hundred
years of residence in Australia and are thus
one of the oldest families in the State of
Victoria.
We have pleasure in including this
brief history in the “Founders of Austra-
lia and their Descendants.”


4swC^
Crest.
The late Pulteney Mein, Pastoralist,
and
Mr. William Pulteney-Mein, of 482 St. Kilda Road,
Melbourne.
The history of other sections of the
family here recorded appears already in
another portion of this Work. For between
eighty and ninety years the name of this
family has stood for a great deal in the
pastoral circles of Australia and the present
branch has upheld in every way the fine
traditions handed down by the Founders of
the family in the fifties of last century.
The Founder of this branch was the
late Pulteney Mein who was born in Canon-
bie, Dumfrieshire, Scotland. Before giving
his career in this country, however, it would
be well to place on record some idea of the
type of forebears from which he was
descended.
His father was the late Nicol Alexan-
der Mein, an ensign in the fifty-second foot
Regiment (1797), who had an outstanding
career in the military forces of the Empire.
On the twenty-fifth day of January, 1813,
he was appointed Commander —with the
rank of Lieutenant-Colonel —of the forty-
third foot. His active service took place
in two campaigns, for he was engaged both
in the American Wars and also under Wel-
lington at the siege of Paris.
It is thus seen that for many years prior
to the settlement of the family in Australia,
England bcnefitted from their fine citizen-
ship.
On the twenty-eighth day of March,
1857, the late Pulteney Mein sailed for
Australia aboard the “King Phillip" from
Cravesend, and arrived on the 20th June.
In October of the same year, in partnership
with his brother —Doctor George Augustus
Mein —he invested in a fine station property
“Moolpa” in the Riverina. This propertv
was then owned by Messrs. McKinnon &
Liddiard.


® w W% ;
The late Pulteney Mein.
At a later date again, the partners
bought “Liewah” and “Keri-Keri” which
were also situated in the Riverina. In the
year 1873 “Liewah” was sold to H. T. Cres-
wick, whilst in the year 1877 “Keri-Keri
was sold to the late John Gumming. The
partnership also owned the fine old 300,000
acres property of “Boorooma” —and such
holding is still possessed by the present
head of the family—Mr. William Pultcney
Mein.
The foregoing does not by any means
cover the extent of their activities in the
pastoral world. In 1881 “Herbert Downs
in Queensland was purchased, whilst in
1888 “Gilmore” also in Queensland, was
added to their possessions. Two station
properties were also bought in New Zealand
in the year 1884, namely “Woodslee Downs’
and “Kiwi”.
The above gives some slight idea as to
the progressiveness and initiative possessed
by such pioneer stock as this family. It is
no exaggeration to claim that it is to such
as these that Australia owes a great debt
The late Mrs. Agnes Mein.
when consideration is given to the develop-
mental work of her primary industries. The
late Mr. Pulteney Mein was a citizen who
commanded the utmost respect from his
fellows throughout the whole of his lifetime.
In addition to his pastoral pursuits he was
a well-known member over many years
standing of the Australian Club. It ; was
during a trip abroad in the year 1908 that
he died suddenly at Lyons, France, and his
remains w T ere taken to Canonbie, where he
was interred in the family mausoleum. His
widow survived him by eight years, passing
away in 1916.
1 he late Mr. Pulteney Mein married
Miss Agnes Mein, a distant relative, of
Marsh House”, Yapeen (whose branch of
the family came out in the middle 40’s of last
centuiy) and to this union there was one
son in the present Mr. William Pulteney-
Mein, who received his education at Mel-
bourne Grammar School, and in due course
became the owner of both “Moolpa” and
“Boorooma.” In the year 1911, he disposed
of the former to Mr. A. T. Creswick, the
present owner.


\ - —a i
Lieutenant Colonel Nicol Alexander Mein
Mr. W. Pulteney-Mein
In the year 1924 Mr. W. Pulteney-Mein
purchased the homestead portion of the fine
“Bringagee” Estate in the Hay district
which had been for many years in the
Austin family.
From his union with Miss Beatrice
Staker, of Melbourne, there has been a
family of four children of whom particulars
in brief follow :
1. Dalzell (married Miss Kath-
leen Rhys-Jones of Melboune)
now part owner and manager
of “ Toolang,” Coleraine, a
recent purchase. He and his
brother are partners. The
firm’s name being Messrs. D.
P. & I. P. Mein.
2. Tan. At present gaining pas-
toral experience on the land.
3. Phyllis. In residence with her
parents in Melbourne.
4. Alison. Mrs. R. A. Stuart,
of Toorak.
Mr. and Mrs. William Pulteney-Mein
are now in residence in Melbourne as al-
ready stated in these lines. Like his father
before him he is a member of the Australian
Club in addition to the Athaencum Club, the
\ .R.C., \ .A.T.C., Moonee Valley Racing
Club and the Williamstown Racing Club —
the last of which he is a Committeeman.
He also is a member of the Peninsula Golf
C lub and the Albert Park Golf Club.
V e are pleased to be able to include
the history of this branch of the family in
the present work, for Australia as a nation
has benefitted to a considerable degree as a
result of their settlement on her shores
throughout the three generations since the
year 1857.


Jk ill
Mr. William John Clement of Raywood
Air. William John Clement.
Mr. \A illiam John Clement, of Ray-
wood, is a native of New Zealand, and a
son of one of the early pioneers of the
sister colony in Mr. John Clement of “The
llutt”, Wellington, where he was born on
the twenty-seventh day of January in the
year 1862. When the goldfields were
booming at Kimberley, West Australia, in
1886, Mr. Clement decided to try his luck
hut, unfortunately for him at the time, he
not only met with no success on the digg-
ings but, also, lost his entire capital. Un-
daunted, the young adventurer then under-
took wood-cutting for a few months and,
with the savings from these activities, in-
vested in a chafif-cutting plant with which
he travelled through the Raywood and
Kamarooka districts for no less than
twenty-one years.
He then took up land at Raywood and
still retains an interest in the property- —-
which is named “The Rest.” Up to the
year 1927 he worked his holdings and, in
1929, settled in his present fine homestead
at Woodvale. Notwithstanding his atten-
tion to his property, however, he has found
time for a considerable amount of public
service and has been a Councillor for the
North-East Riding of the Marong Shire
for the past nineteen years and has served
in the Presidential Chair for two terms.
He is also president of the Marong Sus-
tenance Committee and chairman of the
Raywood State School Committee —the
last-named position he has occupied for no
less than thirty-five years. Since the incep-
tion of the Memorial Committee Mr.
Clements has been Chairman, and his
efforts in this direction have most obviously
met with outstanding success. Pie is also
chairman of the Raywood Recreation
Reserve in addition to many other direc-
tions in which he has served his fellow-
citizens. It is a fact that he is generally
known as “The Father of Raywood,”
Mr. Clement was at once both fortu-
nate and unfortunate in that, in 1900. in
company with two associates, he dis-
covered gold at the old No. 2 lease at Ray-
wood and later floated the undertaking into
a company known as the New Nil but,
owing to the low price of gold at that time,
plus trouble with the water, the mine was
abandoned.
Mr. W. J. Clement married Mrs. Anne
McNeil, widow of the late Charles McNeil,
of Raywood in 1900 and this first Mrs.
Clement died in 1907. In 1929 he married
Annie Elizabeth Tonkin of Woodvale,
widow of the late John Tonkin of Woodvale
and daughter of the late Joseph Shadbolt,
also of Woodvale.


I (“ T.,i 'm«» J. F, GUTSCHE | | f~ Mi... C H 6UTSCHE | j | > F W GUT SC ME *"{ |
IM ■ . -6«- cCem' Tou is. I | ■ " ■ ■ ■■' -
The Gutsche Family, of Yorke Peninsula
The founder of this family in South
Australia was Johann Frederick, who
arrived in this State with his wife and
family in 1854.
Shortly after arrival, he rented land at
Mount Pleasant, where he engaged in
farming for some years. His eldest son,
Johann Carl, was born in Germany on
April 26th, 1852, and after receiving his
education at Birdwood, joined his father
and has been engaged in farming ever
since. lie married Mary Augusta Guldner
of Weaver’s Flat, formerly of Springton,
and there was a family of thirteen, eleven
of whom survive—Carl Herman, Heinrich
Albert, Johann Alfred, Marv, Matilda,
Paulina, Augusta, Rouisa, Ewald, Walter
and Bertha. Mrs. Gutsche died in May.
1903. Two sons Robert and William arc
also deceased.
In 1871, J. F. Gutsche came to Yorkc
Peninsula and in 1874 purchased land
which with several additional area'
attached is still in the hands of the famiF


In addition to mixed farming for several
years he was interested in the salt industry.
Not until super-phosphate was introduced
did the farming industry become profitable.
The original area was 640 acres, which has
since been increased to some 8000 acres.
Mr. Gutsche has seen the Peninsula grow
from virgin scrub to its present productive
state.
4 he oldest son, Carl Herman, married
Annie Louisa Reimann, and has four sons,
61cm, Louis, Carl and Edgar. Herman
(iiitsche was one of the first farmers in the
district to instal an Auto-header for har-
vesting grain on his property. So success-
tul was this that there are now two Auto-
headers and four horse-drawn headers to
work the large area put under crop yearly.
L p to 10,000 bags of barley and wheat are
harvested and some 2,000 sheep grazed.
The four sons of Herman Gutsche are
keen footballers and cricketers. Carl is
captain of the Western United Football
team, which won the local premiership in
1935.
Herman Gutsche is an active member
of the Lutheran Church, being an Elder
and a member of the Finance Committee.
During his life-long association with the
Church he has attended many Synods.
Clem married Edna Preuss of Honiton and
has two children, Ronda and Ross.
This is one of the earliest settler fami-
lies on the Peninsula, and the family has
had over 80 years association with the
State.
Paul Stephen Penrose of 202 Don Street, Bendigo.
In the early 'fifties of last century, the
late Paul Stephen Penrose left his home in
Cornwall, England, and landing at Mel-
bourne, went to Creswick where he estab-
lished a carrying business. In addition to
railway contracts, the newcomer had the
best of horses and was kept constantly en-
gaged in carrying operations to and from
the mines.
He subsequently took up land at Mal-
loo, north of Bendigo, of 320 acres but,
unfortunately, tragedy was fated to be the
lot of he and his family. He married Miss
Eliza Horne, a native of Lanarkshire, Scot-
land, who had arrived in this country in
1854. In the year 1875 Mrs. Eliza Penrose
died as a result of childbirth and, but two
rears later, her husband also passed away.
From their union there was a family
of four young children of whom the eldest
—also named Paul Stephen—was but four-
teen years of age. The other children were
Sarah, Louisa and Eliza. Following the
death of his father, the son stayed with one
of the trustees of the estate and learned the
responsibilities of primary industry but, on
attaining the age of twenty-one years, took
control of his late father’s property and also
undertook the care and responsibilities of
his three sisters . . . with the assistance of
a housekeeper. He worked with a will and
was successful in the raising of sheep, cattle
and grain. In 1892 he married Miss Louisa
Ashcroft of Kangaroo Flat, reconstructed
the home, and became through the subse-
quent years one of the most respected and


W- 91 *
1 - f
t A-: •'■Mpi* W&r-
BhS|>. i
hshw i <' AH
HS9|HHhHHBB **' ■, . n 3
HH /JH
aBHHHHHB f By wl
I i_ w_ -J.
~*3H
»• . I
X *•** JsjfH
■' V*®
Jm . ' - ||h|
jj
•. 7 .* jBfcii
< jf. /v!S| ,1
The late Paul Stephen Penrose.
esteemed citizens for many miles surround-
ing his home.
Having been elected to the Shire
Council, he was paid the compliment of
being President for a term and, in addition,
was recognised as a sincere worker on be-
half of the district and the church.
In the year 1900 he placed his services
before the people for the Mangurang seat
in Parliament. It was unfortunate that the
election was held in the midst of harvesting
time for, as voting was not compulsory, too
small a percentage of his following attended
the polls and he thus was unsuccessful in
his attempt. Despite many requests, he
refused to stand again and he retired to
reside in Bendigo in the year 1906.
Mr. Paul Stephen Penrose was for thir-
teen years a conscientious Justice of the
Peace, and served regularly on the Bendigo
Bench under such well-known Magistrates
as A. M. Cook, David Berriman and F. W.
House. He is an intimate friend of Mr.
Dunstan —the present Premier of Victoria —
and was largely responsible for the latter’s
entry into the public life of this State.
Mr. Paul Stephen Penrose.
Mr. and Mrs. Penrose had a family of
six children to their union in :
Miss Dorothy Penrose who is a teacher
at Gravel Hill School, Bendigo.
Mr. Allen Stephen Penrose, attached
to the Auditor-General’s Department, Mel-
bourne.
Mr. Clifton Horne Penrose, deceased,
was a Bank Manager in New Guinea.
Mr. David Dindsay Penrose, attached
to the staff of the National Bank, Caulfield,
Victoria.
Miss Eleanor Weir Penrose, who re-
sides with her father in Bendigo.
Mr. Norman William Penrose, for seven
years Art Master at the AVorking Men’s
College, Melbourne.
Mrs. Eliza Penrose died in 1927, whilst
Mr. Penrose—who is still actively interested
in the political life of the community—was
for five years President of the Bendigo
branch of the Farmers’ Union. He has
never looked for undue publicity but, at the
same time, is the recipient of a consider-
able measure of esteem among a large
circle of friends in the districts where he
has spent so many years of an active life-
time.


Mrs. Stirling (nee Mary Neill)
The Stirlings of Shea-Oak Log, near Gawler,
South Australia.
The founder of this branch of the
family in Australia was John Stirling, a
native of Paisley, Scotland, who, in 1849 at
the age of 24, arrived at Port Adelaide.
He first engaged in clerical work at a
flour mill in Adelaide, and at that time
farmers were getting up to £1 per bushel
for wheat; this turned John Stirling’s
attention to farming life. He purchased a
property some six miles from Gawler, and
without any previous experience started
farming. In this he became most success-
ful.
John Stirling married Mary, a daughter
of Thomas Neill, who also came from
Scotland, arriving in South Australia on
the ship “Recovery” in September, 1839.
John Stirling and Mary Neill had a family
of four—Jane, William, John Stuart and
1 homas Neill, of whom only the latter
survives.
The family held the original property
taken up by John Stirling for over 80 years.
John died in 1897 at the age of seventy-two
and his wife in 1926 at the age of ninety-
six.
John Stirling was a public spirited man
and took an active interest in all matters of
local welfare, acting for a time as Auditor
of the Nurioopta District Council.
On the death of their father, William
and Thomas took over the property which
was retained by them until the death of
their mother, when it was sold.
When William Stirling died, Thomas,
the youngest son, retired from farm life
and is now residing in Adelaide. In 1934
Thomas went for a world tour, visiting,
amongst other places, the homes of his
parents in Scotland. He has since made
several oversea journeys.
The Stirling and Neill families have
had nearly 100 years association with South
Australia and contributed their share in the
pioneering work of the early days.


jj B
I \j£r /3^
ftJRjKMr/2. i
I
i ’ \ i
'\-&*' /o, M
Brv-.
Alfred Barker
Mrs. A. Barker.
The Barkers and Chambers of South Australia
Alfred Barker was the son of Robert
Barker, silversmith, of The Cross,
Chichester, Sussex, England, and was born
on June 7th, 1812. As a youth he ran away
to sea. He arrived in South Australia in
the brig, “Rapid,” commanded by Colonel
Light, the first surveyor of the Province
and the founder of Adelaide. The “Rapid”
reached Nepean Bay, Kangaroo Island, on
August 20th, 1836 and, after waiting for the
arrival of the second survey ship, the
“Cygnet,” crossed to Rapid Bay on Septem-
ber Bth.
When Colonel Light left the “Rapid,”
Lieut. Field became the commander and
Barker the first mate and early in 1837 they
took the brig to Sydney, the journey taking
ten weeks and the return much longer than
this. Their next trip was to England with
the first cargo of produce from the new
colony.
In 1838 Field and Barker, having re-
turned to South Australia, left the “Rapid”
and engaged in stock expeditions for specu-
lative purposes. In 1841 they brought a
herd of cattle overland from New South
Wales and then they took up land at Finnis
Flat and Yankalilla. According to the 1844
Di rectory they were grazing 1,000 head of
cattle.
On June 2nd, 1842, Alfred Barker
married Priscilla Chambers, who had
reached South Australia early in 1837 in the
‘‘John Renwick.” They were married at
Trinity Church by the Rev. Charles How-
ard, the Colonial Chaplain. Their eldest
child, Mary, was born at the Finnis and
later, at Yankalilla, two sons, William and
John, were born. The third son, Alfred,
was born at Cherry Gardens in 1849 while
they were undertaking the long journey
from Yankalilla to the Burra—lso miles in
a bullock waggon, with no roads or bridges.
For a time at the Burra, Alfred Barker
kept the hotel on the site of the present
hospital. In the late 50’s he purchased
from James Humphries the lease of 33
square miles of country north of Baldina
C reek. Here he bred horses and cattle,
then sheep. He was a keen lover and judge
of horses, an active, modest and unassuming


t !!? Jy ■ 4. I
{* I
® I str fti
| A " I
|l • §S$ | ]
■maul
John Barker.
Mrs. John Barker
man and was much respected. In the early
days he encountered many difficulties and
had a hard struggle to hold the land which
he had taken up.
V\ hilst they were living at the Burra
the son Alfred, died, and two other children
were born. The first, Priscilla, later mar-
ried Mr. H. von Rieben; the second, another
son, was also called Alfred.
Pater Alfred Barker retired to St.
John’s Wood, near Enfield, where he died
on January 24th, 1880, in his sixty-eighth
year.
John Barker was born at Yankalilla in
1847. Whilst his parents were living at the
hurra he came to Adelaide and was educa-
ted at Young’s Academy. After leaving
school he joined the staff of the Bank of
Vustralasia and then, in 1877, entered into
partnership with Hugh Chambers, his
brother-in-law. They established the firm
of Barker and Chambers, Auctioneers and
Stock Agents, which became one of the
most successful firms of its type in South
Australia. In 1896 John took his brother,
Alfred, into partnership and the firm became
known as Barker Bros. The business first
started in Grenfell Street on the site now
occupied by the Adelaide Arcade and in
1885 they removed to the John Bull Bazaar
in Currie Street. The firm became the lead-
ing horse dealers in the State. The volume
of business was enormous. Between 12,000
and 15,000 horses were sold annually and as
many as 66 horses were sold separately in
an hour.
John Barker’s interests were very wide.
He had a share in many station properties
in South Australia, New South Wales and
Queensland. He was a Director of the
Adelaide Steamship Company, a member of
the local board of Advice of Dalgety and Co.
Ptd., a director of the Executor Trustee and
Agency Co. Ltd., a member of the Council
of Governors of St. Peter’s College, and
President of the Adelaide Club for a number
of years. He was extremely popular in
sporting circles and did much to improve the


>m**, '*■
I jjMT-
Jr.. I ■ I ■
: -v f ;^
\ J?
\'1RAi TBy . .-
si. >«\ '^bB^
igiK >
XSe
f,y \ M^^KSSSsf
. \ %
Miss Eleanor Kate Barker.
Airs. Dean W. Berry-
standard of racing in South Australia. He
was elected to the Committee of the S.A.J.C.
in 1894 and was appointed Chairman in 1909,
and acted continuously in that capacity until
he resigned in 1924, when, in recognition
his services to the Club, he was made a life
member. For several years before his ap-
pointment to the committee he acted as
judge. He had a great love for the thorough-
bred and raced several good horses. In
1909, in partnership with the late Mr James
Hill of Clare, he was successful in the South
Australian Derby with “The Greek.”
John Barker was a staunch supporter
of the Church of England ; for many years
he acted as Churchwarden of Christ Church
North Adelaide, and represented that church
on the Synod of the Diocese of Adelaide.
He was a keen worker for the establishment
of the Churches at Prospect and at Henley
Beach and supported them whole-heartedly
when built. He was a founder and sup-
porter of the Soldiers’ Fund, which was
established during the War. His generosity
in all good causes was proverbial.
His keen sense of humour and love of
his fellow man, his sound judgment, his
sterling upright character made him a
favorite with all classes of the community.
He died on 21st May, 1925.
In March, 1872, he married Catherine
Chambers, his cousin, once more uniting
these two pioneer families. They had five
children, John, Hleanor, Alfred, Eionel and
Priscilla of whom only Eleanor survives.
Alfred Edward Barker was educated at
St. Peter’s College. After a period with
the Bank of Australasia he entered the firm
of Barker Bros., becoming a partner. In
1904 he married Ethel Salome Brown and
they had four children, Catherine, Ruth,
John and Edgar.
Catherine married Dean Walter Berry,
architect, of Adelaide and they have three
daughters, Catherine Anne, Patrica and
Mary Dean.
Ruth Barker married Kenneth Norris
Stonier, accountant of Melbourne and has
two sons, Brian and Richard. These child-
ren represent the fifth generation of the
Barker and Chambers families.


np
Catherine Anne Berry.
James Chambers
James Chambers arrived in South Aus-
tralia with his sister, Priscilla, and two
brothers on the ships, “John Renwick” and
Coromandel,” in 1837. He was a native
of London, England, where he was born on
September 21st, 1811.
Shortly after his arrival in the Province
he established a carrying business, trans-
porting goods between Holdfast Bay and
Adelaide. He gradually expanded this
business until he became the leading mail
contractor throughout the settled portion of
the Colony. He owned the largest livery
stable in Adelaide and soon amassed a
fortune. In 1852 he, with Captain Tolmer
(then Commissioner of Police), organised
the transport arrangements to bring the
gold from the Victorian Gold Diggings to
Adelaide. This enterprise put South Aus-
tralia in a better financial position than it
had been previously. It can be stated with
truth that this undertaking saved the State
from bankruptcy. James Chambers per-
sonally took charge of the first cart carrying
the bullion. On their return these two men
were rightly greeted as conquering heroes.
In 1854 James Chambers took a health
trip to the old country and whilst there
conceived the idea of exporting to South
Australia stud horses, cattle and sheep.
This he carried out successfully.
Returning in 1856 he gave up transport
work and interested himself in sheep rais-
ing in the far North of the State. This
country was then in course of survey by


11
11111 ■«
: s ,
y %
1%
% M: yWmmmm
The late James Chambers
The late Mrs. James Chambers
William Finke in conjunction with
McDouall Stuart. The latter explored to
the westward—the expedition being equip-
ped and financed by Finke and Chambers.
This was the first stage in the discovery
which Stuart used on his later journey
when he crossed the continent from South
to North and planted the flag on the shores
of the Indian Ocean. This flag was made
by the eldest daughter of James Chambers,
Elizabeth, and Stuart named the Catherine
River after Catherine Chambers and the
Anna Creek after her sister.
James Chambers financed several of
Stuart’s expeditions and it was not until the
fourth attempt that McDouall Stuart finally
achieved the object of crossing Australia
from South to North. Unfortunately
James Chambers did not live to enjoy this
triumph as he died on 7th August, 1862 at
the early age of fifty-one years.
James Chambers married Catherine
Redin, who also arrived on the ship “Cora-
mandel” in 1837. His daughter, Catherine,
married John Barker who joined with Hugh,
a son of James Chambers, in the business
of Barker & Chambers already recorded
here. James and his brother, John, were
amongst the first to establish stations in
and to open up the Far North.
Government records show that be-
tween 1851 and 1864 they leased from the
Government some 1,773 square miles of
country. They first explored and then
pioneered this part of the State. On their


Eras Ueclasm. p|.
JARTI
L i& ifutc %tpx tl».
4 COEPOaiWfOS. fi
iwm jp
»«ws* «*»i m
I and EAETY. S
I« g
ferasa* OTsrrrsr, I * ®
OROBK, *i g
aaa. >| g Iggl
rrJB». 11 a %$/''
::rt.. •..>'**. s & ,;«?
: c>f yoc'r ' it
*02. ®? ,«g
S33ST >0 »<*,). s JP
*S& fr» & <rf 5k# JR*?
bf JSATft s||J-|r
—jr
t a; Nonls A<k-l«i4*\ «t ’w > ,
»a4 m&m~ |p&
ST ONE poo* Sharp. TO
«tWO |>-»Jv pwjmtfl/s «4 J|l^'
«4 5*cf»st J«g ! !«*s»to<wi > tc 9*» ihe
0SAJK8R8A, Sows PSAassgSw 3|1
Sc S» &MW5C1MB! OfflSK*, WiwS •$/
5? amw «¥3*»a» *a» K?«*«5fy
(BION WtlX MALT! ffK
g CHJEURSr |||
WKKite fe«a>*«s<w 8U» S»i»S!R»jf
%o KAT88. **»A «J .,.:JK:-'
»> J* S» Teg fe» A»B*35(RS8. 23&
&I££- , &<^A8»5i»m
* vmxqpf&i <<&*> to ik* Ptyttoifafy
*<* *< (bf. f&f# &xrtto%. mti
i^6tew«a»
.>■■ V, - ?•
first trip to South Australia, on the Cora-
mandel” they purchased 50 bullocks at the
Cape of Good Hope, bringing them to Ade-
laide. These were pastured on the plains
around the new city. Owing to the
country being fenceless these cattle wand-
ered as far away as Gawlcr some 2a miles
distant.
James Chambers’ memory is honoured
by a plaque on the garden wall of the house
where he lived now occupied by Sir Langdon
Bonython, stating that it was from there
that McDouall Stuart’s final and successful
expedition started. A reproduction of the
notice of this event, published at the time,
is shown herein.


Robert Hermann Hamdorf
The Hamdorfs of Hacienda, South Australia
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, Hermann Robert, was a
native of Germany and came as a child with
his parents to South Australia in the early
forties. The family first settled at Betheny
near Tanunda where Hermann was edu-
cated. He then engaged in brick-making
for some years and married the widow of
Mr. Appleton of Mount Barker. Their
family consisted of Hermann (dec.), Henry
Augustus, Robert Charles, Agnes Martha,
Ernest Edward (dec.), Alfred Walter and
Amelia Hilda (now Mrs. Duncan).
In 1867 Hermann Hamdorf came to
South Hummocks, being one of the first
settlers in the district. His original hold-
ing is still in the hands of the family.
1 lei man Hamdorf was a particularly fine
type of settler, and became the first mail
contractor in that district and the first
blacksmith shop at South Hummocks was
established on the property, where the first
buggy used on the settlement was built by
a son of Hermann when only seventeen
years of age. The mails were carried from
I mt Wakefield in the South to Condowie in


Mrs. R. H. Hamdorf
the North. Hermann Hamdorf was a
foundation member of the Kulpara District
Council and did much for the wmlfare of
the District. He was also a foundation
member of St. Vincent No. 20 Lodge of
Freemasons. He died on the 19th June,
1890, and on his death his son, Ernest,
managed the property for his mother until
her death when he took it over.
Ernest Edward Hamdorf was born on
the property on 23rd January, 1871, and was
educated locally, following which he joined
his father and engaged in farming which
he carried on throughout his life. He
married Emily Catherine Sinclair, daughter
of Archibald Sinclair, a native of Scotland
who came to Australia in the fifties.
There was a family of twelve of whom
the following survive:—Vernon Clifton,
Cyril Ernest, Boycie Allan, Wilfred James,
Eric Victor, Hurtle Walter and Mervin
Percy.
On the death of his mother, Ernest
Edward Hamdorf took over the family
property consisting of 2,600 acres used
for mixed farming. A feature of the pro-
perty is the fact that the horses are all bred
from the original stock established by the
grandfather, H. R. Hamdorf. This breed
of horse has been kept pure right through-
out this long period. Some particularly fine
wheat crops have been harvested and up
to 15 bags taken per acre. A general aver-
age over a long period works out at 15


their Lodge. Their father was a
particularly progressive man and
brought the first motor car into the
district. Vernon of Parakie, married
Henrietta Sutton of Murray Bridge
and has two sons —Clifton John and
Neil. Cyril married Amy Hughes of
Lnley and has one son, Raymond John.
The sons of E. E. and E. C. Hamdorf
have won their spurs in the field of
Sport, being keen on football, tennis,
golf and rifle shooting. In the latter
sport their father was a noted per-
former. He also won many events
as a runner.
E. E. Hamdorf
bushels to the acre. This property
was the first to be settled for agricul-
ture in the district and was so culti-
vated from virgin scrub. E. E. Ham-
dorf took an active interest in the
district. He was a Trustee of the
local Methodist Church and a pro-
minent Rechabite, and was interested
in all local movements. He died on
19th January, 1935 at the age of 63.
Four of his sons with their mother
now run the property, and like their
father and grandfather, are connected
with all local movements. They arc
members of the same Lodge of Free-
masons as their grandfather and
each are to-day holding offices in
Mrs. E. E. Hamdorf


y ' v "' ''" "'"■ y .^^SSSl
i
||f| : *■; t |#
III IMP* e3b l fSE*' ’■" < m.
11' 4 ' r
|K 8 *!#> * ' J| i 9B|
B 1
maem*-'-**’': - •-. - -SHmS
ft I
iij ’•*?■' j ■
\m?A
m ' L - If j
Kf v
■Hit jfflHL % ||m,
4 , :
« I, mmm
Mp > 7s>v| ; % p»,;
M v* r \ *i
' j'"
Vernon Clifton Hamdorf
Boyce Hamdorf
Cyril Ernest Hamdorf
Clifton John
Son of Vernon Hamdorf


Four Brothers all holding office in one year in their Masonic Lodge.


The Hamdorf Homestead


wp >' ;/v. f V- . w • • •••»• • ‘
a • >r TY r~rr w >wrtn 1 m ■•■i'«n nrii n rn n rriV'i ’ i r'" 11~" ■ p r n r n nnr i • nn n r «ii7yy
The late John Smith of Smlthfield
The late Mrs. J. Smith of Smithfield
The Smiths of Yackandandah,
South Australia.
This family has had a very long asso-
ciation with the State. The founder, John
Smith, landed at Holdfast Bay from
Scotland in 1839 with his wife. Shortly
after his arrival they went to New Zealand
where their son, John, was born in 1841.
The outbreak of the Maori War caused
them to return to South Australia, where
John Smith decided to engage in farming.
He purchased land some 19 miles north
of Adelaide and the district was named
after him, being now known as Smithfield.
This property, with additional areas, is
still in the hands of the family. John
Smith can claim to be one of the first agri-
culturalists in South Australia. He grew
some of the first crops of fodder hay in the
district, which is still renowned for this
type of fodder. This land is still owned by
the family.
There were nine children, none of
whom survive. All the sons engaged in
farming in various parts of the State and
his son, William, took over the homestead
after his father’s death.
John Smith, J.P., of Yackandandah,
Anama, was born in New Zealand in 1841,
and on the return of the family to South
Australia received his education under the
late J. L,. Young, of Adelaide. Subsequent
to the completion of his scholastic train-
ing he accompanied his father to Smithfield
and learned the rudiments of farming-
o
In 1865 he decided to launch out on his
own and purchased land at Anama, near
Clare, consisting of about 1,600 acres. In
the following year, John Smith started on
this property which he proceeded to
develop and met with such success in his


The late John Smith, J.P.
of Yackandandah.
operations that he increased the area to
several thousand acres. His wonderful
knowledge of farming enabled him to de-
velop Yackandandah into one of the finest
farming and pastoral properties in South
Australia.
He married in 1871 Charlotte Louisa,
daughter of the late J. Korfif of Gawler.
There was a family of ten; Agnes (dec.),
Jessie, Dora (dec.), Ella Margaret (dec.),
Freda (dec.), Annie (dec.), Stanley of
Hart, Donald of Adelaide, John Kenneth of
“Bolomurtee”, Hart, and Eric, who made
the supreme sacrifice in the War in 1918
while serving with the 9th Light Horse
Regiment of the A.I.F. He won the Mili-
tary Medal in Palestine for gallantry in
action.
John Smith was one of the early
breeders of sheep for fat lamb raising in
which he achieved considerable success.
In 1894 he was appointed a Justice of the
Peace for the district, and served for three
years as a member of the local District
Council and did much to promote the wel-
fare of the district.
The late Mrs. John Smith
of Yackandandah.
He was also a member of the Militia
Forces and gained the medal for rifle
shooting in 1868 and in 1882 won a silver
trophy for his prowess with the rifle.
Two of the sons, Stanley and John
Kenneth, are still on part of the original
Yackandandah property and the only sur-
viving daughter, Miss Jessie Smith, lives
in the old homestead and retains that por-
tion of Yackandandah.
John Smith died in 1915 at the age of
74 and Mrs. Smith died in 1928 at the age
of 78.
The property, when John Smith origin-
ally took it up was virgin country, and all
had to he cleared. Some wonderful wheat
crops have been harvested from Yackan-
dandah and sheep of the Merino type are
run. The property is mainly cultivated
now by share-farmers under the control of
the family.
The great grandchildren of John Smith
of Smith field are: Neil, Gordon, Doris and
Eric, children of Stanley Smith; Nancy,


, nrirrr rnn~ - r - r —r| j
% '
t8|k, 'f®
rns
|BL -
•■*-■ W ; \; \ %
Jv'V 1
4 '‘ ~ I
jflK»*w»!W-.-»'“‘-'--’*r , ‘ J «--"•■ -v-
—
| —— - - ~ u *'' |J-
-..; B •»
Donald Smith
daughter of Kenneth Smith and Helen.
John and Patricia, children of Walter and
Dora Stevenson (nee Smith).
Donald Smith, like his brother, Eric,
served overseas with the A.I.F. 16th
Battalion,
Neil S. Smith
The late Eric Smith, M.M., A.I.F.
Few families in South Australia have
had a longer association with the State.
Each generation in turn has contributed to
the building up of their respective districts
and the Smiths of Yackandandah have won
an honoured place in the list of “Founders
of Australia.”
Pamela Smith
(daughter of Neil S. Smith)


j|r-* i jWj-
| r ~“~| —I a
The Stevens of South Australia
Mark Stevens
The founder of this family, James,
arrived in South Australia with his wife
and family in the early 50’s. They first
settled at the Meadows. In 1881 Mark
Ste vens, his youngest son, purchased the
present property situated some three miles
from Bute, in conjunction with his brother
they being amongst the first settlers in the
district Later his parents joined him on
the property where they resided until their
death.
Mark was born in 1862 and learnt farm-
ing under his father, the latter devoting
himself to the breeding of Clydesdale stock.
He has won an enviable name throughout
the State as a breeder of Clydesdales and
had bred some fine stock. One of his best
horses was a son of that well-known Scot-
tish sire, “Benefactor”, named “Pallacea”
which has left some splendid progeny.
During his career as a studmaster,
Mark Ste vens has had 18 sires on the pro-
perty and has been engaged in breeding for
some fifty years. During that time he also
bred pure Shorthorn cattle with which he
was most successful. Many prizes have
been won by the “Fairfield” Stud.
Mark Stevens has been a member of
the Royal Agricultural Society of South
Australia for many years and has been a
consistent and successful exhibitor. He
recently sold “Fairfield” and now keeps
one stallion only.


r
Mrs. James Ralph Russell
James Ralph Russell
The Russell Family of South Australia
James Ralph Russell left England with
his wife and their four children in the ship
“Fortitude” in 1848.
They intended landing in South
Australia but owing to an epidemic of
measles on board the ship, went on to
Morton Island at the mouth of the Brisbane
River, Queensland, arriving six months after
leaving England. They remained six
months on Morton Island and then settled
on the mainland near Brisbane at Fortitude
Valley (so named after the ship). Fortitude
Valley was the location of the first settle-
ment in Queensland of the pioneers who
arrived in Australia in 1849,
After a few months James Ralph
Russell brought his family to South Aus-
tralia by sailing vessel arriving in 1849. He
settled in Woodville.
On one occasion James Ralph Russell
with his eldest son. James Thomas Russell,
journeyed to Victoria; the greater part of
this hazardous undertaking was accom-
plished on foot. In 1867 he purchased fifty
acres of land known as “Myrtle Holme"
situated on the Junction Road. He lived
on the property and cultivated it until 1879.
When he sold “Myrtle Holme’’ and lived
the rest of his life in retirement at Wood-
ville.
James Ralph Russell was born in Surrey,
England in 1820. He married Ann Jones
in 1841.


w * fc *fwP^®!!™K8
■nr ;^l|j|
A 4'| f *"
JBr
#
m-"mm *
m * *aT / J -*|2
f , p.. ■mmF mM Mm
t f
James Thomas Russell.
Mrs., James Thomas Russell.
There were seven sons and three
daughters of the marriage. The three
daughters died in infancy. The sons were
James Thomas, Thomas Ralph, Edward
Wix, Arthur, Alfred, Walter and Henry.
James Thomas Russell, eldest son of
James Ralph Russell, was born in Surrey,
England on March 17th, 1842 and arrived
with his parents in the ship “Fortitude” in
1848. He was educated at the Pulteney
Grammar School, being one of its earliest
pupils. He became manager of Harts
Flour Mill at Port Adelaide at an early age.
Eater when the Adelaide Milling Company
took over Hart’s Mill, he was appointed
inspector of all their interests in South
Australia which at that time included AT ills
at Port Adelaide, Gawler, Moonta, Walla-
roo, Snowtown, Kapunda, Port Pirie,
Quorn, Plawker, Two Wells and Mallala.
He was associated with the Adelaide
Milling Company for fifty years, resigning
in 1912.
Pie owned Millie Millie Station on the
Gasgoyne River, Western Australia and was
senior partner of the firm of Russell, Reid
and Dickson, Timber Merchants of Port
Adelaide. In his younger days he was a
keen horseman and yachtsman. His love
for yachting brought him prominently
before the shipping world of the State for
it led to the ownership of a number of ships,
among which were the Orange Grove and
Agincourt, Vivid, Success and Enterprise.
He married Susannah Charlotte Bird
(daughter of Robert Horner Bird of Kent,
England) on December Bth. 1866, there
being four sons and five daughters of the
marriage, namely Alice, Alfred Edward


•?**. ’
flv#
ftfc. '4^"'
B-, s*N •:;
■ . ,. " , '
f ■■M%
Alfred Edward James Russell,
M.8., Ch.B.
Colonel H. H, E. Russell,
0.8. E., O.StJ., V.D., M.U.,
F.R.C.P.
Lieut-Col on el H. A. H. Russell
S.B.StJ., V.D., M.B, B.S.
James, Edith, Blanche Eugene, Herbert
Henry Ernest, Ella Alice, Lilian Ethel
May, Ernest Albert Harold and Raymond
Hector Cyril. He died at the age of 86
years on February 21st, 1929.
Henry Russell, seventh and only sur-
viving son of James Ralph Russell, was
born at Port Adelaide on the 2nd December,
1864 and educated at St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide. He is now living in retirement
at Mt. Eawley, Western Australia.
Alfred Edward James Russell, M.8.,
Ch.B., eldest son of James Thomas Russell,
was educated at St. Peter’s College where
he became head prefect and played in the
school’s first Football and Cricket Teams.
He entered the Adelaide University in 1889
and graduated Bachelor of Medicine and
Bachelor of Surgery in the first class in 1893.
In his student days he was an enthusiastic
devotee of Lacrosse. He was one of the
first to play the game in South Australia.
He captained both the University and South
Australian Lacrosse Teams for some years.
After being House Surgeon at the
Adelaide Hospital he became Medical
Superintendent of that Institution in 1895
and resigned in 1898. It was during his
superintendency that the unfortunate dis-
pute arose between the British Medical
and Surgical staff when Alfred Edward
James Russell with four House Surgeons
under him carried on the whole work of the
Adelaide Hospital for many months. He
was a pioneer in X-Ray work in South
Australia. He purchased his first X-Ray
apparatus in 1896 and used it at the Adelaide
Hospital during his superintendency. He
settled in private practice in Unley and was
PTealth Officer of that Town for a number
of years. It was on his advice that a
Health Nurse Inspector was obtained for
Unley—the first suburb in South Australia
to have one.
He was born on February 15th, 1869.
Married Rose Mabel Angas Johnson in
1900. He died on June 14th, 1905. Two
daughters survive.
Colonel Herbert Henry Ernest Russell,
0.8. E., O.StJ., V.D., M.D., F.R.C.P.:
(Edin.), second son of James Thomas
Russell, was born on October 28th, 1875.
He was educated at Prince Alfred College
and the Universities of Adelaide and
Melbourne where he obtained the degrees of
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of
Surgery. Pie was the first South Australian
to obtain the F.R.C.P. (Edin.). Subse-
quently he obtained the M.D. (Adel.), being


Master E. A. D. Russell
Representing the Fourth Generation.
the second to receive this degree. He has
been engaged in private practice in Unley,
South Australia, since 1899 and has been
Health Officer of the City of Unley for
thirty-one years.
During the Great War the Defence
Department refused his enlistment for
service abroad and retained him as Principal
Medical Officer, Fourth Military District.
He was awarded 0.8. E. on cessation of
hostilities. He is a past president of the
British Medical Association, South Aus-
tralian Branch, Consulting Obstetrician,
Queen’s Home, Adelaide and holds many
other Honorary executive positions.
Lieutenant Colonel Ernest Albert
Harold Russell, S.B.St.J., V.D., M.8., 8.5.,
third son of James Thomas Russell, was
born on August 24th, 1885. He was educated
at Prince Alfred College and the Adelaide
University where he graduated M.8., B.S.
After being House Surgeon at the Adelaide
Hospital, he joined his brother, Herbert
Henry Ernest Russell in private practice in
Unley.
In 1914 he relinquished private practice
to join the Australian Imperial Forces and
served abroad until 1919. Since 1919 he
has been in private practice in Unley in
partnership with his brother. He is
Honorary Consulting Obstetrician, Queen’s
Home and Lecturer to the Medical Regis-
tration Board. In 1921 he married Janet
Manson Ward. Of this marriage there
are a daughter and son, Ernest Alfred
David Russell who represents the fourth
generation.
The fifth generation is represented by
Ronald Russell Linklater, grandson of
Blanche Eugene and Richard Russell Han-
cock and Jonathan Yeatman Hancock,
grandsons of Ella Alice.
It is a noteworthy fact that seven of
the descendants of James Ralph Russell
have graduated in Medicine at the Adelaide
University; namely Alfred Edward James,
Herbert Henry Ernest and Ernest Albert
Harold, sons of James Thomas Russell.
Walter Henry and Alfred Burgess, sons of
Walter Russell. Henry Raymond Russell
Hancock, son of Ella Alice and Walter
Alfred Russell, son of Walter Henry Russell


I ' v ■* H
|||jt ■"“ 'Si j^g
E&j /¥■ f|« *
ISiBi* , i v jIB p8B 4 i ; i


The Irwins of South Australia.
1 his family has had a very long asso-
ciation with Australia. The founder of
the family, Canon H. O. Irwin, of Hagley,
Tasmania, came to Queensland from Eng-
land in the fifties and later settled in
Tasmania.
He married Sydney Frances, daughter
of C. B. Newenham of Adelaide, who
arrived in South Australia in 1838 and was
the first Sheriff of that State; there was a
family of six sons and two daughters.
Charles, the third son, was born in
Tasmania in 1862, where he was educated.
He first began his business career in Tas-
mania in the Commercial Bank and after-
wards transferred to the Bank of Austral-
asia.
In 1882 he came to South Australia and
after some years left the Bank and joined
the firm of the Adelaide Milling Co., with
which he continued for some years.
On the 17th December, 1888, he was
elected a member of the Stock Exchange
of Adelaide, but sold his seat in 1901. In
1908 he took his brother, Frances James,
into partnership and re-joined the Stock
Exchange in 1911. He continued in part-
nership with his brother and in 1915 took
a very large financial interest in Holden’s
Motor Body Builders, now General Motors
Holden’s Ltd., of which he was a Director
and various other commercial Interests in
the City of Adelaide. Fie was also a
Director of the “Mail” newspapers.
Charles Irwin, as a young man, was
extremely fond of hunting and rode in a
number of Hunt Club races. Later he be-
came an interested golfer and was one of
the most prominent golfers in this State.
He won the South Australian Golf Cham-
pionship on one occasion. He was also
renowned as a very fine amateur billiard
player.
In later years he took up bowls as a
recreation and was for many years a lead-
ing member of the Adelaide Drive of which
he was President. He was also one of the
Committee for many years of the Adelaide
Racing Club and was a very keen sup-
porter of the Turf and ran several of his
own horses.
He married Olive Morphett, daughter
of William and Mary Mair. Mrs. Mair
was a daughter of Sir John and Lady Mor-
phett, who came to South Australia in 1836.
Sir John was one of the first members of
the Legislative Council of South Australia.
He married Bessey Fisher, eldest daughter
of Sir James Hurtle Fisher.
Charles and Olive Irwin had two
children, Major J. M. Irwin, D.5.0., who
was one of the first of the students to go
from Duntroon College to the War with
the A.I.F. Major Irwin had a distingui-
shed military career and was for a while
attached to the Staff of General Sir Francis
Lloyd.
Major Irwin has a son, Peter, and a
daughter, Margot Morphett. These child-
ren represent the sixth generation on the
maternal side and the fifth on the paternal.
The daughter of Charles and Olive
Irwin married Keith Wilkinson of Adelaide
and has a son and daughter; John Irwin
and Rosemary Irwin. Charles Irwin died
in 1923.


Major John Morphctt Irwin, D.5.0.,
of “Newenham,” Mount Barker, was born
gn the 24th January, 1894, at Glenelg, and
educated at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide,
and Duntroon Military College, Canberra.
At the outbreak of the War he volunteered
and left Australia with the hrst Field Artil-
lery Brigade, A.I.F. as a Subaltern and
served in Gallipoli and France. He was
recalled to Australia during the War to act
as instructor in Artillery at Duntroon, but
after a short time was allowed to return
to the Front with the Third Division, A.I.F.
He was wounded in 1918 and was in hos-
pital in London at the time of the Armistice.
He attained his majority on the field and
was awarded the Distinguished Service
Order and mentioned in Despatches three
times. He returned to Australia in 1919
and stayed on the general staff for three
years.
In 1922 he resigned from the Army
and joined the firm of Holden’s Motor Body
Works with whom he stayed some six
years. In 1928 he decided to engage in
farming and grazing pursuits and has won
renown in the pastoral world as a breeder
of stud stock including thoroughbred horses
Australian Illawarra Shorthorn cattle, large
W 7 hite Yorkshire pigs and Sealyham and
Scottish Terrier dogs. In each of these
Major Irwin has been most successful.
His Shorthorn bull, “Mayflowers, Monarch
of Parkview”, was first and reserve cham-
pion at the Royal Agricultural Society
Show held at Adelaide in 1933. The stud
pigs have been most successful as cham-
pions in the show ring and the Sealyham
dog, “Strathclyde Dandy”, is a Com-
monwealth Grand Champion as is also the
Scottish Terrier dog, “Heather Guards-
man.
In the world of sport Major Irwin has
occupied a prominent place. He is a keen
horseman, a committeeman of the Adelaide
Hunt Club and entertains the Club at
“Newenham” every year. He played polo
with the Adelaide Polo Club for some years
and as an amateur rider has won several
races. The best known of his many race
horses was “Bang Bang” who won the
Australian Steeplechase and many other
races. Yachting also appeals very keenly
to the Major and he has engaged in this
sport for many seasons.
There are two children, Charles Frank
Peter, who is attending St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide, and Margot Morphett. These
children represent the sixth generation of
the family in Australia. Peter follows his
father and grandfather in his love for horses
and rides with the Adelaide Hunt Club.
Like his father and grand and great-
grand parents, Major Irwin is a member
of the Adelaide Club.
THE LATE
SIR JOHN MORPHETT, KNT.
The late Sir John Morphett was born
in London on 4th May, 1809. He was the
son of Nathaniel Morphett, solicitor. He
arrived in South Australia in September,
1836, and was present at the proclamation
ceremony on December 28th of the same
year. On March 6th, 1838, Sir John was
appointed a member of the Aborigines’
Protection Board, and he served on this
for many years. In December, 1840, he
was appointed first Treasurer of the City
Corporation. The birth of the Royal
Agricultural and Horticultural Society
may be indirectly traced to a meeting over
which Sir John Morphett presided on 27th
April, 1844.


James Hurtle Fisher was appointed
first Resident Commissioner of the Pro-
vince of South Australia and accompanied
Governor Hindmarsh to the State in the
ship “Bufifalo.” The vessel arrived on
December 24th, 1836, and four days after
dropping anchor the Colony was proclaimed.
Speaking on that occasion James Hurtle
Fisher said, “May the present unamimity
continue as long as South Australia exists.”
When Governor Gawler was appointed,
the office of Resident Commissioner was
merged in with that of the Governor.
James Hurtle Fisher continued in the
Colony practising as a lawyer. He took a
deep interest in the welfare of the early
settlers and was one of the Committee who
named the streets and squares of the City;
Turtle Square was named after him.
In 1840 he was elected as one of the
councillors of the embryo city and was
chosen as Mayor —a position which he
occupied five times. It was he who laid
the foundation stone of the monument
erected to the memory of Colonel Light.
He took a prominent part in resisting the
royalties imposed in Governor Robe’s time
and his courageous action will always be
remembered. He was a member of the
Legislative Council in 1853 and was also
nominated to the Council created in 1855
and elected Speaker. He helped to pass the
Parliament’s Bill giving power of self-
government to the people and in the first
Parliament was elected a member of the
Legislative Council and chosen as its first
President. This position he occupied until
his retirement in 1864. In 1860 James
Hurtle Fisher was knighted for his service
to the Colony by Her Majesty, Queen
Victoria.
Sir James Hurtle Fisher holds a
unique record both in State and Common-
wealth public life inasmuch as he was the
first Resident Commissioner of South
Australia and the first President of the
Legislative Council. As he was the first
Mayor of Adelaide and the Adelaide
Municipality was the first to be created in
Australia, he has the distinction of being
the first Mayor in Australia.
He served his adopted country well
and, on January 28th, 1875, at the age of 85
years, passed away. His memory is com-
memorated in the Adelaide Town Hall by a
portrait in oils and a marble bust of this
worthy old pioneer.
The family on the maternal side has
been associated with the State of South
Australia for over 100 years. Each genera-
tion has contributed in a marked degree to
the progress and welfare of the State and
Commonwealth and has won an honoured
place on the roll of “Founders of Australia.’’
Sir John Morphett was one of the four
non-official members of the Legislative
Council from 1843 to 1851 ; a nominated
non-official member and Speaker till 1854;
elected under the new Constitution Act in
1857 and retained his seat till 1875 having
been President from 1865; he was Chief
Secretary in the Reynolds Ministry in 1861 ;
he was knighted in 1870. On his retire-
ment from politics Sir John led a life of
comparative quiet and died in November,
1892.
SIR JAMES HURTLE FISHER.


CHARU S f’r-(l L M r, ' AR1 ES F ' RI - E
'" * "*
THE ElRST HERttOttO BULL IMPORTED INTO
south Australia or Charles price
—- ■
; 1 ■ ■ 4
* r* '
MADGE rri' I ' \ N , M
(SWEAT GRANDDAUGHTER OR rrr -■■ ■ - . "' '
CHARLES PRICE \ *


The Price Family of Hindmarsh Island,
South Australia.
The story of that splendid pioneer in
the pastoral industry of South Australia,
Charles Price, has already been told in an
earlier portion of this work. He will always
be remembered for introducing the first
Shropshire sheep and Hereford cattle to
this State. He brought the sheep with
him in 1853, and in 1866 he founded the first
stud of Hereford cattle. Charles Price
made several trips to England in connec-
tion with the importation of Hereford cattle
from his native country, Hereford. His
high standing there enabled him to secure
the best blood available, and that great sire,
“ Bringewood," which was imported by
him, can be termed the father of the breed
in Australia.
After a long association with pastoral
life at Hindmarsh Island he died there at
the age of eighty-four whilst still in the
harness. His family consisted of Thomas
Sherriff, Jane, Sarah, Charles, John and
Rosalama. His wife lived to the age of
ninety-four years. Mrs. Charles Price
made the last of several trips to England
at the age of eighty-four.
John, his third son, was managing the
Hindmarsh Island property at the time of
his father s death in 1886 and then took up
country at Goohva. Later he acquired
a pastoral property near Xaracoorte, which
is still in the hands of the family.
John Price married Emily Addison,
daughter of James Addison, also an earlv
arri\ al in South Australia and their familv
are, Frederick John, manager of Frome
Down Station, Wankaringa; Arthur E.
Price of Xaracoorte; Clare M. Price of
Adelaide; Florence (Mrs. Cook of Cygnet
River, Kangaroo Island) and Dora (Airs.
Gent of Mallala).
There are several grandchildren and
great grandchildren, who represent the fifth
generation of the Price family in South
Australia,


The Hull Family of “Dairy,” Pt. Elliston,
West Coast, South Australia
Robert Hull, J.P., Agriculturist and
Grazier of “Dairy”, Colton, was born at
South Rhine in this State in 1853. His
parents, Adam and Elizabeth, arrived in
South Australia from Scotland in 1852.
He was educated under private tuition,
and after his schooldays went to Strang-
ways Springs, where he was identified
with station life for two years with Messrs.
Hogarth & Warren. Prior to this he
obtained initial insight into sheep farming
and pastoral work generally, in the employ
of the late John Murray of Mt. Crawford.
In 1874 he engaged in shearing and
other work for twelve months at Yardea
Station under the late Thomas Partridge,
then coming to Streaky Bay he took up
fencing on Chanada Station in partnership
with the late Joseph Ford.
About this period good reports reached
Mr. Hull of the farming and grazing pro-
perties in the Hundred of Colton, which
had just been opened up, in conjunction
with Mr. Ford he selected a square mile of
country. The land was heavily timbered
with Sheoak. 'The partners cleared and
worked together for seven years, when they
dissolved by mutual consent. Mr. Hull
continued on his own behalf and was con-
spicuously successful. He later acquired
“Courtabie Station’’ comprising sixteen
square miles at Venus Bay, besides several
thousand acres of land in the Hundred of
'l'alia, and his present homestead which
covers over 2,000 acres.
For the wool industry his flock of
Merino sheep has proved very profitable,
whilst with the aid of artificial manures an


•• ' .. “
B-— —. ■—. „—■„ ■—. „ .■ . ■•
Eric Hull Arthur Hull
Audrey Hull Isabel Hull
average of 10 bushels to the acre of wheat
is secured.
Mr. Hull has taken prizes with his
Merino sheep at the Shows in connection
with the Agricultural societies.
He has acted in the capacity of Presi-
dent for the Great Western Agricultural &
Pastoral Society Show at Colton. He took
a cordial interest in all matters for the
advancement of the district, and was a
member of the Elliston District Council for
fourteen years, Secretary of the Colton
Agricultural Bureau for eleven years, Sec-
retary of The School Board of Advice
which comprised all schools within a fifty
mile radius until it went out of existence.
He was elected Chairman of Colton Public
School and held the position for many years.
He was also a Justice of Peace.
In 188 a Mr. Hull married Agnes
Amanda, third daughter of Mr. Edward H.
\\ hitehead of Mt. Wedge, and thev had
three sons and four daughters. Thev are:
Robert of Mt. Dutton; Elizabeth (Mrs.
Hull of Carawa) ; Agnes (Mrs. Bennie of
Pimbaacla); Daisy (Mrs. Ryan of Xunji-
kompita) ; Allen (Colton); Mavis (Mrs.
Wright of Hallett) and Cecil (Colton).
Mr. Hull died in 1931 at the age of 78
rears. Mrs. Hull still resides at the home-
stead and with her two sons control over
2 acres. Merino sheep are run on the
property, whilst Allen and Cecil devote
part of their time to wheat growing.
Robert Edward Avas born at Port Lin-
coln in 1886 and educated at Prince Alfred
College and then returned to the home-
stead where he stayed until he married and
t< <ok over a property on his own account
at Mt. A edge. He disposed of this pro-
perty and purchased about 7.000 acres at
Mt. Dutton, where he still resides. He mar-
ried in 1909. Barbara Barns, daughter of
\\ . A. Barns of ‘‘Barnsdale*’, Colton, and
there were two children, Arthur and Isabel.
Mrs. Hull died in 1915.
R. E. Hull married Alvena. daughter of
Mr. and Mrs. A. Sacks of Edillie. and thev
have a son Eric and daughter Audrev.
Allen Hull, second son of Robert and
Amanda Hull was born at EHiston 1896.
He married Vera, youngest daughter of
Mr. and the late Mrs. T. Myers of Coulta.
They have four children living. Thev are
Agnes E.. Reg T. A., Victor C. G., and
Douglas W.
Arthur Hull, son of R. E. Hull married
Anne, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Geo.
Spavould. of Lancashire, England.


[ Mw y w BRUNDELL 5 *n
| t-ATf GEORGE BRUNQELL -■.» | \ I L*r C Mw* GEORGE BRUNDELL snr |
* * ‘ " *' ■■•>■■• • " 1 \ \ \ KF »•■• C ' K -V |
BRUNDELL. | | | f M ** CHARLES BRUNOELL. < s*“]


I he Brundell Family, of Dalrymple,
Yorke Peninsula.
The first of this family to arrive in
South Australia was George Brundell, who
came to this State on the ship “Somerset-
shire,” in 1839. Following his arrival in
Australia he acted in various capacities for
the late Judge Gwyn—firstly as coachman
and veterinary surgeon and, later, as Man-
ager of Inman Valley Station. It was as
a result of his occupation in the latter direc-
tion that he later purchased his property
at \ankalilla. In 1872 he, with his family
came to Yorke Peninsula, where he pur-
chased part of a station property and estab-
lished a farm which is now owned by his
son, George, junior, who was born in 1861.
This is one of the earliest settler fami-
lies on Yorke Peninsula. At the time of
purchase, the land was mostly virgin scrub,
and took some years to prepare for agricul-
ture. Kangaroos and wallabies were
numerous and there were a number of
aboriginals in the district who were most
peaceable. George Brundell, senior, died
on the property in 1893 at the age of 71.
In 1848 he married Eleanor, second
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. William Wood,
of whom a brief history appears hereunder.
From this union there ensued a family of
three sons and two daughters in Harriet
(deceased), who later became Mrs. H.
Boundy and was one of the pioneers of
Brentwood —Y orke's Peninsula—Charles,
of Victor Harbour; George; Stansburv
(deceased); Alice, later Mrs. Xatt of
Payneham.
Mrs. Eleanor Brundell died in 1916 at
the age of eighty-nine.
The late Mr. and Mrs. William Wood
came from Essex, England, aboard the
“Somersetshire” in 1839 together with their
family of four daughters and two sons, in
Harriet, Eleanor, Emily, William, Richard
and Charlotte.
On arrival, they purchased a gardening
property at Payneham, and it was here that
two more children were born in Catherine
and Charles. The last-named is still living
at the fine age of ninety-two, and is the
oldest established market gardener in the
State. He takes pride in being the owner
of the original land and home purchased
by his late parents.
George Brundell, junior, joined his
father on the property after receiving his
education from a half-time school, the
master of which taught at two separate
schools in one day. George Brundell
married Catherine Maria Teichelmann,
daughter of the Lutheran, C. G. Teichel-
mann, who came to South Australia as one
of the first Lutheran pastors on the ship,
“Pestonjee Bomanjee,” arriving in 1838.
Pastor Teichelmann was a remarkable
man, and wrote a grammar and vocabulary
of the aborigine language and acted as
interpreter for the then Governor, Sir
George Grey, with the natives. He did
much for the community and his name is
revered amongst both the British and Ger-
man community thioughout the State.
In 1873 he with his family removed to
Yorke Peninsula, where he ended his days
on the 31st May, 1881 in his 82nd year.
George and Catherine Brundell had a
family of seven: Linda, Harriet. Jessie,
Fanny, Charlotte, Alice (deceased) and
George Stanford.
The first wheat grown in the Stans-
bury district was harvested on the Brun-
dell property. The family owns some 530
acres of land. There are 17 grand-children
and seven great grand-children, who repre-
sent the fifth generation of the Brundells in
Australia, and the sixth generation of the
Wood side of the family.


The Rev. Christian Gottlieb Teichel-
mann was born at Dahne, Saxony, on
December 15th, 1807, and ordained a
Lutheran clergyman in Altenburg. He
arrived in South Australia on the ship,
“Pcstonjee Bomanjee,” in company with
Governor Gawlcr who appointed him as
missionary to the aborigines. C. W.
Shurmann also arrived, and these two
clergymen worked together. In 1839 a
school was started for aborigine children.
Two small cottages were erected on the
park lands and occupied by the mission-
aries in 1840. During this year, Pastors
Teichelmann and Shurmann compiled a
grammar and vocabulary of the aborigine
language as spoken by the local tribes.
This book contains valuable informatian on
native beliefs and charms for the curing of
ailments.
In 1841, Pastor Teichelmann was ap-
pointed by Governor Grey as interpreter
for natives in South Australia, and was
also instructed to teach them English. In
the late forties Pastor Teichelmann was
Minister in the following Lutheran
churches: Monarto, Salem, and Peter’s Hill.
He was married on December 25th,
1843, to Margaret Nicholson cf Adelaide,
at the Presbyterian Church. They first
went to Morphett Vale.
In 1872 Pastor Teichelmann took up
land for his boys on Yorke Peninsula at
Stansbury. He died there in 1888 on May
31st., in his 82nd year, leaving a widow
and ten children, three of whom survive.
Those surviving are: Dr. Ebenezer Tei-
chelmann of Hokitika, New Zealand;
Catherine (Mrs. G. Brundell, Stansbury,
South Australia), and Josephine (Mrs.
Kendell, Melbourne),
Pastor Teichelmann was one of the
founders of the Stansbury Methodist
Church, and also conducted the first Sun-
day School with the help of his wife, which
was held at their home. He built the first
store in Stansbury and at Minlacowie.
Charles Brundell, Victor Harbour,
South Australia.
Charles Brundell of Victor Harbour,
South Australia, the eldest surviving son of
George Brundell, was born at Payneham,
Adelaide, in 1851 and educated at Inman
Valley. He then joined his father on the
farm and in 1872 the family removed to
Yorke Peninsula when the land in that part
of the State was thrown open for selection.
Charles Brundell purchased land at
Minlacowie, near Brentwood, where he en-
gaged in mixed farming until his retirement.
He was one of the first settlers in the Brent-
wood district and during this time married
Elizabeth Swincer of Minlaton, who died in
1935.
In 1927, Charles Brundell purchased an
allotment at Victor Harbour where he erec-
ted his present residence, “Hazeldean.”
During his association with the Brent-
wood district, Charles Brundell was an
active supporter of the Baptist Church, and
took a keen interest in all movements for
the welfare of the district.
The family has had nearly 100 years
association with the State.


The late John Barrow
Mrs. John Barrow
The Barrows of Ashwell, South Australia
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, John Barrow, was born at
Seaton, Rutlandshire, in 1813, where, after
receiving his education, he was trained in
farming. He married Emma Percival, also
of the same Country, in 1845 and within five
days of their marriage they embarked on
the ship “Isabella Watson” for South
Australia. They landed at Holdfast Bay
(now known as Glenelg) on April 6th,
1845.
The Province of South Australia was
then only ten years old. Shortly after
arrival John Barrow found employment in
Adelaide and later in the same year was
engaged by Mr. Steven King of Kingsford,
near Gawler, in pastoral work. In
November of 1847 he purchased an 80 acre
section, Xo, 2000 on which £1 per acre
had to be paid with the application for the
section, in the Hundred of Mudla-Wirra,
some nine miles from Gawler, (now known
as Templers). Here he engaged in farm-
ing. John and Emma Percival at this
time had two infant children. Joseph and
Emma Jane.
In those days the land in this district
was heavily timbered, there were no roads
or fences and stock had to be shepherded
and folded at night from wild dogs. The
work of clearing the land for agriculture
was very arduous and the area for the first
crop was prepared by means of a bullock
drawn single furrow plough, and the seed
broadcast by hand.
During this time John Barrow decided
to try his luck at the Victorian Gold
diggings and loaded a bullock dray and
made the long trek overland. He met with
little success and soon returned to his
selection. About this time the Burra
Copper mines were in full swing and Ash-
well was a stopping place for the teamsters
from the mines to Adelaide. As many as
sixty bullock teams camped here at one
time and John Barrow supplied paddocks
and water for them.


A neighbour decided to sell his selec-
tion of 80 acres adjoining that of John
Barrow’s and the latter decided toi purchase
it. The cost was £2OO and by his earnings
from the teamsters who paid him for
paddocking and watering the teams, John
Barrow was able to pay for his selection
within twelve months.
Vincent Barrow
Seven children were born on this pro-
perty —Richard, Mary, Eucy, Jane, Emma,
George and Vincent, of whom Emma (now
Mrs. Nash) and Vincent Barrow survive.
John Barrow, senior, was a public
spirited man and took an active part in all
matters of local welfare. He was for
many years Chairman of the Mudla-Wirra
District Council and occupied many other
local positions. He was created a Justice
of the Peace. He increased the size of his
holding until at his death in 1903 he owned
some 800 acres of what is known as some
of the best agricultural land in the district.
John Barrow gave the land for the
Ashwell Institute and, with a neighbour, was
responsible for the erection of this building
at Ashwell. He was a particularly keen
agriculturalist and most progressive in all
his undertakings. He did not believe in
putting all his eggs in one basket and was
a practical exponent of the successful
application of mixed farming, running
sheep, horses and cattle in addition to cropp-
ing a large portion of his country. He
died in his ninetieth year and his wife sur-
vived him some six years and was also aged
ninety on her death.
On the occasion of their Golden Wedd-
ing in 1895 there was a gathering of 39
descendants. Mrs. John Barrow was a
highly educated and cultured lady, brought
up under comfortable circumstances in
England and entered into the pioneering
life and hardships of the early days of the
Province and was typical of that splendid
type of English womanhood who shared the
dangers and hardships attendant to pioneer-
ing a new land. She proved a worthy
helpmate to her husband and was highly
revered by all who knew her. The family
were educated in the district.
Vincent Samuel, youngest and only
surviving son of John and Emma Barrow,
was born on the property at Ashwell near
Templers, in 1868 and, after finishing his
education joined his father and was
thoroughly trained in farming and pastoral
life. He was keen on travelling, especially
outside the settled districts and has made
several long trips into the interior. He
travelled extensively throughout Australia
and was for five years in the Northern
Territory. On the death of his father in
1903 Vincent Barrow took over the family
property and represents his generation of
the oldest family in the district still retain-
ing the original selection.


The family has now been associated
with Ashwell for some ninety years; during
that period they have seen the district grow
from virgin bush land to its present pros-
perous position as one of the best farming
areas in the State.
Tike his father, Vincent Barrow has
given much time to local affairs, serving as
a member of the local District Council,
occupying his father s seat. He has been
particularly active in promoting the welfare
of the district and no family has a greater
right to inclusion in the roll of “Founders
of Australia.’’ It is interesting to note
that one grandson served in the South
African Campaign and three grandsons
made the Supreme Sacrifice whilst serving
with the A.I.F. during the Great War; one
was killed at Gallipoli; another in Flanders
and one in Palestine. Nurse Lucy
Barrow, a grand-daughter, served through-
out the whole Campaign as a nurse and was
decorated with the Royal Red Cross and
the Greek Red Cross decorations for her
services.
The Union of the Mathison and Stewart Families
of Winchelsea.
As will be seen from the following
lines, the union of the two families above
named brought together two of our oldest
and most respected pioneer families. The
late Councillor George Mathison was born
at Thurso, in the County of Caithness,
Scotland, in the year 1821, and spent his
early years as a fisherman among the herr-
ing fleets which cruised in the regions of
the Orkney Islands. From these activities,
the young man saved sufficient capital to
pay the fares to Australia for his brother —
James —and his sister —Jean. This was
typical of his character for, throughout his
career, he was noted for his independent
spirit which but recognised difficulties in
order to fight and overcome them. Since
it is not proposed to follow the careers of
his brother or sister, it might here be men-
tioned that the latter went to New Zealand
where she ultimately married a member
of the business community who, by coinci-
dence, was of the same name as herself.
One of her descendants is in the business
world of Melbourne at the present time.
His brother James bought a property ad-
jacent to “Stoneleigh” which he later sold
to Mr. George Stewart and went to live at
Portarlington where he ultimately died,
We now return to the career of the late
George Mathison. When he landed at
Port Adelaide, in the year 1847, following a
journey of ninety days aboard the sailing
ship “Phoebe,” he was faced with the task
of making a start in a young, raw, and
somewhat unsympathetic country, with a
total capital of threepence in his pocket.
It is typical of his character that he had no
hesitation in accepting work at the munifi-
cent wage of six shillings weekly, as a
bricklayer’s labourer. However, this lasted
but a brief while and he found it possible
to save enough to bring him to Victoria
where he entered the primary production
field. By the year 1858 he was able to buy
at auction, from the Crown, at Tutegong,
Winchelsea a holding of 289 acres which
later grew to 1858 acres (including the
original holdings of his brother James) and
was named “Stoneleigh.” From this point
onwards, his name became coupled with
that of sterling citizenship and, in addition
to his heavy responsibilities on the land,
he found time to serve his fellow-citizens
as a member of the Shire Council from the
year 1865 to 1867. He died in the year
1900 at the age of seventy-nine.


The late George Mathison married, in
the year 1851, Flesabet'h Stewart then aged
eighteen, daughter of the late George and
Elizabeth Stewart (nee Ogilvy), who came
to Australia on the sailing ship “Himalaya”
and landed at the Port Phillip Settlement
-—later renamed Victoria —in 1840.
The Stewart family, immediately on
landing, proceeded to the Plenty River, and
later to Upper Leigh—since named Shel-
ford —where Mr. Stewart engaged in his
own calling as a blacksmith. Again at a
later date, ihe moved to the Bellarine Hills
and undertook farming pursuits, and, again
later, purchased three hundred and thirty-
one acres at Tutegong, originally owned
by James Mathison as already recorded.
Ide remained at the last-named until the
year 1865 and finally removed to Portar-
lington where he died in 1872 at the age of
seventy-two years. It was a fitting end to
a fine pioneering couple that his widow
then aged eighty, survived him by but four
days.
And thus we close the story of the
founders of the Stewart family in Austra-
lia. To appreciate the true value of such
lives as theirs to a young country, we must
visualise the conditions under which they
strove and won,- —wild bush through which
no roads or fences served as guides, un-
known quantities insofar as the aborigines
were concerned, and no means of transport
except —in the case of a fortunate few—an
odd bullock team, or horse and springless
dray. Surely no monument could exagger-
ate the wonderful men and women to whom
the present generation owes present-day
prosperity.
The late Mrs. George Mathison passed
away at Geelong in the year 1924 in her
ninety-second year, and was, at that time,
a colonist of no less than eighty-four years.
From the union of the late Councillor and
Mrs. George Mathison there was a family
of sons and daughters as follows:
Of the above, Councillor John Stewart
Mathison, J.P., was born at “Stoneleigh”
in 1875 and has ably carried on the tasks
so capably undertaken by his late father.
In 1901 he became a member of the \\ in-
chelsea Shire Council for the East Riding
and has conscientiously fulfilled his duties
in that direction to the present day. He
has been President of the Council on four
occasions and had the gratification of laying
the foundation stone of the present Shire
Hall during his first term in that office.
In the same year that saw him take his
seat for the first time on the Council, he
married Miss Annie Sophia Mann, of Mode-
warre, and took up residence at his present
home ‘‘Bona Vista.” Among his many
interests and activities, he takes pride in
his breeding of horses for the Indian Arti-
llery and remounts. Insofar as the former
are concerned, there are but few who have
succeeded in attaining the standard re-
quired and, thus, his pride is fully justified.
From the union of Councillor and Mrs. J. S.
Mathison there is the following family: —
George Stewart, John Cyril (who is an
engineer with the Queensland Main Roads
Commission), Norman Russell, Greta Ogil-
vic, Wilfred James (who died as a result
of over-strain during his studies at Mel-
bourne University), Annie Gwendoline —
who is a dual certificated nurse, Alwyn
Gordon, Thomas Maxwell, Wallace Kitch-
ener —who is an assistant at the Winchel-
sea Shire Offices, and Geoffrey Ronald, who
is on the staff of Dennys, Eascelles Ltd. at
Geelong.
We take pleasure in including these
lines in the “Founders of Australia and
their Descendants. ’’


f
Mk
The late James Blight,
The late Mrs. James Blight.
Frank Blight
The Blight Family of South Australia
The founder of this family, James
Blight, a native of Devonshire, England,
arrived in South Australia on the ship,
“Lysander’’ in 1849. Shortly after arrival
he purchased land at Gumeracha and later
made two overland trips to the \ ictorian
Gold Diggings, where he met with some
success. In 1869 he purchased land at
Cartapoo, near Hallett, where he engaged
in farming and has the honour of being the
first man to grow a crop of wheat north of
the Burra. He pioneered this portion in
agriculture as it was previously grazing
land. James Blight died on this property at
the age of ninety-one. He held at this time,
some 1,000 acres of what was previously
virgin soil, but which he, with the aid of his
sons, converted into a prosperous farm.
There was a family of twelve children of
whom Frank survives.
Frank Blight was born at Gumeracha
in 1864 and at the age of five accompanied
his parents to their northern selection. On
the death of his father, he with his brothers,
took over the family homestead where he
stayed for some years. He then purchased
a grazing property at Bendigo near Ket-
chowla in the North-east, where he engaged
in grazing and was most successful. Here
he stayed until his retirement when he lived
at the Burra for some years and eventually
came to Adelaide and is now living in
retirement at Glenelg.
Frank Blight from his youth saw the
Northern country converted from grazing
to agriculture and took an active part in the
pioneering work attendant thereto.
The family has had nearly ninety years
association with South Australia and has
won an honoured place in the roll of
“Founders of Australia.”


|p. I iii in hi mi a '
Alexander Low.
The Low Family of South Australia
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, Alexander Low, was a native
of Brechin, Scotland and at the age of 20
sailed for Australia, arriving in Adelaide
in 1853. Alexander Low was a highly
educated man. He graduated at King’s
College, London and then as was usual
amongst the landed gentry of Britain in
those days, toured the Continent where he
rounded off his education. He was a bril-
liant linguist, speaking seven languages.
On arrival in South Australia he first went
to Lyndoch where he worked for a while
and later became engaged in station work
at Mount Bryan for some years where he
acquired pastoral knowledge. He married
Grace Fender, also a native of Brechin,
who arrived in Australia on the ship “Great
Victoria” in 1864. This lady left a delight-
ful resume of her trip to Australia in the
shape of a letter covering the details of the


Mrs. Alexander Low.
voyage. There were 600 passengers on
board, and the ship first went to Mel-
bourne and later sailed for Port Adelaide.
This journey on the “Great Victoria” from
England took a long while owing to engine
trouble, and there were a great number of
deaths en route. When the ship arrived at
Hobson’s Bay, Melbourne the passengers
were put in quarantine for 21 days owing
to the amount of sickness on board.
The marriage between Alexander Low
and Grace Ferrier took place shortly after
her arrival in South Australia. Alexander
Low lived at Mount Bryan for some years
and then purchased land near Hallett where
he engaged in grazing. His wife’s brother
also held adjacent land which Alexander
Low eventually took over and engaged in
mixed farming in addition to grazing. He
sold this property and in 1875 came to
“Yakilo” near Spalding, which formed part
of the present property. This was later
increased to 8,000 acres of grazing country
on which sheep of the Merino type were
used. Up to 10,000 sheep were shorn in
one season and cattle and horses were also
run on the property.


Robert T. Low
Alexander Ferrier Low.
There was a family of eight—Alexander
Ferrier, Elizabeth Jane Ferrier, Margaret
(now Mrs. A. March) ; Jessie Douglas,
Robert Theodore (dec.), Katherine Ferrier,
Alexina Grace and David Joseph. Alex-
ander Low was a member of the first Spald-
ing District Council of which he was Chair-
man for some years; at the same time he
was a Councillor of the Booboorowie Dis-
trict Council. He was also created a
Justice of the Peace. He took a prominent
part in local affairs and was closely asso-
ciated with the local Presbyterian Church.
He was a highly respected citizen and
his education and general knowledge was
availed of by many of his neighbours. He
died in 1910 at the age of 78 years; his wife
died in 1920 at the age of 82.
On the death of Alexander Low his two
sons, Alexander Ferrier and David Joseph,
took over the estate, part of which they
later sold for Soldier Settlement to the
Repatriation Department and the two
brothers divided the balance of the Estate.
Alexander Perrier Low, the eldest son
and his sisters now reside at “Yakilo”,
which is mainly used to-day for wool pro-
duction. This property is now carried on
by A. F. Low who is a well-known identity
of the district with which he has been
associated most of his life. He made
several trips to the Far North to Kalioota
Station during each of which he brought
mobs of sheep down to the “Yakilo” home-
stead property. He acquired knowledge of
the conditions existing in the North during
those days and has seen the country under
varying conditions from extreme drought
to seasons of plenty. A note of interest in
reference to Alexander Low, senior, is the
fact that he assisted to erect the first wire
fence in South Australia at “Turrettfield”,
Gawler.


Gerald Fetherston March,
Grandson of Alexander Low.
David J. Low, J.P.
David Joseph Low, J.P., was born on
July 25th, 1879, and educated, first privately
and at the Spalding Public School, finishing
at Way College, Adelaide. He then re-
turned to the property and engaged in
pastoral life in conjunction with his father
with whom he stayed until the latter’s
death. He like his father was a member
of the Spalding district Council and retained
this seat for some fourteen years during
four of which he was Chairman. In 1919
he was created a Justice of the Peace which
office he still holds. For some twelve years
he was Treasurer and Elder of the Spalding
Presbyterian Church, and still retains his
connection with same. He took a very
active interest in the welfare of the district.
David Joseph Low married Mary Mar-
garet Stalley of Peterborough, daughter of
Richard Stalley, whose father was an early
pioneer of the Nairne district of South
Australia, thus joining two pioneer families.
The children of David and Mary Low are —
Alexander Richard and Ailsa Eva who re-
present the third generation of the Low
family and the fourth generation of the
Stalleys. David Low retired in 1923 to
Victor Harbour, and in 1926 purchased his
present property there, “Goorunga” which
is situated on an eminence some half mile
from the sea-front of Victor Harbour over-
looking Encounter Bay. This homestead
has a wonderful panoramic view and com-
pares very favorably with any other seaside
views in the State. The home is a substan-
tial structure embodying all modern con-
veniences and in addition to the front view
of the sea, covers some delightful views of
the Inman Valley from the rear, giving both
a sea and landscape outlook.


“GOORUNGA.”
The Residence of David Low, J.P., at Victor Harbour.
For some eight years David Low was
a Councillor of the Corporation of Victor
Harbour and has given much time to the
promotion of the progress of this well-
known district. He was a foundation
member of the Victor Harbour Hospital.
Robert Theodore Low was born in
1874 at Pillillie, near Hallet and after
finishing his education joined his father on
the property where he acquired pastoral
knowledge and in the late forties went to
Western Australia where he took up graz-
ing land in the South of that State. He
died there In November, 1923.
Gerald Fetherston March, eldest son
of Mr. and Mrs. A. March and grandson
of Alexander Low, served with the A.I.F.
during the Great War and was at Gallipoli,
Egypt and Palestine, serving overseas some
four years. He married Rita Davies,
daughter of John Davies, and their children
are Peter and lan Davies, who represent
the fourth generation of the Low family.
This family has had 84 years associa-
tion with the State of South Australia and
won an honoured place in the roll of
“Founders of Australia.”


f*k\
if fSS \
1/ ** £*•» V;
1 ’”'■'* '
m •» y ,-> * h
V' / I
if' jfLr &•■
// * fe:-;,.;\\
// Ws\ -x- w V\
ft M ▼ If- |f \\
fir •►' ■j Ip gal
1/ mr / 4
ML \Jll f
U TKf > iy
«fe t . n
i a A i|> - u, jj
r •
'ifl
J m- *• Wv.
m \
■ i
•V ■ W
I IS
% —* H//
■ •
Mrs. Margaret March, nee Low.
Alexander Richard Low
Son of David Low.
Mrs. D. J. Low, nee Stalley.
Ailsa Eva Low.


r
‘
J
*” jjj/p
Wt- *■ #
Jessie Douglas Low.
Elizabeth Jean Ferrier Low,
Katherine Ferrier Low.
Alexina Grace Low.


*& iMM'i iiii u fri
-' ' '*'
" ifk"'
“ YAKILO
The Low Homestead at Spalding, South Australia.
The View from the Low Homestead Victor Harl


[THOMAS GORDOTT] [ANNIE GORDON"j
m S «• & VB H jfe
SB PRESIDENT OF THE LEGiS! ATIVE COUNCIL ML, ' f ,
South Australia
[DOUGLAS PEEL GORDON] --■■ |g
mi m
'MRS STUART W. .MATTERS) (MRS, V H. DAY)
[DAVID MATTERS GORDON;


Thomas and Annie Gordon and Family of South
Australia.
Thomas Gordon, born at Perth, Scot-
land, on Bth June, 1827, was the son of John
Rutherford Gordon who was born at Perth,
Scotland, on sth April, 1801. Annie
Stewart was the eldest daughter of Donald
Stewart who fought in the Highland Brig-
ade at Waterloo under Wellington. Annie
Stewart was born at Craithie, near Bal-
moral Castle and Braemar on 24th May,
1827, and was married to Thomas Gordon
in the Free Church, Dundee, on 30th
November, 1849.
Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Gordon were
early attracted by the promises of the
founders of the Province of South Austra-
lia, and in 1852 with their infant son, John,
they travelled by stage coaches from Scot-
land to Plymouth, and from there on Ist
May, 1852, sailed in the “Gloucester”, a
small ship bound for South Australia. Port
Adelaide was reached on 13th August, 1852.
There was a large number of passengers,
and throughout the long voyage no land
was sighted until daybreak one morning
the cry of “Land ahead!” found the vessel
heading straight towards the treacherous
South Coast of Kangaroo Island. The
voyage was very trying, especially for the
women and children. Several deaths took
place during the voyage and the child,
John, of Mr. and Mrs. Gordon, died soon
after arrival at Adelaide.
Thomas Gordon was a carpenter and
builder and experienced no difficulty in
finding employment. Within a few years
he entered into a partnership and the firm
secured a contract in connection with the
building of Parliament House, which in
later years became the Legislative Council.
His son, Sir David Gordon, after a term
in the Federal Parliament, became a member
of the Legislative Council in 1913 and sub-
sequently its President.
Towards the end of the fifties the
“near” North was beginning to attract
attention and Mr. Masters, an uncle of the
Swinden family, took up country near the
centre of Riverton. Mr. Masters called for
tenders for the erection of a flour mill, and
Thomas Gordon secured the contract.
Riverton, at that time, was the “Farthest
North” of the Province, and the only means
of transport was by bullock dray. There
was no defined road and it took Mr, and Mrs-
Gordon two weeks to reach their destina-
tion, sixty miles from the city.
After completion of the mill, Mr.
Masters persuaded Mr. Gordon to take a
lease of it, and for several years, in con-
junction with his brother, William, who
had followed him to South Australia, he
carried on the mill with great success.
He was one of the founders of the
Loyal Princess Royal Lodge M.U. of
Riverton, and continued a member for
many years.
Retiring from the mill and business,
Mr. Gordon engaged in farming near River-
ton, and on Alma Plains until 1876 when
the family took up land on Yorke Penin-
sula near Ardrossan. Mrs. Thomas Gor-
don died there in 1901 and Mr, Gordon in
1912.
Their family consisted of five sons —
John, William, Thomas, David John and
Albert Edwin, and four daughters—Jessie


Ann, Mary Ann, Eliza Jane and Jessie
Isabell.
The onl} r members of the family living
in 1937 were —Mary (Mrs. Easterbrook)
and David John (Sir David Gordon, Pre-
sident of the Legislative Council). Other
descendant's of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Gor-
don are eleven grandsons, eight grand-
daughters and thirty-five great grand-
children.
Mr. John Rutherford Gordon, father of
Thomas Gordon, came to South Australia
a few years after his son and settled at
Williamstown. He left two daughters —-
Mrs. William Hammatt and Mrs. James
Trestrail and some members of their fami-
lies are farming at Williamstown and
Yorketown, South Australia. Mrs. Tres-
trail was living when this publication was
issued.
Mr. William Gordon, second son, after
farming on Yorke Peninsula for several
years, went to the Wimmera district in
Victoria and became a successful farmer
there. His eldest son, Thomas Stewart,
went into commercial life and at the present
time is Managing Director of one of the
largest shipping firms in Sydney —Birt &
Co., Ltd.
Descendants of this pioneer family to
the number of five grandsons and one
granddaughter, Mrs. Stuart Matters, a
nurse, took part in the Great War.
The PTon. Sir David Gordon, Kt.B.,
M.L.C., the only son of the Pioneers now
living, was born at Riverton, South Austra-
lia on the 4th May, 1865 and educated at
the Stanley Grammar School, Watervale.
He spent his youth in farming and was a few
years in Commercial life, chiefly in the grain
trade and shipping. He was Manager of
the Port Adelaide branch of the “Register”
Newspaper Office for five years and later for
sixteen years successively commercial and
financial editor, leader writer and chief of
the reporting and Hansard staff; M.H.R.
for Boothby, November, 1911 to May, 1913;
M.L.C. for Midland district since Novem-
ber, 1913; Leader of the Liberal Party in
the Legislative Council from 1918 to 1932
when he became President. He was Presi-
dent of the Australian Liberal Union;
President of the Adelaide Chamber of Com-
merce, 1919-21 ; President Associated Cham-
ber of Commerce, of Australia, 1922; Chair-
man of the Army and Navy Department and
Adelaide Y.M.C.A. during the War, first
President of Sailors’ and Soldiers’ Fathers’
Association of South Australia. He is
author of a number of publications relating
to South Australia, including “The Central
State”; “Its History, Progress and Re-
sources” ; “The Nile of Australia”; “Official
Handbook” and “Official Year-Book of
South Australia.” He is a Director of
several Companies including Adelaide Elec-
tric Supply ; North and South Broken Hill;
Broken Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie;
A.M.P., and Goldsbrough Mort & Co.
He married in 1888 Anna Louisa, eldest
daughter of Henry Peel of Semaphore,
South Australia. Sons served in European
War —Flight-Lieutenant John Rutherford
Gordon, M.C., Australian Flying Corps;
served as Sergeant 10th Battalion Infantry
at Gallipoli Landing; promoted Lieutenant,
subsequently transferred to Flying Corps;
served in France, 1918, awarded Military
Cross; Driver Douglas Peel Gordon,
A.A.S.C. Egypt, 1914 and Gallipoli, 1915;
Sister Doris Gordon, Base Hospital, 1915-
16, France and Italy, 1917-18. Another
daughter, Lulu Jean Gordon (now Mrs.
\ ictor IT. Day) is also a trained nurse.
David Matters Gordon, son of Douglas
Gordon, represents the fifth male genera-
tion of this pioneer family which has won
an honoured place in South Australian his-
tory.


»T - - - - . , ini^i
y.lTTl i
-~ M&mm
JBBBPK5E'■ F . ... 'jf 1 MfBt I
A ' ■
■}f
The late James Coulthard
Mr. and Mrs. J. B. Coulthard
The Coulthards of South Australia
James Coulthard, a son of William
Coulthard, who arrived in South Australia
on the ship “Buffalo in 1836, was born and
educated at Nuriootpa and Nesbit School,
Angaston. At the age of fourteen he went
to Angepena in the North of South Austra-
lia and staved on that cattle station for
some years, and later went to Queensland
where he was engaged in pastoral work.
He married Charlotte Elizabeth, daugh-
ter of William Dickerson. In 1876 he pur-
chased land at Koolunga, and in 1888 pur-
chased “Breezy Brae” from the Govern-
ment when that country was then opened
for selection. The family has been asso-
ciated with this property ever since. He
died in 1910 leaving a family of three —
M rs. J. R. Bidgood; William Dickerson
and James Baird.
James Baird Coulthard was born at
“Breezy Brae", Percyton, Snowtown, in
1888 and finished his education at Prince
Alfred College, Adelaide. Returning to
the property he joined his father in farm-
ing until the latter’s death in 1910 when he
carried on in conjunction with his mother.
In 1914 James Baird Coulthard married
Annie, daughter of the late William Rus-
sell Michael, who was a son of John
McKee, an early pioneer of South Austra-
lia. James and Annie have two daughters
Merle Dulcie and Margaret Eleanor. These
children represent the fourth generation of
both the Coulthard and Michael families.
On the death of Mrs. James Coulthard,
senior, James Baird took over the family
homestead. The property is some 1,800


sJ& ' A
- M
fl| WJk ‘ -^P
Mrs. W. R. Michael
Mother of Mrs. J. B. Coulthard
acres in extent used for mixed farming.
For some years James Baird was a mem-
ber of the Snowtown District Council
representing the Cameron area. He is a
member of the Masonic Lodge and has
taken an active interest in all local move-
ments. The family has been associated
with the district since it was opened for
selection, and his father was one of the
first selectors to take up land in this area.
Miss Merle Coulthard
Four Generations of Michael Family
The Coulthard family has been asso-
ciated with the State of South Australia for
over 100 years, and each generation have
contributed largely towards the building up
and the progress of South Australia. Few
families have had a longer continuous asso-
ciation with the pastoral and agricultural
life of this State. They are truly pioneers
in every sense of the word.
M iss Margaret Coulthard


'! —- —- ———!^5r^!^rjX'_ r xj n wm
Hi ; ; r - W
« «4 f
I # 4
I o/'f i
& BMb
y':', , B/ VT
fe * ifl
■t-i* riw "*• fl ■'~-*-~- s ~'~- -■'"*»" i wiw"3rnti
I mi iTniB iiifim MiiM^it^^p
— 1
/**Jrm ’'N/v
A\
JHr® In ,.x|M \\
Sk ~i<ia»’,^
/f ■ g> mWjufik^: ll
‘ \MO’ i
■ 11? iV\\ V \ \ Wk
\ x\ M
Henry Cook Bidgood
Mrs. H. B. Bidgood, Senr.
The Bidgood Family of South Australia.
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, Henry Cook Bidgood, was a
native of Somerset, England and arrived in
South Australia in the ship, “Sir Edward
Parry”, on the 21st June, 1849, with his
wife, Betty, and son, James Roger Bid-
good. Shortly after arrival they took up
land at Chain-of-ponds, near Adelaide and
later started farming at Saddleworth where
the second son, Richard, was born.
H. C. Bidgood died in 1891 and his
wife died at Saddleworth in 1897.
In 1873 James R. Bidgood purchased
two sections of land at Salt Lake, now
Lochiel, near Snowtown. The property at
this time was virgin bush and he prepared
it for farming operations, gradually increas-
ing the area to some large extent. They
started in a small way and at first had two
bullocks and a single furrow plough. Mrs.
Bidgood was a great helpmate to her hus-
band. She was an expert butter maker and
her butter was greatly sought after in the
district. Both Mr. and Mrs. Bidgood were
great workers, and by their thrift were able
to purchase further areas of land, and were
most successful in all their undertakings.
They were active members of the local
Methodist Church, and did much to promote
the welfare of the district. Mrs. J. R. Bid-
good was a native of Forfarshire, Scotland,
where she was born in 1834. She arrived in
South Australia with her brother and sister,
David and Mary Milne, in 1851 in the ship
“Sir Joseph Rowen.” They joined their
brother, James Milne, who had been in the
Province some years prior to their arrival.
In 1859 she married J. R. Bidgood and there
was a family of nine. Only these six
reached maturity—Messrs. Henrv and J.
R. Bidgood, Mesdames Durdin, Maxwell,
Atkinson and Fraser, and there were 22
grandchildren and six great grandchildren.
J. R. Bidgood senior, died in 1903 at the age
of 74, and his wife died in 1916 at the age
of 84. On the death of his father, J. R.
Bidgood, junior, with his brother, Henry,
took over the family property which they
worked together until the death of Henrv in
1914; James Bidgood then took over the
estate. In 1905 he married Winifred Mary.


11
<%, I
■i-wBk f :
4 ’
I
— - - ’" -i riMfi B
James Rodger Bidgood
Mrs. J. R. Bidgood
J. R. Bidgood
Mrs. J. R. Bidgood, Jnr.


' *.
J. R. Bidgood
Miss Rhonda Bidgood
Miss Audrey Bidgood
Miss Elsie Bidgood


daughter of James Coulthard, a member of
one of the oldest South Australian families,
the founder of whom, William Coulthard,
was a native of Scotland, and arrived in
South Australia on the ship “Buffalo” in
1836. When the State was proclaimed
William Coulthard went first to Bull’s
Creek and later to Nuriootpa where he
engaged in farming and also built the first
house in the district. Fie married a lady
from Scotland, Marion Baird, and there
was a family of six; John, James, A illiam,
Robert, Thomas and Maggie.
William Coulthard was engaged in ex-
ploring with Thring, and on the last expedi-
tion perished through thirst in the Port
Augusta district he was only 36 years of
age.
John Coulthard, eldest son of William,
was born at Bull’s Creek, and as a youth
was employed on a cattle station on the
Murray, where he stayed until he went to
Lake Hope. On the death of his father he
returned home and carried on the family
property. Fie married Johanna Pryzibilla
of Nuriootpa and had a family of three —
Harriett Annie, Adelaide Margaret and
William. John carried on farming, dairy-
ing and horse breeding until his death at the
age of sixty-five. The children are still
residing on the property owned by their
grand-parents who had started to erect the
present home prior to his death.
William Coulthard senior, was a foun-
dation member of the Angaston District
Council, and was followed in this position
by his son, John, who in turn was followed
by his son, William, who for twenty-five
years has been a member of this Council
and has taken a keen interest in all matters
of local welfare.
William Coulthard was born at Nuri-
ootpa and also engaged in station life,
managing amongst other stations the Willo-
wie Pastoral Company for many years and
opened up several stations in the far North
and few men had a greater knowledge of
Central Australia, a large portion of which
he explored in the early days. He died at
the age of seventy-three.
Robert Coulthard was born at Nuri-
ootpa and after receiving his education be-
came engaged in flour milling up to the age
of seventeen when the lure of the bush
called him and he managed several cattle
stations in the Far-north and purchased
“Jempy Downs” Station which he held
until his retirement.
These two men can be truly termed
pioneers of the North, as they opened up
much of that country and spent most of
their lives in the Far North. The family is
memorialised in the Nuriootpa district by
the Coulthard Memorial Church which was
given to the district by the grandchildren
of the Founder of the family
Thomas Coulthard is still living with
his son Roy in Central Australia.
James Rodger and Winifred Bidgood
had a family of six—Hazel (now Mrs.
Hancock), James, Leonard, Audrey, Rhonda
and Elsie. James consolidated the property
which is to-day considered one of the best
improved in the district. He, like his father,
was a member of the Methodist Church and
in his quiet, unostcntious way did much for
the district. He died in 1933 at the age of
fifty-eight. James, his eldest son, now
manages the property.
The Bidgoods have been associated
with South Australia for nearly ninety
years, and the Coulthards for over one
hundred years. Both families have won an
honoured place amongst the “Founders of
Australia”. The present generation are
the fourth on both sides of the families.


**
MMKm
. JL mE | p .jSj R
The Maxwells of South Australia.
Mrs. Hannah Maxwell, third surviving
child of J. R. Bidgood, senior, was born at
Saddleworth, and married Robert Maxwell
at Kapunda. They first settled at Marra-
bel and later took up their present
property at South Hammocks. There is a
family of four—Robert Ernest, Susan Vio-
let, Elsie May and Hilda Daisy.
Maxwell Raymond Wallis
Fifth Generation of Bidgoods
The property named “ Warrindi ” is
situated some twelve miles from Port
\\ akefield and is 1,200 acres in extent, used
for mixed farming.
Robert Maxwell was for some years a
Councillor of the Kulpara District Council
and prior to this was Chairman of the
Hamilton District Council.
Robert, junior, married Irene Dunow
and has a family of three children —Irene
Jean, Robert Keith and David John,
Hilda Daisy married Cecil Wallis of
South Hammocks and has one son, Max.
This child represents the fifth generation
of the Bidgood family in Australia.
The Bidgood family have a very long
association with the County of Somerset-
shire, England, and in the parish of Cheddar
in that County, the family can trace their
history back for many generations. Some
of the family are still residing there.


C. H. Atkinson
Mrs. C. FI. Atkinson
The Atkinsons of South Australia
Mrs. Emma Stuart Roger Atkinson,
nee Bidgood, was born at Saddleworth and
came with her parents to Lochiel and, in
1889, married Charles Henry Atkinson of
Snowtown. He was associated in station
work with Mr. Barr Smith at the Snowtown
Station. When the boys began to grow up
he decided to select land in the Hundred of
Cummins on the West Coast of South
Australia. This land at that time was
virgin scrub and Charles Atkinson pio-
neered that district and farmed it with much
success until his retirement in 1916. There
was a family of five children —Charles Henry
Garner, Frederick James, Edward Richard,
Ernest Albert and Winifred Janie Hilda
Eliza.
C. H. G. Atkinson was born at Snow-
town in 1890 and after finishing his education
at the Barunga School joined his father in
farming on the West Coast. On the latter s
retirement he took over the property with
which he was also successful until 1919
when he joined the South Australian Police
Force in which he is still serving. He
married Agnes Mabel, daughter of Alex.
Stevenson Meldrum, and there are two
children—Alfred Frederick and Janet Isabel.
These children represent the fifth genera-
tion of the Bidgood family.
Frederick James Atkinson was born at
Snowtown and at the outbreak of War
enlisted in the A.1.F., joining the 10th
Battalion in 1916, serving in France where
he made the supreme sacrifice in 1918.
Ernest Albert Atkinson enlisted with the
48th Ballalion and went to France where
he joined his brother’s unit and in 1918 was
killed in action.
Miss Atkinson married Alfred Brooks
of Norwood, and has two daughters, Melva
Edna and Lois Jean. The family through-
out their long and honourable association
with the State have in each generation con-
tributed towards the building up of the
Commonwealth, and has won an honoured
place amongst those pioneers who did so
much towards making the Commonwealth
what it is to-day.


ki" 1
F !
Irn/S- |
• 1 # .
* * * * ♦ - ■ .<
• • * 4 • # * .
S' -A ••
■HHHM m ~
The late Frederick Atkinson
Mrs. Brooks (nee Atkinson)
The late Ernest Atkinson
Janet Atkinson
Fifth Generation of Bidgood Family


M fl w m
1
% ig
x *> MiiiX y
% • ill* /
\ VysMpfWMf /
T x3k :^WHLJW^Pf ,ri|r
S nun,
■P^l
II '^f 00mmm %I
| : v -
I I 11^11
Jtmm It
HJ if
I || 'J&Jr ||g|p
I \ p P
Mrs. Thomas Sandland
The late Thomas Sandland
The Sandland Family of South Australia
The founder of this family in Austra-
lia, John Sandland, arrived in South Aus-
tralia from Shropshire, England, with his
wife and three children, John, Emily and R.
Cooper in 1848. They settled first at Row-
land Flat and engaged in farming. Eater
members of the family were born there —
Thomas, Nellie (Mrs. Medway Day) and
William E. The family then removed to
Woodlands near Lyndoch and John Sand-
land, senior, became interested in station
properties on the Darling River, but aftei
meeting with an accident on the Station
returned to Lyndoch where he lived until
his death. Emily, the eldest daughter,
married Johnstone Hone and their eldest
son is Dr. Frank Sandland Hone of Ade-
laide.
Thomas, the third son, was educated
at Lyndoch and St. Peter’s College, Ade-
laide. After finishing his education he
returned to Woodlands and with a view to
gaining pastoral experience went io the
Moorara Station on the Darling which was
then under the ownership of Messrs. Bar-
ritt & Wreford where he was well grounded
in pastoral knowledge.
After some time he was made manager
of Carpa-Cora, a back station of Moorara,
where he stayed for some five years. Dur-
ing that time he made several trips to Ade-
laide with fat wethers. After leaving
Moorara he, with his brother, John C. Sand-
land and Hamilton & Wilcox of Koona-
more, became partners in that property and
Thomas was overseer there for several
years. He married Ellen Mary Barritt of
Lyndoch and after their marriage took up
a small property at Mannanarie near James-
town where he stayed for some four or five
years and then decided to enter the Stock
and Station business in Adelaide, which he
continued for some time and finally came to
Burra and entered into partnership with his
brother, R. Cooper Sandland, in an auction-
eering business at Burra and Jamestown.
This partnership was carried on for some
years. In addition he was partner with
John Sandland of Koonoona and purchased
some 8,000 acres of the Koonoona Estate,
known as Mule Camp, and later called Koo-
owie where they established that well-known


' . t
r ■v £ i. ;
I P
•f i ISNfci.aiP
Mrs. W. H. Sandland
W. Humphrey Sandland
stud which has become famous throughout
Australia for the Merino sheep which are
bred there. This property and stud are still
in the hands of the family, which Thomas
acquired and handed on to his sons and is
now being controlled by Keith Chester
Sandland.
In 1902 Thomas purchased Balah
Station, east of Burra, which at that time
was used for cattle, but he converted it into
sheep country and stocked it with Koo-owie
sheep, and after leaving school P. T. Sand-
land, the eldest son, managed Balah.
In 1908 Thomas Sandland went to
Western Australia and acquired a property
known as Burrabidgy in the Moora district
which was also stocked from the Koo-owie
Stud. This property is now held by the
eldest son, P. T. Sandland. Balah was
taken over by W. Humphrey Sandland,
second son of Thomas, and also portion of
Koo-owie. The children of Thomas and
Ellen Mary Sandland were—Philip Thomas,
William Humphrey, Allan Cooper, dec.,
Mettie Rubelle (Mrs. Thomas Ashton),
Keith Chester and Elsie May Barritt Sand-
land,
P. T. Sandland, eldest son, was born
at Mannanarie and educated at Burra school
and later at St. Peter’s College where he
became a champion athlete of the College,
winning the College Cup and Inter-colle-
giate Cup two years in succession. After
leaving College he went to the Adelaide
University and during that time played
senior football for the North Adelaide Club.
As a youth of 19 he won the Magarey
Medal for the fairest and most brilliant
player in the State. He also played inter-
state football for the South Australian
Team against Victoria. He took up pas-
toral life and in 1908 went to the Western
Australian property of the family which he
later acquired. He married Edith Car-
barns of Victoria, and has a family of
two —-Allan and Betty. Allan is the eldest
of the fourth generation of the Sandland
family in South Australia.
William Humphrey Sandland, second
son, was born at Mannanarie on 17th Feb-
ruary, 1884, and received his early educa-
tion at Burra and later at St. Peter’s Col-
lege, Adelaide. He then returned to Koo-
owie and, after acquiring pastoral exper-
ience, took over the management of the


Koo-owie Stud and later Balah Station. He
followed in his father’s footsteps in the
promotion of the Koo-owie Stud and helped
to make its name known throughout the
Commonwealth. In the division of the
properties amongst the various members
of the family, W. Humphrey took over
Balah Station to which he added adjacent
property besides retaining an interest in
part of Koo-owie. W. H. Sandland makes
a speciality of woolgrowing on Balah and
invariably tops the Adelaide market at the
wool sales for the quality of wool grown at
Balah. He married Stella Marion Lord of
Burra, daughter of George Lord, an early
arrival in the district from England. W.
Humphrey and Stella Sandland are now
living in the old family home, “Heath-
mount,” Kooringa, which has been in the
family for nearly fifty years. This home-
stead is situated on an eminence overlook-
ing the township and commands some
wonderful views. W. Humphrey ofifered
his services during the Great War, but was
medically rejected. He is a keen bowler
and has won several trophies and skippered
many winning rinks.
The family has done much in helping
to build up the high quality of the Merino
flocks from the Koo-owie Stud, and deserves
an honoured place in the roll of “bounders
of Australia,”
Ten years before his death, Thomas
Sandland, visited England with his young-
est daughter and made an extensive tour
throughout England and Europe, visiting
amongst other places, Eoppington Hall at
Shrewsbury in Shropshire, his ancestors
old home and found in the Church Register
a record showing the Sandland name in a
direct line dating back nearly 400 years in
the history of the County of Shropshire.
The family crest bears the motto over a
clefteel “Aut Uniamar Ant Moriamar”
(either unite us or we die).
H eathmoiint,” the residence of W. Humphrey Sandland


n w&mk' iil i.
h
I I
ijf ’ ■* wpt
|PaB|
Mr. Dow, father of Mrs. Joseph Cowan
Mrs. Dow, mother of Mrs. Joseph Cowan
The Cowans of South Australia
The founder of this old pioneer family,
David Cowan, with his wife, sailed from
Scotland for South Australia arriving in
1839. They first settled at Magill, Ade-
laide, where the family were born and edu-
cated. Later they went to Salisbury. Then
they settled at Normanville where David
Cowan established a property known as
the “Gorge Farm.” Joseph, the eldest son
was associated with his father in the early
days of farming of this State. After his
marriage he managed his father’s farm, but
some years later returned to Salisbury.
In 1879 he with his wife, Margaret nee
Dow (whose parents also arrived in South
Australia in 1839) and family came to
Balaklava and selected the present property.
This land was heavily timbered and had to
be cleared by axe and fire. This entailed
heavy and continuous work before the land
was ready for the plough. It was devoted
to wheat growing and some very fine crops
of this cereal have been harvested from the
property.
There was a family of seven —Edith,
Eleanor (Mrs. Finlayson), Laura, Eliza-
beth, Joseph Harold, Ethel (Mrs. Dale,
deceased), and Percy Gordon.
Joseph Cowan died in 1921 at the age
of seventy-nine and his wife predeceased
him in 1915 at the age of sixty-nine. Joseph
Cowan divided the property between his
two sons who are now residing thereon.
Percy Gordon Cowan married Celia
Thomas of Balaklava and has one son,
David Gordon, who represents the fourth
generation of this family.
The family has been associated with
the State for nearly one hundred years and
won an honoured place in the roll of
“Founders of Australia.”


* ”* ♦ | |
The Joseph Cowan Family
David Gordon Cowan


Mr. William John Stephens, F.1.C.A., A.C.A.,(Aust.) J.P.
Air. William John Stephens, F.1.C.A.,
A.C.A. (Aust.), J.P., was born at Parran-
warthal, Cornwall, England in 1873. When
eight months old he was brought by his
parents to New Zealand, where they resided
for two years, after which they sailed for
Victoria and took up residence in Bendigo
His father, Tobias Stephens, was a miner,
and was foreman for many years at the
Johnson’s Reef Gold Mines. He subse-
quently took up land at Mystic Park, and
settled down to a life of farming, all the
members of the family participating in it
with the exception of the subject of this
sketch. He received his education at the
State Schools of California Gully and Long
Gully respectively. At the early age of
twelve he left school. Upon leaving he
became a newsboy, distributing the “Age”
over a wide area. Incidentally, it may be
mentioned that before he left school he
carried each evening for nearly two years
the Bendigo “Evening News.” At fourteen
years of age the mines claimed him and he
became an employee of the crushing battery
at the Johnson’s Mine. From foreman of
the shift he was promoted to battery
manager, which position he held for six
years, when the responsibilities of the wind-
ing engine were entrusted to him.
The'falling off of mining caused a serious
restriction in the need for engine-drivers, so
it became imperative that he seek another
avocation. He was then offered the position
of traveller to an engineering firm, and by
his energy and zealous attention to his
duties was brought under the notice of Mr.
G. V. Tansell, now Col. G. V. Lansell,
C.M.G., M.L.C., who gave him the oppor-
tunity for advancement. The bookkeeping
of his many industries was partly entrusted
to him, and by dint of hard study he sub-
sequently attained a Fellowship in the Com-
monwealth Institute of Accountants, and
since had conferred upon him an Associate-
ship of the Royal Chartered Accountants,
(Aust.).


As time progressed his responsibilities
grew greater, until he was further entrusted
with the management of the finance of the
various industrial companies, namely: The
Bendigo Hardware and Machinery Com-
pany, Austral Drill Company, Horwoods
Foundry Company and the Golden City Im-
plement Company, which when the mines
were flourishing were important concerns.
These extended Mr. Stephens’ knowledge of
engineering industry and general commer-
cial trading. These also included the
Bendigo Advertiser & Independent Pty.
Ltd. the newspaper to which he is now
attached, and took a large share in the
secretarial and executive work of the Board
of Directors.
Six years ago he was appointed Manag-
ing Director and Editor, also in the same
capacity in respect of the “Bendigo Stock
& Land Gazette.” He is also a member of
the Board of Directors of the Provincial
Daily Press Association of Victoria,
It is stated with pride by Mr. Stephens
that while he has been working for fifty-one
years he has only been unemployed for one
day. Although his day schooling did not
extend beyond his twelfth year, at the age
of fourteen years he realised the necessity
for further educational acquirements, conse-
quently he attached himself firstly to the
free State night school, followed by a course
of three years under the private tuition of
Mr. M. G. O’Brien,.this brought him up to
the matriculation standard. Being enforced
to remain at the mines, he then took a
course in engine-driving at the Bendigo
School of Mines, and successfully attained
a first-class certificate. During these and
subsequent years Mr. Stephens became an
omnivorous reader, acquiring a taste for
history, philosophy, economics and finance.
His business training, which was
obtained by his intimate association with
various industrial concerns, has stood him
in good stead for the multitudinous duties
imposed upon the occupant of an editorial
chair.
In 1899 Mr. Stephens married Miss Ada
Bartlett, eldest daughter of Mr. Samuel
Bartlett, who for twenty-one years was the
mining manager of the celebrated South
New Moon Mine.
There are four children, William Oliver.
A.A.8.1., accountant for Foggitt Jones Pty.
Ltd., Bendigo; Herbert Holman, who con-
ducts an Agency business and is also a
breeder of Stud Poultry; Ada Maude, now
Mrs. R. Edwards; and Ruby Ellen, A.L.C.M.
L.L.C.M., who remains at home.
The public duties are many and varied.
A Justice of the Peace, President of the
Administrative Council of the Bendigo
School of Mines and Industries Junior
Technical and Trade Schools, a Director
and Treasurer of Y.M.C.A., a Life Governor
of the Bendigo Hospital, a member of the
Council and Treasurer of Bendigo Agricul-
tural Society, President of the Bendigo
Branch Amateur Athletic Association,
President of the Northern District Council
of the Young Farmers’ Clubs, Director of
the Bendigo Mutual and Permanent Build-
ing Society, and a member of the Council
of the Bendigo Art Gallery.
Mis recreation is bowls and gardening.
He is a prominent member of the Masonic
Lodges and is a Past Master and Past
Principal of various orders. He is a mem-
ber of the Methodist Church, and has been
a lay preacher in the Bendigo and Eagle-
hawk circuit for forty-three }’ears.


wBHH
m m |b
The late Air. Robert Lawson
The late Airs. Robert Lawson
The Lawsons of “Padthaway”, Naracoorte,
South Australia
The founder of this family in Australia,
Robert Lawson, was pioneer of “Padthaway”
in the early 40’s. He w r as a native of Scot-
land, where he w r as born in 1816 and in 1839
arrived in South Australia on the ship
“Suberb.”
Shortly after arrival he took up a hold-
ing in the Mount Barker district and later
Padthaway” in the South-east; the original
area of this property 53,760 acres. They
made their wxiy overland from Adelaide
through the Coorong. This journey was
accompanied by much danger owdng to
bands of savage blacks. The property was
increased later by the addition of some
28,000 acres and the wffiole of the run
amounted to some 131 square miles. It was
heavily timbered and an enormous amount
of clearing had to be carried out by means
of ring-barking, felling and burning off. It
was then laid out in paddocks and in a few
years some 27,000 Merino sheep, over 250
head of cattle and a number of horses were
run. Horses were bred from thoroughbred
stallions brought from New South Wales,
and Robert Lawson built up a large trade
in remounts to India from the Station. The
early homestead still stands. In 1882 a large
22-roomed two storey residence was built.
Robert Lawson died in 1876 at the age of
sixty, leaving the property in trust to his
two sons and his widow, the latter surviv-
ing him until 1913, at the age of ninety-
one.
His eldest son, Robert Lawson, junior,
died in 1908 and the property was taken over
by the youngest son, Allan Bell Lawson,
who had previously owned property on the
River Murray. A. B. Lawson added “Lake
Roy”, an adjoining property, to “Padth-
away” which in 1912 he transferred to his
wife who was a daughter of Benjamin
Rickworth Hunt, a native of Lincoln, Eng-
land, who arrived in South Australia in
1850. He an Officer in the South
Australian Police Force and w’as a member
of that historic party of the gold escort
from the \ ictorian Gold Diggings to South
Australia.
Mr. and Mrs. A. B. Lawson have three
children—Bessie (now Mrs. B. J. Magarey) ;
Allan Keith and Ernest Robert.


■L ,-/
MTi Mi - •' jjj^
B a m
H ? JS \.f\M ■ -. •':
IrSK^Br
’ A
jgtL
ife^-
it 9 -A
tLvmJStm jtp*
Mrs. A. B. Lawson,
The late Mr. A. B. Bawson
The late Mrs. B. P. Hunt
The late Mr. B. P. Hunt,
Chief Inspector of South Australian Police
Father of Mrs. A. B. Lawson


I Mm ■ %..,„
Ijg #* x ■;■:
1%
|Bf f v , > ■
-Siiai # 9SSHBBP
V /. / i
mm \
» ** jm
Mr. Ernest R. Lawson
Mrs. E. R. Lawson
Robert Allan
Son of Mr. E. R. Lawson


5
■ IH
"■ ilJfc ,p- M--
SgmSV m / j| ?
Mrs. S. B. Magarey
nee Miss Bessie Lawson
Mr. A. Keith Lawson
Both A. K. and E. R. Lawson on the
death of their father, took over the manage-
ment of the various properties, and Mrs. A.
B. is residing at the “Lake Roy” home-
stead. These properties are considered
some of the best in this portion of the
South-east of South Australia and stock
and wool produced thereon have realised
consistent high prices in the South Aus-
tralian and Victorian markets. Up to
20,000 sheep arc shorn and a large number
of cattle grazed on the property. Cereal
crops are also grown and fodder conserva-
tion is a feature in working the area.
A. B. Lawson was well-known for his
successes on the turf with thoroughbred
horses which were bred on the property,
and won many classic races.
A. K. Lawson received his education
at Queen’s College, Adelaide, and Geelong
Grammar School, Geelong, after which he
joined his father on the property. Like
both his father and grandfather, he is a
sportsman in every sense of the word,
particularly as a gun-shot. He is a member
of the various racing clubs in South Aus-
tralia and gives much time to the affairs of
the district.
E. R. Lawson was also educated at
Queen’s College, Adelaide, and then took
up a course of studies as an electrical
engineer at the Adelaide University. He
also is a keen sportsman like his brother,
both of whom are interested in the Turf,
having won many classics with their
horses. Besides being keen motorists the
two brothers have also taken up aviation,
having their private aerodrome on the
property and running their own aeroplanes,
both having their Commercial Pilot certi-
ficates.
The Lawson family has been associa-
ted with the district for some 90 years, and
the children of E. R. Lawson represent the
fourth generation of the family in Australia.


I
“Padthaway” Homestead
Lake Roy House


The late George H. Smith
Alfred John Smith
The Smith Family of Happy Valley and Linton,
Victoria.
The career of the Founder of this
family in Australia was marked through
many years by the stamp of public service.
The late George Henry Smith was born at
Eastington, Gloucestershire, on the eigh-
teenth day of December, 1840. Prior to
his journeying to Australia in the early
sixties of last century he married Miss
Emma Keys, who was born on the twenty-
third day of August, 1842. His occupation
was that of a farmer and, upon the arrival
of Ihe couple in this country, they settled
at Happy Valley, near Linton, at the time
when the gold rush was at its height in
those parts.
For about three or four years he was
secretary to one of the mining companies
and was then appointed Revenue Officer
for the Grenville Shire under the first Shire
Secretary —the late Jamc*3 Dodds—and
retained this position for more than twenty
years. On the death of James Dodds, he
was the natural successor for the position
of Shire Secretary. This was in the year
1891 and he filled his duties in this capacity
with honour and distinction until his death
at the age of sixty-three in the year 1903.
After a few years residence he had
purchased a small farming property close
to Linton and resided thereon until his
demise. He was a man of many gifts —
more particularly as an organist and
pianist —and no entertainment was con-
sidered complete without his assistance.
In philanthropical directions his efforts
were widely recognised—more especially
insofar as the Springdallah and Linton
Relief Fund was concerned. Indigent
families were wont to turn to him first and
always for help and comfort, and he was
never loath to place his attainments at
their disposal.
As organist for the Church of England
from the time of his arrival in the district,
his services were more than appreciated.
He was a conscientious churchman and a
member of Ballarat Synod. He also took
active roles in several companies as secre-
tary, and more particularly in the mining
activities of the district. It is no exaggera-
tion to claim that in him the Linton and
entire surrounding districts lost a fine
citizen and a grand Christian. Mrs. Emma
Smith died at the early age of forty-six


years. From their union there was a
family in all of seven sons and four
daughters, and thirty-five grandchildren, of
whom brief particulars in order of seniority
follow:
Clara Emma was born at Eastington,
Gloucestershire. Following school, studied
music and was teaching same for awhile
prior to marriage to George Edgar Yung.
They later moved to Murtoa where he died.
Of her three sons and two daughters, two
sons joined the A.I.F. in 1914 and the
eldest, Alfred, paid the supreme sacrifice.
Mrs. \ ung has since visited her son’s grave
in Flanders.
George Henry. Born at Happy Val-
ley. Joined the Bank of New South Wales.
For health reasons resigned and purchased
a vineyard at South Corowa where he re-
sided until his death. Married at Happy
Valley, Martha Morgan, and family are now
in New South W ales and Victoria.
William Ernest—of whom more later.
Elizabeth Ann—Mrs. James Garvey, of
Happy Valley—after her mother’s death
and her sister’s marriage, capably kept the
home going. Very interested in Church
work (as were most of the family), w r as a
good singer and was much in demand as a
soloist.
Charles Edward helped his father for a
year or two in Shire work. Entered the
Church and was Reader at Bowenvale.
Obtained his degree at Moore College,
Sydney and was ordained. Is now one of
the oldest clergymen in the Ballarat Diocese
having been Vicar at Carisbrook, Alvie,
Clunes, Koroit and is now at Terang.
Eva Ellen. Educated at Happy Valley
School. Married Thomas Carbury of
Yendon, who is now a councillor for the
Buninyong Shire and a well-known farmer.
Was a true worker in all Church and social
activities until her death.
Alfred John —of whom more later.
Frank Garland has resided at Happy
Valley practically all his life. In his early
years he met with an accident to his sight.
Is now settled with his sister, Mrs. Garvey.
Amy Ethel, soon after leaving school,
married George Bolte of Happy Valley who
selected at Wyalong, N.S.W. When min-
ing broke out, they sold the property and
bought Linton Park Estate —the old home
of the Linton family, wdiere Mr. Bolte
died. Mrs. Bolte resides at 46 Ehvood
Street, Brighton.
James Grenville joined the Railways
service but later went to South Africa.
Later returned to Australia and bought a
farm and orchard property between Happy
Wiley and Linton.
Although he is the fourth son, Mr.
Alfred John Smith takes his place in this
section of the family history by virtue of
the fact that he has for many years capably
filled the void created by the death of his
father. Born at Happy Valley on 11th Oc-
tober 1872, his early activities were as assist-
ant to his father, on whose death he suc-
ceeded to the position of Shire Secretary
and has held such to the present dav. His
career has, in many directions, been remini-
scent of the late Mr. George Henry Smith.
In church circles he has been most active,
and for 25 years has been a member of
Synod. His charitable works have been
many including being a Life Member of the
Ballarat Base Hospital. He has been secre-
tary of the Linton branch of the Repatria-
tion Department from the inception to the
present day. His standing in the com-
munity led to a Justiceship of the Peace,
which he accepted in 1929. In school affairs
he has been for twelve years Chairman of
the Committee and a Committeeman for
twenty years. He was responsible for the
inauguration of the local State School
plantation which covers fifty acres, is well-
fenced, has twelve acres planted in pines,
and is generally considered one of the finest
in Victoria.


In the year 1902 Mr. Alfred John Smith
married Miss Ada Watson, daughter of the
late Councillor Richard Watson of “Kelvin
Grove,” Cherry Tree, Sebastapol, and from
this union there has been a family of four
daughters in: —
Miss Daisy Livingstone Smith, who
acts in the capacity of Assistant Secretary
and Treasurer to the Shire of Grenville.
Violet Keys —now Mrs. Leslie J. Keane
of Terang.
Mollie Grenville, now Mrs. J. E. W ills,
of Cressy.
Marjorie Lilian —also in educational
circles as teacher at “Korowa” Church of
England Girls’ Grammar School, East Mal-
vern.
Mr. A. J. Smith acted as official valuer
for the Victorian Land Tax Department for
some years and has now been Shire Secre-
tary for 33 years, during which time, and
under his guidance, the general revenue has
grown from £3,000 to £20,000 per annum.
William Ernest —already named —was
born 11th February, 1866, and educated
locally. Was on the home property until
he was 20 years of age and then joined the
Chief-Secretary’s Department. After three
and a half years transferred to the Lands
and Survey where he progressed until 1904.
Upon his retirement in 1930 was given an
official send-off in addition to a special
private presentation. For nearly thirty
years was an active member and Treasurer
of the Vestry of St. Hilary’s Church of
England, Kew, where he was also Church-
warden for a similar period. He later
joined St. Paul’s Church at East Kew,
where he is also Churchwarden and Vestry-
man since inception in 1925. Despite
protests, he retired to make way for younger
men in 1936.
In 1890 Mr. Smith married Bessie,
daughter of John and Grace Blewett of
Happy Valley, her father being secretary
of the Springdallah and Linton Relief
Fund, and there is a family of four sons
and two daughters of whom particulars in
brief appear hereunder.
Mary Grace, 8.A., Dip. Ed. (who was
for some years a teacher at Melbourne
High School) married Rev. R. T. Miller of
Redcliffs.
Miss Emma Gertrude Smith.
Percy Clement, who served with the
A.I.F. for nearly four years, winning the
Military Medal. Married Miss Dorothy
Gold. There are two daughters.
William Herbert also served nearly
four years with A.1.F., and was recom-
mended for decoration. Is in the Lands
Department, Melbourne. Married Miss
Alice Barnett and there is one son.
Robert Grenville married Miss Mavis
Wyatt and there is one daughter. Is assist-
ant Manager of the laboratory for Rocke,
Thompsitt & Co. Pty. Ltd. and is a qualified
chemist.
Frank Gordon has already a brilliant
record both in accountancy and music.
Holds degrees L.LC.A. and A.I.S. Is with
the Metropolitan Board of Works.
Mr. W. E. Smith has been for 18 years
Secretary of the Committee of Manage-
ment of the Buchan Caves. This Com-
mittee has an independent standing and is
appointed by the Governor-in-Council.
Mrs. Bessie Smith was the instigator
of the Ladies’ Guild of St. Paul’s and is
affectionately called the “mother” of the
Guild by all conversant with her unremit-
ting efforts. For about two years all Choir,
Church and Guild meetings were held at
her home and occupied two or three days
each week.
Mr. and Mrs. W. E. Smith are now in
residence at “Clarkesdale,” Station Street,
East Kew.


Win. Catford, Founder of the Family.
Mrs. W. Catford
The Catford Family of Skillogolee Creek
Auburn, South Australia.
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, William Catford, was a
native of North Molton, Devonshire, Eng-
land, where he was married on July 10th,
1847, and in the following year landed in
South Australia with his wife, Jane, and one
son in the ship “Santipore”. He was met
on arrival by his brother-in-law, Captain
Deeble, and they proceeded to the Burra
Copper Mines. On arrival there a strike
of miners caused them to return to Adelaide
and later, William Catford decided to try
his fortune on the goldfields of Victoria.
On returning to South Australia he joined
Captain Deeble in farming at Skillogolee
Creek where he and his wife lived until
their deaths. William Catford died at the
age of seventy-eight and his wife at the age
of eighty-seven. At the outset he selected
an 80 acre block which is still in the hands
of the family. This area was increased and
he held some 2,500 acres before he died.
He was one of the first settlers in the dis-
trict, and with his wife encountered all the
hardships of the early days of pioneering'.
The nearest railway was sixty miles distant
at Gawler, where all their produce was car-
ried by bullock dray, returning with sup-
plies. At that time they were on the fringe
of the farthest settled areas in the North, and
were pioneers in every sense of the word.
There was a family of eleven, eight of whom
survive—-Edward, Ann Victoria (Mrs.
Cockram), William, John, Mary Jane (Mrs.
Daniels), Henrietta (Mrs, Bowden),
Thomas James and Rosetta (Mrs.
Williams).


% '
Mr. and Mrs. T. J. Catford
Mixed farming, including wheat and
sheep are among the industries of the pro-
perty. He established all his sons on pro-
perties of their own, each of whom became
Master Ragless, grandson of T. J. Catford
prosperous farmers. The original selection
was taken up in 1853 and has been in the
hands of the family for nearly 85 years,
being one of the first to grow wheat in the
district. It had to be sown by broad-cast-
ing, reaped by sickle and thrashed by the
old-fashioned flail.
Thomas James, youngest son of William
Catford, was born in 1867 at Skillogolee,
where he was educated. After his school-
ing he joined his father and learnt the art
of farming, taking over the property on the
death of his father. Thomas James Cat-
ford married Fanny, daughter of Peter
Cornwell, a native of South Australia whose
parents arrived in the early days of this
State. There are two daughters—Jean D.
(Mrs. Ragless) and Vida A. Jean has a
son, John Roy, who represents the fourth
generation of the Catford and the fifth
generation of the Ragless and Cornwell
families.


I
Bft - JHI
I-1
yi - j4sp
Mr. and Mrs. John Catford, “Rose Park”
When T. J. Catford took over the home-
stead property it contained some 1,500
acres. He ran a Merino Sheep Stud which
was successful in many country shows,
including the Champion and Runner-up at
the Clare Agricultural Show.
He took an active interest in all matters
pertaining to the welfare of the district and
was President of the local Methodist Church
to which he was a generous contributor.
In 1921 he retired to Adelaide and his
daughter with her husband is now living
on the homestead property.
Mrs. T. J. Catford died on the 24th
February, 1934, at the age of sixty-four
years.
After such a long and continuous resi-
dence in the district the Catford family has
won an honoured place in the roll of
“Founders of Australia”.
John Catford, third son of William and
Jane, was born at the family homestead on
April 14th, 1858. After finishing his edu-
cation he joined his father and engaged in
farming until he retired. He married
Janet, daughter of John Harvie, a native
of Scotland, who arrived in Australia with
his wife in 1850.
John and Janet Catford had a
family of eight—Henrietta Jane (Mrs. Me
Kenzie), John Harvie, Walter Gilmore,
Thomas James, Eva May, Wilfred Leslie,
William Stanley and Allan Edward.
The property received from his father
and which he increased to some 2000 acres
was used for grazing and mixed farming
and on his retirement left the property in
the hands of the four sons who are now
working it in partnership. John Catford
was a well-known identity in the district


Mr. and Mrs. Edward Catford.
and renowned as a progressive farmer.
Mrs. Catford, with her husband, has seen
the district grow from virgin bush to its
present state.
John Catford died on the 7th January,
1927. His two youngest sons are officers
in the South Australian Education Depart-
ment.
Percy William Harvie Catford, son of
the late Edward Catford and grandson of
William Catford, was born at Tarcowie in
1883 and educated locally and at the
Stanley Grammar School, Watervale. After
finishing his education he joined his father
on the property, and later took over the
property in addition to the family home-
stead.
He engaged extensively in the pro-
duction of wheat and wool and was most
successful in these operations. He married
Louise Mena Plirsch, daughter of the late
Mr. Hirsch of Applia North, a pioneer of
that district, and there is one daughter,
Audrey Jean, who married Gordon Alfred
Richards and has two sons, Brian, born
1934 and David, born 1936 who represent
the fifth generation of the Catford family.
P. W. H. Catford farmed some 1,000 acres
which he carried on until 1920 when he
retired to Adelaide and is now living at
Rose Park.
Edward Catford, father of P. W. H.
died on the 6th November, 1934, having
retired from active farming in 1913. His
wife, Henrietta, nee Bowden, died on July
15th, 1933.
It is interesting to note that the Bowden
family has been associated with the State
of South Australia since 1839, thus the
grandchildren of P. W. H. Catford repre-
sent a family with nearly a century’s asso-
ciation with the State. It should be men-
tioned in passing that the Catford family
were related by marriage to John Ridley,
the inventor of the reaper and binder so
famous in South Australian agricultural
history. P. W. H, Catford was married
on the 27th March, 1906.


j&gmstr JMm. -
,i|f ■'*■ Jp? : ;. '
; *.#" ir
*y _ jp-t l
\\a
Mr. and Mrs. P. W. H. Catford Mrs. G. A. Richards (nee Catford)
Brian and David Richards
Mrs. Ragless (nee Catford)
Miss Catford


ft '•••' - —■ — *rz — *"--v 111 • 1
B'TViWr11irT;-r-| irfiiifinniii"v -ifrrnnnrnfrirnnnnrnrrrr~i --rnrrrr r
rr~~ ■-.7'"- . v .—r--~- -■ .1 -,
kiaaa%fiiM!^Ba£MsaMaiaisa^^
Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Catford and Eric Catford.
John Harvie Catford, J.P., was born at
Hoyleton in 1889 where he was educated,
after which he joined his father in farming
and has been so engaged ever since.
The area of the Catford property is
some 3,000 acres used for mixed farming.
On the retirement of the father, the four
sons, J. H., W. C., T. J., and W. L. took
over the property which is now worked in
partnership. It is a particularly well im-
proved property and splendid yields of
wheat have been harvested. Up to 45
bushels per acre in a good season have been
taken for one paddock. The Catford bro-
thers have been particularly successful in
fat lamb raising using the Merino-Dorsct
cross.
J. H. Catford married Agnes Jane,
daughter of John Rogers who was a
pioneer of the Willowic district. There is
a son, Eric John, who represents the fourth
generation of the Catford and the third
generation of the Rogers families. J. H.
takes a keen interest in all matters of local
welfare. He is a Justice of the Peace and
\ ice-President of the local Institute, and
has been Chairman of the local school com-
mittee. He is a keen sportsman, particu-
larly as a cricketer; he is a member of the
local Methodist Church.
The family has had a long association
with the district and has seen it grow from
virgin scrub to its present state of pros-
perity.


The Patersons of South Australia.
The founder of this branch of the
Paterson family in South Australia, Alex-
ander L. Paterson, arrived at Holdfast Bay
in the ship “Recourse”, in January, 1839.
His son, William Henry Brown Paterson,
was born at Adelaide in 1842.
After leaving school W. H. B. Pater-
son started farming at Lower Light and at
the age of 26 took up land at Burunga being
one of the first settlers in the district.
After some ten years he sold the holding
in that district and he took up his residence
at Willamulka, being one of the first to
engage in agricultural industries in this
district in which he was most successful.
He is one of the original members of the
District Council of Ninnes and was also
associated with the Farmers and Settlers’
Union. His memory is honoured and re-
vered in the district for his public services
to all the community.
William Alexander Paterson, second
son of W. H. B. Paterson, was born at
Burunga in 1876 and after finishing his
education at Way College, Adelaide,
joined his father on the property with whom
he stayed until his marriage to Annettic
Grace, daughter of Joseph Ayles, who was
also a pioneer of the Ninnes district.
W. A. and Mrs. Paterson have a family
of—Vera Dorothea (Mrs. Humphries),
Edna Elizabeth (Mrs. McKay), William
Murray and Albert Reginald. There are
seven grandchildren—Una Dorothea, Helen
Betty, Edna Jeanine, Vera Claire, Jefferey
Paterson Humphries, William Murray Me
Kay and Malcolm John McKay. These
children represent the fifth generation of
the Paterson family.
On the death of his father, W. A.
Paterson took over the present property of
some 1,860 acres at Mona, 4 miles from Bute
used for mixed farming. Up to 13 bags of
wheat per acre have been taken with an
average of nine bags in one season. The
horses used arc bred on the property.
W. A. Paterson is a keen sportsman
having played cricket for his local team.
He has been a patron of the football club
for many years, and was the first President
of the Bute Bowling Club.
The family has had nearly 100 years
association with the State and over 70
years connection with the Northern Agri-
cultural districts. They have always taken
a keen interest in promoting the welfare of
the district and two sons arc now associated
with their father on the property, both be-
ing keen footballers and cricketers.


Councillor Allan Henry Paterson of
“Alandale”, Bute, is the third son of W.
H. B. Paterson and was born at Burunga
in 1878. After finishing his education
locally he joined his father in farming and
has been so engaged ever since. On the
death of his father in 1914, Alexander Henry
took over the present property of some
2,700 acres used for mixed farming. Like
his brother A. H. is a keen cerealist and
has harvested up to nine bags for the whole
property in one season.
“Alandale’’ is situated some five miles
from Bute on the main Bute-Kadina Road.
A. H. is a member of the Bute District
Council, occupying the seat previously and
continuously held by his father. The seat
has been held now by father and son since
1885 which is a unique record.
A. 11. Paterson married Elizabeth
Remison, daughter of Daniel Brinkworth,
a pioneer of the Quorn district and there is
a family of five sons —Eric Roe; Alan
Davies; Leonard Harrison Brinkworth;
Gilbert Remison and Charles Malcolm.
Eric married Thelma Hall of Bute and
there is one son —Glen Hall, who represents
the fifth generation of this branch of the
family. Councillor A. H. Paterson has
taken an active interest in all local affairs
in addition to his work on the District
Council. He is a Trustee of the Methodist
Church and a member of the Hospital
Committee. He is a very keen cricketer,
having played for his local team for many
years and has only recently retired from
active participation in this game. His love
of cricket has been handed on to the five
sons, all of whom have won many prizes
and medals in various departments of
sport.
Eric is now established on the home
property with his father. Eric and Mal-
colm have won the Magarey Intercollegiate
Medal. Th ree of the sons have been mem-
bers of other teams represented in the
Country Cricket Carnival held annually in
Adelaide. They were all educated at
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide. Charles
Malcolm, the youngest son, has a unique
record in football at his school, having
kicked 162 goals for his college in the 1935
season.


(.'?$ • ♦; ll
mM ilP 4mm
; i /
; | ?§ i'
M ::] - •
91 I il; 1
• #1
* ‘ . f ’ *' 1‘" - :
is*; v : <//. •• •'% ' \ ' f|
' ■• - •/'*./ ■;.•••■■■:• 11
■aBwy ■ ■- < ,#*■ ;.«{•'.. •*; > >•&;. “ **&EI
Ip ' ' -4 : : ; • :M
mV,, • . * IM
** V'V * •/■■•.•.■ ; V .A$¥ - W
|j | u - -• '■' v '■■;'
M;.- "■ ■■'■"■■ " i -'-'— - *■ - > x , *, , , * £$SgBfm
,i„,„ r ,„., --— — --~- j ~mmktm*to
The late Dr. H. L. Atkinson, of Bendigo.
The late Doctor Harry Leigh Atkinson
of Bendigo, won for himself a position in
the community which spoke volumes for
his ability, popularity and far-sightedness.
For some generations past his forbears had
occupied positions in the legal, medical and
ecclesiastical spheres of the Old Country
and, he was destined to uphold their best
traditions in his land of adoption—Australia.
His grandfather was a prominent
Attorney-at-law at Malton, Yorkshire, and
his father, the late Doctor John Henry
Atkinson was in practice in various places
in the East Riding and York. Doctor J. H.
Atkinson was born in 1798 and died in 1866.
It is of interest that the present eldest son
has caused to be installed a stained glass
window at Kilham Church—where his
grandfather is buried—in memory of him
and his own father. Doctor H. L. Atkin-
son was born in the year 1831 at Weaver-
thorpe, not far from Scarborough, and his
eai \y studies were at Beverley Grammar
School until 1847, in which year he com-
menced the study of medicine under his
father. Ihe year 1849 saw him continuing
such studies at Leeds Fever Hospital, (now
portion of the Leeds University) where he
remained until 1853, when he gained a dip-
loma from the Royal College of Surgeons,
London, and, also, from the Worshipful
Society of Apothecaries. In 1854 he was
installed in practice in York where he held
an appointment under the Poor Law Board.
In 1858 he walked the hospitals of London
and Paris.


With such advantages it was surprising
that the young practitioner should have
felt the urge for travel, and yet, in 1859, the
wanderlust seized him and we find him
landing in Melbourne in November of that
year, and he was immediately appointed
Resident Medical Officer to the Melbourne
Benevolent Asylum, which in those days
had a hospital attached.
However, in 1860, he proceeded to
Bendigo where he was appointed Resident
Surgeon to the Bendigo Hospital and this
position he retained for slightly more than
two years, when he entered private practice.
It may justly be claimed that this step
marked the foundation of his real career
and fortune. His consulting rooms in View
Street became a centre for many consulta-
tions both medical and financial.
In 1862 he obtained his degrees of
Bachelor and Doctor of Medicine at the
Melbourne University and, soon he was
recognised as one of the definite leaders of
the profession in Bendigo. 1 lis efforts on
behalf of the inmates of the Bendigo Bene-
volent Asylum became almost herculean,
and it is safe to claim that he was easily the
most popular doctor visiting the unfortunate
clientele of that institution. In practically
all other avenues of benevolent work he
was equally well and favorably known, and
his name will long be remembered in such
institutions as the Bendigo Hospital, Indus-
trial School, and various Friendly Societies.
It was typical of his character that,
except for occupying the position of Presi-
dent of the Mechanics’ Institute committee,
he steadfastly refused to enter public life
and concentrated his energies on the wel-
fare of his ever-growing connection and his
pastoral interests. Pertaining to the last-
named, the late Doctor Atkinson displayed
marked powers of discrimination. He
became the owner of several large station
properties in Victoria, aggregating about a
hundred thousand acres: “Ravenswood”
halfway between Bendigo and Harcourt,
“Auchmore” and “Terrick-Terrick West” in
the Northern district, and “Barwonleigh’
near Geelong. He stocked them well with
sheep and cattle —appointing a manager in
charge of each property —and was a large
exporter of wool and wheat, and an import-
ant employer of labour.
At the same time he was ever at the
service of Bendigo’s premier industry-
mining—both with his advice and capital,
and was a Director of many of the best-
known mines for many years. He made a
point of investing his capital in the district
where he won it, and so, it is not surprising,
he became a leader both in his own profes-
sion, the business world, and in the com-
munity generally.
It may be readily understood, there-
fore, why, in the year 1895, the editor of
“Bendigo and Vicinity” finishes his article
pertaining to the late Doctor H. U. Atkin-
son thus: “His great good humour, large
heartedness, and extensive knowledge, have
won him the respect and esteem of local
residents. He fulfils the ideal of a medical
man.” The late Doctor H. L. Atkinson
left a family of three daughters from his
marriage with Miss Christiana Morton in:
Mrs. A. M. Kelly, of “Barwonleigh’’
of whom further particulars appear else-
where.
Miss Helen Louise Atkinson, of
“Ravenswood”,
Mrs. Edith Christiana Nicholaus of
“Ravenswood”, who has also a villa at
Monte Carlo.
Mrs. Christiana Atkinson died in the
year 1876 and, after a few years, Doctor
Atkinson married Miss Eva Moulden —a
member of a branch of the well-known
South Australian family of that name —
from which union there are two sons as fol-
lows ;
Evelyn Leigh was born on June 4th.
1879 in Bendigo and, up to the age of
thirteen, was educated locally. He then
went to the famous English Public School


at Rugby and graduated at Pembroke Col-
lege, Oxford University. He was later
called to the Bar in London and was sub-
sequently admitted to the Bar in Melbourne
where he read in the Chambers of Sir Leo
Cussen.
He, however, has not persisted in his
legal calling, but has followed his own
interests pertaining to his property at
Auchmore in primary production and graz-
ing pm suits. He also spends a considerable
portion of his time in England where he
purchased Holton Place”, a small country
property outside Oxford, from Sir John
Martin Harvey, the noted English actor.
Mr. E. L. Atkinson was one of the
oiiginal Directors of the Bendigo Amalga-
mated Goldfields and on the Board of
several of the companies which were ab-
sorbed in that concern, and still occupies a
similar position with the Farmer’s Trustee
Co. Ltd. He was married in 1920 to Miss
Doris Ritchie of Bega, New South Wales.
Exelyn John Rupert, the second son,
w as born at Bendigo on 2nd February, 1881,
and was educated locally and at Rugby
School and Dover College, England. Fol-
lowing his return to Australia, he was
employed at “Barwonleigh” but later trans-
ferred to Ravenswood’ and 'Auchmore”.
In 1908 he acted as manager of "Ravens-
wood and, on 11th June, 1909, married
Miss Marie Marguerite Domecq-Carre,
grand-daughter of the late Thomas Angelo
Domecq-Carre, a sculptor and artist, who
came from Spain in 1851 and w r as respon-
sible for a large portion of the interior of
St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Melbourne. He
shared a studio with the father of Bertram
Mackennal and exhibited various works of
art at the first Melbourne Exhibition. Her
father, Angelo Domecq-Carre, was a resi-
dent of Melbourne, but suffered fatal in-
juries from a fall from his horse when his
daughter was a child. Her maternal grand-
mother had been Miss Margaret Moloney
who was adopted as a child by her uncle
Mr. Patrick Moloney who came to Australia
from Ireland in 1840. He was the father
of Mr James Moloney the Melbourne soli-
citor, and Dr. Pat Moloney, the latter being
(me of the first two students to qualify
m medicine and surgery at the Melbourne
University.
From 1910 Mr. and Mrs. Rupert Atkin-
son settled in Bendigo until 1915 when,
following the death of his father, they
settled in Melbourne, where Mr. Atkinson
purchased "Scarboro” Lansell Road, Toorak
However, in 1920, this property was sold,
and until 1931 the family resided in Sydney
and London. In 1933 his present residence
at 59 Grange Road, Toorak was purchased.
Mr. E. J. Rupert Atkinson has attained
a leading position as a writer of both prose
and x erse and has published several volumes
which have been well received by the public.
From their union there has been a family of
two sons and two daughters as follows:
Leigh Hugh Harry, born 1910, edu-
cated Grirnwade House, and Courtenay
Lodge, England. At present resident in
Sydney.
James Arthur Lionel, born 1911,
educated as his elder brother. Resident
St. John’s College, Cambridge, 1930-33.
Holds the degrees of 8.A., Cambridge,
M.8., and B.Ch., Melbourne. Is at pre-
sent a Resident Doctor at Brisbane
General Hospital.
Helen Marguerite Yvonne. Studying
Art under Mr. George Bell. Educated
at Convent of Notre Dame*, London and,
later, at St. Margaret’s, Berwick.
Mariegold Elaine Patricia. Born in
London. At present attending St. Cath-
erine’s School, Toorak.
Amelia Margaret—Mrs. A. M. Kelly,
who has been named already in these lines,
was born at Bendigo on the 25th April, 1871
and was but six years of age when her


mother died. She was educated in Bendigo
and, in 1895, she married Alfred Feather-
stonhaugh Kelly, son of John Plerbert
Kelly, of Kellybrook, Lunestown Estate,
Mullingar, in County Westneath, Ireland.
Mr. Kelly was the owner of “Terrick-Ter-
rick” Estate, near Mitiamo in the Bendigo
district. After three years they went to
“Barwonleigh” Estate, Inverleigh, which
was owned by the late Doctor Atkinson,
and the late Mr. Kelly managed this pro-
perty until the time of his death on 9th
December, 1915.
Mr. Kelly was acknowledged as one of
the foremost cattle judges in \ ictoria and
his services were called upon from time
to time to adjudicate at various Shows.
Pertaining to his management of “Barwon-
leigh” many complimentary statements are
made in “Pastoral Homes of Australia.”
The death of Mr. Kelly placed a heavy re-
sponsibility on his widow who, in a manner
reminiscent of the family traditions, has
through the ensuing years carried on the
work of “Barwonleigh” in an efficient and
thorough manner. Although receiving the
assistance of Messrs. George R. Murfitt and
Mr. Herbert Austin for limited periods since
the death of Mr. Kelly, she has at all times
taken an active part in all matters pertain-
ing to the estate.
Her son-in-law, Mr. Reginald N. Camp-
bell, has been manager of “Barwonleigh”
since 1928.
The only child of the union of Mr. and
Mrs. Kelly is Mrs. Helen Margaret Feather-
stonhaugh Campbell who is in residence on
the property and who, in turn, has one son
in Alfred Neil Campbell—at present attend-
ing Geelong College.
Miss Atkinson studied painting under
the direction of Mr. Arthur T. Woodward
in Bendigo for about fifteen years. In
1907 she designed the winning poster for
The First Australian Exhibition of Women’s
Work. Her landscapes particularly have
won high praise from notable authorities-
The Klem Family, of Corny Point,
South Australia.
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, George Klein, arrived in
Australia from Germany in 1856 on the
ship “Malvidal”, a sailing ship loaded with
Baltic timber, and carrying a number of
passengers.
His wife and four children accompanied
him, and the baby girl died shortly after
arrival. The trip occupied several months,
and the ship narrowly escaped being
wrecked off Cape Borda, where the Cap-
tain had dropped anchor. A heavy wind
occurred, and but for the anchor holding,
the ship would have drifted ashore. On
arrival at Port Adelaide where the passen-
gers disembarked, they had to trudge
through heavy sand to Adelaide.
George Klem was an experienced
gardener, being prior to his sailing for
Australia, head gardener to King Frederick
of Prussia at the Royal Palace Gardens at
Berlin. This position he gave up so that
his sons would not have to be conscripted
for the army. In addition to his know-


,, H fl
I Mn O. O, R, KLEM I f ,.
L — 1 M “« WALTER a KLEM I ( ‘“I.
1 — ? I Mi». WALTER B. KLEM I
ledge of gardening, he was a practical wine-
maker, but there being no opening for this
t\ pe of work, his first position was gardener
to the Honorable John Baker at Morialta.
He planted the first orangery in South Aus-
tralia for the Hon. John Baker, and laid
out the drives and first greenhouses at the
Baker home.
Later he joined Joseph Gilbert of
I imey Vale and acted as wine maker, and
stayed with this family until he retired
after some 40 years’ service. There were
40 acres of vines which he taught the gard-
eners to prune, and the following year the
wiue returns from these vines increased
100 per cent. He also brought his know-
ledge of brandy making and cordial manu-
facture into efifect. Wine from the Pusey
Vale property was exported, and the acre-
age was increased to 80 acres, which re-
quired an enormous amount of cellar room.
On his retirement he lived with a mar-
ried daughter at St. Peter’s Parade. His
vv,i ' e (liecl at Pusey Vale, and they were both
buried at Lyndoch. There was a family of
Anna (Mrs. Friebe, of Saddleworth),
Albert, George, Max, Oscar and Carl, Mrs!
Emiala Taylor, St. Peter’s.
Mr. Otto G. R. Idem was born near
)crhn, Germany, and came with his parents
to Australia _ in 1856. He received his
early education at Lyndoch, and during
the time he was receiving his schooling, he
worked for Dr. Pitcher of Lyndoch Valley.
He then joined the local storekeeper for a
while, and later went to Blumberg in a
general store and also to Eden Valley where
he stayed until the firm dissolved.


He came to Yorke Peninsula to have
a look around, and returned home to engage
in horse dealing; on one occasion purchas-
ing some 120 horses at 30/- per head.
These he agisted for a while, and then sold,
making a profit of about £lOO on the
transaction. Pie returned to Yorke Penin-
sula and engaged in general store-keeping
with a partner at Edithburgh in 1872.
In 1879 he decided to engage in farm-
ing. Previous to this he married in 1875,
Miss I. Fairclough. Seven years after his
arrival at Edithburgh, he took over part of
the present property now in his possession.
At that time it was virgin scrub and over-
run with mallee and ti-tree, and infested
with wallabies and kangaroos. Preparing
this land for agriculture entailed an enor-
mous amount of work, and some 200 acres
were first cleared for the plough. It is
now carrying a sheep to the acre, and up to
10 bags of wheat, and 12 bags of barley per
acre per annum are harvested, giving some
idea of the quality of the soil.
There was a family of two sons and
five daughters. Paul Vincent (deceased),
\\ alter Bede, Mabel (Mrs. Purrie, New
Zealand), Nellie Joy (Mrs. Winnecke,
Western Australia), Florence (Mrs. Cald-
well, West Australia), Olive (Mrs. Cardno
of New Zealand) and Mary, the youngest
and the homekeeper.
O. G. R. Klein has done much for his
district and for many years was a Coun-
cillor of the local District Council, He
has been actively associated with all move-
ments for the benefit of the district, and is
now sole surviving original Trustee for the
Methodist Church at Edithburgh. He has
been a generous contributor to the local
hospital, and a keen supporter of the Agri-
cultural Society.
Pic is to-day the eldest living original
settler in this portion of Yorke Peninsula,
which he has seen grow from virgin scrub
to its present prosperous condition. The
property of “Bedefelix” is over 2000 acres
in extent and is to-day one of the best im-
proved farms on the Peninsula. The
scientific application of superphosphate and
top dressing and fodder conservation has
been actively engaged in. In practice it
has been proved that top dressing has in-
creased the carrying capacity of the soil
over 100 per cent. Manganese phosphate
in soluble form applied to the land has had
a remarkable efifect on cereal growing.
Mrs. O. Klein is a native of Nuriootpa,
and has been a great helpmate to her hus-
band in bringing the property to its present
position. This lady is recognised as one of
the keenest concologists in the State, and
her splendid collection of shells was given
to the Museum. She has always been asso-
ciated with the Methodist Church, and to
her Mr. Klein attributed much of his
success.
There are twmlve grand-children and
one great grand-child, making the fourth
generation of this fine old pioneer family.
The oldest surviving son, Walter B. Klein,
married Miss Fraser of Victoria, also a
member of a pioneer Australian family.
A\ . B. Klein works the property in con-
junction with his father and he has erected
one of the most modern residences, equip
ped with all modern conveniences, in the
district.


The Hume (1790) Hugo (1792) and Kennedy (1795)
Families
- and their Connection with
The Murray and Pittendrigh Families.
1 o attempt to give in detail the re-
maikable histories attached to such names
as appear at the head hereof, would be a
task requiring nothing less than a volume
containing some hundreds of pages.
Such names as Hume and others of his
kind and generation represent the best in
the pages of Australian history and it is
quite apparent that little can be done to
record fully their careers in such a Work
as the present. We therefore but attempt
to give the connections in as brief a form
as possible.
The name of Kennedy has stood for
many centuries in the Old Country for the
best of citizenship. Going back to the lat-
ter portion of the seventeenth century, we
find one JOHN KENNEDY born who, in
later years, became Rector of All Saints,
Bradley, in Derbyshire. His son—also
named John —was for thirty years Vicar of
Teston and Rector of Nettlestead, and died
in 1819 at the age of eighty-one years.
Robert Henry Kennedy—a son of John
Kennedy, secundus, in after years married
Mary Bozzom Hume and became a wealthy,
prominent, and most highly esteemed
squatter in Australia and was the owner of
Wonnaminta Station. He exhibited qua-
lities which endeared him to one and all
with whom he had dealings and, to quote a
most outstanding example of this side of
his character, received a most eulogistic
appreciation from the “Australian Worker”
finishing with the following;—“ . . Briefly
enough, bearing in mind the many calls on
‘\\ orkers’ space, I have ventured to pay
my small tribute of respect to the memory
of a true gentleman. May the succeeding
generation follow in his steps, and live as
high in the esteem and regard of all as he
who is gone,”
Surely such words from such a source
constitute a monument which requires no
qualification !
Reverting to the ancient glories of the
Kennedy clan, it is interesting to recall
that the chief of the family was Kennedy
of Dunure, afterwards Earl of Cassilis, and
later again Marquis of Ailsa. In the six-
teenth century the power of this great House
in the Shires of Ayr and Galloway were set
forth in the following words of a popular
rhyme:—
By Wigton and the town of Ayr,
Port Partrick and the Cruives o’Cree,
Nae man need think for to bide there,
Unless he court wi’ Kennedie.
It may therefore be readily understood that
it was no new experience for one of this
fine old family to become a leader of his
generation—whether he be in the Old
World or in the (at that time) unknown
land of Australia.
We also find in ancient records that
ANDREW HAMILTON HUME—Com-
missary aboard the Frigates “Guardian”
and “Lady Juliana” and later of Sydney,
Parramatta, Appin and Marulan, N.S.W.,
married Elizabeth Kennedy—daughter of
the Reverend John Kennedy of Teston,
already mentioned herein. This forms a
double link between these two pioneer
families insofar as Australia is concerned.
Passing to the famous name of the Huon
family, we go back to one Aimee Marie
Gabriel Louis Ludovic Huon “De Kcrri-
leau” (French) whose daughter married a
member of the famous explorer’s family in
William Mitchell. Their daughter married
Francis Rawdon Hume and, from this union,
in turn, a daughter—Mary Bozzom Hume
married Robert Henry Kennedy as already


appearing hereinbefore. It will thus be
seen that in the veins of the present genera-
tion —mentioned later in these lines —runs
the blood of some of the most famous men
in the early history of Australia. Un-
doubtedly, their line represents the flower
of Australian exploratory history.
We now pass on to the PI 1 lEN-
DRIGH section of this history.
This name represents one of the best
families in Scotland. Since the thirteenth
century the Pittendrigh family have been
the owners of estates in Banffshire and, in
fact, the locality bears the family name to
the present day. There has never been a
break in the long line of Pittendrigh
through the centuries and many members
of the family have been honoured members
of the Church and professions. For ex-
ample, we find one James Pittendrigh in,
approximately, 1485, Abbott of Deer and,
nearly four centuries later, another James
Pittendrigh, M.A., was Minister of the
United Presbyterian Church at Pittenween,
in Fifeshire and retained such holding for
thirty years until within a year of his death
in 1893. This member of the family mar-
ried a Miss Helen Murray, who was a sister
of the well-known David and William Mur-
ray who came to Adelaide, South Australia,
in the early fifties of last century and
founded the since-famous House of D. &
W. Murray Ltd. James Murray Pitten-
drigh, son of this union, joined the London
office of the firm in 1896 and came to Ade-
laide in 1897 for the firm. In 1901 he joined
the management of the Perth office and,
since 1923, has been Managing Director of
Australia at the principal office for Austra-
lia in Melbourne.
Mr. James Murray Pittendrigh married
Miss Hilda Frances Kennedy of “Wonna-
minta” Station and thus we see the con-
nection between the pioneer families already
mentioned and the Foundation of one of
Australia’s finest Merchantile Houses.
From this union there have been two sons
in David, who was born at Adelaide in 1909
and is now a grazier at “Werri Park’ ,
Benalla, and Robert Kennedy who was
born at Adelaide 1917.
We take pleasure in including these
brief references in the present Work.
The late Charles Ryan
and
Major-General Sir Charles Snodgrass Ryan, K.8.E.,
C.8., C.M.G., MB.
The family here recorded is one of our
oldest and most distinguished, who have,
through the years, become recognised as
representative of the best in the com-
munity.
The Founder of the family in Australia
was the late Charles Ryan, a native of Ire-
land, son of the Ryans of Kilfera, County
Kilkenny, who was born in the year 1818
and came to Victoria in the late forties of
last century.
Soon after his arrival he purchased a
Station which he named “Kilfera” —later
bought “Doogalook” at Euroa —and finally
became established on a fine property
at Upper Macedon named “Derriwiet
Heights.” Unfortunately, but sparse re-
cords are available as to his career in his


land of adoption except that he married
Marian, daughter of the late John and
Susanna Cotton—another of our old pioneer
families in Victoria.
To this union there ensued a family of
seven children of whom the son who be-
came best known to posterity, (also named
Charles) was destined to add lustre to the
family name. This son was educated in
Melbourne and finished at the University,
later going to Edinburgh where he gained
his degrees of medicine and surgery—M.B.
et C.M.
In September, 1876, he entered the
1 urkish Service as Doctor-in-charge of the
large hospital established on active service
at Nisch and, later, went up to the Orchanie
Balkans in charge of 3,000 soldiers with
whom he marched to Widdin —a journey of
ten days duration. The rigours of that
march have been chronicled many times
and the Doctor all but met his death by
exhaustion on the road.
Eater again, he went to Osman Pasha
and then to Plevna. These were followed
in quick succession by journeyings to
Loftcha, Constantinople and Erzeroum.
His career was indeed a colorful and bril-
liant one and honours fell to his lot in pro-
fusion. Among others, he was the reci-
pient of the Order of the Medjidie (fourth
class), Order of the Osmanieh (third class)
and War Medal. He finally reached the
rank of Major-General and was Knighted
for his outstanding services.
On the fifth day of July, 1883, he mar-
ried Alice Elfrida, daughter of the late
Honourable Theophilus Sumner, M.L.C., of
Stoney Park, Brunswick, Victoria, and to
this union there was one son, Rupert
Sumner Ryan who, like his father before
him, has had a most distinguished career, —
and one daughter who married the Honour-
able R. G. Casey, M.H.R., of Geelong.
Lieutenant-Colonel Rupert Sumner
Ryan was born in the year 1884 and fully
upheld the name he bears during the Great
V ar. fie was mentioned in Despatches on
five occasions, received the D.5.0., in 1918,
received the Order of Aviz, Portugal, Order
of the Sacred Treasure, Japan, and was
created a Chevalier of the Legion of
Honour.
Lieutenant-Colonel Ryan was Deputy-
British High Commissioner of the Rhine-
land and, later, High Commissioner, dur-
ing the years 1920 to 1929, and in the year
1928 was awarded the C.M.G.
Lieutenant-Colonel Ryan married Lady
Rosemary Constance Hay, daughter of the
twenty-first Earl of Erroll, and to this
union there is one son.
He is now in residence on his property
“Edrington”, at Berwick, Victoria, and may
well feel pride both in the history pertain-
ing to his family name and in his own
achievements—the latter constituting a
compliment to Australia, to whose name
his deeds would be credited.
Before bringing this brief history to a
close, it is of interest to record that a sister
of the late Major-General Sir Charles
Snodgrass Ryan became in later years a
well-known Australian Landscape Artist
in Mrs. Rowan.


, ' ' '"*
i
y, m*$
■ Safe - ■ ■■rifmtiftt—"•'- wm-^'-ht:'
,-, imWll , ( BRaBBlfe
K ' ; -' 3? '
.*, / ’ * y % '
'' i |
ip.
llSfe'.. . 'JL
|gl
B£^
I A
Fate Wm. Y. Barclay
William P. Barclay
Mrs. A. S. Barclay.
John S. Barclay


Ihe Barclay Family, of Goolwa.
Captain John Barclay, the founder of
the Australian branch of this family arrived
in the State with his wife, ■ Margaret, in
1857.
He joined several others in opening up
the Murray River for commercial shipping
and was for many years connected with
the first boats running up to Morgan, and
later to Wentworth.
After retiring from the shipping in-
dustry, he purchased a farm near Port
Broughton where he lived until his death.
William Younghusband Barclay, son
of Captain Barclay, was born at Goolwa in
1862, and after finishing his education
joined his father on the family property at
Port Broughton. Later he was appointed
Clerk of the Alma Plains District Council,
which position he retained for many years.
In 1897 W. Y. Barclay married Annie
Susan Player, daughter of Nicholas Player
of Warooka, thus joining two South Aus-
tralian pioneer families and they have two
sons, John Stodard and William Player.
W. Y. Barclay died at Maitland at the age
of sixty-one.
The sons were educated locally and
then apprenticed to the electrical and build-
ing trades respectively. On the death of
W. Y. Barclay, the family removed to
Warooka where Messrs. J. S. and
W. P. Barclay carried on a building
and contracting business. They later
acquired the leading store-keeping business
at Warooka, which they now control. Their
grandfather, Nicholas Player erected the
first residence at Warooka and the Player
family is one of the oldest original settler
families in this district.
Both the Barclay brothers take an
active interest in all matters pertaining to
the welfare of the district. The elder bro-
ther, John, married Sylvia Murdoch,
another member of a local pioneer family.
Through their grandfather, Captain
John Barclay, the family has been associa-
ted with the State some 80 years, and each
generation has contributed towards the
progress of South Australia.


t tm mS S ||
-v i JHHH
John Frame, the First.
The Frames of Mount Barker,
South Australia
John Frame, Senior, with his wife and
family arrived in South Australia from
Scotland on the Ship “Arradue” in 1839.
Within a short time of his arrival he pur-
chased one acre of land at Unley which he
sowed with wheat, taking off the first two
crops of this cereal grown in Unley. This
was the foundation of the wonderful work
done by the Frames in the production of
pedigreed wheat carried on by four genera-
tions of the family. In 1848 John Frame
had acquired “Bnrnbank” near Mount Bar-
ker which he made one of the best equipped
farms in the State and it still maintains
this reputation. He was one of the founders
of the Royal Agricultural and Horticultural
Society of South Australia and also the
Mount Barker Agricultural and Horticul-
tural Society. His son John was killed
on October 21st, 1876 at the age of forty-
seven. John the second married Miss Ham-
lyn,whose parents were early arrivals in the
State. His son, John the third, and grand-
son, John the fourth, still reside at “Burn
bank.”
John the first had the honour of
winning the first prize at the World’s
Exhibition, London, in 1851 for wheat grown
at “Burnbank.” This exhibit was awarded
a gold medal and the family has continued
to grow pedigreed wheat up to the present
time. John the third has won seven gold
and one silver medal and many other
trophies including the Melrose Challenge
Cup for the best twenty bushels of milling
wheat. This cup had to be won three times
by the one competitor. He was an expert
ploughman and in various ploughing
matches in South Australia he was a keen
competitor and won several matches. These
ploughing contests in the early days helped
the young farmer to acquire proficiency in
this department of husbandry.
John the third married Elizabeth Cleg-
gett daughter of Friend Cleggett, whose
parents arrived in South Australia in 1838.
She died in 1914. John the first died in
1885 at the age of eighty-six years.


Cl
■4j
Mr. and Mrs. John Frame and Son.
John the third has been a member of
the Mount Barker District Council for over
twenty years and is active in promoting the
welfare of the district. He invented the
pea harvester which has revolutionised the
harvesting of this crop.
John the fourth has also won gold and
silver medals for the champion bag of wheat
grown in the State. In addition, besides
his splendid work on experimental wheat
plots, he has been the recipient of champion
prizes for sheep, cattle, pigs and wool pro-
duced on the Burnbank property. For over
ninety years the family has been famous for
its contributions towards the improvement
of the agricultural and pastoral life of the
State.
hew families have given greater service
to the State and they are justly entitled to
an honoured place in the roll of “Founders
of Australia.”


—
F #^3|!l-
8B^* e ' t "***' it* -««& fi * 5, i |!|l
r I m f m'** 11
1 1 * v * Jm
B |l * * ? *f~~~-
1 11^
f ! JJ»y mSr
Oh '■'51 ‘f.. _. >- ..
v t
ilil - ngt W*s wi ;
.
■ IhH! &
|| v^Ml
I ***" |
iiij||jij:ii;|T-- - T - r - - -
I
I lu#
A
I
Rev. Sydney H. Smith, AI.A., B.D.
Airs. Sydney Smith
Air. Alurray Smith
Aliss Flora Smith


Rev. S. H. Smith, MA., B.D
Sydney Herbert, the youngest son, was
born at Happy Valley Ist January, 1884.
Encouraged by the home atmosphere, he
early exhibited a strong tendency towards
both religious and secular knowledge,
varied by a fondness for most outdoor
sports. From Happy Valley, he proceeded
to the Matriculation Course, first under the
guidance of Mr. J. Kilfeder for a brief while
at Vendor., and then at the University Col-
lege, Ballarat, under Mr. C. W. Wilson,
B.A. He finally matriculated in nine sub-
jects when studying under Miss Josephine
Kennedy, 8.A., who had classes at Balla-
rat. The years immediately preceding
manhood were spent mainly in the Happy
Valley and Linton districts where he assis-
ted the A icar as a reader and Sunday School
Superintendent. At the age of twenty
he went to Inglewood as Stipendiary
Reader to the Rev. Rowland Hayward —
formerly a chaplain of note in the early
days of Victoria and Tasmania. Thence to
St. Aidan’s Theological College, Ballarat,
and after two years graduated as Dux of
the College, gained the diploma of Licen-
tiate of Theology, and was ordained as
Deacon by Bishop Green. Credit was due
to his three brothers who assisted with the
financial load to be borne for his studies.
Such credit must also be extended to the
student who, by cycling more than fifty
miles every Sunday, was able to take three
services in the Bcrringa Parish and. also,
taught at Ellerslie College, Ballarat. A
Curacy at Ararat followed, where the parish
was fifty miles in diameter with fourteen
centres to be visited by bicycle. Ordained
in 1908 to the priesthood he was given his
first parish as Incumbent of Beulah and
Hopetoun where, under difficult conditions,
he opened several new centres of church
expansion. In 1909 he was awarded the
diploma of Scholar of 'Theology. 1910-11
saw him in charge of St. John’s, Ballarat,
and his services did much toward consoli-
dating the parish. His last parish in the
Ballarat Diocese was at Heywood where he
met, and later married, Miss Anne Murray
of the Education Department. This lady
has been an exemplary wife and mother and
a most assidious church worker. There
are two children in Flora —educated at St.
Michaels C.E.0.5., Melbourne and now in
the War Service Homes Commission —and
Murray, educated at Melbourne Grammar
School and now with the Bank of N.S.W.
'The Rev. S. H. Smith entered the Mel-
bourne Diocese in 1914 as Incumbent of
Portarlington, and, in addition to the build-
ing of a new Church at St. Leonards,
gained the degree of Bachelor of Divinity
of the University of Durham. Later, when
assistant master at Melbourne Grammar
School, he went abroad as Chaplain to the
A. Following his return, he spent six
years in N.S.W., in the Diocese of Grafton
in the parishes of Dunoon, Bellmgen and
South Grafton, where he was a member of
the Council of the Diocese and secretary of
the Board of Education. In 1925 he became
Vicar of St. Luke’s Yarraville and, amongst
other developments since its occupancy, a
handsome two-storied Tudor Vicarage has
been built. In 1928, on special leave, he
toured as Travelling Secretary for the
Australian Board of Missions. In addition
to the degrees already named, he is also a
B. and M.A. of the Melbourne University
and his knowledge is ever at command in
the private coaching of both clergy and
laity. He is also a Past Master of the
Masonic Craft and Probation Officer of the
Children’s Court.


j V P" ~r —r ■■■■
...; .. - * *
m ? m is I
The late Mr. John Love
The late Mrs. John Love
The Love Family of South Australia
The name of the late John Love must
forever be linked with the days of the
pioneering of the sheep industry in South
Australia. Undoubtedly, he was respon-
sible for a great deal of the activities con-
nected with the early days of that State,
and too great credit in this direction can
hardly be extended to his memory.
A native of Scotland, where he was
born in 1828, at the age of twenty-one he
made the journey to South Australia aboard
the “Duncan” with the late George Elder.
Shortly after his arrival, he was engaged
in pastoral pursuits at Port Lincoln and, at
a later stage, was engaged in similar acti-
vities in partnership with his brother —
Robert —in northern stations. In passing,
it should be mentioned that Robert died
unmarried.
Prior to his marriage, the late Mr.
Love owned and resided at his property
Mount Wedge on the west coast, about
twenty-five miles east of Port Elliston, but
afterwards moved to Cooyamoolta Station,
about eighteen miles from Port Lincoln —
although he- retained ownership of both
properties for many years after his retire-
ment from active management and made a
home for himself and his family adjoining
Adelaide —namely “Mitcham Lawn”, in the
foothills.
At one stage of his career he was in
partnership with his brother-in-law, Andrew
Tennant, in several enterprises, although
the principal of these was perhaps Undoolya
Station near Alice Springs. At the time of
his death at the age of seventy-eight, he
owned Bookham Station in New South
Wales in partnership with his eldest son,
James A. Love, who is yet in residence
thereon.
The late John Love married Jessie
Aitken (daughter of the late John Tennant)
who was born in South Australia, and from
the union there ensued a large family, most
of whom survive at the present time. His
widow survived him by more than a quarter
of a century and died in 1933 at the fine old
age of ninety-one years.
In conclusion, it is of interest to record
that the maternal side of this family has
been associated with the State of South
Australia for more than one hundred years.


The late Edward Waters, Pioneer
and
Ihe late Colonel Edward Needham Waters.
The late Edward Waters came to Vic-
toria in the early fifties of last century and,
like so many new settlers of that period,
went to the Ballarat diggings where he re-
mained for a few years and ultimately came
to Melbourne where he established the first
patent attorney’s office. Such office —
under the name of Edward Waters & Sons
is the identical firm which is still in opera-
tion at the present time.
A marked coincidence was attached to
his marriage for his young wife had travel-
led to this country with her parents on the
same ship and journey as had marked the
commencement of his own career in Aus-
tralia. This might not have been so re-
markable but for the fact that, when such
journey was made, she was but three years
of age.
Edward Needham Waters, their son,
entered his father’s business on coming of
age, and quickly betrayed unusual ability.
In addition to his business interests, how-
ever, he took a deep interest in the Militia,
and ultimately was appointed Hon. A.D.C.
to the Governor of Victoria. Upon the out-
break of the Great War he was sent to the
Queensclifif Barracks for twelve months,
and was then released from such duties to
allow him to proceed to the Front.
Having served both on Gallipoli and in
France for three years, he was invalided
home with the rank of Colonel. Both in
business and sporting circles he was re-
garded with the utmost esteem. He was
deputy-master of the Findon Harriers Hunt
Club, a member of the Royal Melbourne
and Victorian Golf Clubs, the Victorian
Racing Club, V.A.T.C., Moonce Valley and
Williamstown Racing Clubs, the M.C.C., and
the L.T.A.V. in addition to being a member
of the Athenaeum Club.
The late Colonel Edward Needham
Waters died on the fourteenth day of June,
1936, at the age of sixty-three and was pre-
deceased by his wife who passed away on
the fifth day of December, 1929.
Of their union there was a family of
one son and one daughter in:—
The late Colonel Waters married Miss
Enid Emily Whiting of Randwick, New
South Wales, who was a direct descendent
of the late Sir John Moore —well-known for
his career during the American Peninsula
wars —and the family residence was, firstly,
“Claremont,” Glenferrie Road, Hawthorn,
and, later, St. Kilda Road, Melbourne.
Mr. Edward Edison Waters who resi-
des in Sydney and is still a member of the
firm.
Enid Betty. Now Mrs. Arthur William
Faver.
Mr. A. W. Laver is the son of the late
Arthur Laver —also one of our pioneers—
who had a large property at Winton,
Queensland and was one of the first men to
drive stock through Queensland to the Gulf
of Carpentaria. The late Mr. Arthur Laver
sold his possessions in Queensland and went
to West Australia where he made and lost
a fortune in the early days of the diggings.
He was later one of the founders of the late
firm of Laver* Bros and Co. Pty. Ltd., of
Melbourne.
Mr. and Mrs. Arthur William Laver
are now in residence at 20 Avcnel Road,
Kooyong, Melbourne. Mrs. Laver has for
several years followed the Findon Harriers
Hunt Club and, in addition, finds time for a
great deal of work on behalf of charitable
institutions.


wjr
Af / 1l
W; jPji
NSHt/ -Ja "
iJSSiLy,.
SHfar
;. "mm-fte •w' j8p ! *f-
The late Redmond Nicholas Pomerxn
Airs. Teresa M. Pomeroy
The late Mr. Redmond Nicholas Pomeroy.
To appreciate the true value of the late
Redmond Pomeroy, one has only to trace
his successful career from a beginning
which offered little opportunity for advance-
ment.
Born in Cork in 1858, he descended
from an old French family, members of
whom crossed the Channel with William
the Conqueror, and flourished in England;
the Irish branch following later when after
the Reformation, the Rev. Arthur Pomeroy,
M.A. Cantab., settled in Ireland where the
family prospered.
In the latter half of the Nineteenth
Century—after eleven years litigation in the
family estate —Mr. Meredith Pomeroy
decided to proceed to Australia. So in 1868
we find him, a widower, Southward bound
in the S.S. “Great Britain.” together with
his young family of two sons and two
daughters; Redmond Nicholas, Richard,
Margaret and Mary Ann.
Settling in Ararat he built his home on
the outskirts of the town, but shortly after-
wards died leaving his young children, with
depleted resources to carry on the family
name. Redmond with the determination of
his forebears set out to make good. Obtain-
ing employment in a local Mercery Store
lie remained there for some years, during
which time he made many friends.
He was an ardent cyclist—riding a
penny-farthing machine —and for recrea-
tion toured the surrounding country, ever
alert to improve his status. Hence a few
years later we find him improving his posi-
tion in the progressive Town of Warrnam-
booh From there he came to the City and
joined up with the Leviathan as Manager
of a Department.
About this time he ventured into the
bonds of matrimony with Teresa Gleeson
of “Woodlawn”, Irrewarra. The combina-
tion was very happy and his wife’s inspira-
tion and encouragement was most helpful
in his venture to the timber trade. The
rapid increase in building so favourably
attracted his attention that in 1894. in
partnership with the late Richard Bowen,
he invested his savings in the timber busi-
ness known as Bowen & Pomerov. The
combination was successful, and after more


than thirty years of mutual co-operation the
firm—-now a Proprietary Limited Company
—had, at the time of the decease of Red-
mond Pomeroy, a paid up capital of well
over six figures, a wonderful tribute to the
tireless energy and application of the
partners.
In public life his upright character and
honourable dealings were such that he was
esteemed and respected by all with whom
he made contact.
In private life his tastes were modest —
gardening, swimming, cycling and later
motoring—he was a perfect husband and a
loving father. His demise on 4th January,
1925, was a very sad bereavement for his
wife and two children with whom his many
friends sincerely condoled.
His widow, nee Teresa Gleeson, was a
daughter of Michael and Margaret Gleeson.
Mr. Gleeson was a well-known Victorian
grazier and breeder of blood stock who
dwelt in the Colac district. His wife came
from the McCarthy family which can boast
one of Erin’s finest genealogical trees dat-
ing back to the early Sixteenth Century.
The union of Mr. and Mrs. Redmond
Pomeroy was blessed with one daughter
and one son, particulars of whom are briefly
as follow:—
Miss Veronica Mary Pomeroy, who
resides with her mother at “Mizpah,” St.
Leonards Road, Ascot Vale, is her constant
companion both in business and recreation
and is also on the Directorate of Bowen &
Pomeroy.
Mr. Redmond Pomery Junr., married
Miss Beryl Langford, a member of another
of our oldest pioneer families. To this
union there is a family of three children in
Mary Teresa, Patricia Beryl and Leonie
Raymond.
Mrs. Teresa Pomeroy has undertaken
the responsibilities of a Directorship in the
firm and has also given a great deal of
attention to charitable institutions. Her
principal activities in the latter direction
are on behalf of the Childrens’ Welfare
League and Public Assistance Committee,
in which she is a recognised and most active
worker.
It is a matter for regret that sufficient
space is unavailable to give a fuller account
of the many directions in which the late
Mr. R. N. Pomeroy was of service to his
fellow-citizens, for his name has been sur-
rounded by complimentary references from
all who were privileged to call him friend.
The Brays of South Australia.
The founder of this family in South
Australia, Thomas Cox Bray, arrived in
this State with his wife on the ship “Prince
George”, in 1838.
Shortly after arrival he established a
business in Hindley Street, Adelaide, which
he carried on for many years. His son,
Sir John Cox Bray, was born in Adelaide in
1842 and educated at St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide, and later in England. He was
articled to the Law and was admitted to
the Bar in 1870, in which year he married
Miss Alice Maud Hornabrook. Sir lohn
Bray never practised actively at his
profession as he was essentially a politician
at heart. Pie possessed rare gifts as a
debater and, as a young man, was very
successful in debating societies. In 1871
he was elected to the House of Assembly
as representative for East Adelaide, which
electorate returned him for 20 consecutive
years. His gifts soon brought him into the
Ministry. He held a position in six cabinets


being Premier in one Government for three
years. He was the first native-born South
Australian Premier. Later, in 1888, Sir
John Bray was elected as Speaker to the
House when he received the first honor of
knighthood as a K.C.M.G. In 1892 he was
appointed Agent-General for South Aus-
tralia in London, but the climate did not
agree with his health, and he left London
in the “Oceana” to return to South Aus-
tralia. He died en route on the
13th June, 1894, being survived by a
widow, his two sons, Cecil Thomas and
Harry Midwinter and a daughter, Ada.
Ada married Mr. (now Sir) Lavington
Bonython. She died in 1908, leaving three
children, Mr. J. L. Bonython and Mrs. K.
C. Wilson of Adelaide, and Mrs Dennis
Heath of Birmingham. Lady Bray died
on the 13th July, 1935, at the age of eighty-
five years.
Cecil Thomas Bray was born in Ade-
laide in 1874 and, like his father, was a stu-
dent of St. Peter’s College, Adelaide, and
finished his education in London Avhere he
studied Law, and on his return to Adelaide,
qualified for and was admitted to the Bar.
During the War he was doing Red Cross
Work and was wounded in France in 1917.
Cecil Bray is one of the best known horse-
men in the State, and for many years has
been an active member of the Adelaide
Polo Club and Adelaide Hunt Club.
He married Miss Claire Eva Bowman
of Adelaide, and there are two daughters,
Mrs. Stanley-Turner and Miss Phyllis
Claire Bray. Master Richard Stanley-
Turner represents the fifth generation of the
Bray family in Australia.
Phyllis Bray, like her father, is an
ardent horse-lover and is well-known as a
successful competitor at the various Royal
Agricultural Shows in South Australia and
the Eastern States. Both Cecil Bray and
his daughter are keen followers of hounds
and are always well mounted.
H. M. Bray, second son of Sir John
Bray, was born on the 10th June, 1879. He
followed the family tradition of starting his
education at St. Peter’s College, Adelaide,
and later at Westminster School, London.
He married Miss Gertrude Stow of Ade-
laide, also a member of a South Australian
pioneer family. They have three children,
John Jefferson, Rowena and Robert Stow.
These children are the fourth genera-
tion of Bray’s in a direct line. H. M. Bray
was a member of the Adelaide Stock Ex-
change for some 20 years and took a keen
interest in the commercial life of the State.
He later decided to take a property near
Clare where he engaged in viticulture for
several years.
John Jefferson Bray, LL.B., the eldest
son of Harry and Gertrude Bray, was also
a pupil of St. Peter’s College, Adelaide, and
later attended the Adelaide University,
where he finished his Law course and is
now a practising barrister in the city of
Adelaide. He was recently awarded the
degree of Doctor of Law, which will be
conferred upon him by the University of
Adelaide.
This family, with their long association
with the State, have Avon a position of pro-
minence in the roll of “Founders of Austra-
lia.”


, V. . » . , A. ....
Robert Seymour
Mrs. Robert Seymour
The Seymour Family of South Australia
This family has had a very long and
honourable association with the State of
South Australia. The founder, Henry
Conway Seymour and his wife, Elizabeth
Drought, came from England on the
ship, “Siam,” with two of their children,
Robert and Ellen, landing at Holdfast Bay
in 1841. He first went to Eittlehampton,
near Mount Barker where he purchased
land which he farmed for a while. He was
one of the founders of that historical old
Church at Blakiston which is one of the
oldest Anglican Churches in the State,
dating from 1847.
In the early fifties his sons, Thomas
Drought and Robert Seymour, went to the
South-east portion of the State and took
up land, establishing a station named
“Killanoola” which is still in the hands of
the family.
Thomas married Mary Jane Lemon,
daughter of Joseph and Susette Lemon
of Rathcam, Ireland, and they had
five children —Elizabeth, Henry Conway,
Charles Randolph, Thomas George and
Mary,
Thomas carried on the “Killanoola”
property until his death and the station is
now managed by Henry Seymour. This
property has been in the hands of the
family for over ninety years. The Seymour
family is one of the oldest pastoralist
families in the State.
Robert Seymour took up pastoral pur-
suits under his father and then went to
Viictoria where he managed two stations.
He married Mary Beath of Hamilton,
Victoria and there was a family of two;
Henry James and Marian (now Mrs. B. W.
Bagenal). Robert died in 1895. Mrs.
Bagenal is the only surviving member of
the family. Her father was one of the best
known amateur riders and horsemen in the
State and rode many winners as an amateur
rider for the late Geo. Hawker.


—SE3ES38S ■
I I
>-*, ■]
>*‘*V .' ; H
I
Mr
im* J» * H'
IL /Mm Jj
B&T > % i j /?sst ~
i s *jhh-.m tes ■
|%K|
vte^iiSF
M*|v if\
\ « si f
’ r -inr^
■ m \ 1
| a| , I
! . -iS
i WeSf I
v«f I
i , |
■ iSr ly'\'i
V h Vk V B9
''HWHk Ik
Hi w I'|
V^E
\\ J >'9$W' -JHF
Henry Conway Seymour
The late Mrs. E. Seymour
Thomas Drought Seymour
Mary Seymour


. V*V' ■ * ’ ' ,
■
Elizabeth Seymour
Henry lames Seymour
Thomas George Seymour


I ■*•—• « _. S'S ;> ,V-. ' s \ ~~ _-.
%|| MARY BOWMAN CAVE | JOHN BOWMAN CHARLES CAVE
"
*r - .. ■■ ‘::::: ; i|


Ihe Bowman and Cave Families
of South Australia.
John Bowman came from Cumberland,
England, where the family had lived on
their own estates since 1589. With his
wife and six children he sailed for Austra-
lia in 1829 on the brig “Fame”, which
arrived in Tasmania (then called Van Die-
man’s Land) early in 1830.
One of John Bowman’s sons, Thomas
Richard Bowman, married Victoria Jane
Kelsh, whose people arrived in Tasmania
also on the brig “Fame.” Their children
were Walter Broughton (dec.) Ada May
and Clara Eva.
The story of the family’s advent from
Tasmania to South Australia is an intensely
interesting one, and few families have a
better right to be termed “Founders” than
the Bowmans.
They were amongst the earliest in
South Australia to found the pastoral in-
dustry, bringing stock from Van Dieman’s
Land in 1839.
T. R. Bowman, father of Mrs. H. C.
Cave, purchased Poltalloch Station on Lakes
Alexandrina and Albert, from Mr. Malcolm
of Poltalloch, Scotland, in 1872. This pro-
perty included Campbell House Station.
T. R. Bowman sold Poltalloch Station to
his brother John, and retained Campbell
House of about 30,000 acres.
During the visit of the late King and
his brother, the Duke of Clarence, to Aus-
tralia in 1881 they stayed at Campbell
House Station and enjoyed typical Austra-
lian hospitality and sport. T. R. Bowman
was a most generous citizen, and his private
and public benefactions were considerable.
T. R. Bowman’s daughter, Ada May,
married Hugo Charles Cave, son of William
Rendall Cave, whose father, Charles Cave,
came to South Australia in 1849 and died
within a year of arrival, leaving a widow
and ten children. William Rendall Cave
engaged first in pastoral life and later joined
his brother-in-law, James Rawlings, in the
wheat and shipping business.
Hugo Charles Cave was born in South
Australia, and educated at St. Peter’s Col-
lege, and the Royal Grammar School, High
Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, England. On
his return to Australia he entered pastoral
life.
I lugo and Ada Cave’s daughter, Mary
Bowman, represents the fourth generation
of the Bowman and Cave families in
Australia.


C" , ? i VT * ■■
\ M \;:;
jp* «Vi '" I f
CR B. E, W, GEHAN | M»s B. E W CEHAN
—,. .„ — -~— ~—”™— — —»


The Gehan’s of South Australia.
John Gehan, senior, was a native of
Guernsey, Channell Islands, and came to
Australia in the early sixties. On comple-
tion of his early training in the Navy he
transferred as an officer in the Mercantile
Marine and became engaged with the
coastal shipping of South Australia.
He married Mary King of Sydney,
whose parents came to Australia in the
early forties. Mary King was born in
Sydney in 1850.
After his marriage, John Gehan settled
at Eyndoch Valley and later at Halbury
where the family of ten were reared. Seven
of these survive. John Gehan died at Port
Wakefield in 1920 and Mrs. Gehan in 1937.
Councillor Bertie Elliot Walter Gehan
was born at Halbury in 1893, being the
youngest son of John. He received his
early education at Port Wakefield and then
was apprenticed to the butchering trade.
After this he acquired farming experience
at Paskeville' for some years, and this ex-
perience has been utilised on his present
properties. In 1911 he came to Snowtown
under engagement to a local butcher and
later purchased his present business which
is the leading one of its type in the district.
From small beginnings Councillor Gehan
has achieved a fine position in the com-
munity. In addition to his business he
engaged in grazing and mixed farming, his
property being some 4,200 acres in extent
He married Teresa Emma Dohnt, daughter
of John Christain Dohnt of Snowtown and
there are two children, Netta Joyce and
Robert Morris, who represent the third
generation of the Gehan and the fourth of
the King and Dohnt families.
Councillor Gehan was elected to the
Snowtown District Council in 1927 and
appointed Chairman in 1937. He takes
an active interest in promoting the
welfare of the district. For two years he
was President of the Snowtown Bowling
Club and also of the Snowtown Agricultural
Society. He is a member of the local Hos-
pital Board. Eike her husband, Mrs. Gehan
is an active worker for the district and a
keen golfer and croquet player. Councillor
Gehan has won many trophies for his
prowess in rifle shooting and is keen on
golf and bowls, Joyce and Robert are also
keen on sport.


: * ***'
ppf |&| / C, & li VjpP mmmjk
' ' v . ? wk * -*J3r *^H|
■f| |.|| ! ' : «||k .*£* mjgBk
IH W OANIGLL [ ’ ~ ”"’ Tne rL.u'v or I H. W. DANIELLj
— — — M* & Ms*s P. H. DANIELL | S ~~*— • —•*
l jf* I
JP
f " _____ „ - .
| FRANK OANIELL £ A, F DANtELL "" |. j Mbs^FRANK OANIElZ' " }
■*^grf*sao«agiagBiafeftftiaaartrt<iws^c<^ooocio^a^aga^B«^.j>wc-?qcccc<w<»a«<tffflgs«Wft9Bft«»QQ,
z&'ssvs&s/My/xvx^y/^&wsz&vx&ttv^
W&m^kMm
j A <J. DANIELL I ““““ ' v “i -
1 — — _ r Mss A G. DAKIEUi_ 1 ■
„A ’. ;-!;|,
' - i i i i ~.»


The Daniell Family, of Yorke Peninsula,
South Australia.
The founder of the Australian branch
of this family, Henry Daniell, arrived in
Adelaide by the ship “Rockhampton”, in
1852, accompanied by his wife and young
family.
In the early seventies he, with his sons,
went to Yorke Peninsula where they were
amongst the first settlers to take up land.
The family is still interested in farming
land near their original holdings.
Henry William Daniell, eldest son of H.
Daniell, married in 1878 a daughter of the
late George Bartram. There was a family
of four daughters and three sons, as fol-
lows: Frances Sarah (Mrs. Y\ . J. Riddle of
Minlaton) ; Ida Mary (Mrs. E. J. Hanker-
vill of Pine Point) ; Elsie Alice (Mrs. E.
H. Drake of Prospect) ; Miss Vera Rosa
(of Prospect) ; Percy Henry, Frank,
Archie Gordon.
Percy Henry, the eldest son, was born
at Coobowie in 1879 and was associated
with his father on the family property
until the latter’s death in 1901. He with
his brothers then worked the land con-
jointly for some nine years, when each
took over properties of their own.
P. H. Daniell married Evelina Francis
lolly, daughter of the late Charles Jolly,
whose parents arrived in South Australia
in the ship “Recovery”, in 1839. They
have four children, Errol Henry, Maud
Eliza (Mrs. Smith of Underbool, Victoria),
Glen Percival and Ross Wilfred. Errol
married Edna Richards and has a daughter
and son, Aileen and Bryan. These child-
ren represent the fifth generation of the
Daniell and Jolly families. P. H. Daniell
came to Adelaide in 1921 and is a partner
in the firm of Kennett and Daniell, Con-
tractors and Lime Merchants. This firm
has built many of the leading residences
and other buildings in and around Adelaide.
The supplies of lime distributed by the
firm are obtained from the Wool Bay Lime
Company, Wool Bay, Yorke Peninsula, near
the original holding of the Daniell family.
The two eldest sons are still engaged in
farming in that district.
Percival Henry Daniell was for several
3 r ears Superintendent of the Wool Bay
Mission Sunday School and for over 30 years
has been a Sunday School teacher.
The family are keen supporters of the
Wool Bay Mission, an independent church
supported wholly by residents of the
district.
Frank Daniell, “Fairview”, Pickering,
was born in 1881 being the second son
of the late Henry W. Daniell, and like his
brothers was educated locally and then
joined his father on the family property,
having been engaged in farming ever since.
In 1916, Frank Daniell joined the 43rd
Battalion, A.1.F., and was wounded at


AVarnetown, Belgium, and after some
months in hospital in England, returned to
Australia. After his discharge from the
Army he returned to his former occupa-
tion of grazing and farming. The area of
“Fairview” is some 1104 acres, situated
midway between Coobowie and Wool Bay.
Like other members of the family, Frank
Daniell has taken an active interest in local
affairs. He was chairman of the local hall
and has done much for his district. He
married Agnes Jane Anderson, and there
is a son, Alexander Frank, who was edu-
cated at Prince Alfred College, Adelaide,
and is now working in conjunction with his
father on the property. Pie is a keen
cricketer and takes an interest in most
other sports. Frank Daniell is also a
breeder of Clydesdale horses, which have
won prizes in the show. Alexander Frank
Daniell represents the fourth generation on
both sides of the family.
Archie Gordon Daniell, J.P., third
son of the late H. W. Daniell, was
born at Coobowie, Yorke Peninsula, in
1885, and after receiving his education
locally, joined his father in farming until
the latter’s death, and then worked his
father’s property in conjunction with the
family. He married Margaret Ruth Ander-
son, daughter of the late Archibald Ander-
son, who arrived in South Australia with
his parents in 1838, having been born at
sea on the ship “Surrey”. They have one
daughter, Gwenith Mary and four sons,
Colin Gordon, Ronald Frank, Kenneth
Maurice and Bruce Henry. A. G. Daniell
was elected to the Dalrymple District
Council in 1917, and was appointed a Jus-
tice of the Peace in 1923. He has taken a
very keen interest in all matters of local
welfare. He was chairman of the local
school committee, and committeeman,
trustee and vice chairman of the AVool Bay
Hall.
The “Blairgowrie” estate now occu-
pied by this branch of the Daniell family,
contains some 2200 acres used for mixed
farming, grazing of Merino sheep and the
breeding of a high class of Clydesdale
draught horse. This stud has won many
prizes at the various Agricultural Shows in
the district and the present sire, “Blair-
gowrie Renown,” has sired some splendid
stock.
Four sons are keen cricketers, Colin
being Captain and Ronald Secretary of the
local club, both of whom have plaved for
their team in the Country Cricket Carnival
held annually at Adelaide.
The child ren represent the fourth
generation on both sides of the Daniell and
Anderson family. The property is situated
at AA f ool Bay. This district was named
through it being the first place used as a
shipping port for station wool from Yorke
Peninsula.


The Boundy Family, of South Australia.
Ihe first of this family to arrive in
South Australia was John Boundy with his
"u ife and family on the ship “Constance”.
He was a native of Cornwall and an exper-
ienced miner. In the early fifties he, with
his son, Henry, tried his fortune on the
\ ictorian Goldfields. He was the first
settler in the Callington district of South
Australia where he farmed and also en-
gaged in copper mining. Later he removed
his family to a property at Inman Valley
where he died at the age of 73.
In 1875 his son, Henry, purchased land
on \ orke Peninsula. This original pro-
perty is still held by the family. Henry
mat ried Harriett Brundell of Bald Hdl and
there was a family of John, Ann, Fanny,
Mary, Edith, Charles, William, Clara
(deceased), and Howard (deceased), John
the eldest son was born in 1870 and after
finishing his education joined his father
with whom he stayed until his marriage
to Mary Giles, daughter of the late Thomas
Giles of Minlaton, and their family of six
are John Howard, Clara (Mrs. Palmer),
Gwendolyn (Mrs. Brasher), Leslie (de-
ceased), Stella (Mrs. Webb), and Rex.
The property at Brentwood consists of
some 340 acres and in addition some 2300
acres are held by the family, trading as
John Boundy & Sons.
John Boundy and his sons are actively
engaged in the wheat and barley agency
business and they ship a large quantity of
grain annually from Port Minlacowie.
John Boundy takes a very keen interest in
the welfare of his district and the local
hospital of which Board he was one time a
member. Both he and his father have been
President of the Minlaton Agricultural
Society and his son, John Howard is the in-
going President. Councillor John Howard
Boundy the eldest son, is a councillor of
the Minlaton District Council and a leader
in all movements for the progress of the
district.
The family is keen on cereal growing
and won the second prize in a local crop
competition on the only occasion they
competed.
There are several grand-children, who
represent the fifth generation of the
Boundy family in Australia.


• " v. *.-. *v .Vc'V. ‘r'AVvV.v^vAJ^w-^'.' >
The late
Henry and Harriett Boundy
Mr. and Mrs. John Boundy


Introduction
The History of the Blackwoods who Settled in
Australia.
The Blackwood family being dealt
with first became connected with the
settlement of Australia in 1839, when
James Blackwood, the elder of the three
brothers who came out to Australia, arri-
ved in Sydney in that year, to be followed
in 1852 by John Hutchinson Blackwood,
the youngest of the three brothers, who
came direct to Melbourne, and later on, in
1854, followed Richard Blackwood, who
had spent nearly eight years in Canada,
joined his two brothers in Melbourne as
he thought that the prospects of success
were at that time better in Australia than
in Canada.
As the family being dealt with in this
work were very early settlers in Australia,
and dies out as regards the male represen-
tatives on the death of Robert Officer
Blackwood, the following history of it
may be of interest.
A certain branch of the Blackwood
family was first publicly referred to in the
14th Century when it was recorded that
“The Mayor of London was ordered to dis-
charge from prison one, Robert Blackwood,
a native of Scotland.” This was during the
reign of Richard II (1367-1400) when the
French and Scots made raids into England,
Robert Blackwood having been a prisoner
of war. This record is in the British
museum.
Again the records show that after the
Battle of Pinkie, 10th September, 1547,
when William Blackwood was killed, his
sons, Adam and Henry, were sent to
Paris to be educated.
Adam was described as a very
learned man, also a writer. He became
Privy Councillor to Mary Queen of Scots.
Adam’s father, James Blackwood, Vicar
of Struan in Perth, was born in 1470, and
was a landlord in the county. He married
a sister of Robert Reid, Abbot of Kinloss
and Bishop of Orkney. James Blackwood
w r as the common ancestor from whom all
the Blackwoods dealt with in this work are
descended in direct line.
Henry was a distinguished Doctor in
France, and his son was in command of
the Body Guard which escorted Queen
Mary to Scotland.
Sir Robert Blackwood, a member of the
rshire Branch of the family, bequeathed
the lands of Rodingrood to the poor of Ayr
and purchased the estate of Pitreavie in Fife,
and became Ford Provost of Edinburgh.
Branches of the family in different periods
were domiciled in Perthshire, Midlothian,
Dumfermline, Ireland and Ayrshire, and
from the latter branch were the three
Blackwoods who came to Australia.
The Marquis of Dufferin, whose ances-
tor settled in Ireland several hundred years
ago, is the head of a distinguished branch
of the same Blackwoods.
The eminent and widely known Edin-
burgh Publishers are descended from the
same forebears.
BLACKWOOD FAMILY.
Ayrshire, Scotland, was the home of
the forebears of the three Blackwood
brothers who came to Australia. Their
ancestors owned the Nether and Upper
Halls Estates from 1632, also Airds Green
and other properties, in the Parish of
Muirkirk. Later on, about 1800, “Hall”
passed by the marriage of Janet Black-
wood, an heiress, into the family of Green-
shields of Westerhouse, Kerse, and Vere-
hills, who thereafter called themselves
Blackwood-Greenshields.


Hew Blackwood, son of James Black-
wood of Middlefield, was father of the
three brothers who came to Australia;
he married Janet Richard of Auldhouse-
burn, her mother, nee Agnes Marjoriebanks,
being a cousin of the Empress Eugenie
through the Kirkpatricks of Closeburn.
Hew Blackwood eventually lived for some
vears near Kirkoswald on the Ayrshire
coast, and later settled in Ayr where he
died in 1872.
THE THREE BROTHERS WHO
CAME OUT TO AUSTRALIA AND
THEIR CHILDREN.
JAMES BLACKWOOD. Born in 1820,
died 4th February, 1881, in Melbourne.
Left Ayr for Sydney on December 17th,
1839. Later on he was chief Inspector
of the Union Bank of Australia, and then
became a partner of Frederick Dalgety,
thus establishing the wool firm known for
so many years as Dalgety, Blackwood &
Co., which in the early eighties, upon
flotation in London, became known as
Dalgety & Co. Ltd.
He was a keen sportsman and the first
Chairman of the Victoria Racing Club.
He married Eliza Hunter, daugh-
ter of Sir Robert Officer, K.C.M.G., Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly of Tasmania
and an able Doctor, and had two sons and
two daughters. His son, Arthur, succeeded
his father as head of Dalgety, Blackwood
and Company, in Melbourne, and was
appointed Managing Director and Superin-
tendent of Dalgety and Company for
Australasia on the formation of the Limited
Company. He was also first Chairman of
The Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. The idea
of a “Henley on the Yarra Regatta” origi-
nated with him, and he became its first
President when it was formed. He mar-
ried May, only daughter of Surgeon-
General Cunninghame, S.C.I. He died
without leaving any issue. His brother
Percy died in boyhood.
Jamima, eldest daughter of James, mar-
ried Arthur L. Bentley of Felton Grange,
Oswistry, Shropshire, and his second
daughter, Adelaide, married the Hon.
Arthur Cole, second son of the Earl of
Enniskillen.
RICHARD BLACKWOOD, father of
the last male survivor of the Blackwoods
who settled in Australia, was born
in Ayrshire, 1825. Left Ayr for Mon-
treal in April, 1846. Returned to Scotland
in 1853, and in February, 1854, sailed for
Melbourne. He bought Woodlands Station
on the Wimmera River in Victoria, and in
1862 sold it and bought Hartwood Station
near Deniliquin, in New South Wales,
which remained in the family until 1913
when it was sold by his sons. Richard
later on became a partner in the private
firm of Dalgety, Blackwood & Company
(now Dalgety and Company Limited) and
controlled the Melbourne partnership for
some years until he left in 1880 on a visit
to England and Scotland, where he died.
He married Isabella, also a daughter of Sir
Robert Officer. While in Canada he served
with the Military when Indian risings were
being quelled.
ROBERT, his son, married Constance,
youngest daughter of Thomas Ferrier-
Hamilton of Elderslie, New Gisborne, Vic-
toria, and Cairnhill, Ayrshire—no issue.
His wife, together with Doctor Helen Sex-
ton and three other ladies conducted a hos-
pital in Paris at their own expense during
the Great War, and received medals from
the French Government for their services.
Mrs. Blackwood was a keen golfer and
was captain at one time of the Metropolitan
Golf Club Associates and later on of the
Royal Melbourne Golf Club Associates.
(Career of Robert Officer Blackwood is at
the end of this narrative).


GEORGE, Barrister, Inner Temple,
London, married Irene, daughter of Albert
Mfiler of Toorak, and widow of the late
George Russell of Langi Willi Station
Victoria. He died in 1931. During the
Great Far, being too old, was not accepted
for Service, but he worked in London a s a
w pedal Constable and undertook other war
work at Woolwich Arsenal and elsewhere.
HARRY, J.P. for Oxfordshire, who
died in 1932, was for many years in the
Lincolnshire Militia. He served through-
out the Great War with the rank of Major.
He was present at the evacuation of Galli-
poli and took part in the Senussi campaign
in Egypt. Harry married Isla, daughter
of W. D. Mackenzie of Farr and Glenky-
likie, Inverness-shire, and Fawley Court,
Henley-on-Thames. His only son, Miles,
who served with the 2nd Seaforth High-
landers v as killed in action on the Somme
m July, 1916, at the age of nineteen (his
fiist week at the Front). The eldest
daughter, Mona, is unmarried, the second
one, Nesta, married Commodore James
Rivett-Carnac, D.S.C., R.N., and they have
two sons and a daughter.
ELIZA HUNTER married Maxwell
Fleming of Inchyra, Perthshire, Judge of
the High Court, Khartoum, Sudan, for
twenty years, who died in 1935.
Mrs. Fleming during her residence in
Khartoum successfully established an Ani-
mal Welfare League amongst the Sudan-
ese, which greatly improved the lot of all
the animals under their care.
MARY, unmarried. Interested in all
Scottish charitable and other work in
London, Boy Scouts, Disabled Soldiers,
etc. Was publicly thanked for her excel-
lent work throughout the war in caring for
the Scottish soldiers when passing through
London to and from the Front. Her poli-
tical influence in the Chelsea Electorate
has always been highly valued by the candi-
dates seeking election.
ELEANOR married the Rev. Bruce
M Ewen, Doctor of Philosophy, Minister
of St. Machar Cathedral, Aberdeen. He
was a combatant during the Great War and
invented a machine gun silencer. Major
M Ewen went to France with the Bth Royal
Scots in October, 1914, commanding a
machine gun section, and served until the
war ended. He died from the effects of
Whir Service in 1922. There is one daughter,
Marjorie IT.I). (St. Andrew’s University)
who has a teaching Fellowship in the
Department of Natural Philosphy at St.
Andrew’s University.
JOHN BLACKWOOD. Born in 1827.
Left Ayr for Melbourne on August 21st,
1852. He was a partner in McMickan,
Blackwood & Company, Steamship owners,
and in later years, when the Union Steam-
ship Company of New Zealand bought the
business, he gave up all forms of city life
and purchased Booabula Station in River-
ina, New South Wales. Later on he left
Australia and resided in England, return-
ing to Australia on a visit where he died
on 23rd January, 1908. He married Elea-
nor, daughter of the Rev. John Morgan of
Brighton, England. His only child —a son
—died in early life.
John represented Melbourne West in
the \ ictorian Parliament from 1864-7. He
was President of the Chamber of Commerce
in Melbourne in 1874. He was a member
of the Board of Management of the Scots
Church, Melbourne, in which he took great
interest, and was largely instrumental in
its erection.
The three Blackwoods, James, Richard
and John, who were the original members
of the family to come to Australia, not only
worked very hard and successfully at their
respective callings, but identified themselves
with all kinds of sport and took great in-
terest in innumerable public and political
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


matters as well as in very many charitable
movements. They were all excellent
citizens, and their readiness to assist
worthy objects, coupled with their ability,
sterling characters and keen sporting
instincts endeared them to their host of
friends.
The Career of Robert Officer Blackwood,
who is the last male survivor of this branch
of the Blackwoods either in Australia or
elsewhere.
This record is taken from “Who’s Who’
in Australia, 1935, page 117 (with certain
additions and omissions).
BLACKWOOD, ROBERT OFFICER,
born on June 24th, 1861, at Woodlands
Station, Wimmera River, \ ictoria, which
property his father then owned.
Son of Richard Blackwood of Ayr-
shire, Scotland, also Hartwood Station,
Deniliquin, N.S.W., and Isabella Black-
wood, daughter of the late Sir Robert
Officer, K.C.M.G., for many years Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly of Tasmania.
Educated Church of England Gram-
mar School, Melbourne, and Trinity Hall,
Cambridge.
Elected Member of the House of Re-
presentatives in 1902, but unseated three
months later on petition, owing to the
Electoral Act passed by the first Common-
wealth Parliament not being properly
understood by the Electors.
Formerly owner with his brothers of
Hartwood Station, Deniliquin, N.S.W.,
originally owned by his father.
Took leading part in many matters re-
lating to the welfare of the district notably
railway extension, water conservation, land
settlement, and pastoral affairs generally.
First President of the Conargo Shire
Council.
Throughout the Great War was con-
tinuously connected with different Recruit-
ing Campaigns.
President of the Employers’ Federa-
tion of Victoria for five years.
Vice-President of the Victorian and
Southern Riverina Pastoralists’ Union (now
Graziers’ Association of Southern Riverina)
for many years. Now a Trustee.
Prominently connected at one time
with different Political organisations in the
Federal sphere and in the States of Vic-
toria and New South Wales.
President of the Registered Clubs
Association of Victoria since its inception
over twenty years ago.
Trustee of The Royal Agricultural
Society of Victoria.
Member of the Focal Board of Advice
of Dalgety and Company Limited, Mel-
bourne.
A Trustee of the late Edward Wilson
Trust. (The “Argus.”)
Director of the Broken Hill Pty. Co.
Ltd., and several of its subsidiary Com-
panies.
Director, Australian Iron & Steel Co.
Ltd.
Director of The Trustees Executors
and Agency Co. Ltd.
First passenger to book a return ticket
by the England-Australia Airmail in May
1935, and to travel by it to England and
back.
Recreations: Carpentry, golf. Once a
prominent boxer.
Clubs: Melbourne Club, Royal Mel-
bourne Golf Club, St. James’ Club, London,
New Club, Edinburgh, Scotland.
Home Address: Landene, St. Kilda
Road, Melbourne.


■ rttfiw"-iii mi u ''’’■
'^SWpk
The late George Fraser.
Mr. Robert Brown Fraser.
Robert Brown Fraser of South Australia.
Robert Brown Fraser was a native of
Saltcoats, Scotland, where he was born in
the year 1832. After being associated with
commercial pursuits in Scotland he left at
the age of twenty-five for Australia, arriv-
ing in Sydney in 1857. Having spent some
time in that capital he proceeded to Mel-
bourne and joined the firm of Messrs. J. D.
McDougall, working his way up until he
became a partner in the establishment. On
the death of D. McDougall the firm was
formed into a Limited Liability Company
and Robert Brown Fraser became a Direc-
tor.
The activities of this large firm then
extended to Adelaide when an existing
business was purchased and R. B. Frasei
became manager for the South Australia
branch of Messrs. Sands & McDougall
Limited; this position he held up to the
time of his death in 1893. During that time
the South Australian branch of the business
increased enormously.
R. B. Fraser married Agnes Brown
Moir, also a native of Scotland, at the North
Melbourne Presbyterian Church and there
was a family of six—George (dec.), Jean
(dec.), Robert Brown (dec.), Edith Agnes,
Reginald and Percival Allan. R. B. Fraser
was a staunch Presbyterian and a generous
supporter of his church.
FOUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA


The late Robert Brown Fraser,


“ t IT in
“Ridge Park,” Glen Osmond.
Sometime after his arrival in Adelaide,
to which city he had become greatly
attached, he purchased Ridge Park, Glen
Osmond, an area of some 50 acres, in 1888
and his great joy was the gardens surround-
ing this wonderful old home which were
laid out in the English style and have, up
to this date, been maintained in their old
world glory.
Robert Brown Fraser was a most hos-
pitable man, an excellent host and kept open
house for a large circle of friends. FTis bene-
factions to the sick and needy were numer-
ous and generous, and his memory is re-
vered by all who knew him.
On the death of R. B. Fraser, George,
his eldest son, who had joined the business
at the age of 18, succeeded to his father’s
seat on the Board which he in turn retained
until his death. Percival, the youngest
son, took his brother’s place on the Mel-
bourne directorate of the firm. Reginald,
the third son, was a resident of London for
many years and his son, Robert Brown
Fraser, had a wonderful scholastic career
at both the Adelaide and London Univer-
sities and is now chief leader writer on the
London “Daily Herald.”
Miss Fraser still resides at the old home
“Ridge Park”, and takes an active interest
in all philanthropic movements and spends
a very busy time visiting and relieving the
many cases of poverty in the district. She
still carries on the traditions established at
“Ridge Park” by her parents. The late
Mrs. R. B. Fraser died in 1903.
Few men were better known in com-
mercial circles in South Australia than
Robert Brown Fraser and he and his family
are justly entitled to an honoured place in
the roll of “Founders of Australia.”


The Gardens at “Ridge Park”.
A View of the Drive and Gardens at “Ridge Park”.


I ... ■. V .... - •.•.•.■.•:■:•..■ ■■■■w.;.v-w~xy.<<<::yx-x*:-:<'*y .:^:^mmSi-
[If J
: —
fjm?T m " J "" N "~ m
The Trengove Family.
The Trengoves, “Fanner Park;’’ Bute, South Australia
The family has had a long association
with the State. The founder, James
Trengove, was born in Cornwall in 1841,
and arrived in South Australia in the sail-
ing ship “Coldstream.”
After some time at the Wallarroo
Copper Mines as engine driver, James
Trengove turned his attention to farming,
and in 1875 he acquired a small holding at
Barunga, and later removed to Bute in
1882, when he selected about 1000 acres.
As a farmer James Trengove had a
successful career and combined lamb rais-
ing and wool production in conjunction
with his cropping operations. He was a
man interested in public life and the wel-
fare of the community. He was an active
member of the Literary Society, local
Institute and the Band of Hope. He was an
active member of the Methodist Church,
Superintendent of Sunday School and lay-
preacher. He married in 1871, Catherine
Warren, and had six sons and three daugh-
ters. James Trengove died as the result
of an accident in 1909 at the age of sixty-
eight, and his wife in 1936 at the age of
eighty-three.
James Trengove junior, was born at
Kadina in 1873. He worked with his father
on the homestead until 1898. About this
time he took over the property now known
as “Banner Park” on his own account,
which he has farmed successfully ever since.
Like his father he has taken a keen
interest in all local affairs, especially in
connection with the Methodist Church of
which he is a lay-preacher, Superintendent
of the Sunday School and has frequently
represented the Bute Circuit at the Annual
Methodist Conference in Adelaide.


In 1912 he married Lily Treloar, and
they have a family of three, James Allan,
Ralph Treloar, and Thelma Amic.
Some sixteen years ago James Trengove
was appointed a justice of the Peace. In
public life he has taken a keen interest in
the Liberal and Country League, of which
he is the President of the local branch.
He was a keen cricketer and played
for over thirty years in the local team and
secured the first century made for the local
club. He has done much to promote this
sport in the district. Rifle shooting has
also been an interesting sport to James
Trengove. He has frequently shot in com-
petitions in Adelaide and Melbourne with
success.
The property is situated some two
miles west of Bute and is of 1048 acres in
extent and is used for mixed farming. Up
to a 30 bushel average crop has been
harvested.
His mother’s people, the Warrens,
landed in South Australia in the early
forties. Both the Trengoves and Warrens
originated from Cornwall and were asso-
ciated with Wallarroo and Burra Copper
Mines respectively.
The children on the Warren side repre-
sent the fourth generation, and the third
generation of Trengoves in Australia.
Both sons were educated at Prince
Alfred College, Adelaide, and the daughter
at Methodist Ladies’ College, Adelaide.
Allan, like his father, is a keen
cricketer playing for his local side. In the
Country Carnival held annually in Ade-
laide, he has made some splendid scores,
twice topping batting averages of his team.
The Late Alfred Ross, - Merchant
The late Alfred Ross, a native of Ton-
don of Scottish parentage, came to Australia
in the year 1842 and landed at Sydney town
holding a Power of Attorney on behalf of
a well-known merchandising house of Lon-
don—Dunbar and Company.
At this time the newcomer was twenty-
five years of age, so that it must have been
apparent even in his young days that he
possessed the necessary qualifications for
a successful business career for one of his
years to have been entrusted with such
responsibilities.
Within a short while, however, Mr. Ross
proceeded to Melbourne and entered into a
partnership with W. Westgarth, the two
founding a Merchandising House which was
destined to become one of the leading busi-
ness institutions of that city. It was later
converted into the firm of “Wetsgarth, Ross
& Spowers” when Mr. Ross’ brother-in-law
joined the firm. At a yet later stage, Mr.
Wesgarth retired and returned to England
when his name was expunged from the
firm’s name, which then became “Ross &
Spowers,” having their warehouse in Market
Street, Melbourne.
The late Mr. Ross remained in the
business until his retirement in the early
nineties of last century and ultimately
passed away in 1896. He married Miss
Elizabeth Spowers, of London, whilst on a
visit to mutual friends in Tasmania, namely
the Johnstone family (of the firm of John-
stone and Wilmont, Launceston) whom he
had known in London.
From this union there was five children
in all, of whom Annie, Lizzie and Alfred
George reached maturity. Of these latter,
Miss Annie Ross, of Munro Street, Arma-
dale, Victoria, is the sole survivor, whilst
Miss Dorothy Jean Ross, now Head Mis-
tress of Melbourne Church of England
Girls’ Grammar School, who is in residence
with her mother at The Avenue, Windsor,
Victoria, Mrs. Charlotte Ross; is the only
member of the third generation of this fine
old pioneer family.


I A * |l\
|. IS •--. ■ a , %'
f*
i- " %.
I - % Vm •
m \V I ilk “f f |
wk w I ft. : ftHMk
: %
m #
. *
/ • ■ |p ' * ff ‘
m \
.£ \ '
’
- ‘ }
• ' J
The late Alfred Ross.
It is of distinct interest to place on
record that the late Mr. Ross owned the
original Orrong Estate of 125 acres in
Toorak, having purchased same from the
celebrated Mr. Rae, who was reported in
the early days to have “bought Toorak.”
I'he present Clendon Road was once the
driveway up to Mr. Ross’ home.
Again, it is with pride that the family
can claim that the Founder of their line
The late Mrs. Elizabeth Ross
in Australia donated the land to Bishop
Perry on which the now famous St. John’s
of Toorak stands. He was a Commissioner
of the State Savings Bank and a Director
of the Northern Insurance Company for
many years. He was also for many years
the Auditor for the St. James’ Cathedral
at the corner of Collins and William Streets
Among his social activities he was a res-
pected member of the Melbourne Club and
a Life Member of the Athenaeum.


y _, v
jjapL
lli. m H
** ■ **
«■ «p. »
J 1
Iil i 1
J. >-. % ■ 1
> - | |:- : ||. xv Tj|: ,.J|\
Mrs. E. J. Anderson
The late E. J. Anderson
Mrs. E. J. Anderson
Mrs. E. J. Anderson, the fifth child,
Edith Alice, of Henry and Harriet Boundy,
was born at Brentwood, Yorke Peninsula.
In 1900 she married Ernest James, son of
Archibald and Ann Anderson of Pickering,
Yorke Peninsula, whose father came from
Scotland to South Australia in 1837 in the
ship “Surrey.”
This family has had nearly one hundred
vears association with the State. Mr. E.
(. Anderson who was educated at Stans-
bury school and \\ ay College, latei took
up farming at Curramulka, where he entei ed
whole-heartedly into movements for the
advancement of the town and district.
A family of six children, Clarice, Mrs.
A. Hanson of Westbourne Road, Adelaide;
Marjorie; Claude Leonard; Dorothy; Elsie
and Winnie; were reared. Claude was
educated at Unley High School and Prince
Alfred College and then went to the Ade-
laide University, graduating as Bachelor of
Medicine and Surgery in 1933. He is now
practicing in Perth, Western Australia.
The family retired to Adelaide from
Curramulka in 1921 and Mr. E. J. Anderson
died in the same year. The children rep-
resent the fourth generation of the Ander-
son and Boundy families in South Australia.
Dr. C. E. Anderson


Charles Henry Boundy
Charles Henry Boundy, “Hardwicke,”
Brentwood, South Australia, second son of
Henry BoUndy, was born at Brentwood in
1880, and after finishing his education
locally entered farming and grazing pur-
suits under his father, and has been en-
gaged in same ever since.
He married Mabel Maud Plummer,
daughter of George Plummer of Cobowrie.
Their family consists of Henry George,
Howard Wellesley David, Gordon Charles,
Ivy Maud (Mrs. Ralph H. May) Desma
Eleanor Harriett and Phyllis Mary. Ivy
Maud married R. H. May and has a son,
Kenneth Charles; Henry George married
Miss Whitehorn of Brentwood and has a
daughter, Shirley Dawn ; H. W. D. married
Constance Jean Mold den of Adelaide and
Gordon Charles married Muriel Ruby
Eichner of Yorketown. The grand-children
are the fifth generation of the Australian
branch of the Boundys.
“Hardwicke,” the property is situated
two miles from Brentwood and comprises
some 1700 acres used for mixed farming.
An average crop of 7 bags of wheat and
barley is harvested, and Merino sheep and
fat lamb raising are combined with crop-
ping. C. H. Boundy has been a councillor
of the Warooka District Council and still
takes a keen interest in promoting the pro-
gress of his district He was a founder of
the Stansbury Butter Factory, which is one
of the most prosperous concerns of its type
on the Peninsula. He was President —like
his father and brother —of the Minlaton
Agricultural Society and as a committee-
man retains his active interest in its work.
His father was a Founder of this society.
POUNDERS OF AUSTRALIA.


|| | - ■ . ■ ■ ■ j | «/,.i;-- ..s;; . }
I My W G BOUNDY ah' sons" |
V,ttlAM LL0Y ° I ' ‘ "" | \QRM>N MQVVAPO |
William George Boundy
William George Bouncly of “Hillcrest,”
Brentwood, third son of Henry, was born
at Brentwood in 1882, and after learning
the art of farming under his father, took
over his own farm near Brentwood. His
wife was Alice Hurrell, daughter of Isaac
Hurrell of Inman Valley, whose father was
an early pioneer of the State. The child-
ren of William and Alice Boundy are Nor-
man Howard, William Lloyd and Edna
Eileen. Mrs. W. G. Boundy died in 1933.
“Hillcrest,” the property of W. G.
Boundy consists of some 1590 acres and an
additional area of 1061 acres is held at
Warooka. “Hillcrest” is recognised as
one of the best farming properties in the
district and W. G. Boundy has won an en-
viable reputation both as a cerealist and
studmaster. In local crop competitions he
has won three firsts, two seconds and two
thirds for wheat. Up to 40 bushels to the
acre have been harvested. The "Hill-
crest” Clydesdale Stud is well known, and
the present sire “Flash Mac” is a grandson
of that celebrated imported horse “Flash-
dale.” The mares are all bred on the pro-
perty and the progeny are eagerly sought
after. The two sons work on the proper-
ties in conjunction with their father. “Hill-
crest” is situated on the main Minlaton-
Yorketown Road and commands a wonder-
ful view of both the east and west coast-
lines of the Peninsula.
Few families have had longer con-
tinuous association with the district than
the Boundys who, with their practical con-
tributions to the advancement of the science
of agriculture have won, through five
generations, an honoured niche in the roll
of “Founders of Australia.”


I ’ ■ J ~
GtORGE BR!NK ' 5RTH p " M L ~P. BRIN>Tw^^H
The Brinkworth’s of Brinkworth
The late George Brinkworth, of
“Willowdene,” Brinkworth, was a son of
the late Mr. Thomas Brinkworth of Saddle-
worth, who was one of the first settlers of
the Province, arriving in 1839. After re-
siding for a time at Walkerville, father and
son visited the Victorian goldfields, Mr.
George Brinkworth remaining there for
some three years. Upon his return he
engaged in farming pursuits for a time at
the Lower Light, and afterwards on a pro-
perty acquired by his parents near Manoora.
In the early days he was identified with
the Barrier, where he sank the Brinkworth
Well. He lost a considerable amount of
stock in this district during the big drought
and some years later in the seventies took
up land on his own account at Mount
Templeton, which he resumed after a trip
to the Northern Territory about 1872.
Subsequently Mr. Brinkworth resided
near Prospect for a short time, and then
came to the locality which now bears his
name, where he purchased a property from
Mr. C. B. Young. The country at that
time was only just opened up and Blyth
was the nearest railway station. Mr. Brink-
worth was married in 1875 to \\ ilhelmina
Frederika Louisa, daughter of the late Louis
Belling of Bismarck, Mount Templeton, and
has one son and two daughters.
Mrs. Brinkworth’s parents came to
South Australia from Tagaminda, near
Berlin, in 1850 and settled at Gawlcr River,
proceeding from there to Concordia, near
Gawler. In 1868 they took up their resi-
dence in the Mount Templeton district,
where they were amongst the first settlers.
Mr. Belling died in 1905
The two surviving daughters of George
Brinkworth, Louisa Doris and Frederika
Alice are now living in retirement at St.
Peter’s, Adelaide.
This family has had nearly one hundred
years association with the State and are
truly pioneers in every sense of the word.


The late Henry T. Morris, J.P., Kapunda,
South Australia.
Henry Thomas Morris, J.P., was born
at Gravesend, England, in 1823 and received
the earlier part of his education at home,
and completed it here under the tuition of
the late Mr. T. R. Stow. He arrived in the
country by the ship “Buffalo” on December
28th, ’ 1836, with his uncle Captain
(later Rear-Admiral Sir John) Hind-
marsh, who was the first Governor of the
Colony. Mr. Morris had the pleasure and
honor of seeing the flag hoisted on the day
of the proclamation of the Colony. Pie
helped build the first Government House,
which was constructed of reeds. In 1843
he entered upon pastoral pursuits, and
formed stations at Encounter Bay and Gui-
chen Bay. On the news of gold being
found in California he went across to try
his fortune at the gold fields in 1859, and
stayed there for about two-and-a-half years.
Shortly after his return to the Colony, he
was appointed Government Sheep Inspec-
tor, and two years later was raised to the
Chief Inspectorship for the Colony, an office
which he retained for thirteen years. Dur-
ing this time he was successful enough to
effectually eradicate the disease known as
“Scab” from the major portion of the sheep
in the Colony. In recognition of this un-
doubted great service rendered, which was
quite beyond the faithful discharge of ordin-
ary duty, a valuable testimonial was pre-
sented to him, which was signed by all the
leading squatters of South Australia, and
this was accompanied by the presentation
of a handsome gold watch, suitably in-
scribed ; a further acknowledgement in the
shape of a purse of 600 sovereigns was
made in a graceful manner. Mr. Morris
was invited on more than one occasion to
contest an electorate for a seat in the House
of Assembly, but in each instance respec-
fully declined to yield to his friends’ solici-
tations. He was placed in the Commission
of the Peace by the then Governor Sir
Dominic Daly, which was done as a com-
pliment to Mr. Morris for the services
rendered the Colony in the way we have
mentioned.
He was also connected for many years
with the District Council at Julia Creek, and
held the position of Chairman. He was
president of the Agricultural Society, and
also a member of the School Board of
Advice. Mr. Morris laid the stone of the
local hospital. He was the General Mana-
ger for Mr. Dutton, in South Australia for
a very great number of years, his residence
being at Analby Station, which was con-
sidered to be one of the finest in the Colony.
This property comprised 70,000 acres of
purchased land. They shore annually
60,000 sheep and the wool clip was exported
to the home market. Needless to relate he
won numerous medals, silver cups and other
trophies which he gained as prizes for sheep
and wool, as he had fleeces there weighing
18 pounds. He spent well over £4OOO in
the destruction of rabbits alone and com-
pletely cleared the run of them.
Mr. Morris was married in 1853 to Miss
Dee, and had three sons and one daughter
in family.
William Owen Hindmarsh Morris of
“The Pines,” Mount Barker, son of H. T.
Morris was born at Payneham, Adelaide, in
1858, and educated at St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide.
After finishing his education he joined
that well-known South Australian pastoral-
ist, Mr. F. H. Dutton, on Callana Station
where he stayed some eight years, acquiring
a thorough knowledge of pastoral work. He
then established a sheep station at Peacha-
warrina, near Maree, on his own account.
W. O. PP Morris married Fanny Eliza-
beth Jones, daughter of the late T. P. Jones,
who arrived in South Australia in 1853.
Mr. Morris retired from active pastoral
life in 1913 when he purchased “The Pines”
and is now living there in retirement.
He has always actively supported all
movements for the progress of his district
although taking no prominent part in public
life.
The Morris family has been associated
with South Australia for 100 years.


The Randells of South Australia
This family has had a long association
’with South Australia. The founder of the
Australian branch, William Beavis Randell,
arrived here in 1837 as sub-manager for the
South Australian Company. He later
became interested in pastoral life.
The late Captain W. R. Randell
J1 is son, William Richard Randell was
born in Devonshire, England in 1824, and
accompanied his father to South Australia.
After finishing his education he assisted his
father on the latter’s station property at
Mannum, and was later engaged in flour
milling at Gumeracha. In 1852 he turned
his attention to steam navigation on the
River Murray. Although at that time he
had never seen a steamboat he decided to
build a steamer for freight purposes. The
Victorian gold fields were then being opened
up and he saw visions of great trading
possibilities with the neighbouring State.
He was a born mechanic and designed and
erected the hrst boiler used on the initial
trip in the “Mary Ann”. This boiler is
now preserved in the Recreation Grounds
at Mannum.
The “Mary Ann” was the first com-
mercial steamboat to navigate the River
Murray in 1853 and to Captain W. R. Ran-
dcll must be given the credit as the pioneer
of this great venture. The first trip was to
Wall, some 12 miles from Mannum and the
journey of 24 miles in all occupied four
h ours.
Captain Randell continued his active
association with river navigation for some
forty years. On his retirement in 1892
from the river interests he devoted himself
to public life. He was the first Chairman
of the Gumeracha Rutter, Cheese and
Produce Society and in 1893 was elected to
the House of Assembly in the South Aus-
tralian Parliament representing the Talunga
District for some six years.
His name will never be forgotten on
the Murray and his pioneering work on the
Murray, Darling, Murrumbidgee and their
tributaries proved the splendid type he was
of those early settlers who gave their life’s
work for the benefit of their fellow men.
No. 1 Lock on the River Murray is
deservedly named after him. He died in
1911 at the age of eighty-seven years.
Captain \\ . R. Randcll’s surviving
children are—Mrs. G. F. Bradley, Capt. R.
M. Randell, Mrs. Edward Kinmont, Dr. A.
S. Randell of Adelaide. Michael A. Ran-
dell, son of Dr. Randell, represents the
fourth generation.


] L ROBERT NAYBALL. 2no | | ROBERT HAYBALL. 3**n
The Hayball Family of Brighton.
To appreciate the true value of such
families as the one here placed on record,
the reader is perforce compelled to try to
visualise the conditions existing in the tiny
township of Melbourne in the year 1841.
Barely could it be called a town, and, it
would be an efficient imagination which
could do justice to the conditions then
prevailing.
The Founder of the Hay ball family in
this country was the late Robert Hayball
who was born at Chard in Somersetshire,
England, in the year 1814, where he served
the rigid apprenticeship required in the
building trade of those days. He was
descended from a long line of builders, and
it was therefore natural that he should have
made a success of his life in later years in
Australia.
In 1840 he married Miss Eliza Thomp-
son, of Tiverton, Devonshire, and, in the
followng year, the newly wed couple
decided on the great adventure of setting
out for the almost unknown land of Austra-
lia, aboard the tiny sailing ship “Duchess of
Northumberland.”
On their arrival, he set up in business
in Melbourne where he continued until the
seventh day of January, 1843, when the
family moved to Brighton and in this dist-


riot the family business and home has
remained to the present day ... in addition
to ramifications which have been added
from time to time during the ensuing years.
The late Mr. Robert Hayball retired
from the business in 1882 to live privately
and passed away on the twentieth day of
September, 1887, with a name to which
honour and esteem had become attached
from his many years of honourable service
to the community. Through these years he
was responsible for the erection of many
historic buildings, including a home for the
well-known personality of early Melbourne
days—Captain McCrae —and the well-known
Apollo Hotel in Russell Street.
To the union of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Hayball there was a family of eight
sons and five daughters of whom the
eldest—Edwin —was born in Melbourne and
the remainder in Brighton. Following the
retirement of the father, the business was
carried on by Edwin, Robert and William
at the premises in New Street and, with
their thorough knowledge of the require-
ments of the trade as the years passed, they
added to the business in many directions.
A large timber yard, sawmills in country
districts, and a fine ironmongering branch
are but representative of their initiative in
addition to their building operations.
In the latter direction, many shops and
residences in Bay Street, Brighton, in addi-
tion to the fine Brighton Free Library serve
as monuments to the size and quality and
their undertakings.
Of the family of the late Mr. Robert
Hayball senior, the fourth son was Mr.
Alfred Harry Hayball (dec.), who was a law
student at the University, becoming a well-
known Barrister-at-law in Melbourne,
whilst the youngest son—Herbert Walter
was for many years with Messrs. Robert-
son and Mofifat, now in Rockbrooke Road,
St. Kilda.
At the time of our going to Press, the
business has been owned and controlled by
Mr. Robert Hayball, the third generation
of the family thus named since the year 1924
who has amply lived up to the traditions
laid down by his forefathers. Under his
guidance the undertakings have progressed
through the years and the intervening
period has seen the demolition of the old
buildings and the erection of new and up-
to-date premises which constitute a credit
to the municipality.
Mr. Hayball married Miss Mabel V.
Whittaker of Maryborough, Victoria, and
the family are in residence at the Esplan-
ade, Brighton.
It is to such families as the one here
chronicled that Victoria owes her prosper-
ous condition now prevailing, for they have
meant progress through the years now
passed.


A. Page
Abbott Family, The 311
Abbott Family, The 375
Addisson and Morphett Families, The . . . . 383
Allen Family, The . . 122
Allen, William and the late John .. .. 183
Anderson. Mrs. E. J 524
Anderson, The late Robert 293
Anderson, The Reverend John . . .. . . . . 392
Atkinson Family, The . . 456
Atkinson, The late Dr. H. L 481
B.
Balcombe Family, and late Dr. David Reid 233
Barrow Family, The 433
Barclay Family, The 490
Barclay Family, The 381
Barker and Chambers Families, The . . .. 402
Bascomb Family, The 128
Beal, The late Charles 113
Best, Sir Robert Wallace, K.C.M.G 206
Bidgood Family, The 451
Birks Family, The 369
Black Family, The . . 119
Blight Family, The 437
Blackwood Family, The . . . . , , 513
Bon, The late John 362
Boundy, Charles Henry . . . . . . 525
Boundy, William George 526
Boundy Family, The 511
Boyd, The late Alexander 303
Bower, Richard 43
Bower, The Hon. David, M.P 151
Bower, Joseph, J.P 1‘55
Bowman and Cave Families, The 505
Bray Family, The . . . 499
Brinkworth Family, The 527
Brundell Family, The . . 431
Brundell, 'Charles 432
Burke-Gaffney, The late Dr. Charles, J.P. 321
Busst, The late Thomas Walter 338
C.
Callaway, The late Alfred .. . 287
Catford Family, The . . 473
Campbell, The late George . . .. 354
Campbell, Donald and the late J. A. .. .. 161
Campbell Family, The 109
Chambers Family, The 348
Chambers, David .. .. 46
Chapman Family, The 345
Page
Clarke, Family of Thomas 82
Oleland Family, The 49
Clement, William John 397
Coghill, The late Donah} John and Mrs.
H. H. Dann 105
Cohn, The House of 326
Coulthard Family, The . . . . 449
Cowan Family, The 461
Crompton Family, The . . . . 156
'Croser Family, The 333
D.
Daniell Family, The 509
Davison Family and Francis James Leary . . 97
Daw Family, The .. 11l
Dawes Family, The . . 193
Devlin Family, The . . 235
Dorward Family, The 76
Doussa Family, The von 391
Dunn Family, The 173
E.
Eckersley, The late William 134
Edwards Family, The .. . . 95
Elliott, The late Thomas 318
Esler, The late John , 221
F.
Fisher and Suter Families, The 198
Ferguson Family, The 177
Foley Family, and late G. F. Coffey . . . . 358
Foreman Family, The 15
Fraser, Robert Brown . 517
Frame Family, The 492
Friswell, The late Richard 337
G.
Gardiner Family, The ... 57
Gehan Family, The .. 507
Giles Family, The 211
Godfrey, Frederick Race, M.L.A., J.P. .. 47
Gordon Family, The 447
Gordon Family, The 262
Graves, Thomas 305
Green, Reverend John Leigh . 266
Green Family, The 18
Gutsche Family, The 398
INDEX


H. Page
Hack, John Barton 139
Hamdorf Family, The 408
Hammill, The late William 328
Harwood, The late Thomas Charles 107
Hiawson Family, The 100
Hayball Family, The 530
Hilder, Family The 38
His cock, Thomas 158
Hobbs, The late William . . . . 355
Hope Family, The .. 376
Hopkins Family, The .. . . 204
Hughes' Family, The 70
Hull Family, The 428
Hume, Huon and Kennedy Families . . . 487
Hutchison Family, The 29
I.
Inkster Family, The 175
Irwin Family, The . . . . . . 423
J-
Jay Family, The . . 213
John, Morgan Bevan . . . . 270
Johns, The late John, and late Joseph
Monkhouse .. .. . . 317
Johnston, The late JoLn 65
Johnston Family, The . . 123
Johnston Family, The 121
K.
Keck, The Hon. Herbert, M.L.C 331
Kenyon, Alfred Stephen, J.P 252
Klem Family, The 484
Krichauff, Friedrich F. H. W 387
L.
Lambrick, The late Richard 286
Lambrick, Nicholas 268
Lawson Family, The 465
Lewis and Argyle Families, The 357
Linklater Family, The 189
Longden, The late Captain Duncan . . . . 385
Longhurst Family, The 273
Love Family, The .. 496
Low Family, The 438
M.
Mackay, The Hon. Angus . . 368
Mackinlay, The late George 32
Malpas Family, The 86
Markham, The late Dr. William .. .. .. .. 245
Page
Mathison and Stewart Families, The .. .. 435
Maxwell Family, The 455
Mayo Family, The 360
Mcßain, John Norman, • • .. 8
Mcßean Family, The .. 279
McKenzie Family, The 255
McTaggart Family, The 3
Mein, The late George Augustus, M.D. Kdin. 248
Middleton Family, The . . . . . 88
Mills, The late Charles 243
Milne, The House of .. .. 52
Milne Family, The .. . . 167
Milne, F. Kenneth 217
Moller, The late Christian Julius .. .. .. 255
Mollison, The late Alexander and Crawford 342
Morgan Family, The 239
Moriss Family, The 26
Morris, The late Henry T . . . . 528
Moseley, James Grey, J.P 77
Mudge Family, The 126
Murray Family, The 33
N.
Neilson Family, The 14
Newman, The Family of H. A 168
Newman, The late George Charles 229
O.
O’Halloran Family, The 91
O’Shanahan Family, The . , 67
P.
Paltridge, John, J.P . 30
Paterson Family, The 479
Penrose, Paul Stephen 399
Piggott Family, The ...... 388
Pike Family, The 209
Pinkerton, James 40
Player Family, The 347
Pomeroy, The late Redmond Nicholas .. .. 498
Porritt, The late Frederick 260
Price, Charles 23
Price, late Colonel Thomas, C. 8., U.S.O. 202
Price, The late Colonel John Longville, V.D. 241
Price Family, The 427
Pulteney-Mein, William .. .. 394
INDEX —Continued.


INDEX —Continued.
R. Page
Randell Family, The 529
Richardson Family, The 10
Richardson, The late Hon. H. F., M.E.C. 148
Robertson, The late Thomas 201
Robinson, The late George • 223
Ross, The late Alfred ’522
Russell Family, The • • • 418
Rust, The late Thomas Holyoake 302
Ryan, The late Charles and Major-General
Sir Charles Snodgrass, 488
S.
Sandland Family, The 468
Seymour Family, The 501
Sheridan, Patrick . . 132
Sherriff, James 379
Sherriff Family, The 208
Stephens, William John, J.P .. .. 463
Stevens Family, The 417
Stevenson Family, The 284
Smith Family, The 36
Smith, Rev. Sydney Herbert, M.A., B.D. . . 494
Smith Family, The .. 414
Smith Family, The 470
Stirling Family, The 401
T. Page
Taheny Family, The 353
Tennant Family, The .. .. 295
Thomson Family, The 190
Thomas, The late William Charles . , . . . . 334
Trengove Family, The 521
Tucknott Family, The 81
Turner Family, The 73
W.
Waite, Peter 257
Wallis, Alfred E 324
Waters, The late E. and late E. N., . . .. 497
Weedon, The late Hon. Sir Henry, K. 8.,
M.L.C., and late Cr. J. H. McCarron .. 289
White, Mrs. E. 1 61
Wilson, The late Hugh May 130
Wilson, The late William 145
Worland Family, The 364
Wragge, late Thomas and Mr. T. G. .. . 225
Z.
Zwar, The late Michael and Mr. H. P 250


Wholly set up and printed in Australia
by GEO. A. LIST & SONS Pty. Ltd.
140 Little Malop Street, Geelong, Victoria,
for the Corio Press.


.
N
-O I






3150B023032253
I®
• , j. ' \ ' ; 1 , |
m m ; - - niniif' TJ^ l) «iir in in r~n"r iinirTrirr m — r mmmmmsm3


''Srt&K, B -Jl-s'*/ jSj
■• ' -• /■' .-,‘; ’ : >' ; ’ ■
• ■ ■ ■
iV. i •■■ •. ,*'/ ,
• ■, '•; - ’/.'- ■' * ■
...
Sills
: ; -. ‘ ■ . . ’ : . * . ;:.'. _ '■ . : .- ? --\ ' . - v v j
Sftj Ir&wl&v. !. ■
iV.v! \&lVv av. ■. ,
