

THE
Jlrdimatisatioa of Animals:
i
©
T
A PAPEE
i
?
0
i
©
T
0
HEAD BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF ARTS, LONDON.
i
1
i
©
?
DR, F. BUCKLAND, M.A.
0
i
©
T
0
i
®
f
|Up«Mislj£b Jtrjr t\it Hoticfji of Victoria.
J MELBOIJENE:
I
T WILLIAM GOODHUGH & CO., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE EAST.
0
PEICE SIXPENCE.


. •
\


ACCLIMATISATION OF ANIMALS:
A PAPER
READ BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF ARTS, LONDON.
DE. F. BUCKLAND, M.A.
bg % Stomfg of Hidoria.
MELBOURNE:
I
WILLIAM GOODHUGH & CO., PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE EAST.
1861.




330*9/
INTRODUCTION.
With the view of conveying information to the Australian public
on the subject of Acclimatisation, which has lately been broached
amongst us, the Provisional Committee of the Society have
decided upon the publication here of a very interesting paper read
in November last, by Dr. F. Buckland, before the Society of Arts
in London.
Inheriting a name long famous in the scientific world, Dr.
Buckland is lending to it additional lustre, by his devotion to the
cause of science. And in the most energetic and zealous spirit
he has lately addressed himself to the advocacy in England of the
vast and inviting subject of Acclimatisation. Associated with a
few gentlemen of kindred tastes, a society has recently been formed
in London, under very encouraging auspices; and papers, magazines,
&c., now teem with notices upon the subject.
Applying the arguments used by Dr. Buckland in favour
of acclimatisation to the circumstances of Australia, it is conceived
by the Provisional Committee that everything that can be said in
favour of experiments in England, can be urged here with much
more force. With an immensely wider area, a finer climate, a
more varied range, and unknown resources gradually opening up in
every direction, it is impossible to say what a vigorous prosecution
of the Acclimatisation project might do for us within even a
few years. The six colonies of Victoria, New South Wales, South
Australia, Tasmania, Queensland, and New Zealand, contain
about 1,010,667 square miles of country, or, 646,826,800 acres, a
mere fraction of which is at present converted to any useful
purpose.
Meantime, the world abounds with valuable animals, capable
of supporting themselves healthily upon that which at present
goes to waste, or is for all present purposes absolutely use-
less. On the immense arid plains of the interior, shut out from


cattle or sheep by absence of grass and insufficiency of water,
vast herds of camels might be reared, which would be of great
service for the settlers in the hotter and drier portions of the
continent.
Mr. Ledger tells us that upon one occasion his herd of Alpacas
were without water for a period of twenty-two whole days, and
that even then they rather sought to bathe than to drink; and as
illustrating the fitness of this country to that animal, he also states
that the small flock of cross-bred Llama Alpacas, now in the
Zoological Gardens at Melbourne are more healthy, and in better
condition than any that he ever saw in their own country.
In respect of game too, nature has not furnished us with any of
the Deer or Antelope tribes, or with anything corresponding to
the Pheasant, Partridge, Grouse, or Hare of other countries. Yet
many of these are already introduced, and doing well; and there
is no doubt that we could soon supply the country with everything
that could lend a zest to' rural recreation, as well as with those
things that would add to our commerce, or furnish fresh forms of
food to our people.
How encouraging then, the prospects of a vigorous effort here
of the nature advocated by Dr. Buckland in England; and with
what interest ought we to glance over the list he selects from
the very large number of valuable animals in all parts of the
world, but little known beyond the immediate localities that they
inhabit!
The paper now reprinted is not a mere, dry, scientific discussion;
but is invested with so much of a popular character as to be
almost as interesting as a novel, while containing many truths
calculated to be of the greatest value to mankind. And the
Provisional Committee of the newly formed Acclimatisation Society
request the kind attention of the public to this paper, and solicit
the co-operation of all real well-wishers to the colony towards the
object which has been entrusted to their charge.


PAPER
ON THE
ACCLIMATISATION OF ANIMALS.
By F. BUCKLANTD, M.A.,
STUDENT OP CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD, ASSISTANT-SURGEON, SECOND LIFE GUARDS.
In the present days of progressive movements we find that knowledge
of details, and experience of facts, are collected into one focus, and
made to bear upon the object aimed at by the means and operations
of societies. We have amongst us societies which take cognizance of,
survey, and reduce to practice almost every branch of human know-
ledge, whether in Science or in Art.
There is, however, one subject which until the last few months
would seem to have escaped the busy minds of our fellow-countrymen,
I mean the art and science of Acclimatisation, a term which may be
said to comprehend the art of discovering animals, beasts, birds,
fishes, insects, plants, and other natural products, and utilising them
in places where they were unknown before.
The importance of this art has not escaped our neighbours the
French ; and in Paris there has been established, since the year 1854,
a society called, “ La Societe Imperiale d’Acclimatation,” of which I
shall have more to say hereafter in the progress of this paper. But
it may be asked, what is the use of acclimatising animals in this
country 1 have we not already the best that the world can procure %
The answer is, you may think you have the best, but good is the
best, till something superior is discovered.
On 22nd January, 1860, I had the good fortune to be invited to
a dinner, which will, I trust, hereafter form the date of an epoch in


natural history,—l mean the now celebrated Eland dinner, when for
the first time the freshly-killed haunch of an African beast was placed
on the table of the Aldersgate Tavern.
The savoury smell of the roasted beast seemed to have pervaded
the naturalist world, for a goodly company were assembled, all eager
for the experiment. At the head of the table sat Professor Owen
himself, his scalpel turned into a carving-knife ; and his gustatory
“ apparatus” in full working order.
It was indeed a Zoological dinner, to which each of the four points
of the compass had sent its contribution. We had a large pike from
the west, American partridges (shot but a few days ago in the dense
woods of the transatlantic east), a wild goose (probably a young bean-
goose) from the north, and an Eland from the south. The assembled
company—the ardent lovers of Nature in all her works—most of
them distinguished in their individual departments.
The gastronomic trial over, we next enjoyed an intellectual feast
in hearing from the Professor his satisfaction at having been present
at the inauguration festival of a new epoch in natural history. He
put forth the benefits Avhich would accrue to us by naturalising
animals from foreign parts—animals good for food, as well as orna-
mental to the park. The glades of South Africa have been described
by numerous travellers as reminding them forcibly of the scenery of
many of our English parks; and here were the first fruits of the
experiment as to whether the indigenous animals of those distant
climes would do well in our own latitudes. The experiment was
entirely successful, and he hoped would lead to more, and that we
might one day see troops of elands gracefully galloping over our
green sward, and herds of Koodoos, and other representatives of the
antelope family, which are so numerous in Africa, not only enjoying
their existence in English parks, but added to the list of food good
for the inhabitants of not only England, but Europe in general.
The Vice-Chairman, the late Mr. Mitchell, then instanced the case of
the Indian pheasants already in course of naturalisation at several
points in England, and expressed his conviction that the American
partridges we had just partaken of, as well as the European Gelinotte,
would thrive well in our woods and copses, particularly in Kent, and
that there could not be any great difficulty in getting them over from
America for this purpose. Elands, since the present experiment had
become public, had been found to answer every expectation; “ they
had risen in the marketthe demand much exceeded the supply,
and there were numerous applicants for them, whose demands, he
was sorry to say, the Zoological Society could not now satisfy.
There were, however, plenty more elands in South Africa to be had


for the trouble of importing them. A fresh supply was much
wanted, and he trusted that this subject might be taken up by those
who had convenient pasture ground for them in England, and who
would be patriotic enough to further the important cause of the
acclimatisation of useful exotic animals in English parks and
homesteads.
Professor Owen himself, a few days afterwards, wrote a letter to
the Times , in which he speaks highly of Eland as a meat, and
advocates the cause of acclimatisation. These observations, both
verbal and printed, of the learned Professor made a deep impression
on all who read or heard, and I may add more especially on my own
mind, for they showed us how that science even in her gravest moods,
bends to utility, and that there was a grand uncultivated field open
to those who would take up the subject in earnest. Shortly after-
wards there appeared a remarkable article in the Edinburgh Review,
No. 224, Jan, 1860, upon the “Acclimatisation of Animals,” which
we have good reason to believe emanated from the pen of that most
accomplished and practical naturalist, Mr. Mitchell, now, alas! no
longer among us. This gentleman had evidently been struck with
the idea of forming, in England, a society for acclimatisation, similar
to that in Paris, which he had just undertaken to manage.
But before going further, I must beg to give an outline of this now
justly celebrated society, which has been published, from the pen of
an accomplished gentleman, in the columns of the Field newspaper.
We learn that the Acclimatisation Society was formed at Paris, on
the 10th of February, 1854 • that, at least, was the date on which it
took material form. It was presided over and addressed by M.
Isidore GeolFroy Saint Hilaire, who, in a speech full of good sense and
sound logic, unfolded the scheme of the society. He told them that
the association they were about to form was, up to that day, without
an example, that it was to be composed of agriculturists, naturalists,
landowners, all the scientific men, not only of France, but of every
civilised country, all of whom would aid in a work which required
the help of everbody, because it was for the good of everybody. The
prospect was, said he, nothing less than to people our fields, our
forests, and our rivers with new guests ; to increase and vary our
alimentary resources, and to create other economical or additional
products. In the vegetable kingdom much had already been done ;
but in the animal almost nothing. We have not one of those
Mammifera which are so useful to the inhabitants of Asia and
America, and to their indigenous game the French had added three
species only—the rabbit, the kid, and the pheasant. M. Saint
Hilaire then proceeded to point out that, although their ancestors had


done much for them in adding to the aboriginal stock of animals and
fowls, very few additions had been made in modern times. Im-
mediately after the discovery of America, the Spaniards added a few
birds to the European stock from the new continent, but no animal
of any use to our farms or poultry-yards.
In its first proceedings the society was very modest. At the
present time it numbers more than two thousand members, and
includes within its roll thirty-five royal names, from the Emperor of
the French to the King of Siam, from the Sovereign Pontiff to the
Emperor of Brazil. It also possesses a splendid garden, more than
33 acres in extent, in the Bois de Boulogne, and every convenience
and appliance for carrying out its principles.
The influence of the Society began to be very speedily felt, and in
1855 a report was presented to the members, from which it appeared
that there had arisen in other parts of France a desire to form
similar institutions, which were to be affiliated to the parent stem—
a movement which was thought well worth the encouragement of the
Society—which accordingly affiliated to itself the Zoological Society
of Acclimatisation for the Region of the A lps. At the same time it
took into correspondence various local and departmental agricultural
societies, and determined to enlarge its plans, so as to admit the
vegetable as well as the animal kingdom.
In the year 1858, however, it was resolved to take a step in
advance, and obtain a garden of an extent sufficient for the purposes
of the Society. Thanks to the concurrence of the Imperial Govern-
ment, and of the Municipality of the City of Paris, this was easily
managed, and a space of ground in the Bois de Boulogne, nearly
three times as large as the Zoological Gardens in the Regent’s-park,
was placed at the disposal of the Society.
Perhaps the best exemplification of the manner in which the
French Acclimatisation Society set to work, is afforded by the list of
prizes which they offered to the competition of the members in the
year 1857. It was as follows :
1. A medal worth £BO, for introducing into the mountains of
Europe or Algeria a flock of pure Alpacas (Auchenio paca.) The
flock must consist of three males and nine females at the least.
2. A medal worth £4O, for the complete domestication, application
to agriculture, or employment in towns of the Kiang (Equus
hemionus), a valuable beast of burden, of great power and swiftness,
which belongs to Thibet, or the peetsi (Asinus Burchelli), a South
African animal, nearly allied to the zebra, but much resembling the
horse. The domestication includes reproduction in captivity.
3. A medal worth £4O, for the domestication and multiplication
of some large species of kangaroo— Macropus gig anteus, M. faliginosus


or some other species of a similar size. The winner of this prize
must possess, at least, six specimens, and must have bred two
generations in domesticity.
4. A medal worth £6O, for the introduction and domestication of
the Australian emu (D remains Novae Hollondiae) , or the American
ostrich (Rhea Americana) . To this are attached the same conditions
as the preceding prize.
5. A medal worth £4O, for the domestication of the great bustard
(Otista tarda). To obtain this prize six adult specimens must be
produced which have been reared in domesticity.
6. A medal worth £2O, for the domestication and acclimatisation
of some new bird of game. Exception taken against all those birds
that will injure crops. [Which exception, if severely construed,
seems to us as tantamount to a prohibition.]
7. A medal worth £2O, for the introduction of an eatable fish into
the sweet or brackish water of Algeria.
8. A medal worth £4O, for the complete acclimatisation of some
new species of silkworm producing silk that may be spun.
9. A medal worth £2O for the acclimatisation in Europe, or in
Algeria, of some wax-producing insect, not a bee,
10. A medal worth £2O for new varieties of the Chinese Yam
(Dioscorea batatas) superior to those which have already been obtained
and easier of cultivation.
11. A medal worth £6O for the introduction, cultivation, and
acclimatisation of the quinine (Cinchona) in Europe, or any of the
European colonies.
To this list was added, by the private enterprise of M. Chagot, a
member of the society, a prize of £BO for the domestication of the
African ostrich (Struthio camelus) in France, in Algeria, or in
Senegal, it being necessary to produce from two or more ostriches at
least two generations, and at least six specimens hatched in a state of
domestication, the method of reproduction being as explicable as that
of any other bird in the poultry yard.
Thus, we find that in its earliest operations the society, paid the
greatest attention to increasing the vegetable wealth of the country,
not forgetting meanwhile, its principal and even more important duty
—that of gaining acquisitions in the animal kingdom.
The proceedings of this valuable Society are now published
monthly, and we find in these pages many articles of the most valu-
able description on the details of acclimatisation; correspondence
from all parts of the world, and references to books which bear upon
the subjects undertaken, I have not space for analysis of the various
and important branches of human knowledge, which, but for the
efforts of this society, would most probably be lost to the public
welfare.
This, then, is an imperfect outline of the plan of the society which
Mr. Mitchell left us to superintend. He has, however, left us a


valuable legacy of the before-named article in the Edinburgh Review,
in which he seems to have put forth his ideas of acclimatisation, as
applied to our own country; and as this paper contains so many
valuable hints from long experience, that experience I feel it incumbent
upon me to put forth in many of the ideas as to details, that honour
should be given where honour is due. He begins with a passage
from Lord Bacon, who, among the inventions of the island Altantes,
shadows forth the practice of acclimatisation, in the following words ;
“We have also parks and enclosures of all sorts of beasts and
birds, which we use not only for view or rareness, but likewise for
dissections and trials, that thereby we may take light what may be
wrought on the body of man 5 wherein we find many strange effects j
as continuing life in them, though divers parts, which you account
vital, be perished and taken forth ; resuscitating of some that seemed
dead in appearance, and the like. We also try poisons and other
medicines upon them, as well of surgery as physic. By art, likewise,
we make them greater or taller than their kind is, and conti ariwise
dwarf them and stay their growth. We make them more fruitful
and bearing than their kind is, and contrariwise barren and not
generative. Also, we make them differ in colour, shape, activity,
many ways. We find means to make commixtures of divers kinds,
which has produced many new kinds, and them not barren, as the
general opinion is We have also particular pools, where we
make trials upon fishes, as we have said before of beasts and biids.
We have also places for breed and generation of those kind of worms
and flies which are of special use, such as are with you your
silkworms and bees.”
Having enumerated the various so-called zoological gardens in
Europe, Mr. Mitchell states of them that they have addressed them-
selves rather to mere exhibition than to reproduction and acclimati-
sation, and then startles us with the astonishing fact that since the
Christian era the only additions to our catalogue of domesticated
animals, have been four in number, viz.
In 1524 the turkey.
In 1650 the musk duck.
In 1725 the gold pheasant.
In 1740 the silver pheasant.
Here, then, is an answer to the question of the sceptic who believes
we have the best of everything; and if he be a gastronome, we
appeal to that love of good feeding which we all have more or less, and
ask him, if it were not for the acts of acclimatisation which took
place in 1524 and 1725, what would he have for dinner on Christ-
mas-day to face the roast beef, and where would his pheasants be
which he takes so much pride in preserving in his coverts.
Now if we were to order a taxidermist to set up and prepare a series
of all the animals we use in England, whether for food or for orna-


merit, we should, 1 think, state that they might be all placed in a
comparatively small space. But let us walk along those marvellous
galleries of the British Museum which are devoted to zoology, and
we shall then see how plentifully the world is stocked with life, and
how little use we have made of that life ; nay, we may go even to
the geological gallery and find the bones of creatures which have
long been extinct in this country, but whose representatives still en-
enjoy life in distant climates.
In fact, to reduce this matter to figures, the learned President of
the Acclimatisation Society in Paris tells us that the world furnishes
a list of no less than one hundred and forty thousand animals, and
out of this vast catalogue we limit our attention to the small number
of forty-three.
I now propose to examine into this catalogue of animal life, and
to see which among the numerous individuals composing it we can
point out as likely to be of future use to us. I shall not do this at
random, but taking as my guides the observations of Mr. Mitchell,
in the Edinburgh article, and also the guide of the gardens of the
Zoological Society of London, I shall endeavour to point out those
animals and birds which from actual experience have been proved to
live in this country, and also to multiply their species. There being
no reason why, having once bred, they shall not breed and multiply
again.
THE ELAND.
To begin with what may well be called the most noble, the largest,
the heaviest, and the most useful of the deer tribe, we may well
instance the eland, of which I have the opportunity of showing you
a magnificent head, through the kindness of Mr. Roberts, furrier, of
Regent-street. As Mr. Mitchell justly observes ; —“The eland is the
(jihiev pav excellence of the South African wilderness, his brisket is
“ the dainty bit they set before the king.” Every travelling sportsman
in Cafffaria agrees upon the fine quality of this meat, and a trial
made in England in the beginning of last year, under very unfavourable
circumstances, fully confirms all that they have said, for the eland is
no longer exclusively African.”
In the catalogue of the animals living at Knowsley when the late
Earl of Derby died, in 1851, figured five elands, two males and three
females, one of which had been born there. The Zoological Society
succeeded to this little herd by bequest. The noble collector had
been their President for more than twenty years. He had witnessed
the decline of the establishment in the Regent’s-park to all but


inanition in 1847 with regret, and had rejoiced in the subsequent
resuscitation which the Council, in their last report, have candidly
and handsomely acknowledged to be due to the exertions and ability
of their former secretary, Mr. Mitchell. Desirous of marking his
sympathy with this management, Lord Derby directed that whatever
group of animals should be considered most eligible for the
purpose of acclimatisation, at the time of his death, should be
transferred from the Knowsley collection in its entirety to the
Society’s possession. By the advice of Mr, Mitchell, the elands were
most judiciously chosen, and the result has justified all the expec-
tations which he formed of them. The progress of this acclima-
tisation, which is now perfected, is related in a short paper published
in the “ Bulletin de la Societe Imperiale d’Acclimatation,” and
subsequently noticed in the report of the Society, read at their last
anniversary. It appears, from the table given in this document, that
up to the 29th of April last twenty eland calves had been produced
in England from the Knowsley stock, independently of any which
may have been obtained from three of the earliest born females,
which were exported to the Continent. If the whole number
had been kept together up to this time, as was, we believe,
the intention of Mr. Mitchell, the united herd would not count less
than thirty head. With such a commencement, it is clear that the
progress of this interesting labour would have gone on much more
rapidly ; and that the next five years, instead of ten, would have
made the eland not uncommon in our parks.
The merit of the first step towards the acclimatisation of the eland
in England is incontestibly due to the late Lord Derby, More than
twelve years ago his first importation arrived. They bred } but he
unfortunately parted with a male. Accident reduced his stock to a
single female, who remained barren. Nothing discouraged, he
recommenced, and in 1851 the animals, so soon transferred to the
Zoological Society, arrived —the female in February, the male in July.
They were young, and their first calf was not born until 1853 —since
then the work has proceeded with great success.
Herds of this noble antelope have been found at Hawkstone, by
Viscount Hill; at Taymouth, by the Marquis of Breadalbane ; and
at Tatton, by Lord Egerton. The stock of the society is still very
strong and vigorous, and will, if well managed, continue to supply the
nucleus of future home-bred herds—for which applications are
constantly made—for years to come.
Lord Hill was the first to profit by the opportunity offered by the
society, and he has no less than eight of these animals roaming in his
deer park, after having slaughtered a six-year old male for the table


in January last. Though anything but fat, this first essay of the
quality of English eland venison satisfactorily corroborated the
character unanimously given to it by African sportsmen, travellers,
and colonists; the verdicts were taken in not a few gastronomic
laboratories —’royal, noble, and scientific.*
Nothing can be more stately than the eland, leading out his family
along the lovely slopes of Hawkstone, where “ a great rocky ridge
rises in the midst of the park, and stretches nearly through it,
affording every variety of shelter. There the pale tawny flanks of
the antelope glisten in the morning light; infinitely surpassing the
dun deer in colour, while they rival them in grace, and their great
size makes them immediate objects of attention. Their clean small
legs, full of power, push them over hill and dale at a tremendous
pace; and if an obstacle opposes, their faculty of*ieaping is almost
incredible compared with their weight.”
In order to bring the information relative to the breeding of the
eland up to the last moment, I took the liberty of writing to Lord
Hill, who most kindly sent me, a day or two ago, the following
particulars:—“ The elands are going on very satisfactorily, notwith-
standing the wet and cold they have been exposed to during the
last summer, having no shed or indulgence of any kind since they
were turned out in the park in May; they are, however now in a
large paddock with a shed in it. I have been most successful in
breeding and rearing them, not having lost one. I have now six
females and three males, and I hope four of them are in fawn, which
win make a good herd next season.” By the kindness of Mr.
Bartlett, I am enabled to give the present stock of elands in the
Zoological Society’s Garden, viz.:—five females and one male, all
doing well, and in good health.
* The following is a note on eland and eland venison, by the Hon. J.
Berkeley The elands are at present in a paddock at laymouth Castle, in
the park’ of the black deer. They do very well; and there are at this
moment two young ones bred there, who seem to be perfectly acclimatised.
There is no sort of reason why they should not do well in all our parks,
chases, and forests, as, when at large, there would be no more danger in
them to man than in the red deer. As to the editorial remark appended to
the question asked by A. B. in the last Field , the trial at the dinner alluded
to of the flesh of the eland was not a fair one; the eland then dressed was
not in season, and therefore no decisive opinion could have been formed as to
fat flesh or flavour. In passing, I would observe that it is confinement or
being in a half-tame state, that makes animals dangerous to man. The
common fallow deer is so when reared by hand. The bison, the eland, the
wapiti the elk, the American antelope, if acclimatised and permitted to run
wild in large parks or forests, would fly the presence of man; and my opinion
is that the elk, from his knowledge of and ability to clear away the snow,
would thrive in the Highland deer forests. These, and thousands of other
animals and birds, domestic and wild, might be made available to the United
Kingdom by the labours of the Acclimatisation Society.


Here, then, we have good evidence that elands will do well in this
country. Let us hope that some day they may become so common
as to be used for ordinary butcher’s meat.
After the elands, I must not omit to mention the smaller of the
antelopes. I may mention the Leucoryx, the Gnu, the various kinds
of gazelles, and several others, many kinds of which I am enabled to
show this evening through the kindness of Mr. Bartlett and Mr.
Leadbeater, Those who wish to see admirable and spirited pictures
of the heads and horns of these can do so by referring to Routledge’s
Natural History, by the Rev. J. Wood, parts xiv., xv., xvi., Yol. I.
Antelopes are delicate things to rear, but yet we find recorded that
the harnessed antelope “ breeds freely in confinement,” as will most
probably the Boschbok. The springbock will also live in our parks,
and we find a hist Cry of them recorded as living in Lord Hill’s park,
by Mr. Mitchell.
Among the antelope family, as an ornamental animal nothing can
excel the eland, except perhaps the Koodoo, which under similar
treatment might be acclimatised with equal certainty. As an addition
to our economical resources it appears to be in no way inferior. It
combines extraordinary quality of flesh with rapid growth, fecundity,
and hardiness, in which it is not exceeded by our best short horns,
which on the other hand very often fail to reproduce, through excess
of fattening property, or from too closely related blood. The great
difficulty in these antelopes is their liability to cold, but there is no
reason why with shelter and care an attempt should not be made to
keep them.
I now pass on to the deer tribe. We know how many thousands
of pounds are annually expended in preserving the deer forests of
Scotland, and with what result. Compare the comparatively pigmy
heads which are brought home by our sportsmen with the heads of
deer that do not live, in these days of steam, an immeasurable
distance from the deer forests, and are by no means difficult to procure
through the proper channels.
If we examine an Ordinance map, how many green spots shall we
observe indicating the parks of nobleman and rich proprietors, many
admirably suited for deer. Now, out of the deer family, how many
are there now in England ? but three, viz., the red deer, the fallow
deer, and the roebuck. It may well be asked how many of the deer
tribe are there on the face of the earth, and why have we so few in
England ?
The answer is given by Mr. Mitchell, who writes : — <c Out of
forty-two species of deer, exclusive of the little moose deer of Tropical
India, there is hardly one which won d not adapt itself to our seasons,”


First, as regards stags, there is no reason why the red deer of Scot-
land should not be crossed with the stag of the Odenwald, and those
that, as Mr. Mitchell says, are at home in the Woodlands of Central
Europe, and thence eastward to the Carpathians.
Then, we have the wapiti, a magnificent deer, a native of the
northern parts of America, of which I have the opportunity of show-
ing a fine head, brought by the Hon. G. Berkeley from America.
This animal, be it remarked, “breeds every year in the Society’s
Menageries,” and there is no reason why it should not be added, as
an ornament, in many of our English parks, where there is room and
proper food for it.
Then we have, in the catalogue, the Barbary deer ( Cevus-Barbarus.)
This is the representative of our red deer on the southern shores of
the Mediterranean. “ The stag and hind, now in the gardens, were
presented from the fine herd of this deer which adorn Lord Hill’s
park, at Hawkstone.”
After the Barbary deer, we find the Barasinghai Cevus Duvancellii,
first imported by the Earl of Derby, a native of Nepaul and Assam.
Its winter coat is of a dullish grey, but in summer it changes to a
brilliant golden hue, which would make the barasingha the most in ■
teresting addition which could possibly be introduced into a heavily-
wooded park. Lord Hill, in a letter to myself a few days ago,
writes, “I have also a number of Barbary deer, about 16, and
Sambur (another kind of deer), in the park, and these are doing- very
well.” And then, what is most important, his lordship says none of
them appear to interfere with the fallow deer, or the other stock.
There is, besides these, a very hardy deer, which breeds well in
confinement, and whose home is in North America, I mean the
Virginian deer. This animal would do exceedingly well in Scotland,
is not difficult to procure, and is cheap in price; in fact, there is a
pair of them in London for sale at this moment. There are othe r
deer whose name must be mentioned, viz.:—a deer, nearly as large
as the Bavasongha, which is found in Yucatan; a deer from South
America (the Blastocei-us Paludosus), a hardy little species, which is
marked with a white circle round the eye. A roe, as large as a fallow
deer, the Gemul of Moteria Molina, as well as the Tartarian roe.
Next to the wapiti, in size and beauty of antler, comes the Persian
deer —Cervus Wallachii. I have also, through the kindness of Mr.
Leadbeater, a fine head of this animal to show to the Society. This
animal also will breed in England, for we read “ The animals were
ultimately sent to the Earl of Ducie, who, after keeping them three
seasons, most liberally presented them (October, 1860) to the Society.”
The two females now in the society’s possession are both accompanied


by their fawns, and there seems every probability of this fine species
being permanently established. A few weeks ago (October 8, 1860)
Viscount Powerscourt was kind enough to send me a catalogue of
the deer, &c., in his park at Powerscourt, near Dublin. This noble-
man is a most active promoter of the society, and his great success
shows how much individual exertion may do. He has now in his
park one bull nylgau, one cow ditto; two stag wapiti, three hind
ditto; one Barbary stag, one hind ditto ; one Sambur deer, six hinds
ditto; one axis stag, two hinds ditto; one male llama, one female
ditto ; one white hind ; and about thirty-five red deer ; all these are
in good health, and the nylgaus and deer breeding well.
Not many hundred miles from England lives the reindeer ; from
our earliest infancy we have heard of the great benefit the poor
Laplanders derive from it—in a domesticated state they drink its
milk ; they cloth themselves with the skins ; they eat its flesh, and
use its sinews and horns; and all the time they use it as a beast
of burthen, and drive about in sledges drawn by it. The English
sportsman derives excellent sport in pursuing the reindeer in its wild
state.
Here then is a beast which recommends itself to the owners of
parks and deer forests, to the farmer, and, I was going to say, the
cabman also. The Dutch have stolen a march upon us in this
respect, for Mr. Bartlett tells me that in a recent visit to Holland he
saw them in a state of domestication, and that they do well.
It is, I believe, an absolute requisite for the reindeer that it be not
kept on a clay soil; the soil upon which they thrive and breed in
Holland is sandy.
Who has not heard of the Moose deer, or elk of Canada, and
mentally followed the hunter in his active foot-race after the animal,
or enjoyed the scene, where in a cold frosty night, with the air so still
that a crack of a twig can be heard for half a mile, the sportsman
lies secreted, from time to time calling the moose through his trumpet
of birch bark. I show on the walls the result of this exciting sport,
a magnificent head kindly lent me by Mr. Leadbeater, and am inclined
to put the question—Why should there not be moose in those parts
of England which are suited to them ? and why should the English
sportsman have to traverse the vast Atlantic to obtain a shot at one
of these noble animals ?
It often happens that one entire race of men is, for the most part,
dependent upon a race of animals, and we have a good example of
this in the North American Indian, who derives much of his
sustenance from the great bison of the prairies. Every one has read
and heard of the vast herds of these animals that are annually


pursued and hunted down, yet seem hardly to diminish in numbers.
English sportsmen make special expeditions in search of these, and
within the last few months the Hon. Grantley Berkeley has returned
from an expedition which he undertook solely to kill these animals.
He has brought home with him the magnificent trophy which, through
the kindness of the Editor of the Field, I am now enabled to show
you. What a magnificent animal for our English parks; it is not
only ornamental, but also exhibits qualities which would in some
persons’ eyes give it greater charms. It is good to eat, and carries a
hump on its shoulders, a taste of which would be quite sufficient to
impress on the minds of our gourmants the necessity of becoming a
convert to the acclimatisation of animals.
I need not refer to printed records as to whether the bison will
live in this country or not. It is a fact accomplished. The Great
Northern Railway will, with the permission of that noble-minded en-
courager of acclimatisation, the Earl of Breadalbane, carry us not
many miles from a magnificent park where we may see the shaggy
monster of the prairies cropping Scottish grass, and watched by
Scottish keepers, and thriving well (like most foreigners) upon the
fat of our favoured land. Our worthy friend, Punch, has unknowingly
given us a helping hand in our desire to acclimatise this beast, for he
has given us a capital caricature, which not only makes us laugh, but
confirms, throughout the length and breadth of the land, the fact,
should it ever be doubted hereafter, that bisons lived in Scotland,
a.d. 1860.
I must not forget to mention in this place those noble beasts the
Aurocks, of Russia. A pair of these, as we well know, were, through
the interest of Sir Roderick Murchison, sent by the Emperor of
Russia, to the Zoological Gardens, where they might be alive now if
a murrain, which was at that time prevalent among cattle, had not
unfortunately carried them off. We trust that we may yet see
another pair in this country.
There is yet another beast that should be mentioned, the. Yak, of
Asia, of which we hear from the French Society, that a cross between
it and the cow produces a hybrid, “ a beautiful animal, which unites
the good qualities of both parents.”
From the deer tribe I now pass on to the other mammalia. And
first let us, according to the rule I have laid down, see whether we
cannot restore any of the British beasts whose bones we find fossil.
In many parts of England, in Norfolk, Suffolk, Berkshire, Cambridge-
shire, and in Scotland, we find fossil bones of the beaver ; nay,
more, Professor Owen writes, tradition refers the names and arms of
the town of Beverley in Yorkshire to the fact of beavers having


abounded in the neighbouring river Hull; and Pennant says that
two or three waters in Wales still bear the name of Llynyr-assange,
or the beaver lake. How there are situations in abundance in the
above-named counties where there is a great lake or stream, where
beavers would, I am convinced, if properly protected and looked
after, again establish their species. We all know how interesting
this pretty harmless water engineer is in his habits; the ladies know
how useful his fur is, and the hunters tell us he makes a capital dish
when properly cooked. The specimens are exhibited by Mr. Roberts,
furrier, Regent-street.
There is, I think, a vacancy in our English parks and farms for
another useful and ornamental animal, which might easily be procured
from Australia. My hearers, I see, have anticipated me when I
recommend the kangaroo to their notice. I will not dilate upon their
merits, but ask my readers to examine the flock of them at the
zoological gardens, and to hear what the able and energetic secretary
of the Zoological Society, Mr. Sclater, says about them. Bennett’s
kangaroo is the most abundant species in Australia, extremely hardy,
and much the best calculated for acclimatisation in an English park.
In favourable localities it breeds with regularity, and with very little
attention would rapidly increase in any of the Midland or Southern
counties, where the soil is dry and the character of the ground affords
shelter from the north-east. Mr. Gould asserts the excellence of
kangaroo venison as a meat for the table, and the introduction of
these animals would therefore be something more than a mere
zoological luxury. Mr. Gould has kindly lent me a specimen of this
animal. The skin makes good leather. There are many places,
he tells me, in England where it would thrive admirably.
But we must not forget to mention an animal which would be very
useful in this country, if it would live, but I fear the climate of
England is not suited for it. There is now in common use a
substance which is called “ alpaca,” and much might be written and
said upon this subject, I prefer, however, to quote the words of my
friend, Dr. Lankester, who, in his admirable lectures on the uses of
animals in relation to man,* thus writes:—
“ But I now pass to a family of animals that has recently yielded
a large increase to our cloth manufacture, I allude to the Alpaca
tribe or family, allied to the camels and dromedaries. When Pizarro
conquered Peru, he found these animals employed as beasts of burden,
and their wool used for making clothing. The Peruvian Government
has placed an embargo upon the exportation of these creatures, so that
we have only now and then seen them as curiosities in the collec-
* Robert Hardwicke, 192 Piccadilly. Price Is.


tions of our Zoological Gardens ; but in 1846, it appears, some of
this wool found its way to Bradford.
“ Por the successful manufacture of this wool, we are indebted to
the energy and enterprise of Mr. Titus Salt, who, in the application
of this material to the making of cloth, has succeeded in laying the
foundation of one of the largest manufacturing establishments in this
country, and has conferred a blessing upon his own country, as well as
the countries in which the animal is reared.
“ The length of the hair of the alpaca renders it of considerable
value for mixing with goat’s wool, silk, and other materials. There
are four forms of these animals, very distinct from each other—the
Llama, the Alpaca, the Vicugna, and the Guanaco. The Vicugna
yields very tine hair, which is very much valued, but the Alpaca
yields the most useful hair.
“ x have mentioned the advantage of acclimatising other animals.
There would be no difficulty apparently in acclimatising these animals
in Australia, though where they have been tried in this country, the
rot has seized them, because of the tenderness of their feet. A few
months ago, several Alpacas were secured, in spite of the jealousy of
the Peruvian Government, somehow or another, and sent over to Aus-
tralia, where they have arrived ; and I understand that a first crop of
wool has been secured, and that the flock is flourishing. Such
experiments as these should be more extensively and systematically
carried on, both in our country and in our colonies."
The alpacas were introduced into Australia by Mr. Charles Ledger.
His brother has been kind enough to put into my hands some papers
relative to this matter, and I trust that the particulars of this most
important act of acclimatisation may be given to the public in the
form of a book, for no one who has not read the history of these
animals can have any idea of the immense difficulties, dangers from
storm, pestilence, and famine—to say nothing of a very considerable
loss of money—which this bold and enterprising man underwent to
carry out a scheme which promises to be of the greatest importance to
the most flourishing of our British colonies.
By the kindness of a friend in Paris, I am enabled to give, from
an article by M. Dupuis, in La Patrie of Sunday last, 25th November,
a resume of the animals, Ac., now in the gardens of the Society at
Paris, and learn that they now have, for the purpose of acclimati-
sation, examples of the following, viz. : —lhe hemione j a mule
between this beast and an ass \ pigs? from China j the pecory, from
Brazil; the taper, from South America ; a flock of llamas and alpacas,
and of yaks, zebras, various kinds of antelopes and gazelles, goats,
sheep, agoutes, and kangaroos.
BIRDS.
We have not all of us got parks or large farms, but there are
thousands of persons who, as our poultry shows tell us, not only have


accommodation for the rearing and preserving of birds, but also take
great interest in their welfare. It is, therefore, part of my plan to
point out what new and interesting birds, according to the experience
of the Zoological Society, will breed, and are capable of acclimatisa-
tion in this country —many of them may almost be said to have been
partially acclimatised —but still, I give as full a list as I have been
able to get together, and in each instance I give the authority of the
Zoological Gardens. I have not included the various foreign song-
birds, which, however, might well be included in our category, as
they afford occupation and amusement to many thousands of English
men and women.
And first as regards the Pheasants, we must mention the Cheer
(Catreus wallichi). —Being presented to her Majesty the Queen, it
ived for several years in the Royal Gardens at Buckingham Palace,
and there is, therefore, every prospect of the present birds doing well
n the Society’s establishment.
The Monal ( Lophophorus impeyanus). —The rich beauty of its
plumage, its size, and the grotesqueness of its actions at particular
periods, are equally remarkable; and when we add that it seems to
be extremely apt to endure the conditions of confinement; that it
breeds without difficulty under that disadvantage in this country;
that it is perfectly capable of bearing the severest rigour of our
winter, it certainly appears that the introduction of this mountain
bird into the forests of Scotland is not only desirable, but ought ere
long to be accomplished.*
The “ Phasanus Versicolor,” from Japan. The Torquatus, from
China. It has been proved that both these birds will cross with our
own pheasants, and produce hybrids of a greater size than either of
the parents, and of a most beautiful plumage.
Continuing the pheasants. lam enabled, through the kindness of
Mr. Leadbeater, to exhibit skins of the following beautiful birds ;
The Pucrass (Peucrasia Macrolophia) , the horned tragophon (a
most desirable species for breeding), the Kalege ( Euphrocomus
alhoceratus) , the Snow Partridge ( Tetroagallus Himalayensis) , all
from the Himalayan range, and which would do well if we could
procure them, and this is by no means impossible.
The Peacock Pheasant (Polyplictwn chinguis). —Two pairs
were transmitted in 1857, from the aviaries of the Babu Rajendra
Mullick, of Calcutta, and the species having bred more than once in
the collection of the late Earl of Derby, it is extremely desirable that
this loss should be replaced.
* Mr. Gould has kindly lent beautiful skins of these two birds for exhibi-
tion, as well as of their hybrids with the common pheasant.


Then, we endeavour to purvey for the farm-yards; and, first on
the list stand the Curassows, of which we learn that they number
some dozen species, most of which have been proved to be capable
of enduring the climate of England, with moderate protection ; and
some of them have reproduced, both at Knowsley and in the possession
of the Zoological Society, The Dutch amateurs who flourished in
the last century had so far acclimatised curassows in Holland, that
they were not unfrequently brought to table j and, at the present
time, several instances are known both of curassows and guans
breeding freely in the neighbourhood of Paris.
Nor must we omit the Oscellated Turkey (Meleagrisoscellata) .
Should a sufficient number of specimens be obtained, although it is
certainly more delicate than the turkeys of Mexico and of the States,
there is no reason to fear want of success in acclimatising it.
The Gubin Colin (Ortyx cubensis), the Welcome Colin
(Ortyx noxenus), the Californian Colin (Gallipepla CaliforneaJ. —
These are all extremely prolific, and exceedingly disposed to repro-
duce in confinement; so that there will apparently be but little
difficulty in acclimatising all those species which are indigenous to
temperate regions.
The Californian colin is one of the most beautiful of the family,
and is so naturally tame, that it has been known to breed freely in a
cage, in the centre of Paris. It is perfectly hardy, and, as it is now
becoming pretty numerous in collections, the day is probably not far
distant when complete success will be attained in the experiment,
which has been already commenced by a noble member of the Society
to establish it as a game bird in this country.*
The Crested Guinea Fowl (Numida crestata ). — l mention it
in the hope that some further information, and other specimens may
be obtained, by the notice of residents in West Africa being called
to the bird, which would certainly make a very interesting addition
to our poultry yards.
A most important bird next calls for notice, viz., the Brush
Turkey of Talegalla, of which, by the kindness of Mr. Gould, I
am enabled to show you a fine skin, I have not time to give any
details of the interesting mound-making habits of this turkey, so
aptly described by Mr. Gould, in his magnificent work on “ The
Birds of Australia.” This bird has made its curious nest and reared
its young in the Zoological Gardens.
Mr. Bartlett speaks most highly of this bird ; it is very lively game and
amusing, and breeds well. One hen of his last year laid thirty-nine esnrs
and they were all hatched under bantam fowls except two or three. ’


Again, we have, as before-mentioned, the Gelinotte or Hazel
Hen, of the Germans. This would breed and do well in many parts
of England, particularly in Kent.
The Eed-backed Parrakeet and Crested Grass Parakeet.
—There is scarcely a doubt that all the species which inhabit the
cooler parts of Australia would reproduce as certainly as those which
are here mentioned, wherever space and congenial treatment can be
afforded to them.
The Wonga Pigeon (Leucosarica picata ). —Australia is rich in
pigeons, not less than twenty-one species being figured in Mr. Gould’s
work. Of these the most desirable to acclimatise in Europe is the
wongawonga, and the most graceful is the crested dove. 'I he latter
breeds very freely in confinement, when suitably accommodated.
It is not only of considerable size, but, according to Mr. Gould’s
observation, a first-rate bird for the table, possessing a whiteness and
delicacy of texture in its pectoral muscles, which are unapproached
by any other species of this widely-spread and useful family.
The Crowned Pigeon ( Goura Coronata ). —These noble birds,
although natives of New Guinea and its adjacent islands, not only
bear the vicissitudes of our climate with the protection the aviary
affords, but have almost every year re-produced in it.
And among water birds we find the following:—
The Pied Goose ( Anseranas melanoleuca). —A pair of these birds
bred in the Gardens (in the pond 29) for the first time in 1859, and
successfully reared four strong young birds.
The White-eaced Shieldrake ( Casarca cana). —Asshe is perfectly
hardy, having survived all the subsequent winters without protection,
and has laid almost every season, it is very much to be regretted that
we have hitherto been unable to obtain additional specimens.
The Bed-billed Duck ( Poecilonetta erythorhyncha) breed pretty
freely in confinement, and are very desirable additions, as they are
perfectly hardy, and require no more attention than the ordinary
waterfowl of Europe.
The Dusky Duck (Anas obscura). —It breeds without difficulty in
a suitable locality, and might easily be established in any district
where it could be preserved for the first few seasons.
The Sommer Duck (Aix spousa). —This beautiful duck is now well
known in Europe, many hundred pairs having been imported from
the United States, and almost as many bred on the ornamental
waters of this country. Like its congener, the mandarin duck, it is
arboreal in its habits, and not only builds its nest, but lives for a
considerable part of its time in trees when in a state of nature.
The Ashy-headed Goose. — (B. poliocephale). — Both of these


species are of great beauty, and are derived from the extreme southern
limit of the American continent. They are perfectly hardy, and as
the ashy-headed goose has increased rapidly since its introduction at
Knowsley, in 1849, there is little room to doubt that the Upland
goose will also, in a few years, become equally abundant in European
collections. The genus to which these birds belong is closely allied
to Bernida, which includes the well known Brent goose, and Bernide.
They are rather terrestrial than aquatic in their habits, feeding almost
entirely upon grass, which they graze with the closeness of a flock of
sheep.
The Sandwich Island Goose, —(Bernida Sandvicensis). —From
these two pairs the whole of the birds now in European collections
are descended.
The Cereopsis Goose. — (Cereopsis Novce-Hollandice). —It breeds
almost every year in the garden, laying its eggs in March, next after
the Sandwich Island goose, which is the earliest species we have.
The Bean Goose found now only wild in England, but might be
easily domesticated.
The Rock or Magellanic Goose (B. Magellanica).
The Snow Goose (Antardica), both from the Falkland Islands,
and which would breed well here.
The Black Swan, of which Mr. Gurney writes to me —“ The
pair in my possession, at Carshalton, breed regularly twice a year,
sometimes three times, and have in six years had about 131 eggs,
hatched 83, and reared about 50.”
The Black Necked Swans which have reared their young in the
Zoological Gardens.*
The Stanley Crane. — (Tetrapteryx paradisea.) —ln the rich and
varied collection of living animals which he subsequently accumulated
at Knowsley, broods of this beautiful bird were hatched out on several
occasions.
The White Stork. —(Cicmia alba.) —The white stork is one of
the most familiarly known species of European birds although in
England it has, from the changes effected by improved agriculture,
become comparatively rare.
The Mantchourian Crane. — (Crus Montignesia .) —The birds
which were taken to Paris by M. de Montigny, on his return from
China, in 1854, have not only flourished there in the most perfect
health, but have for three successive seasons made a nest and hatched
out their young. The Mantchourian crane is a favourite bird among
* For the exhibition of the skins of many of these birds I am again in-
debted to Mr. Leadbeater.


the Chinese, and I believe that a considerable number of them are
always in captivity at Pekin.
The Australian Crane. —{Grus Atistralasiana.) —It evinces great
aptitude for domestication, and is called there “the native companion,”
from the docility with which it accommodates itself to the society of
man. Lord Powerscourt does not confine his attention to mammalia
alone. He also cultivates various kinds of birds, and the following
is his list: —Pair of Polish swans ; one black-necked ditto ; one black
ditto; one ruddy sheldrake; two ditto Mandarin ducks ; one pair
Carolina ducks; one ditto Bahama ducks (and a good many of other
kinds); one pair spur-wing geese; one ditto Egyptian geese; two
ditto grey-leg geese (and several other kinds).
There is a useful bird which may suit the tastes of some persons
who have accommodation, and, I may add, wish for it; it is not very
ornamental, but it is useful; I mean the Laughing Kingfisher
(Dacleo gigantea ) which may be taken as the type of a considerable
group of kingfishers, which differ essentially in their habits from the
lovely bird which flashes like a jewel along the brooks and rivulets
of Europe. These powerful kingfishers of Australia seldom approach
the water, but live in the dry scrub, and feed like birds of prey upon
insects, reptiles, and small mammalia, instead of fish. The laughing
kingfisher is excessively adroit in catching mice, and will wait as
patiently as a cat at a hole whence he expects one to emerge. His
note strangely resembles a rude powerful laugh, and the united efforts
of the fine specimens confined in the aviary are heard far and near
every morning. The regularity with which this laughter rings through
the Australian forest at certain hours of the day, has not been
unnoticed by the colonists, and among other trivial names for the
bird, they have given it that of the “ Settlers’ Clock.”
As among the mammalia, I have endeavoured to point out a
quadruped which might again be restored to this country, so among
birds I beg to suggest that there is no reason why an attempt should
not be made to restore to those places where they once existed, that
magnificent bird the bustard. He lived here once, and that in the
memory of many persons now alive. Why should we not restore him
(and I know where to obtain specimens), and place them in the pre-
serves of Norfolk and on the plains of Salisbury ? the old sport of
coursing the bustard might again be revived, and the table might
be supplied with a fresh delicacy.
We now come to another most important branch of acclimatisation.
CULTIVATION OF THE WATERS.
No English dinner is complete without a dish of fish ; and fish


diet is in itself most digestible and nourishing, particularly for in-
valids. There are indeed many races of men whose sole sustenance
is fish. Again, consider the thousands of persons whose sustenance
depends upon the capture of fish. It is marvellous to behold the
fleets of fishing-boats that annually follow the herrings in their
migration along our costs, and financial returns of this fishery. With
reference to fish-culture in the sea, we can do but little, except as
regards one important fact, which was not long ago mooted in the
Times, viz., the necessity of looking sharply after the size of the
meshes of the nets, to prevent the destruction of the young fry, but
if we cannot do much for fish, surely there are such things as what
are commonly called shell fish; need I name the oyster and the
muscle. As regards the oyster and the muscle, I have reference to
several published facts to show that the cultivation of those articles
of human food not only answers but even pays.
We then come to the cultivation of fresh-water fish, and this may
be regarded in two points of view: —First, as regards the actual use
of fish for food ; secondly, as regards sport, and regulations for the
anglers. Many persons laugh at the angler, and define him, accord-
ing to Dr. Johnson’s idea, as “ a fool at one end, and a rod at the
other;” but, mark you, we do not live in Dr. Johnson’s time, Man’s
instinct for preying and destroying creatures, ferce nature, when
unable to develop itself in fox-hunting or partridge shooting, mani-
fests itself in the love of angling.
This noble art has now reduced its maxims to a science. Hundreds
of brains and hands are at work on this subject, whether it be fly-
fishing or bottom-fishing ; and in London alone there are fishing-tackle
makers innumerable, whose business would cease to exist if they
were not well-supported; and within the last few months a most
important movement has taken place as regards the Thames, for by
the exertions of the Thames Angling Preservation Society and their
secretary, Mr. Farnell, the practice of netting has been abolished, and
the fish are now protected from Kcw-bridge to the .City stone beyond
Staines-bridge, and even higher up the river. I hear that netting is
gradually becoming abolished. Besides this, by the kindness of the
Duke of Rutland, the Right Hon. Sidney Herbert, and others, several
trout and grayling have been introduced at various points of the river.
It is a happy provision of nature that there is a fish to be found
adapted to almost any sort of water, from the lordly salmon of the
mountain torrent to the humble eel of the stagnant ditch. Why
should not we pay a little more attention to the habits of fish, and
transfer fish suited for a certain kind of water into that water, sup-
posing there to be none there already 1 Let us study the transport


of fish, and utilise waters, whether great or small, which are now
idle. The Dutchman does this ; and he plants, so to speak, his
canals with fish, and when the fruit is ripe he turns it into money.
Were it otherwise, why should we find so many Dutch jack, perch,
tench, and eels in Billingsgate Market, all commanding considerable
prices ?
Whether, therefore, we look upon fish as an article of food, or as
affording healthful sport at a cheap rate, it is necessary that we should
look to the cultivation of the waters. I had here intended to quote
a letter from Mr. Edward Wilson upon “ utilising waters,” but I
have not space for it. Ido not wish to mutilate his admirable argu-
ments. The best mode by which we can multiply fish is by the
artificial reproduction of them, a mode long practised by the Chinese,
and of late in several parts of England. Many may be inclined to
laugh at the idea of hatching fish, but I beg to put forward an
answer to them, which of all answers is the best—viz,, that if pro-
perly carried out “ fish-hatching will pay.” Mr. Wilson tells us that
“the annual value of salmon alone to Scotland is no less than
£BOO,OOO per annum, and to Ireland £300,000. With proper care
of the young fish there is no reason why this large sum should not in
time be doubled.” I have lately visited the salmon-hatching ponds
at Stormonfield, near Perth, and was surprised at the facility with
which this process is carried out. This process is also going on at
Lake Bearpot, and other places in Canada. I have also an account
of “ The French Piscicultural establishment at Huninge, near Basle,”
by Mr. Thomas Ashworth, which is supplied by the water of the
Rhine, and no less than five kinds of fish are principally cultivated
viz., salmon, trout, ombre, chevalier, and Danube salmon. From this
establishment the fish are sent all over France, and will in time pro-
duce great national results.
We have all of us heard of the attempts made to introduce salmon
into Australia; within the last few months a sum of no less than
£6OO has been spent upon the object; it has unfortunately failed, but
Mr. Lloyd, the aquarium dealer, of Portland-road, who has studied
the subject of the transport of fish scientifically, says he is convinced
that young salmon, if properly and scientifically watched during their
long voyage, would arrive in safety.
There are many persons living who can recollect salmon being
caught in the river Thames, and not many days ago a spawning fish
was caught at Erith. We hail the appearance of this fish with glee.
If one comes, why not more? Why should we not assist nature, and
hatch salmon artificially on the chance of restoring them to the
Thames, though I myself, in common with several other persons, am


sanguine enough to believe that we have more than a chance of re-
storing this noble fish to our beautiful river. Efforts are at this
moment at work to obtain from the salmon spawning beds at Perth
ova for the purpose of stocking other rivers, but I regret much to
say that the Tay Commissioners have refused applications for the
salmon ova, a fatal mistake. By giving them they would in reality
lose no more than a person who gives a light to another from his
burning candle ; and by not allowing them to be taken they derive
no advantage to their fishery, for a gentleman from Perth writes to
me “ at present we have salmon spawning in one ford from which as
many ova are destroyed by trouts as would supply all that is wanted,
and would no more impoverish the river than giving a handful of
grain out of a granary full of corn.” I trust the Tay Commissioners
will withdraw their refusals of ova, and assist, not endeavour to
arrest, the progress of pisciculture.
Of the science required for the raising fishes for the stock of home
waters, thus speaks Sir Humphrey Davy, in his delightful work
Salmonica :—“ The result is easily attained, and the difficulties are
quite imaginary. The impregnation of the ova of fishes is performed
out of the°body, and it is only necessary to pour the seminal fluid from
the milt upon the ova in water. Mr. Jacobi, a German gentleman,
who made many years ago experiments on the increase of trout and
salmon, informs us that the ova and milt of mature fish, recently dead,
will produce living offspring. His plan for raising trout from the
egg was a very simple one. He had a box made, with a small
wire grating at one end in the cover, for admitting water from a
fresh source or spring, and at the other end of the side of the box
there were a number of holes, to allow the exit of the water ; the
bottom of the box was filled with pebbles and gravel of different
sizes, which was kept covered with water that was always in
motion. In November or the beginnning of December, when the
trout were in full maturity for spawning, and collected in the
rivers for this purpose upon the beds of gravel, he caught the
males and females in a net, and by pressure of his hands received
the ova in a basin of a water, and suffered the milt or seminal fluid
to pass into the basin, and after they had remained a few minutes
together, he introduced them upon the gravel in the box, which
was placed under a source of fresh, cool, and pure water.
In a few weeks the eggs burst, and the box was filled with an
immense number of young trout, which had a small bag attache I
to the lower part of their body, containing a part of the yolk ot
the egg, which was still their nourishment. In this state they
were easily carried from place to place, in confined portions of
27


fresli water, for some days requiring apparently no food ; but after
a week the nourishment in their bag being exhausted, they began
to seek their food in water and rapidly increased in size. As I have
said before, Mr. Jacobi assures us that the experiment succeeded
as well with mature fish that had been killed for the purpose of
procuring the roe and the milt, these having been mixed together
in cold water immediately after they were taken out of the body.
I have had this experiment tried twice,” continues Sir Humphrey,
speaking in his own person, “and with perfect success, and it
offers a very good mode of increasing to any extent the quantity
of trout in rivers or lakes, for the young ones are preserved from
the attacks of fishes and other voracious animals or insects, at the
time when they are most easily destroyed and perfectly helpless.
The same plan, [ have no doubt, would answer equally well with
grayling and other varities of the salrao genus. But in all experi-
ments of this kind, the great principle is to have a constant
current of fresh and aerated water running over the eggs.”
"What has been said of Canada by MF. F. Forrester in his
“ Fish and Fishing” (Bentley, 1849,) will equally apply to many
parts of this country.
There are thousands and tens of thousands of little tumbling
transparent rills throughout this country—scarcely a farm without
a dozen such—which have numerous natural basins in their
courses, each of which, with the aid of a few hours’ work employed
in raising a timber dam, and applying a grate at the entrance and
egress of the stream, would constitute as perfect a storepond for
the making of such experiments as could be erected by the wealth
of Croesus; with the advantage, too, of having the fish requisite
for the tests existing, in a state of nature, within a few miles,
perhaps within a few hundred yards, of the scene of action.* As
an example of what has been done by the simplest possible
apparatus, I would instance the introduction of the grayling into
the Clyde by the Angling Club of Glasgow. In the Field of last
Saturday, JSTov. 24, is a description and also a plan of the process.
"Within the last few weeks, I have pointed out the advantages of
pisciculture to a friend who has facilities, and who is at this
* As it is impossible to go very much into the subject, I have given a list
of books relating to the art of Pisciculture “ Book of the Salmon,” in two
parts, by Ephemera (Longman and Brown, 1850; “La Pisciculture et la
Production des Sangsues, par Jourdier” (Hachette et Co., Paris, 1856) ; “A
Treatise on the Propagation of Salmon and other Fish,” Ashworth, (Simpkin
and Marshall, 1853); “On Pisciculture,” W. H. Fry, New York (to be
obtained of the publisher, at 36 Soho-square) ; and the two works of Boccius
(Van Yoorst, Paternoster-row).


moment engaged in laudable endeavours to batch trout near
Canterbury.
But we must not flatter ourselves that we are altogether about
to introduce pisciculture as a novelty into this country.
In former days, when the inhabitants of this country were for
the most part Eoraan Catholics, and, therefore, greater eaters of
fish, the cultivation of fish was looked after; and I would quote a
good authority on this point: —
« That carp were introduced from the Continent to England by
the monks is nearly certain; this, however, could be accomplished
without recourse to any artificial modes of procuring or raising
the young fry. There are, however, many and powerful reasons
for believing that the grayling, the charr, the gwyniad, and
perhaps also the vendace, the pollan, and the powan, were also
introduced by the same agency from foreign countries. This
belief is supported by the fact that these fish exist only in isolated
and often distant waters, sometimes in only one or two neighbour-
ing rivers, whereof that which contains them is apparently the
least adapted to their habits, but always in such waters as had
many or distinguished monastic institutions on their banks.
While England was Catholic, great attention was paid to the
raising and fattening of the choicest varieties of fresh-water fish,
an art which sunk into neglect, partly owing, doubtless, to the
abolition of fast-days, and partly to the great facility with which
the finest sea-fish are now transported throughout the country.
“Even to this day, in Austria, Illyria, and parts of the Tyrol,
the greatest attention is paid to the nurture of the most delicate
fresh-water fishes in confined situations; and Sir Humphrey Davy
states, in his Salmonica, that ‘at A.dmondt, in Styria, attached to
the magnificent monastery of that name, are abundant ponds and
reservoirs for every species of fresh-water fish, and the charr,
grayling, and trout are preserved in different waters, covered,
enclosed, and under lock and key.’ ”
There is no reason why we should be behind our ancestors
in this matter, therefore let us set to work and see what is to be
done.*
As regards insects and plants I have somewhat to say, but my
limits will not allow me more space than to state that there exist
many specimens of both ; to instance in the one class the Ligurian
* I have received information from Mr. I .loyd, of Portland-road, that in
the hot summer of 1859, he sent out to the Cape of Good Hope a quantity of
carp and tench, that he delivered 75 per cent, of them alive, and that they
since multiplied amazingly. He is about to send out some trout to the
Cape.


bee, wbicli Mr. Tegetmeier, secretary of tbe Apiarian Society, has
already partially succeeded in acclimatising. By the kindness of
this gentlemen lam enabled to show specimens of the bee. He
gives it a most excellent character ; it would be a great adjunct to
our farm economy. As regards plants I have much to say, but I
dare not break into this subject, which would require an evening
to itself; suffice it to say, that there is an immense opening for
the introduction of plants that would prove to be of the greatest
use both to the poor and the rich.
I have now taken a hasty and summary survey of the animal
kingdom, and have presented to your notice what facts I have
been able to obtain relative to various beasts, birds, fishes, &c.,
which are capable of acclimatisation. We have space and means,
and food for many of them in our own favoured island ; we know
where they are, we can get them with interest, labour, and money,
and when they arrive here we have, I am convinced, and actually
know, many who will take charge of them. We, as Englishmen,
are particularly lucky as to our chances of obtaining them. It is
said the sun never sets upon the possessions of our most gracious
Queen. English vessels are sailing daily to and from our colonies.
Let us establish a system of interchange, receiving in return that
which will be advantageous to us at home; for up to this time
this country has been acting on the principle of “ all give and no
take we export of our best living productions—how
few do we import. We have all the crude materials provided by
Nature herself; for an extensive scheme of acclimatisation at
hand, all we want is the interference of man, who shall apply
energy and capital.
How then is this great object to be carried out. Individuals
are comparatively powerless, but by means of a union of efforts,
in the shape of a society, something might be done; at all events
it is well worth a trial. The idea, therefore, having been started,
took a tangible shape but a few months ago. The intelligent
proprietor of the Field newspaper (a journal which opens its
columns to the encouragement of that talent of observation and
love of natural objects which we all of us instinctively possess),
Mr. John Crockford, the Hon. Grantley Berkeley, and myself
held a consultation as to whether it was not possible to direct into
one channel the many facts relating to the subject of acclimatisa-
tion which were floating about, little heeded.
The Hon. Grantley Berkeley, as is well-known, is a gentleman
who has devoted much of his life to the active pursuit of field
sports, and during a long course of years he has devoted his


attention, not solely to the destruction of animal life, but. also to
the accurate observation of facts relating to the creatures’ natural
habits and instincts—l may say social economy. This gentleman
has kindly used his influence in obtaining the support of many
noblemen and gentlemen, who have means and space for the work
of acclimatisation, and 1 am now able to present a long list of noble
patrons, which, indeed, gives us great hope of ultimate success.
Added to this, Mr. Crockford most liberally gave us all the
assistance he could afford by means of the press; and as for myself,
I have used, and hope always shall use my best energies, not only
in starting, but in keeping going the first public attempts at
Acclimatisation in England.
It was therefore determined to start at once a Society for the
Acclimatisation of Animals, and we held the first meeting on June
10th, 1860. We have on our Council men who are willing to devote
their energies to the object. We have for Vice-President the Hon.
Grantley Berkeley, and as Secretary your most obedient servant. Our
plans are based upon those of the Societie d’Acclimatation, and I have
ventured to put forth the following programme, to show what are our
plans of operation ;
The purposes of the society are —
1. The introduction, acclimatisation, and domestication of all
innoxious animals, birds, fishes, insects and vegetables, whether useful
or ornamental.
2. The perfection, propagation, and hybridisation of races newly
introduced or already domesticated.
3. The spread of indigenous animals, &c., from parts of the
United Kingdom where they are already known, to other localities
where they are not known.
4. The procuration, whether by purchase, gift, or exchange of
animals, &c., from British and foreign countries.
5. The transmission of animals, &c., from England to her
Colonies and foreign parts, in exchange for others sent thence to
the society.
6. The holding of periodical meetings, and the publication of re-
ports and transactions for the purpose of spreading knowledge of
acclimatisation, and inquiry into the causes of success or failure.
The society will begin with small and carefully conducted
experiments.
It is proposed that those members who happen to have facilities
on their estates for experiments, and who are willing to aid the
objects of the society, should undertake the charge of such subjects
for experiments as may be offered to them by the society, periodi-
cally reporting progress to the council.


It will be the endeavour of the society to attempt to acclimatise
and cultivate those animals, birds, &c., which will be useful and
suitable to the park, the moorland, the plain, the woodland, the
farm, the poultry-yard, as well as those which will increase the re-
sources of our sea-shores, rivers, ponds, and gardens.
It is hoped that this endeavour to increase the internal resources
of the country will meet with the support of the public.
Persons desirous of becoming members may do so on subscrib-
ing £2 2s. per annum. A donation of £lO will make the donor a
life-member of the society.*
The Society thus formed have had several meetings, and dis-
cussed several points ; they have obtained promises of support and
co-operation from many persons who are interested in the subject.
Among others who attended the meetings was Mr. Edward
Wilson, whose name is so well known in connection with the
operations and successful efforts he has so nobly made to acclima-
tise animals in Australia. This gentleman addressed a most
powerful letter to the Times (which I regret I have not space to
print in full), whereby he raised the public mind to the importance
of acclimatisation, and did an essential service.
Shortly after this letter appeared in the Times, at a meeting
held October 6th, 1860, Mr, Wilson announced publicly that Miss
Burdett Coutts, with that generosity and kindness of heart which
has gained for her the respect and esteem of all classes, both rich
and poor, had presented the Society with the munificent donation
of £5OO, together with a promise of subscription of £lO annually
for five years. Thus did this excellent lady stretch out the hand
of encouragement towards those who were endeavouring to do good
in their generation, and we may now state that “ The Society for
the Acclimatisation of Animals” is fairly on foot, and the Council
are willing to understake such steps as shall he most advisable, in
opening the active operation in a field new and unexplored. We
are as yet young, and amid the embarras des richesses we feel it
difficult to know how to begin.
In his letter to the Times, Mr. Wilson stated that a great
want in this country was a domestic animal not too large to be con-
sumed by a middle-class family, and the flesh of which should be
meaty rather than poultry like. Our sheep are too large for this
purpose; pork is not wholesome if used too frequently or killed
too young; and rabbits are too small, flavourless, and white-
meated.
* Temporary Offices, .346 Strand.


For the new animal the wombat was suggested, a rodent which
burrows in the earth, feeds by night, and has flesh which affords
excellent eating. It abounds in districts of Australia.
Here, then, is an animal which might be tried, but I fear there
would be some difficulty in getting it generally adopted as an
article of food, for prejudice would be in the way.
It remained, therefore, for us to cast about and see what sheep
we could find which would come up to the necessary requirements.
I shortly afterwards received a letter from Dr. Gardner, mention-
ing a sheep which would answer the purpose, viz., the Purick
sheep, which is found in the districts of the Himalaya. Long
correspondence ensued about this sheep, as well as other small
kinds of sheep, which were to be procured in different parts of
the world. At length I heard of a small sheep which had been
imported from Brittany by Mr. Baker, of the Pheasantry,
Beaufort Street, Chelsea. Whether this be the Purick sheep of
Dr. Gardner or not lam not aware; anyhow, I show it alive this
evening, that persons may judge for themselves of the advisability
of endeavouring to make this sheep, or a sheep like it in size, &c.
general in this country. It is certainly a very little beast to begin
our acclimatising efforts with, but I look at it in the light of the
proverbial “ small end of the wedge.” The habits of this animal
are exceedingly hardy; it lives in a wild, barren place, and I should
suggest its adoption by persons who have a lawn or grass plat, or
still better by cottagers, who could turn it out to live on the grass
which grows about our hedges and ditches, and which is often
wasted by not being grazed down.*
The second point the Society intend to commence with—is the
introduction of game birds. The Hon. Grantley Berkeley, in his
wanderings on the prairies of America, was much struck with the
advisability of endeavouring to acclimatise in this country the
prairie grouse and the tree grouse of America (of which I now
show specimens, and relative to which I have much information.)
This gentleman became acquainted with several persons who are
willing to aid him by sending over these birds, and also some
specimens of American deer. Captain Hardy, of the Royal
Artillery, has kindly promised to send us over from Halifax, where
* As regards sheep, I would also mention that we intend to pay attention
to animals which are likely to effect improvements in wool, but as the sub-
ject has been so admirably treated by Professor Owen in his lecture on the
raw materials from the animal kingdom, in the Great Exhibition, given in
this theatre December 10th, 1851, and also by Mr. Leonard Wray, in the
Journal of the Society of Arts, Vol. VIII., No. 377, Feb. 10th, 1860, it
would be presumption in me to touch upon the subject.


he is now quartered, not only living grouse but also their eggs,
relative to the transport of which for long distances I have again
many valuable hints from practical men.
Thus we have endeavoured to select, as opportunity afforded us
(tor we are not yet rich enough to choose), a specimen of a beast
and a bird. It only remains now to find a fish which shall take
the place and become a useful pond fish, and we have, X believe,
found a fish, the “ Lucid Perea” or the “ Sander” (of which I show
a drawing the natural size). Prom all evidence we have received,
this appears to be the fish we wanted. want to get
him over here, and I am in the track to do so by means of an
apparatus kindly lent us by Mr. Wilson; and when he arrives
here, I know a gentleman who has kindly offered to receive him
and treat him with all the deference due to such a distinguished
(and we trust also useful) foreigner.
One of our objects, as you see from the programme, is to collect
information. All information is valuable, for it prevents action in
false directions, and suggests plans.
We have been fortunate enough to receive correspondence from
many parts of the world, and not only correspondence but actual
co-operation, for, in September last, the Society sent, by invitation,
a deputation to Glasgow. A meeting was held, the Lord Provost
in the chair, the result being, that there has been formed by the
enlightened citizens of this noble town, a Scottish branch of the
London Acclimatisation Society; and thanks to them for their
cordial reception and assistance.
I wish, in this place, to state publicly, once for all, that the
Society just formed is by no means desirous to run counter, or be
set up in opposition to, the Zoological Society of London. The
Council, on the contrary, trust that they shall obtain their co-
operation and support, inasmuch as the point aimed at by them
will be to carry out measures in full which are not insisted upon
by that highly scientific body of men.
Again, I feel convinced that, as time goes on, the Government
of this country will be convinced of the national importance of
Acclimatisation. But lately the subject of the systematic inter-
change of the natural productions of the British dependencies was
brought under the notice of the Colonial Office by the Earl of
Carnarvon, and his Grace the Duke of Newcastle replied that it
had been in his power to render some service to the cause by
writing to the governors of several of our colonies, but that ny-
thing like a vote of public money was inexpedient.* In his letter
* See Mr. Wilson’s letter to the Times, for Sept, 22nd, 1860.


to the Times, Mr. Wilson asks 1 “ Is your Government right,
while surrounded by fifty fine colonies of unknown capacities, to
leave everything to private enterprise; and, if private enterprise
fails, to allow the noblest undertakings to rest, comparatively
untested by any effort whatever.” Let us do our best, and rely
that the Government will, sooner or later, recognise our exertions
and help us in our endeavoiirs for the public good.
I have now performed my task (inadequately, I fear), of putting
before this Society some few facts relative to the Acclimatisation
of animals, and I trust that I have succeeded in making it appear
that this is a subject the details of which are not only highly
interesting, but can be carried out with the prospect of great and
most important results. Much, nevertheless, will depend upon
individual exertion and support, and I here beg to appeal to all
those who can (and there are many who have the opportunities) to
help us as much as they can. Mr. Mitchell, with an encouraging
tone, writes: —“ If a hundred of our great proprietors would each
give up the necessary space and money to cultivate one single
species, no matter of how great or how little importance, the
result in twenty years would infinitely surpass all that could ever
have been done by so miscellaneous and comparatively unmanageable
assemblage as that marvellous collection of Lord Derby s, of
which we speak with affection and regret.”
Again, a writer in the Saturday Review, April 14, 1860, most
justly says: —“When we consider the enormous influence produced
upon the history of mankind by the sheep, the horse, the dog, and
others of our domesticated animals —formerly, without doubt,
existing in a state of nature, and reclaimed from it by the agency
of man—who can deny that results, if not equally great, yet of
the utmost importance to the human race, may follow from
additions yet to be made to the list ? It would be strange indeed
if, out of the numerous species not known to science to choose
from, and with all the experience of modern civilisation, we were
altogether to fail in selecting some with constitutions sufficiently
pliable to be moulded into races subservient to the use and profit
of mankind. It is true that the importance of the animals
recently added to our domestic stock is not great, and their number
insignificant. But this, perhaps, is as much attributable to the
little attention that has been paid to the subject as to any supposed
exhaustion of the series of ‘ acclimatisable’ animals.”
I do not wish it for a moment to be supposed that I am sanguine
or enthusiastic enough to imagine that a quarter or even a third
of the animals, &c,, will ever be acclimatised or made useful in


this country, or, that the Society established for this purpose will
be able to make a very large gap in the 140,000 animals mentioned
in M. Gleoffroy Saint Hilaire’s list, but as I have to treat on a
subject as a whole, 1 should be failing in my duty if, to a large
and highly educated audience, I did not endeavour to lift up the
veil which secures that great panorama with which we are every-
where surrounded, to point out with the rod of experience those
living creatures which actual experiment had positively proved
and demonstrated could live and multiply their species in our own
favoured land, or to suggest several foreign creatures that might,
and would most probably live, if conditions were made by the
hand of man suitable to their welfare.
My object has been to show what a wide field is now open for
public as well as individual exertions, and how much is left
unheeded which ought to be cared for. I have cast my bread
upon the waters, in hopes that time will lead to the most important
national results, and that we may live, one and all of us, to carry
out as far as in us lies, that great command which was given to
our first parents, and from them to ourselves, by the great Creator
himself, to have “ dominion over the fish of the sea and over the
fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the
earth.”


THE ACCLIMATISATION SOCIETY OF VICTORIA.
At a public meeting on the 25th February, presided over by His
Excellency Sir Henry Barkly, an Acclimatisation Society was
established in accordance with the resolutions annexed, to which the
Provisional Committee desire to invite attention.
“ That the extent of area, variety of climate, and comparative recency of
settlement of Australia, invest the subject of acclimatisation with
particular interest; and that the establishment of an Acclimatisation
Society, on the basis of those of Paris and London, being highly
desirable, such society be now established.”
“ That the objects of the society shall be the introduction, acclimatisation,
and domestication of all innoxious animals, birds, fishes, insects, and
vegetables, whether useful or ornamental; —the perfection, propaga-
tion, and hybridisation of races newly introduced or already domesti-
cated ; —the spread of indigenous animals, &c., from parts of the
colonies where they are already known, to other localities where they
are not known; —the procuration, whether by purchase, gift, or
exchange, of animals, &c., from Great Britain, the British colonies,
and foreign countries; —the transmission of animals, &c., from the
colony to England and foreign parts, in exchange for others sent thence
to the society;—the holding of periodical meetings, and the publication
of reports and transactions, for the purpose of spreading knowledge of
acclimatisation, and inquiry into the causes of success or failure; —the
interchange of reports, &c., with kindred associations in other parts of
the world, with the view, by correspondence and mutual good offices,
of giving the widest possible scope to the project of acclimatisation ;
the conferring rewards, honorary or intrinsically valuable, upon sea-
faring men, passengers from distant countries, and others who may
render valuable services to the cause of acclimatisation. ”
“ That Mr. D. S. Campbell, Dr. Thos. Black, Capt. Pasley, Professor M‘Coy,
Dr. Embling, Dr. Mueller, Messrs. Hugh Chambers, Archer, M‘Millan,
Lyall, Pyke, Sumner, members of the Zoological Committee, and Mr.
Edward Wilson, with power to add to their number, be requested to
act as a provisional committee, to bring the association into working
order, to enroll subscribers, and otherwise advance the objects of the
society.”
“ That a subscription of £2 2s. annually shall constitute an ordinary
member; a donation of £lO 10s. shall entitle the donor to a life-
membership ; but that the claims of the society shall be urged upon
wealthy and patriotic colonists, with a view to obtaining much larger
subscriptions.”
« That, when thoroughly organised, the objects of the society be formally
brought under the notice of the Government, with the view of learning
to what extent it may calculate upon Governmental assistance and
recognition.”


A large number of names was at once enrolled, and a considerable
sum subscribed.
It will be quite apparent, however, that the progress and usefulness
of the new Society must be regulated by the measure of support and
co-operation accorded to it by the more intelligent and patriotic
amongst the colonists, and the Committee therefore venture to invite
assistance by donation and subscription, remitted to the Treasurer,
;pro tern., T. J. Sumner, Esq., Flinders Lane.
WM. GOODHUGH AND CO., PRINTERS, FUNDERS LANE EAST.




