

In August, 1804, the American whaler Union,
of Nantucket, after having refreshed at Sydney
Cove, as Port Jackson was then called, sailed on
a sperm whaling cruise among the South Sea
Islands. She arrived at Tongatabu on the last
day of September.
So soon as the anchor was let go a fleet of
canoes appeared, and the occupants made the
most friendly demonstrations towards Captain
Pendleton and his officers. In the leading canoe
was a man whom the eaptain took to be a Malay,
and upon being questioned this surmise proved
to be correct. In broken English he informed
Captain Pendleton that the ship would be pro-
vided With plenty of fresh food, water, and
wood, if the ship's boats were sent ashore.
The captain’s boat was thereupon swung out
and lowered, and manned by six men, the cap-
tain and Mr. John Boston* the supercargo, go*
ing with them. These people were armed with
six muskets and two cutlasses.
So soon as the boat was well clear of the ship
the natives became very troublesome, clamber-
ing up the chain plates, and forcing themselves
on board in great numbers.
The chief mat®, Daniel Wright, seems to have
shown more sense than most of the poor fools
who, by their own negligence, brought about—
and still bring about—these tragedies.
He got his men together and tried to drive off
the intruders, but despite his endeavors thirty
®r forty of them kept to the deck, and their
countrymen in the canoes alongside rapidly pass-
ed them up a number of war-clubs.
Wright, with the greatest tact, and with ap-
parently good-humored force, at last succeeded
in clearing the decks and bustling all the na-
tives, except the chief, over the side into their
casoss.
H© was a big,, brawny New Englander, had
served in the American Navy before he had
taken to whaling, and knew the value of cool-
ness and discipline in an emergency, though he
felt much inclined to pistol the chief, who all
this time had been pretending to support his
authority, while actually telling his people to
be “more patient, as the time had not yet
come.”
This chief, whsse name is not given in the
“Sydney Gazette” of 1804, hut who may have
Been “Ducara” of the Portland massacre, or one
•f Dncara’s matahulis, at last took his leave with
the usual protestations of regard so natural to
even the present Christianised Tongan native of
this year of grace, when he means mischief.
Descending into his canoe, he led the whole
flotilla to the beach. Then the mate hoisted the
ensign, and fired a gun as a warning to those
of the ship’s company on shore to return.
No notice was taken of the signal, and pre-
sently through his glass Mr. Wright saw, that
the captain’s boat was lying broadside on to the
beach, surrounded by a crowd of islanders, and
without a boat-keeper. This was sufficiently
alarming.
It was now late in the afternoon, and Cap-
taifi Pendleton had been absent five hours. He
at once came to the conclusion that the people
who had gone ashore in the boat were either
prisoners or had been murdered.
To send another boat after them, he felt sure,
would only lead to the destruction of the whole
ship’s company in detail, and the ultimate loss
of the ship without there being the least chance
of effecting any good.
So he called the hands aft, explained the
situation, and began to prepare to resist cap-
ture.
All tha available firearms were loaded, heavy
stones /vhieh formed the ship’s ballast were
placed along the waterways fore and aft in
readiness to smash the canoes which he antici-
pated would come alongside; the drying-out
works fires rfere lighted, and the huge dry-pots
filled with water, which when boiling would add
to their means of defence, by pouring it down
in bucketfulls upon the savages; the cable was
prepared for slipping, sans loosened, and every
\S A GUARANTEED CIRCULAT
other precaution which suggested itself to him
made.
The sun dropped into the western sea-rim,
and there was still no sign of the captain’s boat.
On the shore an ominous silence prevailed,
though now and then it would b© broken by
the weird, resonant boom of a conch-shell.
The night was passed in the greatest anxiety
by all on board, every man, musket in hand,
keeping a keen look-out.
Almost as the dawn broke, two canoes were
seen to put off from Nukualofa beach, and com©
towards the ship.
They were manned fey young Tongan “bucks”
who, in reply to the mate’s questions as to the
whereabouts of the eaptain and his crew, an-
swered him with gestures which the ship’s com-
pany rightly enough construed as meaning that
their comrades had all been killed, and that
their turn would come shortly.
This so enraged the seamen that tlfey tried to
induce Mr, Wright, te-oper -S?6 os pasost,
destroy them, and get the ship away before
worse happened.
But the mate, hoping that his people on, shore
were still alive, and that h© could yet rescue
them, refused to comply, and the whole of that
day and night passed without anything further
happening.
On the following morning several canoes came
within hail and then lay-to.
In one of them was the Malay, who asked the
mate to come ashore as his captain and the
supercargo wished to see him.
The mate temporised and requested the Malay
to come on board and explain matters, but he
refused and returned to the shore.
In a few hours he reappeared at the head of a
fleet of canoes, and then, to Mr. in-
tense astonishment, he saw that Mm »y wm
accompanied by a young white woman, who was
sitting on the for’ard outrigger of the canoe, in
which the Malay was steersman.
The flotilla brought to within pistol-shot of
the ship, and the woman stood up and called
to him in English.
“Come on shore and see the captain. He
wants to speak to you,”
The mate made no answer, but beckoned to
the fleet of canoes to come nearer. And then,
mercifully, as he took another look at the white
woman, he saw' her, when the surrounding sav-
ages were not watching her, shake her head ve-
hemently to him not to comply.
The flotilla came still nearer, and again Eliza-
beth Morey was made to repeat the mechanical
request for him to come on shore and see the
captain.
Wright, surmising that she was acting under
coercion, appeared to give little heed to her re-
quest, but told the Malay, wh© seemed to direct
the natives, that he would wait for the captain.
Then the fleet of canoes turned, and headed
for the shore, and the captive woman gave the
mate a despairing, agonised look that not only
filled him with the deepest commiseration for
her, but almost convinced him that poor Pendle-
ton and the others were dead.
Another night of weary anxiety passed, and
again with the dawn a single canoe came off,
manned by half-a-dozen armed natives, steered
by the Malay and carrying Miss Morey. This
canoe was followed by many others, but the
leading one alone came close enough to the
whale ship to communicate.
Little by little her savage crew drew nearer,
watching every movement of those on board
with the utmost suspicion; the mate who was
standing at the break of the poop on the star-
board side, desired them to come closer, holding
in his hand a loaf of bread, which he said ho
wanted to give to the white woman. The loaf
was inclosed in a piece of white paper, on which
he had written these words.
“I fear that all on shore are mnrder-'d. I wi l !
wait here a few days in the hopo may
be able to escape to us.”
For some minutes the savages watched the
white man. who, apparently disgusted with his
| THE ADVENTURES OF |
ELIZABETH MOREY. f
attempts to induce them to come closer, and
take the loaf of bread, placed it on the rail, and
lit his pipe.
The Malay again urged him to come ashore
and “see the captain,” fc’-t rEwisiit
and told him he must come
closer if he wanted to talk.
The scoundrel did bring the canoe a few fath-
oms nearer, and then stopped her way.
Then the girl, unable to restrain herself any
longer, stood up and cried out:
“All your friends on shore have been killed.”
Then she leapt into the water, and swam to-
wards the ship..
A yell of rage burst from the natives in the
canoes, but it was answered by the fir© of mus-
ketry from the ship and the thunder of two
carronades, which, loaded with iron nuts and
bolts, had been in readiness, one on the poop,
the other on the topgallant forecastle. The
girl succeeded in reaching the ship’s side in
time to take hold of a life-buoy secured to a
line which was thrown to her, and Wright,
Jumping overboard, helped the poor creature up
over the side into safety.
Then began a desperate and furious assault
to capture the ship. The savages,; led by the
renegade Malay, made three successive attempts
to board, but were each time beaten back by
Wright and his gallant seamen, and the crystal
water around the Union was soon reddened to a
deep hue. Meanwhile the cable had been slipped,
and, like the Portland, the Union’s company
were saved from death by the freshness of the
trade-wind alone.
In half an hour after the last attack had been
repelled, the ship was. out of danger from pur-
go soon as the vessel had cleared the passage
Wright hove her to, and went down below to
Miss Morey, who, exhausted and almost hys-
terical as she was, yet answered his questions
readily. * . . .. .
“You must forgive me, madam, but it is my
duty to at once ask you an important question.
Are you sure that Captain Pendleton and the
supercargo are dead? I cannot take the ship
away if there is any uncertainty about then
“I beseech you, sir, to have no doubts. The
two gentlemen were beaten to death by clubs be-
fore my eyes. They were sitting down to eat
when they were murdered. One was killed by
the Malay man, the other by an old Matabuii.
Oh, for heaven’s sake, sir, do not delay ! Ihe
natives have been planning to capture the slap
and murder her people for the past three days.
Then as she became more collected, she satis-
fied him that all of Captain Pendleton’s party
had been cruelly and treacherously murdered,
and also told him her own terrible story previ-
ous to the arrival of the Union.
The destruction of poor Pendleton and Mr.
Boston had been planned, she saiji, by the
Malay; and when he and his native friends
found that they could not induce Mr. Wright
to further weaken his ship’s company by send-
ing another boat’s crew on shore, so that the
Union might the more easily be captured, she
was ordered under the most awful threats to act-,
as decoy. , . , .. , , <
Resolved to upset their diabolical plan, or
die in the attempt, she gave an apparently
cheerful assent to the meditated scheme of mur-
der, and hence her appearance in the canoe
with the treacherous Malay. , . ,
Under the kindly care of Mr. (now Captain)
Wright, the young woman soon regained her
health and strength in a great measure, and
her delight knew no bounds when he announced
to her his intention of returning to Sydney
Cove to refit before proceeding home to America,
The Union, as we have before stated, enteied.
Sydney harbor in October, 1804, and before that
time the simple gratitude of the rescued girl to
her rescuer had changed into a deeper and ten-
derer feeling. But we must not anticipate.
So soon as Captain Wright had made his re-
port to the New Soutn IVales authorities, Miss
Morey went on shore, where she was treated-
most hospitably by the wives of some ot the
military officers 0 whilst Wright was refitting ins
ship. .........
No further mention of the names of Captain
Wright, Elizabeth Morey, or the good ship*
Union appear in the early colonial records after
1804; blit that the girl’s rescue by the gallant
mate of the whaleship led to hey ultimate hap-
piness we can safely assume, for in the year
1836 there were married in Honolulu one
“Marie Kaulani Shepherd, daughter of John
Shepherd, to Daniel Morey Wright, master of
the ship Patience and son of Daniel ana Eliza-
beth Wright, of Salem, XJ.S.A.” .
SECOND FART
