

ill THE |
CHAMBERS’S
INSTRUCTIVE AND ENTERTAINING LIBRARY,
A SERIES OF BOOKS FOR THE PEOPLE.
EMIGRANT’S MANUAL.
NEW ZEALAND,
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE, PORT NATAL, &c.
EDINBURGH:
WILLIAM AND ROBERT’ CHAMBERS.
1851.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


W. & R. CHAMBERS’S MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS.
CHAMBERS’S
INSTRUCTIVE AND ENTERTAINING LIBRARY.
A series of Original and Selected Works in different departments of Literature,
suitable for popular Entertainment and Instruction. These Books fob the
People are published in Volumes every second month, sewed and m boards, the
following are already issued :
History of the French Revolutions, from
* 1789 to 1849. By T. W. Bedhead. 3
vols., sewed 6*., boards 7 s. 6d.
G uizot’s History of Civilisation in Europe,
with his Treatise on Death Punish-
ments, and Memoir of his Life. 1 vol.,
sewed 25., boards 2s. (id.
Political and Social Economy: its Prac-
tical Applications. By J. H. Burton.
1 vol., sewed 25., boards 2s. 6d.
Memoirs of Francis Horner, with Selec-
tions from his Correspondence. 1 vol.,
sewed 25., boards 2s. 6d.
Paley’s Natural Theology, with Additions
and Notes. 1 vol., sewed 25., boards
2s. 6 d.
German Literature, Historical and Cri-
tical. By Joseph Gostick. 1 vol., sewed
25., boards 2s. (id.
Stories of the Irish Peasantry. By Mrs
S. C. Hall. 1 vol., sewed 25., boards
2s. 6d.
Sanitary Economy: its Principles and
Practice; and its Moral Influence on
the Progress of Civilisation. 1 vol.,
sewed 2#., boards 2s. 6 d.
Lamartine’s Travels in the East, includ-
ing a Journey in the Holy Land, with a
Memoir of the Author. 2 vols., sewed
4r., boards ss.
Butler’s Analogy of Religion, and Select
Sermons. With a Memoir of the
Author. 1 vol., sewed 25., boards
2s. 6d.
The British Museum ; Historical and
Descriptive. Illustrated by numerous
wood- engravings. 1 vol., sewed 45.,
boards 4s. 6d.
Life and Works of Burns. Vols. I. and 11.
Edited by Robert Chambers. To be
completed in Four Volumes. Sewed 2s.
6 d. each, boards 3s. each.
The Emigrant’s Manual. 1 vol., sewed
45., boards 4s. 6d.
CHAMBERS’S PAPERS FOR THE PEOPLE.
This series is mainly addressed to that numerous class whose minds have been
educated by the improved schooling, and the popular lectures and publications, of
the last twenty years, and who may now be presumed to crave a higher kind of
Literature than can be obtained through the existing cheap periodicals. The Papers
embrace History, Archaeology, Biography, Science, the Industrial and Fine Arts,
the leading topics in Social Economy, together with Criticism, Fiction, Personal
Narrative, and other branches of Elegant Literature —each number containing a
distinct subject.
Publishing in Weekly Numbers at 1 id. ; in Monthly Parts at 7 d. ; and in Volumes,
every Two Months, in fancy-coloured boards, at 1». 6d. Nine Volumes published.
CHAMBERS’S EDINBURGH JOURNAL.
NEW SERIES.
Publishing in Weekly Numbers at IJd.: in Monthly Parts at 7 d. ; and in
Half-yearly Volumes, cloth boards, at 4*. 6 d.
Fifteen Volumes completed.
A few complete sets of the Old Series, in twelve volumes, for £4,10#.
CHAMBERS’S INFORMATION FOR THE PEOPLE.
A New and Improved Edition, now complete in Two Volumes, price 16#. cloth
boards; in 24 Parts at 7 d.; or in 100 Numbers at Igd. each.


EMIGRANT’S MANUAL
NEW ZEALAND
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE
AND PORT NATAL.




CONTENTS.
New Zealand—
General Account of the Islands, 1
Scenery and Climate, - - - - 2
Influence of the Climate on Health, ... 4.
History, - - - - - - 6
Material Progress, ----- 8
The Original Inhabitants, and their Progress, - 10
Their Property and Industry, - - - - 15
Capabilities and Inducements to Settlers, - - 16
The Timber, ...... 17
Indigenous Pood Productions, ... 18
Agricultural Capacities, ----- 19
Question of Agriculture and Pasture, - - 20
Minerals, ------.21
Wages and Prices, - * - - - - 21
Arrangements for Disposal and Occupation of Land, - 22
The various Settlements, .... 24
The Northern Settlements, - - - - 24
Auckland, - 24
New Plymouth, ------ 27
Soil and Agricultural Prospects, ... 29
Middle Settlements and Cook’s Strait, - - - 33
Wellington, - - - - - - 33
Valley of the Hutt, ----- 33
Nelson, ...... 37
Wairau Plains, ------ 38
Land in Cultivation, Live-Stock, and Produce, - 39
Estimate for a Fifty-Acre Farm, - - - - 42
Regulations for the Disposal of Waste Crown Lands in New
Zealand, ------ 43
Account of the Otago Settlement, - - - 47
Account of the Canterbury Settlement, - - 68
Conclusion, - - - - - - 74


CONTENTS.
The African Settlements — Vaok
General Account, - 76
The Cape of Good Hope, - - - - 78
Natal, 80
Miscellaneous Productions. - - - - 90
Land Investments, - - - - * 91


NEW ZEALAND.
GENERAL ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND.
The New Zealand Islands in the South Pacific Ocean lie between
the 35th and 48th degrees of south latitude. They form a narrow,
crooked, and serrated chain, extending to nearly twelve hundred
miles in length. From their narrowness, notwithstanding the dis-
tance from each other of the extremes, their whole area is gene-
rally rated as about the same with that of Great Britain. There
are two main islands, the north and the south, separated from
each other by Cook’s Strait—so narrow and irregular a pas-
sage, that in the map it seems like the firths which break in upon
the coast of Scotland or the fiords of Norway, and unless when
traced fairly through, it does not appear to be naturally a sea
dividing two islands from each other. ilie division south of
Cook’s Strait has generally been called Middle Island, because
there is still a third island, though comparatively small, called
Stewart Island, a great place of resort for the southern whalers.
By letters-patent issued under act of parliament of the year 1847,
the northern island was called New Ulster, and the middle island
New Munster. For the sake of uniformity, the name New Leinster
was subsequently given to the southernmost island, which may be
considered as the largest of a set ot islets off the coast of New
Zealand.*
These islands are the most distant of any territory of a liko
* The Auckland Islands may be noticed in connection with New Zealand, though-
tbey scarcely form part of the same group, lying fully 180 miles southward, in
latitude 51° south, and longitude 106°east. The group consists of one principal island,
called Auckland, with smaller ones clustering round it, named Enderby, Disappoint-
ment, Ewing, Ocean, &c. Their formation is volcanic, shooting up into picturesque
groups of basalt, with richly - wooded glens between. The climate, though thy


extent from other large portions of land on the globe. On
the one side they are about 1200 miles apart from the nearest
extensive territory—the island-continent of Australia; while on the
other they are fully 100 degrees of longitude, with scarcely an
intervening rock, distant from the western coast of South America.
So much surrounded by wide oceans, it might at first be supposed
that the climate and temperature of the islands would render
them as distinct from any part of Europe as the Australian
colonies in general have been found to be. But New Zealand
seems to have within itself influencing causes of a totally diffe-
rent character from the vast internal desert of the Australian
continent. The climate has been often compared to that of
Italy, to which it pretty nearly corresponds in distance from the
equator, stretching rather farther north of the 40th south parallel
than Italy stretches south of the same north parallel. The
latitude of Wellington corresponds pretty closely with that of
Naples.
It is held to resemble that beautiful country in its physical
aspect. To those indeed who love wild rocky mountain solitudes,
with forest masses in their clefts—to whom, in short, the usual
characteristics of fine mountain scenery are among the things that
make life enjoyable—New Zealand will probably present more
external attractions than any other emigration field. Australia
has its mountain district in the northern part of New South
Wales, but it is hot and jungly; and while the hilly portions of
South Africa are less densely thicketed, yet both are infested by
dangerous wild animals, which poison the easy enjoyment of
nature, however great may be the attractions they hold out to
the resolute sportsman. New Zealand has been peculiar in
nourishing no dangerous animal save man; and erelong, the last
remains of the aboriginal ferocity will be extracted—if this have
not already been in fact accomplished. The scenery of the
Canadas is not in any part so wild and grand in the height of
mountains and the wildness of ravines, though there is nothing of
course that can be compared, as one separate and peculiar scene
of terrific grandeur, with the Falls of Niagara. Yet there are
many mountain-torrents and fine rivers, and the geological cha-
racter of the islands makes them diversify the coast with deep
inlets, several of which have been found to be well-protected
bays. The interior of the country has been but scantily explored;
islands lie so far south, is described as salubrious. It is considered that they will
form a valuable station for the southern whale-fishery; and in this view they
have been let by government to the Messrs Enderby, who have published a pam-
phlet called ‘The Auckland Islands: a Short Account of their Climate, Soil, and
Productions; and the Advantages of Establishing there a Settlement at Port Ross,
for carrying on the Southern Whale Fisheries.’ —1849.
2


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND.
but probably, when fully known, it will not develop any entirely
new features. It resembles, in general, the mountainous countries
of Europe; and its configuration, rising by spurs and successive
elevations into central chains of high mountains, is so usual as
not to leave room, as in Australia, for mysterious conjectures about
the internal structure of the country. Yet the character of the
geology is calculated to develop, and has already shewn many of
the most striking and wonderful phenomena of the material world.
The Snowy Mountains produce glaciers, though it would scarcely
appear that they can be on so large a scale as those which circle
round the Jungfrau of the Alps, or the Norske Fielen. But the
mountain-ranges have another element of grandeur and terror not
to be found in the Alps or Norway. Not merely does the geology
shew volcanic origin and disturbance, but there are volcanoes in
actual operation. Hot springs and jets, such as those of Iceland,
and even hot lakes, are known to exist; and we may expect that,
as the interior is explored, abundant volcanic wonders will be
found, since, while it seems to have the same remarkable pecu-
liarities with Iceland, they are not, as in that country, impassably
shut from exploration by being embraced within the almost impe-
netrable recesses of a horrible wilderness, which defies the keenest
love of adventure and the sternest courage. The settlers have
already had unpleasant intimation that they sit upon volcanic
ground. In October 1848 there were felt in the neighbourhood
of Cook’s Strait repeated shocks of an earthquake. They must
have done considerable damage among the temporary rickety
edifices of the settlers, since the directors of the New Zealand
Company, in their annual report for 1849, congratulated their
constituents on the amount not exceeding £15,000.
The indigenous quadrupeds of New Zealand have been so few
and small, that, in an economic sense —that is, for the food or other
use of man—none exist. The pig, however, has been so extensively
propagated, as to have in some measure become a wild animal
which is hunted. There are many small birds, and the bones of
a gigantic bird, the dinomis, found in the soil, shew it to have
existed in times comparatively recent. Fish are abundant in the
waters. The whale and seal of the south frequent the neighbour-
ing seas, drawing of course farther and farther off from the islands
the more they are assuming a settled character. The whalers —
adventurers from Britain, the United States, and the southern
colonies, were indeed the first European inhabitants of the islands;
and the nature of the prey they pursue, rewarding great daring
and success with large pecuniary returns, makes their life one
of peculiar wildness and adventure, alternating with fits of indolence
or dissipation. The vegetable capabilities of the islands will
3


have to be more fully considered in connection with their produc-
tiveness, and with the accounts of the separate settlements. It may
only here be observed, that timber abounds, though it does not in
general grow high up the mountains. In the clefts between the
mountains, and especially in the alluvial deposits made by the
torrents, there are fine pasture-lands. Several extensive plains
are of the same character; and much alluvial soil, said to be of
the finest description, is covered with an edible fern.
By all accounts, the climate and atmosphere of New Zealand
possess the invaluable qualifications of being both agreeable and
invigorating—not that they are without occasional personal incon-
veniences in the shape of abundant moisture. There appear to
be none of those scorching droughts or dry winds which blight
the Australian colonies. Travellers in good health, and eager in
the pursuit of knowledge in a new and interesting country, are
peculiarly unsusceptible, and do not by any means represent the
sensitiveness of invalids seeking a place of refuge from the
miseries which their condition subjects them to in the climate of
Britain; but the testimony in favour of the climate of New Zea-
land is so full and concurring, as to be nearly conclusive. From
the scientific notices of Mr Dieffenbach, he was enabled to make
the following general statements as to the climate and atmosphere
of New Zealand, and their immediate physical influence on the
country and its capabilities :
‘New Zealand being situated within the temperate zone, although
nearer the equator than Great Britain, possesses, from its peculiar
geographical position, especially from its being insular, and also from,
the nature of the surface, a climate so modified as to resemble that of
England more nearly than that of any other country I am acquainted
with. . . . The cast coast on which Wellington, Auckland, and the
Bay of Islands are situated, is colder than the western, where the
settlements of Nelson and New Plymouth have been founded, and
where the air is far softer and milder. I ascertained this by actual
comparisons, and in this respect the western coast must have great
advantages over the eastern. In the interior of the islands the climate
is colder and less changeable, in consequence of the presence of
a snow-clad mountain group, and the greater distance from the
ocean. I found at Taupo, the acacias of Van Diemen’s Land, the
Iticinus palma Christi , and potatoes, affected by the frost—a circum-
stance which never happens near the coast. The leaves also of
several trees had become yellow and deciduous; the landscape
assumed an autumnal tint, although it can scarcely be said ever to
have had a wintry appearance. At Wellington, on the contrary, and
along the whole coast, the natives plant their potatoes at all seasons
of the year; the forest remains evergreen, and the opening of the
flower-buds is merely a little retarded during winter, the presence
of which is only indicated by more frequent rains and winds.’


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND.
Mr Dieffenbach joins with other observers in making the
amount of rain which falls throughout New Zealand greater than
the average amount in Britain. In fact, from the vast ocean sur-
rounding the islands, a mass of vapour is always concentrated over
them, attracted by the mountains, and ready to be dissolved with
the smallest change of temperament. The united testimony,
however, of those who have experienced its effects —far more valu-
able than any kind of scientific deduction —shews that this mois-
ture is neither disagreeable nor unhealthy. ‘ This great quantity
of moisture,’ continues Mr Dieffenbach, ‘ accounts for the vege-
tation being so vigorous, even in those places where a thin layer
of vegetable earth covers the rocks. Sandy places, which in any
other country would be quite barren, are covered with herbage in
New Zealand; and the hills, which in lithological and geological
formation resemble those of Devonshire, may, in the course of
time, be converted into pastures at least equalling those in the
hilly parts of that country. Everywhere, also, trees and shrubs
grow on the margin of the sea, and suffer no harm even from the
salt spray.’ However valuable swamp land may be as a means of
investing capital in an effective drainage, which makes it richer
than the dry hilly tracts by which it is surrounded, the absence of
marsh land, and the existence of a geological formation which
affords a speedily-drying surface through natural drainage, is of
infinite importance to the settler whose whole capital is embarked
in his journey and his stock, and who wants immediate produce
from the soil. On this the same traveller says—
‘ The physical configuration of New Zealand, and the geological
formation of the hills, are in general such that the rain is rapidly
carried towards the coasts in countless streams and rivulets. The
lakes with which the interior of the Northern Island abound have
always an outlet; and it is only in a very few places that swamps
exist, and these are owing to the clayey nature of the subsoil; but
they are not sufficiently important to influence the general state of
the humidity of the air, or to become insalubrious. In the neighbour-
hood of Port Nicholson the rain quickly percolates through the light
upper soil, and feeds the numerous streamlets which rapidly carry it.
off into the sea.’ —(Travels in New Zealand , i. 173-179.)
Mr Jerningham Wakefield, whose testimony, however, must be
taken as that of a zealous admirer of New Zealand, speaks in the
same tone.
‘ I landed at Kapiti,’ says Mr Wakefield, ‘ and in a day or two
after crossed over to the main, and walked to Port Nicholson. In
the course of this walk I was benighted on the hills between Porirua
and Pitone, having mistaken the time of the rising of the moon. As
it was too dark to proceed along the tortuous path beneath the thick
foliage, I lay down to sleep for a few hours among the moss and
5


forest fern beside the path. It is worthy of remark, that although
everything was so damp that I could not light a fire, and I had no
blanket or any other clothes but those in which I walked to shield
me from the wet, I suffered no inconvenience from cold, and rose
fresh and vigorous at the first dawn of day.’ —(Adventures in New
Zealand, i. 389.)
This is a matter of the utmost importance, since it now not un-
frequently happens that people in comfortable circumstances, and
with every prospect of success at home, believing that it will give
their unhealthy children a better chance of life, make up their
mind to settle within the range of some more salubrious atmo-
sphere. Mr Allom, a settler at Wairarapa, says, in a letter pub-
lished in Mr Earp’s Hand-Book:
* From the nature of the country and of the climate, New Zealand
stock-farming differs from any other. One of its most valuable pecu-
liarities is in consequence of the climate; namely, your cattle are
never housed either in summer or winter. They are always in the
open air, or, as they would say in New Zealand, “on the run.”
Hence whatever may be the extent of the flocks and herds, the only
farm-buildings requisite are a strong post-and-rail stockyard for the
purposes of milking and occasionally mustering the stock. This
favourableness of climate, again, gives rise to what in my opinion is
the greatest charm of the stock-farmer’s life in New Zealand. His
stock being always free to roam where they please, he must be con-
tinually in the saddle, if he does his duty to them or to himself; and
this constant horsemanship carries with it a life of healthy excite-
ment, to which at times even fox-hunting must yield. Few who
have not tried it can have any idea of the excitement that this occu-
pation affords.’
Such is a general view of the features which characterise this
the latest adopted British settlement. That it is destined to great
influence on the history of the southern world seems almost cer-
tain. Its mountain-ranges, like our own, will not be inhabited or
tilled; but there appears to be sufficient alluvial soil to supply
the wants and the energies of a vast population. It must not
be forgotten, in connection with the prospects of New Zealand,
that when the operations in progress for making a passage
through the Isthmus of Darien, between the Atlantic and
Pacific, are completed, New Zealand will be nearer Britain than
Australia.
History. —For many years New Zealand was only known as a
barbarous country, frequented by whaling-vessels from Australia.
At length, in 1814, the Church Missionary Society marked it out
as a field for its labours; and from the agents of this association
the natives first received the rudiments of civilisation. Gradually
the British government awakened to its importance for colonis-
-6


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND.
ing purposes; but not till France put forward some claims for
its occupation was it adopted as a British possession. From
this event the history of New Zealand is little else than a
series of misunderstandings, blunders, and contentions, some of
which terminated in bloodshed. The natives, the government
officials, the missionaries, and the agents of the New Zealand
Company, were all less or more concerned in these unhappy
events, which it would now be better for all parties to bury in
oblivion.
The principal fact which concerns the intending emigrant is,
that government in 1841 constituted, by royal charter, an asso-
ciation called the New Zealand Company, to which, on certain
terms, a large tract of land was assigned. This company thence-
forward began to carry out emigrants, and retail lands to those
who wished to be purchasers. Their plans were conceived on a
liberal and extensive scale. The colonising operations of the
company clustered round Cook’s Strait, where they founded the
settlements of Wellington, Petre, New Plymouth, and Nelson.
Several men of family and fortune were induced to join in this
remarkable enterprise. Some were attracted from lucrative pro-
fessions by the charms of such an adventure, and many gentle-
men brought attached followers of humble rank from the districts
where they possessed family influence; on the whole, it was a
very pretty object of contemplation—a complete social system,
with all its checking, controlling, and civilising influences, pass-
ing to the other end of the earth to assume mature and com-
plete existence in a fresh and teeming soil. Colonel Wake-
field, who led the expedition, sailed in the Tory from Plymouth,
on the 12th May 1839, and he met the other ships of the ex-
pedition at the general rendezvous at Port Hardy, in Cook’s
Strait.
Almost from the commencement, disputes arose between the
government and the company, which had a paralysing effect on
the various settlements. At length Mr Spain was appointed to
investigate and settle the differences, and he gave his final award
in 1845. Neither this award nor the subsequent proceedings of
Governor Fitzroy or Sir George Grey helped the association out
of its difficulties; and to put an end to the affair, the company
resigned its charter and its functions into the hands of the govern-
ment in April 1850. From that time the New Zealand Company
ceased to exist, save in so far as part of its organization has been
preserved under government direction. From this explanation it
will be understood that though dealing ostensibly for land with
what is called the New Zealand Company, the intending settler
is really purchasing from government. The office of the New
7


Zealand Company, where distinct information may always be
obtained respecting lands, is No. 9 Broad Street Buildings, London.
Letters should be addressed to the secretary.
New Zealand was at first governed as a dependency of New
South Wales. It is now, by various acts of parliament, estab-
lished as a separate colony, with a governor and the usual sub-
ordinate functionaries. It has also been accorded certain muni-
cipal privileges conformable to constitutional forms. These it is
deemed inexpedient to particularise, as the political condition of
the colony is not by any means on a determinate footing. Ac-
cording to a charter and series of instructions communicated to
the governor, the colony was divided into provinces, Cook’s
Strait being the dividing-line. The Northern Island, with its
dependencies, was constituted the province of New Ulster, with
power to the governor to except from it by proclamation any
territories near the Strait; while the southern portion was to be
the province of New Munster. Whether the islands will ever be
popularly called by these names, which reveal a great poverty of
invention in the Colonial Office, may be doubted. The native
designations will more probably come into general use. Already
a considerable number of places are known only by the names
given to them by the natives.
Material Progress. —Notwithstanding the disastrous commence-
ment of the colony, it has never ceased to advance in material
prosperity. The amenity of the climate, the fertility of the soil,
the latent powers of productiveness, the enterprise of its inhabi-
tants, and its admirable situation for trade, all mark it out as the
future England of the southern hemisphere.
In going to this fine country, the emigrant has a choice of
several settlements, either directly under the crown, or under the
management of associations holding from the crown. In a dispatch
by Governor Grey, dated 9th July 1849, the following sketch was
given of the state and position of the settlements in general:—
‘ They are composed at present of what may be termed nine prin-
cipal European settlements, besides smaller dependencies of these.
The largest of the settlements contains about 7000 European
inhabitants, and their total European population may be stated
at about 20,000 souls. These settlements are scattered over a
district of about 800 miles of latitude; they are separated from
each other by wide intervals; and communication even by per-
sons on horseback exists only between three of them The
wide intervals between these European colonies are occupied by
a native race of 120,000 souls, a very large proportion of whom
are males capable of bearing arms.’
Notwithstanding the presence of these natives, the governor


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND.
gave the assurance, that ‘at the present moment there is pro-
bably no portion of the world in which life and property are more
secure than in New Zealand.’ Tn the annual report for 1850,
he proposed to reduce the military establishment to 1180 men,
and wisely suggested that those dispensed with, instead of being
sent back to Europe, at great expense, with their wives and
families, should be absorbed in the colony, where they would be
promising settlers, with notions of discipline and allegiance, and
would be a sort of self-supporting defence—a trained militia. At
the same time, the governor proposed the support of a war-steamer
as the best means of giving effective strength to the executive—
an arrangement well adapted to a narrow island countxy full of
creeks and capes.
It would be improper to leave this department of the subject
without alluding to the convict question. No fruitful and unsettled
territory, especially so near our penal colonies, could keep itself
free of the loose portion of the adventurers cast forth from our
social system; but New Zealand has not, like other southern
colonies, been systematically made the drain of our criminal
population. It is a matter of important consideration for all who
propose to settle there, that the conduct of the government has
guaranteed the settlement from being made a place of exile for
convicts who have undergone punishment. As well as to the
Australian colonies, it was proposed to send ticket-of-leave men
to New Zealand, * if the inhabitants were willing to receive them.’
Though not blind to the advantages in the labour-market from
such a consignment, the colonists expressed a decided disinclina-
tion to receive such associates; and Governor Grey, ever clear-
sighted, and earnestly interested in the welfare of the colony,
seconded the disapproval, remarking: ‘I think that this country
would hold out to men of their characters almost irresistible
temptations to retire into the interior of the country, there to
live among the native population, and cohabit with their women. 1
Meetings were held to express the disapproval of the settlers; and
even the natives, whether spontaneously or not, spoke out, in an
address to Her Majesty, in which they said: ‘Oh, Lady, we shall
be perplexed if the convicts be allowed to come here. They
would steal the property of the Europeans, and the natives would
be accused of the theft, and we should be very much displeased.
Lather let gentlemen, men of peaceful life, come here. We like
such men. Let them be numerous, for our country is large.’
On the 26th November 1849 Lord Grey wrote to the governor
of New Zealand, informing him that the government concurred in
his views, and would not send convicts to New Zealand. — (Pari.
Pop. 1850.)


THE ABORIGINES.
Independently of all questions as to humanity to themselves,
the character of the natives of New Zealand is of importance,
because, instead of dwindling away, and disappearing before the
civilised settlers, it would appear that they and the uneducated
class of colonists are hereafter to be a mixed race. This circum-
stance alone stamps the New Zealander as a being superior to
the Australian and the South African, and even to the North-
American Indian.
The pictorial illustrations of Cook’s Voyages first awakened
a sense among Europeans to their capacity as shipbuilders,
organizers of marine forces, sailors, and ornamental carvers. At
the same time Captain Cook horrified the world by declaring them
to be cannibals : he left the matter in no mysterious dubiety, for
the experiment by which he convinced himself of its existence is
told with a disgusting minuteness which also convinces the reader.
Our countrymen were long loth to believe that people who were
cannibals could be more civilisable than other aborigines living
on rats and reptiles; but it was so: nor, after all, need we wonder
at it, when we see what horrible vices the natives of our own
country can commit when they are sunk in barbarism. The
bushranging convicts of Van Diemen’s Land became cannibals
without the least compunction. As they had sunk from the
level of British civilisation to that, the most horrible of bar-
barities, it appeared that there could be nothing in the practice
itself to prevent a race who followed it from being as civilisable
as our own countrymen.
The same gentleman who so beautifully illustrated the natural
objects of South Australia has performed the like service for New
Zealand, and the intending settler there should take the opportu-
nity of seeing what manner of country he is going to. That the
scenery was of a rich, beautiful, and romantic character, was well
known before, and Mr Angas’s scenes only accord with the expec-
tations formed from descriptions. But his portraits of the natives
are somewhat surprising, especially when compared with his
representations of South Australian aborigines. It is visible at
once that they are a fine race, with a full physical development,
and a sound intellectual expression. Good-humour and firmness
are united in their physiognomy. The garments, especially those
of the women, are becoming and modest; and it is, on the whole,
a pleasure to look on these pictures after the eye and the mind
have been disgusted with the Australian semi-animal. Mr Angas’s


THE ABORIGINES.
portraits in New Zealand correspond accurately with his statement
—that ‘ the character of the New Zealanders is a strange mixture
of pride, vanity, fickleness, covetousness, and generosity, passion
and gentleness, mingled with many good and estimable qualities.
Their temperament is warm and ardent; their ideas are full of
imagery; and they possess much gaiety and wit. In acuteness of
perception they are far beyond Europeans: they are children of
nature gifted with high and superior qualities, which only require
to be directed in a right channel. They have a strong sense of
justice, and I have universally found them honest and hospi-
table.’
The specimens of decoration and architecture in Mr Angus’s
book shew such an advancement in these arts, as the early inha-
bitants of Europe might have been supposed to exhibit in wood-
work just before the date of the Norman architecture. Their
carving, and its adaptation to produce a general effect in com-
bination with the shape of the edifices, are not unlike Norman
work such as we see in the early churches and castles of England.
The carved decorations, in fact, are about as good; and we must
remember that this was the feature in our old buildings, which our
ancestors invented. The arch, and the use of pillars—indeed it
may be said the stonework generally—were derived from the Ro-
mans. It may be questioned if, without this start, the nations of
the north of Europe, at the time of the Conquest, could have
produced buildings to match with those of the New Zealanders;
with, for instance, the mansion of Eangihaiata, which goes by the
name of Kai Tangata, dreadfully indicative of the ferocity which
mixed with the civilisation, since it means eat man , and was pro-
bably conferred in the same spirit in which a sportsman names
his shooting-lodge after some sporting peculiarities or reminis-
cences.
Of their matting, which is one of the best testimonies to their
own indigenous progress in civilisation, Mr Wakefield men-
tions four kinds. The plainest sort, called porera, is closely
plaited from unscraped flax, split into narrow stripes. It has a
glossy straw-like surface, and though coarse, is compact. The
next, called korowai, is woven with scraped flax, and ornamented
with black tags or tassels: they were varied in colour by the
arrangements of different coloured stripes, and were used as
dresses by the women. A coarser kind, but fit, by its closeness of
texture, for clothing, was called tiehe, and was formed from the
refuse of the flax scraping. The finest kind was called kaitaka, or
parawai, described as a beautiful fabric, woven from fine snow-white
silky muka. The black dye so used is extracted from the bark of
a large forest-tree called the hinau, which appears to have the
11


same qualities as,the gall-nut, and the natives had found out the
secret of blackening the tannin by oxidised iron, the method in
which our own writing-ink is compounded.
From the peculiar nature of the land-claims and other sources,
many distressing disputes occurred with the natives. Among the
tragic results of these was the massacre of Wairau, as it was
called, in 1843, in which some of the most valuable men of the
colony were slain, including the gallant Captain Wakefield. Those
who had lost relations or valued friends in this miserable affair
were naturally impatient for vengeance, and irritated when, instead
of immediately bringing down on the assailants the retribution of
the powerful British government, a cool inquiry was instituted
into the whole circumstances. The investigation shewed that the
affair arose out of the fruitful source of all mischief in the new
colony—misunderstandings as to dealings in land ; and it farther
shewed that to treat savage chiefs, who, in a dispute in which they
had plausible grounds of complaint, had used the force they pos-
sessed, like inhabitants of England who had committed a murder
for the sake of revenge or robbery, would neither be prudent nor
iust. The whole of the melancholy transaction is not likely to be
forgotten in future schemes of colonisation; more particularly as
it was followed by various hostilities which did not terminate till
1847.
The fatalities in the subsequent contests with the natives were,
however, on the whole, not very great: they amounted in all to
twenty-eight killed and fifty-three wounded. But they had the
appearance of being interminable. The resources and capacity for
war which they exhibited were of a very formidable kind. Over the
vast districts where the European settlements were scattered there
were no roads, and none but the natives could command the means
of transit. They carried no baggage, their wives following them
with potatoes or other simple food—and the sole encumbrance of
their march was in the excellent double-barrelled rifle which each
warrior possessed, and could effectively use. When they found
that the British troops could destroy their fortified pahs, they
abandoned them, trusting to flying warfare. At any time the
latent energies of this warlike people might thus be roused against
British rule, however firmly established. The question was, what
remedy should be adopted? The harsh old system would have
suggested extermination; but a gentler and more effective method
was adopted, leading to amalgamation. In the first place, efforts
were made to adjust the land question with thorough impartiality:
these have been already considered. There was next an effort made
to give the natives a stake and interest in the administration of the
British system of government. Those who had fought as allies of


THE ABORIGINES.
the government were pensioned, and received distinctions. A
few natives were employed as policemen : the project was at first
nearly overwhelmed in ridicule, but it turned out to be very
effective; and Sir George Grey, in a dispatch of 1849, says— £ The
native armed police force has furnished gallant men, who have led
our skirmishing parties, and who have fallen, like good soldiers,
in tlxe discharge of their duty; and it has furnished intelligent,
sober, and steady constables, whose services, under various cir-
cumstances, have been found of great utility.’ In addition to
such means of civilisation, the instrumentality of savings’ banks,
industrial training, and other aids of civilisation—found efficacious,
and, unfortunately, necessary among the lowest grades of our own
population—have been satisfactorily resorted to. Exhibiting the
first broad, coarse characteristic of a civilisable people—intense
love of gain—the New Zealander, unlike the haughty indolent lied
Indian, has been attracted to the white man by the sources of
profit which he opens up, and many of them have turned out to
bo good workmen on the public works. Such have been the
secondary means of civilisation which, going hand in hand with
the more important functions of the Christian missionary and the
schoolmaster, arc tending to the firm establishment of peace in
New Zealand, and a good understanding between the races.
It will be seen that in the act for the government of New
Zealand, mentioned elsewhere, provision is made for the native
laws and customs being respected, and especially in all questions
among the aborigines themselves. In the royal letter of instruc-
tions sent out with the New Zealand charter in 1847, for the pur-
pose of putting this act in practical effect, not the least interesting
portion is the 14th chapter, applicable to this clause of the act.
An abridgment of it follows :
‘The governor-in-chief shall, by proclamation, set apart particular
districts of New Zealand, under the designation of “Aboriginal Dis-
tricts,” where the laws, customs, and usages of the aboriginal inha-
bitants, so far as they are not repugnant to the general principles of
humanity, are to be maintained. Within these districts the native
chiefs, appointed by the governor, are to interpret and execute
their laws, customs, and usages, wherever the aboriginal inhabitants
themselves are exclusively concerned. At the same time, any per-
son, not an aboriginal native, while within any such district, must
respect and observe these native laws, customs, and usages, on pain
of such penalties as may be inflicted by the sentence of any court or
magistrate in any other part of the province. The jurisdiction of
the courts and magistrates of the entire province are to extend over
the aboriginal districts, subject only to the duty of taking notice of
and giving effect to the laws, customs, and usages of the aboriginal
inhabitants in all such cases. In cases arising between the abori-
c 13


ginal inhabitants, beyond the limits of their districts, and in what-
ever relates to the relations to and the dealings of such aboriginal
inhabitants with each other beyond the same limits, the courts and
magistrates of the entire province, or of the district in which the
cases arise, are to enforce these native laws, customs, and usages.
‘ The governor may contract or enlarge the limits of aboriginal dis-
tricts, but no such district is ever to comprise lands which the gover-
nor may, by proclamation, have declared to be within the limits of
settlement.’
So early as the 25th March 1847, Governor Grey had to report
in the following terms the commencement of a good understanding
with the natives, which, to the advantage of both parties, made
rapid progress:—
* I am unwilling to lose this opportunity of stating, that affairs
throughout the whole of these islands are proceeding in a most
satisfactory manner. Commerce and agriculture are rapidly extend-
ing the improved methods of cultivation adopted by the natives;
the large quantities of wheat they now produce, and the erection
of mills throughout the country—some of which are their own
property—are gradually rendering them an agricultural popula-
tion, whose property will be too valuable to permit them to engage
in war; and although there are still some warlike spirits who may
occasion partial disturbances, I do not see any probability of any
extensive outbreak again taking place.
‘ The revenue, as might be expected, is rapidly increasing—indeed
so rapidly as to surpass my most sanguine expectations; and as the
natives, under the present system of taxation, contribute largely to
that revenue, every improvement in their condition will afford the
means of providing more efficient protection for property, and for
the future peace of the country. Her Majesty’s subjects, both Euro-
pean and native, appear to appreciate fully the advantages of then-
present position ; and not only evince the most gratifying contentment,
but generally afford me the most cheerful and active assistance in
carrying out my various measures. I need hardly add, that this
assistance is most valuable to me; and that, in the case of the native
chiefs, it has recently enabled me to arrange, in the most amicable
and advantageous manner, the great mass of the land-claims in the
southern districts, which, had they not met me in a spirit of the
fullest confidence, I should have found it most difficult to adjust
satisfactorily.’— {Pari. Pap. 1847.)
That a complete cessation of all tribe or party conflict among
the natives should have been accomplished, is of course out of the
question; since indeed their increased industry and civilisation,
by making them more conscious of the advantages of wealth, and
especially of landed property, open up new causes of dispute
and contention. But short as has been the British rule there,
it has been so effectually established, that what would have been


THE ABORIGINES.
a war between two independent tribes or nations, sinks into a
personal dispute, to be settled by British authority. So lately
as September 1849, Governor Grey had to write to the secretary
for the colonies ‘that hostilities had commenced between the
tribes of the Waikato district and those residing on the west
coast of this island, regarding a tract of land claimed by both
parties in the neighbourhood ofWangeroa, which lies between
this place and New Plymouth. I also understand that, from the
number and influence of the tribes engaged in this affair, very
serious disturbances might be apprehended, unless their proceed-
ings were checked;’ but at the same time he had to report that
both parties had applied for his mediation; that, in fact, they
respectively pleaded their case before him ; and that they shewed
the utmost willingness to submit to the decision of the govern-
ment in the matter. —( Papers relative to Affairs of New Zealand ,
1850.)
Governor Grey, in a dispatch dated in March 1849, gave a
very hopeful account of the prospects of the natives, as he saw
them in a progress up the Waikato and Waipa, as far as Otawao.
‘ I was both surprised and gratified,’ he said, ‘at the rapid
advances in civilisation which the natives of that part of New
Zealand have made during the last two years. Two flour-mills
have already been constructed at their sole cost, and another
water-mill is in course of erection. The natives of that distinct
also grow wheat very extensively; at one place alone the
estimated extent of land under wheat is 10,000 acres. They have
also good orchards, with fruit-trees of the best kinds grafted and
budded by themselves. They have extensive cultivations of
Indian corn, potatoes, &c.; and they have acquired a considerable
number of horses and horned stock. Altogether, I have never
seen a more thriving or contented population in any part of the
world.’— [Farther Papers relative to the Affairs of New Zealand ,
1850.)
The latest notice of the habits and position of the natives, from
a private source, is of the same promising and hopeful character.
It is in a letter by Mr Hursthouse of Plymouth, published in the
last edition of Mr Earp’s book on New Zealand. He says;—
* From their skill in using the American axe, management of fire,
and knowledge of “burning off,” they are found most serviceable
in the clearing and cultivation of bush or timber-land —in perform-
ance of which work they now frequently contract with the settlers
at so much per acre. In fact, owing to the rapidity with which
English labourers rise into the “small farmer class,” and become
themselves employers of labour, all our farming operations would
be seriously crippled but for the powerful assistance of the natives.
15


Our harvests are now almost entirely cut and carried by them;
whilst as to ploughing, my esteemed fellow-settler, J. G. Cooke, Esq.,
informs me that on the glebe farm attached to the Wesleyan Mission
Station, there are some native lads who, for quickness of driving and
straightness of furrow, are almost a match for the best English
ploughman in the place. These lads, it appears, are pupils at the
“ Grey Institutea large native industrial school or training college,
an excellent institution, working much good among the natives, and
which owes its existence chiefly to the useful energy and prac-
tical philanthropy of the Bev. Hanson Turton, a gentleman whose
thorough knowledge of the native language and customs is admirably
applied in promoting the joint good of both races.
‘Nor is it in the labour-field alone that we are beginning to find
the natives such stanch allies. They share in the sports and
amusements of the settlers with equal ardour and success. Quick
of eye, strong of arm, swift of foot, supple of limb, for pulling an
oar, running a match, or accompanying an exploring party, they
have no superiors. They are bold riders too, and at the first races
ever held in New Plymouth, subscribed for a plate, and won it on
their own horses; whilst at the last anniversary of the settlement
they took the honours at the rustic sports—catching the greased
pig before he had well started, and throwing the best of our Cornish
wrestlers in a manner patent to themselves.’
CAPABILITIES —INDUCEMENTS TO SETTLERS.
The following very condensed view of the natural productions
of these islands is from an authority which ought to be of the
most unquestionable kind—that of the governor of the colony
in a communication to the colonial secretary:—
‘Animals imported into this country thrive and increase greatly.
There are no beasts of prey except dogs. Fowls of every domestic
kind are becoming abundant. Bees succeed admirably. Hides are
good, and heavy. Wool is excellent—the fibre being of uniform
quality and thickness, owing to the equable temperature of the
climate and continuance of pasture. Timber abounds of all qualities.
Bark, fit for tanning, is plentiful. Dye-woods are numerous. All
European herbage, shrubs, and trees, succeed and thrive rapidly.
Clover and grass speedily conquer any fern or weeds allowed to
remain on ill-cleared land. All European fruits succeed and ripen
well—grapes, apples, pears, figs, melons, strawberries, peaches, &c.
Flax has been undervalued, because an inferior quality has in
general been used and exported. The “tihore,” or silky flax, is much
superior to the common kind, and will become a staple commodity.’
‘Beneath the productive surface of this teeming island are mineral
stores, as yet hardly known. If, from merely looking at or scratch-
ing some of the projecting corners of the land, at least twenty
16


CAPABILITIES—INDUCEMENTS TO SETTLERS.
valuable minerals have already been discovered, in greater or less
abundance, what may not be anticipated after years of research
in the interior? The more valuable minerals hitherto found are
coal, iron, limestone, copper, tin, manganese, nickel, lead, silver,
bismuth, arsenic, cerium, sulphur, alum, rock-salt, marble of various
qualities and colours, cobalt, ochre, fuller’s earth, asphalt tun, pumice,
volcanic earths and lavas, &c. Of the copper, it ought to be re-
marked that the per-centage of metal is usually very high, and that
the ore is easily smelted. Much of the manganese contains a larger
per-centage of copper. Both this and the copper can be quarried,
rather than mined, in abundance. Fuller’s earth, fire-clay, and stone,
fit for furnaces, which the bakers here use for their ovens, can be
found anywhere in this neighbourhood.— Robert Fitzroy, Governor .’
A great many of these tempting inducements for embarking
capital may be safely said to be less seductive or promising than
they were in 1847, when they were so reported.
If this inventory of its productions be admitted to be accurate,
the emigrant’s legitimate chances in New Zealand must still be
as an agriculturist or pasturer. The agricultural land is divided
into the timbered and the fern-covered. Neither travellers nor
settlers in New Zealand talk of timber as a nuisance and impedi-
ment, as it is in North America. It is in scattered masses, not
dense, unremitting forest tracts ; and were there a better market
for it, it appears to be in general timber of considerable value.
It is at all events of great use in the settlements: how large an
article of export it may yet be from the interior recesses of
the mountains no one can anticipate.
One of the most serviceable accounts of the chief timber-trees
of New Zealand is that given by Mr Hursthouse in his account
of New Plymouth, and we shall here quote it:—
‘ The- rimu, called red pine, more from its foliage than from any
resemblance in the wood, is frequently sixty to seventy feet high
without a branch, and from twelve to sixteen feet in circumference.
Its foliage is remarkably graceful, drooping like clusters of feathers,
and of a beautiful green. The tree opens very sound, is entirely
free from knots, and, for a hard wood, works well. It is chiefly used
for house-building; the finer parts for panelling and cabinet work:
these are handsome, taking a fine polish, and in appearance some-
thing between Honduras mahogany and coarse rosewood.
‘ The kahikatea, or white pine, is occasionally seen ninety feet
high without a branch. In foliage and manner of growth it
resembles the rimu, but has a lighter-coloured bark. The wood is
not much unlike the Baltic white pine, but always sound, and quite
free from knots : it is used for general purposes, for oars and boat-
planking.
‘ The puriri, or iron-wood, is one of the most valuable trees in
New Zealand, growing from thirty to fifty feet high, and from twelve
17


to twenty feet in circumference. The wood has a strong scent, is
of a dark-brown colour, close grained, heavy, and of a greasy
unctuous nature; which last property is probably the cause of its
being so much perforated by a large white slug, peculiar to this
tree, when growing. Iron-wood is principally used for foundations,
fencing-posts, mill-cogs, &c. for all of which it is admirably adapted;
as it would bo for any purpose requiring great strength and dura-
bility in moist situations.
‘ The rata in its manner of growth is very singular. At first it
is a creeper, clinging for support round some young tree; for a time
both flourish together in close embrace ; but as they grow, the subtle
rata, appearing to sap the strength of its early supporter, winds
its strong arms around, by slow degrees, crushes it to death, and
eventually becomes itself the tree. The pukatea is generally
favoured with these embraces, which, though slow, are sure to kill.
The wood of the rata is a reddish-brown colour; very strong and
tough ; well adapted to wheelwrights’ work; and from its crooked
manner of growth, furnishing suitable stuff for shipbuilding.
‘The kohe-kohe attains a height of about forty feet without a
branch; it has a handsome laurel-like leaf, and is the most common
tree on the edges of the forest. It splits well, and is used for
shingles, fencing-bars, and rails.
‘ The pukatea, a large tree, is a soft, easy-working wood, of light-
brown colour, chiefly used for common work, and weather-boarding
rough outbuildings.
‘ The tawa and the rewa-rewa are handsome trees, particularly
the latter; both, however, are of inferior quality, and not used
except as split stuff: the first, being highly resinous, makes excellent
firewood. The hinau is remarkable for the whiteness of its wood,
and chiefly known for its valuable dyeing properties; the rich black
dye of the native mats is obtained from its bark.’
There never was perhaps a naturally fruitful country so des-
titute of indigenous productions for food as these fine islands.
Fish, especially the larger kinds, have generally been abundant;
but on the land the only considerable animal has been man, and
consequently he has been eaten. There is a similar destitution in
the vegetable world. Except the roots of the great forests of
fern, and the cabbage plants, there seems to have been no edible
vegetable there certainly was nothing that could be classed
either as grain or fruit; and when some seed-vessels of a luscious
aspect have been produced, as contradicting the latter deficiency,
they have been found unsuitable for food. The nearest approach
to edible indigenous fruit seems to be the poropo, of which Mr
Hursthouse says— ‘ When quite ripe, its flavour is something
between that of apple-peel and a bad strawberry; but if tasted
before it is soft and mellow, the poropo is most nauseous.’
Yet almost every fruit, pot-herb, and grain known in Europe,


CAPABILITIES —INDUCEMENTS TO SETTLERS.
eeems to take naturally in New Zealand; and there is, besides the
forests, at least one native vegetable of the smaller growth which
is useful and valuable —the JPhormium tenax, or New Zealand flax.
As it has been hitherto considered the raw material of a native
manufacture, the fabrics from it have been already mentioned in
connection with the history and habits of the natives.
The agricultural capacities of the islands need be only generally
spoken of, as they have to be mentioned in connection with each
settlement. There are two kinds of agricultural lands—the forest
and the fern—and it seems to be undecided which is the better of
the two, either for the poor settler, demanding rapid returns, or for
the capitalist, who looks for the best ultimate investment. Of
this topical peculiarity, the fern-land, the most practical-looking
account we have seen is in Mr Hursthouse’s account of New
Zealand. He says: —
‘ Fresh fern-land has one marked peculiarity, called “ sourness,” by
which is meant some property hostile to the growth of crops put in
directly after the breaking-up. The probable cause of this is the
absence in the new soil of such promoters of vegetation as the
ammoniacal gases, readily absorbed from the atmosphere when the
soil is loosened and exposed ; although, if “ sourness ” arosb entirely
from this cause, it would appear strange that the bush-land also is
not subject to it. If a piece of the finest fern-land be cleared and
sown at once with wheat, the yield would probably not exceed
fifteen bushels per acre; the same piece prepared nine months
beforehand, might yield from thirty-five to fifty bushels, but on
timber-land this would make no difference.
‘ In cultivating fern-land, the first operation is to clear away the
fern, which is best done in some dry month. Choosing a gentle
breeze, the fern is fired; if it burns well, all the thick and matted
dead stuff at the bottom, with the leafy part of the live fern, will be
consumed, leaving only the shrivelled “ tutu,” and the cane-like fern
stalks, which, as softened by the fire, should be cut at once, either
with a strong hook, or, still better, with a short scythe, and the
“ tutu ” slashed down with a bill-hook. Lying a few days to wither,
the stalks are loosely raked up and burned with the “ tutu ” branches;
and the “ tutu ” stumps have then to be taken up, and carted into a
heap, or carried off. After these operations, which cost from 15s. to
20s. per acre, the land is ploughed with a strong plough, having a
wrought-iron share, and four oxen. The best depth is about ten
inches, turning up a little subsoil. When broken up, the soil should
lie some time to get pulverised, and to dry the fern-root. It should
then bo harrowed and rolled, so as to allow of the easy raking up
and burning of the fern-root; and to get it into superfine order,
ploughing and these subsequent operations should be repeated,
when the land, after lying about six months, will be in the finest
possible condition for any crop which may afterwards bo grown.
19


‘A complete course of “ double working ” such as tliis costs from
£2, 10s. to £3 per acre ; but it should be observed that as this sum
is for work performed chiefly by bullock-power, it will be materially
reduced as cattle become cheaper. The price of working oxen in
New South Wales is about £8 per pair; in Wellington and Auckland,
£2O ; whilst here it has generally been about £35: but as cattle are
fast increasing, and as a direct trade has been commenced with
Sydney, it is probable that in another year a pair of oxen will be
purchased here for £2O.
‘The best method of cropping fern-land thus prepared is hardly
yet determined. If the soil has been exposed about nine months,
well mellowed, perhaps the best course would bo two wheat crops,
then manure a little for potatoes or fallow, and so round; but if it
is likely to prove at all sour, the first crop should be potatoes, which
might be followed by two grain crops, and then a fallow. Sheep
have a surprising effect on fern-land: a flock folded a single night
has been known to increase a crop of Avheat in the particular spot
nearly 100 per cent.; and all animal manure is considered to go
twice as far as in England.’
The question between agriculture and pasture as a settler’s
occupation is not so wide as it is in Australia. The pasturage
capacities of these islands, whatever they may be, do not appear
to have been tried on any large scale. Agricultural capacities can
be tried on any scale; and the cultivator’s success in New Zealand
seems to point it out as the safer walk, at least for a man of
moderate means. It does not appear that the operations, or even
the machinery for large farming, will certainly apply to the pecu-
liar state of the country and its inhabitants. Mr Earp, who
speaks as a practical man, says that when he left the colony,
thrashing-machines, patent harrows, and ingenious ploughs, lay
rotting on the shore; and he recommends the agricultural settler
to trust to the spade and mattock. Perhaps this may be sound
advice until ingenious and sagacious men indicate the kind of
agricultural machinery best suited to the organic character of the
soil.
Dr S. M. Martin, who had resided for some time in New Zea-
land, and had been a member of the legislative council there,
attested its superiority to Sydney, where lie had also resided, for
purely agricultural emigrants, on account of its abundant and
invariable supply of moisture. He thought the North Island the
best—he had there seen, he said, excellent wheat, and still better
barley. He thought all English agricultural products would grow
there, and some not known in England. Flax was indigenous, and
abundant; and he conceived that the vine, Indian corn, and hops,
could be easily cultivated, but he did not think the soil and climate
adapted to rice. He recommended the home system of farming
20


CAPABILITIES —INDUCEMENTS TO SETTLERS.
as the proper one for the place—a combination of pasture ansi
agriculture.
The mining mania generated in South Australia spread every-
where among the southern colonies in which there were any
chances of its finding materials to operate upon. These appear
to be abundant in New Zealand. Near Auckland manganese has
been worked and exported with great success. In the same
neighbourhood there are several copper-mines, where the metal
has been prepared for shipment at the several rates of £B,
£G, and £4 per ton, according to quality. The mining mania lias
had a characteristic influence on the natives, who, though given to
industry, are still more partial to bargaining than to producing, and
seem ever ready to make their own out of the desires and wants
of the colonists. ‘ The very natives,’ says an eye-witness, ‘ have
become infected with the mania, and are nearly as expert judges
of copper and manganese as the settlers, and may be seen going
about with fragments of stone and bottles of nitric acid for the
purpose of testing its composition. They serve to keep the
settlers in a perpetual .excitement by pretending to have dis-
covered copper or manganese upon their lands; and no little
money is spent in fruitless expeditions to pi'ove the fact. In some
cases the eagerness of the settlers outruns their prudence, and
they are induced, by the solicitations of the natives, to purchase
the land before seeing it, fearing some reckless speculator may
otherwise secure the prize; but it is needless to say that they are
almost sure of losing their money, as the specimen of the ore
shewn to them has in all probability been taken from the mines
of the great barrier, or from the island of Kawau ’ [near Auckland.]
—(Brown on New Zealand and its Aborigines, p. 203.)
With a laudable desire to afford every kind of useful infor-
mation to emigrants to New Zealand, as well as to all the other
emigration fields, the Emigration Commissioners, in their official
circular for 1850, give the prices of provisions and the wages
of labour there. But in a territory so scantily supplied with
European inhabitants, so apt to have its population in any
district rapidly increased, and also so apt to have its market for
goods affected by the unexpected arrival of a vessel, or any
like cause, one can scarcely speak of a fixed scale of wages of
labour, or of the price of commodities. It will hardly be a prac-
tical guide to people proposing to emigrate thither, to know that
in 1848 the wages of bakers were from 4s. to 6s. a day ; those of
bricklayers from 6s. to Bs.; and those of carpenters from 7s. to
10s.; while those of cabinetmakers were from 6s. to 7s. only; and
on the other hand, those of blacksmiths, generally one of the most
serviceable of all trades in a colony, were from 3s. to ss. The least
21


vibration in the labour-market, caused by the influx of a few
carpenters, bricklayers, or other trades, might completely revolu-
tionise this scale.
In the circular there is also a list of the prices of commodities.
It is pretty clear that, unless in so far as manufactures happen to
bring a very different price in New Zealand from what they bring
in the Australian colonies, it must be owing to conventional cir-
cumstances, not likely to last—to incidental circumstances, for the
moment enhancing or lowering the price. For instance, in this
list, while baize shirts are quoted in Western Australia as from
ss. to 6s. each, they are in New Zealand from 10s. to 16s. Then,
while strong boots are in Western Australia sold at 12s. to 16s.
per pair, the price in New Zealand is from Bs. to 10s. It is clear
that these prices, in the case of New Zealand at least, are tempo-
rary and capricious.
DISPOSAL OF LAND.
Since the cessation of the New Zealand Company, the method of
disposing of the lands of the colony may be considered in a state
of transition. It has been stated that the company superseded
the government in the southern colony in 1847, and that it
had its own peculiar privileges in the disposal of land. On the
cessation of the company in 1850, the statutory rules, to be imme-
diately detailed, of course applied to the colony in general. But
the government market for land is liable to be disturbed by the
quantity thrown into the market by the private allottees, who have
never gone out to take their allotments, or have been forced or
induced to part with them. The statements connected with the
history of the colony, with the aborigines, &c. will let the reader
see in some measure the position of the land-question in New
Zealand; and it will be seen further on that the Otago and Can-
terbury settlements have their own special regulations.
The statute of 1847 having repealed the Australian land-sales
act, in so far as it comprised New Zealand, left the crown, as
having at its uncontrolled disposal the unappropriated lands, to
make such rules as the government should think fit for that pur-
pose. Accordingly a set of regulations on this subject, adhering
in general to the system of the waste-lands act, formed part of
the instructions transmitted to the colony with the charter. The
general spirit and object of these regulations will be inferred from
the narrative already given of the history of the New Zealand
Company, and the adjustment of the land-claims; but those who
desire to see all their specialties will find an abridgment of
them in a succeeding page.


DISPOSAL OF LAND.
Regulations for depasture and timber licences were issued in
August 1848; but they were withdrawn, and others substituted for
them, by proclamation of the governor-in-chief on the 2d Novem-
ber. By the regulations as so amended, the licence for a defined
run costs £5; that for depasture on common lands, 10s. 6d. The
yearly assessment for the animals depastured, payable in advance,
according to registered returns, is, for each head of great cattle,
including horned cattle, horses, mules, &c. Bd.; for each head of
small cattle, including sheep, goats, and swine, Id. A person
desiring to occupy a defined run, having obtained from the sur-
veyor-general a certificate that the land belongs to the crown,
and is unoccupied, lodges it with the commissioner of crown
lands. If the run remains four months unused, it may be
claimed by another party. The occupation is not to interfere
with the crown’s right to sell any part of the run; and the pur-
chaser of any portion is entitled, in the neighbourhood of his
station, to pasturage for sixteen head of great and one hundred
head of small cattle, for each eighty acres of purchase. Runs
supposed to possess any peculiar value are to be let by public
auction. It is provided that * every proper facility will be afforded
by the government to persons desirous of purchasing homesteads
on their runs, but it will not undertake to survey and offer for sale
any smaller block than fifty acres of land.’
There are special rules applicable to those tracts of land which
are within the limits of proclaimed hundreds. There the right of
pasturage is to be granted exclusively to occupants under grants
of land within the hundred, and to the New Zealand Fencibles,
and the natives and half-castes, occupying lands by permission of
the government. In applying for the licence, which is renew-
able annually, and costs 10s. 6d., a return must be made of
the quantity of land held. A meeting of the licensed holders
in each hundred is to be held annually, for the election of
wardens to regulate the appointment of pasturing for the year
following.
Timber. —Persons occupying waste lands for the felling of tim-
ber pay a licence of £5. The district covered by a licence is
marked out by the commissioner of crown lands. No fresh appli-
cant for a licence is to be allowed injuriously to interfere with a
forest on which any other person has expended capital and labour,
and no one is to be allowed to cut or remove timber on the crown
lands reserved by government for the public use.
In the Report of the Emigration Commissioners for 1851, it is
stated that a decision of the supreme court had made the pre-
viously unsatisfactory state of the land-claims assume a still more
uncertain appearance, and that in consequence it became necessary
23


to pass an ‘ Ordinance for the quieting of titles,’ which validates
all existing crown-grants in the northern province without excep-
tion. This will render the title secure to about 93,000 acres.
To prevent injustice, it is provided that ‘ unsatisfied native claims
connected with the lands thus granted away shall, if brought
before the judge of the supreme court before the Ist of January
1853, be satisfied in the first instance out of the general revenue
of the province, the compensation thus paid being made a charge
upon the land: that grants of a given quantity of land, to be
taken within certain limits, shall confer a right of selection within
those limits; but that where such selection may be impossible,
by reason of native claims, the grantee shall be allowed compen-
sation out of other lands (not being town lands) which have been
put up to auction, but not sold ; competing claims to be disposed
of by a commissioner.
THE NORTHERN SETTLEMENTS.
Beyond the belt of rich alluvial land which is more directly
connected with the Cook's Strait settlement in the east is New
Plymouth, the garden of New Zealand. The whole of the middle
district of the Northern Island, except the bare tops of the highest
mountains, is said to be eminently productive. There is fine
agricultural land in the great valleys; but most of the hills are of
rounded outlines, and capable of cultivation when in distant ages
the plains and valleys become exhausted, while in the meantime
they will make ample pasture-ranges. From New Plymouth,
along the west coast beyond Auckland, the country is compa-
ratively level, rising into downs and isolated hills; the district is in
general lightly wooded, and pronounced suitable for all ordinary
kinds of cultivation. From Kaipara to the North Cape the
island is narrow and mountainous, and the tracts applicable to
productive purposes are in a much more limited proportion than
in other parts of the island.
Auckland is the capital of New Zealand, at least so far as it has
been, from the commencement of its colonisation, the seat of
government. But it has not been a popular emigration district,
and it is often remarked that less can be discovered regarding it
than about any other settlement. It contains about three thou-
sand inhabitants, and displays some public buildings, chiefly the
government offices of the colony. The neighbouring district is
undulating, well watered, and in general stripped of timber. The
town is the trading centre, so far as any place can be so where
there is so small a population on a territory as large as Great


THE NORTHERN SETTLEMENTS.
Britain. There are statistical trading returns for Auckland, but
it is not easy to say how far they contain matter likely to influence
the position of the future emigrant.
This has not been a popular district. The most distinct account
of its physical character which we have seen is in ‘ The First-
Annual Keport of the Agricultural and Horticultural Society of
Auckland’ (1843), and is as follows: —
* The country in the district of Auckland is of that undulating
character which marks the lower series of the secondary sandstone
formations, with table-lands and corresponding valleys; so that the
sections formed by the shores of the estuaries and rivers which
indent it—the Waitemata, the Manukao, the Tamaki, and part of
the gulf of Hauraki —present a succession of argillaceous sandstone
cliffs of different heights, with intervening bays receding inland—
the country lying between these great estuaries varying in breadth
from 15 to 3, and at the portage of the Tamaki only three-fourths
of a mile, affords over its surface flats of considerable extent and
declivities practicable for agriculture, the bottoms being always occu-
pied by a small stream —generally bare of wood, or covered with
patches of small-sized trees suitable for fuel or fencing—and rising
in gentle elevations to the mountain-ranges to the west and south,
which are of a different geological formation, and are universally
covered with forests of gigantic trees.
4 In various parts of the above-described tract, hills shoot up in
the form of truncated cones of various elevations, the highest about
500 feet, which are the remains of extinct volcanoes, each having
a well-defined crater and a base of some extent, covered with loose
fragments of vesicular lava and scoria, or immense masses of more
compact lava 44 cropping out” at various points, the interstices, how-
ever, pennitting the growth of a variety of shrubs and trees. The
whole of the above-mentioned country, with the exception of the
volcanic land, is well watered by natural streams, and water can be
procured at all times in abundance by means of wells.
4 About one-half of this district, consisting of undulating ground,
is covered with fern and various shrubs, chiefly the tupaki, and
possesses a soil of a rich yellow clay mixed with sand and charred
vegetable matter, owing to the frequent burning of the fern, which,
when broken up and exposed to the air, soon pulverizes into a fine
rich loam, varying in depth from one to two feet, easily laboured; but,
from the excellency of the subsoil, it may be cultivated to any depth
required. The subsoil consists of a red and yellow clay, mixed with
ferruginous sand. The substratum is formed of a soft blue and
yellow argillaceous sandstone.
4 One-fourth of the district presents a more level surface, being
covered with dwarf manuka, fern, and a variety of small shrubs and
tufts of grass. Its soil consists of a whitish clay mixed with sand,
more adhesive than the former, yet, when broken up and exposed,
soon pulverizes; the subsoil white clay and red ferruginous sand,
2 5


substratum the same as the former. It is not so rich as the first-
mentioned soil.
‘ The remaining fourth may he considered different from either of
the former, being generally situated near the volcanic hills of a
varied surface, the hilly portion being covered with fern and grass.
The soil consisting of a dry red volcanic formation to a great depth,
the greater part covered with scoria, and where it is only on the
surface, the soil is a rich red loam, very fertile; another portion,
covered with trees and shrubs, shews a rich mould of a volcanic
nature to a depth of several feet, mixed with red sand and small
calcined stones, resting upon a substratum of concrete. Another
small portion lying along the banks of fresh-water creeks, covered
with evergreens and tree-ferns, affords a rich friable clay, mixed
with ferruginous sand, resting on a substratum of a soft yellow and
red ferruginous sandstone.
‘ It is thus seen what a variety of soils are offered to the agricul-
turist, each adapted to some particular production, and favourable
to some peculiar mode of agriculture.’
Mr Tyrone Power, a son of the actor of that name, in his
‘ Sketches of New Zealand,’ already cited, gave the following
unprepossessing account of Auckland:—‘A beggarly collection
of poverty-stricken huts and wooden houses, without any of the
bustle and briskness that betokens business and prosperity.’ And
as to its neighbourhood —‘ The surrounding country is barren and
uninteresting; it consists of low rolling hills covered with fern.
Mount Eden, and one or two other black, scorise-covered hills, are
in the distance; but their sterile look does not make the landscape
more inviting.’
A return is contained in the parliamentary papiers on New
Zealand for 1850, of the exports from Auckland in the five years
from 1844 to 1848 inclusive. With a steady advance in some
articles, there is a decrease in two considerable items Kauri
gum and copper ore. Of the former, the exports in 1845 were
estimated at £12,847, and in 1847, £l4l. The copper ore of
1846 was valued at £22,180, and that of 1848 at £5OO. It
appears, as to the former, that its value had been much exag-
gerated, and that the copper ore, from the quantity of sulphur
contained in it, was not a safe stowage. The other exports were
grain, timber, flax, bark; whalebone, oil, and other produce of the
whale-fishery ; hides, salted butcher-meat, wool, ropes, and curio-
sities. The exports of timber had increased considerably—the
amount in 1844 being £346, and in 1848, £7604. The barley
exported was in 1846 valued at £1479 ; in 1847, at £943; and in
1848, at £270. The wool-trade had, up to 1848, shewn but trifling
results, producing in 1846, £822; 1847, £627; and in 1848, £421.
The total amounts are shewn to have been —in 1844, £3037; in
26


THE NORTHERN SETTLEMENTS.
1845, £27,239 ; in 1846, £40,087; in 1847, £12,670; and in 1848,
£15,096.
New Plymouth. —This small agricultural settlement, the native
name of which is Taranaki, is on the west coast of the North
Island, just where the coast trends eastward, after the broad head-
land, called Cape Egmont, formed by the sudden turn of the long
semicircular sweep from Cook’s Strait. It is in latitude 39° 1'
south, and longitude, 174° 15' east. By sea, it is 180 miles from
Wellington, 150 from Nelson, and 120 from the nearest harbour
to Auckland. This was one of the earliest proposed settlements
of the New Zealand Company, having been the object of an
arrangement by Colonel Wakefield in 1839. The land-claims
connected with it were the most difficult and perplexed of all;
and conflicting views kept the poor colony far behind the pro-
gress it would naturally have attained. As in the instance of
Port Nicholson, there was a question between conqueror and
conquered. The owners were the Ngatiawa, who were attacked
by the Waikato under the powerful chief Te Whero Whero, by
whom they were driven into exile, enslaved, or put to death. The
conquerors do not seem to have occupied the territory, and the
New Zealand Company had to deal only with a small number of
natives, whose claims were very modest. Subsequently, however,
two opposite parties urged their claims —Te Whero Whero by
right of conquest, and the fugitives whom he had driven forth.
Settlers had arrived in 1841, and were proceeding with the occu-
pation and cultivation of their allotments, when the question of
their title was thus provokingly opened up. Mr Commissioner
Spain, as referred to, awarded the company 60,000 acres of the
70,000 which they claimed. This was disallowed by Governor
Pitzroy, who, on the ground that all who had latent rights
had not been made parties to the sale, restored nearly the whole
land to the natives. Thus the settlement was for the time
paralysed; a few only of the colonists remained, and compen-
sation had to be made to others deprived of their holdings.
Sir George Grey at last turned his endeavours to the restoration
of New Plymouth. To force the natives to abandon what
had been named as theirs by the highest authority was of
course out of the question; but it was not difficult to satisfy
them of the policy of disposing of their claims for a reasonable
compensation. It was seen that the new arrangement was
rightly sanctioned, and that there should now be no mistake about
the absolute character of the purchase. When Mr Hursthouse
wrote his account of New Plymouth in 1849, the 60,000 acres
were again considered virtually available, and the colony was
flourishing. Though projected on a small scale, it will probably
27


ramify itself into other fruitful districts when the 60,000 acres
have been absorbed in cultivation. To a population of 1137, Mr
Hursthouse gives the following account of the land in cultivation :
—Wheat, 7G6J acres ; barley, 128 do.; oats, 108! do.; potatoes,
167£ do.; turnips, 79 do.; rye, 5 do.; maize, 1J do.; hops, 1 do.;
grass, 267 do.; fallow, 85 do.; gardens, 45 do.; native clearings,
estimated at 450 do.; in all, 2103 J do. He gives the live-stock as
follows:—Cattle, 726; horses, 48; sheep, 898; goats, 177. This
includes a small number of each possessed by natives, who besides
own a large number of pigs.
This little settlement, now containing about 2000 inhabitants,
since its recovery from the convulsions of the land question, has
been considered a very suitable place for men of small capital and
frugal habits, or for those who, having nothing but their labour
to go forth with, desire an opportunity of gradually raising
their condition. Mr Hursthouse gives the following statement
of the possessions of sixty-nine emigrants, chiefly agricultural
labourers, whose average possessions, on their landing, he sup-
poses to have been about £5 per head:—3l2J acres of wheat,
barley, and oats; 10 do. turnips; 80f do. potatoes; 46 do. grass;
97 head of cattle; 143 pigs; 27 goats; 59 houses; 238 J acres of
cultivated land; 180 acres of wild land.
Of the climate, and its effects on health and vitality, Mr
Hursthouse tells us—
‘ From the remarkable equality of the climate of this settlement, it
is impossible to define the seasons with accuracy: the coldest and
wettest months are June, July, and August; the warmest and driest,
January, February, and March Snow is never seen except
around Mount Egmont; ice is occasionally observed in the July
mornings, but soon disappears under a brilliant sun, like that of an
English September. The warmest weather is refreshed by sea-
breezes, and the nights are invariably cool. Although the winter
months are wet, and showers frequent through the greater part of
the year, yet from the lightness of the soil, and the dryness and elas-
ticity of the atmosphere prevailing in the fine weather, the climate is
not felt to be damp. Fogs and mists are unknown; there are no
hurricanes ; and thunder-storms are neither so frequent nor severe
;us even in England This climate, .as might be expected, is
highly salubrious. The children born here are considered by their
mothers to bo remarkably fine; and making all due allowance for
maternal hyperbole, they certainly promise to be a large and robust
race. By the census of 1847, the population was 1137; the births
that year, and in 1846, when the census was 108.9, amounted jointly
to 104—the deaths to 14, two of which were accidental; yet in 1847
fever and hooping-cough were introduced into the settlement from
Auckland. This shews the annual ratio of births to be lin 18; of


THE NORTHERN SETTLEMENTS.
deaths, lin 159; whereas in England the births are 1 in about 32
the deaths 1 in 44. This comparison,’ however, the writer candidly
remarks, ‘does not prove Taranaki to be superior in salubrity to
England to the enormous extent indicated by these figures; for some
fatal diseases common to humanity have not yet been introduced
into the country, and most of the emigrants to this settlement were
in the prime of life.’
The character of the country is a fern-land, with a vast, rich
forest background, exhibiting almost every variety of tree known
in these prolific islands on the slopes of the mountains. Towering
over these rises the great conical snow-capped summit of Mount
Egmont, 900 feet high, and by repute the highest mountain in
the islands. The character of the lower scenery is described as
beautifully rich and undulating. Running water is abundant.
There are, besides the graceful fern, many beautiful flowering
shrubs, and among others the delicate and brilliant fuschia, while
the thickets abound with bright blue parroquets and singing-birds.
On the productive capabilities of the soil Mr Hursthouse says—
‘ The soil may be called a very light, friable loam, with a porous
subsoil: it is divided, locally, into three sorts, each marked by a
different vegetation. The first is but a strip, extending along the
coast, covered with light fern, interspersed with tufts of grass, and
freely mixed, especially nearest the shore, with the black iron sand
which is so plentiful here. The productive powers of this sand are
rather surprising. Almost on the beach, within sixty yards of high-
water mark, some early emigrants formed a few rough gardens,
which produced excellent crops of vegetables ; and, strange as it
may seem to an English farmer, upwards of sixteen bushels of wheat
have been obtained from a quarter of an acre of nearly the same
description of soil.
* The second division, adjoining this, is a tract of great exent,
covered with fern six to eight feet high, intermixed with a small
bush called “ tutu,” and a species of tall grass called “ toi-toi.” The
surface is a vegetable decomposition of from seven to ten inches,
matted together by the fern-root, with a light, yellow subsoil of
many feet in depth, entirely free from stones, shells, gravel, or clay.
The principal farms are on this land; and it may here be observed
that the chief difference, as respects the cultivation of this soil and
the preceding, is, that it requires more exposure before cropping.
* The third division is the bush, or forest-land, which joins the fern,
and extends along the country in a rather irregular line, two to five
miles from the coast, and a considerable distance back into the
interior. This soil in appearance resembles the second description of
fern-land, but turns up quite mellow, and fit for cropping at once.’
The natives remaining in the settlement amount to about seven
hundred, living in a few well-constructed pahs, and cultivating
Gome four or five hundred acres of land. They are described as a
C 29


civil, worthy, well-meaning set of people, tolerably industrious,
and in this respect useful neighbours to the settlers.
Away from the small block of cultivable land there stretch
various grassy plains, the nature and extent of which is as yet but
little known. The settlement does not yet press in the direction
of sheep-walks or cattle-runs, nor is it likely, while other parts of
these islands and the plains of Australia hold out higher imme-
diate temptations, to be sought by the lordly owners of great flocks
and herds. It is as yet essentially a small agricultural settlement;
and from the same author from whom we have already so largely
quoted, we take the following account of the actual effect of the
agricultural operations heretofore conducted. Commencing with
the statement that ‘ wheat is a certain crop, not subject to rust,
mildew, or the attack of any insect,’ he then proceeds to say—
‘ Fern-lands apparently alike in every respect have varied in yield
the same season as much as twenty bushels per acre—a difference
attributable to bad preparation and premature cropping. Small
cultivators have not always been able to farm properly; and others,
until lately, have not been fully convinced that fern-land pays best
when thoroughly worked at first, as in the manner before described.
The most practical men are of opinion that when this is done, the
general average yield of wheat in this district will be from thirty to
thirty-five bushels per acre. The heaviest crop that has yet been
obtained on any large piece was 448 bushels from eight acres, equal
to fifty-six bushels per acre; sixty bushels have occasionally been
obtained on small pieces; and in one instance it is said that the first
crop on an acre of bush-land sown with four pecks was nearly eighty
bushels of clean wheat. [The last statement is very doubtful.]
‘ From the apparent nature of the soil, it was expected that barley
would succeed even better than wheat: it has, however, been found
inferior both in yield and quality; and if the common crops were
placed in the order in which they have answered best, they would
stand nearly as follows:—Wheat, say 3; potatoes, 2|; barley and
oats, 2. As wheat, however, has been grown in the proportion of
eighteen to three of barley, and eighteen to two of oats, the latter
have scarcely had a fair trial. Three to four bushels per acre more
of wheat would be obtained if the operations of harvesting, thrash-
ing, and dressing, were better performed; and in estimating the
agricultural capabilities of this district by the present yield of crops,
it should be remembered that if farming were conducted with that
practical knowledge, skill, and attention required in England, the
yield would be materially increased; in some cases perhaps almost
doubled.’
The notices of the iron-sand, and the fruitfulness of the soil in
which it is found, are curious, and seem to point to some new
agency for stimulating the vegetative powers of organic matter.
After observing that barley and oats have been little attended
30


THE NORTHERN SETTLEMENTS.
to, and are supposed to be liable to attacks by caterpillars, Mr
Hursthouse continues —
4 Maize grows luxuriantly on bush-land, and the natives raise it in
warm spots; but the climate of this district, like that of Van
Diemen’s Land, is not sufficiently hot to ripen maize as a general
crop. Cobbett’s corn, however, succeeds remarkably well; under
garden cultivation it has yielded nearly a bushel of shelled corn to
a rod. It would be an excellent first crop on bush-land.
‘Potatoes are a certain crop; not subject to disease, nor, if planted
in proper time, to the attack of any insect. On bush-land they attain
a great size, but are not so good in quality as those grown on fern,
which are remarkably dry and mealy. The early sorts should be
planted in August; the later, for a general crop, in September or
early in October. On fern-land, without manure, about six tons per
acre are considered a fair crop; but bush-land will produce from ten
to fourteen. An extraordinary potato-plant once grew in a garden
on the “Black Iron-sand;” in size, the haulm and top resembled
some bushy shrub rather than a potato. It was taken up in the
presence of witnesses, and the tubers, carefully counted, numbered
240, of which 170 were of fair cooking size.
4 Turnips have not been extensively grown. The middle of
October is the best time for sowing, although a fair crop has been
obtained when tilled as late as Christmas; twenty tons per acre
are considered about the average yield. Turnips, like all other
roots grown here, are of excellent quality, and specimens of Swedes
weighing thirty pounds are not uncommon.
4 Beans, peas, cabbages, parsnips, carrots, and onions, have been
grown chiefly as garden vegetables; but from the luxuriance of
their growth, some of them may become rotation crops. Parsnips
and carrots yield most abundantly, and nearly 300 lbs. of onions have
been obtained from three-quarters of a rod of the black sandy soil
near the beach.
4 About three years ago, some interest was excited by an attempt
to introduce the cultivation of English flax. From some experiments
tried chiefly by Mr Flight, a gentleman conversant with the subject,
it .appeared probable that the soil and climate of the Taranaki dis-
trict would be found well suited to the production of this important
article; and a sample was sent to Messrs Marshall, the Leeds flax-
spinners, and to a Dorsetshire house, whose report of its quality was
considered favourable. Seed was imported, but owing chiefly to the
want of capital, and to the then unsettled state of the land question,
none of it was sown, and the subject has not since been revived.
4 About 260 acres have been laid down in grass; chiefly white
clover and rye-grass mixed, other varieties not having been generally
obtainable: grass seeds are best sown in March. The white clover
is very luxuriant, and by banks and road-sides, from farm to farm,
is gradually spreading over the country. For pastoral purposes,
however, the district adjoining the present southern boundary of
the settlement, extending sixty miles along the coast, is one of the
31


finest in New Zealand, and as capable of supplying cheap working
stock for the farms, and beef and wool for exportation: portions of it
would form a most valuable appendage to the present agricultural
settlement. The greater part of this district is better adapted for
cattle than for sheep, or rather for cattle first. The roughest tract
is so improved in two or three years by the depasturing of cattle, as
entirely to change its character. The fern is destroyed to some
extent, and is succeeded by coarse grasses. If sheep follow, the fern
is gradually killed, grasses become finer, and white clover soon
appears: thus in the end luxuriant pasturage is obtained, never
here burnt up in droughts, but always green and succulent.
‘ Cattle and sheep thrive, and, like all other animals which have
been introduced, increase very fast; both are subject to a kind of
delirious attack, arising from overfeeding on the “tutu;” but this
seldom affects them more than once or twice, and the actual loss
caused by it is probably not more than 2| per cent. A strong doSe
of spirits—for a bullock two to three bottles—is considered the best
remedy; but quick bleeding has been found very efficacious. Sheep
are never attacked by the “fly,” are free from their common
diseases, and fatten quickly; half-bred Southdovvns have been killed
weighing nearly 30 lbs. per quarter.’
It is, however, of very high importance to give, in connection
with this passage, the modification of opinion formed by Mr
Hursthouse on the different capabilities of the soils after two
years’ farther knowledge. It is conveyed in a letter of 20th
November 1850, addressed to Mr Earp, and published in the third
edition of his Hand-Book of New Zealand. The remarks on the
bush-land appear to be particularly valuable.
‘ It appears, then, that there are even now several thousand acres
of bush-land open for selection, and that, too, surrounding and within
from two to six miles of the actual town. It should be borne in
mind that what is called “bush-land” in New Plymouth is different
from much of the heavily-timbered lands in New Zealand —such, for
instance, as the valley of the Hutt near Wellington—the land for
the most part being level and more open, and the wood of lighter
growth. It has long been known to the New Plymouth settlers that
this bush-land is wonderfully fertile, far more so in fact than fern-
land. But owing to the greater first cost of clearing it, and to the
natural preference which English labourers and cultivators have for
the familiar plough and harrow over the axe and the saw, bush-land
has come to be regarded as far less desirable than fern-land. At
page 99 of my little work the comparative merits of the two are dis-
cussed ; and I still entertain the opinion there expressed, that for a
very numerous class of emigrants the cultivation of the former would
be found the most profitable.
‘ In fact, as native labour is peculiarly adapted to the clearing and
cultivation of bush-land, and as native labour has become, and is
every day still further becoming, more available, I consider the
32


relative merits and advantages of bush-land to be consequently
greater than they were two years ago, and that the cost per acre of
clearing and cultivating it is decreasing, and will decrease, in a
greater ratio than the cost of clearing fern-land.
‘ With respect to wheat, however, which has hitherto been the
staple crop of the settlement, although it could be produced at a
remunerating rate on bush-land, I believe that it would still be pro-
duced cheaper on fern. But wheat is only one of many crops which
the soil and climate of New Plymouth would produce. Flour is
only one of many exports which would find a good market
‘ This bush-land is admirably adapted to the production of many
important articles besides wheat, far more so, in fact, than fern-land.
Among them may be enumerated hops, tobacco, fruits, cider, oil,
seeds, hemp, and flax; butter, cheese, hams, and bacon; whilst from
the extraordinary fineness and luxuriance of its artificial pasturage,
it may be questioned whether fine-wool sheep could not be kept upon
it with advantage—for the risks, losses, and expenses attendant on
the care and management of sheep would be less on what may
be termed the “ near-field system,” than on the distant, exposed,
“ stock-station” plan followed in Australia.
‘Emigrants, as a general rule, will take too much land; but if a
person settling in New Plymouth with, say a couple of hundred
pounds, would be content to purchase and cultivate one of the
twenty-five acre bush-sections, he would, I conceive, be almost certain
to realise a greater profit than if he took fifty acres of fern. la
short, for emigrants of limited means, farmers’ sons, and small
yeomen, working-men with a little money —the pith, bone, and sinew
of a settlement —these little twenty-five acre freeholds of bush-land
arc admirably adapted.’
THE MIDDLE SETTLEMENTS, OR COOK’S STRAIT.
Wellington is generally considered the centre of the middle dis-
tricts, as exceeding the other settlements round Port Nicholson. It
is described as a town beautifully situated, with neat clean painted
brick and timber houses, and in the vicinity of beautiful stretches
of forest-land. Near it is a large district of table-land, and the
fruitful valley of the Hutt. Mr Earp says—
‘ The valley of the Hutt extends from the harbour of Port Nichol-
son to the Tararua mountains, a distance of about fifty miles. The
land stretching on botii sides of the river is of extraordinary fertility,
arising from the periodical overflowings of the river, and the rich
deposit left on its retirement to its natural bed. This rise of the
waters of the river was the cause of the removal of the principal
town of the settlement to its present site. Not having been fore-
seen, this was the cause of serious annoyance to the first settlers, as
far as the location for a town was concerned. In an agricultural
33


point of view, this is of the highest importance to the agriculturist;
and happy is he who has been lucky enough to obtain a section
within the reach of the waters of the river, whether for flooding or
irrigation.
‘ Of the rural districts bordering upon the town little need be said.
They lie for the most part between Wellington and Porirua, those
scattered around the shores of the latter harbour being the most
fertile. The remainder of the sections, in the immediate vicinity of
Wellington, consist of flat table-lands, through which never-failing
streams run in every direction towards the coast. Many of the
sections in this district occupy the valleys at the foot of hills which
have not been included in the lands given out, and which are there-
fore waste. Such sections are considered valuably, from the extent
of sheep and cattle runs which they thus afford. But it is probable
that they will not continue to lie waste. Much as has been said
about the hills of Wellington, there are few which, when cleared,
are not cultivatable to the summits —the land there, as in the case
of the table-lands alluded to, being of the finest quality, whilst the
valleys, filled with the debris of the hills, are fertility itself. It
would have been folly, however, to have given hill-land as sections,
whilst there was plenty of flat land for the purpose
‘ The amount of available land in immediate connection with
Wellington is limited, not amounting to more than 30,000 or 40,000
acres. °At the distance of forty miles north-east is the fine valley
of the Wairarapa, containing about 300,000 acres of excellent land
fitted for both pasturage and agriculture. At about the same dis-
tance west of Wellington commences an extensive country at
Waikanai, gradually widening to Wanganui, 120 miles from Welling-
ton, and presenting an extent of perfectly level land, estimated at
upwards of a million acres, the greater portion of which is excellent
arable land, and nearly the whole is covered with abundant pasture.
This district is now being connected with Wellington by the military
road, already available the whole way for horses, and for two-thirds
of the way forming a good carriage-road.
‘ The Wairau plains also, on the other side of Cook’s Strait, though
nominally connected with Nelson, are in reality an appendage of
Wellington, being much more accessible from the latter port, to
which the settlers of Wellington already resort for a market.’—
( Hand-Book for New Zealand, pp. 33, 34.)
There is here a branch of the Union Bank of Australia, a
savings’ bank, mechanics’ institute, a horticultural society, and
other elements of a somewhat advanced state of social life. The
European population of the district had exceeded 6000 in 1849,
and the means of worship were more or less supplied for members
of the English establishment, Presbyterians, Roman Catholics,
Wesleyans, and Congregationalists. The attention of this settle-
ment has been turned less to pasture and agriculture than to com-
merce and the whale-fishery. It was one of the most popular


settlements when the New Zealand Company was in the ascendancy.
Having been readily purchased, great part of it is in the hands of
absentee speculators, and thus the settlers in this district, instead
of endeavouring to obtain an original allotment, will have to deal
with a proprietor either at home or in the colony.
Besides the agricultural operations, considerable enterprise has
been developed in industrial operations in this district. Flour,
saw, and flax mills have been here established, along with a
canvas manufactory, rope-walks, breweries, cooperages, and brick-
kilns. Mr Earp, in the third edition of his valuable little work
on New Zealand, says—
* The total quantity of land in cultivation in 1848 was 2178 acres—
the general occupation being the breeding of stock, for which no
cultivation is necessary the natural pastures being inexhaustible.
In consequence of the ready market for cattle, and the high price of
labour, a comparative neglect of rendering land arable was to be
expected; but now that emigrants are rapidly flocking into the colony,
as well from New South Wales as from the mother country, the
cultivation of the soil will rapidly extend; and the more so, as animal
food has been brought down to a price which will render the cultiva-
tion of the land equally profitable.
‘ The quantity of stock in Wellington in 1848 was about 50,000
head of all kinds, pigs alone amounting to 7500 ; of these, upwards
of 5000 were the property of the natives, who pursue this lucrative
pursuit with energy. The importation of stock since 1848 has been
very extensive, numerous families from New South Wales having
emigrated to New Zealand with their stock ; the Sydney merchants
also having engaged in New Zealand stock trade to a large extent.
The number of horses in the town and its vicinity was, at the above
period, 672, or about one horse to every ten persons
‘ The number of manufactories already established in the province
is as follows six breweries, two brickyards, one candle manufac-
tory, two stocking-looms, six cooperages, one flax-mill, four rope-
walks, two sacking-looms, seven flour-mills, two of which are worked
by steam; seven ship and boat yards, four tanneries, and nine timber
Saw-mills.
‘ The total number of vessels owned in Wellington is seventy-six,
the whole of which, with the exception of two, have been built in
the colony. Of these, seven are the property of natives, and are
either sailed by the natives, or by Europeans acting under their
orders. The total number of buildings in Wellington and its vicinity
was in 1848, 922, exclusive of native habitations. Many of these are
substantial erections of stone and brick, but the majority are of
wood—-this being a favourite material for houses, notwithstanding
the facilities which now exist for the erection of more durable
fabrics.’
The chief exports are flax, wool, and the produce of the whale -


fishery. The amount of wool appears to have pretty rapidly
increased. In agriculture, however, the settlement had shewn
its backwardness by the importation of a considerable quantity of
grain. Eastward of Wellington lies the long valley of Wairarapa,
unknown to the original settlers, but calculated to supply the
demands of an extensive emigration. It contains about halt a
million acres of plain and down, while the sides of the mountain-
ranges which bound it are said to be capable of supplying valuable
pasture-ranges when these have been exhausted. r lhe Isew Zea-
land Company’s agent, in a report to the directors, stated
‘Of the level country there appears to be about 80,000 acres of
woodland, finely timbered with Totara, Matahi, Miro, Kahaikatea,
Manuka, &c. the soil of which is particularly good; about 200,000
acres consist of open land covered with grass, fern, anise, flax, and
toi-toi; the level land is intersected by several swamps, but they
could mostly be easily drained. The soil of the open land in the
lower part of the valley is in general clayey and gravelly, but some
of the plains are of a very good soil. The undulating land consists
chiefly of grass or fern land. At the southern end ot the valley are
two lakes, covering an area of about 50,000 acres, but they are so
shallow as to be comparatively useless: there is no entrance seaward,
in consequence of a complete bar of sand, and being surrounded by
low swampy land
‘ The district may be divided into three parts, each possessing its
distinct and peculiar characters: the lowest part, or that nearest the
sea, and the western side of the lakes, is mostly swampy, and is
covered during the winter months with water; the eastern side, on
which the stations are formed, consists chiefly of grass-land ; the
lower ground near the river consists of the woodland previously
described. Beyond these, in what may be termed the valley of the
Upper Wairarapa (by far the larger division of the district), there
are magnificent grassy plains, the soil of which is of the richest
description, intersected by belts of wood, and watered by numerous
streams. This district is easily connected with the plains of Ahuriri,
which, at a moderate estimate, comprise an area of 500 square miles
of level grass-land, from which there is an easy communication with
the Manawatu district.’
Mr Tifen, the surveyor of the company, reported that the district
was abundantly watered; and at the same time that there were on
it unavailable swamps, rocky spots, and large patches of timber.
Of the grassy plains he said—•
‘ Some of these contain upwards of 10,000 acres of perfectly level
land, where good grasses are growing as luxuriantly, and nearly as
close in the sward, as in English meadows. Their present drawback
is the absence of natural drainage; for on crossing three ot those
plains, I found the substratum to be of conglomerate so perfectly
impervious, that I feel satisfied they will prove unfit for anything
36


else but grass, or other plants requiring but a few inches’ depth of
mould for their support. At Huangarua, and again at Waingowa,
this is particularly apparent. At the extreme edge of those plains
caves have been formed, the roofs being of conglomerate, which pro-
jects five or six feet, the earth having crumbled away.’
Nehon. —As Wellington in the north, so Nelson on the south
side of Cook’s Strait, is the centre or capital of an agglomeration
of small settlements. It is at the head of the great inlet called
Blind Bay; and the districts connected with it ramify towards
Massacre Bay on the west, and Cloudy Bay on the east, where the
great Wairau plain and river meet the sea. The following account
of the lands belonging to the settlement is taken from Mr Earp’s
work. The first paragraph relates to Massacre Bay:—
‘ The district is a very pretty one; the greater portion heavily
timbered, and the land extremely good. Coal and lime exist in it,
both accessible at the surface on the bank of a small river (the Mo-
tupipi), in which they can at once be put on board vessels of fifteen
or twenty tons’ burden. Of the two sections known to a certainty to
contain these minerals, one, on which they have been already worked,
became the private property of the company at the selection of rural
lands; the other belongs to Major Baker of Wellington. The gross
amount of level land in this bay is estimated at 45,000 acres, of which
at least 25,000 are fit for agriculture. The greater part of it has been
surveyed for rural sections, and a considerable number were selected
there, generally with medium orders of choice.
‘Blind Bay contains about 60,000 acres of land sufficiently level for
agriculture; but not above one-half of this is of a quality adapted for
that purpose. It is generally free from timber, but covered with
fern; and in the swampy parts, forming a margin half a mile deep
on the south and east, near the sea, with flax.. The latter description
of land was considered, at the period of the original selection of
suburban sections, as nearly worthless; much of it was selected for
the very latest orders; and some considerable portions, though only a
few miles from the town, were left out of the suburban surveys alto-
gether. It has now, however, proved to be the best land in the dis-
trict, is easily drained and cleared, and bears very heavy crops.
The fern-land is also good when the fern grows strong and high;
though, when the vegetation is stunted, it of course indicates a poor
soil. But on some fern-land, cultivated on a large scale, from thirty
to thirty-five bushels of wheat per acre have been grown without
manure, proving that it only requires proper culture to make it good
land
‘ A purely fern district at first affords little or no pasturage for
cattle or sheep; scarcely even goats will live upon it. in Blind Bay,
however, there has always been some grass; and as the stock have
increased, the grass increased also in a wonderful degree, so that it
is now capable of maintaining a very considerable quantity. It has
been owing in great degree to the semi-pastoral nature of the district,
37


and consequent increase of stock, that the settlement has been able
to stand its ground among the difficulties with which it lias been
surrounded. ......
‘Cloudy Bay, with the Wairau Plain and Yalley, forms, however,
the most extensive and most valuable portion of the settlement.
The whole of that district is somewhat of the shape of a skate-fish—
a broad level plain, eight or ten miles wide, at the head of Cloudy
Bay, running inland for eighteen miles, when it suddenly converges to
a width of two or three miles, equally level with the plain below, and
extending from forty to fifty miles further inland. Though it appears
level, or may, in a general description, be so spoken of, there is a very
considerable but gradual fall from the head of the valley to the sea,
probably not less than 2000 feet in fifty miles; but it is not perceptible
to the traveller. The land for four or five miles from the sea is
covered with flax and other strong vegetation, and is generally
swampy, but of excellent quality, and capable, apparently, like that
in Blind Bay, of easy drainage; for the next eight or ten miles it is
dry, covered with long grass, and generally of good quality; beyond
this it continues grassy, the land getting lighter the further you ad-
vance up the country, till the last sixteen or eighteen miles, which arc
very poor and stony, only fit for grazing purposes. At the very ex-
tremity there are a few miles of forest. Several portions of the district
(chiefly in the valley) are very stony, which were omitted from the
surveys, and have no value except for pasture. The whole district,
however, contains a great abundance of excellent agricultural land;
but its principal value at present is to be found in the fertile pasture
with which it is clothed from end to end, including the whole of the
hills which bound it on the eastern side, which present some of the
finest sheep-runs in the world, and extend all the way to the east
coast by Cape Campbell, and so southward to the Kaikora Mountains.’
The averages of agricultural produce per acre are stated at—
■wheat, 24 bushels; barley, 25 do.; oats, 21 do.; potatoes, 6 tons;
turnips, 24 tons. Some mismanagement appears to have occurred
in the organization of this settlement, since it remained sta-
tionary down to 1848, notwithstanding an excess of births over
deaths, which would have made it increase had not, as we shall
see, some of the original settlers re-emigrated. There are here
places of worship for members of the Church of England, the
Wesleyan Methodists, the Free Church of Scotland, Roman
Catholics, and German Lutherans. It has been stated that the
settlement was from the beginning overstocked witli labour. Yet
it seems to have been beneficial to the labourers themselves, since
many of them are now landowners. The trade of the colony, though
small, seems to have a healthy tendency. From 1843 to 1846, the
imports fell from £28,867 to £3082, while the exports rose from
£629 to £9819. In 1849 the exports exceeded those of previous
years by £9OO. The following particulars as to the industrial
38


statistics of this district are extracted from a recent report by Mr
Bell, agent of the New Zealand Company:—
‘The immigration that recommenced to this settlement upon the
completion of the arrangement between Her Majesty’s government and
the company in 1847, and the births since that time, have added more
than 500 souls to the European population of Nelson since the date
of the last returns in my predecessor’s report of July 1848; the total
number of Europeans and natives at the end of 1848 being 4780.
Had the re-emigration of 1000 people not taken place in the years
previous to 1847, there would have been at this time a European
population of 4600, or a total population, counting natives, of nearly
6000 souls. There are about 200 more European males than females,
and about 200 more native males than females; shewing a total
excess of rather more than 400 males in the settlement; but this
disproportion is much greater in the adults than in the children
under fourteen years of age. A new feature in the returns subse-
quent to 1847, is the addition of the natives of Wairau, Waitohi, and
other parts of Queen Charlotte’s Sound, which places have been an-
nexed to Nelson by the government purchases of the last three years.
‘ The distribution of the population is interesting as respects the
proportion engaged in agricultural occupations compared with that
employed in the town. The number living within the town boundary
at the end of 1849 was 1297, and 2075 in the suburban and rural
districts —giving 778 more people in the country than in the town.
In 1844 the proportions were—l46o in the town, and 1555 in the
country; and at Port Nicholson in 1848 there were 2649 persons in
Wellington and its suburbs, and only 2039 in the rural districts.
‘ Land in Cultivation. —There has been a steady increase in actual
cultivation from 1847 to 1849 —276 acres more being cultivated by
Europeans in 1848 than in 1847; 84 acres more in 1849 than in 1848:
altogether, 360 acres more in 1849 than in 1847; while the total
number of acres fenced last year was 5203, and cleared 4167. Still,
I believe that the extent of cultivated land is underrated for 1849,
and that the returns of the present year will shew a considerable
increase
‘ The price of wheat and potatoes, and indeed of all agricultural
produce, will probably be much higher this year than at any time
in the last three years, in consequence of the demand for California;
and though at the end of 1849 the prices of produce were lower than
those set down in this estimate, it will be remembered that the grain
crop of 1849, harvested quite at the year’s end, will only be sold in
1850, so that its value is set down at the present rates, and not at
those of the former year. But lam disposed to think that the price
of flour and potatoes will go so much higher in the course of this
year, that a considerable addition might justly be made to the total
sum of £26,000, at which I have estimated the crop of 1849
‘ The practice of squatting has been very much diminished in the
last two or three years, especially since the remodelling of the settle-
ment by the scheme of July 1847: there are now only about sixty of
39


them, cultivating about 200 acres, whereas in 1846 there were 210.
The ordinance lately passed for enabling the magistrates to impose
a fine on squatters has had a good effect, and there are some men
who only occupy their land without leases, because the proprietors
have not given power to an agent to grant any, and who will gladly
become regular tenants when sufficient authority is received
'•Live-Stock. —There has been an astonishing increase in the live-
stock belonging to this settlement since 1843. The total stock of all
kinds, which in that year only amounted to 3000 head, was in 1841)
upwards of 72,000 head. The number of horses have increased 600
per cent., the horned cattle 650 per cent., the goats upwards of 500
per cent., and the sheep nearly 5000 per cent.; the value of the stock
Avas nearly £BO,OOO, upon a moderate estimate, at the end of last
year; in 1843 the value did not exceed £*7000: so that the money
value of it has multiplied nearly tAvelve times in the six years
* Adding, therefore, the agricultural to the pastoral returns, the
result is, that the actual produce or income of cultivation and live-
stock for 1849 Avas £50,588; and for the eight years of the settle-
ment’s existence, the large sufn of £252,930; being an average of
£31,616per annum, even reckoning the tAvo first years, Avhen increase
Avas necessarily very small both of agriculture and of stock.
‘ The list of shipping belonging to this port shews some falling off
from the year 1848, and still more from previous years; Avhich is to
be accounted for by the loss of eight vessels wrecked in various
places in the last few years. A great part of the loss Avas owing to
the shipment of entirely inexperienced persons as masters on board;
but the severe lessons that have been given of such folly will
certainly prevent its recurrence for the future. Six vessels, not yet
in the registered list for 1849, are built or building at the various
yards; and this will bring up the number again in 1850.
‘ Buildings, &c. —The return of increase in building during the year
is satisfactory, shewing one neiv building in less than every eight
families, taking each family at the usual average of four persons.
There are only two brick houses less than in 1848, Avhich is the best
proof of the earthquakes of that year not having done much damage;
the clay and mud houses have somewhat diminished, and the in-
crease is altogether in the better sort of Avooden houses which form
the staple building in new colonies
* Manufactures, Mines, &c.—The account of manufactures forms
perhaps the least satisfactory return under this section of the statis-
tics of Nelson; for though no retrograde steps have been taken, no
advance has been made. The only decrease of importance is in the
number of saw-mills; and this has happened, unfortunately, at a time
when the demand for timber is larger than it has been for years, and
is likely to increase very greatly yet. There are, however, efforts
making to erect one or two more mills in the course of the present
year, and if the demand should continue steady, means will be found
for the necessary buildings at the proper time. And although the
same amount of improvement is not seen under this as under other


heads, the manufacture of goods to the amount of £16,000 is, after
all, no inconsiderable circumstance for one year.’
The settlement will look forward to a material extension of its
operations on the Wairau Plains. The reason why it has not as
yet taken advantage of this valuable tract, is said to be the
deficiency of local capital arising from this —that of the original
allotees of the land, only thirty have settled.
Wairau is the spot which acquired so unfortunate a celebrity
by the massacre of 1843; but it is understood that none of the
few natives who reside there were connected with the series of
outrages by which the colony was so severely shaken. Their
leaders, Rauparaha and Ilanghieta, belonged to the north. Since
these unhappy events, the natives have given remarkable instances
of their acuteness as traders and men of business generally.
Coal and lime are among the natural productions of the district.
There are lime and brick kilns, and several workshops and manu-
factories ; as, for instance, saw-mills, flour-mills, flax-mills, ship-
yards, rope-walks, &c. On the subject of small farming, both in
this and the other New Zealand settlements, the following estimate
by Mr Ward, published in the‘New Zealand Journal,’will be
found practically instructive: —
‘ I will now give you a short outline of the expenses that must
necessarily be incurred in order to commence with a farm of fifty
acres at Nelson; it may vary a little in the other settlements: I only
mention Nelson, because I know nothing of the other settlements
personally. The fifty acres of land at Nelson would cost you, to buy
it—if near town, or within five or six miles of it, and being good flax
land—£lso per section of fifty acres; if inferior land, within that
distance, £5O to £100; if at a greater distance, less in proportion, espe-
cially bad land, which at a distance from town is unsaleable: no person
would have it as a gift to cultivate it: quality and situation are the
two main things to be attended to in selecting land in New Zealand:
but without buying the land, it can be rented at a low rent, with a
purchasing clause inserted in the lease, so that the tenant can buy it
at any time within seven years at a given price if he chooses. This
is very convenient, and many sections are let at Nelson in this way.
The rent of land varies according to quality and situation—some
sections are let at 2s. 6d. per acre per annum, some at 55., and some
65., for the first seven years; but it is a general rule for the tenant
to have it rent free for the first year, and sometimes for two years:
this is regulated by the apparent difficulties and expense that the
land offers to get it in a state of cultivation. I subjoin my estimate
of the first year’s expense, so that you may form some idea what
you can do in the colony: you must recollect the first year is
the most difficult and expensive—during that, you will have all to
buy, and nothing to sell; but after the first year the scale will be
turned; you will have plenty to sell, and little to buy. J. Ward.’
41


Estimate of the necessary expenses to commence a farm at Nelson, New
Zealand—fifty acres, at ss. per acre per annum, for seven years, first
year’s rent free: —
Wooden house, large enough for five or six people, - £l5 0 0
(A good substantial brick house of this size, £30.)
Four working bullocks, £4O; plough, £6; harrows and roller, £5;
cart, £l2; gear and small tools, £7, - - - 70 0 0
(Two horses will cost £5O, and the harness £6 more ; bullocks
are the best until the land is in a state of cultivation.)
Fencing a ten-acre field, - - - - - 10 00
(It would be cheapest to fence the whole in at once, £25.)
Seed for three acres wheat, bushels to the acre, at ss. a
bushel, say seven bushels, - - - - -115 0
Seed for four [two ?] acres barley, tliree bushels to the acre, at 4s, 1 4 0
Seed for half acre potatoes, - - - - . 0150
Garden seeds and plants, - - - . . 050
One cow, a good one, £l2; a few pigs and fowls, £5, - - 17 0 0
Housekeeping expenses for three of you for twelve
months, ..... £5O 0 0
(After the first six months, you could have your
own vegetables, eggs, and fowls, if you go the
right way to work.)
Furnishing the house, and incidental expenses, 20 0 0
7O 0 0
£lB5 19 0
(Suppose it takes £2OO, as I have allowed nothing for acci-
dents or breakages; you may have a bullock die, or break
the plough or cart.)
At the end of the year your account would stand thus
Value at the end
of first year.
Crops, three acres wheat, thirty bushels per acre, allowing the
straw to pay expenses, at ss. per bushel, - - £22 10 0
Crops, two acres barley, forty bushels per acre, straw will more
than pay expenses, at 4s. per bushel, - - - 16 0 0
Crops, half acre potatoes, four tons, at £2 per ton, - - 8 0 0
Cow and calf, £l5; pigs and poultry, £10; sold butter and
milk, £6; two pugs, £1; twenty fowls at 9d.—lss, - 32 15 0
Bullocks, cart, plough, &c.; allow 5 per cent, for wear and tear, 66 10 0
House and goods, - - - - - - 30 00
Improvements, ten acres land fenced, £10; and six acres got in
a good state of cultivation, £24, - - - 34 0 0
Improvements on four acres land, cleared, ploughed, once
harrowed and rolled, at £2, - - - - -800
Improvements by putting up cow-shed, pig sty, fowl-house, and
tool-house, £6. Loss for materials—boards, £l, 125.; nails,
6 lbs. at 7d.—3s. 6d. =£l, 15s. 6d, - - - 4 4 6
£221 19 6
‘I have supposed you ljo effect these improvements yourself.
Although this may not appear to be a very glowing account, yet in
reality it is a very favourable one ; and better than it will prove to
be, except you are industrious, and everything is looked after as well
as it should be, and the land must be good. I see there has been


£96, ss. 6d. earned within the year—namely, by produce and increase
of stock, £l7, 155.; nett produce of crops, £42, 165.; improvements,
£4O. But you must bear in mind that you have much better pros-
pects for the second year: you would be able to get twenty acres
under crop the second year; the five and a half acres would take but
very little cultivating for the second crop; you would have four
times as much produce for sale; and your expenses would not be
one-fourtli as much as the first year. At the end of the second year
your accounts would stand thus: —
Value.
Proceeds of crops, sold and unsold—namely, ten acres wheat, at
£7 per acre ; eight acres of barley, at £8 per acre ; two acres
of potatoes, at £l2 per acre, - - - - £l5B 0 0
Cows and pigs, increase since last year, £l2; produce sold, £l2;
value last year, £25, - - - - . 49 00
Bullocks, cart, &c. same as last year, having laid out £lO in
repairs, - - - - - - . 66 10 0
House and goods, £3O; improvements on the land, £4O; con-
tinued same as first year, £4O, - - - 11100
£384 10 0
Less for expenses—namely, materials, and building a barn, £l5;
housekeeping, £2O; rent, £l2, 10s.; sundries, £lo—less ex-
penses for the yejir, - - - - - -57 100
Total value at the end of second year, - - £327 0 0
‘ I have estimated these expenses from actual experience at Nelson,
and I have only to say that the prices would be different in a new
settlement—the bullocks, cart, plough, and seed would be dearer;
then, in return, your butter, eggs, and milk would sell for double as
much, and you would get a better price for your wheat and potatoes.
If you could buy two or three cows at the commencement, it would
increase your income considerably: the young cows would soon make
you increase the size of your dairy, and the young steers would soon
be fit to assist the old ones, or you could increase the size of your
farm when you had sufficient young stock to work it; this would
cost you but very little, as you would have only to buy another
plough and two yokes and bows. J. Ward.*
The following are the regulations respecting the acquisition
of waste crown lands in New Zealand already referred to, which
have been issued in connection with an order in council:—
‘l. Charts of the islands to be prepared with all practicable expe-
dition and accuracy; and especially charts of all those parts over
which either the aboriginal natives or the settlers have established
valid titles, whether of property or of occupancy.
‘2. In every district shall be kept a registry of the lands, distin-
guishing, with reference to such charts, the settled lands from the
unsettled.
‘3. At the capital town of each province shall also be kept a
43


general registry of the settled and of the unsettled lands, with refer-
ence to such charts.
‘ 4. It shall be the duty of every person (other than the aboriginal
inhabitants) to transmit to the registrar of lands for the district a
statement of the extent, locality, and bounds thereof, and of the title
under which he claims to be provisionally registered.
‘5. The protector of the aborigines shall, in like manner, trans-
mit to the registrar of the district a statement of the extent (as
nearly as it can be ascertained) and of the locality of all the lands
situate within the same, to which any such natives, either as tribes
or as individuals, claim either a proprietary or a possessory title, to
be provisionally registered.
4 6. All lands not so claimed or provisionally registered by the time
limited, are to be considered as vested in the crown.
4 7. Within a time to be for that purpose appointed after such
provisional registration, a land court shall be holden, for investigating
and deciding on the accuracy and validity of such registrations, com-
petent to decide both as between the claimant and the crown, and
as between different claimants asserting opposite and incompatible
titles. It shall not, however, be competent to any such land court
to decide upon or to investigate any titles to land which at any pre-
vious time may have been adjudged to any person, by the sentence
of any competent court, or which may at any previous time have
been granted or assigned by the crown, or by any governor-in-chief,
governor, or lieutenant-governor.
4 8. The land registries of the districts being revised and corrected
by the adjudications of the land courts, an appeal shall lie from any
such adjudication to the supreme court. The registries of the several
districts, when revised and corrected, to be final and conclusive
evidence of the title to any lands comprised in such registries, and as
final and conclusive evidence of the crown’s right to all lands not
comprised therein.
4 9. No claim shall be admitted in the land courts on behalf of the
aborigines to any lands, unless it shall be established, to the satis-
faction of the court, that either by some act of the executive govern-
ment of New Zealand, or by the adjudication of some competent
court, the right of such aboriginal inhabitants to such lands has been
acknowledged and ascertained, or that the claimants or their pro-
genitors, or those from whom they derived title, have actually had
the occupation of the lands so claimed, and have been accustomed to
use and enjoy them, either as places of abode, or for tillage, or for the
growth of crops, or for the depasturing of cattle, or otherwise for the
convenience and sustentation of life, by means of labour expended
thereupon.
4 10. For insuring the observance of these rules respecting the
preparation of the charts and the keeping of the registries, and for
determining the methods to be followed in drawing up and trans-
mitting claims, and in the provisional registration of them, and for
ascertaining and regulating the constitution and proceedings of the
44


land courts, and the mode of proceeding upon appeals to the supreme
courts, and otherwise for carrying into full effect these instructions,
the governor-in-chief shall, by proclamations, establish all such rules
as by the act of parliament charter and these instructions may be
competent to him; and so far as it may not be competent to such
governor-in-chief to establish such rules, it shall be his duty'to propose
to the legislatures of the provinces the enactment of all such laws as
may be necessary for that purpose, that so the extent and limits of
the lands of the crown, available for future settlement, and the extent
and limits of the lands of the aboriginal inhabitants, and the extent
and limits of the lands of the settlers, may severally be distinctly
ascertained.
‘ 11. No conveyance of the lands of the natives in any'shape, or for
any period, to be valid unless sanctioned by the crown. This is not
to apply to the case of natives who have acquired land by tenure, after
the manner of British subjects.— N.B. This part of the regulations is
so purely technical, that it seems to have been introduced by the
draughtsmen, afraid lest some case had been left unprovided for.
‘ 12. All the lands so ascertained, as aforesaid, to constitute the
demesne of the crown, are held for the benefit of the subjects of the
crown at large, and especially' of settlers.
‘ 13. The demesne lands shall, by proclamations to be issued by the
respective governors of the provinces, be divided into counties, hun-
dreds, townships, and parishes, each exactly defined with reference
to the charts.
‘ 14. No crown lands in New Zealand to be alienated, either in per-
petuity or for any definite time, either by way of grant, lease, licence
®f occupation, or otherwise, gratuitously, nor except under the regu-
lations.
* 15. No crown lands to be alienated, unless included within the
terms of some proclamation issued by the governor or lieutenant-
governor of the province, declaring for three calendar months at the
least next before alienation, that the lands are thenceforward to be
within the limits of settlement.
‘l6. No such lands to be so alienated unless previously surveyed,
and distinguished by a mark in the chart of the county, hundred,
township, and parish.
‘ 17. The governor, with the executive council, to mark out and dis-
tinguish all such parts of the demesne of the crown as may appear
best adapted for the site of future towns, and especially seaport towns
—or as the lines of internal communication, whether byroads, canals,
railways, or otherwise—or as places fit to be reserved as quays,
landing-places, or otherwise, for the general convenience of trade and
navigation—or as places of military or naval defence —or as the sites
of churches, court-houses, markets, hospitals, prisons, or other public
edifices—or as cemeteries, or as places fit to be reserved for the
embellishment or health of towns, or for the recreation of the inhabi-
tants; or otherwise for any r purposes of public utility, convenience, or
enjoyment, in which either the whole population of the province, or
D 45


any large number of the inhabitants, may have a common interest:
all these to be known as reserved lands.
‘ 18. All reserved lands, with the exception of those reserved as the
future sites of towns, may be conveyed to any corporation gratuitously,
for the public uses for which they were so reserved.
‘ 19. The lands reserved as the sites of towns shall be divided into
two classes —‘ town allotments,’ and ‘ suburban allotmentsthe town
allotments being such as will probably become the future site of
buildings, the suburban allotments being such as will probably
acquire a greatly-enhanced value from the close vicinity to such
buildings.
«20. All the demesne lands of the crown brought by proclamation
within the limits of settlement are to be alienated as follows, being
divided into three classes; of which the first class shall consist of
town allotments; the second class of suburban; and the third of rural.
‘2l. In reference to each town, and the suburbs, the governor shall,
by proclamation, determine the number and extent of the allotments;
care being taken that they be made in reference to some convenient
plan previously fixed for the erection of the town, and that no town
allotments be greater in extent than will probably be required for a
single edifice, with such adjacent land as may probably be necessary
for the use and enjoyment of the future occupants.
‘ 22. No rural allotment within the demesne shall exceed in extent
one square mile; but it shall be competent to the governor to divide
any such allotment for the purpose of such alienation into allotments
of one-half or of one-quarter of a square mile.
‘ 23. Rural allotments shall, by proclamation, be divided into such
as are supposed and such as are not supposed to contain valuable
minerals.
«24. No part of the demesne of the crown shall be alienated, either
in perpetuity or otherwise, either absolutely or conditionally, until
after it has first been put up to sale at a public auction, on three
calendar months’ notice.
‘ 25. At every such public auction the lands are to be put up in lots
at a minimum upset price.
‘ 26. No rural allotment shall for the present be put up at any
minimum price less than twenty shillings per acre.
‘ 27. The respective minimum upset prices of rural lands supposed
to contain minerals, of suburban lands, and of town lands, shall
always be the same in respect of each separate allotment of the same
extent comprised in any one of those several classes respectively.
Such upset price shall always exceed the before-mentioned upset
price of twenty shillings an acre, the amount of such excess being
from time to time determined by such proclamations as aforesaid, in
respect of the allotments contained in each of the said several classes
of land.
‘ 28. It shall be competent to any person, within three calendar
months after the auction, to become the purchaser of lands put up,
and not sold at the upset price.


THE OTAGO SETTLEMENT.
‘29. Immediate payment in cash an indispensable condition of
every sale. •
‘ 30. It shall be competent to the governor to demise, for any term
of years (not exceeding twenty-one), any rural allotments supposed
to contain minerals, reserving a royalty of not less than fifteen per
cent, on the produce, and to introduce all covenants necessary for
the faithful discharge of all the terms and conditions of the lease.
‘3l. A separate account to be kept by the treasurer of each province
of the gross proceeds of the land-sales, rents, and royalties, and of
all the costs, charges, and expenses of crown lands, after deducting
which, the net balance shall be held for defraying the cost of intro-
ducing into the respective provinces emigrants from the United
Kingdom, or for defraying the costs of such other public services as
shall from time to time be prescribed by instructions to be issued
under the act.
* 32. These rules not to affect the promulgation of instructions
respecting the occupation of lands by lease or licence for any term
of years, or for any shorter time, to be regulated by further in-
structions.
‘ 33. But this exception is not to extend to the temporary occupa-
tion of lands, for the purpose of depasturing sheep or cattle under
any lease or licence. This branch is to be regulated by further in-
structions, and in the meantime by orders by the governor-in-chief.’
An amendment of these instructions was issued under the sign-
manual on 7th February 1850, authorising the remission, to a
specified extent, of the minimum upset price of 20s. per acre in
the case of officers of the army and navy settling under the
government regulations, and to sanction the gratuitous alienation
of land to military pensioners and natives.
THE OTAGO SETTLEMENT.
Before the separation from the Established Church of Scotland
of a large body of its members, constituting the Free Church,
a design had been formed of constructing a class or ecclesiastical
colony, the ruling principle of which should be an attachment to
the Presbyterian form of worship and church government. It
does not appear to have ever been designed that the settlers and
labourers should consist exclusively of members of one church,
but that the promoters should be a Presbyterian body, who should
take especial care to provide for the means of their own worship,
and for the education of the rising generation in their own senti-
ments. It seems to have been contemplated from the first, that
part of the funds raised from the disposal of land should to a consi-
derable extent be devoted to these purposes. Thus the members of
47


the persuasion of the promoters, though not arrogating an exclusive
right of colonisation, would have a privilege over others in their
worship and education, being supported out of the general funds.
The persons who had nourished this idea being chiefly connected
with the large body who had left the establishment, it came into
practical effect as a project of the lay members of the Free
Church. The site of the colony was suggested in 1845, and the
Otago Association was soon afterwards formed. A bargain with
the New Zealand Company was completed in the summer of
1847, and before the end of that year, the first party of colonists
were despatched to the settlement in two ships.
The district apportioned to this Scotch colony is situated in
the Middle Island of New Zealand, near its southern extremity,
south latitude 45° 40' to 46° 20'. It comprises a large block of
fine land, and has been called Otago : such being the name given
to it by the natives. The capital of Otago is called Dunedin:
that being the Celtic name for Edinburgh, and therefore appro-
priate. The settlement has a coast-line of from fifty to sixty
miles in length, lying between Otago Harbour and a headland
called the Nuggitts. It extends an average distance inland of
seven miles to the foot of a low mountain-range.
According to all accounts, the lands of the Otago settlement
are fertile, well watered, and eminently suitable for purposes of
husbandry, while beyond the boundary there is extensive and
available pasturage. The basin called Otago Harbour, on which
Dunedin is situated, is a fine land-locked sheet of water, fourteen
miles in length, and so deep that vessels may sail up and deliver
their cargoes at the quay. The nature of the country will be
gathered from the following extracts from different authori-
ties :
‘ Beyond the first ridge of down, which forms the southern horizon
from the'harbour, lies an undulating country, covered with grass.
This is more or less good, according to position and aspect, and has
been much deteriorated in places by extensive and repeated burnings,
which impoverish the land. The worst of it, however, affords abun-
dant food for sheep.
‘ The anise plant, so valuable as pasture for sheep and cattle,
abounds over all the land we traversed. It is this plant that renders
the plain of the Waimea, near Nelson, so propitious to the fattening of
stock. I have never tasted such well-flavoured meat as that fattened
on the natural pastures near Nelson. The plant is also found in
abundance near Port Cooper, and in the Wairarapa Valley, near Port
Nicholson. I have not seen it farther north, or in any district where
fern abounds. Its chief property seems to be a warming tonic. As
such, I believe some preparation of its seed is given in racing stables
in England as a condition-ball. It arrives at its full growth during
°4B


THE OTAGO SETTLEMENT.
the summer; but in many places during our journey I found it at
this season of the year eighteen inches in length, and scarcely a
square foot of ground without a root of it. In the uplands we found
snow in some places knee-deep, and the ground frozen to the depth
of an inch; but on our return these indications of a severe climate
had disappeared before some days as warm as those of summer. The
vicinity of snowy eminences is highly estimated by flock-owners,
particularly where the downs are round-topped, and in long slopes ;
so that the gradual tricklings from the melting snows go to nourish
the roots of the grasses. After traversing these downs for five miles
from Otago, we overlooked the plain of the Taieri, which contains
about 40,000 acres of land, and is intersected by the river of the
same name, navigable for large boats twelve miles from the sea, which
it reaches at about twenty-five miles from Otago, About two-thirds
of the plain are now available. The remainder is subject to inun-
dations, but may be reclaimed and rendered more valuable than the
higher parts.’ —(Colonel Wakefield, pp. 9, 10.)
‘ The tide having ebbed, wo descended to the base of the cliffs,
and walked along a natural pavement formed by the horizontal strata.
We were not long in perceiving indications of coal in black streaks
in the sandstone, and thin beds of richly bituminous shale; and we
picked up several rounded pieces of pure coal cast up by the waves;
But on turning a projected point, we found ourselves in face of a
black wall or cliff, which upon examination turned out to be pure
coal. In thickness, what we saw of it could not be less than 18
feet, while, as the pavement on which we stood was coal as well,
extending out to meet the waves, it was impossible to say how much
deeper it went. Mr Tuckett was of opinion that in quality it was
very superior to the ordinary New Zealand coal; but in this opinion
I could not agree with him, as it appeared to me to have the same
conchoidal fracture and resinous lustre as the Massacre Bay coal, as
well as that which I have seen from other districts in this country.
What was rather remarkable, was its nearness to the surface. Above
it lay a bed of about twenty feet of a conglomerate of small quartz
pebbles, on the top of which the soil commenced. We were not
able to estimate the horizontal extent of the bed. What we saw
ranged only for a few hundred yards, disappearing in some small
gullies, which at that point intersect the cliffs.’ —(' Munro , p. 119.)
‘ As we proceeded about the time of low-water along shore, I was
gratified to observe very abundant large pieces of drift-coal of good
quality, still no bed was visible in the face of the cliff. Farther on,
the beach became again rocky, and quantities of coal were lodged
between the rocks, and soon appeared in view a black cliff. I felt
certain it must be a vast formation of coal, although Mr , at
Waikauwaike, had declared that there was no other coal discovered
along the coast but the insignificant appearance which I had examined
at Matakaea. Approaching this cliff, I found it to be a mass of coal
for about 100 yards’ length, in thickness from 12 to 20 feet, as seen
in the face of the cliff above the sand, and to what depth it exists
\ 49


beneath the sand I could not ascertain : I should suppose, from
appearance of coal, adjacent to the depth of low-water.
‘ The beach is not accessible on account of the heavy swell and
great surf. The coal must therefore be worked inland, and the bed
will be no doubt discovered near the bank of the Clutha (or Matou)
River, which, in a direct line inland, is probably not more than four
or five miles distant.’—( Tuclcett , pp. 41, 42.)
In the following extract from a letter by the New Zealand Com-
pany’s surveyor, reference is made to the capital of the, settle-
ment :
‘ The site of the Upper Town (Dunedin) proves to be extremely
convenient in every respect: a great part of the suburban sections
may be laid out immediately around it; there is an easy access from
it to the rural districts, the walk to the Taieri at the present time
not occupying more than two hours; and when the banks in the
upper harbour are marked by a few stakes, vessels of 100 tons’
burthen might, in two tides, be towed up with boats a-head to within
a very short distance of it. Along the water-frontage there is a long
flat, dry at low tide, which might be easily reclaimed; and on the
opposite side of the bay, about half a mile across, there are 2| fathoms’
water. Eighty suburban sections adjoining the town at Koputai
have been laid out and staked, and there are about a hundred more
ready to be staked on the line between the two towns. In marking
both town and suburban allotments, I have adopted the system of
using square-sawn stakes, with the numbers branded on them, so
that a surveyor will not be required to go over the ground hereafter
to shew the proprietors the boundaries of their properties.
‘ I have lately been examining the flat, which you perhaps remem-
ber, lying between the township and the sand-hills on the ocean
shore, with the view of laying it out into suburban allotments.
This land is covered mostly with high grass; and though in some
parts there is surface-water to be found, yet it is not at all swampy,
the drainage being only impeded by the exuberance of the vegeta-
tion, and which will, I believe, be entirely obviated by the lines
which will be cut for the survey. The area I estimate at 2000 acres,
or 200 allotments ; the survey can be made very quickly, and will
be commenced as soon as possible. .
‘ On the west side of the town, separated from it by some grassy
hills, lies the Kaikarai Valley, which will yield about 300 suburban
sections. It is open land, with a rich alluvial soil, well adapted for
agricultural purposes. Mr Charleton is now cutting lines for
sections in wooded land on the side of the harbour opposite (east of)
the town.’
From the ‘ Otago Journal’for November 1849 the following
passage, giving the experience of the first settlers, is taken. Its
author is not mentioned ; and it must be remarked that the yield
of wheat stated in it is of a very extraordinary kind;—
50


October, from 9th to 31st,
November, ... 1st... 30th,
December, ... 1st... 31st,
January, ... 1st... 31st,
February, ... 1st... 28th,
March, ... 1st... 31st,
April, ... 1st ... 17th,
Months.
Or ijx 4*-
5JI C 0; M ®
CO C CO U M
Average of Mean
Temperature of
each Month,
from observa-
tions taken be-
tween 6 and 7
in the morning.
oto^Mcowo:
Number of Days
of twenty-four
hours perfectly
dry.
C5 03 H- 05 «0 to C*
Number of Days
of twenty-four
hours showery.
• 4*- 03 CO 4»- Ot tO
Number of Days
Wet.
THE OTAGO SETTLEMENT.
‘ Letters have just arrived from this settlement of dates down to
the 25th of April last. They announce the safe arrival of the Mary
with immigrants. The settlers had then had twelve months’ expe-
rience of the country ; and their opinion of its climate, soil, capabi-
lities, and resources, fully bear out all that has been said in regard to
them. The summer had been splendid; and the second winter, on
which they had then entered, so far as it was gone, had been charac-
terised by weather remarkably fine and calm. We have been favoured
with the following extract of a diary of the weather from 9th October
1848 to 17th April 1849:
‘From sixty to sixty-five bushels of wheat per acre, with oats,
barley, and potatoes in proportion, were the yields of the soil. The
lands being generally open, fencing and ploughing up with oxen was
all that was required, whilst the luxuriance of the gardens and
nursery-grounds exceeded expectation. Hawthorn seeds, for instance,
gave a full braird within six weeks after sowing. Shepherds,
ploughmen, and country labourers, were in proportion to the demand.
Amongst the last were a few weavers from Scotland, who, in bad
times at home, had been accustomed to work with the spade, and had
proved the most useful and intelligent at similar work in the colony.
One of them, with a large family to support, has built himself the
most perfect and commodious cottage in the settlement, which is
referred to as a model. The landowners were busily occupied in
building houses, erecting stockyards, forming sheep-stations, and
introducing stock. Many ships laden with sheep, cattle, horses, &c.
had arrived from Australia. A channel into the harbour, of twenty-
one feet at low-water, being five more than were supposed to exist,
had been discovered. Dunedin, the capital, consisted of 130 houses,
and the revenue for the quarter was nearly £5000.’
It is to be regretted that the series of papers from which the
above quotation is made is more devoted to rhetorical commenda-
tions, and to general views on the duty and wisdom of emigration,
than to that kind of specific information, either about the original
nature of the soil and its produce, or about the progress of the
colonists, which would be really valuable to intending emigrants.
51


There are some letters from settlers, but these, too, are of a some-
what vague character, and in general only shew that the writer
has reason to be contented with his own lot. One of the most
business-like of these letters, from a Scottish gardener, dated 16th
April 1849, contains the following passage :—■
‘Bush-land can bo cleared for about £6—that is, the bush burnt
off; of course the stumps are left to rot out. The breeding of cattle
will pay best here, I believe, for some time; you may purchase them
from £7 to £l5, turn them out to the hills, and let them run summer
and winter. Some people milk them, but others allow their calves
to suck. They never cost a farthing for food, so that you would
pay almost as much for a calf as a cow, and no one would kill a calf
on any account. A squatter told me lately that he had sold a
young bullock for £l5, which never had cost him a halfpenny. The
first thing that people do, or should do, is to provide themselves
with some sort of house. Some are merely covered with grass;
others built with clay; others weather-boarded; others, among which
is my own, are made with trees, say 9 inches diameter, fixed upright
in the ground, and then plastered over with clay; a brick chimney;
and for slates we have shingles, or a sort of lath 1 foot long, 4 inches
broad, inch thick; and in these said houses, rude though they may
appear, we are quite as comfortable as you are in No. 10 Duncan
Street. As regards the climate, it is very temperate; we had the
thermometer as low as 27 degrees several times last winter, and I
have seen ice as thick as a penny; but it uniformly disappeared
by nine a.m. We had a good deal of wet weather in May and June,
which in fact constitutes our winter weather. The air is pure and
bracing, of which we have ample evidence in the appearance of the
settlers, notwithstanding all the exposures to which they have been
subjected; and I think those who were once most bitter in their
declamations are now to be heard the warmest in their praises of
their adopted country. As for myself, I would not return to Scotland
to live permanently: true, we have rough labour, but we can afford
a day for recreation too; and where can there be finer sport than a
pig-hunt V
The following passage is from the letter of a settler whose
class is no farther stated than as it may be indicated by his tone.
He is evidently possessed of a less contented spirit than the
majority of those whose communications are adduced as testimo-
nials of the perfection of new emigration fields :
* I have now had eight months’ experience of the colony, and from
what I have seen myself and gleaned from others, I have little
doubt but that it will yet be a very valuable country; but at pre-
sent there are many drawbacks: first, we have few men of means
amongst us who can afford to do much in the way of hiring labour;
still, it is wonderful how few are for any time out of work, and those
who are are generally of the unsteady class. It is a great bane to
52


THE OTAGO SETTLEMENT.
this and the other colonies the great number of runaway sailors
that are to be found generally spending every shilling in the tap-
room, and practising every vice. They leave their ships in the
prospect of getting the high colonial rate of wages, but it is seldom
of much use to them. lam happy to see that the labouring-men
are making a beginning in cultivating their gardens: this is a
beginning, and were they to join heartily, and lay their little stores
together, they might soon bo able to have their own ground.
‘ I have mentioned these things, that people may know the true
condition of matters —as the fact is, that people coming here in
general have not the least idea of what sort of country they are
coming to, and have puffed themselves up with the most extrava-
gant notions and ideas, till I believe the garden of Eden itself would
scarcely have satisfied some of them; but in general, after they get
a little settled, the steady portion find work, and get more, into the
way of the country, and more reconciled with their own condition.
Another drawback at present is, that we are dependent upon other
colonies for supplying us with provisions until we can raise our
own. This is a most fearful drain upon our capital, which thus flies
off at once, and we have nothing at present to draw it back again.
Were facilities given to the labouring-men to cultivate the ground,
this would soon be at an end, and I hope such a thing is not far
distant.
* The want of roads is a serious evil, as the roads we have at pre-
sent are merely formed out of the soil, and are more like canals of
liquid mud and clay in winter than anything else ; in fact, you can-
not set a foot upon them at that season, but must make the best of
your way along the edges or through the adjoining flax and fern;
but in summer they are as good as they are bad in winter. The
weather in this country is very changeable, and in the winter months
very disagreeable—there being so much rain, which, with bad roads
and bad houses, gives things a very dreary appearance; but there
are many more working days than at home in winter, and the inter-
vening days are often very mild and pleasant. I may mention that
we had several severe falls of snow and sharp frosts, but such as you
would merely laugh at in the north of Scotland. People coining
here should provide themselves with the strongest and most du-
rable clothing, especially laced boots, both for men and women, as
dress-shoes and cloth-boots would be of little avail here. The
summer months are very warm and pleasant, but the heat has not
that oppressive feeling that is often felt in very warm days at
home. For this reason a lighter clothing is necessary, and light
canvas or duck trousers are the best, with a blue woollen shirt or
duck overall; but the boots and shoes must always be strong.
One thing is evident, that although the climate is very changeable,
there can be no doubt but it is healthy; and lam told, and believe
it to be a fact, that the climate is far better in many parts of the
block than at Dunedin; and I know by experience, that where I
stop it is much milder. The reason is, that there is no high ground
53


between it and the ocean towards the south, and to the east and
north-east there is the harbour, and a large valley, so that it is
exposed to a drought when the wind blows in any of these direc-
tions ; and the south-west wind is the coldest wind here, answering
to your north-east at home.’
The progress which the association have had to report in the
last number of their journal, published in November 1850, was
not in accordance with their anticipations, and, apparently ad-
mitting this to be the case, they refer to ‘ a combination of adverse
circumstances which have retarded their progress.’ The quantity
of land disposed of in Otago was stated to amount to 18,000 acres;
and the number of persons who had embarked thither from the
United Kingdom in New Zealand ships, exclusive of those other-
wise conveyed, amounted to 1400. By the agreement with the New
Zealand Company, five years were allowed, from 23d November
1847, for the association selling 2000 properties covering 125,000
acres. By the New Zealand Company abandoning their privileges,
and allowing their rights to revert to the crown in July 1850, the
proceedings of the association were subjected to a temporary
disturbance. The association immediately applied to the govern-
ment for assistance in carrying out their original arrangements.
While taking into consideration the propriety of giving the asso-
ciation a royal charter, an arrangement was made for paying over
all moneys for purchases to the Emigration Commissioners, to be
held for the government, who thus marked their intention to carry
out the principles on which the bargain with the New Zealand
Company was contracted.
Arrangements were made, and from time to time amended, for
the disposal of lands in the settlement. The last series were
issued on Ist August 1849. They are in many respects inter-
woven with the interests and privileges of the extinct New Zea-
land Company. They will thus have to be altered in then-
details ; but as it is presumed that in essentials they embody the
pecuniary and other conditions on which lands are to be held,
an abridgment of those parts which most materially affect the
immediate interest of the proposing settler is here subjoined :
‘The settlement to comprise 144,600 acres of land, divided into
2400 properties, and each property to consist of sixty acres and a
quarter, divided into three allotments—namely, a town allotment of a
quarter of an acre, in a spot selected as the site of a town ; a subur-
ban allotment of ten acres, in the vicinity of a town site; and a
rural allotment of fifty acres, be the measurements more or less.
‘But each class of land to be sold separately, if so desired by the
purchaser; and in case of such separate sale, the rural allotment to
be reduced, if so desired, to twenty-five acres.
54


THE OTAGO SETTLEMENT.
‘The 2400 properties, or 144,600 acres, to be appropriated as fol-
lows: namely—
-2000 properties, or 120,500 acres for sale to private individuals.
100 properties, or 6025 acres, for the estate to be purchased by
the local municipal government.
100 properties, or 6025 acres, for the estate to be purchased by
the trustees for religious and educational uses ; and
200 properties, or 12,050 acres, for the estate to be purchased
by the New Zealand Company.
‘The price of the land for sale in the United Kingdom to be fixed
for the present at 40s. an acre, or £l2O, 10s. a property, if the
property be purchased entire, as defined above. But if purchased
separately, the price of each class of land to be —Town land, £l2, 10s.
per allotment of a quarter acre; suburban land, £3O per allotment of
ten acres; and rural land, £5O per allotment of twenty-five acres.
‘ The said prices to be charged on the estates of the municipal
government of the trustees for religious and educational uses, and
of the New Zealand Company, in the same manner as on the 2000
properties intended for sale to private individuals ; and the purchase-
money, amounting (at the rate of 40s. an acre) to £289,200, to be
appropriated as follows—namely, emigration and supply of labour
(three-eighths, 7s. 6d. in £l, or 374 P er cent.), £108,450; civil uses,
to be administered by the company —namely, surveys and othci
expenses of founding and maintaining the settlement, roads, bridges,
and other improvements, including steam, if hereafter deemed expe-
dient, and if the requisite funds be found available (two-eighths, ss.
in £l, or 25 per cent.), £72,300; religious and educational uses, to be
administered by trustees (one-eighth, 2s. 6d. in £l, or 12.| per cent.),
£36,150; the New Zealand Company, on account of its capital and
risk (two-eighths, ss, in £l, or 25 per cent.), £72,300.
‘ It is to be observed that from the sum of £36,150, to be assigned
to the trustees of religious and educational uses, will be defrayed
£12,050, the price of the 100 properties, or 6025 acres to be pur-
chased as the estate of that trust. ,
‘ In like manner, out of the sum of £72,300, to be assigned to the
New Zealand Company, will be defrayed £24,100, the price of the
200 properties, or 12,050 acres to be purchased by the company as its
estate. . .
‘ The purchase of the surface to include coal and all other minerals,
but the company to have power to exclude lands containing, in con-
siderable quantities, coal or other minerals, to be disposed of, by lease
or otherwise, in such way as may be agreed on ; with a view to pre-
vent the coal-field from becoming a monopoly in the hands of private
individuals, injurious to the public interests, and to insure to the
community a due supply of fuel at the cheapest possible rate, and to
enable lands containing other minerals to be disposed of in such way
as may be considered most expedient.
‘ Reservations to be made, so far as may be practicable, of the
sites of villages and towns, with suburban allotments adjacent, in the
55


parishes and hundreds, to be laid out in accordance with the govern-
ment regulations.
4 ln laying out the chief town, Dunedin, due provision to be made
for public purposes; as fortifications, public buildings, sites for places
of public worship and instruction, baths, wharfs, quays, cemeteries,
squares, a park, and other places for health and recreation.
4 Five years from the 23d of November 1847—the date of the em-
barkation of the first party—-to be allowed to the association for
effecting the sale of the 2000 properties, or 120,500 acres to private
individuals.
4 ln the event of the whole 2000 properties being sold to private
individuals within the period, the association to have further the
refusal, on such terms as shall then be agreed upon, of the entire
remainder of the block of 400,000 acres, or such portion of the same
as the company shall not have returned to the crown.
4 Each allotment to be assigned to the person first making appli-
cation for it at the appointed place in the settlement.
4 Purchasers to be allowed to select out of the whole of the
lands of each class which may be surveyed, laid out, and open to
selection at the time in the settlement.
4 The municipality, and the trustees for religious and educational
uses, to be entitled to select their respective estates in the proportion
of one property or allotment each for every twenty properties or
allotments sold to private individuals; and the New Zealand Com-
pany in the proportion of two properties or allotments for every
twenty so sold.
4 The association (including the purchasers and colonists whom
they have brought forward or approved) having prepared a deed of
trust and relative institutes, dated 6th November 1847, as a consti-
tution for church and schools, the same to be held as part of the
terms of purchase; to trustees appointed thereunder, the funds for
religious and educational uses to be handed over, as collected, on the
completion of each party; the provisions of such deed of trust and
relative institutes to be duly observed in all respects; and in this
and all other matters, the association to have respect to the full
exoneration of the company from responsibility at the earliest pos-
sible period.
4 Purchasers desirous of recommending labourers to the associa-
tion for free or assisted passages, to give to the association written
notice of the desire to make such recommendation, with full particu-
lars of the labourers recommended, six weeks before the sailing of
the vessel in which the labourers, if approved, are proposed to be sent.
4 Two-thirds of the amount of the emigration fund (or £3O on each '
entire property purchased) to be applied to the provision of a supply
of labour in accordance with the government regulations; and the
remainder (or £l5 on each entire property), subject to the concur-
rence of the company, to the passages from the United Kingdom of
persons who, under those regulations, are not strictly eligible —such
as the pax-ents of grown-up children; children under seven yeax-s of
56


THE OTAGO SETTLEMENT,
age, 5n excess of the authorised number; and, to a limited extent,
purchasers as detailed below.
‘ Chief cabin passengers, being purchasers, to be entitled, at any
time within twelve months from tire date of their respective pur-
chases, to receive one-third of the emigration fund accruing thereon
(or £l5 on each entire property) as an allowance towards defraying
the expense, actually and reasonably incurred, for the passages to
the settlement of the said purchasers and their families, at the rates
laid down by the New Zealand Company.
‘ Fore-cabin and steerage passengers, being purchasers with regard
to whom the Otago Association may be satisfied that they intend to
be hirers of labour in the colony, to be allowed, at any time within
twelve months from the date of their respective purchases, the same
sum as chief-cabin passengers; if to the satisfaction of the associa-
tion not intending to be hirers of labour, but to be, in fact, labourers
themselves, the whole emigration fund accruing on their pui’chases
(or £45 on each entire property); provided in every case that the
sum specified be actually and reasonably expended, as stated above.
‘ Passages to be reserved for purchasers, and for labourers recom-
mended by them and approved by the association, in the ships
chartered by the company, provided that application for such pas-
sages be made six weeks before the sailing of the ship in which the
parties desire to proceed.
‘ Licences. —Licences for the pasturage of land in the Otago settle-
ment, while such land continues unappropriated, and not required
for any purpose other than pasturage, to be granted for periods
not exceeding one year, nor less than six months.
‘The persons qualified to hold such licences to be the owners of
not less than twenty acres of suburban, or twenty-five acres of rural
land in the settlement, under titles originally derived from the com-
pany; or, with the consent of such owners, their immediate lessees
or tenants to the like extent; in the latter case, however, the owner
not to be qualified to hold a pasturage-licence in respect of the same
land as his tenant.
‘ Apportionment of Pasturage. —No licence to be granted within
the boundaries of the settlement for any defined pasturage-run; but
the extent or amount of pasturage to be enjoyed by each licensee,
and the mode of using the same, whether in commonage, in runs, or
otherwise, to be decided by wardens elected annually under the fol-
lowing arrangements: namely—
‘ A public advertisement to be issued by the company’s principal
agent, or other authorised officer, in the month of October in each
year, calling a general meeting of the persons qualified to hold
licences in the settlement, to be held on a specified day in the ensu-
ing month, where three wardens are to be elected by a majority for
the year ensuing. Persons to bo entitled to votes in the following
proportions: namely—


Suburban Land.
Rural Land.
Votes.
For 20 acres and under
40,
or 25 acres and under
50—One.
... 40
80,
... 50
100—Two.
... 80
120,
... 100
150—Three.
... 120
160,
... 150
200—Four.
... 160
200,
... 200
250—Five.
200 acres and upwards, or 250 acres and upwards—Six.
‘Applications to be delivered on or before the 15th days of the
months of November and May respectively; and the licences to take
effect respectively on the Ist of January and the Ist of July then
next ensuing. •
‘ The pasturage to be apportioned, the mode of using it to be
decided, and the parties interested to be apprised accordingly, by the
wardens, in the months of December and June for the half-years
ensuing.
‘New purchasers of land, being duly qualified, and making the
requisite application, to be admitted to a proportionate privilege of
pasturage at each half-yearly apportionment.
‘ On the issue of each licence, a fee to be paid of 10s. 6d.
‘ No licence to confer any right to the soil, or power of breaking
up the same, or of subletting the pasturage apart from the land in
respect of which the licence is issued, without consent of the other
authorised officer.
‘No allowance to be made to the holder of any licence for any
improvements which he may think proper to effect.
‘ Disputes among licensees to be determined in such manner as
the wardens may decide. Such decision to be conclusive against
all parties interested.’
Such are the principal arrangements respecting the disposal
and use of lands. Exact information as to making purchases,
transit, &c. may be obtained in this country by application to
the secretary of the Otago Association, 27 Hanover Street, Edin-
burgh. At this office the ‘ Otago Journal,’ a small and useful
periodical, is issued as occasion requires.
Conducted with considerable spirit and discretion, Otago settle-
ment can hardly fail to do credit to its promoters, though, from
the expense at which lands are disposed of, it must suffer in com-
parison with other districts.
THE CANTERBURY SETTLEMENT.
While Otago is professedly a Scotch settlement, with a regulated
endowment for religious and educational purposes according to
Presbyterian doctrines and forms, Canterbury, its neighbour, is
a settlement having precisely similar class objects in view, in rela-
tion to the Church of England.


Canterbury settlement is conducted under the auspices of a
society, having its head-quarters in London, and consists of a large
block of land, which, as in the case of Otago, was acquired from
the New Zealand Company. The spot selected for the operations
of the company was the neighbourhood of Banks’s Peninsula,
on the east coast of the Middle Island. The 44th degree of
southern latitude passes nearly through the centre of the district.
The peninsula itself is a wild rocky mass; but the pioneers of the
settlement satisfied themselves that the land stretching inward was,
from its possession of pasture and alluvial soil—of wood and water
—a satisfactory site for their intended settlement. It may be
mentioned that the open space proposed to be occupied by them,
stretching to the interior mountain-chain, comprises a district
somewhat less than Yorkshire in England. The operations of
the society cannot be said to have assumed a practical form till
1850, when various vessels with emigrants were despatched.
The aim of the society was to transfer a settled and civilised
community, with its various attributes—religious and educational
establishments, employers or capitalists, tradesmen, labourers,
&c. ; and to carry out this object, funds were to be contributed
from the price paid in acquiring lands. Thus while the purchaser
has to pay £3 per acre, it was not to be considered that this was
to be the price of the land. That was to cost but 10s.; but £1 was
to go to a religious fund for the support of an ecclesiastical
hierarchy and a system of education; another pound was proposed
to be expended in emigration—that is, according to the lately
prevalent theory, in bringing out-labour to balance the capital.
The remaining 10s. of the £3 per acre was to be applicable to
miscellaneous purposes, such as surveys, roads, bridges, &c. When
the w'hole territory expected to be absorbed by the system was
actually purchased, a million of acres would be disposed of; and
of the proceeds half a million would go as the price of land, a
million for religious and educational purposes, a farther million for
the emigration fund, and half a million for miscellaneous purposes.
As regards the selection of emigrants and settling on lands, the
association, at an early stage of their progress, announced the fol-
lowing principles:—
*Selection of Colonists. —So far as practicable, measures will be
taken to send individuals of every class and profession, in those
proportions in which they ought to exist in a prosperous colonial
community. The association retain, and will carefully exercise, a
power of selection among all those who may apply for permission to
emigrate to thci* settlement, either as purchasers, or as immigrants
requiring assistance. They will do so with the view of insuring, as
far as possible, that none but persons of good character, as well as
£9


members of the Church of England, shall form part of the popula-
tion, at least in its first stage; so that the settlement may begin its
existence in a healthy moral atmosphere.
‘ Mode of Selecting Land. — Tliq peculiarity of the method of
the selection of land adopted in this settlement, consists in allowing
every purchaser of an order for rural land to select the quantity
mentioned in his land-order, in whatever part of the surveyed terri-
tory he may please,assisted by an accurate chart, which will he made
as rapidly as circumstances will permit, representing the natural
features, the quality of the soil, and the main lines of road.
Certain rules as to position and figure, embodied in the terms of
purchase, and framed with a view to prevent individuals from mono-
polising more than a certain proportion of road or river frontage,
must be observed in each selection. But it is not the intention of
the association to divide the whole or any portion of the territory
to he colonised (except the sites of the capital and other towns)
into sections of uniform size and figure, which has been the system
generally pursued in other settlements. Every selection will be
effected by the owner of the land-order communicating to the chief
surveyor a description of the spot on which he wishes his section
to he marked out. If this selection shall not violate the regulations
as to position and figure, and if the area included shall be equal to
the amount of land stated in the land-order, the section will be
immediately marked on the chart, and a surveyor will be sent as
soon as possible to mark it on the ground.’
Doubts being entertained as to whether it was necessary that
purchasers of lands in the Canterbury settlement should be mem-
bers of the Church of England, we applied for information on the
subject, and are now authorised to state that it is not essential
that purchasers should be so. They may belong to other religious
bodies; but will of course have to give a third of their purchase-
money to the support of the avowed institutions of the settlement.
Labourers and others sent free from this country to the colony
must, we presume, be members of the Church of England; but
as natives will be employed, and a general community be self-
introduced, the promoters of the scheme may lay their account
with seeing the rise of dissenting bodies within the boundaries
of the settlement.
The nature of the arrangements between the association and
the New Zealand Company may here be explained. It was
agreed that, unless before 30th April 1850, the amount paid
to the company for land taken by members of the Canterbury
Association should amount to £lOO,OOO, the territory should revert
to the company, and the purchase-money be repaid to the asso-
ciates who had advanced it. On the Ist of January 1850 a royal
charter of incorporation, which had passed about a month earlier,
was communicated to the association. The contingency which was
60


to prevent the reversion of the lands to the New Zealand Company
was, however, far from probable. A very small amount of the
promised £lOO,OOO had been raised, and the association ob-
tained a postponement of the day to the 30th of June. The
prospect of the requisites being fulfilled, however, was as faint
as ever. An entirely new arrangement was necessary; and it was
carried out by the zealous friends of the project at, it would
appear, some personal sacrifice. The term was prolonged to the
31st of December; and instead of realising £lOO,OOO, the new
condition Avas, that sales must have been made to the extent of
£50,000 by that day, and should be continued annually for ten
years at the same rate, otherwise the powers of the association
were to cease. The crisis in the New Zealand Company occurred
in the meantime. On the sth of July the New Zealand Company
announced the termination of their functions both as a colonising
and a commercial body, and thenceforth it fell,to the association
to deal immediately with government. A bill was then brought
in for regulating the functions of the Canterbury Association by
statute, and was passed on 14th August 1850—(13 and 14 Viet,
c. 70.) It followed the arrangement previously adopted when the
New Zealand Company was a party, requiring, as a condition of
the continuance of the association’s functions, the expenditure of
£50,000 a year on land purchases. The conditions on which land
was appointed to be sold "were, in general, those which will be
found in the terms subsequently issued by the association, which
will be seen further on. It was made a condition that a sixth of
all receipts on land, whether from sale or depasturage, should be
paid to the government. It will thus be observed that the scheme
of the association has not been so widely appreciated as its pro-
moters were led to anticipate, and hence probably the disposition
to sell lands to any one without reference to religious profession.
The character of the lands within the Canterbury settlement
will be gathered from the following extracts. Captain Thomas,
agent and chief surveyor of the association, thus reports under
the date of May 1849 :
‘ The block of land on the east coast of the Middle Island, from
which the million of acres for the site of the Canterbury Settlement
is to be selected, contains over two millions of acres, extending
coastwise to the north and south-west, and bounded inland by a
range of hills whose distance from the coast varies from forty to
fifty miles. This country is perfectly level, watered by numerous
rivers and streams, and covered with grass. Like all extensive dis-
tricts, portions of it are found of inferior quality—a very small part
is swampy, indeed so trifling, that a dray may be driven over almost
every part of it: the surface in some parts is stony, but on examina-
tion we found it confined to the surface alone, the soil consisting of
E 61


a light loam, resting on gravel and a substratum of blue clay; much
of it well adapted for agricultural purposes, and capable of yielding
excellent crops of all kinds of grain, potatoes, and European fruits
and vegetables. The whole of this extensive and almost uninha-
bited tract of plain country affords excellent natural pasturage, and
is particularly well adapted for the depasturing of cattle and horses.
The produce of a very extensive country, extending along the sea-
coast for 200 or 300 miles, will have Port Cooper as its market and
harbour. Banks’s Peninsula contains no less than four good har-
bours—namely, Akaroa, Pigeon Bay, Port Levy, and Port Cooper.
The country is hilly, and well wooded; and the three former harbours
are separated from the plain country, excepting by forming long
and expensive hill roads : thus Port Cooper alone is of any value
with reference to the plains adjoining. The harbour of Port Cooper,
situated in the north-west angle of Banks’s Peninsula, though open
to the eastward, affords good and safe anchorage. Large ships
anchor about four miles up, whilst brigs and large schooners lie off
the port town of Lyttelton. It has no bar, is easy of access and
egress, and has been frequented by whalers of all nations for the
last twenty years, and no accident is on record; and with a light-
house on Godley Head (which I should most strongly recommend),
might be entered with safety in the darkest night. The districts
Lincoln, Stratford, Mandeville, Ashley, Oxford, and Buccleuch, are
for the most part grassy, or partially covered with flax, and can be
brought into cultivation at a very moderate expense; and I recom-
mend these districts to be first occupied, not only on account of the
quality of the land, but the first three with regard to the relative
position of the harbour, as also of their possessing in many instances
the advantages of water-communication for the transport of their
produce, and supplying them with timber and firewood from Banks’s
Peninsula; and the last two with reference to the large extent of
forest-land adjoining. We were agreeably surprised to find that
mosquitoes, which are common in many parts of New Zealand dur-
ing the summer season, were seldom found on the plain; and we
attributed their absence to the very small extent of swampy land.’
In 1850, the association issued authoritatively to the public
the following matured statements as to the theatre of their
operations:—
‘The site of the settlement is a territory on the east coast of the
Middle Island of New Zealand, containing about 2,500,000 acres in
one block, consisting mainly of three grassy plains or prairies,
named Sumner, Whately, and Wilberforce, and intersected by several
rivers, with their numerous tributaries, running to the sea from
an Alpine chain of snow-capped mountains. All along the spurs
and foot of this range, the forest, of which the plains seem to have
been stripped by fire, extends in primeval grandeur. Near the
middle of the coast-line, Banks’s Peninsula, which comprises about
260,000 acres of mountain-land, the greater part of it being still
covered by the forest, contains two lake-like harbours, with several
62


smaller ones. The capital of the settlement is Lyttelton, in Victoria
Harbour (formerly Port Cooper.) The latitude of this place is 43°
35' south, which, as respects temperature, corresponds with about
47° in the northern hemisphere, being that of the most pleasant
spots in the south of France. The climate exactly resembles that
of Tasmania, being chiefly remarkable for warmth without sultriness,
freshness without cold, and a clear brightness without aridity. Both
the grape, for which England is too cold, and the gooseberry, for
which the south of Italy is too hot, come to high perfection. In
consequence of the scale of the natural features of the country, the
scenery is very beautiful, and in some places magnificent. The
fertility of the soil has been abundantly proved by the experience
of successful squatters. The prairie character of the main part
of the territory, together with the dryness of the atmosphere and
the mildness of the winter, indicates that the most suitable occu-
pation for capitalists will be pastoral husbandry—the breeding of
cattle, horses, and sheep; but the absence of timber, the absence
of drought, and the natural richness which produces grass in abun-
dance without man’s labour, explain why the arable lands of the
squatters have yielded large returns, and shew that the plough and
the flail will be plied successfully by those who may prefer tilling
the earth to the management of live-stock. Drought is unknown.
As respects flowers, kitchen vegetables, and all the English fruits,
with the addition of melons and grapes, the gardens of the French
settlers at Akaroa, and of the squatters on Sumner Plain, are
described as teeming with produce of the finest quality and most
beautiful appearance. Sea-fish is abundant, various, and of excellent
quality. The only wild quadruped is swine; they are numerous, are
very good to eat, and afford plenty of hard sport. The plains abound
with quail, and a variety of wild-fowl. There are no snakes, wild
dogs, or other indigenous vermin.’
Perhaps the most valuable, and certainly the most trustworthy
document which the association have published, is an answer to
a series of queries, given by the Messrs Deans, who had been for
about six years previous to 1849 settlers and farmers about fifteen
miles inland within the district proposed to be embraced by the
new province of Canterbury. These explanations, and indeed, of
course, any other documents issued by this association, as well as
its rival, already noticed, will be readily afforded by the pro-
moters to all applicants who are at all likely to put them to
use. Had it been otherwise, this document would have been con-
sidered of sufficient importance to be here repeated. The survey-
ing officer of the ship Acheron , writing in May 1849, said:
‘ You know, of course, that the general feature of the country is a
succession of abrupt and lofty hills, with corresponding deep and
secluded valleys, either thickly wooded, or clothed with a thick fern
and long grass, offering all kinds of obstacles both for pastoral and
63


agricultural purposes; indeed it is often heartbreaking to see the
laud that people have settled down on, and the struggle and priva-
tion that must be endured before it can be turned to account. But
here we have a plain extending from north to south .100 latitude
miles, with an average width of at least thirty miles, intersected by
numerous rivers; not the water holes of Australia, but rather rushing
torrents, which have managed to excavate beds for themselves some
200 or 300 and 400 feet in a perpendicular drop, on the western side
of the plains : these rivers will, I anticipate, on a detailed examina-
tion of their entrances being made, offer but few obstacles to boat
navigation for some half-dozen miles from the sea-board, which will
render their passage at all times secure : this great plain may be
called almost a dead level for as far as the eye can trace from any
point. From the sea-shore to the Backbone ridge, not a rise of
twenty feet meets the view; but judging from the excavated bed of the
rivers and other circumstances, I think there will be found a gradual
rise of the land from the coast to the base of the mountain-range,
where I judge it may be some 500 feet above the level of the sea.’
The documents published by the association are not all abso-
lutely eulogistic. Even their enthusiastic agent, Mr Godley, so
late as the 31st August 1850, gives the following qualified remarks
on what passed under his eye: —•
‘ After inspecting the works at the port and in the immediate
neighbourhood, I rode with Mr Thomas over the hill to Mr Dean’s
farm on the plain. The tract which we were obliged to follow is
exceedingly steep —so much so, as to be only just practicable for
horses, and no heavy baggage could be transported by it. I cannot
better describe my impression of the country beyond the hill, than by
saying that it precisely corresponded to the idea which I had formed
of it from the map which was sent home last year. It may be said
that to the eye there are but two features —a range of mountains,
apparently thirty or forty miles distant; and a vast grassy plain (the
colour of which, as seen from a distance, is not rjre.en,hvLi rather that
of hay) stretching from the sea towards them as far as the eye can
reach, without any inequality, and almost without any variety of
surface; for streams, though numerous, are not large, and they are
sunk between very steep banks, and the patches of wood are unfor-
tunately both rare and small. The grass on the plain is intermixed
with fern and flax. To an eye unaccustomed to new countries it
does not appear luxuriant; but lam informed on the most undoubted
authority, that the district in question is equal, if not superior, in
this respect to any part of New Zealand, and that the improvement
of the grass, after its being grazed over for some time, will be almost
incalculable. In Mr Dean’s garden I saw excellent crops of fruit
and vegetables, and he gives a very good account of his own crops.’
The Canterbury Association have from the first kept candidly
and prominently forward their main objects. They have not con-
cealed, but have rather profusely announced, that these objects


THE CANTERBURY SETTLEMENT.
must be paid for by their colonists. It will therefore always be
a question for the intending emigrant to satisfy himself on, whether
these are objects for which he will feehinclined, or feel himself
justified, to pay. Of the £3 an acre, it has already been said
that £1 is to go for church and education, £1 for emigration, and
10s. for miscellaneous services; 10s. being considered the actual
price of the land. At the commencement of their operations, the
association offered the following calculation —a calculation which,
it may be remarked, was not by any means justified subsequently,
especially in the most important, indeed the fundamental element
—the quantity of land disposed of:—
‘ Assuming, by way of hypothesis, that out of the territory of one
million acres to be allotted to this settlement, two hundred thousand
will be sold in the first year or two, and the remainder appropriated
to pasturage, the association will have at its disposal two lunds, each
a little exceeding £200,000 : one appropriated to immigration pur-
poses, the other to ecclesiastical and educational establishments and
endowments. The former funds, under the system of partial con-
tributions to passages, instead of defraying the whole cost of them,
which the association intends to adopt, will probably enable the
association to forward 15,000 persons to the settlement. The
association, considering the large surface over which the popula-
tion will be distributed, calculates that twenty clergymen, and as
many schoolmasters, will not be more than arc requisite to establish
and maintain that high religious and educational character which
the association hopes, with the Divine blessing, that this settlement
will possess. Assuming that the churches, parsonage-houses, and
schools, will be constructed of wood, upon foundations of stone, carried
to a height of three or four feet above the ground, the following
will be an approximate estimate of their cost:—
20 Churches, at £lOOO each, ... £20,000
20 Parsonage-houses and Glebes, at £5OO each, - 10,000
20 Schools, at £lOO each, ... 2,000
A College and Chapel, ... - 6,000
Residences for a Eishop, the Principal of the College,
and an Archdeacon, ... 3,000
Total, - - £41,000
‘Deducting this sum from the original fund of £200,000, £159,000
Mill remain. The interest derived from this sum will probably have
to defray the following stipends :
To a Bishop, ----- £l,OOO
To an Archdeacon, ----- 600
20 Clergymen, £2OO each, ... 4,000
20 Schoolmasters, £7O each, ... 1,400
Total per annum, - £7,000*
65


Among the earliest of the scanty funds obtained by the land-
sales, £lO,OOO were sunk as an endowment for the bishop. In May
1850, a project for the establishment of a college was announced,
of which a full statement will be found in the documents readily
communicated by the association to those who have an interest in
them. Some money appears to have been expended on a bell
weighing thirteen hundredweight, an organ, and carved work for
church decoration. As regards preparatory means for public
instruction, the following passages occur in a letter from the
secretary of the association to Mr Godley its agent: —
‘ With respect to the erection of schools, the committee leave you
to consult with the bishop designate. You will together consider
the question of making the best provision for this object, having re-
gard to disposable means. On the subject of the college, the bishop
designate has made all necessary arrangements for beginning the
work. Some of the clergy who sailed by the last ships, together
with masters and teachers in various departments (several of whom
will accompany the bishop designate), will form an ample staff for
commencing an educational system of a high order, embracing all
the departments of literature and science, and including instruction
in the arts most useful in the colony. The committee have provided
an ample supply of books (selected by the bishop designate), both as
the foundation of a college library, and for instruction in the college
and schools. The bishop designate will hand you a list of these
books, and of other articles designed for the use of the college and
schools. The whole of this department will be under his direction,
except so far as concerns matters of expenditure, upon which he
will consult you, and obtain your sanction, previous to any outlay
being incurred. You will, however, assist him in his objects to the
utmost extent which prudence and the present limited amount of
disposable funds will permit.’
‘ As regards the college buildings, you will together consult as to
the best temporary provision to be made. It would, in the opinion
•of the committee, be inexpedient (even were there ample funds at
command) to undertake at once buildings of a costly and permanent
kind. It must, for a little time at all events, be matter of uncertainty
as to the best locality to select for a site, and a hasty decision on such
a point may involve consequences extremely injurious. Besides this,
to commence a great work of this kind, involving the employment of
a large quantity of labour, in the first infancy of the settlement, would
be, as the committee think, an unwise measure in point of economy
in every way; both as rendering the work itself unnecessarily ex-
pensive, from the excessive price of labour, and at the same time
enhancing the price of labour in the colony, by taking up a large
portion of the available supply. In all works of a public nature
which you may consider necessary—whether churches, colleges, or
schools —the committee wish you to bear this in mind, considering, as
they do, that every addition at the present moment to the demand
66


for labour beyond what strict necessity requires, must operate inju-
riously to the colonists, whose first wants ought to be supplied before
anything not strictly necessary is undertaken. Subject to these
remarks, and governed, as you will be, by the amount of funds at
your disposal, the committee desire that you will, in concert with
the bishop designate, provide temporary buildings sufficient for
carrying on the work of education. The committee cannot doubt
that all parties concerned in this work will, for a time, cheerfully
submit to slight inconveniences, having regard to the necessity of
circumstances, and looking forward to a speedy completion of the
edifice and buildings of the college upon a suitable scale.’
A practical difficulty arose at the very outset about the estab-
lishment of the bishop—whence he was called in this document
‘ the bishop designate.’ There was already a bishop of New Zea-
land. He had been appointed at a time when the probability of
a small settlement in the colony demanding a bishop for them-
selves was not anticipated, and when it was believed that one such
dignitary would be sufficient for a population not likely, for some
years to come, to exceed that of a secondary county in England.
It was impossible, however, according to the episcopal system, to
appoint an independent bishop to a territory already under epis-
copal jurisdiction. Before the territory could be episcopally parti-
tioned, the existing bishop of New Zealand would require to resign
his office, and the episcopal function would thus be suspended
until a new arrangement was made.
The actual colonisation did not commence until the autumn
of 1850, when it was thus announced in a statement of the pro-
gress of the institution down to November 1850;
‘ The first expedition of colonists, 800 in number, sailed from
Plymouth on the 7th September, in the ships Randolph, Sir George
Seymour, Cressy, and Charlotte Jane, which have been succeeded by
the Castle Eden and Isabella Hercus, each of them carrying about
200 passengers; so that the whole number of colonists who have
sailed is just 1200. Of these 307 were cabin passengers; a much
larger proportion, it is believed, of that class than ever occurred
before in the same number of emigrant ships proceeding at the same
time to the same colony, and one, therefore, which shews that the
desire of the association to render their settlement attractive to the
richer order of colonists has thus far been fully realised. Other
vessels are now preparing for sea, and will be continually succeeded
by ships of the same class, and despatched in the same manner.’
The association could only announce, however, the sale of
14,000 acres, with a right of pasturage over 70,000 acres. The
committee of the association, in writing to Mr Godley on the 7th
September previous, had said :
‘You will doubtless have been disappointed at the non-fulfilment


of the expectations at first entertained as to the extent of land-sales,,
and the consequent amount of funds available for the service of the
colony. Such expectations appear to have been founded in too
sanguine a confidence in the immediate effect which would be pro-
duced in the public mind by the first promulgation of the plan of
the colony. It has, in fact, been a work of time to impress upon the
public its real merits. However, to a great extent this effect has
been accomplished, partly through the medium of public meetings,
and the strenuous exertions of individuals, and partly through the
agency of the “Canterbury Tapers,” of which the circulation is rapidly
increasing. The progress, however, has been gradual. The com-
mittee hope and believe that this very circumstance is in itself an
omen of more sure and certain success eventually. But in a finan-
cial point of view, the amount of land-sales (small, as compared with
previous anticipations) is attended with inconvenience. In parti-
cular, it does not enable the committee at once to place at your com-
mand the full amount which you estimate as required to complete
all the works in progress in the colony. At the same time, with the
means that they will place at your disposal, and upon which I shall
address you by a separate communication, they are confident that
you will be able to effect all which may be considered essential to
the general wellbeing of the colony.
‘ I send you a statement, shewing the account and particulars of
land-sales, with the names and descriptions of purchasers. In the
aggregate, including the sales both for the first and second opening
of applications, there have been sold about 151 allotments, containing
13,150 acres of rural land ; 264 allotments of town-land, extending
to 132 acres; 151 allotments of pasturage, with pre-emptive right of
purchase, containing 65,750 acres. The aggregate of purchase-
moneys will be (when the full purchase-money upon the second lot
of sales shall be paid) £39,300. I need not stop to calculate for
you the proportions in which these amounts will be applicable to the
respective funds.’
This was not a cheering practical result of operations, com-
menced on the supposition that three millions would be put at the
command of the association, and which still continued to announce
its views and objects on the following large scale :—-
‘ln order to render the state of society in the colony similar to
that which exists at home (except, of course, as regards the evil of
competition amongst the members of every class, in which respect
the colony cannot too much differ from the mother country), it has
been deemed sufficient to guard against the occurrence of four com-
mon drawbacks to colonial life. The first is the appropriation of
more waste land than can be occupied, and the consequent dispersion
of the settlers over a wide space of ground, whereby the productive
powers of industry are weakened, and social intercourse is impeded:
the second is that want in colonies which most renders them unsuit-
able abodes for emigrants of the higher classes—namely, the want
63


of labourers for hire and domestic servants: the third is the want
of a systematic, organized preparation of the wilderness for occupa-
tion hy settlers: and the fourth —a circumstance very repulsive to
heads of families, and especially to thoughtful mothers—is the want
of religious provisions, and of the means of school and college train-
ing similar to those which exist in England. In the Canterbury
Settlement, moderation in the appropriation of land will be enforced
by the prime cost of all land, which is the fixed uniform price of £3
per acre. It is believed that one effect of this price will be to occa-
sion such a proportion between the number of inhabitants and the
quantity of appropriated land, as to secure the occupation and use
of all the land when it becomes private property. If so, no part of
the waste will be treated as the hay was by the dog in the manger;
and the colonists will not be mischievously scattered. But in order
that the price of freehold land may not operate as a restriction on
the use of those extensive natural pastures from which thejwealth
of the settlement must, for a long while, be mainly derived, it has
been provided that every buyer of land, amongst the purchasers of
the first 100,000 acres, shall be entitled to occupy pastoral runs, for
an almost nominal rent, at the rate of five acres of pasture for one
of freehold. One-sixth of the purchase-money, or 10s. per acre, is
paid to the government for public purposes. Another sixth, which,
when the whole plan shall be carried out, will amount to £1,250,000,
is to be expended in surveying, road-making, and the general admi-
nistration of the plan. A third, or £1 per acre, being £2,500,000 in
the whole, is to be an emigration fund, devoted to the purpose of
paying for the passage of the land-buyers with their families, their
servants, and other persons of the labouring-class. And the remain-
ing third is exclusively appropriated to religious and educational
objects—such as churches and common schools, a parochial clergy, a
bishopric, a school of the highest class, and a college fit to supply
New Zealand, and the other colonies of England in the South Pacific,
with a local Cambridge or Oxford.’
The conditions on which the association offered land for sale
and pasture-licences were altered from time to time, according to
circumstances. After the passing of the statute, it was necessary
to revise them, and they were then finally consolidated and issued
on the 27th September 1850, as follows :
‘ 1. With the exception of such land as has already been or may
hereafter be selected by the agent of the association for the site of
the capital town, and of harbour and port towns, and of such land as
may be reserved by the association for works of public utility under
the present or any other terms of purchase, all the lands shall be open
for purchase as rural land. The association has resolved not to
exercise the right of selecting the sites of towns beyond the site of
the capital; and in case Port Lyttelton should not be selected as
the capital, then of one port town,
‘ 2. Any quantity of land may be purchased as a rural allotment


not being less than fifty acres. Any person desirous of purchasing
land in distinct allotments, may do so by separate forms of applica-
tion, each allotment not to be less than fifty acres. The extent of a
town allotment shall he one-half acre; and in the port town, if any,
one-quarter of an acre.
‘ 3. The rural land shall be sold at £3 per acre, including the sums
contributed for special purposes.
‘ Town allotments may be sold in the colony in the following
manner:—An allotment of half an acre in the capital at £24, and
an allotment of a quarter of an acre in the port town, if any, at
£l2; but no such allotments shall be sold upon the foregoing terms
without being first put up for sale by auction, at upset prices of
those amounts respectively.
‘ 4. All land for the time being remaining unsold shall be open,
under licence, for pasturage purposes, at the rate of 20s. per annum
for every hundred acres. And until 100,000 acres, being the quantity
of land originally appropriated to the first body of colonists, shall be
sold, every purchaser of rural land, and no other person, will be
entitled to a transferable licence for pasturage, renewable by such
purchaser from year to year, in the proportion of five acres of
pasturage to one acre of land purchased.
‘5. Holders of pasturage-licences under the last condition will be
entitled to a pre-emptive right of purchase of the lands comprised in
such licences, subject to the conditions herein contained, applicable
to the purchase of rural land; except that, instead of applications for
purchase being made to the secretary of the association, and the
purchase-money being paid to the bankers of the association, such
applications may be made to the principal agent of the association at
the land office in the colony, and payment of the purchase-money may
be made to him.
‘ 6. Lands held under pasturage-licences may not be purchased by
any persons other than the licensees until after one month’s notice,
in writing, given by an intending purchaser at the land office in the
colony, stating the intention to purchase, and specifying the lands
proposed to be purchased ; the intending purchaser being required
at the time of such notice to deposit his full purchase-money at the
land office. Pasturage-licences will confer no right to the soil.
‘ 7. Subject to the foregoing conditions, all lands included in such
pasturage-licences will be open for purchase in like manner as other
unappropriated lands.
‘ 8. Applications for the purchase of rural land must be made
according to a printed form, which may be obtained at the office of
the association, 9 Adelphi Terrace. Before any application can be
received, one-half of the purchase-money must be paid to the
bankers of the association, Messrs Cocks, Biddulph, & Co. Charing-
Cross, and their receipt produced. Land-orders will not be issued
until the purchase-money shall be paid in full.
*9. The selection of land in the colony will be made according to
the order in which land-orders shall be presented at the land office


of the association in the colony. But if it should ever so happen
that two or more persons should apply at the same time for the same
allotment, the preference of selection between them shall be deter-
mined by lot.
‘ 10. Every allotment of rural land must be selected of a rectangular
form, so far as circumstances and the natural features of the country
will admit.
‘ll. Every allotment fronting upon a river, road, lake, lagoon, or
coast, must be of a depth from the front of at least half a mile.
‘ 12. Every allotment not fronting upon a river, road, lake, lagoon,
or coast, must be not less than 300 yards in width, and not less than
half a mile distant from a river, road, lake, lagoon, or coast.
‘ 13. Each section under a pasturage-licence must be in one block,
and of a rectangular form, as far as possible.
‘ 14. The intended application of purchase-money is as follows :
one-sixth part is to be paid for the land ; one-sixth part for miscella-
neous expenses, including surveys, roads, &c,; one-third part for reli-
gious and educational purposes ; and one-third part for emigration.
Subject to the regulations of the association with respect to the
selection of the emigrants, every purchaser will be entitled to re-
commend emigrants, proportioned in number to the amount of his
contribution to the emigration fund ; but not more than ten shillings
per acre will be allowed towards the passage of the purchaser and
his family.
‘ 15. The association reserves to itself the right of selecting, and ap-
propriating, and obtaining a conveyance to itself, for public use only,
of all such lands as may be required for streets, squares, roads, sites
of churches, churchyards, schools, parsonage-house, wharfs, landing-
places, jetties, or other objects of public utility and convenience.
‘ 16. The association reserves to itself the right of making such
modifications in these terms as experience may prove hereafter to
be expedient or desirable for the general benefit of the settlement,
and as may be consistent with the conditions under which the land
has been reserved to the association.
‘ No rural land will be sold in the colony until after due notice to
that effect. Subject to the engagements which the association has
made by previous terms of purchase, town land may be sold in the
colony at any time after the date of these terms of purchase. And
the foregoing conditions shall (so far as they properly can) apply
to such town lands, except that, instead of applications for purchase
being made to the secretary of the association, they may be made
to the principal agent of the association at the land office in the
colony; and instead of the purchase-money being paid to the
bankers of the association, the same must be paid to such
agent.’
Of the actual progress of affairs in the settlement, Captain
Thomas, the agent of the company, wrote to his constituents on
27th January 1850, saying:—
71


NEW ZEALAND.
‘Nothing I have ever seen out of England comes up to our sur-
veys ; and all the surveyors employed on it, whether on the staff or
by contract, are delighted with it. The trigonometrical survey is
completely successful, and the filling in of the intermediate features
by the system of contract is also most satisfactory. We have com-
pleted 230,000 acres, and in a couple of months more shall have
200,000 more trigged; and before the winter, we shall complete the
districts of Lincoln, Christchurch, and Mandeville; so that I shall
fulfil my promise of having at least 300,000 acres ready the first
twelve months. The next year I hope, our facilities of movement
are so increased, that we may complete it all. The cost of the tri-
gonometrical survey, without the topographical, is, up to the present,
about three farthings per acre. I shall, when further advanced, send
you a great deal of information on the formation of these settlements,
by giving all the expenditure, and classifying it under the various
heads of surveys, towns, roads, and public buildings.
‘ The experiment of bringing down natives from one part of the
island to work in another, is also successful, and was the only one I
could adopt, in the absence of police and protection, to form the
roads. As yet we have not made much progress, for it is a very
arduous undertaking to get a road from here to Sumner—distance
four miles. We are, however, getting through the worst of it;
and should we have funds, I hope to have the whole line to Christ-
church miles) open in the course of a twelvemonth.
‘ As I wrote you, I contracted for Hobart Town timber, as the only
way of obtaining a sufficient supply in a limited time, and at a rea-
sonable price. A fortnight since it arrived, and is all now stacked
in the timber-yard, or in the hands of the carpenters, who are putting
up the emigration barracks. Sixteen carpenters also arrived from
Hobart Town, and they are a very passable lot, and as yet work
well. Altogether, this plan has completely succeeded, by keeping
down prices, and compelling the vagabonds that pack to all new
settlements, to work and accept reasonable terms. The vessels that
brought the Hobart Town carpenters and timber have now been at
anchor here three weeks. The captains speak well of the place
The improvements I have made in this place will make it a very
pretty town, and it will have an excellent road to Christchurch. I
am quite satisfied we have made no mistake in fixing the sites of
these towns.’
It appeared, however, from the subsequent dispatches of Mr
Godley, that Captain Thomas, to do even the limited services he
accomplished, had overdrawn the association’s account; and on
31st August it was necessary to say —
‘ For the present, accordingly, all our operations are at a stand-
still, and must remain so until fresh remittances shall arrive from
England. This is very mortifying, as not only is there necessarily a
considerable amount of loss accruing on such a suspension of exten-
sive works, and a risk of considerable damage to the works them-


selves, but Mr Thomas and myself are in the disagreeable position
of remaining idle for want of moans to do any work. I shall remain
here, and endeavour to employ my time as usefully as I can in acquir-
ing general information; and he will remain at Lyttelton, after wind-
ing up his operations, until he shall receive from me instructions
to resume them. The work actually done consists of the buildings
which I have enumerated, of a road partially made, but which (in-
cluding a bridge and sea-wall, which are necessary to complete the
connection between the port and chief town) will require at least
£7OOO to finish ; of the trigonometrical survey of about 600,000
acres, the topography of about half of which will be completed (as
Mr Thomas informs me) within the period at which he will be com-
pelled to stop; and finally, of the materials for emigration houses at
the chief town, which will hardly, I fear, be erected within that
period. I consider, however, that, with the exception of the road ,
nothing will then be left unfinished which is absolutely necessary for
the reception of settlers.’
Of the general appearance of progress in the settlement, he gave
the following sketch; —
‘ The harbour is very fine, both in a picturesque and a utilitarian
point of view. The captain and all the nautical men on board were
delighted with it. It consists in a regularly-shaped inlet, about seven
miles long from the entrance to the end, and varying from a mile to
a mile and a half in width. It is open to one wind (east-north-east),
but everybody agrees that it never blows hard from that quarter, and
also that the swell is lost before it reaches the harbour. There is a
good anchorage outside in seven fathoms, and from thence it gra-
dually shoals to three fathoms, about five miles up. There are two
small bays, in which, if it should be found necessary, shelter for
ships may be found from the only wind to which the rest of the
harbour is exposed. No pilot is required, as there is literally nothing
to avoid except the hills on each side; and there is width enough to
beat in or out in fine weather. Half-way up the harbour we passed
a whale-boat, which informed us that we might go up and anchor
opposite “ the town.” At that time we had seen no sign of civili-
sation, except the line of a road in process of formation along the
face and over the top of the hill on the northern shore, and no human
habitation except some Maori huts close to the beach; but we held
on, and presently another whale-boat, with Captain Thomas, the chief
surveyor of the association, on board, shot from behind a bluff on
the northern shore, and boarded us. Immediately afterwards we
let go our anchor, though “ the town” was not yet visible, and my
wife and I went off with Thomas. On rounding the bluff aforesaid
again, I was perfectly astounded with what I saw. One might have
supposed that the country had been colonised for years, so settled
and busy was the look of its port. In the first place, there is what
the Yankees would call a “ splendid ” jetty; from thence a wide,
beaten-looking road leads up the hill, and turns off through a deep
73


cutting to the eastward. On each side of the road there are houses
scattered to the number of about twenty-five, including two “hotels”
and a custom-house (in the shape of a small weather-boarded hut cer-
tainly, but still a custom-house.) In a square, railed off close to the
jetty, are four excellent houses, intended for emigrants’ barracks,
with a cook-house in the centre. Next to this square comes a small
house, which Thomas now inhabits himself, and which he destined
for an agent’s office. Behind this, divided from it by a plot of ground
intended for a garden, stands a stately edifice, which was introduced
in due form to us as “ our house.” It is weather-boarded, has six
very good-sized rooms, and a veranda; in short, after seeing it, we
could not help laughing at our own anticipations of a shed on the bare
beach, with a fire at the door.’
Further particulars respecting the settlement, terms of purchase
of lands, transit, &c. may be obtained on application to the
secretary of the Canterbury Association, No. 9 Adelphi Terrace,
London.
CONCLUSION.
The facts offered in the preceding pages will have shewn that
New Zealand differs materially, in climate and general physical
features, from any part of Australia. The prevalence of moun-
tains and hilly lands renders the climate showery, and consequently
it bears a resemblance to that of England, though of a finer
quality. While, in the pastoral districts of Australia, the popu-
lation must be necessarily of a dispersed character, that of New
Zealand will generally attain a density similar to that of Europe.
Other peculiarities of New Zealand are equally significant. It
consists of a group of islands, abounding in bays and harbours
suitable for foreign commerce, and affording means of ready inter-
communication by steamboats. The coasts also yield vast quan-
tities of the finest fish, valuable for home use, and for exportation
in a salted state. Then, the moderate climate admits of not only
fish, but beef being salted, without risk of loss. The lands, when
cultivated, yield prolific crops of wheat and other kinds of grain
suitable for exportation. From the trees, potashes may be made
to any imaginable extent. From the Phormium Tenax , or New
Zealand Flax, cordage of the strongest and most durable kind may
be manufactured. Of fruits of excellent quality, there will be,
as cultivation advances, the greatest profusion. The amount of
mineral wealth it would be presumptuous to estimate.
It would be difficult to say what New Zealand wants in the
natural attributes of a great country. And a great country it
will be —the greater from its proximity to the vast regions of
74


CONCLUSION.
Australia, still in the infancy of their prosperity. That which
New Zealand requires is the settlement of industrious and intelli-
gent Europeans. From what has been previously said, it is seen
that everywhere the field is open. At Auckland, Wellington,
Nelson, New Plymouth or Taranaki, Dunedin, Lyttleton, and
other centres of British civilisation, lands may be acquired, and
employment will be found by those who are able and willing to
work. It is true that fortunes are not to be made by sheep and
wool, as in Australia; but sufficient scope is offered to capitalists,
and also for carrying on a system of rural husbandry on a mode-
rate scale, with room for extending to greater things. Unite to
this the usual exemption from rates and taxes, freedom from the
oppressive conventionalities of an old country, and the solacements
of a delightful climate, and it may be said with justice that few
parts of the earth’s surface present such allurements to the emi-
grant as New Zealand.
Note. —Since the above was written, the following extract from a
letter from Mr Godley to Mr Adderley, M.P., dated Wellington, New
Zealand, August 13, 1850, has been put into our hands:—
* This colony, as a field for the investment of capital, is, I firmly
believe, unrivalled in the world. Sheep and cattle-keeping here will
pay—does pay, in fact, according to the most moderate computation
—3O per cent, on the average, and has often paid 100 per cent, and
more. And this will last, and even increase, until the vast available
districts of the Middle Island are filled up. ... Is it not most
wonderful that there should, in these circumstances, he hardly any
capital flowing into the country? A man beginning with £5OOO is
quite a Jones Lloyd here; and I know a man who began with about
200 sheep, and 15 or 20 horses, seven years ago, and who has now
sheep and other stock worth at least £lO,OOO, besides having 150
acres under the plough, and large farm-buildings, a brig of his own,
&c. Everything , no doubt, depends on personal, or at least trust-
worthy management; but what each family in England ought to do is
this —to send out one of its own members, if qualified, and make him
superintend the investment of the family capital. It might, with
ease and certainty, be doubled in four or five years at present rates.
I am sure of this, and you know I am not given to rash or headlong
speculation. I could prove it to you by numerous instances.’


THE AFRICAN SETTLEMENTS.
GENERAL ACCOUNT.
The British possessions in South Africa now reach from the
southern extremity of the Cape Colony, 34“ 51' south latitude,
to the northern extremity of Natal, at 27“ 40' south latitude on
the east side of the coast, and to the most northerly bend of the
Orange River (29° 41' south latitude) in the interior towards the
western coast. Their estimated area is about 130,000 square
miles considerably larger than that of the United Kingdom.
The enlargements which have lately taken place in the boundaries
of these possessions, accompanied not only by considerable
immigration of British emigrants, but by changes in the native
population, render the number of inhabitants doubtful. Including,
however, natives and Europeans, the whole may be estimated at
about 300,000. These possessions are of irregular structure, the
Cape Colony forming a pretty compact area at the very extremity
of the great continent, but the new district of Natal stretching
northward in a long narrow strip along the east coast. There
are thus great varieties in the character of the country. It
contains deserts; mountain - ranges, some within the line of
perpetual snow; a long indented sea-line, with many harbours
and stormy headlands. Though thus various, the whole territory
differs greatly in one marked respect from the other British
possessions in the southern hemisphere: it is full of animal life
in beast, bird, and reptile.
The general character of everything, animal or vegetable, earthly
or atmospheric, in these as well as other parts of the huge African
continent, is extreme and contrasted. Either the earth is stone
and dust, or rankly prolific in vegetation : there is parching dry-
ness or deadly swamp; the animals are of the most gentle or
the most ferocious character; the vegetation produces luscious
fruit or deadly poison. Naturally, a place with such characteris-
tics is one of risks and alternations in fortune. Whatever the


GENERAL ACCOUNT.
settler pursues, especially far inland, he must prepare himself to
meet great and often overwhelming risks. The flock-master cannot
repose with his peaceful sheep around him in the firm reliance
that each succeeding day will only witness the gradual increase of
his wealth. The enemies he has to contend with are numerous,
and they come not in detail, but with great destructive sweeps.
The sheep are liable to inflammatory epidemics, which run
through the flock like electricity. At times, they eat poisonous
herbs, as if a diseased appetite had overtaken them. Even
a storm of hail or of thunder will kill several hundred sheep
at once.
In the far interior, the farmer may have to encounter losses
from the ravages of the fiercest kinds of wild beasts; but these shy
animals keep at a distance from the approach of man ; and the
settler must have made choice of the far wilderness for his home
before he is disturbed by them. Animals individually less terrible,
become, however, collectively, far more formidable. In the simi-
larly remote districts, herds of spring-boks, and other kinds of
delicate and beautiful antelopes, cross vast territories like living
inundations, gleaning every green blade from the surface they pass
over, and leaving perhaps a small percentage of their number the
victims of the settler’s rifle. The still smaller locust is a more
formidable scourge. The vast clouds of these insects, when
scorched by fires, are taken up in basketsful, and eaten; and if
the burning has not been excessive, they are said to resemble
shrimps. But this is a poor recompense for the mischief accom-
plished. ‘ The farmers,’ says Mr Nicholson, ‘on any indication of
such a visitation, by making large smoky fires, and by other
means, sometimes partially succeed in protecting their fields from
total destruction; but although they may escape the effects of
any immediate consequences on the first attack, they are liable to
the more destructive ravages of the young generation produced
from the eggs deposited by the first flight, and whose black
multitudes, wingless as they are for a length of time, cannot be
driven off, but must be suffered to hop about, ravaging every-
thing, till their wings grow, and a gale of wind tempts them to
a flight.’
The whole of British South Africa has a character for salubrity,
and is in this respect very different from the rest of the continent.
The general opinion, indeed, is, that the salubrious cordon, as it is
termed, of the continent passes where the British settlements end,
and the Portuguese colony of Delyoa Bay begins. The Cape,
and Natal, as emigration fields, may be mentioned separately,
though, for reasons after stated, little need be said respecting
them.
r 77


The Cape of Good Hope.— This colony occupies the southern
extremity of Africa, its capital, Cape Town, being conveniently
situated on the coast, and now inhabited by a large and respect-
able population. The territory of the colony has been described
as a series of terraces one rising behind the other, and each fronted
by a range of rocky mountains parallel to the sea-coast, through
which passage is found by gorges, glens, or clefts, called cloofs.
The general range of the elevations is from 1000 to 4000 feet; but
there are mountains in the colony above 7000 feet high, and with
their tops within the line of perpetual congelation. Close to the
capital, is the remarkable flat-topped hill called Table Mountain,
rising abruptly upwards of 3500 feet. In the western, which is
the older part of the colony, there are great deserts called Karoos ;
and large districts are quite unfit for culture. Many writers have
recorded the sinking of the heart with which they saw the dreary
dark - stone masses which fronted them, when approaching the
land of promised verdure and abundance. But if less promising
at first, the comparatively scanty vegetable covering of the Cape
soil is of infinitely more value than the rank, deadly, tangled,
luxuriant herbage of the more tropical regions of Africa. The
rivers, with the exception of the great boundary-line—the Orange
—are not large, and dryness is the characteristic of the district.
Sportsmen complain that they lose the advantage of a turf-footing
in making their stealthy advances on their prey, and that there
are few uncultivated places in the Cape Colony where they have
not to scramble over loose shingle, which give forth a metallic
clatter.
The old colony is divided into two provinces—the western and
the eastern. The former contains these divisions : Cape, Stellen-
bosch, Zuellendam, Worcester, Clanwilliam, George, and Beau-
fort. The other contains Albany, Uitenhage, Somerset, Cradock,
Graf Eeinet, and Colesberg. The additions made to the colony
in 1848 by proclamation will have to be mentioned further on.
In temperature and other physical characteristics, the two divisions
differ considerably from each other. The winter in the western
provinces is described as wet and disagreeable, while that of the
east is said to be dry, bracing, and pleasant, though cold. The
Emigration Commissioners, in answer to the question: ‘How are
farms supplied with water ? say: By fountains and rivers, and by
natural and artificial dams and reservoirs, which may be much
extended. Near Cape Town, periodical rains may be relied on.
In the interior, they are more uncertain.’ And when asked: ‘ What
are the best watered and most fertile districts? say: Those bor-
dering on the south-eastern coast.’
The Cape had been possessed and colonised by the Dutch for a


THE CAPE OP GOOD HOPE.
century and a half, when, on their alliance with France in the
great European war, it was taken from them by Britain in 1795.
At the peace of Amiens, it was stipulated to be restored; but
when the war broke out again, its convenience as a stage on the
way to India, and its value in many other respects, had become so
obvious, that it was again taken possession of in 1806. It was
ceded permanently as a British possession at the peace of 1815.
The nominal boundaries of the colony, though far within the
actual range at the present day, had not been nearly filled up.
At the time of the distresses in Britain arising from the sudden
cessation of employment by the peace, and the losses occasioned
by the war, emigration was prominently brought forward as a
means of national relief. Fifty thousand pounds were voted by
parliament to accomplish this object, and the Cape Colony was
chosen as the place of destination for the exiles. It was believed,
not without reason, that as the object of the government was to
get rid of people who were, or were likely to become, discontented,
they preferred for their destination a colony governed somewhat
arbitrarily, to the American settlements, more liberally governed
in themselves, and close to countries still more free. The number
to be exported was 4000 ; but such was the fever for emigration
at the time, that there were 90,000 applicants. The disappoint-
ment of the upwards of twenty rejected for each one accepted was
extreme; but the felicity of the fortunate few was not entirely
unmitigated. Instead of a land of spontaneous abundance, they
found that they had gone to one where they were under an
absolute necessity of working, though their work was in the end
productive of satisfactory results. Landed at Algoa Bay, they
may be said to have founded a separate colony at Albany, which
is, from being so peopled, the most thoroughly English part of the
old Cape Colony. The infant settlement had to encounter at first
severe calamities; but it ultimately righted, and became prosperous.
Its capital, Graham’s-town, is the second town of the old colony,
containing a population of upwards of 6000. It has its own
enterprise and attractions, and especially to British emigrants, in
the origin of its inhabitants. The Dutch language, their ideas,
associations, and habits generally, pervade the other districts of
the old colony; though many of the Boers or Dutch farmers have
removed to a distance, from their irreconcilable objections to the
British system of government especially to the denial of their
right to keep slaves. It is to be regretted that their cause of
enmity is of so selfish a character, since, in general, they are an
honest-minded, kind, and hospitable people. The capital, Cape
Town, with nearly 30,000 inhabitants, is still in a great measure a
Dutch town; but it is full of British gentry, with their official and
79


commercial importance, and contains a mixture of classes and
races.
In virtue of terms of capitulation, Dutch law remains in force
in the province, and the church of England has not been estab-
lished. The prevailing form of religion is the Presbyterian.
Latterly, an excellent system of elementary education has been
instituted on a legislative basis. The colony is under a governor
appointed by the Colonial Office, and for some time the establish-
ment of a provincial parliament has been in agitation.
The great drawback on the tranquillity of the Cape Colony, is
the proximity of tribes of Caffres and other intractable savages.
Wars with these have been common; and with a view of beating
them back, or of placing a wide and secure territory betwixt them
and the colonists, the boundaries of the province have been
immensely, and as the event has proved, unwisely, extended. The
first great extension was in 1847, when two great divisions, called
Victoria and Albert, were added, consisting of thirty millions of
acres. This enormous increase only led to fresh encounters with
the natives, and still another vast territory was added, called ‘ the
Sovereignty.’ It might have been foreseen that these extensions
would expose a frontier too large for regular observation and
protection, and inevitably produce collisions with fresh bands
of irritated barbarians, who would at least feel aggrieved by being
dispossessed, or cheated out of their lands. Such have been the
consequences—long and expensive wars, ruinous to the unfortunate
colony. Other things have injured the Cape. The attempt of the
home government to force convict settlers upon it, caused much
bad feeling; and the withholding of often-promised free institutions,
till the colony was in some measure exasperated, had the worst
consequences. Still occupied with military, and far from being
settled in its general affairs, we regret that the Cape does not yet
offer that safe and satisfactory field of settlement for intending
emigrants which its naturally fine qualities would seem to war-
rant. On this account, we refrain from presenting any statement
respecting its lands, products, or other particulars.
Natal. —This, the last acquired dependency of the British Empire
for general emigration purposes, is a portion of the south-east coast
of Africa, as it trends eastward after passing Algoa Bay. Its geo-
graphical extremes are from 27° 40 / to 30° 40' south latitude, and
from 29° to 31° 10' east longitude; covering an area of about 18,000
square miles. With the Indian Ocean on its seaboard, it is separated
inland from the new acquisitions of the Cape by the Drakenberg
or Dragon Mountains.
The history of the acquisition of this colony is In some respects
a melancholy one. The Dutch farmers of the colony, the Boers,
80


as they are called, shewed an immitigable restlessness under the
British rule. The Dutch are naturally independent and high-
spirited, and possess many qualities in common with the British—
a circumstance which does not make them the most docile of
subjects. Probably it would be difficult to get British settlers
converted into submissive subjects of a foreign government ac-
quiring any of our colonies in war. Almost since the conquest
of the Cape, they had been gradually moving over the boundaries
into open districts; and in 1843, it was ascertained that they
entered into a treaty with Dingaarn, king of the Zoolus, for the
absolute possession of a district of territory more extensive even
than the present colony of Natal, which forms a part of it. Here
it was their intention to form themselves into an independent
republic. It was contrary to the policy of the British colonial
system to permit the formation of the state close on the boun-
daries of a colony. Though of Dutch origin, these Boers were
considered as British subjects; and it was held that they did not
dispense with their allegiance by settling beyond the bounds of
the colony, unless they went over to some established govern-
ment, and that the extension of the space covered by the colonists
could only be considered an enlargement of the colony. Accord-
ingly, in 1843, the district occupied by the emigrants was declared
to be a British possession and a dependency of the Cape. The
Dutch resisted this annexation, but were obliged to yield to a
military force. It may seem hard that these lovers of independ-
ence should have been thus hunted to their place of refuge, and
prohibited from peaceably establishing themselves on a territory
which they acquired by treaty, and which interfered with no
actual used dependency of the British crown. But the rigour of
our colonial system to individuals embraces a spirit of high justice
to the world at large. The emancipation of their slaves was one
of the main objects of complaint with the Dutch ; and there is
no doubt that if they had been left to their own will, they would
have subjected the natives to bondage, if they did not even
procure slaves from a distance.
In further accordance with our colonial system, the individual
lands occupied by the Boers could not be considered their own,
but were the property of the crown, to be disposed of as the
British authorities might direct. The equitable claims of the
settlers to a sufficiency of land would of course be considered;
but the government, treating them as other British settlers
have been treated in New Zealand or elsewhere, would not in-
vest them in reality with the large districts which they would
nominally assign to each other. Disgusted with their position,
many of them disposed of their interest in the land, and again


swarmed off to new settlements. They had thus voluntarily
subjected themselves to the greatest hardships and privations,
taking up their abode in distant solitudes, far from the borders
of civilisation; and in many instances supporting themselves by
their rifles, and merging into a state of semi-savageness. Attempts
have been made to conciliate them towards colonial British rule,
but these efforts have not proved so successful as could be wished.
Emigration to Natal did not seriously commence till the year
1849. It has not thus furnished any practical experience of its
capabilities as an emigration field; but, as we shall presently see,
its promises are large, and well supported. The number of
persons who have already settled there is not known, since,
besides those who have gone directly from this country, many of
the Cape colonists have moved northward.
The climate of Natal is warm, but salubrious; and as the soil is
said to be generally fruitful, it seems that all the productions not
only of the warmer climates of the northern hemisphere—such as
Turkey, which is in a corresponding latitude—but also those
of the temperate regions, may be successfully cultivated. In the
information issued to settlers by the Emigration Commissioners, it
is stated, that
‘ All the European vegetables may be grown in Natal. Good seed-
potatoes are much wanted. All garden seeds should be brought
out; beans do well, and are a useful vegetable here; apple and pear
trees grow well, but few have been grafted: whether these fruits
will attain perfection, there is no experience to prove. Pine-apples,
water-melons, bananas, and yams, thrive well; plantains have been
introduced.’.
Many fruits and valuable vegetable productions appear to be
indigenous. Mr Isaacs, who appears to have been an early
settler in the country, before it was even extensively occupied
by the Boers, gives the following account of its fructifying
capacities, and of the simple manner in which the natives took
advantage of them: —
* The people bestow but little pains in preparing the land for culti-
vation. The boys cut and clear the bushes, never extract the roots
nor turn up the surface. The wood or bush is burnt, and the ashes
strewed over the land. This is all the preparatory labour for sowing.
Afterwards, the women commence their labour by scattering the
corn on the surface without order or precision. This completed, the
ground is turned over in the seed, but much is uncovered. After
germination, a month after sowing, women and girls clear it. Two
months after sowing, it begins to ripen; and at the end of the third
month, it is hard, and fit for garnering. Thus, with an industrious
people, three crops of corn each year might be easily raised. They
plant both the Guinea and the Indian corn. We introduced at Natal
82


a regular system of husbandry; and our natives had become so accus-
tomed to it, that we had but little difficulty, latterly, of preserving
our crops in regular succession. The natives have several sorts of
beans or pulse, all differing from the European bean ; they grow
productively, and are an agreeable vegetable. They also cultivate
a seed called the “ Loopoco ” —it is not dissimilar to rape in size and
colour. Of this, the natives make their beer, which is produced by
fermentation. It contains very powerful fermentative properties,
and when drawn off from the vessels in which it is prepared, it is
a red, or light-brown colour; an excellent beverage, both potent and
stimulating.
‘ They raise four sorts of potatoes—red, white, pink, and brown; all
of them sweet, and not of the European description, but a very good
vegetable for culinary purposes. Pumpkins and melons grow spon-
taneously, and are also cultivated to great perfection, while they
have an excellent vegetable both in appearance and flower like
spinach; it grows also spontaneously. They have a great variety
of wild-fruits, particularly the aumuntingoola—about the size of a
plum, rich in flavour, and with seed, instead of a stone, in the body
of it. This makes a most excellent and a highly-flavoured preserve.
The sugar-cane is wild, and, I suppose, an indigenous plant. They do
not cultivate it, though the soil seems adapted for its growth, as it
runs to a prodigious height, and the cane is of large dimensions.
They have two sorts: one grows larger than the other; the former
the natives call “Moaba;” the latter, “Simpla.” The plantain is
also another native vegetable, which, with the “ edoc ” and yam, are
substitutes for bread, although they have a bread made from Indian
corn, pulverised and made into a sort of thin cake, which they bake
by putting it into hot ashes. Every sort of European seed for hor-
ticultural purposes which we had brought from the Cape, grew
exceedingly well, and produced luxuriantly, particularly the smaller
sorts of vegetables. Salads we raised prodigiously fine, and rapidly.
Cabbage - lettuce grow in great perfection, as did the beans, and
kidney-beans, and a variety of other seeds, particularly spinach.
‘ The fact is, the climate of Natal is congenial to vegetable life, as
is proved by the rapid germination of the seed after it is sown. The
seasons are also exceedingly encouraging to the growth of all vege-
table productions; the dew, during the intervals of the periodical
rains, being extremely fertilising and nutritive. There are at times
checks to vegetation in Natal, as in all other parts of Eastern Africa,
but they are far from being common visitations. The principal is
the locust. They now and then spread their destructive influence,
and their devastation is great; but only one or two instances occurred
during my five years’ residence of their appearance amongst us.
Those I have already detailed; and even then, I was somewhat
surprised, from the prodigious flight of them, that they did not do
more damage.’ —( Christopher on Natal , p. 22.)
Like all the fruitful parts of Africa, Natal is prolific in animal
83


as well as in vegetable life; but the absence of vast dense thickets
seems to prevent the wilder children of the desert from remaining
there in the presence of so considerable an influx of strangers.
It is said that some ladies of Pietermaritzburg, taking a walk
one day to the cemetery, were somewhat startled to find a few
elephants walking about meditatively among its few tombs. Mr
Isaacs, whose authority has been referred to in the vegetable
productions, says: —
»The country of the Zoolas, eastward of Natal, is much infested
with wild beasts, and those of every species of the African continent.
At Natal, however, and for a large space around it, they have been
greatly disturbed, and have gone further inland, fearing the effects of
our firearms and the force of people collected and settled within a
small circumference. In my various peregrinations, I have met with
elephants, buffaloes, tiger-cats, leopards, panthers, hyaenas, wild boars,
wolves, jackals, iron hogs or crested porcupines, monkeys, ant-eaters,
civet-cats. The foregoing animals, at a time, were very numerous in
the vicinity of Natal, but from the causes stated, are greatly decreas-
ing Various species of the antelope are common. Otters are com-
mon in the rivers, which the natives hunt and catch in traps. To
the eastward of Natal, there are also to be found the rhinoceros, lion,
camelopard, zebra, baboon, vivera, kangaroos, gnoos, and hares; also
the hippopotamus and alligator, and other amphibious animals. Of
domestic animals, they have horned cattle, being the great object of
their various contests; namely, the bceve, the cow, and the bull.
They have also sheep and goats, and the domestic dog. Hogs are
only to be found among the Europeans, who have imported a few for
breeding. Their cattle are not large, but exceedingly good meat;
and the sheep are of the Cape species, with broad tails, and with
fine hair instead of wool. The goats, like the sheep, are used for
animal food, and are very fine eating. Of the feathered race, there
is a great variety. The wild sort are easily obtained, and often killed
by the natives with a sort of small club, which they throw with great
precision. The Numidian crane, the crowned crane, black eagle,
vulture, heron, flamingo, wild-turkey, wild-goose, wild-duck, partridge,
grouse, galina or guinea-fowl, owl, and dove of various descriptions,
are common, besides birds of varied plumage, but none with any
note. The domestic fowls are the same as in the British settlements
of the Cape.’
In the notification from the Emigration Board, questions on
the animal productions are stated and answered as follows;
‘What is the probable value of oxen and cows, sheep, pigs, horses,
poultry, &c. at Natal, and what class of animals is most suitable for
the colony ? What description of wild animals, wild fowl, and fish
abound; are there now dogs obtainable in the colony suitable for
sheep-farming, hunting, &c. f—Good trained working oxen, £3 each ;
fat cattle, £3, 55.; Zuloo cattle, £l, 10s, to £2, 10s.; cows (common),


£2, 10s. to £3, 10s.; sheep (Cape), 10s.; pigs, 10s.; horses, £lO to
£2O; fowls, 4s. per dozen; ducks, Is. 6d. to 2s. each ; geese and
turkeys, 9s. to 12s. each. Most of the abovS animals are abundant.
Good fish may be taken in great quantities on the sea-coast, the few
caught in the rivers in the interior are of a worthless kind. Useless
dogs abound in the district; good ones for hunting and shooting are
rare and valuable. Wild fowl are not generally numerous, but they
may occasionally be obtained.’
With all the salubrity and productiveness with which this
country is endowed, there is still a painful uncertainty about the
character it is to assume with reference to the ordinary staple
produce of our other settlements —a dubiety, in short, as to the
productions which may be profitably raised in the district, and,
consequently, as to the kind of emigrants who should seek. it.
Undoubtedly, it will not be safe for any man who takes his
notions of a colonist’s pursuits and chances from the flock and
stock-masters of Australia, or the wheat-growers of Canada, to
make choice of Natal, and proceed thither to follow the systems
there established.
Whether it is to be at all a sheep-farming district, is still an
open question. The herbage is described as very rank, and it is
supposed to contain many poison plants. The fat-tailed sheep of
the Cape may be safely placed on it, but it will scarcely be worth
the settler’s while, in a new and thinly-peopled colony, to raise a
kind so valueless for its wool. It is stated that a superior breed
of goats has been introduced in the stock - farming of the
district; and pigs, which seem to live everywhere that food
exists, flourish.
Cattle and horses have been more extensively tried than sheep,
being almost necessary for the operations of the colony. The
Dutch wagon requires a whole train of oxen, and the plough
requires a strong drag through the heavy land. The settlers have
not yet had time to test the suitableness of the colony for horses
and cattle as a produce; but the general opinion of those who
have had experience, appears to be more decidedly in favour of
their thriving than in the case of sheep. Mr Methley, who de-
scribes himself as a general commission-agent in the colony, says—
‘ Horses are to be had at prices varying from £lO to £2O; they
are generally of excellent quality, and have well-developed points.
Thorough - bred horses have been extensively imported into the
colony, and have much improved the breeds. They are hardy, easily
supported, and equally serviceable for harness or saddle. There are
no heavy draught-horses, such as are seen in drays in towns, or are
in use on the farms in England ; neither are they so much in
request, as, for general purposes, oxen are found to answer better.
There are two or three varieties of oxen. The cattle obtained from


the Zoolu country are the most hardy, they are small in size, and
are best adapted for land near the coast; they can be purchased
unbroken from 255. to 30s. The “ Africanda ”is the largest species,
and have immense horns; nevertheless, they make excellent draught-
oxen : they may be had from £2, 10s. to £3. What is called the
“Fatherland” is decidedly the best; the cows give more milk, and
the flesh makes better beef, than either of the others. By English
graziers, they are much preferred, and generally bear a higher value
in the market.’ —{The New Colony of Port Natal , p. 93.)
It is doubtful as yet whether any rankness or other deleterious
qualities in the vegetation are general, or merely local, with
characteristics which may teach the settler to select the pasture
which is exempt from them. It is also uncertain how far burning
may be depended upon for sweetening the herbage, and whether
it may not be greatly improved by systematic depasturage.
Besides any natural defects in the herbage, there are noxious
agencies to which agricultural animals are liable; the most for-
midable of these being the attacks of insects ; and in mentioning
this, we notice a serious drawback on colonisation in any part of
Africa.
Three of the great staple productions of the very warm regions
are known to grow well in Natal—tobacco, indigo, and cotton. It
is believed that the sugar-cane could be well cultivated, but indigo
and cotton are indigenous. How far these tropical productions,
especially the latter, is to become a staple production of this
colony, is a matter of serious importance in the prospects of its
settlers. The industrial capacity of Britain demands the raw
material of its principal manufacture wherever it can be got.
There is a desire to introduce small capitalists—they might per-
haps be better described as men of the working-classes, and those
immediately above them, who possess some saved money—into the
colony; and it is thought that they can usefully conduct cotton-
farming. It may be so; but the production of cotton has hitherto
in general been on large estates, where slave-labour, or something
closely resembling it, has been employed. And if this produce
should suit the means and habits of the small capitalist, it does
not follow that it will suit the working-man. It has hitherto
been the characteristic of cotton plantations, that they can be
brought to perfection by the inferior kind of work which slaves
can impart. It will be seen from the document quoted below,
that much of the work connected with the cotton harvest can be
carried on by children. Much interest was created in the Man-
chester Chamber of Commerce by the production of some samples
of Natal cotton, which were found to be long-fibred, adhesive, and
very white. There were other and inferior kinds produced at the
86


same time ; and the quality seemed to depend, as in other places,
on the seed. By the practical men before whom they were
placed, one of the inferior samples was priced at from 9d. to lOd.
per pound. Another kind was estimated at Is. per pound. Mr
Bergtheil, a German settler in Natal, who had assisted in bring-
ing the matter before the Chamber of Commerce, published the
following estimate of the cost and produce of a moderate cotton
farm, in the ‘ Manchester Guardian: ’ —
‘ Suppose a Family of Five Persons to go out with a Capital of - £4OO
They will have to spend—
For Passage, £2O a head, - - - - £lOO
... 200 Acres of Land, at 65., - - - - 60
... Eight Oxen, at £3 per piece, - 24
... Temporary House, and necessary Working Implements, 30
Together, - 214
Which would still leave for their living, and payment of Wages
and other Expenses, the sum of £lB6
Suppose they cultivate in the first year fifty acres of land, which would
produce (as proved already at Port Natal) per acre 600 pounds of clean
cotton, the value of which is 6d. per pound at Port Natal; but taking
it only at 400 pounds of clean cotton per acre, and at 3d. per pound,
in order to be on the safe side, the fifty acres would produce 20,006
pounds at 3d. per pound, ----- £250
The Second Year, 100 acres might be cultivated, and would
produce, ------- 500
The Third Year, 150 do., - - - - - 750
The Fourth Year, 200 do., 1,000
The Fifth Year, 200 do., 1,000
The gross Production of Five Years would be, - £3,500
From this amount the following expenses are to be deducted;—
The First Year—Wages for Ten Caffres, at £3, 10s. per
annum, ------ £35
Ginning and other little Expenses, - - 30
£6s
The Second Year—Wages for Twenty Caffres, - £7O
Ginning and other little Expenses, - - - 60
The Third Year—Wages for Thirty Caffres, - £lO5
Ginning and Expenses, - - - " 9 ° 195
The Fourth Year—Wages for Forty Caffres, - £l4O
Ginning and Expenses, - - - - 120
The Fifth Year—same as Fourth Year, - - 260
9lO
Which leaves a net Profit for the five years of - - £2,590
Besides a Plantation of 200 acres (and not, as stated in the ‘ Guardian,’
of ten acres) their own and free property.
London , 6th March 1848. T. Bergtheil.
The following extract from the ‘ Cape Town Advertiser was at


the same time brought under attention. It related to a farm of
twenty-nine acres three miles from D’Urban :
‘ The twenty-nine acres have this year yielded 8925 pounds of clean or
ginned cotton, being at the rate of 307 pounds per acre, and that which
I have shipped to England during the last three years has netted, on
the average, Sd. per pound.
The expenses from Ist August 1847 to 31st July 1848 were : —•
Caffre Wages, - - £37 16 7
Rugs for Caffres, - - 3 14 6
50.] Muids Maize, do., - 10 19 4
Meat for do., - - - 3 6 2
£ss 16 7
Bagging, - - - £6 8 3
Twelve Spades, &c., - - 210 0
8 18 3
£64 14 10
which brings the cost of production, exclusively of first outlay for cost of
land, ploughing, &c., to Id. 13-16ths.
At 4]d.per pound on the spot, the value of 8925 pounds would be £167, Bs.’
On the capabilities of the colony for this very valuable produc-
tion, Mr Christopher says—
‘ Growth and Preparation of Cotton. —Nine kinds of cotton have
been grown in Natal, proving thereby the adaptation of the soil for
the growth of this order of plants. The coast-line is the most suited
for its cultivation, the sea-air, or the deposit of saline dew on the
plant, favouring its growth as much as the sandy nature of the soil.
At Natal, cotton consequently should be planted facing the sea, hav-
ing an eastern and south-eastern aspect. The north-west winds are
supposed to be trying to the plant. It is certainly the most parch-
ing wind. Every kind of cotton may be produced ; and those who
are inclined to take some extra pains, will probably find the Sea
Island cotton will answer best: and those who are inclined to cultivate
that which is the most hardy, and requires the least trouble in clean-
ing, will grow the most common cotton now in the colony probably
produced from Egyptian seed. The additional difficulty of cleaning
Sea Island cotton is the principal reason for supposing that it will
not answer so well as the most common cotton. The machines lately
invented, however, may obviate much of the difficulty found in clean-
ing this the most valuable cottons ; and every effort should be made to
bring it to market, the price being double.
‘ Cotton maybe sown in Natal from August to October; and although
cotton has been grown at Maritzburg, fifty miles from the coast, the
best cotton lands will certainly be found within fifteen miles from
the sea. Cotton lands require ploughing; and if crops, and continuous
good crops, are required, subsoil ploughing should be resorted to. If
good seed can be had from Liverpool, there will be no harm in emi-
grants bringing different kinds; but the colony will now supply any
quantity of the common quality. In order to keep the ground clear
of weed, and for facility of gathering, as well as economy of ground,
the seed should be planted in rows at least five feet asunder (six feet


probably better), and in holes three feet apart. They should be
dibbled in (and if the ground is subsoil ploughed) twelve inches
deep, half-a-dozen seeds in each hole. If all come up, thin them out,
leaving a couple of the strongest. If fibres adhere to the seed, and
the colour of both be a little green, it is very doubtful if the seed
will germinate: the seed should come out clean. In America, the
cotton-plant is an annual; in Natal, it is a perennial. I have seen
them nine years old. Cleaning the ground should not be omitted. If
weeds take up the nourishment between the rows, the plants will
not thrive so well. The ground between should, in short, be turned
over every year. It has been suggested that mealies might be
planted between the cotton; but at anyrate it should, I think, be
only for the first year. In such cases both are liable to bo neglected,
or the gatheringof one may interfere with the other. Mealies are also
temptations to cattle, which would do the cotton also no good. Prun-
ing has been proved advantageous, producing more pods. The
strength of the Natal cotton harvest is from January to the end of
March. It is then that a farmer would wish for a large family to
send his children into the plantation. The more the merrier. But
if he has none, ho can still employ the coloured women and children
of the country. These go through the grounds gathering the cotton
from every open husk, leaving those unopen for another gathering.
Unless gathered perfectly matured, there is difficulty in separating
the cotton from the seed ; and moisture then being in the seed
and fibre, the cotton is liable to become mouldy, and consequently
weak in fibre. When gathered, it is placed in open sheds, and soon
becomes perfectly dry. It is then fit for cleaning—the long staple
cotton being separated from the seed by a roller gin; the short
stapled on the old system by the saw gin. Those among the
emigrants who intend going largely into this article, should make
themselves acquainted with the last improvements in the construc-
tion of machinery for this purpose ; and perhaps they could not do
better than apply to the secretary of the Commercial Association,
Manchester, on the subject. In making this reference to him, I trust
that gentleman will excuse my doing so, the object being a public
one, and no person likely to be able to advise so correctly.
* A gin or cotton-cleaning machine has lately been invented, which
costs about £3: and I hope, shortly after arrival in the colony, most
of these emigrants will keep one of their own.’
At the same meeting of the Chamber of Commerce where the
cotton was produced, it is stated that ‘ the president also produced
a specimen of indigo which was said to be worth from 3s. 4d. to
3s. 6d. per poundbut we have only very slender means of know-
ing anything of the capabilities of the district for producing this
precious but very precarious commodity. The only decided ex-
periment appears to have been made by Mr Wilson, who laid out
fourteen acres with the plant in 1849.
Tobacco is another vegetable of the warmer latitudes which
89


Natal is expected to furnish. Mr Christopher says— * I have not
only seen good tobacco grown from Havana seeds at Natal, but
good cigars made from it.’ But this production, like indigo, is as
yet matter only of speculative expectation. In the same position
we may place raw silk, which has also been spoken of as a com-
modity which we may expect some day, according to the anticipa-
tions of some of the settlers, to see imported from Natal.
We shall conclude this general and necessarily vague account
of the expected produce of Natal with a list, given by Mr Chris-
topher, of miscellaneous commodities which he expects to see the
colony producing. Some of them are of great importance, but the
prospect of their realisation must be admitted to be very vague:—
* Aloes. —This plant is indigenous to Natal, and may be made a
valuable article of export. Its manufacture is so well understood,
that the simple process adopted in the colony requires no improve-
ment or instruction.
* Colombo Root.— This may be made an article of export to some
amount. The root is dug up, cut in slices, and dried on cords in the
sun. It is a drug useful in dysentery, cholera-morbus, and many
other diseases.
‘ Castor-Oil. —A valuable plant, indigenous to superfluity. And if
farmers and others would use this oil in the colony, and export
their superfluous fat, or convert it into soap, colonial wealth to a
certain extent would be obtained, rendering us independent and
unindebted for imports from Europe.
‘ Gum, Acacia Arabia. —This drug may be very extensively col-
lected, and of a very superior quality.
* Coffee. —The Mocha coffee grows on the African coast, and the
berry has been successfully tried at Natal. Every cottager should
grow his own, and export several hundredweight to England. Natal
appears to be well suited for it, not being subject to frost.
‘ Tea —will probably do well, Natal being exactly the same latitude
south as the China tea district is north. The plant grown by the
natives for tea, and another used by the Dutch, are aromatic,
agreeable, and refreshing. Unless people are fastidious, importations
of tea are unnecessary.
‘ Olive-Oil. —Much of Natal resembles the country about Seville, in
Spain. The wild olive grows now, and no doubt the true olive will
thrive; but it will require six to ten years probably before it will
carry fruit.
* Coed —is in abundance in localities. Copper supposed to be so.
‘ Woods —equal to the Cape, fit for furniture, building, &c.
* Bees’ Wax and Honey —are found extensively.
‘ Sheep’s Wool —may be grown in the mountainous parts, and also
collected in the interior. Before the Dutch left, Natal exported
4200 pounds.
‘ Tallow— should be an article of export, even after making their
own soap and candles.


‘ Ivory. —Some in the country, and great quantities will be collected
from the Dutch and the Zoolus.
‘ Hides. —Great quantities. Natal should make its own leather.
‘ Bark. —Mimosa is an excellent tan.’
Land and Investments. —The general rule for the disposal of the
vacant or ‘ crown ’ lands of Natal is, that they are to be sold by
auction at an upset price of 4s. per acre. This price only applies,
however, to the rural districts, and the general scale of prices is
thus practically set forth in the information furnished by the
Emigration Commissioners: —
‘ The upset price in the seaport town of D’Urban is £lOO per acre,
each lot being in extent about one-third of an acre. In the town of
Pietermaritzburg, the seat of government, and in other towns, price
£5O per acre. Suburban allotments £1 per acre. Country lands
are offered at an upset price of 4s. per acre. These upset prices are
sometimes raised under peculiar circumstances.
‘ Government lands rarely fetch more than the upset price, owing
to the great extent of private property in the market.’
In answer to questions about the necessity and cost of clearing
land, these answers are given :
* There is so much available open land, that clearing has not yet
been necessary.
‘ There are no data on which to ground any calculations as to
expense of clearing. Bushy lands cost most in clearing.’
In answer to further questions as to the delay that may take
place before the settler is put in possession of his lot—-a very
serious matter to the emigrant —and as to the possibility of any
questions arising on the validity of the titles, the following infor-
mation is given by the commissioners:—
‘ On application for crown lands that have not been offered for sale,
the survey takes place as soon as possible. There is, however, always
a quantity of land that has been offered for sale, available for imme-
diate purchase.
‘ Where the crown lands selected have been offered at public sale,
they may be obtained on payment of the upset price and surveying
expenses. Where the land selected has not yet been put up for sale,
it will be necessary to advertise it for three months previously to its
being put up for auction at the upset price. Possession may be
obtained immediately after the purchase. With reference to private
lands, it may be stated that purchases can be made previously to
survey.
‘ Information as to the validity of titles may be easily obtained at
the government offices. A fee of 2s. 6d. is charged in the Transfer
Office, where all mortgages are registered, for every search. All
arrears, if any, must be paid before transfer of these properties, or
any portion of them, will be allowed. Mortgages are not often met
with: but where they have been effected, the purchaser must, as a
91


matter of course, arrange with the seller as to the mode of paying
them off, either on transfer, or allowing them to remain at the
current rate of 6 per cent, per annum.
‘The crown reserves to itself the right of making roads over all
lands, without compensation to proprietors, except on those parts on
which buildings may actually stand at the time, and also the right
of fixing outspans (halting-places where draught-oxen and horses
may graze) on the line of road.’
As to land specially suitable for cotton culture, if it really
become successful, it would appear that there may be a run on it,
which will considerably raise its selling above the upset govern-
ment price. Mr Bootham, the secretary of the Chamber of Com-
merce, writing to the editor of the 1 Manchester Couriei on the
cultivation of cotton at Natal (21st December 1848), says—
‘ I have said that parties must not expect to get cotton land at the
government minimum price of 4s. per acre, unless, indeed, they
will be at the trouble and expense of clearing away dense bush.
All clear open ground, that has been hitherto offered loi sale by go-
vernment (I allude, of course, to cotton ground), has been bought at
prices ranging as high as 10s. 6d. per acre, and tliey have now none
such for sale within thirty miles of the port; but some in faims ot
from 500 to 700 acres, at this distance, will be submitted to public com-
petition in the course of a few months; and as there are no speculators
here just now, these farms, in the event of their not being sold by
auction, will be for private sale, thus affording an opportunity for any
emigrants that may arrive subsequent to the date of the public sale
to commence operations, without being compelled to purchase from
private parties at exorbitant rates; but as government have not
more than from 75,000 to 100,000 acres of cotton ground to dispose
of, and as the best lands are in possession of private parties, it can-
not be long ere there is any good cotton land all undei
15s. or 20s” per acre. We have ourselves sold about 2700 acres at
ss. per acre, bushy land, to as high as 10s. for cleai giound, in the
neighbourhood of the port.’
But there is an announcement in the Government Emigratic
Report for 1850, which must bear somewhat on the scarcity of
cotton-growing land in the market, and its selling pi ice. It is
there stated that 25,000 acres had been granted by the local
government, on very advantageous terms, to a company of cotton
producers; but that they had not been successful, and it was
necessary to resume the land.
A strong desire has been expressed, in various quarters, to
make Natal a settlement for people of some, but moderate, means.
It is felt that it is not a very suitable one for labourers—at least for
a large number of that class rising in position and becoming land-
owners ; and therefore that if large capitalists should fix on it as
a country for investment in cotton, tobacco, and other tropical
92


products, it will merge into a territory of two classes—an indo-
lent, rich, colonial aristocracy, on the one hand; and on the other,
a low, labouring class, only a little above slavery. It is stated in
the government information to emigrants 1 , that ‘ the most valuable
emigrant for Natal is the practical farmer, possessing a small
capital—say of £5OO to £looo—and of industrious and steady
habits. With these qualifications, success is ultimately certain.’
The Dutch are more inveterate followers of old customs than
even the English peasantry; and in the use of their ancient wagon,
there can be little doubt that there is a vast waste of substance
and motive-power. At the same time, there are doubtless obstacles
in transit to be overcome, for which the neat English van would
be very unfit. It has been suggested, that the rough Scottish cart
might suit very well as an African vehicle. It was invented for
the same purpose as the enormous Dutch wagon passing over
rough ground. As to other objects of expenditure, the following
advice is offered by the Emigration Commissioners: —‘ Emigrants
with capital should be careful how they invest their money in
goods for sale in the country, as the market is liable to great
fluctuations, ind merchandise which at one time will meet with a
ready sale, yielding great profit, will at another time not realise
the cost in England. It is also advisable that no land should
be purchased previously to seeing it, or at least obtaining a
description from competent and disinterested persons.’
An arrangement has been made, by which depositors of money
in this country for land in Natal may obtain a remission for each
labouring or mechanical emigrant conveyed by them to the colony,
and invested in small holdings. The deposits must be in sums
not less than £lOOO, and the remission is £lO for each emigrant.'
With regard to the wages of British labourers or artisans, the
Emigration Commissioners have not deemed their several amounts
sufficiently established to enable them to make a distinct announce-
ient of them. On the remuneration of productive artisans they
say —‘ Each tradesman makes his own articles, asks his own price,
and obtains it, yielding about 10s. per diem wages.’ This would
be a glorious state of matters for mechanics were it likely to be
permanent. There are, however, large sums, in the form rather of
profits than wages, passing from hand to hand in all infant colonies.
Labourers, and these of a very inefficient kind, have obtained high
wages in Natal, but they have been favoured by lucky accident.
We do not yet know how far the colony is to be permanently a
good source of employment for the better kinds of skilled labour;
but the arrangement for the accommodation of working emigrants
,n small locations would seem, at least at first sight, a good one.
It shews a considerate spirit on the part of the Emigration Board,
G 93


and a desire to make the colony as useful as it can be made to
that valuable class of men—the productive workers of Britain,
whether in mechanical or agricultural operations; and if the par-
ticular scheme which has been developed should turn out inap-
plicable to the circumstances of the colony, the painstaking good
intention which has characterised it will naturally lead to amended
efforts to accomplish the same end.
But there is another matter of importance to all classes of
people in this colony, which has to be viewed along with its
prospects of employment to emigrant workers —and that is, the
position of the native tribes, and their relation to the colonists.
A variety of native tribes exist in this large territory, but they
are scanty in number; and there are only three who are of much
importance to the settler—the Hottentots, the Caffres, and the
Zoolus, or Zoolu Caffres, as they are occasionally termed. The
Hottentots are the best workmen. They are said to be excellent
wagoners, and have almost a monopoly of this occupation. Their
wages are far higher than those of their neighbour tribes. The
Zoolu Caffres are a comparatively gentle and honest race—very
different from the tribes which carried on the war with the Cape
Colony. Their services, such as they are, may be had for little—
-ss. a month in wages, along with their support, which, as they live
upon Indian corn and coarse refuse of other food, amounts to about
a like sum. Very few attempts have been made in, any of our
emigration colonies to get the natives to work either as self-
supporters or as servants. Port Natal is thus an exception—
probably on account of that notion of being made to work for the
white man which has associated itself with the African races.
Their wages mark their superiority to the aborigines of the other
southern colonies, and at the same time shew the utmost extent
of their availability; for it appears impossible by any inducement
to make them worth more. The colonists complain bitterly about
the idle servants or workmen. A correspondent of Sydney’s
Emigrant's Journal says: /It is the cotton-planter that this state
of matters most seriously affects, for his loss is very great when
his cotton is dead ripe, and he unable to pick it. I know a farmer
at this moment so situated: he has about 170 acres of Sea-Island
cotton, most of it commencing to burst the pod, and yet he cannot
get a single labourer for love or money, although there are
thousands around him. He (Mr Davidson), lam sorry to say, is
only one out of a number similarly situated. I have no doubt
that he will lose this season between £7OO and £lOOO, and he has
no means of remedying it. Let him offer any wages he likes,
the natives will not work—they prefer ease and idleness.’—
{Emigrant's Journal , New Series, i. 164.)
94


Practical men of course propose to make short work of such
difficulties, and compel the idle to labour. Other nations might
do so; but slavery, even in this modified form, is not a thing to be
even proposed and discussed for a British colony. Others propose
to tax the Africans, or drive them from the colony. Their position
is peculiar, and one that would in some respects justify restraint.
They do not belong to the district, the original natives of which
appear to have been cleared off before the Dutch occupation; but
they are fugitives, seeking refuge from the neighbouring tyrants,
and especially from the bloodthirsty Chaka. The protection
from slavery, and the scattered benefits which the presence of a
civilised industrious community strews, however slightly, in the
path of the savage, are great temptations to them to migrate to
Natal; and there seem's to be a fear that their numbers may
become formidable. They have already increased, in fact, from
about 20,000 to about 150,000. Thus, the colony is in some
measure the converse of others where the coloured races are
gradually disappearing.
From the preceding facts, it will be seen that Natal, though
presenting some favourable features, is not suitable for the
reception of emigrants on an indiscriminate scale. On this
account, we should consider it as considerably less worthy of
attention than New Zealand or Australia. True, it may be
reached at less cost of time and money than these more distant
provinces; but really a little additional outlay on this score
should be of small consideration to intending emigrants. A few
weeks more or less on a voyage, or a few pounds more or less
for the transit of a family, ought not to weigh in opposition to
circumstances of greater moment.


■
- j / _ ■ '
*
;
M


W. & R. CHAMBERS’S MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.
CHAMBERS’S LIBRARY FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.
This series, which embraces Moral and Religious Tales, History, Poetry,
Religious Tales, History, Poetry, and
Subjects of’General Information, now consists of the following Volumes, price One
Shilling each: —
Orlandino, a Tale, by Miss Edgeworth.
The Little Robinson, and Other Tales.
Uncle Sam’s Money-Box, by Mrs Hall.
Self-Denial, Jacopo, and Other Tales.
Truth and Trust.
Alfred in India, or Scenes in Hindoostan.
Moral Courage, and Other Tales.
Clever Boys, and Other Stories.
A Tale of Old England, by Thomas Miller.
Grandmamma’s Pockets, by Mrs Hall.
History of France, by Leitch Ritchie.
True Heroism, and Other Stories.
Fireside Amusements.
The Steadfast Gabriel, by Mary Howitt.
The Whisperer, by Mrs Hall.
Duty and Affection, a Tale.
History of England, by Frederica Rowan.
The Swan’s Egg, by Mrs Hall.
History of Scotland, by Frederica Rowan, will be shortly published.
The Series will he completed in Twenty Volumes.
CYCLOPAEDIA OF ENGLISH LITERATURE.
A Critical and Biographical History of English Writers in all departments of
Literature, illustrated by specimens of their writings;
Forming two handsome volumes, price 14 s. cloth.
CHAMBERS’S MISCELLANY
OF USEFUL AND ENTERTAINING TRACTS.
In twenty volumes, at If. each, done up in fancy boards; or in ten volumes,
cloth boards, at 2s. each.
This work will be found adapted for libraries in the army and navy, hospitals,
prisons, schools, and other establishments. All the Tracts continue to be sold
separately, at a halfpenny or penny each, according to size.
WORKS BY ROBERT CHAMBERS.
TRADITIONS OF EDINBURGH. New Edition. 4s.
HISTORY OF THE REBELLION OF 1745-46. 4s.
POPULAR RHYMES OF SCOTLAND. Select Original Poems. 4f,
ESSAYS. 4 vols. 16f.
*,* The above may be had, as a series, in seven vols., with Vignette Titles. 28j.
ANCIENT SEA-MARGINS, as illustrative of Changes of the Relative Level
of Sea and Land. With Map and numerous Wood-Engravings. 9f.
COMMERCIAL TABLES;
Consisting of Reckoning, Interest, Annuity, Money, Weights, Measures, and other
Tables; and forming a convenient Manual for the Warehouse and Counting-Room.
Price 3f. half-bound.
ATLAS FOR THE PEOPLE;
Consisting of thirty-four quarto maps, coloured in outline; an Introduction descrip-
tive of the physical and political features of the globe; and a Consulting Index.
Price 12f. 6 d. cloth boards.
COOKERY AND DOMESTIC ECONOMY,
FOR YOUNG HOUSEWIVES.
In one small volume, neatly bound in cloth, price If. 6d.
CHAMBERS’S PEOPLE’S EDITIONS.
A series of Original, Translated, and Selected Works, printed in double columns,
Bvo, and, from their cheapness, adapted for the use of the less opulent classes of the
community.


■
m
EMIGRANT’S MANUAL.
This Work, which has been carefully prepared
from the most recent Public Documents and
other trustworthy sources of information, will
embrace Accounts of the following Fields of
Emigration :
AUSTRALIA;
NEW ZEALAND;
SOUTH AFRICA, including the CAPE OF
GOOD HOPE and PORT NATAL;
BRITISPI AMERICA; and UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA; also,
A GENERAL DISSERTATION, containing
Miscellaneous Information, and Advice to
intending Emigrants.
These will he published separately; and when
all are issued, they will form a Comprehensive
Work.
Published by W. & R. Chambers, and sold by
all Booksellers.
