

[?]
THE DREAM
OF
MATTHIAS the BURGOMASTER.
AN ORIGINAL POEM,
WRITTEN, AND PUBLISHED FOR THE FIRST TIME, BY
FRED. M. ALEXANDER.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
MELBOURNE,
JAS. TURNER. PRINT., 642 ELIZABETH-ST.


W . cd*u}d, -%
-wt JU
s . :, -.. ; '> :
v,;. Vi . ’


THE
DREAM OF MATTHIAS THE BURGOMASTER.
By FRED. M. ALEXANDER.
The marriage guests had left the house, and all were hushed to rest,
The father sought his lonely room to soothe his troubled breast,
For the recollections of the deed were weighing on his mind.
He thought that in this quiet place sweet solace he would find.
He tried to sleep, but all in vain, his eyes were hot and red,
The vision was before him now, it hovered round his bed ;
With trembling frame and haggard face he moved about the room,
For the human blood that he had shed now seemed to seal his doom.
The wind without blew fierce and strong, the snow was falling fast,
And now and then the bells rang out as the sleigh wont rushing past,
Then would the wretched father start, and utter fearful screams.
Those bells were always haunting him, he heard them in his dreams.
Once more he sought his restless couch, and tried to soothe the pain,
But ere he’d time to rest his head the vision came again.
His body with convulsions shook, he tottered from his bed,
And told the story of the crime that linked him with the dead ;
‘ ’Twas a Polish Jew I killed that night in the depth of winter time,
1 used the axe to take his life, then cast him in the lime,*
The blood flowed freely from the wound—Oh God ! that dreadful corse,
Aloud 1 cried in agony, in anguish and remorse.
“ I heaped the lime upon his frame, I saw his eye-balls glare,
I saw the pale distorted face, and heard him gasp for air,
And last of all a death-like groan rose upwards to the sky,
Then on the bank I fainting fell, and prayed that I might die.


“ Alas ! my prayers were all in vain, I staggered to my feet ;
In dreadful terror there I stood lest I should someone meet,
For my bloody hands and gore-stained clothes the secret would reveal,
It’s cost me years of pain and grief that secret to conceal.
“ The scene’s before me day and night, it racks my tortured brain,
Whate’er I do, where’er 1 go, I bear the brand of Cain,
A fearful'picture blood has drawn, which cannot be effaced,
And on my hot and reeling brain this fearful sight is traced,
“ My sweet child kneels beside my knee, and asks for me God’s peace,
Her words as arrows cleave my heart, and cause life’s joys to cease.
The avenging spirit’s fearful cry comes from the heaven’s height
To charge me with the blood I shed, that dark and stormy night.
“ So must the murderer suffer pain, he dreads both death and life,
His soul is torn by fearful pangs—with God Himself at strife,
The torments that I’m suffering now were caused by greed for gold,
To gain the bright and cursed trash all peace in life I’ve sold.
“ Oh God ! I hear the bells again 1 I feel I’m on the rack,
Once more I shed the human blood which cannot be brought back,
I see the warm blood gushing forth. Oh ! look, it’s stained my hands,
And there before my burning eyes the ghostly thing now stands.”
“ What shall I do? Where shall I go to rid me of this sight ?
Oh God ! Have mercy on my soul, and give me rest this night ;
For now my strength is failing fast, my end is drawing nigh.
Oh help ! The vision’s there again. I die ! I die I I (lie /”
[NOTE.—This Poem was written after witnessing Mr. Bentley’s admirable
interpretation of tha character of Matthias, in “ The Bells,” played
at the Theatre Royal recently.]
