

THE CASE
E. W. LANDOR, Esq., J.P.,
POLICE MAGISTRATE,
WESTERN AUSTRALIA:




Hist of lUtters anft papers in following pages.
Date.
Page,
Marked
1872.
A Colonial Secretary’s Letter to E. W. |
Laudor, Esq., Police Magistrate |
June 6th.
June 10 th.
B Mr. Landor’s Reply thereto
C Charges preferred by Governor F. 1
Aloysius Weld ... ••• )
2
3
June 11th.
June 17th.
5
8
D Answer of E. W. Landor, J.P.
E Letter of Mr. Landor, accompanying )
Answer ... ••• ... )
F Letter of three Magistrates to H. E. )
Governor Weld ... ••• )
G Report of the evidence against L. C. 1
Burges, J.P. {from the Perth Ga~ >
zette 4- W. A. Times) ... ]
H The Magistrates’ Observations on the )
evidence when comm.tting Mr. f
Burges for trial on the minor charge C
(from the Perth Gazette 4‘ W. A. T. j
I Mr. Landor’s Letter of Complaint to )
H. M. Secretary of State for the >
Colonies ... ... ... j
K Letter from the Colonial Secretary an- ]
nouncing Mr. Landor’s suspension f
L Mr. Landor’s, Reply thereto
June 17 th.
June 14th.
May 31st.
June 7th.
June 17th.
June 18th.
June 19th.
M Mr. Landor’s 2nd Letter to Secietary )
of State. J
N Extract from Perth Gazette W. A. )
Times containing Letter from the f
three independent Magistrates to the |
Editor J
June 21st.
O The Address from the principal inhabi-
tants of the colony to the Secretary
of State, praying i lis Lordship not
to confirm the Suspension made by
Governor Weld
P Mr. Landor’s Acknowledgment to the
Memorialists.




CASE OF
E- W. LANDOE, Esq., J.P.,
POLICE MAGISTRATE,
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Mr. E. W. Landor, Police Magistrate, Perth, a gentle-
man advanced in years, and highly esteemed and re-
spected throughout the Colony, has recently been sus-
pended from office by His Excellency Frederick
Aloysios Weld, the Governor of the Colony, for the
following alleged offence.
Mr. Landor, in conjunction with three other Ma-
gistrates, of the highest position in the Colony, and of
unimpeachable honor, committed a gentleman, who was
charged before them at the instance of the Government
with unlawfully shooting a wild Native in an unsettled
district for trial upon the minor charge of shooting
with intent to do bodily harm, instead of with intent to
murder, (a capital offence here,) as the Prosecutor de-
manded. But which would not prevent the Crown from
indicting him for murder, or any other offence. In
fact, Mr. Landor had a few days before, committed a man
named James Reid for trial on a charge of wounding
with intent to do grievous bodily harm ; and the Attorney
General indicted him for wounding with intent to
kill and murder. The jury at the same Sessions at
which Mr. Burges was also committed for trial, returned
a verdict against Reid of Guilty on the minor charge.
And in fact, as a rule, a prisoner is committed for trial
on such a charge as the Magistrate thinks is likely to


be proved—leaving it to other authorities who may
think differently to'act as to them appears proper.
It is alleged by Governor Weld that the Police Ma-
gistrate in committing Mr. Burges on the minor charge
was instigated by motives of partiality towards the
accused—with whom, however, (as will be seen) Mr.
Landor had no personal acquaintance.
Mr Landor’s friends do not wish to enter into the
case of the accused person at all; their only object
being to shew that in whatever Mr. Landor did he at
least°was not actuated by any unworthy motives.
The case has excited very great public interest, and
very great interest has been manifested in it on the part
of the Government.
Mr. Landor having been suddenly suspended from
Office and receipt of all Salary, has appealed home to
Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Co-
lonies.
The three independent Magistrates have all resigned
their Commissions of the Peace, alleging that the}
fully identify themselves with Mr. Landor, and are
therefore obnoxious to the same criticism and censure.
[See their letter of June 14, page 9.]
The whole correspondence has been published in
the Colonial papers, “ Inquirer” July 3, “ Perth Gazette
& W. A. Times” July 5, and “ Herald” July 6.
The Colonial Secretary in a letter dated 18th June,
in reply to the Magistrates’ letter ol June 14th, ob-
serves that “ the Governor sees a marked distinction
between your position and that of Mr. Landor, and he
has consequently hitherto refrained from removing you
from the Commission of the Peace, but at the same
time should you be deliberately )f opinion that in toe
execution of the unpleasant duty which has devolved
upon him, he has reflected dishonor on you, he is lead}
to accept yonr resignation of that office. ’
The three independent Magistrates, Messrs. W. L.
Brockman, M.L.C., Henry Ashton, A.C.G., (half pay,)
and Captain Hamilton Burke, 68th Regiment, (H.P.,)
thereupon sent in their resignations, which were ac-
cepted in the following letter, which concludes the pub-
lished correspondence


“Colonial Secretary’s Office, —Perth, June 25, 1872.
“ Sir,- —His Excellency the Governor has directed
me to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yester-
day’s date, and entirely concurring in the course you
have adopted in tendering your resignation as a Magis-
trate, has no hesitation in accepting it. —I have, &c.,
Fred. P. Barlee. To W. L. Brockman, Esq., Herne
Hill.” “H. Ashton, Esq.” “ Captain B. H. Burke.”
The public have energetically taken the part of the
Magistrates, believing them to be wholly incapable of
shewing favor from personal bias towards the accused,
who was admitted to bail on the minor charge, but
immediately afterwards again arrested on the capital
charge, at the instance of the Government, upon a
Bench Warrant granted by Chief Justice Burt, on the
application of the Public Prosecutor, Mr. R. J. Wal-
cott, Attorney General, who acting as Grand Jury,
immediately found a true Bill against the accused.
[See Newspaper Report, page 18.]
In this Colony we have no Grand Jury. The At-
torney General acts in the twofold capacity of Public
Prosecutor and Grand Jury. The Magistracy there-
fore are naturally looked upon by the people as the
outer-bulwarks of public safety, and in all cases tinged
with any political or party coloring, they are expected
to act with more than ordinary jealousy. In fact if it
should happen that the Governor and the Chief J ustice
(our only Judge) act together, the people are entirely
helpless—as appeared in November, 1870, when three
newspaper Editors were imprisoned, and one of them
also fined £lOO, for an alleged contempt of Court—a
proceeding that caused great scandal and considerable
sensation throughout all the Australian Colonies. It
is therefore of real consequence to the community
that the Magistrates should not be mere cyphers ; and
whether Stipendiary Magistrates when sitting on the
Bench have less liberty of judgment than independent
Magistrates is a question of deep interest to the public.
An Address to the Secretary of State, praying for
the reinstatement of Mr. Landor, has been speedily
got up and signed by all the influential settlers


throughout the colony, who could communicate with
the Capital in the very short space of time before the
departure of the Mail. [See page 25.]
The helplessness of Englishmen in this Colony in
cases of official injustice, must surely give some claim
upon the notice of their countrymen more fortunately
circumstanced ; and may be considered some excuse
for what would otherwise be merely an impertinent
intrusion in thus thrusting this case before them.
N.B.—The publication of this correspondence is
made by the Committee of Mr. Landor’s friends, by
whom his case is conducted.
ERAS. LOCHEE,
Hon. Secretary.
Perth, Western Australia,!
July 15, 1872. j
(Copies are forwarded to the Secretary of the Eotal Colonial
Institute, No. 15, West Strand, London.)


ADDENDUM TO PREFACE.
The Charges against Mr. Lander may be resolved
into two. The first, is stated in Letter A, page 1: —
that lie ought to have committed Mr. Burges for trial
on the capital charge instead of the minor one. It is
urged against him that a man who pursues a supposed
thief (whether White or Red) for the purpose of catch-
ing him, or of driving him to a certain spot, is doing
an unlawful act, and therefore if the pursued party
resists the capture and is killed, it may amount, in the
eye of the law, to murder. But Mr. Landor and his
brother Magistrates, taking into consideration the re-
moteness of the spot, far from civilization and all legal
protection, thought that Mr. Burges might plead that
the only mode of catching the thief was to do it him-
self, and that he being a Magistrate was justified in
trying to recapture him when he had escaped out or
custody. They thought it right to commit him on the
minor charge, leaving it to the Attorney General to
indict for the capital offence, if he should think proper.
The other charge is, that Mr. Landor and the three
other Magistrates gave their reasons in writing for the
course they pursued, and commented upon the evi-
dence, contrary to the usual practice.
The other Magistrates published their reasons for
taking this course. [See post, p. 24.]
Jt is urged that the public mind might have been
influenced by this course, and possibly Jurymen biased.
But the committing Magistrate cannot always main-
tain silence. The Counsel on both sides contest every
point, and the Magistrate must give his opinion, based
on the evidence. There are reporters and a crowded
audience, and the public and future Jury are quite as
likely to be influenced by the Counsel’s arguments as
by the Magistrate’s remarks. The Jury, also, at the
trial are warned to decide solely by the evidence before
them, and not from previous statements ; and the ex-
pressions of the Magistrate would not weigh much
against the direction of the Judge.




The. Colonial Secretary of Western Australia to E. W. Landor, Esq., J.P
Western Australia.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Perth, 6th June, 1872.
Sir, —I am directed by His Excellency the Governor.to say that
he has been informed that on Monday last, the 3rd instant, you dis-
missed a charge preferred against Mr. Lockier Clare Burges for
wounding with intent to kill; at the same time, and on the same evi-
dence, committing him upon a minor charge. If the evidence were
sufficient to enable you to commit him on the one charge, His Excel-
lency after considering that evidence is of opinion that it was sufficient
also for the other ; in this conclusion, he is supported by the opinion of
the Attorney-General.
His Excellency cannot but fear that there are grounds for an im-
pression which is abroad, that the course taken by you in this case has
in more than in one respect differed from that which would have been
pursued, had the accused (instead of being a member of an influential
and respected family,) been friendless and of humble station, or had
the case been reversed, and a mounted native had pursued and shot
Mr. Burges under the circumstances in which, setting aside all other
evidence, Mr. Burges in his journal admits having pursued and shot a
native.
His Excellency feels that it would be highly improper for him to
anticipate or express any opinion upon the question which will now
come before a jury, but he is fully at lit erty, without prejudice to the
case itself, to express his decided conviction that the charge of wound-
ing with intent to murder, is a case for the decision of a jury, and that
the dismissal of that capital charge by you was an act calculated to
impair all confidence in your ability or your impartiality, or both, and
to bring the law into contempt.
His Excellency, however, before taking any further steps, will receive
and carefully consider any explanation that you may think fit to make
regarding your proceedings in this case. And should he after receiving
such explanation, find it necessary to take further steps, you will be
duly informed, and every proper facility will be given you for your
delence.
I have the honor to be, sir,
Your obedient servant,
FRED. P. BARLEE.
1* W. Landor, Esq., Police Magistrate.




The Colonial Secretary of Western Australia to E. W. Landor, Esq. f J,P
Western Australia.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Perth, 6th June, 1872.
Sir, —I am directed by His Excellency the Governor.to say that
he has been informed that on Monday last, the 3rd instant, you dis-
missed a charge preferred against Mr. Lockier Clare Burges for
wounding with intent to kill; at the same time, and on the same evi-
dence, committing him upon a minor charge. If the evidence were
sufficient to enable you to commit him on the one charge, His Excel-
lency after considering that evidence is of opinion that it was sufficient
also for the other ; in this conclusion, he is supported by the opinion of
the Attorney-General.
His Excellency cannot but fear that there are grounds for an im-
pression which is abroad, that the course taken by you in this case has
in more than in one respect differed from that which would have been
pursued, had the accused (instead of being a member of an influential
and respected family,) been friendless and of humble station, or had
the case been reversed, and a mounted native had pursued and shot
Mr. Burges under the circumstances in which, setting aside all other
evidence, Mr. Burges in his journal admits having pursued and shot a
native.
His Excellency feels that it would be highly improper for him to
anticipate or express any opinion upon the question which will now
come before a jury, but he is fully at literty, without prejudice to the
case itself, to express his decided conviction that the charge of wound-
ing with intent to murder, is a case for the decision of a jury, and that
the dismissal of that capital charge by you was an act calculated to
impair all confidence in your ability or your impartiality, or both, and
to bring the law into contempt.
His Excellency, however, before taking any further steps, will receive
and carefully consider any explanation that you may think fit to make
regarding your proceedings in this case. And should he after receiving
such explanation, find it necessary to take further steps, you will be
duly informed, and every proper facility will be given you for your
defence.
I have the honor to be, sir,
Your obedient servant,
FRED. P. BARLEE.
•• W. Landor, Esq., Police Magistrate.


Mr. E. W. Landor, J.P., to the Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
Perth, Western Australia,
June 10th, 1872.
S « R .’i~ l EVe ! hC h ° nor to the receipt of your letter of
the 6th mst» relative to the commitment of Mr. Lockier Clare Burges
on the 3rd instant by myself and three other Magistrates for trial on a
charge of shooting a native with intent to do him bodily ha.m, instead
°lr7* rr- Tf Wlth .T tent t 0 murder - You sa 7 that “if the evidence
weie sufficient to enable me to commit him on the one charge, His Ex-
cellency, after considering that evidence, is of opinion that it was suffi-
cient also for the other.”
The case engaged the most anxious consideration for many hours,
and even days, not only of myselt but of three other Magistrates of un-
impeachable honor namely; Messrs. W. L. Brockman, Henry Ashton,
tb^r^n l^ 10 Hamilton-Bnrkej and I may refer to the statement of
their opinion delivered on the Bench, as reported in the Perth news-
papers. All of us most conscientiously considered that there was
not, in our opinion, sufficient reliable evidence to justify us in charging
Mr. Burges with a deliberate intent to murder the native, or with
“/hat intent. As he had himself stated in his jour-
SlSd' fw y Sh °L a " atlVe Under certain circumstances, we con-
todslnd? w WeoU?ht n . ot i° dis . miss the case summarily, but ought
to send it before a jury to determine whether he was at all, or to what
extent, justified in what he did. I myself conceived that this would
not prevent the Crown from indicting Mr. Burges for an intent to
T ed ‘i Wh6n tbe Cr ° Wn Sobcit °r opened the case
fi* W ? uld .make no specific charge, but would leave it to
tbev S f v 6 [ hean s? tbe '! ltnesses? t 0 commit on such a charge as
they might think was disclosed. On being pressed to lay some positive
itrZ: T™ murder." LT ™
the ■“ ?, e , de P° s ; tlo " s - On the day of committal he told
„ B ~b tbat h ® that charge and charged the prisoner with
wounding with intent to murder.” The Bench however could not
agree with him It was at one time my own intention to commit the
rZ nr' a h C ?w g u e ’ bu , fc ulti mately, after anxious deliberation and
consultahon, we all (the other Magistrates and myself) decided that, in
our opinion, the fairest course was to prefer the minor charge.
d t iat “ Hl - Excellenc 7 cannot but fear that there are
grounds for an impression which is abroad, that the course taken by
me has in more than one respect differed from that which would have
tkl3 rS ? e a ,°T ed inStead 0f bein S a member of an influen-
tial and respected family, been friendless and of humble station.”
tt- J, ppy to ,f a^’ T a ? d Ido 50 witb the most profound respect for
T tbat 1 b . a 7 e “° fear tbat an ? BUcb impression will get
abroad respecting me. My character has been too long established,
aTvelv b°r knoW T n all ™ of a "7 «uch imputation being exten-
“* 1 Was appol , nted my present post by the Right
me n morf f n , . ’ bo bad good grounds for considering
me a man of honor and integnty, and fully qnalified to perform all
the duties of the office. I shall never consciously do discredit to his


kindness and confidence. Certainly not, by acting on the Bench with
the unworthy motives imputed to me.
1 have endeavored in this, as in all other cases, to act with the
purest impartiality and uprightness ; and I have always believed it my
duty as a Magistrate not to be swayed by any other influences what-
ever. Nor would I hold the post for a day under any other circum-
stances. If in the discharge of my functions, I have ever had the mis-
fortune to do anything contrary to the wishes or opi dons of the Go-
vernor, it is the occasion of very great pain to me; for I can have no
greater pleasure than in meeting and furthering his views at all times •
but I should be unworthy to fill the office I hold were I to act at
variance with my own conscience and convictions; and I feel assured
that the Governor is the last person who would expect me to do so.
I have the honor to be, sir,
E. W. LANDOR, J.P.,
mt rr _ , . . Police Magistrate,
-the Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
The Colonial Secretary to E. W. Landor , Esq,, J.P.
Western Australia.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
B T Perth, 11th June, 1872.
oiß,—l am directed by His Excellency the Governor to inform you
that he is unable to consider the explanation contained in your letter of
yesterday’s date as in any way satisfactory, and that it becomes his
painful duty to bring your conduct before the Executive Council, with
Vlew to your removal from the office you hold.
For this purpose I enclose herewith certain charges, to which I am
to request your answer in writing on or before Monday next, the 17th
instant.
I am, sir,
Your obedient servant,
FRED. P. BARLEE.
CHARGES
Preferred by His Excellency the Governor in Executive Council, against
Edward Wilson Landor, Esquire , Police Magistrate
at Perth , Western Australia,
1. That on the 29th day of April, 1872, Police Sergeant Dale
Drought an aboriginal native named Chum Chum before yon, who took
bis information, but instead of at once issuing your warrant against
Mr. L. C. Burges, asked for instructions from the Government, ex-
pressing yourself in conversation with the Governor, the Attorney
General, and the Superintendent of Police, to the effect that it was a
toost extraordinary thing to commit a white man on a capital charge
pn the evidence of a native, arguing against the propriety of appre-
hending Mr. Burges, and endeavouring to show why you ought not to
expected ta act on your responsibility as a Magistrate. That you
ereby acted in an unusual manner, and showed an evident unwilling-
ess to do your duty or assume your proper responsibility, and caused
u «Jay 5 which might have defeated the ends of justice.


2* That ultimately you acted by talcing a fresh information in open
Court, (a most unusual proceeding,) thereby giving an opportunity to
the friends of the accused to warn him of his danger, and to the accused
to effect his escape; that, after talcing the information, you delayed
some hours before you issued your warrant, and then only issued it
after pressure from the Attorney General as detailed in the accompany,
mg copy of a letter addressed by that officer to the Colonial Secretary,
dated 11th June, 1872, and marked A; you at the time well knowing,
that it was of the utmost importance in capital cases that no time
should be lost in making the arrest.
3-—That you, upon issuing your warrant, and prior to hearing the
evidence to be adduced, informed the Attorney General and the Super-
intendent of Police that you would admit Mr. Burges to bail when
brought before you—himself in £lOOO, and two sureties in £5OO each.
4*—That in this, you expressed your intention to deviate from the
usual course adopted in all felonies of any enormity.
5-—That when the accused was brought before you, there is reason
to believe you called in the assistance of other Magistrates who do not
usually assist you in the performance of your duties, although commit-
tals are the individual acts of one Magistrate and not of a Bench, and
the responsibility is individual and not collective. That in this also,
you appear to have evaded your proper responsibility.
6.—That you, acting in concert with other three Magistrates, dis-
missed the capital charge against Mr. Lockier Clare Burges, and com-
mitted him on the minor charge, admitting him to bail in the amount
you had predetermined to take before the Warrant was in the hands of
an officer for execution, although the evidence in support of the capital
chaige was identical with that in support of the minor charge, and,
that in the eye of the law, an armed mounted man who pursues an un-
armed man on foot (or one armed with a hunting club or stick only)
and shoots him, leaving him for dead, if the evidence is to be believed,
it is clear that he is guilty, if not of murder, at least of shooting with
intent to murder, and that if the evidence is to be disbelieved, he is not
guilty. You therefore are charged with either from want of ordinary
knowledge or ability to act in a Magisterial capacity, or with partiality
in the execution of your office, or with both, for it appears evident that
you either guilty of malversation in dismissing the capital charge
against Mr. L. C. Burges, or of gross injustice to Mr. L. C. Burges
in committing him at all. & ’
7.—That you took an unusual course in making in the name of your-
self and three other Magistrates such a public statement as the one
put forth by you of the reasons which led you to dismiss the capital
charge and to commit on the minor one.
B.—That it is highly indecent and improper in a Magistrate (as was
done by you) to hand to the Advocate for the accused, for publication,
a document commenting adversely upon the evidence for the prosecu-
tion, and discrediting the witnesses upon whose depositions you had
just committed a prisoner for trial.
9.—That the reasons put forth by you ar* founded upon an unfair
analysis of the evidence for the prosecution, and evince an animus to
screen the accused, as is shown in the endeavor to discredit the wit-


nesses, as well as by the reference to the statement in the journal of
Mt. L. C. Burges, which in itself was sufficient evidence to make the
capital charge a case to be enquired into by a jury. That in allowing
this document to be published you thereby adopted a course having a
tendency to prejudice a case sub judice, a course from which even the
Press have retrained.
(Annexed to above.)
. Perth, 11th June, 1872.
SIR,—In accordance with His Excellency’s desire I send a statement
ot the substance of a conversation which .1 had with Mr. Landor in the
pretence of the Superintendent of Police.
Mr. Landor in the office at the Police Court told me that he had
taken an information charging Mr. Burges with shooting an aboriginal
native, and that he was about to issue a summons to Mr. Burges
which would be sent by the next post. [Our conversation took place
on a Thursday or Friday afternoon.] I told Mr. Landor that a sum-
mons where the charge involved the life of the accused, could be looked
upon in no other light than a warning to the accused to make his
escape. And that if he persisted in sending a summons instead of
issuing a warrant I should so advise the Governor. Upon this Mr.
Landor took out of his pocket a warrant which he signed. After sign-
ing the warrant, Mr. Landor then said that he would accept bail when
■ T 8 W r as brou S ht up—himself in £lOOO and two sureties in
ioOO each. I told Mr. Landor that on that point I would not advise
mm, that undoubtedly it was within his competency to take or withhold
bad and that he must exercise his own discretion, and take the respon-
sibility upon himself. r
I have, &c.,
m., tj - ~ , .i rt RJ - WALCOTT,
■to the Hon. the Colonial Secretary, &c., &c.
Answer of Mr. E. W. Landor , Police Magistrate , Perth, Western
Australia, to the charges brought against him by H. E. the T)
Governor on 1 1th June, 1872. AJ %
1 -~* Th ? fi,st charge commences with a mis-statement. On the
th Apiil ( 1872, I had the first intimation of any charge against Mr
Lockier Clare Burges, J.P., from Captain Smith, Superintendent of
Police, who came on to the Bench in the Police Court and said he
wished to speak to me. I took him into the adjoining room where he
showed me a Report of Sergeant Piesse containing the statements of
several persons that Mr. Borges had told them he had shot a native
He said that Chum-Chum was the only eye-witness, and he, Captain
b mith, said he did not know what to make of it. I said I could not
read the report then, and perhaps it would be well if I examined Chum-
Ltmm myself at my private office, and tried to learn the particulars of
‘be case, and I asked him to send Chum Chum to my office after I
should have read the report. I saw a memorandum on the Report by
‘be Attorney General to the effect that “ he considered there was only
hearsay evidence against Burges and he did not recommend his arrest.”
ne of course changed his opinion subsequently. There was no intro-


mation then laid before me. Chum-Chum was bronght to mj office
and his statement was taken down by me. Knowing that as a rule
the natives will say whatever they think likely to please the querist I
did not think much more of the case than the Attorney General had at
one time done especially as Chum Chum had been for three or four
months in the hands of the Police (he was soon afterwards permanently
® n ff a S> e d on the Force) and I saw on the Report orders from the Go-
vernor* that Chum Chum was to be offered a reward if he would tell
the truth. Also when I asked him, for the purpose of testing him fur-
ther, it Mr. Burges was his enemy ? he replied “ No.” I then said, Do
you think that he will be pleased by what you are saying ?
He burst into a loud laugh, and said “No I but Gubernor be
pleased.” I then annexed the evidence of Chum-Chum to the Report
of Sergeant Piesse, and sent it to the Superintendent of Police, who
immediately laid it before the Governor. I carefully abstained from
mentioning the above to the Magistrates, wishing them to judge
solely by the evidence at the hearing.
. I sa J I was surprised at the unusual course taken in
imposing upon me the duty of investigating this charge, as it would
properly be the duty of the Resident Magistrate of the Champion Bay
District in which Mr. Burges resides, and where the magisterial inves-
tigation would in ordinary cases be held. On May 2nd, Captain
Smith again called on me with the Report, and said that Chum-Chum
was to lay an information against Mr. Burges, charging him with
murder. I was surprised to read across the first page in the Governor’s
hana-writing, words to this effect: He should expect the Police Mag-
istrate to do his duty, and if he granted a warrant against Mr. Burges
merely on a charge of shooting with intent to do bodily harm, he must
forward to the Governor a full statement of his reasons for so doing, as
the Governor would probably lay the whole matter before the Sec-
retary of State. Not understanding what could be meant by this re-
mark, I waited upon the Governor, who kindly said that as I had not
issued a warrant immediately he conceived that I had some reason for
not doing so. I said the charge was so serious that I should be glad if
tne conduct of it was placed in the hands of the Crown Solicitor. It
was not that I cared for or felt any responsibility, but I thought that
the Crown Solicitor would best get up the evidence, which seemed so
imperfect.
2.—There was only one information taken, and Chum-Chum was
brought by the Police to the Court to lay it, where it was taken in the
usual way on Friday, May 3rd. I certainly felt great hesitation about
granting a warrant on the statement of a native, who knew nothing
about an oath ; and without any feeling as to Mr, Burges personally
i®^ ;^ S „?s° e il enC Z l a , r . e3 th . at n ° suph . order . either from himself or
the Superintendent of Police, appears the Report.
?r^r'^“ t ' o t n^loWe^ ,iOWU ’ in - ex P reasln S hesitation to grant » ZaTnpon
the sole evidence ot Chum Chum against a man some hundred miles away, in auother
magisterial district, I remarked that I had noticed that His Excellency had directed Chum
fi hU^ fhouM v b , e l , reWara ?l f 101(1 the trut h about this matter ; and I could not help hinting
Batlre'would hlVw Jded d fw Exc ® ll . enc y rejoined that of course he meant Vat the
r d b lf he told the whole truth ; not if he told lies. Within an hour
to him and f^TJ^told^hill.*' u oUB *> and 1 ex P re9Sed the same hesitation
to him , and I also told him that the Police had been ordered to reward Chum Chum (or to
woL’t hold of thi°s U -> b 6 WwardedJ ,f he toW the truth. I added '• I hope the other side


(with whom I was scarcely acquainted at all) I thought I might be
doing very great injustice and hardship in bringing a gentleman and
magistrate in the custody of the Police" from a distance invSgLor
twelve days journey, upon a charge so doubtfully supported. I how-
evei made out the warrant and put it in my pocket, intending to ask
ffi-st ffistancp Whe ?f er he th ° Ught a would df in the
nist instance, as I was well convinced there was no chance of hi*
escaping out of the colony, and no likelihood of his attempting it
Whdst going to the Attorney General, I met him and Captain Smith
in the street, and we all repaired to the Police-court office.
then wt d t he , Gene,, al about a summons in the
T bl r* he aughed at the idea ’ and said that only a war-
L his W d d °’ l A n °\ the I**' aS al,eged b 7 the Attorney General
in his letter appended to the charges, that I told him “ I was about to
pared a warrant, as shown by himself. I observed that the evidence
weXIP t’ T° f 3 doubtful nature * He remarked, “of course
weshaHnot get a conviction from a jury.” I then said that under the
ZZTrr ? . W ,° uld be hard t 0 kee F him in jail for two or three
e Th e p Af a ’ r &t be , migbt be let out on bail to a high
mount. The Attorney General again laughed in an offensive wav
.£lonr» ani X ed me ’ a ” d * Said 1 sbou i d he disposed to take bail in
and two sureties m £5OO each.
takeTallVn SS’.° rdi , nance J- 4 > »• 14 authorises Justices to
1 k ° ™ , felonies, if they think proper so to do
xt ar from call mg in the assistance of other Magistrates both
Mr. Brockman and Mr. Ashton asked me separately if I had any ob-
jection to their sitting ? I replied « Certainly not?” but I ceXnlv
did ask Captain Burke, H.P., 68th Regiment and Staff Officer of Pen-
cZrL tOJ T theotherS ’ - nd lam quite unable t 0 see that there
cou dbe anything wrong or irregular in this. As to evading respon-
sibility no such idea occurred to me. ° **
fnlX I AII Magistrates considered the evidence so extremely doubt"
f 1 and -unsatisfactory, as related to the charge of shooting with intent
“V the °u ly , w ! tnesses besides Chum-Chum proving simply
, n U [^ 6S b ir\ d t 0 d tbem be bad sbot a nat i y e, which was freely
admitted by himself), that we thought we should be doing a great wrong
to justice if we committed the prisoner on the capital charge. We
eie oie committed him on the charge of wounding with intent to do
odily harm ; but conceived he might still be indicted for murder or
ything else if the Attorney General deemed it necessary. The latter
pai of paragraph 6is not a charge but an argument. As to my « want
of ordinary knowledge or ability to act in a magisterial capacity » my
expe r ‘ e rofthrt y . je ‘ rs in Enghmd, and th£ testimony
” all the lawyers who practise in my Givi! and Criminal Courts will
afford a sufficient answer. tS Wlli
oJiTfT ° f thC Magistrates considering and insisting that the case
ought to be summarily dismissed, and I not being able to agree with
iher n th mUCh Waß - iD ™/PP iDion tke of a jury to decide
Hussion 1 * “ What he did ’ 54 after long dis-
ssion, agreed that he should bo committed on the minor charge; and


that the Maeistrates should for their own satisfaction, and for that of
the Governor, and the public, give their reasons in writing for adopting
this course ; more especially as Mr. Brockman (who Jives at some dis-
tance from Perth) could not be present on the day of commitment.
8. —There was at least one newspaper reporter in Court, who might
have reported verbally the whole evidence. The statement made in
this charge that I gave a copy of the Magistrate’s decision to the pri-
soner’s Advocate for pnblication, is not the fact.
9. —I cannot agree with the argument contained in this paragraph.
I protest against the charge of having made an unfair analysis of the
evidence, and that the reasons put forth evince any “ animus” in favor
of the accused. However I may have erred it has been from no desire
to mislead. I have no interest in Mr. L, C. Burges or his relatives,
and no motive but a desire to do justice. He does not reside in this
neighborhood, and I believe I have never exchanged twenty words with
him since his arrival in the colony. I have once drawn a Conveyance
to him from instructions laid before me as Counsel by his Attorney
and Agent. It is entirely my interest to support the views of the Go-
vernor and not to oppose them; and although not agreeing with the
assumption that there is perfect equality between an English gentle-
man and Magistrate when beyond the outskirts of legal protection, and
a wild savage, I should be among the first to punish any wanton
cruelty inflicted upon the latter.
I have ,>tten advocated the cause of the natives, and have been com-
plimented by the Aborigines Protection Society for so doing.
E. W. LANDOR, J.P.,
Perth, W.A.
Mr. E. W. Lander to the Colonial Secretary.
Perth, Western Australia,
June 17, 1872.
Sir, —I learn with regret from your letter of June 11th that the
Governor is unable to consider the explanation in mine of the previous
day as in any way satisfactory.
I feel therefore assured that nothing I could add to it would be more
so. My case is evidently already judged. Unfortunately I have not
had the honor of any intimate personal acquaintance with the Go-
vernor, and therefore His Excellency can have but a most imperfect
knowledge of the tone of mind and guiding principles by which I am
actuated.
I cannot but fear that the Governor’s opinion of me has been to
some extent derived from some prejudiced and hostile soun e.
I feel it an indignity to be compelled to answer charges of such a
nature as those brought against me.
I am charged with having evinced “ an animus to screen the accused.”
This is certainly jot the fact; but may it not be fairly inferred that an
animus, and a very strong one, exists against myself ?
I am aware that it is the duty ol officials to bear with patience many
rebuffs of no measured kind ; but I think I have some right to complain
when I am told in your letter of June 6th that I—an old and experi-
enced Magistrate, a Barrister of the Supreme Court, and now in the


decline of life (upwards of 60) after an honourable and unstained career,
am guilty of favoring a prisoner merely because he is a “ member of
an influential and respected family,” and not “ friendless and of humble
station,” and because (see same letter) I committed him for trial on a
minor charge instead of the capital one, although His Excellency
“after considering the evidence” was of a different opinion—and there-
fore I have been guilty of “ an act calculated to impair all confidence
in my ability or impartiality.”
With respect to the decision of the Magistrates signed by them and
reported in the public newspapers, I have explained their reasons for
this course in my answer to charge 7, viz., that they could not all be
present on the day of committal, but particularly wished, in a case of
such public interest, to make known the reasons by which they were
guided.
There seems now no course open to me but to appeal to the justice
and protection of Her Majesty’s Secretary of State; and I therefore
have now the honor to forward my complaint, together with copies of
all the letters, reports, and other documents, to His Excellency the
Governor, with a request that he will be so good as to transmit them
by the outgoing Mail,
I shall also forward similar copies through another channel, and also
to several gentlemen who have the honor of Lord Kimberley’s acquaint-
ance, and to whom my character is not unknown, in the hope that I
may not be thus dishonoured without the opportunity of a voice being
raised in my behalf.
I will also venture to ask the Governor to request of Lord Kimberley
(to whom I will also appeal myself) that he will be so good as to delay
returning any decision upon my case until at least the mail but one
after receiving the papers, in order that (as the time is so short before
the departure of the outgoing mail) I may have a little more time to
obtain materials which are necessary to the completion of my case.
I have the honor to be, sir,
Your obedient servant,
E. VY. LANDOR, J.P.,
Police Magistrate.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
From the Magistrates to the Colonial Setretory.
Western Australia, Perth, June 14, 1872.
Sir, —As forming part of the Bench of Magistrates who heard the
case against Mr. L. C. Burges, we cannot but feel deeply hurt by the
reflections cast upon the decision by His Excellency the Governor in
a letter addressed by you to Mr. Laudor, dated the 6th instant, and
which that gentleman considered it his duty to shew us.
Fully identifying ourselves, as we do, with Mr. Landor in the deci-
sion arrived at, after long and impartial consideration of the case in
all its bearings, we cannot but feel that the reflections made in yo”
letter apply most painfully to ourselves.


We now beg most respectfully, but emphatically, to protest against
criticism which reflects discredit and dishonour upon us all.
We have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servants,
W. L. BROCKMAN, J.P.,
HCNRY ASHTON, J.P.,
B. HAMILTON BURKE, J.P.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
Extract from the Perth Gazette 4' W. A. Times, May 31, 1872.
POLICE COURT.
Before E. W. Landor, H. Ashton, B. H. Burke, and W. L. Brockman,
Esquires, Justices of the Peace.
Tuesday, 28th May, 1872.
Begina v. L. C. Burges. —Lockier Clare Burges was again brought
up on the charge of murder of a native, unknown, at or near Mr.
Hooley’s Well, on the 12th October last.
The Crown Solicitor prosecuted ; Mr. E. A. Stone and Mr. S. H.
Parker appeared for the Defence.
John Fitzgerald, sworn—l am a shepherd, in the service of Mr.
Alfred Pead at Champion Bay ; I know Mr. L. C. Burges ; I was in
his service close on two years, from the latter part of 1870 till a couple
of months ago ; I was with him atNickol Bay, at Jones’ Creek, and at
the house; Mr. Burges lived at Andover, Nickol Bay ; left Nickol
Bay with sheep in July, 1871 ; we drove the sheep overland to Mr.
Burges’ station on the Bowes ; Carroll and Robert Withnell were with
me when we started ; there were three natives —Woolamgarry, Mos-
quito, and Judy, and a native boy named Baldwin started with us ;
Farrell overtook us the next day and a native named Jimmy, a Bun-
bury native ; we went to a place called Yaatamarra, about 60 miles
from Andover ; we remained there about four weeks before Mr. Burges
came up ; he had two-horse teams and some loose horses and the
rations for the party with him ; Murphy and Alfred Smith were with
him and a native called Suggary, and another named Chum Chum ; the
former belongs to Nickol Bay, and the latter to Perth; we arrived at
Mr, Burges’, on the Bowes, sometime in November last ; we lost a
saddle about a day’s journey the other side of Hooley’s Well; I recol-
lect the loss of a dog, it generally accompanied Farrell, who w r as my
mate on the journey ; the dog was lost three or four days ; three
natives brought it to us some time in the afternoon ; they were natives
that he overtook them, and that they had some belonging to the Lyons,
and we could not make them understand us or understand them ; this
was two days before we got to Hooley’s Well, the natives might have
been armed ; I was with the leading flock and did not see them when
they came up ; they stayed at the camp until late at night; I saw no
spears -with any of the natives ; I saw they had douarks ; I did not
see how many ; they are from two inches to two feet long ; I believe
they went away in the night ; I don’t think we had any other wild
natives in the camp that night: next morning I heard there was a
saddle missing ; the saddles and harness were usually in charge of


Murphy ; that morning I saw Mr. Burges ; T first saw him at the
cart; nobody was with me ; this was about 7 o’clock ; he was on foot ;
he did not say anything to me then ; I'started with the sheep, &c. ;
Mr. Burges overtook me, riding, about 10 o’clock ; he told me he had
been after three niggers who had stolen a saddle ; they had part of the
saddle with them ; he was bringing them back to the cart; one of
them had run away and the second made an attempt to run ; he struck
him with the butt end of his revolver on his forehead and knocked
him down ; he was not down a second before he was up and ran
away ; the third made an attempt to run, and he put a ball through
him ; he dropped and never kicked ; I was the leading shepherd,
Farrell was the next behind me, and generally about a quarter of a
mile in the rear ; the flocks of sheep were four ; Carrol was third, and
Withnell fourth. Mr. Burges did not say anything about the natives
having spears ; he said the reason why he struck the native with the
revolver was because he was going to throw him off his horse ; he did
not say anything as to the other native, except that the reason he shot
him was for running away ; never saw Mr. Burges on the journey with-
out a revolver ; we had not been molested at all by the blacks ; we had
seen a good few at different places ; when we started from this place a
native accompanied us to Hooley’s Well ; he was one of the three that
brought us the dog ; I saw him at the well, but not before ; 1 think
this was in September.
Cross-examined by Mr. Stone—l have been with Alfred Bead till I
left to come down here ; I arrived in Fremantle last Wednesday.
By Mr. Landor—l was alone when Mr. Burges this conversa-
tion with me : he said Chum Chum was with him at the time they
overtook the natives.
James Murphy, stonemason and cook, in company with Chas. Fisher
at the Greenough Flats—l was in the service of Mr. Burges for about
five months, up to the 10th November ; I was with him at Nickol
Bay ; recollect leaving with Smith and Chum Chum ; we had two
teams with us ; Mr. Burges went to Roebourne with us, and left us
there and joined us two days afterwards ; one man came into the
Fortescue for rations, wejoined the rest of the party there —Carroll,
Farrell, and Withnell ; we had natives—Nickol Bay natives—Sug-
guary, Traveller, Judy, Palpin, and Mosquito ; Jimmy was with the
sheep ; I know a place called Hooley’s Well; from the time we left
Nicol Bay till we got there we were never molested ; we met num-
bers of natives, and they were always quiet and willing to show Mr.
Burges where water was ; recollect a saddle being lost ; this was the
night before we got to Hooley’s Well ; Suggary, Traveller, or my-
self used that saddle ; I last saw that saddle the night the natives came
to the camp with the dog ; this was the night we got to Hooley’s Well;
it was missed next morning ; 1 put it under a tree near the camp side
of Mr. Burges’ saddle ; Mr. Burges missed the saddle next morning ;
he told me to drive the horses that day, as he went to saddle his
horse ;he said, “ I say those natives have taken that saddle he re-
ferred to the three natives who came to the camp the night before ;
they brought a dog that had been lost, and had with some douaks and
wommeras ; I saw no spears with them ; they came to camp about


sundown ; they went away as we were going to bod bade on the road
we had come ; when Mr. Burges spoke about the natives having taken
the saddle, the drays were close to the trees and the horses were har-
nessed ; he got on his horse and told Chum Chum to go with him ;
Chum Chum started away with him ; I saw them start; nobody else
went with them ; Chum Chum rode on a horse ; I did not see Mr.
Burges with a revolver when he started ; but I saw him with one
when he came back with a native ; I have often seen him load it ;
Chum Chum had a single barrel gun called a repeater ; it fired eight
charges ; they were away about one hour or a little better ; recollect
theii leturning ; a native came with them ; I saw the native four or
five days before ;he w r as one of the three who brought in the dog the
night before ;he had one of the flaps of the saddle—part leather and
part flannel; the stuffing -was taken out to make a bag ; there was a
stirrup iron and leather and an old towel in this bag ; the towel went
at the same time as the saddle ; when they returned Carroll and Tra-
veller were close to me ; Smith had unharnessed the horses and hobbled
them, and had gone away with a gun, duck-shooting ; Mr. Burges
said, “ Who unharnessed the horses ?” and I said, “ Smith,” and he
said, “ Get them in again he seemed to be in a very flurried state ;
Chum Chum, Carroll, and I harnessed up the horses ; the native was
sitting down on the ground and Mr. Burges sitting in front of him ;
Mr. Burges’ revolver was on ths ground near him ; Mr. Burges said,
“ Well, I’ve dropped one of them ; I let go at one of them and he
dropped and never kicked Carroll must have heard him ; Alfred
Smith was away, and had not returned ; he, Mr. Burges, told Chum
Chum and traveller to go and find the saddle, as he knew it could not
be far away ; they were away about twenty minutes or half an hour ;
they brought back the saddle ; all the padding was torn off and the
stirrups ; Carrol was close by ; Smith had not returned ; Mr, Burges
said he had paid 30s. for having it repaired in Roebourne, and aside,
“it was hardly worth while for the sake of 30s. as if speaking to
himself; Mr. Burges directed me to stow it away in the dray ; Smith
came in just about that time j I never heard Mr. Burges say anything
more about shooting the native ;he never said why he did it; he said
one of the three held up the left arm—l think it was the left—and he
thought he was going to pull him off the saddle, and he hit him on the
forehead and dropped him ; he said he hardly lay there a second before
he was up on his feet and off like a shot out of a gun ; he said one of
the others started to run after the native that had gone away, and “ I
let go at him and he dropped and never kicked Carroll and‘Traveller
and Chum Chum were there and heard him say this ; Smith was away
shooting ; Smith did not return till some time after ; Smith was away
about an hour altogether ; I can’t say how long after he came up ; Mr.
Barges ordered the native into the cart, and told him to get up also,
and gave me a gun, and told me to drop him if he tried to get away ;
we kept the native on the dray till about 3 o’clock, when we met a Jot
of natives at Hooley’s Well, where this native joined them ; we could
not understand the natives at all, not even the Nickol Bay natives ;
this was about the middle of September last; the native who sat him-
self alongside me used to tap himself and say “ Boorai mool I don’t
know the names of any of them.


Cross-examined by Mr. Stone—Recollect coming up to Fitz Gerald,
and Mr. Burges took us to him with the dray ; I don’t remember
whether Farrell or Withnell were there ; I have been working for Mr.
J. S. Davis for 14 days, and was three weeks at Mr. Redhead’s ; I was
assisting Fisher to build a stable for three days ; I was seven weeks in
the hospital with rheumatics ; I was living at Champion Bay, ill, at
Turner’s boarding-house, after I came out of hospital ; for 14 days I
paid him with money I got from Davis and Redhead ; I was doing a
job for a pensioner named John Felon ; was three weeks there, getting
pay all the time ; I was knocking down a partition and putting up a
doorway ; this was prior to my going to Bell’s ; I left Mr. Bell’s place
cn the Greenough to come down here ; recollect seeing Mr. Burges and
Timperley coming through there ; I am on very good terms with Mr.
Burges ; I brought a charge against him of assault, and it was dismissed.
John Carrol—l am a Pensioner on the Enrolled Force at Fremantle ;
I know Mr. Burges, and was in his service at Nickol Bay ; recollect
leaving there with sheep ; Fitz Gerald was also with me ; Farrell joined
the following evening ; we travelled to Champion Bay ; Mr, Burges
joined us at the Fortescue. Recollect rhe party arriving at Hooley’s
Well, I think in the month of September ; I remember the loss of a
saddle, and I think it was missed either the night before or the night
after we got to Hooley’s Well. I recollect two or three natives bring-
ing up a dog, and it was about the same time the saddle was lost; the
natives had their wommeras and douarks with them ; the saddle was
one usually used by Murphy. The morning after it was taken Mr,
Burges became aware of it; I saw Mr. Burges come back from some-
where on horseback ; Chum Chum came shortly afterwards. Mr.
Burges brought a bush native with him ; I believe he was one of those
who were at the camp the night before ; I don’t know his name, and
did not understand his language. Mr. Burges spoke to me when I
came up to the cart to him ; he said one of the natives had stuck him
up, and he was obliged to use his revolver on him. He did not say
how the native had stuck him up or how he used his revolver. He
sent me away to Smith, who was out with his gun fowling. I think
Murphy was present on the cart, loading it. I think I asked him if ha
had shot the native, and he replied “yes.” I did not see Mr, Burges
with any arms there. I can’t say whether we got to Hooley’s Well the
day before or the day after ; I heard of no other native being shot on the
way down from Nickol Bay to the Bowes.
Cross-examined by Mr. Stone—Recollect hearing after Mr. Burges
came up ; we went in and passed Farrell and Fitzgerald about 10 or
11. Mr. Burges was not with us when we came up to them ; Mr.
Burges had gone on to look for water. Mr. Burges was present when
Farrell passed with the sheep. I did not hear them speak to him ;
Murphy rode on the cart that morning. Carroll was near me when
Mr. Burges returned, and Traveller was ; I never heard Mr. Burges
say to any one “ I dropped one of them and he never kicked when
Mr, Burges came’up and spoke to me he was on horseback and I was
on one side, Mr. Burges on the other, and Murphy was on one of the
carts just in front; the only words I remember Mr. Burges saying
were, “ one of the natives had stuck him up, and he was forced to use


his revolver on him I saw him come up, and these wore the first
words he spoke. I then went on to get Smith, and when I returned
with him, about half an hour afterwards, I think he was still on horse-
back. I don’t remember Mr. Burges ever saying anything tome about
shooting a native in the presence of Murphy and Traveller; Murphy
was not on good terms with Mr. Burges on the way down.
By the Bench —There were only two or three natives who brought
the dog, but six or seven other bush natives came in that night, I
think the native was one who brought in the dog, but I don’t know. I
heard no rejjort of firearms.
Chum Chum, an aboriginal native —I know Mr. Burges. Lived with
him at Nickol Bay, stock-hunting. Came away with liim from Xickol
Bay after the races. Came overland with him with carts. Sheep on
ahead, with Carroll, Fitzgerald, Bob Withnell, and Farrell. Six other
natives were with them—Judy, Traveller, Baldwin, Musquito, Jimmy,
and Suggary. Went to Hooley’s Well, and remember saddle being
lost same morning. Native came in the night and stole saddle, Mr.
Burges missed saddle, and next evening went after him on horseback,
and had revolver with him. He went alone. He sent Suggary to
meet me. and I went after him in about an hour. When I got to him
a native was pulling him about. I did not see it; Mr. Burges told
me. Mr. Burges cut one of the natives across the face with a revolver.
I see it. I think Mr. Burges was on the ground. The native was
on the ground. The native was carrying a piece of the saddle. Mr.
Burges was driving him to camp. He hit him because he could not
manage to fetch him to camp. The natives were scattered and run-
ning away. He went after them on horse, hut could not get them all,
but two. He drove these two across to camp, to flog them. One of
them began to run. Mr. Burges went after him on horseback, and he
pulled out his revolver and shot the native as he was running. I saw
this. The native did not do anything before he shot him. He fell on
the ground after he shot him. He shot him in the back. Mr. Burges
then drove one man to the cart. I was with him. Mr. Burges’ revol-
ver was loaded, I know, because the man would not have laid down
without a ball, I heard a report and saw smoke. I have seen Mr.
Burges load his revolver with cartridge. Mr. Burges was within 40
or 50 yards from the native when he fired. I did not go and look at
the native. He would not be alive when he lay like that, I don’t
know his name. Mr. Burges said he had hit him across the back with
a ball. We started same day to Hooley’s Well.
By the Bench —Mr. Burges told me he shot him in the back when
he came back to me. I could not see him. I was about 40 or 50
yards from Mr. Burges when he fired, and when I saw the native
tumble he was as far as from here to the street from me. He was
the other side of the bush, but I could see, because 1 was on horseback.
There was a thicket on the right, and clear on the left. There were
bushes between me and wheee the native was lying. Mr. Burges told
other people that he had shot a native. I tell people after he tell. He
told Murphy he had shot him in the back. When the native run away
Mr. Burges go after him in a straight line. I was behind. Mr.
Burges came straight back to me after he fired the shot. He said,


“ Chum Chum, we’ll take this native to the cart,” and we went away
at once. These were the first words he said. 1 did not look for native
to see if he was there when we went away. He told me he hit him in
the hack. Native walked in front of Mr. Burges and myself. Mr.
Burges rode close to me to camp, and never said anything to me all
the way. Native did not try to run away. It was about a mile to
camp. Native had a piece of a saddle under his arm. Mr. Burges
said he wanted to take him to the cart. He said nothing else. We
did not talk at all. Sure he never said “he shot him in the back” to
me. Murphy began to talk about it, Murphy began to talk as soon
as we got to Wanerenooka Mines. The natives had douarks and
wommeras.
William Henry Timperley—l am Inspector of Police, stationed in
Perth. I arrested Mr. L. C. Burges at Geraldtpn. He made a state-
ment to me voluntarily. I read the warrant. He said “I never have,
and never will deny that I shot the native that he expected there
would be an investigation as Sub-Inspector Piesse had been questioning
his men ; that he never expected to be arrested on a charge of murder.
1 said “it is not murder, but shooting with intent.” He said it was
done in self-defence ; that one night, while travelling from Nickol Bay
some natives stole a saddle from his camp ; on the following morning
he went after them, and came across seven or eight of them ; one of
them had part of the saddle-flap in his possession ; he tried to drive
them back in the direction of the camp, so that they should shew him
where the rest of the saddle was ; he took especial charge of the native
with part of the saddle, as the others began to run away, and he was
determined to stick to this man, so that he could shew him the rest of the
saddle; that he (the native) had tried to lift him out of the saddle by laying
hold of his feet and lifting him out of the saddle, and he hit him with
the butt end of his revolver over the head ; that they all got away but
two, one he had seen Chum Chum had ; his man tried to get away from
him again, and when he arrested him he had again tried to knock him
off his horse, and he then shot him iu self-defence, as he considered his
life in danger ; and further, that he had all this entered in a journal,
which he would shew witness. On the Monday I took him to Oaka-
bella, he showed me the journal, and the entry I now see is the one he
shewed me respecting the occurrence, and is exactly in the same state.
I read the entry.
Cross-examined by Mr. Stone—l recollect Mr. Burges saying that
a native had thrown, or attempted to throw, a stone at him.
The case was then remanded for eight days, to enable the Crown
Solicitor to consult with the Attorney General whether he should pro-
duce Farrell, who was supposed to be at present at Shark’s Bay.
[We understand that no further evidence will be produced on behalf
of the Crown, and that Mr. Burges will be brought before the Police
Court again on Monday next. — Ed.J
Extract from the Perth Gazette and W. A. Times , June 7, 1872.
PERTH POLICE COURT.
Before E. W. Landor, Esq., P.M., H. Ashton, Esq., J.P., and Captain
B. H. Burke, J.P.


Monday, June 3, 1872.
Ladder Clare Burges , on remand, was again brought up charged
with the murder of a native, name unknown, at Hooley’s Well, on the
7th October last.
The Crown Solicitor appeared to prosecute; Mr. E. A. Stone
and Mr. S. H. Parker for the defence.
The prisoner, it will be remembered, had been remanded in order to
enable the Crown Solicitor to consult with the Attorney General as to
the desirability of adducing further evidence on the part of the prose-
cution. On the reassembling of the Court this morning,
The Crown Solicitor intimated that it was not intended, on the
part of the Crown, to produce any additional evidence, and that the
capital charge of the murder had been abandoned, —merely upon the
ground of the technical difficulty of adducing any absolute proof of
the actual death of the deceased. He understood it was not the inten-
tion of the prisoner’s counsel to call any evidence, and he would there-
fore ask their Worships to commit him on the charge of wounding with
intent to murder. Taking into consideration the enormity of the offence
with which the prisoner was charged, he must again oppose any
application to admit him to bail.
Mr. Parker contended that the case was one in dealing with which
the Bench was fully empowered to grant bail, and he maintained it was
one especially calling that bail be granted.
Mr. Landor then read the following document, signed by himself
Messrs. W. L. Brockman, H. Ashton, and Captain Burke, J.P.’s :
“ Every member of this Bench has felt the greatest anxiety in consider-
ing this case. We have wished most anxiously to do impartial justice
without regard to difference of races. We have had to consider
whether the evidence adduced is sufficient to warrant our committing
the prisoner for trial on the charge of doing a felonious act, or whether
we ought to dischaifce him for want of sufficient proof that he acted
feloniously. We all agree that he did not go from the camp on the 7th
October for the purpose of shooting natives, but that he went in order
to recover his saddle, and also to capture some of the thieves and bring
them into camp. He did not shoot them as soon as he fell in with
them, but tried to drive them towards his carts, which were several
miles distant. When one of them tries to escape he knocks him down,
and does not shoot him. When the others, seen by Chum Chum, were
running away, he (the prisoner) did not fire at them, and we believe
he did not fire at this native merely bee ause he was running away.
The two who remained prisoners he drove towards the carts, and one
of them tried to escape, and he set off in pursuit with the intention of
heading him back towards the carts. According to the evidence of Chum
Chum, he fired at him whilst running and hit him in the back, and he
immediately fell flat on the ground. We hesitate a good deal as to the
weight to be attacned to this evidence, both because it appears to us that
Mr. Burges did not pursue with an intent to shoot, and because probably
the witness Chum Chum had enough to do to guard the other native,
and therefore had not his eyes wholly fixed upon the chase. Moreover,
there were bushes in the way. Chum Chum said that Mr. Burges was
on foot when he knocked one of the natives down. This is evidently


not true, for Mr. Burges was trying, according to the same witness, to
drive the party towards the camp. Thus when he says that Mr.
Burges fired and hit the native in the back, and he immediately fell
flat down, ’n the way exhibited in Court, the circumstance appeals to
us almost physically impossible, for the impetus with which the man
was running would have carried him on for some distance after he was
hit (if he was hit) before he fell ; and even if struck on the spine with
so small a bullet he would have run forward for some space and not
have fallen instantly. This leads us to infer that the man, before he
was shot, had ceased running, and was standing still, and was shot (if
hit at all) not in the back but in front ; when he would probably have
dropped at once, as described. This is consistent with the statement in
Mr. Burges’journal, that the man was in the act of throwing his douark
when he fired. This is also, to some extent, corroborated by the
witness Carroll, who was the first person who saw Mr. Burges on his
return to the camp, and who was then immediately told by Mi. Burges
that he had chased the parties who had stolen the saddle, and that one
of them had stuck him up, and he was obliged to use his revolver.
The other witnesses are Fitzgerald and Murphy, the shepherds.
Murphy was at enmity with Burges, having had a scuffle or fight with
him not long before this event, and he continued hostile on the journey ;
for immediately on arriving in Champion Bay he charged him with an
assault; and as he gets no satisfaction by this step his good feeling to-
wards his late master is probably not improved. But though he
charged him with an assault he never thought of charging him with a
murder, until reminded of the incident by the Police long afterwards.
Now, it is scarcely likely that Mr. Burges would have made a confi-
dant of this man, or have spoken to him like an associate, and told him
that he had “ let go at the native, who dropped, and never kicked.”
It is also remarkable that Fitzgerald, who says that Mr. Burges told
him the story, makes use of exactly the same terms. Whether they
talked the matter over together does not appear ;at any rate they only
state what Burges does not deny—that he shot a native. But under
what circumstances ? They therefore prove nothing, or next to nothing.
There is a difference of opinion among the magistrates as to the course
that should be pursued. Some of the Bench doubt whether there is
sufficient proof of a felonious intent to warrant sending the case to a
jury. But ultimately it has been resolved to send the case to a jury
for decision as to whether, under the circumstances described by Mr.
Burges himself, he was justified in using the pistol in the way he did.
The prisoner is therefore committed for trial upon a charge of shooting
a native (name unknown) with intent to do bodily harm. And it is
further resolved that he be admitted to bail.
The prisoner, on the application of his counsel, was thereupon ad-
mitted to bail in his own recognizance of £IOOO, and two sureties in the
sum of £SOO each
E. W. Landor, J.P..
W. L. Brockman, J.P.,
Henry Ashton, J.P.,
B. Hamilton Burke, J.P.
The prisoner was bound to appear at the J uly Criminal Sittings of
the Supreme Court.


SUPREME COURT.
(Before His Honor the Chief Justice.)
Wednesday, the oth June, 1872.
Regina against Lockier Glare Burges. —The Attorney General, as
soon as the Court was opened, filed an Information against Mr. Burges.
It contained nine counts, and charged him, amongst other things, with
shooting at a native, unknown, on the 7th October last, with intent to
kill and murder him.
The defendant not being present, the Attorney General procured a
certificate from the Clerk of the Peace that he had not attended and
pleaded to the indictment, and then addressed the Court making a
motion for a warrant for defendant’s arrest.
The Crown Solicitor followed on the same side, and argued that un-
der the 14th Yict. No. 4 His Honor had full power to grant such
•warrant.
Plis Honor said that the Court had a common-law right, upon a bill
being filed by the Attorney General, who here represented the Grand
J URY, to grant a warrant for the arrest of the accused if he did not
appear and plead to such indictment. The warrant w T as then imme-
diately issued.
His Excellency the Governor’s Private Secretary, as well as his
honorary Aide-de-camp, were present during the argument.
Mr. Purges was shortly after arrested by Sergeant Dale, and was
taken before His Honor in Chambers. Mr. S. H. Parker, one of the
defendant’s counsel, accompanied him there.
The Crow r n Solicitor moved His Honor to commit the prisoner to
gaol until he should be delivered by due course of law r .
Mr. Parker asked His Honor to grant bail.
His Honor said he could not take the matter of bail into consideration
then, having no affidavits before him ; but if the prisoner was so ad-
vised, he could be brought up on a Writ of Habeas Corpus, and the
matter of bail then considered. His Honor then granted a warrant in
accordance with the Crown Solicitor’s motion.
Mr. Burges was then escorted to the lock-up.
Mr. Landor to the Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Perth, Western Australia,
June 17th, 1872.
My Lord, —It is my painful duty to have to lay before your Lord-
ship the circumstances of a case w r hich has placed me as Police Magis-
trate and Chairman of the Bench here, in the unfortunate position of
having to act at variance with the wishes of His Excellency the Go-
vernor, or to violate my duty as a Magistrate by acting against my own
convictions, when in concurrence with those of three of the most
honorable Magistrates of the colony, viz. : —W. L. Brockman, Esq.,
late M.L.C. and a settler of 40 years’ standing ; Henry Ashton, Esq.,
Assistant Commissary General, half pay, and Captain Hamilton Burke,
H.P. 68th Light Infantry, and Staff Officer of Pensioners,
2. Mr. Lockier Clare Burges, J.P., in August, 1871, started from
Nickol Bay with sheep and carts to Champion Bay, some three months’


journey, through an unsettled country, where the natives are the wild-
est savages (some of the tribes cannibals) and speak languages unknown
to the natives of the settled districts. About half way, six or seven
natives entered their camp, shewing a friendly disposition, and bringing
in a dog which had strayed.
During the night they stole a saddle and went off. In the morning
Mr. Burges set off on horseback with one of his own native assist*
ants with the avowed intention of finding his saddle and driving the
thieves into the camp, in order to flog them as a Warning to others.
He encountered several parties of natives, and tried to drive some of
them into camp, but they ran away. He shewed no intention of firing
at them, as was shewn by his own native, Chum-Chum.
Unfortunately one of two savages whom he had captured tried to
escape ; he galloped after him, and the man was fired at, and either
killed or wounded. Mr. Burges’ journal of same date, October 7th,
records the fact, but says that the native was about to throw something
at him when he fired and shot him ; Chum Chum on the contrary says
that Mr. Burges fired at him as he was running away. From his de-
scription that he tumbled flat on the spot, stone dead, this seemed in-
credible. Mr. Burges seems to have made no secret of the fact, and
by degrees it reached the ears of the Resident Magistrate at Champion
Bay, and of His Excellency, who ordered that the Police should make
searching inquiries. Chum Chum was sent down to Perth and taken
possession of by the Police, and soon afterwards made an assistant
officer or tracker.
3.—The Governor took up the case most warmly, being apparently
possessed with the conviction, that the native was murdered deliberately
and wantonly. After three months’ investigation by the Pelice the
Governor directed the Superintendent to cause an Information to I>e
laid before me, the Police Magistrate of Perth, and not before Mr.
Eliot the Resident Magistrate of Champion Bay, where Mr, Burges
resided, and three hundred miles neai’er to the scene of the event.
4.—lt will be seen by my answer to charge No. 1 and hereto annexed
(marked “ D”) that having read the Police Sergeant’s report I could
learn only that several persons had heard Mr. Burges say he had shot
a native, but not under what circumstances. I then examined Chum
Chum privately, to see if 1 could get the facts out of him ; but though
he said he had seen Mr. Burges shoot whilst the native was running
away, I could not help feeling great doubt and suspicion, both because
he had been so long in the hands of the Poiice, wno had been told by
the Governor (as appeared in the Report) to offer him a reward
if he would speak the truth, and because he said he should
“please the Guberuor ” by what he was saying. [See Answer
Dto charge I—page 5.] To issue a warrant for the arrest of a
Magistrate and gentleman, who would have to be brought in custody
on a ten days’journey, to the ruin of his business, upon the evidence
merely of a native who knew nothing of an oath, seemed to me to be
rather a hasty proceeding, and I asked the Attorney General if he did
not think a summons would answer the purpose ? (See the answer to
No. 1 D.) After a little delay, and upon pressure of the Governor and
Attorney General, I granted a warrant charging Burges with shooting
with intent to kill—which is, in this convict colony, a capital offence.


This reluctance of mine is attributed by the Governor to a desire of
giving the accused time to escape ; His Excellency appearing fully
convinced if not of his guilt, at least that he ought to be treated as a
murderer until tried by a jury. I felt no personal interest in the ac-
cused, and had never exchanged twenty words with him.
5. —Before being brought up on the warrant Messrs, Brockman and
Ashton asked if I had any objection to their sitting on the Bench ? I
replied, “ certainly not/’ I then, thinking that perhaps they might
have some feeling for the prisoner (though they really had none) asked
Captain Burke to sit also, who being lately arrived in the colony and
a military officer, and a Roman Catholic, I thought would be acceptable
to the Governor, and I felt sure he could not be biased towards the
prisoner. I carefully abstained from telling them my doubts about
Chum Chum’s veracity, in order that they might hear the evidence
without any prejudice.
6. —The Crown Solicitor, who prosecuted, first told us he would
leave the charge open, leaving us to define the offence when we had
heard the evidence. This we objected to, and he then laid a charge of
murder. The evidence did not prove this. (See Report in “ Perth
Gazette” marked “ G,” page 10.)
7. —The prisoner was remanded for some days, during which time
the Magistrates met, and for nearly a whole day debated upon their
duty in the case. Some of them contended and insisted that the case
should be dismissed, as in their opinion the evidence did not justify
them in subjecting any man to the risk of being hanged, when they did
not think the evidence warranted their so acting ; but ultimately they
consented to a committal on the minor charge, believing it was the
province of a jury to decide whether the prisoner was justified in acting
as he did. But they thought that for their own satisfaction and for
that of the Governor and the public, they ought to explain their reasons
in writing for adopting this course. This was no doubt an unusual
course, and perhaps I was to blame in adopting it; but the great inte-
rest felt by the public, the little weight to be attached to the evidence,
and the great hardship of keeping the accused in a cell for five weeks,
if committed for the capital offence, on which there was no likelihood of
a conviction, made us think we should better meet ffie real justice of
the case by acting as we proposed, although possibly laying ourselves
open to censure, than by committing him for trial as if he were one of
our Convict population to whom imprisonment is a common and slight
hardship,
B.—On the day of remand the Crown Solicitor said he withdrew the
charge of murder, and charged him with wounding with intent to
murder (also a capital offence) and should oppose bail. As the Magis-
trates had decided on their course, and were not all present, the Bench
would not change its views, and I read their reasons for committing on
the minor charge. Afterwards the prisoner was admitted to bail in
£lOOO, and two sureties of £5OO each. It was conceived that this did
not prevent an indictment being framed for the capital offence, should
the Crown think it necessary.
9*—As soon as possible after this admittance to bail, the Attorney
General (acting as Grand Jury) found a true Bill for wounding with


intent to murder, and applied to His Honor the Chief Justice, whilst
sitting in Court on a day appointed for trial of Civil Causes, to grant
a Warrant of Arrest. This being done, Mr. Burges was again forth-
with arrested. As there was no probability whatever of any attempt
at escape, and as the solvency of the bail could not be questioned, the
Magistrates felt somewhat surprised at this course.
10. —Shortly afterwards I received a letter from the Hon. the Colo-
nial Secretary, dated June 6th (see copy annexed marked “A”) ac-
quainting me that I was charged by His Excellency with breach of
duty in committing the accused on the minor charge, and reproaching
me with want of ability, partiality, and of bringing the law into con-
tempt.
11. —My reply to that letter was dated June 10th (see copy annexed
marked B.)
12. —Feeling that the honor of the independent Magistrates who had
sat with me was affected no less than my own by the Governor’s stric-
tures, I laid the Colonial Secretary’s letter before them ; and they ad-
dressed a letter on the subject to the Colonial Secretary (a copy of which
is annexed marked F.)
13. —On June 11th I received a statement from the Colonial Secre-
tary’s Office of nine charges preferred against me by the Governor, with
a letter prefixed, stating that His Excellency considered it “his painful
duty to bring my conduct before the Executive Council with a view to
my removal from office.” (See copy annexed marked “ C.”)
14. —Had His Excellency done me the honor in the first instance to
have ordered my attendance upon him, and given me an opportunity of
explaining my reasons for the course adopted, and especially for dis-
crediting the testimony of Chum Chum, the painful necessity for im-
puting dishonorable motives to me might perhaps have been avoided.
If a Magistrate, because he is a Stipendiary, is to have less latitude
when sitting on the Bench than independent Magistrates, when acting
according to his convictions, I fear it will certainly be impossible for
me any longer to occupy the position.
15. —lf your Lordship will do me the kindness and justice to sus-
pend your decision until the departure of at least the next mail but one
after receiving these papers, I feel confident that the colony as a body
will come forward and testify to the high character I have always main-
tained, and to their confidence in my entire fitness for the duties I have
so long and honorably discharged.
16. —[ This paragraph refers to testimonials to my character from gen-
tlemen in England of high position.']
17. —Not being conscious of any wilful wrong-doing my only offence
being, so far as I can understand, that I committed a man for trial
upon a minor charge instead of upon a capital one —the testimony
against him not warranting the latter course (so far as I and my brother
Magistrates could judge''—l look with trustful hope to your Lordship
to do me justice and afford me protection.
I have the honor to be, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s humble servant,
E. W. LANDOR, J.P.


Western Australia.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Perth, 18th June, 1872.
Sir, —His Excellency the Governor in Executive Council has this
day taken into very careful consideration your letter of yesterday’s
date and the accompanying replies to the charges preferred against you
and forwarded with my letter of the 11th instant, No. 53 | 530.
It is with deep regret and pain that His Excellency in Council has
come to the conclusion that the defiant and improper tone which per-
vades both your letter and the replies to the charges, coupled with the
insinuations personally levelled against the Governor and the Members
of his Council would probably in themselves be quite sufficient (were
it not unnecessary to consider them) to warrant His Excellency in re-
commending to Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies that
you are an unfit and improper person to remain in the Civil Service of
the colony.
With regard to the charges, His Excellency in Council is reluctantly
driven to the conclusion that no one of them is satisfactorily answered
and they are therefore considered as clearly proved.
It becomes therefore my duty to state that His Excellency the Go-
vernor in Council has decided to suspend you from the office you hold,
and to recommend to Her Majesty’s Secretai-y of State that such sus-
pension be confirmed.
From the date of receipt of this letter you will therefore understand
that you are suspended from office and salary, pending the decision of
the Secretary of State.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
FRED. P, BARLEE.
E. W. Landor, Esq., J.P., Perth.
Perth, Western Australia,
June 19th, 1872.
Sir, —I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday’s
date announcing my suspension from office from that day.
I deeply regret that His Excellency should be impressed with the
feeling that a “ defiant and improper tone ” pervades my letter of the
17th instant, as well as my answer to the charges.
Some feeling of indignation at being charged with dishonorable
motives may naturally have mingled with the deep sorrow I feelj that
His Excellency should regard me in the light he does. But certainly
I did not intend to express myself in a defiant or improper spirit.
I have not consciously levelled “ insinuations against the Governor
and the members of his Council,” but I cannot bow to the justice of
the statement that I am “ an unfit and improper person to remain in the
Civil Service of the colony.”
It becomes necessary to add a supplemental letter to the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, which 1 trust the Governor will be so good as
■to for ward to Ills Lordship, together with that handed in for
transmission.


I enclose three copies of the letters, and also of the “Inquirer” news-
paper of this day’s date for transmission by the outgoing mail.
I have the honor to be, sir,
Your obedient servant,
E. W. LANDOR.
The Hon. the Colonial Secretary.
Perth,'Western Australia,
June 19, 1872.
My Lord, —Since forwarding to His Excellency the Governor for
transmission to your Lordship my letters of the 17th June inst. on the
subject of my conduct in the case of Mr. L. C. Burges, charged with
having committed a capital offence, 1 have received an intimation from
His Excellency that he has deemed it necessary to suspend me from
my offices of Police Magistrate and Magistrate (or Judge) of the Local
Court of the District; and that it will be his duty to recommend your
Lordship to confirm my removal. (See copy annexed K, and of my
reply of this date marked L.)
As the charge against me is that I, in conjunction with independent
Magistrates of the highest character and honor, viz., Mr. W. L. Brock-
man, late M.L.C., Henry Ashton, Esq., Assistant Commissary General
(half pay) and Captain Hamilton Burke, H P. 68th Light Infantry
and Staff Officer of Pensioners, committed Mr, Burges on the minor
charge instead of on the capital one, and imputing to me the most un-
worthy motives for so acting. I trust, as I have already said in my
former letter, your Lordship will do me the justice to suspend your
opinion until receiving further materials on which to ground it, and
which I trust will be transmitted by the July mail.
I hope at any rate to be able to satisfy your Lordship as to my cha-
racter for uprightness and integrity.
In the “Inquirer” of this morning appears a letter signed by the
three independent Magistrates who sat with me upon the Bench, and
were I not a partial Judge in my own case I should almost feel confi-
dent that their testimony exonerates me from being obnoxious to the
charge of improper conduct in this painful matter.
I have addressed copies of the “ Inquirer” of this date to your Lord-
ship, and forwarded them through His Excellency the Governor by
this mail.
I have the honor to be, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s humble servant,
E. W. LANDOR, J.P.
To the Right Hon. the Earl of Kimberley, Secretary of State for the
Colonies.
Extract Jrom Perth Gazette £ W. A. Times of June 21, 1872.
SUSPENSION OF E. W, LANDOR, ESQ., P.M,
Subjoined is the explanation of the Magistrates composing the Bench
that admitted L. C. Burges to bail on the charge of shooting at an
aboriginal with intent to do bodily harm.
The charge preferred by the Government against Mr. Landor, P.M.,


and incidentally the other Magistrates in a higher degree—they being
for dismissing the charge altogether—is that of favoritism. We can-
not but think that the explanation relieves all, but especially Mr.
Landor, from the charge of being actuated by base motives. Whether
the Bench exceeded their legitimate powers is now a question for the
English Crown lawyers to decide. We have heard that on his arrival
at the Bowes in October last the accused wrote to the Colonial Secre-
tary informing him of what had occurred, but it did not appear to the
Magistrates that any steps had been taken to obtain evidence as to the
death of the aboriginal.
The greatest sympathy is being expressed in all quarters for Mr.
Landor, and we have even reason to believe that a memorial, nume-
rously and influentially signed, will be forwarded by next month’s
mail, bearing testimony to the purity of his private, and the integrity
of his public life, as well as to the ability with which he has for many
years discharged his magisterial duties, and deprecating his removal as
a serious public loss.
EXPLANATION.
To the Editor.
Sir, —It appears to us, from remarks in the Herald of last week
that there is some misapprehension as to the cause which induced us
to adopt the, perhaps , unusual course of stating in writing our reasons
for committing Mr. L. C. Burges on the minor charge, instead of the
capital one. We therefore wish it to be clearly understood, that it was
because of a difference of opinion amongst us, some being strongly per-
suaded that the case should be dismissed altogether ; but when Mr.
Landor pointed out that it was the province of a jury to determine
whether the prisoner was justified in what he had done, we consented
to a committal on the minor charge, and considered that for our own
satisfaction, as well as that of the Government and the public, we
ought at once to make known our reasons for so doing, and that in a
manner that could not admit of being garbled, misrepresented, or mis-
understood.
We are, sir,
Your obedient servants,
W. L. Brockman, J.P.,
H. Ashton, J.P.,
B. Hamilton-Burke, J.P.
THE SUSPENSION OF MR. LANDOR.
(From the W. A. “Herald,” June 29, 1872.^1
We have very much pleasure in publishing the following Memorial,
addressed to Earl Kimberley, in defence of Mr. Landor, who has been
suspended from office, charged, most unwarrantably we think, with
being actuated by improper motives in adopting the course he (in con-
junction with three other Justices) did with regard to the committal of
Mr. L. C. Burges, who was accused at the instance of the Crown with
a capital offence. That the Bench acted unwisely and irregularly in
drawing up and signing a document commenting upon the value of
evidence that would subsequently be a subject for the consideration of


a jury, cannot be denied, but so well and widely known is Mr, Landor,
so deeply is he respected, and so strong is the faith of the public gene-
rally in his honor, impartiality and integrity, that we are certain there
are not ten men in the colony, unconnected with the Government, who
will credit the assumption that Mr. Landor has been guilty of the grave
offence against society with which he has been charged. We will ven-
ture to say, that the character of Mr. Landor for righteous impartiality
and incorruptibility stands as high among the people of this colony as
that of the Chief Justice of England. The loss of office, great as that
is, is not we feel sure the cause of so much pain and sorrow, as stain
the charge reflects upon his honor, which has ever been dear to him as
his life’s blood :
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Kimberley, Her Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State for the Colonies.
The bumble Petition of the undersigned, Magistrates, Merchants,
and others, inhabitants of the Colony of W estern Australia,
Sheweth -
That Mr. E. W. Landor has been, by order of His Excellency
Governor Weld, removed from his office of Police Magistrate in Perth
upon a charge of alleged improper performance of his dnty in having,
in conjunction with three other Magistrates, committed an accused pei-
eon for trial on the minor charge of shooting at an aboriginal native
with intent to do bodily harm, instead of on the capital charge of shooting
with intent to murder, as urged by the Crown Pi osecutor; it being fur-
ther charged against Mr. Landor that he was led to adopt this course
from the unworthy motive of an improper bias in favor of such accused
person. # ,
That your Memorialists, while refraining from discussing the question
of the proper form of coramital, are anxious to convey to Your Lord-
ship their firm conviction that Mr. Landor, a highly accomplished and
honest English gentleman, is not open to the charge of favoritism and
personal bias, and that he is incapable of being actuated by any un-
worthy motives ; this conviction being based on their knowledge of Mr.
Landor, who has resided among them for many years, and whose char-
acter and conduct have gained him the universal respect of all classes
of the community.
That your Memorialists and the public generally, who have had such
experience of the professional ability and integrity of Mr. Landor, and
who have felt such confidence in his love of justice, view his suspension
from office with sorrow and alarm, aud would look upon the confirmation
of it by Your Lordship as seriously affecting the public interests. The
community cannot afford to lose the services of such a man, and they
humbly trust that, in considering the case, Y r cur Lordship will be able
to fine sufficient grounds for reversing the decision that has been come
to, and for restoring Mr. Landor to the position he has so long filled
with honor to himself and advantage to the public.
And your Memorialists will ever pray, &c.
[Signed hy ten out of the twehe elected members of the Legislative Council —
the two others, at Champion Bay and King George's Sound, being too far distant
to have had time to forward their signatures; and by all the Gentry, Land-owners ,
and Independent Magistrates (with scarcely an exception) within reach. J


To the Magistrates, Landowners, Merchants, and other Inhabitants of
Western Australia, who have signed the Memorial in my behalf to Her
Majesty's Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Gentlemen, —
1 do not thank you so much for your kind sympathy thus warmly
expressed, as for your generous, manly, English spirit in coming forward
spontaneously to give your testimony to the truth and uprightness of
my character, which with that of three independent Magistrates, has
been so unexpectedly assailed.
lam not what is commonly called a popular man. I am not natu-
rally demonstrative. lam not a public speaker, and always feel out
of place in crowds and popular assemblies, and live almost exclusively
in the little world of my own home.
But I am known to you all as an old Colonist and quiet neighbor;
as a lover of freedom of thought and action ; as a hater of every kind
of injustice and oppression; and as one accustomed to speak his
mind honestly and openly.
These indeed are traits which, as society is constituted, have often
proved to be great drawbacks and disqualifications; but I have ever
preferred my own self-respect to any other opinion.
A man without some enemies may not be worth much, but as I have
always felt good-will towards all I cannot but be deeply pained at
knowing there are at least one or two men who regard me with bitter
personal ill-feeling.
I have not consciously incurred their enmity by anything more than
once or twice differing from them in opinion, and perhaps too freely
expressing ray own—which is sometimes an unpardonable offence.
But if I have found some enemies, I have in the time of trial dis-
covered that I possess many friends upon whom I had not reckoned ;
friends who are not ashamed or afraid to stand forth and testify that
in the performance of my duties as a Magistrate, I have never known
any distinction between different classes, but have dealt equal justice
to all men according to the best of my ability. For in truth, the love
of justice, without any respect of persons, has been (as I think you
believe) the animating principle of my life.
I have, I know, often made mistakes ; but I have never found any-
body infallible. If errors were pointed out to me in a kindly spirit,
t o one would more frankly and freely acknowledge them. When driven
into n corner, and assailed with keen weapons and strong language, I
presume even a Quaker would shew fight. Therefore lam compelled
most unwillingly to appear in a.hostile attitude, when it would be more
in accordance with my spirit and feelings to be on friendly terms with
every one. Even with- your honorable testimony to back my
cause, there may not be a successful issue to your kind and
g i erous advocacy. But this is of minor importance. My expe-
rience of othce has not led me to consider it the swnmum bonum of
human life. But what is of importance to me, is the outspoken ex-
pression by my fellow-colonists of their confidence in my truth and
honesty of purpose. This is indeed grateful to me, for it repels the
stigma which is attempted to be cast upon my reputation*


It is you, my friends, who thus coming forward, enable me to hand
down to my children (unimpaired) that good name which I received
from my forefathers. For, like them (I can truly say) it has
been my aim through life “to do justly, to love mercy, and to
WALK HUMBLY WITH MY GOD.”
With every grateful sentiment,
I subscribe myself
Your obliged servant and humble friend,
E. W. LANDOR.
George Inkpen, Printer, William Street, Perth.


