





Alfred Cecil Rowlandson
Born June 15. 1865
Died June 15. 1922




THE LATE
Alfred Cecil Rowlandson
Pioneer" Publisher"
of Jlustralian Novels


WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
BY JOHN SANDS LTD.
SYDNEY.


FOREWORD.
WHEN Alfred Cecil Eowlandson died in New
Zealand on June 15, 1922, the Commonwealth
lost a publisher who had performed a very-
great service for Australian literature. In
less than a score of years he had produced
nearly two hundred novels by Australasian
writers and sold more than four million copies.
That publishing record is remarkable, con-
sidering the limited book-markets of the
Commonwealth and New Zealand; and it is also an achievement of
national importance.
The publishing enterprise of A. C. Rowlandson encouraged the
writing of novels by Australians, and books by authors who were in
the first instance “discovered” by him account for the larger portion
of the four million novels already sold.
“A.C.R. ” —by friends and employees he was always affectionately
referred to as “A.C.R.” or “The Chief”—was ever of a retiring dis-
position. He was modestly proud of his publishing achievements; but
he sought no publicity for the valuable service he rendered his country.
Except for the announcement in all Bookstall publications that
copyright was held by “Alfred Cecil Rowlandson, of Cremorne and
Sydney,” readers of the four million novels knew little of the man who
was wholly responsible for their publication. To the public the Bookstall
novel appeared as a product of the N.S.W. Bookstall Co., Ltd.; but
actually the Company’s publishing activities were entirely due to the
enterprise and personal attention of its Managing-Director.
Early this year, when in response to the appeals of medical advisers
and friends, “A.C.R.” agreed to take a trip to Canada in search of
health, a few of his friends decided to risk incurring his displeasure
by compiling, in his absence, a brief record of his career as a publisher


of Australian books, and at the same time tell the public a little about
the authors whose novels had proved so popular. Bookstall writers and
artists readily responded to the invitation to assist in the compilation
of the little souvenir, and it was well in hand when, alas, news was
received of Mr. Rowlandson’s unexpected return to New Zealand, and
of his death there shortly afterwards, following upon an operation for
appendicitis.
To those who had designed the souvenir has fallen the task of
replacing it with this little memorial, telling of “A.C.R. ’s” life-work
and putting on record the high esteem in which he was held by the
authors for whose work his enterprise alone provided an audience.
It is unnecessary to add much to the unsolicited articles which follow.
Mr. Rowlandson began as a bookseller; but early in his career he decided
that local writers should be given opportunities to compete with overseas
authors on his bookstalls. His early publishing enterprises—Common-
wealth Souvenirs, “The Commonwealth Annual,” and “Rowlandson’s
Success”—were followed by several novels, the sales of which indicated
the possibilities of producing, at popular prices, other novels by
Australian authors. There were disappointments, but the genial and
ever-kindly publisher was possessed of a determination to make a success
of anything he handled. The publication of novels soon became his
life-hobby. The prospective financial success of any particular volume
became a minor consideration with him. If there was a reasonable
prospect of a book paying its way he did not hesitate to accept and
publish it. During the war years, when publishing costs were almost
prohibitive, and whatever profit there had been in even “best sellers”
practically disappeared, “A.C.R.” continued to accept new novels, and
the publishing programme meantime was only slightly restricted. It
was a bitter day when, long after the price of practically everything
else had been increased, he decided that the Shilling Bookstall novel
could no longer be sold at that popular price, and was compelled to
increase the price to fifteen-pence. But when publishing costs first
showed a tendency to decline, the old price was promptly reinstated,
though at the time the reduction was not warranted. In the dark war
days, when most other publishers had ceased producing books, at least
a dozen new Australian authors were “discovered” by “A.C.R.,” and
just on fifty new novels were accepted, paid for, edited and illustrated,
and made ready for publication when conditions should become more


favorable. As a result of that policy the Company’s output has averaged
two new novels per month for some time.
No writer with a manuscript ever failed to secure an interview with
the Bookstall publisher; “A.C.R.” always found time to offer encourage-
ment and helpful advice. Many Australian authors, whose books have
since sold in tens of thousands, owe their success to his encouragement
of their earlier efforts. Except for the “reading” of the thousands of
manuscripts offered, “A.C.R. ” personally attended to every detail of
publishing.
A. C. Rowlandson’s influence on the development of Australian
literature will be more fully appreciated in the future. He provided
Australians with novels written by their own authors, illustrated by
Australian artists, and produced by Australian printers. Though it
would have been more profitable to have sent manuscripts abroad for
printing—several attractive offers were made to him by overseas
publishing-houses, which had the advantage of cheap labor—“A.C.R.”
invariably gave the work to local industry. Besides having provided
local writers with a profitable market for their work, the Bookstall Series
has been an excellent training-school which has helped them to success
with more ambitious efforts in the world’s literary centres.
In recent years the Bookstall Library has developed rapidly; the
encouragement given local writers by “A.C.R.” has been directly
responsible for a marked improvement in the Australian novel and for
the appearance of many new authors. In the first six months of this
year, sixty-four novels were offered. No less than ten were accepted;
four being first novels.
As a pioneer publisher of Australian fiction, the late A. C.
Rowlandson will long be remembered, not only for his enterprise and
his straight-dealing, but for his genial nature and, as Canon- Charlton
told the hundreds who saw their old friend go to his long rest, because,
in the fullest sense of the phrase, he was a “white man.”
R. WYNN.
5


The New South Wales Bookstall Books.
AND THEIR PUBLISHER. A. C. ROWLANDSON.
By A. G. STEPHENS.
MANY publishers, during many years of Australian history, have
attempted the enterprise of issuing original Australian books
at the popular price of one shilling. Only A. C. Rowlandson,
as head of N.S.W. Bookstall Co., Ltd., has succeeded in any considerable
and continuous way. He builded what is in 1922—with regard to all
points of money invested, sales made, attractive production, authors and
illustrators included, printers and binders employed, and number of
booksellers trading—the largest, most representative, and most prosperous
publishing business in AustraZealand.
Back in the 19th century, when Melbourne led Australian letters,
the old bookselling firm of George Robertson tried its publishing hand
at cheap books, but never reached large editions widely circulated. Later
the Sydney Bulletin Company brought out “A Golden Shanty” at 1/-,
cleared a 20,000 edition in short time, but found the colored cover too
costly for the second edition. Two more shilling books were tried; but
with all the advantage of a weekly paper to push sales, The Bulletin
Company found the business unprofitable at the price.
Various other publishers in the Australian capitals have issued a
couple or a dozen shilling books, but none was able to show a sufficient
profit. Manufacturing estimates are so high in this country that at the
best of times there is but a small margin between printers’ costs and
wholesale prices; and nowadays this small margin, unless a large sale
is achieved, is likely to disappear altogether. Only the combination of
authors’ popularity with the widest local distribution makes a shilling
series commercially possible.
The publishing merit of A, C. Rowlandson lay in keeping on where
others lost courage and stopped. He backed his reading fancy and his
business judgment. He was told that a successful series of Australian
shilling books “could not be done”; he said it could be done, and he
proved it could be done. The Bookstall Company’s eight shops and fifty
stalls were a factor in sales, but not the deciding factor. Sale expenses
go on in your own shop the same as in the other fellow’s. The deciding
factor was circulation of the books over the length and breadth of


Australia and New Zealand, and that circulation had to be attained
gradually and slowly.
Rowlandson ’s earliest publishing years, starting about 1900, showed
a big balance on the wrong side of the ledger; but he kept on. He started
by paying “Steele Rudd” £5OO cash for “Sandy’s Selection”—an
unheard-of price in advance for a shilling book in this country; and he
kept on. He added “Steele Rudd’s” earlier books and many later; he
added Thomas E. Spencer’s verses and stories; his list grew and grew.
On some books, in strict book-keeping, he did not clear expenses; but the
good ones went ahead with edition after edition, rising past 40,000 and
50,000 to nearly 100,000 in some cases, with a large sale yet to come.
Rowlandson kept on. By degrees newsagents and small storekeepers
throughout the whole extent of AustraZealand learned that Bookstall
books are attractive goods and reliable stock. To-day more than 3,000
shops, small and great, are selling Bookstall books—in a back-street
grocery in Auckland I have seen their covers brightening the limited
display of packed-tea and candles—and the Bookstall Company has a
corresponding advance order for everything it publishes. The books go
from Broome in the West to Rockhampton in the East, and from
Thursday Island at the top of Australia to the Bluff at the bottom of
New Zealand. There has always been a large sale for them in South
Africa, led by Australian mining wanderers. They went through
Gallipoli and Palestine, and thousands of them were sent to the trenches
in France.
Rowlandson kept on because he believed he would succeed eventually
—and because his heart was in the job. He was not a literary man; he
had less than ordinary schooling. He was born at Daylesford, Victoria,
in 1866. “When I was eleven years old,” he said in a Book-fellow
interview, “I found myself in Brisbane, busy at my first job. I had
been a pupil at the Normal School, and I should have had more schooling;
but I didn’t like school —to tell you the truth, I was always wagging it.
So one day my dear mother said to me, ‘Alfred,’ she said, ‘you must
do one thing or the other. Will you go to school or will you go to work?’
‘ ‘ ‘ Mother, ’ I said, ‘ I ’ll go to work. ’
“So I went out and found a job as shop-boy at a Shilling Shop at
5/- a week (you would have to pay a boy 15/- a week now, and then you
wouldn’t get the same work out of him, for we worked till dark and after
dark), and I remember very well getting my first week’s wages—two
half-crowns. I looked at it, and it didn’t seem much; so before I took
it home to my mother I changed the half-crowns into threepenny bits and
came home with a whole pocketful of money.”
When Rowlandson came to Sydney strenuous labor left him little


inclination for reading. Yet he had always an inclination for literature,
and his work as publisher satisfied a personal craving and a patriotic
instinct. He liked the business battle; but apart from business he took
pride and pleasure in the job. When he decided on a new book or a
selling cover, he felt he was taking part in artistic creatorship, so
expressing a deep strain of character that otherwise went unexpressed.
He made a new market for the work of AustraZealand authors and
writers, and often paid ready money in advance of publication when
no other publisher could be found even to risk publication. The specu-
lative price did not always reach an author’s expectancy; but the proof
of the pudding was eating—most of the Bookstall authors came back
with another book, and some of them came back wdth a dozen.
The snow r ball grew as it rolled. It wanted steady pushing at the
beginning; it took ten jmars to sell a million shilling books; but in the
second decade, to 1920, with more than a hundred authors on the list —
dropping off or coming on—the Bookstall series sold 3,000,000 copies;
and another million is in sight—s,ooo,ooo copies for twenty years of
publishing. Good work; very good work; considering the cost of the
enterprise, and the limited and far-scattered population to be dealt with.
The war sent the price of paper so high that output was perforce curtailed,
and for a time the price of the Bookstall series rose to 1/3, coming back
to the people’s shilling as soon as it could be managed.
In his interview, Bowlandson said: “You have to reflect that the
Bookstall books are purely Australian and New Zealand books —a distinct
class. We haven’t the world-audience to buy them; though recently
several have been taken up by a big London firm for re-issue in England.
They’re local books. That’s their fault, in one way, and their big merit
in another way. You see most of our people have never seen England
or America. Most of them will never see any country but Australia.
Education helps them to be interested in other countries; but they’re
always most interested in their own. That’s natural, isn’t it? I say
that’s natural, isn’t it? You can’t expect Bill or Mary in the backblocks
to really thrill about daisies in English meadows, or train-robbing in the
Wild West. Tell them about the Big Flood or the Old Man Drought,
and they sit down and take notice—they’ve been there. Or they’ve heard
their grandmother tell how a bushranger asked her for a drink of milk—
they can appreciate bushranging stories.
“We have a pretty fair idea now of what real Australian readers
want. They want stories about the people and scenes they have known
themselves, or might have known themselves. They want honest stories,
stories that ‘read true.’ They want lively stories, with a dash of humour
and a touch of pathos. They like a good plot, but perhaps they’re more


interested in character, and in incidents that display the character,
Their own lives, in fact, with a little more fun and excitement than they
get in their own lives—that’s what our readers want. We have many
women writers on our list, and their books sell just as well as the men’s
—sometimes better.
‘‘Some books sell better than others, but there’s a steady sale for
most of the list all the time. When a book flags, and gives definite signs
that it isn’t wdiat the public wants, we have to let it drop quietly when
the edition is exhausted. On a long run the merit of the authors is
tested; some single themselves out from the ruck and keep on going ahead
just like horses on a racecourse. We give all our authors an equal
show, and the public picks its fancy. Got a dozen books waiting for
publication here—and w r e’re still ready for more. Anything Australian,
and readable, and entertaining—with the incidents dramatically presented
and the people made lifelike—and paying reasonable respect to English
grammar—we’re always glad to consider.
“All our books are illustrated—some of them very well illustrated—
and by Australian artists. We employ Australian authors, Australian
artists, and Australian printers to do our Australian publishing—and
the Australian public is kind enough to appreciate our work. Not for-
getting New Zealand—a great many Bookstall books are sold in New
Zealand; and we have several New Zealand authors on our list. The
New Zealand taste is very much the same as Australian.”
The list of Bookstall authors includes many who have made a name
through the Bookstall series, and some who have won high reputation in
other fields as well. Perhaps the most popular author has been “Steele
Rudd”; but, book for book, T. E. Spencer has run him close; and Arthur
Wright, one of the newer men, wdth eighteen sporting stories already to
his credit, is a formidable rival. David Low, a famous caricaturist now
in London; the three Lindsays—Norman, Lionel, and Percy; and other
well-known illustrators are contributors to the series. J. H. M, Abbott
has written romances of early Australia that throw instructive light on
historical characters; and many other well-known authors are represented.
Fresh talent is continually being discovered—S. W. Powell, for instance,
is a skilful writer who has recently begun to win high credit. Some of
the best books in the series are by single-book authors.
Rowlandson builded well. He enlarged the scope of Australian
talent and Australian industry. In creating opportunities for writers,
he helped to create writers who have broadened the field of local literature.
The Bookstall series is clean, and in many aspects highly creditable.
Long may it grow and thrive!


A. C. ROWLANDSON,
Founder of a Great Australian Publishing Business.
By the late BERTRAM STEVENS, in
The Lone Hand (October, 1918),
The New South Wales Bookstall Co.
is not only a great distributing agency
for books and periodicals; it is also the
largest publishing business in Australia,
having already issued 2,000,000 volumes
of Australian fiction alone. [ Sales now
exceed 4,000,000 copies.] One has to
remember that the population of the
Commonwealth is only five millions—
less than that of the city of London—
to realise the magnitude of this Sydney
firm’s business as publishers. Not many
years ago it would have been regarded
as absurd if any business man had sug-
gested that the Australian public could
absorb so many books as have been pub-
lished by the Bookstall Co. since it be-
gan this department of its business.
There are, of course, a number of other
Australian firms publishing every year,
some of them with considerable success,
and in addition a large amount of im-
ported literature is also consumed in
this country. It is evident that Aus-
tralians are on the whole fond of read-
ing, and that they now take a keen
interest in their own literature.
The reason for the Bookstall Co. ’s
phenomenal success in publishing is
solely the faith and courage of one man
—Mr. A. C. Rowlandson, the proprietor.
He will tell you that it was simply a
matter of giving the public what it
wanted; all he did was to act as a link
between Australian authors and their
readers. Still, it took some pluck for a
man to launch out into a new line by
paying £5OO for a book and selling it
for one shilling. The writer, “Steele
Rudd,” was already known, two of his
hooks having sold well at 6/- each; but
it was quite a guess as to whether
“Steele Rudd” would sell by the tens
of thousands necessary for a shilling
book to pay. It did pay, however, and
the Bookstall Co. then took over the
two 6/- volumes by the same author, re-
printed and sold them as three 17-
volumes.
The story of Mr. Rowlandson’s ad-
ventures in publishing is worth telling,
for it is part of the literary history of
Australia, and is likely to have an im-
portant influence on its future. To
begin at the beginning, Alfred Cecil
Rowlandson was born near Ballarat,
Victoria, his parents having come from
England in 1852 —the year of the great
gold discoveries. They all returned to
England again, for two years; but once
more journeyed to Australia and stayed
at Northcote, Victoria, where young
Rowlandson went to school for a while.
Then they removed to Brisbane, where
the boy’s education was continued at
the Superior Normal School. In 1878
Alfred Rowlandson came to Sydney and
started work in the otfice of Henry
Waddington, Indent Agent, of Mac-
quarie Place.
On leaving Mr. Waddington’s office,
young Rowlandson received the offer of
three positions. That was the moment
when the tide in the affairs of A. C.
Rowlandson was on the turn, though he
did not know it. He took it, as it hap-
10


pened, at the flood, by accepting the
offer of the N.S.W. Bookstall Co., then
owned by Henry Lloyd. The handling
of books formed part of the attraction,
though his first work was to sell tram
tickets in the office at the corner of
King and Elizabeth Streets. Rumor,
the jade with many tongues, has cir-
culated the story that A. C. Rowland-
son began life by selling newspapers.
That is quite untrue, though if it had
been true Mr. Rowlandson would not be
ashamed of having earned a living in
that or any other honorable fashion.
As he says: "One might rise from
polishing the knocker of the big front
door, to be a ruler of the ‘King’s Navee’
and be none the worse for starting in
that way.”
From ticket-seller, a position in which
he handled a large amount of money,
Mr. Rowlandson was promoted to be
cashier, and eventually manager of the
Company. After the death of Mr.
Henry Lloyd, he bought the business
from the widow and carried on. Alto-
gether, he has been thirty-five years in
the Bookstall Co., and during the last
twenty-one years he has been sole pro-
prietor.
The ordinary distributing business of
the company, with its large number of
stalls throughout the State, necessarily
occupies a good deal of the time of the
management. The publishing business
appealed to Mr, Rowlandson very early,
and he had no hesitation in adding it
to his responsibilities. He was gen-
uinely anxious to encourage Australian
writers and artists; and he knew that
that could not be done unless their pro-
ducts were made to pay. Until he be-
gan, the cheap book had hardly been
tried in Australia. Certainly he knew
that his own bookstalls would be a
valuable assistance in selling. But he
had to embark a very large amount of
money in payments to the author, artist,
printer, and block-maker, and had to
wait until a sale hitherto undreamed of
had been achieved before he got a
penny back. Some of his business
friends ridiculed the prospect of suc-
cess; they were confident that Aus-
tralian fiction at 1/- could not be sold
by the thousand; as for a hundred
thousand copies—well, it seemed idiotic
to expect such a thing.
Mr. Rowlandson believed that there
was a market for cheap Australian
books in his country, and he has found
that the public has bought most ex-
tensively those books which he thought
were most likely to be popular. So far
as Bookstall publications are concerned,
the amount invested in each book by
the publisher —in payments to author,
printer, etc.—is so large that 10,000
copies have to be sold before the com-
pany gets its money back. Therefore,
the only manuscripts accepted are those
which seem likely to sell to that ex-
tent. Since the War began the cost of
production has increased in every de-
tail —paper prices in particular having
risen skywards. The Bookstall Co. has
not increased the price of its shilling
series to the public, and it has foregone
nearly all its legitimate profits so that
the authors and artists might not suffer
and the series be kept going until bet-
ter times return. They could hardly
have done this if the firm of John Sands,
Ltd., had not stuck to them so far as
paper and printing costs are concerned.
Even with this consideration, the ex-
pense of production is so high that the
series is continued on the bare margin;
some of the less popular volumes have
not been re-issued, and the authors’
royalties have fallen off. When the
War is over and prices return to normal,
the prospects before the Australian
author and artist are very good, as the
market for their work is being main-
tained and developed in adverse con-
ditions by such firms as the Bookstall
Co.
11


Mr. Rowlandson spends some hundreds
of pounds per annum in fees to readers
of the manuscripts which come to him.
The authors are not charged anything
for the reading, and if the manuscript
has to be returned, it is generally ac-
companied by a note giving an expert
opinion upon its good and bad points.
In this respect alone he is rendering a
valuable service to the latent literary
talent of Australia.
In his younger days Mr. Rowlandson
was a good bicycle rider, and was a
member of the Naval Artillery, reaching
the rank of second-class petty officer.
Now he indulges in the quieter sports
of fishing, boating, motoring, and gar-
dening. Nearly all his time is devoted
to his business, in which he has the
satisfaction of feeling that he is doing
some good for the country in which he
was born, and which he loves very much.
THE INDUSTRIAL ASPECT OF THE BOOKSTALL
NOVEL.
Few people realise the ramifications of
a publishing enterprise of the magnitude
of that established by the late A. C.
Rowlandson. When a new novel appears
the public is directly brought into con-
tact with only the author and publisher,
but many others have played an import-
ant part in its production, and indirectly
numerous Australian industries have as-
sisted.
In addition to Australian authors,
from whom an average exceeding one
million words per annum is now ac-
cepted for this fiction library, and artists
and the N.S.W. Bookstall Company’s
own publishing, advertising and dis-
tributing staffs, regular work is provided
for Australian printers, who, in turn,
directly and indirectly provide employ-
ment for an army of workers. To feed,
clothe and provide amusement for those
workers, practically every trade and in-
dustry in the Commonwealth benefits.
When a novel is accepted, edited and
illustrated, the printer is called in, and
the work of reproducing the original
manuscript and drawings in attractive
and permanent form commences. Cover-
designs and illustrations pass through
the hands of photographers and etchers,
and are reproduced on metal plates ready
for printing; meanwhile, Compositors,
linotype operators, printers’ readers and
make-up hands are employed making a
faithful copy of the novel in metal in
the form in which it will be presented
to the public. Next comes the process of
printing, employing machinists and en-
gineers, and consuming large quantities
of papers and inks and electric power.
In the production of nearly five millions
of Bookstall novels already printed, ap-
proximately 650 tons of paper have been
used.
When printed and folded, the various
sheets which make up the volume are
collated, and wire-stitchers and sewers,
cutters and binders add the final touches
to the novel as it will appear before the
public.
In the processes of printing, the vari-
ous articles required indirectly afford
employment in mines and metal manu-
facturing industries, for power-suppliers,
glue-makers, and so on. Subsequently,
the completed novels pass through the
hands of distributors, providing work for
packers, transport workers and salesmen,
and, incidentally, adding considerably to
the postal revenue.
The rapid progress of the Australian
fiction-publishing business in recent
years has been of national importance
industrially as well as from a literary
12


point of view. It promises to become
still more important in future. The
N.S.W. Bookstall Co., Ltd., proposes to
develop on extensive lines the great
library of Australian fiction established
by its late managing-director, and an
active publishing programme has been
planned. Forty new novels are in pro-
cess of publication, and limited editions
on antique paper, bound in cloth, will in
future be a feature of the Series. By
still further improving the quality of
novels, presenting them in more attrac-
tive form, and by increasing the output,
the management of the N.S.W. Bookstall
Co., Ltd., will endeavour to provide the
most effective and lasting memorial to
its old Chief and the Commonwealth’s
pioneer publisher of fiction—the late
Alfred Cecil Rowlandson.
A. C ROWLANDSON: “GODFATHER OF THE
AUSTRALIAN NOVELIST;’
By S, W. POWELL.
If “The Bulletin” has been the god-
mother of the Australian poet and short-
story writer, Mr. A. C. Rowlandson may
well be called the god-father of the
Australian novelist, for certainly no one
in the Commonwealth has done so much
for the budding novelist as he. One
can say that without being fulsome, and
I think no one will deny it; least of all
those writers to whom the Bookstall
Series has given their chance, and who,
but for its existence, might never have
had their chance at all.
As to what the Bookstall Series has
accomplished, that is too big a subject
for me to tackle; that it has laid the
foundation of a distinct school of Aus-
tralian novelists there cannot, I think,
be any doubt; and it is, perhaps, not too
much to believe that, in future literary
histories of our country, this fact will be
fully recognised.
And what part did Mr. Rowlandson
himself play in this accomplishment?
I have called him the god-father of the
Australian novelist, and I can think of
no better term to describe what he has
done. He it was who inaugurated the
Series when all similar enterprises had
failed, and he kept it going through a
period, only recently passed by, when
most other publishers practically sus-
pended operations. He kept it going
for the reason that it had become the
chief work of his life, and because he
had faith in it. It was the task which
he had chosen whereby to leave his
mark upon Australia. He has left it —
for Australians who come after him to
read.
“THE BEST FRIEND OF THE AUSTRALIAN WRITER.”
By ROY BRIDGES.
He was putting on his coat; and he
told me he was rather in a hurry. He
said he was sorry, but he was going to
the races. He asked me to see him on
Monday, and we’d talk business.
He was the first publisher I’d ever
known, and he is pretty well the only
Australian publisher I’ve known since.
My first meeting with Mr. A. C. Row-
landson —on a Saturday, in March, 1909
—came from an introduction from Mr.
Ralph Asher, then managing-editor of
13


By CON
DREW.
I first met Mr. Rowlandson, or tfie
books, and books in the making—they
Chief as we ink dabblers called him,
flooded the office like an ocean of litera-
some eight or ten years ago. I had
ture. Surely, thought I, the whole
written a book. A BOOK mark you—
world must be writing books.
not the ordinary kind that your every-
“Will you call and see me in two
day author writes, but a book that was
weeks’ time?”
to take Australia by storm.
The words brought me back to myself,
But how to secure it proper produc-
and I rose to take his outstretched hand,
tion? That was the fly in the honey.
“For sure I will,” I said, elated.
Someone suggested the N.S.W. Book-
The whole wide world seemed full of
stall, and thither I went straightway.
melody.
At the end of a passage I came to a
A fortnight passed.
little office, and was ushered in to Mr.
“It will be quite all right,” said the
Rowlandson.
Chief kindly; “ but it is a little bit crude
He greeted me with a friendly smile
in places. May I make a few sug-
and waved me to a chair —the old cane
gestions?”
chair beside his desk in which so many
Then followed some sound advice
budding authors had sat before me.
which enabled me to strengthen the
“And so you have written a book!”
book sufficiently to ensure its public-
he said, when I had made my business
ation —advice which helped me greatly
known. “Would you please let me
in later years.
have a look at it?”
And it was ever the way with A. C.
He flinched not at the mass of well-
Rowlandson. Poet or artist, scribe or
thumbed manuscript I passed him, and
scribbler, they were always welcome to
as he glanced through the first few
a word of advice from him. And a word
pages, I looked around the little room.
of advice from A. C, Rowlandson was
My eyes fell upon a sea of books. Boys’
worth a library of books on how to
books, books of adventure, historical
14
write one.
‘ ‘ The Australian Star. ’ ’ Mr. Asher
was not the first editor to publish my
stuff; but he was the first to pay for it.
He had published in and syndicated
from the “Star” office a serial, “The
Barb of an Arrow”; this he offered
subsequently, for me, to Mr. Rowland-
son, who published it in the “Book-
stall” series. I’ve not had quite the
same feeling since for any yarn of mine
at first sight as I had for that—in its
red cover, with the design by Mr. Lionel
Lindsay. It meant a great deal to have
a yarn illustrated by one of the Lind-
says of “The Bulletin.” But it meant
more to get a chance of having stuff
published in book form; but for Mr.
Rowlandson and the Bookstall series,
I’d not have had the chance here. It’s
probably more a case for my particular
gratitude than anybody else’s; still, I’d
like to make the point that the case is
just one of a big list—the list of Aus-
tralian writers who would not have had
the chance otherwise of getting their
Australian yarns put in book form be-
fore their own folk.
My feeling of gratitude to Mr. A. C.
Rowlandson is deep and lasting. I
knew him for the best friend the Aus-
tralian writer has had; and over the
years since my first meeting with him,
I had the honour to count him as one
of the best of good personal friends.
A FIRST MEETING.


AN APPRECIATION.
By E. J. BRADY.
The profession of Letters in Aus-
tralia having claimed me as a victim
when youth and enthusiasm were step-
ping together in perfect rhythm, and
having survived “the bullets of time
and chance” long enough to reach the
reminiscent stage, I want to tell a little
story of A. C. Rowlandson.
I first met the managing-director of
the N.S.W. Bookstall Co. when I came
back to Sydney from Grafton, where I
had been conducting a bi-weekly journal-
istic stoush-mill called the “Grip.”
Mark Twain’s “Journalism in Ten-
nessee” was Sunday-school exercise to
the everyday life of that waspish little
Northern rag. Writs for libel were as
plentiful as the spikes on Scotch
thistles. Captured cowhides and pistols
formed part of the office furniture, and
threats of tar and feathers were fre-
quent.
After this strenuous period I was
minded to revive an old press and ad-
vertising agency in Sydney which that
brilliant but irresponsible young Aus-
tralian, the late W. B. Melville, had
left one fine morning to pursue elusive
fortune in South Africa.
Mr. Rowlandson handled some of my
small advertising and publishing efforts
while I carried on this business at 38
Elizabeth Street.
Shortly afterwards, he had started the
Bookstall series of Australian novels,
I clashed in the usual vociferous Irish
fashion with A. C. R. over another
matter, purely c®mmercial. It is pos-
sible that I may have been unnecessarily
clamorous in demanding his scalp for
my literary wigwam.
Anyhow, I bowled cheerfully into his
office one day on another business mis-
sion, He waved me courteously to a
chair, and I opened the matter in hand.
Gradually we drifted around to the con-
tentious subject, and I said:
“Did you see what I wrote on that
aspect of the question in the ‘Star’
about a fortnight ago?”
Rowlandson regarded me over the top
of his spectacles in a perfectly bland
and benevolent manner and replied:
“No, I did not, but I wouldn’t mind
reading what was written on your tomb-
stone!”
We laughed together.
I knew Rowlandson to be what he
was, a good-hearted, brave, kindly man,
who had risen from the ranks into the
Big Business of Australia, and had not
allowed himself to be soured by the
fierce competition of our social system.
From that hour I had a soft spot in
my heart for A. C. R. Not long after-
wards I sold him “Tom Pagdin” for his
Bookstall Series of Australian novels,
and it is my fault that he did not buy
more.
He stood among the few Australians
in the publishing world who have
backed their faith in Australian writing
brains with their cash, and won on the
combined merits of publisher and writer.
A. C, Rowlandson as a pioneer of
popular Australian literature, was one
of the few oases that Australian writers
have met in the Sahara they are still
painfully crossing to the Promised
Land!
15


TWENTY-ONE YEARS.
By J, H. M. ABBOTT.
Early in 1901 the writer, not long re-
turned from the South African War,
had just completed and despatched to
London the MS. of his first book, “Tom-
my Cornstalk,” and had received a
commission from the late Walter
Jeffery, then editor of the now defunct
“Town and Country Journal,” to wan-
der about Western New South Wales in
order to describe ‘ ‘ The Lay of the
Land” under the baleful sway of the
great drought that was then afflicting
Australia. Just before starting out on
his travels, his old friend, the late
John Arthur Barry, meeting him in
George Street, said:
“Come with me if you’ve got an
hour to spare. I want to introduce you
to a man worth knowing.”
So they took tram towards the rail-
way station, and in a tiny, littered
office behind a bookshop, situated close
beside the old Cyclorama of the Battle
of Gettysburg, the writer made the
acquaintance of A. C. Rowlandson.
It was not an impressive sort of
office—“A. C.” never fitted himself out
very sumptuously in this respect—ex-
cept in the evident indications that it
gave of being a place of hard work,
plenty of work, and pretty ceaseless
work. A fresh-complexioned, sanguine,
burly man sat at a desk that was hope-
lessly piled with a collection of
apparently chaotic documents and
papers that seemed to be strewn about
it anyhow.
With an impression of the extra-
ordinary neatness that characterised
Walter Jeffery’s work-table—where
there never seemed to lie anything but
a blotting-pad—one wondered how he
ever was able to find anything he might
want in that disorderly heap. The
needle and bundle of hay seemed an
apt comparison.
“Don’t worry about that,” said
Barry afterwards. “That chap's got
a card-index in Ms head, and nothing
in his business ever goes astray. You
take it from me, friend Rowlandson’s a
pretty wide-awake bird. He has no
barnacles growing on him,” he laughed.
“He’s the early bird, if ever there was
one. ’ ’
He asked us over to his home at
Mosman’s to dinner, and, with ripen-
ing acquaintance, one learned to like
and appreciate the genuineness and
goodness of this breezy, laughing,
robust and healthy Australian book-
seller, who was just beginning to turn
into a publisher. Whether he had then
brought out any books one does not
remember, but he was engaged in mak-
ing up ‘ ‘ The Commonwealth Annual, ’ ’
and commissioned the writer, very
liberally, to do a story for it about the
Boer War. That yarn, “The Church
Militant,” was the first bit of work he
did for the Bookstall Company. Since
then, at intervals, he has done ‘ * The
Sign of the Serpent,” and “Sally,”
and a volume of short stories, pre-
viously published in “The Bulletin,”
is at present in the printer’s hands.
In his time the writer has had oc-
casion to curse more than one publisher
—they are not, as a clan, very agree-
able people to have to do with, from
the author’s point of view—but he is
quite sure that he never wanted to
swear at Rowlandson. He never was a
pirate or a sweater, and his bare word
was always as reliable as the very im-
pressive and lengthy agreements which
he insisted upon inflicting upon the
generally unbusinesslike persons who
sold him novels and stories. There are
a large number of them on the list now,
but from several whom he knows per-
sonally —and he has little doubt as to
the others —the writer never heard any
opinion of “A. C.” but that one with
which he was in entire agreement—
“Ob, Rowlandson-he’s a good fellow!”
16


A.C.R/S PLEASANT AND PROMPT METHODS.
By “JACK NORTH.”
The newspaper man who fancies him-
self as a bit of a yarn-spinner is apt to
hit a deal of trouble when he seeks to
place the stuff.
After all, there isn’t a large market
for stories, short and long, and it’s a
devil of a long way between pubs —
that is, publishers. One MS. in its
time travels many weary miles ere it
comes to rest, usually in the gifted
author’s own battered desk.
For years and years and years I had
contributed lavishly to the postal
revenue by the despatch of various
fictional efforts to publishers of books
and magazines and newspapers. Here
and there at rare intervals the copy got
through the outer gates of the garrisons,
and remained there for the customary
sickening period which every right-
thinking journal imposes on contributors.
Then, in a social-cum-journalistie way,
I became acquainted with Mr. A. C.
Rowlandson, and was agreeably aston-
ished to find a cheerful human being
of ready sympathies and easy manners.
He always conveyed to me the im-
pression of being a man who, even in
the midst of a terifiic lot of work, had
time to burn. He was singularly unlike
the publisher of tradition, probably be-
cause he was not afraid to be courteous.
Tempted into the moving-picture field
by the offer of £5O through the Red
Page of the “Bulletin,” and my prize-
winning yarn having been converted
into the photo-pjay, “The Lure of the
Bush,” the notion occurred to me of
writing a novel that might readily be
pieturised. Outcome: “Harry Dale’s
Grand National,” -which, with some
trepidation, I took to A. C. R.
He didn’t fall on my neck, embrace
me, and hail me as the literary genius
of the Commonwealth. But he accepted
the MS. without noticeable shrinking,
promised attention from his reader,
offered me a smoke, chatted for a few
minutes, and eased me painlessly off the
premises.
A week later came the intimation that
the reader had approved. Two weeks
subsequently I called and signed various
documents. Then I carried away a
cheque for an amount which, in the
circumstances, was distinctly gratify-
ing.
Emboldened by this prompt and
pleasing experience, I sold Mr. Row-
landson “A Son of the Bush,” which
had appeared as a serial in the “World’s
News,” and a while later unloaded on
him another entitled “The Black Opal.”
Here’s the point of interest! When
A. C. R. accepted and paid for on the
nail the last two novels, he was already
loaded down below plimsoll with fiction
cargo. Yet he assumed that a news-
paper man needed the money. And he
was right, of course.
More grateful even than the business
relationships, which were of a highly
satisfactory nature, is the fact that
I found in Mr. Rowlandson a genu-
ine friend to the writers and artists,
one who had done what had lain in his
power to advance their interests by
boosting the works of the native-born.
He made no fortune out of them, but he
never hesitated to use the great re-
sources of his extensive distributing
business to advertise Australian literary
and artistic productions.
Those highbrow critics who affect to
despise the Bookstall Series, and dis-
miss each addition with a few satirical
observations, are of the school of
knockers who do nothing themselves for
Australia, and would discourage public
support of local writers. Any old mush
from England or America is given
lengthy, ofttimes fulsome notices. The
Australian is often damned with faint
praise.
17


A SHILLING FOR YOUR THOUGHTS.
By ERNEST O'FERRALL ("Kodak").
“I say, why don’t you publish your
stories in book form!”
Every Australian writer who has made
his name familiar to the reading public
through the weeklies and magazines has
that question shot at him regularly by
well-meaning acquaintances. (Friends,
having been initiated, know better.)
It is then the budding author’s pain-
ful duty to inform the enthusiastic
enquirer—after thanking him for his
interest —that (a) publishers of short
stories are hard to find, and (b) that
the reading public fight shy of books of
short stories. Personally, I prefer a
book of well-written short stories to a
long novel; but that may be because
I am more interested from the writer’s
point of view; the people who read
purely for relaxation ask for long
books; so I find writer friends expand-
ing what could be said in a compact
short story into a long novel. It seems
bad art, but writers must live. And
now let me anticipate a brickbat that
lies ready to the hand of any critic.
“Well, old man, there is a fairly good
sale for O. Henry’s yarns. Write up
to his level and they’ll buy you.” Of
course, they will. In the language of
the movie director, the local writer then
“registers humility” and subsides.
I began to think I would never get
between covers. But about two years
ago, my friend, the late Bertram
Stevens, anthologist and critic, added
one more kindly deed to his long list
and brought a collection of my lodger
yarns under the notice of the subject
of this memorial book. The result was
a fair-sized cheque for me one Christmas
Eve and “Bodger and the Boarders”
in the famous Bookstall series. The
book reviewers generally were very
kind, and at last I had something where-
with to silence the enthusiastic soul
who called for a book of mine.
At least one copy of “Bodger” was
gloriously bound. By way of acknow-
ledgment to Stevens, I got art book-
binder Wal Taylor to attire the old
senior boarder in gold-tooled leather and
enclosed a letter making dear old Bert
the book’s literary godfather, as indeed
he was. It makes me happy to remem-
ber that the little compliment was very
much appreciated. And now godfather
and publisher have both passed! “Into
the night go one and all.”
I had not the privilege of knowing
the late A. C. Rowlandson intimately;
I met him on only a few occasions; but
I shall always carry a mental picture
of a big, kindly, shirt-sleeved man in
a small office most amazingly littered
with books. Years of journalism have
innured me to overcrowded, paper-lit-
tered offices; but the state of Rowland-
son’s office when I saw it —the snow-
drifts and landslides of books —held me
spellbound. It was as if there had been
an eruption of literature. And he sat
enthroned amid the miniature Alpine
scenery of bound print and manuscripts
asking for more! It was heroic.
I mourn his untimely death and ap-
plaud his ideal of a readable book at
a shilling. It appeals to me as a book-
lover forced by high prices to do most
of my hunting along the secondhand
shelves and amongst the cheap reprints.
By all means let us have books of our
own—paper-covered books —books at a
bob! It suits me both as writer and
reader. I don’t want to approach my
fellow-Australians via London. (Inci-
dentally, I’ve never attempted the feat.)
If I want to see the man next door I
don’t travel by way of Fleet-street.
Why should I be forced to do so on
paper? No, looking at it as impartially
as I can, I like the local, paper-covered
shillingsworth. If I can buy a handful
of fun like “On Our Selection” or “A
18


Curate in Bohemia” for a bob, I am
delighted and feel that I can freely
bestow a copy on any friend who needs
cheering up, knowing that for another
bob I can buy a fresh copy for myself
when I wish to read the jolly work
again, as assuredly I will. As for my
own book, if a reader thinks I have
taken him down, why the thing only
cost him the price of two shaves and
there’s no great harm done. The high-
priced book misses a great public which
the cheap book catches. A. C. Eowland-
son, with the sure instinct of the keen
business man, brought a big range of
Australian authors within reach of the
hurrying crowds. It was a considerable
service for which he deserves credit.
Though I knew A.C.E. only slightly,
I liked and respected him. But I do
know very well a man who worked with
him for years, and he always spoke with
affection of the Bookstall Co.’s vanished
chief. The stress and strain of work
will always reveal a man’s real charac-
ter; so the leader who goes to his long
rest with the affection of his work-
mates must have been a jolly good
fellow, I am sure A.C.E. was.
THE INKY WAY.
By EDWARD S. SORENSON.
Long ago Henry Kendall wrote of
the lot austere
That waits upon the man of letters here.
Our literary world was young then;
but most of us who journeyed along
the inky way in later times found it
anything but smooth going. Some
other job had nearly always to help the
pen to earn the basic wage. Until 20
years ago, when I struck firmly and
finally against all bosses, and deter-
mined to dip the basic sustenance ex-
clusively from the ink bottle, I brought
all sorts of jobs to the nib’s assistance.
None of them was a sinecure, and there
was no 44-hours week about them either.
At various times I was employed as
stockman, dairyman, farmer, engine-
driver, painter and paper-hanger, car-
penter and builder, squattage hand,
cook, rouseabout and shearer, wool-
presser, wool-elasser, handyman, boun-
dary-rider, shepherd and drover. The
day’s work was day-long, which left
only a tired feeling for the recreation
of pushing the pen in the evening;
while much of Sunday was devoted to
washing colthes, half-soling boots, and
sewing on buttons and patches.
On the droving track there was no
evening, for a night watch of two or
three hours was added to the long
stretch from dawn to dusk. Still, many
a page was pencilled on the lazy rides
behind the cattle. As back-block pub-
lican and jockey club secretary, there
was time to marry the hero and heroine
between races, and to murder the villain
between drinks. Shepherding permitted
scribbling spasms under trees, providing
the dingoes kept away; prospecting and
digging afforded changes from pick to
pen; and boundary-riding was associ-
ated with eternal peace.
I had the scribbling itch that wouldn’t
be denied. Even though my manu-
scripts were come-back boomerangs, it
persisted. I wrote in the saddle, in
cart and shanghai, and in the mail-
coach; I scratched notes on the side
of a blackened billy while trudging
along a Queensland track with bluey.
But I used most ink at night, after
working at the main job all day, in
tents and huts, by the light of a slush
lamp or a flickering candle. My first
printed “Bulletin” par was written
alongside a camp-fire on the bank of
the Warrego River.
When I chucked all tools of trade for
19


the one I could carry behind my ear,
I found I had left some pleasant jobs
to chop wood —and it was wood that
gapped the axe and broke the handle
pretty often. When the output found
an intake, the experience I had gained
in a wide bush school was valuable.
The young author to-day has more
encouragement to dig into local fiction,
and better prospects of immediate re-
ward. In A. C. Rowlandson’s Book-
stall series there is a welcome market
for all good work. The firm has
pioneered a field that must grow as
the population grows, and its benefit to
the country is measured by the rude
bump it gives to the importing fetish
and the lift to our national ideals. Its
literature is everything to a nation, and
the patriotism of publishers is every-
thing to the makers of that literature
when the country is still young.
I first met A. C. Rowlandson over 20
years ago. I had some business trans-
actions with him that helped me to
keep the landlord off the doorstep, I
hated landlords; but I could love a
publisher who had a cheque for me now
and again. But whether the Boss of
the Bookstalls had or not, he always
had a smile and a friendly hand for
Tom, Dick and Harry. In the long
period that I have known him I have
always found him a white man.
I believe that nearly four million
copies of the Bookstall series have been
sold, an achievement that is just as
gratifying to the true-blue Australian
citizen as to the publisher. Apart from
the important encouragement to an in-
dustry that has been severely handi-
capped, it demonstrates that Australian
readers are eager for a literature of
their own. They want the Australian
outlook, the Australian sentiment; the
sunny spirits of her roving sons and
merry daughters. Humour bubbles out
everywhere in this happy clime, especi-
ally in the freer life of the open that
is experienced in all the inland parts.
The bushman is given to yarn-spinning,
and though he occasionally bends to
the tragic, he is never so much at home
as when telling something that has a
laugh in it. He can joke in the most
tragical circumstances. It is a good
quality, and it is spontaneous and natural.
Australia is already rich in literary
talent, and with the growth of the pub-
lishing business, the national literature
will develop and assert itself all over
our laughing land.
DEEDS THAT LIVE.
By BRODA REYNOLDS.
Limitless and continual though we
believe all life to be, we yet find its in-
dividual visible duration here too brief.
Men come; they tarry a little while, and
they go; even men of genius, of person-
ality, of mental force. Those who find
themselves in possession of a read|y-
made business and carry it to a still
more successful issue are, of course,
worthy enough citizens, but the man who
has the strength and courage to branch
out into a new, and hitherto unknown
line, climbing all difficulties, laughing in
the face of every adverse criticism, and
eventually reaching the very topmost
pinnacle of his ambition, is the man who
wins our attention and our unstinted
admiration. Under this category comes
the late A. C. Rowlandson, pioneer pub-
lisher and founder of the Australian
series of Bookstall books.
Many of us whose works, great or
small, adorn the library shelves to-day,
would never have seen the light were it
not for the kindly encouragement of this
man of giant brain himself. I am proud
to be able to say that I claimed a per-
sonal acquaintance with the late Mr.
Rowlandson—an acquaintance which gave
me an insight into his many splendid
20


characteristics. A man of strong tem-
perament, of unshakable will-power, of
lion-like determination, he was yet as
easily touched by the sight of human
suffering as might be the gentlest of
women. His sympathy was quick and of
the right kind. I don’t believe anyone
ever went to Mr. Rowlandson on a
mission of charity who did not see his
hand go to his pocket immediately. But,
it was, perhaps, his genial smile, his
bright word of hope that endeared him
most of all to the Australian artist and
author. I remember well my first inter-
view Avith him, when I approached him
to try and find out if there was a pos-
sible chance of getting my literary effort
even looked at, I having been given to
understand by those who had been
through the mill themselves that the
string was seldom, if ever, taken off an
unknown MB. Of course, like most be-
ginners, I entered the office in fear and
trembling, the disheartening “never un-
tied string” tidings painfully before me,
and quite prepared to hear the remark,
“No, we are not considering anything
further just at present.” The fact that
I was not only cordially received, but in-
vited to sit down, came as a shock to me.
Why had people invented such wicked
falsehoods about publishers and their
brusque business manners ? Here was
one, not alone courteous and smiling
that rare smile which at once gives you
confidence in yourself, but with time and
patience to listen while you explained
your visit, and even said something
about your work. Two minutes’ chat,
and I not only felt my nervousness van-
ish, but had caught an almost dazzling
glimmer from that hitherto dim and far
off star of hope, for I had been asked to
bring along my story and was given to
understand that if it possessed merit and
had the right atmosphere, it would cer-
tainly be published. That was most
pleasing; my foot was on the first rung
of the ladder, and when some time later
one of my books proved what the pub-
lisliex* himself called a good-seller, he
voluntarily sent me a cheque for a fur-
ther amount, notwithstanding the fact
that the MS. had been purchased out-
right in the beginning.
Such justness and generosity make it
abundantly clear that it was not on the
stepping-stones of others losses that Mr.
Rowlandson reached such colossal heights
of success himself, but by his live-and-let-
live principle, his earnest endeavour, his
indomitable commercial abilityj. I
recollect one day while chatting on the
phenomenon of money-making and of
enterprise, Mr. Rowlandson ran over a
brief sketch of his own start in life, and
looking at me in his straight and levelled
way, he said: “You never want to allow
small difficulties to assume formidable
shapes. Do you know, failure is a word
I have never tried to understand; I did
not even want to know how to spell it;
success was all I ever saw, and the
letters stood out so big and bright that
they obliterated the others.”
Quite apart from his wonderful mental
force, Mr. Rowlandson was at no period
of his all too brief career the man who
was always going to do kindly deeds.
He DID them.
The world is in urgent need of men of
this class—men who, while confident of
their own ability to break down barriers,
and to climb over every obstacle, can
still fling back a thought to others—hold
out a helping hand to the less fortunate.
It is a matter for deep regret that one of
such sterling worth as was the founder of
the N.S.W. Bookstall’s novels, should be
taken while still in his prime. Though,
who knows; he might to-day be carrying
on a higher and still more helpful work
in that beautiful Kingdom to which he
is called. Though gone from our gaze,
we know that he will live for long years
in the memory of his many friends and
admirers—admirers, who through deeds
that cannot die, must sing his praise in
silent prayer if not in audible song.
21


“REAL. TRUE-TO-LABEL AUSTRALIAN.”
By ARTHUR WRIGHT, who tops the score in the Bookstall Series with eighteen novels.
Amongst the real, true-to-label Aus-
tralians with whom I have had business
dealings, A. 0. Rowlandson easily holds
pride of place. He has, indeed, achieved
something. From very small beginnings
he built up a huge business, whose rami-
fications extend throughout the length
and breadth of his native land. From
one modest stall, the business which bears
the title of the N.S.W. Bookstall Coy.,
has grown until to-day there is no rail-
way station or ferry wharf of import-
ance which is without a branch of the
parent tree. Having toiled for a number
of years to achieve success, the chief—
affectionately known to his staff and
friends as A.C.R. —surveyed the result
of his labours. He was supplying his
fellow-citizens with the literature of the
world. On each of his stalls was dis-
played row upon row of imported books,
magazines and newspapers. Every ship
from overseas added to his stock, and
every class of reader found to his hand
the particular description of food in
which his brain delighted. But what of
Australia ?
A.C.R. saw that something was miss-
ing. His native country was without
representation, and he held the opinion
that there were Australian writers and
artists who were quite capable of cater-
ing for the tastes of their fellow Aust-
ralians, and he was game to back his
opinion with solid cash.
To an Australian who had made a
name as a writer, he paid a hitherto un-
heard of price for books, and from that
beginning he formed the nucleus of a
series of books written and illustrated
by Australians, which to-day has a cir-
culation throughout the Commonwealth
and New Zealand running into millions.
No longer are the bookstalls devoid of
Australian literature. The Bookstall
series is well to the front, and the re-
sponse of the public proves that its
founder’s faith was justified.
MEMORIES.
By A. R. FALK.
Memories! Those mind pictures of
yesterday! Who would not be without
them? I have many, yet, at this time,
one stands pre-eminently out from all
the others, and leaves them obscured as
in a mist.
Seated in the passage-way, awaiting
my turn, I stared with perplexing doubt
at a door bearing the name in big letters
—A. 0. ROWLANDSON.
Who was this man who had in his
hands the devastating power of raising
me into the Elysium fields of delight or
hurling me down into the depths of des-
pair by his acceptance or refusal of my
first book? In my apprehensiveness I
pictured him square-jawed, thin-lipped,
and with well outlined features —an auto-
crat, a potentate of potentates, stringent,
relentless, and inexorable.
Then suddenly I became aware of the
fact that my eyes had wandered from
that door, behind which lay my fate,
and were fixed upon a yellow card,
directly opposite me, bearing the title,
“Horse Sense.” This I had been reading
and re-reading with monotonous uncon-
sciousness, until phrases from it had
stamped themselves upon my mind. “.. ..
I would work for him all my time.. ..
Then resign your position.... Don’t for-
get, T forgot’ won’t do in business.”
22


As I repeated, almost subconsciously,
these and other phrases from the card,
my nervousness increased, my fears
deepened, and my imaginary autocrat
became now a potent reality.
Then the door opened, and a man
came forth, and —wonder of wonders—-
he was smiling. I watched this, I could
almost say annus mirabilis in wonder
and amazement, until he passed me by.
Then rising slowly, I walked to the door
and timidly knocked upon it.
“Come in.”
The cheerfulness of the tone in which
these two words were uttered staggered
me, and for an instant I stood hesitat-
ingly in the doorway. Then I entered,
and lo! all my fears and nervousness
were gone, eradicated completely by an
overwhelming personality of amiability
and bon natural. A few moments later
I was chatting with this “autocrat” as
I would with an acquaintance of many
years’ standing.
As I left the office, buoyed up with
the succeses of my first attempt, and
wandered up George Street, my mind
seemed to revert back to what I had read
of Captain Cook and his voyage of dis-
covery. And then my imagination took
complete possession of me.
I could see myself on board a ship at
sea. The ocean through which our boat
ploughed its way went by many names,
a few of which were: —Averse Criticism,
Prejudication, and Dogmatism. The
vessel’s name was “Australian Litera-
ture,” and its destination, the Island of
Impregnability.
Around about me were the crew, and a
thrill ran through my body as I realised
that I, too, was one of them; that they
were my “mates,” and I theirs.
High up on the bridge I could see the
“Old Man,” his two hands on the steer-
ing wheel and his face lighted up with
the confidence of ultimate success.
“Eight bells, and all’s well.”
“All’s well,” I echoed, and again my
senses tingled as I watched that figure
on the bridge, the “Grand Old Man,”
the Captain of Australian Literature.
And now . Now the ship lays safe
in its moorings; its trip accomplished;
its destination reached. But, alas! the
hand, the master hand, that guided it
through its difficulties and perils, is no
more. With his life’s task achieved,
and leaving behind him an enviable and
unobliterable record in Australian hist-
ory, the Captain, the “Grand Old Man”
has answered the last call.
HARRY JULIUS,
Artist and Caricaturist, and partner in
Smith d Julius, Illustrators and
Designers.
Sydney Ure Smith and I, while work-
ing as students, were generously given
opportunities to blossom forth as black-
and-white illustrators by Mr. A. C. Row-
landson. Together we illustrated Steele
Rudd’s “Poor Parson” for the Bookstall
Series, and after the lapse of years, we
realise that Mr. Rowlandson was cour-
ageous to place the illustration of an
important book in two little-known
students’ hands. A few years after this
he issued a volume of my Theatrical
Caricatures, with a number of Stories
by Claude McKay. Sydney Ure Smith
and I found Mr. Rowlandson always
ready to give the value of his experience
freely, and he showed excellent judgment
in his advice. He was always interested
in helping an Australian publication,
and his co-operation with the “Art in
Australia” publications was valuable.
While launching “The Home,” the Aus-
tralian Quarterly Magazine, Sydney Ure
Smith and the late Bertram Stevens
were grateful for the help Mr. Rowland-
son gave them in putting this magazine
23


oefore the public. Our publishing world
has lost a big Australian, whose repu-
tation for honesty and geniality will
live long among the writers and artists
of this country.
ARTHUR H. DAYIS (“Steele Rudd”)
in “The Theatre Magazine
I look upon Mr. Rowlandson as the
pioneer publisher of Australian litera-
ture. He has been extremely kind to
Australian writers, and can always be
relied upon to give you a square deal.
“J. H. M. A.,”
in the Sydney “Bulletin.”
When Alfred Cecil Rowlandson went
Avest at Wellington (M.L.) recently,
Australian Avriters lost a good friend
Avho did much to improve the somewhat
precarious position in Avhich he found
them at the outset of his career as a pub-
lisher, a little less than a quarter of a
century ago. The remarkable success of
his business shoAvs him to have been
aboA r e all else a business man, but, be-
side that, he was a good Australian with
an enthusiastic belief in Australians’
work for Australian readers. With the
large distributing power that his many
stalls on wharves and railway stations
gave him, as avgll as his numerous book-
shops in and about Sydney, he might
just as easily, and perhaps more profit-
ably, have specialised in cheap reprints
of syndicated English and American stuff
as in novels and short stories by men and
women of his OAvn country. He might
have folloAved the lead that most Aus-
tralian dailies and Aveeklies had given
him in the selection of their serials. It
Avould haA r e been cheaper to have bought
the Australian rights of Charles Garvice,
Elinor Glyn, or some of the American
coAvboy and sob experts, than to have
paid fairly decent prices for work by
local authors. But none of the latter
who had dealings with “A.C.” ever failed
to recognise that, though he Avanted to
make money for his firm, he was never-
theless largely actuated in his publish-
ing ventures by a generous consideration
of their interests as well as his own. He
was Australian to the backbone, and his
personal pride in having done something
for Australian literature was unmistak-
able. He pinned his faith to the paper-
covered shilling edition printed on “news-
print,” and it was almost a grief to him
when the scarcity and high cost of the
latter compelled him temporarily to
raise the price of his little volumes by
threepence.
Personally, Rowlandson was a manly,
generous, lovable kind of human being,
of a cheery and healthy temperament
that made him popular with everyone he
met. Of nearly 100 writers whom he
published in his Bookstall Library, it is
quite safe to say that there was not one
of whom he made an enemy—a strange
thing, indeed, to say of a publisher.
C. T. CLARKE,
Manager of Edwards Dunlop d Co., Ltd.,
distributors of Bookstall Novels.
Though it is very many years since, I
remember clearly the first occasion when
I met our friend, and the impression he
created by his attractive personality,
kindliness and geniality. Scarcely in my
experience can I recall any one who at a
first meeting impressed me more favour-
ably, and those who knew him well will
hardly need to be told that more in-
timate acquaintance did not lessen that
favourable impression, but deepened it.
The charming qualities Avhich charac-
terised him as a friend in no way ham-
pered him in his business operations.
Still displaying those qualities, and
thereby securing the good-Avill and con-
fidence of those with Avhom he was deal-
ing, he added to them shrewdness, sound
judgment, and tactfulness. Success Avas
rapidly achieved. His initiative, courage,
energy and industry combined to develop
what he took over as a comparatively
24


small concern, with practically only one
objective, into a large and prosperous
business with numerous ramifications —
a business, moreover, which incidentally
rendered very great service to Australian
literature.
MRS. M. FORREST,
in Brisbane “Daily Mail.”
It was with regret I saw in the papers
the news of the death of my old friend,
Mr. A. C. Rowlandson, of the N.S.W.
Bookstall. I remember, 10 years ago,
what a bright and breezy person he was;
how he used to entertain me with tales
of his children, of whom he was passion-
ately fond. He once asked me to send
some verses I had written for “The Aus-
tralasian,” to his wife, because they had
lost a little baby, and he described to me,
with tears, the fair curly hair and blue
eyes of the infant.
In his small room, up some steep stairs
above the N.S.W. Bookstall shop, in
George Street, Sydney, he was always
busy, but always approachable. One sat
on a brown form in the passage outside,
while one could hear his jolly voice going
on inside, and when the visitor retreated
—and one glared at him in passing,
wondering if he, too, be an anxious
author —one seized the opportunity given
of darting into the room beyond. Mr.
Rowlandson was then a fresh-coloured,
healthy-looking man, with shrewd eyes
and a fair waxed moustache. When I
saw him last, three or four years ago, he
had considerably changed; though still
comparatively young he was suffering
from a serious heart-trouble, and had
been seeking strength in vain. In his
youth he had worked very hard, and was
possibly paying the penalty of over-
driving himself. He used to tell me of
his rise from eleven shillings a week as
a boy in Webster’s to his present secure
financial position.
He bought my first novel from me, and
as well as the cheque, presented me with
a fountain pen and a copy of Gordon’s
poems. He did much, in his particular
line, for Australian writers.
All spoke well of Rowlandson, though
they dubbed him a keen business man.
He was absolutely natural in his manner;
he had none of the pomposity we are
apt to associate with men who have risen
to be a power in the world by making
money. He catered principally for one
class of readers —said he did not want
literature as much as the books the man
in the street would read. Indeed, I
know, on more than one occasion he
turned down MS. with the frank remark:
“Too good for us!”
A good business man, he was not
“sharp” in the accepted commercial
meaning of the term. There was one
thing no man could say of him, and that
was that he did not give “a straight
deal.”
In the words of Henley—“He faced his
foes, and he backed his friends.”
What better epitaph than this?
A. G. STEPHENS,
in the “Sydney Morning Herald,”
June 29, 1922.
The early death of Mr. A. C. Rowland-
son brings more than commonplace re-
gret. He played a part in Australian
progress; he made our small world a
little better than he found it. He was
but a few years past 50; and he was
born to live to 70. He died before his
work was finished.
He stood for a long time at the head
of a large business, which he directed
well. In his field as bookseller and pub-
lisher, the loss of his warm personality
is felt keenly. He had a good head, but
a better heart, and his heart made the
little kindly difference which leaves
many people sorrowful. When he acted
wrongly he knew it, and tried to react
rightly. His nature was good.
He controlled more than a hundred
workers, many with long years of ser-
25


vice, in a harmony honourable to him
and them. Some of these miss him with
the grief that pulls the heart-strings
tight; he was the best man they knew.
Much courage and enthusiasm went to
his publication of four million shilling
books for a hundred and fifty Aus-
tralian and New Zealand authors. He
made mistakes, and pushed past them
to success. No one has rivalled him in
his own field —the Bookstall enterprise
is unique in this country. The homely
human taste of the publisher met the
taste of plain people, our majority.
Years ago he told me: '‘You know,
old chap, my little boy got into bed
with me this morning, and he curled his
little legs around me, and he hugged me
tight as ever he could, and he said to
me, ‘Oh, I do love you, dad.’ That’s
the sort of thing makes life worth
living. I say that’s the sort of thing
makes life worth living.”
That was the keynote of A. 0. Row-
landson.
SYDNEY “WORKER.”
Forty years ago, when he was a mere
lad of 17, Mr. Rowlandson was connected
with the book trade. From a ticket-
selling job in the stall, he rose to run
the business, and as soon as he got con-
trol of the reins he started to do big
things. One of his greatest triumphs,
and, at the same time, one of the biggest
benefits to local literary talent, was his
establishment of the shilling novel trade.
These shilling books have enjoyed an
enormous popularity, and new volumes
are still being issued with the regularity
of clockwork. Some of the writers taken
up by A.C.R. have since capitalised their
“bob” start, and made oversea repu-
tations. Rowlandson, by instinct and
practice, was a tremendous live-wire
hustler, and probably his business inten-
sity contributed to his all too early death
—a death which will grieve hundreds of
thousands who enjoyed cheap local fie-
tion, of exceptional merit as a result of
his enterprise, and by scores of young
writers who never would have been heard
of only for his faith in local literary
products, his kindly and sympathetic
disposition, and his never-resting deter-
mination to give Australian literature a
show.
TOM L. MILLS,
in the Fielding “Star” (N.Z.).
There passed away in Wellington the
other day, wholly unexpectedly, an Aus-
tralian whose name is written larger
over the Commonwealth than even that
of any public man—and yet he came into
and passed out of our Dominion without
any of the recognition usually given to
distinguished visitors. We refer to Mr.
A. C. Rowlandson, of Sydney. Perhaps
he was not boomed in our Empire City
because the big Sydneysider was not in
the habit of booming himself. Yet his
N.S.W. Bookstall publications, of which
he was the creator, are popular and
amongst the best sellers in all the
six States, even unto New Zealand.
Probably it was because the George Street
bookseller was the Publisher for the
People, and not for the exclusive reading
classes, that he passed away unhonoured
and unsung. Excepting the Sydney
“Bulletin,” no institution has done more
than Mr. Rowlandson and his house to
keep the pot boiling and the home fires
burning for the promising literary talent
of Australia. For Mr. Rowlandson paid
a good price—and paid on acceptance of
the MS.
SYDNEY “MAIL.”
The late A. 0. Rowlandson, of N.S.W.
Bookstall Co., was once an employee in
the business of which he became the
owner. He gave an opportunity to many
an Australian writer to publish stories
of a class for which there was little
scope otherwise, in the shilling novels
that were issued during his lifetime.
26


THE SYDNEY “BULLETIN,”
January 26 th, 1911.
A. C. Rowlandson, known in commerce
as The N.S.W. Bookstall Co., has knocked
the two sides and bottom out of the idea
that a book must be imported to sell in
Australia. A brief time ago he com-
menced publishing Australian books, by
Australian writers, and already has sold
over half a million copies. With such
a proved demand he plunges deeper, and
is now snapping up good work right and
left. The early part of this year will
see the publication of new books by Steele
Rudd, T. E. Spencer, Randolph Bedford,
E. J. Brady, Ambrose Pratt, Arthur'
Wright, and Edward Dyson, and a num-
ber of other interesting though less
known writers. The discovery of this
market has changed the look of things
for the Australian author. He formerly
had to send his work to London and take
what he got (which was usually noth-
ing). Now he can deal direct with the
publisher and get prompt settlement and
quick returns. The result is that the
Australian writer finds that it pays bet-
ter to publish in Australia than in Lon-
don—which is good for Australia as well
as for the author.
“BOOKIES.”
By George A. Taylor.
In this great land of racing dates.
Bookmakers —there are many.
And when they’re betting on the weights
They take few risks—if any.
But other bookmakers, who lead
In winning admiration.
Are those who make books fit to read;
Hence help to build our nation.
And there’s a chap of whom we’re proud;
He made books we were needing,
Yet he took risks, because the crowd
Might not take on their reading.
Between him and the other chaps
The diff’rence is notorious;
So Rowlandson deserves some claps;
The books he made are glorious.
Long live the books that he brought out.
Of them no fellow wearies;
So cheer my friends with mighty shout,
“The famous ‘Bookstall’ Series.”
27


BOOKSTALL AUTHORS AND THEIR BOOKS.
STEELE EUDD (ARTHUR H. DAVIS)
Author of
On Our Selection.
Our New Selection.
Stocking Our Selection.
From Selection to City.
Back at Our Selection.
Dad in Politics.
Sandy’s Selection.
The Book of Dan.
Grandpa’s Selection.
The Old Homestead.
Memoirs of Corporal Keoley.
The Poor Parson.
Duncan McClure.
On an Australian Farm.
The Dashwoods.
For Life.
Arthur Hoey Davis, the most popular
of Australian humorous writers, was
born at Drayton, Darling Downs, Queens-
land, November 14, 1868. After some
years spent in the bush, in shearing-
sheds and as stockrider, in 1889 he
joined the staff of the Curator of
Intestate Estates, in Brisbane, and be-
came Under-Sheriff. He wrote for local
papers and for the Sydney “Bulletin,”
and won immediate success with his
“On Our Selection” series of stories.
Collections of his early Selection stories
were published first by “The Bulletin”
Newspaper Co., Ltd., and were later
transferred to the N.S.W. Bookstall Co.,
Ltd. His humorous books of bush life
have had a remarkable sale and continue
in demand. Several of his books have
been very successfuly dramatised and
reproduced for the moving pictures.
AMBROSE PRATT,
Author of
Three Years with Thunderbolt.
Dan Kelly—Outlaw.
The Golden Kangaroo.
The Outlaws of Weddin Range.
Wolarol’s Cup.
Ambrose Pratt was born iix the year
1874, at Forbes, on the Lachlan River,
New South Wales. He began writing
at an early age, and a good deal of
prose and verse from Ms pen saw pub-
lication in the Sydney “ Bulletin”
while he was still in his teens. He was
educated for the law and practised as
a solicitor for several years in New
South Wales before definitely adapting
the literary profession. His first book,
“King of the Rocks,” was published
in 1897 by Messrs. Hutchinson & Co.,
of Loudon. The fact that at that time
it was all but impossible to get an Aus-
tralian novel published in this country
induced him to go abroad, and for a
time he settled in England, where many
of his earlier novels were printed. Re-
turning to Australia some years latex’,
Ambrose Pratt found that his old friend,
Mr. A. C. Rowlandson “had had the
courage and enterprise” to become a
publisher of the work of Australian
winters, and shortly afterwards the New
South Wales Bookstall Co. issued
“Three Years with Thunderbolt,” the
first of a series of purely Australian
novels written specially for Mr. Row-
landson, all of which have had large
sales in the Commonwealth. In the
year 1906, Ambrose Pratt joined the
editorial staff of the Melbourne “Age,”
where he remained until 1918, when he
acquired an interest in the ‘ ‘ Industrial
Australian and Mining Standard” and
joined that paper as its Managing-
Editor.
All told, Ambrose Pratt has published
32 works, many of which have been
simultaneously published in England,
America, and the Commonwealth, and
translated into many foreign languages.
‘ ‘ Throughout the whole of my literary
career,” Ambrose Pratt writes, “I have
enjoyed the personal friendship of Mr.
A. C. Rowlandson, and I welcome this
opportunity to express my very grateful
acknowledgment of the splendid services
which the New South Wales Bookstall
Co. has rendered not only to me but to
all the writers of Australia.”
28


ARTHUR WRIGHT,
Author of
Keane of Kalgoorlie.
Gamblers’ Gold.
A Game of Chance.
A Rogue’s Luck.
A Rough Passage.
The Boss o’ Yedden.
In the Last Stride.
Over the Odds.
Rung in.
The Breed Holds Good.
The Outlaw’s Daughter.
Under a Cloud.
When Nuggets Glistened.
Fettered by Fate.
The Sport from Holiowlog Flat.
A Colt from the Country.
A Close Call.
The Boy from Buliarah.
Altogether, Mr. Wright has contri-
buted eighteen novels to the Bookstall
series.
“It was away back in 1908,” he
recalls, “when I first approached
‘A. C. R. ’ with the MS. of a story. It
was not my first effort. I had been
dabbling in the inky way for some time,
having had yarns published by ‘ The
Sunday Times,’ ‘The Bulletin,’ and
several other papers. I have to thank
Mr. Thos. Roydhouse, who, for so long
held the position of Editor-in-chief of
the ‘Sunday Times,’ ‘Referee,’ and
‘Arrow,’ for putting me into print as
the author of a long story. Having
published a few of my stories, which
contained a sporting element, he one
day suggested that I should try my
hand at writing a serial for the
‘Referee,’ a journal, by the way, which
had the honour of publishing the first
Nat Gould novel. I took on the job,
and the result, ‘Keane of Kalgoorlie,’
was duly accepted and ran through the
columns of the popular sporting paper.
Later the ‘Sunday Times’ people pub-
lished it in book form, and it was also
dramatised, and picturised, with, I
might state, but little financial benefit
to the author.
*‘ It was my next attempt which I
submitted to Mr. Rowlandson, now
launched as an Australian publisher.
This was a sensational tale of the turf,
which I named ‘A Rogue’s Luck.’ So
commenced an association which still
continues, and which I for one can look
back on with feelings of the greatest
of pleasure and satisfaction.
“ ‘ Gamblers’ Gold’ quickly followed
the first book, and proved a good seller.
This story also was put into celluloid,
and a few years ago a racehorse
appeared bearing the name of my book,
a circumstance which the writer has
had cause to regret, for, alas, the name
tempted him to speculate, and the horse
proved what the book has not —a failure.
The next time a racehorse flaunts the
title of one of my books, he will have
to be a very Beauford before he carries
my modest investment.
‘ ‘ Because I write novels, in which the
racecourse plays a part, I have been
dubbed the Australian Nat Gould, but
apart from the fact that we both intro-
duce horse into our stories, I fail to see
any great similarity in our stories. I
have written novels which have had
nothing to do with the turf, but my
friend A. C. R. preferred that I should
not stray far from the racetrack, so I
wandered back again.”
ROY BRIDGES,
Author of
On His Majesty’s Service.
The Fenceless Ranges.
Mr. Barrington.
The Barb of an Arrow,
By His Excellency’s Command.
The Stony Heights.
Haunts of Fear.
Cards of Fortune.
Mystery of the Cliff.
By Mountain Tracks.
Mr. Bridges is a prominent Melbourne
journalist who has had considerable
success as an author both in Australia
and England. Two long novels are at
29


present being published in London, and
one, an adventure novel, will be issued
simultaneously in New York. In another
section of this volume Mr. Bridges ac-
knowledges the assistance which Mr.
Rowlandson gave him early in his career
as an author.
His novels published in England, in-
clude: “The Fugitive,” “The Fires of
Hate,” “The Bubble Moon,” “Dead Men’s
Gold,” “The Immortal Dawn,” “Merchan-
dise,” and “The Black House.” In 1920
he published a big historical work, “From
Silver to Steel,” the romance of the
Broken Hill Proprietary Company. Mr.
Bridges was born in Hobart, March 23,
1885.
EDWARD DYSON,
Author of
Fact’ry ’Ands.
The Missing Link.
Spats’ Factory.
Tommy the Hawker and Snifter his
Benno and Some of the Push.
Loves of Lancelot.
The Grey Goose Comedy Co.
Edward Dyson is one of the best-
known names in Australian journalism.
For many years he has been a regular
contributor of stories, verse, articles and
paragraphic matter to numerous Austra-
lian papers. No other Australian writer
has shown so wide a range and such a
consistent standard of humor. Other
books from his pen are: “Rhymes from
the Mines,” “The Golden Shanty,”
“Below and On Top,” “The Gold
Stealers,” and “In the Roaring-
Fifties.” Mr. Dyson was born on
Morrison’s Diggings, Victoria, on March
4, 1865. Will Dyson, the world-famed
caricaturist and cartoonist, is a brother,
and so was the late Ambrose Dyson, a
prominent Bookstall illustrator.
S. W. POWELL,
Author of
The Maker of Pearls.
Hermit Island.
The Great Jade Seal.
The Pearls of Cheong Tah.
X-Mixture.
The Trader of Kameko.
Golden Chance.
The Closed Lagoon.
Mantle of Authority.
Mr. Powell is one of the newer Book-
stall authors. Only a few years ago he
submitted his first novel, ‘ ‘ The Maker
of Pearls,” and as a result of the late
Mr. Rowlandson’s encouragement, has
since written numerous other novels,
several of which have not yet been
published.
“My first literary effort,” says Mr.
Powell, “was made at the age of seven,
when I composed what purported to be
a poem. At any rate it was in stanzas,
and each line began with a capital
letter. Ten years later I wrote some
verses which were published in the
English magazine, ‘Temple Bar.’ About
a year after this I essayed some-
thing totally different—to wit, a guide-
book to the town of Durban, South
Africa, where I lived when I was a boy.
The guide-book brought me in £l5 and
some little satisfaction, for lowly as
was its purpose, it was my first book,
and I was not twenty then. My next
was not published till more than twenty
years later.
“In the meantime I had been knock-
ing about the world, chiefly in South
Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and the
South Seas; and in 1907-8 (I think),
while at Thursday Island, I was contri-
buting verse and prose-sketches to the
‘ Bulletin ’ under the pen - name of
‘Wyben.’ Later I went to Tahiti, and
the place captured me from the day I
landed.
“It was only, however, on revisiting
Tahiti after my return from the War,
that I first thought of writing a novel
30


around the island. The idea came to me
when I was on a trading-schooner bound
for the Paumotu Archipelago. The novel
was duly written and, after mature con-
sideration, burned. Its two immediate
successors are still in existence, but not
in print. Then I wrote ‘The Maker of
Pearls/ and that introduced me to Mr.
Rowlandson and began my connection
with the Bookstall Company.”
JACK McLAEEN,
Author of
Red Mountain
The Skipper of “The Roaring Meg.”
Feathers of Heaven.
Fringe of the Law.
Spear-Eye.
The Savagery of Margaret Nestor.
The Oil Seekers.
Tal l fa.
Fagaloa’s Daughter.
Sunlight, Adventure and Love.
Mr. Jack McLaren, though for many
years a regular contributor to Australian
newspapers, has come into prominence
as an author only in recent years. He
was for a long time resident in Cape
York, and has intimate knowledge of
Northern Australia, Papua and the
Islands. Owing to his absence in Eng-
land, arranging publication of several
long novels, the compilers of this little
volume regret that it has not been
possible to obtain from Mr. McLaren
his own story of his meteoric success
as a novelist. But it was wholly due
to the late A. C. Eowlandson that Mr.
McLaren received his opportunity. It
was in the darkest days of the world
when he submitted his first novel; that
was promptly accepted, and the en-
couragement given by the publisher,
and the latter’s decision to continue to
publish novels under adverse war con-
ditions, provided a market for nine
other novels which followed in rapid
succession.
THOMAS E. SPENCEE,
Author of
How McDougall Topped the Score,
and other Verses and Sketches.
That Droll Lady.
The Spring Cleaning.
The Surprising Adventures of
Bridget McSweeney.
Why Doherty Died.
Bindawaila.
The Haunted Shanty.
The late Thomas E. Spencer was the
most humourous of Australian writers
of verse, and though he died in 1911
his books have always been in popular
demand. Mr. Spencer was born in
London, but came to Australia at an
early age. He was a successful builder
and contractor, and took a prominent
part in industrial arbitration. He was
employers’ representative in the old
Arbitration Court for some years, and
chairman of numerous wages boards.
His output of humourous verse was re-
markable, and the publishing enterprise
of the late A. C. Eowlandson provided
the means of collecting his best work
for presentation in permanent form.
J. H. M. ABBOTT,
Author of
Sally: The Tale of a Currency Lass.
The Sign of the Serpent.
Ensign Calder.
John Henry Macartney Abbott, born
at West Maitland (N.S.W.), in 1874, is
a son of the late Sir Joseph Palmer
Abbott, one-time Speaker of the N. S.
Wales Legislative Assembly. He served
in the South African War and resigned
a commission in the Eoyal Field Artil-
lery in 1901 to take up jouralism. In
addition to his “Bookstall” novels, Mr.
Abbott is author of “Tommy Corn-
stalk,” “An Outlander in England,”
“Letters from Queer Street,” “The
South Seas,” “Plain and Veldt,” “The
Story of William Dampier ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ Castle
Vane.” He is a regular contributor of
articles and short stories to the prin-
31


cipal Australian newspapers, is one of
tlie Commonwealth’s foremost descrip-
tive writers, and an authority on early
Australian history.
BEATRICE GRIMSHAW,
Authoress of
The Coral Queen.
White Savage Simon.
Queen Vaiti.
Miss Beatrice Grimshaw has a world-
wide reputation as a writer of Island
stories. She has travelled widely in the
Pacific and elsewhere, and for many
years has lived in Papua. Among many
other novels in addition to these pub-
lished by the Bookstall Company are:
“When the Red Gods Call,” “From
Fiji to the Cannibal Islands,” “In the
Strange South Seas,” “The New New
Guinea,” “Guinea Gold,” “Red Bob of
the Bismarcks, ” “ The Sorcerer’s
Stone,” “Kris Girl,” and “Nobody’s
Island. ’ ’
LOUIS BECKE,
Author of
Bully Hayes, Buccaneer.
The Adventures of Louis Blake.
The late Louis Becke was born at
Port Macquarie (N.S.W. in 1857, and
went to sea at an early age. He spent
20 years wandering in the Pacific, and
came into contact with “Bully Hayes,”
the pirate of the Pacific. Returning to
Australia, the late J. F. Archibald in-
duced Becke to write of his experiences
in the South Seas, and his subsequent
book, 11 By Reef and Palm, ’ ’ proved a
great suceesss. He became the most
popular writer of South Sea stories.
“Bully Hayes, Buccaneer” gives the
story of the Pirate of the Pacific, and
in “The Adventures of Louis Blake,”
the author told of many of his own
adventures. Louis Becke died in Sydney
in 1913.
EDWARD S. SORENSON,
Author of
The Squatter’s Ward.
(Vlurty Brown.
Mystery of Murrawang.
The Rheas of Werriwang
E. S. Sorenson was born near Casino
(N.S.W.) in 1869, and is a regular con-
tributor to numerous Australasian news-
papers. He has written several books
in addition to those published by Mr.
Rowlandson, including “Quinton’s
Rouseabout,” “Life in the Australian
Backblocks,” “Friends and Foes in the
Australian Bush,” and “Chips and
Splinters.” In an earlier section of this
volume Mr, Sorenson tells of his varied
career under the title of ‘ ‘ The Inky
Way. ’ ’
E. J. BRADY,
Author of
Tom Pagdin, Pirate.
Edwin James Brady was born at
Carcoar (N.S.W.), August 7, 1869. He
has had a varied journalistic and
literary career, and has written much
notable poetry collected in “The Ways
of Many Waters,” “The Earthern
Floor,” “Bushland Ballads,” “Bells
and Hobbles,” and “The House of
Winds.” Other books include “The
King’s Caravan,” “River Rovers” and
“Australia Unlimited,” the latter a
large and exhaustive volume dealing
with the Commonwealth and its
resources.
ARTHUR H. ADAMS,
Author of
The Knight of the Motor Launch.
Double-Bed Dialogues.
The New Chum.
Poet, novelist, dramatist, and journa-
list, Mr. Adams is one of the Common-
wealth’s best-known writers. Born in
Otago, New Zealand, in 1872, he went
through the Boxer Campaign as a war
correspondent, and spent several years
in London, He was “Red Page”
32


editor of “The Bulletin” 1906-9, and Sandes has written numerous other suc-
editor of “The Lone Hand” magazine
1909-11, and afterwards on the literary
staffs of Sydney ‘ ‘ Daily Telegraph ’ ’
and ‘ ‘ Sun. * ’ Author of ‘ 1 Maoriland
and Other Yerses,” “The Nazarene,”
“London Streets,” “Collected Verses,”
and the following novels in addition to
those published by the Bookstall Com-
pany: “Galahad Jones,” “Tussock
Land,” “A Touch of Fantasy,”
‘ ‘ Grocer Greenheart, ” “ The A ustra-
lians. ’ ’
RANDOLPH BEDFORD,
Author of
Billy Pagan, Mining Engineer.
Aladdin and the Boss Cockle.
Sliver Star.
Author, journalist, mining-man, poli-
tician, and traveller, Mr. Randolph
Bedford, now Member of the Queensland
Legislative Council, is well-known in
every corner of the continent. Born in
Sydney, July 28, 1868, Mr. Bedford has
been on the staff of numerous news-
papers, but has for many years been
free-lance contributing to a number of
papers, particularly ‘ The Bulletin, ’
meanwhile travelling extensively in
Australia and abroad. He has written
a number of plays and is author of the
following books, in addition to those
included in the Bookstall series: “True
Eyes and the Whirlwind,” “The Snare
of Strength,” “Explorations in Civilisa-
tion.”
JOHN SANDES,
Author of
Love and the Aeroplane.
Mr. John Sandes is a leading Aus-
tralian journalist, and was for many
years on the leader-writing staff of prin-
cipal Melbourne and Sydney dailies.
He was one of the journalists who
accompanied His Highness the Prince
of Wales on his Australasian tour. Be-
sides “Love and the Aeroplane” Mr.
cessful novels under a nom-de-plume.
He is now London correspondent for
the Sydney “Daily Telegraph.”
DON DELANEY,
Author of
A Rebel of the Bush.
Fop Turon Gold.
The Captain of the Gang
Gentleman Jack.
The White Champion
The above novels, some of the most
popular published by Mr. Rowlandson,
are by one of the best-known of Aus-
tralian journalists, who adopted the pen-
name of “Don Delaney” for his lighter
writings.
A. G. STEPHENS,
Author of
Bill’s Idees.
Editor of
The Poems of Adam Lindsay Gordon.
Gum Blossoms: A Volume of Aus-
tralian Verse.
Mr. A. G. Stephens is Australia’s fore-
most literary critic. He has been re-
sponsible for placing before the public
numerous collected works by local
authors, and assisted many successful
writers in their early struggles on the
Inky Way. Among the books he planned
and edited are volumes by James
Hebblethwaite, Barcroft Boake, W. T.
Goodge, Hubert Church, Bernard
O’Dowd, Joseph Furphy, A. H. Davis
(Steele Rudd), E. J. Brady, W. H.
Ogilvie, Roderic Quinn. He revised the
Poems of Adam Lindsay Gordon,
remedying many defects which had
appeared in other collections, and his
preface to the volume is regarded as
the best criticism of the poet’s work
which has appeared. Mr. Stephens com-
piled several brochures for the late Mr.
Rowlandson.
33


NORMAN LINDSAY,
Author of
A Curate in Bohemia.
Norman Lindsay’s Book.
Norman Lindsay, Australia’s most
famous black-and-white artist, in addi-
tion to illustrating many “Bookstall”
novels, wrote and illustrated ‘‘A Curate
in Bohemia,” a sparkling story of the
Bohemian life of a number of Melbourne
art-students. Besides numerous illus-
trations, he also contributed stories to
two “Norman Lindsay Books.”
J. A. BARRY,
Author of
South Sea Shipmates.
The Luck of the Native Born.
Steve Brown’s Bunyip.
The late J. A. Barry had roved the
seas for 30 years before settling in
Australia. He had a natural gift of
literary expression, and his experiences
as sailor, and afterwards on Australian
goldfields and sheep-stations, provided
him with excellent material for contri-
butions in the Commonwealth and
abroad. He died, aged 60, in September,
1911.
ERNEST OSBORNE,
Author of
The Copra Trader.
The Plantation Manager.
Creatures of Impulse.
Sixteen years ago, Ernest Osborne
made his entry into the literary field
in Australia with paragraphs. His first
par. —and very many subsequent ones—
appeared in the Sydney “Bulletin.”
Short stories followed in natural
sequence. He secured two first prizes
in “Lone Hand” storyette competitions,
and his first short story, “The Wreck,”
was accepted by that magazine. Since
then many short stories has appeared
in “The Bullentin,” “Lone Hand,”
“Aussie,” “Sydney Mail,” and other
papers.
Based on varied experiences in
Oceania and Tropical Australia—trading
for copra in the Central Pacific Islands;
assisting for six years to build the
Island-phosphate industry into effi-
ciency; plantation management; sugar
and cocoanuts; agricultural pursuits;
economical entomology; commercial ac-
tivities, etc., including editorial inaugu-
ration of a successful weekly Sydney
trade journal which afforded studies of
educational value —numerous important
articles from Osborne’s pen have
appeared in the leading journals.
During nine months of 1921 the
Company accepted three of his Island
novels, at a time, when, as Mr. Osborne
puts it, “no other Australian publisher
would consider any book manuscript for
publication. ’ ’
An Island-phosphate novel, a romance
of fertilisers—and there is plenty of
romance in the acquisition of that
prosaic substance to one who knows—
is nearin gcompletion. Mr. Osborne’s
personally-acquired material is world-
wide, unlimited and unhackneyed, and
he has planned fifteen additional Island
novels.
CON DREW,
Author of
The Doings of Dave.
Rogues and Ruses.
Jinker.
Mr. Con Drew was born in Brisbane.
Son of the late W. L. Gt. Drew, Queens-
land’s Auditor-General in the 90’s, he
cleared out to sea in a wind-jammer
bound for Frisco, then the mecca of
most adventurous youths. Since then
he has battled round the world in a
way it has been the lot of few men
to do.
Among other things, Mr. Drew has
been miner, drover, surveyor, purser in
the British India Co., trainer, boxer,
traveller, and journalist; and the ex-
perience he gained when following those
devious callings has helped him not a
little in his present profession as a
journalist.
34


J. M. WALSH,
Author of
Tap Tap island.
Goldie Law.
Mr, Walsh is one of the newer Aus-
tralian novelists.
“I can’t say definitely when I first
felt the impulse to write. As long back
as I can recollect, even as a lad at
school, I was sketching out novels and
short stories. My first short story was
published about 1913; then followed
years when I wrote not with any idea
of publication but simply as an exercise
in craftsmanship. Those earlier manu-
scripts still exist; whenever I feel the
need of a spirit-chastener I take them
out and look them over. My first seri-
ous endeavour to capture a definite
public was ‘Tap-Tap Island,’ written in
1918, serialised by the Melbourne
‘Leader’ the following year, and later
issued by N.S.W. Bookstall Co. in volume
form. ‘Tap-Tap Island’ was the case
of a novel growing up around a title.
The title crept into my mind one day,
unrelated to any plot, and I thought
round it for quite six months before I
put pen to paper.
“Following this came several novels
of a highly sentimental nature, none of
which has so far been rescued from
serial form. Next I wrote ‘The Lost
Valley,’ which ran second in the Be
Garis competition. Almost on its heels
I produced ‘Goldie Law,’ now in the
hands of N.S.W. Bookstall Co. This I
consider my best novel to date.
‘‘ At the moment of writing, another
novel, ‘The Lure of the Hidden
Hoard’ is running serially in the Mel-
bourne ‘Argus.’
“Personally, I would rather be the
author of one good psychological novel
—my tastes indeed incline towards
polemics —than a dozen successful tales
of the adventure class. I work regu-
larly day in and day out —I do not
believe in waiting for ‘inspirations’ —
and I scrap quite fifty per cent, of my
work and re-write the remaining fifty.
The first chapter of ‘Goldie Law’ for
instance was re-written five times; the
complete book was typed twice over.
‘ ‘ As far as short stories are concerned,
I have been extremely lucky. I have
never yet written one that I haven’t
been able to place eventually, and last
year I turned out quite thirty that have
met with a ready market.”
ERNEST O’FERRALL,
Author of
Bodger and the Boarders.
Mr, Ernest O’Eerrall (“Kodak”),
for many years on the staff of the
Sydney ‘ ‘ Bulletin, ’ ’ and now on
“Smith’s Weekly,” is one of Aus-
tralia ’s best writers of humorous stories.
“Bodger and the Boarders” is a collec-
tion of Mr. O’FerralTs popular series
of boarding-house stories published in
“The Bulletin.”
SUMNER LOCKE,
Author of
Mum Dawson—Boss.
Skeeter Farm.
The Dawsons’ Uncle George.
Brownie Unlimited.
Miss Sumner Locke, one of the most
promising of Australian authoresses, was
introduced to the reading public by the
late Mr. Rowlandson. The success of
her three Bookstall novels encouraged
her to greater effort, and several very
successful novels by her were published
in New York. The popularity there of
“Samaritan Mary” was followed by
requests for further novels, but unfor-
tunately for Australia, she died at the
height of her success and early in her
married life.
HARRISON OAVEN,
Author of
The Mount Marunga Mystery.
Mr. Harrison Owen, formerly a promi-
nent Melbourne journalist and whose
name was prominent as a contributor
35


to leading Australian newspapers, is at
present in England. His ‘ ‘ Mount
Marunga Mystery ” was re-cast for
moving-picture production, and as “The
Blue Mountain Mystery” has proved
one of the most successful Australian
films.
M. FORREST,
Author of
Bachelor’s Wife.
Mrs. Forrest is a Queenslander, and
one of the best-known writers of verse
and short stories in newspapers and
magazines throughout the Common-
wealth.
ROBERT KALESKI,
Author of
Australian Barkers and Biters.
“I began writing when I was nine;
have been a. passionate and omniverous
reader from six upwards. I was for-
tunate in the possession of a father who
kept a fine library and often left the
door unlocked. My father had a true
taste in literature, also printing and
binding; so I had a fine field to roam
in. At nine I was sent for health
reasons (too much reading) to an aunt
at Holdsworthy, near Liverpool. She had
the public school there, and a fine
library left by her father (old Dr.
Falder, well-known in the early days).
Chief amongst them were the original
editions of Byron, Scott, Campbell, and
Pope. These I devoured with avidity,
not having had them at home. At this
time I felt an irresistible desire to
write, and turned out a lot of rough,
disjointed stuff which never saw the
light. I was so ashamed of it, compared
with what I wanted it to be, that I
wrote nothing more till I was twelve.
By that time I had read a few copies
of ‘The Bulletin’ by stealth, (Aunt
didn’t believe in ‘The Bulletin’ at all
—‘nasty nonsense’ she called it. She
was a typical Northumbrian Border
woman; kind, But without the slightest
spark of imagination or humor. Sir
Walter Scott or R. L. Stevenson were
related or connected with our family, I
forget which; this may have accounted
for it.)
“After reading ‘The Term of His
Natural Life’ and ‘Robbery Under
Arms’ (also by stealth; aunt’s hus-
band thought I ought to be always run-
ning after cows for him), I decided I
must write THE Australian Epic in
novel form, and made a start on it
(Am about half-way through it now.)
“At sixteen the banks broke, just as
I was preparing for the University, and
I had to leave school and battle for
myself. In this way I got a very wide
experience of Life and Nature, which
has been invaluable to me; learnt to go
to the bedrock of things. In ’9B, I
drew up the standard and description
of the cattle and sheep dogs of Aus-
tralia; and it was published in the
N.S.W. Agricultural Gazette of 1903.
Before this I had had a few stories
accepted by ‘The Bulletin,’ under my
pen-name of ‘ Falder, ’ when I was a
selector in Dorrigo.
“I left Dorrigo in 1903, and came to
Sydney, Was building for a time; then
free-lancing; turned out a heap of stuff
for various papers, mostly ‘Sydney
Mail’ and ‘Bulletin. r Also a book
called ‘The Settler’s Guide,’ published
by Anthony Hordern & Sons. The dog
articles in the Gazette brought me
prominently before the public; also A.
G. Stephens, then running the ‘Red
Page ’ in the ‘ Bully. ’ He gave me
much good advice and encouragement,
taking a good deal of work from me.
When he left ‘The Bulletin’ and started
the ‘Bookfellow,’ he suggested a series
on Australian dogs and other natural
products. I did these for him, and they
were the origin of the Bookstall book,
‘Australian Barkers and Biters,’ now
well-known over a good bit of the world.
36


‘‘My relations with ‘Eowley’ (our
pet name for A.C.E.) were always
of the most cordial nature; in fact, I
have spent hours and hours exchanging
views with him in that close little office
of his, many a time, when both of us
should have been at work. ”
YEEA BAKEE,
Author of
Equality Road.
When Satan Laughs.
Miss Vera Baker is a new Australian
author of considerable promise. The
encouragement given by the late Mr.
Eowlandson was directly responsible for
the writing of “Equality Eoad,” a
novel highly praised by literary critics
and which won immediate popularity.
“When Satan Laughs,” recently ac-
cepted, will be published at an early
date.
E. F. CHRISTIE,
Author of
The Calling Voice.
Miss E. F. Christie, now Mrs. J. A.
Marmont, tells why she wrote “The
Calling Voice”:
“It was during the lifetime of my
late brother-in-law, Mr. Thomas E.
Spencer, that the N. S. Wales Bookstall
became a household word. Through Mr.
Eowlandson’s interest and agency, the
T. E. Spencer books appeared in print
and Mrs. Bridget McSweeney was intro-
duced to the reading public. At that
time, my own literary ambition did not
aspire beyond the publication of short
stories and verse, and my first personal
connection with the Bookstall was when
some verses of mine, entitled ‘ The
Moonlight Message,’ appeared in an
issue of ‘Eowlandson’s Success.’
“After Mr. Spencer’s death, while
thinking over his favourite poem,
‘Come Back to the Bush’ —which is
really the ‘Home, Sweet Home’ of the
Australian bushman —the idea came to
me that I would try to express in a
story the Call of the Great Australian
Bush-Mother to her wandering children
—a call which reaches out to them, no
matter how far they stray. As a result,
my book, ‘The Calling Voice,’ materia-
lized, and, when completed, was sub-
mitted to the N. S. Wales Bookstall Co.,
Ltd., and, to my joy, accepted! I saw
Mr. Eowlandson, who spoke kindly
words of encouragement, and I have
always thought that a hearty vote of
thanks is due to the N. S. Wales Book-
stall Co., Ltd., from many first-bookers,
who are required to produce no previous
Certificate of Merit, so long as they can,
in the Bookstall’s opinion, ‘ deliver the
goods! ’ ”
JACK NOETH,
Author of
Harry Dale’s Grand National.
A Son of the Bush.
The Black Opal.
“Jack North” is the nom-de-plume
of a leading Sydney journalist.
CHAELES WHITE,
Author of
Martin Cash.
Gardiner, “King of the Road.”
Ben Hall.
The Kelly Gang
John Vane, Bushranger.
Captain IVioonllte.
Short-Lived Bushrangers.
Mr. Chas. White is the recognised
authority on Australian bushranging.
HILDA M. BEIDGES,
Authoress of
The Squatter’s Daughter.
Miss Bridges is a sister of Eoy
Bridges. “The Squatter’s Daughter,”
her first contribution to the Bookstall
series, is an excellent “book” of the
famous play of the same name by Bert
Bailey and Edmund Duggan,


H. M. SOMER,
Author of
Base Brands.
Mr. Somer is the popular secretary of
the Royal Agricultural Society of N. S.
Wales, and a one-time Svdney journalist.
EDWARD MERYON,
Author of
Yellow Silver.
One False Step.
At Holland’s Tank.
“Edward Meryon” is the thin dis-
guise adopted by one of Melbourne’s
leading journalists.
OTHER BOOKSTALL AUTHORS.
F. AGAE,
Eros! Eros Wins!
808 ALLEN,
The Mare with the Silver Hoof.
GERALD R. BALDWIN,
In Racing Silk.
Lydia’s Lovers.
H. K. BLOXHAM,
The Double Abduction.
On the Fringe of the Never Never.
LANCELOT BOOTH,
The Devil’s Nightcap.
Tools of Satan.
A. BATHGATE,
Sodger Sandy’s Bairn.
JOHN X. CAMERON,
The Spell of the Bush.
ARTHUR CROCKER,
South Sea Sinners.
The Dingo Pup.
The Great Turon Mystery.
DALE COLLINS,
Stolen or Strayed.
GEORGE COCKERILL,
The Convict Pugilist.
R. J. CASSIDY,
Chandler of Corralinga.
GEORGE DARRELL,
The Belle of the Bush,
A. R. FALK,
Puppets of Chance.
Red Star.
J. D. FITZGERALD,
Children of the Sunlight.
W. G. HENDERSON,
The Bathers.
BEET JAMES,
The Mystery of the Boxing Contest.
The Loser Pays.
CECIL ROSS JOHNSTON,
The Trader.
A. R. KENT,
A Chinese Vengeance.
h. r. McDuffie,
Rooks and Crooks.
A. lAN MACLEOD,
Hack’s Brat.
CLARENCE W. MARTIN,
Übiquc.
VANCE PALMER,
The Boss of Killara.
The Shantykeeper’s Daughter.
38


SYDNEY PARTRIDGE AND CECIL W. SABELBURG,
RAWORTH,
The Key of the Mystery.
The Mystery of Wall’s Hill.
RALPH STOCK,
SYDNEY PARTRIDGE,
Rocky Section.
The Recipe for Rubber.
The Pyjama Man.
CLEMENT PRATT,
CRYSTAL STIRLING,
Soldiers Two.
Caloola.
BRODA REYNOLDS,
The Heart of the Bush.
Dawn Asper.
The Selector Girl.
CHARLES E. SAYERS,
The Jumping Double.
R. S. TAIT,
CHARLES RODDA,
Scotty Mac, Shearer.
The Fortunes of Geoffrey Mayne.
HARRY TIGHE,
Cerise and Gold.
The Man of Sympathy.
IVAN ARCHER ROSENBLUM,
C. P. WYNN,
Stella Sothern.
Princess Naidl’s Fetish.
Marjorie of Blue Lake.
OTHER BOOKS PUBUSHED BY THE LATE A, C. ROWLANDSON
The Poems of Adam Lindsay Gordon.
Edited by A. G. Stephens.
Theatrical Caricatures.
By Claude McKay and Harry Julius.
A Guide to Sydney.
“The Bulletin’’ Reciter.
“The Bulletin” Book of Humorous Verses
and Recitations.
Sydney—Descriptive and Illustrative.
Panoramic Sydney.
“Aboriginalities” (from “The Bulletin”).
Norman Lindsay’s Books.
Sydney from the Air.
Canberra Cookery Book.
The Billy Book.
Australian Bungalow and Cottage Home
Designs.
Drawings by David Low.
And Numerous Souvenir Publications.


VERNON LORIMER GETTING THE ATMOSPHERE FOR A BOOKSTALL ADVENTURE NOVEL.


BOOKSTALL ILLUSTRATORS.
Almost every Australian hlack-and-white artist of note during the past twenty
years has illustrated novels in the Bookstall Series. The list includes: —
NORMAN LINDSAY,
LIONEL LINDSAY,
PERCY LINDSAY,
RUBY LINDSAY,
DAVID LOW,
FRANK P. MAHONY,
PERCY SPENCE,
ALF VINCENT,
FRED LEI ST,
A. J. FISCHER,
HARRY J. WESTON,
PERCY BENISON,
D. H. SOUTER,
HARRY GARLICK,
VERNON LORIMER,
HARRY JULIUS,
SYDNEY URE SMITH,
AMBROSE DYSON,
NORMAN LINDSAY.
All members of the famous Lindsay
family have illustrated books in the
Series. Norman Lindsay, in addition to
illustrating a score of novels, is also
author of “A Curate in Bohemia,” an
excellent humourous story of early
student days. Ten years ago lie also
produced two “Norman Lindsay Books,”
a collection of prose and verse which he
illustrated throughout, and which in-
cluded numerous independent drawings
by the artist. Norman Lindsay was
born at Creswick (Vie.), on February
23rd, 1879, and for many years has been
principal cartoonist for the Sydney
“Bulletin.”
LIONEL LINDSAY.
Mr. Lionel Lindsay was born at Cres-
wick (Vic.), on October 18th, 1874. He
WILL DYSON,
JOHN P. DAVIS,
JAMES POSTLETHWAITE,
MARTIN STAINFORTH,
R. H. MOPPETT,
J. MUIR AULD,
CLAUDE MARQUET,
L. L. ROUSH,
C. H. HUNT,
H. W. COTTON,
TOM FERRY,
G, C. PEARCE,
BEN JORDAN,
NORMAN CARTER,
L. H. BOOTH,
NUTTALL,
JAMES F. SCOTT,
HUGH MACLEAN.
has illustrated many Bookstall publi-
cations, notably the “Steele Rudd”
Selection stories. He is cartoonist for
the Sydney “Evening News.”
PERCY LINDSAY.
Another mmber of the famous family
of artists, and also born at Creswick,
Mr. Percy Lindsay has in recent years
been the principal illustrator of Book-
stall novels. His cover designs, in par-
ticular, are an attractive feature of the
Series.
DAVID LOW.
One of the world’s foremost black- and-
white artists and caricaturists, Mr.
David Low, is a New Zealander. He be-
came cartoonist on “The Bulletin” on
the death of Alf. Vincent. He is now a
leading cartoonist in London. He is
41


ARTIST PERCY LINDSAY.
“Well! —that ought to fetch ’em. A good, meaty cover ivith a touch of the
feminine. I hope it will please A.C.R. It heats me how these write)'
chappies would sell their bally stuff if it wasn’t for we artists.”


best remembered in Australia for his
cartoons dealing with the Prime Minis-
ter, the Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, and he
contributed “The Billy Book,” a volume
of new Hughes cartoons, specially to the
Bookstall Series.
VERNON LORIMER.
Mr. Lorimer is another prominent
Bookstall illustrator since the war, in
which he served. He was born 32 years
ago, and was educated at Wesley College,
Melbourne. Studied four years at the
National Gallery, Melbourne, under
Frederick McCubbin and Bernard Hall.
In recent years he has been designer and
illustrator in Sydney. He went to the
war as stretcher-bearer with the Bth
Field Ambulance, won his commission,
and became A.D.O. to Major-General Sir
Charles Rosenthal. Served in Gallipoli
and France, and was twice wounded.




CABLE ADDRESS-
“BOOKSTALLS”
Messrs. Ahgas & Robertson Ltd.,
Y D H JS Y.
Dear Sirs,
In announcing the death of Mr. A. C. Rowlandson, late
Managing Director of the N. S. Wales Bookstall Co. Ltd., we do so
with a real feeling of grief and sorrow for the passing away of our
worthy Chief.
We also feel that the news will be received with deep
regret by the many good friends he made in the course of his
strenuous business career, and whose confidence he held to the day
of his death.
His great desire was that his business relations should
at all times be erected on a foundation of the highest commercial
morality and integrity, and contrary to the old maxim that "there
is no sentiment in business," Mr- Rowlandson always made a point
of being on the most friendly terms with those with whom he had
business dealings. That he was successful in his aim, is self
evident.
We are sending you under separate cover a small Souvenir
which we have issued in connection with his work as publisher of
Australian Novels. The articles contained therein are spontaneous
contributions from various Authors and Artists who were associated
with the production of the Library. Each and every one of the
Writers was anxious to contribute an article narrating his or her
experience with our late worthy Chief.
We trust you will accept the little Souvenir in the
spirit in which it was sent and that it may help to keep his memory
green a little longer, and as a last memento of a personality
whose watchword was "honor before gain."


In connection with the business of the N. S. Wales
Bookstall Co. Ltd,, this will be carried on for the benefit of
Mrs. Rowlandson and the three children upon exactly the same lines
as those laid down by the late Managing Director, under the
Directorship of the Writer, who was associated with Mr. Rowlandson
for the last 39 years in the active management of the business,
and it is our sincere wish that the cordial relationship which has
existed hitherto between your goodselves and us, will continue in
the years to come.
Yours very sincerely.
N.S.W.
MANAGING


ANGUS & L Ti?
PUBLISHERS *
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET
SYDNEY
9/11/22.
CABLE ADDRESS : FRAGMENT, SYDNEY
The Manager,
IT.S.W. Bookstall Go. Ltd.,
476 GEORGE STREET.
Bear Sir,
I have to thank you for a copy of the interesting
memorial volume you have issued to commemorate your
late "Chief", and his work. In my opinion it under
rather than over-praises his good qualities, and it
certainly underestimates the value of the work he has
done for Australia.
If you have half a dozen copies to spare, I should
like to send them to the six leading collectors of
Australiana. You will have taken care to deposit one in
The Mitchell Library, Macquarie Street, where future
generations may see it; but possibly you have overlooked
The Turnbull Library, Wellington, N.Z., which is the
Mew Zealand "Mitchell." If so, pray send one
Yours faithfully,
