





P22[?]
[?]












THIS JLFFI3,
OF
J. KNATCII BULL,
Executed at Darlinyhurst , Sydney , on Tuesday,
February 13, 1844,
FOB THE
HORRID MURDER
OF MRS. JAMIESON :
©©fiSMOM©
full Particulars of his early Days—Entrance in the Navy
—Personal Courage and Intrepidity in twenty-two
Engagements —Promotion to the Rank of Commander
Subsequent dismissal from the Service
His Private Life and Adventures in London, as a RAKE
—a SEDUCER—a GAMBLER —and his final Cap-
ture as a PICKPOCKET.
HIS COLONIAL HISTORY
FROM THE PERIOD OF HIS TRANSPORTATION TO THE LAST
DREADFUL ACT OF
ATHOCIOVS murder!
TO WHICH IS ADDED,
A FULL REPORT OF HIS TRIAL,
And subsequent vain Attempt to set aside the Verdict.
HIS DEMEANOUR WHILE UNDER SENTENCE
AND
HIS EXECUTION
The Whole comprising a most interesting Record of this
case of unparallelled Atrocity.
PRICE SIX-PENCE,
Printed for, published and sedd by U. Evers, King-st, Sydney,




LIFE OF
JOHN KNATCHBULL.
SINCE the foundation of the Colony of New South Wales
_ no circumstance has occurred in the Criminal Records,
which has excited so extraordinary and universal sensation,
as the atrocious crime for which this wretched being has just
paid the penalty of his forfeit life. Murder is at best a
fearful subject for contemplation, even when it may be
viewed through the medium of excited passion, or tem-
porary anger oir revenge—but when a crime so repugnant
to every law divine and human, is committed in cool blood
—the chances as deliberately calculated as by the gambler,
when he takes his gold upon the “ main,” and each precaution
taken to avoid, if possible, the dreaded discovery—when
the object is robbery, and guided by the insatiate thirst for
gold, assassination is resorted to to close the victim’s lips—
when the heart of humanity sickens at the horrible nar-
ration : and even those who would endeavour to invent
some excuse (if excuse there can be for shedding the blood
of a fellow-creature,) for a deed committed during the
whirlwind of passion, and under the influence of provoca-
tion turn with horror and disgust from the cruel and de-
liberate murderer of a weak and defenceless woman, and
the public voice is universally raised in one general cry of
exectation, and a demand for justice on the cruel per-
petrator of the atrocious deed.
It is not merely for the purpose of gratifying the taste
for the horrible, that we have commenced our present task.


No; we have a much higher and nobler object in view,
in laying bare to public observation the vices and crimes
which have characterised the career of this unhappy man.
We are anxious that his history may afford a salutary
warning to the rising generation, and prove to them how
little avail the gifts of birth, education, and talent, if the
important duty of learning to moderate the wildness of
passion is unattended to —and if the uncurbed temper is
permitted to carry the reason away in the overwhelming
impetuosity of its angry torrent.
The subject of this memoir, John Knatchbull, son of
the late Sir Edward Knatchbull, of Meersham, in Kent,
of which county he was for many years a distinguished
representative in the Imperial Parliament. Sir Edward
had been twice married; by his first marriage he had
two children, who have borne the lustre of the family
name with unsullied brightness—the present Sir Edward
Knatchbull, Paymaster of the Forces —a gentleman uni-
versally respected for his political consistency, and the
amiability of his private character. The other child, a
daughter, who has ever proved a worthy scion of the
illustrious family to which she belongs.
John Knatchbull was the offspring of the second mar-
riage, and well would it have been for his family, and for
the sake of human nature, had the hour of his birth, and
that of his death, been the same—but the wisdom of
Providence is inscrutable, and villainy is permitted to
triumph for a time only, that its end may be more terribly
marked by the infliction of divine vengeance and retribu-
tion, and serve as a salutary warning to avoid the -ways of
evil, which lead to ultimate destruction and disgrace.
At a very early age, John Knatchbull’s temper began to
exhibit itself in its true colours. Violent and headstrong in
his infancy, he was permitted by his too indulgent parents,
to pursue the bent of his own inclinations, and w'hile the
nfantine bursts of uncontroulable passion were only made
the theme of laughter and amusement to those around him,
it was little supposed that the foundation of a future career
of misery and disgrace to himself, of distress and trouble to
his family—eventually to
"Wet a Father’s couch in tears,
“ And tinge a Mother’s glowing cheek with shame ’


to bring his Parents grey hairs with sorrow to a premature
grave, and for himself to expiate a career of crime, and
vice, by an ignominious death upon a public scaffold.
As he advanced in years his disposition further de-
veloped itself—at school his character was displayed in acts
of petty tyranny to his inferiors in age and strength, and of
cringing servility to those above him—selfiishness and
treachery were the principle characteristics of his nature,
and he was at once hated and feared by his schoolfellows.—
Few there are so utterly depraved as not to present some
solitary traits of good feeling and even nobility of spirit, but
in these Knatchbull was in every respect deficient, not one
single “green spot,” not one oasis appeared to brighten the
dreary desert of a mind, fraught with evil, and he was re-
moved from school, to enter upon his professional career
without leaving behind him one friend to regret his de-
parture, or one hand to clasp his in the embrace of friend-
ship, on his entrance into the busy scenes of life.
At an early age, he was appointed to the rank of Mid-
shipman in the Navy, and here he acquired some credit for
his proficiency in the details of his profession, and for the
negative qualification of personal courage and fearlessness
of danger, which proved itself in the many engagements,
in which it was his lot to take part; under Lord Cochrane
he served on the Spanish Main, and received several wounds;
by his daring courage he achieved rapid promotion, and
though the evil passions of his youth became stronger and
more deeply fixed as he reached manhood, yet his deter-
mined bravery and nautical skill, obtained for him at an
early period of life, the honourable commission of Comman-
der, and he was appointed to the command of the Linnet,
a ten gun Brig.
Hitherto the rigid discipline of the Service, had prevented
any extraordinary exhibition of his real disposition, although
his proud and austere bearing to those beneath him in
authority, and his servile adulation, and cringing sycophancy
to his superiors in rank, drew upon him the merited con-
tempt of all connected with him in the details of duty ; but
once to a certain degree emancipated from immediate
authority —and every body knows at the period to which
we allude, the commander of a vessel was possessed of the
most arbitrary and despotic power, and none better knew


than Knatchbull to turn his power to his own account, and
to render his “ brief authority” subservient to his own
views and purposes. To effect these objects the most des*
potic tyranny was frequently resorted to, and the officers
and crew under his command pronounced the vessel a
floating hell. His profligate course of life, had involved
him in considerable pecuniary difficulties, to meet which
no means were too debased, or dishonourable, to which he
would not resort. To an enormous extent, his family had
from time to time liquidated his debts, still clinging to the
vain hope, that time and reflection would bring about a
reformation in his iniquitous career, until at last, sickened
and weary with the continued acts of fraud and deceit by
which he was eternally bringing disgrace upon his illus-
trious name, and odium upon tire honourable profession to
which he belonged, they were at last compelled to decline
to feed his vices, by permitting further inroads upon their
pecuniary resources.
Abandoned therefore to himself, Knatchbull began to
endeavour to appropriate to himself the means of others.
The officers under his command, who happened to be pos-
sessed of any means beyond the circumscribed limits of
their professional pay, were marked as his victims, even the
Midshipman, who ignorant of the ways of the world, and
unsuspicious of the meshes spread to entangle him, was
pounced upon by this harpy, if it came to his knowledge,
that through the bounty of his friends, his purse happened
at any time to be recruited. To obtain his ends in these
cases, every allurement was resorted to —wine, gaming, and
the pleasures of the table, were by turns, his instruments to
confuse the senses of his victims, and render them more
easily led into his toils; but if a spirit bolder than the
others, or perhaps better acquainted with the designs of the
selfish and heartly despot dared to resist his encroachments
—then would the tyrant burst forth to full view, and ap-
pear in his true colours, and every species of hidden
artifice, and open cruelty would be essayed, to crush the
offender.
This conduct could not long escape the notice of the
world, and Knatchbull was brought to a Court Martial, on
charge of repeated acts of tyranny, and unofficer like con-
duct, which were so clearly proved, that he was at once


cashiered, and declared thenceforward incompetent to hold
any commission in His Majesty’s Service.
Notwithstanding the disgrace attendant on his dismissal
from His Majesty’s Service, his private character had not
been as yet irretrievably sullied ; a kind consideration for
his family, and an unwillingness to afflict them, had induced
many of the witnesses to suppress circumstances in evi-
dence calculated to add unnecessarily to the wounds,
already so deeply inflicted, upon the sensibility of his un-
happy relatives ; thus, though cashiered from the service,
many respectable stations in life w r ere yet open for his
adoption, stations wherein, he might, without much diffi-
culty, have retrieved his tarnished fame, and become a
useful and honourable member of society. In the fond
hope that this most desirable object might yet be achieved,
his kind and indu’gent relatives, again came forward, with
pecuniary assistance, and for a time—a short, short time,
he endeavoured beneath the spacious mask of hypocricy to
deceive his too confiding friends, and for a brief season
succeeded ; but the natural bias of his disposition was not
to be restrained, the seeds of profligacy had been too deeply
sown, to be eradicated; and after a little, the pent-up
torrent burst through every barrier, and he yielded to the
current, which bore him along to the wild vortex of dissi-
pation and debauchery. He was now a constant frequenter
of the various hells, and emporiums of vice in London, and
for a time, fortune seemed to smile upon his efforts to gain
the favours of the capricious Goddess. His success at the
gaming table, was extraordinary, and as the respectability
of his connexions obtained for him the entree into a spe-
cies of society, denominated good, though in many instances
somewhat questionable, he was enabled still to pursue his
rapacious career, in at least the outward style and guise of
a gentleman ; and as it so unfortunately happens from the
very vitiated and unwholesome formation of the “fashion-
able world,” the drunkard, the gamester, and the roue,
are not considered inadmissible to the claim of gentility,
but are too frequently courted and caressed when they
should be scouted from an admixture with the lovely, pure,
and virtuous —we cannot be surprised that Knatchbuli still
was enabled to maintain some footing in respectable so-
ciety. Amongst his many other propensities may be men


tioned a strong passion for the female sex; not that vte
believe a being constituted as he was, could be susceptible
of a delightful, pure, and refined passion as that of love is
when it finds its abode in virtuous breasts. Yet in that
spurious glow of animal desire, which, like the tawdry
tinsel, is too often mistaken for the genuine ore, he too
well succeeded in many instances in passing the coun-
terfeit for the reality; and in too many cases he was
enabled to gratify his propensities at the expense of the
unhappy fair ones, who, deluded by his specious arts and
deceitful promises, yielded to his wishes, only to add to the
vast number who, imagining that they are destined to
effect a reformation in the object of their affection, and
acting under the delusive principle that “ A reformed
rake will make the best husband/’ too easily become the
victims of the heartless seducer. Amongst the number
who thus were made the prey of this abandoned libertine,
the following incident will not be perused without interest,
and will, we trust, be received as a warning by those of
the confiding sex who may find themselves similarly as-
sailed -
Amongst the many bright stars who, at the period we
allude to, gemmed the horizon of the London fashionable
world, few shone with such resplendant beauty as Selina
D , the only and beloved child of a wealthy merchant
in Old Broad-streeti It is true, that she could not boast of
the adventitious advantages of high birth and noble descent,
but the wealth of which it was supposed she would be in-
heritrix, the beauty of her person, and her fascinating man-
ners, the result of a most finished education, easily obtained
for her a footing in that which has been falsely denominated
the beau monde. It is true, that the fair routcuriere, by
her superior attractions, drew upon herself the envy of
her own sex—and though she was compelled to hear the
scornful remarks, and ill-conceited taunts which her rivals
cast upon her plebeian origin, her pride (if any she pos-
sessed) was most amply compensated by the universal ad-
miration her surpassing loveliness and elegance excited
amongst a throng of admiring followers, who would fain
have enrolled themselves as her lovers. She was, however,
possessed ol too much good sense to permit her mind to
be carried away captive, or her senses bewdldered by the


empty adulation of the fashionable butterflies who fluttered
around her—accustomed to the language of flattery, she
treated it as it deserved, as “ sounding brass or a tinkling
cymbal”—and while she well knew that this homage was
generally offered at the shrine of her wealth, she estimated
it accordingly, by making it pay tribute to her female
vanity, while she laughed at the votaries who offered such
fulsome incence to her charms; happy would it have been
for her had she ever maintained the same frigidity towards
all who approached. But, alasl she was soon made the aim
of a villain’s stratagems; and became the victim of that
very screen of security under which she had hoped to en-
shroud herself.
It is not to be wondered at, that a man of Knatchbull’s
propensity to gallantry should, when frequently thrown
into the society of such a being, make her for his prey.
We have already noticed him as a devoted worshipper at
the shrine of fortune) and now that when the reputed
wealth of the fair par venue was added to the charms of
beauty and superior education, a double incitement was
offered to his cupidity and libertinism, to achieve a conquest
in which so many of his compeers had so signally failed.
With these objects in view, he entered the lists, and though
nature had not bestowed on him a form likely to captivate
the affections of a young and aspiring beauty, he possessed,
in an eminent degree, those arts which result from an in-
timate knowledge of the world, and a reliance upon the aid
which “ Richard” sums up in the inventory of his attri-
butes—
‘l he plain devil imd dissembling looks ”
He thus became one amongst the train who basked in the
sunshine of the fair Selina’s presence —haunted her in
public—and sought, by every means in his power, to render
himself agreeable to her —his object was soon attained.
The attentions of a man who seemed to bid defiance to the
arts and fascinations of her sex, were highly gratifying to
the vanity of a young and inexperienced girl —the idea that
a man of his high birth and connexions should thus pass
by the proud and tilted dames to whose smiles and favours
he might justly aspire to pay his votive homage at her
shrine, was cherished by her with a feeling of gratitude
which his artifices too soon succeeded in kindling to a more


ardent sensation —and when, at length, he perceived that
his victim was securely meshed, and deemed the. time op-
portune to speak of love, he met with no repulse ; but as he
had anticipated, found that his schemes were but too suc-
cessful, and that he had secured the first and purest af-
fections of her guileless heartx
At this eventful period the rumour first reached his ears
that Mr. D , the father of Selina, had been a con-
siderable loser by several speculations, in which he had
ventured enormous sums. This induced a temporary
pause in his proceedings. Marriage, unless attended with
great pecuniary advantages, was adverse to his principles,
and as through various indirect channels the reports of
Mr. D .’s embarrassments were assiduously circu-
lated, his attentions to Selina became less ardent, and his
visits less frequent. At length his doubts were confirmed
—the malicious world, who had long envied Mr. D .
the possession of that wealth which had enabled him suc-
cessfully to vie with some of the proudest of the aris-
tocracy, now triumphed in the reverses to which he was
exposed, and luxuriated in the contemplation of the in-
solvency which now appeared inevitable. Selina but rarely
presented herself in those scenes of which she was wont
to be the brightest ornament; and when she did, the ill
concealed triumph of her rivals, and the scornful pity of
pretended friends, sunk deep into a heart too acutely
sensitive for so harsh an ordeal as she was doomed to
undergo. It was at this period of grief and sorrow that
the libertine deemed he might best effect his purpose.
Those who had formerly fluttered round the wealthy city
beauty, anxious to catch the reflection of a passing smile,
had given up the chace, and left him undisputed master of
the field. Although he had now relinquished every idea
of a matrimonial connection, yet his passions were excited
—he projected the hellish scheme of the seduction of this
simple unsophisticated girl. For this purpose he redoubled
his attentions—spoke to her of love, devoted, honorable
love—lamented over the reverses to which her parent’s
mercantile speculations had subjected him, and in the
usual cant of the libertine, assured her that her compa-
rative poverty would only render her more dear to him, as
it would afford him the means of proving the pure disin


terestedness of his affection. Selina—the innocent unsus-
pecting Selina —wept upon the bosom of her lover; but
they were fears of gratitude and love. He pressed for an
immediate union, but at the same time represented the
necessity that existed for the present concealment of their
marriage, lest his friends might be angered by his mating
with one inferior in birth to himself.
In an evil hour, the hapless girl consented—she left her
father’s house, taking with her, at the instigation of her
lover, the splendid assortment of jewellery, wherewith it
had been the pride of her doating parent to deck her lovely
person in her more prosperous days, and which even now
he would not hear of her relinquishing. Knatchbull
easily found, among his dissolute companions, one as heart-
less and depraved as himself, who readily entered into his
views, and in the guise of a Minister of Religion, performed
the mock ceremony of marriage, between his brother in
iniquity, and his innocent victim. But it is sickening to
dwell upon details of such nefarious and heartless guilt.
Ere three months had elapsed, Mr. D. died, broken-
hearted, at the desertion of a daughter in whom he “ had
garnered up his hopes”—and the wretched Selina, (whose
charms now palled upon the sated appetite of her seducer,
who, in addition to his other villainy, had recklessly squan-
dered at the gaming table, and in other scenes of vice, the
money derived from the sale of his victim’s jewels) was
suddenly, and in a brutal manner informed of the de-
ceit by which she had been trepanned into the snares of a
villain—who then abandoned her to her fate—hopeless,
penniless, and unprotected. The result may easily be
imagined—houseless and friendless, an outcast from that
society of which she once shone forth the brightest orna-
ment —scorned and contemned by those who were once
proud to claim her friendship, disgrace, attending on her
steps, and gaunt poverty twining around her its chilling
embrace-—such an accumulation of suffering was too much
for her enfeebled frame—reason tottered on her throne—
and in her aberrations of intellect, she attempted self-de-
struction—rescued by the intrepidity of a passer by, from
a watery grave—the hapless Selina was conveyed to an
hospital, where she was shortly delivered of a still-born
child—and though, in due course of time, her bodily health


was partially restored, yet reason, the “light of life;” had
fled for ever—and after lingering a few years, the inmate of
a Lunatic Asylum, the miserable victim of a villain’s guile
sunk into a premature grave.
The extreme profligacy of Knatchbull’s career had now
completely alienated Ins friends, who refused any longer to
supply him with the means of pursuing a life of uninter-
rupted and reckless debauchery. At this time, however,
they had not utterly abandoned him. A sufficiency for
the support of life was still at his command, and offers were
repeatedly made him of lucrative situations abroad, if he
would consent to tear himself from the disgraceful con-
nections he had now formed, and make one more endeavour
to return to the paths of rectitude. But no —he had now
become associated with a knot of men of the most lawless
and depraved character, and with them resorted to the most
subtle fraud to obtain the funds to minister to the grati-
fication of their vicious habits, and every wile was essayed
to lead the unwary into their snares, and every stratagem
resorted to that the gaming table, the ring, or the turf,
presented to pigeon the dupes who were unfortunate enough
to fall into the power of this gang of sharpers ; and when
these efforts failed in success, the most open violation of the
laws was unhesitatingly adopted to provide the means of
continuing their nefarious debaucheries. Yet even in this
infamous career, fortune for a time seemed to befriend him;
his name, and the interest of his friends, however re-
luctantly extended, still served to shield him from pu-
nishment, which would otherwise have been inevitable;
but so far from this being attended with any favourable
symptoms in his disposition, the ill-timed leniency of his
friends only served to urge him on to greater excesses, and
stimulate him to the commission of further atrocities.
Step by step, Knatchbull had now rapidly descended from
the pinnacle of respectability to the depths of degradation
and crime. Every effort that parental affection could sug-
gest —every means that patenai regard could employ —every
care that friendship could propose, were all in vain essayed
to win him from his evil courses, and lead him once again
to the paths of virtue and of honor. But the Demon
triumphed in his prey—he would not be reclaimed —and all
those who had fondly clung to the hope, that he might yet


be induced to turn and repent —now disparingly abandoned
him to his fate, which rapidly approached its climax.
The Billiard Tables in the Metropolis were a favourite
haunt of Knatchbull and his confederates. At one of
these, he happened to encounter a gentleman who had re-
cently arrived from abroad —to him Knatchbull paid most
assiduous attention; and, in the course of conversation,
learned that he had a considerable sum of money on his
person, which he was about to proceed with to the Bank.
Knatchbull immediately laid his plans—he detained the
gentleman at the Billiard Table until the Bank had closed,
and then proposed that they should dine together, and in
the evening proceed to Vauxhall. This proposal was ac-
ceded to. Knatchbull gave due notice to his associates of
his intentions, and took especial care during dinner, to ply
his conviva with wine until he was well heated with the
liquor. They then proceeded to Vauxhall, where Knatch-
bull, under pretence of an assignation with a female, sepa-
rated from his new acquaintance, promising shortly to re-
turn. He then joined his confederates, and with them
continued, at a respectful distance, to watch his prey, who
now having freely sacrificed at the Shrine of Bacchus,
promised to be an easy victim. Following him, therefore,
into one of the dark walks, they proceeded to hustle him,
and succeeded in making themselves master of his pocket-
book.
Information of the robbery being given to the police,
Knatchbull was arrested and identified as one of the parties
who committed the crime. It was in vain that he ex-
pressed the utmost indignation, and proclaimed himself the
brother of Sir Edward Knatchbull. At length his identity
was proved, but his relatives, utterly disgusted with his
disgraceful career, declined any interference on his behalf,
and abandoned him to his fate. On the 19th of August,
1824, he was therefore tried at the Surry Assizes, the
offence fully proved, and he received sentence of trans-
portation for a term of fourteen years, under the assumed
name of John Fitch.
In the same month, Knatchbull was sent on board the
Leviathan Hulk, then lying in Portsmouth Harbour, and,
as is customary, was told off to a gang of men employed to
work in the Dock Yard. While in this occupation, he


was recognized and assailed by the seamen, to whom his
character, as a ruthless tyrant, had rendered him peculiarly
obnoxious—and to so great an extent was this hatred
carried, that he was ultimately obliged to be kept on board
the Hulk Ship for safety, until removed on board the
Asia.
It has been heretofore asserted, that Knatchbull had
been married, but this we can most explicitly contradict.
The fictitious ceremony, by means of which, he succeeded
in decoying the unhappy Selina D , was the only
approach to wedlock on the part of this abandoned
libertine. It is natural to be supposed, from one of his
character, that his connexions among the female sex were
manifold—and while he was on board the Asia, which was
destined to convey him to this Colony, as well as during the
period he remained on board the Hulk, he was visited by
several prostitutes, who contributed to his assistance in a
pecuniary point of view. But he never received any aid
from his relations or any persons of respectability, his dis-
graceful career having completely annihilated him.
Notwithstanding the enormity of his crimes, and the
baseness of his character, his name and former station still
commanded influence, even where impartiality should reign,
and indulgence should only be accorded, we will not say to
the most worthy, but to the least criminal. On board the
convict ship Asia, instead of being (as should have been the
case) classed and confined amongst his fellow-prisoners,
(but few of them his equals in villany) he was permitted,
forsooth, because he was the son of a baronet, to have a
special apartment assigned for his own use, immediately
under the captain’s cabin; instead of being compelled to
put up with the coarse fare of his fellow-prisoners, he was
pampered with all the delicacies the cuddy could afford—-
was treated, in fact, as an officer, and was placed in super-
intendence over the other convicts, and thus was enabled
to exercise over them that petty tyranny and love of supre-
macy which suited so well his rancorous and domineering
character; and many unfortunates who were, during that
eventful voyage, submitted to his iron rule, bear to the
present day melancholy testimony of the vindictive spirit
which animated him on all occasions, as we have had from
their own Ups the painful evidence.


Amongst the many instances of the Demoniac spirit
which animated this man, we may mention the following as
a case in point: —>
u The Asia was detained four months in the harbour of
Portsmouth before sailing, and during that time, there was
a convict on board of the nßme of Lovett, in a very sickly
state, who was, in a manner put under Knatchbull’s charge,
and was, in reality a servant to him. To this poor fellow
he behaved with the most wanton cruelty, often beating
him in the most distressing manner, and that principally
when so ill that he was unable to perform those menial offi-
ces which Knatchbull required from him. The man died,
and his death was attributed to the treatment he had re-
ceived from Knatchbull’s hands, and great excitement
respecting it prevailed amongst the crew, and a general
spirit of repugnance towards Knatchbull was consequently
evinced throughout the voyage.
He arrived here in the month of April, 1825, and was
immediately sent as a special to Wellington Valley, then
termed the “ swell settlement” being the place were the
better class and more educated of the criminals were gene-
rally sent. He continued in this settlement until 1829.
Four years after his arrival in the colony, when he obtained
a ticket-of-leave, principally owing to his having informed
again st and apprehended several runaways ; and as we are
credibly inform ed, he here commenced the system, which
he afterwards carried to a fearful extent, at a penal settle-
ment —to use the language of Lord Frizzle :
“He made the Giants ’ first, and then he killed them - ’
It was his plan to induce these unfortunate men to abscond
—provided them with the facilities for so long, and subse-
quently pursued, and brought them to justice for the pur-
pose of earning the indulgence which he obtained thereby
—and thus by means fully in keeping with the usual tenour
of his life, he succeeded in obtaining a degree of liberty
which would have been denied to more worthy and deserv-
ing, though less obtrusive individuals-
He now soon managed to find his way to Sydney, where
amidst the circumstances of the times, he contrived to pick
up a suspicious sort of livelihood, and to considerably ex-
tend his reputation for gallantry. In the latter end, how-
ever, of 1831, Knatchbull was apprehended on a charge of


xorgery on a party at Bathust, and tlie evidence being clear
and conclusive against him, on the 25th of February, 1832,
he was convicted in the Supreme Court, and sentence of
death was recorded against him, which sentence was after-
wards commuted to seven years, transportation to Norfolk
Island.
Knatchbull arrivad at that Island about the beginning of
1833, in the government brig Governor Phillip's. Pre-
vious to leaving the hulk Phoenix, then laying in Sydney
Cove, a project was formed amongst several of the prisoners
piratically to seize the vessel that should convey them from
Sydney, by mixing arsenic among the cooking boilers —it
being well known amongst them that a prisoner would be al-
lowed to remain on deek all day for the purpose of cooking
the rations. It is generally understood that Knatchbnll was
the party who procured the poison from Sydney, and the
plot would doubtless have succeeded had not one of the prw
soners —not in the plot —heard of the diabolical attempt,
and immediately communicated the circumstance to Captain
Lewis, then commanding the brig, and thereby saved the
lives of a detatchment of the 4th Regiment, as well as the
crew. Upon examining that portion of the vessel set apart
for the prisoners, a quantity of arsenic (two or three pounds
in weight) was found scattered amongst the teir of chain
cable on the prisoner’s deck. A number of the “ Tea
Sweeteners,” (as the draft of prisoners, to which he belonged
on that occasion were afterwards facetiously termed) were
placed in the gaol gang in heavy irons for different periods.
Knatchbull, shortly after his arrival on the Island, was
kept apart from the rest of the prisoners, being placed in the
stables. But, although his work was, in comparison with
that of his unfortunate fellow prisoners, trifling. He
neglected it*, and, anxious to find time to concoct further
plans of villainy, he feigned sickness, and for a considerable
time figured on crutches, as suffering from an attack of pa-
ralysis, whice deprived him of the use of his legs. During
this period, it is confidently asserted, that he contrived the
, meeting which broke out in January, 1834 ;in which seve-
ral prisoners were shot dead. Thirteen were hanged, and
many others had long periods added to their colonial sen-
tences.
Knatchbull figured conspicuously in this affair. He was


admitted an approver (through the (instrumentality of Cap-
tain Lambert, of her Majesty’s then oft the
island,) and handed over to Captain Fyans of the 4th
(King’s Own) Regiment, then Commandant. On that oc-
casion he is said to have given in to the authorities a long
list of the mutineers who were in the secret, but whom, it
afterwards appeared, were totally ignorant of the contem-
plated crime ; however at this time he had a very narrow
escape from the halter.
Captain Lambert had known him when an officer in the
Navy, and succeeded in saving him in the manner above
described.
The authorities at Norfolk Island did not consider it safe
(after giving the information above alluded to) to allow this
miscreant to remain on the island, as there is little doubt
but he would have fallen a victim to the just resentment
of some of the unfortunate victims in the above transaction.
Having served his se tenee in Norfolk 1 land, ha again re'
turned to Sydney, and from thence to Port Macquarie Win e
here, finding that his character had prcc ded him, he assumed
the garb of sancti y, and alth ugh, his hypocrisy was penetrated
by many, and his ‘ private conduct’ proved that he was in every
re pect unchanged, yet he had still sufficient ‘ tact’ to eouceal
the more glaring views of his nature, and confine himself
within the bounds of decency, to such an extent, as to deceive
the authorities, those who, deeming that a thorough reforma-
tion had taken place, and that he was now' worthy of some
indulgence, he wa on the recommendation of several gentlemen
and magistrates of the territory, allowed in July 1842 a ticket-
of leave for that district.
In July last, he again paid a visit to Sydney, when he
applied in person, direct to Sir George Gipps, for an alteration
>f his ticket to Sydney, staling as a r.ason, that he could
»btain no employee it in the district of Port Macquarie by
which he could live; he also stated to Sir George that he was
• ffered employment in Sidney, by a Mr. Lewis, residing in
Sussex street, who would give him the charge of a small
easting craft, if he could but obtain the enlargement of his
icket. Sir Gcotg' sent for Mr. Ryan, of Hyde Park Barracks
old informed him of the circumstances, directed him to see Mr.
Lewis and ascertain whether what had been said respecting
him was correct. This Mr. Ryan did, and finding that Mr.
Lewis would give him such employment, Sir Geerge directed
that a ticket of leave passport should be granted to Knatchbull,
to trade on the co .its in the cutter Thomas and Harriet, or the


schooner Waterwitch. At the beginning of the month of Jan
uary, Mr. Lewis became insolvent, and returned the passport
to Mr, Ryan,statin?, that it was only on account of his in’
solvency that he discontinued to employ Knatchbull. As how-
ever, that person did not come to report himself, he gave in-
structions to have him looked after, when the commission of
the horrid crime for which he is to suffer, brought him again
into the hands of justice. During the time that Knatchbull
was lurking about Sydney, there is abundant reason to believe
that he was on the watch to obtain money, either by fraud,
forgery, or robbery, but being disappointed of opportunities of
exercising his talents in these acts, he, as a last resource, dared
even murder itself, rather than restrain the detestable passions
which actuated him.
After leaving Mr, Lewis’s employ, Knatchbull took lodgings
at the house of a man named Hellowell, Clarence lane.
ft was during this period, while he was thus at large in
Sydney, that Knatchbull formed au acquaintance with a res-
pectable widow, and the representations he made, with regard
to his family and prospects as well as by the personal affection
he professed towards the object of his attention, succeeded in
winning from her a promise of becoming his wife—the day
for the wedding was appointed and, it is said that one of the
causes which urged this miserable wretch on to the commission
of the last dread crime, was to procure a sufficient sum of momy
to meet the expenses of his intended marriage, and make such
an appearance on the occasion as would bear out the vaunting
representations he had made, with respect to himself and his
expectations.
On the night of the 6th January, the diabolical act, for which
he now stands in forfeit of his life, was committed. On Thurs-
day the IJth of January, Mrs. Jamieson died, and on the same
day a Coroner’s inquest was held on the body, and a virdict
of wilful murder returned. On the 23td, his trial came on at
the Supreme Court, when he was convicted of the crime, and
sentenced to death. An objection was afterwards made by
the prisoner’s Counsel, in arrest of execution as to the formal-
ity of the sentence, but on Thursday, the Ist February, their
honors the Judges confirmed the doom already pronounced.
Having thns presented to our readers, an authentic though
necessarily brief memoir of the wretched man we must disclaim
any charge of personal ill feeling, save that which must arise in
every well constituted mind against the perpetrator of a crime,
so black, so repugnant to humanity, and if we have drawn
aside the veil which shrouded from public view, his previous
career, it is in the hope that by a forcible delineation of the ill
effects arising, from the unrestrained sway of impetuous pas-
sion his fate may prevent others yielding to the impulses of their
own desires and falling from the highest pinnacle of fame and
fortune to the lowest depths of disgrace and infamy.


THE TRIAL.
Supreme Court—Criminal Side — Wednesday , Jan. 24, 1844
Before His Honor Mr Justice Burton and the following Jury :
John Tingcombe, (foreman), William Woolscott, James Lethbridge
Templar James Uptom. George Talbott George Venables Frederick
Thompson, James Urquhart, W. J H. Thorne, Peter Henry Valen-
tine, John Brown Viles, and George Tabor.
John Fitch, alias John Knatchbull was placed at tho bar indicted
for the wilful murder of one Ellen Jamieson by striking her on the
head with a tomahawk, on the 6th of January instant, thereby inflict-
ing divers mortal wounds of which the said Ellen Jamieson expired on
the 18th of the said month, A. second count of the indictment charged
the prisoner with having committed the assault which caused the
death of the said Ellen Jamieson by forcibly casting her on the ground
and beating her with his hands and feet.
Mr. Lowe who appeared as counsel for the prisoner, endeavoured to
oppose some technical objections, which were overruled by the Bench
He then endeavoured to procure a postponement of the trial on the
affidavit of the prisoner setting forth the absence af an essential wit-
ness, but the affidavit being defective, His Honor would not entertain
the proposal, and the trial was consequently proceeded with.
The Attorney General then opened the case on behalf of the
frown, remarking that when they had heard the information read and
found that.the prisoner at the bar was indicted for so serious a charge
as that of murder a charge which if proved would entail the forfeit
ure of his life -he presumed that he need scarcely caution the Jury
against allowing themselves to be influenced by any reports which they
might have heard out of Court. They had heard an affidavit read in
support of an application for postponement, one of tre reasons for which
was for the excitement alleged to exist in the public mind at the pre-
sent time, to such an extent as probably to prevent the prisoner from
having a fair and impartial trial This statement, perhaps, alluded to
.the publication in the newspapers of the evidence and proceedings at
the Coroner’s inquest which had been held upon the body of the un-
fortunate deceased; and although it must be admitted that the publi-
cation of proceedings of this description did much good, it could not
be denied on the other hand that they was calculated to produ e much
evil - and the greatest evil probably of all, was its possessing the pub-
lic mind with a chain of evidence and circumstances which might not
be made evident in the trial, and thus perhaps create a prejudice
against the prisoner. If any of the Jury had read the reports
alluded to, they must dismiss them wholly from their minds, and form
their opi don solely upon the evidence which might be brought under
their notice by him the (Attorney General) ,by which evidence alone
the case must stand or fall He presented the case to them, no- one of
particular interest, but as an ordiuary case of murder, a crime he was
sorry too say to common in this colony; for although the prisoner
might have acquired a sufficient notoriety to occasion a crowd of pe;-


sons to come to the Court for the purpose of hearing his trial there was
no reason why any distinction should be made upon that ground be-
tween this and any other case of a similar description.
The Attorney General then went into a detail of the circum-
stances of the case, and concluded by saying, that if the instructions
with which he had been furnished, were to be depended upon, he had
no doubt he should be able to fix the guilt of the prisoner beyond the
possibility of a doubt.
On the part of the prosecution, several witnesses were examined*
and their joint evidence may be summed up in a brief space
The facts were that the prisoner was seen lurking about the door of
deceased’s house, at the corner of Kent street and Margaret place,
for upwards of an hour and a half, by Mr. Shalles, the builder, and
was finally seen by the same party to enter the house, when suspecting
the evil nature of his intentions, Mr. Shalles ran up to the door and
listened —hearing no sound except a noise like that of some one break •
ing a cocoanut with a hammer, he suspected foul play, and procured
assistance of a Mr Jaques and others, by whom the house was forci-
bly entered, and the prisoner secured. On entering the house the
deceased was found lying insensible, with her head dreadfully cut, but
the instrument with which these injuries had been inflicted was not
discovered until the next day, when Mrs Jaques, who was attending
on the deceased, found a tomahawk spotted with blood concealed
between the mattrass and battons under the bed whereon Mrs, Jamie-
son was then lying, which tomahawk was proved afterwards to be the
property of one Charles Holliwell, with whom the prisoner was then
lodging, and in whose.yard it had been openly lying for several months
past, so that it might easily have been removed by the prisoner. The
prisoner was also seen by two of the witnesses while up-stairs, and
was observed to push aside the blind and look out upon them when
the alarm had been given. On getting the prisoner to the watch-
house. and searching him, a woman’s pocket was found upon him,
containing ten shillings and eighteen sixpences and apparently torn
by force from her person ; they also found a bag containing i. 4 2s. Bd,
in silver, £ 1 Is also in silver, six, £1 notes, and one five, the whole
of which money had been concealed on various parts of his person.
Besides this money they found six bankbills, three of which were fiilled
up for £SO each, signed by the prisoner, and addressed to Edward
Knatchbull, and the other left blank as far as the amount and sigua
ture were concerned, but addressed to the same party. Upon examin-
ing the prisoner’s trousers they were found to be spotted with blood
and they were accordingly taken from him for production at the trial.
The trousers were accordingly produced and sworn to, and the toma-
hawk and pocket were also produced, but neither of them could be
proved by the police to be the identical ones procured in the manner
above stated. The tomahawk, however, was sworn to by Mr and
Mrs. Jacques as the one which was found on the premises, and lu
spepter v olloy, although he could not swear positively tfast the pocket
produced was the one found upon the prisoner, but stated, he believed
that it was so, inasmuch as it very ranch resembled that article. The
pocket was likewise sworn to by a Mrs Brown as having belo:ged to
the deceased. 1 o prove that the deceased had lost her life from the


‘juries she had received, Mr. Jones of Jamison street, the surgeon
■vho had been first called to the unfortunate woman, was examined,
rnd after describing the nature of the wounds, and the probability of
heir having been inflicted by such an instrument as the tomahawk
produced gave it as his decided opinion that her death had been
produced by those wounds
After the case for the Crown had closed,
Mr Lowe rose to address the Jury on behalf of the prisoner Afte r
the shocking detail which had been laid before them by the witnesses
called on behalf of the Crown it must (he said) be a relief to their
minds to know that it was not his intention to shock their feelings by
a recapitulation of those harrowing circumstances. To lay that evi-
dence impartially before them, and to comment upon its various
bearings, was constitutionally the duty of the Judge, and he should
leave that evidence, accompanied by the prisoner’s denial of guilt, in
the hands of his Honor, confident that, on addressing ihena upon it, he
woul not fail to lay the case before them in as merciful a light towards
the unfortunate prisoner at the bar as consistently with his duty he
could do« His Honor would tell them that if the slightest doubt
should arise in their minds as to the prisoner’s guilt, they would be
bound to throw all the benefit of that doubt into the scale of mercy.
But as he had before said, it was not his intention to enter iato a cir-
cumstantial detail, for the duty which devolved upon him that day
was of a very different kind ; and he should endeavour to show that,
then supposing for the sake of argument the statements of all the pre-
ceding witnesses had been true, the prisoner was still one of those
persons for whom laws had not been made, and who, although for the
peace and welfare of society he ought to be placed under the most
severe restraint, ought not to be held responsible for his actions. It
was not for the good of society that the life of any man who could not
be held legally responsible for his actions should be taken ; and
he must most earnestly impress it on the minds of the Jury that
they did not sit there merely as the avengers of blood. It was not
because a murder had been committed, with the terrible particulars
of which the evidenc for the Crom had rendered them so familiar,
that they necessarily were called upon to avenge that mu der by deli-
vering a verdict which should deprive another fellow creature of life;
for if any circumstances should have ar.seu which might reasonably
lead them to the conclusion that the prisoner, provided he committed
the crime at all had laboured at the time underja condition of mind
which rendered him unable to control his own actions—had acted
under an invincible and unavoidable necessity they would be doing
justice to their country by at once acquitting him upon that ground,
of the crime laid to his charge
fuch was the unhappy state of the prisoner at the bar, and if he hail
.succeeded in obtaining the postponement of trial for which he had
applied in an earlier period of the day, he was not without a hope
that he should have been enabled to procure evidence showing from
the annals of the noble family with which the prisoner was u fortu-
nately connected, that the existence of this disease had bee i already
heir bane, 1 hey were doubtless well informed as to the past history


nf the unfortunate man then upon his trial, and he trusted he should
have the indulgence of the Court on referring to that history in support
of his argument Ihe prisoner was of a noble family, and began
life with suoh fair prospects tha’ he was promoted to the rank of Con-
mander in the British Navy, for his gallantry in the service of his
country and it could hardly be credited that with these fair prospects
with the high Parliamentary interest which the prisoner undoubtedly
possessed, with every motive in short to induce a continuance and
probity of action, he should be plunged into such self created vicissi
tudes unless labouring under some mental infirmity which paralysed
his better nature. The impulse under which the prisoner had acted,
if really guilty of the crime laid to his charge, might be almost desig-
nated as one of a childish nature, for no man in possession of his
faculties would have perpetrated such an offence as this, with almost
a certainty of immediate detection ; which certainty, it was clear from
the nature of the evidence adduced on behalf of the Crown, the pri-
soner must have been fully conscious of. It was clear that a man
who had acted so must have been under the influence of an uncontrol-
lable des re to do the deed alluded to, for it was easy to conceive that
if any determined and more experienced ruffian had been bent upon
the crime, he would have taken much better care to secure himself
from detection. The learned gentleman continued to say, that, he was
aware of the narrow imaginations of our forefathers, twhich would
confine the attention of a Jury to ihe simple ffct of, whether a person
charged did or dtd not commit the crime of which he was accused;
but he could only hope fpr the dawning of a brighter day, when their
aitention might be extended also to a full enquiry into the motive,
which had led to that crime. In conclusion, he might tell them that,
while holding in their hands two of the attributes of God-the power
of giving life or awarding death, they should take upon thems elves
two others of those heavenly attributes—justice and mercy; and
tempering the one with the other, should determine whether, after a
careful consideration, they could believe that a man with the great ad
vantages originally possessed by the prisoner could have fallen, step
by step, into the lowest depths of disgrace, unless urged on by some
resistless demon of insanity. He would with these remarks leave
the ease in the hands of the Jury, confiding that they would divest
themselves of any impressions, which they might have rece ved out of
doors, and would return a fair and impartial virdict.
i he learned gentleman then called, Patrick Harnett, Fsq . Colonia l
surgeon, that he had known tho prisoner at Norfolk Island
v.,i‘ re he hid come under witness’s notice, in consequence of some
snght ailments, but that he had never had an opportunity of ascertain-
ing th i precise condition of the prisoner’s mind.
the hev Vlr Murphy, Homan Catholic clergyman, was then
called, and stated that he had been acquainted with the prisoner in
the years ! 817 and 1318, when (he the prisoner) was a captain in the
navy,but had never had any opportunity of forming a judument as
to the state of his mind, ° J 6
defei:ce . aad the Attorney General intimated
that it was not his intention to offer any thing in reply.


His Honor charged the jury at considerable length, and entered
into a full recapitulation of the evidence which had been adduced.
The Jury without leaving the box returned a verdict of Guilty;
and the Attorney General having prayed the Judgment of ihe
Court in the usual way, the prisoner was asked if he had anything to
say why such Judgment should not be passed upon him ;
The prisoner said, that if the witness Tattersal, for the purpose of
procuring whom he had applied for a postponement, had been there
to give evidence, he should have been able to contradict a great por-
tion of Mr. Shallis’s statement, by proviug a complete alibi up to
eleven or twelve o’clock at night, and having satisfied the C ourt upon
that point, he had no doubt he should have been able to prove his
innocence in other respects. It was true, however, that he had been
found guilty by a Jury of his countrymen, and as they had acted to
the best of their judgment upon the evidence produced, he could not
complain. He appealed however to the Conrt, whether it was prob-
able that a man like him, educated in tha lap of affluence, and brought
up to an honorable profession—one who had been in twen’y two
general engagements, and had received eleven wounds in the service
of his country, would be guilty of so base—so vile, and so disgraceful
an action, as to murder a defenceless woman ? - the heait of a British
seamen was always mild and averse to any such disgraceful conduct.
He submitted also, that he had not sufficient time to prepare himself
properly for his trial, as he had only had three clear days’ notice of
its approach, and expressed a hope that his Honor would deal as leni-
ently with him as was consistent with his duty.
His Honor prodeeded in a most solemn and impressive manner to
pronounce sentence of death upon the prisoner, and in addressing
him previous to passing such sentence, aeraarked, that the prisoner
complained that he had not had sufficient time allowed him to prepare
for his earthly trial, but, with the full knowledge of what he was about ,
he had given the unfortunate deceased far less time to prepare for the
more awful arraignment before the bar of her Maker ; and he must
make a good use of the time still left him, as his days were now num-
bered. it was not for him to stop the source of mercy, but he could
see no possible reason for extending it to so aggravated a case as that
of the prisoner. His Honor then proceeded to pass upon the prisoner
the final sentence of the court.
The demeanour of the prisoner throughout the trial was very firm,
and although evidently affected, particularly at its conclusion, he ex-
hibited but little symptoms of agitation, except in the tremulous tones
of his voice while addressing the Court, previous to the passing of the
sentence- He left the Court with a firm step.
An attempt was subsequently made by the Counsel of the prisoner,
Mr. Lowe, to invalidate the verdict of the jury, but after a patient
and laborious investigation, which occupied a considerable time, thr
judges unanimously gave as their opinion, that the sentence was pe«e
fectly just, and it was ordered to be carried into effect accordingly.


DEPORTMENT UNDER SENTENCE.
From the period that the ratification of his sentence was commm;
cated to him, the prisoner's demeanour exhibited a strange compoun
of despair and hope. It is pitiable to dwell upon scenes such as mm
have been presented to the visitors of this unhappy man. We ar
well aware that every consolation that religion and human sympath\
could afford, were tendered to him by the Reverend and truly piou
gentlemen, whose duty and Christian feeling induced to visit him in
his confinement; and it isnot for weak and erring mortals like our
selves to presume to judge of the heart of man under such awful cir
cumstances; we can only express our fervent hope that when in th<
“ eleventh hour ” the rays of divine mercy may have reached hi;
heart, and that sincere penitence prepared him for the dreadful or
deal he was doomed to meet.
THE EXECUTION.
On Tuesday the I3th instant the last sentence of the law was car*
ried into effect, upon the wretched being. It had been rumoured
that it was his intention to make a full confession of his atrociou
guilt, as he had previously done in private, to the officiating clergy-
men. This was sufficient to attract the most numerous assemblage,
that we have ever witnessed on a similar occasion in Sydney, the ma-
jority of whom we should say, were females and children ; a conside-
rable detachment of Military, aided by the Mounted Police, were on
the spot at an early hour ; and we are happy to state their services
were not requisite, as the utmost order and regularity pervaded the
vast assembly. At 9 o’clock precisely, the bell commenced to toll, and
it’s funeral sound proclaiming, that, in a few minutes a soul would be
called to render up it’s account, at the bar of a justly offended Deity*
and seemed to strike no inconsiderable awe, into the minds of alf pre-
sent—at about ten minutes past 9, the melancholy procession appeared
the w etched culprit seemed overwhelmed with the sense of his sii-
uation—horror and dismay were depicted in his pale and amacialed
countenance, as with much difficulty he draged his attenuated frame
towords the last melancholy scene of his eventful and guilty life. He
was attended by two clergymen of the established Church, with whom
he seemed to converse with much earnestness, though with apparent
difficulty. Ke made an attempt to address the assemblage, in fact
from the state of terror and inanimation to which he was reduced, we
should say, that such an effort would have been unavailing - after
shaking hands with the Reverend gentlemen, who attended him, he
prepared for his fate, and abont half past nine o’clock was launched
into eternity— a melancholy instance of the inefficiency of the best
gifts of nature, and of fortune—of birth and of talent, when impetuous
and overwhelming passion is permitted to assume the mastery over
reason.
After hanging the usual time, the body was cut down and delivered
for interment.
The mighty concourse then separated in the most orderly manner.








