





*
HyiCSiaSS « I—liwnln »" Hill «I'*WS >rnk
II -. ||
fßfm ' Wr JQI mm
l&m . HQWjB' * JHr f; ffiß SM|M
mm ,$% if/rTW
B v ' H
H NB
M s ■ • Br* |Py
SI &t i4&mi®w^-
ir v»• ..j • i i.l *" 11 '
The LIFE and Extraordi-
nary Adventures of
George Barrington,
Now under fentence of transportation,
f in Newgate, for picking the pocket of
Mr. Townfend, at Enfield races.
/ v • . . • •. * * .
Containing, an account of the various
robberies he has committed, ill Eng«-
land, Ireland, and Scotland.
Alfo, his love exploits, fufferings oa
board the hulks at Woolwich, various
v trials, famous fpeeches, &c. &c.
Printtd and Sold mLondon.
(Price ONE PENNY.)


- \ /
i jST* ,i f w Itf • f jK; 4 M g ' f
The Life of Barrington.
QEQRGE BARRJNGTON, alias Waidron, alias
Jones, the hero of thefe memoirs, was born at
JUfh, in Ireland, 1X1758. His mother's name vas
Waldron, a milliner of that town ; the name of his
father was Barrington, captain in a marching regi-
ment quartered at Rufh. When fix years of age,
his father treated him with the titmoft tendernefs s
put him under the direction of Mr. Jones, ,an apo-
thecary of Dublin, who fent him to a common fchool
for a twelvemonth, and then removed him to a
grammar fchool, where he continued until twelve
years old. when he was much famed For his ingenui-
ty in mifchief. Mr. Jones then took him into his
iioufo, to rnltruet him in the bufinefs of furgeoh, a-
* poth'etaty, and man-midwife. *•"' •
In this occupation he might foon hive become a
prof cicnt, but he gave his attention entirely to the
Inventing and making of furgeon's inftruments. '
Vf hen lixteen years of age, he ruffled into every
kind of extravagance, frequented .all public places
and getting acquainted with a wo-
man,named Ranby, her extravagance greatly em-
fcarrafTed him ; his father being in America, arid his
too fmall for fuch cxpenfivc .ways.
About this time ap Irifh member of parliament
had his pocket picked at the Dublin theatre, and fuf-
piciorr falling on our hero, he was, for the firft time,
laken iflto cuflody ; but difeharged with honour, on
tdiiflg the name of his ra&ffceiv
X,/ . *
■ /■■ ■ , , f '% \ " J f*


Soon after this, Mr. Jones miffed a twenty pound
note, and feven guineas, and fufpe&d his appren-
tice ; but he put on a look of innocence, denied the
charge, and his rnafter dropped the enquiry.
In 1774, Harrington's girl was detetled attempting
to pick the pocket of the Biffiop of K. who only
gave her a moral admonition^
Soon after this they went to the theatre, where
file picked the pocket of Lord M. and was deleted |
Harrington was alio fecured as an accomplice*; on
fearching them, the watch was found in his breech-
es, and they were both fent to prifon. But Lord M,
knowing Harrington's father, would not profecutc.
rhe fcandal of this, and the perfuafion of friends,
induced him to go as furgeori's mate from Dublin to
the Weft Indies, After this vnvi^
. . ■ aci LniS v °yag€ f he came to
.London in 1775.
In the April of that year he firft made his appear,
ance atiWftreet, by the name of Brown, charged
with ffealing a lady's purfe ; but he was difcharged.
nJuly he was again brought to the office,
iteahng Captain Sunderland s watch, and fully com-
mitted, but the captain being ordered to America,
e 01 e the trial came on, Harrington got off. %
«, * le foon after this S ot acquainted withMifs Weft
at ovent Garden theatre, and they Jived as man
an ■ v.j.c, attending all public places. I n this part,
rierfhip, they robbed Mr. Day of his watch, at the
Pantheon, for which they were both apprehended,
tried, ana acquitted, <
la 1776, Bar ring ton was ex toned before Sir J,


Fielding, for robbing Mifs Hurft of a filver watch,
andsl. He was committed, but the bill not found.
He fketched a plan for-a knife with three joints,
1 • '
and got a cutler near the Mews to make it, for which
he paid two guineas. But the man alking what it
was for, Barrington laid, can you keep a fecret P
Yes. It is a device for picking of pockets, when the
pocket is too fmall to admit the hand. If lam dole
to the perfon I put on one joint, if at a diftance,twO,
if far off, three. He then took his leave, and the
cutler foon after found he had paid dear for his cu-
riofity, having loft two guineas and a half out of his
pocket.
In 1775, Prince Orlow, a Ruffian nobleman, paid
a vifit to this court, and going to Covent Garden thea-
tre, he got clofe to the Prince, and conveyed a dia-
mond fnuff-box, faid to be worth 40,0001. from the
waiftcoat pocket of that nobleman into his own ; but
not fo dexteroufly as to efcape dete&ion ; the noble-
man felt the lofs, and feized Barrington, when a icuf-.
He and uproar enfued, in the midft of which, he, in
a' fecret manner, flid the box into the owner s hand.
He was committed, but no profecution followed.
A few weeks after this, he was turned out of the
lobby of the houfe of lords, being known by a Mi.
G. againil whom vowing revenge, lie was in prilon
a long time, for want of furetics to keep the peace.
After his relcafe, he was detected robbing Mrs..
Dudman, and committed lor trial.
He Was inditted for dealing a pair of ituds, a pus «i
, half a gui*ea, and three and iixpence, She, Iwoie
. -* r *


pofitively to his picking her pocket, and took th c
purfe out of his hand ; which was confirmed by othe'
witnefles. This was December the 18th, 1776, at
Drury-Lane playhoufe, when the King and Queen
were there. He made an artful defence, but
Jury found him guilty, and hewasfent on board the
hulks for three yeaasr ; where being fafely lodged.
Mils Weft fent him conftantly two guineas per week,
and vilited him as often as convenient.
In one of theft; excurftons, fhe picked the pocket
of the celebrated David Brown Dignam, a prifoner
onboard the hulks, who had plenty of cafh but Bar-
- rington made her reftore it.
This woman was tried feven times at the Old
Bailey; three of which fhe was found guilty. The
of which was on the 14th of February, 1777, for
robbing Squire Affleck, of a watch, chain, and feals„
She was fentenced to three years imprifpnment in
i * •"
Newgate, about the expiration of which time fhe
caught the gaol diftemper, and loon after died.
Barrington was dcte&ed, in St. Paul's cathedral,
picking the pocket of Mrs. Montague, and taken to
the Crown in St. Paul's church-yard, where alking
leave of the conftable to go backwards, he made his
efcape. H y , t ... „ ■
lie got into company with John Brown, E£q;
and while in eonverfation, picked his pocket *of 40
guineas, a gold watch, and feals. y.
Upon this booty he lived, till he was apprehend-
ed for robbing Elizabeth Ironmonger, and indi&ed
fifr ftsaling a watch, a ftlk watch firing, and a feal


fet in metal, privately from her perfon, Match 15,
1778, She depofed, that fhe went to* St. Pulchre's
Church to hear a charity fer mon, and loft her watch.
AM- t T
Mr. Payne apprehended Barrington, and lea rc hi tig
him, iihe watch dropped from his hair.
Being called upon for his defence, "lie addreflcd
the Jury in a very ingenious and artful manner.
3They found him guilty of 'dealing, but not pri-
*e lately, and was lent on board the hulks for five years,
But m-thc end of four was pardoned, on .condition
of quitting the kingdom, which not doing, he was
again taken up, and ferved the remainder .of his time
in Newgate. /' •• " '
. On February 28, 1784, lie "w as tried for picking
the pocket of Sir Godfrey Wcbfter, Bart, and ac-
quitted. And, in April 7, 1785, for picking the >:
pocket of John BagfLaw, Efq; when he was likewifc J/ '
acquitted.
On the tpth of January, 1787., he picked &he pock-
et of Mr. Lc Meforier, was detected, and delivered
into the hands of a conftable, who fuffcrcd him to
U ' ' »* 'Jr.'
efcape, when he Went to Edinburgh, but being there
lenown, he went to Glafgow, and engaged with a
company of comedians, when he fobbed their ward-
robe, and accompanied by the. Juliet of their ftage,
made off, and went to Leith races, where he picked
the pocket of Mr. Campbell of a gold watch, and 20'.
guineas, and deferring his fair companion., went to
' Carlifle, where meeting Jack Brown, an old ac-
quaintance, they fet up an E O table.
From thence they ws©t to .Xferby races., where a
' #.'■ 1 ■ f • * ".'*3 '»> 't » •*»


Mr. H. of that town, having won upwards of 70k
at their table, our h|*o followed him down flairs, and
picked his pocket *of the caSfh ; but he almoft imme-
diately miffing it, feized George by the coat, crying
out for help, but ere that help came, found himfelf
in poffeftion of nothing but a coat. Confufion im-
mediately followed, when Brown put the lights put,
fwept the money into his pockets, and got off. In
revenge for which, the company broke their E. Q.
table to pieces.
Out hero then went to the mufic meeting at York,
where he picked up about Sol. and feveral watches.
from thence he went to Ncwcaltle, and being at
the theatre one evening, a gentleman in one of the
boxes loft his watch, when Harrington being fufpecl-
ed, was foon feeured ; but in his way to a place of
confinement, be dropped his booty in the ftreet, and
it was found the next morning. When before the
Juftice, a Gentleman from London knowing hi in, he
was detained, and notice lent to Bow-ftreet, when he
was brought up by a habeas corpus, and fafdy lodged
in Newgate.
Being outlawed, he was brought up to the Court
o. King s Bench, when, after a variety of arguments,
the outlawry was reverfed, and he was tried at the
Old Bailey, for picking the pocket of Mr. Le Mefu-
ner, and for want of fufficient evidence, acquitted.
On Weenefday morning, Sept. s 5, i m *was
arraigned for Healing, on the 1 ft, of September, a
gold watch, chain and fcals, and a metal key* the
property of Henry Hare To wn fend, r Ef<j;


Mr. Townfend fworn.
On the ift of September I was at Enfield Marih,
on account of the races ; I believe it was near two
o'clock, that is the time fixed for the horfes to ftart;
J
I was on foot: I went on the ground in a phaeton ;
I got out of the phaeton, and was walking about; I
did not mifs my watch till I was fpoke to by a Mr.
Blades; I miffed it from my waiflcoat pocket; I had
a new pair of leather breeches an, and was afraid
the feals would dirt them ; it was a gold watch and
chain, and metal key ; I felt my watch in my pock-
et after I came on the ground ; I think it mufl have
been a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes before
I miffed it. I recovered my watch again, but Ido
not recolleft who produced it to mc } the watch was
given to Lady Lake, and fhc took it home with her;
and when we took Mr. Barrington before the Juf-
tice, I fent for the watch, and the watch was given
te me by a fervant.
John Widduck iworn.
• I am coachman to Mr. Townfend, I knew no-
thing of the matter till I helped to take the prifoner
to the booth ; I had "one hand on his collar, and the
other hold of his right hand, which was open. He
could have nothing at all in his right hand. I was
left in care of him. I put him at the-kack of the
booth, and there was a carpet nailed at the back of
that. • ITaw the watch drop "between Mr. Barring-
ton and the carpet. It apparently fell on the left
fide of Him/ behind him ; I faw it as it jingled down,
* *" _ ...
before it reached the ground, -


Mary Dandy fworn.
I was in the next booth to that in which the pri-
foner was brought in ; I was but a very little way off
of him ; there was nobody between him and me •
*/ • !
nothing but the partition ; I was next the partition;
the prifoner was fidewavs to tne when he dropped
the watch on his fide ; he dropped the watch fr&m
his hand-; I told him of it at the time ; I cannotr£-
' * > * r s . * * 4
colleft which hand, his hand was by the fide of him
at the time I faw it drop from him, and I mention*
4» • \ .
ed it to him at the time.
. .. ' '• *
Barrington being called upon for. his defence, ad-
ckeffed the Court in that fenfible and pathetic man-
ager, which he is fo capable of doing.
He made feveral remarks upon the evidence a-
gainft him, , endeavouring to prove that it was im-
poflible they could diftinflly fee from whom the
watch was thrown to the ground,
' * " "* : ' ~ N .
After endeavouring, by every pathetic utterance*
to raife compaihon in the hearts of ; the Jury, he left
his fate to their determination.
* ' ~ y -- -♦ x >r> ' , ' *
The Jury, after a fhort confultation, found him-
GUILTY,.
On Wednefday, September the 22a, being the
feyentjr aud.lafl day of this feflion. this
George Barrington, was,fet to the bar, in order to
receive fentencc. .
1 . <■ * ,* * *•. * ' Z' * * ' *
Mr. R ECOID F, R. , ,
George Barrington : the fentence of the Court
upon you, is, that you be tranlpontcd.. for the term


of feVen wars, to parts beyond the feas, to fuch
place as His Majeftv, with the advice of his Privy
Council, ill all thiuk hi to. declare and appoint#
: GEORGE BARRINGTON.
My Lord,
Iliad a few words to fay, why fentence of death
fhould not be faffed upon me j I had much to fay 3
though I fhall fay but little cn the oceafion.
Notwithftanding I have the beft opinion of his
Lordfhip s candour, and have no wifh br pleafure
in tailing a reflection on any pcrfon whatever*; but
I cannot help dbferving, that it is the ftrange lot of
fome perfons through life, that with the beft willies,
the beft endeavours, and the beft intentions, they
arc not able to efcape the envenomed tooth of ca-
lumny ; whatever they fay or do is fo twifted and
perverted from the reality, that they will Meet with
cenfures and misfortunes, where they were entitled
perhaps to iuceefs and praife.
The world, my Lord, has given me credit for*
ttludh more abilities than I am confident of pofiefs-
ing ; but the world (hould alio coniider. that the
great'© ft abilities may be fo obftruffced by the merce-
V * ' - * v '+
nary nature of iome unfeeling minds, as to render
them entirely ufelefs to the poffeflhr.
Where was the generous and powerful man that
«• . JK- v r Vl
w-oulo come forward and lav. vou have fome bi 4-
, • 9
ties, which might be of lervice to yourfelf and to
others, but you have much to ftruggle with ; I foci
jfo-c your' Situation, and will place ih a coftditi-


on to try the fincerity of your intentions; and as
long as you aft with diligence and fidelity, you (hall
not want for countenance and protcft'on ?
But, my Lord, the die is caft I I am prepared to
meet the fentence of the court <with tefpe&ful refig-
nation ; and the painful lot affigned me, I hope,
with becoming refjgnation. ,< , '
Mr. Barrington then made a low bow, and re-
tired.
A NEW SONG.
TUNh— Keeper.
\f.E fcarnps, ye pads, ye divers, who, go out
upon the lay,
Draw near, and give attention unto the words I fay,
Concerning of George Harrington, the noted prig I
mean, s .
Who at balls, at plays, and churches fo often has
been feen.
•« , '* A '* ■* '<* «• • *%■ f- , , . 7
With his row tie dow, .
" <*" i . « ' " <f
n boaid the hulks at Woolwich this knowing prig
they lent,
For handling of his daddies, that there he might
repent,
Was Weft ihe cry'd, dear Georgy.! J pray now do
not grieve,
THO quid a week X will allow, your for,row to re-
lieve.


From Campbell's lag at length got clear, loft Anff
I . for to regain,
A curious chive he then had made, the lourto obtaafi, i
The cutler was not lcary, lb it's ufe he wilh'd to
1 know,
,Gcorgv bon'd his quids, and bought a bn'tlh, his
dexterity to fhew. & I j
i ," f ( *
' V"* f*"'i Vt I ' •*' ■*' '• ' 1 '
At length got bon'd at Epfield, for milling of a
yack.
Our hero's patter would not do, nor keep a witnefs
back,
George he was found guilty, they queer'd the know-
ing know^
The Judge did fentence pafs, you to Botany mufl
S°-
-*.! . 1 '
* * ' l \ *
This King of all the KnucklcrS he is at length Come
home,
His reign is* at a'n end, he to foreign parts niuft roam,
So ye fcamps, ye pads, and divers, v I bid ye al
»• •farewel,
No more at the fpell-kens will Georgy cut a fwell.
*/7 ' . •
fIN ,1 S;






