

■V ■ , , : ■'■
■1 ; 1 ’> 1
JS»
CHAMBERS’S
INSTRUCTIVE AND ENTERTAINING LIBRARY,
A SERIES OF BOOKS FOR THE PEOPLE. ,
• '•#%
EMIGRANT’S MANUAL
AUSTRALIA
AND
THE GOLD DIGGINGS.
: s
m
EDINBURGH:
pif ROBERT CHAMBERS,
WILLIAM
1852.
PRICE ONE SHILLING,
J. J / y 4
f/j/y'//
B&. jt/t / ■ v/2
V. v"'


W. & R. CHAMBERS’S MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS.
CHAMBERS’S
INSTRUCTIVE AND ENTERTAINING LIBRARY.
A series of Original and Selected Works in different departments of Literature,
suitable for popular Entertainment and Instruction. These Books for the
People are published in Volumes every second month, sewed and in boards. The
following are already issued
Spanish Literature. By A. P. Foster.
1 vol., 3s. sewed, 3s. 6 d. boards.
The Emigrant’s Manual; with a Preli-
minary Dissertation, by John Hill
Burton. 1 vol., sewed 45., boards 4s. fid.
History of the French Revolutions, from
1789 to 1849. By T. W. Redhead. 3
vols., sewed 65., boards Is. 6 d.
Guizot’s History of Civilisation in Europe,
with his Treatise on Death Punish-
ments, and Memoir of his Life. 1 vol.,
sewed 25., boards 2s. 6 d.
Political and Social Economy: its Prac-
tical Applications. By J. H. Burton.
1 vol., sewed 25., boards 2s. 6 d.
Memoirs of Francis Horner, with Selec-
tions from his Correspondence. 1 vol.,
sewed 25., boards 2s. 6 d.
Patey’s Natural Theology, with Additions
and Notes. 1 vol., sewed 25., boards
2s. 6 d.
German Literature, Historical and Cri-
tical. By Joseph Gostick. 1 vol., sewed
25., boards 2s. 6 d.
Stories of the Irish Peasantry. By Mrs
S. C. Hall. 1 vol., sewed 2#., boards
2s. 6d.
Sanitary Economy: its Principles and
Practice) and its Moral Influence on
tbe Progress of Civilisation. 1 vol.,
sewed 25., boards 2s. 6d.
Lamartine’s Travels in the East, includ-
ing a Journey in the Holy Land, with a
Memoir of the Author. 2 vols., sewed
4j., boards 5;.
Butler’s Analogy of Religion, and Select
Sermons. With a Memoir of the
Author, 1 vol., sewed 25., boards
2s. 6 d.
The British Museum ; Historical and
Descriptive. Illustrated by numerous
wood - engravings. 1 vol., sewed 45.,
boards 4s. 6d.
Life and Works of Burns. Edited by
Robert Chambers. In Four Volumes.
Sewed 2s. 6 d. each, boards 3s. each.—
Vol. IV. will be shortly published.
CHAMBERS’S EDINBURGH JOURNAL.
NEW SERIES,
Publishing in Weekly Numbers at l^d.; in Monthly Parts at Id. j and in Half-
yearly Volumes, cloth boards, at 4s. 6 d.
Seventeen Volumes completed.
*** A few complete sets of the Old Series, in twelve volumes, for £4,105.
CHAMBERS’S'^POCKET MISCELLANY.
In Monthly Volurftes, price fid. each, Paper Covers.
the demand for a light and entertaining class of books for perusal on Railways,
has Messrs Chambers,"as it has done other publishers, to prepare a
series of cheap and handy volumes, accessible to all. The Work consists partly of
amusing -papers reprinted from the early quarto volumes of ‘ Chambers’s Edin-
burgh Journal ’ now irrecoverably out of print, and unknown to the young
generation of readers—and' partly of articles of a similar kind for which space has
not been found in the current numbers of that periodical. In short, this Pocket
Miscellany may, in a limited sense, be considered a supplementary ‘ Chambers’s
Journal,’ and is respectfully offered as a literary companion for the Railway,
the Fireside, or the Bush.
CHAMBERS’S PAPERS FOR THE PEOPLE.
In Twelve Volumes, at If. 6 d. each, fancy boards ; and 96 Numbers, at lid. each.
CHAMBERS’S INFORMATION FOR THE PEOPLE.
A New and Improved Edition, now complete in Two Volumes, price 16f. cloth
boards; in 24 Parts at 7 d. j or in 100 Numbers at lid. each.




r N ‘f; Pi 1 I s 1 F
* k * x -i
i 1
j « .. 1 | | |
f|I1 Vih *
- C-. 5 T' J * !S ? |3 i -
1 |! 3 a** m
K *?! S-S 'S 3 s
® s ; <' f/y/ %jl 9 g §
s— " ~ 4
% f I ■ ° i/J^
3 / ! - : 5 •J,’? i^f jy&^fegS) "~z %
<i i w 5 rt
® ! :....* V * 5
a-tVi'ti.vai'aMa “ ! : Jp. 1 S. —-
<mw . i : SHir^ “is-tu* 1, 3
j
° o (_ i| j° wi
i< « «s. " 5/% ; % v.
—C \\ *! Hi a • —“
|rT- II li$ 85 4 I
f S /CV* l| £ H I
s ■/ I % J
I 4 "3 S w “ *■ %/f |zL| S 1
-— 3 | i 'f. ! ui f- 14, r* § —
g \»» * 1/1 _ SWAN RIVER ®L M®> .ft
| V* i 5 ® *>
<s l/o i SI f I %K |3l *
s>. t§
| 5. ! £ |> 5v
9 2S ; js *{. U u S
— | S | 3
\ s i £ «1 »
H x 1
' !V
1
Is 1 Is i 1 Is ' 1?


CONTENTS.
General Account op Australia— Page
Physical Geography, ----- 1
Constitution, ----- 6
Disposal of Lands, - - - - 7
Voyage to Australia, - 8
Assisted Emigration, ----- 9
Government Regulations for Emigration, - - 10
New South Wales—
Geographical Account, - - - - - 11
Settled and Unsettled Districts, ... 13
The Northern Districts, - - - - 13
Convict System, and its Modification, - - 17
Bush-Rangers, ------ 19
Sale of Lands, - - - - - 19
Towns, -------22
Productions, Trade, &c. - 25
Victoria, or Port Philip—
History, -------28
Speculative Mania, ----- 29
General Account of the District, - - - 30
Sale of Lands, and Capabilities for Settlers, - - 34
Statistics, - - - - - - 41
South Australia—
Geography, Alluvial Soil, Water, Climate, and Temperature, 42
Adelaide and the Towns, - - - - 51
Settlements, ------ 64
History and Social State, - - - - 66
Effects of Land Speculation, - - - - 68
Religion and Education, - 64
Trade and Taxation, - - - - - 65
Produce, ------ 68


CONTENTS.
Grain, - -- .- .-68
Cattle and Sheep, ----- 69
Fruit, - - - - - - - 72
Mineralogy, ------ 74
History and Progress of the Mines, - - 75
Labour, ------ 81
Prospects for Artisans, ----- 81
The Shepherd Class, ----- 84
Sale and Occupation of Land, - - - 85
System of Tenantship, - 86
Order in Council for Occupation of Waste Lands, - 87
Western Australia—
Disastrous History, - - - - - 91
Prospects as a Place of Settlement, - - 92
Order in Council for Regulation of Waste Lands, - 93
Tasmania, or Van Diemen’s Land—
Geographical Description, --- 99
Land and Produce, - - - - - 100
History, ------- 104
The Convicts and Natives, - - - - 104
Prospects for Emigrants, - 107
Inducements to small Capitalists, - - - 107
Regulations for Sale of Land, - - - 108
Regulations for the Encouragement of small Capitalists, 111
Australian Gold-Mines, - - - - 114


.-'innuc
LLLCA.U'
AUS T R
ALIA.
GENERAL ACCOUNT.
Australia is an island of extraordinary magnitude, forming the
chief of a group lying off the southern coast of Asia, and collec-
tively termed Australasia. Next to the great continents composing
the four ‘ quarters ’ of the world, it is the largest mass of land of
which we have any certain acquaintance, being in length from east
to west 2000 miles, and in breadth from north to south 1700, It
lies between 9° and 38° of south latitude, and 112 3 and 153° east
longitude. Australia was discovered by the Dutch in 1616, and
from them it received the name of New Holland, which is now
generally disused. The Dutch having done little more than merely
point out the island, it was afterwards visited and more carefully
examined by several English navigators, and amongst those by
the celebrated Captain Cook, who bestowed upon its eastern coast
the name of New South Wales. Its distance from Great Britain
is 16,000 miles by ship’s course. Australia has a few small islands
near its shores; and one of larger dimensions on the south, called
Tasmania, or Van Diemen’s Land, from which it is separated
by a channel named Bass’s Strait.
The physical geography of Australia is in some respects pecu-
liar. The country, taken as a whole, and as far as it has been
explored, exhibits less hill and dale, with less compact vegetation,
than most other parts of the world. At different places there are
extensive ranges of mountains, between which and the sea there
are generally some fertile valleys; other parts of the coast are
flat and sandy; while the greater part of the interior is said to
consist of extensive plains, with rising terrace-like land, and low
ridges of hills, with open forest. Nowhere are there any dense
forests like those of North America; the timber is for the most part
thinly scattered, and the scenery has in numberless places been
compared to that of a gentleman’s park in England. The herbage
in nearly all quarters, except the fertile valleys, is thin, and what
A 1


in England would be called scanty; yet there are spots in which
the vegetation is exceedingly beautiful. Australia has a variety of
rivers, great and small—as the Hunter, the Hawkesbury, the
Macquarrie, Lachlan, Morumbidgee, &c.; but they all less or more
possess the peculiarity of being subject to great flooding at certain
seasons, and being very low at others ; consequently, none can be
said to be navigable for any great length. Some of the rivers are
liable to be so greatly dried up in summer, that they cease to flow,
and their course is only known by a series of pools, from which
alone water is to be obtained. A natural result of this general
deficiency of irrigation is the scanty herbage already noticed, and
the adaptation of the land more to pasturing than to agriculture.
It is to be remarked, however, that the coarse scanty grasses are
extremely nutritious; those named oat-grass and kangaroo-grass
are distinguished for their fattening qualities for horses, cattle, and
sheep.
Nature has, in several instances, put on very different forms in
Australia from what are customary elsewhere. Among the ani-
mal tribes, the chief are of the pouched kind, and move forward
by springing. The kangaroo is the principal animal of this
description, and there are different kinds of it; some are from
four to five feet in height, when sitting on their hind-legs. They
will in some cases leap twenty feet at a single bound, by which
odd species of movement they are able to outstrip a horse at full
gallop. This interesting and pacific class of animals is fast dimi-
nishing in numbers; they are now seldom seen in the settled
parts of the country. Opossums are numerous. There is an
\ animal half-bird half-beast, or possessing the bill and feet of a
duck, and the body of a mole or rat {ornithorhyncus paradoxus.)
Wild savage animals are unknown, the native dog excepted, which
has been pretty well hunted in some quarters. Of birds there are
some singular varieties, both large and small. There are, in
particular, a great variety of parrots, parroquets, and cockatoos,
all with exceedingly beautiful plumage—green, red, purple, and
white. The doves are equally splendid in their feathery coverings.
There are several kinds of native bees, ‘ which are without stings,
and produce a great deal of delicious honey. I — {Martin.) Of
snakes there are several varieties, some of them poisonous.
Mosquitoes prevail in the uncleared districts, as they do in all
warm uncultivated regions where there are marshes and trees to
harbour them; but we do not see it anywhere mentioned that
they form that horrid nuisance which they are in almost every
part of North America. In some places fleas are described as
forming a serious nuisance. The rivers abound with fish, some
with cod of a large size; and of aquatic birds the usual kinds are
2


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF AUSTRALIA.
seen, including swans of a dark colour. Shrimps, mussels, and!
oysters, are plentiful; the oysters, though small, are of a very
superior quality, and abound on some parts of the coast to an
extent quite unprecedented in any othei; quarter of the globe.
The seal and whale fishery on the coasts of Australia offer bound-
less scope for profitable adventure to those acquainted with this
branch of industry, and who have capital to risk.
The mineral riches of Australia are also of great amount, as
will be more particularly alluded to in subsequent sections. Coal,
iron, and copper, are found in abundance. Limestone of a fine
quality is wrought, and also clay for pottery. Gold has lately
been discovered in the Bathurst District of New South Wales,
and an account of the diggings in that quarter will be found at
the conclusion of the present part. Vast as are the latent resources
of Australia with respect to its fruitage, mining, and fisheries,
it is not to these departments of industry that the country at
present looks for its advancement. Its grand resource consists
in an illimitable extent of pasture-land, which it presents to the
sheep-farmer, or the proprietor of cattle, in every direction. No
country on the face of the earth seems to be so admirably
adapted for the feeding of sheep and produce of fine wool.
America, as is well known, is not a sheep-feeding or wool-growing
country. In Canada and other northern parts, sheep require to
be housed and fed by artificial means for several long winter
months; while on the fine prairies of the States, the sheep which
are left at large throughout the year do not yield wool of a
valuable quality. Australia, on the other hand, resembles Spain
in its qualities for pasturage in all seasons; and its climate
produces equally fine, if not superior wool. At the present
moment Australian wool enjoys the highest reputation in Eng-
land and America —it takes the lead in the market and so
readily and so profitably is it disposed of, that the cost of tran-
sport of 16,000 miles goes almost for nothing in the grower’s
calculation of profits. Most of those beautiful and soft woollen
fabrics which go by the names of Indianas, Merinoes, and
Challis, and are in so great request by ladies, in the shops
of our haberdashers, are chiefly manufactured from this fine
Australian wool.
The aborigines or natives of Australia are now very inconsider-
able in numbers. They lead the usual wandering life of savages,
roaming throughout the interior in small tribes, each claiming as
headquarters a respective territory. They are jet black in com-
plexion, and in general tall and thin in their persons; with large
heads, large lips, and wide mouths, and are altogether the reverse
of beautiful, according to our ideas of that quality. They have
3


been considered, although the opinion is not completely borne out
by experience, as amongst the lowest of all known savages in
the scale of intellect. There is certainly less mechanical genius
amongst them—fewer contrivances to improve the original con-
dition of man—than are to be found amongst the natives of any
other quarter of the globe. Their only arms are a rude spear, or
rather pointed pole, which, however, they throw with great force
and precision; and a short club, called by themselves a waddie.
Their huts are of the poorest description, and they wear no sort
of covering whatever on their bodies. All attempts to civilise
them, and to induce them to abandon their wandering life, have
hitherto been nearly ineifectual; and with the exception of a few
in the neighbourhood of Sydney, and some other of the colonial
towns, whom this contiguity has in some degree forced into a half-
domesticated state, they still wander in roving tribes throughout
the interior. From the latest accounts, it does not appear that
the white settlers are now suffering much from these miserable
beings; indeed, it seems that any person may command their
good-will by the slightest efforts of kindness and conciliation.
The climate of Australia, confining ourselves of course to the
settled portion of the country, although varying considerably in
different districts, is altogether highly agreeable and salubrious.
According to Mr Cunningham, who was a surgeon in the colony of
New South Wales, exposure produces no bad effect, from the dry-
ness of the atmosphere; and it has been recommended to consump-
tive patients. The summer commences in December, and extends
to February, during which period the heat is considerable. Dr
Lang states that the thermometer seldom rises above 75° in
Sydney, except when the hot winds blow from the west. Another
writer mentions having walked two miles to church with the
thermometer at 146° in the sun, and 95° in the shade, yet felt no
inconvenience, the air being dry and pure. In the lower districts
the air is tempered by a cool and delightful sea-breeze, which
blows steadily and regularly throughout the day, and is succeeded
at night by an equally steady and grateful breeze from the land.
The average temperature at Sydney during winter is 55°; and
there is only one instance on record of snow having fallen in the
town, which was on the 17th June 1836. In the higher districts,
of course, the cold is greater; the thermometer at Paramatta
sometimes falling so low as 27°, and in the district of Bathurst
snow lies for a short time in winter.
A peculiarity in the climate of Australia is the prevalence of
hot winds during the summer. These blow from the north-west,
and resemble a strong current of air from a heated furnace, raising
the thermometer to 100° in the shade, and 125° when exposed to
4


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF AUSTRALIA.
their influence. They seldom occur more than four or five times
every summer, and last only a few days. It has been supposed
that these winds derive their extreme heat from passing over a
great extent of arid and heated country, which deprives them of
all moisture. Breton, in his ‘ Tour in New South Wales,’ says—
‘ I rode fifty miles a day in the hot wind, without feeling more
inconvenience than in a hot day in England; and at night I have
slept in the open air, my saddle for a pillow—the breeze balmy r
the firmament studded with innumerable bright stars shining
sweetly through the deep blue of that cloudless sky, and never
yet experienced any ill effects from it; indeed, in a climate like
that of New South Wales, I question if anything is to be feared
from night exposure.’
Regarding the mortality in Australia, no certain tables have as
yet been formed. Dr Lang says—‘ lam inclined to believe that
the probabilities of life for any number of children born in the
colony are higher than for a similar number born in England.’
Several instances of longevity are mentioned—one of a woman
who had reached 125 years, and was able to perform her daily
work. Mr Butler says he has seen several persons upwards of a
hundred years old, which is confirmed by Dr Lang and others.
At Moreton Bay, a penal settlement, only one man was in the
hospital, out of 1200 convicts and soldiers, in six months. In
Bathurst district, which is upwards of 2100 feet above the level
of the sea, only two persons are said to have died in twelve years.
All writers agree upon the salubrity of the climate, however much'
they may differ regarding the capabilities of the country. All
persons from Australia with whom we have conversed, represent'
the climate as giving a remarkable buoyancy to the spirits: a
peculiarity which perhaps arises from the dryness and lightness of
the air. From whatever cause, nature appears to act more power-
fully in Australia than in the northern hemisphere. Birth is
given to children by parents at a more advanced period of life,
and the young attain greater tallness than in England. The
climate, in short, produces some, strange effects on most con-
stitutions in both sexes; and is generally favourable to persons’
labouring under weaknesses in the chest.
Australia being situated in the southern hemisphere, the seasons'
are the reverse of those in Britain—January being the middle of
summer, and July of winter. The spring months are September,
October, and November; those of summer are December, January,
and February; autumn includes March, April, and May; and the
winter months are June, July, and August. March, April, and
August, are generally considered the rainy months. The average
temperature of spring is 65°; summer, 72°; autumn, 66°; and
5


-winter, 55°. As a matter of course, while it is day in Britain
it is night in Australia, a circumstance of no consequence to the
inhabitants.
Australia, though originally discovered by the Dutch, has long
been a possession of the British crown. In 1778, the British
government planted a settlement at Botany Bay, in consequence of
the recommendation of Captain Cook, designing it to serve chiefly
as a place for the reception of transported convicts. This was
soon after removed to Sydney, on Port Jackson, and notwithstand-
ing the unfavourable circumstances attending convict labour, was
found to prosper very considerably. In 1803, a second settlement
was formed on Van Diemen’s Land, to which convicts were also
sent. The transportation of convicts to these two colonies has
been continued till a recent period, and has had of course a certain
moral effect on the population. A large portion of the inhabitants
are either convicts or the descendants of convicts. The more
recent seftlements in Australia—namely, West Australia, South
Australia, Port Philip or Victoria, and Port Essington—have not
received convicts. Hence the classification of the Australian
colonies into penal and non-penal—a distinction, however, which
we may hope to see always less and less marked, as time and
the- usual moral influences work their effect on the masses of
settlers.
Constitution. —The Australian, like all the other colonies, are
respectively under the authority of governors appointed by the
crown, through the colonial office in Westminster. In 1850, after
much discussion, these colonies received the benefit of constitu-
tional government by virtue of an act of parliament (13 and 14
Viet. c. 59.) It was provided, at the same time, that the crown
might erect the territories north of the 30th degree of south
latitude into a separate colony on the petition of the inhabitants.
The act sanctions the meeting of parliaments or assemblies, and
vests the elective franchise in every male having a freehold estate
in possession within his district of the clear value of £lOO, free of
encumbrances, or occupying a dwelling-house worth £lO a year,
or holding a pasture-licence, &c. It is deemed unnecessary to go
into any of the details of the act, as the law is only of recent
institution, and will probably be applied and modified according
to circumstances. Besides the general assemblies, there are dis-
trict councils for conducting local public business.
The Church of England is established in all the Australian
colonies, to which bishops have latterly been appointed. There
is everywhere, however, perfect freedom in religious matters; and
in the settled districts there exist churches in connection with the
Presbyterian, Roman Catholic, and other bodies. The ordinances
6


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF AUSTRALIA.
of religion are also administered at preaching stations and other
places.
Disposal of Lands. —The method of disposing of waste crown
lands of Australia remained in a perplexing condition till 1842,
when an act of parliament (5 and 6 Viet. c. 95) was passed,
placing the disposal of lands on a distinct and uniform condition.
The act authorises a division of the surface of the soil into three
different classes of lands. The first was into town lots—compris-
ing all lands within the limits of any existing town specially
named and described by the governor, or within any locality
specified by the governor as the site of an intended town. The
second class were to be called suburban lots, and were to com-
prise the land within five miles of the nearest point of the town
lands, unless in any instances where the governor might think fit
especially to exclude land from this class, on the ground that it
will not derive any increased value from being near the town.
The third class were to be called country lots, and were to com-
prise all the land not included within the other two. Before
being sold, the lands were appointed to be surveyed, and to be
delineated in the public charts of the colony in the lots in which
they are to be offered for sale, each containing an area of a super-
ficial mile. The public sales were appointed to be held quarterly,
or at any other times which the governor might think fit. The
times and places of sale were to be announced by proclamation
three months beforehand, describing the lands, and mentioning
the upset prices. The lowest upset price was fixed at £1 per
acre. The governor was authorised to raise, but not to lower the
upset price; and the Queen in council might either raise the
amount or reduce any raising by the governor, but so as not to
bring the price below the minimum of £l. An indefinite power
was given to the governor to raise the upset price of town and
suburban lots, even when sold with other lots. In the sale of
country lots the governor was authorised, in relation to a tenth
part of any lot, to fix a higher upset price, and designate it a
‘ special country lot.’
No town suburban lots could be sold otherwise than by auction;
but it was made competent to dispose of country lots if not
bought at the auction by private bargain, but not under the upset
price. In these sales by private bargain the price must be paid
down; in sales by auction there must be a deposit not less than
10 per cent, forfeited if the full price be not paid within a
month.
There was a provision for special surveys of blocks of 20,000
acres in parallelograms. Such a survey might be obtained on
payment of the lowest upset price—that is, in the general case, ou
7
■


sioners tor 1851, the tares or ire
Australia were as follow :—
lights
to the several colonies of
Cabin.
Intermediate.
Steerage.
Including
With
With Pro-
Provisions.
Provisions.
visions.
£
£
£
£
£
£
j
London, .
j 45*
to 00 \
21
35
15 to 20
Sydney, . . <
Liverpool,
45
... 00/
15
10 ...
(
Ports in the Clyde,
40
... 60
20
25
(
London, .
f 42*
... 601
21
35
15 ...
20
Port-Phil ip, . s
Liverpool,
45
i_!a
15
10 ...
(
Ports in the Clyde,
40
... 60
20
25
London, .
65
... 90
35
40
20 ...
Van Diemen’s Land, <
Liverpool,
45
15
10...
1
Ports in the Clyde,
40
... 00
20
25
W estern Australia,
London, .
60
... 90
30
40
18 ...
20
(
London,
; 4-2
... 60 \
21
35
15...
20,
South Australia, <
Liverpool, .
45
15
10 ...
l|
(
Ports in the Clyde,
40
... 60
20
£5
• Victualled according to the ordinary diet-scale of the ship.
payment of £20,000. The survey to which such a purchaser rs
entitled only embraces the external boundary.
To facilitate purchases in this country, it was provided that a
certificate of payment by the Emigration Commissioners might be
employed as so much cash in the purchase of lands in the colonies.
The produce of the land sales was appointed to go to the public
revenue, one-half being employed for emigration purposes. Power
was given to the governor by proclamation to divide a colony
into four parts for the purpose of the land sales. It was specially
provided that the act should not interfere with the granting of
licences for one year for pasture -and felling timber.
The subject of land purchasing is afterwards treated at length
in the different sections.
Transit. —The great distance of Australia from Great Britain
renders the cost of transit necessarily high. The time occupied
in the voyage averages about 9G days; it is seldom more than 104
days; and has been known to be as little as 89 days. The season
usually preferred for proceeding to Australia is from November to
March, by which arrangement the settler arrives in the cool part
of the year—our summer, as already said, being the Australian
winter. According to the circular of the Emigration Commis-
sioners for 1851, the fares or freights to the several colonies of
Australia were as follow :
It is usual to classify children by the division in the passengers’
act: to charge nothing for those under one year, and half price
for those under fourteen. In proceeding to any part of Australia
8


GENERAL ACCOUNT OF AUSTRALIA.
it is advisable to take passage from London, Liverpool, Greenock,
or other large port, where there is usually a good choice of vessels,
sailing at regular intervals. At these ports the vessels are gene-
rally of large size, and well appointed as regards cabin accommo-
dation, food, water, cooking apparatus, &c. Small vessels from
the lesser ports, besides being on a poor scale of accommodation,
require a long time to make up their cargo, and therefore seldom
sail at the time advertised.
It may be proper to explain, in reference to transit to Australia,
that parties proceeding as cabin passengers take, on that account,
a certain standing in the colony to which they are bound, which
they would not otherwise possess. The names of cabin passengers
are announced in the newspapers on landing—an honour not paid
to those arriving as steeragers or intermediates. Coming in the
cabin is, in short, considered to be a species of guarantee for
‘ respectability.’ Young adventurous persons will of course dis-
regard this matter of etiquette, though for men with families, or
for young women of good station, it may not be altogether
unworthy of attention.
In proportion as emigration increases, we should anticipate the
introduction of methods of transit less sectional than have hitherto
prevailed. Already an arrangement on a broad scale has been
adopted, with respect to certain vessels from London to Australia.
It consists in having only one class of passengers, instead of the
divisions into steerage, intermediate, and cabin. By this new
plan, each male adult pays the sum of £2l—which includes food,
water, bedding, and the use of cooking utensils. For further par-
ticulars, we refer to the advertisements of the day.
The route ordinarily pursued by vessels from Great Britain
to Australia is that across the Atlantic in a diagonal direction,
taking advantage of certain trade-winds. Sometimes the vessels
touch at Rio Janeiro in South America. From the neighbour-
hood of the South American coast, the vessels recross the Atlantic
in latitudes south from the Cape of Good Hope. In many
instances, land is never seen between the British islands and
Australia. As the vessels have to cross the equinoctial line, and
are consequently exposed to the warmth of a tropical climate, it
is necessary for emigrants to be provided with light clothing for a
part of the voyage. As there is ho washing on board, it becomes
also necessary to have such a stock of under-clothing at hand as
will serve for the whole voyage.
Assisted Emigration. —Under certain conditions, emigrants are
assisted to emigrate to Australia. Latterly, societies of benevolent
individuals in London and elsewhere have contributed means to
assist unmarried young women, of good character, in paying for a
9


passage; and in this object Mrs Chisholm, a lady who had been
some time in New South Wales, has taken a prominent part.
Government lends its aid towards the emigration of agricultural
labourers, mechanics, and others. The business is intrusted to
the Emigration Commissioners, Westminster, who act through a
secretary. Local agents for the commissioners are established in
Edinburgh, and other principal towns. Eegulations, and also
blank forms to be filled up, are given on application; but it is
proper to mention, that so numerous are the applications, that
frequently the funds are exhausted, and a tempoi’ary stop is put to
the further dispensation of funds. It is proper to explain that
the commissioners do not place money in the hands of emigrants;
they, on the contrary, exact certain payments from the emigrants,
-according to age and other circumstances ; and having made these
payments, and attended to various regulations, they are taken
charge of, and sent out. Copies of regulations of the latest date
may be had on application to J. Walcott, Esq., Secretary to
Emigration Board, No. 9 Park Street, Westminster. So great is
the chance of not being accepted as a candidate for government
assistance, that we should recommend all parties to endeavour to
pay in full for their own passage, and otherwise depend on their
own energies and resources. By doing so, they can adopt their
own route, regulate their own time, and choose their own com-
pany.
We now proceed to give an account of the principal colonies of
Australia:—New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Western
Australia, and Tasmania, or Van Diemen’s Land. Tables of
wages, prices, population, trade, &c. applicable to the several
colonies, and drawn from official documents, are given in conclu-
sion. Special advices as to choice of colonies and other matters
are presented in the General Dissertation.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
New South Wales —so called by Captain Cook on account of
some resemblance which he thought he could trace between the
scenery of Botany Bay and that of South Wales—is the parent
colony of Australia. It is scarcely more than sixty years since
it was first colonised, yet it has much of the character of an old-
established country, having its capital, its provincial towns, and
its rural districts. Its extent is not measured off by nature, like
Tasmania, or artificially, like the later Australian colonies. It in-
cluded Victoria, or the Port Philip district; but by the act of 1850
supplying a legislative system for the Australian colonies, that
territory is separated from it; and thus the southern boundary
of New South Wales is fixed by statute at ‘ a straight line from
Cape Howe to the nearest source of the Murray, and thence by
the course of that river to the east boundary of South Australia.’
By the same act, power is given to the crown to erect the terri-
tories north of the 30th degree of south latitude into a separate
colony. It may thus be considered that the districts about the
Clarence, the Macleay, Moreton Bay, &c. of which an account
will have to be given in the following pages, will, if they continue
to prosper, come under a separate government. In the meantime,
the colony includes the district east of longitude 141° east, and
stretching from 26° south latitude to the above boundary. Its
population now amounts to about 200,000.
With the sea-coast on the east, what is called the settled part
of the colony has also a species of natural boundary westward in
the range of the Blue Mountains, rising from 3000 to 4000 feet
above the level of the sea. The principal rivers are in that
northern district, which will be afterwards more fully described.
The Murray, connected with the southern extremity of the colony,
has to be more fully spoken of in connection with South Australia.
The principal streams falling into the sea in the old part of the
colony are the Hawkesbury, the Hunter, the Nepean, the Mac-
donald, and the Manning. None of these rivers is very large, and
they are all subject to droughts. The land in the first-occupied,
and still most densely-inhabited district beside Port Jackson is
not the most valuable. The Hunter is navigable for a consider-
able distance with small vessels, or rather boats; and as it has a
pretty full supply of water, and is bordered by rich alluvial land,
some of the finest farms in the western world skirt its banks.
There are abundant testimonies to the excellence of the climate


and the general pleasantness of the country. The following:
account by Dr Lang, given in 1834, is perhaps among the most
accurate, while it is in a sufficiently laudatory tone :
‘ For eight months during the year—namely, from the Ist of March
to the Ist of November —the climate of New South Wales—which,
throughout the whole year, indeed, is at least equal, if not superior
to that of any other country on the face of the globe—is peculiarly
delightful. The sky is seldom clouded; and day after day, for whole
weeks together, the sun looks down in unveiled beauty from the
northern heavens. In ordinary seasons, refreshing showers are not
unfrequent; but although there arc no periodical rains in the colony,
as in the torrid zone, it sometimes rains as heavily as it does within,
the tropics. It seldom freezes in Sydney, and never snows ; but fires
are requisite during the day in the winter months, and for a con-
siderable time longer in the mornings and evenings.
‘ With the exception of the large open plains which occasionally
occur in the interior of the country, and which, like the plain of
Bathurst, are naturally destitute of timber, the territory of New
South Wales is, in its natural state, one vast interminable forest.
In many parts of the colony, and especially in the interior, the land
is but thinly timbered—there being not more than three or four
trees, of moderate height and of rather interesting appearance, to
the acre. In such places, the country resembles the park scenery
around a nobleman’s seat in England, and you gallop along with a
feeling of indescribable pleasure. In general, however, the forest-
land is more thickly timbered—sufficiently so to form an agreeable
shade in a hot Australian summer-day, without preventing the tra-
veller from proceeding in any direction at a rapid trot or canter.
On the banks of rivers, and especially on the alluvial land within the
reach of their inundations, the forest becomes what the colonists call
a thick brush or jungle. Immense trees of the genus eucalyptus
tower upwards in every direction to a height of 150 to 200 feet,
while the elegant cedar, and the rosewood of inferior elevafion, and
innumerable wild vines or parasitical plants, fill up the interstices.
In sterile regions, however, on rocky mountain-tracts, or on sandy
plains, the forest degenerates into a miserable scrub, as the colonists
term it; the trees are stunted in their growth, and of most forbidding
aspect, the fruit they bear being literally pieces of hard wood similar
in appearance to a pear, and their shapeless trunks being not unfre-
quently blackened from the action of fire. In such regions, the more
social animals of the country entirely disappear. The agile kangaroo
is no longer seen bounding across the footpath, nor the gaily-plumaged
parroquet heard chattering among the branches. If anything with
the breath of life is visible at all, it is either the timid gray lizard
hiding itself in the crevices of the rocks, or the solitary black snake
stretched at full length on the white sand, or tire busy ant rearing his
slender pyramid of yellowish clay.
‘ There is a much greater extent of forest than of alluvial land in
12


a state of cultivation throughout the colony; and, what is exceed-
ingly anomalous, the best laud is in many instances on the sides and
summits of the hills.’
To the eastward of the Blue Mountains are the agricultural and
peopled districts—westward are the wide pastures of the squatters
and other depastures. The progress of good roads has made the
distinction less marked; but it was formerly useless for the agri-
culturist to cultivate behind the Blue Mountains, from the diffi-
culty of conveying his produce to any available market; and it
was the natural sphere of the Bushman, who required but once a
year to send his produce to the market, receiving in return the
year’s supplies for home consumption. The arrangements for the
occupation of waste lands have, as we shall presently see, been
charged with having a strong tendency to increase this class, to
the prejudice of the regular permanent settlement of colonists.
The southern geographical division of the country for the pur-
poses of the tenure and disposal of land, follows, as nearly as has
been practicable, the natural. In the central old inhabited district
are the nineteen counties proclaimed in 1838. On 29th December
1848, thirty-one new counties were proclaimed as intermediate
districts. A portion of them lie south-east of the original nine-
teen counties, and are in the colony of Victoria, but the greater
portion of them stretch northward as far as Wide Bay beyond the
twenty-sixth parallel. The accessible squatting fields are called
Commissioners’ Districts; and these were increased by the addi-
tion of three new districts in the north, at the time when the
additional counties were proclaimed. They are named Wide Bay,
Burnett, and Waranoa, and stretch westward as far as the banks
of the Waranoa River. Sir George Gipps, in a letter to Lord
Stanley in 1844, enclosing the regulations as to squatters, thus
described the vast country even then occupied by them:— ‘ A
glance will suffice to shew the immense extent to which the
squatting, as it is called, has grown:—From Wilson’s Promontory
on the south, to Harvey’s Bay on the north, it extends through
fourteen degrees of latitude, with an average width of four
degrees of longitude; and a straight line passing through the
centre of it, from the bottom of Harvey’s Bay (in latitude 25
degrees south, longitude 152 degrees east, to the mouth of the
Glenelg, on the southern confine of South Australia), measures
1100 English statute miles.’
The variety of climates, soils, and physical aspects which may
yet be developed within the vast circumference of Australia is
indicated in the prevailing features of the new northern counties.
Everything here is different from the dry sheep-walks of the
south. The character of the scenery encountered by the traveller
13


is precipice, mountain, torrent, and lagoon, with rich tropical
vegetation clothing the mountain-sides. The Australian settler
who finds the other more important elements of the district suit-
able to his views, may here indulge in the fullest luxury of fine
scenery. It is a country of considerable rivers. The Macleay
enters the sea at Trial Bay, in latitude 30°, 40' south; and its
feeders may be traced far up through the mountains to the table-
land of New England. There is a considerable bar at its mouth,
yet it is navigable for vessels of fifty or sixty tons for a distance
of thirty-four miles. After passing several secondary streams,
the valleys, separated from that of the Macleay by great ranges of
hills, are watered by the Odalberree and the Bellengen. After a
considerable interval comes the Clarence, entering Shoal Bay in
south latitude, and rising in the same range of mountains with
the Macleay. It would appear that this —the finest river yet dis-
covered in Australia—is destined to be some day or other one of
those great waters which people speak of throughout the world,
on account of the civilised luxuriance on its banks, and the riches
which it is the means of concentrating. ‘ The Clarence,’ says the
gentleman who surveyed it, ‘ is remarkable for its great breadth
and large volume of water compared with other Australian rivers,
when the short distance of its source from the coast is considered.
In common with all other rivers north of the Hunter, its entrance
is obstructed by a bar having about eleven feet of water on it; its
reaches are longer and wider than those of any other river on the
coast of Australia, and are navigable for large steamers from
Sydney to a considerable distance up the river: some craft can
ascend the Clarence as far as ninety miles from its mouth
The country available for grazing at this river is of excellent
quality, and much more extensive than that of the Macleay; for
the country bordering on the Clarence and its tributaries is gene-
rally level, and the mountains do not attain any great elevation,
except at the sources of the streams. A great number of squatters
have formed stations at the Clarence River. The communication
between the table-land along the main range and the navigable
estuary of the Clarence, is naturally much less difficult than at
Port Macquarrie. Wool drays can descend from the fine district
called Beardy Plains (that portion of table-land opposite the
sources of the Clarence) with comparative ease, to that paxT of the
river where the vessels take in cargo for Sydney.’— {Hodgkinson's
Australia.)
The next river to the northward is the Richmond, the sources
of which were not known when Mr Hodgkinson wrote. But of
the known portion he says ‘ Mangrove scrubs, tea-tree, and
swamp oak-thickets cover the low flats near its mouth; and the
14


alluvial land higher up the river is diversified by brush abounding:
in cedar and pine, clumps of bangolo palms, reedy swamps, small
rich plains, and lightly-wooded forest flats of great richness. The
rest of the country is very slightly wooded grassy forest of the
greatest fertility; in fact there are few rivers where so much good
available land exists unbroken by densely-wooded ranges and
ravines. Immediately north of the Richmond, but at long inter-
vals, we have successively the Tweed, the Logan, and the Brisbane
—a long broad river which, with several smaller streams, falls into
Moreton Bay at 27 J degrees south. The banks of these rivers, so
far as they are known, are of the same character with those of the
Clarence and Richmond; and their scenery is eminently beautiful.
The country produces almost everything that can be found service-
able to the settler in such a latitude. Besides the vegetable and
animal productions, and capabilities to be afterwards noticed, there
is abundant building-stone, along with lime, coal, and iron. The
district received the name of Stanley County; and Moreton Bay
being at first used as a penal settlement for convicts under colo-
nial sentence, free emigrants were consequently excluded; but its
destiny was subsequently changed; and it contains many thriving
settlers, with small towns—Moreton Bay, Brisbane Town, Lime-
stone, &c. To this port will be brought the wool from Peel Plains,
Darling Downs, Byron’s Plains, &c. the descent being described
as peculiarly easy and gradual, and the cargoes will be shipped
either for Sydney or for England direct.
It is somewhat of a drawback to the generally agreeable nature
of this quarter, that sharks penetrate the rivers, and render them
dangerous in crossing. The thickets also abound in venomous
snakes, that require to be guarded against. In travelling on foot,
many wear thick leathern leggings as a protection ; but this prac-
tice prevails in various other quarters of Australia, from the same
cause. All the minor tortures which infest hot marshy jungles—•
such as mosquitoes—seem here to abound. The marsh leech is a
virulent and active torturer, insinuating himself near the skin in
spite of all means of protection, and often filling the shoes with
blood. A sort of stinging ant has been described which, not
content, like its industrious namesake in this country, with self-
protection, leaps up like a grasshopper, and inflicts an irritable
little wound.
The intending emigrant who should be induced to make this
part of Australia his destination, cannot keep too prominently in
view its characteristic differences from the other districts. Its
geological formation, instead of the uniform sandstone of the
south, consists of the primitive granites and porphyries, with
trap, ancient limestone, and abundant clay-slate. There are ranges
15


of mountains rising, even at no great distance from the coast, to
the height of 6000 feet; and the valleys between them are
remarkably steep; so much so, that the surveyors often wondered
—especially in the cleft of the Bellengen—how alluvial soil and
vegetation could be supported at so acute an angle of elevation.
A country of such a character, with many rivers passing through
it, is naturally found to abound in cataracts. Water-power, should
the settler have occasion for it, will be found superabundant. In
the course of the Macleay River there are several great cataracts.
One of these, from the account given of it, must resemble some of
the falls in Norway, and be superior to those of the Alps. The
whole river, with a large body of water in it, falls down a height
of 250 feet.
In such a country the hills will attract the passing clouds, and
create vapour, which, by increasing the vegetation, will be the
source of additional moisture. Thus the common characteristics
of the Australian weather are reversed. Instead of hearing about
dry plains of withered grass, and the traveller’s cattle dying,
while his own life is threatened by want of water, we always hear
from the adventurer in Stanley or Moreton of the efforts he has
to make to protect himself from the soaking rain, of torrent-like
showers that come upon him by surprise, and of great marshes
interrupting his progress. The proposing settler may be pretty
safely insured from the prevailing droughts of the south, but it
would be rash to warrant him against the opposite evils. Vast
tracts, especially at the mouths of the rivers, are entirely marsh.
For instance, the following passage from a letter by Dr Leichhardt
(19th January 1844), is something different from the usual accounts
of New South Wales :
‘ The rainy season has commenced —powers of rain have poured
down ; the rivers and creeks were filled to the highest brim, and the
adjacent fiats and hollows were extensively inundated. The waters,
falling on the steep slopes of the Bunya Range and of its spurs, col-
lected quickly into the gullies and creeks, and ran off as quickly as
they came. The wind blew during the rains from easterly quarters
(east and south-east.) Last Thursday it changed to the west, and
fair weather set in again; but even now thunder-storms are
generally gathering in the afternoon, and loose clouds send down
occasional showers, particularly towards evening and during the
night. The wind during the rains was very slight, and in the morn-
ing there was generally a perfect calm. The heat during the sunny
intervals is very oppressive, and I think it approaches very much to
the description of the moist heat of the East Indies.’
The inference from the above and other accounts is, that the
district is not free from unhealthy peculiarities; and we should
16


recommend intending settlers to make all proper inquiries on the
spot, before taking any determinate step.
CONVICT SYSTEM.
New South Wales was originally settled as a penal colony, and
nowhere else has the convict system been more extensively carried
out. It is scarcely necessary to state that the convicts were
essentially slaves during the period of their banishment, and
were under the orders of the local authorities. Latterly, a prac-
tice of giving tickets-of-leave to well-behaved convicts was
established, by which they were at liberty to hire their labour,
and so far the rigours of the system were modified.
The social ahd moral evil inflicted on the colony by the in-
discriminate import of a criminal population, at length roused
attention; the home government was remonstrated with, and
a modified system of transportation was adopted. It is to be
noted, however, that there have always been, and now are, two
parties in the colony, who view the convict system differently.
One wishes that convicts should be sent—the other desires the
contrary ; hence the conflicting accounts which reach this country,
and perplex legislation. Many of the settlers condemned the
modification of the system; they maintained that it was an un-
worthy yielding to the outcries of a party in Sydney, who were
no doubt shocked and annoyed by the quantity of criminals which
the system concentrated there, but did not keep in view the vast
advantage of assigned labourers to the distant settlers. In short,
these settlers felt the advantage of having slaves, and were loth to
lose them, even under all the evils arising from having men of
profligate habits and infamous character about them. Very many
of the influential inhabitants of Sydney itself prayed for a resto-
ration, at least in part, of the system; and when public meetings
were held on the other side, the advocates for the return of the
convicts characterised those who attended them as idlers, and men
who had no stake in the colony.
A sort of medium arrangement was afterwards entered on,
which, though it does not make New South Wales a convict
colony, yet will continue to make it the recipient of a considerable
portion of our criminal population. In a dispatch of the 3d Sep-
tember 1847, the secretary of the colonies said: ‘ The system of
assignment, though no doubt of great pecuniary advantage to
those of the settlers in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land—to whom it was the means of affording a supply of gratui-
tous, or, at all events, of very cheap labour—is one which has
B 17


been condemned on grounds so conclusive, that I cannot anticipate
the possibility of its ever being resumed.’ In this dispatch the
arrangement subsequently adopted -was explained, which was that
of sending out convicts, after they had been subject to refor-
matory punishment at home, to the colonies, either with condi-
tional pardons or tickets-of-leave. By the former they were
simply prohibited from returning to Britain; by the latter they
were bound to a district. In the words of the dispatch ‘ Those
who have conditional pardons are, on their arrival in Australia, in
precisely the same condition as free emigrants of the working-
class, except in the single condition of not being at liberty to
return to their own country; and the situation of holders of
tickets-of-leave is practically but little different, since, while they
reside in the districts appointed for them, and maintain themselves
by honest industry, conforming to certain rules by no means of a
severe character, they are not interfered with.’
Thus the convict is subject to his punishment under the im-
mediate and vigilant eye of the government where he has com-
mitted his offence, and where his character and past history are
known. It is made reformatoiy where that is practical; and when
the ordeal has been gone through, care is taken that he shall
not be immediately exposed to his old temptations, and driven
among his old associates, by coming, a tainted and avoided man,
into the home-labour market, but he is sent at once into a new
world, with a fair start in the road of honest industry. The
system adopted by the executive, which may be altered from
time to time, as the experience of its working may suggest, is to
keep the convicts in prison for periods varying from six to
eighteen months, and then to employ them on public works—
chiefly in Gibraltar or Bermuda. It is a general rule that they
are not to be permitted to go at large in Britain at any time
before the expiry of the period of bondage to which they have
been sentenced; but when the imprisonment and labour processes
have been gone through with satisfactory effect, on the expiry of
half the period, the convict may be sent as an ‘ exile ’ to the
colony. The plan has been in some measure carried out, of
taxing the partially, emancipated convicts out of their earliest
earnings for the cost of their removal to the colony, and the
money thus raised has gone in aid of a fund for carrying out free
labourers to relieve the moral balance of the colony from the
preponderance of penal society. The necessity of supporting this
balance induced parliament to vote a sum of £30,000 to meet
the expense of exporting free emigrants to the places to which
the exiles were sent.
It was an unfortunate concomitant of the penal system, that in


a place where churches, schools, and every institution which might
aid in filtering the colony of its moral pollution were peculiarly
needed, they were peculiarly neglected. The convicts were bad
men, and they were thrust thither to be out of the way, as far
removed as possible from all hopes and consolations, except those
which were casually cast up on the spot,; and no pains were taken
to provide them with those higher and purer influences which it
is the function of religion and knowledge to provide. The conse-
quences, as exhibited in the moral character of the colony, were
of the most appalling character. One of its most serious evils
was the creation of a class of runaways called bush-rangers, who
fled to the wilderness, and lived the life of brigands, much to the
terror and discomfort of the settlers, who required to be provided
with firearms for defence. A large police force was also neces-
sary. The worst features of the convict system are doubtless
now removed ; but its effects are not easily obliterated, and New
South Wales must, on this account alone, present a less tempting
field of emigration than some other districts of Australia.
SALE OP LANDS.
In New South Wales, as in the other Australian colonies, crown
land is now sold at not less a price than 20s. per acre. The
plan of selling land on these terms originated in the notion, as
applied to South Australia, that a large price should be charged,
in order to employ a portion of the proceeds in sending out
free labourers. This plan may be pronounced a failure. Besides
the attraction of cheaper lands in America, it did not seem to be
borne in mind that by no conceivable method, in so vast a country
as Australia, could parties be prevented from taking possession of
land for nothing. Such has been the result. As long as land
was disposed of at a few shillings per acre, people bought it; as
soon as they could not get it on moderate terms, they took it,
settled upon it, and gained a livelihood from it. This well-known
class of settlers is called squatters.
The declension in the sale of lands in New South Wales, on
the establishment of the minimum price, was very remarkable.
In 1847 the legislative council reported that, instead of increas-
ing the land fund for bringing out labourers, the system had nearly
annihilated it; and instead of concentrating the colonists, it had
dispersed them farther than ever over wide sheep-walks. In fact,
the system of temporary possession was adopted,' and, as in other
interferences with natural arrangements, nature tried in this way
to right herself. From upwards of £300,000 paid for lands in


1840, the amount sank next year to £138,253; in 1842 to £16,508;
in 1843 to £11,297; and in 1844 to £7403. This prodigious
diminution of realised price for land was perhaps ascribable in
part to the corresponding decline of a rash speculating spirit; but
in 1848, when there was no such disturbing cause, the amount
did not rise above £46,674. It is proper to mention that govern-
ment was to blame for this ruinous result, only in having yielded
to the crotchets of private parties respecting the transference of
large numbers of labourers to fields requiring their assistance; and
the consequent impromptu creation of a regular community—
employers and employed—in close juxtaposition. The very reverse
has taken place—a community widely dispersed, and occupied
principally, and in a most irregular manner, by squatters..
How to deal with these irregular occupants became a matter
of serious deliberation. Forcible ejection was inexpedient, and
indeed impossible. At length, in 1844, a system of granting
licences to the squatters, at so much for a sheep-run, was applied;
but did not come fully into operation till 1847, when the system
was reorganized.
According to an order in council, in 1847, the whole lands were
divided into unsettled, intermediate, and settled districts, being so
named in relation to their distance from towns, rivers, or the sea-
•coast. A few of the clauses from the order in council may here
be given.
In the first place, with regard to unsettled lands, the governor
is empowered to grant leases of runs ‘ for any term or terms of
years, not exceeding fourteen years in duration, for pastoral pur-
poses ; with permission, nevertheless, for the lessee to cultivate so
much of the lands respectively comprised in the said runs as may
be necessary to provide such grain, hay, vegetables, or fruit, for
the use and supply of the family and establishment of such lessee,
but not for the purposes of sale or barter; and so, nevertheless,
that such leases shall in no case prejudice, interrupt, or interfere
with the right of the governor or other officer for the time being
administering the government of the said colony, to enter upon
any of the lands comprised in the said leases for any purpose
of public defence, safety, improvement, convenience, utility, or
enjoyment. The rent to be paid for each run to be proportioned
to the number of sheep, or equivalent number of cattle, which the
run shall be estimated as capable of carrying, according to a scale
to be established for the purpose by authority of the governor.
Each run shall be capable of carrying at least 4000 sheep, or
equivalent number of cattle, according to the scale aforesaid, and
not in any case be let at a lower rent than £lO per annum, to
which £2, 10s. per annum shall be added for every additional
20


1000 sheep, or equivalent number of cattle, which the run shall be
estimated as capable of carrying. The rent to be paid yearly in
advance.’
Next, as regards intermediate lands, ‘ the interest in runs shall
be acquired, held, and determined upon the same terms and con-
ditions as above laid down for unsettled lands, excepting that the
leases shall not be made for more than eight years in duration;
and that at the end of each successive year from the date of the
lease, it shall be competent for the governor or officer for the
time being administering the government of the said colony, pro-
vided he shall have given sixty days’ previous notice, to offer for
sale all, or any part of the lands within any such run, subject to
the same conditions in favour of the lessee as are above laid down
in case of a sale at the expiration of the full term of a lease of
unsettled lands.’
Lastly, with respect to the settled districts, leases of lands may
be granted exclusively for pastoral purposes, for terms not exceed-
ing one year. Holders of purchased lands within these districts
‘ may be permitted to depasture, free of charge, any adjacent
crown lands, provided that the depasturage of such unsettled
lands, free of charge, shall in noway interfere with the right of
the government at any time to dispose of the same, either by sale
or by lease, for one year, as above mentioned.’
By these and other regulations, a great system of leasing lands
is introduced, and so completely in operation, that the practice of
buying land for sheep - runs may be said to be extinguished.
Settlers who design to become stock-farmers either procure leases
of unoccupied lands from the government authorities, or get runs
transferred to them from parties already licensed; by wliibh
arrangements, capitalists may start without having to lay out
large sums in buying land. There can be little doubt that these
licensed settlers will subside into leaseholders in perpetuity—a
species of croAvn feudatories paying an annual quit-rent for their
possessions.
Of the extent to which the available lands of New South Wales
have been disposed of, and the breadth of territory still remain-
ing, there is the following notice in the Report for 1850 of the
Emigration Commissioners: the statement includes Port Philip :
‘ The whole extent of land alienated in New South Wales amounted,
on 31st December 1848, to 5,526,395 acres, 2 roods, and 18 perches,
leaving about 300,000,000 acres still in the hands of the crownt Of
this immense extent of land it is said that about two-thirds are
occupied by grazing establishments, which are also rapidly extend-
ing beyond the limits of the colony, and that millions of acres of
the richest land within the range of the temperate zone are avail-
-21


able for every description of cultivation. In Port Philip alone
nearly 900,000 acres have been surveyed, and not bid for, and are
consequently available for immediate purchase,
‘ On the 30th December 1848, thirty-one new counties were pro-
claimed, which will accordingly fall within the class of intermediate
lands, as defined by the order in council, 7th March 1847. The effect
of this proclamation is to bring within the settled or intermediate
districts the whole sea-coast of the colony and the adjoining laud to
a depth varying from 50 to 150 miles. In the northern parts of the
colony, between 26 and 31 degrees north latitude, the depth does
not appear to be more than 50 miles. Prom 31 degrees north
latitude, southward to the boundary of Port Philip (including the
greater part of the settled districts), it ranges apparently from 100
to 150 miles. In the Port Philip district it would be, on the average,
considerably under 100 miles.’
TOWNS,
New South Wales now possesses some fine large towns,
chiefly on the coast, and between which communication is kept
up by steamboats, stage-coaches, &c. Sydney, situated on Port
Jackson, a beautiful bay of the sea, is the capital. The rise
of this city has been very rapid. Fifty years ago it was merely
a few hovels ; now it has a population probably of fifty thousand.
And such a population is not to be compared with that of an
English town of the same size, which has taken a thousand
years to grow, and has consequently a quiet vegetating commu-
nity, increasing both in numbers and in transactions at the rate
of about 1 per cent, per annum. The extreme rapidity of its
growth shews that it is a city of people in progress and actibn;
and hence its city peculiarities are not those of the quiet mansion
and the indolent back street, but those of intense activity and
enterprise, accompanied by their characteristics both good and
bad. These characteristics, however, all tend to make Sydney
more metropolitan than a town of the same size in this country.
There is a magnificent government-house, and there has long
been a theatre, with abundance of handsome taverns, and places
of indulgence of a less reputable character. But, fortunately,
it may now be said that there is abundant church accommodation,
and many schools. There is a well-endowed school for the higher
branches of education, called Sydney College. It was founded by
a convict, but not one of the class counted infamous. He had
been transported for his share in a tragic duel, and being a skil-
ful physician, he appears to have devoted the remainder of his
days, with wonderful success, to giving the world more than a full-
-22


measured compensation for all the injury he had done it. Another
similar institution is called the Australian College. The parent
■who desires to give his children as good an education as they
can obtain in any of the middle-sized commercial or maritime
towns of Britain, need not shrink from taking them to Sydney, if
other things should happen to attract him thither. In this city,
drafted from all classes and kinds of the community, the members
of every considerable religious body find their fellows, and for-
tunately, of late years, the means of worship and instruction. A
town where religious feuds or combinations have not had time to
grow up and strengthen themselves, or divide the community, has
naturally exhibited a pretty fair proportion of each of the reli-
gious bodies of the old country. Perhaps the Roman Catholics
slightly predominate, as they do in all the colonies, owing to the
multitudinous expatriation of the Irish. An Anglican bishop has
his cathedral at Sydney, and there is now a Roman Catholic
hierarchy in the colony.
The legislative council-house, court-house, the building formerly
used as a convict barrack, the custom-house, and other central
public institutions, contribute to the metropolitan air of the place,
assisted by a handsome theatre and a public pleasure-ground
called Hyde Park. There are many suburban villages—such as
Balmain, Camperdown, Newton, Paddington, Redfern, &c. ; and a
rapid communication is kept up throughout the populous neigh-
bourhood by stage-coaches and omnibuses. Sydney possesses
several well-conducted newspapers, and some respectable works
have issued from its press.
The wharfs and warehouses in Sydney are of surprising extent;
and the fine secure harbour in front, so advantageously adapted
for. general traffic, as well as the reception of vessels employed in
the sperm-whale fishery of the southern ocean, is a grand feature
in the scene. From all we can learn of Sydney, it appears that
the industry and enterprise of its inhabitants, acting on the great
resources around them for inland and external trade, promise to.
raise this chosen seat of population to a high pitch of prosperity;
and we may expect that in a few years Sydney will be by far the
most important British city in the colonies. The environs of
the town are said to be very charming, and include a botanic
garden, laid out with handsome walks and rides.
Next to Sydney in importance, though much inferior to it, is
Paramatta, situated at the head of the narrow inlet of the sea in
which Port Jackson terminates above Sydney. Between the
latter place and the former, a distance of about sixteen miles,
there is frequent and regular communication both by land and
water. Nothing can exceed the beauty of the scenery which
‘23


presents itself on all sides as you proceed to Paramatta by water;
the sea generally smooth as glass,. or but gently rippled by a
slight breeze ; innumerable little promontories covered with wood
to the water’s edge, stretching into the sea, and forming a corre-
sponding number of beautiful little bays and inlets in endless suc-
cession and variety. Paramatta contains upwards of 6000 inhabi-
tants. The greater part of the houses here are built of brick or
white freestone; and being for the most part unconnected with
each other, cover a greater extent of ground altogether than its
population would seem to warrant. The situation of Paramatta
is exceedingly delightful. It lies in a spacious hollow, covered
with the richest verdure, and surrounded by hills of a moderate
height. Here, too, are churches, hotels, taverns, seminaries, &c.
and all the other appendages of a considerable country town,
with a military and convict barracks, jail, government-house, and
the female factory—an establishment for the reception of incor-
rigible female convicts. Many of the private houses are of ele-
gant construction, Avith parks and gardens attached; the place
altogether thus forming rather an assemblage of cottages than a
town: the streets, hoAvever, are regularly laid out, running north
and south, east and Avest.
Pursuing an inland course for about tAventy-one miles, the tra-
veller next arrives at Windsor, containing a population of about
3000. From Paramatta to this little tOAvn a coach runs three
times a Aveek. Windsor, which, in the description of its buildings,
much resembles Paramatta, is built upon a hill close by the River
Hawkesbury, Avhich forms the north and the north-Avestem boun-
dary of the county, and which, after a circuitous route of about
140 miles, discharges itself into Broken Bay. Windsor also
contains a handsome government - house, Avith extensi\’e gar-
dens, &c.; two churches, a jail, court-house, military and convict
barracks, taverns, inns, shops, &c. The lands in the neighbour-
hood of Windsor are exceedingly fertile; but this advantage is
more than counterbalanced by its extreme liability to inundation
from the HaAvkesbury (in consequence of its vicinity to the Blue
Mountains), which has been knoAvn to rise to the almost incredible
height of 93 feet above its ordinary level. Inundations of 70 and
SO feet are of frequent occurrence; and the consequences to settlers
Avithin its reach are often fatal, and always ruinous to their
settlements. The tOAvn itself, Avhich is built on an eminence of
about 100 feet above the level of the river, has hitherto escaped
these tremendous overflowings; but as its elevation above the
highest known floods is only a feAV feet, it cannot be considered
as free from danger. Next to Windsor in importance is Liver-
pool, at the distance of about eighteen or tAventy miles from
24


Sydney, in a south-west direction. Between these two places a
stage-coach runs several times a week. Liverpool is situated on
the banks of George’s River, which discharges itself into Botany
Bay. It possesses a church, two or three good inns, stores, court-
house, jail, and the usual accompaniments of a town in New South
Wales —a convict and military barracks. The soil around Liver-
pool is of a very indifferent quality; but as the town occupies a
central situation between Sydney and some fertile districts in the
counties south and west of it, it is, notwithstanding, a place of
considerable bustle and of rising importance. George’s River, on
which it is situated, and which is about half the size of the
Hawkesbury, is navigable for boats of about twenty tons’ burden
as high up as the town.
PRODUCTIONS, TRADE, &C.
As elsewhere stated, New South Wales is chiefly pastoral in
character, but is more agricultural than other colonies of Australia.
Its mountains and rivers give moisture, and consequently the earth
renders her fruits. In 1848, with a population of 220,474, there
were 163,669 acres of land in cultivation; the value of the exports
of wool was £1,260,146, and of tallow, £140,579. Of live-stock,
the colony owned 113,895 horses; 1,752,852 horned cattle;
70,875 pigs; and 10,053,641 sheep. Besides being suitable for
grain culture, much of the land is adapted to the growth of the
vine, with regard to which some attention begins to be paid.
Peaches are produced in great abundance, and from them the
finest brandy is distilled. As, however, the wines and brandies
of New South Wales are not admitted into Great Britain except
by paying high duties, the manufacture of them is not conducted
on an extensive scale. In 1848, the land under vines was 875
• acres; the quantity of wine produced was 97,040 gallons; and of
brandy the produce was 1163 gallons. Tobacco is also grown to
some extent, and so likewise are oranges. A country which
produces grapes, peaches, and oranges, on a large scale, in the
open air, along with maize, wheat, potatoes, and other ordinary
products, besides affording boundless pasturage for sheep and
cattle, may be said to enjoy the greatest bounties of nature, and
to be capable of yielding sustenance to millions of human beings.
A strange result of the abundance of sheep is the superfluity of
animal food. There is so much mutton, that it is worthless in
the pasturing districts. Sheep are valuable only for their wool
and fat. The plan pursued with these animals is to drive them
in flocks to the seaports, then slaughter them, and boil down


their carcasses for tallow. In 1849 there were in New South
Wales 350 boiling-down establishments; 1,565,752 sheep and
188,064 horned cattle were slaughtered, and 440,186 hundred-
weight of tallow were produced. The wool exported was
13,396,525 lbs., amounting in value to £663,965. The exports
of tallow and wool are principally to London, where the sales are
managed by commission-agents, on whom the exporters draw
bills of exchange. There is a law in the colony, by which money
can be lent securely over wool and live-stock —the arrangement
being of course an accommodation to small capitalists requiring
to borrow for short periods. In 1849, the amount of prefer-
able liens on wool was £84,692, 18s. 3d., and on live-stock,
£161,553, ss. lid.
Not the least valuable of the natural products is timber of fine
qualities and large size. The following kinds of trees may be
enumerated: —The red cedar, equal in richness and beauty to
mahogany; iron bark and blue gum, suitable for house and ship-
building and general carpentry; rose or violet wood, suitable for
gig-shafts; beef-wood, adapted for tool-handles and bullock-
yokes; and tulip-wood, for all fancy-work. In consequence of
the prolific growth of the mulberry-tree, silk-worms may be
reared to any extent, and with scarcely any trouble may be a
source of considerable profit to the families of farmers. The soil
and climate of certain districts appear to be suitable for the growth
of the sugar-cane, and the coffee and cotton plants. The following
is a list of manufactories in New South Wales (including Port-
Philip) in 1849 : —Distilleries, 2 ; rectifying and compounding, 2;
breweries, 31; sugar-refining, 2; soap and candle-works, 19;
tobacco and snuff, 15; woollen cloth, 6; hat, 5; x’ope, 4; tan-
neries, 72; salt, 1; salting and preserving meat establishments,
7; potteries, 4; glass-works, 1; iron and brass foundries, &c., 16.
It will be judged from the above that Australia is not a proper
field for the emigration of skilled labourers who look for employ-
ment in great manufacturing establishments. In the towns there
are doubtless a moderate scope for operative tailors, shoemakers,
carpenters, masons, and other tradesmen; but the class of emi-
grants best adapted for this quarter of the world are shepherds,
ploughmen, and gardeners, or those who will ungrudgingly adapt
themselves to those pursuits, or to the more laborious duties of
draymen. It must be remembered by all classes of free labourers
to New South Wales, that they will require to compete with
ticket-of-leave or other varieties of convicts; and that, conse-
quently, they will labour to a disadvantage. Mechanics must
not be deceived by the outcries for labourers. In this particular
instance, the demand is chiefly for ploughmen and shepherds, in
26


consequence of convicts not being now drafted into the colony
on the former abundant scale. At the same time, this scarcity
affords an opening for free rural labourers, and also for domestic
servants. The Emigration Commissioners, in their circular for
1851, report that ‘ the labourers most wanted are shepherds,
farm-servants, agricultural labourers, and female domestic ser-
vants. For rough carpenters, bricklayers, and blacksmiths there
is a slight demand in the country districts; but for the superior
description of mechanics or tradesmen, who can only find suitable
employment in Sydney and other populous towns, there is no
demand at all.’ Tt is to be feared that the discoveries we are
about to notice may disturb the labour-market in this colony, and
create fallacious expectations, leading the labouring-classes from
steady pursuits. Several of the useful minerals—such as coal,
iron, and copper—have been found in the colony, but not to such
an extent as to supersede pastoral by mining pursuits. Of late,
however, gold has been found in the township of Bathurst iti the
range of the Blue Mountains. This mineral always holds out
glittering temptations to adventurers, but there are many reasons
why its discovery is never a steadily - profitable pursuit, and
among others there is this, that people will not work effectually
at it for hire, and no one can make more than his own hands can
raise and remove. Few have made fortunes in California, while
,many have undergone frightful hardships, and the adventurers at
Bathurst seem to be meeting more hardships than success.


VICTORIA, OR PORT PHILIP.
Victoria, or Port Philip, was established by act of parliament
in 1850, as a colony distinct from New South Wales, of which it
was formerly a part. It occupies the most southerly part of
Australia, with a stretch of sea-coast, opposite to Van Diemen’s
Land. By the above statute it was measured off as the territory
bounded on the north and north-east by a straight line from Cape
Howe to the nearest source of the Murray, and thence, by the
course of that river, to the east boundary of South Australia. It
covers an area of about 80,000 square miles, or rather more than
50,000,000 acres; It is about 500 miles in direct length east and
west, with a coast-line of 600 miles.
The rapid rise of this fine colony is the best token of its adap-
tation to the wants of emigrants. Scarcely fifteen years have
passed since the first faint whispers began to be heard of adven-
turous owners of flocks and herds having crossed a strait on
the north of Van Diemen’s Land, and found an endless undu-
lating tract of sweet, abundant pastures, spread out for their
use beneath a cloudless, sunny sky, and watered by pleasant
streams. Sir Thomas Mitchell, the surveyor-general, in the
course of his exploring expeditions, passed through this territory
in 1836, and became its discoverer, in as far as he first made
its character and resources known to the world. It afforded
so striking and delightful a contrast to the arid deserts of salt
and stone over which he had so long tracked his weary way,
that he gave it the name of Australia Felix. Custom, however,
gave it the name of Port Philip, from its principal harbour. A
clever clergyman, who meddled with many things, and could
never speak without dictating, demanded that it should be named
Philip’s Land; but demanded in vain; and parliament, trying
whether its authority will be more powerful, has directed the name
founded on custom to be revoked, and that of Her Majesty substi-
tuted for it. •
Sir Thomas Mitchell found a few adventurers already occupying
this paradise with their flocks; and when the governor of New
South Wales paid it a visit in the ensuing year, he found nearly
500 colonists, with 150,000 sheep. After the experience of Swan
River, the government was not very anxious to have another
Australian colony on its hands. But the rumour had spread
rapidly through all the southern territories; it was operating on
the parent country, and the new territory was fast receiving flocks


and herds. To avert worse evils, the crown at length interposed,
and to the district was assigned a local government. As soon as
it was formally constituted, a wild spirit of speculation in land
broke put in the colony, and with it a system of prodigious
extravagance in living. To this unhappy state of things succeeded
the usual reaction; and great numbers of settlers were ruined.
Fortunately, the natural capabilities of the district could not be
annihilated. The grass grew, and the herds and flocks fattened
for some one; and though often the master changed places with
the servant, the colony revived, and rose in material prosperity.
All who have spoken from experience of the land of Yictoria,
confirm each other in pronouncing it to be more uniformly rich
than that of the older colony, especially throughout a border
stretching about fifty miles from the coast. The easternmost
portion, called Gippsland, is separated from Port Philip Proper
by the Waragong Mountains, or Australian Alps. Along the west
run the mountain-ranges called the Pyrenees and Grampians; and
there are many isolated hills of great elevation, among which is
Mount Cosciuszko, rising to the height of GSOO feet above the
level of the sea. It has several rivers. The Yarra Yarra —on
which stands Melbourne, the capital—the Glenelg, the Taylor,
the Barwon, the Moorabool, the Glengary, the Thomson, &c.
These flow from the mountain-ranges into the sea, and are
not of course of very large volume of water, nor of great length ;
but they appear to keep the territory well watered; and so far
as experience hitherto has gone, they are not liable to the
parching droughts which convert the rivers of the East into
stony highways. Besides the streams already mentioned which
flow into the sea, the great interior rivers—the Murray, the
Murrumbidgee, the Severn, and the Hovell—touch the borders
of the district. The scenery is by all accounts beautiful and
diversified. Sometimes continued successions of rolling downs,
covered with soft beautiful grass, and diversified with majestic
trees, to which travellers pay the poor compliment of sometimes
saying that they are as picturesquely and effectively placed as if
they were in a gentleman’s park. In other places—but away from
the more fertile and frequented districts—are precipices, torrents,
and shattered peaks. Even Mr Richard Howitt, whose misfor-
tune it was to be one of the victims of the wild early history of
the colony, could not help admiring the scenery, though observed
under the vexatious circumstances of a search after his stray stock.
He says in his work on the country—
‘ This country had its delights as well as vexations: I saw a great
deal of very delightful country, when on my return I could look
about me and enjoy it. I was about ten or twelve miles from Mount
29


Macedon, and a more picturesque and beautiful region was never
looked upon. Water there was none, and the trees were all of one
kind, but the whole country had a delicately smooth, lawn-like
surface, without scrub or stones. Around me spread a spacious plain,
the she-oaks, a rich silky brown, scattered thinly and in clumps ;
farther off, bounding the plain, knolls, slopes, and glens, all of the
smoothest outline, crowned or sprinkled with the same trees; and
beyond, mountains and mountain-ranges, on which rested deliciously
the blue of the summer heavens. Some of these mountains were
wooded to the summits; others revealed, through openings, im-
measurable plains, where sheep were whitely dotting the landscape,
the golden sunshine seen at intervals betwixt the long shadows of
the she-oaks. There only wanted a good stately river—American or
English—to make the scene magnificent A more splendid
and extensive country there is not in the world for sheep and cattle
than Australia Felix. How fat and sleek are its immense herds !
I speak not here of the immediate neighbourhood of the town, but of
the country generally.’
Of a country about the size of Great Britain, so recently and
thinly inhabited, we can only expect to get from those who are
even best acquainted with it scraps of information about particular
patches here and there. Mr Griffith, in his ‘ Present State and
Prospects of the Port Philip District,’ divides the flat country
into two classes :
‘The one,rich alluvial plots of deep-brown loam, formed of de-
composed trap, generally destitute of timber, but occasionally
wooded; and the second, of plains entirely free from timber, or else
thinly sprinkled over with she-oaks or stunted honeysuckle-trees;
the latter being sometimes of a light-reddish clay soil, mixed with
sand, and at others of a brown loam, but producing everywhere
excellent food for sheep. A great part of the country, from Gee-
long to the River Grange, on the way to Portland Bay, going the
southern road by the lakes Colac, Poorumbeet, and Corangamite,
and more to the southward still, towards Port Fairy—a tract of pro-
bably 160 miles long, and varying from ten to thirty miles in breadth
.—consists of the first description. This description of plains is
admirably adapted for cattle or tillage, but not so well calculated for
sheep, which on this rich soil are apt to suffer from foot-rot, unless
very well looked after. The second comprises the plains stretching
from Melbourne westward forty miles to the Brisbane Range; from
the ranges northward of the Saltwater River towards Geelong, forty
miles; from the River Hopkins eastward by Mount Elephant, forty
miles; and from the Pyrenees in the north to the lakes Colac, Co-
rangamite, &c., probably a hundred miles.’
Dr Lang, who perambulated the territory at his leisure, and,
with an observant eye in all matters where he was not blinded by
his violent prejudices, has given the best general account of the
district which we yet possess, with the title ‘ Philip’s Land; or the
.30


Country hitherto designated Port Philip: its Present Condition
and Prospects, as a highly eligible Field for Emigration.’ Of
the district of Western Port, immediately eastward of the harbour
of Port Philip, and between it and Grippsland, he says, partly
from his own observation, and partly, as it will be seen, on the
authority of another—
‘ Western Port consists of a large circular basin, of about eighteen
miles across, with an island, called Frenchman’s Island, of about
twelve miles in length and six in breadth, in its centre, which thus
divides it into an eastern and western arm. There is another island*
however, called Philip’s Island, of about fifteen miles long, stretching
across the mouth of the Port, a few miles to seaward from French-
man’s Island, which effectually shelters the entrance of the harbour*
and renders it easily accessible for sailing-vessels in any wind
*“ Western Port,” according to Mr Hovell, “affords safe anchorage
for vessels of any draught of water.” The government settlement
was situated on the east side of the bay, and the country from this
spot to Bass’s River, which enters the Port from the northward,,
“ consists principally,” Mr Hovell informs us, “ of a rich alluvial soil*
interspersed here and there with patches of heath.”
* The district of Western Port undoubtedly presents superior capa-
bilities. It contains an abundance of land of the first quality for
cultivation; although, in general, the arable land in the immediate
vicinity of the port is covered with timber. The extent of excellent
grazing land in the district is much greater ; although, from the
general moistness of the soil and climate, it is better adapted for
cattle than for sheep. The bay abounds with fish of the finest
description; and fuller’s earth, and various other mineral products*
are found in the vicinity. But the circumstance that will unques-
tionably render this district of the first importance in Philip’s Land*
is the inexhaustible supply of coal which it contains. In a compara-
tively thinly-wooded country, like a large portion of the best part of
the territory of Philip’s Land, especially in a climate considerably
colder than that of New South Wales, this valuable mineral will
necessarily be in great request, and the coal trade will consequently
be of the utmost importance to the future inhabitants of this district.
‘“From Wilson’s Promontory to Western Port,” observes Mr Cun-
ningham, during whose residence in New South Wales this district
attracted more attention than it has done till very recently, from the
circumstance of the abortive attempt to form a settlement in Western
Port having taken place about that period, “ the coast stretches along
in a westerly direction round Cape Liptrap, about sixty or seventy
miles, bounding an extent of country described ds the finest ever be-
held, and reaching apparently about forty miles to the foot of a very
lofty range of mountains running parallel with the coast. In part it
resembles the park of a country-seat in England—the trees standing
in picturesque groups, to ornament the landscape. The timber is
mostly the same as in Yan Diemen’s Land, but some of the species
31


in that genial climate attain greater size and beauty. In other parts
the eye wanders over tracts of meadow-land, waving with a heavy
crop of grass, which, being annually burnt down by the natives, is
reproduced every season. In these situations large farms might be
cultivated, without a tree to interrupt the plough. Various fresh-
water lagoons lie scattered on the surface, and about eight miles up
the Western River a branch stream intersects it. A second tributary
stream falls by a cascade into this latter, about five or six miles up,
navigable for small vessels, where there is an eligible situation for a
town. The mouth of the port is about thirty miles wide. An island,
called Philip’s Island, occupies the centre, stretching about thirteen
miles, leaving an entrance at each extremity. From the headland
of the eastern main a reef runs towards the island, leaving a narrow
entrance for ships, but hazardous to one unacquainted with the
passage. - The western entrance is, however, safe and commodious
for vessels of any burden.” ’
Equally favourable accounts are given of some other districts,
which appear to consist chiefly of those broad level plains, with
scattered timber, which form the main feature of Australia, and
render it so available as a vast sheep-pasturing country. In
Gippsland, towards the coast, there is stated to be a tract of rich
alluvial land, suitable for agricultural purposes. This tract is
reported to embrace at least 500 square miles, or 320,000 acres,
and to have the advantage of being close to navigable water.
1 In short,’ observes. Dr Lang, 1 the district of Gippsland is un-
questionably one of the finest fields for an agricultural population
in the colony. From its vicinity to the Snowy Mountains and the
southern coast, it is blessed with abundance of rain; and the
climate, although mild and genial for a European constitution, is
considerably colder than that of New South Wales.’
Of certain inland districts, Mr Malcolm, a squatter and settler,
gave the following evidence before a select Committee of the Le-
gislative Council of New South Wales on Immigration in 1845:
‘ The district from Lake Colach, for about 200 miles, is very rich;
Ido not think there is richer land in any part of the world; it is as
good land as ever plough was put into.
‘And already cleared? —Yes; there are thousands of acres adjoin-
ing Lake Colach clear of timber, and the richest land I ever walked
or rode over; it is about forty-five miles from Geelong, between
Geelong and Portland.
‘ls it well supplied with water? —Yes; with streams and lakes,
one of which is about twenty miles in circumference.
‘You are of opinion, then, that the field is almost unlimited for
the eligible settlement of immigrants ?—I should say so: all the way
to Port Fairy, on the Glenelg River, is as good as the part I have
spoken of, taking the soutli side of the lakes; the other side is not
so good, but is a good grazing country.
o 2


• ‘Do you know the country on the hanks of the Goulburn?—Yes;
I have been on the Goulburn.
‘Do you think that is a country which would support a large
agricultural population?—l do not: from what I have seen of it,
I should say it is more a sheep country. I have been over a tract of
country extending from Lake Colach to Portland Bay, which I never
saw the like of; a great part of it is too rich for sheep.’
Another experienced settler, Mr Holland, gave this evidence:—
* Would you state your opinion as to the capability of the colony
for immigration generally ?—The district of Port Philip is a splendid
held for immigration ; I think the soil able to maintain a dense
population, and the.climate highly favourable.
‘ Are you acquainted with England generally ? —I have travelled a
great deal in England.
‘Would you compare the province of Australia Felix, in point of
apparent fertility, with any district in England, or with England
generally ?—I am of opinion that the -western district of Port
Philip is capable 6f supporting as dense a population as any part
of England.
‘ Do you think the climate favourable ?—Highly.
‘ By the Auditor-general —Have you experienced any inconvenience
from the dryness of the climate?—Not the least.
‘ By the Chairman —Do you not think it would be desirable to in-
troduce a class of persons, such as the small yeomanry of England,
■who would cultivate farms of perhaps two hundred acres’ extent, by
the labour of their own hands and that of their families ?—lt would
be a splendid field for them.
‘ From what you know of the capabilities of this country, of its
soil and climate, do you think there would be any doubt of the
idtimate success of a farmer with a small capital, and a farm of say
one hundred and fifty or two hundred acres, cultivated by himself
and his family?—l think such a person would do well—that
his position would be materially improved by emigrating to Port
Philip.
‘ Would you look upon the present low value of agricultural pro-
duce as calculated to interfere with the prosperity of small farmers ?
•—No.
‘ By the Auditor-general —Do you think they could raise wheat at
such a price as to make it pay to send to England ?—I feel certain
they could.’
At a point about thirty miles from Port-Philip Heads, on the
south-east coast, veins of coal of a good quality have been dis-
covered; and specimens of copper and lead ore have also been
collected. We do not, however, possess any accurate statements
respecting the mineral riches of Victoria; the attention of the
settlers being at present so profitably diverted to rural pursuits,
that mining adventure does not appear to be prosecuted.
C 33


Melbourne, the capital of the colony, is situated on the River
Yarra Yarra, at the head of the large land-locked bay of Port
Philip. Twelve years ago Melbourne was only a collection of
huts, and now it is a city with between twenty and thirty thou-
sand inhabitants, possessing many public buildings, sending forth
its mail-coaches and its steamboats daily to the neighbouring
ports, and, at stated intervals, to Sydney and Hobart Town. It
is partly built of brick, from an excellent clay found in the vicinity,
and partly of stone. The handsome granite fronts of some of the
houses have recalled recollections of Dublin and Aberdeen. The
finest structure in Melbourne is Princes Bridge, built across the
Yarra, and consisting of a single arch of 150 feet span; it cost
£15,000. The churches, hospitals, theatre, and mechanics’ insti-
tution, are buildings on a large scale; and their existence is
creditable to the feelings of the people. The town has some
large hotels. The streets, though irregular in outline, are wide
and convenient, and offer the spectacle of a busy population.
The bay on which the town is built is one of the finest in the
world —broad and capacious, it offers an admirable haven for
shipping. The view of the town from the water* is striking and
beautiful. In Melbourne there are extensive stores, where every
necessary and luxury may be procured ; and so excellent are these
stores, that emigrants have little need to take with them large
stocks of clothing or other articles. The town is rapidly in-
creasing by the immigration of families from all parts of the
United Kingdom. The tone of society and of the general speech
is distinctly English.
Geelong may be called the second town in Victoria. It lies on
the west side of the bay of Port Philip, and we believe already
numbers about 6000 inhabitants. Between this western shore
and Melbourne, a steamboat regularly plies. The country behind
Geelong is now in the course of settlement for sheep-runs, on
licence from government, and is extremely well spoken of, and
we believe with justice. Few parts of Australia can be so well
recommended.
SALE OF LANDS AND CAPABILITIES FOR SETTLERS.
The regulations as to the sale of land, and the occupation of
the waste crown lands as cattle-runs or sheep-walks, are the same
which apply, under the general statute, to New South Wales.
The effect of the dear-land scheme, and the corresponding squat-
ting-system, does not here appear to have been so marked in
driving the community into two classes the great capitalist
34


owners of sheep and cattle, and the hunahle shepherds and herds.
In the first place, the colony not being old enough to have a race
of mechanics of its own, there appears to be more room for that
class of workers, even in following their own special and legitimate
trades. Probably also the greater fertility of the soil has given
more encouragement to a middle agricultural class to rise out of
the humbler grade, or to come otherwise in between them and the
shepherd lords.
There can be no doubt that this fine colony offers the broadest
scope for men of moderate capital, possessing intelligence, skill,
and industry, along with that degree of self-denial which can dis-
pose a person to feel comfortable in a life of comparative solitude.
Of course we here point to the profession of sheep-farming in the
more distant parts of the country, where it is necessary to ‘ rough
it ’ at least for a time, in a dwelling of a very rude kind, and to
spend no little time daily on horseback. But the drawbacks on
■what is usually called comfort, will to many be more than com-
pensated by the abundance of provisions, the cheapness of tea
and other luxuries, and a total exemption from rates, taxes, and
we might almost say rent; for the sum payable to government in
name of licence for a sheep-run is too insignificant to be taken
into account. The settler in the remote solitudes of Victoria is,
however, not utterly cut off from communion with his fellow-crea-
tures. There is a remarkably free intercourse among neighbours,
and travellers are frequently making calls; while, by means of
bullock-drays, all requisite articles, books, letters, &c. are brought
from the nearest seaports and towns.
The following views with regard to the applicability of this soil
to the objects of the middle classes, and of the humbler, who emi-
grate not merely to live, but to rise, are taken from the very best
authority—the Report of the Committee of the Legislative Coun-
cil of New South Wales on Immigration, issued in 1845 :
‘Emigrants arriving in the colony, bringing with them a small
capital and habits of industry, would constitute a social grade in
colonial society, of which it is at the present moment to a great
extent deficient. A boundless extent of land available for culture
exists in various divisions of the colony. Australia Felix, generally,
may be said to be eminently adapted for the settlement of an agri-
cultural population ; the evidence on this point is so ample and
conclusive, and is furnished by such a multitude of witnesses, that
it would be quite supererogatory to dwell upon it in this report: it
may, however, be remarked, as a peculiar feature in the Australian
lands, that tracts best adapted for the plough are naturally clear of
timber and brushwood.
‘ It is stated by an intelligent witness, Mr Malcolm, that “he
believes any given area in the Port Philip district is capable of sup-
iio


porting as large an average population as any part of England or
Scotland that “he believes that there is no part of the world
where small farmers, arriving with their families and with a small
capital, could do better than in Port Philip that “he is himself an
agent for several gentlemen who have lands in that district let out
in small farms ; that many of the shepherds, after they have been a
few years in service, have saved perhaps £lOO or £2OO, and turned
farmers on their own accountthat “ all the lands around Mel-
bourne and Geelong were as rich as any lands he had seen ; that a
district extending from Lake Colach, about two hundred miles to
the westward, was capable of supporting the densest agricultural
population.”
‘ Mr Walker, whose long experience and extended observation in
all matters relating to the colony give to his evidence the highest
value, confirms the testimony of Mr Malcolm as to the great capa-
bilities of the colony for all agricultural purposes. Mr Walker
observes : “ I could not think of finishing my enumeration of agri-
cultural tracts without including Australia Felix, in which district
there is an immense extent of country suitable for agricultural pur-
poses, and for the maintenance of a dense population; and which
has been so well described by Sir Thomas Mitchell, the surveyor-
general of the colony, as ‘ a region more extensive than Great Bri-
tain, equally rich in point of soil, which now lies ready for the plough
in many parts, as if specially prepared by the Creator for the indus-
trious hands of Englishmen.’ There is, besides, the whole of Gipps-
land of a similar character.”
* The Australian climate and soil are peculiarly adapted for the
growth of all Mediterranean productions : in the southern divisions,
for the vine, the olive, the mulberry, and the tobacco-plant; in the
northern, for the cotton-tree, the sugar-cane, the coffee and indigo
plants, rice, and all the indigenous productions of tropical and semi-
tropical climates. Numerous and inexhaustible sources of wealth
and prosperity remain in abeyance, and wholly undeveloped for
want of labour and capital: these, if brought to bear in due pro-
portion, could not fail to elicit results alike productive of prosperity
to the individual colonist, the social advantage of the colony at large,
and the interests of British commerce generally.
‘ Some of the branches of industry above referred to have already
engaged the attention of the colonists, and the most conspicuous
amongst them is the culture of the vine. During the year 1845,
566 acres of land were in cultivation as vineyards, yielding 50,6‘66
gallons of wine, and 1018 gallons of brandy.
‘ With the view of encouraging the growth of the vine, a wish has
been very generally expressed that the immigration ot a limited
number of vine-growers from the south of 1 ranee and Germany into
the colony should be encouraged. The knowledge necessaiy foi
the successful cultivation of the grape, and the manufacture of wine,
is only to be found amongst the inhabitants of the wine-gi owing
parts of Europe; and as the advantages that would accrue to the
S 6


colony by the introduction of such a class of persons would he of
the most serviceable kind, the committee conceive that equal faci-
lities should be afforded to them as to British immigrants, either in
affording them a free passage under a bounty-system, or in the
granting a remission in the purchase-money on land, as an equiva-
lent for the outlay incurred in their passage.’
Dr Lang gives the following pleasing account of what may be-
accomplished out of the smallest means by perseverance and pru-
dence, in the history of one of his own Scottish countrymen:—-
‘ On his arrival in Melbourne, he had only from five to ten shillings
in the world, and this small sum he had earned by some petty ser-
vice rendered on board ship to one of the cabin passengers; but he
had nine sons and a daughter, of whom the eldest was about twenty
years of age, and the youngest in infancy. Labour was high priced
at the time, as everything else was; and having no mechanical
employment, he hired himself as a stone-mason’s labourer at £2
a week. Those of his sons who were fit for service of any kind
were also hired at different rates of wages to different employers.
The earnings of the family appear to have been all placed in a com-
mon purse, and with their first savings a milch-cow was purchased
at £l2; another and another being added successively thereafter at
a somewhat similar rate. Pasture for these cattle on the waste land
quite close to the town cost nothing, and there were always children
enough, otherwise unemployed, to tend them; while the active and
industrious wife and mother lent her valuable services to the com-
mon stock by forming a dairy. In this way, from the natural
increase of the cattle, and from successive purchases, the herd had
increased so amazingly, that in the month of February 1846 it
amounted to 400 head; and as this was much too large a herd to be
grazed any longer on the waste laud near Melbourne, a squatting-
station had been sought for and obtained by some of the young men
on the Murray River, about 200 miles distant; and as I happened to
be spending an afternoon in that month at the house of my worthy
friend John M‘Pherson, Esq., of the Moonee Ponds, near Melbourne
—another remarkably successful colonist from the Highlands of
Scotland, whose eldest son is now a student of divinity in the Free
Church College at Edinburgh —the herd was actually pointed out to
me by Mr MT’herson as it was passing his house at some distance,
under charge of the young men, to their station in the interior. For
such a station the temporary occupant has merely to pay £lO a year
to the government, which insures him an exclusive right of pas-
turage, for the time being, over perhaps from fifty to a hundred
square miles of land,’
Much to the same purpose is the following statement
‘ Mr Malcolm observed that he had had various families of Scotch
Highlanders and others in his service as shepherds, who had saved
the whole of their wages, and invested them in cattle, and taken
farms on lease. One of these has a cattle-farm of 800 acres rented


from him for £GO a year. Mr Malcolm added, that he had an excel-
lent shepherd —an expiree convict—still in his service, to 'whom he
had paid in money-wages upwards of £4OO, at the rate of £4O a year
sometimes; but the man has not a sixpence saved, as he drinks all
he earns as regularly as he receives his wages. Mr Aitken confirmed
this statement by observing, that the rest of his men had had pre-
cisely the same opportunities as the Camerons and the two Mowats
[men who had raised their position]; but they had regularly spent
all they earned, and were shepherds still.’
The following instructive passage is taken from the same
source:—
‘ Many of the squatting-stations of Philip’s Land are held in this
joint-stock-partnership way: two young men find, perhaps, on their
arrival in the colony, that the amount of capital they can each invest
in stock is sufficient to bear the expenses of a separate establish-
ment, and they therefore unite their capital, and make a joint-stock
concern. In this way their individual expenses are diminished one-
half to each of them, while a more effectual superintendence is
secured for both; for the one can always be present on the station
while the other is necessarily absent, disposing of produce, purchas-
ing supplies, or transacting other business for the station. It often
happens also, that even when these partnerships are well assorted,
one of the partners is much better fitted for the one class of duties
than the other; so that each contributes in the most effectual manner
his quota of service or exertion for the common benefit of both.
And when the concern becomes sufficiently extensive to bear divi-
sion, and when each is able perhaps to keep an overseer of his own,
the stock and other property are divided accordingly; and then when
Lot goes to the right hand, Abraham goes to the left. From a list of
the payers of squatting-licences in Philip’s Land, he will see how very-
large a proportion of the squatting-stations of that country have
hitherto been held on this joint-stock principle. It is true the
partnerships are not always well assorted: the partners, it may be,
do not draw well together; they are not of congenial dispositions;
and a disruption takes place, as occasionally happens elsewhere in
other partnerships of a more extensive character and a more intimate
connection: but these are the exceptions—self-interest and common
sense preventing them from becoming the general rule.’
The vine has been extensively cultivated, as will appear from
the report of the Legislative Council and the statistics already
quoted; and a considerable quantity of wine and brandy have been
already made from it. By a parliamentary report presented in
1851, it appears that in 1849 there were laid out in vineyards 164
acres, producing 5220 gallons of wine, and 515 gallons of brandy-.
Along with the paper containing statistical returns of the produce
and the demand for labour in the various districts in New South
Wales already mentioned, there is a separate set of returns from
38


Port Philip, divided into the districts of Melbourne, Western
Port, Portland, Geelong, Murray, and Gippsland. The staple
agricultural productions are generally the same as in that return—
wheat, oats, barley, potatoes, and maize, with no mention of peas
or beans. The productions of Portland are set down as ‘ wheat,
oats, hay, vegetables, wool, hides, tallow, black-oil, black-cattle,
and sheep.’ The labour column shews that commodity to be
everywhere in demand, but does not press so steadily on purely
field-labour as the corresponding document relating to the old
colony. Of Melbourne it is said— ‘ Most parts of the district are
still requiring labourers ; the city and vicinity a little better sup-
plied than heretofore, in consequence of the arrival of immigrants.
All kinds of labourers are required.’
The latest published work on Victoria is that of John Fitz-
gerald Foster, Esq. (Trelawney Saunders, 6 Charing Cross, Lon-
don, 1851.) Mr Foster was for some years a member of the
Legislative Council for the Port Philip district, and may therefore
be supposed to be a trustworthy authority. His representations of
the prospects of small capitalists are as encouraging as those of
Dr Lang. After giving some instances of mercantile adventure
and success in town pursuits, he proceeds to speak of pastoral
occupations. The first instance he adduces of this class is that
‘ of a family who, in 1838, came over to Port Philip with 3000
sheep from Van Diemen’s Land: they are now possessed of
stock equivalent to 75,000 sheep.’ A second case is that of ‘a
man, formerly an overseer of theirs, who now has one of the best
stations in the land, on which he has 15,000 sheep.’ Another
instance of success is that of ‘ one of the earliest settlers, who
commenced with 100 ewes : he is now said to be in the receipt of
£4OOO per annum. An overseer of his, who saved a little money,
has at present a station and 7000 sheep. A third, who also com-
menced with 100 sheep, is now a very wealthy man, with many
thousands of sheep and cattle, and considerable landed property.
A fourth, who invested £l2OO about twelve years ago, lately,
during his absence in England, had £3OOO per annum remitted
from his agent in the colony, who at the same time increased his
stock. A fifth, who commenced with £3OO, sold his stock in
four years for £2300.’ It is admitted by this writer that as the
nearest lands fill up, the chances of success are probably lessened;
nevertheless, in so extensive and so productive a region, the
enterprising emigrant need entertain no fears as to any difficulty
in obtaining a location suitable to his means. It may be added,
that if the capitalist has a family growing up, he possesses a great
advantage over the bachelor; because the services of his sons and
daughters will prove of inestimable value, and then: society, along
39


•with that of his wife, will prodigiously assuage the discomforts of
a dwelling in the broad wilderness.
In some convenient part of each run the house of the squatter,
or more properly the shepherd patriarch, is placed, with a few
enclosed paddocks and slip of garden in its vicinity. Besides the
family hut, which is built of wood, there are huts for the shepherds,
stables, and other accommodations. The run may be large or small,
but usually it is a number of square miles in extent. Some runs
are twenty miles long, with a corresponding breadth; and in such
cases there are outstations for trustworthy shepherds, with their
dogs. These persons bear little resemblance to the shepherds on
the Scottish hills or downs in the south of England. Their equip-
ments, with a rough blouse, a belt round the waist, a gun over
their shoulder, leathern leggings, and a cigar in their mouth, give
them more the aspect of brigands than that of watchful guar-
dians of a flock of sheep.
The distribution of shepherds over the runs is thus referred to
in Mr Foster’s account of a squatter’s life: —‘To each flock one
shepherd is allotted, who feeds it for two or three miles round an
outstation, possibly at the distance of ten or fifteen miles from
his master, who, if very diligent, may perhaps visit him once a
week or month. Two flocks run from each station, where the
watchman lives who guards them from the wild dogs at night,
shifts the folds daily, and cooks for the shepherds. On another
part of the run may be found a herd of cattle depasturing, 1000
or 2000 head of which are under the charge of a stockman, who
is perpetually on horseback, riding round his herd, and collecting
the stragglers. Nearer the homestead, we may meet with 50 or
100 horses, old and young, some belonging to the squatter him-
self, some to his men; for few of them have not, out of their
savings, purchased a brood mare, while some of them possess
several.’
The life of one of these great sheep proprietors is described as
being a condition of leisure and coarse abundance, interspersed
with a peculiar class of cares. There is always a certain fear of
shepherds deserting their charge, of sheep being worried or dis-
persed by wild dogs, or of catarrh, scab, or foot-rot having broken
out in the flocks. Then there is a period of anxiety at the
lambing season —‘ when,’ says Mr Foster, ‘ a storm of sleet may
destroy hundreds of lambs.’ Lastly, there is the trouble con-
nected with the great sheep-shearing season, when all hands are
pressed into service, and casual assistants require to be hired,
to wash and shear. Of the minor anxieties consequent on the
running away of cattle, the training of horses, and so forth,
nothing need be said. He who cannot face such difficulties had


better remain at home, and draw out existence in the midst of
cares of another class. The world is not to be won anywhere
without some variety of toils and troubles.
_ The progress of Victoria is as marvellous as anything in colonial
history. The country which, fifteen years ago, had only a few
wandering savages and wild animals, is now occupied by 60,000
inhabitants of British origin, and feeds 400,000 horned cattle, and
upwards of 5,000,000 sheep, producing upwards of 12,000,000
pounds of wool for exportation. In 1849, the imports amounted
to £479,831, and the exports to £755,326. The exports are there-
fore about £l2 per head, and the imports £8 per head on the
settled population. The exports and imports are rapidly increas-
ing; and since 1849 we should imagine that the imports per head
must have risen to about £lO or £ll. As much of the imports
are British manufactures, it is evidently for the benefit of the
home country to encourage by all reasonable means the growth
not only of this but the kindred Australian colonies.
The returns to parliament, bringing down the amount of emi-
gration to the beginning of 1849, shew the total number- of
immigrants who landed in Port Philip during the preceding year
to have been 4098. Of these, 2111 were males; 1987 females. The
number of agricultural labourers was 841, and of shepherds 94.
The domestic servants are rated at 15 males and 704 females. The
number of building mechanics was 115, and of persons employed
in preparing or selling food • 20. Engaged in making articles of
clothing were 8 males and 25 females. The persons following
mechanical pursuits, not included in any of these classifications,
were set down at 134 males and 3 females.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
This colony is situated to the west of Victoria, and, like it,
commands a certain extent of coast, which is here indented with
several extensive bays; and at the head of one of these inlets is
the port of Adelaide. This situation is believed to give the
colony advantages for external traffic, more particularly as respects
trade with India, the Cape of Good Hope, and islands in the
Indian Ocean. In sailing from England, the port of Adelaide is
reached a few days before Melbourne or Port Philip—a circum-
stance that may be kept in mind by emigrants in making preli-
minary arrangements.
By the statute appointing the constitution of South Australia
(4 and 5 Will, TV. c. 95), the boundaries of the settlement were fixed
between the 132 d and 141st degrees of east longitude, and between
the Southern Ocean and the 26th degree of south latitude, making
an area of 300,000 square miles, or nearly 200,000,000 of acres. In
the papers relating to the crown lands in the Australian provinces
presented to parliament in 1851, there is a proclamation minutely
setting forth a specific boundary in terms of the geographical
definition. It is appointed to commence at a point about 1J mile
west of the mouth of the Glenelg, where the 141st meridian cuts
the sea-coast. The distance surveyed is about 124 miles from the
coast, marked with a double row of blazed trees, and mounds
where the ground is bare. It was provided that the sovereign in
council might authorise any body of men to make laws for the
colony, constitute courts, appoint judges and other officers, and
also appoint clergy of the Established Church of England or
Scotland, and impose rates or taxes. It was provided that all
such laws and regulations be laid before the sovereign in council.
It was under this act that * The Colonisation Commissioners for
South Australia’were appointed, with certain definite functions.
A portion of these comprehended the establishment and enforce-
ment of what is called the self-supporting or sufficient-price
system already referred to, and which will have to be further
noticed.
South Australia is not a mountainous district, though it has a
sufficiency of hill and other inequality of surface to redeem it
from the character of flat monotony. The highest summits rise


slightly above 3000 feet from the sea-level. The general cha-
racter of the scenery, unless in the great alluvial plains, which are
the surface riches of the district, is that of gently-undulating
ground, with forest-glades and clumps. There is a large quantity of
land ready for the plough, without the necessity of clearing it either
of forest or of the fern-root, which gives so much trouble in many
parts of New Zealand. One authority mentions that there are
‘ thousands of acres broken up, from which not a single tree
required to be removed.’ The fertility of many parts for arable
purposes, the adaptation of large tracts for sheep pasture, the
abundance of mineral wealth, and the salubrity of the climate,
are all admitted on the best evidence. We possess less satis-
factory accounts respecting springs and water-courses. Those
who have had experience of the colony speak of the water as
sufficient for all practical purposes; but it is not supplied by
abundant perennial streams, as ih Britain and New Zealand. Na-
tural holes, ponds, or tanks, have to be greatly relied on; and it is
believed that these are not merely collections of river and surface
water, but that they are supplied by springs beneath, since they
are very deep, fresh, and cool. It is said that bathers find a diffe-
rence of temperature in different parts of the same pool—a pheno-
menon quite consistent with the supposition of subterranean
springs, as warm water, being lighter than cold, tends upwards, and
brings the whole mass to the same temperature; but when cold
water is supplied from below, it keeps to a certain extent its dis-
tinct temperature. One of the most enthusiastic admirers of the
district—for the good reason, that he was one of the most fortu-
nate settlers—gives an account of the water, which, though it is
intended to be laudatory, should make the emigrant, both with
reference to his own and his family’s health, and minor considera-
tions, inquire well into the matter before he finally trusts his for-
tunes to this colony. Mr Dutton says—‘ For about five months
in the year all our creeks —“ rivers ” par excellence —are running
with delicious water: after the rainy season is over, the natural
ponds formed in the beds of the rivers and creeks afford a never-
failing and abundant supply; and, with few exceptions, you may
always rely on getting water by sinking wells at from 20 to 100
feet, at from many places under 20 feet. In some parts of the
colony the water has to the new-comer a somewhat disagreeable
and brackish taste, owing to the aluminous nature of the subsoil.
It is, however, a well-established fact, that there' is nothing un-
wholesome in this; indeed I have myself become so accustomed
to the taste of it, that after a lengthened stay in the country,
upon returning to Adelaide, I almost preferred the slightly
brackish water I had been drinking in the country to the fresh


spring water out of the torrent. Cattle and sheep flourish amaz-
ingly on this water (that is, the water of South Australia), and are
very fond of it.’ * Mr M'Laren, when asked by the 1847 Com-
mittee on Emigration, ‘ls the colony well watered ?’ answered—-
* There are extensive districts well watered.
‘ Comparing it with Sydney, it is much better watered than the
Sydney colony?—Much better: there have been no droughts in
South Australia as there have been in New South Wales. And this
is not a statement made on vague grounds ; because, ever since the
settlement of South Australia was formed, there have been regularly
meteorological tables published; and there has not been one
calendar month since the settlement of Europeans in South Austra-
lia in which rain has not fallen.’
The evidence of Mr Morphett, who had resided in the colony
from its commencement, given before the same committee on this
highly-important subject, was as follows :
‘ls South Australia better watered than Sydney?—Yes: our
colony is not what Englishmen would call a well-watered country,
inasmuch as there is not so much surface-water as we see in Eng-
land ; there are not the rivers that we here see running towards
the sea ; but there is, for all practical purposes, as much water for
the country as we require.
‘Are you subject to droughts such as have occurred in Sydney?—
No: we have never had droughts, and I do not think that our coun-
try is subject to droughts.
‘ Do you find any difficulty in procuring water by sinking wells ?
Not any: a great many of the sheep of the country are watered by
wells.’
It is of course, in a colony holding out inducements to agricul-
turists, a matter of vital importance to know something of the
breadth and depth of the alluvial soil, as well as of its character.
But these are precisely the important matters in which it is most
difficult to obtain specific information, and in which the informa-
tion obtained is most frequently one-sided or en-oneous. Colonel
Gawler, the second governor of the colony, is said to have pro-
nounced, in a general way, that one-third of the land was good
for agriculture, one-third for pasture, and that the remaining third
was barren. This general estimate has been coincided in by those
who have had fqller means of testing its accuracy.f The fertility
of the organic matter contained in the soil is largely developed by
the abundant presence of decomposed limestone, though in some
places the earth, from consisting of imperfectly pulverised primitive
* Dutton’s South Australia, p. 86. f Dutton, p. 200.
44


rock, is hard and inorganic. These interruptions are, however,
according to the general accounts, comparatively rare; and it
appears that, especially wherever the streams from the upper
lands have left deposits in the lower, they have been of an organic
character, caused by the decay of vegetable matter, while the
mineral deposits are calcareous and argilaceous. A practical
authority has been quoted by Mr Dutton, to the effect that ‘ the
open plains and low grounds throughout the colony consist prin-
cipally of light sandy loam, of a bright-red colour, resting on a
limestone rubble. Tracts of sandy and poor soil are also met with,
generally arising from the decomposition of sandstone and quartz
rock, &c. On the face of many hills of moderate elevation a fine
brown loam is abundant, of more or less depth; in some cases
three, in others as much as five feet, and is a most admirable soil
for the growth of fruit-trees. On the base of the hills, resting
on the recent limestone, is generally found from six to eighteen
inches of a reddish loam, the very perfection of soil for the vine.’*
The principal river in the colony, the Murray, reaches the sea
in the estuary called Lake Victoria, which is shallow, and is
ever becoming shallower. It can scarcely be said that the mouth
is practically navigable, as, from the shallowness and the heavy
rolling surf, it is but on rare and special occasions that a vessel
can enter it. But it is thought that when it becomes dry, as it is
likely to be, the river, in a narrower channel, may be more easily
entered. This river is of great length, from thirteen to fifteen
hundred miles. How far it may be useful in a commercial sense
is still a matter of doubt. It passes, in a great part of its course,
between high cliffs of sand and clay, while in other places a broad
belt of brush and forest skirts it, with occasionally great flat plains
on either side, unfortunately too arid to be used for pastoral
purposes. There are along its course quantities of lagoons or
small lakes —a constant attendant of the limited river districts of
South Australia, as they are the natural result of a water-system,
which is liable to be much reduced during the dry season. The
variations of this river, answering to the dry and wet seasons, are
very great. ‘lt receives,’ says Captain Sturt, 1 the first addition
to its waters from the eastward in the month of July, and rises at
the rate of an inch a day until December, in which month it
attains a height of about seventeen feet above its lowest or winter
level. As it rises, it fills in succession all its lateral creeks and
lagoons, and it ultimately lays many of its flats under water.
The natives look to this periodical overflow of their river with as
much anxiety as did ever, or do now, the Egyptians to the over-
* Dutton, p. 200.


flowing of the Nile. To both they are the bountiful dispensation
of a beneficent Creator: for as the sacred stream rewards the
husbandman with a double harvest, so does the Murray replenish
the exhausted reservoirs of the poor children of the desert with
numberless fish, and resuscitates myriads of cray-fish that had
long lain dormant under ground.’
The 35th degree of southern latitude passing right through it,
the centre of this district is on a parallel with the northern extre-
mity of New Zealand, and, independently of the causes of greater
dryness, it has naturally a higher average temperature. In this
respect the only element of difference between it and Sydney is
the one being on the east and the other on the west side of the
continent. Compared with the northern hemisphere, it lies like
Malta, Algiers, and Gibraltar ; but there are now ascertained to be
topical causes of influence which prevent places, in the same posi-
tion of the two hemispheres, from having the same temperament;
and of these the broad arid continent itself, with the wide open sea
around it, are causes sufficient to account for great differences, from
the varied centre of Europe. The climate of South Australia is more
temperate than that of Southern Europe—apparently more like that
of France and Northern Italy. The friends of the colony speak of
its climate in unmeasured terms of praise. Mr Dutton says—‘lt is a
continued succession of spring and summer; for although one part
of the year is called winter, it is only so in name, because we have
not yet discovered an appropriate word to substitute for it. Suf-
fice it to say, that our so-called winter is without frost or snow;
that it clothes the country with a verdant and flowery sward, and
the trees with foliage, delighting at once both man and beast. The
rain which falls during this season germinates the seed which the
farmer has sown into green and luxuriant growth. Winter is the
season when the young lambs, calves, and foals gain strength from
the tender and nutritious grass which springs up in every direc-
tion, while the w r ool of the sheep is matured in growth.’—(P. 113.)
This is fully confirmed by Mr Wilkins, who says—‘ The rainy
season is called the winter, but this name gives but a poor
idea of that season to persons who have been accustomed to
the frost and snow of a winter in England. There is no frost
or snow, or, more strictly speaking, it is so rare an occurrence,
that I only once remember having seen ice, and this was in a cold
hilly district.’
Where there is delicacy of constitution in a family, health is
the most valuable attainment which the emigrant can pursue,
and we have known at least one instance where a family, pros-
perous, beloved, widely-connected—possessed, indeed, of every
social element which could make them adhere to home—have


courageously resolved, because the children were liable to pul-
monary complaints, to shift their whole race and fortunes to the
warmer shore of this colony. To an act of this kind, such state-
ments as the following, by Mr Dutton, would naturally be an
inducement :— ‘ The medical profession is, generally speaking,
an unprofitable one (in South Australia.) There are no endemic
diseases, fevers, or agues. The dry, warm, and elastic atmosphere
is also peculiarly favourable to asthmatic and pulmonary com-
plaints. I have myself known cases where the early stages of
these diseases have been removed, and in many others great
relief afforded where the disease was too deeply rooted for a
radical cure. People who, before they left England, were for
years in a debilitated state of health—some that were actually
given over as hopeless cases—have, on arriving in South Australia,
taken out an entirely “ new lease,” and are now as hearty, hale,
and strong as they could wish, able to undergo fatigues of all sorts,
and exposure to heat, cold, and “ bushing it under a gum-tree, with
a saddle for a pillow,” without the least inconvenience.’ —(P. 101.)
On the minor matters of mere agreeableness the testimonies
seem to be equally favourable. The country is, like all the rest
of Australia, clear of fog, and those who have experienced even
the pleasant atmosphere of New Zealand, complain of its con-
trast to the clear, dry, transparent sky of South Australia.
The evenings are described as peculiarly serene and beautiful,
with the air generally sufficiently cool to be bracing and exhi-
larating. According to meteorological observations in 1844 and
1845, the coldest day was in June, when the thermometer was
as low as 47£°, and the warmest in January, when it was at
106J°. The observations were taken at four hours of the day,
ten, twelve, two, and four. Almost invariably the highest reach
was at twelve o’clock, that of two o’clock sometimes reaching the
same level, but very rarely exceeding it. The variations in the
heat were not great, seldom above 4°,- but they were largest when
the general heat was greatest. Thus on the day of the highest
heat in January, which was likewise one of the few when the
thermometer was highest at two o’clock, the variations were—ten
o’clock, twelve o’clock, 106°; two o’clock, 106£°; four
o’clock, 101J°. Even in that, the warmest month of the year,
however, the mean temperatures and variations were, with refe-
rence to the same hours respectively, the following:— 85°,
85", and 84J°; the lowest, likewise at the same hours, were
respectively 70°, 70°, 70°, and 71°. In June, the cold month,
the highest points were, for the same respective hours, 65°, 68°,
67°, and 63°: the mean heights were 55°, 58°, 58°, and 56 ; and
the lowest 47J°, 49°, 49°, and 49£°. In the temperate month of


April the highest heights, still in reference to the hours of ten,
twelve, two, and four, were 8186°, 85°, and 82 3 ; the mean
63f J , 65'g°, 67 }°, and 64 r V ; the lowest 53|°, 5355£°, and 5U.*
South Australia is not, however, entirely exempt from its
atmospheric annoyances. To persons brought up in this country,
the few days in the summer months, December, January, and
February, when the thermometer is in the neighbouxdxood of 100°,
are somewhat formidable. It appears, too, that at such times a
very disagreeable wind blows occasionally from the north, hot
and arid, and bearing clouds of burning dust. Its peculiar cha-
racter has led to the belief that it must pass over vast sandy
deserts in the interior of the continent, which, lyhxg baked in the
sun, make a sort of ovexx where the wind heats itself in passing.
Unprepared as the dweller in India is for a perpetual warfare
witlx heat, the rougher settler in South Australia feels both
annoyance and prostx’ation from this visitation. But it appears
that it is generally but of short duration, a sea-wind from the
cool south stopping its career after a few days, and bringing with
it freshness and pleasantness. Mr Dutton thus descxdbes the
change:— ‘ All of a sudden the atmosphere becomes dax-ker and
darker; the servants rush into each room to see that the windows
are fastened. You look out and pex’ceive to the southward a
dense column of dust rising perpendicularly into the air—the two
winds have met! The south wind, fresh from tlxe sea, being many
degrees colder than the nox*th wind, is violently px-ccipitated on
bo the ground, the lighter hot wind rising in proportion; this is
the cause of the column of dust being x-aised so high; now the
two winds are engaged in tiex’ce struggle! It lasts but a mo-
ment; with gigantic stx'ides the column of dust breasts its way
northward—the hot wind is fairly vanquished, and with a blast
before which the mighty gum-tree breaks, and your house quakes,
the south wind proclaims its victory, axxd in half an hour it settles
down to a steady, cool breeze; the dust subsides, and “ Richard
is himself again.” ’ —(P. 108.)
As the person who is going to commit his fortunes to a distant
emigx-ation field cannot know too much about the place of his
adoption before he takes his final step, the works referred to in
the present depax-tment of this book are of course recommended
to the traveller’s full considex’ation. But in this instance it is
fortunate that infox-mation may be received through the eye by an
inspection of the magnificent book called ‘ South Australia Illus-
trated, by George Frederic Angas.’ The possession of this costly
series of illustrations will be the privilege of but a few; but others
* See the tables at length, Dutton, p. 103.


may see it in public libraries, or in the hands of opulent and
friendly book-collectors. There are some people who, in the pur-
suit of what they consider the main element of life, are completely
unsusceptible to scenery and the other external features which
surround them; while others, who are keenly alive to all such
influences, should, for the sake of their own contentedness and
happiness, keenly examine and appreciate such external elements
of wellbeing. One of the great features of nature brought out by
Mr Angas cannot be called prepossessing: it is the aspect of the
people. It is difficult to conceive anything more truly revolting:
their possession of the features of our common humanity, so
strongly impregnated as they are with elements of brute life,
makes the representation all the more unlovely. Massive, wide,
projecting under-features—a grin or a scowl of the least intellec-
tual and the most animal character that can be figured as human
—orang-outang-like limbs and splay feet, with the hanging
abdomen even in the young—such are their unpleasant charac-
teristics. They are of that lowest human grade which, instead of
improving, seems gradually to disappear before the progress of
civilisation. They have already been, however, cured, and fortu-
nately not in a harsh manner, of their mischievous and cruel
propensities, and the settler need fear little or no annoyance from
the aborigines beyond that of beholding occasionally an object
which it disgusts him to look at.*
The other departments of nature—animal, vegetable, and mine-
ral—exhibited to us by Mr Angas are a pleasing contrast to his
representations of the lord of the earth. His pictures justify the
statement often made by travellers in the colony, that the scenery
of the better parts is very like that of a well-kept English park—
trees not so numerous as to give a forest character, ground gently
* The latest information we have from the colony would represent these poor
creatures as not by any means a hopeless nuisance. In the paper on Australia
presented to parliament in 1851, there is a report from the governor, in which he
says— ‘ The assistant-protector of aborigines on the Murray has recently reported to
me that the aborigines at Encounter Bay were employed during the harvest by
thirty-six different settlers, and reaped CG6 acres. At Strathalbyn, for eleven
settlers, the aborigines reaped 305 acres; at Mount Barker, for seven settlers, they
reaped 97 acres ; and at the Hutt River, for two settlers, 15 acres.
A traveller from Adelaide to the south-east district was taken ill on the Coorong,
and had exhausted all his provisions; the aborigines built him a hut, brought him
food and water, fed him on fish, and after attending him several days, gave infor-
mation of his helpless condition to the police, by whom he was removed to the
station at Wellington, and thus saved his life. Between Nairne and Mount Barker
the aborigines were the means of extinguishing a bush fire which threatened destruc-
tion to the crops of the settlers. Around the lake, near the mouth of the Murray,
the aborigines are employed by the sheep-farmers to extinguish bush fires, and they
have become careful to prevent their occurrence. At Encounter Bay some of the
aborigines are good boatmen, and are thus employed in the whaling season. 1 was
informed that some of the lubras, or wives, made themselves useful as washerwomen,
and my informant spoke highly of the kindness of one who had been a nurse to her
child.’


swelling, and a coating of smooth sweet grass. The waters are in
general tranquil, with smooth turf edges; but in some places there
are torrents, and the cataracts of Glen Stewart especially, remind
one of Scotland. The vestiges of volcanic operations, which have
ceased to be active at a period comparatively late, are a pecu-
liarity of this colony. Mr Angas gives a representation of the
crater of Mount Schank, evidently a very remarkable piece of
scenery. He describes it as ‘ a hollow truncated cone of dark
cellular lava. It is about 600 or 700 feet in altitude, and rises
almost abruptly from a rich plain scattered over with luxuriant
gum and wattle- trees. The vieAv from the rim or outer edge of
the crater is peculiarly striking. The neighbouring peaks of
Mount Gambier (another extinct crater with volcanic lakes) rise
in the distance on the one side from the wooded and park-like
country surrounding them; whilst on the other, the mouth of the
Glenelg, the high land of Cape Nelson, and the indentations of
Bridgewater and Discovery Bays, with the Southern Ocean beyond,
appear as on a map, over the opposite edge of the crater. Look-
ing below, the immense hollow or bowl is seen forming the
interior, studded at the bottom with trees, which appear from the
heights above to be only small bushes.’
The intending emigrant who sets his eye upon this colony must
remember that, notwithstanding the quantity of information hither-
to received about it, it is yet a land of unknown resources —that
it is impossible to prepare the settler, as if he were going to any
of the pld settled districts of Sydney or Tasmania, to know how he
will find himself with relation to all surrounding objects. It will
be for some not the least inviting feature of the expedition, that
there is a wild adventurous vagueness about it. Hitherto, men
with a little capital and considerable enterprise, or merely with
health, industry, and some skill, have found a field here, but of
what precise character it will in future be, it is not easy to say,
since every year materially alters the ratio of the population to
the territory, and develops some great new resource for enterprise.
While a territory which, if peopled like the United Kingdom,
would contain fifty millions of people, has only had little more
than fifty thousand inhabitants,* it is easy to imagine that a mere
fractional and indicative part of its resources have been developed.
Accordingly, on turning to a map of the province, it will be found
that the settlements are nearly all comprehended in the compact
and nearly rectangular district which has the gulf of St Vincent
on the west, and the Murray, or rather the ridges of the hills on
the west of the Murray, as its eastern boundary, with the river
* At the commencement of IBSO it was 51,904.


Wakefield on the north, and Encounter Bay on the south. The
Burra Burra and other mines are carrying enterprise farther north;
hut in the meantime the wide area south of the 34th degree of
south latitude, with the two huge peninsulas on either side of
Spencer’s Gulf, are, with little exception, fresh ground on which
the adventurous settler has a new world all before him. Nearly
in the centre of the settled portion, and with a considerable front-
age to the gulf of St Vincent, is the county of Adelaide, where it
was resolved to make the seat of government. Adelaide, the
capital, was only founded in 1836, and few transatlantic cities
have exceeded it in rapidity of growth. At the commencement
of the year 1850, the population was 14,000, the number of houses
2922. It is six miles from the port, with which it will probably
be soon united by a railway. The port, the capital, and the
way there, immediately strike the newly-arrived settler by their
thoroughly English appearance, and make him feel, after his
tedious sea-joumey, as if he had really arrived at a home. The
author of the ‘Working-Man’s Handbook for South Australia’
says of the road from the Port to the city—
‘ This bustling road generally excites surprise amongst new-comers.
They seem to think that, after having left England so far behind
them, they will, in the antipodes, find nothing resembling the old
country. Here, however, at first landing, everything they see puts
them in mind of home. The houses and streets; the shipping, boats,
and vehicles; the men, women, and children; all recall similar objects
in old England. Eamiliar-looking inns and shops, and genuine
English bar-maids or shopmen, take one quite by surprise. The
glass of beer drawn out of the London-made engine; the cheese,
butter and bakers’ bread; the meat and vegetables; and, in fact, the
tout ensemble, is English and comfortable.’
From the same homely, but apparently accurate and honest pen,
we may take the impression made on entering Adelaide :
* After traversing the park-land, the road is up a gentle rising hill,
and then turns to the right along North Terrace, in front of the
Government House. This is a commodious building, surrounded by
ten acres of land, part of which is laid out in tastefully-ornamented
gardens, with walks and shrubberies ; and in the front of the house
a high signal-mast is put up, on which the British flag is hoisted, to
denote the presence of the representative of royalty. This house
was built by Colonel Gawler, and is a convenient and comfortable
dwelling. In front of the house, and separated from its grounds by
only a large sunken ditch, is a pleasant promenade, neatly railed off
from the road, and gravelled. This promenade is deservedly a
favoured resort with the townspeople, who come out here after the
heat of the day is over. On the other side of the road, and facing
51


the Government House, is North Terrace, which boasts of many neat
villas, with handsome gardens and cool verandas; in this terrace
there are some substantial and ornamental stone-and-brick buildings
—as the Australian Company’s offices, the Bank of South Australia,
and, farther on, Trinity Church, part of which has been lately built
afresh, and the whole much improved in appearance; on the same
side as the Government House is the Legislative Council House, and
other substantial edifices. A turn to the left, past the post-office (a
small and mean-looking edifice, built in former days), takes the
visitor up King William Street, lined on one side with comfortable
houses and shops, and on the other with the stock-yards and other
buildings belonging to the auction-mart, which is at the corner of
King William and Hindley Streets, and is a handsome building, that
would be considered an ornament to any English town. Farther up
King William Street are many large buildings—as Younghusband’s,
Montefiore’s, and Stock’s stores, and in the distance the government
offices and commissariat stores; and besides these many good private
houses and shops of all descriptions. Hindley Street is the principal
place of business, and here is to be observed all the bustle of a
flourishing town, the way being filled with heavy drays loaded with
produce, drawn by four, six, or eight bullocks, and accompanied by
the drivers, shouting and cracking their long whips; also with
wagons and carts, drawn by strong English-looking horses, and
mingled with gigs, carriages, and horsemen, all seemingly eager in
business or pleasure, and taking little notice of the half-naked black
men, armed with spears and waddy, accompanied by their lubras (or
women) and children, and followed by gaunt, lean, kangaroo dogs.
Hindley Street is lined on both sides with good stone, brick, or
wooden houses, some few of which are of superior build, and do
credit to Australian street architecture. Many of the stores or
merchants’ warehouses are massive brick or stone buildings; and
altogether, the town has a much more imposing aspect than could
be expected from the difficulties it has encountered, and the short
time it has been established. Most of the better kind of buildings
have been but recently erected, and these are finished in such a
style as to lead to the idea of no scarcity of cash at present. The
principal public edifices are the two churches (Trinity and St John’s),
and three or four very commodious chapels belonging to different
sects, the Government House and offices, the Court-house (once the
theatre), the Bank of South Australia, the South Australian offices,
not to mention others. There are two banks in Adelaide—one the
South Australian, the other the Bank of Australasia. This last is a
branch of the Australasian Bank, which has establishments in all
these colonies. Its business has hitherto been carried on in a small
but elegant cottage situated in North Terrace; but now, I under-
stand, the intention is to erect a more commodious and substantial
building in the business part of the town. Besides the Frome, a
large stone bridge is in the course of erection, and probably by this
time completed. This, by opening a new line of way, will lessen
52


the distance to the port, and be a saving of labour to the bullocks
that are constantly at work on the road.'*
Small towns rise so fast in this colony, as traffic takes new
directions, that any account of them from accessible materials
would be sure to be obsolete. Twenty-three miles from Adelaide,
and on the great thoroughfare towards the northern centres of
mining as well as pastoral production, is G-awler Town, a small
but very bustling place, from the quantity of traffic, for which it
forms a station.
A few villages, of which Hahndorf is the chief, are occupied by
the German settlers of South Australia. They arrive there poor
enough, and they have been burdened with a heavy draining sort
of expenditure for their little holdings. But in their simple com-
fort and content they are a wonderful specimen of what patience and
temperance can do. Ungifted with the fiery energy of our British
people, they do not attempt to rival their rapid and shifting opera-
tions. But they are not afflicted by the same vices, and they have
enjoyment in keeping themselves alive, and becoming contentedly
comfortable; while of their more stirring fellow-settlers, some
have striven far ahead, while others, alas! overcome by the vices
of their country, have fallen as far behind. The earliest village
built by them, Klemzig, about three miles from Adelaide, is de-
scribed as being so purely national, that the inhabitants might
have been supposed to have brought it over from Prussia. Bound
Adelaide, in various directions, are scattered villages, with from
60 to 200 or 300 inhabitants, and bearing names familiar enough,
such as Kensington, Islington, Walkerville, Hindmarsh, Bowden,
Prospect, and Thebarten. The inhabitants of the capital have
already their bathing-places and marine villas in Glenelg and
Brighton, described as beautifully situated on the shore of the
gulfj with a pleasant range of sea-beach. Three small streams,
the Torrens, the Sturt, and the Onkaparinga, water this favourite
country. It contains a vast stretch of fine pasture, called Ade-
laide Plains. The county immediately to the south is Hind-
marsh. It is in the form of a cape, and has an extensive sea-
board to the south and the north-west, and even to the east, where
the lake Victoria is formed by the outlet of the Murray. Along
the shores of this estuary the land is of a varied character: part
of it is sufficiently bare and bleak, but there are rich alluvial
tracts. The next county north-westward, with the Murray for its
eastern boundary, is the Sturt. At the mutual boundary of the
Hindmarsh and the Sturt is Mount Barker, an elevation seen
from a great distance. It is the centre of a district celebrated for
its rich productiveness, abounding in fruits and vegetables, in
garden as well as agricultural produce, and supplying the primi-
-53


tive settler with the luxuries of a high state of civilisation. It
is chiefly by this district that the prizes at the agricultural
exhibitions in Adelaide are carried off. The county town,
Mount Barker, supplied with a police establishment, is a rising
and important place. Near it, at a place with the native
name of Kangooarinilla, has risen the village of Macclesfield,
and near one of the late-discovered mines is the village of Nairn.
The whole district bids fair for a course of rapid agricultural
prosperity.
Directly northward of Sturt is Eyre County, stretching along
the Murray to the great bend, and bounded on the west by the
Mount Torrens, Greenock, Bar ossa, and other ranges of hills. This
district is little known, and very scantily settled. A great part
of it is covered with what is called the Murray ‘scrub;’ a belt or
forest of scrub, about twenty miles wide, which lines, as it were,
the principal Australian river. It is described as monotonous and
gloomy to a depressing extent, and is connected with legends of
native outrage; but it has been perforated by roads, and the
short-lived period of aboriginal resistance and revenge is now
long past. Immediately to the north of Adelaide, and also on
the coast of Gawler County, and inland towards the mountain-
ranges, is the Light, the reputation of which as a scrub county,
and therefore of secondary agricultural importance, was materially
altered by the discovery of the Kapunda mines. Further north
is Stanley, unsettled and almost unknown till within these few
years; but becoming a great focus of enterprise from the Burra
mines, situated at its western extremity. These three counties
are considered as the Bush, to which the adventurous settler,
discontented with the civilisation and uniformity of Adelaide,
goes. The grain produced in them is generally only sufficient for
the settler’s own consumption, and sheep and cattle-farming are
the main occupations. Suitable for such purposes there are vast
well-grassed plains and valleys, and unless a peculiarly strong
tide of emigration should set in in these districts, proposing
settlers will have an extensive choice of station for years to come.
‘There is no lack,’ says Mr Dutton, with special reference to
these northern districts, ‘of the best soil; indeed it would appear
invidious to particularise any one district more than another, as
they all more or less possess like advantages. The wide tract of
country on the east side of Spencer’s Gulf is still fresher than that
which has just been mentioned. The accounts of it are contradic-
tory ; and so far is it from being settled, that there are no means of
forming any estimate of its capabilities. It was there that, in the
early history of the colony, had been established the town settle-
ment of Port Lincoln. It was recommended as a suitable place for


the capital of the country; but a sort of prejudice has since arisen
against it, and it has dwindled away instead of increasing. The
capaciousness and excellence of its harbour have elicited unani-
mous admiration, and it has been stated, on pretty good authority,
that there is abundance of good soil around. As stated above,
the accounts of the broad peninsula on which Port Lincoln is a
dot are varied and inconsistent, and in such circumstances it is
the safer policy for the emigrant to treat the worst accounts as
the most accurate. Mr Eyre, who went over the ground, has
reported that ‘ the great mass of Port Lincoln Peninsula is barren
and worthless; and although it possessed a beautiful, secure, and
capacious harbour, with a convenient and pretty site for a town,
and immediately contiguous to which there exists some extent of
fine fertile soil, with several good patches of country beyond, yet
it can never become a large and important place, on account of
its complete isolation, except by water, from every other, and the
limited nature of its own resources.’ * This unfavourable view is
confirmed by the remarks of the governor, who, in a report drawn
up by him in 1850, says—
‘ Of Port Lincoln it was remarked, on its discovery in 1802, “ that
the excellence of the port might seem to invite there the establish-
ment of a colony ; but the little fertility of the soil offered no induce-
ment.” Nor has it, in my opinion, at the present time any other
prospect of becoming a populous or thriving settlement, than that
which the recently-ascertained mineral character of the country
presents. The land is for the most part poor and rocky, the trees
scrub and shiack, the water generally scarce and brackish. There is,
however, a spring of good fresh water, below high-water mark, on
the beach, near the present township. Boston Island, where Flinders
searched in vain for water, is still reputed to be destitute of it;
although it is rather a marvellous fact that a flock of 1200 sheep at
present thrive there.
‘ A speculative township, extending to the preposterous length of
about five miles, was originally laid out along the margin of Boston
Harbour (the adjacent bay is Port Lincoln Proper, and is uninha-
bited) ; and at the farthest extremity of it, on an eminence over-
looking both bays, was laid the foundation-stone of an intended
church, which, however, w r as never proceeded with, and is now only
alluded to by the settlers as a record of the exaggerated and hitherto
disappointed expectations of the early purchasers of land, many of
whom are resident in England.’
Settlements have tended rather towards the south than the
north in this colony. On the coast, 300 miles south of Adelaide,
was discovered the promising district of Port llivoli, visited by
* Dutton’s South Australia, p. 92.


Governor Grey in 1844. In a dispatch to the colonial secretary
on the occasion, he said— ‘ lam happy to be able to assure your
lordship that the results of our journey were of a most satisfac-
tory nature ; and that we ascertained that by keeping near the
sea-coast, instead of passing the line of route previously adopted,
there is an almost uninterrupted tract of good country between
the rivers Murray and Glenelg. In some places this line of good
country thins off to a narrow belt; but in other portions of the
route it widens out to a very considerable extent, and on ap-
proaching the boundary of New South Wales, it forms one of the
most extensive and continuous tracts of good country which is
known to exist within the limits of South Australia.’ But the
views of Governor Young, in his report in 1850, have a less favour-
able appearance.
Running along Encounter Bay, this new district has been divided
into two counties, the more northerly called Robe, and the other
Grey County. In the former, running parallel to the coast, is the
Wambat range of elevations. In the latter are Mount Muirhead,
Mount Gambler, and the volcanic hill Mount Schank, elsewhere
mentioned. It is not easy to give any satisfactory account of the
resources of this district, which indeed is not laid down at all, or
at most only outlined in the usual maps, though perhaps the emi-
grant who had looked at them in this country for information may
find, ere he has reached the spot, that pretty full experience has
been had, either for good or evil, of the district. The suspicion
that haunts all parts of Australia—that of good fresh water being
limited in its supply—shines through the accounts even of the most
sanguine supporters of this new field. Thus ‘an experienced
colonist in search of sheep-runs,’ quoted by Mr Dutton, says,
evidently making the best of the case —‘ In the lowlands of this
district, and near to Rivoli Bay, water is everywhere to be found,
in the tea-tree SAvamps (always regarded as an indication that
Avater is near), A\ r hich are very numerous and extensive. I consider
there are some thousands of acres of land on Avhich the tea-tree
is to be found. In the middle of one of these swamps avc dis-
covered a small stream of running Avater, Avhich must be perpetual,
as it was in the latter end of April when I saw it, and before any
rains had fallen after the summer drought.’—(P. 98.) It is an
important feature of this new district that it is intersected by the
overland tract from Port Philip.
HISTORY AND SOCIAL STATE.
While the early history of many other colonies shews the evils
arising from utter anarchy and Avant of a principle of manage-
-56


ment, that of South Australia, on the other hand, exemplifies how
powerful may be the evil influence of any miscalculations on
the early operations of a new body, while it is plastic and
impressible. The Commission appointed in May 1835 published
a very well-written and rational exposition of the system on
which they proposed to act. It set down as a first principle, that
the characteristic feature of the system was the securing a certain
amount of free labour, and that this was to be accomplished by
exacting for each grant payment of a certain sum per acre, to form
a general fund, applicable to the exportation of labourers. This
fund was to be placed under the control of the commissioners, whose
duty it was to apply it with a view to the interests of the colony, in
reference to the number, the age and character, and all other quali-
fications of the labourers exported. It was held out that while the
act guaranteed the colony against convict labour, its conveniences
and advantages, without its evils, would be thus supplied. As the
allottee did not pay for any specific labourers coming out, but paid
into a general fund, on which all the labour of the province was
supplied, it was unnecessary to have recourse to the indenture
system, ever productive of discussion and legal interference —of
tyranny on the one side, and of hatred and insubordination on the
other. It was represented in this document, that 1 the contribution
to the emigration fund being a necessary preliminary to the acqui-
sition of land, labourers taken out cost free, before becoming land-
owners, and thus ceasing to work for others, will furnish the
means of carrying out other labourers to supply their places.’
The characteristics of the method of payment, as appointed by
the act, were set forth. There was no penalty to be levied on
leaving the land waste; • because the sum paid being a kind of
instalment on the price of cultivation rather than the value of
the land, it was believed that none would take allotments which
they did not seriously intend to make use of.
An incident in the very outset of the colony was not of favour-
able auspices. The governorship was offered to Sir Charles
Napier; but that shrewd officer declined to rule on the self-sup-
porting system, as it was called, ‘ without some troops, and with-
out power to draw upon the home government in case of neces-
sity.’ Captain Hindmarsh, a very meritorious naval officer,
believed to be highly skilled in all the routine of his own profes-
sion, was then appointed. He found a state of matters very diffe-
rent from that on board a man-of-war, or even in a garrison settle-
ment. Before he had arrived and established his government,
crowds of impatient settlers were there before him, and were rush-
ing in a continuous torrent. As it was no longer the rule of first
come first served, but each had to wait to take the allotment
57


surveyed off for him, there was an immediate demand by each
immigrant of his destined allotment, since they were fast spend-
ing their capital in idleness, drawing costly supplies from the old
settlements. But the surveyors had not begun to work—they
did not even know where the capital of the new colony was to
be. This state of matters created discussions in the colony which
came to blows, and brought immediately such a torrent of com-
plaint to the colonial office, that it was quite necessary to recall
Captain Hindmarsh and some other official persons.
He was succeeded in the government by Colonel Gawler, under
whose auspices the new system was worked in a manner which
speedily shewed how dangerous it might be made, and taught a
severe lesson to colonists going to places where there was tempo-
rary prosperity for them caused by circumstances which were
forced and fleeting, and did not arise out of the true elements
of permanent colonial prosperity. Under the original act, some
powers had been given to the commissioners to borrow money on
the security of the funds derived from the sale of lands; and these
powers were enlarged by an act passed in 1838. The new gover-
nor drew a strong description of the false position of the colony, in
which, from the mass of immigrants far exceeding the immediate
arrangements for allocating allotments, the people had crowded
to the centre of government, and were occupying themselves in
anything but the legitimate pursuits of colonisers. 1 Scarcely any
settlers in the country, no tillage, very little sheep or cattle pas-
turing, and this only by a few enterprising individuals taking their
chance as squatters. The two landing-places—Holdfast Bay and
the old port—of the most indifferent description ; the expense of
transport to and from them to Adelaide the most ruinous; the
population shut up in Adelaide existing principally upon the
unhealthy and uncertain profits of land-jobbing; capital flowing
out for the necessaries of life to Sydney and Van Diemen’s Land
almost as fast as it was brought in by passengers from England;
the colonial finances in a state of thorough confusion and defalca-
tion.’ The wildness of the system of land-speculation which had
sprung up can only be comprehended by those who have witnessed
the madness of any commercial crisis, where all are occupied in
making money by advantages over each other, and the true source
of wealth and increase—production—has ceased. While the coun-
try lands were sold at a fixed price of £1 per acre, the town acres
were set up to auction at an upset price of £2, 10s. each. The
dealings which took place in the transfer of these allotments
were an exaggeration of everything that has occurred in railway
gambling. From £3 or £4, acres rose to the price of £2OOO and
£3OOO ; and those who pocketed and spent these rapid profits, of
58


course thought that both they and the colony were advancing.
As it is every trader’s object in an established city to get into a
business locality, it became every town-section holder’s object to
make his property a centre of business. Hence came a race in
building and laying out; and frantic efforts were made by each
to have streets and warehouses about him earlier than his neigh-
bour. The handicraftsmen connected with building sometimes got
bribes which defeated the intended end, for they would then only
work occasionally, and after they had exhausted the produce of
their last turn of work in brandy and champagne. The mania.
scattered itself through the country. Holders endeavoured to
set up villages which might become towns on then’ allotments;
and a map of the central district, with all the projected villages
laid out on it, would have made it appear as populous as Lanca-
shire. It is said that wanderers in the bush would come upon
signal-posts indicating the position of streets and squares, with
the most familiar aristocratic names of the West End of London.
An active, energetic administration, aided by the funds advanced
by the commissioners, and by drafts and other forms of credit
where these were insufficient, rapidly changed this gambling
system, and produced a temporary period of apparent prosperity.
Public works were now undertaken on a large scale, and the
settlers drew considerable incomes. But it was overlooked at
the time that this is not colonisation as a new source of supply,
but merely the employment of people far off at the expense of
the mother country, instead of their employment at home. Mr
Dutton says, that ‘ South Australia was producing nothing at the
time, and immense sums were obliged to be sent to the neighbour-
ing colonies for the necessary articles of daily food—-an expense
which was heightened by the failure of the crops there, which
brought the article of flour alone, in 1840, to my knowledge, up
to £9O and £lOO per ton. As long as the governor circulated
such large sums in the colony, this dearness was not felt
The working-classes scouted the idea of proceeding into the
country, when they were sure of employment at large wages on
the government works; and the country settler was thus pre-
vented from producing those very articles of food which, by keep-
ing the money in the colony, would have laid the sure foundation
of future wealth. The colony, therefore, did not receive any
further benefit from this large government outlay beyond the
possession of a number of handsome buildings, necessary, it may
be, but all the profits of whose erection went to the neighbouring
colonies in exchange for food.’ *
* South Australia and its Mines, Pp. 21, 25.


The necessity for the buildings may be doubted, unless it were
necessary that a man who is poor should spend all his own money,
with some that he has borrowed, in building a large house, because
some day he may become rich enough to require it. This state
of matters now belongs to past history so far as South Australia
is concerned; but the conclusion is still important to settlers, as
shewing them that it is not the fact of a settlement being pros-
perous from money, and occupation being abundant, that makes
it desirable, but the circumstance of that prosperity being well
founded—the circumstance of its being founded on production.
A new governor, Captain Grey, succeeded, and set his face
immediately to a retrenchment, firm and stringent, but as gentle
as with these necessary qualities it could be made. But the true
sources of colonial wealth and income had been so completely
neglected, that, to obviate the most calamitous consequences to
the unhappy settlers, large advances from the home government
were necessary. Notwithstanding very liberal aid, the revulsion
was so great that multitudes were thrown into destitution, and dis-
contents were created which threatened actual violence. In the end,
however, the necessity of the settlers betaking themselves to the
true objects of their mission—the means of communication with the
interior, the bringing in of land, and the depasturing of sheep and
cattle—produced their legitimate good fruits. But owing to the
energetic efforts which had been made to give the colony, at its
very outset, all the advantages of a home district, in a city, har-
bour, and public buildings—including a large and costly prison—•
the authorities were not put in the right position for really start-
ing the colony, without an immediate expenditure of upwards of
£185,000 from the home government, with the prospect of fur-
ther contingent outlay; while the colonists themselves were sub-
jected to the greatest hardships and privations. The early misfor-
tunes of this colony for some time damped it; but whether its
people ought to have been brought together or not, there they were
—intelligent, well-educated, well-intentioned, energetic, English
and Scotsmen, and it could not be but that in the end they would
right themselves. They were at first, like all bodies of men who
miscalculate or are unfortunate, clamourers for government aid
and the parental assistance of the mother country. But that was
sternly refused, so far as it inferred future aid and artificial sup-
port. The very considerable sums already referred to were spent
to meet obligations and debts incurred by the representatives of
government—not to give artificial assistance to the colony. It
took of course some little time before the energies at work gave
any visible sign. But, from the year 1840 onwards, the province
was progressively prosperous; and thus it is usual, though it was
60


as attested by the lollowing docum
of 1847, by Mr T. F. Elliot
ent, laid beto
re the Committee
Return shewing the General Condition of South Australia in the Years
1840 and 1845.
1840.
1845.
Total Population, -
In Town, -
In the Country,
Number of Public-Houses,
Convictions of Crime,
Acres in Cultivation, -
Exports of Colonial Produce,
Revenue, -
Expenditure, ...
14,610
8,489
6,121
107
47
2,503
£15,650
30,199
169,966
22,390
7,413
14,977
85
22
26,218
£131,800
32,099
36,182
N.B. —Observe the extraordinary increase of every favourable element,
and decrease of every one that is unfavourable. Public-houses, convic-
tions, and expenditure, materially diminished; occupation of country
lands, agriculture, and production of articles of export, largely increased.
founded in 183 G, to date its real existence from the former year.
The rapidity of its progress, immediately on its passing the term,
is attested by the following document, laid before the Committee
This increase in the elements of wellbeing was accompanied by
a dispersal of the population from the town, where they were ob-
taining a false and self-consuming income, to their allotments and
service in the country, in so far that Adelaide, in the early days,
contained more than half of the colony’s population, and had appa-
rently more inhabitants than it possesses now. The South Austra-
lians boast that they are, in the various grades of society, and their
habits and social condition, more like the mother country than any
other colony. We have seen that they had no convict population
to contaminate them, and they speedily put down the faintest
attempt at bush-ranging within their border. They consider them-
selves fortunate in the purity of their Anglo-Saxon race, having a
larger proportion of Englishmen* and Lowland Scots than any other
colony—at least in Australia. A proposal having been made,
during the scarcity of emigrant labour, to introduce that of hill-
coolies, many of the settlers have congratulated themselves on the
proposal not having been adopted. They have taken with them
the national amusements as well as the more important qualities of
their race; and the accounts that we have of hunting, horse-racing,
cricket-playing, &c. in South Australia, at least indicate the most
fervid and sincere pursuit of pleasure under all difficulties. Those
who pursue these occupations, however imperfect bo the means


—and they must, in so raw a country, be imperfect—seem, how-
ever, to enjoy their, sport with much zest; and perhaps they have
there, as well as at home, the essential element in the enjoy-
ment—a competition with each other, tending to the accomplish-
ment of feats which are remarkable, if not for their absolute
perfection, at least for the difficulties overcome in accomplishing
them. But in a country where the whole occupation of man is
in combating with, and overcoming, the difficulties of nature —where
there is a race with time—and hunting out the savageness of the
land, and bringing it into civilisation, are the daily exciting pur-
suit of the inhabitant —one would really think that open-air exer-
cises could not obtain the same importance as they do in a country
where the momentous labours are in the crowded senate or court-
house, or at the dusty desk. Yet it is evident, from Mr Dutton’s
account, that the races are a very important affair. He says—
‘ The annual races are very popular, and well attended—causing,
for the time they last (usually three days), almost a total stagnation
of business. Adelaide boasts of as fine a race-course, in the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the town, as any in the world. Perfectly
level, and without a single stump of a tree or stone, it presents a
fair field for equestrian feats. The beginning of January is the time
set apart for these truly national sports, and then the settler comes
in to Adelaide from far and near : top-boots and cut-aways are the
order of the day; and the steady old nag, which has been accus-
tomed for months before to jog through the bush at his own pace,
gets extra allowances of corn, and a double application of currycomb
and brush, to be able to shew off on the race-course in gallopping
from one point to another—for everybody is on horseback
No greater and more convincing proof can be given of the very
orderly nature of the South Australian population, when I say, that
out of the thousands assembled in January 1845 to witness the races,
at a time, too, when most of the labouring-classes bad plenty of
money, and means of becoming intoxicated and riotous, not one case
of disorderly behaviour occurred which called for the active inter-
ference of the police.’—(Pp. 144r-147.)
Every country, old or new, has its peculiar form of the victim
class. It is the advantage of the distant colony that the indolent,
spiritless child of selfishness, whether of high or low origin, who
leans upon others instead of exerting himself for self-support, is
driven to his shifts. This is very naturally and amusingly shewn
in Mr Wilkins’s description of the South Australian victim—
* Some persons are ruined by farming; but these belong to the
class who leave others to act for them, and spend their time and
money in training horses for the race, driving tandem, and living at
62


hotels; fond of what they call a quiet game of cards, and going homo
in the morning without hat or boots, which have been as quietly
staked and lost; and so on, until they turn unfortunate, and become
acquainted with Ashton’s Hotel , as the jail is called. Such are not
uncommon cases, even in so small a community as South Australia;
and it is curious that you may generally tell the habitation of these
characters by observing their dwellings surrounded with the remains
of expensive furniture, broken shafts of gigs, tools in abundance, and
much broken, expensive clothing, and piles of empty bottles; which
last are the only articles that make any return to the poor creditors*
for the land has boen already staked and lost to some brother chip.
These are the men who lose by farming, and would lose by the
richest mine that was ever discovered; but even they afterwards
find employment; and their good seat on horseback, and devil-may-
care hunting propensities, render them valuable servants to the
cattle-owner, who engages them as stock-keepers, where they vege-
tate until a fresh supply of money comes out, and enables them to
pursue the old game. However, there is no fear that their case will
discourage the hard-working sober man from engaging in the pur-
suit in which they have failed.’ *
The inns in the towns and villages of this colony are described
as numerous and good. The peculiarly English character of the
population would at once prepare us to expect this; but the
traveller penetrating the bush to look out for a pasture location,
or for employment, is not to expect an inn at every stage. A
universal system of hospitality, however, seems to have been
established throughout the district; and while the absence of
bush-rangers has rendered it safer than in New South Wales,
it has been found that, for the general interests of the colony,
the system is as prudent as it is neighbourly and humane. The
searcher after employment is recommended to burden himself with
nothing but clean linen, a couple of towels, a razor, brush, and a
piece of soap. He has of course learned to dispense with heated
water, and he will have had the prudence, before leaving Britain,
to procure such articles as he may need in their most portable
shape. Mr Wilkinson recommends the addition of negrohead
tobacco, with a flint and steel; but this must be as the workman’s
tastes and habits lie. Thus proceeding on his journey, he is wel-
come at every door, and he receives not only such plain substan-
tial hospitality as the emigrants’ store affords, but probably
instruction and advice as to the best direction to follow, or the
best means of accomplishing the object of his wishes. Mr Wil-
kinson gives this emphatic assurance on the subject—
‘ I have travelled in all parts of the country, and been entertained
* Working-Man’s Hand-Book.


by all classes : at one time by the owners of large stations, who
covered their hospitable boards with delicacies; at another by the
shepherd or bullock-driver, whose humble meal I have shared. I
have remained a visitor for days together with persons whom I had
not seen before; but in all my experience, I found only one person
who did not offer me food and lodging. Let all working-men bear
this in mind, and themselves maintain this hospitality towards
wandering fellow-colonists.’
Perfect religious toleration has been all along a fundamental
principle in this colony, and, what must be in all respects
gratifying to reflect on, it is accompanied apparently by zealous
efforts on the part of each body amply to supply the means of
worship and religious teaching to its own people. In Adelaide
there are two churches of the English establishment, two Pres-
byterian places of worship, nine edifices devoted to the worship
of other Protestants, a Roman Catholic chapel, and a meeting-
house of the Society of Friends. There are throughout the
whole territory seventy-six places of worship. It is not un-
likely that the emigrant, ere he reach his destination, may find
this number increased, to meet the increasing wants of the
growing colony. In one part or other of the colony there will
be found places of worship for the Wesleyan Methodists, the
Primitive Methodists, the United Presbyterians, the Indepen-
dents, the Baptists, and ‘immersed believers’—the ‘Christian
Brethren,’ the Unionists, and the Swedenborgians; while the
Germans have their Lutheran Church.* An ordinance of the
year 1847 appointed aid from the public funds to be given in
supplement to voluntary contributions. It proceeds on the prin-
ciple of giving £5O when there is a population of fifty persons
who have themselves raised £5O, and of larger aid, not exceeding
£l5O, corresponding with the amount locally raised. The stipends
of the ministers are also aided from the same source.
The education of his children is one of the most formidable
obstacles to the enlightened citizen emigrating. He cannot but
remember how frightfully this great source of civilisation and
wellbeing has been neglected in other colonies. It was natural
to expect South Australia to profit by the sad experience, and it
must be admitted that her government has employed the moderate
means at its disposal in this field of usefulness in a manner which
somewhat shames the old country. In 1847 an arrangement was
made for paying to each schoolmaster who had twenty scholars, or
more, £1 a year for each, up to £4O, when the allowance ascends no
higher. In Adelaide munificent aid has been given to the schools
■* See Tables and Particulars, Martin's British Colonies, i. 690.
64


on the supply and demand system, by some of the fortunate indi-
viduals who profited by the tide of success in the colony—among
others which have more or less connection with the various reli-
gious bodies, there is a great collegiate institution on the principles,
and to a certain extent under the authority of the Church of Eng-
land. The educational operations embrace the somewhat uphill
task of teaching the children of the aborigines.
Almost next to instruction itself is the supply of its daily food
from the newspaper press. It is especially valuable to the colonist
who can take few books with him, and to whom the current his-
tory of that European world which he has left at a distance is
the most interesting object of study. Several newspapers have
been established in the colony; but it would be useless to name
or number what is so very fluctuating in its character.
That powerful measure of the state of society, the extent of
criminality, shews here a favourable aspect in comparison with the
penal settlements, or those which have been penal. Yet some
formidable offences have been committed. Between 1840 and 1847
there were seven murders, and, what is rather singular, only two
cases of violence, with intent to kill or do some bodily harm. Of
that species of assault on females which marks an intensity of
sensual savageness there were three, and of ordinary assaults nine
—a small number for a new society; of sheep-stealing, a very
formidable offence in a colony, there were eight instances; of cattle-
stealing eight, and of horse-stealing three.
TRADE AND REVENUE.
The history of the colony’s export and import trade keeps
unison with that of its social health, or disease arising from mis-
taken management. In 1841 the imports from Great Britain
exceeded £150,000. In the ensuing year they were considerably
less than £93,500; in 1848 less than £58,500, rising in 1844 to
nearly £64,000; and in 1845 exceeding £103,000, while in the
ensuing year they rose above the level from which they had sunk.
In exports from the colonies there was a like depression. They
were upwards of £123,000 in 1841, and less than £70,000 in 1842,
while they became but a small fraction more than £47,000 in 1843,
and were more than £54,000 in 1844. The same malady struck at
the exports, though not in so marked a manner. They amounted
to more than £53,500 in 1841, were in 1842 under £40,000,
and in the year following rose to a point slightly above then-
former level. In the feature of importation, the preponderance
of increase is decidedly in favour of British exports. In the
earlier periods of the colony, when the inhabitants were spending
E 65


their money, were exporting little, and so were not put into the
channel of interchange with the home country, they bought from
the colonies and from foreign countries to a large proportional
extent. Thus in 1839, when the exports were trifling —to
Britain about £9500, and to the colonies about £6soo—the im-
ports from the colonies were upwards of £200,000, while those
from Britain were less than £123,500. In 1849 the imports from
Britain had increased to £177,428, while those from the colonies
had decreased, being £196,236. The imports from foreign countries
had been upwards of £23,000 in 1839, and in 1849 they had
fallen off so as to be less than £ll,OOO. In the same time the
exports to Great Britain had increased from the small sum
already mentioned—about £9soo—to exceed £300,000. The
exports to the colonies had at the same time increased from about
£6500 to upwards of £165,000 —a result which, when compared
with the decrease of imports from the colonies, shews that the
circle of the colonial trade must right itself through Great Britain;
in other words, that the other colonies must export to Great
Britain, to enable them to pay the excess of their imports from,
over their exports to, South Australia. The exports to foreign
countries have ever been trifling. In 1845, by an unusual leap,
they reached £9783; but in 1849 they were down to what appears
nearer their usual level, £1875. The quantity of wool exported
has in more than one year risen above 2,000,000 pounds, worth
about £lOO,OOO. The value of the corn exported in 1848, however,
was more than three times that amount. In the latest information
contained in the governor’s report laid before parliament in
February 1851, it is stated that—
‘ The exports for the year ending sth April 1850, contrasted with
those of the previous corresponding year, are decreased one-half per
cent.; namely, from £485,951 to £483,475. The decrease has been
chiefly owing to a smaller amount of the produce of the mines. The
expectations of the miners and smelters of the Burra Burra ore, as
mentioned in my last annual blue-book report, were not realised to
their full extent.
‘ The export, as above, of wheat, meal, and flour to Great Britain
and elsewhere was 14,4974 quarters of wheat, and 1924 tons of meal
and flour.
* The export of tallow was 5571 cwt, against 3867 cwt. of the
previous corresponding year.
‘ The export of wool for the year ended sth April 1850 was
2,841,131 lbs. against 2,243,086 lbs. of the previous corresponding year.
‘ The tonnage inwards and outwards has increased for the year
ended sth April 1850, as compared with the previous corresponding
years, forty-three per cent.; namely, from 112,338 tons to 160,497
tons.’


The receipts of the general revenue, according to the same-
authority, -were for 1849, £108,301. The revenue has more than
tripled in five years, that for 1844 having been less than £28,000.
The chief item is of course the customs-duties. But to speak of
sources of revenue, unless they materially affect the means of
settling and obtaining land, and other-wise embarking his means in
the colony, is generally to refer to a matter of comparatively small
moment to the emigrant. He may feel pretty sure that once over
the grand impediments before him—the voyage, the selection of a
district, the choice of an investment, and the purchase of his loca-
tion —the article of taxation will not seriously impede him. It will
not therefore be of great service to offer him the tariff of Western
Australia. He will forget its items before he get there, and they
will not be sufficiently important to influence him in the choice of
the particular emigration field which he should adopt, as people
used to be influenced in this country in the choice of a trade under
the old system of duties. Moreover, the latest table of any kind
accessible while this goes to press, might be useless to the
emigrant after he has reached the country. It may be useful,
however, that he should have a general idea of the tone and
character, as it were, of the taxes in South Australia.
Previous to the year 1849, there was a differential tariff in
favour of imports from the United Kingdom. Since the summer
of that year, the duties have been indiscriminate on the produce
of all countries. The most important are of course those on
articles of manufacture, whether in metals or in textile fabrics.
On these there is a universal ad-valorem duty of 5 per cent.
Besides the principal articles of our cotton, silk, woollen, linen,
and hardware manufactory, it applies to clocks and watches,
stationery, glass manufactures (other than bottles), saddlery and
harness, carriages, brushes, miscellaneous machinery, mats, imple-
ments and tools, haberdashery and millinery, hats and caps,
musical instruments, drugs, miscellaneous groceries, oilmen’s stores,
&c. The duty on books was fixed at 6s. per hundredweight: it
would be of little importance that bacon and hams were 2s. 6d.,
and beef and pork Is. 6d. per hundredweight, or that wheat-meal
was fixed at Is. 6d., and barley and oat-meal at Is. 3d. per quarter.
But it would be of more consequence to the settler to find that
boots are only charged 6d. per pair, half boots 3d., and shoes 2d.
The tax on beer, porter, ale, and cider, is 3d. per gallon, on wine
Is. per gallon. There is a much higher proportional duty on spirits
—for every description of the strength of proof it is 10s. per gallon.
This must lead to an extensive home production, and is thus an
impolitic tax, which will probably counteract its object. Its
policy was to make the settler pay as much as he would be con-


tent to pay, without attempting to distil. But if grain spirits cost
a guinea a gallon, and he can make it for 55., he will do so, and the
practice will become temptingly easy. The growth of the grape
will probably make the finer kinds of spirits almost as easily pro-
curable. Coals are charged 9d. per ton, and coke 2s. Among
the minor miscellaneous duties are—bottles, Id. per dozen; ordi-
nary bricks, 25., and fire and bath-bricks, ss. per 1000. Twine, ss.
per hundredweight; fish, dry and pickled, Is. per hundredweight.
Common window-glass is included in the 5 per cent, ad valorem ,
but for plate-glass there is a separate charge, of which it will im-
port little to the intending emigrant to know the minutiae: when
it is in squares exceeding 600 inches, it is charged 4d. per pound.
Dressed hides, 35.; raw salt and dried, Is.; soap, Is. per hundred-
weight; macaroni and vermicelli, Id. per pound.
Living animals are imported free, so are bullion and coin; plants
and trees, garden-seeds and roots, unmanufactured wool, and, most
important of all to the intending emigrant, his luggage. The other
sources of income are in general of too trifling a nature to have
much influence on the new settler’s position. There are some local
rates connected with Adelaide and its harbour which are applicable
to their special improvement. After the customs, the next most
important item in the general taxation is a licence-duty, by far
the greater part of which is laid on the sellers of liquor. A general
publican’s licence costs £25, and a licence to sell wine and malt
liquor £l2. This high scale has probably, like the import duties
on liquors, been adopted as a negative restraint on intemperance,
and so long as it acts in that direction, it is of course an unexcep-
tionable source of revenue. In 1847 the receipts from 135 general
publicans’ licences amounted to £3375; but this is a source of
revenue which would require to be carefully watched, lest it over-
stretch itself. Store-keepers pay a licence-duty of £5.
PRODUCE.
Grain. —South Australia now produces fine and heavy crops of
wheat. In 1845 it was stated that in the Mount Barker district
from thirty to thirty-five bushels an acre was a low average there,
and that from forty to forty-five had been repeatedly grown.
Mr M‘Laren,when asked by the 1847 Committee on Emigration,
‘ Is the quality of the grain produced good ? ’ answered—
* According to Lord Lyttelton’s statement in the House of Lords,
the finest in the world; and I believe that statement was fully justi-
fied. The South Australian Company sold 450 quarters of wheat in
the month of November 1845 at 765. a quarter in the London mar-
-68


ket, when the current price of good English wheat was about 605.;
and at the same time there were three or four quarters of South
Australian wheat which had been sent home for seed sold at 9Gs.,
when English wheat was selling generally at about 60s. They had
an agricultural show some time ago in Adelaide ; and the weight of
the prize wheat for the first and second prizes exceeded sixty-six
pounds the bushel; and when the South Australian Company weighed
out that 450 quarters, they paid freight for it at the rate of sixty-four
pounds’ weight per bushel for the whole cargo; I paid it myself.’
The average depth of ploughing is about eight inches. The time
of sowing wheat is from the middle of April to the middle of
June; and it is thought expedient, by not having it later, to
avoid the hot winds of December and January. Barley, however,
may be sown at a later period. As is usual in fresh agricultural
colonies, it has generally been found more economical to let por-
tions of sections stand fallow than to be at the trouble of collect-
ing and distributing manure; but the time of course will come
when the artificial enrichment of the soil will be worth the settler’s
while. The ploughing is by oxen, whose steady, powerful pull is
found more convenient in the circumstances than the more rapid
operation by horses. A strong rough plough is made in the
colony suited to the character of the soil. For this and other
instruments it is thus of more value to an emigrant who is not a
capitalist, to be able to do some carpentry and smithy -work for
himself, than to possess some choice tools from the manufactory
of accomplished makers at home.
It is not the object of the present work to supersede the inquiries
winch the intending emigrant must make upon the spot, before he
embarks his capital or labour, but rather to give such general views
of the several emigration fields as may help him to a choice, by giv-
ing him a general notion of their several adaptabilities and charac-
teristics. No attempt, therefore, will be here made to indicate the
best investments that the capitalist may make with his money, or
to recommend how the settler should proceed after he has landed.
Mr Dutton, who lived long in the colony, and had every practical
advantage, sensibly remarks— ‘ It has always been the fashion in
publications on the colonies, to give tables of calculations as to the
profits realised from the breeding of sheep or cattle. I, however,
have a strong objection to this, as it cannot be done with sufficient
accuracy to serve as a guide for those who would wish to embark
their funds in it, and I should be sorry to mislead any one into
following pursuits which a variety of contingent causes might,
after all, disappoint him in. The price of the sheep, in the first
place, is very various, according to their quality, and whether they
are clean or “ scabbythe nature and extent of the run, its being
69


well watered or badly watered ; the distance from town, and cor-
responding facility of access for the transport of wool and stores ;
the great or small demand of wedders by the butchers; the price
of wool obtained in England—all’combine to make the task of
compiling correct calculations as to profits one which I have no
ambition to undertake.’—(Pp. 249, 250.)
Between the two great staple occupations of the monied settler
—cattle pasturage and sheep-walks—it seems to be the under-
standing in South Australia, as in the other provinces, that the
former is the safer speculation, more suited for the medium capi-
talist not inclined to make daring adventures for chances of large
profit. A very practical-looking little book, called ‘ The Working-
Man’s Hand-Book to South Australia,’ by George Blackiston
Wilson, gives the following business-like counsel to the settler
who has cattle in his eye. It is cited here rather as giving a
general notion of what a settler’s prospects in that department
might be, than as containing a specific rule which he is to hold by
from the moment when he has made up his mind to emigrate.
Mr Wilson observes that—
‘After farming, cattle-keeping is the easiest and most certain
method of gaining a living; but cattle require a large run of pasture-
ground to feed upon, for they are not enclosed in fields, or house-
fed, during any part of the year. This is the difficulty of the case.
It will not be advisable to purchase land for the purpose; and
therefore, after the intending purchaser of stock has, by actual
inspection, become acquainted with the price of cattle throughout
the colony, he will do well to buy his herd from some respectable
man who is willing to allow him to live at the station, and, acting
as overseer without pay, look after his cattle on the run that they
have been accustomed to, until he knows each beast, and has found
a good run or station which he can rent for himself. This is a pretty
sure way of going to work without needless expense, and will amply
compensate for loss of time and comfort. When once on his own
run, his days will pass pleasantly; and all the labourers he requires
will be two men—one as stock-keeper, who is answerable for the
cattle; the other as hut-keeper, who cooks, cleans the hut, and attends
to the garden : 700 head of cattle, valued at £3OOO, will give a good
return in a couple of years (about 25 per cent.), and, with very little
attention on the part of the master, after the first year, will become
a source of considerable profit. Many of the South Australian stock-
owners live almost entirely in or near the town, and leave their
stations to the care of an overseer, they themselves only visiting
their flock two or three times a year.
* Two or three persons, with £4OO or £5OO capital, may join toge-
ther (although this is dangerous, unless they are previously well
acquainted) ; but no individual with only £5OO should lay it out on
cattle with the object of taking a run for that number. Other
70


methods, however, there are for parties who prefer cattle ; as
First making an agreement with a respectable cattle-owner to take
your cattle on either one-half or two-fifths of the increase; which
means, that he keeps the cattle for you, pays all expenses of stock-
keeper, he. and at the end of the year hands over to your account
either one-half or two-fifths of the calves ; and if he keep a dairy,
three-fifths of the profits on butter or cheese. This is very fair for
both parties, and enables the owner of the cattle to employ himself
in any way that suits him best, while at the same time he knows
that his herds are increasing. Second, if the cattle are quiet, and of
a good breed, many parties will keep them for their milk once a day,
taking this as an equivalent for all expenses. I prefer the first of
these two plans, because thereby the calves are more likely to have
full justice done them, and not to be stinted in their milk, which,
when they are young, would be sure to spoil their growth. Another
plan is—to pay about 7d. or Bd. a month for each head to some party
owning a good run ; he agreeing to find and pay for all necessary
labour. The breeding of horses should be combined on a small
scale with cattle-keeping.’—(Pp. 47, 48.)
The South Australian settler with capital has thus several means
of investment at his disposal, and is not, as in other Australian
settlements, driven absolutely to the adventurous occupation of
sheep-farming. Still, like cotton in Manchester, and cutlery in
Sheffield, this, until mining greatly superseded it, was the chief
pursuit of the district—that which stamped the man as of the
highest order of settlers. It is said that here the flocks are not
subject to that mysterious catarrh or influenza which in other
places sweep them off by thousands. Yet it is the doom of this
gentle quadruped to be ever environed by enemies which render
necessary the most vigilant attention of man, to whose wants he
ministers. They are liable to scab and foot-rot. Mr Dutton
says it is only in marshy runs that they fall victims to the latter;
and that there is an immediate remedy—in driving the flocks
to the hills. The scab is not a deadly disease, and its evil
is its injury to the quality of the wool. From carelessness
or poverty in a few holders, this disease has sometimes been very
rife in South Australia, and many vain efforts have been made by
regulation to interrupt its spreading. The great sheep-owners
complain of the runs being broken in upon by the demand for
small sections. They consider that this circumstance both
limits the extent of their operations, and exposes their stock to
infection. The dingoe or wild dog is a formidable enemy of the
flock. Its extreme cunning, both in preserving itself from attacks,
and in choosing the defenceless moment for pouncing on its prey,
is a cause of endless provocation to the flock-master.
The effect of the seasons on the stock has to be carefully


studied; and even those who are most laudatory of everything
in the province, cannot conceal that the drought is at some
seasons very prejudicial. ‘ The appearance of the sheep-runs,’
says Mr Dutton, ‘ during the rainy months is very beautiful; and
the growth of the grass is so rapid and so abundant, that during
J uly, August, and September, one acre would feed four sheep, whilst
in summer it would take four acres or more to feed one sheep. This
is the reason why the settlers require such large tracts of country
to feed their stock upon.’ The dryness is formidable in another
way—from affording a rapid spread to bush fires, which sometimes
destroy buildings as well as grass. They run lightly along the soil,
not destroying the roots ; so that the fresh grass which rises up
through the accidental top-dressing is described as very beautiful
and tender. It is one result of the system of selling the land at a
uniform and comparatively high price, that its acquisition in pro-
perty for sheep-farming purposes is not thought of. The pastures
are on the waste lands of the crown, held at a merely nominal
rent, with a licence-duty, under the conditions set forth in the
document afterwards given. As the land may at any time be
sold, there is no inducement to the sheep-owner to improve it, or
raise buildings on it.
Mr Dutton complains that there has been a prejudice against
South Australian wool in the British market. ‘ The same wool,’
he says, ‘ which, had it come direct from Adelaide, would have
fetched say Is. 6d. per pound by being first shipped to Sydney,
and from thence home to London, sold for 3d. and 4d. per pound
higher.’ A neglect in cleaning the wool has been attributed as
the cause of the inequality ; and it may be attributed to the want
of labouring hands, of which this colony had so long to complain.
Fruit. —Horticulture, especially the frugiferous department, is a
secondary matter to the emigrant seeking only rude abundance, or
even to him who has no other object before him but the mere
realisation of wealth. But to every one looking at home-comforts,
and the expectation of a simple and refined life for his offspring,
the prospects of the garden will not be wholly overlooked. Tree
fruits were not an abundant produce of the district, and of course
in the early stages of settling they were not profusely introduced.
From the first, however, that luxury of the tropics, the water-
melon, w 7 as abundant. Its price has been about half-a-crown per
hundredweight, and it has been abundantly consumed by all
classes.
As the colony advanced, however, apples, pears, citrons, figs,
plums, peaches, almonds, oranges, medlars, pine-apples, bananas,
and guavas, were produced. The displays of these productions
read brilliantly in the accounts of ‘ The South Australian Horti-


cultural and Agricultural Societies’ shows.’ But the most impor-
tant of fruits in this, as in some other parts of Australia, is the
grape, cultivated specially for the manufacture of wine, which
requires qualities quite different from those which make the fruit
suitable for the table. These have appeared with the others at
the exhibitions, and gained their prizes; but how far the colony is
to be a wine-producing one, it will yet take time to shew.
In enumerating the vegetable productions which figure in the
same exhibitions, we would be but repeating the names of all the
familiar pot-herbs of our own country. The onions were said to
be in many instances equal in size and excellence to the gigantic
pioduce of Portugal. Ihe gourds, including vegetable marrows,
aie repi esented as large and full. Owing to the greater warmth of
the climate, many plants of a medicinal nature, unknown at home,
have been got to grow; but the colonists appear to have had too
many other objects in view to make many experiments in such
kinds of produce. It is more important to know that the most
valuable to the comfort of the middle classes of all garden produce,
the potato, grows satisfactorily. It can never be wished, however’
after the experience of Ireland, that any country should have to
look on this root as a staple, or as anything farther than a useful
and agreeable addition to other crops and sources of subsistence.
r I here have, at the same time, been reported as successfully pro-
duced in this colony two herbs, which in other places are the source
of great staple trade and riches—the tobacco-plant and the sugar-
cane. It has been maintained that the country is quite capable of
producing them ; but their cultivation is not known to have been
earned to any great extent. At one of the exhibitions of the
Horticultural Society, it is, however, announced that one gentle-
man’s sample of tobacco ‘ consisted of six stalks of Virginia
tobacco partly cured; six ditto ditto from the same plant; six
stalks of negrohead; a small parcel of cut tobacco; 100 cigars;
and three pounds of leaves made ready for packing.’ * It is of
consequence, too, to know that hops have been successfully raised.
In the examinations before the Committee of 1847, it was stated
that no attempts had been made to introduce the cultivation of
flax and hemp in the colony ‘to any extent.’ The native gum
had afforded remuneration as an export at the commencement of
the colony, but the trade had ceased to be worth pursuing. Some
mulberry-trees had been grown, sufficient to attest the capacity of
the province to rear silk-worms should it be an object to produce
silk in the colony. It was remarked, however, in reference both
to silk and wine, that the scarcity and dearness of labour stood in
* Dutton, p. “225.


the way of attempts to make them a staple production. Though
the country is timbered, it -does not appear that, especially in com-
petition with New Zealand, the export from it of wood will ever be
pursued. The trees are generally of the same hard gummy kind
as those of the rest of Australia.
As to those productions which shew rather how the people live
than how rich they may become, the accounts given of this colony
at least sound well. The butter, salt and powdered, the cheese,
hams and bacon, meet with approval. Good ale is spoken of
.at 2s. a gallon, which is about its price in Britain. Mr Morphett,
when examined before the Committee of 1847, being asked what
are the great sources of industry in the colony, included some
branches which certainly would not have been expected in an
infant settlement:
‘ Agriculture, horticulture, pastoral pursuits, such as sheep-farm-
ing, dairy-farming, and breeding stock, and mining. There are also
springing up a great many manufactories. I think the manufac-
tories in South Australia, according to the last statistics, amounted
to eighty-three, and I daresay there are now more than one hundred.
There are tanneries, breweries, malting-houses, candle-manufactories,
snuff and tobacco manufactories, starch-manufactories, iron and brass
foundries, and, in fact, manufactories for a great many of those
necessaries and comforts of life which are at present, to some extent,
and were formerly entirely, imported from England. 5 But Mr
Morphett thus qualified his statement— ‘ Our manufactures in the
colony are of a very simple kind, and do not interfere with the
general manufactories of England, more especially the cotton, woollen,
and iron manufactures. I should observe that woollen manufacture
has been recently commenced in the colony. But the whole of the
amount which we raise by our various industrial pursuits is expended
in Great Britain in its manufactured articles—articles of necessity
and articles of luxury. 5
Mines and Mineralogy. —The most remarkable feature, as well
in the past history as the future prospects of South Australia,
is its mineral wealth. The general geological character of the
district is much varied, from the primitive granite and porphyry
upheaved in the hills, to the later formations containing organic
remains. There are abundant marks of great volcanic convul-
sions. In the settled localities building stone, chiefly lime-
stone, is abundant. In the mountains east of Cape St Vincent
the primitive limestone is said to assume the character of a
pure white marble. Ornamental stones —a secondary matter to
metals and building materials, but still of some possible impor-
tance—are abundant. Among the copper mines have been found
some specimens of that beautiful mamilated ore, the malachite,
74


with which the' Russians make their costly ornaments. The
stones which make our secondary jewellery, and which, found in
abundance, and cut by machinery, might make an endless variety
of trinkets, are apparently very abundant, especially in the
Barossa range. There are the several varieties of siliceous stones,
of the jasper and agate kind, which blend so into each other,
and present so infinite a variety of deep rich tints. They are
here to be found not merely in nodules, but in rocky masses
and veins. Opal is abundant in all its forms—white, fire opal,
wax opal, and precious opal. From the general accounts,
it would seem that the agate frequently runs in those bands
of contrasted colours which give it the name of onyx, and suit
it for the cutting of cameos, and other ornaments demanding
variety of colour. The pure translucent white or red agate called
cornelian is also said to be abundant. Mr Monge, the geologist,
says—‘The hornstone within the Barossa range has nothing
similar to it in Europe, where it is usually a combination of
quartz and felspar; while the South Australian hornstone combines
quartz, magnesia, and lime, which produce a variety of siliceous
minerals, of which I have never seen anything alike. The rock
itself turns not merely round its own character, in different shapes
and colours, but it includes at the same place jasper, cornelian,
chalcedony, opal, woodstone, and siliceous tuffa, altogether more
or less varied by accidental ingredients of iron, magnesia, and
lime.’
In 1842-3, the mineral riches of the colony were discovered by
the accidental breaking down of a piece of rock, which disclosed
the appearance of copper ore. The parties concerned in the
discovery were Mr Dutton and Captain Bagot. Maintaining
secrecy on the subject, these gentlemen got eighty acres of
land surveyed according to the regulations. The section had
to be advertised for a month in the government Gazette.
There were many holders of eighty-acre orders who might
have claimed the section, and then the avidity of the dis-
coverers to possess this particular land-section would doubtless
have roused speculation and suspicion. But it was not coveted,
and they bought their eighty acres for the fixed upset price of £1
per acre. They afterwards refused £27,000 for it. This was a
curious and rather severe test of the plan of a uniform price for
all colonial lands. Such was the origin of the Kapunda Copper
Mine, now a great establishment. The purchasers thought they
had secured the whole breadth of land impregnated with the
mineral in that neighbourhood, but they found themselves mis-
taken. Application was made for the survey of another 100 acres,
close to theh eighty-acre section. It was of course of great impor-
-75


tance to Messrs Dutton and Bagot to possess this section; but
instead of £1 an acre, they had to pay for the lot £2210. ‘ The
description of ore,’ says Mr Dutton, ‘ found in the Kapunda mines
is principally composed of the carbonets and sulphurets. A large
number of specimens of every variety were, as soon as we began
working, transmitted to England for analysis, we keeping half of
the specimens at the mines for subsequent reference. The aver-
age produce gave a result of 291 per cent, of copper, for 39
specimens good, bad, and indifferent taken from every part of
the property.’ In 1845 the Kapunda ores sold at Swansea brought,
at an average price of £24, Bs. 6d. per ton, upwards of £6OOO.
Kapunda is in the Light County, between the River Murray and
the Gulf of St Vincent. It is about the farthest removed from
the means of water communication of any of the settled districts.
Great difficulty was found in procuring water for the workers and
their families. But the wealthy produce has forced for itself a
means of transit which will ever be increasing. The land was
looked on as the least valuable of any in the colony, being of the
kind called scrub, where a hard unprolific soil is covered with
stunted and comparatively useless wood.
Soon after Mr Dutton’s discovery, Mr Henderson, when in
search of a lost bullock on the Mount Lofty range of hills near
Adelaide, observed the green colour of the rock, and communi-
cated his observation to his employer, Mr Fortnum. These two
gentlemen were not so fortunate as Messrs Dutton and Bagot.
Probably those who set their heart on particular sections were
more narrowly watched—at all events, the secret of the new dis-
covery was not kept. By this time the new regulations for the
sale of land by auction had come in force, and when the Monta-
cute section was brought to the hammer on 16th February 1844,
a company had been formed who were prepared to bid £4ooo—
£5O instead of £1 an acre —but they obtained it for £l5OO.
When, in 1845, Mr Dutton was leaving South Australia, a
rumour was creating much excitement that in the far north,
where settlers had scarcely penetrated, indications had been found
of a monster mine. The rumour turned out to be true. A spe-
cial survey of 20,000 acres was demanded—the necessary deposit
of £20,000 having been made, in the district of the Eazorback
Mountains—and the celebrated Burra Burra mines were established
a hundred miles from Adelaide. Here the richest ores were found
in large masses, before there was any necessity for sinking shafts.
The operation has been described as more like quarrying in copper
than mining. In 1848 upwards of 16,000 tons of ore were raised
from this mine by the South Australian Mining Company, who had
then nearly six hundred operatives in their employment. This
76


joint-stock company, -with a capital divided into 2464 shares of
£5 each, has had a run of prosperity -which may form an unfor-
tunate precedent for wild mining undertakings. It began by
declaring a dividend of 50 per cent.; but this was found to be
child’s play, and it has year by year declared 200 per cent. What
is remarkable, too, about this spot is, that its, iron appears to
rival the richness and excellence of its copper. ‘ The deposits of
iron,’ says Captain Sturt, ‘ are greater than those of copper, and
it is impossible to describe the appearance of the huge clean
masses of which they are composed. They look, indeed, like
immense blocks that had only just passed from the forge.’ But
this is a matter for speculation, scarcely for the consideration of
the immediate emigrant, since the want of coal or of sufficient
wood for smelting has prevented the working of iron in the colony.
A highly-coloured description of this great establishment, which
appeared in an Australian newspaper, and found its way to the
press in this country, contains the following passage:—
‘ We now attempt to relate our labours in threading the mazes of
the vast souterain. We can assure those who read this that it is
not every one who can do it. The man who attempts such a great
enterprise should be young and active, should be sound and lithe in
limb, and should possess good lungs, and no little perseverance.
Above all, he should not be stout, for some of the holes are so
narrow that not more than thirteen stone can squeeze through,
unless it belongs to a practical miner. You descend, and find it
only twenty fathoms ; you follow on through galleries dotted with
copper, down little shafts, and into great vaults, and chambers, and
caverns like Vulcan’s forge, where men are seen with candles in
their hats, or stuck on the rocks, hewing away at the most splendid
copper ores that eyes ever beheld. Ever and anon we came to
beautiful little malachite arbours, which the miners called their
gardens, every side of which being a bright green, formed delightful
spots in which to rest. A few of the miners grumbled because they
had only Is. 3d. per pound of tribute (from which sum the tribute
ranges to 2s. 6d.), and protested that they did not make quite £lO
per month; but an old Cornish and Columbian captain, unconnected
with the mines, who was present, told us that the miners were
habitual grumblers; and we learned afterwards that some of them
made as high as £4O or £5O per mouth, and that the superintendent
sends as much as £2OO or £3OO in a week into Adelaide, to invest
for the fortunate and industrious. We must, however, mention, for
the honour of the men, that the grumblers were a small exception.
In some of the vast caverns, thirty, forty, and fifty feet wide, when
surrounded on every side with malachite, red oxide, green and blue
carbonates, mingled in rich confusion, the miners asked our expe-
rienced friend if he had ever seen or heard of anything like the Burra,
and evidently were far from surprised at his most energetic negative.
77


After four or five hours’ hard travel through this labyrinth, we at
last reascended, leaving, for want of time, a great part of the mine
unexamined.’
In 1847 some regulations were passed applicable to lands used
for minerals. By these a royalty was established on the produce
of the mines, which it was deemed necessary afterwards to recall.
In the latest official information on the copper mines, contained in
the Report of the Emigration Commissioners for 1851, the surveyor
says:— ‘ I have just returned from my examination for minerals
about ten or eleven miles to the eastward of Mount Barker, and
within a short distance of the Murray Scrub, where there is to be
seen a large lode cropping out at surface, in unsurveyed land;
which lode can be traced for upwards of sixty fathoms in nearly
a north and south direction. The lode is found in a micaceous
sandstone stratum of a slaty structure, and consists of quartz,
sandstone; and iron, mixed with blue carbonate of copper.’
But copper and iron are not the only mineral riches of this
province. Lead has been found and worked, especially at Glen
Ormond and Rapid Bay. There had been speculations about gold
so early as 1844; and in the Eeport of the Emigration Commis-
sioners for 185** it is stated, that ‘ in consequence of the prevalent
rumour that gold had been discovered to exist extensively in the
colony, a company for washing and streaming for gold, with a
projected capital of £25,000, had been formed. We have not
heard,’ say the commissioners, ‘ what success has attended this
enterprise.’ There is no doubt that the slightest indication of the
appearance of the precious metal will be eagerly followed up,
especially after the events which have taken place at Bathurst.
In fact, mining, especially in the richer metals, is the very last
species of enterprise to which people require to be stirred up.
It is only apt to create, by its glittering produce, too great a
fervour of speculation. Mr Dutton’s discovery set the sheep-
owners, like treasure-seekers, to the examination of every rock
and stone in their allotments. There was a wild hunt after the
green or blue indications of copper. Companies were formed with
immense rapidity, and British capital was immediately embarked
in the new metallic harvest. In the documents published in the
last Eeport of the Emigration Board there are complaints of the
sale of land being interrupted by fictitious biddings, evidently
made to stop the sale until some party should ascertain whether
the purchase was for mining purposes. The operations have
increased so rapidly, that any attempt to give a full statistical
account of them would probably be found to be antiquated when
the reader of it reaches the spot. In so large a country peopled
by little more than the contents of a middle-sized town in Britain,
78


it is quite impossible to form any conception of the mineral wealth
that may yet be disclosed. The vastness of the area over which
it has already been found to be scattered is shewn by the circum-
stance, that the White Station Copper and Lead Mines are three
degrees distant from those of Yattagolingay, close to the cape of
Hindmarsh county. Yet notwithstanding all this prolific pro-
mise, let not the ordinary emigrant too eagerly snatch at the
glittering prize. We should be sorry if even the modified picture
which we have drawn of Australian mineral wealth should tempt
the moderately-endowed emigrant to go to the colony to make
his fortune in mining, like Messrs Dutton and Bagot, or the
fortunate stockholders in the Burra Burra Company. If he
should stumble on a lode of copper in his allotment, it is well
to take advantage of the windfall, just as if some relation had
died and left him a good coal-mine or cotton-mill at home. He
may take the prizes that come, but don’t let him peril his little
all in the lottery. The capitalist may invest in the Burra Burra
mine. He may even, if he be a man of large fortune and enter-
prise, prefer a great undertaking in the copper mines of Australia
to the like in the manufacturing or mining districts at home.
This is quite another affair. But as to the emigrant of the
middle classes, with his few hundreds, which he goes to invest in
such a manner that it may purchase a free area for him to
exercise his industry, caution, and skill in let him look to
pasture and agriculture as his main staple steady sources of
progress, and avoid the glittering and dangerous bait. Metallic
mining is the occupation that produces the least average profit—
nay, it would not be unsafe to say that, take it all in all, in every
part of the world it is generally conducted at a loss. All the
gambling spirits are tempted into a pursuit where chance some-
times tosses up instantaneous riches. They go like the buyers
of lottery-tickets. A lottery is always a losing concern to the
public. If you were to buy up all the tickets, you would to a
certainty lose, because the owner of the lottery must have his
profit on the whole; yet people crowd to the venture—and so
it is with mining. Indeed the general limit of the supply, and
the absence of a large profit, is the very reason why the precious
metals keep their position so steadily, and form a standard of
value. These observations are not of course to prevent the min-
ing-engineer or workman to look to South Australia as a place
for following his pursuit; and it will be of importance to the
working emigrant to know that efforts have been making to set
up smelting establishments in the colony, so that it may have
the advantage of the smaller stowage occupied by the refined ore.
The exportation of melted copper for the Indian market pro-
-79


mises to be a great branch of commerce in this colony. The
possibility of its being aided by the discovery of seams of coal has
of course been a matter of anxious consideration. We have not
yet heard that coal has been actually discovered. A large part
of the country consists of ranges of hills of the old formation,
where it would be useless to search for carboniferous deposits;
but on the plains, the slate, clay, and sandstone strata, which con-
stitute the coal-measures of other countries, give a fair promise of
success: indeed the geological structure of this vast territory has
hitherto necessarily only received a very superficial inspection.
‘ Several times,’ says Mr Dutton, ‘ have reports been current that
coal had been discovered: if it really is the case, the discoverers
are obviously keeping the locality secret, with a view to purchasing
the ground at a fitting time.’ And he says farther—‘ But we have
no reason to lose courage, when we consider the unbounded extent
of our forests, containing as they do a description of wood which
will produce a large proportion of charcoal. The wood itself,
when billeted and dried, burns with intense heat and steady blaze,
owing to the quantity of resinous matter it contains. Smelting
with Avood and charcoal produces the finest metal; and there is no
reason Avhy we should not be able to effect, by means of our virgin
and noAV unprofitable forests, that which for centuries has been
adopted in Germany, Russia, and other countries, where there
exists no coal in the mining districts.’—(P. 309.) But it must be
remembered that if coal should not be found in this colony, it
exists abundantly in Sydney and other parts of Australia so that
if the smelting process should not be performed at Adelaide, it need
not involve so distant a transit as to SAvansea. On the subject of
the lead ore, we are told by Mr Dutton that it is ‘so easily run
into pigs, that, as regards this branch, the success of smelting in
the colony cannot for a moment be questioned.’—(P. 310.)
It might have been almost a question for some time whether the
mines were to be a benefit or the reverse to the colony. So alarm-
ingly were the usual and safe means of competency deserted, that
in 1844 the number of acres under Avheat cultivation was lessened
by upAvards of twenty-six thousand. Yet there was much diffi-
culty in getting hands to bring in the reduced crop; and the upper
classes, including ladies, came forward to stive the crop, and the
police were devoted to that useful labour. It was in these circum-
stances that, as elsewhere mentioned, the reaping-machine was dis-
covered.
Fortunately, the dreams of the colonists respecting the produc-
tiveness of the mines have not been ultimately disappointed; and
it may be said that prosperity has ensued from causes not contem-
plated at the outset of the settlement. The primary elements of
80


success, however, have been the firmness and indomitable industry
of the people.
LABOUR.
The demand for labourers of nearly all classes is as great in
South Australia as in the adjacent colonies. The following are a
few notes on this subject:—Bricklayers are said to receive wages
varying from 6s. to 7s. a day without rations, and from ss. 6d. to
6s. 6d. with rations; the latter arrangement is generally made in
the country. Brick and stone are both employed; and as the
latter more seemly material appears to be abundant, stone-masons
will find employment as well as those who know merely the
routine occupation of bricklaying; and they should be better
paid, for the mere bricklayer will be unable to dress and set
stones, but the mason can always lay bricks. Plasterers are not
so urgently in demand. Brickmaking is necessarily a consider-
able employment wherever English people settle in numbers, and
clay is to be had, as it is in South Australia. Blacksmiths are
described as being in more demand than in the other colonies, on
account of the mining operations, and their wages are rated at
much the same as those set down for bricklayers. The mines
also give a peculiar kind of employment to carpenters; and the
superiority of finish of the houses and farm - buildings of South
Australia, will give more proportional employment than the other
Australian colonies to the full-trained carpenter, in comparison
with the rough worker capable of turning his hand in a plain way
to many things, who is in general the most valuable sort of man
in a new settlement. A cabinetmaker can generally do rough
carpentry work if he chooses to apply himself to it; otherwise,
it would not be wise in the first-rate veneerer or finisher of
mahogany and rosewood work, or French polisher, to trust even
to this the most genteel of the new colonies. A good deal of
the furniture of the South Australians is brought from Singapore
and other Eastern settlements, where the natives are ingenious.
Coopers can also turn their hand to carpentry; but they have
here a plentiful source of employment in their own profession in
connection with the whale-fisheries. It is said to be one of the
surest trades which an emigrant can carry with him to South
Australia, with wages from 6s. to 7s. a day. The mining opera-
tions, which will certainly, when the colony can afford it, bring
railway locomotion into operation, must give employment not
only to the mining, but to the machine-making engineers. The
wages of journeymen engineers are set down at from 6s. to 7s.
a day. Those above the qualification of the mere journeyman,
in the collapse of engineering enterprise in this country, might
F 81


possibly do worse than try their fortune in this new field. Miners
are well paid: they have from 335. to 425. per week; but they
have also their chances from the arrangements called tribute or
tut-work, in which they make according to the produce of their
exertions. In the first chances of the discoveries, large sums have
been talked of as thus realised by the fortunate Cornish and other
miners, who were tempted from their wheat-fields and sheep-runs
back to their old cavernous trade, which still had charms for them
when it was accompanied with gain. Boot and shoe makers are
of course in requisition, their wages ranging from 255. to 455. per
week. Homely coarse work is valuable in the bush, almost more
so than that of the first-rate hand; and thus the mere village-
cobbler, who is on the verge of pauperism at home, if he have
youth and health, may be a valuable member of society there,
being able probably to pursue some of the more routine duties of
the sheep-walk along with his profession. The leather is tanned
in the colony from the natiye cattle. Almost the same may be
said of tailors as of shoemakers; but it may be observed that, as
the cloth comes from Britain, there is more opportunity for the
ready-made article—attractive, from its cheapness—getting the
command of the market.
Sawyers are a class of men who have a large field of occupation
in boarding the native timber for mines, as well as buildings or
fences. They are paid in a great measure according to their
work, and sometimes realise considerable sums —so much, for
instance, as £3 a week. They must not go with the notion of
finding the work on the stringy and gummy timber of Australia
the same as in that of their own country. Next the sawyers, are
the ‘ splitters,’ who are scarcely known by name in this country,
but important in a land where the limited household accommoda-
tion is dependent on very rough woodwork. ‘ These men are the
hut-builders at the out - stations, and the makers of hurdles and
watch-boxes for sheep-owners, and of heavy stockyards for the
cattle.’ We are told by Mr Wilkinson, that ‘ the demand for
splitters has been very great; and in consequence of the difficulty
of obtaining them, quantities of timber have been imported from
Yan Diemen’s Land at a heavy expense. Branching off from
carpenters and sawyers, there is here another well-employed class
called ‘ shinglers,’ who cover roofs with shingle. Taking analogy
with the progress of house-building at home, after that rude and
solid workmanship which serves for strength and protection, the
nearer we approach decoration and finery, the less do we find the
capacity to produce it a desideratum in the colony. Plasterers
and cornice-makers have, we are told, but a limited amount of
employment in town, and painters are still less essential; since
82


the colonist, having often spare neuks of time, and not caring
much for elegance or finish, covers the woodwork of his house,
his palings, or whatever he wishes to protect from the weather,
with such a rough coat of colour as he can himself lay on. These
classes of men, therefore, are not to leave a decent amount of
employment at home with the notion that they will find it increased
in South Australia. But if they found their trade overstocked,
and a necessity to turn their hand to something else, that some-
thing else will come much more readily to hand in Australia than
at home. So it may be said as to those who minister in other
shapes to the luxuries of densely-peopled Britain. Watchmakers,
jewellers, silver-chasers, carvers and gilders, and the like, will not
find a ready market at the antipodes. But the followers of these
skilled trades are generally men of some education—at least with
an education in the use of their hands. They can turn themselves
from one pursuit to another better than the handloom-weaver,
who has been jerking a stick from side to side year after year;
and if they find little or no room for their skill at home, a transi-
tion to another occupation will most suitably be made along with
a transition to another and roomier hemisphere.
The respectability of the class who colonised this district, and
the wealth extracted from the mines, have made house-service
more valuable than in other new settlements. This of course
chiefly absorbs the class of respectable females. So many of these
have lately found their way to the other hemisphere, under the
inducements of the arrangements for watching over their comfort
and respectability, that probably there is now less opportunity for
males employing themselves in that capacity.
It is rather surprising that gardeners should be found a very
successful class of emigrants to South Australia, even when keep-
ing to their own profession; and perhaps the spirit of rivalry, in
the display of horticultural produce elsewhere mentioned,* may
account for the circumstance. But in truth, to such a colony,
where there is much agriculture as well as pasture, the gardener
is always a safe colonist. If he be not too much wedded to the
minute and complete operations of the parterre, he has the rudi-
ments of all capacity for operations on the soil, and can turn him-
self to that which is most profitable. Notwithstanding the use of
the reaping-machine, there is employment at the season for those
who can reap; and the agricultural labourer, capable both of
reaping and of sheep-shearing, may pocket a double harvest.
Here, however, as in the other Australian colonies—but not to
so great an extent as in the great sheep - districts —the staple
* See above, p. 72.


revenue of those who have no trade, or who cannot follow it in
the colony, is that of the shepherd, with the.subordinate function
of hut-keeping. The latter is the resource of the old or feeble—
often of boys; and the shepherd’s proper hut-keeper is of course
his wife, when he has one. The shepherd’s wages are from £25
to £3O a year, with victuals. Should the colony, however, receive
a large influx of the very humble class who are fit to do nothing
in the line of labour, it will be less. Mr Wilkinson gives the
following picturesque account of the utility of this occupation in
draining off the useless surplusage of society:—
‘ In the bush, the shepherd class consists of the most heterogeneous
materials. Within ten miles of the place where I lived, I remember
as shepherds one apothecary; one lawyer’s clerk; one counting-
house clerk; three sailors; one tailor; one Jew; one Portuguese
sailor; one native of Ceylon; one Australian black; one barman;
one gentleman’s son, brought up to no business; one New Zealand
merchant, who had been burnt out; and a second Portuguese, who
could not understand a word of English; one person, late a lieute-
nant in the Honourable East India Company’s service; and one gipsy.
These parties were all either shepherding or hut-keeping; and the
gentleman’s sou, the Jew, and the barman, made the best shepherds
of the lot. A few miles further off, at a friend’s station, there were
a black fiddler and a dancing-master. A large sheep-owner told mo,
that he would sooner take a sailor, who hardly knew the head from
the stern of a sheep, or a clerk who had been in an office all his life,
than an English-bred shepherd. The one class, he said, would obey
orders, and b‘e afraid of losing the sheep; the other always thought
they knew better than their master.’
The same writer gives a not unattractive picture of shepherd
life. He describes the evening meal—
‘lf a garden be cultivated —for they are allowed as much ground
as they like to crop—this meal is composed of potatoes, cabbages,
turnips, and other vegetables, and roast, boiled, or stewed mutton;
and singing, near the wooden fire, is what is called the hilly, or tea-
kettle. ° A neighbouring shepherd will perhaps drop in to spin a
yarn, and pipes are filled, and finished again and again, until the
smoke issuing from the door, walls, and roof, would make one fancy
that the was on fire. Large quantities of the beverage that
cheers, but not inebriates, pass round in tin mugs, and the jovial
song and merry laugh sound happily in comparison to the drunken
frolics in our workmen’s homes, the gin-palace, or the public-house.
The hut-keeper sallies off to his watch-box, which, unlike those of
our old “ Charlies,” is horizontal instead of perpendicular; and there
ensconcing himself in his blanket, he sleeps the calm sleep of health,
until*perhaps roused by the bark of his dogs; then he pops out his
head from his box, and halloos to the trusty guards, which tear
away and give chase to their enemy—the dingoe.’
U


In consequence of the deficiency in labourers to assist in
harvest-work, great difficulties have been experienced in getting:
grain reaped; the colonists were consequently induced to make
great efforts to invent a reaping-machine; and one of them, Mr
Ridley, appears to have succeeded—at least so far as to invent
an instrument suited to the nature of the district. It is both a
reaping and a thrashing machine; and from this happy combina-
tion of accomplishments, we may infer how little it would be
welcomed in this country, since what is accomplished is, neatly
and cleanly to peel the grain away, and leave the straw prostrated
by the wheels of the machine—it is decided that until artificial
manures become more necessary in the colony, it will not be good
husbandry to look after the straw. This is not the only circum-
stance which makes the machine of peculiarly local application.
The extreme dryness of the grain, and its uniform ripeness, make
it peel away clean and easy from the straw. In fact, this makes
the union of reaping and thrashing, by the peeling off rather than
the cutting down and conveying to the thrashing-mill, a peculiar
advantage, since it has been observed, that in cutting in the usual
way, and in removing to the thrashing-floor, much more than the
usual proportion is scattered in South Australia.
SALE AND OCCUPATION OF LAND,
So early as the establishment of South Australia, the minimum
price-system was by statute applied to it, for the purpose of forming
an emigration fund. The minimum was then 12s. an acre; it was
subsequently raised to 20s. by the general land-sales act for the
Australian colonies, an account of which is given above—(See p.
12). The regulations for the sale of land are thus the same as
those extending over the whole continent. Here, however, as
elsewhere, the squatting - system began to predominate. It was
necessary to regulate it; and in December 1848, certain ‘ regula-
tions for the occupation of crown-lands ’ were proclaimed, which
will be found at length at the close of this section. In the papers
laid before parliament at the commencement of the session of
1851, it is stated in the governor’s report, that
* The extent of enclosed land has been increased in 1849, as com-
pared with 1848, from 125,643 acres to 138,710 acres.
‘ The crown - land sales in 1849 comprised 56,607 acres at an
average of £l, 2s. 7|d. per acre; 72,106 acres were surveyed in
1849 ; the average cost of the field-work for surveys was
per acre; the total cost of the survey establishment, and of the
works performed by it in 1849, was 12 £d. per acre.
85


‘ The stock depastured on crown lands, under licence, was in 1849
1781 horses, 51,540 horned cattle, 885,918 sheep; and on the crown
common lands of the various hundreds there were either 33,717
more horned cattle, or 202,482 sheep; certificates of licences be-
ing taken out in the proportion of one great cattle to six small
cattle. The licences to occupy the waste lands of the crown for
the year ended March 1850, were 267; the licences extended over
12,522 square miles. The licences to cut timber on crown land
were 238.’
It may be mentioned that, apart from the purchaser of land,
and the labourer on it, there is in this colony a separate class,
whose position is a sort of tenantship, with a capacity to advance
to proprietorship. Thus it was stated to the Committee of 1847,
by the manager of the South Australian Company, that that body
possessed about 60,000 acres. He thus described the method
in which this land was made available:—•
‘Will you describe how the land is managed generally?—By
leasing the land to agricultural tenants, and by keeping sheep and
cattle, sales of which are effected in the colony, and the wool from
the sheep is sent home to this country.
‘Are those sales effected on account of the company itself?—•
Solely.
‘ Does the company undertake the agricultural management of
such portion of the land as are in their own possession?—Not mi
their own account: they lease their lands to the tenants, giving
those tenants, generally, the right of purchase of the freehold during
the currency of the leases.
‘ls that power of pre-emption, which is vested in the tenant, a
power of pre-emption at a fixed rate, ascertained at the time he
commences his lease ?—lt is.
‘ Therefore, under that system, a tenant acquires all the interest in
his improvements ?—He does.
‘ The value is fixed upon the lands in an unimproved state, and
the purchase may be completed at a time when they are improved
without any increase of charge?—Substantially. The mode of ope-
rating is, however, this: the leases are generally for a period of
twenty-one years, in three series of seven years; both the rate of
rental and the pre-emption price are fixed at the commencement
of the lease; both vary; both rise during the currency of the lease.
Bor instance, if we let our lands the first seven years at 4s. per
acre, which is the common rate, generally speaking, the pre-emption
price is £4 per acre; the next series of seven years it is five
shillings per acre, and with £5 the pre-emption price; and the next
•series of seven years six shillings per acre, with the pre-emption
price £6. Those rates vary both as to the rent and as to the pre-
emption price; but that is the principle upon which they are
regulated.’


He gave the following rather attractive account of the career
of one of these tenants:—
‘ There was one of the company’s tenants who wrote to us, giving
a particular detail of the circumstances in which he was: when he
landed he had about £5OO with him, and by the end of the second
year he considered that he had more than doubled his capital; he
enjoyed all the conveniences that he could desire, and had a fair
prospect of continuing to add to his capital hereafter.’
ORDER IN COUNCIL FOR OCCUPATION OF WASTE LANDS IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
(From the Report of the Emigration Commissioners for 1850.)
Division of Lands—Definition of Terras, and General Powers of the Governor.
Section I.—The lands in the colony of South Australia shall, for
the purposes of the present order, be considered as divided into two
classes namely, lands within and lands without the hundreds,
accordingly as they may be situated within or without the boun-
daries of any hundred now or hereafter to be proclaimed by the
said governor.
Sect. 2.—For the purposes of the present Order in Council, the
following terms, whenever they occur, shall respectively have the
following significations:—The term ‘governor’ shall signify the
person who for the time being shall be lawfully administering the
government of the colony of South Australia. The term ‘ lessee ’
shall also include the executors, administrators, and assigns of a
lessee; and, unless there be something in the subject-matter or con-
text repugnant thereto, every word importing the singular number,
or the masculine gender only, shall include several persons, matters,
or things, as well as one person, matter, or thing, and females as
well as males respectively; and every word importing the plural
number shall include one person or thing, as well as several persons
or things.
Sect. 3. —And for more effectually carrying out the objects of this
Order in Council, the said governor shall have power, from time to
time, to make general rules respecting the due preparation and ser-
vice of any notice hereinafter mentioned, and respecting all other
matters and things not herein provided for, but requisite for carry-
ing into more complete effect the objects of this Order in Council:
Provided always that no such general rule shall be in anywise
repugnant hereto.


Rules applicable to Lands within the Hundreds.
Sect. 1. —It shall be lawful for the said governor, and he is hereby
empowered, to make general rules under which the holders of pur-
chased land, within any hundred, may depasture, in common, the
unappropriated waste lands of the crown situate therein.
Sect. 2.—lt shall be lawful for the said governor, if he deem it
expedient, to grant leases not exceeding one year in duration for the
occupation, for pastoral purposes, of any such lands as aforesaid,
not being required for the use of the commoners within the
hundred.
Provided that no such lease or common of pasturage shall in any-
way interfere with the existing or future right of the said governor
at any time to sell, reserve, or otherwise dispose of the whole or any
part of such land so depastured.
Rules applicable to Lands without the Hundreds.
Sect. 1. —It shall be lawful for the said governor, and he is hereby
empowered, to grant to such persons as he shall think fit leases of
any waste land of the crown not situate within the boundaries of
any hundred, for any term or terms of years not exceeding fourteen
years in duration, for pastoral purposes ; with permission, neverthe-
less, for the lessee to cultivate so much only of the land comprised
in any lease as may be necessary to provide such grain, hay, vege-
tables, or fruit, as may be required for the use and supply of the
family and establishment of such lessee, but not for the purposes of
sale or barter.
Provided always, that such leases shall be subject to such conditions
as the said governor shall think necessary to insert therein, for the
protection of the aborigines, or for securing to the public the right
of passing over any part of the said lands, and to the government
the right of searching therein for minerals, or for any other purpose
of public defence, safety, improvement, convenience, or utility.
Sect. 2.—lt shall be lawful for the commissioners of crown lands,
subject to the revision and control of the said governor, to deter-
mine the boundaries of the land to be comprised in any such lease
as aforesaid, and to determine, in a summary way, all disputes and
differences respecting such boundaries, and if necessary, to view and
take evidence upon such land, touching any such dispute or diffe-
rence.
Sect. 3. —The rent to be reserved in every lease shall be at the
following rate per square mile : —For land of the first quality,
£1; for land of the second quality, 155.; for land of the third
quality, 10s.
Sect. 4.—ln order to estimate the quality of the land before the
granting of any such lease, the intended lessee or occupier shall
name a valuer, and the commissioner of crown land shall either
act as valuer, or name one to act for him; and these two valuers
shall have power to choose, if necessary, an umpire; but if they
88


cannot agree in the choice of an umpire, he shall be appointed by
the said governor.
Sect. s.—Nothing in this Order in Council shall be construed in
anyway to interfere with the right of the colonial legislature to
impose, from time to time, such assessments as may be deemed
advisable for local purposes upon the lands, or upon the cattle
grazing thereon, under and by virtue of any lease.
Sect. 6. —The rent shall be payable yearly in advance, at such
time and place as shall be respectively specified in the lease. In
the event of default being made in payment of the rent, the lease
shall be forfeited; but the lessee shall be permitted to defeat the
forfeiture, and prevent its becoming absolute and indefeasible, by
payment, within sixty days from the date of the original rent-day, of
the full annual rent, with the addition of a sum equal to one-fourth
part of the yearly rent so due from him by way of penalty; but
unless the whole of the said yearly rent, with such penalty as afore-
said, shall be duly paid within the term of sixty days, counting from
the original rent-day inclusive, the lease shall be absolutely and
indefensibly forfeited.
Sect. 7. —Nothing in these regulations, or in any lease to be granted
under the powers hereby vested in the governor, shall prevent the
said governor from selling any land comprised in such lease, or from
resuming such lands for any purpose of public defence, safety, im-
provement, convenience, or utility.
Provided always, except the land be required for purposes of
public defence, that six calendar months’ notice should be given of
such intended sale or resumption.
Sect. B.—And whenever any land shall become part of any such
hundred, every lease of such land shall thereupon cease to have
effect.
Sect. 9.—lf any land comprised in any such lease as aforesaid
shall at any time during the existence of such lease be sold or
resumed for public purposes, or shall become part of any such hun-
dred as aforesaid, payment shall be made by the government to
the lessee of the value of any substantial and useful improvements
existing upon the land when it shall be so sold or resumed, or shall
become part of such hundred as aforesaid, but no such payment
shall be made to the lessee upon the termination of the lease by
forfeiture or effluxion of time. -
Provided always, that if a portion only of t&p. land comprised in
any lease be sold, or resumed, or become part of such hundred as
aforesaid, the lessee, at his option, may either retain until the end of
the term the residue of the land, paying for the same a reduced
rent, proportionate to the value of the land retained by him, or may
surrender to government the residue of such land; and in case of
such surrender, but not otherwise, he shall receive the value of all
such improvements as aforesaid existing upon the land so sur-
rendered.
Provided also, that the value of such improvements (which shall
89


not exceed the actual outlay thereupon of the lessee), and the amount
of such reduced rent, shall be determined by valuers appointed in
the manner prescribed by section 4 of the third chapter of this
Order in Council.
Sect. 10.—Every occupant of any crown land not within the hun-
dreds, who, when this Order in Council shall come into effect, shall
have been in licensed occupation of such land for one year, shall,
within six months from the date of the proclamation by the said
governor of this Order in Council, but not afterwards, be entitled to
demand a lease of the land so previously occupied; and every such
licensed occupant as aforesaid, who shall have occupied his land for
less than one year, shall be entitled, upon the completion of a
licensed occupation of one year, and within six months thereafter,
but no longer, to demand a similar lease.
Provided always, that he shall not in the meantime have done any
act or thing whereby his licence shall have become forfeited.
Sect. 11. —When any land, after being occupied, shall be forfeited,
or otherwise become vacant, it shall be lawful for the said governor
to direct, if he thinks fit, that the land shall be relet, and to prescribe
the manner of reletting the same.
Provided always, that in every such case the land be relet by
public auction.
Sect. 12.—1 t shall be lawful for the said governor to make gene-
ral rules under which the first occupier or discoverer of land, not
previously occupied under lawful authority, may be entitled to
demand a lease of the land so occupied or discovered by him, of
the same duration, and generally upon the same terms, as in the
case of leases granted under section 10 of the 3d chapter of this
Order in Council.
Sect. 13.—Any lease made under this Order in Council of land
without the hundreds shall be liable to forfeiture for non-payment
of rent; upon any conviction for felony against the lessee; and in the
event of his conviction by a justice of the district for any offence
against the law.
On sth January 1850, a colonial ordinance was issued, in virtue
of section 1 of the above ( Rules applicable to Lands within the
Hundreds.’ All persons claiming common of pasturage are
required to deposit a declaration of their acreages of purchased
land with the corresponding acreages of pasture claimed, before
31st January. The declaration is published in the ‘ Gazette,’ and
a commissioner of crown-lands is to attend soon after, to appor-
tion the pasturage among the claimants, and determine the number
and description of cattle to be depastured.


WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Western Australia nominally consists of that vast territory
which, projecting southwards into the ocean, passes the 35th
degree of south latitude, while its northern extremity touches the
28th, and its longitude ranges from the 115th to the 120th degree.
Marked off, as it frequently is, into its intended quadrangular
counties, it gives an air of occupancy to the desolate map of Aus-
tralia, where it seems to revive the populousness of the southern
provinces after the dreary sweep of the great Australian Bight.
In fact, this giant skeleton of a colony, with its less than five
thousand inhabitants, covers an area of about a million of square
miles—about eight times that of the United Kingdom!
The principle on which this colony was projected was, that the
land should be allowed to support and protect itself. That the
mother-country was to make no advances of any kind to the
colonists for emigration, government, military protection, or any
other purpose; but that the projectors, on bringing forward a
feasible scheme, were to be intrusted with the land deemed valu-
able, or at least the source of value if properly managed, and were
from that source to make, as it were, their new state. The official
persons, from the governor down to the humblest officers, were to
be paid in land—w r ere, in fact, like the followers of the old feudal
conquerors, to receive a territorial investment for the support of
their official dignity. Thus, the governor had 100,000 acres set
apart for him, while the humbler officers generally obtained about
6000 each. The colonists in general were to obtain land according
to the means of emigration which they furnished, it being quite
overlooked, that those who took out free labourers could not compel
them to work for their exporters, or even to remain in the
colony.
In 1829, the stream of emigration began to set in upon the
settlement. The first settlers arrived in June and July, the mid-
winter of the antipodes. Many of them were people of consider-
able substance, and they brought with them, besides herds, flocks,
and agricultural implements, sundry articles of furniture, dresses,
and jewellery. The ships landed them with their property on the
barren shore. There were no towns or dwellings, no storehouses;
no one responsible for assisting the helpless emigrants, who landed
like fugitives before a pursuing enemy. The allotments could not
be found, for the land had not been surveyed; and those who had
so many thousands of acres assigned to them, might find their
01


property where they could. Before the end of the year, twenty-
live ships had reached the shore, with nearly a thousand immigrants
and property worth about fifty thousand pounds. Early in the
ensuing year, the number of settlers and the quantity of property
landed were more than doubled. The tide poured in, until there
was time to communicate at home the disastrous reception of the
settlers. Then, indeed, it of necessity subsided, and people awaited
with uneasy expectation for further news from the land of promise.
The intelligence was distinct enough. The colony was just as if so
many people had been shipwrecked, had been able to get ashore,
and then depended on the chances of finding food or being picked
up. This inconsiderate and unfortunate beginning of the colony
had a bad effect on its progress; and till the present day, Western
Australia is the least popular of all the colonies in this quarter of
the world.
Perth is the name given to the town on the Swan River,
which has been necessarily called the capital of the settlement.
It is described as prettily situated, and pleasantly surrounded by
the gardens of its inhabitants, abounding in the ordinary fruits
of warm climates. Freemantle, the nearest seaport, is a place of
more real business as a whaling-station; and another collection of
houses in the same district as Perth is called the town of Guild-
ford. It is an unfortunate peculiarity of the little rising com-
munities in a colony established under such circumstances, that
they have received important names at the time when they were
designed, and almost before they have obtained a social existence.
The total population of the Perth district or county is about
2500 —more, however, than half the population of the colony.
There are, however, adventurous settlers, who have moved over
the ranges of hills, and occupied in the most primitive manner
large pasture-grounds, on which, it may be fairly hoped, that they
will be the patriarchs of a future race of useful agriculturists, and
rearers of flocks —such are the occupants of the district next in
populousness to Perth, and called York County. ■
Discouraging as the whole history of this colony has been,
it would probably be a good place of settlement for a man with
a small capital, not dependent on society, and prepared to trust
greatly to his own resources. It would seem, from the general
accounts of its state, to suit such a settler; but no one in his senses,
and with the means of making inquiry, will of course proceed
thither without knowing all he can discover from every approach-
able quarter about the resources of the district. No one will
discover anything of a very definite character about them; but
still, we cannot help thinking, from the general tenor of the reports
which have come over —and especially from the circumstance of
92


WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
the miserable remnant of the colonists having in the end thriven
—that there are fine resources in Western Australia. Labour has
become so valuable there, that the restless versatile natives have
been occasionally tempted to work; and more recently, convicts
have been sent to the colony at the request of parties who stand
in need of assistance at any cost.
It may be mentioned that, in December 1849, a valuable deposit
of guano was found on an island, called Egg Island, in Shark’s
Bay. An export-trade of this commodity to the Mauritius was
immediately commenced. A hope of future improvement is
expressed from the construction of a road ninety miles long
from Victoria Plains to the head of the Swan River, opening
an access to the probable seat of mining operations north of
Champion Bay.
According to the latest information, Western Australia was get-
ting into a generally thriving condition; its agriculture, fisheries,
and trade were on the increase, and the only thing that hampered
it was the want of labour —that universal want over the whole
settlements of Australia.
We conclude our brief notice of this little-heeded but not
unimportant colony, with some distinct information respecting land.
The regulations for the sale of land in Western Australia are
the same as those provided by statute for the whole of Australia.
But the regulations for the occupation of waste lands have, from
the peculiarities of the district, necessarily differed from those of
other colonies. In fact, the sale of lands at the minimum upset
government price was out of the question when there was no
emigration, a very small population, and individuals impoverished,
and possessed of large tracts which they were ready to dispose of
for almost anything. It will be seen, then, that instead of mere
licences of departure, the privy -council, under the powers as to
waste lands in the lands-sale act, give tillage - leases as well as
pastoral-leases, with inducements to improvement.
ORDER IN COUNCIL FOR THE OCCUPATION OF WASTE LANDS.
{From the Report for 1850 of the Emigration Commissioners.)
Regulations as to the Division of Lands.
1. For the purposes of the present Order in Council, the lands in
the colony of Western Australia shall be considered as divided into
two classes, denominated respectively Class A and Class 13.
2. Class A shall comprehend—
-93


First, All lands which may be within the distance of three
miles from the outer boundary of any occupied town site, or
of one mile from any land granted in fee-simple at the time
when these regulations shall come into force.
Secondly, Land which may be within the distance of two miles
of any part of the sea-coast.
Thirdly, Land which may be within the distance of two miles
from either of the two opposite banks of any of the following
rivers or inlets:—
The Swan, from Preemantle to Toodyay town site.
The Avon, from Toodyay to Beverley town site.
The Toodyay, from Toodyay to Bijoording.
The Canning, from Melville Water to the Darling Range.
The Murray, from Peel’s Inlet to the Darling Range.
. The Collie, from Leschenault Inlet to the Darling Range.
The Fitzgerald, from the sea to twenty-five miles inland in
a straight line.
The Philip’s River and Culham Inlet, twenty-five miles
from the sea in a straight line.
3. Class B shall comprehend all other lands of the colony open
for location.
Regulations as to Tillage-Leases.
1. It shall be competent for the governor to grant tillage-leases to
such persons as he may think fit, for any term or terms of years not
exceeding eight years.
2. The annual rent reserved in any such lease shall not be less
than £lO in all, nor less than 2s. per acre on the land comprised in
any such lease, which shall in no case exceed 320 acres.
3. It shall be competent for the governor to sell to any person
who shall be in actual occupation of lands under any tillage-lease,
any part of such lands for their fair value in an unimproved state:
provided, nevertheless, that the size of the lot sold shall not be
less than ten acres, nor the price less than the general minimum
price for the time being. If the governor shall think that a higher
price ought to be demanded, the value shall be determined by valuation.
4. It shall be competent for the governor to insert in any tillage-
lease a clause, entitling the lessee, subject to such conditions as to the
said governor shall seem fit, to claim at the expiration of such lease
a renewal of the same for a further period not exceeding eight years.
5. On the determination of any tillage - lease, the lands comprised
therein, and all improvements thereon, shall, in the absence of any
right of renewal, or in case the lessee shall not avail himself thereof,,
revert unconditionally to the crown.
6. Tillage-leases of land, not also comprised within any pastoral
lease, shall be disposed of by public auction.
Regulations as to Lands within the Limits of Class A.
Within the limits of Class A it shall be competent for the governor
to grant pastoral-leases to such persons as he may think fit, for
terms not exceeding one year.
94


WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Regulations as to Lands within the Limits of Class B.
1. ’Within the limits of Class B it shall be competent for the gover-
nor to grant pastoral-leases for terms not exceeding eight years, and
to insert therein such clauses of renewal as hereinbefore provided
for with respect to tillage-leases.
2. It shall he competent for the governor to sell to any person
who shall he in actual occupation of a run under any pastoral-lease
any part of such run, at its fair value in an unimproved state: pro-
vided, nevertheless, that the price of the land sold shall not he less
than the general minimum price for the time being. If the governor
shall think that a higher price ought to he demanded, the price shall
he determined by valuation.
3. It shall be competent for the governor, at the end of each suc-
cessive year from the date of any pastoral-lease, to offer for sale all
or any part of the land comprised therein (not being also comprised
in any tillage-lease), subject, nevertheless, to the following con-
ditions :
First, The governor shall give sixty days’ notice of any intended
sale, either by advertisement in the Government Gazette, or
by some other sufficient method.
Secondly, The lessee shall have the option of purchasing the
land offered for sale, on the tertns prescribed in the last pre-
ceding section.
Thirdly, If the lessee declines to purchase, the value of any
improvements effected on the land (which, however, shall in
no case be estimated at more than the actual outlay made by
the lessee) shall be ascertained by valuation.
Fourthly, The upset price of the land shall then consist of the
joint value of the land and of the improvements. If the
land be sold, the value of the improvements shall be paid
over to the lessee, and only the balance be retained by the
government.
4. The rent to be paid for each run shall never be less than the
following: namely, £5 per annum, with an addition of 10s. per
annum for every 1000 acres comprised in the lease. But in com-
puting the acreage of any run, the governor may exclude from the
computation any tract of land which is reported to him by the
proper officer to be unavailable for pastoral purposes.
5. All persons who shall be in licensed occupation of crown land
when these regulations shall come into force, and shall, within three
calendar months thereafter, apply to the governor for pastoral-leases
of the lands respectively held by them, shall be entitled to a pre-
ference in obtaining such leases.
6. Any persons desiring to obtain a pastoral-lease of land which
has never been occupied before, shall send in an application for the
same, at such time and place, and in such form as may be appointed
by the governor in respect to such applications; and shall set forth
in his application a clear description of the boundaries of the run
Do


for which he applies; and it shall be competent for the governor to
grant to the person so applying a pastoral-lease of such run, on the
terms hereinbefore prescribed.
7. If the boundaries of any run applied for under either of the two
last preceding sections shall not be in conformity with any colonial
regulations then in force, or if any part of such run shall be within
Class A, or shall be applied for by any other person, the governor,
or other officer authorised by him, may declare what shall be the
boundaries of such run.
8. Pastoral-leases of lands which have been occupied, and have
become vacant by forfeiture, or other determination of a previous
pastoral-lease, shall be disposed of by public auction.
9. It shall be competent for the governor, with the advice of his
executive council, at any time within three months after the deter-
mination of any pastoral-lease, and notwithstanding such right of
renewal as aforesaid, to declare, by proclamation in the Government
Gazette, that all or any of the lands comprised in such lease, which
may be within one mile of any lands which have been granted in
fee by the crown, shall thereafter be deemed to be within Class A.
Miscellaneous Regulations.
1. The rents reserved under the provisions of the Order in Council
are to be reserved and paid without abatement, on account of the
existing or any future assessments of taxes or rates on sheep and
cattle, and are in noway to interfere with the right of the Colonial
Legislature to impose from time to time such assessments as may be
deemed advisable.
2. Every such rent shall be paid yearly in advance, at such time
and place as shall be specified in the lease. If the rent be not paid
on the prescribed rent-day, the lease shall be absolutely and inde-
fensibly forfeited, unless within sixty days of such rent-day the lessee
shall duly pay the full amount of the annual rent, together with an
additional sum equal to one-fourth part of the same.
3. All leases made under authority of this Order in Council shall
be transferable under such conditions, and in such maimer, as shall
be prescribed by the governor.
4. It shall be competent to the governor to insert in any such
lease such conditions and clauses of forfeiture as may seem to him
to be required by the public interest.
5. Nothing in this Order in Council shall prevent the governor
from excepting out of any sale or lease all such lands as it may
appear to him expedient to reserve for any of the public uses, for
which it is enacted by the 3d clause of an act passed in the 6th year
of her present Majesty, intituled ‘An Act for Regulating the Sale of
Waste Lands belonging to the Crown in the Australian Colonies;’
that lands required for public uses may be excepted from sales
authorised by that act, or which in his opinion would, if sold, give
the purchaser an undue command over water required for the bene-
ficial occupation or cultivation of other lands.
S 6


WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
6. Nothing in this Order in Council, or in any pastoral lease to be
granted under the provisions thereof, shall prevent the said governor
from making grants or sales of any lands comprised in such lease
for public purposes, nor from entering upon and disposing of, in
such manner as for the public interest may seem best, such lands as
may be required for the sites of churches, schools, or parsonages, or
for the construction of high-roads, or railways and railway stations,
or other internal communications, whether by land or water, or for
the use or benefit of the aboriginal inhabitants of the country, or for
public buildings, or as places for the interment of the dead, or places
for the recreation and amusement of the inhabitants of any town or
village, or as the sites of public quays or landing-places on the sea-
coast or shores of navigable streams, or for the purpose of sinking
shafts and digging for coal, iron, copper, lead, or other minerals, or
for any other purpose of public defence, safety, utility, convenience,
or enjoyment, or for otherwise facilitating the improvement and
settlement of the colony, but so that the quantity of land which may
be granted or sold to any railway company shall not exceed in all
the rate of 100 acres for every mile thereof in length.
7. Nothing contained in any pastoral-lease shall prevent the
aboriginal natives of this colony from entering upon the lands com-
prised therein, and seeking their subsistence therefrom, in their
accustomed manner, or shall prevent any inhabitants of colony
from passing over the said lands, or from examining the mineral and
other capabilities of the same, or from doing all things necessary for
the purpose of such examination—paying, nevertheless, to the lessee,
full compensation for any damage accruing to him therefrom.
8. A lease shall be liable to forfeiture for non-payment of rent;
upon any conviction for felony against the lessee; and in the event
of his conviction by a justice of the peace for any offence against
the law.


TASMANIA, OR VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
This island, in the maps of the world published down to the
end of the eighteenth century, was always represented, so far as it
appeared in them at all, as a promontory of Australia. It was
not until the year 1798, when Bass explored the strait called by
his name, that it was known to be an island. Separated from
Australia by this arm of the sea, which averages a hundred miles
in width, the southern extremity of the island reaches the latitude
43° 40'. The island is of an irregular but compact shape, so lying
in the direction of the Australian continent that the northern coast
bends towards it, and the southern projects into what might natu-
rally be set down as the southern cape of Australia by geographers
unacquainted with the intervening strait. It was discovered in
1642 by the Dutch navigator Tasman, who of course knew not
that it was an island. He conferred on it the name of Van
Diemen’s Land, after the surname of the governor of the Dutch
possessions in the East Indies. It seems to have been thought
that the name Van Diemen called up associations only too
appropriate to the social condition of the colony, from its simi-
larity to the word demon, and the name Tasmania has been sub-
stituted for it.
This island, about half the size of Ireland, is mountainous and
woody, broken into creeks and harbours round its edge, and watered
by several streams of considerable volume. The mountain-ranges
occupy great part of its surface, and the agricultural lands are dis-
persed in the interstices between them. Of these mountains there
are at least two —Mount Humboldt and Ben Lomond—which rise
above 5000 feet above the level of the sea, while there are several
which, like the highest points in Great Britain, rise a little above the
level of 4000 feet. The mean height, indeed, of the depressions in
the ranges where the waters fall into the sea on either side is about
3700 feet. It will thus be seen, on comparison with the British
islands, that Tasmania is very mountainous, and it will readily
be inferred that its agricultural districts are of limited extent.
Some of the pasture-stations are at an elevation above the sea of
3000 feet. There are many precipices and steep declivities among
these mountains, which rise range after range. They are dark and
gloomy, from the natural hue of the Australian verdure, and
contain much majestic and striking scenery, associated, though the
colony has had so brief a history, with many scenes of tragic
■horror. The rivers are considerable for so small an area. The


principal stream, called the Derwent, which enters the sea at
Hobart Town, is there twenty miles from its source, and its wind-
ings are said to double its actual running length as a stream.
Two other rivers, the Tamar and the Macquarrie, with their feeders,
drain great districts of valuable land. There are several lakes,
and some impenetrable marshes. The rivers are, in a modified
degree, liable to the pulsations which characterise the Australian
streams; but it does not appear that the severe droughts of the
mainland are known here.
From the narrowness of Bass’s Straits, the island is naturally
not entirely free from the influence of the hot north winds, sup-
posed to be caused by the burning plains in the vast interior of
the continent. But they are here more closely encountered by
the currents of air from the snowy south pole, and the climate
seems to have some of the shifting characteristics of our own, but
with a temperature generally higher, since the southern extremity
of the island is no nearer to the south pole than the warmest
parts of France to the north. Rain is pretty frequent, and the
atmosphere is described as humid. Tasmania has the character
of being a healthy country, notwithstanding the unpromising
nature of a portion of its population—diseased in body as well as
in mind. In a return of 3475 cases of disease in the hospitals in
1848, there appear 357 cases of diseases of the lungs. This pro-
portion is perhaps below what would generally appear in this
country, and yet its extent is deserving of consideration, since the
southern colonies are often looked upon as almost exempt from
these dreaded inflictions. The liver diseases, a peculiarity of hot
climates, amount only to 31. There are just two other classes of
disease more numerous than those of the lungs. Diseases of the
eyes are numbered as 553. Eye complaints have been noticed as a
peculiarity of the continent, supposed to arise from the hot winds.
Abscesses and ulcers are another large item, amounting to 439.
Their prevalence may in some measure be accounted for by the
habits of the Australian convict population. The deaths among
these 439 are, however, only 6. In fact, it is worthy of remark that
the most mortal diseases are here, as at home, those of the lungs;
for the deaths are a larger per-centage on the attacks than those
in any other of the enumerated diseases—making 47 out of 166
deaths from all causes. A census of the population of Tasmania
was taken on 31st December 1847. The total amount was found
to be 70,164, consisting of 47,828 males, and 22,336 females,
the former more than doubling the latter. This population
was classified thus —free emigrants, 13,818; persons bom in the
colony, 18,355; persons who have been prisoners, 11,519; ticket-
of-leave holders, 5714; convicts in government employment, 9758;
99


convicts in private service, 8716; troops, with their families,
2246; aborigines, 38.
LAND AND PRODUCE.
Tasmania, being the most thickly-peopled and extensively-.-
cultivated of the southern colonies, is one of the most important
of them all in a geographical and economical point of view, but 1
it is of secondary importance for the purposes of the intending
emigrant, and will not call on the present occasion for so full an
account as its neighbours. It is not among the mountain-ranges
comprised within its narrow cincture that new tracts of wide-
spreading down or plain can be expected to be discovered, offering
inexhaustible grazing districts for countless herds and docks. Yet
it would appear that towards the western part of the island new
districts have been opened up, and others are still unexplored.
The areas of some of the former tracts are thus estimated
‘King William’s Plains, 40,000 acres; Guelph Plains, 20,000
acres; Yale of Gordon, 120,000 acres; Pedder and Huon Plains,
12,000; forest openings, 8000 acres. Total, 280,000 acres. 1
-—(Montgomery Martin’s British Colonies, ii. 53.) Between
Woolnorth, the north-western town of the island, and Mac-
quarrie Harbour, a deep estuary about the centre of the western
coast, there is still a considerable district unexplored, the cha-
racter of which, as seen from the neighbouring mountains, is said
to be of the same promising description, opening the prospect of
a considerable addition to the grazing-grounds. The most thickly-
settled districts of the island are, however, on the other side, in
the rich alluvial valleys of the rivers. The nature of these tracts
naturally recommended them for agricultural rather than grazing
purposes. The state of the labour market of the colony, involv-
ing so much convict service, has had an important effect on the
outward aspect of the country. Wherever slavery'has been in
any shape in operation, the place is materially changed in its
character for the emigrant. It is more like an old country, in
which capital has been expended. Capital is employed in pro-
curing work; but if the work is produced by compulsion, it will
have more or less the same effect. To say that slave labour is
unprofitable to the slaveholder is an arrant fallacy, which only
prevents people from looking the criminality of slavery fairly in
the face. To compel a man who would work for himself to work
for a master, or to compel a man to work who otherwise would be
idle, is in either case a profit to the master; and'if it were not so,
he would not be a slaveholder. Whatever evils may have attended
the penal system, there is always one local result of it—that where
100


it was set down, it produced the effect of the expenditure of capital.
That convict labour is thus an ultimate benefit to the world, out-
balancing any evils of the convict system, no more follows this
than would a belief that an idle criminal, convicted and transported
to a place where he is made to work, is as valuable a member of
society as he would have been had he been virtuous, sober, and
industrious at home. All we have to do at this moment with the
question is, that the operation of the penal system has altered the
face of the country where it has been set down, just as manure
may have altered the character of a field. These characteristics
iare thus described by Mr Wakefield in his ‘ Art of Colonisation: ’
‘ln Tasmania, which is fast losing its ugly name of Van Diemen’s
Land, there are farms, being single properties, consisting of seven
or eight hundred acres each, under cultivation, besides extensive
sheep and cattle-runs, the farming of which is not inferior to that
of Norfolk and the Lothians. A description of one of these farms
is before me. The 800 acres are divided into fields of from 80 to 50
acres each. The fences are as good as can be. The land is kept
thoroughly clear of weeds ; a strict course of husbandry is pursued ;
and the crops, especially of turnips, are very large. The garden and
orchards are extensive, kept in apple-pie order, and very productive.
The house is of stone, large, and commodious. The farm-buildings
are ample in extent, and built of stone, with solid roofs. The imple-
ments are all of the best kind, and kept in perfect order. The live-
stock, for the most part bred upon the spot, is visited as a show, on
account of its excellence, and would be admired in the best farmed
parts of England : it consists of 30 cart-horses, 50 working bullocks,
100 pigs, 20 brood mares, 1000 head of horned cattle, and 25,000
fine-woolled sheep. In this single establishment, by one master, 70
labourers have been employed at the same time. They were nearly
all convicts. By convict labour, and that alone, this fine establish-
ment was founded and maintained. Nothing of the sort could have
existed in the island if convicts had not been transmitted thither,
and assigned, on their landing, to settlers authorised to make slaves
of them.’—(Pp. 176, 177.)
All strangers in Van Diemen’s Land are in fact struck with the
home appearance of the farms—the neat, clean agriculture, the
fences, the well-constructed, comfortable, even elegant and stately
houses, and the good roads. All these are the produce of those
peculiar industrial facilities which have unfortunately been paid
for by formidable social evils. It is stated, on the other hand, by
some authorities, that the colonists have been far from taking
advantage, to their full extent, of their industrial opportunities;
that the indolence and unenlightened carelessness which generally
attend the command of slave labour are conspicuous here; and
that there would be great room for enlightened, well-economised
101


industry in the colony. The excellence of their wheat is a great
object of pride with the Tasmanian agriculturists. They have
generally found an excellent and lucrative market in the various
new colonies rising around them in the south, where the means of
subsistence have been sought by the first settlers in the nearest
source of supply; and the impulse thus given has been aided by
the convict system. The parliamentary papers shew the amounts
of land cultivated, and of produce to have been, at the commence-
ment of the year 1849 (calculated from the crop of 1848,) 64,700
acres of wheat, producing 1,153,303 bushels ; 14,042 acres of bar-
ley, producing 331,184 bushels; 29,463 acres of oats, producing
756,762 bushels ; 3916 acres of potatoes, producing 18,231 tons ;
and 49,315 acres, on which 43,195 tons of hay were raised. To
these have to be added 674 acres laid out in peas, 132 in beans,
8836 in turnips, and 458 in tares. The quantity of farm animals
in the districts in which their numbers had been ascertained were
—horses, 17,196; horned cattle, 86,485; sheep, 1,752,963; goats,
2902; and pigs, 29,967. It will be found, however, from the
above details, that the quantity of land in cultivation does not
yet much exceed 170,000 acres, while about two and a half millions
of appropriated lands are said to remain uncultivated, and nearly
a million and a half are held under depasturing licences. -It is said
that more than eleven millions of acres remain ungranted. This
would appear to open a wdde field for future settlers; but on the
other hand, many practical men are of opinion that colonisation
has nearly reached the limits to which it can be profitably carried
in the present state of colonial demand and supply, and until
a new impulse shall have created inducements for settling on less
productive lands, and for the renovation of the powers of the older
lands by artificial manures. We hear of old settled estates being
sold for from £2 to £3 per acre. It is observed that the large
landowners have found it profitable to let farms at money or
grain rent, and thus to create a middle half-working half-capitalist
class, quite distinct from the great capitalists of New South Wales
and their semi-slavish servants.
Agricultural and pastoral produce are not the only exports of
this island. It has a variety of timber-trees, chiefly different kinds
of eucalypti, hard, durable, and of great value in ship-building,
and other practical applications. The value of the timber exported
exceeds £20,000; and there has been a considerable amount of
ship-building at Hobart Town and the banks of the Huon. Fruits
and other secondary vegetable productions are raised, and even
exported, but not to the extent of being important. Some wnne
even has been made in the neighbourhood of Hobart Town ; but
the colonies in the mainland seem to promise better for the supply


of this commodity. Coal is pretty abundant, and salt-pools are
known, while various minerals have been found, as iron, copper,
lead, zinc, and manganese; but the mining of minerals has not
been an industrial occupation in the colony. It appears, however,
that it has been found convenient there to smelt the copper of
South Australia. Sir W. Dennison, the lieutenant-governor,
writing to Earl Grey on 25th May 1-849, says—
* The trade which is rapidly increasing between Van Diemen’s
Land and the other Australian colonies, will in a few years become
of the greatest importance. Prom South Australia a quantity of
copper ore has been already sent here for shipment to England as
ballast; and we have every prospect of being able to establish smelt-
ing-furnaces in this colony, by which a large portion of the copper
ore raised in South Australia will be transferred here, and a back
trade in coal created.
‘ I have therefore deemed it very desirable to relieve a rising traffic
of such importance from the trammels which a heavy duty of 15
per cent, would impose upon it. In the same way, the wool which
is brought into this colony is merely sent here from the settlements
to the southward and eastward of New South Wales, because there
are greater opportunities of shipment to England from hence than
from the place where the wool is produced. The coal which it is pro-
posed to admit, duty free, is merely that which may be required for
the purposes of steam navigation. I expect to be able very shortly
to provide an article from the coal-mines of the colony, of better
quality and far cheaper than any which can be imported.’—(Corre-
spondence Australian Government Bill, Parliamentary Papers. 1850.)
Hobart Town, on the Derwent, the capital of the colony, is now
nearly half a century old, and has become a considerable town.
It has several public buildings—such as the government-house, the
banks, the customhouse, prisons, and barracks. Attached to it are
several works connected with the staple commodities of the island
—as flour-mills, saw-mills, &c.; but the number and wealth of tire
inhabitants also give support to the makers of articles of luxury—
such as cabinet and upholstery work, carriages, &c,; and to places
of entertainment and dissipation, naturally numerous in a popu-
lation sadly impregnated with the criminal element. It must be
mentioned, at the same time, that the churches are numerous and
conspicuous, and that all the leading denominations have here their
representative congregations, supplied with less difficulty than in
the newer and barer colonies.
On the Tamar, which runs into Bass’s Straits, there is the other
considerable town of Launceston. It has its own public buildings
and hotels, and even its race-ground. Its population is about 5000.
Like the capital, it is close to great mountain-ranges; but there
are open grassy tracts near it, among the most important of which
103


are Paterson’s Plains. Forty miles farther north, and at the mouth
of the crooked estuary of the Tamar, is Georgetown. A good
road runs from it to Launceston, and thence over the hills and
across the whole island to Hobart Town. There are several
smaller towns scattered through the agricultural lands.
History. —The history of this colony has been far from a happy
or pleasing one. It was first employed as a convict station in the
year 1803. The fertility of the alluvial parts of the island, and its
general desirableness as a place of settlement, gradually brought
voluntary colonists to it. The number of free settlers received a
considerable addition when the colonisation of Norfolk Island was
abandoned, and its inhabitants were settled in the district of Tas-
mania, now called New Norfolk. As inhabitancy and cultivation
increased, the country became less suited for the exercise of penal
discipline. The means of subsistence could be obtained by terror
or favour in the recesses of the mountains, and troops of convicts
became bush-rangers. The unlicensed ferocity of these men has
filled the mountain recesses of the island with such horrible legends
of the nineteenth century, as civilised nations only know from
romances and doubtful tradition running back to fabulous ages.
Cannibalism and all kinds of horrible vices have been attributed to
these men ; their contact with the natives tending to degrade and
brutalise their originally corrupt nature. These aborigines are
described as having been of a still more degraded type than any
of the races on the Australian continent. Utterly unsusceptible
of acquiring any of the benefits of civilisation, they yet acquired
the vices of the bush-rangers, and they became formidable from
their low animal cunning and their relentless cruelty. Their
existence among the mountains and forests was to the settler
exactly like the vicinity of some dreadful wild animal, and they
were a source of uneasiness, misery, and terror to the European,
which in truth, by his conduct towards them, utterly reckless
when not resolutely cruel, he had brought upon himself.
A desperate war was made by the colonial authorities against
the bush-rangers, who had organised themselves under popular
chiefs; and they were at last put down, at least as a body capable
of supporting each other, and putting the law at defiance, though
in such a country it is natural that individuals will still take to the
bush, and lead a marauding life. But the old horrible vision that
haunted the stockman so late almost as the year 1830—that of a
band of ruffians armed to the teeth gallopping up to his house,
and besieging it as a brigand army—was put down. It is wonderful
that, under British rule, it was so long tolerated.
The natives were not so easily dealt for a conscientious
government could not make war on savages as on civilised
104


criminals; and yet it was plain that they must be controlled, or the
country could not be lived in. In 1830, a plan was organised for
surrounding them, as the game was surrounded in the old hunting
expeditions, but not of course with the same exterminating conclu-
sion. It is said that it cost £30,000, and was conducted with the
utmost vigilance and care ; yet so cunningly could these otherwise
contemptible savages take advantage of the local facilities, that
they all oozed, as it were, through the converging lines of troops,
who surrounded in the end nothing but a poor decrepit boy! At
length, partly by kindness, partly by compulsion, they were col-
lected together, and removed to Flinders Island, where the remnant
of them have got a kind of exotic treatment, which, though their
number does not increase under it, may, it is hoped, make them
happier individually than they were in their filth, nakedness, and
starvation. The last vestiges of the native inhabitants have
almost disappeared since 1842. As we have seen in the popu-
lation abstract, their numbers were calculated in 1847 at 38;
so that their presence is an evil to which the colonist is not
subjected.
The most unpleasant feature of society in Tasmania, is the
prevalence of the convict system: a fatal inheritance from New
South Wales. In 1840, the colony was in a state of high pros-
perity—whether on account of, or in despite of the convicts. In
that year, however, it was resolved to abandon transportation to
New South Wales; and, conjointly with Norfolk Island, where
Captain Maconochie’s bold experiments w r ere going on, Tasmania
was made the penal settlement. After being subject to the Norfolk
Island system, the convicts were to be drafted in probation-gangs
into Tasmania, where, after having satisfactorily gone through
probation, they were to receive passes, entitling them to enter
the labour-market, and seek employment. This tainted part of
the colonial population, which had been diminishing, now rapidly
increased. A return in 1847—(Papers relative to Convict Disci-
pline, p. 49) —shews that there were then in Tasmania 8603 male,
and 1119 female prisoners. Of the former, there were rated at hard
labour, 6491; at barrack duties, 1467: miscellaneous, 645. The
comptroller-general reported the whole number of convicts under
his control, including those in Norfolk Island, at 26,157 males,
and 4544 females. Of the former, 7245 were ticket - of-leave
holders; 12,695 pass-holders; and 6217 in gang. In 1849, the
convicts in Tasmania, including expirees as well as those under
sentence, were reported to amount to 38,133. In allusion to the
quantity of convict or slave labour which the habits and method
of cultivation in the colony had brought it to absorb, the comp-
troller-general observed, that ‘it requires no argument to prove
105


that 2000 convicts would annually be absorbed in the labour-
market of this colony.’ But however the labour might be absorbed,
as it is termed, the general moral tone of the population was
suffering, and the colony was becoming a sort of stationary slave-
settlement. But it was a peculiar feature of this community, into
which a criminal population was thus systematically forced, that
whether from want of sufficient capital, or because, as we have
seen in the account of Victoria or Fort Philip, a number of the
colonists re-emigrated thither, there were not the means of
employing all the convicts. If they were absorbed, it was not in
the capacity of active workers. With all their vicious propensi-
ties, they were to a certain extent thrown idle on society; and the
social consequences were of so formidable and horrible a character,
that the attention of the home government was thoroughly roused
to a true acquaintance with them, by communications in a tone
rather of despairing supplication than of mere ordinary complaint,
by the respectable settlers.
The change in the convict system will, in time, operate an
alteration in the moral state of Tasmania; but in the meantime,
its state is disorganised and out of joint. Of a population pro-
bably of 80,000, not far from one - half have passed through the
ordeal of criminality. The persons sent to the island must be
supported; and, what is fully worse, the settlers require to main-
tain a large police force to protect their lives and properties. As
honest, industrious, and skilled artisans settling in Van Diemen’s
Land have to compete with cheap convict labour, the colony is
equally disadvantageous to them. In a word, unless the trans-
portation of convicts on any pretence is stopped—which we trust
it soon will be—the prosperity of this naturally fine island will be
seriously marred. Already large numbers of free and wealthy
settlers have left the colony for Sydney, Adelaide, Victoria, and
other places; and a considerable decrease has taken place in the
quantity of cultivated wheat-land.
As Tasmania is now under the operation of the act of 1850 for
the constitution of the Australian colonies, so it was under the
uniform system of land-sales. When the £1 minimum system
came to be acted on, it was remarked that probably all the land,
which, in the then state of the land-market, would be worth 7s. fid.
an acre, was disposed of, and that the rule of £1 an acre was a
virtual prohibition to the sale, unless in peculiar circumstances —
and so it has turned out to be. When the land-sales act was
suspended as to Tasmania and New Zealand, the spirit of the
minimum was still preserved; and on the 3d July 1848, regula-
tions were issued for the sale of waste lands and licences of the
pasturage, which will be found at the close of this section,
106


STATE OF LAND IN TASMANIA ON 31st DECEMBER 1848.
POLICE DISTRICTS.
Number of
Acres of
Land in each
District.
Number of
Acres of
Land
Cultivated.
Number of
Acres of
granted or
sold Lands
Unculti-
vated.
Total num-
ber of Acres
granted
and sold to
Settlers.
Number of
Acres of
Land held
under
Depasturing
Licences.
Bothwell, ...
299,520
4,214
148,994
153,208
Brighton, -
133,700
11,248$
92,636$
103,885
Campbell Town, -
492,800
4,358f
314,122$
318,481
Fingal, ...
1,807,360
4,500$
117,627$
122,128
CO
George Town,
792,320
659|
55,915$
56,575
—
Great Swanport,
677,120
5,105
112,679
117,784
Hamilton, ...
415,360
4,751$
186,992$
191,744
Hobart Town,
688,160
4,915$
94,283$
99,199
rC
Horton, ....
2,574,009
5,548
344,452
350,000
Launceston,
437,760
9,532
127,140
136,672
o
Longford, ...
590,720
28,586
172,633
201,219
Morven, ...
260,480
16,146
130,247
146,393
New Norfolk,
125,440
5,854
62,524
68,378
£
Oatlands, ...
448,000
14,484$
234,361$
248,846
a
PortSorell, ...
561,920
2,064
9,846
11,910
o 3
Richmond,
153,600
16,574$
136,342$
152.917
to
Sorell and Prosser's Plains,
440,320
13,195$
52,792$
65,988
1
Southport, ...
1,304,800
1,169
5,410
6,579
a
Westbury, - -
571,520
18,633
150,907
169,540
&
Not yet marked off into 1
Police Districts, - /
i
Total,
14,482,892
171,540
2,549,906
2,721,446
107
The government, however, strongly felt the importance of
inducing sound emigrants of the middle and humbler classes to
proceed to Tasmania, and fill up the vacuum between the rich
colonists and their tainted slave-working class. The want of
inducement to the respectable working-classes to make it their
destination, was endeavoured to be remedied by the introduction
of pensioners. But it was felt to be of still more moment to
induce people of moderate means, desirous of possessing small
colonial estates, to look to this island—naturally very well adapted
to their object. A relaxation of the minimum land-sale system
■was consequently embodied in a notice, which will be found at
the end ot this section. It is very instructive, and well deserves
the attention of intending emigrants of the class to whom it
is chiefly directed.
The persons who take advantage of this arrangement must be
prepared to encounter a social system, of which the best that can
be said is, to hope that it may rapidly improve. It will be seen
that the framers of the document hold a life in Van Diemen’s Land
to be so essentially uninviting, that there is a condition to prevent
the obtainer of a crown-grant from immediately abandoning it,
and proceeding elsewhere.


REGULATIONS FOR SALE OF LANDS.
The following are the Regulations for the Disposal by Sale and
Licence of Waste Lands in Van Diemen’s Land, drawn up from the
Report for 1849 of the Emigration Commissioners:—-
Sale. —l. All persons desirous of purchasing crown land will make
■written application to the surveyor-general, describing as clearly as
possible the land they desire to have offered for sale.
2. No lot will be allowed to contain an area exceeding 640 acres,
or to embrace a larger frontage on a river or road than one-fourth
the depth of the lot, or as near thereto as may be.
3. Should the land applied for be available, the surveyor-general
will call upon the applicant to deposit in his office the cost of survey
(should such be required); upon receipt of which, instructions will
be issued for the laud to be marked off.
4. Upon receipt of the survey, the land will be described and
offered for sale by public auction, after one month’s advertisement
in the ‘ Hobart Town Gazette.’
5. The lands offered for sale will be distinguished into the follow-
ing classes ; namely—l at, Town lots ; 2 d, Suburban lots ; 3 d, Country
lots ; and 4th, Special country lots. The upset price of the ‘ country
lots ’ will be £1 per acre; and for the other three classes such higher
upset price as to the lieutenant-governor may seem fit.
6. A deposit of 10 per cent, upon the purchase of the land must
be paid at the time of sale, and the residue witliin one calendar
month therefrom; in default of which the deposit-money will become
forfeited.
7. Upon the completion of the purchase within the period men-
tioned in the preceding clause, the purchaser will be entitled to
receive a grant-deed of the land purchased, upon payment to the
collector of internal revenue of the usual fees chargeable there-
upon.
8. Such lands as are comprised within the third and fourth classes
will be available for selection by individuals on application, or by
parties holding remission orders (if not held under licence), after
having been once exposed for sale, and not sold at the upset price
previously affixed to the same ; or if any bidding above that price
was made for the land, then at not less than the amount of such
bidding, after deducting the amount of any deposit that may have
been paid thereon : provided, however, that no land shall be so dis-
posed of unless the full amount of the purchase-money be imme-
diately paid. Should the land, however, be held under licence, the
lots must be advertised, and submitted to competition at public
auction.
9. A sale of crown lands will be held at the Court of Requests
Room, either at Hobart Town or Launceston, at least once in each
quarter of the year.
108


Licence for Depasturing. —lo. All persons desirous of occupying
crown lands for depasturing purposes, will make written application
to the surveyor-general, describing as minutely as possible the situa-
tion of the land with reference to some known point.
11. Each lot applied for must form the subject of a distinct appli-
cation.
12. No lot will be allowed to contain less than 500, nor more than
5000 acres, unless there be not sufficient land in the situation applied
for to make up a lot of the minimum area.
13. The licence-fee on each lot will be charged at the rate of £1
per 100 acres.
14. Provided the land applied for be available for licence, the
applicant, if known to the department (or, if not known, after a satis-
factory reference to the police-magistrate of the district in which he
may reside), will be called upon by the surveyor-general to deposit
in the office of the collector of internal revenue, within three weeks
from the date of the notice, the amount of the first year’s licence-fee
in advance ; upon receipt of which a lice’nce of occupation for twelve
calendar months will be immediately issued from the surveyor-
general’s office, and which will bear date from the first of the month
succeeding that on which the party is made aware of the approval
of his application ; but if payment of the fee be not made within the
time specified, the land will be licensed to the next applicant.
15. Should, however, two or more applications for the same land
be received upon the same day, the claims of the contending parties
will be referred to a Board, to be nominated by the lieutenant-
governor, who will decide upon the appropriation of the land. The
Board will also investigate and settle all other cases of conflicting
claims other than those arising from simultaneous application.
16. Holders of licences will be allowed the privilege of renewing
them from year to year for ten years, subject, however, to the pay-
ment of an additional fee of 10 per cent, after the expiration of the
first five years, and provided that each year’s licence-fee be paid into
the Internal Revenue Office two months before the expiration of the
current licence.
17. In the event, however, of the land being required for sale, or
for any public purpose, the government reserves to itself the right
of resuming, at the end of each year for which the licence may be
granted, the whole or any portion of the land occupied, subject,
however, to three months’ notice being given to the licensee of such
intention on the part of the government, and subject also to his
being assured the value of the improvements (consisting of buildings
and fences) he may have effected upon the land so resumed.
18. Should only a portion of a lot be resumed by the government,
the licensee will be allowed the option of continuing in the occu-
pation of the remainder of the land for the unexpired term of the
licence at a proportionate reduction of the licence-fee.
19. In order to value the improvements, when necessary, the occu-
pier and the surveyor-general will each name an arbitrator, with


power to choose, if requisite, an umpire ; but if they cannot agree in
the choice of an umpire, he will be appointed by the lieutenant-
governor. The value, however, of the improvements is in no case to
exceed the amount of the actual outlay made by the licensee.
20. The upset price of the land for sale will then consist of the
joint value of the land and the improvements; and if the land be
sold, the latter amount will be paid over to the licensee, unless he
(the licensee) becomes the purchaser, in which case the value of tlie
improvements will not be demanded. Should the land, however, not
be disposed of, the licensee will be allowed the privilege of renewing
his licence for the unexpired period of the ten years referred to in
clause No. 16, upon the same terms as before. In case the land is
required for any public purpose, the value of the improvements will
be paid by the government to the licensee.
21. Should a licence of occupation not be renewed in the manner
provided for in clause No. 16, the land will become available for
licence to the first applicant.
22. The government reserves to itself the right of granting to men
of good character licences to cut timber upon all lands which may
hereafter be occupied under these regulations, whether by applica-
tion or tender; an indulgence, however, which will not be continued
to those persons who do not strictly conform to the terms of the
licence, and obtain the recommendation of the police magistrate of
the district in which they may reside.
23. The licences which have been issued under the government
notices, Nos. 240 and 68, of the 28th of September 1843, and 14th of
June 1847, will be renewed from year to year for ten years, from
the Ist of August 1847; the licensees paying after the first five
years from that date 10 per cent, in addition to the present amount
of licence-fee, and conforming to the rule laid down in clause No.
16, respecting the payment of the fee; failing in which, the land
will, in the month of June in each year, be advertised as open to
tender.
24. In the event of two or more tenders being received of the
same amount, the parties whose tenders are equal will be called
upon by the surveyor-general to submit fresh tenders within four-
teen days from the date of the notice; falling in which, the Board
referred to in clause No. 15 will investigate and decide on the claims
of the contending parties.
25. All lots which have been or may hereafter be licensed by
tender, will be subject to the conditions specified in clauses No. 16,
17,18, 19, and 20.
26. The lands licensed under the government notice No. 69, of the
14th of June 1847, will not be resumed by the government before
the expiration of the ten years referred to in notice No. 71, of the
21st of June 1847, unless required for public purposes; among which
must be taken to be the construction of roads for the use of the
public, or for obtaining access to crown lands.
27. The fees, however, for such lands as have been licensed and


applied for under the notices referred to in the preceding clause,
must be paid in the manner prescribed in clauses Nos. 14 and 16 of
these regulations; otherwise the lands will become available for
licence to the next applicant in the way pointed out in those clauses,
and will thenceforth be licensed upon the same conditions as those
lands which are now open for licence.
28. A limitation will be made in reference to the proportion of
water-frontage to be given to a lot. Looking at the necessity of
obtaining water for pastoral purposes, the lieutenant-governor directs
that the frontage shall be to the depth of the lot in the proportion of
1 to 4, or as near thereto as may be.
29. The lieutenant-governor reserves to himself the power of
rejecting any application which may be made to purchase crown
land held under licence, notwithstanding the right reserved in
clause No. 17.
30. The licences which may hereafter be granted under these
regulations will be subject to forfeiture in the event of the licensee
transferring to another his licence of occupation for the whole or
any portion of the land licensed to him, unless done with the pre-
vious written consent of the surveyor-general.
31. Any lands which have been or may hereafter be cultivated or
depastured by the crown, will not come under the operation of the
foregoing regulations.
32. Any persons occupying crown lands for the purpose of depas-
turing sheep or cattle without having paid the usual licence-fee for
the same, will be treated as trespassers.
33. The regulations hitherto promulgated for the disposal of the
crown lands are hereby cancelled.
PLAN FOR THE SETTLEMENT OP SMALL CAPITALISTS.
In 1849 certain regulations were issued by the Emigration
Board, to facilitate the migration of small capitalists to Van
Diemen’s Land. They were nearly but not entirely in the same
terms with the notice which follows. In their report for 1851
the Board say: ‘ A few persons had already taken advantage of the
regulations when a dispatch was received from the lieutenant-
governor, pointing out some local difficulties in their execution
which made it desirable not to carry the scheme further.’ The
following amended scheme was consequently issued in place of
the original one, which is printed in the previous impressions of
tins work :
NOTICE TO PERSONS DESIROUS OF PURCHASING LAND IN
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
Her Majesty’s government being anxious to encourage the settle-
ment in Yaa Diemen’s Land of small capitalists and persons capable
111


of employing labour, the Colonial Land and Emigration Commis-
sioners have been directed to make known the following arrange-
ments which her Majesty’s government have sanctioned for that
purpose: —
1. The Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners will be
ready to receive deposits from persons desirous of emigrating to and
settling in Van Diemen’s Land, in sums of not less than £2OO, to be
paid to the credit of the Commissioners at the Bank of England, or
any of its branches ; and the Commissioners will grant in exchange
for such deposit a ‘remission-certificate,’ for a sum equal to double
the amount of the deposit; which certificate will be available as so
much cash in the purchase of government land in the colony, if
presented at the proper office in the colony within eighteen months
of its date.
2. Parties making such deposits will further be pntitled to free
passages (intermediate or steerage) to Hobart Town, for themselves,
their families, and servants; provided that the whole cost of such
passages shall not exceed two-thirds the amount of the deposit.
Depositors desirous of being furnished with cabin instead of inter-
mediate passages, may take advantage of this condition by paying
the difference of expense out of their own funds.
3. Depositors must at the time of making the deposit obtain from
the Bank of England, or the branch in which the deposit is made, a
receipt to be produced to the Commissioners as the voucher of the
payment.
4. Depositors when applying for their remission-certificates, must
at the same time submit to the Commissioners the name and descrip-
tion of the persons nominated for free passages, otherwise the
privilege will be forfeited, and persons so nominated will neverthe-
less be subject to the approval of the Commissioners. Any loss
which they may experience by the neglect or default of the depo-
sitor or his nominees, either to come forward at the proper time for
embarkation, or in any other respect, must be borne by the depositor,
and any expense so incurred will be defrayed out of the sum which
he may be entitled to have spent in emigration.
5. The object of the above regulations being to encourage the
permanent settlement in Van Diemen’s Land of a class of small
capitalists, and it being necessary to prevent persons who have no
intention of settling there from taking advantage of them, depositors
who shall proceed to Van Diemen’s Land under these regulations,
will not, for the space of two years from making use of their remis-
sion-certificates, receive a crown-grant for any land purchased by
such certificates; but will, in the meantime, receive a ‘ location-
ticket.’ At the expiration of the two years, the depositor, on shewing
to the satisfaction of the governor that he is bond fide a resident
settler in the colony, and has so resided continuously since obtaining
his location-ticket, will be entitled to a crown-grant in exchange for
it. If, however, application should not be made for the exchange of
the location-ticket within twelve months from the expiration of


the two years for which it is granted, it will be considered to have
lapsed, and the land will be open to sale or grant.
6. In the event, however, of the purchase of land which would
properly be included in a single grant, partly by means of a remis-
sion-certificate, and partly in cash, the lieutenant-governor will be
authorised, provided the amount paid in cash be not less than
half of the nominal value of the remission-certificate, and provided
also he be satisfied of the good faith of the transaction, to issue a
grant for the whole at the expiration of one year from the date of
purchase.
It will be seen that the above regulations are intended to apply
only to persons having capital enough to enter on the cultivation of
a tolerably large property. To such parties Yan Diemen’s Land,
from its healthy climate, productive soil, and cheap labour, offers
every prospect of success. But persons not possessed of capital, nor
accustomed to agricultural or pastoral pursuits should, for their own
sakes, abstain from taking advantage of arrangements which are not
designed for them, and for which they are not suited. Otherwise,
they can scarcely fail to meet with disappointment and pecuniary
loss.—By order of the Board,
(Signed) S. Walcott.


AUSTRALIAN GOLD-MINES.
In the early part of May 1851, gold was found and began to be
dug at a place called Ophir in the Bathurst District of New South
Wales. Bathurst lies two or three days’ journey west of Sydney,
beyond,the range of Blue Mountains, and is reached by a route
through Paramatta. The account of the discovery and working
of gold in this quarter created much excitement in Sydney and
other places, and great crowds of persons immediately proceeded
to the scene of operations, and betook themselves to the business
of gold-finding.
In the new and unforeseen position in which it was placed, the
colonial government seems to have acted with much prudence. A
proclamation was issued to the effect, that the gold found at the
diggings was the property of the crown, and that it could be taken
only by procuring a licence, and according to certain regulations.
The licence, as is since made known, is for a month, and costs
each individual 30s. All persons are licensed on these easy terms
who can shew a discharge from former employers—an arrangement
designed to check the sudden absconding of servants, but which,
it is almost needless to say, will fail in that effect. To preserve
order, a government-commissioner as head-magistrate was also
despatched to the scene of operations; this onerous appointment
being given to Mr J. R. Hardy. A police force under Captain
Battye was at the same time sent off, to preserve the peace on the
road between Sydney and Bathurst. It may be hoped that by these
means, as well as by the due admixture of a respectable class of
persons at the diggings, something like order will be maintained,
and society saved from the evils that have afflicted the Californian
community.
The following letter in the 1 Sydney Morning Herald,’ pur-
porting to be written by G. Lacy, and dated Bathurst, May 18,
conveys an account of the diggings and their locality, which will
be perused Avith interest by our readers :
‘Having made a hurried visit to the gold-fields of this district, for
the purpose of satisfying myself as to the reality of the reports which
were daily arriving in Bathurst during last week, causing the greatest
excitement amongst all classes, I have fonvarded a slight account of
the diggings, thinking it would not be unacceptable to many of your
readers. The locality is about thirty -fiA r e miles hence ; eight miles
from Cornish Town, and twelve from Orange. There is a tolerable
bridle-road, and even loaded drays are brought down to the spot by
114


taking the road through Blackman’s Swamp. It is at the junction of
Summer Hill and Lewis’ Ponds Creeks, where the diggers are now
at work. There is nothing peculiar in the appearance of the country,
broken ridges and continuous hills of quartz being the principal
features. On arriving at the diggings, which lie in the narrow bed
of the creek, where there is not level standing-room for fifty people,
a singular and exciting scene presented itself. About two hundred
individuals were congregated (though large parties were hourly
arriving), forming as motley a group as could possibly be brought
together, and attired in every conceivable style of costume, the fierce
and brigandish seeming to be the one most in vogue. From the
magistrate down to the shirtless vagabond, the features of every one
bore an expression of bewildered anxiety. It was evident that by
far the greater portion of the people went there with the expectation
of picking up lumps of gold among the rocks and stones of the creek,
many arriving with nothing but a pick or a spade, and not provision
even for a single meal, or a covering for night. The ridges all
around were covered with hundreds of horses, though there is
not sufficient grass to feed a dozen. I did not see more than
three camps erected, the majority of the diggers seeming to imagine
that a covering overhead is totally unnecessary in this auriferous
region; and bitterly must they have repented for their want of
forethought, as towards evening a pelting shower came down,
continuing at intervals during the whole night and next day, no
doubt considerably cooling the ardour of the gold-seekers. With
respect to the quantity of gold to be found, no one with the slightest
knowledge of geology can doubt that it exists in great abundance
somewhere near the spot. A spadeful of earth taken from any part
of the banks of the creek, and carefully washed, will produce gold
more or less. But nothing can be done without proper machines for
separating the gold from the earth, sand, and particles of iron which
are found with it. I did not see more than three of these rockers
or cradles at work, the greater part of the diggers contenting them-
selves with whirling the earth and water round in a tin basin, the
lid of a saucepan, or even their hats, and letting it gradually wash
over the sides, leaving the grains of gold at the bottom; and most
amusing was it to observe their anxious features while peering most
intensely into the dish for the coveted metal, the bystanders, who
had perhaps only just arrived, appearing equally as anxious; doubt-
less judging what their own chance of success would be. I heard
many say they had found considerable pieces that morning, but I
did not see them. One gentleman, with a cradle, shewed me his
produce of three or four hours’ labour out of seven buckets of earth:
as nearly as I could judge, I imagine it would fill a good-sized
thimble, the largest piece being the size and shape of a flattened
pea. The greatest good-humour, badinage, and a disposition to
oblige, seemed to prevail; but whether this will last when the
worthless characters arrive from all parts of the colony, it is difficult
to say. It is expected that thousands will soon be on the road from
115


Sydney, many of whom will most certainly be egregiously dis-
appointed, and rue the day they gave up their ordinary avocations
for gold-hunting. Let no one come who cannot stand up to his
knees in the cold water for hours ; who cannot lie down in wet
clothes, and sleep under the greenwood-tree; who does not know
how to make a damper or a fire when every bit of timber round is
soaking wet. The only possible chance of doing any good, is for
six or eight to form a company, provide themselves with a tent,
plenty of provisions, necessary machines and tools; and by incessant
labour and co-operation, it is not improbable a profit may be
realised.’
The excitement created all over Australia by the early accounts
of the diggings at Bathurst, caused a search to be made in various
quarters for the precious metal; and, greatly to the satisfaction of
the parties concerned, it was found in such astonishing abundance,
that the only real wonder was, that the discovery had not long
since been made. The following, according to the latest accounts,
are the places where gold is found:—
In New South Wales. —Ophir, Winburndale Creek, Frederick’s
Valley, Campbell’s River, all in Bathurst County; Turon River,
Roxburgh County; Muckewa Creek, Louisa Creek, Meroo River,
Wellington County; Aberci’ombie River, Georgiana County;
Araluen River, St Vincent County. Also, the Orange and
Braidwood Diggings.
In Victoria or Port Philip. —Mount Alexander, otherwise called
Mount Byng, at which the largest quantities of gold have been
found. Ballarat, in the same region.
The diggings are thus confined to New South Wales and Victoria,
though it is not improbable that gold may be discovered elsewhere.
The precious metal is found in connection with quartz and slate,
and for the most part in smaller or larger pieces, which have been
washed down from the rocky heights into the beds of the rivers
and alluvial plains. Very commonly the gold is found between
strata of clay slate, into which it has been swept by torrents.
Small lumps, called ‘nuggets,’ are thus discovered in a remark-
ably pure state. Occasionally, the gold is found on the surface of
the ground; but the usual practice is to explore by digging in
holes. The rubbish dug up sometimes offers sparkling nuggets to
the sight, and these are at once seized and laid aside. Usually,
however, the rubbish requires a kind of sifting and washing in a
rocker or cradle, by which the dirt is cleared away. Some who
work on a small scale, employ only a pan for shaking and rinsing
a shovelful of earth. The employment in either case is toilsome
and precarious. One writer, who has been an eye-witness, mentions
116


that ‘ breaking stones by the road-side in England as gentlemanly
in comparison with it.’ The only difference we suppose is,
that the pursuit of the gold-digger has the quality of adventure
strongly tinctured with hope.
The most practical and useful book yet produced on this
subject, entitled the Gold Digger in Australia (W. S. Orr & Co.,
London), may be consulted for a variety of information as to
the steps to be taken by persons in search of gold. The writer,
who seems to speak from experience, states, ‘ that the usual way
is for intending diggers to form themselves into small parties, or
companies of about half-a-dozen, and to purchase a cart, horse
and harness, to carry their provisions, tools, clothing, cooking
apparatus, &c., to the gold-tields. But there are many persons
who have not the means of making such purchases. In this case
the diggers engage with a carrier, in Sydney or Melbourne, to
carry at so much per cwt, all their tools, clothing, and provi-
sions, consisting of flour, tea, and sugar. All which they put
under his charge on his dray or wagon, which themselves accom-
pany on foot. By adopting this economical plan, an outlay of
£5 or £6 by each of the party of half-a-dozen, will enable you to
proceed as pilgrims fully equipped to the golden shrine. Hun-
dreds of men, however, proceed thither without either a blanket
or any change of linen, and without tool or a single ounce of
provisions, or one shilling in pocket to buy them. But such reck-
less conduct is little short of insanity. At the diggings, there are
no bowels of compassion; there, every man thinks only of himself;
and that hospitality so prevalent throughout all the rest of these
colonies has not yet been admitted within the precincts of our
gold-fields.’ Other writers similarly recommend parties of four
or six to club together, and work in company. Besides the usual
instruments for digging, stores, and slop-clothing, it is proper to
possess a pair of small scales and weights—the latter to be troy-
weights, in which gold is purchased; that is, 20 dwts. to the
ounce, and 12 ounces to the pound. On account of the preva-
lence of large flies, diggers require to carry green veils to protect
their faces.
The store-keepers, and others on the spot, purchase the gold as
found, but it is much more advantageous to transmit it in pack-
ages to Sydney or Melbourne, to which armed escorts go once a
week. By these escorts, a sealed packet of gold will be carried
at a charge of 1 per cent, on the value. Latterly, the buying of
gold has sprung up into a regular trade; and at the present time,
capitalists are leaving England with quantities of sovereigns,
wherewith to carry on this profitable business.


In the work above quoted, the following instances of good-luch
in digging are presented:—
l At a place called Louisa Creek, situated about fifty miles from
Bathui'st, thirty from Wellington, and twenty from Mudgee, a black
fellow (one of the aborigines), while tending a flock of sheep for his
employer, Dr Kerr, observed a bright yellow speck in a lump of
quartz, of which he broke off a portion with his tomahawk. He had
no sooner done so than the splendid prize was uncovered. Leaving
his flock of sheep there, he started off for home, and disclosed his
discovery to his master, who, as may easily be supposed, lost no time
in saddling his horse, and galloping away for the spot. In a very
short period the doctor carried away three blocks of quartz, con-
taining 106 pounds of pure gold. The largest of the blocks was about
a foot in diameter, and weighed 75 pounds gross; out of this block 60
pounds of pure gold were taken, in lumps of 5 pounds or 6 pounds
each. The whole of the masses was supposed to weigh about 2 cwt.
The pure gold, when separated from the quartz, was weighed by Dr
Kerr at the Union Bank, Bathurst, and was found to contain 106
pounds or £4240 worth. It is but justice to Dr Kerr to add, that he
liberally rewarded his faithful black servant for his frank surrender
of the treasure he had accidentally discovered.
‘ In September last, at Ballarat, in the colony of Victoria, a party
of six men procured in one day £9OO worth of pure gold. There,
also, on the same day, a man dug up a tin dishful of slaty-coloured
clay, when an individual on the adjoining claim offered £5O for the
dishful before it was washed. “No,” said the other; “but you may
have it for £75,” which offer was refused. When the earth was
washed, 32 ounces of pure gold, worth £lOO on the spot, was obtained
from this single tin dishful of slaty clay.
* Two brothers,named Cavanagh, obtained in four weeks 60 pounds’
weight of gold, value £2400. At Ballarat, one young man, named
Stapleton, obtained 20 pounds’ weight in one week in February last;
and other parties from 15 ounces to 20 ounces per day. A party of
four men dug up 30 ounces in one day ; among this gold was one
lump weighing 1 pound. Another parcel, weighing 14* ounces,
consisting chiefly of small pieces and dust, was procured by a
butcher named Lanky, and other four men (his party), in two days.
A man named Murray, and a party of four men, all of them
tee-totallers, who had been at work only ten days, received £165
for the proceeds of their labour. Among the gold they found there
was no piece which weighed more than 3 ounces. A party, headed
by a man of the name of Fitzpatrick, had been a fortnight at work,
and their earnings averaged £4O for each man. The gold which
they procured consisted of lumps, weighing from 8 ounces to 10
ounces, there being very little dust among it. One man, a labourer,
procured about £3OO worth of gold in one day, the largest piece
in which weighed nearly 4 pounds troy. In February last, at
118


Braidwood, one man found in one day 130 ounces of gold, value about
£4OO. One individual, who trespassed on the digging-ground of
Messrs Howard and Clapham, at Bathurst, during their absence, got
in a few hours about £350 worth of gold from among the roots of a
tree. About the same time, a Bathurst blacksmith found in one
day, in a hole, 11 pounds’ weight of gold, or to the value of £440.
And, near the same place, a poor man, one of a party, or company,
consisting of four persons, found in one day upwards of 9 pounds of
gold, 8 pounds of which he found in one spot, and dug out in a few
minutes. He described it as putting him in mind of digging up a
plant of potatoes, there being about one hundred pieces together of
the precious metal. For this one day’s gathering he received £350.
‘ At Louisa Creek (Bathurst district), a man named Brenan found
a lump weighing 341 ounces, which was bought at auction, in Sydney,
by an acquaintance of my own (a Mr Lloyd), for the sum of £1155.
‘Five men from Camden (near Sydney) worked for four weeks on
the Turon lliver; at the end of which time they sold their gold to a
Mr Samuel Thompson for £509, being rather more than £25 a week
to each man.
‘A baker named Smith, from Brickfield Hill, Sydney, left with a
party of seven men early in August last for the Turon, where they
wrought for about six weeks. For several days their earnings
averaged from 12 ounces to 24 ounces per day; and on one day they
took out 93 ounces, or worth £3OB. In the last week they wrought
they got 180 ounces, or to the value of £585; and then they sold
their claim to a Mr Travers for £7OO.
‘At Ballarat, situated about seventy miles from Melbourne, 560
men obtained, in less than one week, £12,000 worth of gold—that is,
their joint earnings averaged upwards of twenty guineas a week for
each man. Surely this is a fair way of estimating the profits of, our
gold-diggers.’
We have selected the following paragraphs from respectable
Australian newspapers, communicating intelligence to December
1851:
‘ THE TURON.
1 Sofala, December 2. —An accident occurred last night at Golden
Point, through the incautious discharge of a pistol, whereby a woman,
seated with an infant in her arms, at her tea in her tent, nearly lost
her life. Several slugs entered her person, which had to be extracted
by the knife, yet hopes are entertained of her recovery.
‘Our population thins, yet trade is generally brisk, and houses
increase and multiply amazingly. Slab huts succumb to weather-
boarded tenements, and brick-yards are already talked of. Gold
abounds more profusely than ever, and the universal watch-word
seems to be, “Advance, Australia.” At Eation Hill, Townend’s
party, consisting of himself, Henry Trump Harris, William Tuttelby,
and Leonard Peglar, yesterday obtained 36 ozs. 12 dwts. in less than
four hours, amongst which was the maiden nugget of the' hill, a
119


beautiful specimen, weighing upwards of 2 ounces, of irregular
formation, and thinly impregnated with quartz. Mr Thomas Wilson’s
claim is an adjoining one, and the average of his daily yield exceeds
10 ounces. Ranger lads rank up closely on the heels of Townend;
and Robinson (the architect’s) sons are keeping the game alive by
their civil engineering. At Big Oakey, in the dry diggings, Page and
Lane last week obtained 27 ounces, whilst their neighbours are all
thriving.’
‘Gwynn’s Point returns a fair remuneration to those who delve
into its banks, and they muster in force. At the Little Wallaby,
tunnelling is carried on to a great extent, and life and limb are
consequently jeopardised. The two poor men upon whom the bank
fell in a few days ago, are progressing favourably, and a handsome
subscription-list testifies how feelingly their fellow-diggers sympathise
with their misfortune. The weather is sultry to a degree scarcely
commensurate with health, and far apart from the requirements
of comfort. Sickness prevails to a great extent, and will probably
extend its influences as the summer season advances.’
‘ Neale's Point , December I.—The bank-diggings opposite the Tipper
Wallaby Rocks are turning out better and better, and I have no
doubt very extensive digging operations will soon be carried on in that
locality. At Thompson’s Point, above Oakey Creek, some of the bank-
claims are splendid ; Mr Campbell has some first-rate ones in that
locality. At the point on this side of Oakey Creek, where Beardy
Joe is at work, the bank-claims are also improving. Mundy Point
is considered to be fast running out. Our point stands in about the
same position as when I last wrote; a party of Frenchmen got a
nugget weighing 5 ozs, 17 dwts., in one of the bank-diggings on
Saturday. We have cool weather for the time of year, for the last
two or three days, and this afternoon a slight shower of rain fell,
which lasted for about ten minutes.’
‘ December 21. —After heavy rains and floods at Summerhill, the
miners said that there was a fresh deposit of gold, and holes which
had been worked out, would pay for being worked a few days
longer. The Rev. W. B. Clarke, in his pamphlet on the gold-diggings,
mentions that in Brazil, after heavy floods, gold is found lying on the
surface of the ground, and among the grass, on the banks of the
rivers. An interesting confirmation of this was exhibited on the
morning after the flood in little Oakey Creek, on the flat above the
Falls. The waters had gone down almost as rapidly as they rose the
day previous, and the banks of the creek on which the water had
flowed, were covered with gold-dust, especially about the highest
water-mark. The miners set to work gathering the scattered
treasure early in the day. A nugget, nearly an ounce weight, was
picked up, and, not to enumerate details, a woman got upwards of an
ounce during the day. Two of my mates, who went there the same
day, picked up several pennyweights in a short time, chiefly round
gold, like shot. This deposit of gold was owing doubtless partly to
the waters having washed away the earthy particles of the tailings
120


and refuse soil, in which there is generally more or less gold, and
leaving the heavy metal behind, but also in some measure to a wash
of gold particles from the sides of the ridges.
* December 22.—The news from the Victoria gold-fields has occa-
sioned some excitement, but the majority of the diggers are
perfectly content to bide the “ good time coming” on the banks of the
Turon. Rumour already speaks of a gold-field of unsurpassable
richness having been discovered some eight miles from Sofala in
the direction of Louisa Creek. The gold is represented as being
found there in irregularly-shaped nuggets about the size of a pistol-
ball. That the return of the Christmasing absentees will be the
prelude to extraordinary discoveries, I entertain not the slightest
doubt.
‘ December 23. —Several parties have commenced sinking about a
mile from Sofala, on the Bathurst road. Numerous claims have
already been marked out, and the indications of the plentiful pre-
sence of the coveted metal are said to be unmistakable. The fine
weather has apparently set in, and the holders of bed-claims are
hopefully looking forward to the commencement of the new year, as
the period from whence to date the realisation of their expectations.’
‘ophir.
‘December I.—Our principal Creek (the Summerhill) is now in
better working order than I have seen it during the last four months;
and from some claims in the bed a large quantity of beautiful lumps
has been extracted, and as usual a few “ elegant extracts” denomi-
nated specimens. A very singularly-formed one was procured near
the Junction last week, somewhat resembling a horse’s ear, weighing
about eight ounces; the concavity is beautifully interspersed with
white quartz. This specimen was purchased by Mr John Jardine,
having been procured by a party of two who had just commenced
digging.
‘ The weather is delightfully warm, and the flies both as numerous
and as troublesome as at the Turon.’
‘ ORANGE.
‘ December I.—A good deal of gold has been purchased here this
last week, all of which had been obtained at the Rock Diggings, or
crossing-place. I saw yesterday about sixty ounces with Mr Peisley,
of a very pure description, and consisting of nuggets from twenty
ounces to that of a pennyweight. Though the number of diggers
at this place is not very great, I believe the majority of them are
doing well, and earning good wages. I know of a party of six who
made their £l2 each last week, and nearly all this in two days.
‘ I have no doubt that after harvest, we will have a great influx of
people to the Mookerawa, Burendong, and the Macquarrie; the
latter especially is much spoken of.’
121


‘the braidwood diggings.
‘ BelVs Creek, Braidwood, 21 st December 1851. —Since my last
communication, fresh diggings have been opened on the flat at the
middle part of this creek, near the boundary of Dr Bell’s purchased
land As to the success of the diggers generally, I have to report
favourably. The lower part of the creek is in a great measure
deserted, on account of the banks liaving been worked out, and the
flooded state of the bed precluding operations for the present.
Between the junction and Bell’s boundary-line are located some
hundreds of persons. All appear to be doing well. Nowlan’s party
got sixteen ounces on Friday, and twenty ounces yesterday. They
have gone to a depth of twenty-five feet, and are compelled to use a
pump. Another party at the junction got thirty-two ounces one day
last week, and have had great, though not such great success since.
The flat I have spoken of as the new diggings, is limited in extent,
and has not as yet had a fair trial. One company took out seventeen
ounces in one day, but they have had hard work and plenty of water.
At Point Perseverance, the lowermost point of the flat, a party,
consisting of Messrs Poison, Hillyard, Carson, dowry, and Short,
opened a claim on Thursday last, and on Friday got down to the
auriferous stratum. After rocking the cradle for two hours and a
half, they procured between six and seven ounces of gold. The vein,
as it is called, appears to be exceedingly rich. Mr Poison took up a
handful from near the top, and found the earth actually yellow with
the precious metal I was over at Major’s Creek on Sunday
last. There is not much doing there, as many of the holes have
been flooded by the recent rains, and the owners, intending to return
to their respective homes at Christmas, do not consider it worth
while to bail out the water till they return. Mr J. J. Martyr, in
conjunction with Mr Wallis, has purchased a number of valuable
claims during the past week: I understand the purchase-money
came to £450 At both diggings, matters are going on very
orderly, and although there is a considerable police force on the
ground, their interference is rarely required. I would mention, before
I close this rambling letter, that many persons are in the' habit of
forwarding gold by private hand, instead of by the government
escort. lam aware of several considerable remittances being made
in this way.’
* Warwick. —There is one party at work at Lord John’s Swamp,
consisting of Messrs Burgoyne and Thompson, and three or four
men, and I am told they are very successful, and sanguine of speedily
proving the existence of large quantities of gold. Mr J. Murray has
a party of four men at work in another locality, but they have as
yet kept the whereabouts a secret. lam informed that they have
every prospect of success, and that the field is of great extent. Mr
Commissioner Eolleston and Mr Moriartypaid a visit to Lord John’s
Swamp, but no diggers were then at work there, consequently no,,
122


licences were issued. Mr Rolleston washed out a small quantity of
soil, and found several scales of gold in different places,’— Moreton
Bay Free Press, December 22.
MOUNT ALEXANDER.
The following letter from a digger at Mount Alexander, dated
January 18, 1852, was sent to ft respectable person in London,
and appeared in the Times , May 20 :
‘ The gold here is generally found in clay, clayey gravel, and in
interstices of slate, &c., at depths varying from the surface to 25 feet.
It is more generally diffused on this ground than it ever was known
in any other part of the world, hence persevering and steady parties
are sure to do well. It is found in patches, or “ pockets,” as it is
termed; and sometimes a party of say three or four will obtain over
50 pounds’ weight in a day. Having a splendid pair of scales, lam
in the constant practice of weighing and subdividing gold for parties,
and have had as much as 20 or 30 pounds brought by one party at a
time. About a fortnight since, I was purchasing gold at £2, 17s. the
ounce; now the price is down, from the quantity thrown into the
market, and I can get it at 50s. per ounce. I have bought it as low
as 455.
‘ Provisions, &c., are at a high rate here: flour, sd. per pound;
ham and butter, 2s. 6d. per pound; oats, 18s. per bushel; slop-boots,
245. per pair; common pitchfork and shovel, 10s. each. These rates
are under those of several stores in the district.
‘ The cattle-owners now want men to look after their sheep. The
price of labour is most enormous ; a man is worth £1 per day.
< The void discovery is ruining the neighbouring colonies, Adelaide,
Van Diemen’s Land, &c., which are fast becoming depopulated.
‘ At night, the sight of the thousand fires around us is very pretty,
and the incessant firing of guns and pistols rather astounding.
Almost every man is armed, and I can assure you the state of the
society requires it, for crime in almost every shape and form is being
perpetrated almost daily.
‘ You may suppose a gold-field a most original sight: at a distance,
it can only be compared to an immense army, encamped in myriads
of tents of all shapes, sizes, and colours. From where I write are
the main diggings in the country: they extend for about ten miles,
and about three weeks since contained from 12,000 to 15,000
persons; besides, there are many other places close at hand, and
gold is still being found at several new places throughout the colony.
To give you an idea of the business I am carrying on, I may tell
you I sent down 26 pounds’ weight of gold, and about £2OO in checks,
per last escort, the proceeds of one week.’
With regard to the quantity of gold which has reached England
from Australia, it shews a much less yield than that of California,
123


though far from insignificant. In the work entitled The. Gold
Digger , already quoted, the author thus sums up the yield of
Australian gold, from Custom-house entries :
‘ The total value of all the gold shipped at Sydney for England up to
the 4th of March last, was £819,953; and I have also ascertained
that the quantity of gold shipped at Melbourne was, up to end of
January last, 303,082 ounces, which, at the then Sydney price—£3, ss.
per ounce—amount to £985,016, or nearly a million sterling, dug
out of the earth in about three months’ time. This is a large accession
to the wealth of such a limited population. From the first time the
gold escort ran, the weekly yield of Mount Alexander Diggings was
never less than 10,000 ounces, or value £32,500. On one occasion
it reached 22,000 ounces; and in two weeks—one trip per week—
in the month of December last, the government escorts brought to
Melbourne, from Mount Alexander and Ballarat, 46,000 ounces, or
to the value of £149,500. After this, owing entirely to the want
of water, the quantity fell off to about 12,000 ounces per week ; but
on the 25th of February last, two cart-loads of gold arrived in
Melbourne from Mount Alexander alone.’
Nothing could be more easy than to fill a volume with letters
and paragraphs of the above nature, for the daily newspapers
abound in them. It is only necessary for us to say, that wMle
there really seems to be no exaggeration in the accounts receipted
as to the vastness of the Australian gold-field, it may be found by
emigrants, that on a calculation of toil, risk, time, and money, it
will be more advantageous for them to apply themselves to ordinary
occupations than to the search for the precious metal. Our
belief, indeed, is, that of all those who actually quit this country
for the diggings, a large proportion will find it their interest to
betake themselves to trading or rural pursuits. Mr Mossman,
the author of a small work on the Gold Diggings, the result of
personal inquiry, takes this calm view of the subject. The
following are his observations: —
‘To the intending emigrant gold-seeker, there are many con-
tingent circumstances which spring up around this field of labour,
which require his most serious consideration. At the best, it is a
precarious occupation, and this barbarous mode of life is of a
retrograde nature in the scale of civilisation. We are speaking
advisedly ; for we believe that most people think of pursuing it for
a temporary period only, and then to resume their former occupa-
tions with a fuller purse than before. We therefore think it judicious to
put suggestions that are reasonable, in juxtaposition with the flatter-
ing announcements of gold being gathered by the hundredweight.
The gold-seeker’s lot is to toil from sunrise to sunset, with little
leisure for meals, and less spare time for intellectual instruction ; to
be wet, and bespattered with mud and sand, without the most ordinary
124


house-comforts to retire to after the labours of the day; and
exposed to the changes of weather, which are keenly felt in the
winter season in the high altitudes of the gold-field. Again, if he is
not a lucky man, what is the recompense for all this privation ? Pro-
bably not so much in the end, after paying heavily for provisions, as
he would obtain at some ordinary employment in the colony, where
he could also exercise any degree of talent or trade he possessed. If
he is an educated man, unaccustomed to hard labour, we counsel
him to weigh the consequences of launching into this wild mode of
life. While his heart throbs with sanguine hopes of success, and he
seems to grasp the lumps of precious metal imagination had pictured,
from the flattering accounts received, he should listen to the advice
of experienced men who have returned with disappointed hopes.
To the uninitiated we say, until you have encountered the first toils
of a bush-life, let the “ old hands ” of the colony monopolise this
occupation —to them it is but ordinary employment. And the greater
the number of those who proceed to the diggings, the better chance
there will be for the labouring emigrant to obtain good wages in the
service of the flockmaster and grazier, together with a life of com-
parative ease, and, what is of more consequence, have the opportunity
of commencing his career in the colonies by a steady and constant
occupation. By resisting the temptations held forth at the gold-
m nes, and assisting the stockholder in this emergency to reap his
h; rvest of wool and tallow, the emigrant will enhance the benefits
to himself as well as his master, and be doing a service to his
adopted country.’
Referring the reader to a previous part of this work for some
general information as to the selection of fields of emigration and
cost of passage to Australia, we may add the following specific
advices, based on careful enquiry. We should recommend
emigrants bound for the diggings to take a passage in a vessel
bound for Melbourne, because it is in the Port Philip district that
gold is most abundantly found. From Melbourne, we understand
public conveyances now regularly set out for Mount Alexander;
therefore, there can be little real difficulty in reaching the centre of
mining operations.
Sailing vessels for Melbourne are now loading in every port of
any consequence ; and from Liverpool, a communication by steam
for high-class passengers is about to come into operation. (See
advertisements of the day.) The best port to sail from is
London. Within the East-India dock, reached by the railway to
Blackwall, there is to be found a large variety of vessels of good
size, fitting up specially for Australia. Should the reader be
unacquainted with a respectable shipping - agent, we would
recommend him to apply to F. Green and Co., 64 Cornhill. The
vessels of this firm we have inspected personally , and for cleanli-
ness, order, neatness, general good management, and dietary,
I 125


we give them the preference beyond all others. A passage by
any of these vessels is a little higher than is ordinarily charged ;
but we feel assured that the difference of a few pounds in
this respect ought not to weigh with parties who look for some
degree of comfort on ship-board. Another respectable firm is that
of Hall, Brothers, 3 Leadenhall Street. The present usual charge
for an intermediate berth is, we believe, twenty-five guineas. For
this sum, a berth is given in a small cabin of temporary wood-
work, containing six beds, with little standing-room. In cabins
of four beds, the charge is three guineas more; and, strange as it
may seem, people of respectable station are fast filling berths of
this class —one evidence among many, of the prevailing excitement
on the subject of the diggings.
In conclusion, it may be added respecting assisted emigration
(noticed at page 9 of present work), that the Colonial Land and
Emigration Commissioners purpose to send at least six large vessels
to Australia every month. The conditions they prescribe for
furnishing a free passage for emigrants are as follow :
‘ The most eligible class of emigrants are married agricultural
labourer's, shepherds, or herdsmen, and women of the working-
class ; and these are taken up to the age of 45 at £1 per head;
between 45 and 50, at £5 per head ; and between 50 and 60 (when
they are comparatively useless to the colony), at £ll per head..
‘ The next best class are married mechanics and artisans, and
these, with their wives, are taken up to 45, at £2; between 45 and
50, at £6 ; and between 50 and 60, at £l4. The children of both
these classes, under 14, pay 10s. a head.
‘ But single men, if accompanying their parents, are required to
pay £2 a head; and if not accompanying their parents, £3 a head;
and of the latter very few are taken, both because they are the most
likely at once to resort to the gold-fields, and because there is
already so great an excess of males in Australia, and the unassisted
emigration is so certain to add to that excess, that it becomes a
matter of great importance to avoid, as much as possible, anything
which would increase the disparity. Families with more than four
children under 12 are also considered ineligible, both because a
number of young children interferes with the engagements of their
parents in the colony, and because their presence on ship-board
tends to engender sickness and increase mortality.’
Application for assistance on these terms should be made to
J. Walcott, Esq., Secretary to the Emigration Board, 9 Park
Street, Westminster.
126


AUSTRALIAN GOLD MINES.
We add the following notice respecting the imports of
Australian gold and emigration movements, from the newspapers,
June 26, 1852
‘ Two vessels arrived on the 18th inst. with gold from Port
Philip—the Enchanter , which left Melbourne on the 27th of
February, having on freight 22,988 ounces; and the Northumber-
land, which left on the 3d of March, with 16,900 ounces. The
aggregate value of these imports is nearly £150,000. The latest
news from the gold-fields announced, that eleven Adelaide miners
had brought into Bathurst no less than £22,000 worth of gold;
and a party of four men had deposited 50 pounds’ weight each in
one week in the Bank of Australasia. Emigration to the gold-fields
continued very active, and all the vessels taken up for Melbourne
were filling rapidly. Out of twenty-two vessels advertised for
different ports, no less than fifteen were for Melbourne.
‘ From Melbourne, Port Philip, the advices extend to the 3d
of March. The city is represented to be overcrowded with
strangers of all kinds, who are arriving at the rate of 2000 persons
per week, and the new-comers were compelled to erect tents on
the banks of the river. About 40,000 persons were assembled at
the Mount Alexander Diggings, and the traffic from thence to the
city is stated to be enormous; so much so, as to cause serious
apprehensions lest it should destroy the road entirely. About
forty to fifty drays per day were required to supply food to the
miners, and therefore any stoppage of the traffic would prove a
very serious matter. The price of gold had declined from 635. to
60s. per ounce, and the tendency was downwards, as in conse-
quence of the news that the Anglo-Australian Bank were about
to become purchasers of gold, sellers had refrained from operating.
The receipts of gold for the week ending the 28th of February, had
been 21,916 ounces, which, with previous exports and subsequent
shipments, gives a total of 457,149 ounces, valued in the colony
at £1,371,447, estimated at 60s. per ounce, but equal to £1,828,596
in the London market. English manufactured goods were in
demand, especially boots, shoes, saddlery, and slops.
‘ It is satisfactory to learn that all the wheat and other crops in
the colony of South Australia have been gathered, and even the
farmers who had been tempted to leave for the gold-fields had
taken the precaution to sow, or had made preparations for sowing
their fields at the proper season. The local government had
taken steps to open up the Overland route from Adelaide to
Mount Alexander, a distance of 400 miles, and in a short time a
safe and practicable road would be established for both horse and
foot passengers.
127


‘ The Great Britain steam-ship having established her character
for speed and efficiency, by her voyage to New York and back,
will take her departure for Melbourne, Port Philip, on the 21st
of August. A new line of screw-steamers from Liverpool to
Australia via the Cape of Good Hope, is also just advertised, to
commence on the Ist of August. On the 7th of August, the
Peninsular and Oriental Company will also despatch their new
steam-ship Formosa for Sydney and Port Philip.’
Van Diemen’s Land, July I.—While gold in considerable
quantities continues to arrive from Melbourne, accounts have
been received from Launceston direct, to the 10th of March
inclusive, which confirm the report of gold having been discovered
within the colony, but in such small portions that it would not
pay for the labour required to obtain it.
3 1508 01512925 2


W. & R. CHAMBERS’S MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS CONTINUED.
CHAMBERS’S LIBRARY FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.
This series, which embraces Moral and Religions Tales, History, Poetry, and
Subjects of General Information, now consists of the following Volumes, price One
Shilling each
Orlandino, a Tale, by Miss Edgeworth.
The Little Robinson, and Other Tales.
Uncle Sam’s Money-Box, by Mrs Hall.
Self-Denial, Jacopo, and Other Tales.
Truth and Trust.
Alfred in India, or Scenes in Hindoostan.
Moral Courage, and Other Tales.
Clever Boys, and Other Stories.
A Tale of Old England, by Thomas Miller.
Grandmamma's Pockets, by Mrs Hall.
History of France, by Leitch Ritchie.
True Heroism, and Other Stories.
Fireside Amusements.
The Steadfast Gabriel, by Mary Howitt.
The Whisperer, by Mrs Hall.
Duty and Affection, a Tale.
History of England, by Frederica Rowan.
The Swan’s Egg, by Mrs Hall.
History of Scotland, by Frederica Rowan.
Poems for Young People.
This Series is now complete, in Twenty Volumes,
CYCLOPAEDIA OF ENGLISH LITERATURE.
A Critical and Biographical History of English Writers in all departments of
Literature, illustrated by specimens of their writings;
Forming two handsome volumes, price 14 s. cloth.
CHAMBERS’S MISCELLANY
OF USEFUL AND ENTERTAINING TRACTS.
In twenty volumes, at Is. each, done up in fancy boards; or in ten volumes
cloth boards, at 2s. each.
This work will be found adapted for libraries in the army and navy, hospitals,
prisons, schools, and other establishments. All the Tracts continue to be sold
separately, at a halfpenny or penny each, according to size.
WORKS BY ROBERT CHAMBERS.
TRADITIONS OF EDINBURGH. New Edition. 45.
HISTORY OF THE REBELLION OF 1745-46. 4s.
POPULAR RHYMES OF SCOTLAND, Select Original Poems. 4s.
ESSAYS. 4 vols. 16s.
••• The above may be had, as a series, in seven vols., with Vignette Titles. 284.
ANCIENT SEA-MARGINS, as illustrative of Changes of the Relative Level
of Sea and Land. With Map and numerous Wood-Engravings. 94,
COMMERCIAL TABLES;
Consisting of Reckoning, Interest, Annuity, Money, Weights, Measures, and other
Tables; and forming a convenient Manual for the Warehouse and Counting-Room.
Price 34. half-bound.
ATLAS FOR THE PEOPLE;
Consisting of thirty-four quarto maps, coloured in outline | an Introduction descrip-
tive of the physical and political features of the globe; and a Consulting Index.
Price 124. 6 d. cloth boards..
COOKERY AND DOMESTIC ECONOMY,
FOR YOUNG HOUSEWIVES.
In one small volume, neatly bound in cloth, price Is. 6d.
CHAMBERS’S PEOPLE’S EDITIONS.
A series of Original, Translated, and Selected Works, printed in double columns
Bvo, and, from their cheapness, adapted for the use of the less opulent classes of the
community.


EMIGRANT’S MANUAL
~r. •
This work, which has been carefully prepared
Public Documents and
s of information, will
; e following Fields of
embrace A<
Emigration
AUSTRALIA.
NEW ZEALAND, CAPE of GOOD HOPE,
and PORT NATAL.
AMERICA.
A GENERAL DISSERTATION, containing
Miscellaneous Information, and Advice, to'
intending Emigrants.
G x to
*
