

3r&lE'V\ JOHIT MACG-OWAIT.
SHEWING
HOW THE CHTJECH TREATED THE FOUNDERS OF METHODISM.
Extract from Wesley’s Works, Vol. 1.
BY THE
“ I have been drawing up a short state of the case between the clergy and us.
1. About seven years since we began preaching inward, present salvation, as attainable
by faith alone.
2. For preaching this doctrine, we were forbidden to preach in the churches.
3. W e then preached in private houses, as occasion offered : and when the houses could
not contain the people, in the open air.
4 For this many of the clergy preached or printed against us, as both heretics and
schismatics.
6. We were represented, both from the pulpit and the press, as introdncing Popery,
raising sedition, practising both against Church and State
9. But now several of the Bishops began to speak against us. either in conversation, or
in public.
10. On this encouragement, several of the clergy stirred up the people to treat us as
outlaws or mad dogs.
11. The people did so, both in Staffordshire, Cornwall, and many other pi ices.”
MAITLAND :
ROBERT BLAIR, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,




m
f $ • ** ■ t *i|i \ ;.-, v *
PREFACE :
TO THE CANDID READER.
You must know, my friend, that T am a gentleman m the country, and by craft a
Shaver of very considerable scope; notwithstanding, I have turned preacher of late,
and seem to be pretty successful at my preachment, as the sale of this sermon will
testify I have been a great mm for the news, as we Shavers commonly are and
among other papers, I usually took in the St. James’s Chronicle ; a paper that is filled
in all the four corners : but if you ask. with what 1 on my word, I must refer you to
people of greater penetration Well, I paid and L read to no purpose for a long while;
till at lasi I chanced to ’spy, ‘ An Extract of a Letter from Oxford, and I wot it
P 1 iTtol (Tus 'h ow that Six young men mere expelled the University, for holding Met ha.
disticnl tenet;, and for praying, reading, and exyounding tne Scriptures in a private house.
Well thought I, that may work for the good of tne church : but then I did not so
much approve of the principal crime of those caded Methodists, being said to be reading
and expounding the Scriptures &c, Thought I, that is going somewhat too far
Could they find nothing worse against them! Could not they have pioycd them
drunkards ? or, made it evident that they were given to wenching’-(things very
common in some places.) Or could they not have convicted the young fellows of
having reviled the miracles of Christ and ot Moses, that their expulsion might appear
the more eligible ? , ..
Not long after this. I happened to see another account from Otford, wrote by the
Rev. Dr. Oxoniensis ; and that account made me resolve upon something. *or he tells
us that one of the six was formerly a publican ; another had been a blacksmith ; a
third, a barber-, and a fourth had been a teacher in a school, under
Well you must know’, my grandfather was a publican ; ray uncle, a blacksmith, 1
mvself am a shaver, which is, by interpretation, a barber ; and my eldest son, a pro-
mising lad, is designed for a schoolmaster, Therefore, seeing the honours of our
family cast down into the puddle, by the arrogance of Oxonian priests, I began to
grow surly upon it, but did not yet think of preaching. What brought me to that,
was finding, from the learned Dr. Oxonieusis, that those young men had preached
without orders-then, thought I, I will even have a tiial at it myself. Well, you must
know we have a good sort of a fellow to our parson ; a gentleman, who loves his
bottle and his friend, if it was for a night together ; and there is never a youth in all
the parish who will sing a merrier catch, nor tell a prettier story <hau himself, for he
is what ye may call, a merry parson. With him lam pretty lamilar, and I thought
I would even borrow his Sunday’s style, and his orthodox plan ; knowing him to be
a true churchman . and I would try what I could do at preaching But I had certain-
ly been disappointed in an audience, if an happy imagination had not befriended me ,
but no sooner had I bestirred my imagination, than I was wafted from Clar/ej.
common to the great hall at 0 d, before the V—e C r, and the Heads of Houses,
to whom, after I had mounted the rostrum with the usual formality, I preached the
following sermon, the whole world being supposed hearers.
Concering which sermon, 1 would have it observed r ~
1 That 1 pretend not to justify any parts of the conduct of the Methodists, besides
praying to God. reading, expounding the Sc.iptures. and singing of hymns, Ac.
2. That I censure none of the clergy, but such as are against praying, reading, and
expounding the Scriptures, and singing hymns.
3. That whoever this coat is found to fit, 1 would have the gentlemen put it on,
and wear it as his own; assuring himself that it was made for him, and that, though a
Shaver, lam his Tailor. . , . , ■ ...
4 That perhaps, iu gratitude for my great pains, and the new hints given in this
sermon, which may cast a light upon ecclesiastical history, the V-e C r, and
Heads of Houses, may present me to some good benefice. And tbey may depend upon
it, that 1 shall shave the parishioners as handsomely as any of them.


Thus, reader. I have told you all about it; aud have only to add, that after I had,
at leisure hours, wrote my sermon fairly out, I carried it to a bookseller, expecting
that he would be as fond of it as I was myself; which, I believe, is a case very common
w h us authors : but he drew up his shoulders, looked sour upon it, and said, he
feared it was too coarse for this polite age. 1 assured him that the style .vas quite
clerical, being borrowed from the parish-priest, and what he might hear in many
pulpits, if he would only travel for it ; but he, being of the saving order, and not
over fit for travelling in deep roads, agreed to take my word rather than be at the
expence and trouble of seeking farther proof; so it was sent to the press, to furnish
you, my friend, with half an hour’s entertainment, and please
Your humble Servant,
THE SHAVER.


THE SHAYER: A SERMON, ETC.
YT avtng the honour of addressing so learned a body, with bands so
A white, gowns so black, and caps so orthodox, I take the liberty
of striking a little from the common road of preaching; and, as this
is a singular occasion, I shall make free with a singular text.
You know, my beloved, it is the way of most preachers to choose
some passage of Scripture for their text, which, having distinctly read
twice over, you hear no more of the Bible till the sermon is finished ;
but are entertained with such a lecture as you may find in a newspaper,
price threepence—But I have the honour of departing a little from this
general rule, and shall be the first who takes his text from a newspaper,
and illustrates his doctrine by Scripture history ; and having broken
the ice, as we used to say, I expect to have many ingenious followers.
You will find our text in the St. James’s Chronicle for Thursday,
March 17, 1763, No. 1099, printed by Henry Baldwin, at the Printing
Office, White Friars, Fleet-street ; wherein, if you will pull your news-
papers out of your pockets, you may read with me the following
paragraph :
‘ Extract of a Letter from Oxford.
‘ On Friday last, six Students, belonging to Edmund Hall, were
‘ expelled the University, after an hearing of several hours before
*Mr. Vice-Chancellor, and some of the Heads of Houses, for holding
‘ Methodistical Tenets, and taking upon them to pray, read, and ex-
* pound the Scriptures, and singing hymns in a private house. The
‘ of the —*>-, defended their doctrines from the thirty-nine
‘Articles of the established church, and spoke in the highest terms
* of the piety and exemplariness of their lives ; but his motion w ; as
‘ over-ruled, and sentence pronounced against them. Dr. , one
‘of the Heads of Houses present, observed, that, as these six gentle-
‘ men were expelled for having too much religion, it would be very
* proper to inquire into the conduct of some who had too little; and
‘ Mr. was heard to tell their chief accuser, that the University
‘was much obliged to him for his good work/
Our text is indeed somewhat long; but then, my beloved, we have
the more matter to work upon : and you know this is a day in which
invention is not very brisk, especially among the gentlemen clergy. But,
We proceed to prosecute our subject after the old orthodox plan;
namely,
I. To go over our text, by way of explication.
11. Deduce a notable point of doctrine from it; viz. That this act
of the V—e C r, and the Heads of Houses, is defensible from the
conduct of the clergy, in all ages and in all countries.


111. Conclude with a special application.
I. Explain our text. In doing which, I must divide it into very
small parcels, even as the skilful surgeon does the flesh of a hanged
malefactor, when he dissects an organ. And in the first place,
j Extract of a Letter from Oxford.
This Oxford, my beloved, is a city in the West of England, notable
for a great University, i. e. a place for learning; and it would do you
good to see the numbers of hopeful young gentlemen, who come from
all parts of England, in pursuit of learning; insomuch, that all the
colleges are frequently crowded. But you will say, What do they
learn ? To which I answer in the negative, as being much easier than
the affirmative; for it appears from our text, that there are some things
which they do not learn.
(1.) Praying:—l mean, they do not, in common, learn to pray to
God. It seems this is no part of the approved exercises of the students
in that University; for, says our text, Six young gentlemen were ex-
pelled the University for praying. From whence we may draw this
inference; namely, That if the Vice-Chancellor, and the Heads of
Houses, expelled these six offenders for praying to God, it is natural
to suppose, that they are not guilty of that crime themselves; otherwise,
they would fall under that reproof, Rom. ii. 1.
(2.) To read and expound the Scripture is another thing which seems
to be there prohibited. Whether Rochester's Poems, Tristram Shandy,
The Minor, and such books, are esteemed orthodox, and therefore
tolerated, I pretend not to say; but one thing is clear from the text,
That reading and expounding the Scriptures is against the Oxonian
law; for six young gentlemen were expelled the University for reading
and expounding the Scriptures.
(3.) Singing of hymns is another thing which they do not learn ;
this is also clear from the words. By singing of hymns, I mean,
praising of God for blessings received, according to Col. iii. 16. ‘ Let
* the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom ; teaching and
'admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns and spiritual songs;
* singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.' But singing of psalms
and hymns, and spiritual songs, cannot be connived at in the University
by the Heads of Houses; for six young men were expelled the University
for singing of hymns.
Note. This was an extract of a letter from Oxford ; which shews
that there be some people there w r ho can write, notwithstanding all the
reflections that have been cast upon them ; and that, although reading
is dangerous there, yet an Oxonian may write with impunity.
11. Last Friday. —The better day, the better deed. Friday, you
know, is a fast-day; on which it was fittest to go about a work of this
importance, when the judgment was not fettered with bodily grossness,
but purged by an empty belly.


Last Friday. —lt was not a thing that happened in the dark ages of
Monkish ignorance, but what has happened in this enlightened age oj
Christianity. It was not when the University was tied hand and
foot by Popish prejudices, and the Heads of Houses were obliged to
submit to their betters; but it was last Friday, the act and deed of
Protestant Divines.
111. Six Students! —What a miracle was it, my beloved, that out
of so many hundreds of students as are at Oxford, only six should be
found guilty of praying, reading, and expounding the Scriptures !
This shews the faithfulness of their vigilant tutors, in guarding them
against such pernicious practices. Now, from this, observe,
1. That there were but six students of all the University, who could
be detected in those evils of praying, &c., much to the honour of that
learned body.
2. That those six being expelled—now there are none left in all the
colleges, who take upon them to pray, read, and expound the Scriptures ;
therefore, gentlemen may with safety send their sons to that fountain
of learning without fearing that they will become religious; there being
none left now to ensnare them.
IV. They all belonged to Edmund Hall. —lt seems they loved to be
together; from whence it may be gathered, that they loved one another;
a fault which the heathens accused the Christians of old with, but from
which mankind in general are now pretty free. It appears as if this
Edmund Hall was the only place at Oxford in which praying people
were to be found. But it is hoped that the Governors at that Hall
will be mulct for their carelessness in suffering the students to read the
Bible and to enquire after religion, seeing it is contrary to the sense of
this University.
V. Were expelled the University—D* prived of the rights and privi-
leges of the king’s loving subjects ; or, as the word signifies, they were
drove out, forced away, and banished from the University. This
religious act was performed by the Vice-Chancellor, after an hearing
of several hours. I remember when bishop Hooper was sent for by
queen Mary, the pious bishop of London and my Lord-Chancellor, the
guides of her conscience, being determined to have him burnt, they
thought to make a shew of justice by giving him an hearing, withal
resolving not to swerve from their bloody design. So, in like manner,
our venerable tutors were determined not to suffer praying persons to
breathe the University air; yet being tied to form, they would give
them an hearing.
An hearing oj several hours. —Ah! my beloved, ye may see how
remarkably the Scriptures are fulfilled in that learned body of divines,
where it says, ‘ Hear ye indeed, but understand not; see ye indeed,
* but perceive not,’
VI. We come to the crime for which they were expelled the Univer-
sity; and I wot it was an heinous crime indeed. r lhis would appear
without illustrating it, from the character of the expellers; namely,


Mr. Vice-Chancellor, and the Heads of Houses. But, as I love to
remove every hillock out of the way for your better information, I shall
explain it. What was their crime then, my beloved, think you ? Was
it drinking? No, no; it was not drinking; for they were very tem-
perate. Was it for whoring then, the common practice of many
students? No, it was not for whoring neither; for their lives are said
to have been very exemplary. I wish, my beloved, it had been no
worse. But what was it then ? Was it swearing and fighting, and
abusing their fellow students? No; for they shunned the other
students, as a wise man will shun an attorney. —Thus much may be
gathered from our text, which intimates, that they met together among
themselves. But it was praying : that , ray beloved, was one part of their
crime.—Six young men were expelled the University for praying. For
Mr. V--e C r, and the Heads of Houses, will suffer no praying
people to continue in the University.
Heading and expounding the Scripture was another part of the crime;
but what, in the name of the Pope, can students have to do with the
Scriptures ? What a pity it is that the Bible is not locked up in the
Vatican ! But letting that pass, we find that learning to expound the
Scriptures, is no part of the employment of the students:—six young
men being expelled the University for reading and expounding the
Scriptures.
What added to their guilt was, that they carried their religion to a
private house. But what can private people have to do with religion ?
Ought not they to do as their forefathers did ; namely, give up their
consciences and understandings to the guidance of their venerable
priests ? Is it not enough that gentlemen in black know and under-
stand religion, but every private person must be dabbling in it,
contrary to the sense of this University ? I wot, my beloved, that the
clergy cannot thrive as they do, if every private house must become a
worshipping temple; but it is thought there is little reason to fear this,
seeing our text informs us, that the doctors of the University are de-
termined to do what they can to prevent it; for six young men were
expelled the University, fur being religious in a private house.
VII. Another part of their crime was, that they held Mcthodistical
tenets. The name Methodist, my beloved, is a cramp word, gathered
out of old books, by men of reverence and learning, and applied to such
who pray, read, expound the Scriptures, and sing hymns in private
houses—a people never to be tolerated by the clergy. You’ll observe
that this same hard word which the nation has long rung with, first of
all was given to the sons of Esculapius, as a name of honour, and about
thirty years ago was, by learned men, raised up, as the witch of Endor
(who seems to have been a clergywoman too) raised the ghost of old
Samuel.
Those same sons of Esculapius were physicians, surgeons, and
apothecaries in their day; but then they were quite immethodical, like
the greater part of the old women in black prunella and white cambric.


For instance, they had not the method of wearing large wigs, gold-
headed canes, and of wheeling about the streets in their chariots. And
with respect to their physic and surgery, they were guided chiefly by
the dictates of nature, without the abstruse methods of art. At last,
there arose a great man, and his name was Galen , a mighty man for
dissecting of apes; tor it ought to be observed, that in his days, in
Pagan lands, there were very few criminals who deserved death, and
fewer still who were given to the surgeons. Well, what should he do,
think you ? Why, my beloved, being blessed with better stars at his
nativity than his predecessors, he took their confused and immethodical
practices, and reduced them into method i.e. form and order. Well, this
great man being principal of the College of Physicians, he taught his pu-
pils to observe orderly rules, atherwise method, from whence his disciples
were in honour called Methodists. So much for learning,now for doctrine.
Then, my beloved, the case stands thus : Amongst the clergy, there
always have been a great number who did not love praying, singing of
hymns, reading and expounding the Scriptures; the like may be said
of the students. What they aimed at, was a good living without much
work; and as one in a certain place says, Those men care not if the
devil take the flock, provided they have but the fleece. —On the other
hand, there have been some who loved to pray, to sing hymns, to read
and expound the Scriptures; who, if they where not permitted to do
it in public houses or churches, would do it in private houses, to the
no small disgrace of the other gentlemen. Well, my beloved, these
are they who have been called Methodists, fanatics, and enthusiasts.
Now a word or two about their tenets, and then I dismiss this head :
for really their tenets, being distructive of priestcraft, must by no
means be encouraged.
First, and foremost, they think that a man ought to attest no
article of faith, but what he believes to be true.
1. They think that a man ought not to profess to my Lord Bishop,
that he believes all the thirty-nine articles of the established church to
he the true faith of the gospel, when he secretly believes in his heart
that they are false and methodistical.
3. They think that a man should not profess to his lordship, that
he his moved by the Holy Ghost to desire the office of a deacon, when
he is, in fact moved with the hopes of a benefice, and considers it in
his heart as a delusion and enthusiasm, for any man to pretend to be
moved by the Holy Ghost in these days.
4. They think that after a man has subscribed to the thirty nine
articles, and solemnly sworn that he believes them, that he should not
go and preach doctrines directly opposite to the said articles.
5. They think that no man ought to be permitted to enter the
pulpit, whose life and conversation is dissolute.
These, with a great many tenets besides, equally rediculous to main-
tain, and therefore, though tolerated by the king and parliament, the
Heads of Houses will never endure them m the University.


VIII. The of the——defended their doctrine by the thirty-nine
articles of the established church.
I wot, I fear me much, that this doctor is himself tinctured with
methodistical tenets: for nobody, now-a-day, besides Methodists,
considers these thirty-nine articles of the established church as any test
of doctrine; as for the clergy, it is well known that they are mostly
dissenters from the doctrine of the articles and prayer-book. Ah ! be-
loved, if the truth was known, it would be found that this same doctor
Dixon prays to God, and reads his Bible; or how else should he take
part with those young men, whom the Heads of Houses expelled the
University, for praying, reading, and expounding the Scriptures . ? Besides
he would not have spoken so highly of their piety and the exemplari-
ness of their lives, as the text tells us he did, seeing the sense of the
University was, that their praying, reading, &c. was vicious. I fear,
me, my beloved, that if the Heads of Houses do not keep a good look
out after this same doctor, it will be difficult for them to keep the Uni-
versity clear from such as pray, and read and expound the Scriptures ;
but his motion was over-ruled. What is one Methodist amongst a host
of divines ?
IX. Dr. , one of the Heads of Houses present, observed, that as
these six gentlemen were expelled for having too much religion, it would
be very proper to enquire into the conduct of some who had too little.
From this part of cur text, it appears, that the several crimes alleged
against them, amounted in the aggregate to a being righteous over
much), wich the learned Dr. Trap, of crabbed memory, has very piously
shewn to be an evil, almost unpardonable. According to the Rev. Dr.
Noweßs learned answer to that profane son of our Alma Mater, called
Pietas Oxoniensis, it is evidently much more safe, and less impious, to
ridicule the miracles of Moses and of Christ, than to pray in private
houses without book. The eloquent orator of the University gives a
full account of the case of Mr. W—-—ng, a friend of his oratorship’s,
who was charged upon oath with the above said contempt of the Scrip-
tures, and ridicule of the miracles of Moses and Christ. The proofs
were so point blank against the said Rev. Mr. W. W ng, that his
Reverence could not deny the charge. Well then, what was the issue ?
Was he expelled ? No, my beloved : he was not expelled. Q, Why
was he not expelled ? Ans. His Reverence pleaded his being drunk
when he uttered those contemptful words against the miracles of Moses
and of Christ ; i. e. The Candidate for holy orders was drunk when
he rediculed revealed religion ; and yet he got into orders; and yet ha
continues a member of the University ! There is a vulgar proverb, in-
deed, which says, ( What a man thinks when he is sober, he speaks out
when he is drunk/ Whether this is applicable to parson W ng,
we pretend not to say; but this we are certain of, had the six Metho-
dists ventured to pray to God when they were drunk, they had been
expelled for it when they were sober.


But the sweet-spirited V e C r, received Mr. W——ng’s
penance favourably ; and good reason why, for he was never charged
by any body with the heinous crime of praying to God off book in pri-
vate houses ; or that would have ruffled the V e C r's spirit to
the ejection of parson W—ll—ng.
In the same affair, related by the Rev. Dr. Nowell, it is plain that
private religious assemblies, alias conventicles, are in much less esteem
at Oxford, than tap-houses and taverns: for the six Methodists were
expelled for praying in a conventicle, but the Rev. Mr. W ng could
get drunk in a tap-house, and yet continue a member of the University.
Nor can this be denied, unless the public orator should eat his words;
otherwise shew from good and authentic records, that members of that
learned body do occasionally get drunk within their own peculiar dis-
tricts.
But let us pass on to the absurdity of this doctor's proposals c To
enquire into the conduct of those who had too little religion ;' as if that
should be deemed a crime! Would this doctor have the colleges to
stand empty, think you ? But we learn that this motion was over-
ruled ; the V e C r and Heads of Houses did not think proper
to come into it : from which, after-ages will have a very respectable
idea of the present piety of that learned body.
Thus, my beloved, I have gone through the first part of my plan,
and shall proceed to the second.
11. Namely, to rise a notable point of doctrine from it; which is this,
viz., That the conduct of the Heads of Houses in expelling the six
young men for praying, reading, and expounding the Scriptures, is de-
fensible, from the conduct of the clergy of all ages and countries, what-
soever snarling parsons may say.
To clear this, 1 shall produce four instances : most of which I shall
take out of that old antiquated book, called the Scriptures; a book,
which sets forth the true spirit of the University doctors to the very life.
The first of these instances we have in the book of Daniel, chap, iii.,
wherein some transactions of the doctors of the established church at
Babylon are recorded, concerning which I would make the following notes.
I. That the religion, by law established, was the religion of the
golden image which Nebuchadnezzar, at the request of the clergy, made
and set up in the plains of Dura. A place, my beloved, which, if we
may give credit to travellers, very much resembles the plains of Oxford.
11. The clergy, who you know have always been very fond of a golden
god, would by no means suffer an act of toleration to be passed in favour
of methodists and dissenters ; but on the contrary, got an act of parlia-
ment on their own side, enjoining the strictest uniformity in religion,
and threatening death to all dissenters. It seems this prince was too
easy; and like some of our former princes in England, was so much
afraid of the clergy, that he was obliged to conform, and so espoused
an act of uniformity, which the clergy hoped would bring good grist to
their mill, verse 6.


111. This law established, the clergy were very impatient to have the
subjects of this great king brought to the test; which they thought
best to do by appointing a public feast, on which it is required that
every man and mother's son should fall down before, and worship this
golden god set up by the king, as the tool of the parsons.
IV. That there were four degrees of learned men, whom, I suppose,
dwelt in the University at Babylon. First, there were magicians with
them, the same as doctors of divinity are with us in our Universities here;
secondly, there were astrologers , or men of learned sciences, much the
same with our Masters of Arts; thirdly, there were sorcerers , who, I
suppose, were either Fellows of the College, or Bachelors of Arts
appointed to be tithe gatherers ; and, fourthly, there were Chaldeans or.
Students of their Divinity, and other fine arts . —And,
V. That all those gentry were very vigilant in discovering and in-
forming against dissenteas, verse 8. ( Wherefore at that time certain
* Chaldeans came near and accused the Jews.' That is to say, certain
young Students, being spurred on to it by their tutors, who cared not
to appear in such a dirty affair themselves, and so forth, by which they
appear to have been rather more honorable than the reverend tutor of
E—d Hall
VI. Strict as the law was, there were some who took upon them to
pray to God, like those six young gentlemen who were expelled the
University for praying. But what were they think you ? why truly,
they were dissenters and methodists; for they would not conform to the
Babylonish prayer-book, and other forms of worship by law established,
therefore were dissenters : and they were methodists, if praying to God,
and refusing to pin his faith on the sleeve-of the parson's gown, de-
nominates a man a methodist. But what followed, trow ye ? Why, as
soon as they were found out to be non-conformists, the clergy accused
them of rebellion; and had the king been as fond of burning dissenters,
as their Reverences were, these men had in a trice been executed, with-
out having another chance for their lives. But he was not quite so
fiery, but gave them another trial, and strove to bring them over to the
church by gentleness, intermixed with severity; the gentleness was his,
and the severity belonged to their Reverences. But the methodists
continued obstinate, and at last overcome the parsons. If you'll read
the chapter through, you’ll see the upshot of it, and how the doctors of
the University were confounded, and the dissenters re-admitted to the
king's favour; for God did work for them.
I pass on to the days of Darius, a prince who had a praying noble-
man for his first minister of state, and, for ought I know to the contrary,
he might be first lord of the treasury, as well as chancellor of the empire.
His name was Daniel, and by birth a Jew. Well, my beloved, being
so very great, he was greviously envied by the inferior placemen, though
they kept it secret, and spoke him fair to his face; and he was very
much abused by those who were out of place. If we may judge of


ancient things from what appeaes in ages more modern, we may suppose
that the times took a turn something like the following .
One man cries out against his being a favourite, and two intimate
with the queen, or queen’s mother, as their kinsmen do upon similar
occasions: another complains of his being a foreigner, and a captive, so
highly dignified, whilst the natives were neglected. Perhaps their news-
papers might be stuffed with clamours against the exotic favourite: and
the incensed mob might be taught to cry out, Liberty and Babylon for
evev _but no Jew—no favourite—no captive. Well, my beloved, all
the ins and outs might have fretted themselves to death, without being
able to do any thing against this prime minister, this same Daniel, the
king’s favourite, if they had not applied to the principal clergy, the
Heads of Houses. But I trow, the reverend doctors, the magicians,
the masters of the art of astrology, &c., &c., no sooner embarked in the
popular cause, but they were more than a match for the favourite, who
had fallen by means of their reverences, if the Almighty had had as
little to do with them, as he has to do with the greatest part of the
clergy.
Well, my beloyed, the Heads of Houses, and the disaffected states-
men, met all together, and consulted which was the best way to overturn
the state of this praying favourite. But the conduct of Daniel was so
exemplary, that they knew they should be able to find nothing wrong
in him, unless they could entrap him in matters of religion: therefore,
having* first persuaded the king, that the church was in danger, they
urged°the necessity of a law being made, prohibiting any man’s praying
to God. Well, Darius the king, was not such a novice in politics, but
he knew the necessity of having the clergy on his side; and therefore,
though he could not see into that part of their mysterious divinity, made
the decree according to the plan concerted by that learned body.
But it is thought that he would have strained a point with them, if
he had known that they w ere aiming at the life of his faithful favourite.
But how stiff these bibhsts are ! For this Daniel went on praying to
God, reading and expounding the Scriptures in a private house, notwith-
standing the king had, under the direction of the clergy, ordained
otherwise; this was enough to have provoked the Heads oj Houses to
have expelled him the University, had he belonged to it; but he not
belonging to it, they were obliged to be satisfied with putting him to
death without expelling him.
Now, lest any should object to the clergy having the honour of
devising this scheme, because there is no notice taken of them in the
history, let it be observed, that it w r as never known that many great
men or noblemen were ever given to interfere in religious matters;
statesmen, in all ages, have been wise enough to take up with the
religion which the priests have prescribed to them : therefore, what you
give of honour to any body in this affair, let it be given to the clergy.
And I pass on to make a comparison betwixt that affair and this before


I. They could find no occasion of fault in Daniel ; so it was with the
six young men who were expelled the University, for their lives were
said to be pious and exemplary.
11. They thought they might entrap him in some matters concerning
the law of his God. So likewise these young men, though they were
no whoremasters, no gamblers, no drunkards, no Scripture-revilers, &c.
yet they could be entrapped in matters relating to their God.
111. This same Daniel notwithstanding the penalty denounced m the
edict against any who should take upon them to pray to God, perversely,
rebelliously, and obstinately persisted in his usual apostolical, puiitan-
ical, non-conformistical, and methodistical manner of praying to God
in a private house. Soon, no doubt, but these six young mem knew
it was against the Heads of Houses, &c., that any of the students under
their care should pray to God in a private house, or even pray without
book in a public house; for says our text, Six young men were expelled
the University for praying, reading and expounding the Scriptures in a
private house; yet they persisted in it. . . ,
Lastly, under this head. Daniel, president of the princes, kneeled
upon his knees three times a-day, and prayed and gave thanks before
his God as aforetime. But how will you be able to find such puritanic
conduct among our British noblemen ?—for I wot that a praying
nobleman is pretty near as great a rarity as a white crow upon Malvern
hills. If outward conduct is to determine inward sentiments, it may
be concluded, that most of our people of fashion consider themselves
either as immortal, or as on a level with the beasts, destitute of lational
souls. . .... , ,
The second instance of clerical conduct which gives countenance to
the late act of the Heads of Houses, I shall bring from the clergy of
that famous University at Jerusalem in the days of Christ and his
Apostles. In the established church of Judea, there were articles ot
faith and a canon law, which all the clergy professed to believe, regal’d,
and defend. This confession of faith was first compiled by Moses, the
founder of the church; and afterwards ratified and confirmed by Ezra
and Nehemiah, their two principle reformers ; even as the thirty-nine
articles of the established church were ratified and confirmed by our
English reformers. I know youfil be ready to think that the clergy
deemed it an honour to tread in the steps of those pious reformers ; but
I trow, ray beloved, ye are grately mistaken; for the Heads of Houses
of the at Jerusalem, even did as many others have done
since, make the comandment void to establish their own traditions.
Perhaps you will be ready to startle, like the cows in July, when bit
by the envious fiies, when you hear of an University at Jerusalem :
but I assure you it was there that the doctors ( i.e . teachers) of the law
dwelt, and their law was their divinity. Now where do the neigh-
bouring dogs delight to resort so much as to the place where the
carcase is? Or where shall we see such swarms of reverend doctors
as at the University ? Those pharisees, those lawyers, those scribes, and


those doctors where all gownsmen; but whether they wore the same
uniforms with the gentlemen of Oxford University, my author does not
say. Yet this much may be gathered from the history, that if that
wandering Jew, wha they say has lived ever since the times I am
speaking of, should chance in his travels to call at Oxford, he would
think upon his longevity, from the manners of the men, that it was
old Jerusalem risen again from its ruins, and that the ancient Scribes
and Pharisees, &c., were all risen from the dead. But we will drop
this, and come to the matter in hand, which is, to give a just account
of those clergy, that you may see that the Heads of Houses have not
departed a jot from the rules of their clerical ancestors.
The Jerusalem clergy finding that their living depended upon sub-
scribing the articles given by Moses and the homilies compiled by the
Prophets, they could, for the sake of a venerable reputation, and a
fattish living, or as ye would say, for the good of the church, very readily
subscribe and attest them upon oath, notwithstanding many of them,
called Sadducees, did not believe any thing about them. Now, not to
take any notice of the vulgar opinion, namely, that there are a great
many Sadducees in our Universities, I cannot but observe the weakness
of those who blame such of the clergy who swear to articles they do not
believe, seeing that was practised hy the clergy of the first established
church that was in the world.
About something more than 1700 years since, there arose some dis-
senters, who made a great stir among the people, and brought great
uneasiness upon the clergy. Ido not mean that those were dissenters
from the articles of faith which were of old given to the saints; but
they were dissenters from the clergy, and did not spare to detect their
errors, both in principles and practice; a practice which our modern
methodists are said to be guilty of, to the great concern of the Heads
of Houses.
Those were laymen, not regularly educated at the University, and
who took upon them to preach without receiving authority from the
archbishop of Jerusalem : I think his name was Caiaphas, and I wot,
he was primate of all Judea. Well, those men were not only laymen,
but even the riff-raff of them, even fishermen : note, they were not
attornies, or merchants* clerks ; nor were they chymists, nor were they
apothecaries, but fishermen. And yet they prayed extempore, and yet
they preached, and yet they expounded the Scriptures to the great con-
fusion of the holy trade of priestcraft. The established church was now
thought to be in danger. And how it could be thought so, was some-
thing strange, seeing those praying and preaching dissenters proved
all their doctrines from the articles and homilies given by Moses and
the Prophets, even as our modern methodists prove their doctrine from
the articles and homilies of the church of England ; and the church of
England has been thought in no small danger from these same metho-
dists upon grounds equally substantial. Believe me, my beloved, the
learned, the zealous Doctor Scheverel, was not the first, nor the last,


who was grieved for the church. 13ut he is dead and gone, theretoie X
return to the clergy at Jerusalem ; and ye cannot but remembei how
active they were in procuring the destruction of Jesus Christ, and, when
he was risen from the dead and ascended into glory, they abated nothing
of their zeal for their established church. For no sooner were they
aware of the power of the apostles' doctrine (by the apostles I mean
those who took upon them to pray, read, and expound the Scriptures in
private houses, as you may see in the subsequent parts of the history)
as these six young men who were expelled the University aie said to
have done. Seeing, I say, their extraordinary fervour in preaching,
they cried out against them as persons drunk with new wine, by which
we may understand enthusiasm, Acts ii. 13 Well, my beloved, this is
the very cry of the clergy against all such as preach Jesus and the
resurrection, and from their mouths the vulgar catch the sound; so
with many, a methodist and an enthusiast, a dissenter and a fanatic, are
thought to be synonimous terms. From hence we may learn that a
slander may as well be thrown out in a sermon as in a farce, and will
issue with as good a grace from a pulpit as from a theatre. But no
more of this, because our time draws towards the other end.
It is very remarkable how zealous those gentlemen of the gown, who
aim no higher than a good fat benefice, have always shewed themselves
when the doctrine of Christ in its simplicity hath been preached ; for
why ? Truly, because it lays the axe to the root of the tree of priest-
craft, and throws down the importance of the parson into the dirt—lf
the clergy were all to observ e the rules given by Christ to his disciples
in his sermon upon the mount, where would be all their titles, their
riches and grandeur, their coaches, their livery-men, and their plate?
But ye know that these rules are different from this craft, whereby the
parsons get their wealth, as heaven is different from hell. But as
priestcraft is lucrative, it will be sure to find supporters, whilst the
houses have got one Head left upon them.
In Acts v. we find that Feter and the rest of his praying, reading,
and Scripture-expounding brethren, were brought before the Vice-
Chancellor and the Heads of Houses for an hearing, and after an hear-
ing of several hours they took counsel to slay them, v. 33. But there
was one Dr. Gamaliel, the head of a certain house, who sided with them,
and probably proved their doctrine from the articles of the Jewish
church as by law established. I trow this same Doctor Gamaliel was
tinctured with the doctrine they preached, as the principal of Edmund -
Hall, who defended the faith of the six young men who were expelled
the University of Oxford for praying, &c. may be supposed secretly to
have believed in the articles which he once subscribed, though he dare
not now to avow his faith openly.
There is one thing in the account that is something remarkable,
namely, the wise motion of Dr. Gamaliel over-ruled the bloody designs
of the priests; but it was not so at the other University, for although
the principal of Edmund-Hall defended and proved the methodistical


doctrine from the articles of the church, and spoke highly of the piety
and exemplariness of the lives of the young men, his motion was over-
ruled, and the six young men were expelled. As before observed, what
is one methodist among a host of divines ?
Another thing we may take notice of, namely, those ancient doctors
bad a law by which they could put people to death for praying, reading,
and expounding the Scriptures; but our Universities have no such law,
or it is no way doubtful but that the same zeal which will, under a
protestant government, expel the students of the University for praying,
&c. would, for the same reasons, burn offenders at the stake, were they
favoured with a popish King, So that if the Heads of Houses were
less bloody in their designs than their ancestors, it is not to be inputed
to want of good will, but to the protestant restraints which they are
uuder,
Eemarkable was the procedure of the Jews against Stephen, related
Acts vi. 9 ‘Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called
‘ the synagogue of the Libertines, &c disputing with Stephen,’ &c.
This same Stephen was a low churchman, a whig, and a puritan, and
therefore was sure to be opposed in that blinded age. But who were
they, my beloved, that here are said to have risen against Stephen ?
Not bargemen, iinkboys, lamplighters, and Irish chairmen; but gentle-
men of the synagogue. Certain q f the synagogue , i. e. devout men of the
established church ; their Lauds, their Calamys, and their
But to what synagogue did they belong, think you P Why they belonged
to the synagogue of the libertines. Was ever one egg more like another
than ancient things are to modern ? If the gentlemen of the synagogue
of the libertines would have been quiet, Stephen might have gone on
preaching and praying without opposition; but then it would have
spoiled the priests’ trade of getting wealth.
This leads me to enquire wherefore they rose up against him. Was
he a drunkard, a murderer, or seditious person ? or did he speak re-
proachfully of the miracles of Christ and of Moses ? No, none of all*
these were alledged against him. But the grand cause of their umbrage
was, ‘The word of G-od increased, and then numbers of his disciples
* increased.* whereby the people forsook their old libertine pastors,
insomuch that the parish synagogues, in many places, were almost wholly
forsaken. Exactly alike again ■ Stephen you must know, was a great
ringleader of that sect that turned the world up-side down; he was full
of faith and power, performing many notable miracles , to the grief of the
gentlemen belonging to the libertines ; therefore they thought it best to
dispatch him out of the way, for the safety of the church.
It would be endless, my beloved, to point out all the instances in which
the Jewish and the clergy agree; I shall therefore leave them to
another occasion, and shall pass on to another very famous church in
that part of the world, and after that I shall come near home, within
our own ken. And,
111. This famous church was that of Diana at Ephesus : and I wot in
this church there was many a good living in the gift of the University;
and I trow, that the Heads of Honses were very careful that none should
enjoy one of them unless he was well known to be a true son of the


church, that is to say, a promoter of the sale of the shrines of Diana and
a worshipper of the image that fell down from Jupiter.
This Diana was, in her day, a lady remarkable for hunting of stags,
and ever since, her clergy have been as remarkable for the hunting of
(not stags, but) a good benefice. Now, my beloved, this same huntress
was the personage worshipped by most people of Asia, and she had many,
very many clergy, who adored her for the sake of gain ; for by this craft
we have our wealth, s>y they. A language not yet practically laid aside.
There was a famous University for the training up of young gentlemen
in the holy craft of making shrines for the goddess ; and a lucrative craft
they found it, my beloved, for they had it in their power to sell a brazen
shrine for a golden price ; a thing which others besides them practise.
This Univer>ity was at Ephesus, a very populous city, where water
was cheap, but fire very dear; and here were many colleges and
halls for training up of young men in the craft of getting wealth. Every
hall had a head, and over all the Heads of Houses was a Yice-Chancellor,
the Rev. Dr. Demetrius by name. As for praying, reading, and expound-
ing the Scriptures, they meddled not with them, but were, in the highest
degree, intent upon getting wealth.
Well, they carried on this craft for many years, till at last there came
some itinerant preachers to town, who made it their business to pray to
God, to read and expound the Scriptures, and sing hymns in private
houses, contrary to the sense of the University of Ephesus. This was
no small mortification to the clergy, who very well knew, that if real
religion, or praying, reading, and expounding the Scriptures were tolera-
ted, that it would put an end to their lucrative priestcraft, and their
reverences would fall into disgrace. But to prevent such a catastrophe,
the Rev. Dr. Demetrius, Vice-Chancellor, assembled the Heads of
Houses to consult what was best to be done, and it was resolved, nemine
contradicente, to cry out the church was in danger, that under pretence of
saving the church, they might save their own profits. Well, they cried
out, that the church was in danger , that the church was in danger , till they
had sufficiently inflamed the rabble, who have always proved the pillars of
the church, when instigated by the priests ; then they laid hold on the
itinerants, and had thembefore the Heads of Houses, who gave them such
treatment as prayingpeople may expect to meet with from the clergy of
the •. It happened, however, as in a late case, that there was one man
of integrity and honour amongst them, much like the Head of Edmund-
Hall; only with this difference—the one was an attorney, and the other is
a gentleman in holy orders. Well, this attorney, it seems, being town-
clerk of Ephesus, thought that the clergy carried their authority a little
beyond the rules of moderation and decency—a thing by no means uncom-
mon for some gentlemen of the cap and gown. This town-clerk took up
the cause of the itinerants ; and in a spirited, sensible manner, defended
their conduct and tenets ; not from the thirty-nine articles, but from
the articles of natural religion and morality, and spake very highly of
their piety and good behaviour. I cannot but remark, that in this affair
the town-clerk was more successful than the gentleman who pleaded the
cause of the six methodists at Oxford: the former over-ruled the pur-
poses of Diana’s clergy, but the University clergy over-ruled the motion
of the latter, according to our text; for, though he defended their


doctrine from the thirty-nine articles of the established church, and
spoke very highly of the piety and exemplariness of their lives, Ihesesix
young men were expelled ihe University /or pray my, leading and expound-
ing the Scriptures , and for singing hymns in a private house. For why f
Why truly, my beloved because praying, reading and expounding the
Scriptures, is not the craft by which w T e get our wealth. For proof of
this proposition, I refer -you to stubborn facts, namely, that you shall
seldom see a divine, who makes a point of praying readsng, and ex-
pounding the Scriptures, and of singing hymns, either in private or
public houses, who keeps his equipage, and posesseth your fat livings.
I wot, my beloved, that one drone eats more honey than four laborious
bees ; for proof of this, I refer you to the Rev. Dr. Pliny, an author of
approved merit, and a great divine.
But I pass on to the fourth established church, the clergy of which,
in all respects posessed the spirit of University divines, or Heads ot
Houses; and I trow, it is a church of great pretensions, the clergy of
which are as infallible as the most holy mother pope Joan, that lady
who was Christ’s vicar, Peter’s successor, and carried the keys of heaven,
hell, and purgatory, in her pocket, when she was in her prime and her
moon shown at full. I guess by this time, you know that I mean the
good old one, catholic, Roman, infallible, pontifical, universal, mother
church, in the bosom of w'hich our forefathers of the sursingle slept so
snug, wrap about with abbey lands, as with warm blankets. And if X
may speak the sentiments of my sable brethren of the University, and
we wish for the sake of those lands, that we were all safe rolling in her
warm bosom once more. But I will not keep you in suspense about it.
IY. Church, the conduct of whose clergy was so near a-kin to the
conduct of the clergy of ***** In the days of Betsey, the vestal Queen,
the clergy suffered great discontent. For why ? Because praying,
reading; and scripture-expounding people were suffered to live, and were
even tolerated in the university, which was a kind of counterbalance to
the emolument their reverences had enjoyed in the days of Mary, of
scarlet memory; for as soon as this orthodox lady had ascended the
throne, matters took a very agreable turn, and the right reverend
bishops, Bonnor and Gardiner, began to work for the good of the
church. Like truebread doctors, they searched every corner of the land
for matter to work upon; and who should they pitch upon, trow ye,
but those ministers and others who prayed to God, read and expounded
the scriptures, and sung hymns ? For those clergymen were much like
unto others ; they discouraged praying to any besides saints, canonized
in their own church; and as for the scriptures, they found it for their
interest that the sense of them should be concealed. And, no doubt
other people of the same practices have reaons equally ponderous to,
asign for their conduct.
"Who was Cranmer, my beloved ? XVhy truly, though he was primate
of all England, he took upon him to pray, read, and expound the
Scriptures, and as one such, according to the laws of the Trent council
he was expelled the convocation, and burnt to death, as an enemy to the
clergy. Latimer and Ridley, and Hooper and Taylor, and Bradford
and Hunter, and Philpot, &c. &c. were all of them guilty of those
heinous offences of praying, of reading, of expounding the Scriptures,


Thus, beloved, I have with much pleasure gone so far through with
my first proposed plan ; aud from what I have advanced, we may raise
the following remarks ;
1. That the spirit of our doctors has been the same in all ages—a
noble spirit of opposition to methorlistical tenets. The magicians, the
astrologers, the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, the scribes, the pharisees,
the lawyers, the sadducees, and the doctors, and the shrine-makers, and
the inquisitors, and the Roman bishops, and the Vice Chancellors, and
the Heads of Houses, are all in the same religion; namely, to oppose
praying , reading , and expounding the Scriptures.
2. That the state of religion in our land is likely to be soon upon a
very respectable footing, seeing no more than six, out of the vast num-
ber of students at Oxford, took upon them to pray to God, to read and
expound the Scriptures ; so that it is hoped, the many parishes in
England will be likely to have parsons who will let their parishioners
have their own way, and go quietly to hell without disturbing of them.
Whereas, was not care taken to suppress praying people in the Univer-
sity, we should have the nation swarming with them, much to the
detriment of priestcraft.
3. It is observable, that we have found out more fully what four of
the six gentlemen were, ere they set a foot in the University; one was a
publican ; another, a smith ; a third, a barber ; and a fourth, a teacher
under W—-y, as it is written by the Rev. Dr. Oxoniensis, —Gazetteer
12199, April 8, 1768 ; and I wot, my beloved, though my kindred are
professors of such arts, they are held dangerous—therefore must not be
tolerated by the clergy.
First and foremost, the Clergy have suffered much discontent from
the blacksmith ; and whilst the bitterness of the loss of the abbey-lands
belcheth from our stomachs, we prunella gentlemen will never forgive
the blacksmiths. Query, For why? Ans. Because he was a black-
smith’s son, Lord Thomas Cromwell by name, who stripped the church ;
that is to say, the clergy, of those warm, those fat abbey lands, Ho
more blacksmiths, I pray ye now—we’ll have none of them. Therefore,
Mr Y—e C r did well in expelling the man, because he had been
a blacksmith.
2. Another of them had been a publican, i. e. a tax-gatherer; and I
suppose Mr, Y—e C r thought the difference betwixt tax-gather-
ing and tithe-gathering being so very trifling, that alter a young man had
sufficiently learned at home to gather taxes, it was quite needless for him
to come to the University to learn to gather tithes. I wot, my beloved,
that the old grudge betwixt the pharisees and the publicans had not yet
subsided ; for, as the learned Oxoniensis observes, the Y—e C r
expelled a man the University for having been a publican,
3. And in the next place, another had been a barber ; that is to say,
a shaver. His reverence, Dr Howel, public orator of the University,
hath given it as his charitable opinion, that this same barber can make
a very good wig , from whence he lovingly concludes, that the said barber
need not to starve; and from whence I conclude, that he would have
made a very useful member of the University. A good wig says Dr.
Nowel, i. e. a decent artificial covering, for a bald pate; wherefore, it
seems to have been very bad policy to expel so useful a man, at a time


when the Heads of Houses are so bald and weather-beaten themselves,
4 A fourth was a teacher in a school, under W—y : but who or what
this same W—y is, whether an hill, an old abbey, an holy college, or
an oak tree, the accurate Oxoniensis does not say. But this schoolmaster
who taught under it, be it what it will, was justly expelled. For why ?
Because he departed so very far from the rule established among stu-
dents The common rule observed by the hopeful young gentlemen of
the gown, is, before they have so much as learned the first lesson of
themselves, they conclude that they are able to teach others: witness so
many dull parsons. But this man, though he had been accustomed to
teach others, meanly debased himself so far as to receive instructions
from others; but such a mean opinion of one’s self being no way likely
to add weight to the importance of the parson, must not be tolerated.
END OP THE SHAVER.
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER, WEST MAITLAND,


■■' .
• • rVit 1
•* * I
■ •
*»
* * .
■
