

THE " SOMERSETSHIRE "
A Weekly Newspaper,
WRITTEN ON BOARD THE S. S. SOMERSETSHIRE,
ON HER VOYAGE FROM MELBOURNE
TO LONDON 28 TH APRIL TO
9TH JULY, 1870.
PRINTED BY SUBSCRIPTION.
LONDON:
J. TUCK & CO., 6, UNION COURT, OLD BROAD STREET, E.C.\
1870.


THE “SOMERSETSHIRE”
SEA PIE.
• A Weekly Newspaper ,
WRITTEN ON BOARD THE S. S. SOMERSETSHIRE,
ON HER VOYAGE PROM MELBOURNE
TO LONDON, 28TH APRIL TO
9TH JULY, 1870.
PRINTED BY SUBSCRIPTION.
LONDON:
J. TUCK & CO., 6, UNION COURT, OLD BROAD STREET, E.C.
1870.


Any communication respecting this paper may be addressed
to the Editor,
J. W. SEWELL,
Gresham House, London, E.C,


No. I.]
[Friday, May 6, 1870.
The “ Somersetshire ” Sea Pie.
S. S. SOMERSETSHIRE,
2342 Tons Register. 300 Horse Power (nominal.)
Oivners - Money, Wigram, & Sons.
Commander - J. S. Atwood.
Medical Officer - - T. S. Hospord, F.R.C.S.E.
CLate Resident Surgeon, London Hospital), Tottenham.
Chief Officer, J. P. O’Callagham. Second Officer, R.
Ticehurst. Third Officer, J. Fenton. Fourth Officer,
J. Smith. Chief Engineer, W. Miles. Second En-
gineer, T. Don. Third Engineer, G .A. Miles.
Chief Steward, W. Wei: den.
Crew and Officers, 96. Passengers ; First Class, 46.
Second Class, 37. Third. Class, 123. —Total 302,
SALOON PASSENGERS.
Mr. & Mrs. J. W. Sewell.
Miss Peel, 2 Masters, &
Miss Hogarth.
Mr. F. H OPCRAFT.
Mr. C. Edwards.
Mr. W. West.
Mr.&Mrs. Allan Staley
Mr. Mrs. J. Christopher.
Mr. & Mrs. J. Smith &
2 Children.
Mr.Mrs.E.M.LiAscELLEs
Miss Collins, Nephew,
and Servant.
Mr. Edward Simmons.
Mr. Mrs. & MlssWarley.
Mr. W. Spain & Servant.
Mr. C. Wight.
Mrs. E. Simms.
Mr. H. PINNIGER.
Mr. D. H4MMOND.
Mr. D. MThail.
Mr. and Mrs. Hooper.
Mr. F. Jackson.
Mr. and Miss Barker.
Mr. Disher.
Mr. A. Howden.
Mr. J. E. Ellis.
Mr. S. Mayer.
Mr. T.H. Broderick, Jun
Mr. J. A. Hardy.
Mr. J. Sniders.
Mr. D. Monro.
Mr. J. Brook.
Dr. Barry.
Capt. Terkelsen.
B 2


TO OUR READERS.
Ship newspapers have now become such a recognised institu-
tion, that as far as the majority of our passengers is concerned
it is, perhaps, unncessary to do more on this occasion than
simply to announce the fact of the publication of the present
one. There may, however, be some on board to whom such a
periodical is a novelty, and to these we would explain that our
paper is projected with the sole object of affording amusement,
and in some measure assisting to beguile the monotony of
a long sea voyage. Shut out as we are from the world at
large, and forming a little community by ourselves, we are
solely dependent upon our own resources for passing the time,
anything, therefore, that will cause the hours to fly more
swiftly, will be gladly hailed; and even the incidents of our
daily life, trivial though they may be, will, if duly chronicled,
assume an importance which they would not otherwise possess.
Our paper will record all matters of general interest, such as
our daily progress, the medical report as to the health of our
passengers, &c. ; and will contain, in addition, a variety of
original articles in prose and verse, enigmas, conundrums,
letters, and other matters too numerous to specify.
To find a title for a book is in these days almost as difficult
as to write a volume, and the aim of the present generation
of authors seems to be to choose a title utterly remote
from the contents of their work. Now this accusation cannot
be brought against our Journal; the name “Sea Pie” expresses
exactly what the reader may expect —like that toothsome pro-
duction of the culinary art, our paper will contain the succulent
meat, the light and easily digested fish, and the, stop! we
were going to say fowl, but nothing of this kind will be
admitted to our columns, so we must pass on to the
vegetables, the whole forming a delicious compound, flavoured
and seasoned with a quantum suff. of spice and attic salt.
This we can recommend with confidence, to the aged and the


young, the youth and the maiden. Sufferers from sea-sickness
will find it the best antidote, whilst the more robust will, by
its use, acquire an increased appetite.
We would particularly impress upon the minds of our
readers that the future prosperity, nay the very existence of
our enterprise will depend upon the manner in which it is
supported. It must not be left to its originators alone to
find week after week matter for its columns; we therefore
appeal to all classes of passengers to come forward and aid
us in our task. Some have already done so, but if the Journal
is not to follow the fate of the unfortunate Platypus, a
constant supply must be kept up.
With these observations we launch our little bark, trusting
that both it and our ship may meet with favouring winds and
calm seas, and that both may escape the perils of the voyage
and ultimately arrive safely in port.
OUR PROGRESS.
April ay. - Left Sandridge Railway Pier at one p.m.,
steamed a short distance down the bay, where we finally
anchored for the night.
April a 8 passengers ordered on board not later than
eleven a.m., when anchor was weighed, steamed to the Heads,
where we again anchored for about an hour, owing to the
unsettled appearance of the weather. Got to sea by dark,
discharging pilot about seven p.m.
April 39. —Still under steam, sea very calm, passed Wilson’s
promontory about eight a.m., sighted Flinder’s Island before
dark, took up screw at four p.m. Breeze moderate.
April 30. —Wind nearly on the beam. Vessel close hauled.
Weather squally. Most of the passengers suffering from
sea-sickness.
May x.—Still close hauled. Ladies not yet under weigh,
other passengers badly ballasted.
May 3. —Fine bracing morning, very squally afternoon.
Rice pudding still at a premium.


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Temp.
April 29.
...
13 1'Knots
„ 30-
40.30 s.
152.11 E.
247 „
6°
May 1.
41.49 s.
156.4 E.
192 „
49
a.
44.7 s.
159.10 E.
196 „
48
3-
46.43 s.
163.15 E.
236 „
46
4-
48.42 s.
167.42 E.
219 „
45
” 5 ■
48.53 s.
172.52 E.
208 „
44
Total Knots
— -1427
May 3. —A most uncomfortable night. Everybody rolled
everywhere, sea rough, only two ladies at table.
May 4. —Smooth night and beautiful day, most of the
invalids appearing.
May 5. —Rolled a great deal during the night, beautiful day,
passengers getting their sea appetites.
Medical Report. —We are happy to state that with the
exception of a few colds we are, at present, free from illness
on board. Owing to the calm weather, those who have been
suffering from sea-sickness are fast recovering.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Dear Mr. Editor. —An idea has just come into my
head, now as this is a very rare, I may say unprecedented,
occurrence, I think my wisest plan is immediately to sit down
and transmit it to your safe keeping. My idea is to get
up a series of concerts, Shakesperian and other readings, as
possibly by this means some of our bashful young gentlemen
instead of gazing at the lumris, as they doubtless consider the
young ladies (they are not like vou and me old married men)
will mix more with the said fair damsels, and so there may be
a possibility of our poet Laureate getting some material for
his long-promised poem of the “Breach of Promise;” and the
immense amount of musical talent at present concealed
among us may be brought into notice, so preventing our res-
pected officers applying in this case the almost invariable rule
that outward bound passengers are always jolly, whilst home-
bound ones are the reverse.
I am, Ac.,
OLD BOY.


Third Cabin. — Mr. Editor. — l am, or rather was, a
bloated aristocrat. From my earliest years I have seen life
in its most attractive forms. The gay metropolis of France
is familiar to me. Oft’ have I wandered by the sunny banks
of the silvery Arno, and dreamed away the weary days by the
ever-changing Rhine. From the frozen city of the Czar, to
Naples’ incomparable bay, old Europe all thy ways and bye
ways, from childhood Fve known. Fve eaten “ sour kraut ”
in Germany, frogs in France, roast bear in Russia, and mac-
caroni in Naples. Fve been at Vauxhall, the Mabille,
and, breathe it gently, the Varieties, and found in the expres-
sive language of Sir Charles Coldstream that there was
nothing, absolutely nothing, in them. Tired of the monotony
of the old world, I sought in Australia’s sunny plains “ fresh
fields and pastures new,” hunted the Kangaroo in his native
wilds, and speared the lordly Emu ’neath the shadow of the
silvery gum. Here I got solitude, but nothing more. My
years advanced, and I despaired of ever finding that excite-
ment for which my soul thirsted, when, lo ! happy thought, I
took a passage by the “ Somersetshire,” and now all is changed,
I breathe once more, there is still something worth living for.
Mr. Editor, I pity you; never, I presume, has it been your
happy lot to wash on deck out of a soup plate, with the
vessel rolling, the sensation is exquisite, try it. You have
never experienced the thrill of pleasure that rushes through
the veins when the cry of “ Scaldings ” announces that
breakfast is ready, or rather that it is time to wet your tea. I
have heard Grisi, Piccolomini, Patti, aye, and Barratti too, but
their sweetest notes cannot compare with the melody of that
one word “ Scaldings ”on a cold morning. Then, too, the
piquant flavour imparted to plum duff by eating it off the
same plate as pea soup, salt pork, and mustard, must be
experienced to be understood. I really pity you Mr. Editor
when I see the miserable dinners you get in the saloon, and
contrast them with the blessings we enjoy. However, I will
no longer, metaphorically speaking, make your mouth water,
but will for once in my life become a philanthropist, and
make an offer which I hope no one will accept; however, I
am anxious that some one should share my bliss, and if any


gentleman has suffered as I have done I don't mind changing
places with him for a week, on one condition that he comes
forward at once. If we pass the Horn before any one offers,
no inducement should make me sacrifice my happiness.
You will, Mr. Editor, excuse the writing, two little chcrjibs
being at present searching my pockets for raisins (the
“Somersetshire” raisins are a superior article), while a young
lady, setat five, is tugging vehemently at my hair; I trust,
however, you will excuse the length of this production, and
will promise that you shall never again be troubled by so long
a communication from
Q
FACETIÆ, &c.
Mr. Miles, the first engineer, sends word that he hopes
soon to have his screw raised.
Hint to those who consider the condensed water on board
too soft for drinking purposes. Take to drinking hard.
CONUNDRUMS (answers in our next).
1. Why is it further to the engine room than to any other part
of the ship ?
2. Why should everybody on board drink sherry ?
3. Why are we never likely to run short of bread this voyage ?
4. What positive evidence have we that Captain Atwood is
particularly anxious to make a remarkably short passage home on
this occasion ?
(N.B. —This riddle is contributed by a young lady.)
ENIGMA.
My first’s a philosopher, learned and glum
As a bear, with my second afflicted ;
On my third you will find out the place where he lives.
Where to search by my fourth is depicted;
O’er my fifth many sages have puzzled their brains;
My sixth in the surgery dwells;


My seventh floats proudly aloft in the breeze,
Whilst my eighth as best fire-wood sells; ■
My next pulls your whiskers, or raps on your walls.
With a sound that my tenth well describes j
In India’s jungle my next you will find;
To my twelfth flock musicians in tribes;
My last we must thank for melodious strains.
Which often our ears have delighted,
Kis pianos all over the world are renowned.
To guess at his name you’re invited.
My whole, if you take the first letters you’ll find.
Is a good ship; may fierce gales ne’er strand her;
Whilst my last letters tell who’s the head of affairs.
In fadt, who’s this good ship’s commander.
5. When you are pulling your cat’s tail, why is it like your tea-
caddy? Answer: Because your tea’s in it (teazing it).
At a wreck on the north coast of England, an insensible
sailor being washed ashore, one of the bystanders ran to save
him, and was pulling him out of reach of the waves, when an
old woman called out “ Push him in again, he’s a sailor fish,
he’ll die if he comes ashore.”
Mathematical Problem. A gentleman having a square
field was anxious to ascertain the area, but all the data he had
was the following: the distances from an oak tree to three
corners in succession are, 116, 156, and 166 yards. What
was the area ?
Notice. —Owing to limited space the insertion of many
communications is unavoidably delayed until the publication
of our next number.— Ed.


No. 2]
[Friday, May 13, 1870.
The “ Somersetshire ” Pie.
The early hour at which we went to press last week
prevented us from giving more than an abstract of the log up
to Thursday, sth, the total number of miles run for that week
is 1,437, being an average of 303 per day, or per hour.
Steam was used for twenty-four hours. On the sixth a
westerly wind then sprang up, which lasted till Wednesday
night when it became light, and the ship was again put under
steam at 11.30 a.m. yesterday. We are glad to see that our
passengers have recovered from the effects of sea sickness,
and are able to make their appearance at table with improved
appetites. The deck during the day, and the saloon in the
evening, now look cheerful and lively j various games of
chess, cards, &c., are carried on with great spirit, whilst fair
lingers touch the keys of the piano, or fair voices delight us
with song. The long evenings pass quickly away, and ten
o’clock arrives only too soon.
During the past week large numbers of albatross have
followed the ship, two of them falling victims to the fatal
hook. Their skins have been carefully preserved, and will,
doubtless, be laid at the feet of some ladies in England.
Happy birds! did they only know it would be their lot, after
death, to deck the brow or warm the hands of beauty.
Divine Service took place on Sunday, and was well attended,
especially in the evening, when the Rev. Schleicher preached
a short and excellent sermon. A choir has been organised,
and the chants and hymns were sung in a manner most
creditable to the performers, considering the short time for
practice they had had. On Monday evening we were favoured
by one of our passengers by a recitation from Richard 111.
A full notice of this performance will be found in another
column; we trust that the entertainment in question is but
the precursor of many others. In accordance with custom,
Friday last being the day on which we crossed the 180th


degree of longitude, was extended to forty-eight hours, in
order to make the days of the week correspond to those in
England. Our log for the week ending Thursday, lath,
shows the total number of knots run to have been 1,744, but
as the week contained eight days instead of seven, we cannot
compare it with the previous one. We would draw attention
to the excellent run on Monday, when 310 knots were logged.
The weather for the most part has been fine, and not so cold
as to prevent a great deal of exercise in the open air. We are
pleased to observe that our friends in the second and third
cabins are making efforts for the amusement of their fellow
passengers. We hear that their projected concert fell through
for want of support, but we are confident that as soon as our
ship arrives in warmer latitudes, such an entertainment will
be favourably received by all. Some races are also in con-
templation as will be seen on reference to another part of our
paper. We have been favoured with the inspection of some
drawings by one of our passengers, representing the woes of a
gentleman whilst in a state of transition from health to
sea-sickness. These sketches display considerable ability,
and we hope that the artist will exercise his pencil upon the
various incidents presented by the voyage. We again
request contributions from our fellow passengers: a very
slight expenditure of time and trouble on their part would
materially relieve us, and would ensure the future well-being
of our paper.
THE LOG. May 6 TO 12.
Friday 6, Lat. 48.54 S. Long. 176.35 E. Dist. 148 Miles.
„ 6, „ 48.54 S. „ 178.45 W. „ 185 „
Saturday 7, „ 49.12 S. „ 173.43 W. „ 198 „
Sunday 8, „ 49.12. S. „ 168.11 W. „ 218 „
Monday 9, „ 50.0 S. „ 160.19 W. „ 310 „
Tuesday 10, „ £0.15 8. „ 153.23 W. „ 269 „
Wednes. 11, „ 50.15 S. „ 146.49 W. „ 253 „
Thursday 12, „ 49.49 S. „ 142.48 W. „ 163 „


A NIGHT WITH BUSHRANGERS.
About thirty years ago an adventure befel me, the conse-
quences of which might have been very unpleasant. I was
coming out from England as doctor to a ship • upon arriving
off Sydney heads, we were unfortunate enough to meet with
light baffling winds. Getting tired of tacking backwards and
forwards in sight of land, I prevailed upon the captain to put
me on shore, and, accompanied by one sailor, I started to
walk up to Sydney. The distance was much greater than we
had anticipated, and at night-fall we found ourselves still
nearly twelve miles from town. Just as we had decided upon
camping out, I discovered a column of smoke rising in
the distance. We immediately set out towards it, and on
arriving at the hut from whence it proceeded, found that
its only inmate was a young woman, who, contrary to
the usual custom, seemed to try her best to persuade us
to go away. We replied that we were strangers to the road
and too tired to walk any further, upon which she very
reluctantly permitted us to enter, and was preparing us some
tea, when, first one man and then another, in all nine men,
armed with revolvers, came in. I now saw the reason
why she was so unwilling to receive us ; it was evident
that these men were bushrangers. They at first appeared
very friendly, producing a bottle of grog, and pressing both
myself and my companion to drink. Jack, who was never
known to refuse grog, drank; one glass preparing the way
for another, until eventually he found it necessary to take
a dignified position on the floor in a sublime state of intoxica-
tion. I did not drink, and kept my eyes about me on the
look out for a chance of escape. I noticed the bushrangers
had taken my pistols which I had lain down on the window,
and, quietly drawing the balls, replaced them. Under the
pretence of wanting to smoke I went outside the hut, but was
followed by two of the men, one walking on either side
a few yards distant. Having walked a little way from the
hut, I called to the men, “ Now, look here,” I said, “ I
will give you five pounds if you will at once quietly unmoor
your boat and pull me up the bay to Sydney. After a good


deal of hesitation they agreed to do so, but said that I
must lose my carpet bag which was inside the hut. This
I agreed to do, the more willingly as there was nothing in it
of any value. On leaving the hut I had taken up my pistols,
and now, whilst the men were engaged loosing the boat,
I took the opportunity to slip in two more balls in the place
of those which had been extracted, and seeing the priming
was all right, I felt easier, as I thought it highly probable that
my two worthies might think better of their promise before
we reached our journey’s end. After having pulled quietly for
a few miles, they suddenly ceased rowing, and saluted me in,
as nearly as I can remember, the following words, “Now,
governor, I reckon you’ve jumped out of the frying-pan into
the fire j out with your purse, watch, and chain, and off
with your ring.” I instantly presented my pistols, threaten-
ing to blow the brains out of the first man that stirred from
his place. “Oh, said one, it’s no use your trying that little
game on, they’ve had their teeth drawn, and though they’ll
bark, they won’t bite.” “ Don’t rely upon that too much,” I
replied, “ I’ve loaded them again to make sure.” Keeping
the men covered, I made them pull me right up to the wharf,
and having given them half-an-hour’s grace which I promised
them, I put the police upon their tracks. By the time the
bluecoats arrived at the hut it was deserted. The sailor was
still lying where I had last seen him, and was brought up to
town in the constable’s boat. —Old Boy.
“SOMERSETSHIRE” ALPHABET.
A stands for Atwood, and he is a i.
We hope that the present will prove his best run;
B stands for Barker, Broderick, and Barry,
And Brook is the fourth, but with these I’ll not tarry ;
C stands for Christopher, Collins also.
As I can’t make them rhyme, to the next I will go ;
D, is alone represented by Disher,
I can’t think of a word that rhymes with it but fisher;
Messrs. Ellis and Edwards come jointly with E,
Sincerely I wish that they happy may be;


F stands for Fenton, third mate in command,
A jolly good fellow on sea and on land ;
No person whatever will answer to G,
So I’ll whip up my pen and onward I’ll gee.
Hardy, Hopcraft, and Hooper, Hammond and Howd
-en, Hogarth and Hosford come next in a crowd ;
J answers for Jackson, whose talent we’ve seen.
If Jack’s son is so great what must Jack then have been ;
K is a letter for which there’s no name,
A rhyme to it though I must .find all the same;
I tender my thanks to Lascelles for an L,
And hope that he soon will get hearty and well;
M’s next with McPhail, and Monro, and Mayer,
The last is our generous tobacco purveyor;
I can’t find on board an owner for N,
Sol almost am tempted to throw down my pen ;
With O’Callaghan O comes next in the rank,
He’s as thorough a seaman as ’ere trod a plank;
P answers for Pinniger, also for Peel,
As the passenger list doth most clearly reveal;
Q. and R are left out, for no names can I find,
’Tis Q-R-rious enough, but I hope they don’t mind ;
Smith, Simmons, and Sewell come next in the train.
With Sniders and also Simms, Staley, and Spain ;
T stands alike for Ticehurst and Terkelsen,
Two seamen as brave as ever was Nelson ;
I can’t find a. place for a U or a V,
They fully deserve it they came after T (tea) ;
The four W’s now to record is my fate.
They are Warley and West, and Weeden and Weight;
And now comes that horrible jaw breaker X,
To put it in rhyme the best poet would vex;
Dearreaders, at length my task I’m permitted
To finish, I think not a name is omitted;
I’ll ask your indulgence for all I have said.
And subscribe myself, ever yours truly, Y. Z.
CORRESPONDENCE, &c.
Mr. Editor, —I rejoice to find that no one has accepted
the generous offer contained in my last, which you will,


therefore, kindly consider withdrawn. There is very little
excitement this side of the mizen, Messrs. Vernon & Moore,
of the second cabin, announced a concert for this week, but,
alas! for human hopes. To use the promoter’s expressive
and touching words, “ Not having met with that support to
which they deem their talents entitled, they are reluctantly
compelled to announce that the entertainment has collapsed.”
Let us drop a tear over Messrs. Vernon & Moore’s blighted
hopes of fame, and wish them “ better luck ” next time.
You lucky dogs in the saloon are to be envied the enchant-
ing company of numerous charmers, whose fairy-like forms,
the darlings! occasionally gladden our sight (in fine weather),
and of whom, after straining our necks to get a nearer glimpse
we are forced to acknowledge that the adage, of distance
lending enchantment to the view, is a base calumny ; in fact,
we think that in the article, young lady you suffer (if that
were possible), from an emharras de richesses, as we used to say
long long ago in France; while we poor wretches possess but
one solitary specimen. Such being the case, I need hardly
mention that the charmer’s admirers are ardent and numerous,
and it is even currently reputed that the green-eyed monster
has taken undisputed possession of at least one heart;
however, things went passably until a day or two since, when
a swarthy son of Ethiopia, connected with the culinary
department, entered the lists, and to our infinite disgust,
addressed to our darling, an epistle, of which, having been
favoured with a perusal, I am enabled to give a verbatim copy :
S. S. “ Somersetshire.” Scullery.—Angel of my soul, thou
art scrumptious; I love thee muchly ! In the far off land of
my birth my father was a chief, but wat of dat. From
the first moment my poor heart quailled beneath the dark
flash of your orient orbs. I have been thy slave, much more
than the slave of that tarnation Yankee who stole me from
the mango groves of my fore faders. When thou art near
the sight of plates and dishes is to me odious. I follow thee
wid my eyes, and den the tarnation cook, him sware, I
can supply thee with “ minavelins.” Wilt thou be mine !
Ever yours, fondly,
SAMBO.


N.B.—Minavelins are the remains of your sumptuous
feasts, Mr. Editor, presented by Sambo and his companions
to the idols of their souls. “0 tempora, O mores,” poor
Sambo’s hopes are blighted. Notwithstanding this touching
appeal, the lady was deaf to his entreaties, and (slightly
changing Dick Swiveller’s immortal lines) Sambo exclaimed
with anguish
’Twas ever thus since childhood’s hour.
I’ve seen my fondest hopes decay;
I never loved a maid or flower.
But ’twas the first to fade away;
I never nursed a dear gazelle.
To glad me with its soft black eye.
But when it came to know me well.
And love me it was sure to—go and get married to a barber.
Q
TO ROSE. A SONG BY J.K.N.
There’s not a spider in the sky.
There’s not a gloworm in the sea.
There’s not a crab that soars on high.
But bids me think dear maid of thee.
When watery Phoebus ploughs the main,
When fiery Luna gilds the sea.
As flies run up the window pane.
So fly my thoughts sweet maid to thee.
FACETIÆ &c.
That idiot Jones, who has been reading some Scotch poetry
lately, having stumbled on the well known Jacobite song,
“Wha would’na fecht’ for Charlie? Wha would’na draw
the sword ? ” wishes to know if “ Wha ” was a Scotchman,
and if so “ Was’nt he a dooced coward just.” Poor Jones !
his education (particularly in the Scotch language) must have
been woefully neglected.
What part of the ship most requires our sympathy ? The
helm, because it is often “ Hard up.”


After a very poor harvest an Irishman went to a money-
lender to borrow .A 1 too, to be repaid when the winter was
over. The Jew agreed to the loan, and said he should charge
lo per cent, interest. Pat objected, complaining that that
was too much. “But, think,” said the money-lender, “of
the long time—till the end of the winter.” “ Arrah, oh! but,”
says Pat, “ remember the short days.”
CONUNDRUMS.
When a lady is petting her cat, what fish does she generally
'name ?—Poor puss (porpoise.)
Who was Jonah’s tutor ?—The whale that brought him up.
Why is a speech made on the deck of a ship like a lady’s neck-
lace ?— Answer: It is a deck-oration (decoration.)
Explain the three following French enigmas :
. T liers. p T pir . venir . .
1. 1 T 2. \ |. a. 3. r vient ~ Ans. in our next.
J sans. A J J un dun
What is the worst kind of sympathy ?— Answer : To be pitted
by the small pox.
ANSWERS TO LAST WEEK’S CONUNDRUMS, &c.
i. Because you have to get over two (Miles) miles before you
arrive there. 2. Because we’ve run out of port. 3. Because we
can always get plenty of rolls. 4. Because he has allowed his
cabin to be turned into an engine-room, the gentlemen to make
furnaces of themselves, and funnells of their mouths.
Answer to Enigma. —Somersetshire, Captain Atwood. —l.
Stoic. 2. Ophthalmia. 3. Map. 4. East. 5. Rosetta. 6.
Spermacetti. 7. Ensign. 8. Totara. 9. Spirit. 10. Hollow. 11.
Indigo. 12. Ridoto. 13. Erard.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Correct solutions to riddles received from N. Z, Old Boy, Nemo,
Tom Bowline, Flora, Donkey, and Miles’ Boy. All others are
incorrect.
“ A Crusty Old Bachelor.”—We cannot publish your letter in
extenso, but we agree with you that the lower saloon would make
a capital playground for the children, without their disturbing you
and other card players.
A correspondent, whilst writing in flattering terms of our paper,
C


draws attention to the omission of any mention of the services on
Sunday, ist inst. We beg to apologize for this oversight, which
was unintentional, and we thank our correspondent for the good
wishes expressed in the letter in question.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Mr. Editor. — No doubt you have, in your youth, sung to
an admiring audience “ A life on the ocean wave,” and you
and they felt that it must be something awfully jolly to be on
the sea. Did your first week’s experience of the “ Somerset-
shire ”go to prove it ? Mine did not. The agents told me
in Melbourne I could get anything on board. For once
they told the truth, one morning I found everything on the
floor of my cabin, myself included. My feelings can better
be imagined than described, the deck seemed to have an
insane wish one moment to fly up in my face, and the next I
found myself in an undignified posture among the ruins of
my earthly goods, which kept moving round my cabin a la
Astley. I gave chase to one of my portmanteaus and the
other chased me. I yelled out “ Steward,” he came and
informed me that there were rolls for breakfast. I could have
rolled into him, but could not speak from indignation; he
inquired whether I would take a sardine, the idea of the
greasy dainty was too horrible, I feebly gasped a negative.
But troubles, like a cow’s tail, must have an end, and now
that we have got into fine weather, and everybody has
recovered from their bilious attack, I don’t see why we
should’nt try to amuse ourselves. Readings, concerts,
amateur theatricals, &c., &c., would wile away many other-
wise tedious hours. Surely, Mr. Editor, there are some
among our numerous passengers gifted or endowed with
dramatic talent, I think that by making an earnest appeal to
their feelings we might find many who would come forward
and devote their services to the general weal. Those willing
to enroll themselves into a company, if they would send in
their names to your office, would be benefactors of their
species by enlivening some of the tedious hours of a long
vovage, which otherwise would hang heavily on our hands.
I am, &c.,
PUBLICOLA.


IN THE RANGES.
There are, probably, few among our readers who have had
the good fortune to pass through the wild and romantic
regions of the Southern Alps of New Zealand. In the words
of our correspondent, I might boast of having visited some
of the most picturesque or beautiful spots in the old world;
and although I have not eaten roast bear with the Russians,
nor fed on train oil and blubber with the inhabitants of the
ice-bound coast of the Arctic seas, yet the vineyards and
orchards, the corn-fields and olive groves of the sunny south,
the flowery slopes and the snow-clad peaks of the Alps, and
the Apenines are scenes once familiar and indelibly impressed
upon my memory. I can recall the wild song of the Tyrolese
mountaineer, the picturesque costume of the Hungarian
peasant, and the steep slopes of the Bernese Oberland,
blushing with the crimson flowers of the gentian.
On arriving in New Zealand I found my new home situated
at the foot of the vast chain of mountains dividing Canterbury
from Westland. Often whilst pursuing my daily occupation
amongst stupid sheep, and often still more stupid shepherds,
I have built castles in the air, and formed plans for an ex-
pedition in the remote and unexplored regions in the heart of
the ranges, and pictured to myself new wonders to be found
on the slopes of those distant mountains, whose snowy peaks
I had often watched bathed in the rosy light of the setting
sun. In the autumn of 1868, the opportunity I had long
waited for occurred, I mentioned my wish one day to a friend
residing on a neighbouring station, who, delighted with the
idea, proposed that our plans should at once be put into
execution, and that we should start that day week. During
the interval all our preparations were made, our stores reduced
within the smallest possible compass, our guns cleaned, and
by the end of the week everything was in readiness. With
the first grey streak of daylight on Monday morning we were
on the move, and having despatched a hearty breakfast were
already fairly en route before the sun was many degrees above
the horizon. The hills being covered down to their base with
dense brush, our only means of penetrating into the interior
C 2,


was by following up the stony bed of one of the numerous
rivers in that locality. We chose a branch of the Ashburton,
and having travelled up it for some hours arrived by about
three p.m. at our first camping ground, a place where the
hills, receding on either side, disclosed a narrow flat covered
with flax and spear grass, through the middle of which the
river ran. Having tethered our horses and boiled a billy of
tea, there being still some hours day-light, we loaded our guns
and, accompanied by our dogs, started on a ramble in search
of some pigs, which, from the number of rootings we had
seen, we knew must be plentiful in the locality. We had not
gone many yards before a couple of blue ducks rose, but out of
range, and whilst following them up, we got upon the scent
of a pig, and very soon the distant baying of the dogs and
squealing of the grunter proclaimed that the engagement had
begun; we were soon upon the scene of action, and found
Toady and Nipper on either ear of an immense old sow,
whilst the other two dogs, Grab and Di, were amusing them-
selves pursuing the small members of her numerous family
who were running squealing about in every direction. After
having despatched the old one and secured two of the best of
the youngsters, which we carried with us, we returned to our
camp, starting some red-bills on the road, two of which fell to
our guns. Limited space compels me to refrain from giving
anything like a full account of our numerous adventures
during the next few days, I will therefore proceed at once to
an account of the most unpleasant night I ever remember
spending. After about a week’s steady travelling, sometimes
on account of the difficulties of the country only succeeding in
getting over three or four miles a day, we arrived at length at
a most enchanting spot for a camping ground. Completely
shut in by densely wooded hills, we found a small green
valley, watered by a clear silvery streamlet, overhung with
graceful ferns, innumerable varieties of which covered its
banks, reminding one of one of the enchanted valleys of the
Arabian Nights. Here we discovered the first hot springs we
had seen, rising, curiously enough, in the immediate vicinity
of springs of ice cold water. We pitched our tents, and
turning out our tired horses determined to give them a few


days’ spell. The afternoon being very hot we thought we
might venture to leave our coats in the tent, so shouldering
our guns we crossed the creek immediately facing our camp
and began to ascend the opposite slope, forcing our way with
considerable difficulty through the bush which extended some
distance up the hill-side. Above this was open ground
covered with stunted flax, amongst which we found some
pigeons and kawkaws. When about two miles distant from
our camp we noticed that heavy black clouds were rapidly
gathering. We had hardly begun to retrace our steps when a
few heavy drops proclaimed that a storm had begun. In less
than five minutes it had burst with full fury. What a change
from an hour previous, then the leaves were hardly stirred by
the faintest breeze, whilst the feathery spray of the dashing
creek sparkled like clouds of diamonds in the full blaze of the
undimmed sun. Now, the wind roared through the trees, the
sun was completely hidden, and excepting when lit up by the
almost incessant lightning flashes it appeared dark as night.
The thunder pealed in an unceasing roar, shaking the hills to
their very foundation, the rain descended in floods, and what
had been a few minutes since a trickling rill was now an
impassable torrent, one of which we now approached in our
retreat, on arriving at its bank we held council of war as to
what we were to do, and decided to ascend the stream and
see if it was possible to ford it higher up. However, after
plodding on till nearly dark we were compelled to give up the
idea, and choosing as sheltered a spot as we could find we set
about making preparations for the night. The rain having
abated, our first thought was to get a fire, but everything was
soaked through with the rain, and with the exception of a little
dead wood out of a hollow log which we carefully collected,
there was nothing we could possibly hope to light. Having
arranged our fire in the most scientific way we could think of,
and prepared some dead twigs with which to feed the flame
when once kindled, I took out my match box, but, alas !
although well replenished the contents had become damp and
refused to strike. My friend Willoughby got out his, it
contained but two. We filled our pipes, determining anyhow
to light them, even should we not succeed in starting our lire.


Carefully was the match struck, and carefully was it applied
to the dry chips. Hurrah! they catch fire, and now a little
steady blowing and the red flame bursts out, our efforts had
been successful and we were flattering ourselves that at least
we should manage to get partially dry, but our hopes were
doomed to be disappointed, hardly had we made up our minds
that our fire was at length in a fair way to burn, when down
came the rain again harder than ever, and a gust of wind
scattered our few glowing embers in all directions. Here we
were, dog tired with a heavy day’s walking, shivering with
cold and wet, without coats, our last match gone, our pipes
out, afraid to move a step for fear of tumbling into a stream,
the night pitch dark, and up to our ankles in mud and water,
in which we were eventually compelled to lie down, the
blinding lightning dazzling our eyes, and the cold wind and
rain sending a chill to our very bones. We huddled up
together as close as possible, dogs and all, and thus managed
to keep life in us. Like the patriarch of old our pillow was a
stone, but unlike him our slumbers were blessed with any-
thing but pleasant dreams ; in fa£t, up to the present moment
I can never recall the miseries of that night without a
shudder.
“SOMERSETSHIRE” RACES, MAIDEN
PLATE.
A Handicap Hurdle Race of 5 sovs. each, half forfeit, with
100 sovs. added, over such obstacles as the ladies may
appoint. Acceptances with entrance money will be received
at the fore-mast until four o’clock p.m. on Saturday afternoon,
the 14th inst.
DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENT.
On Monday evening, the 9th inst., we were favoured by
one of the saloon passengers with a recitation from Shake-
speare; the portion selected was from Richard HI., a£l 1,
commencing with the well known lines, “ Now is the winter


of our discontent.” Beginning in a low tone of voice as a
soliloquy ought properly to be spoken, the reciter gradually
warmed with his subject until at the words in which Richard
expresses his consciousness of his own deformity and his utter
nothingness in comparison with his hated rival, the speaker
burst into fervid eloquence, and, throwing his whole soul into
the effort, with flashing eye, and gleaming teeth, he thundered
out the words “ The dogs bark at me as I halt by them; ”
here he paused, as if overcome by excessive emotion, but
shortly recovering himself he proceeded to the passage in
which the Duke resolves to cast away all thoughts of love and
to come out in his true colours. Here the orator surpassed
even his former efforts, and the force with which he rendered
the concluding words “Since I cannot prove a lover, I am
determined to prove a villain,” completely electrified his
audience, and created a sensation which would baffle our pen
to describe. Those of us who are old enough to remember
Edmund Kean and Kemble must have fancied that those
departed great ones had once more visited earth, but were it
possible for them to do so they would rejoice that their mantle
had fallen upon shoulders so worthy to wear it as those
of our young friend, who evidently possesses histrionic
abilities of the highest order, and should he adopt the stage as
his profession will doubtless equal, if not surpass, the
distinguished men we have mentioned.
LOST.
A copy of the “ Somersetshire Medley,” January 30th to
March, 1870. Anyone returning the same to Mrs. Atwood
will be politely thanked.
Lost. Four hearts, one set of wits, a fair wind, and a pair
of boots. The finders will be rewarded on application to the
editor.
FOUND.
Several pairs of sea legs, the moon, and several voices.
Owners to apply as above, sending full description.


[ Friday, May 2,0, 1870.
No. 3.]
The “ Somersetshire ” Sea Pie.
We regret that we are obliged to report that our progress
during the past week has been anything but satisfactory. At
two p.m. on Friday, the 13th inst., the wind having become
favourable, the engines were stopped and the ship put under
canvass. The usual services took place on Sunday, the Rev.
Mr. Schleicher preaching in the evening. The attendance
was not large owing, no doubt, to the cold damp weather;
various hymns and chants were satisfactorily sung by the
choir. On Sunday evening the wind increased to a gale, and
the motion of the ship unpleasantly affected some of the
passengers. The wind became more violent, and unfortunately
hauled round to the south east, which prevented our keeping
our proper course, and sent us on a voyage of discovery
towards the South American coast. On Monday the state
of affairs was anything but cheering, the ship was labouring
in a heavy sea close hauled under reefed topsails. The sea
ever and anon broke over the ship, drenching the decks and
occasionally visiting the lower regions, and the wind blew in
furious gusts, accompanied by heavy showers of snow and
sleet. Below, the aspedt of things was not more pleasant,
walking and even sitting was by no means an easy task, and
at dinner the dishes behaved in a most erratic manner,
occasionally finding their way to the stomach by a more
direct route than the ordinary channel. Everybody • seemed
dull and out of sorts, and at an early hour the majority
retired to bed. But not, alas! to sleep, the lurching of the
vessel, the creaking of the rudder, and the noise of the waves,
as they either struck against the sides or broke over the decks,
added to the thousand and one strange sounds only to be
heard on board a vessel in a gale, effectually banished sleep
from many an eye, and when Tuesday morning came the
passengers who appeared at breakfast looked un-refreshed and
weary. The gale still continued, but at noon it abated, and


May 13, Lat. 49.50 S.
Long. 137.13 W.
Dist. 209 Knots.
„ i4»
99
50.8 S.
99
131.58 w.
99
*99 »
i5>
99
50.3 s.
99
125.26 w.
99
25 2 »
„ l6,
99
49.25 s.
99
118.40 w.
99
265 „
«
99
48.55 s.
99
115.51 w.
99
117
„ 18,
99
48.35 s.
99
113.17 w.
99
hi
19.
99
50.8 s.
99
108.31 w.
99
a 1 3
Total Knots
1366
in the evening the wind and sea having considerably gone
down, steam was got up, and at half-past ten p.m. we were
again on our way to the south. During the storm, the
captain, his officers, and crew, must have had a trying time,
but we are glad to report that through their unceasing
vigilance the ship sustained no damage whatever, and fully
maintained her high character as a sea-boat. On Wednesday
the sun favoured us with his beams, and the absentees again
put in an appearance at table and on deck. In the evening a
fresh westerly breeze sprang up, and at five a.m. on Thursday
morning the engines were stopped and the canvass again
spread.
The log for the week shows a total of only 1,366 knots,
and we fear seven more days will elapse before we turn our
backs on Cape Horn.
We have been kindly favoured by some of our passengers
with readings and music. A notice of a reading by Mr.
West appears in another column.
It is gratifying to us to learn that our last number met
with general approbation; we beg to assure our readers that
no efforts on our part shall be wanting to keep up the
character of our paper. Any shortcomings this week will, we
trust, be regarded with indulgence, the bad weather having
rendered composition, and even writing, a work of great
difficulty.
Our marine artist has again been busy with his pencil, and
has executed two more sketches still further depicting the
miseries of the gentleman, the hero of his last drawings, to
which we referred last week.
THE LOG.


THE LAY OF THE HOME-SICK.
PART I.
i. In the month of dark December,
To travel long and far intent,
I bade farewell to home and country
On a voyage to Melbourne bent.
а. What my object was exactly
Would be difficult to tell.
But I hoped to make a fortune
And to get some sport as well.
3. Gold, I’d heard, was just like pebbles.
Plentiful on every road;
While as for diamonds ! these were merely
Reckoned by the wagon load.
4. Then I thought I’d shoot the turkey.
And I’d chase the kangaroo.
And o’er solitary deserts
I would stalk the shy emu.
5. Possum, bandicote, and rabbit
Should fall victims to my skill.
While swans and ducks innumerable.
Should, in turn, my game-bag fill.
б. Blue the sky, and calm the water,
When I stepped on board the ship.
And I thought that all the voyage
Would be quite a pleasure trip.
7. But the wind began to blow hard.
And the waves ran mountains high ;
And, in short, though I’m no coward.
Soon I felt about to die.
8. For the vessel she did pitch so.
And did act so very rummy,
That it caused a queer sensation
In my —shall I say it—’tummy.
9. O’er my sufferings that followed,
Decency must draw a veil;
But the very recollection.
While I’m writing, turns me pale.


10. How I tossed, and how I tumbled
As I lay upon my bed;
How I swore, and how I grumbled.
How I wished that I was dead.
11. Soon the raging sea abated.
And the wind no more did blow ;
And at length we saw Cape Otway
Looming large upon our bow.
12. Then Port Philip Heads we sighted,
And the Rip we safely passed,
And that afternoon beheld us
In the Bay, arrived at last.
PART II.
13. Now I’m here, I don’t much like it.
Everything seems very queer.
And I ask myself the question.
Why the Devil came you here ?
14. Melbourne’s very much like London,
Only not so big I’m told.
And I know, by sad experience.
That its streets arn’t paved with gold.
r j. Where are, now, my dreams of fortunes
Gained within a single day.
And my thoughts of high ambition ?
All, alas! are passed away.
16. What, though rivers teem with nuggets,
Gladd’ning the prospector’s eye,
What, though in each creek and gulley,
Precious stones unnumbered lie.
17. Gold for me has no attractions ;
Gems and Jewels I don’t prize,
All the diamonds of Australia
Are less bright than Julia’s eyes.
18. What care I for emu, possum,
Wallaby, or kangaroo,
I can see them far more safely
For a shilling at the Zoo.


19. Now my mind is fully made up.
I’ll not stop a moment here;
Though some folks may call me foolish.
And some others chaff and jeer.
20. At White & Co.’s I’ll take a passage
In the earliest ship that sails.
Nor will I remain contented
Till I’m once more back in Wales.
21. There will my revered paternal.
Quick to meet the traveller run,
And my affectionate maternal
Weep for joy to see her son.
22. There the wanderer they’ll welcome,
And they’ll kill the fatted calf,
And they’ll toast the dainty rarebit.
And the nut-brown ale they’l quaff.
23. When I’m there, once more in clover.
Won’t I, rather, take my ease;
And I’ll take my solemn davy.
Never more to cross the seas.
24. One thing I have learnt, and this is,
Whereso ’ere my feet may roam,
I’ll not find in all creation.
Any place to equal home.
w
TO JULIA.
1. While-within these dreary walls,
For thee, beloved, I pine;
There’s but one face my mind recalls,
And, dearest, that is thine.
2. And when, at length, my sea voyage o’er.
My freedom I have found.
I’ll fly to thee to part no more.
And cure my poor heart’s wound.
3. Then, dearest, wilt thou then say yes?
Oh ! say that this may be.
That thou my future home wilt bless,
By dwelling there with me.


4. For as the woodbine to the shrub,
The ivy to the tree;
So does my heart with true love throb,
And cling still more to thee. — Montanus.
REVERIE.
1. I long to wander on the shore.
To linger by the sea.
For oft’ I think of those who once
Have wandered there with me.
2. I long to stand where once I stood,
In happy days of yore,
And listen to the ocean’s flood,
Murmuring on the shore.
3. I long to watch, at close of day.
The sea-birds homeward flight;
I long to see a good ship brave
The billows’ angry might.
4. I long to see the feathery spray
Over the bleak rocks flying ;
I long to hear the summer breeze
Around the old cot sighing.
ip I long to hear the wild waves roar,
To hear the curlews’ cry;
I long to hear the splashing oar.
These were once my lullaby.— Stroud.
NOTICE OF READING.
On Wednesday evening Mr. West entertained the company
in the saloon with a reading consisting of some admirably
selected extracts from some of the best known English authors.
Notwithstanding the disadvantageous circumstances to be
contended with—viz., the lowness of the ceiling rendering it
difficult to make the most powerful voice audible, and the
disturbing influences of the creaking mast, which kept up a
most persistent interruption during the whole entertainment.


Mr. West succeeded in completely absorbing the attention of
his whole audience, and excepting when a rapturous burst of
applause broke out, after some passage of peculiar interest, a
dead silence reigned throughout the whole saloon; every ear
and every eye being bent upon the reader.
The first piece chosen was the well-known poem by
Browning, “Good News front Ghent,” which was rendered
in a most spirited manner, and at once proclaimed the
lecturer an artist of no ordinary merit. Want of space
forbids us to enter into detail, we will, therefore, pass on to
the next piece, “ Sam Weller’s Valentine,” to the inimitable
wit, of which Mr. West did full justice. At the part where
Sam begins to read forth his production to Mr. Weller, Sen.,
the audience could no longer suppress its laughter which
burst forth in a universal roar.
The third selection was Tennyson’s “ Lady Clara Vere de
Vere,” a piece, the stern pathos of which admirably suited
the deep rich tones of the reader’s voice, who brought the
entertainment to a close with the “Vulgar Little Boy ; or,
Misadventures at Margate,” in which Mr. West exhibited
great skill in the modulations of his voice, the way in which
he imitated the articulation of the young rogue was really a
clever piece of acting.
In saying that it is sincerely to be hoped that this reading
may be but the inauguration of a series, we feel sure we are
but expressing the sentiments of the whole of Mr. West’s
audience. At the present day there are so many ignorant
pretenders who, without possessing even the rudiments of
the art of elocution, thrust themselves before the public, that
talent such as Mr. West’s, when exhibited, cannot fail of a
due appreciation.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor. —Dear Sir, — Being desirous of con-
tributing towards the pastime and amusement of my fellow
passengers, and having to avoid politics, religion, and per-
sonalities, I find there is nothing left for me to dilate upon.
Please sir allow me then to indulge in that nothing. Nothing


can surpass our captain as a gentleman, a sailor, or a
watchful guardian over the lives entrusted to him. And, take
nothing I may say in a sense of flattery, if I add that nothing
could rival his good lady for jollity, good heartedness, and
kindness to all around.
Of the passengers. lam sure nothing can be said against
the beauty and elegance of the ladies, especially the single
ones; while as regards the males, nothing can be said
derogatory to either their persons or conduct. Of the food—
I can say nothing good of the poultry, and nothing against
the other dishes, as many of them are often left with nothing
upon them. Of the ship—Nothing afloat can surpass her
(if she takes us home safe). Of the voyage —Nothing can
be said against it up to the present time, and of its duration
nothing can be said with certainty. ’ I hope there may be
nothing in the wind, and that nothing may mar the prospect
of a successful voyage. I shall at present touch upon
nothing more, leaving it to you to insert this letter if you have
nothing better, but if you have please destroy it and say
nothing. In conclusion, Mr. Editor, I beg to subscribe
myself
“ NOTHING TO NOBODY.”
P.S.—I heard a young lady remark just now that she
thought nothing would be more polite than to invite our
officiating minister to dine in the saloon on Sunday; she
added, civility costs nothing.
Mr. Editor. —Allow me to offer my sincere congratu-
lations on the successful inauguration of your very excellent
journal, and my best wishes for its future prosperity, I can
assure you it is highly appreciated on this side of the main-
mast. The woes of your correspondent, Publicola, have
elicited our warmest sympathies, and when our elocutionist
came to that pathetic passage in which he so feelingly depicts
the indignity put upon him by the steward, who had the
temerity to offer him “ Sardines,” the murmurs of condem-
nation were numerous and loud, but quickly changed to
admiration for the wonderful command of self displayed by
your correspondent. Had the unfortunate steward made his


appearance at that moment he would have inevitably have
been flayed alive, and opinions were freely expressed that had
the wretch dared to make such an offer here, the very slightest
punishment he could have expected would have been to be
thrown overboard. Sardines, indeed! The very idea made
us shudder, we may have to put up with some inconveniences
here, but we are never insulted by the offer of sardines.
There is a great dearth of news down here, and except the
daily immolation of hecatombs of sheep, pigs, poultry, and
oxen, for your delectation, and the incessant clatter of tin
cans of every conceivable size’ and shape, for ours, nothing
disturbs the even tenor of our way. We smoke the calumet
of peace near the wigwam of the butcher, criticize your tucker
in the sanctum of the pastry cook, and discuss the pro-
babilities of the voyage with Childers the prince of boatswains,
or listen to incomparable nautical yams from his mate Bill.
I always held, Mr. Editor, that envy is a mean vice, yet, I
must confess to have given way to it on reading your
description of the Shakesperian recitation, with which you
were favoured on last Monday week in the saloon. Although
none of us can boast of having heard either the elder Kean or
Kemble, yet have we spent many enchanting hours with such
minor stars as Kean the younger, Montgomery, Fechter,
Phelps, and poor G. V. Brooke, and therefore feel extremely
anxious to hear our gifted shipmate. We trust he will give
us poor critics In the pit a specimen of those transcendant
abilities which so enraptured you in the dress circle. We
would not trouble him to come amongst us in the present
unsettled state of the weather, but can promise him a hearty
welcome and an enthusiastic reception should he be kind
enough, on a favourable opportunity, to visit the third cabin.
Would you, Mr. Editor, favour us with his name, that we
may render him that respect we ail owe to genius, and send
him through your columns a formal invitation to give us a
recitation. I am reluctantly compelled to admit that salt
horse is not the food for inspiration, and pea soup is
decidedly inimical to soul, for all of which blessings you
ought to thank your stars, or you would have been victimized
by a much longer letter from
Q


Mr. Editor, —Charity, according to an old proverb,
begins at home, and I am sorry to say with a good many, it
ends there. We all know that a ship composes, as it were,
a little world of its own, and each one has, for the nonce, to
take it or make it as his or her own home; and it becomes
us, therefore, each and all to aid and assist those who may be
unfortunate in our own community. We are now on a
voyage of many thousands of miles, and have already had
many opportunities of observing what “Jack,” as he is
commonly termed, has to go through. How many of us
would have liked to go aloft in this bitter cold weather in a
gale of wind such as we have just passed through? Little
do many of us think, sitting in warm and comfortable cabins,
of the hardships and exposure that (what are too often
termed by the ignorant) “common sailors” have to endure.
If by accident, and this frequently happens, Jack happens to
fall from his lofty perch into the sea, a few will exclaim,
“ How dreadful, poor man! I wonder if he was married,”
and he and his misfortune are forgotten over a substantial
breakfast next morning. Little do too many trouble them-
selves that there may, perhaps, be an anxious wife at home,
and little ones that will never more be able to run and
greet father, whose safe return they looked and prayed for.
Unfortunately it is a too popular error to look at a sailor or
a man before the mast, as one whose only ideas of amuse-
ment must be in the “ Hard ” at Portsmouth, or Ratcliff
Highway, in London, and believe fully in the legend of
Wapping Old Stairs. But we must, now-a-days, look at
Jack as having kept (comparatively) the same pace with
society, which has far different rules than when George the
Third was king. Look even on board our own ship at the
present time, and go into the forecastle, and PII be bound
there are many there who would put us to the blush on the
score of “ laming,” but adverse circumstances have compelled
them to adopt that refuge for the destitute—the sea. Now,
Sir, I ask you to use your best endeavours to appeal to all on
board to induce them to contribute, as their means may allow,
something towards the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
It matters not how small, the widow’s mite was not despised^
D


something to comfort and benefit those who will never again
see their father; something that will alleviate the widow’s
anguish, by knowing that kind hands and kind hearts have’
done what they could to comfort her in her great tribulation.
To those whom we denominate “skin flints,” we would point
out, “ He that giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord,” and,
as Sydney Smith observes, “ It’s a pretty safe investment.”
Yours, &c.,
PUBLICOLA.
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE. BY CHARON.
Maiden Plate. —Latest Betting.—Even money on “ The
Barber” and “ Invalide,” the former for choice; 10 to i agst.
“ Rory O’More;” 30 to 1 agst. “The Nigger;” 50 to 1 agst.
“Gorilla;” 1000 to 10 agst. “Dark’un.”
During the week the betting on our principal event, “ The
Maiden Plate,” has undergone considerable change. “The
Barber ” is now a decided favourite; in fact, I believe odds
would be laid on him. He had a slight accident in the early
part of the week, but has recovered, and is again doing strong
work. “ Invalide ” also takes his breathings regularly,' but
appears to go rather stilty; still, on the day, I think he will
be all there, and give “ The Barber ” gruel. Some hints have
been thrown out about a Dark’un, but as little is known
concerning him, nothing but a long shot would be taken.
On deck last night there was talk of a diminutive second-
rater having offered to do something extraordinary with any
other two gentlemen on board, but as his utterance at the
time was rather thick, and his ideas by no means clear, the
feat, whatever it may have been, was not performed.
Bets on the length of our voyage continue to be made by
the knowing-ones in limited quantities of “bottled Tennent,”
but no transactions to any extent have taken place.
THE BAZAAR.
We are requested to announce that, in accordance with the
precedent adopted on former voyages of this ship, a bazaar


will take place on board soon after our arrival in the Tropics,
on behalf of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum. The
institution is one most deserving of support, and we purpose,
on a future occasion, to make a few remarks upon it ; mean-
time, we ask the co-operation of all our passengers in
furtherance of the object. Contributions of fancy and useful
articles, drawings, &c., will be thankfully received by Mrs.
Atwood.
D 3


No. 4]
\Friday , May 27, 1870.
The " Somersetshire” Sea Pie.
We are at last enabled to congratulate our readers upon the
result of this week’s progress, Cape Horn having been passed
on Wednesday at midnight. Our course is now towards the
north, and each day we may expect to have warmer weather
and calmer seas. The total number of knots run during the
week is 1,625, an average of 232 per day, which is,
undoubtedly, very good sailing considering the weather we
have experienced. The weather has been very cold, and there
have been but few opportunities of taking exercise on deck.
Snow have fallen on several occasions in sufficient quantities
to enable some of the hardy ones to indulge in the invigorating
game of snow-balls, and several fiercely contested combats
have taken place to the mutual satisfaction of victors and
vanquished. On Friday morning an iceberg was reported in
sight, and after breakfast it was abreast of the ship at the
distance of about a mile-and-a-half; it appeared to be about
two miles in circumference, and about 200 feet high. Ever
and anon the waves broke against it, throwing the spray
completely over the summit. No others have, as yet, been
seen, and we fervently hope that, as is frequently the case at
this season of the year, we may meet with no more of these
grand but fearful visitors from the polar regions.
On Saturday a sudden fall in the barometer indicated the
approach of a gale, and from the evening of that day till
Monday, the wind and sea were high, accompanied by squalls
of snow and sleet. Divine Service took place on Sunday,
but the attendance was scanty. On Monday the wind
moderated, but the weather continued wet and squally.
On Tuesday the wind became adverse, and the screw was put
into requisition, but was stopped at 8 p.m. ; the wind having
hauled round to the N.W. In the afternoon a heavy fall of
snow took place, which completely covered the decks and


Friday 20, Lat. 52.12 S.
Saturday 21, „
53-35 s -
Sunday 22, „
55- 8 s -
Monday, 23, „
56.13 S.
Tuesday 24, „
56.54 S.
Wednesday 25, „
58.9 S.
Thursday 26, „
5 6 -57 s -
Long. 103.39 W.
Dist.
221 knots.
99
97.50 W.
39
240 „
y>
90.6 w.
93
276 »
• 99
92.48 w.
99
256 „
)>
76.3 w.
99
225 „
39
72.9 w.
99
148 „
99
64.16 w.
99
259 »
Total ■
1,625
rigging. On Wednesday we reached our furthest southing,
and began to steer in a north-easterly direction. In the
evening the ship encountered a tremendous sea, which caused
her to roll frightfully, and to take in much water. One sea
found its way into the saloon, inundating the lower end and
the pantry, nearly frightening some of the passengers out of
their wits. During the night the violent motion of the ship
continued, and sleeping was out of the question. The miseries
of that night few will forget; but the bright sun of Thursday
morning, and the welcome news that the Horn had at length
been passed, restored their drooping spirits. An accident,
which might have been attended with serious consequences,
happened to Captain Atwood on Thursday morning; he was
struck by some tackle which had broken adrift; we are happy
to say, however, that he escaped with a few bruises only. A
reading took place on Monday, a report of which appears in
another column.
THE LOG.
THE PRIDE OF THE MESS.
A DESCRIPTIVE DOGGREL. BY A THIRD-RATER.
Poets may sing, and critics may praise
Those ideal heroes that in fancy they raise;
But mine is the task, in few lines to express.
The glories and charms of “The Pride of the Mess.”


Six bells, seven o’clock, then his duly begins,
In well brightened tins, the fresh water he brings.
With corkscrew like motion o’er the deck he will press.
For the first to be served is “ The Pride of the Mess.”
Next the compound called Burgoo engages his cares.
How he stirs, and he skims, how he frets and he swears;
But served up in a billy, I think you’ll confess
’Tis unctuous when made by “ The Pride of the Mess.”
When breakfast is over, and all things put by.
He thinks it is time for a “ nip ” on the sly;
Then to heighten complexion, and the ladies to bless,
A turn on the deck takes “The Pride of the Mess.”
Four bells, ten o’clock, down the ladder in haste.
To wash out his currants, and roll out his paste;
Rice, Spices, and onions go in at a guess.
He don’t stick at trifles, this “ Pride of the Mess.”
Now with fingers half scalded, he washes the platters.
And knives, forks and spoons on the table he clatters ;
Bangs the head of the “wash-up,” then hastens to dress.
For he’s a i at “killing,” “ The Pride of the Mess.”
The afternoon spell, oh ! what vision of brightness.
Is that which appears now, got up with such tightness.
Paper collar, balmorals, all things made express.
To deck out our hero “The Pride of the Mess.”
For the last meal each day, he now hastens to make,
A whitey-brown mixture, some people call cake.
This chef d’oeuvre of his, mere words cannot express.
But it’s scrumptious, as made by “The Pride of the Mess.”
His cares being o’er, now his “mere sham ” he lights.
Walks his maiden on deck, and beholders delights,
It’s all over, she’s killed, and is fain to confess.
Her heart has been lost to “The Pride of the Mess.”
ICEBERGS.
At this period of our voyage, when one iceberg has been
seen near the ship, and others may reasonably be expected to
be met with, a few words upon these phenomena may be
opportune and perhaps interesting.


We use the word, “phenomena/’ advisedly, for strange to
say, notwithstanding all the discoveries of modern science, the
origin of these monsters of the deep is still a mystery, and
beyond ascertaining, with some degree of accuracy, their pro-
bable position in the ocean during the different months of the
year, their formation and place of birth are still as much a
matter of uncertainty as ever. Towering like precipices and
pinnacles varying from too to 1000 feet above the surface of
the sea, in some directions they assume the appearance of
chalk cliffs ; but, near the edges of a fracture, they exhibit to
the sun a translucent appearance of emerald green. Between
the spires and ridges of their summits are pools, and in some
cases even lakes of azure blue. Icebergs are not the produce
of one season, on the contrary, there is reason to believe these
masses commenced their formation at a period equally remote
to that of the Tertiary rocks. In 1799 the body of a mam-
moth was found imbedded in an iceberg, and as the fossil-
remains of that animal are discovered in deposits of a Phocean
period, a convincing proof is afforded that some icebergs at
least, must be of very remote date.
In the northern hemisphere, icebergs do not appear to attain
the dimensions of those of the southern regions. In the former
300 feet is the greatest elevation reported, whilst in the latter,
bergs of 800, 900, and even 1000 feet in height have been
recorded. The area of some of the southern bergs is very
great, the largest reported was 60 miles by 40, containing on
one side a bay, many miles across. The course of these
southern icebergs west of Cape Horn is E. by N., at the rate of
about 10 miles day. East of the Horn they drift to the
North East, but their progress is much slower. Some
continue their progress towards the Cape of Good Hope, but
the greater number return eventually towards the South.
It has been ascertained that the height above water is one-
seventh of the whole mass.
READING.
On Monday evening a reading took place, which was
opened by Mr. West, who read from the Ingoldsby Legends


the amusing poem of the “Lady and the Knight.” Mr.
West’s reading fully confirmed our former opinion as to his
powers as an elocutionist. Mr. Disher followed with the
interview between Rebecca the Jewess and Brian de Bois
Gilbert “The Knight Templar,” from Sir Walter Scott’s well-
known novel, Ivanhoe. For some reason, probably not being
able to see very well, the light being rather dim, Mr. Disher’s
efforts were not so successful as on the former occasion, when
he read Byron’s “Night before the battle of Waterloo.”
We cannot help thinking that some of the passages from
Rob Roy or Guy Mannering, in which the broad Scotch
dialed! forms a prominent feature, would be better calculated
to exhibit Mr. Disher’s powers to advantage. The reading
concluded with an extradl from “Hamlet,” by Mr. Brook >
but owing to the clatter of plates and cups attendant upon
the preparations for tea, the reader’s voice was rendered
almost inaudible excepting to those sitting in his immediate
vicinity. We will, therefore, pass over this for the present
without further comment, hoping that Mr. Brook will repeat
the passage on a more auspicious occasion so that those who
were unable to hear on Monday may be enabled to judge for
themselves as to his powers as a Shakesperian reader.
FACETIÆ &c.
Pat was relating to a friend what a narrow escape he had
had of being shot at the battle of Bull’s-run. “ I should have
been killed enthirely ” says Pat, “only I left America three
days before the battle took place.”
Our friend Jones, whilst taking his constitutional, is almost
smothered by the smoke from the engine. He says it’s an
“ in-funnel ” nuisance.
The Astronomer Royal, we arc informed, receives an annual
income of He ought to thank his stars.
Ignoramus having been disturbed on Wednesday night by
a great clattering of water tins in the saloon, wishes to know
if they were dancing the can-can. Our special correspondent
not being on the spot at the time we are unable to say for


certain, but we think they were merely taking a nocturnal
canter.
Saltator wishes to know if this is the part of the world in
which it is customary to dance the Horn-pipe.
There was a certain editor down east so excessively mean
that he used to save his tears to extract the salt.
Why are the passengers on board the S. S. Somersetshire,
when she is under steam, like the Queensland settlers ?
Answer: Because they are often annoyed by the blacks.
Why are railway shares the most incomprehensible and
paradoxical affairs in the world ? Answer: Because when
you can-cel (can sell) them you can’t sell them, and when
you can’t sell them you can-cel (can sell) them.
To let, at very low rent, a two-storied novel. To let, a
wine cellar; apply to head steward. To let, a sale room,
good sales guaranteed; apply to sail-maker. To acrobats.—
To be let or sold, half-a-dozen good tumblers.
CORRESPONDENCE.
IMPORTANT DISCOVERY.
Sir, —There are probably very few of us who will ever forget
the lively performance of the “ Somersetshire ” on the night of
Wednesday, and the morning of Thursday last. The grey dawn
of morning was just beginning to struggle through the port
holes and down the cabin sky-light, and the writer had just
turned over for the hundred and eighteenth time, in his bunk,
when the steward commenced that delightful solo on the bell
which warns us that it is time to rise and prepare for the
arduous duties of the day. Watching my opportunity and
taking advantage of a timely lurch, I was safely landed from
my berth (a top one by the way) without any apparent effort
on my part, upon the floor of the cabin, my head appropriately
filling up the wash-hand basin, and my heels unfortunately
deposited on my room-mate’s hat box, which, in common with
every other article of our joint property, had found its way to
the floor. I dressed, and with somewhat of a rueful counte-
nance strutted into the saloon and watched the solemn pre-
parations of the stewards for breakfast. Whilst thus engaged,


waiting like another celebrated character for “something to
turn up,” I discovered a small heap of sweepings from the
floor of the lower deck, which were carefully placed just out-
side the cuddy door, preparatory to being thrown overboard.
My attention was attracted to what appeared to be fragments
of a MS. closely written and much blotted, evidently at
one time the object of great labour and consideration; now,
like other pets of the hour, destined to be left to the mercy of
the winds. Being of an inquisitive turn of mind, I gathered
these together, and in the seclusion of my cabin devoted some
time (after breakfast), to deciphering the contents. To my
surprise and gratification, I found them to contain portions of
a MS. poem of considerable force and beauty, evidently, too,
having for its subject the “Somersetshire” and its passengers,
and the incidents of our voyage. What could have induced
the talented author to reject the studied and laboured compo-
sition of his muse I cannot, of course, divine, but in the
interests of ourselves, and the public generally, I have thought
fit to make some endeavour to rescue from oblivion such por-
tions of the M.S. as I was able to decipher, and to preserve
them for the benefit of posterity in the columns of the “Somer-
setshire Sea Pie.” As I require to make still more minute and
further arrangement of the fragments, I am unable to do more,
this week, than introduce the subject. Perhaps some one will, in
the meantime, be enabled to throw light upon the question of
authorship. It appears to me that there is internal evidence to be
gathered from the verses themselves which would materially as-
sist, and probably your readers will be enabled to form a pretty fair
guess. I have taxed my ingenuity but have failed, probably,
because I have little, if any, idea of rhyme, but no doubt
amongst your numerous and intelligent body of readers, some
are better qualified and may be more successful. I subjoin
the verses in question, they will serve to convey some faint
idea of the beauty and spirit of the author's style.
The ship behaved well, and as for her master
We feel that with him we need fear no disaster.
“A sailor each inch of him,” not even that would
Be considered tall talk when I mean Captain Atwood.


There were cries, though of anguish, and screams of distress,
And sounds of a nature I cannot express,
Or would much rather not if I could; but they reached
All over the ship; and the little ones screeched.
And as the ship rolled, which it did when it blew hard,
There were calls for“more basins,’’and shouts for the steward.
And some do you know
Seemed plunged in such woe.
They cared nought for what happened, and were ready to throw
Up, all they once prized and valued, below.
******
But all this was changed, and wern’t they delighted,
When one evening I stood up and read and recited,
And as Sunday was fine, and to church they could get —oh!
I sang with the choir in my sweetest falsetto.
In short my great powers are put no small tax on,
But I felt fit for all when they cried “ go it ! ”
I have tried to decipher the last word but have failed, how-
ever, I hope to have the poem complete in time for your next
issue. B
Third Cabin, Thursday, May %6, 1870.
Mr. Editor. —How do you feel this morning ? I trust
none of the passengers, at breakfast in the saloon, looked
“ weary and unrefreshed.” Down here we passed a delightful
night, my friend Jones called it scrumptious. Have you ever
attended a seance of the Davenport Brothers ? They are a
mere “bagatelle” compared to the scene last night. First
the pots, billies, kettles, boulli tins, and boxes chased one
another round the cabin; then the provisions, untrammelled
by any of the narrow prejudices of fashion, boldly struck out
for themselves new paths. The corned beef got into the
sugar, the tea into the butter, the coffee into the pea soup,
and the currants into the preserved potatoes, all of which
were excusable enough, but what the soap could have wanted
in the pickle jar is more than I can comprehend, and certainly
the vinegar had no business in the burgoo. The excitement
was tremendous, but culminated when our marine artist


requested the steward to help him bail the water out of his
bunk, a trifle of a few hundred gallons or so, that he might
not be out of his depth, being a poor swimmer. The next
incident was the pitching of a stalwart son of Britany head
foremost over two gentlemen, straight into, shall I say the
aldermanic protuberance of a third, who with a politeness that
did him credit calmly asked “ Voulez vous avoir un pickle.”
But enough of this for the present. Where on earth (there's
a bull) did you hide yourselves on Her Gracious Majesty's
birthday? We were anxiously looking for you. We paid her
all due honours here, had in fact a regular field day, dis-
charging numerous volleys of snow balls (none of your blank
cartridge for us), and had a real stand-up fight, which lasted
fully two hours, and was well contested throughout. We at
length retired, covered with glory and wet, and drank her
health in silver mugs of “ bohea.'' Know, sir, that we
despise Money Wigram’s German silver, and are all provided
with crested family plate. lam glad to inform you that as I
have for the past week been in charge of the culinary depart-
ment, constructing in fact more sea pies than you will accom-
plish during the voyage. lam not going to inflict myself at
any greater length, so “ May your shadow never grow less,"
and allow me to subscribe myself, with most profound respect,
Your most obedient,
Q
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
[PER REUTER & Co.'s AGENCY.]
Paris, Wednesday Evening, May 25. —In replying to an
address from the commune of Sabot Crotte, the Emperor is
reported to have said: “ Let France confide in me to insure
her prosperity and glory. She is daily increasing in power in
spite of the efforts of her rivals, and will ultimately extend
over the whole of Europe.” These words have created great
excitement, and the journals of this evening, in commenting
upon them, are of unanimous opinion that war at no distant
date is in contemplation.
Thursday Morning.—The Journal Official, of last evening.


explains that the words used by the Emperor were as follows:
“ France will ultimately extend over the whole of Europe the
blessings of peace.” The excitement caused by the false
report of the speech is, therefore, groundless, and proceedings
will be taken against the journals which published such
reports.
Berlin, Thursday Morning.—The king having partaken
too freely of sausages and sour kraut yesterday is slightly
indisposed this morning.
Vienna, Thursday.—Rumours were prevalent yesterday of
a Russian army having crossed the Frontier. Explanations
were immediately demanded from the Russian ambassador,
who, upon inquiry, ascertained that the only foundation for the
report was the circumstance that a Russian soldier had, when
running after a dog, unwittingly trespassed upon Austrian
territory. This explanation has been considered satisfactory.
New York, Thursday.—Senator Bowie, of Missouri, has
laid before the house a resolution to take possession of Great
Britain and her colonies in liquidation of the Alabama claims.
This resolution will be taken into consideration at an early
day. Gold 130. 5.30 Bonds 85.
Yesterday evening the occasion of passing Cape Horn was
celebrated according to custom. In the saloon a merry party
assembled at nine o’clock. ' We regret that space will not
allow us to give more than an epitome of the proceedings.
The first toast, viz., the health of Captain, Mrs., and Miss
Atwood was proposed by Mr. Sewell, supported by Mr.
Brook, and received with acclamation, followed by a song by
Dr. Hosford, “The Englishman.” The next toast, “The
officers of the ship,” coupled with the names of Dr. Hosford
and Mr. Miles, was proposed by Mr. Disher, and duly
honoured. Mr. Miles returned thanks. Dr. Hosford then
proposed “The ladies,” for whom Mr. Howden returned
thanks. A song by Mr. Miles, “Mary May,” followed.
The last toast, “Absent friends on both sides of the line,”
was proposed by Mr. Sewell, and the proceedings were
brought to a close with the following songs; “ Home Boys
Home,” by Dr. Hosford. “The Sea,” Mr. West. “My


Old Kentucky Home,” Mr. Mayer. “Policeman 93 X,”
Mr. Ellis. “Oh! Had I but Aladdin’s Lamp,” Mr. Miles.-
“Australia,” Mr. Brook. “The Milkmaid,” Mr. Mayer, and
“Ring the Bell, Watchman,” by Dr. Hosford and chorus.
It was regretted by all that neither the captain nor any of the
officers, except the surgeon and engineers, were able to be
present.
Lost.—Mrs. Atwood’s copy of the “ Somersetshire Medley.”
Lost, Lost, Lost.—A great coat. Any person returning it
at once shall have the use of it in the tropics. Apply to F. J.
To Correspondents. Received, with thanks, Salonica,
Charon, Fidget, Lion’s Den, F. Jackson.


No. 5.]
[ Friday, June 3, 1870.
The “ Somersetshire ” Sea Pie.
Seldom we should think has it fallen to the lot of our
predecessors in nautical journalism, to have to record a
succession of such tempestuous weather as we have ex-
perienced during the past week. Storm after storm has
beaten upon our ship, not only delaying her progress, but
exposing her to danger. Bad as the weather was before we
rounded Cape Horn; it was a mere nothing in comparison
with that which followed, and as each succeeding night found
our ship contending with heavy seas and furious gales, we
were almost tempted to side with the desponding, and to
believe that the voyage was an unlucky one altogether.
There is no denying the fa£t, that ever since we sailed, light
and contrary winds have been the rule, and fair winds the
exception, and that we cannot expcft a very rapid passage;
still we feel that there is much cause for thankfulness, that
the first half of our voyage, and that the most dangerous, has
been accomplished in safety, and that we have had no disaster
to record either as regards the ship or her company.
Each day is now bringing us into warmer weather, the days
are lengthening, and the sun is beginning to show his face;
let us, therefore, trust that we have bid adieu to our troubles,
and that the remembrance of them will serve to make us
more fully appreciate blue skies and smooth waters. We
will now continue our epitome of the week’s progress. On
Friday the 27th inst., the propeller was started at 8.30 a.m.,
the wind being N.E., which at noon increased to a gale
accompanied by snow. In the evening the wind shifted to
N.W. and from thence to W., and by midnight was blowing
a hurricane, the sea being at the time terribly high. The fore
top-sail was blown clean away, and the fore-sail, which was
loosed, but not unfurled, was split into ribbons; the engines
were kept going to keep the ship’s head to the wind. Very


few of the passengers,went to bed that night, and those who
turned in as usual got but little sleep. The gale moderated on
Saturday morning, and the engines were stopped at xi.3o a.m.
On Sunday at 5 a.m. the engines were again started, the wind
having dropped. Divine service was conducted morning and
evening by the Rev. Mr. Schleicher, and we were glad to
notice a larger attendance of passengers. On Monday we
were still under steam, endeavouring to make way against a
strong head wind and sea. At night several seas broke over
the ship, one of them finding its way through the saloon sky-
light much to the discomfort of those who were engaged with
their quiet rubber of whist, or glass of grog at the table beneath
many of them getting an unexpected, and equally unwelcome,
shower-bath. The violent rolling and pitching during the
night prevented anybody from enjoying anything like un-
disturbed repose. The screw was hoisted at about 9 a.m. on
Tuesday morning, a fair wind having come at last from the
S.W. This increased to a strong gale in the afternoon, and
at night the ship was flying along before a high and
dangerous sea at the rate of fifteen knots. A few seas broke
over the ship during the night, but early in the morning the
whole saloon was deluged by a mass of water which dashed
through one of the cabin windows washing its unfortunate
inmates out of their respective berths, and taking unwarrant-
able liberties with the property of various passengers. All
available hands being occupied baling the water out of the
saloon, breakfast was unavoidably postponed until an hour
later than usual. On Wednesday the wind moderated, and
the day being warm and bright our weary, wet, and dis-spirited
passengers were enabled to smooth their ruffled feathers. At
noon the log registered 346 knots, the best day’s run we have
yet made. At 3 p.m. the funeral of the child, whose death
we mention elsewhere, took place: the service being read by
the Rev. Mr. Schleicher. The ship being steady during the
night, all were enabled to enjoy a good night’s rest. Thurs-
day morning was bright and fine, but some violent squalls
took place in the afternoon. At 8.30 p.m. the wind, which
had got round N.W. by N., again became favourable, and
to-day we are progressing favourably under all sail.


Friday, May
27
SS- 2 S s.
Lat. 58.46 W. Long.
Dist. 207 Knots.
Saturday
28
33-5 a s -
99
5 6 -34
99
>9
127
99
Sunday
29
52.20 S.
99
3 2 -3i
99
99
173
99
Monday
3°
50.30 s.
99
49.8
99
99
171
99
Tuesday
3 1
49.17 s.
>j
47.20
99
99
ICO
))
Wednes. June i
45.2! S.
99
41.8
9*
99
348
99
Thursday
2
42.21 s.
99
36.20
9>
99
276
99
Total -
1402.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
“SOMERSETSHIRE” THEATRE.
IMMENSE ATTRACTION!! GRAND NOVELTY!!!
HIGH LIFE BELOW STAIRS;
OR,
THE BATTLE OF THE PLATE, AND MYSTERIOUS DIS-
APPEARANCE OF THE BACON,
An Extravaganza in two a6ts, in which will appear
THE WHOLE OF THE TERTIUS COMPANY.
DRAMATIS PERSONA!.
Sir Kenneth Furioso ... An Irish Chief.
Sir Charles du Barri ... An English Baron.
The O’Conlon Don ... A Peaceable Irishman.
By the Originals.
Courtiers, Attendants, Lance Bearers, &c., by the rest of the
Company.
ACT I.
Scene I.—THE CABIN OF A SHIP, Sir Charles, gorgeously
arrayed in shooting coat and slippers, seated at breakfast. Enter
Sir K.—
Sir K. —Base Caitiff! that you stole my bacon’s true,
Tis' true you swallowed it and therein lies.
The head and front of your offending;
For the plate on which it simmered, I care not.
Within my father’s halls in ancient Galway,
A dozen such adorn the dresser,
E


Perish the dross !! But for the bacon;
Know, glutton base, that for a hundred years.
The breed from sire to son’s been handed down.
And that this last of porkers had
By my maternal parent been reserved
For my especial use, her only son.
Sir G. —Vile Slanderer ! I stole it not.
With better tucker doth my seneschal
Supply my buttery, but search my bunk.
And if within that broad domain.
The smallest particle of pork is found ;
A thousand marks I’ll forfeit,
Cans’t make more of it ?
Sir K. —I can, and will, upon thy recreant body prove
That in thy throat thou foully liest.
Sir C. — Enough! my matutinal muffins finished.
I’ll wait on thee, so God defend the right.
Scene lI.—ON DECK OF SAME SKIP, Sir C. & Sir K,
Fighting. Enter the O’Conlon Don magnificently got up in frock
coat and five-storey hat.
The O’C. — l tell yees, stop 1 let yees shake hands.
Sir C.— My reverend friend avaunt,
Else thy new fangled head-piece with my maul
Into a thousand atoms I will crush.
[Fighting renewed. Sir K. is vanquished,}
Sir K.— l will no more of it, I’m such a figure,
I must give in, shake hands, let’s liquor,
ACT 11,
An interval of a whole day is supposed to have elapsed when the
retainers being assembled in the baronial hall of all the Barries, the
family bard, by name Du Vernon, splendidly decorated with
opossum and other skins recounts the doughty deeds of both
champions, and the final triumph of his master.
[Bard sings.— Air, “Death of Nelson.”]
’Twas in the sheep-pen bay.
We viewed the fierce affray.
Each limb was trembling then.
They scorned the word each spoke.
Mouth, nose, and knuckles broke.


And proved themselves game men.
Our Cook he marked them on the wave.
Loud cheers their gallant backers gave,
For pork, and soup, and boulli;
Along the deck the signal ran,
Fight on my braves, and every man,
W ill see you do your duty.
[Air changes to “ Lady of the Lake.”]
I’ll fared it then with bold Sir Kenneth,
That on the ground his old caubeen he shieth.
Whose stifFning crown, and jagged brim.
Had turned aside old Death, that tyrant grim.
Trained at the “ Butcher’s Arms ” his fists to wield,
Sir Charles’s fives were sword and shield.
In deadly rounds six times they stood.
Six times the Saxon fist drew blood.
Now gallant Celt, hold, hold, thine own.
No stripling’s arms are round thee thrown;
They tug, they strain, down, down, they go,
Saxon above and Celt below.
[Air changes again to “ Death of Nelson.”]
At last the fatal blow,
A trifle just the eye below,
Sir Kenneth’s cheek received;
Heaven fights on your side
Sir Charles, he faintly cried;
Now, long enough I’ve lived,
In fruitless wars my life has passed.
In Porker’s cause I breathe my last.
For Porker, soup, and boulli.
FINIS.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To THE EdDITUR OF THE “SUMMERSET SHIRE” See Pi.
Deer Edditur. —I have been grately pleazed and much
amuzed in readin of your valuabell and entertanein peeriodicle
sinz I started on this voiage. Bein dezirous and willin to let
the yung lades and gentlemun on bored have the advantidge
of my grate expeeryence, I have bean injuced to take up a
pen and rite you a letter, althou I am not by enny meens a
litterery persun, this bein my furst attemt at ritin for the
£ 2


public press. My headukation was much neglekted in urly
lifetime, which is to be lambmentid, but i have improoved
myself very considerabl sine I arived at ears of deskretion.
i ham nou travellin for sevaral reesuns, partly for plcssur,
partly for the benefit of my helth, which ave sufferd much in
konserkwense of the arduus dooties of my perfesshun, but
most of all for the purpose of improving myself stil furder
than I have ithurto dun.
Sur, my perfesshun is that of a footman, from which
agreeabel occupashun I have for some time retired. As I sed
prevusly, I am a persun of extensiv expeerence, and my
manners has always been grately admired. I will nou tel
you that I wunc ad a twin bruther, some fue ears oldur than
me, hoo proved himself particular kind and affeeshunnate, we
was both trained and brot up to the same perfesshun, but
wen the gold diggins was started in Victory my affectshunate
brother give up bein a footman and went orf to Orstraly. he
was a lucky man as well as a affectshunite won, and cum
back to ingland with a fortun wich he maid at the diggins,
wen he took no more notic of me than if i were nobodi. He
bawt a ous close to Kennintun Oval, in wich he rezided 6
munths, wen is constitushun brok doun threw takin neet
brandy, arfter menny disputz among the loryurs, lat length
cum in to his proppurty, and instuntly resind my sitivation
with the intentshun of retirin from public life, has I already
obsurved, my elth ad sufferd from the menny responsibillitys
which devolvd upon me, therefour my meddicle man advised
me to take a see voige to Orstraly. wishin to improv myself,
and noin my manners to be alius admird, I at wunc concentid.
Sur, if yew wood like to ear from me agen i shal be mutch
pleezed to relate my numerrus adventours, but in konsekents
of the see bein so ruff at presents, i finds riting a verry
difficult mattur, like a frend of my fathers, Mr. Weller by
name, did wen he rote a Valentine to his sweethart, I will
now say adoo, Mr. Edditur, And remane, yeur umble servunt.
JOHN SMAUKER.
P.S.—I wish yeu to inform yewr newmerus and inteligent
reeders that I am a purseun of grate exponents, and my
manners is extensively admired.


To the Editor of the “Somersetshire” Sea Pie.
Sir. —My attention has been drawn to an article appearing
in your last week’s issue under the title “Important Dis-
covery.” The writer furnishes a specimen of doggrel rhyme
which he is pleased to designate poetry, and which he des-
cribes as having discovered, in manuscript, among the
sweepings of the lower deck.
As it is well known amongst the passengers, I am and
have been for some time engaged in a poetical effusion,
having for its subject “The Storm,” encountered by us on the
aBth ult. It is also within the knowledge of your readers
that I have had the honour, on various occasions, of reading
and reciting, in the saloon, passages from Shakespeare and
other authors, which I am proud to say were invariably
received with marked appreciation and applause, it would also
appear that my name would not inappropriately supply a
blank in the lines referred to, furnishing a sort of rhyme to
the last preceding line. From these, amongst other circum-
stances, it is clear that the intention of your contributor is
that the public should draw the inference that I am the author
of the lines referred to, I feel that such an imputation, if
allowed to pass unchallenged, might seriously injure me in
my literary capacity, and I have, therefore, no alternative but
solemnly and unequivocally to deny such authorship. Further,
I must express my opinion that the alleged discovery of your
contributor is a base fabrication from beginning to end, and
was dictated with no other obje£t than to injure me in my
literary standing and prospects with the public. I may add,
that as soon as I have overcome a few of the difficulties con-
nected with such minor matters as rhyme and metre, both of
which I regard as subjects of very secondary importance, I
hope to be able to lay before your readers, and I may say
before the world, a composition of my own, from which they
may be enabled to judge of my qualifications as a poet.
I remain, Sir, indignantly yours,
F. JACKSON.


LAMENT OF THE SINGLE YOUNG LADIES.
We’re ready, we’re ready, it really is hard.
That from Hymen’s sweet bonds we so long are debarred;
The men are so the hard-hearted creatures.
They don’t seem to care for our smiles or fair features ;
There’s a sprinkling of blue jackets, we like them the best.
But they’re just like the others, when put to the test.
The men tell us we form the delight of their lives,
But they very well manage to live without wives.
They bow when they meet us, and say we look charming,
The weather is cold, ’tis their hearts that want warming.
They laugh and they chat, and they pass for our beaux,
Yet ’tis very provoking, they will not propose.
What is it they want, oh ! sadly we fear.
The charms they require are some hundreds a year.
Out papas, poor old souls, trot about every day.
Till their legs and our patience are near worn away;
The men might possess some respect for old age.
And by taking their daughters their troubles assuage.
I am sure taken en masse we’re are a good-looking set,
A better assortment the men ne’er will get j
We very well know that all tastes don’t agree.
But we are as complaisant as women can be.
Oh ! if t’were the fashion for ladies to ask
(Bye the bye, this to some is no difficult task).
How delightful it would be to pick and to choose.
For of course the men would not, and dare not refuse.
But, alas ! we are doomed not unsought to be won,
If it rested with us, oh ! how soon ’twould be done.
’Tis a terrible thing that men won’t understand.
They are really the plague and the pest of the land;
Our papas and our mamas get quite cross and look glum.
As much as to say you’ve been too long at home,
We’are ready, we’re ready, will nobody try ?
Or in single felicity are we to die ?
FACETIÆ &c.
Well, Pat! said a friend, you seem to have a very bad cold
this morning. Faix, and I have that same, sure and dld’nt I
sleep in a field last night and I forgot to shut the gate.


Pat, having had his jaw-bone broken by a bullet, was asked
one day how he was getting on? Arrah, be dad, but it’s
mighty onconvanient, for wheniver I spake I'm obleeged to
hould me jaw.
Pat, having taken the Queen’s shilling, requested to be
allowed to enter the 78th regiment, in which his brother was
serving. Being told that this was impossible, there being no
vacancies, he replied that since that was the case he would
enter the 79th so as to be near him.
Why is the screw the most dissatisfied thing on board?
Answer: Because it is always ready for a revolution.
What is the largest room in the world ? Answer: Room
for improvement.
What is most like a hen stealing? Answer: A cock
robin.
How do we know that fowls have no future existence?
Answer: Because they have their necks twirled (next world)
in this.
SPORTING.— BY CHARON.
Maiden Plate. —Latest Betting.—6 to 4 on “The Bar-
ber;” even money on “The Invalide;” ao to 1 agst.
“ Dark’an; ”aoto 1 agst. “Rory O’More;” 30 to 1 agst.
“The Nigger;” 100 to 1 agst. “Gorilla.”
As anticipated in my communication of last week, “The
Barber” has considerably improved in the betting, 6 to 4
being freely offered. He is doing strong work morning and
evening, and his trainers think nothing on the list can touch
him. “ Invalide,” in consequence of first impressions and
his old performances, remains at even money, but is sadly
neglecting his training, only taking an evening walk to the
ground and very gentle exercise when there. I expect to see
him recede in the betting. His backers were rather “down
on it” in consequence of a heavy wetting he got this week,
more particularly as he was without his clothing at the time;
however, as his constitution is good no ill effects have as yet
appeared. The- “ Dark’un,” spoken of last week has put in


an appearance, he seems a first-class horse, dark brown with
black points, from the Emerald Isle, with good muscle and
action, but is at present too beefy. If he goes into active
training I think he will be a safe investment to carry a few
hundreds. As yet he takes his exercise in clothing, part of
which he lost during a preliminary canter last week. None
of the others, except “The Nigger,” are inquired for. I
think he is doing rather too much work, and runs a chance of
breaking' down.
DEATH.
On the Night of Monday, May 30th,
ELIZABETH HINDMARSH,
Aged 5 Years.
AN HOUR OF HORROR.
CHAPTER I.
One evening in May, 1853, I was sitting in my chambers
in Pump Court, Temple, lazily puffing my pipe and dreamily
watching the smoke, which curled upwards from the bowl.
Briefs were few and far between, and though I managed to
pick up a few guineas to pay my rent, and the salary of the
boy who acted as my clerk, light porter, valet, and factotum,
my prospects were by no means bright, and my hopes of being
able to marry and settle in life seemed likely to be indefinitely
postponed. Altogether I felt dull and melancholy, and when
I heard a knock at the door, I felt by no means disposed to
welcome any visitor. “ Come in,” I cried sulkily, in the ex-
pectation that the opening door would reveal the face of one
of my neighbours or some equally uninteresting person; but,
all my ill-humour vanished in an instant, when I saw that my
visitor was none other than Tom Singleton. Tom had been
my college companion, and the friendship then formed had
been kept up, though from the circumstance of Tom’s residing


in Cumberland and I in London, we were only enabled to
meet at intervals.
“Now,” said Tom, when he was duly ensconced in my easy
chair, “what do you think has brought me to London? but it's
no use puzzling your brains, you’d never find out in a month
of Sundays. Read that, old fellow,” pulling out of his pocket
a newspaper and pointing to a column, headed; “The Austra-
lian Gold Fields.”
“Interesting enough, no doubt, Tom,” said I, as I handed
him back the paper, “still I don’t see what on earth it has to
do with your visit to town.”
“Why,” said he, “the fact is, I’ve made up my mind to be
off to the diggings, and I want you to go with me.”
“What! go to Australia?” said I, utterly taken aback by
the proposal. “Yes,” replied Tom, “look here, old fellow, what
good can any one possibly do for himself here in England ?
Look at yourself, with all your talent, you are only making
enough to pay for your bread and cheese, and in a few years
with all your exertions, the utmost you can hope to attain will
be the means of supporting a family with the greatest eco-
nomy. Now, look at Australia.—There you may have to rough
it and to work hard, but you have the prospect, or at least the
chance of making a fortune, and anyhow, the excitement and
novelty of the thing is worth something. I am fully deter-
mined to go; with you if possible, if not, by myself, but I
wish you to consider the matter seriously and not to come to
a hasty conclusion. ”
I will not weary my readers with a detail of the discussion
that ensued, and which lasted far into the night, suffice it to
say, that when Tom walked into my room to breakfast, in the
morning, I said, “the die is cast, I have made up my mind to
go with you.”
“That’s right,” said he, “I was sure you would take a sen-
sible view of the matter, and now hurrah! for Melbourne, the
sooner we are off the better, so we won’t lose any time about
it; I see from the paper to-day, that the clipper ship ‘Firefly,’
is to sail from the East India Docks to-morrow week, so I
vote we take our passage in her.”
“By Jove,” said I, “we shall have to work like niggers to get


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wanted, a few soft nibs, J. S. preferred; the highest value
given. Apply to Editor.
Lost, a two-bladed knife with tortoise-shell handle, maker
Lockwood Brothers. Apply as above.
ready by then, so you must take upon yourself the booking
our passage and buying our outfit, and this will leave me at
liberty to wind up my affairs.”
Breakfast over, Tom set out for the city, and I proceeded to
the steward’s office to arrange for vacating my chambers. In
this I luckily found no difficulty, a tenant being at once found
for the rooms, and my furniture purchased by him. The rest
of the morning was occupied in flying visits to some of my
friends, and writing letters to others, and the time flew so
quickly, that when Tom returned at three o’clock I had no
notion he had been so long absent.
Throwing his hat on the table and himself into a chair,
Tom exclaimed, “well, my boy, I’ve done a good day’s work.
Seen the agent, been down to the docks, secured our berths,
and ordered our outfits. Here’s your ticket, so there’s no
going back now.” With this, Tom placed before me a printed
document, duly dated and signed, to the effect that Messrs.
Junk, Dunnage and Co., contracted with Frederick Briefless,
to take the said Frederick Briefless as a cabin passenger to
Melbourne, by the ship “Firefly,” &c., Bcc.
“Well,” I observed with a sigh of resignation, “you have
been and done it with a vengeance, so now we are in for it.
What else ? ”
“Oh!” he said, pulling out a formidable looking document,
“here’s the list of your outfit, which Silver & Co. undertake
to have ready and on board by Monday; so I think I have
made good use of my time.”
“You have indeed,” said I, “and now for an adjournment
to the Cock, for I’m as hungry as a hunter.”
The following week saw us on board, and on the 75th day
from our departure from the Downs, the good ship “ Firefly ”
cast anchor in Hobson’s Bay.
(To he Continued.)


No. 6.]
[Friday, June 10, 1870.
The “ Somersetshire ” Sea Pie.
The past week has been a very pleasant one, the weather
has been delightfully bright, but not so warm as to be
oppressive, the thermometer not having exceeded Bo° in the
shade.
Our progress has been, on the whole, satisfactory. It is
true that since Monday night we have been under steam,
but we have reason for congratulation that no head winds
have been encountered. What little wind is now blowing is
favourable, and hopes are entertained of our speedily falling in
with the S.E. trade winds. The only event we have to record
connected with the ship during the week, has been the
splitting of her main-sail on Monday morning during a squall.
Several sails have been lost or damaged during the voyage,
and we are credibly informed that the ship left London with a
very insufficient outfit.
The number of knots run during the week has been 1,504.
On Wednesday we crossed the tropic of Capricorn, and we
hope to reach the Line in another week. We shall then be
but a day or two behind the previous voyage of this ship, so
that, after all, we may, perhaps, make a better passage than
we anticipated.
We are very sorry to have to mention the mysterious dis-
appearance of Nos. 1, a, and 4of our journal. A reward has
been offered for their recovery, but if they do not come
to hand, it will be impossible to print the paper on arrival in
England, as no other copy is in existence. It is hoped that
they are only mislaid, as we cannot conceive that any person
has wilfully concealed or destroyed them.
Great preparations are being made for the bazaar, which
will take' place during the ensuing week, the exact day on
which it is to come off is not, however, yet fixed.


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Temp.
Friday, June 3.
39.30 s.
33-4 W.
227
55
Saturday
4-
35-35 S.
29.33 W.
280
60
Sunday
5-
33.18 S.
28.36 W.
208
*5
Monday
6.
29.18 s.
26.18 w.
219
69
Tuesday
7-
26.19 s.
23.17 w.
187
80
Wednes.
8.
23.23 s.
24.56 w.
*75
75
Thursday
9-
19.39 S.
23.6 w.
203
74
Total Knots
—-
r 5°4-
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
Average per day, 214 ; total for previous weeks, 7,364 knots; total
distance run up to noon, Thursday 9th, 9,068 knots 5 average per
day since commencement of voyage, 215 knots.
THE MERCHANT SEAMEN’S ORPHAN
ASYLUM.
A Bazaar being about to take place next week in aid of the
above Institution, we feel that a few words on the subject
will not prove inopportune. Those who are anxious for a
more detailed account of this Asylum, we would advise to
study the annual reports with which all subscribers are
furnished.
The Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum was founded as
far back as the year 1827 ; its object being to provide a home
for the destitute offspring of British sailors. Up to the
present time between 900 and 1,000 children have found
within its walls a shelter and a home, receiving at the
same time a good education, calculated to make them useful
members of society. The Asylum, when first established,
was situated in Clerk Street, St. George’s-in-the-East, where
ten children were received. This number was soon increased,
and in 1834 fresh premises were taken in Bow Road, where
xao inmates were accommodated. But this, like the former
institution, soon overflowing, it was determined to build a
new Asylum on a much larger scale. The site chosen was
in the parish of Snaresbrook, in a healthy locality, delightfully
situated on the road from London to Chigwell. The first
stone of the new building was laid by H.R.H. Prince Consort


in 186 1, and the new home was opened by Lord Russell in
July, 186 a. The number of Orphans resident at present
is 309, but the Institution is capable of accommodating 300
when the additional support afforded to it shall have made it
possible to increase proportionately the number of its inmates.
The character and calling of the British sailor is everywhere
held in estimation amongst all classes of Englishmen; and
we feel assured that few, to whom the existence and objects of
this Institution become fairly known, can fail to take an
interest in its welfare, or refuse to accord to it their support.
In referring to the list of subscriptions from ships, we find
that the vessels commanded by Captain Atwood have always
held a pre-eminent place. Whilst under his command no
less than xos. 1 id. was subscribed by the “Essex,” and
up to the present time the sum of 86 has been forwarded to
the society from the S. S. Somersetshire. Let everyone of us
then do what we can, not only for the benefit of the society,
but to maintain the honourable prestige of the ship in which we
sail. The ladies, in a most exemplary manner, have devoted
their time and talents in preparing for the coming bazaar, and
we hope that the gentlemen will show, by their liberality in
making purchases, due appreciation of their efforts, and will
do all they can to promote the well-being of so deserving an
Institution as the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
We extract from the columns of some of our contemporaries,
the following flattering notices of our paper:—
The Cape Horn Mercury. —We have received a copy of the
“Somersetshire” Sea Pie, a new weekly journal. It appears
ably conducted, and many of the articles possess considerable
merit.
The Antipodes Albatross. —This morning’s mail brought us
the first four copies of the “ Somersetshire Sea Pie,” a newly
established newspaper. We are pleased to hail this addition
to our periodical literature, and we doubt not, that it will have
a large circulation in this district.


The Patagonian Pioneer. —A rival, and we fear a formidable
one, in the literature of this part of the world, has appeared
under the quaint title of the “Somersetshire Sea Pie.” We
beg to announce to our readers, that competition will but
stimulate us to increased exertions, to sustain the position of
our journal as the leading organ of this hemisphere.
The Magellan Cloud. —With that impartiality which should
always characterize journalists, we are glad to welcome a new
fellow-labourer, in the shape of the “Somersetshire Sea Pie,”
a weekly newspaper, five numbers of which have already ap-
peared. Our contemporary evidently possesses an able staff
of writers, and we heartily wish it success.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Sir. —Having accidently dropped across your widely cir-
culated and influential paper, my eye rested on an advertise-
ment of: “ Lost a Great Coat,” the loan of which was offered
to the finder whilst in the tropics. Sir, I believe I have found
this great coat, and a marvellous great coat it is, equally
capable, no doubt, of keeping out either heat or cold; it Is in
every sense of the word, a great coat, great in the first place,
from its antiquity. On close inspection it is found to exhibit
evident traces of having played a part in the universal deluge,
in fact I doubt whether any other coat ever made would have
been capable of keeping Father Noah dry during that me-
morable down pour. It must now be doubtless a great family
relic, only wojn by the greatest of the family on great occa-
sions. Anything further might occupy too great space, I will,
therefore, communicate with the owner, who will, no doubt, be
grateful. I am, Mr. Editor, yours truly, &c., X.Z.
Deer Edditur. —Fur the second time I’m wunce mower
takin my penn in and, but has thawts crouds my mind I
finds it diffikult ware to start, thou praps i may giv yeu sum
of my experence on bored this vessle. Wei, sur, the first
mornin of the voiage I woak urly and procedid to dres myself,
wen avin deck’d on my ansomest soot (wishin to appeer to


advantedge befoare my felloe pasingers), I suddinly perseevd
that my butes wos not cleened, I insterntly opend the dore of
my cabbin and hollerd out at the top of my voice, “ Stuard,”
I ad to kawl mower than a duzzen times befour I receeved
enny anser. This maid me in a grate rage, so wen i see the
stuard cummin I at wunse begun abuzzin im for knot a
kleenin mi butes, and knot hanserin mi kail. E wos verry
impertenint, and sed I cuddent expekt to av evvrything write
the fust day, this maid mi raje stll grater, soe i nok’d im
doun on the hinstunt. E jumped up remarkabul kwick, hand
ceazin a kan ful of water wich stud neer, chucked it hall ovur
me, and boulted has sharp has e wos abel. Mi favurite soot
was completly dammidged, and I felt very onkumfutabcl orl
over. N. B.—l shall remember that Stuard wen we reatches
Lundon.
Wee ad knot been on bored menny days wen my attenshun
wus perticler struk bi the vareegated kullers of the label
kloths, kawsed bi the gravi, curry, jews, and settery, runnin
out of the dishes at dinner, the kombind efeekt of wich i
konsidur wos fine, soe much soe that if i’d not retired from
my formur genteel perfesshun I shuld ave tried to introjuice
the same kind of kullerd kloths among hall fashunabel curkels.
Sur, i believ i told yeu i ham travelin for the good of mi elth,
i ham glad to tell yew that i ham nou purty wel. I takes
plenty of hexersize bi day, and I sleeps wel at nite, hand
(what is of mower konserkence) mi appertight is exceading
good, pertikler at meel times. I drinks but littel, yet i takes
kare to ave that littel of the best kwality. Yeu wont ketch
John Smauker a drinkin ship’s brandy, nor enny huther ov
there lickers neethur; noe, if i wants to get pisund, Mr.
Edditur, I’ll goe to a kemmists and get sumthin as ul do it
respectabel, and not disstroy my konstertushun with Meshers.
Munney Wiggram’s sperrits. I want yew to no, sur, that i
ham an individjewil of grate experiancc, but never did I
experence befour ennything like wot apperd to me on the nite
we kum round the orn, and wich I will tel yew about in sum
futcher communekation. Opin, Mr. Edditur, that yew are
fealin mutch bennefit from the voyage, I beg to remane,
Your faitheful Frond,
JOHN SMAUKER.
P.S.—I understand that sum ov the yung peeple av bin


makin fun ov nil grammer and speling, if enny moar kum-
plantes cums to mi years, I shal take the matter into mi ands
and serve them the same has i served the stuard.
Thursday, io th June, 1870.
Mr. Editor. —Dear Sir, — I am glad to inform you
that Mr. Francis de Vernon of the Second Cabin has re-
considered his intention of abandoning his original idea of
concerts, and has, on two occasions during the current week,
favoured us with those charming re-unions, ravishing our ears
with the soothing strains of harmonious music, and delight-
ing our eyes with terpsychorean displays of surpassing
splendour, in which valse, varsoviana, polka, reels, jigs,
quadrilles, and nigger breakdowns followed each other in rapid
and enchanting profusion; and made us almost rebel against
that hateful and inexorable mandate, which forced us at ten
p.m. to leave the scene of such unalloyed and unexpected
bliss. Foremost among the host of talent, Mr. de Vernon has
been fortunate enough to secure, must be mentioned that
swarthy son of Ethiopia, to whom I before alluded as the
unrequited lover of our solitary darling; and who, on both
occasions, proved himself worthy of a better fate. As the
rich tones of his deep and melodious falsetto voice, reminding
one forcibly of a tin whistle, wafted o’er the waters of the
deep blue sea, and his handsome noble and expressive ebon
features, stood revealed bathed in the silvery light of the
gentle goddess, thoughts 'of love, of home, of sweethearts, of
blood, murder, and all the rest of it seemed to take possession
of many manly bosoms, and melt them to unwonted tenderness.
Of his dancing it behoves me not to speak, did I possess the
word-painting powers of a Dickens, I might attempt to do
justice to its manifold charms; let it suffice that Taglioni,
Vestris, and naughty Lola Montes would have infallibly
hidden their diminished heads had they lived to behold the
true poetry of motion as exemplified by our black friend in a
nigger break down. Words fail me again, when I attempt
to do justice to the spirited effusions of the Rollicking Ram
School so feelingly rendered in the Champagne Charley style,
by the talented and modest de Vernon; by the departure of


Mr. de Vernon from her shores, Victoria has sustained a loss,
which is, I fear, irreparable. The sentimental and pathetic
style of ballad poetry, for which England has long been
famous, found an able exponent in Jemmy Ducks, the Butcher’s
mate, who favoured us with several choice and well-selected
specimens of this class of music. In fact, were Ito attempt
to do justice to the galaxy of talent and accomplishments of
which Mr. de Vernon is the brilliant centre, I should
inevitably exhaust your patience and my paper. I cannot,
however, conclude without paying a passing tribute to the
brilliant talents of one of Ireland’s most gifted sons, the young
and the fascinating O’Macafirney, who m the most dulcet tones
of his powerful voice fbasso profundo) favoured us with many
of the sweet melodies of his much suffering land, and
enchanted us with specimens of the dances formerly practised at
that praiseworthy and gallant assemblage (now, alas! abolished)
known as Donnybrook Fair.
As the soft light of the pale moon penetrated into hidden
crevices in the neighbourhood of the fore-mast before un-
dreamt of, I beheld numerous amorous swains breathing
vows of love to their adored ones; and my heart grew sad
within me, as just before descending for the evening I beheld
the arms of a certain “Artist Peruquier” lovingly clasped
around the slender waist of our only representative of the
fair sex. I thought of the heart-aches and the blighted
hopes, the head-aches and the sleepless nights in store for,
oh! how many, and then I turned in, and slept like a top
till morning.
Q
RANDOM RHYMES.
1. There is an old fellow called Sewell,
Editorial tasks he can do well,
Though he’s too fond by half
Of indulging in chaff.
Yet still everybody likes Sewell.
2. And next there comes Ellis, J. E.,
Our scribe and our printer at sea.
On Thursday he writes,
And on Friday recites.
The newspaper in the Cuddie.
P


3. There’s also a party called Q.,
Who has written a letter or two;
I’m sure he is clever,
Although I have never
Yet met with this party called Q.
4. Then Charon stands next on the list.
Who of sporting affairs gives the gist.
If he’d get up some fun,
He’d delight every one.
For we’re all sick of cribbage and whist.
5. You asked what I thought of the Pie,
So I hastened to send a reply,
But I purpose to speak,
Of some others next week,
Contributors to the Sea Pie.
SPORTING.— BY CHARON.
Maiden Plate. —Latest Betting.—7 to 4on the “ Barber;’'
6 to 4 agst. “ Invalide;” 10 to 1 agst. “Rory O’More;” 20 to
1 agst. “Dark’un;” 30 to 1 agst. “Nigger;” 100 to 1 agst.
“ Gorilla.”
During the past week the betting has materially changed,
“The Barber” advanced a point while “Invalide” has receded
considerably ; the warm weather agrees wonderfully well with
the former’s mode of training. He is going better and stronger
than ever, particularly in the evenings, when no amount of
work seems to tire him. He is evidently a sticker, and good
judges who watched his- performance on Monday evening last
say he has the race in his hand. “ Invalide” who was at one
time first favourite, is, lam afraid, going entirely wrong. He
was in the hands of the vet. this week and underwent
an operation of the hoof for corns and sand crack. -This
accounts for his going rather stilty to which I alluded a fort-
night since. I think his racing career is rapidly drawing to a
close. “ Rory O’More” has got a good hoist in the market,
his price being now at 10 to 1. This is partially accounted
for by his having had favourable training grounds for the last


week, he is a showy looking colt that may furnish a good
useful second-rater. “ Dark'un,” the coming horse that was
to be, has rather disappointed his backers, he does not take
kindly to his training, and I am afraid will not stand the
necessary preparation.
Melbourne was then a very different place from what it is
now, and instead of the air of quiet respectability which it
now assumes, it presented the appearance of an ant-hill which
has been suddenly invaded by an enemy. Everybody seemed
in a state of excitement, heavily laden vehicles of every des-
cription were moving along the streets, coaches crammed
with passengers were taking their departure, whilst everywhere
were to be seen strange-looking men in flannel shirts, and jack
boots, carrying a revolver in one side of their belt, and a
bowie knife in the other. The cause of all this excitement
was gold. The drays were taking goods to the diggings, the
coaches were filled with intending diggers, and the rough
bearded men were the diggers themselves. Gold was in
everybody's thoughts, gold the subject of everybody's conver-
sation, and it would have been a safe bet that every other
man you met in the streets either had been, was, or was about
to be a digger.
Such was the state of things when Tom and I landed in
Melbourne, and of course we felt the change doubly striking
after our quiet life on board ship. Our plans, as determined
on previous to disembarking were, to lose as little time as
possible in Melbourne but to start for the diggings as soon
after our arrival as practicable. A few hours would suffice for
requisite purchases and to make enquiries; the first thing
to be done, therefore, was to engage beds for the night. In
our ignorance we thought that we had only to walk into the
first hotel which took our fancy and bespeak a room, but we
soon found out our mistake. Instead of the landlady's civil
“ Bedrooms Sir, certainly, chambermaid, show the gentlemen
to No. ‘ 23 and 24,' the individual whom we addressed at the
F 2
AN HOUR OF HORROR —(continued).


Antipodes Hotel, after a vain attempt to keep from laughing
outright/’ replied, “ House full, twenty sleeping in the coffee-
room, and two on the billiard table, can’t even accommodate
regular customers.” “This is surely an exceptional case,” I
remarked to Tom as we again stepped into the street, but at
hotel, public-house and grog shop, the invariable answer was,
“No room, not a bed to be had.” “ Here’s a pretty go,”
said Tom after he and I had looked into each other’s faces in
blank amazement for full five minutes. “ I declare you and
I will have to begin roughing it a little sooner than we
expected and to sleep ‘ sub-jove’ to night. But let’s get some-
thing to eat, for I’m pretty well done up, there’s an eating-
house yonder, now for some dinner.” Whilst masticating a
very tough piece of meat, facetiously termed a beefsteak by the
vendor, and for which we were charged the modest sum of 55.
each, we agreed to go back to the ship and ask the captain to
take us on board for the night, we would then take our bag-
gage on shore with us in the morning, and start for Ballarat
in the afternoon. We had hardly left the eating house with
the intention of proceeding to the wharf when we were
accosted by a man who said, “ New chums, I’ll bet you’re
looking out for lodgings ain’t you?” “Yes,” we replied,
“Well,” said he. “unless you know the run of the ropes, you
won’t find them. Now you don’t look bad sort of chaps, so
I’m dashed if I don’t take you to the crib where I’m putting
up, and where, if I say you’re friends of mine they’ll perhaps
take you in.”
In anv other part of the world this protestation of friend-
ship on the part of a mere stranger would at once have
aroused our suspicions, and have met with an immediate
negative. In Australia, however, the case was different, so
after a hurried consultation we decided to accompany our new
found acquaintance.
Following our conductor we passed through two or three
streets, until turning down a narrow lane he stopped at the
door of a building which, as far as we could distinguish in the
darkness, appeared to be a small public-house. Entering the
passage he ushered us into a small room on the right, evi-
dently from the odour of stale tobacco smoke and liquor


which saluted us the coffee-room of the establishment. “Here
we are,” exclaimed he, “ and now mates let’s liquor, I’ll go
and fetch a glim, tallow seems scarce here,” so saying he left
the room.
“ Well, Fred,” said Tom, “what do you think of this busi-
ness ?”
“To tell the truth,” I answered, “I’ve been puzzling my
brains to make it out. Either the fellow is one of these lucky
diggers one hears about who go throwing their money about
like water, and feel benevolent towards all the world, or he’s
a villain, who thinks we have probably got , some money about
us, and wants to get it from us by fair means or foul, and
I confess that at present I rather incline to the latter opinion.”
“ So do I,” answered he, “ but until we are sure let us both
be on our guard, and above all we’ll drink as little as possible:
it’s a lucky thing we took the Captain’s advice and brought
our revolvers with us.”
“ Hush,” said I, “ here he comes,” as a heavy step was
heard in the passage, and in an instant after our friend entered
the room bearing in one hand a candlestick, and in the other
three glasses. Setting these down on the table, and drawing
from his pocket a full bottle, he exclaimed, “ been a long time
ain’t I, that d landlord’s busy, so I had to help myself.”
Pouring himself out a glass of the liquor he pushed the bottle
over to me, and then for the first time I got a full view of his
features.
My profession had brought me into contact with criminals
of all classes from the juvenile thief just placing his foot upon
the ladder of crime to the hardened ruffian who regarded
neither life nor property, and whose hand, like Esau’s, was
against every man, but never had I seen a worse countenance
than that which now met my gaze. The low receding fore-
head, the flat nose, the largely developed jaws proved, beyond
the possibility of a doubt, that a law-breaker, and that one of
the worst, was now entertaining us, and it needed not the
word convict to be stamped on his features to explain satis-
factorily the reason of his presence in Australia.
Hastily pouring a small quantity of the liquor into my
glass to conceal as much as possible my agitation, and motion


mg to Tom to, do the same, I nodded to the man, and we
both raised our glasses simultaneously. As he set his glass
down on the table I noticed that the middle finger of his right
hand wa? missing. But little conversation passed between
us, Tom and I being so taken aback by the appearance of
our entertainer, and so convinced that some villainy was
intended, that we felt ill at ease, and both declining his fre-
quent invitations to drink he lapsed gradually into silence, and
we were about to rise and endeavour to leave the house when
the door opened and another person appeared on the scene.
{To he continued.)
Wanted.—A straight jacket for a musical conductor.
Apply “Temple Bar.”
Explanatory mem. —Temple Bar is a song sung by Mr.
Wallace, alias The Possum, alias Mr. Frank de Vernon, at
the last two evening concerts.
Lost. —A German silver pencil and pen-holder. A white
handled two-bladed knife: also a two-bladed knife, tortoise-
shell handle. Apply to Editor.


No. 7]
[ Friday, June 17, 1870.
The “ Somersetshire " Pie.
During the past week another point has been reached in
our voyage, the Line having been crossed early on the morn-
ing of Wednesday, the 15th. For the most part the wind
has been favourable, though occasionally so light as to render
the use of the screw necessary. Still we have reason to be
very well satisfied with our progress, the number of knots run
being 1475, and the number of hours under steam 93. The
weather has been hot but not oppressively so, the heat having
been tempered by a fresh light breeze; up to Thursday the
16th the highest temperature in the shade was 8a Q on that
day. The absence of vessels has been a matter of surprise,
day after day having passed without any being sighted, until
on Tuesday one was reported on the lee-bow. We rapidly
overhauled her, and when we arrived within speaking distance,
she proved to be the brigantine “Belle of Weymouth,” from
Buenos Ayres to Nor Koping. Being desirous of ascertaining
the latitude and longitude she crossed our bows, and then
luffed up within a very short distance so that our passengers
got a good view of her. The bearings being furnished, her
ensign was dipped in acknowledgment, and amid hearty cheers
from both ships we sped on our way very soon leaving her far
astern. On Wednesday we spoke the German ship “ Solide”
from Cardiff to Singapore, and several other vessels were
passed during the night. On Sunday divine service took
place both morning and evening on the poop, being conducted
by the Rev. Mr. Schleicher. We were glad to observe a
marked improvement in the attendance, the increased number
of second and third-class passengers being specially note-
worthy.
The beautiful moonlight nights have attracted our passengers


Date.
June.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Temp.
Friday
10.
16.28 s.
25.33 w.
212
76
Saturday
II.
12.50 s.
2 5-35 w -
219
78
Sunday
12.
8.46 s.
26.1 W.
244
78
Monday
1 3-
5-35 s -
25.57 w.
191
81
Tuesday
14.
1.57 S.
26.0 w.
218
80
Wednes.
i5-
1.11 N.
26.10 w.
189
78
Thursday
l6.
4.32 N.
25.49 w.
202
82
Total Knots
■ 1
475-
to the poop, where music, singing and dancing, promenading,
smoking, and (we have heard it whispered) flirtations have
been by turns indulged in.
We regret to have to notice some cases of sickness amongst
our passengers of the different classes consequent upon the
hot weather. One of these terminated fatally, a child having
died on Wednesday night of diphtheria. Her funeral took
place yesterday evening. In our last issue we mentioned the
loss of three numbers of our paper, we are happy to state that
they have been recovered, having been accidentally mislaid.
The series is now complete from the commencement until the
present date, and we shall be glad to ascertain the wishes of
the passengers generally, as to whether we shall follow the
example of our predecessors, and print the paper upon our
arrival in England. We shall have the pleasure of appearing
once, and perhaps twice more before our readers, in order
therefore to make the necessary arrangements in good time,
a list of those passengers who are willing to contribute towards
this object will be made out during the ensuing week.
The Bazaar will, weather permitting, take place on Tuesday
next. It is particularly requested that all contributions be
sent in to Mrs. Atwood not later than to-morrow (Saturday).
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
Average per day, 210 knots; total distance run, 10,543 ; average
for voyage, 215.


THE SEA. —(NOT BY BARRY CORNWALL.)
1. The sea, the sea, the horrid sea !
I do detest it heartily;
With a doleful melancholy sound.
It’s ever encroaching on the ground;
It invites to its bosom, by calms and blue skies.
But like a sleeping serpent lies;
I’m on the sea, alas, for me!
Of my own free will I ne’er would be ;
With tossing aloft, and pitching below.
And danger whereso e’er I go;
And amidst the horrors of the deep,
I never can get a wink of sleep.
2. I love, oh, how I love to ride.
With a pleasant companion by my side,
On Hampstead Heath, by the light of the moon.
And carol forth some amorous tune ;
While the great metropolis lies below.
And its million gas-lights brightly glow ;
Sometimes I take a trip to the shore,
Brighton and back, three shillings, no more;
But it only gives me a greater zest.
For my peaceful home in London west;
And, however humble that home may be,
’Tis better far on land, than at sea.
3. It was at five o’clock in the morn.
Of the tenth of April that I was born.
The cocks they crew, and the cats they squalled,
And the watercress man he loudly bawled.
And never was heard such a hullabaloo
As welcomed to life the cockney true.
If I get to land after all this strife,
I shall hope for the future a peaceful life,
And however tempted again to range
I never will sigh or wish for change,-
And death, when ever he comes for me.
Will never find me upon the sea.
w.


CORRESPONDENCE.
Deer Edittur. —I resume the thred of my narrativ from
last weak’s isshu, hand propose to tel you wat I experinced
the nite we cum round the Orn. I retired to rest has ushool,
and doased orf to sleep fur about arf a hour, wen i wos
suddinly awoke by bein pitched from my birth on to the
cabin floor, were my bockses wos runnin two and frow in a
pecewliar way. Avin succeded in sekewerin them two the
bedd poast, i dresst myself and went on deck to see wot was
goin on. Sinz yew ave alreddy deskribed the appeerants of
the see and the rollin ov the ship, which tuk plaice on that
memmurabel okashuil, there is no call for me to attempt
dooin it agen. I ad not purseeded fur wen I lawst my
ballanse, and i wus about bein pitched down won of the stare-
kasis, wen a frendly and chekd my progris, and reckuverin-
my balluns I perseeved the Capting. “ Capting,” ses I,
“ yeu ave rendered me such a kindnis has i kan nivver furgit
til my dyin day.” “I beleeve yeu, my buoy,” sed the
Capting. I shuk im by the and, hand oldin on farst we lited
hour pipes and injoid a frendly chat. It wos one of the most
bewtiful sites I ever witnesed, to sea the way in which the
Capting and HorAsirs, and Crue, mannidged the ship in that
gail. I did not feel a bit afffaid, but wen the wind abaited
returned towerds my cabbin, which lies on the mane deck.
Has I reached the bottum of the stares, my attenshun wos
struck by a Agger of remarkabel apperunce and pekewlior
hattitude, oldin in is and a henormus klub; I ham kumpelled
to confess, Mr. Edditur, that I wos rather fritend wen I seed
this Agger, hand fanssyin the klub mite be intended fur mi
back, I dartid into my cabbin has fast has I cud and locked
the dore. I ave sintz bean informd my alarm wos groundlis,
fur that a simmiler Agger av been seen nerely everry nite, at
haul hours, in varus parts ov the ship, but it ave inflikted no
brewses nor brokin know boanes with the klub. I presoom
therefoar that the Agger is a aimless sort of goast who awnts
the ship fur is own pleshur, but I shall be grately pleesed if
yew kan thro enny light upon the subjickt. I ope, sir, the ot


wether is agreein with yewer constitooshun, I am glad to say
it soots mine purty tollerabel.
1 remane, yewer obediunt servant,
JOHN SMAUKER.
P.S.—I wish to inform yew that I finds the society on
bored extreemly impruvin and agreeabell, soe I ope the voige
wawnt kum to a hend jest direkly. though I finds it rather
difikult to get the yung lades into konvursashun, they
preferrin to talk with the yung men rather than with a person
ov my ears, knotwithstandin my bein a man of grate ex-
peerince, and my manners is univurssally admired.
READING.
Yesterday evening (Thursday) Mr. West read some selec-
tions from several well-known authors, which had evidently
been carefully chosen. The Reading commenced at eight
o’clock in the evening, being conducted by the light of a
single lamp, which, while it illumined the book and face
of the lecturer, left the audience enveloped in darkness.
The Reading began with Aytoun’s “ Execution of Mont-
rose,” which was, in our estimation, the gem of the evening,
and was admirably rendered by Mr. West. The “ Old
Woman of Berkeley,” by Southey, followed, which was also
very well read, and received by the audience with marked
approbation. The “ Jackdaw of Rheims ” was the next
selection, and was also rendered in praiseworthy style.
Owing to the pieces chosen, occupying longer time than had
been anticipated, “ Clarence’s Dream,” which had been
advertised in the programme, was omitted, and “The Jackdaw
of Rheims” was followed by Tennyson’s “Charge of the
Light Brigade.” The Reading terminated with one of Mrs.
Caudle’s curtain lectures, which provoked the frequent mirth
and applause of the audience.
We feel sure that we are only stating the opinion of the
whole of the saloon passengers, in expressing the hope that
Mr. West’s readings will be repeated at short intervals during
the rest of the voyage.


SPORTING. —BY CHARON.
Maiden Plate. Latest Betting. % to i on “ The
Barber;” 6 to 4 agst. “Invalide;” 10 to 1 agst. “Irish Bird-
catcher;” 30 to 1 agst. “Rory O’Moore;” ao to 1 agst.
“Dark’un;” 50 to 1 agst. “The Nigger;” 100 to 1 agst.
“ Gorilla.”
Slowly and steadily “ The Barber ” continues to advance
in favour with the betting public. Close attention to work is
the order of the day, with an occasional “ spurt ” of an
evening, and, when thus let out, he is everything that could
be desired. Blessed with that essential of a race-horse, a good
temper and docile as a spaniel, he goes evenly from start
to finish, and, retiring from exercise, you cannot perceive a
hair turned. He is evidently a first-rater, and “ shines like a
dollar.”
“Invalide” shows up only at intervals, doing nothing
beyond walking exercise; probably 'from the effects of the
operation performed ten days ago. Occasionally he displays
some of the old spirit, kicking and jumping in a remarkably
playful manner; but, I think, he now lacks the steam, to get
him even a place in the race. Almost, at the last moment for
closing the entry, another opponent has been nominated, and,
from his appearance, is likely to prove a teaser.
“ Irish Birdcatcher ” is a powerful, upstanding, 5 year old,
dark-brown, with black points, compact, and well ribbed up;
strong hind quaters, tail well set on, and hind legs well under
him, altogether he is well calculated to win a long race like
the present. Should he get rid of some of his superfluous
flesh before the day, and be well handled, I think he will be
there or thereabouts.
“Rory O’More” and “Dark’un” take things very quietly,
and none of the others are inquired for in the market.
We are to have a “ Consolation Stakes,” post entry, for
which two horses not named in the Maiden Plate are con-
fidently named as starters —viz., “ Peter Simple ” and the
“ Artful Dodger.” The latter, an aged iron grey, is considered
the favourite by many, and is reported as having been taking
his galops on the sly for some time past. But the backers of


“ Peter ” think that, if in condition at the post, he can give
“The Dodger” a stone and a licking. The horses are, in my
opinion, so evenly matched, that I can scarcely make up my
mind which shall carry my money.
6. There’s also a fellow called West,
Of our readers and singers the best;
He’s exceedingly kind,
And I’m sure you’ll not find
Among all those on board one like West.
7. Then there’s a tall fellow called Hardy,
Who lately has been very tardy
In helping the Pie,
Because he won’t try ;
For by no means a dolt is friend Hardy.
8. There’s an Adelaide lawyer named Brook,
In his practice a first place he took ;
He sings a good song,
And I’m sure I’m not wrong
In saying “he speaks” like a book.
9. There’s another tall fellow called Howden,
I’m sure he’s by no means a proud’un ;
He’s too fond of bed.
And this muddles his head,
Or he could write well, could friend Howden.
10. We next come to Snider, sly dog,
On his way he doth quietly jog,
While he writes, oh ! my eye,
Many lines for the Pie,
But none think him the author “by Gog.”
CONUNDRUMS.
What does a condemned criminal usually get for breakfast
on the morning of his execution ? Answer: A h’oyster and
a h’earty choke (artichoke).
Why is the ship better provided with fresh water on this
voyage than on any previous occasion ? Answer: Because
she has got a Brook on board.
RANDOM RHYMES. —(Continued from our last.)


ENIGMA.
Complete I’m small but very round.
And am at times in every household found ;
Cut off my head and then I’m sure
My whole is needed to effefit a cure.
My tail’s a double limb you’ll find,
Which if you amputate will leave behind
A thing of paste two thirds entire,
A mighty cause of indigestion dire.
Cut off ray head and tail then I
In solitary glory all defy. Answer: Pill.
The new comer was a young man of rather short stature>
but muscular build, and his countenance would have been an
ordinary one, had it not been for a pair of black piercing eyes.
His costume partook equally of the sailor and the landsman,
and at first sight it would have been difficult to determine
with certainty his profession. That he had not been used to
hard work was evident from the appearance of his hands,
which though not remarkable for cleanliness, were obviously
not those of a mechanic or labourer.
“ Hullo Jim,” exclaimed he, addressing the man who had
brought us to the house, “I made sure when I came in that
you would blow me up well for stopping away so long; but I
see you’ve got company.”
“Oh!” replied Jim, sulkily, “that’s no thanks to you,
neither you nor any of the other chaps would have cared a
brass farthing about keeping me waiting, and had’nt I had
the luck to pick up these here chums, I might have kicked my
heels off for the last two hours, where the deuce have you
been?”
“Why,” answered the first speaker, “after we left you, Bill
and I went down to the wharf to see the Sydney boat come in
and who do you think was on board, why the Downey and
old Cocky.”
“ What,” shouted Jim, “ how the deuce did they manage
to
AN HOUR OF HORROR. —(continued.)


" Come, I say none of your gammon, you are only larking.”
“ PH be shot if I am,” was the answer, “ I saw and spoke
to them, and what’s more, Bill is going to bring them here
to-night, but is it all right?” giving a jerk of his head in the
direction where Tom and I were sitting.
“ Right,” said Jim, “ that’s all serene. These are two new
chums, but I’ll be bound they’re fly. Look here, I want to
speak to you.”
Rising from his seat he drew the new comer into a corner
of the room, where an animated conversation took place. It
was carried on in too low a tone for us to hear, though from
the frequent glances towards us we felt quite sure that we
formed the subject of the conversation.
Profiting by the occasion Tom and I on our parts exchanged
a few words. Of the character of the men into whose com-
pany we had fallen, there could be now no doubt whatever.
Of their intention we had hardly a question, and our most
prudent course would have been to leave the place as soon as
possible. As regarded our personal safety we felt no fear, we
were both of us young, athletic, and possessed of arms, and
we resolved therefore to wait at least for a time and see the
issue of the evening’s adventure. To disarm suspicion we
agreed to feign being at our ease, and to accommodate our-
selves to the humour of our companions, and with this object
I threw a sovereign on the table, and invited the new comer
to take a drink.
He took the money and left the room, returning soon with
a bottle of brandy of which he and Jim took ample toll, whilst
Tom and I contented ourselves with more modest portions.
The new comer, who was evidently a better hand at con-
versation than Jim, then began praising up Australia, and its
advantages to a man of spirit and pluck, adroitly putting in
questions to me and Tom, with the evident object of eliciting
our present means and future plans. But in this he reckoned
without his host, my practice at the bar had rendered me
familiar with the art of cross questioning, and whilst appa-
rently replying innocently to his questions, I succeeded not
only in completely mystifying him, but in eliciting far more as
to tile character of himself and his companion, than he in the
least imagined.


Half an hour thus passed, when our conversation was
interrupted by Jim who had been all the time sitting silently
smoking. Bringing his hand down upon the table with a
violence that made the glasses ring, he exclaimed with an
oath.
“ Stow that gab, Barney. I’m d dif you wouldn’t talk
a horse’s hind leg off, one wouldn’t think it was so long since
you were in the Model.”
“ D you,” replied Barney, “ if I was in the Model, I
got my ticket a precious sight sooner than you did yours, so
drop all that and let bygones be bygones. Let’s have a game
at cards,” pulling a pack from his pocket, and spreading them
on the table, “ You’ll play mates ?” addressing Tom and me.
Perhaps it was foolish of us to assent, most of my readers
will I fear be of this opinion. Still we had heard and read so
much of the tricks of cardsharpers that we felt impelled by a
feeling of curiosity to see their modus operandi. We had,
moreover, sufficient confidence in our own firmness, not to
risk more than a trifling sum, and although we felt sure we
should lose, we considered the lesson was worth paying for.
The game proposed was euchre, and as Tom and I had been
initiated into its mysteries during the voyage, we were well
acquainted with it, and thought we could at once detect any
improper play on the part of our adversaries.
Partners were cut for, Jim falling to my lot, and Barney to
that of Tom. The stakes were trifling, and at first everything
appeared open and above board, as fortune favoured each side
alternately.
After some time, however, I noticed a change, my partner
and I persistently losing while Barney and Tom cleared the
stakes at every deal; still we went on playing, Jim cursing
his bad luck until at last with well feigned indignation, he
threw down the cards, vowing he would play no longer, unless
we had a fresh cut for partners. This was agreed to, and as
I expected, the two men this time joined each other, and Tom
and I became partners. From this time luck completely
changed; play as we might, our opponents had it all their
own way, and invariably held the winning cards.
The night was now getting on, we had lost as much as


ADVERTISEMENT.
Lost, several numbers of the “ Mechanic ” sewn together.
we intended to risk, and we had had quite enough of the
society of Jim and his friend; taking advantage, therefore, of
a pause in the game, caused by one of the men filling his
pipe and the other his glass, Tom and I rose to our feet,
and I said, “Well friends, it’s pretty late now, and we must
be off.”
“Off,” exclaimed Jim, “Why I thought you were going
to stop here, and that’s why I brought you.”
“That’s quite true” I answered, “But we’ve left some
things on the ship, and we want to get them the first thing in
the morning, so if we start for the wharf now, we shall be
able to get on board about daybreak.” Now ensued a warm
argument, both the men doing their best to combat our
resolution, or at least to induce us to stay an hour or two
longer. Finding us firm they changed their tone and
assumed a menacing attitude, until at length, Jim placing his
back against the door, declared with a volley of oaths, that
we should not leave the house.
(To he continued.)
OBITUARY.
On the night of the 15th Inst.,
MARY ANN HINDMARSH,
Aged 3 Tears and 9 Months.
G


[Friday, June 24, 1870.
No. B.]
The “ Somersetshire ” Sea Pie.
The weather during the past week has been unfavourable
to a quick passage, and the ill luck which has hitherto attended
us appears likely to accompany us to the end of the voyage.
The ship has been under steam for sixty-seven hours during the
past week. On Tuesday morning the N.E. Trades were fallen
in with, but they died away on Wednesday night, and since
then we have been steaming; our course has unfortunately
been too much towards the west, of course increasing the
distance to be run. The total number of knots run has been
1,290. The tropic of “ Cancer” was crossed yesterday. The
hopes formed last week of our accomplishing the journey in
sixty-four days are, we fear, doomed to disappointment, and we
do not consider it likely that less than sixty-seven will see us
ashore. Various bets on the subject have been made, and the
backers of time are pretty certain of winning. Rain fell on
Friday but during the rest of the week the weather has been
fine, though hot.
The bazaar in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan
Asylum took place on Tuesday, a full account of which will
be found in another column.
Lists for receiving the names of persons willing to subscribe
towards the printing of this paper have been prepared and
placed in the several cabins, and should a sufficient number
come forward the object will be carried out immediately after
our arrival in London. Each subscriber will be entitled to a
copy, which will be forwarded, post free, to any part of the
United Kingdom or the Colonies.
We will now continue our summary for the week:—Friday,
17th. Heavy rains fell during the early morning, but before


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Temp.
Friday, June
17-
7.41 N.
24.5 r W.
197
75
Saturday „
18.
10.36 N.
25.41 W.
182
80
Sunday „
19.
12.58 N.
27.10 w.
170
00
Monday „
20.
15-43 N.
28.23 w.
180
00
-T"-
Tuesday „
21.
18.17 N.
29,56 w.
tH
CO
CO
Wednesday „
22.
21.21 N.
31.27 w.
205
75
Thursday „
23-
23-53 N.
334 w -
178
75
Total
for week
—1290
knots.
ijppn the weather cleared up: at 3 p.m. signalled the ship
“TJodden Castle,” destination not given; at 4 p.m. the bark
“ Guillaume,” from Swansea to Singapore. Early on Sa-
turday, 18th, we passed two vessels, and about noon signalled
the ships “Fenella” and “ Caducous,” all outward bound: at
1 p.m. the screw was raised. Early on Sunday morning we
passed a steamer outward bound, and at 7.30 a.m. spoke the
barque “ Ville de Marseille ” from Marseilles to Bourbon,
Mauritius, 38 days out. Divine service took place on the
poop in the morning only, the Rev. Mr. Schleicher officiating.
The wind falling light at 7.15 p.m. the engines were started,
and the ship remained under steam till 6.30 on Tuesday
morning when a strong N.E. wind sprang up, and all sail was
set. The bazaar took place to-day. At 8 a.m. on Wednesday,
73nd, the main royal yard broke in two, but without causing
any further damage. The wind fell light during the night.
Thursday, 33rd, at daybreak this morning the screw was
lowered and steam got up.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
Total distance run; 11,833; average for week, 184; average for
voyage, 211.
THE BAZAAR.
[FROM OUR SEPECIAL CORRESPONDENT]
On Tuesday, the long expected and anxiously awaited day
appointed for the bazaar arrived. The weather, although fine,
was not all that could have been desired, the wind being strong
G 2,


and the vessel lying over to such an extent as to make walking
about a matter of difficulty. The early part of the day from
breakfast time till lunch was occupied in decorating the poop
with flags, &c., and in spreading out the various wares about
to be disposed of, in the shape of woolwork in every con-
ceivable form and variety, old novels' and books of sermons,
baby linen and embroidered penwipers, in short, an assortment
of articles altogether too numerous to mention. By about
noon everything being arranged, the business of the day
began. The ladies were indefatigable, and the manner in
which the members of the sterner sex were, so to speak, led
by the nose, was something partaking equally of the mar-
vellous and the sublime. Bearded veterans of the bush might
be seen withdrawing shillings and half crowns in rapid suc-
cession from the depths of their pockets to go towards the
numerous lotteries and raffles set on foot. The proportion of
winners seemed remarkably small, I think I saw one, who
having most perseveringly subscribed towards anything and
everything during a considerable part of the morning, was at
length hailed as the drawer of a lucky number. The look of
astonishment on his face upon being presented with a beauti-
fully embroidered article of baby linen, was a sight long to be
remembered. Sambo's face seemed to shine brighter and
blacker than ever as he elbowed his way amongst the crowd
singing out at the top of his voice, “ Black your boots sir,"
which duty he performed for the modest sum of 6d., in con-
sideration whereof Sambo was kind enough to include a pretty
liberal coating of blacking bestowed in patches upon the
lower extremities of your continuations. Far above the
tumultuous roar of voices, however, might be heard the sten-
torian tones of our worthy third mate, Mr. Fenton, who was
presiding over the, I was going to say “ roulette table," but as
that would savour rather too much of gambling, I will call it
the wheel of fortune. Who could resist the seducing tones
in which he offered you “ 5 bob for a shilling?" Many there
were who having been persuaded into expending rather more
than they had intended, resolved to tempt the fickle goddess,
and just to risk one shilling. Then being encouraged by the
proprietor of the table, after having lost first one, then several,


who could be proof against the argument so speciously and
so logically put. “Never mind sir, nothing like perseverance,
try again, you’re sure to win next time?” Then I must not
forget the weighing-machine, whose qualifications were an-
nounced by the person in charge, at' the highest pitch of his
voice. It was an amusing sight to see some of the heavy
weights being helped into the small scale, the vessel rolling
one way, the scale swinging the other, and sixteen stone
clinging frantically with one hand to the rope which suspended
the weighing machine, and with the other to the “ clerk of the
scales,” apparently in imminent danger of coming between
two stools ignominiously to the ground, however, nothing
of the sort happened and all went off satisfactorily, and
although one individual, who had the curiosity to be weighed
twice, informed me that upon the second occasion he weighed
nine pounds less than at first, I attributed this to the exertions
he had undergone in the intervening two hours, and also to
the absence of sundry half crowns from his pockets.
One of our officers collected a considerable amount by
means of his great South Sea wonder, which was enclosed in
a small box, through a hole in which the Curious were allowed
a peep for the small consideration of 3d Those who did
look were amptly rewarded by the sight of a very fine speci-
men of the rat tribe, caught on board a few days previously.
On the whole, we think that the bazaar passed off most
satisfactorily, everybody seemed amused and in a good temper,
and we rejoice to be able to state that the sum of 4 s. sd.
was by this means raised for the benefit of so deserving an
institution as the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Deer Edittur, —Has yeu avc give me to hunderstand that
yewer periodicle will sune cum to an hend in konsekwence of
our getting towards the hend of our voiage, i ham anxious to
tell yew wot air mi sentimints about the kollernies, especially
has there have been much discussion on bored lailty amung
the passingers about this point. Now, Sur, it appears to me


simple noncents to kompair a nu kuntry like Orstraly with
a hold one like Ingland, has Fve heered sum of the passingers
a doin, for it aint to be expekted that the formur shud ekal
the latter jest at present. I must say tho I enjoied my visit
grately, fur I was verry kindely treated, and I maid menny
frends: but I sertinly did miss the haristokratick society
among which I ave bean akustomed to move durin the ole of
my life. I need not tell yen, Sir, that my manners was
exceedingly admird by evverywone, wether I went up kuntry
to sea the digging and settery, or wether I staid in Melburn.
I always maid it a part of my dais okupashun wen I wos in
town to walk up and doun Collins Street fur at least an our
everry hafternune, nor cud I elp observin ow menny highs was
then dereckted towards me. Too be sure I felt flattered, and
I'm not ashamd to own it, though it was onley what I ex-
pekted. The wide and hairy streets air a grate credit to the
plais, but I kannot say I approves of the hopen dranes which
run doun the sides of them. The suner these are closed up
the better. Hupon the ole, Sur, I ave kum to the konclushun
that althow the kollernies aint by enny means a bad sort of
plaise to live in, yet they ave verry much to do be 4 they will
cum up to the hould kuntry. The manners ov the futmen air
not so refined and harristokratick has I cud ave wished them
to be, hand I’m kompelld to stait that the futmen has a boddy
air fur infeeriur two wat they air at ome. I remane yewers
trooly,
JOHN SMAUKER.
P.S.—Fve been takin sum lessons in spellin lately from
won ov my felloe passengirs, theirfour I ope yeu find me
improved in this respeck. My time fur studdy his between
brekfust and lunch.
MARINE PHOSPHORESCENCE, WHAT IS IT?
The dark nights we have experienced during the past week
have attracted the attention of almost all our passengers to
that beautiful and remarkable phenomenon, marine phosphor-
escence. Having heard various theories propounded for the


solution of the mystery, and numerous discussions as to its
cause, we think that a few lines upon the subject will prove
interesting. According to M. Duchemin, a celebrated French
savant, who states in his work that he has spent four years in
investigating the matter, the phosphorescence, the true cause
of which has occupied so many minds, and given rise to so
much discussion, is due to the presence of myriads of small
infusoria. These animalculse emit light whenever they are
agitated either by motion, or by heat not exceeding 39 0
(Reaumur), a temperature of 41° kills the animalcules, and
after death neither electricity nor the action of cold or heat
will again elicit the phosphorescence.
An addition of 50 p.c. of fresh water does not appear to
affeft the infusoria, if, however, alcohol or dilute acid be added
to sea water, the infusoria are for a moment greatly excited,
and a brilliant flash of light is the result, but the experiment
is fatal to them. Kept in total darkness they will retain their
phosphorescence for a fortnight or more.
FACETÆ.
Our friend Jones, who has been studying several bulky
volumes on Spiritualism, writes to ask if they converse in the
dead language ?
A young lawyer, who had succeeded to his father’s practice,
informed his venerable parent one day, with rather a self-
satisfied air, that he had succeeded in a week in settling a
lawsuit which his father had had upon his hands for years.
“ Settled it ” exclaimed the old man, horror struck, “ why I
gave you that as an annuity for life.”
A man said the only reason why his house had not been
blown away was because there was a heavy mortgage on it.
If a rabbit laid eggs what shape would they be ? Conical.
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.-BY CHARON.
Maiden Plate.—Latest Betting.—s to % on “The Bar-
ber;” 6 to 4 agst. “Invalide;” 10 to 1 agst. “Irish Bird


catcher;” 20 to 1 agst. “Dark’un;” 30 to I agst. “Rory
O’More;” 50 to i agst. “The Nigger;” 100 to 1 agst.
“ Gorilla.”
Consolation Stakes. —Even on “Peter Simple;” 5 to
4 agst. “ Artful Dodger;” 30 to 1 agst. “ Jack of Clubs.”
For the Maiden Plate, “The Barber” and nothing but “The
Barber” will go down. Commissions to a large amount have
been received this week at the present price of 5 to 2, and it is
said that any quantity of money will be laid, with but few
takers, in fact, bar accidents, he is looked on as a certainty,
and deservedly so, for if ever a little horse trained and worked
hard for a large prize, that horse is “ The Barber.” He looks
as well and as sleek as ever. “ Invalide” keeps on the even
tenor of his way, but seems too confident of the result, that
is, if he ever was intended. There are some who go the
length of saying that both horses belong to the same stable,
and which ever way the event may go they will divide the
stakes.
The “ Birdcatcher’s ” party seem to be keeping their horse
in the background, probably to get on all their own money at
long shots. After that a rash on him is expected, condition
will tell against him, however, unless severe training is com-
menced immediately. All other horses are looked upon as
out of the race.
For the Consolation Stakes.—“ Peter Simple” has got the
call of “ The Dodger ” by a point, in fact, it is believed that
5 to 4 could be got on him to a small amount, as it was
currently reported this week that the grey was to be scratched.
This, however, was only looked upon by the knowing ones as
a ruse to throw the simple party off their guard. At all
events we are to have a race as “ Jack of Clubs,” a flea-bitten
grey is considered as good as entered. I don’t know much
about him but will give a report next week.
NOTICE.
A sale by auction will take place to-morrow (Saturday), at
5.30 p.m., on the poop, for the sale of unsold articles from
the bazaar. All are invited to attend.


This was bringing matters to a crisis, however the time for
action had come, and any exhibition of weakness on our part
would have been fatal. Stepping forward I faced the ruffian
at the door, and said as cooly as possible, “ Now, look here,
what your object in bringing me and my friend here was, you
know best, we have spent our money freely in treating you,
and you and your companion have won some more of us : we
are now determined to leave this place, quietly if possible, but
if force be necessary to enable us to do so, we are equally
resolved to use all the means in our power ; I must tell you,
moreover, that we have arms in our possession, so if you
compel us to use them, you will only have yourselves to
thank.”
“No,” he replied, with an oath, “I won’t,” and as he spoke
he put his hand to his side, and I saw the gleam of steel.
Quick as lightning,'and before he had time to guard him-
self, I planted him two blows right between the eyes, and the
fellow stunned and half blinded staggered and fell against the
wall,, leaving the door free.
“Now’s our time, Tom,” said I, opening the door and
looking round.
On seeing his companion fall Barney had moved to the
fireplace and seized the poker, but Tom had drawn his re-
volver, and keeping him covered with the muzzle, this an-
tagonist deeming discretion the better part of valour made no
farther attempt. We were thus enabled to leave the room.
I have before mentioned that this room was situated on one
side of the passage leading from the front door. Once in the
passage our escape would be easy, but on emerging from the
room we saw three or four men in conversation, who on
hearing the scuffle had turned their heads, and were now
looking towards us.
“ Stop them !” shouted Barney. “ Mike, where are you?”
We had jumped evidently out of the frying-pan into the
fire, we were now fairly in for it, and there was no drawing
back.
“ Keep close to me, Tom, and cock your revolver, but don’t
AN HOUR OF HORROR. —(continued).


fire till I give the signal;” so saying, I went down the pas-
sage, Barney following us.
“ What’s up ? Barney,” said one of the men. “ What’s
the row ?”
Before he had time to answer I went straight up to the
speaker and said, looking him full in the face. “ Please to
let me pass.”
For a moment he hesitated, but in that moment he was
pushed aside, with a bound we rushed upon the other two
fellows who completely taken by surprise offered but little
resistance. We were in the open air, and at liberty. Morn-
ing was now approaching, and there was sufficient light in the
sky to enable us to find our way out of the lane and into a
wider thoroughfare. We expected to be pursued by the gang,
and therefore walked as briskly as we could considering the
state of the road, but to our surprise we were not followed,
and after proceeding a considerable distance in a wrong
direction we at length fell in with a sailor under whose pilot-
age we reached the wharf, and were soon once more on board
the “ Firefly.”
“A pretty good beginning Tom,” said I, “one day on
shore, and a fight for our lives.”
“Yes,” said he, “our adventures would make a good
chapter for a sensational novel.”
CHAPTER III.
As it is my desire to condense my story as much as pos-
sible, I will pass over the events of the next few days, which
saw our baggage landed, and the bulk of it warehoused, our
necessaries purchased, and ourselves on the way to Ballarat.
Our party had been reinforced by the addition of Banks our
second mate, who had determined to try his luck at the dig-
gings, and whose unfailing good humour and aptitude in
emergencies made him a most valuable companion. On our
arrival at Ballarat we found that news had been brought in of
the discovery of gold at a place a few miles distant called Gum
Tree Gully. The information appeared reliable, and tired as
we were we started at once for the place, and when the morn


ing sun rose our tent was pitched, our claim marked out, and
we were ready to try our ’prentice hands in the search for the
precious metal.
We had come just in the nick of time, in a few hours every
yard of ground along the creek was taken possession of, and
a multitude of white tents covered the place where the kan-
garoo and emu had lately been the sole inhabitants.
For the first few days our progress was but slow, we were all
of us new to the work, the tools blistered our hands, and a few
hours a day were sufficient to tire us completely. The dis-
covery, however, of a few specks of gold at the bottom of our
cradle inspired us with fresh energy, our task became easier
through practice, and though at the end of the week the bag
containing our gains looked uncommonly small we felt that
our toil had not been altogether fruitless.
Weeks went by, our hole was getting to a respectable depth,
and each washing gave us better results, at last one afternoon
as we were going to knock off for the day, Tom’s pick struck
against a hard substance, which being exhumed and brought
to the surface revealed to our delighted and astonished eyes a
huge nugget.
Behold our hopes realized, our toils rewarded, how carefully
we cleared off its earthy envelope, and admired the beautiful
thing as the rays of the setting sun fell upon it. Our emotion
was too great for words, and we stood for some minutes
silently gazing on our treasure.
A shadow fell upon the ground, a voice behind us exclaimed,
“ Hullo mates, you’ve made a pile this time.”
The voice was familiar to us, and under the red shirt and
long boots of the digger we recognized the villain Jim.
(To he Continued.)


No. 9.]
[Friday, July 1, 1870.
The “Somersetshire ” Sea Pie.
The 9th week of our voyage and our 63rd day have passed,
and we still are at sea and some 900 miles from land; with
the exception of ten hours on Tuesday, and half-an-hour
yesterday, the ship has been under steam the whole time.
The total number of knots run, has been 1,147 only; if, as
appears probable, we have to steam the rest of the way, we
ought to make Plymouth on Wednesday next, and we shall
then have to take in coal for the voyage to London. Our
voyage will thus have taken 69 days, a long one as compared
with some of this ship’s previous’ performances; but which,
when we take into account the had weather during the first
part, and the adverse winds and calms during the latter
portion cannot, in justice, be considered a bad one. Since we
rounded Cape Horn we have been under sail 13 days, and
steaming 23, and what wind we have had has been invariably
in a wrong direction; since leaving Melbourne we have only
had 4 days really fair wind. We deeply sympathize with
Captain Atwood in the disappointment he must naturally
feel, and his untiring vigilance and consummate seamanship
ought to have insured him a better reward.
A few incidents have occurred during the week which have
served to break the monotony of our daily life, and to afford
fresh topics for conversation. On Tuesday, the engines having
been stopped for the purpose of cleaning the boilers, and the
sea being smooth, a boat was lowered and several of the pas-
sengers took short trips round the ship which presented a fine
appearance, twenty-seven of her sails being set at the time.
An attempt was made to catch a turtle, but the animal effected
his escape, and the only marine trophies brought on board
consisted of a few jelly fish and a nautilus.
Early on Wednesday morning the islands of St. Michael


and Terceira, two of the Azores, were sighted, and our eyes
were gladdened with the view of the first land since leaving
Australia. In another place we give a short description of
the larger Island, which remained visible for several hours.
In the afternoon, a wreck was discovered on the port bow,
the ship’s course was immediately altered and we bore down
towards her, and when within a short distance the engines
were stopped and a boat lowered which proceeded to the
wreck, under the command of the chief officer. She proved
to be a foreign, probably a Prussian, barque laden with petro-
leum, but no name could be found to throw any light upon
her history. She had evidently been abandoned for a long
period, as she was completely covered with barnacles, and her
timbers perforated in every direction by worms. Part of her
fore and mizen masts were standing, but her mainmast had
been broken off close to the deck, two anchors and chain
cables were at her bows, but everything else had been either
washed or taken away. Swarms of fish surrounded the wreck
feeding on the barnacles, some of these were secured by the
boat’s crew and brought on board, on the return of the boat
the engines were started and we soon left the abandoned ship
far astern. These drifting hulks are extremely dangerous, as
they are not easily perceived, and a ship striking them would
meet with severe injury if not total destruction.
The weather has been fine and the decreasing temperature
begins to be felt especially at night. The southern cross has
disappeared, and the familiar constellations of the northern
hemisphere nightly stud the sky. The health of the passen-
gers generally continues good, and those who have been on
the sick list are now convalescent. The names of a certain
number of subscribers having been received we Intend to take
upon ourselves the risk of publishing this paper, rather than
disappoint our friends, although the amount contributed falls
considerably below that subscribed on former occasions. The
whole of the saloon passengers, with but two exceptions, have
placed their names on the list, and we have forty-five sub-
scribers from the second and third cabins. We beg to request
our friends to hand in their contributions to-morrow. We
purpose publishing a short supplementary number next week,


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Temp.
Friday June 24.
26.39 N.
33.18 W.
168
7S 9
Saturday „
2 5-
29.22 N.
32.19 W.
171
80
Sunday „
a 6.
32.5 N.
30.29 W.
188
75
Monday „
27.
34.27 N.
28.45 W -
168
75
Tuesday „
28.
36.48 N.
27.21 w.
1 S7
76
Wednesday „
29.
38.35 N -
2 5-35 w -
J 35
74
Thursday „
30.
40.32 N.
23.18 W.
160
72
Average for week, 163 knots ; average for voyage, 206 knots.
Total .
.
1,147 knots.
Previous 8 weeks
... 11,833
Total
,,, '■
12,980.
so we shall once again have the pleasure of appearing before
our readers.
We conclude as usual with our epitome for the week.
Friday 34th. —Early this morning two schooners were seen:
weather, fine and calm. Saturday 25th. —The great event to-
day was the sale by auction of various un-sold articles from
the late Bazaar; the auctioneer’s duties were ably and hum-
ourously performed by Mr. Sniders. Most of the lots were
disposed of and the amount realized, was £2 13s. 3d.,
weather, sultry and oppressive. Sunday 36th, —The Rev.
Mr. Schleicher conducted divine service in the morning on
deck, and in the evening in the saloon; weather fresh and
calm. Monday 37th, —Mr. West gave a recitation in the
evening on the poop; weather, hot and calm. Tuesday 38th,
at ten a.m., the screw was raised, the engines being stopped
to clean the boilers and all sail set. The wind was very light
and dropped entirely at noon, a number of dolphins were
seen playing about the ship; at a quarter to eight the
propeller was again lowered and the vessel put in motion;
weather, hot and bright. Wednesday 29th, St. Michael’s
and Terceira sighted at daybreak at four p.m., an abandoned
vessel was seen and boarded; weather, bright and pleasant,
the air in the evening perceptibly cooler. Thursday, 30th, —
Engines stopped for half-an-hour, to clean the feed-pipe;
weather, fine and cool.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.


CORRESPONDENCE.
Deer Edditur. —Now that hour voiage is drawin rappidly
too a klows, and we air hall lukin forword to sea hold Ing-
land’s shores shortley, I’m compeld too aknollige that mi
mind his two mutch aggittated fur me too right down mi
thawts in mi ushual pirspickuous stile, butt I want to tel yew,
sir, thet I’ve bean perfectly sattisfyed with haul that’s tuk
plaise on bored sinz we startid from Melburn. Halltho I
shall be sorree to leve the “ Summersetshire,” at the same
time I shall bee glad two find miself wonce mower in mi hone
neet little ouse at Kenninton. It’s mi intenshun to tellegraft
too mi ouskeeper, from Plimmouth, so has fur hir to ave
evverything reddy by the time the ship arrives hat Blakwal.
If yeu shud feal inklined too pai me a vissit, Sur, I knead
knot say that I shall ave grate pleshure in seein yeu, and we
kan entertain hourselves by steppin hinto the Ovul, wen a
good kriket match is goin forwood, if such is agreabell too
yewer taist, and in the evenning we mite ave a look inside the
Victoriar Theayter, if knot objekshunabel to yewerself. I kan
asshure yew that you may trust yewerself in mi kumpanny
ennyware with the graitest saifty, bekaws I’m a persun of
grate expeeriance, and mi manors ave allwais bean extreamly
admird.
I remane, Sur, Yewers fathefully,
JOHN SMAUKER.
P.S. —I ham thinkin ov devotin my attenshun too litterrat-
choor, and bringin hout a buk. Do yeu approve of mi plan ?
I ham but 47 yeers hold, so there’s time for me two maik a
distingwished naim yet.
MR. WESTS RECITATION.
On Monday Evening we were favoured, by Mr. West, with
a recitation, on the poop. The pieces selected were as
follows:
Othello’s “Address to the Senate .”
Hamlet’s “Advice to the Players.”
Tennyson’s “May Queen.”
Hood’s “ Dream of Eugene Aram,”


We have, on previous occasions, recorded our opinion of
this gentleman’s talents; the manner in which the above
pieces were rendered fully confirmed the justice of all we have
before said. The time fled but too quickly, and when the last
word had been spoken we all wished for more. No doubt
there exists a considerable amount of talent among our
passengers, this talent has, however, been studiously con-
cealed, and had it not been for Mr. West and a few others
(very few we are sorry to say) the present voyage would have
been still duller than has been the case, and week after week
would have dragged its slow course along without anything to
enliven our weary passengers. Novel reading, after a time,
palls the appetite, and even cards, if indulged in daily, cease
to amuse. All honour then to gentlemen, like Mr. West,
who are willing to come forward and place their talents at the
disposal of the public.
POETRY.
Dear Jack,
When we parted you begged me to write
And inform you of all that occurred day and night.
All the storms and the calms, all the dangers and woes.
That attended our voyage from commencement to close.
As I promised I’ll try to perform what you ask
Please remember that ’tis a most difficult task.
For to put into verse all the small talk and chatter.
That one hears on board ship is in truth no light matter.
Before I begin then I’ll beg you to pardon
My muse’s shortcomings and not to be hard on.
The many gross blunders you’ll find in my verse.
They’ve at least this attraction; you never read worse.
Leaving Melbourne behind us we steamed down the bay,
’Twas on Thursday, of April the twenty-eighth day.
The weather was fine and the waters were smooth.
And rapid but stately our good ship did move.
But once outside the Heads ’twas a different tale.
Our canvas was set with a favouring gale.
We were bounding along, lurching, rolling and pitching,
Which produced a sensation one can’t call-bewitching.


And when dinner was served, though the feast was delicious.
And the captain declared that our start was auspicious.
Yet those who were present, and that wasn’t many.
Would hardly touch food, some wouldn’t take any,
And as for conversing there scarce could be heard,
Throughout the whole length of the cuddy a word.
From the cabins around, though deep groanings resounded.
We were with a grand chorus of moanings surrounded.
But soon things grew brighter, nearly all had got well,
And like notes of sweet music came the sound of the bell.
At breakfast the burgoo, the chops and the fry.
Disappeared in a manner I’ll not even try
To describe, and so likewise lunch, dinner and tea.
Were despatched with a gusto refreshing to see,
Each man did his duty as Englishmen should do.
And feeding and sleeping were what we just could do,
It was out of the question to walk on the poop,
When you once got on deck you must seize a hen-coop.
Or a rope or a railing and stick like grim death.
Till again you were ready to go down beneath.
After meals there was always an hour or so’s smoking,
Though in reaching the deckhouse, one oft’ got a soaking.
When the tea was cleared off, cards were quickly brought out.
Little parties of fours you’d see scattered about,
I think whist on the whole was the favourite game.
Though ecarte and cribbage I also must name,
And forming together their own little clique.
There were some who through thick and thin stuck to bezique,
Fifteen two; —that's my trick, —till 9.30, you’d hear.
When the grog is brought in and the cards disappear.
Then there’s brewing of punch and mixing of toddy.
And all sorts of liquors to suit everybody.
Until ten o’clock strikes when out goes the light.
And we’re off to our cabins once more for the night.
On the 20th of May a huge iceberg was sighted,
At the view of which many felt rather affrighted,
For sailing midst ice in the dark foggy weather.
To say the least of it, is unpleasant, rather ;
From thence we had one long succession of gales.
Losing, on one occasion, no less than three sails;
The wind shrieked in fury, the ship leapt and quivered.
H


And, as if in dire anguish, she trembled and shivered ;
But nobly she weathered the fierce raging storm.
And Cape Horn’s dreaded region I’m glad to inform
You was safely passed through, and with all sails unfurled,
’Neath our prow pointing northward, the dancing waves curled ;
’Twas somewhere in this part of the globe. Dr. Hos
-ford and Hopcraft ensnared two immense albatross;
Which they skinned, and dissected, and carefully dressed.
Preserving for muffs, just the white downy breast;
Each day now grew longer, and soft blew the wind,
And sea-birds and snow-storms we left far behind ;
The saloon was deserted, excepting at meals,
And on deck we played quoits, or lay kicking our heels;
When the sun, whose bright rays through the day had oppressed us.
Had sunk in the west, and no longer distressed us ;
The soft silvery moon lit her lamp for the night.
And the blue waters sparkled, reflecting her light;
Then ’mid music and dancing, and laughing and talking.
Reciting and singing, and smoking, and walking;
The long pleasant evenings glide quickly away,
And four bells comes too soon by a very long way ;
I have heard it hinted, that quiet flirtation.
Has been spied out by persons of ’cute observation;
And there are some who, having nought better to do.
Must poke in their nose should they chance to see two
Conversing together, and always must know
What was that ? Who was this ? And who said so and so ?
And whatever they hear to whom ever they meet.
With their own slight improvements, they’re sure to repeat;
Thus out of a mole-hill a mountain they raise.
And imagine that this their vast talent displays ;
But what am I doing, I’m wandering away,
So revenons a nos moutons as the Frenchmen would say.
We sighted some ships on the 14th of June,
The barque, “Belle of Weymouth,” was signalled at noon;
On the 17th the “ Guillaume,” bound for Singapore,
And, again, on the 18th we spoke with two more;
On the 19th we passed by the “ Ville de Marseille,
Arriving about 7 a.m. within bail;
On June 21st dawned the long watched-for day.
When doll’s clothes and ribbons in endless display.


Pincushions, pen-wipers, and ribbons, and laces.
Exposed to our view, were arranged in their places;
There was no lack of wool-work, nor slippers, nor fans.
By the way, the Bazaar was in aid of the Orphan’s
Asylum at Snaresbrook, of which you’ve, perhaps, heard ;
Though, indeed, in the wilds of New Zealand interred.
Where your thoughts seldom reach beyond cattle and sheep.
It’s quite likely you still rest in ignorance deep ;
Concerning the matter, if so, don’t delay.
Send a guinea subscription, you’ll get, I dare say,
A full printed report in a blue paper cover.
And a vote of your own for an Orphan moreover;
All the things that were sold realised very good prices.
And the ladies were up to all sorts of devices;
To swell the amount, and stuck to you like vices;
Not letting you go till you’d spent your last shilling.
And, even then, to give “ tick ” they were perfectly willing ;
But, once more to return, for I must not digress.
As I’ve got more to say than I well can express;
Since we crossed the Equator we’ve scarce had a breeze.
And the sea’s been as calm and as still as you please.
And as we have constantly been under steam.
The consequence was, at least so it would seem.
That the boiler, or something, having got in a mess
(I don’t know exactly what it was I confess) ;
And, requiring cleaning, we had up the screw,
Without which, about two knots was all we could do;
And the day being fine, and the sea smooth as glass.
We thought ’twould be glorious, a few hours to pass j
Rowing hither and thither, and looking for turtle.
Whose life (if we found them) we quite meant to curtail j
The Captain most kindly bestowed his consent.
And the gig being lowered, our backs were soon bent;
Thus o’er the blue waves we were soon bounding free.
But never so much as a turtle saw we.
Until after dinner, when on the port bow,
We discovered one sleeping, and thought anyhow.
We’d endeavour to capture so goodly a prize.
But the turtle, though sleeping, proved rather too wise;
For, when the boat neared, and we nearly had got him.
He dived out of sight like a shot to the bottom.
H %


On June 29, we passed by the Azores,
About twenty miles from St. Miguel’s shores;
Whose bold craggy mountains rose rugged and high,
Standing out in relief ’gainst the clear summer sky.
Bright visions of oranges filled every mind,
But soon islands and oranges sank far behind;
At the very same day, at about 4 o’clock,
A sight met our view, which quite gave us a shock ;
Dismantled and drifting, the sport of the tide.
About five miles distant a ship was espied ;
Her mainmast, and topmast, and bowsprit were gone.
Her bulwarks were stove in and two spars alone.
The stumps of her mizen and foremast remained.
And two anchors were still in their places retained;
As soon as we neared her, our course was arrested,
A boat was soon lowered, and the first mate requested
To take a picked crew, and on board her to go.
And see if she was worth being taken in tow ;
But no carom of value on board her was seen,
O '
She was found to contain nothing but kerosine;
They looked for her name, but never discovered it.
She was sunk so deep down that the water quite covered it;
After catching some fish, shoals of which swarmed around her.
They left ter again just the same as they found her;
And, the boat being hauled up, we started once more, .
And are now not far distant from Old England’s shore;
But the pen after all only feebly expresses.
All the charms and the pleasures a sea voyage possesses ;
So don’t lose a moment, but hasten to pack
Your portmanteau, and start off at once, my dear Jack,
At present I’ll add nothing more to my log,
But remain, au revoir, yours sincerely.
INCOG.
THE AZORES.
San Miguel commonly called Saint Michael, is the most
important in a commercial point of view of these Islands. It is
about thirty-five miles long by seven-and-a-half miles wide in its
broadest part. The chief town is Ponta Delegada on the
south side.


The Island is undoubtedly volcanic, the cliffs at the east
are from 1,300 to 1,400 feet high, from which a range runs to
the west, terminating in the Serra da Agoa de Pao, 3,070 feet
above the sea. The mountains are generally covered with
heath, cedar, laurel, laurestinus and other evergreen shrubs.
There are four lakes and several smaller reservoirs which
supply a number of streams. The products are wheat, Indian
corn, beans, vines and oranges, the latter form a considerable
article in trade, and St. Michael’s oranges are held everywhere
in high estimation.
The indigenous animals are the rabbit, ferret, weasel, rat,
mouse and bat, to which may be added the frog, which having
been introduced some years ago, now inhabits every pool.
Most of our English singing birds abound, with the addi-
tion of the canary, red-legged partridge, quail, and green sand-
piper. It is estimated that the population at present exceeds
100,000.
If he recognized us he did not manifest it, and after a few
trivial remarks he bade us good evening. What to do with
our prize was now the subject of discussion. It was too late in
the day to take it to the bank, we therefore determined to
bring it into our tent, and that two of us should keep guard
over it at a time. This plan was immediately put into exe-
cution, and after our evening meal Tom started off to the
store for some necessary articles, and Banks and I mounted
guard with revolvers at hand, capped and loaded, he reclining
on the ground near the entrance, and I on the blanket, which
served for my bed.
CHAPTER IV. AND LAST.
The sun went down, darkness fell upon all around, and the
cool evening breeze blew through our tent doorway, refreshing
and invigorating our frames, wearied by the toils of the day.
Banks, after making most desperate efforts to keep awake had
at last given up the attempt as a bad job and was fairly asleep,
AN HOUR OF HORROR.— (continued.)


while I felt strongly inclined to follow his example. But of
course, this would not do, I had a duty to perform, and the
default of my companion called for increased watchfulness on
my part. Rousing myself, therefore, I lighted a candle, the
end of which I stuck in a bottle, by way of a candlestick,
charged my pipe, and selecting a book from our very limited
stock began to read. Page after page I perused mechanically,
but my thoughts were elsewhere, my mind was far too
absorbed to admit of my appreciating my author, and after a
while I laid down my book and gave loose to my thoughts
upon the events of the past day. I passed in review the last
few months, our hasty determination to seek our fortune, our
voyage to Melbourne, our night adventure and providential
escape, and our subsequent toils and troubles; and now here
was the reward of all. Since that morning fortune had in-
deed smiled upon us, and wealth was in our grasp, nay,
actually at our feet. There, close to where I was sitting was
a prize, the actual value of which was at present unascertained,
but which, without doubt, would yield each of us a handsome
sum. If ever I had had any misgivings as to the wisdom of
the step I had taken in quitting my home, friends and pro-
fession, these had fled for ever, and again and again I con-
gratulated myself upon having obeyed the secret impulse
which had urged me to accompany Tom. From the past my
mind turned towards the future. I would work on for a few
months longer and by then I calculated I should have gained
sufficient, if invested, to secure me a competency for life.
Well, then of course I must marry. But who should be the
partner of my jovs and sorrows? In our commercial and I
fear mercenary state of society my wealth would be a passport
to the heart of many a fair damsel, aye, even the haughty and
high born damsels of the aristocracy would not disdain a
wealthy commoner. But not to one of these did my fancy
turn. My thoughts fled to an old red brick house in a mid-
land county, and to a bright-eyed, fair-haired maiden, who,
last Christmas had considerably enlivened a week of festivities,
and whose image on my return to town I had found rising up
in a most extraordinary way before my eyes at all times and
seasons, obtruding itself between me and my papers, and


putting Archbold’s Practice and the Statute of Frauds, com-
pletely out of my head. That I was not altogether indifferent
to her I had the vanity to assume, and, yes, I would run down
to Warwickshire immediately after my return to England and
A slight noise outside caused me to look up, and I fancied
that in the darkness I saw the head of a man stooping for-
ward,
“ Who’s that ?” I said, instinctively grasping my revolver.
My words fell on the empty air, no answer was returned,
the night wind gently shaking the tent was the only sound to
be heard.
“ It must have been my fancy,” I said, as I again lay down
and endeavoured to resume the broken thread of my thoughts.
This time there was no mistake, from behind me came a
rustling of the canvas, and I could see a hand raising it up,
with the evident intention of effecting an entrance.
Seizing my revolver, and turning half round so as to face
the point of attack, I prepared to do battle with the intruder.
In an instant my arms were pinioned from behindhand
before I could utter a cry a hand was upon my mouth. In
vain did I struggle, my efforts were futile, and tightly bound
and securely gagged I lay helpless bn my bed.
Three men were in the tent. In the dim light of the candle,
I could hardly have made out their faces, even had not their
coat collars been turned up, and their hats pulled down over
their eyes. They intended to rob, and, if necessary, to murder
us, and it was clear that our discovery of the nugget had
somehow or other become known.
This conjecture which flashed through my mind was the
next moment verified by a voice which whispered or rather
growled in my ears, “We’ve come for the nugget and we
mean to have it. Now if either of you moves hand or foot, or
makes a sound you are dead men, for by G we’ll put a
bullet through your brain.” So saying, the speaker put the
muzzle of a pistol to my forehead. I shuddered as I felt the
cold iron, and I knew that the hand would, in case of need,
shoot me down like a dog, for one finger of that hand was
missing !


Yes, all was clear now. Jim the criminal who alone had
seen our treasure had planned and organized this robbery,
and his feelings of revenge towards us as well as his natural
cupidity had made him a merciless and vindictive enemy.
I turned my eyes towards Banks who providentially had not
been awakened by the intruders, but who was lying in his
original position fast asleep. By his side stood the second
robber with a revolver pointed to his head prepared to send its
contents through his brain should he awake. The third man
was turning over the contents of the tent and searching in every
direction for the nugget. Not finding it he turned towards
Jim, who said, “Look again, Barney, they’ve got it here
somewhere, and I’ll burn the tent, and everything in it, before
we give it up. I’ve got this cove here (pointing to me) safe
enough, and the moment the other one stirs, Mike, blow his
brains out.”
At these words my blood froze within my veins, and a cold
perspiration broke out upon me. I was looking death in the
face, and the next minute might be my last. Still my terror
was not so much on my own account, all my thoughts were
concentrated upon Banks, who was sleeping on unconscious
of the danger that menaced him. The least noise might wake
him, and then ! ***** * How long I remained thus I
know not, the search still went on and the third robber was
now engaged in sounding the ground with his knife in order
to ascertain whether the earth had been recently turned up.
I paid no attention to this proceeding, my eyes were fixed
on Banks, and the feeling that death was hovering over him
without my being able to help him, drove me nearly mad.
I could bear the suspense no longer, my agony became
intolerable, with a sudden effort I burst my bonds, tore the
gag from my mouth, and with a cry like that of a drowning
man I threw myself upon the ruffian who stood by me.
“ Hullo ! Fred ! what the d is the matter,” exclaimed
Banks, jumping up.
I looked at him, he and I were the sole occupants of the
tent, the candle had burnt low in its socket, my pipe was
on the ground at my side, and I was conscious of the fact
that instead off keeping a vigilant guard over our treasure,


I had fallen asleep, and that that which had happily turned
out to be only a dream might have proved a stern reality.
w.
POSTSCRIPT.
Friday Morning.
Since our paper went to press yesterday afternoon an im-
portant event has taken place. During the voyage an old
white hat of the orthodox bell topper style has been per-
sistently worn by one of our passengers, neither remonstrance
nor ridicule having had the effect of inducing him to discard
the obnoxious article, which was believed (by the superstitious)
to be the cause of the adverse weather. In storm and in
sunshine, in rain, snow and hail, by night and by day, the hat
still clung to the head of its wearer, and like the flag of Old
England seemed likely to brave for a thousand years the battle
and the breeze. Plots and conspiracies had been hatched
against it, missiles had been hurled and sails and ropes had
fallen upon it at night, but lo ! next morning it appeared again
battered and bruised, but not defeated, and still bidding de-
fiance to its foes. But its days were numbered, its span of
existence was drawing to a close. Yesterday upon going on
deck after dinner the first object that met our eyes was the
venerable hat, which had been run up to the peak of the gaff.
When all had seen and admired, it was lowered with all due
solemnity and committed to the deep, which bore it on its
bosom in our wake until we had left it far astern. If we
don’t get a fair wind now it will not be the fault of the me-
morable headpiece.


No. lo]
\July io, 1870.
The “ Somersetshire " Pie.
We are now on shore, our ship has arrived safe in port,
and her passengers are by this time dispersed to the four
winds, never to meet again. Our voyage, from Hobson’s
Bay to the East India Docks, has been accomplished in
sixty-nine days, and from land to land sixty-seven. Had not
circumstances been so unfavourable sixty days might have
seen our arrival, but considering all things, we think that
great credit is due to Captain Atwood that the average
length of the voyages of the “ Somersetshire ” has not on this
occasion been more greatly exceeded.
The “ Somersetshire ” is, unquestionably, an admirable
vessel for safety and comfort, but in order to enable her to
compete successfully with so formidable a rival as the “ Great
Britain,” her steam-power must be increased and a greater
supply of coals put on board. The engines, as at present
regulated, are inadequate for their work, and 8 knots per hour
are the most they have performed this voyage under the most
favourable circumstances, and when the supply of coal has to
be diminished, of course the speed has been proportionably
reduced. We have had an unusual amount of steaming to
do, and it has only been by the exercise of the greatest
economy, as regards the fuel, that we have been enabled to
complete the voyage without putting into port for coal.
We have been requested to draw the attention of the
owners to the quality of the wines and liquors supplied to the
passengers, most of which are not only bad, but positively
unwholesome, whilst the prices charged are such as would
allow of a first-class article with a fair profit. Complaints
have from time to time been made on former voyages, but
these have been disregarded, and unless the evil is rectified


the “Somersetshire” will establish a reputation for bad
liquors. The smokers have also asked us to mention that
five shillings per lb. is far too high a price to be charged for
tobacco. We are simply doing our duty in referring to these
matters; we wish well to the “ Somersetshire,” and will
always recommend her to our friends, we trust, therefore,
that our observations will be received in the spirit in which
they are conceived, acting as we have done under the desire to
“ Nothing extenuate, and nought set down in malice.”
We conclude with our usual record of progress. Friday,
July ist. —Weather, cool and pleasant; two schooners were
observed in the afternoon. At night a westerly breeze sprang
up, and sail was set to assist the engines. Saturday, July
and. —Weather, dull and cool. Fresh westerly breeze, all
sail set. A fog came on at night. Sunday, July 3rd. —
Weather, dull and misty. At 5.30 a.m. the screw was
raised. Divine service took place morning and evening in
the saloon, the Rev. Mr. Schleicher officiating. The fog
came on again at night, necessitating the use of the fog-horn.
Monday, July 4th. —The fog cleared up in the forenoon. At
6 a.m., the wind having become light, the engines were
started. The fog came on again at night, and the steam
whistle was kept going at intervals. Several vessels were
observed during the day. Tuesday, July 3th. —Weather,
foggy. Several vessels were seen. At noon we were hailed
by a cutter from Falmouth, which informed us of our position,
and at 1 p.m., a cutter from Plymouth having come into
sight, our engines were stopped, and a boat from the cutter
boarded us and took our mails, letters, and fourteen passen-
gers for Plymouth, where they arrived in the evening. The
fog came on very thick at night, so our sails were taken in,
and the ship put under easy steam. Wednesday, July 6th.—
The morning opened foggy, but at 9.30 the sun came out,
and Beachy Flead appeared on our port bow. At 3 p.m. a
pilot boarded us off Dungeness. As we proceeded up
Channel we had a full view of the coast, and at Dover we
could even distinguish the persons on the pier. The Downs
were passed, Ramsgate and Margate were dimly seen in the
twilight, and at 11 p.m. the engines were stopped, and we


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Temp.
Friday J uly
i.
42.18 N.
20.2 I W.
164
69°
Saturday
2.
43.46 N.
17.17 W.
J 74
66
Sunday
3-
46-39 N.
12.44 w.
227
66
Monday
4-
47.47 N.
9.30 w.
188
62
Tuesday
5-
49.50 N.
4.49 w.
222
61
Wednesday
6.
Proceeded up Channel, and anchored the Nore.
Thursday
7-
Weighed anchor at 3 a.m., and moored in East
India Docks at 8. a.m.
came to an anchor for the night at the Nore.' Thursday,
July 7th. —The anchor was weighed before daybreak, .and we
proceeded with the tide, under steam and aided by a tug, to
Gravesend, where two more tugs took us in tow, and by
8 a.m. we were safely moored in the New Dock, East India
Docks.
LOG FROM THE 1ST JULY.
SPORTING —By CHARON.
Maiden Plate. —Latest Betting.— 3 to 1 on “The Bar-
ber;” 6to 4 agst. “Invalide;” 10 to 1 agst. “Irish Bird-
catcher ;” Nominal all others.
Consolation Stakes. Latest Betting. 3 to 1 on
“ Peter Simple.”
For the Consolation Stakes Pm afraid we will only have a
walkover as “The Dodger” is scratched, and the flea-bitten
grey “ Jack of Clubs” is only a cocktail that might shine in
a butcher’s cart, but not anywhere else, “ Peter” will thus be
without an opponent.
As to The Maiden Plate speculation on it is almost come
to a stand-still, 3 to 1 on “The Barber” being offered freely,
in fact, it seems a foregone conclusion that he is to reap the
fruits of his hard training.
The meeting is, I believe, to be on “The Oval” next Wed-
nesday, when no doubt a good contest will take place.
I have been so much interested in this race, that following
up my waking thoughts I think Queen Mab must have paid


me a visit during sleep, and driven her team right across my
horsey .bump for certainty.
I dreamt a dream the other night.
When, everything was still,
I dreamt I saw “ The Barber,”
Rushing down the hill.
Not agreeing with Rory O’More of courting celebrity that
dreams always go by contraries, I will transcribe my vision
in extenso for the benefit of your readers, verily believing that
for this race it will be.
THE TRUE TIP.
The July sun was shining bright.
As tens of thousands thronged the gate
That guards “The Oval,” and the right
To view our race—The Maiden Plate.
With straining eyes the eager crowd
Around the paddocks throng,
To see the horses that are proud.
For such a prize, to go along.
When lo ! with platted mane and tail,
“ The Barber’s” first led out.
Shining and sleek, he cannot fail.
Go it, old shaver! is the shout.
To stretch his legs, and try his pace.
Along the course just see him bound.
His actions free, nought in the race.
Can cover half his ground.
With arching neck, and shining head.
He that once was thought a “ Wunner,”
Old “ Invalide ” will not be led.
But kicks and bucks a “ stunner.”
“ Birdcatcher ” next in order passes
Too high in flesh, too low in bone.
His backers groan ; then, lowering glassess.
Sigh out —“ It’s not for him,” Och hone !


To face the starter, now they go,
“ The Barber ” in the centre,
Of both the others he’ll make a show.
And lick them in a canter.
Down goes the flag, they’re gone, they’re gone !
The roar is for “The Barber
Steady and sure he skims along.
Poor “Invalide” breathes harder.
With whip and spur he’s punished hard.
His effort makes, then stumbles;
For such a stake he’s not the card.
He shies, then down he tumbles.
He’s in the straight, my bonnie horse !
The gap he’s making wider;
“ Birdcatcher’s ” beat, the crowd is hoarse,
Crying—“ The Barber and his rider ! ”
RIDDLES, &c.
Why did the wreck which we passed on Wednesday re-
semble a drunken man? Because it was abandoned; and
was rolling about under the influence of liquor.
Why did it not resemble a drunken man ? Because it was
not tight.
What epitaph should be placed over its grave ? Reguiescat
in pace.
Why do sailors fall an easier prey to pickpockets than any
other class of men ? Because they are always ready to be
relieved of their watch.
THE ALPHABET OF THE VOYAGE,
A’s the Azores which we sighted one morn,
B the bazaar which the poop did adorn ;
C is the calms which our progress delayed,
D is the dolphins which round the ship played ;
E is the engines stopped one day to clean,
F is the fog in which nought could be seen;


G is the gales which we got round Cape Horn,
H is the hurricane when our canvas was torn;
I is the iceberg so large and so high,
J is friend Jackson, who vessels did spy;
K is the Kangaroos, of which there are two,
L is the land which we soon hope to view;
M is the minister who on Sundays did preach,
N is the nautilus, which navigation doth teach;
O is the old hat which was overboard tossed,
P is the parrots which escaped and were lost;
Q stands for quoits a game very nice,
R is the royal yard which broke in a thrice;
S the Sea Pie,” with its weekly report,
Tis the turtle which would’nt be caught;
U is the untiring care of the master,
V is our voyage which we wish had been faster;
W is the wreck, waterlogged yet afloat,
X the Xcursions we made in the boat;
Y our young ladies, we’re sorry to lose ’em,
Z the last letter, so here’s my conclusion.
w.
ADDRESS TO CAPTAIN ATWOOD.
The following address was presented to Captain Atwood on
7th July, by the saloon passengers.
S. S. SOMERSETSHIRE,
6th July, 1870.
To J. S. ATWOOD, Esq., Commander.
Dear Sir, —We cannot allow this voyage to terminate
without expressing our sense of the watchful care and vigi-
lance you have at all times displayed, and which under Provi-
dence have been the means of preserving our lives, and of
bringing ourselves and the ship safely into port.
We deeply sympathize with the disappointment you must
naturally feel that your expectations of a quick voyage have
not been realized. These hopes have been frustrated by cir-
cumstances entirely beyond your control, and which have in


no degree diminished our confidence in the “ Somersetshire’ 7
or her commander.
Wishing you and Mrs. Atwood, long life, health and hap-
piness.
We are, yours faithfully,
J. WILLIAM SEWELL.
SELINA SEWELL.
E. M. LASCELLES.
FLORENCE LASCELLES.
ALLAN STALEY.
JESSIE STALEY.
G. WARLEY.
M. WARLEY.
JAS. BROOK.
DAVID HAMMOND.
LILY WARLEY.
JAMES SMITH.
JESSIE SMITH.
THOS. HENRY BRODERICK, Jun.
J. SIMMS.
SIMON MAYER.
C. WIGHT.
CHARLES EDWARDS.
DONALD MACPHAIL.
JAS. ARTHUR HARDY.
DAVID MONRO.
H. H. PINNIGER.
J. R. HOOPER.
C. L. HOOPER.
W. WEST.
ANDW. HOWDEN.
WILLIAM BARKER.
JOHN CHRISTOPHER.
M. CHRISTOPHER.
J. T. SCHLEICHER.
J. E. ELLIS.
M. BARRY.
JOSEPH SNIDERS.
A. TERKELSEN.
J. DISHER.
The Editor has great pleasure and satisfaction in inserting the
following :—
At a Meeting of the Third Class Passengers, hastily
convened this Evening, it was unanimously resolved that
the thanks of this portion of the passengers, per S. S.
“ Somersetshire,” are due, and hereby tendered, to Wm.
Sewell, Esa., for the generous disposal of time, the
universal urbanity of manner, and the acknowledged ability
displayed by him as Editor of “The Sea Pie” Newspaper
during our voyage from Melbourne to London.
C. E. McMASTER,
Chairman.
S. S. Somersetshire,
June 6th, 1870.


TO OUR READERS.
Everything sublunary must have an end, and our voyage
and our newspaper alike have come to a conclusion. For
nine consecutive Fridays have we appeared regularly before
our readers. Amidst the snows of Cape Florn, and the heat
of the tropics, our task has been carried on, and on no occa-
sion have we failed to be ready at the appointed time.
We are conscious of our shortcomings; we are well aware
that our work might have been performed better, but let those
who would find fault recollect the difficulties with which we
had to contend, and before criticizing our production let them
ask themselves whether under the same circumstances they
could have succeeded better. A sea voyage is by no means
favourable for literary composition, the mind naturally be-
comes languid, and any exercise, whether mental or physical,
is irksome. Our papers have been written amidst incessant
noise and distraction, the greater part of the labour has been
thrown upon our shoulders for want of co-operation on the
part of our fellow-passengers, and, worst of all, we have had
to bear the indifference, to use no harsher term, of others.
These were our discouragements; on the other hand, we
were cheered and gratified by the appreciation and sympathy
of many, who weekly rallied round us, and whom we trust
we amused and pleased. To these we return our best thanks.
To those few fellow labourers who kindly assisted us we
desire to record our gratitude. Their contributions relieved
our paper from monotony, and ourselves from still greater
labor.
We now lay down our pen, wishing our late fellow-
passengers a hearty
FAREWELL.
London, io July, 1870.
