

THE
r I
I
Reprinted from the Financial News, Friday, February 9th, 1917.
"UNSEEN
HAND"
SPECIAL ROYAL
COMMISSION
DEMANDED.
Huge and Enthusiastic Gathering assembles
at Cannon Street Hotel to demand Enquiry
into the source of the Treacherous and Devilish
Influence which is at work to bring about a
British Defeat and a German Victory.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney.


The ''Unseen Hand."
An enthusiastic meeting, crowded to the very doors, was held
(February 8, 1917) by the Women's Imperial Defence Council, at
the Cannon-street Hotel, to protest against the influence of the
"Unseen Hand," and to demand the appointment of a Special
Royal Commission to search it out and destroy it. General Sir
Alfred Turner presided.
The Chairman, in opening the proceedings, said it was a very
great honour to him to have been invited to preside over that mag-
nificent meeting, which had been organised and held under the
auspices of the Women's Imperial Defence Council, an entirely non-
political body. It was not his duty to make a long speech or to take
up the time that was needful for the speeches to be delivered by the
distinguished and eminent gentlemen who would address them.
Briefly speaking, the objects of the meeting were (1) to emphasise
and to demonstrate the great peril that existed among us from the
existence of the "Secret Hand"—(hear, hear) —that was to say
the German influence which up to the outbreak of the war had grown
with gigantic strides, and which threatened to take us to the brink
of the pit of destruction—(hear, hear) —and (2) to discuss the
means of exorcising and banishing that danger once and for all
from our midst, (Loud applause.) The country had been lulled into
a false sense of security mainly owing to the wait-and-see principle
(laughter) —and the inaction and the apathy of th« late Govern-
ment. Still, there were those - among us who foresaw—he could not
claim to have been one of them—the great and imminent menace
to us from the ever increasing growth of the military and naval
strength of Germany. First of all, there was the late Lord Roberts.
(Applause.) He prophesied that Germany would strike as soon as
she felt she was ready to do so, and that she only waited her day—
her '' tag," as it was called—had come. Then there was Mr. Arnold
White, who lie was delighted to see present at that meeting, who
never wearied of warning the Government of what the sinister inten-
tions of Germany were. But the warnings of those and others fell
upon deaf and indifferent ears, and no preparation whatever was
made to meet the gathering storm, although in the year 1913 the
German Government raised by means of a super-tax a sum of
£00,000,000 solely for warlike purposes.
Unmasked at Last.
But Germany had now been unmasked. She had unmasked herself
as a ciuel, mendacious, and treacherous nation, with a Government
that was not possessed of one shred of honour, of honesty, principle,
or mercy—(hear, hear)—and with an army composed of hordes of
barbarians who were ready to do any crime, whether it was murder,
rapine, or pillage, if ordered to do so by their officers. (Hear,
hear.) They were worse than the Huns of Attila, the Goths of
Alarie, and the Mongols and Tartars of Genghiz Khan. Then the
actions of their Navy, the worthy accomplice of their Army in
»rganised savagery, were such that we could never make peace with
them; we must beat them down to the ground. (Applause.) We
now knew what we were up against, but what we did not know


was the extent of the Hidden Hand. The Women's Imperial
Defence Council was founded in June last, and it had already done
great national work, among other things, in connection with other
important women's societies with which they were affiliated. They
put great pressure on the Government —a very unwilling Govern-
ment —to permit Mr. Hughes, that great Imperialist—-(loud applause)
—to go to Paris to stand up for Imperial rights against the Hidden
Hand. That Council considered it very important and advisable that
other' meetings should be held in other parts of the country, but that
required funds, and he urged his audience to subscribe as liberally
as they possibly could in order to carry on the great objects which
they had in view. The Chairman concluded by moving the follow-
ing resolutions:—
" (1) That the Government shall appoint without delay a
Special Royal Commission to make a full investigation as to
the identity, or identities, of that treacherous influence in our
midst known as ' The Unseen Hand.' ''
"(2) Further, that the Government shall at once dispense
with the services of all officials in the Foreign Office who have
married German subjects, or who have any German connections."
(Loud applause.)
MR. JOYNSON HICKS, M.P.
Mr. Joynson Hicks, M.P., who was received with applause, said:
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, an audience of this kind met
to-day after two-and-a-half years of war to determine and to de-
mand of the Government a greater determination in the carrying on
of the war in this country against German influence, German power,
and German domination was a very remarkable fact. That it should
be necessary in the iieart of the City of London for a meeting of this
kind to be called together surely indicates that whatever confidence
we may have in the carrying on of the war by land or by sea, there
is a lack of confidence in the determination somewhere to eradicate
German influence in our own midst. (Hear, hear.) So far as the
sea and the land are concerned, with our Army in Flanders and
France and our Navy in the North Sea, I beg leave to say, on behalf
of this. great meeting, that we, and all in Great Britain, are not
merely satisfied, but we are absolutely proud of the work which
they have done. (Loud applause.) We .desire nothing better than
that the Navy and the Army shall be left unfettered by party
politicians—(hear, hear) —uncontrolled, in the execution of their
great work; and we have every reason to be satisfied, and
we shall have every reason to be satisfied, with the result
when the war is over. There is somehow an ugly suspicion in
many quarters that the war is not being carried on with the same
energy, the same determination, and the same zeal in our own land
as it is being carried on in Flanders and 6n the North Sea. While
we are fighting the enemy in France and on the sea we must not
forget that the enemy is entrenched here. (Hear, hear.) He has
to be fought; he has to be got rid of here; we want to make it
absolutely impossible that for years to come, for generations to come,
Germany shall never be in a position of holding an entrenched camp
in the middle of the British Empire. (Applause.) I am not here
this afternoon to say to you that any one person is the "Hidden


Hand." I do not know who the Hidden Hand may be. I do not
think that the Hidden Hand is any one individual. I think, rather,,
the Hidden Hand is the process of thought in the minds of -many
of our public officials. (Applause.) While the Navy and Army are
fighting it is necessary to eradicate. German. influence here. (Hear,
hear.) I want to ask you whether you who are here are satisfied,
with the way, even up to this present moment, the internment
system has been conducted? (General cries of "No.")
The Entrenched Alien Enemy.
We began with some 70,000 alien enemies, entrenched here in the;
heart of Great Britain, many of them in the heart of this city,
carrying on their businesses for their own benefit, living here for their
own benefit, carrying on their traditions, their thoughts, and their
aims as members of .the German community, and not of the British
community. (Cries of "Shame!") Time after time we have en-
deavoured in the House of Commons to get these people interned.
With regard to British subjects in Germany we know they are all
interned. You will not find an Englishman treated as are the in-
terned aliens at Donington Hall or anywhere else in this country.
You won't find a man in Buhleben who can see his manager and
sign his cheques, or who is able to go out from time to time and:
attend to his work the same as the alien can over here. (A Voice:
"What about the German women?") I am coming to them.
(Laughter.) The meeting is by no means over yet. We have had
up to the present time three Home Secretaries —Mr. McKenna, Sir
John Simon, and Mr. Samuel. Each of them in turn took up this
question of the aliens, and each of them could at the very moment
of their installation into that great office have settled this question
once and for all. Each of them tinkered with it, and looked behind
public opinion, and not one of those three did anything towards
interning the aliens in our midst or breaking down the German
domination until they were forced by the House of Commons and
the people of this country. Now, after two and a half years of war,
and the bloodiest and the most brutal war that the world has ever
known, after knowing, as our leaders and our rulers must know, as
we all know, all the cruelties and all the barbarities which the Ger-
mans have been guilty, there are to-day some 20,000 alien enemies,
uninterned in our midst—(cries of "Shame!" and "Scandalous!")
—14,000 or 15,000 of tbeih in the City of London and its suburbs.
(Renewed cries of "Shame!") Why should we allow these men
and women to be free in our midst to carry on- —I do not say they
are all spies; but remember this, that the German who is the best
German is the one who appears to be the best Englishman—(hear,
hear) —the one who ingratiates himself among English people, who
carries on his business in friendship with English people, making
them believe he is an Englishman when all the time he is a German
at heart. (Hear, hear.) Whoever knew a spy was a spy until he
was caught? Who knows whether among the 14,000 men and
women in London to-day there are not many potential spies, many
who, if they could, would be true to their own country instead of
ours? (A Voice: "Why not?") Why not! I agree it is rather
an uncomfortable position. I cannot help feeling for a German who
lives in what to him is a foreign country at the present moment.


If he has become an Englishman then we are bound to despise him
for ever having been a traitor to the country which gave him birth—
(applause)—and if he remains a German we are bound to detest
him as being an enemy to our race. In one category or the other
we are determined that every German living in our midst must ba
placed. But to-day German life is going on in our midst much
as it did when the war began. (Hear, hear.) You can go into the
West Central district and see their German restaurants having Ger-
man customers, menus and notices on the walls in German, hear
German spoke there, and, indeed, if you went in there you might
consider that you were in Berlin before the war began.
Why Do Not Officials Act?
I myself have taken the trouble at different times to go to the
Home Office and given in the names of those men who ought to be in-
terned, and I am bound to say that out of the 14,000 or 15,000
enemy aliens only one or two have been interned. I might be asked:
"Why am I bound to do this?" Have we not Government officials
whose duty it is to do this? Members of Parliament should not be
bound to take up the question of the internment of individuals, and
it may be said: "What do we pay our public officials for?" (Hear,
hear.) Are they not the servants of the people of England, or are
they the rulers? Are they bound to do what we wish, or are we
bound to submit to any mood which they may feel in or choose in
the carrying on of the business of the country? I ask this great
audience to authorise me to go to the House of Commons and to say
that we demand that the existing laws and regulations shall be
properly carried out. (Loud applause.) And I believe and I hope
that the new Home Secretary and the new Government, formed, as it
is, with a stern determination to carry on the war on the other side
of the sea, will be prepared to carry it on with the same determina-
tion on this side. We have every confidence in our Army and Navy,
and every confidence in our new Prime Minister, Mr. Lloyd George.
(Loud applause.) And I hope and believe' that we shall soon feel
that we are entitled to have the same confidence in the new Home
Secretary. I hope at least that when we ask questions in the House
—that we shall get frank answers.
Spitting on Munition Badges.
Mr. Hicks then proceeded to give some specific instances of actions
on the part of certain uninterned German aliens. He mentioned
that a friend of his who was in a German restaurant had seen German
munition workers, at the end of their day's work come in, hang up
their munition badges, and spit upon them in contempt of Great
Britain; and the people of this country were so weak and so foolish
as to leave them uninterned. (A Voice: "What are you going to
do about it?")
Mr. Joynson Hieks: This meeting has been called for the purpose
of demanding that we shall do something which will strengthen the
hands of those in the House of Commons to fight this menace. That
is the only avenue open to ns. (A Voice: "Except the lamp-post,"
and cheers.) The House of Commons still rules the country, and it
is the one avenue which can make or unmake Ministries to-day.
You must strengthen the hands of the members in the House of
Commons in order to eradicate this cancer from our midst.


Enemies in Prohibited Areas.
Proceeding to deal with alien enemies in prohibited areas, Mr.
Hicks pointed out that, despite the stringency of orders in force,
in June of last year there were no less than 4294 alien enemies living
in prohibited areas. (Cries of "Shame.") They were allowed to
remain by the chief constable of the individual districts, and he (the
speaker) thought that there must have been some hidden hand on
the chief constable's shoulder. Why did they allow those men and
women to be there? Would Germany have allowed 4000 English-
men to reside at Wilhelmshaven, Kiel, or Essen? Why should we be
so foolish and so weak as to permit it in our own prohibited areas?
That number included 847 males, 287 of whom were of military age
and were still uninterned, and yet they were still living in prohibited
areas. What was the good, he asked, of passing laws or trying to
eradicate this pest from our midst? In individual cases he could
■nderstand a German being allowed to live in the heart of England
where he could do no harm, but there was no reason why we should
allow a man of military age to reside in a prohibited area. The
people in this country should make it their business to see that
England, the Hnited Kingdom, in fact the Empire, should not be
preserved as the happy hunting ground for the Bosche when the war
was over, but that it should be preserved for our own people. (Loud
applause.)
Hamburg-Amerika Line.
Another speaker will deal with the question of the German banks;
but there is one point I would like to allude to, and in regard to
which I asked a question in the House. It is with reference to that
great place at Charing-cross where the Hamburg-Amerika Line had
their headquarters. That line had business connections all over the
world, but it had now been closed. But what was the position
to-day, after two and a half years of war? It was empty, but it was
still retained by one of the German banks, ready to be handed over
to the Hamburg-Amerika Line as soon as the war is over, in order
that they may re-establish themselves in our midst. (Cries of "No! ")
The year before the war was declared the Kaiser had a silver
jubilee, and the Germans over here got up a subscription. A cir-
cular, which I have before me, was issued in 1913 and signed by
certain members who had formed themselves into a committee. I
may say that these English-living Germans when they communicate
with one another do so in the German language, and this document
which I have calls upon all Germans living abroad to celebrate the
Kaiser's jubilee. In this document the committee appealed to all
Germans, among others those who through birth, descent, education,
oi* other relationship are tied to the German home, and who, although
living here, are still knotted together to their German homes. This
Kaiser fund would not only serve its immediate purpose, but should
be a further help to unite the German population in Great Britain
and Ireland in one common bond of love,to the German Fatherland.
Who signed this precious document? Of course, the chairman was
the German Ambassador. It is further signed by Baron Bruno von
Schroder. It was neeessary for the Government to naturalise him
when the war began. Then the other names included Sir Edgar
Speyer, Sir Carl Meyer, and Mr. Alexander Siemens, the great elec-
trical manufacturer.


A Permanent Peace.
Well, now, we want all trifling stopped. We demand that as the
war is carried on abroad so it should be carried on here. We de-
mand that a special Royal 'Commission or some other means, I care
not what means they are, shall be carried out in order to root out this
German influence once and for all. (Applause.) Do you think we
are going to be satisfied with an undecided and inconclusive peace
Jk if! n No -") 1)0 y° u think that with the blood
that has been shed, all the lives that have been lost, all the limbs
that hjve been maimed, all the sacrifices which you have made, which
every house m our land lias made during the past two years, we are
going to be satisfied with a peace that is not a conclusive peace with
a victory that does not lead straight to Berlin? (Applause.) Great
Britain has put her hand to the plough in this matter. (Hear, hear.)'
She has gone into this war with a determination not to draw back
until the end is accomplished, with a determination that the military
domination of Prussia shall never be the military domination of
Europe; with the determination that this war, which has broken every
law of God and of man, shall be crushed beyond any power of resur-
rection or any power to do the like thing again. (Loud applause.)
. , °" r demand for victory in the war, so is our demand for
victory here at home. (Applause.) As we demand that German
militarism shall be crushed m Germany, so we demand that German
home life and German commerce shall once and for all be made
impossible m our own land. (Loud and vociferous applause.)
DR. ELLIS POWELL'S SPEECH.
Poy 11 said: We are here to support a resolution calling
lor the appointment of a Royal Commission to inquire into the pro-
Tl^f mgS T-i i ? ldentl ty of the mysterious agency known as the
Unseen Hand. I propose by a little brief but practical reasoning
to show you how we can narrow down the area within which a
Royal Commission would have to search. When I have done that
1 will go on to indicate by the mention of names and dates three
hi It, Sp ® e^ c ° pica w l lch Btand in urgent need of investigation
f/o A fi 1 T U r naL T t ? b6gm Wlth > let us ndandon once for all the
idea that the Jnseen Hand is some vague influence, or a sentiment,
or an illusion or as one polite critic calls it, a "crazy notion, carry-
ing with it the idea of the mad-house." As common-sense people,
we share the sentiments so tersely put by Mrs. Peyser, in "Adam
Bede, when she said: 'I am not one of those as can see the cat
i the dairy and wonder what she's come after." (Laughter ) We
are not of those who can see traces of pro-German malignity and
treachery m every part of our national policy, anS yet wonder how
they got there. They do not arrive by accident. The plain, unde-
them in 1S the Unseen Hancl is a person who manoeuvres
Personal Dexterity Essential.
'o ijegin with, so vast a web of treason-treachery, woven into
ri national life - vould have been detected and
sfhlmf 7/ ag °' 11 W f' e controlled by a group of people. The
scheme could never have been kept watertight, nor could it have
been manipulated with the superb and super-Satanic skill thus far


displayed. But if you postulate a single dominant brain, controlling
a multitude of agents, some intimate, some distant, and but few of
whom knew the identity of the arch-Traitor at the centre, then you
have a system which would not only be comparatively safe for the
arch-Traitor himself, but would, as a hypothesis, cover all the facts.
(Hear, hear.) The arch-Traitor is an individual. But he must
obviously be an individual with extensive and powerful influence. He
must have been preparing for years past to play the devilish role
in which he is now engaged. Germany could not say to any person,
no matter how clever, at the outbreak of the war, '' Go and* worm
yourself into every department of public life and infect them all
for our advantage." That is an impossible suggestion. (Hear,
hear.) But if for many years past a magnetic and dexterous per-
sonality has been at work permeating every department of our public
life, rewarding subservience, and penalising independence, he would
have brought into existence just the very species of subterranean
devilry which we have seen in operation since August of 1914.
Frankfort Metal Octopus.
Once more, we may conjecture that when it placed its interest
in the hands of this occult agent, the German Government would
put at his disposal any organisation which it already possessed.
Was there such an organisation in this country? Certainly there
was. (Hear, hear.) The Frankfort Metal Octopus, which for years
has been trying to strangle one of the greatest of Imperial indus-
tries, was all over the place before the war. We may take it as a
certainty that the machinery operated by the Unseen Hand would
be reinforced by this accursed organisation with all its multitude
of agents, creatures, and subsidiaries in every part of the world.
Further, if that were so, it would be necessary that the components
of the organisation itself should be kept alive, so as to be capable
of utilisation by the arch-Traitor. Well, you know, as a matter
of fact, that although some of the components of the Frankfort
Metal Octopus in this country have been judicially declared guilty
of assisting its enemies, ho proceedings have been taken against
.them, and nothing whatever has been done to hamper their opera-
tions. Perhaps, in saying that, I have gone a little too far. You
know we were told by the late Government that the German and
naturalised German element had been eliminated from the list of
Merton shareholders. Mertons, as you know, were connected by vari-
ous ties with the Frankfort Octopus. If you look at the old and new
list of shareholders, you will see that elimination, of a sort, has
taken place. The old list included Mr. Oscar Uangenbach.
(Laughter.) He has been eliminated and only Mr. Oscar Lang
remains. (Loud laughter.) Then, again, the old list included Mr.
Heinrich Schwartz. He also has been eliminated and Mr. Harrv
Ferdinand Stanton is left in his place. But when you know that
Heinrich Schwartz and Harry Ferdinand Stanton are the same man,
you begin to doubt what the so-called elimination is worth. (Sensa-
tion, laughter, and a Voice: "Is that really a fact?") Yes; I
publicly state it as a fact, and challenge Mr. Stanton to deny it.
(Loud applause.) Who has been protecting this flouting of the
nation? Who holds John Bull down while this humbug goes on?
The Unseen Hand. ("Hear, hear," and loud cheers.)


The "British" Company.
And now let lis glance at one or two specific cases where the probe
ought to be remorselessly applied. No German influence in recent
years has been so mischievous as the formation of so-ealled British
companies, consisting entirely of German interests and devoted to
carrying on what the Germans call penetration. Soon after the
outbreak of war one of these companies sought to collect a cer-
tain debt from the Daimler Motor Co. The Diamler people replied:
"You are an alien enemy, although disguised as a British com-
pany. Of your 25,000 shares all but one are held by Germans, and
even this solitary exception is in the hands of a naturalised German.
(Laughter.) Therefore," said the Daimler people, "we pay no
money io you." (Applause.) Well, the Germans went to the
Judge of the First Instance, and lie decided in their favour. The
case went to the Court of Appeal in January of 1915. The Judges
there included the greatest of English company lawyers, then Lord
Justice Buckey, now Lord Wrenbury. ("Hear, hear," and cheers.)
He, a one man minority of the court, held that as the components
were German, the company was German, and could not possibly ap-
pear as a plaintiff in the King's courts against the King's sub-
jects. (Loud applause.) But the rest of the Court of Appeal took
the other view that you could make a British company out of
German shareholders. The rest of the court consisted of Lord Bead-
ing and Lords Justices Cozens-Hardy, Kennedy, Phillimore, and
Pickford. They held that this company, made up entirely of Ger-
mans, was nevertheless a British entity entitled to appear as plain-
tiff against defendant British subjects. In the City, of course, every-
body recognised it as an utterly mischievous and vicious judgment.
It went to the House of Lords. They not only reversed it; they
jumped on it—(applause) —they stamped on it—(renewed applause)
—until nothing was left but a mass of unrecognisable fragments.
(Laughter and cheers.) This was on June 30 last year-—that is to
say, between the original vicious and mischievous judgment in January,
1915, and its reversal by the highest legal tribunal of the land a period
of eighteen months elapsed. ("Shame!" and Hisses.) We want a
Boyal Commission to inquire why that eighteen months was allowed
to elapse, and why, immediately upon the delivery of the original
vicious judgment, an Act was not passed to remedy the blunder and
to put these impudent alien companies out of the court. In reliance
upon that judgment they went on threatening and blustering in all
directions. Whose was the influence that prevented the instant pas-
sage of an Act to protect national interests from such dangerous
and malevolent aggression? Get that identity, and you have found
the Unseen Hand. (Cheers.)
The German Banks.
Of course, the damage was not limited to German companies regis-
tered as British. We have seen that the three principal German banks
—the Deutsche, the Dresduer; and the Disconto—have managed to
survive until this very hour, although they ought to have been wound
up within a few months of the commencement of the war. Those
banks were nests of espionage and treachery. There can be little
doubt that their survival has been materially furthered by their


m oS^W° n f d f n g e ™ us knowledge with regard to various political,
fundi /<<lr reS I. £ kne , w T what German money went into Party
T ittlp Nnvr
Ar T ™ en kad had his election expenses paid from Potsdam.
(More Laughter.) But all the documents which would have told
the tale were removed just on the outbreak of war, so that Germany
might retain her pull. ' When a month or so ago Sir William
I lender issueu his belated report upon his operations in connection
with these concerns he replied to those who had been suggesting
rot^, s ? me tks kanks' papers had been removed from London
W hat he said was this:
~ , Vl ®7 of the allegations made in August, 1914, to the effect,
that the German and Austrian banks had been shipping abnormal
quantities of securities and bullion to the Continent within a few
days of the outbreak of war, the official supervisors were instructed
to examine the accounts and the security registers to see if such
allegations were justified. In each case they reported that they had.
found no evidence of any unusual transactions."
How the Documents Were Removed.
a I a + w 6 WilHam Plender to look again. I believe that he will
iiiKi chat at about four o'clock on Wednesday, July 29, 1914 (when
war was recognised to be inevitable), a party of men was sent from
the Dresdner Bank m Old Broad-street, to the Safe Deposit in the
basement of mehester House, Old Broad-street. They were em-
ployed (as I have been told by one of the men, an old soldier, on-
gaged m the operations) in clearing two huge safes and packing the
contents (documents and stock certificates) in large wooden chests
il ' •Y-V?\ lormati O' 1 is that the same thing occurred on
the Thuisday and Friday. Some 30 or 11-chests in all were filled
and these were closed and sealed by those in charge of the partv'
(Sensation.) The work was not finished until late in the evening.,
lhose who supervised operations were continually urging the neees-
sity of all speed being used in the packing. The cases were taken
from Winchester House to Liverpool-street Station in a two-horse
lorry on Thursday evening and Friday evening. Keen apprehension
wate felt by those m charge that the lorry load on Friday evening
might be stopped. The lorry, however, returned from Liverpool-street
Station empty. The address on all the chests was "Dresdner Bank.
Berlin " ("Shame!") What "influence" preserved the Dresdner
Bank from interference in shifting these papers and stock certificates
away from London? If an honest British hand had been laid upon
the scruff or the Dresdner Bank's neck we should have got a million
or two m advance on account of the indemnity. (Applause.) The
records of donations to Party funds and accommodation granted to-
I arty politicians would have materially assisted us in the investi-
gation which this meeting is called to promote. Who stood between
us and the information? Let the Royal Commission find the answer
to that question, and it will discover the Unseen Hand f" Bear
hear," and Cheers.) ' '
The Privy Council Affair.
Let me turn briefly to look at another species of occult and
gratuitous intervention against overwhelming national sentiment. Last
year an attempt was made to secure the removal of Sir Edgar Speyer


and Sir Ernest Cassel, two naturalised Germans, from His Majesty's
Privy Couneil. You know who these gentlemen are. In their per-
sonal capacity as private individuals, we are not discussing them.
But as naturalised Germans they are centres of notable public in-
terest. Sir Edgar Speyer is one of the connections of an inter-
national banking firm which has branches in Frankfort and New
York. Sir Edgar himself has been in America for a considerable
time since the war began, though I do not know if he is still there.
He is an intimate friend of Jacob Schiif, who engineered the nego-
tiations for a compromise peace which all but succeeded two months
ago—aye, would have done, if the little Welshman had not jumped
the claim. (Loud and prolonged applause.) In fact, it is said that
the proposals were signed by Speyer and Schiif. Sir Ernest Cas-
sel was the subject of a statement on December 8, 1915, in the House
of Commons. The Chancellor of the Exchequer denied that Sir
Ernest Cassel represented the Treasury directly or indirectly, or
acted in any capacity on behalf of the Government in the negotia-
tions for the Anglo-French loan in the United States. These nego-
tiations, you will remember, were conducted by Sir Edward Holdea
and Lord Heading, who went to New York. The reason of the
statement by the Chancellor of the Exchequer was the fact that Sir
Ernest Cassel crossed the Atlantic on the same vessel with Sir Edward
llolden and Lord Beading. (Sensation.) At whose request, or by
whose authority, he travelled with the Commission has never been
stated. That is one of the problems which we hope time will elu-
cidate. (Hear, hear.)
The Roya! Prerogative.
Now, both these gentlemen —Sir Edgar Speyer and Sir Ernest Cas-
sel—were members of the Privy Council. A long line 'of constitutional
authorities, dating back for more than two centuries, lays it down
that the composition of the Privy Council is solely a matter for the
King. In publie affairs generally he is guided by the advice of his
Ministers. In the matter of the Privy Council he is entirely his own
master, responsible to nobody but himself and the nation. But when
an attempt was made to question the presence of Sir Edgar Speyer
and Sir Ernest Cassel on the Privy Council the late Government in-
tervened and fought the case on their behalf in the Law Courts. Most
of us would have thought that the presence of naturalised Ger-
mans on the Privy Council was sufficiently inexpedient for their
removal to be allowed to take place quietly and uninterruptedly.
(Hear, hear.) The late Government thought otherwise. It actually
briefed the Law Officers of the Crown to prevent the removal of these
gentlemen from the Privy Council. As you know, Sir George Mak-
gill's effort in that direction was defeated by the decision of Lord
Beading and Justices Lush and Avory. This case has gone as far as
the Appeal Court, and I am sorry to say that the decision of the
lower court has been approved. (Shame.)
The King in a Back Seat.
Now, what we want to know is: Why did the Government spend
the taxpayers' money, at a time when the income-tax stood at an
appalling rate, in keeping two naturalised Germans on the Privy
Council? Whose insidious influence was responsible for sending the


Uaw Officers of the Crown into court at the public expense to defeat
Sir George Makgill's patriotic endeavour? What was Sir Edgar
Speyer's "pull"? Gifts to Party funds, or loans to Party poli-
ticians, or financial accommodation for politicians' wives, or what?
(Loud applause.) It will be a pretty problem for the Eoyal Com-
mission. (Laughter, and renewed applause.) When Mr. Asquith was
asked why the traitor Duke of Cumberland was not removed from the
peerage, he said it was too much trouble. But it was not too much
trouble to waste the taxpayers' money in defence of the interests of
Sir Edgar Speyer and Sir Ernest Cassel. Whose was the influence
that intervened to abrogate a constitutional principle more than two
centuries old and to prevent the exercise His Majesty of a pre-
rogative which would have been in accord with the unanimous feel-
ing of the whole Empire? Who manoeuvred the Government
into that policy? Who had the consummate insolence to push the
King of England into a back seat? When we know that we shall
be much nearer quite a little array of interesting facts. (Cheers.)
Secret Wireless?
Let us look now for a moment at a recent book, written by one
of the most brilliant, intrepid, and patriotic members of my pro-
fession—l mean my friend Lord Northcliffe. (General cheers.) On
page 267 of his book, "At the War," he says:
"I asked Commendatore Marconi if it were possible that the Ger-
mans had a secret wireless in our midst. He replied that it would
be quite possible for them to have wireless apparatus, that it would
be very difficult to detect, and that he himself would be able to erect
a wireless in England that our authorities would have great trouble
in detecting."
Well, doesn't that mean substantially that the wireless background
ought to be investigated—the very thing that I said months ago,
and which brought the threat of the Public Prosecutor on my head
for saying it? (Shame.) The time has gone by for that kind of
thing. We have a new Government, headed by a little Welshman,
who has learnt a good deal in the last few months. (Cheers.) Lord
Northcliffe will not be threatened, as I was, with the attentions of
the Public Prosecutor, because I suggested that the British public
has an absolute right to turn the searchlight of national knowledge
upon the whole wireless background. Do not let us have any mis-
understanding. The Marconi system, and the Marconi companies
and their managers and officials, have rendered services of incal-
culable value to us and to civilisation at large. ("Hear, hear," and
applause.) Every decent man and woman recognises that. All the
same, we have the clearest right to accept Commendatore Marconi's
hint and look into the wireless background for ourselves. (Hear,
hear.)
Dresdner Bank and Schiff.
At a certain stage in the Marconi inquiry, certain of the mem-
bers asked for the production of a list of persons who had received
American Marconi shares under highly privileged conditions. There
was a great fight in the Committee, and the list was only at last
produced with the express stipulation that the names should not be
read out, and that there should be no cross-examination upon them.
Why all that secrecy? Would you be surprised to hear that one


of the names on that list, the production of which was fought tooth
and nail, was that of the Dresdner Bank? (Sensation and applause.)
What was the Dresdner Bank doing there? Why was there to be no
cross-examination upon the presence of its name in the background
of the Marconi dealings? Once again, a couple of months ago the
British Empire was nauseated by certain proposals for peace on Ger-
man terms, made by Mr. .Jacob Schiff, of New York. Mr. Schiff
had given a luncheon to 50 German bankers, at which arrangements
were made to employ speakers in touring the United States in the
interests of a German-dictated peace. Well, would you be sur-
prised to hear that this Mr. Jacob Schiff, who is so anxious to bring
about peace on German terms, was right in the thick of the Mar-
coni dealings? (Sensation.) He got 50,000 American Marconi shares
at 1 1-16. That was a bargain which, having regard to market
conditions, represented a potential profit of over £IOO,OOO. What
was Mr. Schiff doing there? Is not his presence in the Marconi
background a matter of the gravest publie moment? I could give
other names, but I think I have said enough to satisfy you that in
the light of Corhmendatore Marconi's friendly hint as to the pos-
sible existence of a secret wireless, the public is entitled to know
all about these various "influences" in the wireless background. It
is not the direct and palpable that you have to fear where Ger-
man and pro-German intrigue is concerned, it is the indirect, the
subterranean contagion which might infect some point of the Mar-
coni organisation without the company or its directors and managers
having the remotest suspicion of its real character. (Loud applause.)
That is what we want to probe.
A Solemn Warning.
Ladies and gentleman, we are to-day poised upon the razor-edge
of destiny. A single clever push by the Unseen Hand may thrust us
down upon the wrong side, altering the course of civilisation for the
next thousand years, if not for all time. When the thrust has been
bestowed, when we lie prone at the feet of the conqueror, it will
be too late for a Boyal Commission to inquire into the infernal devil-
ment that works among us. You know the good old couplet:
"Treason doth' never prosper—what's the reason?
Why, when it prospers, none dare call it 'treason.' "
When you have paid a £20,000,000,000 war indemnity to Germany,
when your girls by tens of thousands have been removed to human
stud-farms in Germany—(Sensation)—-when all your over-seas Do-
minions are German colonies, you will have no power to demand Boyal
Commissions. In fact, you will not need them, for by that time
the Unseen Hand will have been rewarded with a princedom of the
Holy German Empire, and will doubtless have replaced your King
at Buckingham Palace. Therefore, tell your friends and neighbours
about the Unseen Hand. Notice how every effort will be made to
hush up all allusion to this meeting—("lnfamous") —and to the
facts I have told you, so that the nation shall be kept quiet while
treachery makes further furtive strides towards our ruin. I believe
—I might almost say I know—that Mr. Lloyd George favours the
rigorous and ruthless application of the probe. I myself have been
told, on authority quite unimpeachable, that in the very highest quar-
ters—l say the very highest—(loud cheers) —the peremptory necessity
for inquiry is recognised. I ask you to send forth your unanimous


■demand for the extirpation of this sleepless, super-satanie devilry, and
the dispatch of its perpetrator, whoever he is, to a task for which
his talents so conspicuously qualify him—the Kingship of the dark
dominions of the damned. (Loud and prolonged cheers.)
The resolutions were carried by acclamation.
MR. ARNOLD WHITE.
Mr. Arnold White proposed a hearty vote of thanks to the chair-
man for presiding and to Air. Joynson Hicks and Dr. Powell for
their addresses. In doing so, he said Sir Alfred Turner was a most
distinguished soldier and was a brave, great man who had the spiri-
tual courage to say that he was mistaken in some of his
former notions. Over and over again he was the personal
guest of the tuberculous braggart who sat on the Throne of Prussia,
and he (Sir Alfred) had every temptation that human nature could
afford to stick to his guns anil to decline to say that he was wrong.
(Applause.) He (Air. Arnold White) would always lift his hat to
Sir Alfred Turner. Mr. Joynson Hicks, if war was a matter of com-
munications, had contributed as much to the progress of this country
and its advantage as most civilians, or almost as much as any mem-
ber of Parliament. They all knew what he had done in the automo-
bile world, and in the clearing up of the air trouble. More than that,
he had risked his political career by coming to a meeting like that
one. As to Dr. Powell, it would be impertinent to offer him any
praise, but he hoped that every word of his speech would be reported.
(Applause.) If not, the little Welshman would see to it that in
future his speeches would be reported. He stated that among the
ladies who had arranged that meeting with so much skill, tact, and
energy was the sister of the late Lord Kitchener of Khartoum, who
was on the platform. (Loud applause.) With regard to the foreign
Office, its policy had been for many years that of a diseased pas-
sion for neutrals. (Hear, hear.) In this war, however, there could
be no neutrals. They must either be in favour of a policy of rape,
rapine, robbery, and piracy, or a policy opposed to it. It was not
the desire of the promoters of that meeting to do anything except
to strengthen the hands of the little Welshman. (Applause.) He
would like to give two specific instances of the working of the
Foreign Office, one at the beginning of the war and one at the
middle. A German, naturalised after the war began, hired an estate
with the shooting rights in the county in which he (Mr. White)
lived. On that estate he preserved pheasants and enjoyed himself.
There was, however, a brave farmer who was a special constable,
and who declined to guard the pheasants, whereupon he was brought
before the magistrates and fined £3. Would any Englishman who
became naturalised in Germany be allowed in time of war to pre-
serve pheasants for his own particular enjoyment or to employ men
of military age to act as his keepers?
Amazing Naval News.
The other point he wished to refer to was that on the outbreak
-of war the territorial waters of nations was a stretch of sea three
miles from the coastline. On October 18, 1915, an order was re-
ceived by the Admiral Commanding the Orkney 'and Shetland Fleet


that for the present the territorial line of Norway was to be ex-
tended from three to four miles. Why was the territorial line on
the Norwegian coast extended for four miles? It was absolutely
necessary for Germany to get in oil and other necessaries from
abroad, and these had to be brought down the Norwegian coast But
the steamers were too large to be of use in the three miles limit
so that somebody must have had an interest in extending the limit
from three to four miles. (Sensation.) To whose interests was it'
By extending the territorial limit it had been possible for the Ger-
man Government to import by way of the Norwegian waters 179,000
tons more necessaries than they did in the year before. That, he
-considered, was an unanswerable sign—a sign of the invisible hand.
(Shame.) A- ship called the "Gloria," loaded with iron ore, was
stopped outside the four-mile limit. The Swedish captain admitted
that he was outside territorial waters. He had three or four sets
of papers, none of which were in order, and these papers would have
enabled him to go to any part of the planet—to Tokio, Lisbon, New
fork, or Holland. The ship was arrested. The Foreign Office was
■communicated with, and the ship was held for seven hours. Then a
wireless was received from the Foreign Office, "Belease 'Gloria.' "
(General cries of "Shame!") Now this was either true or untrue.
That was a matter which ought to be the subject of a Eoyal Com-
mission, and if the statement were proved true then they should
get at the invisible hand which dictated that infamous, that treacher-
ous, and that wicked order. (Loud applause.) If they did they
would find that it was the same hand which had endeavoured to
jettison the aneient sea-power of this country at the Hague Con-
ference, when Sir Edward Fry went with instructions to throw over-
board the one power that made us what we are. (Applause.)
Comb Out the Foreign Office.
If England were only what she seems, and not the England of his
dreams, he would despair; but now, with a new message and a new
sense of union, caused by a meeting like this, they were determined,
at all 1 lsks, to see that justice was done to our own country. They
knew that the time had now come to comb out those men at the
I- oreign Offiee. The men he wanted to see combed out were per-
manent officials of the Foreign Offiee, such as the one who was the
son of a German mother and who was married to a German wife.
Another was the son of a naturalised Prussian father, and another
was married to a German lady. What they had got to do was to
make up their minds to get rid of the Germans not only at the
I- oreign Office, but to destroy their influence in this country and
boycott our alien enemies in every possible way. If they had been
taught anything by this war, they had been taught to stand together.
He urged his hearers not to go away thinking that those on the plat-
form were going to do everything. The responsibility rested on
every one to discharge their duty by getting rid of these Germans,
and by following up in every way the advice which had been given
tnem m the magnificent speech by Dr. Ellis Powell. If they did
that, then he was convinced, from what he had seen and heard, that
they had won the day. (Loud applause.)


MR. A. G. HALES.
Mr. A. G. Hales said that the principal cause of the Germans
being in our -midst, carrying on their devilish work with impunity,
was the apathy of the British public in regard to this deadly menace.
He asked whether they were going to wait that short time, which
was ahead of them, when they would want in their own homes the
neeessary food to keep their wives and little ones alive. The action
of our troops on the front would not counteract treachery within
the gates. How was it that the Germans could follow the movements
of every ship on our sea routes? He believed that they were supplied
with the information by German agents, who were living within our
midst, even at the present moment. (Sensation.) What he would
like to see would be a special Boyal Commission appointed, with
powers to act drastically and immediately. There should not be to-
day a German at large. He did not believe there was another country
under Heaven where such crass stupidity would be submitted to for
a moment. . For three years we had allowed spies the free run of
the country, and they were to be found in every business. What
class of man could one be who did business with an enemy? (Hear,
hear.) A man who did business with an enemy at this time was a
traitor to his country, because he was placing his personal gain
against his country's honour, and above the lives of those gallant lads
who were fighting so finely for us and those of others who were willing
to go on fighting. (Applause.) Some people seem to imagine that
if America were to come in the war would soon be over; but when
was it that we had to look to another country to settle our difficul-
ties? (Loud applause.) He respected and admired the American
as a fighter when he got his coat off, but it took him too long a time to
get his coat off. (Laughter.) He did not believe in Uncle Sam fight-
ing until he had bared the muzzles of his guns. If they did come in,
we were perfectly willing to welcome him. He pointed out that as a.
conqueror the German was a devil unchained, and if the people in
England only had him here for a week it would drive the steel into
their souls, and then they would never rest until they had wiped
every German off the face of God's earth. (Loud and vociferous
applause.) If they did not take hold of this spy question, and grapple
with it, they might live to see for themselves those happenings, such
as he had seen himself in Belgium and France, in what we proudly
called Merrie England. The Navy had kept the enemy from these
shores, but the latter were using a new weapon which was, paralysing
all the efforts of our brave sailors and soldiers, and therefore it
may be that they would bring the horrors of war nearer home to
us more than they have hitherto. He h-ad the greatest pleasure in
seconding the resolution which had been proposed by Mr. Arnold
White.
The resolution was carried with loud applause, and the proceedings,
which throughout were of a most enthusiastic character, terminated
with the singing of the National Anthem. The final verse—not often
sung—was peculiarly impressive:—
'' Confound their politics,
Frustrate their knavish tricks:
On Thee our hopes we fix,
God save us all.''
