

■|i |||[&^^
»5f$$ }$M$M H » *‘ *0 lj*\ \'i ' V- *""> i w x H’ ' j \v'^fe v ’.' ■ ' •' ' !:
s &$$ : : %1'KW -- : 'XX ■:*
BiffimJ :^Tj^RfTrrV¥ r i ?ilnli® W
Hun vJiVilwfi ilMiWffflwiMTOiW ' j mill | 1 1 rj 1 SM S 5 ;
Hyf-"CfiliVVl yAm. 8ffiygfr
15?^^
BilililliilllffliliiS lillilllMIl* I MllffiliMMls MmMmBMl
HE' 1 i'lim <&wfMsiiWM i »HPrtf•
ip -'■ ■fmKlm^- ' ' >:>
m I .' wmmm
Bi|| |
mmmMl * i *1 iwJrvWS MX! 4 U ; jf.Tf yk Q *iyji f & Vi vi I a! j I'i y®Ri V/}\ »A fijfZ fw'i J >7 -I *i vJKilU"} WS/fX&k T?Jf {N *A S » A%or %. S •? *Vjf • yW?' &vkvNk!|WW
fnVH rvlirM Vc4 «i w vivwVMf&fiz'iJmyt* KIjAM Lr±A wA JuSi 1 Im $ i^« j i V W a M ‘i t Iy*< &Stf awalkt:
* \w\ $j4 A W A\V JfS 1ftHfy{il w BRI
I"' IS -V- ' ’ ' . I
■PWffll i ItmlBBBBHH il m IB™ yfiTyl Wmf mW Mm
\ Bh /5:?$T
By*w| *.': v ? v v*. >1 Mji


KjgiH
jKb I B|r' ' , JMs0BS£§ iB> w^^ a^m '_jSf jfev^BWr
if&H .■£ JL^yiDr^i^Tfl^
iinnn
PjjBm
■gX'S I ck T WpjUh j9r^m
V. , ■ /Jfe | £lv '.II.Mk ? y *


' * is ybr ' :■ • ,\
okS - \w "-y mSp r —* .uTtffck v>1 B z flm. SV■aft. «jv
yimlmam V# i fife <?« if ■ J j ■ T j
'^Sc^ wry '. -.;-T a ,3k. ■ {BT ‘ . : J/ m ' laftySSSyM '■ jSSSBSS-y
% JffilL 3SI. ; ' il Iri ik •-?
‘ ■ „ ' Eg). HR^r^x;--'-
v gw -#| SiPjr
- aTvHKK > '-jml f n-rrm, y ->' Jr9Jfff . ;3 S|k\ ;; '. ' I
Pi mmi PI ' nJI,
jfi •■* i
■ ]HHK\ W7 f jM- **w| jHT
jp ; ■ iD*9| \ - pft :■' Jfc ” fem liioSSESn
’ .JmkJm'\ Mj » «»r ]jfl[ i®ix j»r jjBSSi\mm ■ i
N IM@MpPI?V «. ™ JEmM S«\ /'JPk Jms/ MT I/IIV^I
i Jp : /*\ wf I
PSll T) hKS Pb b|SH
T^^V 1 iff/ 4/ jRr *nS *i y /jfi vwjKs »«•«<








THE PASTORAL HOMES OF
AUSTRALIA.




THE PASTORAL HOMES
OF AUSTRALIA.
Volume I.
VICTORIA.
With Introduction by W. H. Lang, “Fife and Drum” of The Pastoralists’ Review.
PUBLISHED BY
THE PASTORALISTS’ REVIEW,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, and LONDON.
1910,


MELBOURNE I
M‘CARRON, BIRD AND CO., PRINTERS,
479 COLLINS STREET.


NOTE. — Owing to the Sections referring to the various Homes included in this work
having been printed at different times, extending over a year, it was found impracticable
to number the pages consecutively in the usual wav. To facilitate reference, however, each
individual Section has been given a number, which is printed at the bottom right hand corner
of the first sheet. In binding the book these numbers are arranged in their proper sequence
and any particular Home may he readily found by referring to the following Table of Contents.
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Section Page
27 Avalon ... ... Mr. F. Austin ... ... ... 293
18 Barunah Plains ... Mr. James Russell ... ... 201
29 Berrambool ... ... Mr. Wm. Moffatt ... ... 331
g Boisdale ... ... Messrs. Foster Bros. ... ... log
32 Boorook ... ... Mr. W. T. Allen ... ... 359
1 Boortkoi ... ... Mr. Edw. Manifold ... ... 1
21 Bretton ... ... Messrs. H. H. Wettenhall & Sons... 229
20 Brooklyn ... ... Mr. S. J. Staughton ... ... 221
37 Bushy Creek ... Mr. F. Beggs ... ... ... 415
28 Caramut House ... Mr. E. R. de Little ... ... 315
13 Caramut North ... Mr. H. F. de Little ... ... 149
21 Carr’s Plains... ... Messrs. H. H. Wettenhall & Sons... 229
26 Clifton ... ... Mr. A. J. Simpson ... ... 285
35 Dalvui ... ... Mr. N. W. Black ... .. 387
1 Danedite ... ... Mr. Edw. Manifold ... ... 1
22 Deniliquin Stud Park Mr, Thos. Millear ... ... 245
22 Edgarley ... ... Mr. Thos. Millear ... ... 245
8 Eeyeuk ... ... Mr. Alex. Dennis ... ... 101
34 Eumeralla ... ... Mr. R. A. Staughton ... ... 379
23 Eurambeen ... ... Messrs. Beggs Bros. ... ... 261
41 Eynesbury ... ... Exors. late Capt. S. T. Staughton ... 463
12 Gala ... ... Mr. Edwin Currie ... ... 137
42 Glengower ... ... Mr. Thos. J. O’Loughliu ... 475
21 Glen Holford ... Messrs. H. H. Wettenhall & Sons... 229
16 Glenormiston ... Mr. S. G. Black ... ... 181
30 Gnarpurt ... ... Mr. James C. Manifold ... ... 343


Section Page
31 Hexham Park ... Mr, W. J. T. Armstrong ... 351
3 Keayang ... ... Mr. A. J. Staughton ... ... 37
42 Killarney ... ... Mr. Thos. J. O’Loughlin ... 475
22 Kulki ... ... Mr. Thos. Millear ... ... 245
42 Lake Menenia ... Mr. Thos. J. O’Longhlin ... 475
17 Melton Park ... ... Mr. Harvey Patterson ... ... 193
38 Melville Park ... Mr. S. P. Mackay ... ... 423
33 Merrang ... ... Mr. R. A. D. Hood ... ... 363
40 Mondilibi ... ... Mr. J. I. Winter ... ... 455
24 Moranghurk ... ... Mr. J. Lee Matheson ... ... 269
6 Mount Napier ... Mrs. E. M. James & Co. ... 81
7 Mount Noorat ... Mr. A. J. Black ... ... 85
14 Mountside ... ... Exors. late Mr. Peter Mclntyre ... 161
2 Mount Talbot ... Mr. W. Officer ... ... ... 25
4 Moyne Falls ... ... Mr. T. Robertson ... ... 57
38 Mundabullangaua ... Mr. S. P. Mackay ... ... 423
14 Murdeduke ... ... Exors. late Mr. Peter Mclntyre ... 161
4 Murroa , ... ... Mr. T. Robertson ... ... 57
20 Nerowie ... ... Mr. S. J. Staughton ... ... 221
11 Purrumbete ... ... Mr. W. T. Manifold ... * ... i 2 g
39 Quamby ... ... Trustees late Mr. Jas. Lindsay ... 443
ig Rippon Hnrst ... Mr. H. M. Sargood ... ... 213
36 Skene ... ... Mr. J. Robertson ... ... 4 q 3
10 Stony Point ... ... Mr. R. Jamieson ... ... I2 i
30 Talindert ... ... Mr. Jas. C. Manifold ... ... 343
25 Union ... ... Mr. William Lindsay ... ... 2 y 3
4 3 West Cloven Hills ... Messrs. Cole Bros. ... ... 4 g 3
1 Wiridgil ... ... Mr. Edw. Manifold ... ... x
15 Wormbete ... ... Mr. W. Hopkins ... ... 173
5 Yarra View ... ... Mr. A. E. T. Payne ... ... 69


INTRODUCTION.
VICTORIA is the most precocious child that this great world has ever seen.
So precocious is she, so grown up, that we almost forget that this forward,
healthv, bouncing individual is a child at all, or ever was a child. It
may do her good, and we, some of her children, good, to be reminded that
we are still very wonderfully young, and not one bit grown up. One hundred and
seven years ago there were mutterings about the birth of an infant away down
south here, but it was all a false alarm. For some few weeks, fifteen, I think, all told,
a little band of convicts, with their keepers and officers, had wandered about Port
Phillip Bay, and had then joyfully returned to the more hospitable shores of
Tasmania. It was a home-coming for them, poor things. But for twenty years
more no portion of what we call Victoria to-day was disturbed by the feet of white
men. In the meantime, if you will glance your eye over your History, you will
see what an epoch those years form in the story of the nations of the Old World.
It was during those twenty years that all Europe was boiling with the ferment of
war. No wonder that immigration from the old lands was slow and delayed. Every
able-bodied young man was wanted, body and soul, to combat him whom the theo-
logians of the time recognised as the Great Beast ol the Revelations. But in 1821,
when Scott was just publishing The Fortunes of Nigel , the Great Beast lay down
and expired on the little island in the South Atlantic Ocean, and Europe was
permanently free. Then, three years later, the year in which Lord Byron died,
Hume, and his little band, burst into the solitudes on the southern side of the
Murray River. And so, in that act, Victoria was born. Yet, so slow is the birth
of nations, ten more years passed before there were any signs of life. Years are
but as minutes in the labouring of worlds. The Hentys came to Portland in ’34.
This was, as it were, the first wail of the infant. Then, unexpectedly, there
arrived to the Hentys Major Mitchell on his travels, after having traversed what
he was pleased to call Australia Felix. His nomenclature was not far amiss.
The Pastoral Homes of Victoria, dealt with in this book, might as truthfully be
styled the Pastoral Homes of Major Mitchell’s Australia Felix. This was seventy-
five years ago. At nearly the same time came Batman and Fawkner. Very few


people notice the tablet in Collins Street, recording the arrival of Batman.
Perhaps those who come after us will look upon it with more reverence than
we do. It is too new to impress this generation. But after these opening
years events began to move more quickly. The Heroes of Romance began to drop
in upon our shores. The Major Buckleys and Brentwoods, the Hillyars and the
Burtons, the Browns and the Geoffrey Hamlyns. There is one alive amongst us
to-day—and long may he live—who was present when Batman and Pascoe Fawkner
were the moving spirits in the land. It gives one quite a curious turn when you
meet this fresh looking gentleman, and realise that he has seen a tribe of black-
fellows where Collins Street streams along, the fashionable world of to-day, and has
watched innumerable wild duck and swans disporting themselves in the “ West
Melbourne Marsh.” Yet here he is, a well-known figure still, and we are
reckoning ourselves amongst the nations. Already we are building great
ships of war, or are contemplating such an act, at all events. Already
have we stood up and taken our part, right manfully, in the struggles on the
battlefields beside the people of the older world, that world which was so far
removed from our shores in the forties, which is so close at hand to-day.
Already have “we harkened to our Mother’s call, and have met our foemen
in the gate.” And, therefore, are we not precocious beyond all precedent?
Mitchell looked down from the summit of Mt. William, and he saw that the
land was good. In his eyes it was the Garden of Eden returned again. Henty
must have been the Adam then. Before many years were past there were a
considerable number of young Cains about, though not of Henty’s rearing.
Some of the old aboriginal inhabitants of the place were bold and brave, and we
murdered heaps of them. Partly, of course, this was done in self defence, partly
as punishment for cattle spearing and so forth. Still we were Cains, if unwilling
ones. But from this time forth, until to-day, the history of certain families is
the history of Victoria, so far as its pastoral life is concerned. These families,
realising through their chiefs that the land was very fair, sat down upon it like
Lot and Abraham, and with their flocks and their herds they abode there. But
unlike the land of Abraham and Lot, the country was able to bear them. There
was no crowding so that the herdsmen of an Abraham should perforce quarrel with
the herdsmen of Lot. So they sat down, and they stuck to what they had acquired
through all the years of struggle with drought and fire, bad prices, and scant
population. Their descendants have reaped, truly they themselves did reap, an ample
reward. We can see to-day what an eye for a country had old Major Mitchell when
he described the land that lay beneath him as Australia Felix. Almost every
“ Pastoral Home” described in this volume lies in that portion of Victoria which is


bounded on the North by the Grampians and the Dividing Range, on the West by
the Eumeralla River, on the East by the Yarra Yarra, and by the great sounding
ocean on the South. It would indeed be a delightlul task for anyone with leisure
to write a full history of these families, from records left behind by the early
pioneers. There must be much material in existence for such a volume.
To us, looking over the country to-day, it appears as though this early
settlement might have been an easy matter. When we see the well-grassed flats, and
the rich volcanic rises, with their fat cattle and dairy herds, the choicest ot merino
mutton, and with hundreds of bales ot wool, the price of which runs up as high as
some twenty pence per pound, the task of our forefathers looks as though it had
been simple enough. But times were pretty desperate in the early forties, when a
scanty, scattered band did at length make a beginning to turn the beautiful country
to some account. The first great tract of land which the pioneers crossed on their
trek westward from the settlement at Port Phillip could be traversed without
setting foot upon grass at all. Tussocks there were, but far apart. Where at
present you see the grand pasture land round, let us say, Mount Elephant, wheie
everything to-day is open to the eye and to the light of heaven, and wheie stiips
of artificial plantations are raising their graceful heads, thick scrub was growing in
such a dense mass that you could not see your strayed cattle until you had t limbed
the steep, slippery hill —no easy task. Blackfellows abounded, dingoes were
apparently nearlv as numerous as rabbits have been during more recent A
terrific drought had probably been scorching up the land just before this time.
At all events streams have been running ever since where in the earliest days they
were absolutely non-existent. It you ventured to keep a flock ot sheep, the wild
dogs ate them up. If you invested in cattle, there was nobody to do the like
service for them and eat them up, after due remuneration to the ownei. Prices
were so miserably low that you were simply forced to boil your bullocks down, and
make what profit you might from their tallow and hides. But those heroes of the
brave days of old sat tight. Rolf Boldrewood has even said that these years
between ’46 and ’52 were the happiest possible in this or any world. Yet one
cannot but think that Mr. Brown, when he wrote that sentiment, might well have
been inspired by the same spirit as he who sang —
“ Pour rever gloire, amour, plaisir, folie,
Pour depenser sa vie en peu d’instans,
D’un long espoir pour la voir embellie,
Dans un grenier qu’on est bien a vingt ans.”
“ To draw long dreams of beauty, love and power,
From founts of hope that never will outrun,
And drink all life’s quintessence in an hour,
Give me the days when I was twenty-one.”


But great was the faith of the men of old, and at the last it succeeded as
though in removing mountains. Then the Prophet Hargraves struck the solid
rock, and there flowed thence not water, but gold—much fine gold. And all
the peoples of the earth rushed hither, as children do when called to scramble for
coppers in the street. And these had all to be fed. Beef and mutton rose to
prices only before dreamt of in the philosophy of the squatter. But you may say
that trom that day to this the inhabitants of Australia Felix have never looked
over their shoulders. Since the gold rush, but a trifle over fifty years have passed
away. Be pleased to compare the aspect of the country before the year ’SO and
now. It was a land ot bleak plains or ot dense scrub, of volcanic rock or deep
glue-pot swamp, of no rivers and few creeks, and brackish lakes. I sometimes
think that one reason why so many men from the North of Tweed made their
abiding place here was from some fancied resemblance which they saw to the
moors at home. Ihe same feeling, I know, has often touched the writer of these
lines, as on some “gurly” day, with the clouds flying low and the wind blowing
sharp and snell, away trom amongst the benty grass an old magpie has flown
jauntily oft with the same gleam of white under-feather, and the same swing as
an old black-cock of the hills. No roads, no fences; dingoes, blacks, stone or turf
huts, shepherd’s watch boxes, a scattered, sparse population.
1 o-day, vast flocks and herds, a population growing denser each year, seeking
elbow room across the Murray, and even in far Queensland. There are lovely
roads. With a gale behind you, and on a “free wheel,” you can skim from
Mounts Feura or Flephant to Geelong in next to no time, without putting your
foot on the pedal. There are plantations of trees where the plains were bleakest,
railroads with their engines puffing round the lakes and through the stony
rises, motor cars, handsome even palatial—homes. Western District mutton is
eaten fresh in London and Manchester. Western District butter, cool and sweet,
you can have for your breakfast in the North of Scotland if you so desire it.
All the products of Australia Felix are called for in Great Babylon, and are
brought there by magic, at the waving of the wand of that wizard, gold. Oh !
but I wish that the Editor of this volume could have discovered some old drawings
of the spots so faithfully depicted for us by the camera to-day, and old daguerro-
types of the men and women who, by their bravery and their pluck, gave us this
fair land in the long ago. Long ago! What nonsense! I mean yesterday, fifty years
back. I have seen an odd picture or two of the scenes of that yesterdav.
One looks at them with reverence, affection, almost with awe. The history of
one of the early families, one which still flourishes with undiminished vigour, is, I
believe, furnished for their descendants on painted friezes in the entrance hall of
their home. A fine idea, reminding one of the picture stories of the Aztecs. To


my mind one of the most interesting of the photographs in this book before us is
that of the “Four Generations at Cloven Hills.” There you see the oldest of
these generations sitting calmly, fresh and well still, with a look of humour in
the brave eyes, as if smiling after her survey of all, to her, the well-known story
of Victoria through the perspective glass of history. Would that we could read
all that those eyes, so yet undimmed by time, have seen.
But if changes so vast have taken place in that short span of years,
what may not have occurred before the next half-century has passed away ?
The photographs so beautifully reproduced in this book will be inspected
with amusement, almost with pity, by those coming after us. Many of them
are living to-day. I have here at my side some very well executed engravings
of Victoria in 1857, and how infinitely old-fashioned and out-of-date everything
appears to be to our civilised eyes —the costumes, the soldiers, the people, the ships,
the horses even, the railway trains. The only structure which has not been
improved out of all recognition is the pier at Port Melbourne. It was called
Sandridge then. This has been retained by a succession of far-seeing Governments
as a relic of the past, calculated to keep down our pride perhaps—a mummy at
the feast of progress. But in another fifty years that too will have passed from
us, as our rulers become more enlightened and patriotic. If our planet is still
at that time swinging safely through space, unhurt by comet or falling dead
worlds, those pictures of ours, so truthful to-day, will be but curios. Doubtless
the books of those who follow us will be illustrated by moving bioscope pictures,
coloured with nature’s own dyes, and, at will, accompanied by gramophonic
conversations from the figures represented. The brave motor cars standing at our
front doors will be replaced by some ingenious type of air ship, which will carry
its crew and passengers at the rate of two miles to the minute. “The Shover’’
will be put on one side by a mechanic designated “ The Lifter,” or some equally
appropriate substantive. Telephonic and telegraphic wires will no longer wind from
station to station, from farm-house to Exchange, Every man will carry with him
his own little wireless apparatus, with which to communicate, from any distance, to
whomsoever he chooses. Yet we will still require cattle for our beef, sheep for our
mutton, and wool for our clothing. Wheat and oats will still be cultivated, potatoes
and onions will be more valuable than before. Butter and milk will not have been
banished from the dietary of nations, however advanced they may be. Nay, butter
milk, that elixir vitae, with its Bacillus Bulgariensis, may be at a premium. And
still the favourite amusement of the people will be horse-racing. The descendants
of these thoroughbreds which we see in the photographs here, belonging to Mr.
Staughton and Mr. Manifold, Mr. Mackay and Mr. Harvey Patterson, will be fighting


still for the cash on improved, if that be possible, Randwicks and Flemingtons. Our
Pastoral Homes will be still flourishing, only more smiling, more beautiful, more
prosperous than to-day. That is to say if the same old flag be flying that has
braved a thousand years the battle and the breeze. If our day has passed, it our
Empire, like that of Rome and Greece, has tottered to its fall, then we need not
think of a future at all. But that day will not have come. Trouble there may be
ahead of us. Nay, trouble and striving there will assuredly be, and must be. No
nation ever rose to greatness, or remained great on prosperity. We are no
exception. It would be but an evil heritage if our ancestors, who made these
homes, had left to us unbroken prosperity, a freedom from foreign foe, an effeminacy
as of the old Bengalee. No one except a socialistic labour party could ask for
that. No! Our strides must be ever upward, onward, out of the bounds of the
waste; if necessary over those stepping-stones fashioned from oui own dead sel\es.
So let it be.
“ FIFE AND DRUM.”
Melbourne,
January, 1910.


Wool Team leaving Danedite.
TKHtdfcoU, IDanebite, anb .USoorthoi Estates
Six' properties of flDr. fiOwaiO flDauifolb.
AS Mr. Edward Manifold’s three estates are of varying character, and not all suited to the
/ \ same purpose, he finds it necessary to carry on several forms of pastoral industry. Wool-
L V giouing, stock-fattening, and dairying are each conducted on one or other of his properties.
Wiridgil, which the owner makes his home, first belonged to his brother, Mr. T. P. Manifold. It
passed into the hands of Edward after his brother’s death in the hunting field in 1895. Danedite
came into his possession at an earlier date, when the estates of his father, the late Mr. John Manifold,
and his uncle. Mr. Peter Manifold, were divided amongst the sons.
MlruVuL
The Wiridgil Estate consists of about 6000 acres, of which 3000 are devoted to dairying,
being subdivided into farms of about 300 acres each, and let to tenant farmers. The remaining
3000 acres are used for grazing crossbred sheep and cattle. The land is fertile and volcanic in its
(Section 7, pages 1-24.)


View of Wiridgil Country from the Road.
1
A Corner of the Homestead at Wiridgil.


;. :>
, , Ri’. , * ‘ — ■• *"’
THE HOMESTEAD, WIRIDGIL.
Wiridtfil, Victoria.


THE WIRIDGIL HOMESTEAD IN 1900.
(Compare with Picture on opposite page.)


THE HOMESTEAD IN 1909.
(Taken from almost the same spot as the opposite picture.)
Note the growth of Timber and the fact that the Lake is now quite dry.
Wiridgil , Victoria.


View from Mt. Wiridgil looking towards Lake Purrumbete.
origin. In springtime the rapid growth of grass quickly brings milking cows into their highest
state of productiveness, whilst the character of the soil gives heavy yields of almost any fodder
crop that may be sown. The tenants are all exceedingly prosperous, for not only are the natural
features of the country conducive to high and regular returns, but the improvements on the
property are such as to tone down the effects of climatic extremes. 1 here is ample shade in
summer, shelter during the winter, and a plentiful water supply is rendered available by windmills
drawing on springs beneath the volcanic rock. Originally the country was heavily timbered, but
in the early days the sunlight was let on to the surface of the ground by clearing, and a thick
sward of grass quickly followed. Fresh trees were planted where shelter was needed, and they
have now grown to a good size, adding both to the attractiveness of the scenery and the carrying
capacity of the estate.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GENERAL VIEW OF A TENANT FARMER’S HOME ON WIRIDGIL.
With the Township of Camperdown in the Distance.
Wiridgil, Victoria,


THE DRIVE IN FRONT OF THE HOMESTEAD, WIRIDGIL.


w j,
SCORIA PITS AT WIRIDGIL.
Wiridgil, Victoria.


*■"■■- ’ '»-■•*■. m
fe. ■ . ■ -5-- ;■ ...... -... ... , /.feSc
MR. E. MANIFOLD’S POLO PONIES.


Tame Kangaroos at Wiridgil.
IDancbitc.
This property is a good deal larger than Wiridgil, and comprises 22,000 acres. It also is
of rich volcanic land; parts are eminently suited to dairying, the whole well adapted to heavy grazing,
and some of the drier portions suit Merino sheep.
A total area of 7573 acres of Danedite is leased to dairyfarmers at rents varying from 10s.
to 13s. per acre, according to the quality of the land and the nature of the improvements. There
are fourteen tenants on the property. About 150® head of Shorthorn cattle aic kept. 1 hey have
descended from the “ F.F.” stud of Mr. Robertson, of Colac, and in past years have been very
successful in the show ring, a number of the prizes at the Camperdown Show being won each year
by them. Of recent years some fresh blood was introduced into the herd by means of a pedigreed
bull, bred by Mr. Thomas Holmes, of Rathurst, New South \\ ales.
Danedite, Victoria


■ -r ** *“''
'■ " v ' - . - '
. *<k •* ' ■ .‘ -. , *?. -' ,'J ’
)atmS> T m ~ ■.' .... ■'■'•-
'Ll f>fi ** ' m - - i • '* * '*» •■''**■ ~-r- v * ■*. ■ . „ -**. ’Oj
... .* '\ r>i .* ' • '
*7**. .-, 5#H* •■ >V1 “■• ' ■ S, ' 1 . , x - T ' • V T„
' - A'*-
v • • • : , >r4' ♦ *l
w. - . n -.-XX •.* • ~rz**%, - Vi^Wal
Tenant Farmer’s Home on Wiridgil.
The property carries about 16,000 sheep all the year round. Of these 11,500 are Merinos
and 4500 Lincolns. The Hock and stud of Merinos were acquired with the estate by the present
owner. The stud was originally brought together in 1885 by the purchase of a number of Lara
ewes and some special selections made from the station ewes. Tasmanian rams, principally from
Rhodes and Scone, were bought to use on these and their progeny. This was done about the time
that the wonderful quality of the wool on Scone rams was doing so much to add to the lustre and
the character of the fleeces of Western \ ictorian sheep. The stud also at one time had a good
deal of Carngham l)lood used in it. thus, though the sheep have descended from several strains,
they have sprung from a common type, for in every instance the studs selected were characterised
with good frames, high quality wool, and length of staple.
When Mr. Edward Manifold took over the property he determined to continue improving
the sheep, and he made a number of purchases of high-class Tasmanian rams. In no case was he
deterred by the price asked from securing a sheep he really wanted. He recognised that the value
of a really good sire was not to be measured by the difference between a dear and cheap sheep.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


’ '}■?*? '*- <ry f ’i , *" t^'-/» s , ~*5 ‘""SfclMltlBSt'l . {*
'• ~ - ' " . ....... " ' - '. ~ ~\_ " '■•? ■
’’***' . ' -
; ; *r ■ -•'■ .- ~ ~ -. - „ - ... :' 2^ :
f&X * * ”& . „ » ” w ’ * :^-
$ge «- r , ’ ' J.HJ. '" ' " ~ „ ,’.. . . .-iSSSS*' ' '-***’ ; * ■ v^l V, ' ; *C* -" '"T” \
THE DANEDITE HOMESTEAD.
Danedite, Victoria.


Jfjf "3 Cf'* *l\ I
** *-
--i. ’ ■■./
The Danedite Woolshed.
Flock of Lincoln's on Danedite.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


-i* - luO-* - . ■ - ■<-•’/“ •"••• "■ \dtH : ' :
Mr. J. H. Hindhaugh’s Polo Ponies.
and once satisfied that a ram would nick with his ewes, and the progeny would be an advance on
what he had hitherto bred, the figure demanded did not prevent a purchase being made. On one
occasion he gave as much as £BSO for a ram. The last ram bought for Danedite was the Winton
sheep which took the strong-wool champion prize at the A.S.B. Show in Melbourne in 1904. This
sire was secured for 170 guineas. The ram, however, which Mr. j. H. Hindhaugh, the manager
of Danedite, considers to be the most successful ever used in the stud was a Scone sheep,
bought in 1899 f° r guineas. He was by Great Piero 2nd, and his dam by Sir Simon. He
proved an even stock-getter; his lambs were plainly characterised with the best Scone traits, and
passed the features on to subsequent generations with conspicuous regularity. He was one of
those sires who makes a marked change for the better in the stud he is used with, and which is
cheap at almost any price.
Danedite, Victoria.


I I **
Stud Lincoln Ewes at Danedite.
The quality of the land at Dancdite is such that Lincolns thrive. Ihe stud of these dates
back to 1870, when it was formed at Boortkoi from six ewes bought from Mr. John Sanderson, of
Brie Brie, and thirty-nine from Mr. Austin’s stud at Barwon Park. In 1873 some very high-class
imported Lincolns were purchased in Melbourne for use at Boortkoi. dhe special stud English
ram known as Windham was then obtained for 300 guineas, and ewes were secured at prices
ranging up to 100 guineas per head. The year following the whole stud was transferred to Uanedite.
Mr. Hindhaugh, sen., the father of the present manager of the property, then took charge of the
breeding operations, which were continued on the most methodical lines, a complete pedigree being
kept of each sheep, and careful records taken of yields of wool and other prominent and important
characteristics. For some years the Danedite Lincolns proved hard to beat at most of the leading
shows, and they took many first prizes, especially at Campcrdown. For some time they have not
been exhibited, but it is intended shortly to again bring them under the attention of the public at
agricultural shows.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


Stud Lincoln Rams.
J .. ♦I. 1 " 11 "--' ' "" ~»«WM»warw^-«■*»»
iSaaisL—LL - . ::~" ~ — . ■ —
tt^inMHHj^jtfaniMr^nBMK H aHHBnMHMv a WHHnrniMHa~v v tMaMr'^^^M B MHnaM~wMMv^mKwv'»«*M»vnnM
T ~ Iii "niir . ■!■ "•'■■ ■• ‘ 1 i mm.
-■- ~ '• , - , " 1 ——r-
[ ! fc. •4j5fe* l £~ ~ i : J
Stud Lincoln Ewes.
Daneclite, Victoria,


- *
-«rn_.—JiJJ-;. w ISj pi . -
*•-- - - - 3 ■ » | s
. j 1 * -1
r •' £
_ • •*’' •, %W»AiilwV -S * x-
■ " : / ** r ;. *—■- _ * ■ ■
*
■ _ £*» W '. ‘ ’ ; •
The Men’s Quarters at Boortkoi.
The Boortkoi Homestead from the Hopkins River.


* g- - r, • • j|^^jj(
- ■ * .. ,
..* * '-;
<''iww>s j 'twt- •*’ * SaBR 1 *' toB*'-*ffe^L/JHS^w MlH
A FLOCK OF MERINOS A FEW MONTHS AFTER SHEARING, BOORTKOI.
Boortkoi, Victoria.


Mr. Manifold Shooting Quail on Wikidgil.
Imported Lincoln Ram.
Boortftoi.
Mr. Manifold’s third property is situated some little distance from his other two, which are
comparatively close together, and is of quite a different character. Instead of being suited to
dairying and heavy grazing,
it is adapted primarily to
growing Merino wool. The
estate is 28,000 acres in area,
and some 25,000 sheep, in-
cluding lambs, are shorn on
it each year. In addition,
about 400 head of cattle are
run on the holding all the
year round.
Boortkoi lies on the Hop-
kins River, the homestead
being two miles above Hex-
ham. and eleven from Mort-
lake, the nearest railway
station. A number of properties annually yielding very high-grade fleeces have frontages to the
same river, and this holding is no exception, as the prices received for the clip frequently demonstrate.
At the Geelong wool sales
of the season recently closed
(1908-9) the lambs’ wool
brought per lb., whilst
a large line of 78 bales of
first combing sold at the ex-
ceptional figure of iBd.
With the exception of
about 4000 acres of light
timber, Boortkoi consists of
plain country, liberally ridged
with volcanic stony rises. It
is clean woolgrowing land,
as sound as a bell, and
owing to its character is not
likelv to be used for agricultural purposes for many years to come. The only farming carried on
is the cultivation of about 42 acres of hay for home consumption.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Jm w Bk
m/Kk S^Hfflk
|Hv . ■
* JflHi m jm*& %■
« ' ///*';- 3 j# 1 ||ir cJT
} koto hy Lafayette.
Mr. Edward Manifold.
Ihe homestead on Boortkoi was one of the oldest in the district. Mr. Manifold has, however,
decided to build a new house from bluestone quarried on the property, and the work has already
commenced.
flDr. lEbwarb flDanlt'olb.
Mr. Edward Manifold is the third surviving son of the late Mr. John Manifold. He was born
in 1868 at Purrumbete, and received his early education in Melbourne and Geelong. He took an
ordinary B.A. degree at drinity Hall, Cambridge, in 1891. In 1890 he rowed head of the river
during the Lent Berm, and while at college played cricket and Rugby football. Besides taking an
active interest in local matters of a public character, Mr. Manifold is a member of the committee of
the Victoria Racing Club. In 1900 he married Beatrice, the second daughter of Mr. A. G. Anderson,
of South \ arra, and formerly of Ballarat. There are three sons.
Wiridgil, Danedite & Boortkoi, Victoria.


THE HOPKINS RIVER, BOORTKOI.


miMSm, 5 >||
frmm y Kr r . .1® ■ ' HSyttglv jjjH
PORTSEA.
Ghc IRadno Stub.
Mr. Edward Manifold is well known in racing circles as an owner of jumping horses, and his
colours of yellow, with violet hoops and cap, are always viewed with confidence by backers. lie
belongs to a type of racing men who run horses for sport, and who are, unfortunately, too scarce
on the Australian turf.
Dungan, one of the famous horses of his day, was owned by the Messrs. A
Manifold Bros. (Edward and his brothers). He was prominent in jumping races
about the middle nineties. In 1895 he won the Great Eastern Steeplechase at Onkaparinga, South
Australia, and the same season he annexed the Grand .National Steeplechase at hlemington. XXateiloo,
another successful steeplechaser, belonging to Mr. Edward .Manifold, also won tbe important event at
Onkaparinga. On another occasion the Messrs. Manifold were successful in the Grand National
Steeplechase at Flemington, when Mysore beat Domino, the most noted ’chaser of his time.
Wiridgii, Danedite & Boortkoi, Victoria.


One of the best performances recorded to the credit of the Manifold Bros.’ horses was in
when they won the treble at Onkaparinga on Easter Monday. On that occasion Geometry
annexed the Hurdle Race, Veronica the Cup, and Dungan the Great Eastern Steeplechase.
The thoroughbred sire at present being used by Mr. E. Manifold is Portsea, by Neckersgat—Lady
Lo\ elace. loitsea, it will be remembered, won the Champion Stakes, and proved himself a stayer.


A Cricket Match at Mount Talbot.
/Iftount Talbot Estate.
£bc property of flDn Mm. ©tficcr.
THE Mount Talbot Estate, which consists of some 14,000 acres, and lies 28 miles south of
Horsham and 60 north of Hamilton, has been in the hands of the Officer family for three
generations. In the early forties it was purchased by Sir Robert Officer, who afterwards sold
it to his son, the late Mr. Charles Myles Officer. In 1885 the latter s son, Air. \\ illiam Officer, took
charge of the property, and he still holds it.
The mount from which the estate derives its name is the northern extremity of the most
westerly spur of the Grampians. It is practically the end of the Great Dividing Range, which continues
with few breaks through the length of Victoria, and then northwards through New South Wales and
Queensland, finally terminating at the far end of Cape York Peninsula. Ihe station is situated almost
(Section 2, pages 25-33.)


Cars in Front of the House.
on the saddle dividing' the watersheds of the State. The Glenelg, which passes only a few miles
away, flows south into the sea at Discovery Bay, whilst the Norton and Mackenzie Creeks and the
Wimmera River run north to Lake Hindmarsh. The locality is therefore just within the better-
watered section of Victoria. Much of the moisture is generally robbed from the clouds when they
have crossed the Divide, and as the country drops to the northward the droughts become more
frequent and of greater severity.
The country is partly plains and partly timbered with sheoak and eucalyptus. Some of it is
well suited for growing cereals, and the property was one of the first in the locality where wheat
was produced on the share system. The yield is usually from four to five bags per acre, and the
returns are very regular. Some considerable acreage is cultivated by tenants. Mr. Officer also
farms a piece of the run, principally for oats. Since the use of superphosphates has become common
those portions of the estate suitable for farming have attained quite a new value. Land previously
regarded as light sheep country, with a low farming value, and that only for oat growing, has now been
proved to give prolific yields of wheat. It is, moreover, found that when wheat is grown for one or
several seasons, artificial manure being used with each sowing, that on the ground reverting to
grazing uses its grass-growing capacity has increased. The possibilities of such land for mixed
farming have hardly yet been put to a practical test, but its marketable value is likely to continue
to rise for some time to come.
The Pastoral Homes of A ustralia.


m ■ > # jrwT WLfr Jr.*SI : ISuSfc!ffli| t * - V v , j8| W[' ?j
BPtv«»?IMy \ -«il»i!T>ilkr f T'4y*WM ISeJPm v jX\ \ i
v u ■ f ? ryjjS
\ y A W7
’• *•■ v^' ,J * '\r.-. — •• " • jj -Bfey;'''".it.ztit* ~ " '■ "v -. r
fi£.~
THE HOUSE FROM THE SOUTH-EAST.
Mount Talbot, Victoria,


A Garden View.
Part of the Drive.


Part of the Jersey Herd.
...
tin 1 ' ,} ‘
• ” ■ •; ; ! ; ‘ ■
Station Entrance. V i * ■ Mm
In its natural state the land is excellently suited to woolgrowing, and where not under
cultivation is used almost exclusively for running Merino sheep. Besides being healthy and growing
Merinos of large frame, the conditions favour the production of high-grade wool of fine fibre, and
the clip always sells well up on the market. The pastures are particularly nourishing, being
composed of a wide variety of plants.
For over sixty years improvements have from time to time been made on the Mount Talbot
Estate, with the result that the property has now reached a high state of perfection. The water
filled by pumping. The
woolshed is situated about
three-quarters of a mile
away from the house, and is
fitted with eight stands of
Wolseley machines. Mount
Talbot was among the first
properties on which shearing
was done by machinery, it
supply is a liberal one, pro-
vision being made by tanks
and wells, besides the natu-
ral lakes, of which there are
several on the run. The
wells vary in depth from 20
to 60 ft. A complete ser-
vice of pipes connects the
garden and the outbuildings
with large tanks, that are
being twenty years ago since the blade shears were last used there. The homestead,
with the garden and outbuildings, covers some 10 acres of land. The present house was erected
about the year 1865. It is a comfortable two-storied residence, built of stone obtained in the
locality. Great attention has been bestowed on the garden, as Mr. Officer is an enthusiastic
horticulturist. A portable Hornsby steam engine is used for chaff and wood cutting, as also for
shearing and other work about the homestead.
Mount Talbot, Victoria


Ewes and Lambs.
She Stoch.
From 10,000 to 12,000 Merinos are shorn annually at Mount Talbot. In the early days the
flock was one of the best known in Western Victoria, and the position the clip then won for itself
on the wool market has ever since been maintained. The sheep are of strong constitution, and the
fleece is of fair length, dense, and of high quality.
During the first period of Victorian sheepbreeding, the late Mr. C. M. Officer won many prizes
at shows with his studs. When the Upper Glen Ig and Wimmera Pastoral Society held its first
show at Balmoral in 1864, he secured leading hon nrs with an imported Spanish Merino ram, and
in the following year he was similarly successful. From time to time since then the flock has been
improved by the introduction of carefully-selected sires from the well-known studs of the Gibsons,
Gatenbys, and other prominent Tasmanian breeders.
A milking herd of Jersey cattle is kept on the estate, principally for home use. The herd has
been established for a quarter of a century, and pedigreed bulls have at different times been purchased
as fresh blood was thought advisable. The latest addition of this sort was a pure Werribee Park
sire, bought from Mr. George Chirnside a couple of years ago. Mr. Officer also takes a practical
interest in horses, and breeds a few for station use and sale.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The House from the North.
A View on the Estate.
Mount Talbot, Victoria.


i. A View on the Estate, showing Some Dairy Cattle.
2, The Bullock Team with a Load of Mount Talbot Wool.
3, Harvesting on Mount Talbot.


"'; j' ’>"*'■
THE LAKE FROM THE NORTH.
Mount Talbot, Victoria.


w *
The Late Sir Robert Officer.
J ' H
• '■"jr^MUk.
The Late Mr. Charles Myles Officer.
jfour Generations.
The late Mr. Charles Myles Officer, M.L.A., J.P., was the second son of Sir Robert Officer,
and was born at New Norfolk, Tasmania, in 1827. After living in Hobart with his parents for some
he again took up his residence in Melbourne, and
made it his home until his death on ist February,
1904.
Few Australian pastoralists have been better
known in political life than Mr. C. M. Officer. In
1880 he yielded to strong pressure, and consented
to stand for the Dundas seat in the Legislative
Assembly. lie offered himself in the interest of
the anti-Berry party, but was defeated at the polls.
However, a dissolution shortly afterwards occurred,
and he again stood, and was this time elected,
when he supported a coalition Ministry led by
Sir Bryan O’Loghlen. The next general election
years, in 1841 he went, in company with a brother,
to Edinburgh to complete his education. He
entered on the medical course there, but before
completing that line of study was called back to
Australia on urgent private business. In 1848 he
came to Victoria, and proceeded to .Mount Talbot,
which his father had previously purchased. With
the exception of a few months spent with varying
fortune amid the stirring scenes of the 1853-4 gold-
fields, he lived there till 1866, when he went to
reside at Toorak, a suburb of Melbourne. After
something over two years he returned to Mount
Talbot, and remained there until early in 1873, when
was in 1883, and so strong was the confidence of the electors of Dnndas in their sitting member
that he was allowed a walkover. In that year he was appointed a member of a Royal Commission


''3? ' eras* -
mL ’ K| |F MS A
||| ;'..
* ' ; K " L/-* 1
Photo hy Sears.
Mr. William Officer.
Jm Bl
■BB B7B
a M l JPSP^Sw
*H(r if .Ao^v
Photo by Sear s.
Mr. Leslie W. Officer.
on lunatic asylums. In 1886 Mr. Officer was again returned unopposed, and he supported the
Service-Berry and Gillies-Deakin coalitions. In 1880-1 he represented the Government of Tasmania
and in 1876 he married Ellen Agnes, the second
daughter of Thomas Pope Besnard, of Inverell,
N.S.W. He had a numerous family, and the owner
of Mount Talbot is his second son.
Mr. William Officer was born in 1858 in the
original Mount Talbot homestead, part of which
is still standing. He received his schooling at
the Wesley College under Professor Irving, and
afterwards for a year at the Hawthorn Grammar
School from the same teacher. Subsequently he
entered for the law course at the Melbourne Uni-
versity, and graduated there, taking out the L.L.B.
degree. The following two years he spent travel-
ling in the United Kingdom and on the Continent.
as executive commissioner at Melbourne during
the International Exhibition held in the \ ictorian
metropolis. For many years he was treasurer to
the Deaf and Dumb Asylum, and for a term of
ten years a member of the council of the Zoological
and Acclimatisation Society, being president of
that body during 1887. Amongst other impor-
tant posts he held was membership of the Central
Board for the Protection of Aborigines, and the
chairmanship of the board of advice of Dalgety and
Co. Limited
Mr. C. M. Officer was twice married. In 1854
he entered into matrimony with Christina Susannah,
the daughter of Daniel Robertson, of Launceston,
In 1885 Mr. Officer married Alexa, the daughter of the late Mr. Alexander Wilson, a pioneer
pastoralist, very widely known in both New South Wales, South Australia, and Victoria. Mr.
Mount Talbot, Victoria


Engine-room and Workshop at Mount Talbot.
Wilson, who was a brother of Sir Samuel Wilson, of Erciklonne, first settled in the Wimmeia in
1842, and during' the early seventies purchased Mount Emu Station, some 14 miles from Beaufort.
He died at that property on 31st August, 1893.
Mr. and Mrs. William Officer, who hope to celebrate their silver wedding on 15th January,
1910, have two sons —Leslie Wilson and Errol Myles Wilson. Ihe former (who is the elder) vvas
educated at the Church of England Grammar School, Melbourne, and now helps his fathei in the
management cf the estate. Errol is at present at the Church of England Grammar School. Mr.
William Officer was always a lover of sport, and his taste has been inherited by both his boys.
Leslie, while at school, made rowing his principal pastime, and has many trophies of his victories,
while Errol is keenly interested in football, cricket, and lawn tennis.


SIX' ipiopcrtv of fll>r. H. 3. Staugbton.
KEAYANG, in the fertile Terang district of Victoria, is the home of Mr. Arthur John
Staughton, one of the best-known pastoralists, and a noted owner of thoroughbred horses. The
original selectors of the holding were Messrs. Ayers and Nicholson. Afterwards it was taken
over by the late Mr. J. G. Ware, of Barwidgee, and run in conjunction with Minjah. Old Kerang
was in those days part of the property. At a later date the estate was sold to Mr. O'Brien, but in
1895 it, found a further purchaser in the late Mr. S. T. Staughton, the father of the present proprietor.
At the time of writing (1909) the area of the estate is 7400 acres, but when bought by the deceased
Mr. Staughton it comprised only 5028 acres. The present owner, after he came into possession in
1900, added to it considerably by purchasing the adjoining property, Fine View, owned and originally
selected by Messrs. McWilliam Bros., and various farms adjoining; but he also sold 1400 acres to the
Government for closer settlement purposes. The Closer Settlement Board found the land so
productive that they were able to establish twelve farmers on the 1400 acres. Not only is the soil
of a rich volcanic nature, but the rainfall averages 28 in. per annum. The result is a great luxuriance
of vegetation, besides which the pastures are so varied and sweet that few places possess such
excellent advantages for fattening stock and for maintaining dairy cows in a profitable condition.
That Keayang is pre-eminently suited to dairying has been thoroughly proved by tenants who
live on the property Two of these are working on the share system. Between them they milk 350
cows, which are of the useful Milking-Shorthorn type. One of the share farmers on an area of but
230 acres milks 175 cows, and his share of the profits last year amounted to £672. This was
accomplished by only the expenditure of one man’s wages and the assistance of his family. One of
the share farmers sends his milk to the Dixie Creamery. The other separates his own cream on the
premises, and sends it to the factory at Cobden. In addition to these there are four tenants on the
I (Section 3, pages 37-36.)


The Stables. — Kate Carew (Imp.) with Foal at foot by Gingal.
Emu Creek, which runs through the Estate.
property paying a fixed rent, who also supply the Dixie Creamery. The latter milk about 250 cows
between them.
From the land he works himself Mr. Staughton is able to fatten annually from 500 to 600 head
of cattle, 1000 to 1500 lambs,
and 2000 sheep and upwards.
Not only is Keayang pecu-
liarly favoured by nature in
regard to the soil's fertility
and the regular rainfall, but it
is also one of the best im-
proved properties in the Wes-
tern District. Evidence of this
is to be found in the increase
of the rating value of the es-
tate. The property is in four
shires, and the portion which
is in Heytesbury was in 1896
rated at £26 16s. per annum.
For 1908. with 1100 acres less land, Mr. Staughton was rated by the same shire (without including the
holdings of the tenants) at £lO7 4s. The extra rating is mostly due to the value of the improve
ments he has effected.
One of the methods adop-
ted by Mr. Staughton for in-
creasing the carrying capacity
of his property has been
in planting English grasses.
Among the most successful of
these has been English rye
grass and meadow foxtail,
which grow profusely on the
flats, and give a delightful
tinge of green to the landscape
at seasons when the natural
pasturage is mostly burnt and
brown. Strawberry clover and
white clover have also been
sown and planted with most satisfactory results. The plan has been to plant them by
seed and then transplant, in the case of the strawberry clover, by hand. Mr. Staughton’s


THE HOMESTEAD, FRONT ELEVATION.
Keayang, Victoria .


r.' ' ’ 1 , < ?* m* ' s *“* * r
«*>:-^fe• ■'*''iT^^Tv* •* ~ -“iiT ; - ' ■*•%* • ■•-^^^**ly,2r;--^y 1 ■ *$^\^i't>* ' tk
■ t ". '-* * v*- ; T "" % "7" v. v 1 ~.. > ~~* -.
j|LL-'t*bv‘•. T.-* 2 i [' x ■" '*5«f' : * 3“'* V ' ; ~'‘~L . '■/■'- -s'£V * --^v’ ■ 'VWT /x **
WAITING TO BE MILKED.


wjT" MgSBHpm 7 -^wABbBmwI
’i-’V ■-'■;;•■ mm J fPwBfeMp 3aaagWiBM|
St'- *— •' ■ ;•»■ ■ '
MILKING TIME.
■ ' • > ' * * ''' " '
many experiments and careful observations have shown him that with the systematic introduction
of English grasses, the feed becomes more nourishing, and it fattens both cattle and
sheep more rapidly than will the natural pastures. As many as twenty-eight different varieties of
English and Continental grasses have been grown on Keayang in experimental plots at one time.
As the result of these experiments, the kind most suited to the particular locality has been determined,
and it is mixed with the other standard grasses when sown down for permanent pastures. In
consequence, the area of land under English grasses is added to each year. One flat of 360 acres,
about 4 miles from the homestead, which has been thus planted carries 250 milking cows and seventy
bullocks continuously throughout the summer, and about half that number of stock during the winter
months, ft also grows a great deal of maize in the autumn for the dairy cows. Among his other
agricultural operations Mr. Staughton grows a quantity of field peas for pigs, of which there are a
considerable number on the estate. As has been proved, they add considerably to the profitableness
of dairying.
Keayang, Victoria.


Ml _ -> < |M» *«*>' ».. lllli-m" tl'
( ■ pyi‘ '■ hmm
7i£iuli *...
/W-JWy ~ ■* !'*. •'*:_.* v — • ■ , . '” “** AtftiAfe*^Pfc3l wt^^^m^' , - i "
IN THE MILKING YARDS.


\ * - ; | '
' i 1 * /' - «***
;:*k • r - -w—• — p t K>-7 r ; ■■■
• /•*•> j||jL ’ JKl'*‘ , <m> ,st' ,- v‘‘' V •’ ,v i. ' vSgu' jjy v . , •■.,,* ;#$$£* >*£ •-- 4 \k : 4i
POLO PONY MARES.
keayang, Victoria.


Vrr
&£ i -.Jp! Bk
- jjnnw ■*'
11 ' 11 1 i
i|Va laHBB ■ M
rT7>^pai|^^B
"”«- 111*-* - -/ M
KrS M 'm0& t '** — f > r ' Kvj9 . *y;»-’ JHt0*2i*
M H-»^ m ' KW a
ra BB
CURRAN DOOLEY. —Argonaut—Griddle.
(Foaled, 23rd September, 1904.)
Won. -Maiden Plate, Mentone ; Koroit Handicap, Moonee Valley; Flying Stakes, Camperdown ; Trial Stakes, Sunbury;
South Yarra Handicap, Caulfield ; Valley Handicap, Moonee Valley; April Handicap, Flemington ; and S.A.j.C.
St. Leger, 1908. Second.— Maiden Plate, Sandown ; Lillimur Two-year-old, Caulfield ; Trial Stakes, Williamstown ■
and Hawksburn Handicap, Caulfield.
Ikca\>ano Sheep.
in 1901 a pure Lincoln stud was established at Keayang. The foundation was laid by Mr.
Staughton purchasing from Messrs. Armstrong and Urquhart, of Hexham Park, the whole of their
2 tooth drop of ewes. He also secured a ram known as Tanner, bred by Mr. Fowling, the champion
at the Melbourne Show in 1902. A second champion ram which Mr. Staughton secured was Royal,
bred by Mr. Nixon, of Lovely Banks. The blue ribbon was awarded to this sire at Ballarat in 1901.
Another of Mr. Nixon’s rams has been used since then on the Keayang stud. No other blood,
however, has been introduced, and Mr. Staughton has bred the flock within itself with marked
success. The great wool-yielding capacity of the sheep is clearly illustrated by the returns received
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


T'l'*
>H
yO» e^Pl
« . *] T - ” £ ”*^"^j^
* * ?. * ’*■ - — *
POSTER.— Postmaster—Brunette.
Winner of V.R C. Autumn Steeplechase and Onkaparinga Great Eastern Steeplechase, 1905 ; V.R.C. Cup Steeplechase,
1906 ; and other Steeplechases and Hurdle Races.
from some of the rams at last shearing. Of the four 6-tooths one gave 36 lbs. of wool, one 3 1 lbs.,
one 33 lbs., and one 25 lbs. Of the two 4-tooth rams one gave 34 lbs. and one 29 lbs. All had
thirteen months of wool on at the time of shearing, but notwithstanding this, Lincoln men will agree
that the fleeces were exceptionally heavy, hor fear there might be any enor, the weighing tvas
witnessed and checked by four persons.
That the merit of the Keayang Lincolns has become recognised among breeders is shown by
the prices received for sale rams. The year before last all Mr. Staughton had to dispose of sold at
£5 5- each. Last year the stud rams brought up to £lO ios., and only the flock rams were allowed
to go at £5 ss.
The great fertility of the Keayang paddocks., the quantity of English grasses they grow, and
the excellent rainfall of the locality, give to the estate a rare capacity for producing export lambs.
The owner has consequently engaged very thoroughly in that business of recent years.
Keayang, Victoria.


POLO PONIES,


' 1 ‘ I ' U
FATTENING BULLOCKS FOR THE MARKET.
Keayang, Victoria.


THE DRIVE AND SIDE VIEW OF HOMESTEAD, KEAYANG.


MNEMON (Imp.)—St. Frusquin—Mneme.
£be IRadnoVStub.
Air. Staughton has owned some excellent racehorses in his time, and his colours have been
carried to victory many times and over many courses. One of his best horses was Currandooley, by
Argonaut from Griddle. This horse won the Maiden Plate at Mentone, the Koroit Handicap at
Moonee Valley, the Flying Stakes at Camperdown, the Trial Stakes at Sunbury, the South Yarra
Handicap at Caulfield, the Moonee Valley Handicap, the April Handicap at Flemington, and the
S.A.J.C. St. Leger at Adelaide. He also ran five times second, once third, and once fourth. After
winning the St. Leger, Currandooley was sold by Mr. Staughton for £lOOO, and shipped to India.
Another well-known performer who carried the Keayang colours was Poster, the jumper,
by Postmaster from Brunette. In 1905 Poster won both the V.R.C. Autumn Steeplechase and the
famous Onkaparinga Steeplechase in South Australia. The next year the same horse won the V.R.C.
Cup Steeplechase. In addition to these important races he won other steeplechases and one hurdle
race.
Keayang, Victoria,


4,
ORACULAR (Imp.) —Orme—Wise Flower.
Besides owning several other racehorses, Mr. Staughton recently brought four from England.
Among these was Mnemon, a three-year-old colt, the son of St. Frusquin and Mneme, the dam being
by Minting from Arcadia, by Isonomy from Distant Shore, by Hermit. Mneme is thus a half-sister
to the celebrated sire Cyllcne, which was sold for 25,000 guineas to go to South America, and was
afterwards resold for 30,000 guineas. Another of the importations was a two-year-old filly called
Oracular, by Orme from Wise Flower, by Wisdom, from Jessica, by Newminster. the Australian-
bred mare Kate Carew was also one of the shipment. She is by the Derby winner Harvester from
Madcap, the dam of Malvolio, the Melbourne Cup winner. Kate Carew has a foal at foot by the
Carbine horse Gingal.
All who have the interests of Australian horses at heart will wish to see Mr. Staughton’s
recent enterprise prove successful and profitable to himself. There has been a steady drain on our
best stock from other countries for some years past, and very few good horses have been brought
back here either for racing or for stud purposes. The reason usually ascribed is that there are so
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


1 koto by Lafayette.
Mr. A. J. Staughton.
many more rich men racing for sport at the other side of the world than there are here. It is
therefore encouraging to see one gentleman spending his money in bringing out some of the best
blood the English stud has to offer.
flfcr. Hrthur John Stauobton.
Mr. A. J. Staughton comes from an old-time squatting family. He was born at Werribee, where
his grandfather had taken up a great quantity of land in the very early days of settlement, about 1842.
Air. Staughton was educated at the Melbourne
Church of England Grammar School. After twelve
months’ northern experience in New South Wales,
he came to Keayang, settling there in 1895. In
1901 he married Elsie, the fourth daughter of the
late Mr. W. J. Winter-Irving, of Dandenong-road,
Armadale.
Mr. Staughton is a keen sportsman. Besides
being a polo player, his popular colours, green
body with yellow sleeves and cap, are well known
at both the Flemington and Caulfield racecourses.
For eight years he maintained a pack of harriers,
and hunted the Terang, Camperdown, and Colac
districts, and gave them up only because the
increase in the number of wire fences rendered the
fine old English sport no longer practicable. This
was one of the three privately-kept packs of
hounds in Victoria. Mr. Staughton is a prominent
member of the Camperdown Polo Club, and takes
an active interest in the welfare of that sport.
In addition to his industrial activities and his sporting undertakings, the squire of Keayang
finds time to engage in many public duties. He is a member of the Heytesbury Shire Council, and
identifies himself in one way or another with most movements tending towards the advancement of
the district and its interests.
Keayang, Victoria


The late S. T. Staughton, M.L.A.
<L\k £arl£ of tbc Stauobton family
The Staughton family has descended from a long line of English squires. Ihe accompanying
illustrations are of their estate in Huntingdonshire, where their records go back to the year 1312.
Being staunch Royalists, the family fell on hard times when Cromwell’s party took the British
Government into their hands, and in 1745 the property of the Staughtons was confiscated. As a
consequence of this the great grandfather of the present Mr. Arthur John Staughton was apprenticed
to a printer in the town of Bedford, England. His son, Simon, was ultimately trained to the same
business, and so strenuously did the father and boy
apply themselves to the uphill battle of retrieving
their fallen fortunes, that Simon succeeded, when
still a comparatively young man, in accumulating a
fortune of £25,000.
With an independence regained, it was but
natural that Simon Staughton should seek to estab-
lish a family estate in Huntingdonshire, but it
proved impracticable. The retired printer, however,
was not to be baulked in his desire to follow in his
forefathers’ steps, and be a landed proprietor. Colo-
nisation was then in the atmosphere of England,
and men were seeking to extend the Empire over
vast and fertile areas of unexplored territory in
little known lands. Pioneering life in these distant
regions offered fascinating attractions for such
lovers of adventure as preferred the perils of enter-
prises in new continents to the conventional com-
forts of humdrum old world life. Though at the
time encumbered with a young family, Mr. Simon
Staughton was one of those who decided to build a fortune for his children in the Southern Hemisphere.
For some time he was undecided whether to sail for the Cape of Good Hope or to the Port Phillip
district of New South Wales; but in 1841 he landed with all his worldly belongings on the shores of
Hobson’s Bay from the ship “Himalaya,” of 450 tons burden. His son, Samuel Thomas, the father
of Arthur John, had been born on 17th November, 1839, and Stephen George was also then but a
baby.
Almost immediately after his arrival, Mr. Simon Staughton bought the Exford Estate, on the
Werribee River, or the River Ex, as it was then known, and about twenty miles from the village of
Melbourne. The vendor was Dr. Wotton, who was one of the syndicate formed in Tasmania by John


STAUGHTON MANOR, HUNTINGDONSHIRE, ENGLAND.
Staughton Manor.


BRIDGE OVER THE OUSE, ST. NEOTS.
On the Staughton Manor Estate, Huntingdonshire, England.


THE LODGE, STAUGHTON MANOR,
Huntingdonshire, England.
Batman to take up country on the mainland. In 1845 Staughton Vale, of some 20,000 acres, was added
to Exford, making a total area of 80,000 acres. In the early fifties about 60,000 sheep were annually
shorn on the property. Mr. Simon Staughton died in 1863, after having lived twenty-two years of hard
colonising life, during which he engaged in many pioneering enterprises, and did much to build up the
stability and the future wealth of what had by that time been constituted into the colony of Victoria.
In 1863 the brothers, Samuel Thomas and Stephen George Staughton, entered into partnership,
and engaged in several enterprises of back country squatting in the Darling district of New South
Wales. The Terrywenia Station was formed there in tB6i by the latter, and he was the first man to
take up country beyond the Darling. In 1870 they sold that property, with 60,000 sheep on it, to Mr.
Livingstone Learmonth, late of Ercildoune. They also owned Tintinalogy Station on the same river,
and at one time refused £120,000 for it, though in 1884 they were induced to dispose of it for £54,000.
The depreciation in value was due to a series of bad seasons and a threatened rabbit invasion. The
partnership was dissolved in 1883.
Staughton I'a/e, &c.


Mr. S. T. Staughton was for many years member of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria. In
public life he was regarded with affection and respect by members of all parties, and though opposed
to him on almost every political principle, the Labour party always held him in high esteem. Llis
career in the Legislature was characterised with unflinching stability and adherence to the principles
in which he believed. His own party invariably regarded him as a pillar of support in his unfailing
constancy to what he held to be right, whilst those from whom he differed looked on him as an upright
and courteous opponent. His death in August, 1901, was received with feelings of the deepest personal
regret by all those with whom he had been associated in his public life. On the news of his decease being
announced, the Legislative Assembly at once agreed to adjourn its sitting. The high esteem in which
the late member for West Bourke was held within the constituency was made manifest by the public
movement instituted to induce Captain Staughton, his son, to contest the vacancy. Mr. Staughton's
public career will be remembered among other things, for the consistency and strength of his political
actions through the stormy period from 1877 to 1880.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


Shetland Ponies on Moyne Falls.
(Ibe /Ifturvoa anb Estates
Jib e properties of fPr. Gbomas IRobertson.
MURROA was purchased by Mr. Thomas Robertson in 1896, and was then known as Cape
Wrath —a rather inappropriate title, seeing that the sea is 4° miles distant as the crow
flies. On taking over the property, Mr. Robertson changed the name to Muiroa, one of
the native names of Mount Napier. This mountain is situated on the fiinge of the inn, about four
miles to the south of the homestead and thirteen miles south of Hamilton, and is one of those
extinct volcanoes which are so common a feature throughout the Western District of Victoria.
The holding contains about 8500 acres of undulating country, timbered with white gum, sheoak,
honeysuckle, and blackwood, but of recent years the trees, with the exception of the white gum, have
shown an unmistakable tendency to die out. Originally the land was covered with a dense forest,
I (Section 4, pages 57-68.)


,l I I
Side View of the Murroa Homestead.
the timber being so thick that the early settlers found it necessary to kill off a considerable
portion by ringbarking. A fair amount of the dead timber still remains, and, as firewood, is
in good demand.
The stock-carrying capacity is less than a sheep to the acre, and the grasses are almost entirely
of the indigenous varieties. Experiments were tried with imported species, but the results were not
encouraging, and the work was discontinued. The property has an ample supply of water, derived
from dams, tanks, and a few bores.
Since the property came into the hands of the present owner considerable improvements have
been carried out. In the first year a modern homestead of brick, on bluestone foundations, and fitted
with the latest conveniences, was built. Acetylene gas is laid on throughout, telephone connection
has been made with the public exchange at Hamilton, and a sewerage system on the septic tank
principle has lately been installed. A varied and extensive garden surrounds the residence, which is
watered from an underground supply. The original timber was in some places cleared too thoroughly,
or else has since died off, and to replace this a large area has been replanted. Finns insignis, sugar
The Pastoral Homes of Australia 3


View from Edge of Mt. Napier Lava Country, looking towards Murroa Homestead.
gums and several varieties of wattle have been used for this purpose. They are found to provide the
best shelter for stock, and are already beginning to add to the attractiveness of the property.
Zb e Stock.
Excepting for small flocks of pure Merino and Lincoln rams, the sheep on Mnrroa are all
crossbreds and comebacks. The original Merinos were introduced from Wanganella, but latterly
Barnnah rams have been purchased. The Lincoln rams are bought locally or bred at Moyne Falls,
where a small stud flock was started by Mr. Beal, the manager, a few years ago.
The practice is to use only pure blood on the sires’ side, and to choose the breed of rams to fit
the particular characteristics of the ewes. Lincoln rams are mated with fine-woolled ewes, and
Merino sires with ewes of coarse fleece, thus aiming at a common standard. Except in an exceptionally
good year portion of the flock have to be fed for part of the summer, and a fairly large area is annually
cultivated for that purpose. The clip generally sells well, and up to has been obtained in
London. During the last season the comeback avool sold at up to in Geelong.
Murroa, Victoria


THE MURROA CHILDREN ON THEIR PONIES,


TD
j bKoMl
Photo hy Savon y.
Mr. Thomas Robertson.
Polled Angus cattle have been kept on Murroa for the last twelve years. The first cows were
purchased from the Noorendoo Estate, and for some years a light-coloured Shorthorn bull was run
with them. Ihe bullocks obtained by this cross were exceptionally good fatteners, being of that blue
roan colour so often highly spoken of by “ Bruni.” The heifers were not kept for breeding purposes,
but were speyed and also fattened for the market. Naturally this method of breeding in course of
time exhausted the original herd, so about three years ago some ninety head of fresh cows and heifers
were bought from Mr. Thomson, of Monivae, who had been breeding pure Angus cattle for many
years. In addition, a bull was obtained from the same source, and the following year (,1907) the
champion bull and cow at the Melbourne Royal Show were purchased and added to the herd.
flDovnc Jfallt?.
Mr. T. Robertson also owns Moyne Falls, a rich property of 15,000 acres lying about half-way
between Macarthur and Hawkesdale. The estate was purchased in 1884 from the late Hon. William
Rayles by the late Mr. John Robertson, who made it over to his son in 1888. The country is half
volcanic and half forest land. The volcanic country is of two descriptions, part being fertile, well-
grassed stony rises, interspersed with rich alluvial Hats. These flats were originally of a swampy
nature, and a large sum of money was spent on them in the early days in draining. The less fertile
Murroa and Moyne Falls, Victoria


Moyne Falls Cattle Country.
volcanic land, and also portion of the forest country, is rough, and covered with large patches of
bracken fern.
The origin of the Moyne Falls stony rises may he traced to the overflow of lava from Mount
Rouse, another extinct volcano, which lies about ten miles to the north. The molten rock from this
old vent flowed along the natural contour of the country towards the sea, and to-day some exceedingly
rich land is found on its bed. The mountain stands isolated near the village of Penshurst, and lends
its name to the shire of which that place is the business centre.
Taking it all through, Moyne Falls is capable of carrying rather more than a sheep to the acre,
the normal stocking being approximately 13,000 sheep, besides 900 head of cattle, about half of which
are young growing steers and heifers. Ihe sheep are of the same breeding as those on Murroa, whilst
the rich properties of volcanic land render Shorthorns the most suitable type of cattle for the country,
and a herd of that variety is kept. Shetland and 1 imor ponies are also bred on the estate, and do very
well. Water is provided for stock by means of dams, tanks, and fifteen bores. The latter give an
abundance of water at depths varying from 20 to ft.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Homestead at Moyne Falls.
HL i T
The Homestead at Murroa.


1' I y */ < : 'j\ ' I M
11 • ' I* I dm • luh
A Large Dam on Moyne Falls with Woolshed in the Distance.
A year after the estate was purchased rabbits first made their appearance, and multiplied so
rapidly that by 1890 they had increased to such an extent that they began to seriously interfere with the
carrying capacity of the holding. Attempts were made to keep them in check by poisoning in the
summer and trapping in the winter, but these methods, as has often been the experience elsewhere,
soon proved quite ineffectual. By 1896 it seemed as if the rodents would render the estate completely
valueless. In January of that year a rabbit drive, which will long linger in the memories of those
who took part in it, was organised. The previous week had been spent in erecting yards and long
wire netting wings and forming ambushes. On the morning of the drive about a dozen sportsmen
.-started out with guns, and about as many men followed with picks and axes to dig out shallow
burrows and open hollow logs. The party conducting the first drive of the day shot about 1000
rabbits before they reached the yard, whilst nearly 700 more were yarded and “ waddied” there. The
other two drives were less successful, but it was estimated that over 3000 rabbits were killed as a


* f ' f -dj- *>
. -€%.:- . a6l
The Approach to the Moyne Falls Homestead.
tesult of the day’s work. One of the shooters—Mr. W. Moodie—was responsible for 365 kills, Mr. J.
McLellan put up the next best record with 280, while several others shot over 200 each. After the
drive large quantities of poison were laid.
From then on the method of dealing with the pest was completely changed; some of the
paddocks were individually netted off, and in other cases two or three paddocks were enclosed with
a ring fence of netting, and the cover in each destroyed. FTollow logs and hollow trees were burnt,
stone walls pulled down, and finally the burrows dug out. Twenty-four men and two teams of
bullocks were employed for the greater part of three years on the work, hut the expenditure proved
a very profitable investment, for the rodents were, so far as Moyne Falls Estate is concerned, almost
completely eliminated. Two or three men are still employed with packs of dogs to kill any stray
rabbits that remain and to keep the netting fences in repair. A person may now ride all day over the
property without seeing a single rabbit, whilst the carrying capacity has been doubled.
A great variety of nourishing native grasses flourish on the volcanic country, the kangaroo
grass being particularly luxuriant, and forming an excellent standby for the summer, as it is green
when most other kinds are dry and dead. English grasses and clover have been sown on the flats
Moyne Falls, Victoria


I
i. Stud Lincoln Ewes at Moyne Falls.
2. Drafting Fats.


Station-bred Cattle.
between the stony rises, and are found to make excellent progress, the rye grass especially appearing
to be well suited to the conditions. During the past two or three years strawberry clover has been
planted on the wettest flats, and is expected later on to do well.
About four years ago the woolshed was fitted up with twelve Mofifat-Virtue machines driven
by a 6-h.p. engine, which also works the woolpress, and in that way saves an immense amount of
labour. Up till about three years ago the shearing was done by contract, and though that system
has been discontinued, it must be confessed that the work has never since been done so expeditiously,
the dozen shearers supplied by the contractor having shorn as many as 2080 sheep in a day.
m>r. Thomas IRobcrtson.
The owner of Murroa and Moyne Falls is the eldest son of the late Mr. John Robertson, a
pioneer squatter of the Western District, who landed in this country in January, 1840, with his father,
brothers; and sisters. They came out to Australia by the sailing- ship “John Bull,” under Captain
Ormond, whose son founded Ormond College. Mr. Thomas Robertson was born at Victoria Valley
in 1864. In 1896 he married Annie, the eldest daughter of Mr. William Moodie, of Wando-Dale,
near Coleraine. There is a family of one son and two daughters.
Moyne Falls, Victoria


Polled Angus Cow at Murroa.
Champion Royal Show, Melbourne, 1907.
Station-bred Bullocks on Moyne Falls.


HJarca Uiew Estate.
Zbc property of nDi\ H. j£, ft. ipa\mc.
UNLIKE Tasmania, Victoria is greatly lacking in properties of up to a thousand or so acres,
and worked primarily as stud farms. One of the exceptions to this, however, is to be found
in the Yarra View Estate, consisting of some 900 acres of pleasant undulating country a few
miles up the River Yarra from Lilydale, and about an hour and a-half’s smart motor run
from Melbourne. So far as it is a model farm, the property has been created by its present owner,
Mr. A. E. T. Payne. He built the homestead, cleared much of the land, established plantations,
improved the water supply, added productiveness to the soil by draining and reclaiming, and either
imported or purchased locally the foundation blood of the present flocks and herds. When he bought
the block, three years ago, it was comparatively a wilderness. It now forms a most picturesque
estate, abundantly productive in the bright green of the English grass and cultivated aieas, with the
river murmuring through rich alluvial flats and deep blue mountain ranges bounding the horizon on
three sides.
Romney Marsh sheep, Shorthorn cattle, and Berkshire pigs are the three kinds of live stock
Yarra View is being devoted to. For the sheep and cattle a considerable portion of the estate has
been put under fodder crops. Among these lucerne is conspicuous, and its rich verdant leaves already
colour a number of the thirty-six paddocks into which the holding has been divided. Rye and prairie
grass, clover and cocksfoot, and several varieties of other grasses have also been used with success.
They are obtaining a good hold, and appear to be well suited by the natural conditions. Arrangement
has been made for the preservation in its most nourishing condition of the surplus fodder of spring
time by the erection of two commodious silos, whilst provision is being made for shelter by the
plantation of trees. When the latter grow to maturity the beauty of the estate, as well as its industrial
value, will be greatly added to.
The river frontage forms an important source of wealth. At this point the ’S arra is a clear,
sparkling, and quite constant stream. Its floods through the past centuries have deposited on the flats a
I (Section 5, pages 69-80.}


Some Imported English Romney Marsh Ewes.
great depth of rich black earth, and to protect the grass from further floods a levee a mile and a-half
long has been erected. Ihe effect of keeping the water off the ground will be, no doubt, to still further
sweeten the pastures. Water from the river is pumped for stock or domestic purposes to all parts
of the property, and is held there in troughs.
I he conspicuous feature at present about Yarra View is the rapidity with which improvements
ha\ e been carried out. An important factor in producing this result has been the traction engine used
l<»i cultivation purposes, helping in the clearing operations, heavy haulage, and pumping when aid is
needed by the ordinary water-lifting plant. The manager at Yarra View is Mr. T. T. Grigg, and the
rapidity of the progress made certainly reflects credit on his energy and organisation.
dhe homestead is a roomy, one-storied house, built, with a wide verandah, on the bungalow
pattern. It is surrounded with a nicely-laid-out garden, and the subdivision of the immediately
adjoining land into small paddocks allows for the easy handling of stud stock. The outbuildings are
3.11 substantial in tlicn structure, and arc planned on modern lines
£bc IRomncp flDarsb Sbccp.
Ah. Payne decided to establish a stud of Romney Marsh sheep, in the belief that they are
destined to become a favourite type among lamb raisers and others in need of a variety adapted for
the dual purpose of yielding meat and wool. Pie considers that the Romney’s merits are hardly
i eahsed as yet in Australia, but that time will bring a vigorous and extending demand for the rams.
Resides being of large symmetrical frames, the Romneys are blessed with strong constitutions, and
have excellent early maturing propensities. In addition to these characteristics, the wool yield is
heavy. 3he latter feature should receive important consideration from lamb breeders, for when a


Af " 2 ' - * ' ■ tS^UKw^^Ktdfkk 'wKKf \. *..
| ..^4^«^ 1|| . , a t *J%f4l JW^^-I I C
'■*>■ *. * , ■ - «*. iSMBs^*
THE HOMESTEAD.
Yarra View, Victoria .


VIEWS ON THE RIVER YARRA AT YARRA VIEW.


Elham 45TH of 1906, Champion Romney Ram of England, 1908.
considerable proportion of a dropping of lambs miss the market owing to a bad season or other cause,
the fleeces which they yield will not infrequently make all the difference between profit and loss.
The best Romney Marsh sheep are, of course, bred in England, and it was largely from the most
prominent breeders there that the basis of the Yarra View stud was drawn. Six special stud ewes
were purchased from Mr. Charles File, of the famous Elham stud in Kent. These are all entered in
the Romney Flock Book of 1907. In addition, a specially-selected sire, known as File’s No. 15 of 1906,
and bred by Mr. John File, was imported. The latte is entered in the Kentish Flock Book as No. 19038.
He is a very typical Romney, displaying the merits of the breed in a conspicuous degree, being of robust
build and very symmetrical shape, whilst carrying an even fleece of good weight and considerable
quality. The English sheep are kept in a separate stud at Yarra View. One of the reasons for this
is that their owner considers them a good deal superior to the New Zealand strain, both in the virility
of their constitutions and in their size. The New Zealand breeders, he contends, have concentrated
so much into improving the wool that they have lost something in other characteristics, which in the
Romney Marsh sheep deserve to be considered equally important. The English ewes were all served,
before being shipped, by the ram Elham 94th of 1906, a son of the well-known sire Windsor 71st, a
sheep sold at a sensational price to go to the Argentine Republic. The pedigree of the latter goes
-back to Windsor Ist, a ram verv famous in his time.
Yarra View, Victoria.


HKL — fNfcfc* **7
r ‘ x ' • '' \ j-* I ' • ‘ ' * % .' v '
■
Velmore Duke 3RD.—xst and Champion, Royal Agricultural Show of Victoria 1908.
Extensive purchases were made for the Yarra View stud in New Zealand. 1 hirty-
six ewes were bought from Mr. j. R. McKenzie, of Otago, and at the same time a
special stud ram bred by Mr. J. Reid was secured from Mr. I). Murray. Iwo hundred
and four ewes were drawn from the stud of Mr. E. Short, of Parorangi. this draft consisted of
the selected top of 4000 ewes. In February last Kir. Payne bought at the Masterton Ram hair. New
Zealand, the champion English ram of 1908. This sire was also from the stud of Mr. Chas. File, and
is known as Elham 45th of 1906. He is entered as No. 18184 in the Kentish block Book, and is by the
celebrated ram Royalist. He holds an unbeaten record, and the following English prizes were won
by him during 1908: —First, Royal Show; first, Counties Show; first and champion, East Kent Show;
first and champion, Mid-Kent Show: and first and champion. Tunbridge Wells Show. At Masterton
Mr. Payne also bought the special stud 2-tooth ram Elham 88th, registered in the Kentish Flock Book
as 20668, and bred by Mr. Charles File.
Though the English stud is kept separate at Yarra View, the sires from the old country have
been used on New Zealand ewes, and the progeny has proved very satisfactory. For last vear's rams
orders had to be refused, and the demand appears to be increasing. The breed is undoubtedly adapted
for thriving over a wide zone of varying climates and conditions, being able to maintain health on
scanty pasturage as well as to thrive on places where most varieties would get down with footrot and
fluke, in addition, they are more than ordinarily prolific breeders.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD SHORTHORNS ON RIVER FLATS.
Yarra View, Victoria .


i n |J ■ I
i. The Earl of Summerton’s 56TH Princess. 2. Prince Marmion, by Marmion (Aged 10 months).
3. Lady Fortunate 63RD, with Bull Calf by Duke of Wortley 32ND.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


Duke of Wortley 32ND.
<Xhc Shorthorn Cattle,
Expense has not been spared in founding the Shorthorn herd at Yarra View. Blood has been
drawn from some of the oldest and best known studs in Australia, and the selecting has been done in
such a way that Mr. Payne should soon have a strain which will vie with any of the original herds
from which his stock will have descended. He bought some of his cattle from the trustees of the
late Mr. J. H. Angas, of Point Sturt, South Australia, and the dispersal sale at Coolart gave an
excellent opportunity of securing beasts which would have been kept by their breeders rather than
offered at an ordinary sale. Stud Shorthorns were also secured from Messrs. David Mitchell, E. A.
Porter, and Williamson and Buckland. The specially selected sire at Yarra View was bred in the
Angas stud. He is known as Duke of Wortley 32nd, and holds the pride of place by reason both of
his pedigree and of his own merits, which become apparent as soon as he is inspected. He is a roan of
great size and symmetrical figure. Lady Fortunate, also of the Point Sturt cattle, is conspicuous at
Yarra View. She is of the Connaught strain. Another attractive cow is the Earl of Summerton’s
56th Princess, by Earl of Summerton. She has a bull calf by Marmion, by Haylc Duke, which
should ultimately make a valuable sire. Among the Coolart cattle are Coolart Flower of Derrimut
4th by the 81st Duke of Derrimut, Coolart Red Rose sth by Duke of York 3rd, and Coolart Matilda
2nd by Longney Champion. Six cows were purchased from Roxburgh Park. They were Ruby
Yarra View, Victoria,


•»"-.. J|L : "mKSnSU -
siOTU* Xr ' S| . * ■■ I /, i iP jt J ____—
wi *
.* "»'<•. s*>
-*>
Imported Sow, Velmore Kitty.
i S' *5r
Lord of Manor ist.
Star 13th, Duchess of Smeaton 13th, Star 15th, Cherry 6th, and Star 16th. These are sired respectively
by Earl Summerton 55th and 90th Duke of Derrimut.
Very few herds have been
founded on such uniformly
high-class strains as that at
Yarra View.
Berkshire iPuuv
it is a truism that the profits
of any kind of intense culture
can be increased by keeping
pigs. This is none the less
true of model farming and pure
stock breeding than of any other
form of agricultural enterprise.
But the object in getting to-
gether a herd of Berkshire pigs
at Yarra View has not been altogether for the ordinary purposes for which swine are kept. It has
rather been to breed stud stock, and to do it somewhat better than is the usual practice in Australia.
To do this Mr. Payne considered it necessary to build on a foundation of imported blood.
Purchases were consequently
made on an extensive scale in
England.
Two sows —Velmore Kitty
and Manor Elegant—were im-
ported. They were both preg-
nant at the time of purchase,
one to Velmore Dragon and
the other to Lord of Manor.
In addition, the boar Velmore
Duke 3rd was brought out.
Both the sows farrowed on ar-
rival, and this has given a large
selection of pure imported
stock to work on. Besides
these, a large number of sows of the imported Danesfield Rudolph breed are being used for stud
purposes, being mated to Velmore Duke 3rd. The last named was on view at the last show of the


VIEW ON ESTATE.
Yarra View, Victoria.


:V ; - ;
Some Berkshires.
Royal Agricultural Society of Victoria, where he was awarded the ist and champion prize of Austialia.
He attracted a great deal of attention there, and was generally admired for the pronounced type which
he embodies.
Some IResulte.
The Yarra View pure stock are already becoming conspicuous at shows. At the last Royal
Show in Melbourne the following prizes were won by them: —First and champion, Berkshire boar,
second, Romney Marsh ram, open class; second, Romney Marsh ewe, open class; and first and second,
2-tooth Romney Marsh rams. At the last Lilydale Show first prizes went to Mr. 1 ayne foi a Romney
Marsh ram, a Romney Marsh ewe, a Berkshire boar, a Berkshire sow, a Shorthorn bull, and a
Shorthorn cow.
There has not, of course, yet been time to get the stock bred at Yarra View ready for show
purposes to any extent. But sufficient time has elapsed to allow any stockbreeder to see abundant
promise in what has already been produced there. The expenditure of money will not alone lead to
successful studs being collected, but far more than the results of financial expenditure is apparent in
the sheep, cattle, and pigs which Mr. Payne has selected. In each instance blood is being blended in
such a way as to give progeny with the most valuable combination of characteristics. When
representatives of different studs have been mated, it is because they are of a kind likely to nick with
one another. To successfully accomplish this is perhaps the most difficult feat in the stockbreeder’s
art, but the character of the young stock on the property goes to show that it is being done at Yarra
View.


L ms*#
f .,■ '*'■?.• a[ V. "** ‘
"4 T„ * :> j if' ■*.' f:
Mount Napier.
'Cbc flfoount IKlapier BEstate.
iw OUNT NAPIER is situated in one of the most interesting parts of Western Victoria. The
'% / 1 estate lies some thirteen miles from Hamilton in a south-easterly direction, the homestead
▼ being close beneath the extinct volcano from which the property derives its name. Ihe
mountain is of conical form, rising abruptly from undulating country, and the crater is still nearly
perfect in shape. The sides of the peak are very abrupt, and when the summit is reached the
climber looks down into a declivity which is nearly a complete circle.
The late Mr. John Matheson, who purchased the property in 1862. was one of the most striking-
personalities in pastoral and financial circles in \ ictoria. Born in 1820 at Lairg, Sutherland, Scotland,
he, when fourteen years of age, came out to his uncles, Robert and Joseph Sutherland, in Tasmania.
He shortly afterwards went to Sydney to complete his education, and on his return to the island
colonv entered an office. Soon after he accepted a post in the I nion Hank of Australia, and rose so
rapidly in that service that in 1843 lie was appointed manager of the Geelong branch. Shortly
afterwards he was promoted to the manager’s chair in Melbourne, and held that position till 1853,
1 (Section 6, pages 81- 84.;


f-
The late Mr. John Matheson.
" / Jr ■
ytfS ■') iiifjr
Mr. J. M. Moles worth.
crossbreds, and the wool, which is clean and light, always
brings a good price.
A large section of the property was cleared and
drained in the seventies and early eighties, but owing to
too much of the shelter having been destroyed, it was
found necessary at a subsequent date to establish plan-
tations. Finns insignis trees, as well as some native
gums, were used for that purpose. A good deal of work
has been done in destroying ferns on the stony ground,
and the cattle are found useful for that purpose, as they
trample down and kill large quantities. There are ten
wells on the estate. Water has been struck on the side
of the mountain by putting bores down 100 ft. Tanks
and swamps are also used for providing water for stock.
The run is divided into twenty-one wire-netted paddocks,
and an additional large quantity of subdivisional fences
have been erected. The homestead is a comfortable
brick residence of one story, surrounded with a garden
when he accepted the general managership of the Bank
of Victoria, being the first general manager of that in-
stitution. Besides Mount Napier, he owned Morang-
hurk, in the Geelong district, and was part owner, with
his brother, of Marysvale and Ulswater Estates. He also
held an interest, in conjunction with his uncle, Mr.
Joseph Sutherland, and Mr. Joseph McDonald, in the
Kilfera run, New South Wales. Fie died in July, 1882,
at the age of sixty-two years.
The area of the Mount Napier freehold is about
16,500 acres, of which some two-thirds are forest land,
portion being very rich. The remaining third consists
of stony and ferny country. The latter is not so rich,
but, taking the property all through, the carrying
capacity of the whole is about one crossbred to the acre,
in addition to some 800 head of cattle. Some very good
fattening land is included, and both sheep and cattle are
sold in a prime condition each year. The sheep are all
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


f
■ V V iS? , . '■**$£*
., - ■ " i - ' - . - ■
*»•- - - ■ --vt- ■ ■ .• 'Tf- rv’.-’^i
i. General View of the Homestead.
2. Station-bred Cattle. 3. The Woolshed.
mount Napier, Victoria,


’’ •*" ; 1 '" . • • ; * -'* k -£‘ *•* * ’ ’| * ,^jjPi
- - > : . *, •’ fc Vc * ■ f •**■ ■ ? * >
The Homestead, Mount Napier.
an acre and a-half in extent. From 40 to 50 acres are annually cultivated for station purposes. Ihe
woolshed is a substantial stone structure, with fourteen stands, whilst a commodious men s hut has
recently been built.
The estate was purchased in 1862 by the late Mr. John Matheson from Mr. John Mooney.
On the death of the former gentleman in 1882, his sons, William Norman and Joseph Stanley,
exercised a right conferred on them by the will, and purchased the property. On the death of
William his interest was purchased by his sisters, Mrs. E. M. James, Mrs. Id. A. Molesworth, and
the late Miss Agnes Matheson, who carried on the property in conjunction with their brother Joseph.
On the death of Joseph some four years ago, Mount Napier was offered to the Government for closer
settlement. It being refused, it was put up for auction in 1906, and Mr. J. S. Matheson’s interest was
then bought by the surviving partners. The estate is now being managed for the owners by Mr. John
Matheson Molesworth, who married his cousin, Miss James. It is the intention of the owners to
subdivide and lease to farmers those portions of the estate suitable for dairying.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


fllboiint IHloorat 2£state,
Che property of riDr. El. 3. ffilnch.
THE Mount Noorat Estate was founded in the very early days of pastoral settlement by the
late Hon. Niel Black, the father of Mr. Archibald John Black, the present owner. The
deceased gentleman was one of the first white men to strike out into the fertile
Terang district, and he lived there from 1840 till the time of his death in 1880. The property was
taken up in the name of the firm of Niel Black and Co., the other partners being Messrs. Finlay and
Gladstone. The total area which they then held was nearly 40,000 acres, but this has since been
split into several estates. The estates now known as Glenormiston, Dalvui, The Sisters, and Gnotuk
are parts of the old run, as well as the present Mount Noorat property.
Mount Noorat to-day consists of 5314 acres of uniformly fertile land, nicely subdivided into
farms, and picturesquely planted with indigenous and imported trees. Originally part of the land was
very heavily timbered, and the bare trunks of some of the old forest giants still tower over the meadows
as solitary relics of a more primitive state. The homestead is a massive building surrounded with a
beautiful garden and sheltered on most sides by dense belts of mature plantations.
In 1895 a commencement was made to cut the property up into dairy farms, and practically the
whole of the estate is now in the hands of well-to-do tenants. Some hold their land on the share
system, and others pay a straight-out rent. Shelter is provided for the milking cows by means of
plantations, and the stock-carrying capacity of the land has been greatly added to by the
application of modern agricultural methods. In fact, in most respects Mount Noorat is a model
dairying estate.
The extinct volcano, from which Mr. Black’s home derives its name, is one of the most
interesting relics of volcanic activity in Victoria. The mountain itself lies immediately behind the
homestead, to which it forms a picturesque background. It was one of the last of the Western
1
(Section 7, pages S5-TOO.)


£jjt*
The Drive.
Victorian craters to belch forth lava and steam, and was probably among the most important. The
natives held traditions of some of these old hills having shown fire, but geologists discount theii
evidence. At any rate, in the crater of Mount Noorat there are tall trees probably as old as severa
generations of men, also there are none of the hot springs or vapour vents which usually survive
volcanic activity. This is regarded as testimony that the volcano has been extinct for many centuries,
and that it is not likely to again burst into eruption.
<Tbe Country
Portions of all the estates into which the original pastoral holding of Mount Noorat was
divided, with the single exception of Gnotuk, are now in the hands of members of the late Mr. Niel
Black’s family. In 1868 the firm of Niel Black and Co. dissolved partnership. Glenormiston property
was then taken over by Mr. A. K. Finlay, Mount Noorat by Mr. T. S. Gladstone, and The Sisters
by Mr. Black. Shortly afterwards, however, the latter gentleman bought out Mr. Gladstone's share,
and added the land to his own holding. In 1889 the land held by the Black family (the father being


-y«ras.A-. ryiu|ak|^.
” ■*" in ■ •• 1
'■, o - f % • ,. - ■
✓# '>” -''*•*' ■ -
fM V ,, „./ ...;■ <*• «. . .,* , 1; , ■
; "‘ ‘ . * r Z ' $
, . ■ r, , J$ *0.
s, ' ■&■'*? .< ., „• . • *• f t a ' ••• ■ '-
£ ' . * tyy t , ■ % ,- ■** -*•'
-» • \ i** 1 ♦ • ,.' ,. , . ■ ‘ * :* h ,;; iV •'
THE HOMESTEAD, FROM THE MAIN ROAD.
Mount Noorat, Victoria


wfe I S']B|H Ml; I Is- ill II ll|
THE HOMESTEAD.


f?f
»
J pg ;jt ■■ ’,';
- '- A mf,a^WI
The Late Hon. Niel Black
'"a-;. W '
Photo by Vandyck.
Mr. A. J. Black.
the Mount Noorat and surrounding estates. The
land is of exceptional fertility, and this is because
of the lava that has been poured over the ground
and the volcanic ash which has fallen in beds about
the old vents. There are patches of deep, rich soil
extending downwards for many feet, free from
stone, and at times in the year so prolific that it is
found almost impossible to keep down the natural
growth. The ash beds alternate with land formed
from solidified lava partly decomposed. Had the
late Mr. Black searched all over Victoria, or the
Port Phillip district as it was then called, he could
have found no spot more favoured by nature in
fertility, in natural beauty, and in its climatic
advantages.
dead the property devolved on his sons) was further
added to, for in that year the Land Company of
Australia subdivided Glenormiston Estate. Seven-
teen hundred acres of it, together with the home-
stead, were purchased by the Black Eros. The
balance was bought by dairy farmers, to whose
industry the country is excellently suited, as the
success subsequently attained makes abundantly
manifest. In 1900 the firm of Black Bros, dis-
solved, and it was then that Mr. A. J. Black became
sole proprietor of Mount Noorat. With this part
of the property went the old homestead, built
in 1878. '
The old craters have naturally been a "prime
factor in determining the character of the soil on
Mount Noorat, Victoria


Cabbage grown for Dairy Cattle.
The land, as now improved, lends itself readily to agriculture. Unlike the more stony type of
volcanic country, a plough can be run for miles through it without meeting with obstructions of any
kind, whilst the gentle undulations render both cultivation and draining easy. Fodder crops of various
kinds are grown extensively on the estate. These include maize, cabbage, kale, and mangel-wurzel,
and they all do exceedingly well. Experiments have, from time to time, been tried with one and
another of the different kinds of crops, and a useful knowledge gained of the species most suited to
the local conditions. Excellent results have been secured with lucerne grown without irrigation, the
roots of which penetrate far into the depths of the porous soil, and appear to like the chemical
constituents of the ground. The accompanying illustrations give a very fair idea of the methods
used for growing fodder.
Dairying in the future must be based on somewhat similar lines as regards fodder growing to
the method adopted at Mount Noorat. The days of turning milch cows on to natural pastures, to
thrive when grass is plentiful and to starve in times of drought, are fast passing. The prices which
rule for good dairying land are such that the dairyman must make his holding yield something near


"V, iff.
A MANGEL-WURZEL CROP.
Mount Noorat , Victoria.


LUCERNE GROWN WITHOUT IRRIGATION.


MAIZE FOR DAIRY CATTLE.
Mount IMoorat, Victoria.


A Prosperous Share Dairy Farmer and his Family.
its maximum producing capacity to make both ends meet. He must also do this in such a way as
to add to the fertility of, rather than to impoverish, his farm. By a variety of correctly chosen crops,
sown in rotation, and used in connection with grazing, the carrying capacity of dairying land should
continue to increase.
Those of Mr. Black’s tenants who use silos are reaping the full advantage of the cultivation.
With silos they always have on hand food in such a condition as to best suit milking cows. Also
for the quantity of fodder grown they have, in weight, a far greater proportion preserved than has
the farmer who stacks the crop dry. Silos are gradually coming more and more into service in
Australia among dairy farmers, and the results obtained from them on Mount Noorat are consistent
with the experience of their usefulness everywhere else.
Of course the establishment of dairying completely altered the possibilities of the estate. Before
then a beef strain of Shorthorns were bred, and for these it did not pay to adopt modern agricultural
methods. The frozen meat trade was not then established, and breeding and fattening bullocks for
local consumption was an industry subject to many reverses even in rich and well-watered country.
The Blacks were among the first to engage in the business of butter production on methodical and
modern lines, and their enterprise has been well rewarded.


A GOOD FIELD OF KALE.
Mount \oorat, Victoria .


•.% -«•»>*. ?,V»
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.


A Profitable Adjunct to Dairy Farming.
£be Mount IMoorat Shorthorns.
For half a century the Shorthorn herd at Mount Noorat was among the best known in
Australia. It was founded in 1841 by the late Hon. Xiel Black, who imported a number of stud
bulls and cows of the famous Bates blood. These were crossed with sires and dams purchased from
the Messrs. Bolden, who had a station on the Hoikins, and who also founded their stud on Bates
stock. By careful selection and the addition from time to time of the best English and colonial stock,
a very high order of merit was established and maintained in the cattle.
For very many years the Mount Noorat herd consisted of over 1000 breeding cows, including
the stud, in which there were more than 100 specially selected females. The sires all trace
back to the most notable strains, and how valuable were the progeny for ordinary grazing
purposes was proved by the very high prices,the bullocks always brought when offered in the fat stock
markets at Ballarat and Melbourne. Not only were the cattle famous for their uniform and
conspicuous merit, but other vendors who had bred up herds 011 blood obtained from the estate
were more than ordinarily successful in the prices they obtained. Ihe breed was notable for the
size of the beasts, their symmetry, early maturing properties, and tendency to fatten readily.
Mount Noorat, Victoria


- 'M
The Front of the Homestead.
The Piggery at Mount Noorat.
For fifty-nine years the Mount Noorat herd roamed over the wide volcanic flats. When they
were disposed of in 1899, because the run had been let to dairy farmers, their departure denoted not
only a change of industry in
the district, but altered condi-
tions of country life. The old
squatting days had gone, with
its wide expanses, furious gal-
lops, and great mobs of cattle.
These have given place to
pleasant farms, numerous
homesteads, and the intricate
subdivision of the land into
small paddocks. It was a pic-
turesque sight in old times to
see the wide-spreading mobs
of massive bullocks graze
peacefully in knee-deep pas-
tures, or bellow and thunder
forward like a cavalcade as‘the
stock horses turned and twisted on their flanks. But though the Mount Noorat herd has gone, its
influence on Australian Shorthorns remains. Many a type was fixed, and herd built up, on stock which
originated in that famous old
stud. When the sale was held
103 stud cows and twenty-nine
pedigreed bulls were offered.
In addition, a great number of
ordinary herd females in calf
to noted sires were disposed
of, and the whole of the stock
were dispersed throughout the
continent.
flDr. Hrcb. John Black,
Mr. Archibald John Black
was born on the property in
1859, and he has practically
spent the whole of his time in working at the industries of the land. In 1882 he first started pastoral
work on his own account. In 1895 the Glenormiston butter factory was established on the property.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DRUM-HEAD CABBAGE GROWN FOR DAIRY CATTLE.
Mount Noorat, Victoria,


A View looking across the Estate.
It was then realised that the dairy industry could be carried on more successfully by small holders
than by large proprietors, and Mr. Black consequently leased a considerable portion of his land.
The utmost success has followed this development. The dairy farmers form a prosperous class,
the production of butter for export has brought much wealth into the district, and land values have
assumed a new and much higher value.


% jil i'l m mt S|£ tSrUi ""Rflbja. ?j * AXwMFimit BEkS^- P« m SS
-*sP^ 4^ l '^* JjB
V• ■ •.••'b / r. -JgL jfgflf ■ ’*&* ■&&)$ ■ a H
i '• •■ a • Ify 1 ; vj* * *'"’/>
No. 2 Four-tooth Ewes.
BEcpeuh Estate.
ahe property of flhr. Bley. Dennis.
THE Eeyeuk Estate originally formed part of Keilambete run, which was first taken up by the
late Mr. John Thomson, and was afterwards owned by Dr. McFarlane. In 1867 it was
purchased by the late Mr. Alexander Dennis, the father of the present proprietor of the
property. At the time of the sale the estate consisted of about 5800 acres, but it has since been
increased by several small purchases to 6400. For some years Mr. Alexander Dennis, jun., and
his brother leased the holding from their father, but at a later date it passed into the sole control of
Alexander.
The carrying capacity of Eeyeuk is fairly heavy: about ro.ooo sheep are shorn annually, and
some 200 head of cattle are depastured on the property all the year round. The land is usually
calculated to permanently carry equal to one and a-half sheep to the acre. The soil is of volcanic
origin, and carries a dense sward of native grasses. The Ti-tree Spring, the natural outflow of some
X (Section 8, pages 101-108,


The late Mu. Alexander Dennis,
of Tarndwarncoort.
deep-seated subterranean flow, which probably obtains vent through fractures in the upper strata
caused by volcanic action, provides a never-failing and abundant water supply at one end of the run,
whilst in each of the other paddocks a bore has been sunk and a windmill erected. In every case water
has been found at not more than 40 ft. from the surface.
At one time Mr. Dennis tried sowing rye grass on his land, and put about 800 acres under that
seed, kor a while it flourished well enough, but it was found that the native grasses grow with such
vigour that they choked out the imported species, and during a drought about ten years ago practically
regained possession of the land. On account of the rapid growth of the pastures during certain
times of the year, cattle have to be kept to eat off the rough feed. Though originally quite park-like,
with its undulating paddocks nicely shaded with blackwood trees, the effect of keeping stock on the
country, or the increase of grubs which the aboriginals used to eat, has been to gradually kill off the
original trees. Presumably for the same reasons no others have sprung up naturally to take their place,
so Mr. Dennis has put in a number of artificial plantations. About 54 acres are at present under
planted trees in various scattered plots placed where shelter is most needed, and the area is being
increased. The sugar gum. blue gum, mahogany gum, and wattle are the seeds most used.


THE HOMESTEAD.
Eeyeuk, Victoria.


fe-
I V
PART OF THE GARDEN.


fc ■ % ’■ •''' - '' ‘j . ■ /. - • rr ",. 1 1 , ' *■> ■
« , : t .:; - •■ r ... •/ .^
If? ’ *\i v \» , JL is , t # '|j £jj| -^iv
; ' 1 ' ' : *% ■ ' I ,
No. t Four-tooth Ewes.
i he homestead of Eeyeuk is a fine building of bluestone, surrounded with a well-tended garden
3 acres in extent. Ihe house was built by the present owner in 1875, and the garden laid out by him
a year later. Iwo years ago an acetylene gas service was installed, and telephone communication
with Camperdown has been established.
The rainfall averages about 27 in. per annum at Eeyeuk, and the country is well adapted for
breeding stock and for fattening purposes. The surplus cattle are sold each year to graziers, and meet
with a ready demand at the Terang market. The wethers are eagerly sought after by butchers. Owing
to its volcanic nature the soil is porous, and water does not lie long on its surface, so that it is
healthy for all kinds of live stock.
Zbc S3 beep.
The country on Eeyeuk is too heavily grassed for Merino sheep to do well. Lincolns were kept
on the property for some years, but as the prices for strong wool fell, it was thought advisable to tr} r
a cross with finer-woolled sheep. Consequently in 1881 the Eeyeuk Lincoln sheep were mated with
Merinos, and subsequently their progeny were again crossed with the same variety, and a stud formed
from the result. In-and-in breeding has been practised ever since with the most satisfactory results.
Sheep from such a foundation stock are generally known as comebacks, but through having been
kept on the same lines for twenty-eight years, the Eeyeuk Hock is now an established strain and the
type is quite fixed, ami the term comeback fails to accurately describe them. Eor the first few years
Eeyeuk, Victoria.


Photo hy Johnstone , 0’ Shnnriessy & Co.
Mr. Alexander Dennis.
after starting the breed it was found necessary to cull a little heavier than of late. More recently,
however, there has been no occasion to reject more than 17 or 18 per cent., and the 4-tooth cull ewes
have several times brought over 15s. just off the shears at auction at the Mortlake sales.
The sheep are large-framed, very even, and well-woolled. The 6-tooth wethers sold off shears
on the place in December during the last seven years averaged 14s. 6d.
The clip has always been disposed of in Geelong, and for the past four years the whole of the
fleece wool has averaged 15^d. per lb. In 1899 —the year of the boom —it averaged a fraction over
17th per lb., the top price being 18Jdd. for 28 bales.
ni>r. Hleyanber Dennis.
]\rr. Alexander Dennis was born at Tarndwarncoort in 1844. He is the second son of the late
Mr. Alexander Dennis, who arrived in Australia by the sailing ship “ John Bull'" in January, 1840,
and who soon afterwards began pastoral undertakings in partnership with his younger brothers, John
and William, under the style of Dennis Bros. Their early enterprises were carried out
at Tarndwarncoort, near Birregurra, Victoria. The present Mr. Alexander Dennis was educated at
the Geelong Grammar School under Dean Vance between October, 1856, and October, 1859. The


J$m> ■ / '^WjPW
II s 'K:. - T- r i
Mf9r* * , *vv > #"~' . vs&v^,f*.» ‘iMSrJtiaS
fe, Ato.
i. The Woolshed. 2. A Garden Walk.
3. View from the Homestead.
Eeyeuk , Victoria.


Station-bred Shorthorn Bull at Eeyeuk.
following year he entered the Scotch College, and continued his studies there under Dr. Morrison.
He married Jessie, the second daughter of the late Mr. Janies Fairbairn, of Hallyburton, Berwickshire,
Scotland, and a niece of the late Mr. George Fairbairn, who was well known in the early days of
squatting settlement as an enterprising pioneer. There is a family of five sons and one daughter
surviving. Two of the sons, G. L. and A. T., assist their father in the management of the estate.
Mr. Dennis lends active support to matters of local progress, and was a member of the Mortlake
Shire Council for twenty-one years before he retired from that body.
Mr. Dennis finds a hobby in shooting, and is one of the best shots in the Western District. He
also takes a good deal of interest in coursing, and lends Eeyeuk to the Mortlake and Camperdown
Club to hold two meetings on annually. Rifle shooting has in the past attracted attention from him,
and he was a Lieutenant in the Mounted Rifles, now converted into the Australian Light Florse, for
about five years when that corps was first formed.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


— ■ t 1 "* 1 ■
•;_ ;.f-
’ • '
The Township of Boisdale, which is on the Estate.
'Cbc ÜBoisbale Estate.
cl he property of flDessrs. if ester Bros.
THE Boisclale Estate is situated in what might well be termed the garden of Australia. It lies
in the heart of the fertile Gippsland country, where the soil is of the richest, and where the
rainfall is heavy and regular. The property is a few miles from the prosperous town of
Maffra, a business centre which has made very rapid strides during the last fifteen years.
Boisdale itself lies in particularly picturesque surroundings. The country is undulating, and
is dotted with trees that have been left standing for economic and ornamental purposes. The country
never was very heavily timbered, and when originally selected was not ruthlessly cleared of all forest
growth, as was, and still is, too often the case when opening up new country in this land. In spring-
time a most pleasing effect is produced by the contrasts in the colours of the foliage of the native trees
and the bright green of the luxuriant pastures. To visit Boisdale about October after journeying
across some typical section of the continent’s interior is like arriving in quite another land. The
general effect resembles that of a rich English park, and is similar to what you may find at certain
1 (Section f), mines 109-120.)


The Avon River at Boisdale.
times of the year in the best of Tasmania. It is no wonder that the district has become so famous
for dairying', and that those engaged in primary production in the locality have of late years been so
successful.
The Boisdale Estate, which now belongs to the brothers, Messrs. A. M. and J. D. Foster, was
selected in the very earliest days of Victorian settlement by the late Mr. McAlister. It was bought
by the late Mr. John Foster, of Tasmania, as far back as 1841. A very large tract of country was then
comprised in the holding, as the Government of that day imposed practically no restrictions on the
quantity of land a pastoralist was permitted to take up. Indeed, the New South Wales Government
(it was before Victoria was a separate State) was only too glad to encourage squatting enterprises,
and offered almost any inducement to tempt pioneers to go on to virgin lands. Mr. John Foster took
up the Maffra country at the time when so much Western District land was being selected by the first
occupiers. But the conditions which had to be contended against in Gippsland were far harder than
those prevailing in the west. There was less open country, and, in addition, the early roads were
of a far worse description. As a matter of fact, Gippsland was never properly opened up until long
after a great deal of the rest of Victoria had been comparatively fully developed.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Drive.
View from the Homestead.
Bolsdale, Victoria.


( ' m >^ : -*—— r V'- A*** v . '\IB
ON THE VERANDAH.


0 ■■ '''
The Homestead from the Tennis Court.
The Front Verandah,
Boisdaie, Victoria.


I *
A Tenant Farmer’s Home.
Silos and Milking Sheds on a Tenant Farmer’s Holding.
Boisclale was used for very many years as a cattle run, and, of course, it was most excellently
suited for that purpose. The wealth of natural grasses would grow beasts of large frame, and fatten
them readily; and while
droughts sometimes oc-
curred, they were of less fre-
quency than in most other
parts of Australia. A good
type of Shorthorn cattle was
bred on the property. Dur-
ing the fifties, when the de-
mand for beef was in excess
of the supply on account of
the enormous rush of popula-
tion into the country owing
to the opening up of the
goldfields, the business was very remunerative. At a later period, however, the breeding and fattening
of cattle became less lucrative, for the simple reason that the supply overtook the demand. This
was before the possibilities of the frozen meat and butter export trade were realised, and those
landowners who were dependent on an overstocked local market to take their fat stock fell on
somewhat evil times. Ihe late Mr. John Foster lived all his life in Tasmania, and to all intents and
purposes managed the Boisclale Estate from there. When fat cattle values dropped to an
imremunerative level on the
mainland he conceived the idea
of fetching supplies across to
the island. At that time Tas-
mania was decidedly under-
stocked as regards cattle, and
rates for fat beasts were rela-
tively high. He used to send
drafts of fats across country
from Maffra to Port Albert
(about 80 miles) where there
was a good port, put them on
board brigs, and so have them
brought down to Hobart sales.
On the death of Mr. John Foster in the seventies, Boisclale was leased for a term of years
About 1892, his sons, the present owners, took over the property, and they have held it ever since.


Cutting Feed for Dairy Cattle.
Preparing for a Crop.
Boisdaie, Victoria.


The Cheese Factory.
The Store Room.


-vjfla . I Wy£jH
J r i ;.- ■ % !g *MfepBP%( £^LL_— IB^^mma^m^mSrn
|SPR\ Wj4 w ®**h I
WSBpi/r M W r ' . *W 'VI.} ft
IgSgiQ&C ' Jr /~ X W%' • mIK'^"“*«»'*as<3gfc|^', -ij» f , ■“% I
JSp • ••' • . I BP^S^S» r «■ ’* yf? f£'- %”** H •■■■
Jr ... im / ' §M H ft n
Pressing Cheese.
On assuming ownership of the estate, which now consists of about 10,000 acres, the Messrs. Foster
Bros, decided to lease it to farmers. The area was consequently subdivided into blocks of suitable
sizes, and soon found applicants. At present there are thirty-five farmers on the property, and they
hold areas ranging in extent from 100 to 260 acres. The owners were very fortunate in the time they
chose for their enterprise. They cut up the property just about the time that the butter export trade
began to develop, and from then on very rapid progress has been made. In a very short space of time
there was a boom in dairy land, and areas suitable for the production of butter increased in value by
double and sometimes treble what had been the market price only a short while previously. At present
the whole of Boisclale is let to farmers, and they all arc applying- themselves to the production of
butter and cheese. A considerable population is therefore supported on the property, and the output is
an extensive one.
The Foster Bros, are really pioneers of the dairying industry so far as their locality is concerned.
Besides turning over the whole of their property to that business, they have spent a considerable
sum of money in establishing an up-to-date butter and cheese factory at Boisdale. This is on their
Boisdale, Victoria.


A BUSY MORNING AT THE FACTORY.


The Boisdale Cheese and Butter Factory.
Draught Stallion for the Use of the Tenants on Boisdale.
own property, and is of the greatest assistance to the tenants, being so near to the holdings that the
milk and cream can be carted at a minimum of labour and expense. The cheese is exported to
Western Australia, where it
meets with a ready demand,
whilst the butter is sold in
Melbourne for export to
Europe. The brand is well
and favourably known on
the market.
The Avon River runs
through one side of the
estate. It is to the alluvial
deposits of that stream that
the propery owes so much of
its productiveness. The river
flats are extremely fertile, and contain a great depth of rich black soil. Lucerne has been found to
thrive excellently on that part of the property. Its roots drive through the layer of river silt to the
moisture beneath, and by this
means green fodder of the
most nourishing and milk-
forming kind is provided for
dairy cows throughout the
year. There is now an area
of between 500 and 600 acres
under the leguminous crop,
and an increasing quantity is
being sown annually. Silos
are also used to help the
cows through the more dry
periods of the year.
The hill country at Bois-
dale is also of fertile descrip-
tion, the soil containing a
quantity of humus derived from the decay of vegetable matter before the days of settlement. The
grasses on the higher land are indigenous, whilst the sod is very thick. The plant life is sweet and
Boisdale, Victoria.


i^ijwwwiipi^jinirpwre^^
«f jj«pr v ■
A Corner of the Butter Factory,
nutritious. The water supply comes largely from the river, but, in addition to it, there are a
number of dams and wells scattered about the estate. The subdivision of the land into so many
small holdings makes a copious and well-scattered water supply essential.
The homestead is a comfortable brick structure of one story, which was built in 1882 by Mr. A.
M. Foster. The garden is elaborate, being the object of much attention, the rich soil and good raintall
both favouring the following of horticultural pursuits. I n springtime the wealth of bloom, having the
pleasant green of the surrounding landscape for a background, forms a most delightful spectacle. The
factory for manufacturing cheese and butter is fairly adjacent, and during the busy months of the dairy
season a scene of great activity is presented. Mr. A. M. Foster manages the estate and the
manufacturing business for himself and brother, and he also supervises, the sale of the output. He
lives on the property with his family, having four daughters and a son. Mrs. Foster is a daughter
of the late Mr. Francis Ormond, the founder of Ormond College, Melbourne University.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


(Ibe property of flbr. (Robert Jamieson.
THE Stony Point Estate was purchased by the late Mr. Robert Jamieson, the father of the
present owner, from Mr. T. F. Gumming in 1881. The property at the time of the sale
consisted of about 5000 acres, though at an earlier date it contained between 12,000 and
15,000. The flock as founded by Mr. Gumming formed the foundation of that running at Stony
Point to-day.
Mr. Jamieson was one of the early pioneers of the Western District. He landed in Victoria
in 1840 from the barque “ John Good," and at once proceeded to Port Fairy, where he settled, and
soon became actively engaged in pastoral pursuits. Mr. Jamieson was a very keen sheepbreeder, and
during his life the Stony Point flock greatly improved. He also devoted a great deal of his time to
the welfare of the district, and was an active member of the Mortlake Shire Council. He died in 1894,
and from then onwards the property has been managed by his son.
Mr. Robert Jamieson the younger was born at P>olac Plains, near Woorndoo. Fie was educated
at the Church of England Grammar School, Geelong, and immediately after leaving that institution
returned to his father’s property. Fie then spent thirteen years working under the tuition of Mr.
Jamieson, senior, and became thoroughly efficient at all kinds of sheep and station work. When his
father died in 1894, the trustees therefore felt confidence in appointing him as manager. This position
he held until 1899, when he took possession of the property on his own account. Since then he has
spent much time and capital in improving the estate. For about eight years he has been a member
of the Mortlake Shire Council, and this year he is president of that body.
In 1901 Mr. Jamieson married Florence, the second daughter of Mr. James Usher, of Melbourne.
There are two sons and one daughter by the marriage.
Zb c Stock.
The Stony Point Merinos are of robust constitution, fairly large in the frame, considering
the nature of the country, and the fleeces are of good staple and high-quality wool. When the late
T (Section 70, pages 121-128.)


Photo hy Johnstone , O’Shannessy & Co.
The late Mr. Robert Jamieson.
■
Mr. Robert Jamieson.
Mr. Jamieson took over the property he bought 100 stud and flock rams of the old station breed and
1200 ewes. From time to time afterwards he purchased high-class stud rams from Tasmania, but
the foundation of, and the leading strain in the flock has always been the Sir Thomas blood. Sir
believer in the Herefords for plain country, as he
finds they stand climatic adversity and poor feed
better than other varieties. His experience has
been pretty generally borne out on numbers of other
places where the handsome red and white beasts
have had to face difficult conditions of life.
c Estate.
The Stony Point homestead is situated on the
Emu Creek, a stream which flows for almost the
whole of its course through well-known pastoral
properties, ft passes through Mr. Jamieson’s run,
so as to divide that property into two almost equal
sections. Besides forming an excellent fire break,
Thomas, it will be remembered, was the most
famous sheep of his day, and was purchased for 680
guineas by the late Messrs. W. and T. F. Gumming
for use at Stony Point and Mount Fyans.
Both father and son have been consistent in
adhering to one type. Having found the class of
sheep suitable to their country, and able to yield a
good cash return, they have both been uninfluenced
by the passing whims of fashion. The consequence
has been a steady progress and an even clip of
bright high-quality wool.
The Stony Point cattle are chiefly of the
Hereford-Shorthorn cross. Mr. Jamieson is a strong
the creek provides a valuable water supply. When the level is low in summer time the water is slightly
brackish, but stock appear to be fond of it, and it suits them well.


THE HOMESTEAD.
Stony Point, Victoria .


1. I he Road leading to the House.
2. A Corner of the Garden.


Station Bridge over Emu Creek.
The Stables.
The house was built by Mr. T. F. Gumming. That gentleman aimed both at comfort and
permanence. It is convenient, roomy, and is as good as on the day it was built. Surrounding the
residence is a most attractive
garden, most of which was
laid out by Mr. Gumming.
The flower beds, shrubberies,
and thick-leaved trees stretch
away for some considerable
distance in front of the dwell-
ing, so that a very charming
view is commanded from the
windows, whilst the hot
winds of summer are plea-
santly tempered with the
moisture from cool green foli-
age and the scent of sweet-
smelling blooms.
A modern woolshed has
been erected on the estate. It contains eleven Wolseley machines, which are driven by a
portable Hornsby oil engine. When shearing is not in progress the engine is used for cutting chaff
and wood and pumping water. Mr. Jamieson’s hand was forced into putting in the shearing machines
owing to rapidly-increasing difficulty in securing good hand shearers. For the past fourteen or fifteen
years the Stony Point clip
has been sold in Geelong, as
the owner is a strong advo-
cate for the maintenance of
the local wool market.
The Stony Point land con-
sists of plains of a clay soil.
The grasses are mostly natu-
ral. The present Mr. Jamie-
son has tried some planting
with artificial grasses, but the
rainfall is insufficient, for onlv
moderate success has been
obtained.
obtained. plantations.
Originally the plains were bleak and cold enough when the sharp W. and N.W. winds blustered
restlessly across their unbroken expanses. The physical character of the country, as far as this is
Stony Point, Victoria.


The Woolshed.
Digging out Rabbits in the Stony Rises.
concerned, has to-day been completely altered. Mr. Jamieson, sen., in his time established a number
of plantations, and these to-day are masses of mature and vigorous trees. Since the present owner
took possession they have
been greatly added to, and
now there are some 500 acres
heavily clothed with nicely-
arranged timber. It might be
thought that tree-planting
over an area equal to 10 per
cent, of the whole property
would decrease the carrying
capacity of the estate. Such,
however, has by no means
proved to be the case. Though
there has been a necessary
decrease in the acreage under
grass, the grass-growing capacity of the rest has so greatly benefited from the shelter afiforded, that
the loss has been more than counterbalanced, and there has been an actual gain. Moreover, the
protection afforded to stock from the biting winds of winter has tended to keep them in better condition.
Stony Point really pro-
vides a model of what can be
accomplished by judicious
tree-planting. Instead of the
bare plains remaining a wide
desolation of lifeless mono-
tony, the trees at evening
time and in the early morning
ring with the screechings of
parrots, cockatoos, magpies,
and other wild native birds.
On a bleak day you may
drive along in the shelter,
little dreaming you are in the
same climate as that where
the wind blusters on the
shelterless plain a mile or two away. The economic advantages derived from the presence of the
plantations have proved very much greater than was generally expected when the first steps were
being taken to establish them. The attraction of native birds is a clear gain from the pastoralist’s
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


1. The Garden.
2. A Peep on Emu Creek.
Stony Point , Victoria.


* W"'* nSSA nr — -
♦ ’ % • • % r *** >%* ;. 4 *. fc * % ; *-d'' .* ***.■> h % >»**»*
%V* * *».'* --.’• %,** % > 'Vi\,' * k »* 4 % * ? Vj**'* ! v W* ■** "*• - ** ‘ %«S*
| S^’, * * * * .» *• . W* 1 , V ,f * ***''
'
*”* . V 4k ■ ‘ ,.-■ . .•;> ;« -. > * • ■ **. _ ** ‘ <*'■
* •^‘
AA:.. m. * ** A • A 1 ■•■• •■'
Station-bred Cattle.
viewpoint. The birds subsist mostly on insects and grubs, many of which are harmful to pasturage.
Moreover, the direct effects of the plantations on the grass arc marked. When unbroken, the sheer
force of the wind on the Western Victorian plains will break the grass and blow it away, especially
in places over which a flock of sheep has recently grazed.
A big asset which the plantations provide is the supply of fencing timber and firewood they
produce. Under the old conditions waggons had to be sent twenty-five miles for both commodities
at Stony Point. The planted trees are as yet too young to use for fencing purposes, but in the
immediate future there will be quantities of timber available close to the homestead.
Altogether, Stony Point is a highly improved property, and bears the stamp of great thoroughness
of management on the part of the successive owners. The improvements are all of a permanent and
substantial kind, and add to the productiveness of the property.


Zbc pumimbete Estate
Ehc property of fll>r. M. Z. flDamfolfc.
PURRUMBETE came into the possession of Mr. William Thomson Manifold when the estate
of the late John and Peter Manifold was divided among the former’s four sons. The pro-
perty lies about five and a-half miles from Camperdown, and consists of some ro.ooo acres
of rich pastoral land. It takes its name from the picturesque lake situate on it, which is
the native name for “ the round lake.”
It was in the Purrumhete country where the father of Mr. W. T. Manifold and his two
brothers settled with their stock in 1839. Coming originally from Chester, England, the family went
first to Tasmania, but they left that State in 1836 and landed the same year on the shore of Port
Phillip, at Point Henry, near Geelong. Three years later, in spite of many difficulties, they took flocks
and herds westwards. The blacks were then troublesome, and the extremely rough and stony ridges,
to say nothing of the lakes, such as Lake Corangamite, they encountered on the way, presented no
small problem. However, these obstacles were ultimately overcome, a cottage was built on the shores
of Lake Purrumhete, and a squatting license obtained for about 100,000 acres of land. The annual
fee payable to the Government for lease of this stretch of country was 3d. per head horses, ijdd. per
head cattle, and Rbl. per head sheep, per annum. But it is to be recollected that the date was long
prior to gold being discovered. The country was found of too rich a character to maintain sheep in
good health, and cattle breeding and fattening was the only industry open to the plucky pioneers. But
no local market then existed for beef. Bullocks were boiled down for their tallow, and their hides were
shipped to London. That was the best use to which the cattle could be turned in the very early days,
and the profits of pastoral industry were correspondingly small. The influx of immigrants and the
corresponding increase in the demand for meat subsequent to the discovery of gold, altered all this,
however, and the conditions improved rapidly.
The country, as comprised in the property of to-day, is of rich volcanic land, luxuriantly
grassed, and healthy for cattle. Still, it was not until the dairying industry and the butter export
trade became established, some fifteen years ago, that the full value of Purrumhete and similar country
(Section 11, pages 129-136.}


The Entrance Gate.
«%' , ,, -jg
> x ,-** dBjpiWifr jfcg
£ -
jj^KtwWM H k>'^4^
Igl ¥ • • ■ /: -v (t-I*
8BT
Shorthorn Bull (Milking Strain) Rose King.
3 years old ist Jan., igog. Dam, Rose Queen (imp.); Sire, Royalist (imp.)
was understood. Trior to this the land was used for fattening cattle, and fat cattle depended for a sale
on the local beef market, which frequently was overstocked, and fluctuated greatly. Mi. \\ . 1 • Manifold
now has a butter factory
on the property. J his en-
sures London prices being
secured for the product of the
land, and has created a new
industry on it. Since dairy-
ing started, the property has
been subdivided into smaller
holdings. Twenty of these
are in the hands of tenants,
and six more are worked by
dairymen who milk the cows
on the share system.
The property is well
watered with windmills, and
is highly improved. The homestead is one of the most charming in Victoria, being roomy, comfortable,
and lying back in the full foliage and bloom of such a garden as rich soil, artificial watering, constant
labour and g'ood taste can
produce. The power used at
the butter factory also gene-
rates electricity for lighting
the homestead.
Che ipiuTumbctc
Cattle.
Mr. \\ . T. Manifold has
made a special study of
breeding Shorthorn cattle of
the milking strain. In evolv-
ing a dual purpose cow he has
perhaps done as much as any
other stockowner in Victoria.
The method of attaining this has been to thoroughly and scientifically test the actual yield of each
individual cow given under ordinary conditions of life.


THE HOMESTEAD ACROSS THE LAKE.
Purrumbete, Victoria,


.'-Siiifc- . «'• --~'‘
4 ■' 1 1 » * * ?•' *i -•
* •, ** iMtii ' _
SMbra master- ■-■• , ~F -
1 | i j * _.,. ■ ■»-*- # ** * *’ -♦'••"'♦ «hf* «.«*• '-£,., ■, ■ ....,- «»2
A DAIRY FARM ON PURRUMBETE.


i
The Homestead from the Lawn.
the foundations of the present Purrumbcte herd were laid in 1847, when Mr. John Manifold
pin chased and imported some high-class Shorthorn bulls. In 1854 a number of cows were also
bought at high pi ices. At a considerably later date Mr. John James, of Colac, - visited England for
the purpose of sending out stud Shorthorn cattle to be used with the Purrumbete herd. Originally
the held was bred for the object of beef yield. Latterly it has been treated for its merits in producing
dairying cattle. Some of the best dairy cows in \ ictoria have come from it, and Mr. Manifold has
successful!} established the lact that a dual purpose cow can rival any other in quality of milk pro-
duced and in the percentage of butter fat it yields. There is a constant and vigorous demand for both
heifers and bulls of this breeding, because it is well known that not only are they hard of constitution,
but, in addition, whilst the milch cows are all that the dairyman may desire, the steers are easy to sell
because of their frames and their fattening- propensities.
In evolving a dairy herd which has become famous throughout Victoria and beyond its
borders, Mr, Manifold has adopted a perfectly simple plan, and one which might be followed by other
breeders just as easily if they would take the trouble to keep the necessary records. The milk from
each cow is weighed, and samples tested for butter-fat contents. The plan used is to weigh the milk
from each cow once a month, and to test every day in the week for one week in each month. The
results obtained are regarded as being typical of what would be the yield in gross weight of milk and
■ n percentage of butter fat for the whole month, if measurements were taken and records kept for
Purrumbete, Victoria,


MARES AND FOALS.


Star’s Pride.
3 years old Feb., igog. Bred by Mr. W. T. Manifold.
that period. On these returns are based the decisions as to which cows shall be kept and which
culled. The result of the method has been that during the season 1905-6 Mr. Manifold’s three-year-
old pedigree Shorthorn heifers, of which there were thirteen, averaged for the twelve months 583
gallons of milk, from which the butter fat was 289.9 lbs.; that would, valued at rod. per lb., have
been worth an average of £l2 is. nd. per cow, exclusive of the value of the skimmed milk obtained.
The lowest test of butter fat was 4.1 per cent., and the highest 5.4. Among his whole herd individual
cows have yielded up to £22 7s. 6d. worth of butter fat during the twelve months. Some have, of
course, yielded far less, but these are yearly being culled, the bulls from the very best are being
retained for breeding purposes, and the herd is all the time making a steady progress. The average
test for percentage of butter
fat has shown a difference of
from 3.7 per cent, to 6.2 per
cent. One of Mr. Manifold’s
cows on four successive years
averaged 5.2, 5.5, 6.2, and 5.0
per cent, of butter fat respec-
tively, and she was not a
young one at the commence-
ment of those records. The
yield of milk from this cow
in the four periods of lacta-
tion, the period of her being
milked, was as follows: —-
330 days in milk, 395 lbs. of
butter; 240 days in milk, 339
lbs. of butter; 270 days in
milk, 353 lbs. of butter: 210
days in milk, 259 lbs. of but-
ter. Some of the cows milked
successively for over 500 days and returned nearly a lb. of butter a day for the whole time. One in
six periods of lactation milked 1850 days, gave 5335 gallons of milk and 2390 lbs. of butter. Valuing
the latter at iod., the cash return was £99 ns. Bd. or over £l6 per annum. Another in six periods
of lactation milked 1955 days, and gave 2242 lbs. of butter, averaging T. 14 lb. per day.
Hulls and cows from the 1 hirrumbete herd are being extensively used throughout the
Western District and elsewhere, and are doubtlessly exercising an influence as wide as it is beneficial.
Indeed, any dairying district would become more valuable when stocked with these cattle as compared
with the ordinary nondescript description too often seen on dairy farms in this country.
Purrumbete, Victoria.


Prince Juno.
4 years old. Bred by Mr. W. T, Manifold.
p urrumbctc Cl\>bcsba ice .
Since 1893 Mr. Manifold has been an enthusiastic and enterprising breeder of Clydesdale
horses. W hen Mr. John James went to England to purchase cattle for Purrumbete, Mr. Manifold
directed him to secure a Clydesdale stallion. Ihe result was that the entire, Duke of Bernhead,
and two high-class mares were sent out. Unfortunately, one of the latter died during the voyage,
but the other, which arrived safely, was served by Lord Carrick before leaving England, and duly bad
a colt foal, called Star of England. Mr. Manifold was himself in England in 1906, and he purchased
another stallion known as Baron Inch, who is now four years old. Though the latter is too young
for it to be possible to pronounce a verdict on the merit of his stock, the progeny of the former
horses have been highly satisfactory. In addition to these, the owner has been able to get together
a number of other Clydesdales of high class. The stud of this breed now at Lake Purrumbete is
perhaps the largest in Australia. It certainly is one of the best known. A definite type has been
produced, and progress is well maintained by judicious and careful selection.


mt HJMBi .. . jMM&W
A View on the Estate.
Cbc (3ala Instate.
Che property of ni>r. £bmn Currie.
THE Gala Estate is situated about four miles north of Lismore and 22 miles from Camperdown.
Until recently it consisted of about 22,000 acres, but 7000 acres have lately been sold for
agricultural purposes. The run is near the centre of what is known as the great Western
District plain. Ihe country is not of high stock-carrying capacity, but there is no land in any part
of the Commonwealth more healthy for Merino sheep or which will grow a higher class of wool. The
natural features were rather monotonous, consisting of one vast stretch of rolling plains extending
in all directions as far as the eye can reach. The surface undulates very gently, and is free from stone.
About 5000 acres are of granite formation, which is exceptional for that part of Western Victoria, but
the balance apparently owes its origin to the decomposition of volcanic rock which has streamed over
the locality from some of the older of the adjacent extinct volcanoes.
I (Section 12, pages 137-145,)


The Terrace.
The Entrance Gate.
In the first days of pastoral settlement Gala was lightly timbered with scattered honeysuckle,
sheoak, and other native trees. By natural cause, combined with the effect of the stock on the land,
this protection became quite
eliminated, and for years
the estate was bare of trees.
However, since passing into
the possession of the Curries,
extensive plantations have
been established on the pro-
perty. The trees grow
rapidly, and probably no
estate in any part of \ ic-
toria has been more im-
proved in value this way
than Gala. The various
areas now covered by timber
aggregate about 700 acres, and
practically every paddock is well sheltered with great walls of stately and heavily foliaged trees. The
roads for miles are rimmed on both sides with rows of timber, and the wind which whistles
relentlessly over the shelterless plains around is greatly reduced in force and broken as it passes
over Mr. Currie’s property.
Since the plantations have
grown to their present size,
stock are found to keep their
condition better, and the
carrying capacity of the land
has increased, whilst quite
a picturesque appearance has
been imparted to the country.
Sugar gums and wattles
have been extensively used,
whilst there is a large area
about the homestead under
Finns insignis. The planta-
tions were commenced by
the late Mr. John Lang Currie, the father of the present proprietor, and he was one of the very
first Western Victorian pastoralists to carry out tree planting on an extensive scale.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


i $*ppiij|| *-'j ‘ ‘ A * « '„ ** ’ ’ * -' *
The Home Paddock.
The Homestead.
Gala, Victoria.


. -• t ' .'
>,5?’;'.; c ■; , i-t~ .;^8?l
‘ » • 4bi * *"♦ ** !&&&&* <
The Orchard.
Gala Creek.


General View of the Homestead.
(iala is one of the oldest pastoral holdings in Victoria. It was first settled by Mr. J. Brown,
who came there in 1840 from Tasmania. Ile named the place after his birthplace in Scotland. In
1852 the run was purchased by Mr. John Aitken, who in turn sold out to Mr. John Matheson some
four years later. Mr. Matheson, however, did not long remain in possession, for in a few years he
sold the run to Mr. Andrew Lyell, who after holding it a short while, sold it to Mr. Robert Adams.
The next purchaser was Mr. James J. W. Wilson, who at that time (1859) was in partnership with
Messrs. John Wilson and A. Buchanan. In 1871 the run was turned into freehold, and the partnership
was dissolved. Air. J. Wilson taking the eastern half, to which the original name of Gala adhered,
whilst the other portion was called Titanga, a native name. In 1889 Gala was sold by the executors
of the late Mr. J. Wilson to Mr. John Lang Currie, who owned it till the time of his death. The
property then consisted of 20,000 acres. Though owning Titanga and Larra near by, the Curries have
always worked Gala as a separate property. It is now bounded on the south by Gnarpurt, on the
west by Titanga. on the north by Bannongil, and on the east by Mount Bute.
In 1898 Edwin and Allan Currie inherited Gala under their father's will. They formed a
partnership to work the estate, and a year afterwards purchased Mount Elephant, which they added
to it. In 1901 the partnership came to a conclusion, and Mr. Edwin Currie then became absolute
proprietor of Gala.
Gala, Victoria.


A Gala Merino Ram.
The homestead at Gala is one of the finest in Western Victoria. The house, which is a two-
storied bluestone structure, was built in 1871, but it has since been added to and considerably
improved. It lies in a hollow in the plain, and is surrounded on all sides with many acres of well-
established and dense timber. The house is lit throughout with petrol gas, and is sewered, and is
connected by telephone with the public exchange in Lismore. The garden, which covers a large area,
has been kept up to a high standard of excellence for a very long time. It was laid out first by the
late Air. Wilson, who took great interest in beautifying the property. The soil is very rich, and the
sheltering girdle of trees helps to bring the flowers to perfection. The garden is supplied with water
from three large dams. A considerable length of piping has been used in carrying the water over
the grounds and to the various outbuildings.
ahe Sheep.
The carrying capacity of Gala is about a sheep to the acre, and the clip is one of the best known
in Australia. For several years it has topped the local markets. The wool is fine, soft, and of great
length. The sheep are of large frame, and free from wrinkles. They belong to the true Western
Victorian type, and no blood alien to that locality has been introduced into the flock at any time.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Ready foe Shearing.—Flock of 3-year-old Meeino Wethers.
flflie sheep have been bred true to type practically since 1835, and from the beginning of the ’so’s till
now they have ranked among the best-known Victorian strains.
The foundation of the Gala flock of to-day was laid by Mr. John Aitken in 1835. When he landed
in Victoria from the schooner “ Endeavour" he had with him a draft of the finest Merinos he could
get together in Tasmania. He settled at Mount Aitken, near Melbourne, with this stud, and ten
years later he purchased other high-priced Tasmanian sheep. In 1850 he paid what was then the
fabulously high price of £250 for a ram imported from the flock of Prince Lichnowski in Prussian
Silesia. Mr. Aitken’s sheep were considered the best of their day in Victoria, and he probably did more
than any other breeder to help along Australian sheepbreeding in its first stages.
When Mr. Aitkcn purchased Gala in 1852, he sold off the sheep then on it, and restocked with
lo,oco of the Merinos he had bred himself. When the station was bought by Mr. Matheson in
these high-class sheep remained on it. During the following changes of ownership the sheep were
kept on, though for a while they were handled with less skill. When Titanga was taken away from
the Gala run the flock was divided. Before the division Ercildoune rams were extensively used on the
ewes. That was when the Ercildoune sheep were at the height of their fame. The wonderfully silky
lustre of their long soft wool is not likely to be forgotten by pastoralists whose memories carry them
back to the sixties. After 1871 a good deal of Larra blood was used in the Gala sheep. Larra then
Gala, Victoria.


The Drive to the Stables.
Draught Stallion General Gordon.
belonged to Mr. J. L. Currie, and the flock was a very noted one. Barunah Plains was also drawn
on for studs. Inbreeding was practised to a large extent, and the type was firmly fixed. The Gala
sheep have been very success-
ful in competition at shows,
and at Ballarat they have
won a large number of first
prizes.
As is evidenced by their
history the purity of the Gala
sheep from the importation
of the original stock in 1835
till now, cannot be doubted.
Whatever outside blood may
have been introduced has
always brought a repetition
of the characteristics of good frame and high-grade fine-wool so particularly needed in
Western Victoria. “ Bruni” in his book on Australian stud flocks quotes a friend who was
very intimate with Mr. Aitken, and who knew the sheep with which he did so much to build up the
future merit of Western Victorian flocks in general, and the Gala flock in particular, as writing—-
“ The improvement in the
Merino sheep of A ictoria pre-
vious to the origin of the Ercil-
donne and other stud flocks
was owing more to Mr. Aitken
than to any other sheepbreeder
in the country. His aim was
to increase the weight of the
fleece, and to keep up the fine-
ness and density at the same
time. This he accomplished by
adding to the length of the staple
of the wool. He spared no
expense or trouble in introducing
fresh blood into his flock possess-
ing the qualities he desired.
And this extra length of staple
is to-day an outstanding characteristic of the Gala sheep. Shearing is done in a large blnestone
shed fitted with twelve stands. Burgon machines are employed.
r he Pastoral Homes of Australia.


f* * ’ =>~
Two Views in the Garden.
Gala, Victoria,


The Woolshed.
. v J ; .
. jijffl&Mr.'-.- tiffiX** ~ , • ■>- %2a«pl||a|
>. -.. . \ '?vS8h
--; ?V '■, ! .% *' ■' ol '■ •"••
The Drive, showing Timber Belts along the Roadside.


, '' J
■ ' ’■ ; : , - ■ '
.
Draught Mares.
In view of the keen and increasing demand for draught horses, Mr. Currie is applying
considerable attention to producing this variety of stock.
personal.
Mr. Edwin Currie is the fourth son of the late Mr. John Lang Currie, of Larra. For very
many years the Larra sheep were renowned for being one of the best, if not the very best, flocks in
\ ictoria. Mr. J. L. Currie, sen., started breeding in 1844 when he purchased Larra, which he held
continuously from then till the time of his death fifty-four years later. He had arrived in Victoria
in 1841. Mr. Currie himself said that the foundation stock with which he started was of more than
ordinary merit. In 1848 he founded a stud flock and obtained some German-bred rams and ten pure
Camden rams. He bought the latter from the Hon. William Campbell. For the following ten
years he used a continuous supply of Camden rams, and thought highly of their effect on his flock.
He experimented with Saxony and Rambouillet sheep, but did not like their progeny, and cleared
them out. There used to be a very keen demand for Mr. J. L. Currie's rams from all parts of
Victoria and from other colonies. He sold single sheep at prices ranging up to 350 guineas at a
time when such prices, now quite common, were almost unheard of. In the sixties Mr. Currie
established a special stud of sheep, which he called the “ Larra Lustre Alerinos.’’ This stud was
Gala, Victoria


* “V ti * * ▼
J Mil ill
■ J
>*" A A * "*•■ "C
•- ■ : ■-■■■•■-■;-•.;. '•■■ * - **-. ■ ■ ■. •..« ,-v-.. ,^2
On the Golf Links.
founded on the progeny of one remarkable ram which was conspicuous because of the peculiar
whiteness, brilliant lustre, and very long staple of his wool.” The wool from these sheep was
probably unequalled in quality, and it is doubtful if anything produced since has been of higher
value.
Mr. J. L. Currie took a very prominent position among \ ictorian pastoralists, and
his enterprises met with consistent success. He purchased Titanga, as well as Cala and other
properties. Larra was inherited by his eldest son, Mr. John Lang Currie.
Air. Edwin Currie married Laura, the daughter of the late Air. Frank Grey Smith, the general
manager of the National Bank. There are two children, John Clive and Evora Frances.


ILbe Caramut 11'loitb Estate
Zbc property of nbr. Ib. jf. be Xittlc.
CARAMI T NORIH is situated about 30 miles from the town of Hamilton, and an equal
distance from \\ arrnambool, on the main Melbourne to Adelaide road. In the north lie
the Grampian Ranges, like the teeth of some gigantic saw, Mt. William towering above
them all on the extreme horizon. In other directions may be seen several of those curious peaks which
lise abruptly from the surrounding plains, and are so noticeable a feature of this district. These are
extinct volcanoes, and no doubt from them flowed the bluestone which is distributed over the country
in such enormous quantities as to effectually bar cultivation, except in isolated patches.
iEarl\> lbistor\).
Caramut North comprises nearly the whole of the original Caramut Estate, first taken up by
Mi. Muston in 1838, and called Muston’s Greek. It passed into the hands of Messrs. Smith and
Osberney in 1841. These gentlemen took part in the historical battle with the blacks on what is now
known as Lubra Creek. Soon after this they sold out to Mr. Sproat, who in turn sold the estate
to the enterprising Dr. Palmer in 1846. This last gentleman started boiling-down works on the site of
what is now the Caramut Racecourse. Messrs, de Little Bros, acquired the estate from Dr. Palmer
about 1850. In the year 1854 the late Mr. Henry de Little purchased his brothers’ shares, and became
sole owner of Caramut, and carried it on until bis death in 1871. From then on till 1890 the property
was worked by trustees, who appointed Mr. Jas. Todd as manager. When Mr. de Little first acquired
the property, the blacks were very troublesome, and he had to face many hardships in one way and
another. These, no doubt, affected his health, for during the latter years of his life he was very delicate.
\\ hat with bad health and low prices for wool and stock, the estate was so heavily encumbered at
the time of his death that it took the trustees and the present owner many years to get matters
straight.
I he two sons of the late Mr. Henry de Little took charge of Caramut in 1890, and worked it
in partnership, under the management of Mr. H. F. de Little. In 1891 this partnership was dissolved,
Mr. H. F. de Little renting nearly the whole of his brother’s portion.
1
(Section 13. pages 149-160.)


| ■' ’* ■ rJT
% %**** i
'
i.
J*'r £mk
mmf jmm&M
'WexISm 5 * i;
9 «■ -f 1
v ly * : i
From an Oil Painting.
The late Mr. Henry de Little.
p sTli
»' jp
i f*
*Ss| "''I
v
Photo hy Johnstone, O’Shannessy it Co.
Mr. Henry Francis de Little.
Caramut Worth of Co=^a\L
In 1896 Mr. H. F. de Little purchased most of the land he had been previously leasing, and
formed the present Caramut North Estate. As the natural timber was fast dying off and shelter for
The bulk of the property was at one time heavily
timbered with white gum, sheoak, blackwood, and
honeysuckle. Successive fires and natural causes
have, however, destroyed almost all of the native
timber, but in its place plantations are springing
up on every side. Miles of timber belts have
been planted since the great fire of 1900, which
destroyed nearly all plantations existing at that time.
These were mostly of pine, and since that experi-
ence pines have only been planted in the small
paddocks surrounding the homestead, where their
position enables them to be to some extent protected
stock becoming less, in 1905 Mr. de Little purchased
from Mr. Win. Mofifat about 5000 acres of the
estate once known as the Cattle Runs, and now
called The Ranch. This country is fairly heavily
timbered with red gum and sheoak, and afifords
good shelter for lambing ewes, besides being a
change of pastures and conditions.
Mr. de Little is one of the many pastoralists who
have shown their willingness to encourage closer
settlement, and during 1908 sold to local and north-
ern farmers 1000 acres of the Caramut North Estate.
from fire. Blue gums were next tried, but it was found that they soon lost their lower branches
and shot up into tall saplings, and so did not afiford the necessary protection to stock from the biting


THE HOMESTEAD.
Cara mat North. Victoria.


Part of the Garden.
sou’-westers which sweep across the open paddocks in winter and spring. Lately sugar gums have
been almost exclusively sown, and so far have been found to answer the purpose admirably.
The homestead is a handsome and substantial bluestone building situated towards the southern
end of the property, about miles from the pretty little township of Caramut. It is surrounded by
a well-laid-out garden and orchard, both house and garden being watered by two magnificent dams.
These were originally constructed to conserve the enormous quantity of water required in the days
when all sheep were washed before shearing. Both house and stables are lighted throughout with
acetylene qas.
The property as now held comprises some 16,000 acres, subdivided into about thirty paddocks,
and is all sound woolgrowing country. In conjunction is worked 5000 acres of The Ranch, the
change of pastures being found very beneficial to the sheep. Owing to overstocking being unknown,
the land carries a thick sole of grass of various kinds, of which the most noticeable and valuable is
perhaps Danthonia pilosa, or wallaby grass. Kangaroo grass is found over nearly all the country, and
is a good stand-by in the summer if not allowed to grow too rank. The least moisture causes it to
give a green shoot, much appreciated by stock. A curious fact in connection with this grass is that
although it is evidently impossible to propagate it by seed, it will, in paddocks where it has apparently
been eaten out, in a short time again take possession of the place, if fenced off from stock.


ar*JuHfs« ? fff ] iBa r/HB — ji^ll 2
ff ,#^^^3S5i
The Approach to Caramut North.
One of the lessons learned from the disastrous fire of 1900 was in the matter of fencing. At that
time the majority of fences were burned to the ground; in fact, it was possible to ride from Caramut
to Dunkcld, a distance of 30 miles, without opening a gate. It was noticed that in odd places where
posts had been renewed, and the wires stapled instead of run through holes, as was the usual custom,
none of the stapled posts were burned, although in some cases they had been standing for ten years.
In consequence all fences erected since the fire have the wires stapled with ij/Cin. staples, driven in
sufficiently to allow the wires to run. Angle iron standards are used alternately with posts, and the
result is practically a fireproof fence.
The greater portion of the property is watered by natural creeks, which run all the year round.
In the few paddocks that do not contain creeks, tanks and dams have been made, and the water is
pumped into troughs by windmills.
As all the station outbuildings, men’s quarters, woolshed, stables, &c., were razed to the ground
on the day of the great fire previously mentioned, the present buildings are of modern design and
well constructed. The woolshed is a commodious stone building, fitted with thirteen stands of Moffat-
Virtue machines, and with every facility for working the clip. The entrances to the shed, of which
there are three, deserve special mention, as they are all sown down with rye grass and top-dressed
Caramut North, Victoria .


annually. Ihe benefit from this is that the grass forms a dense mat which stands the continual
sheep traffic and effectually prevents dust.
1 he men’s quarters have been built with the view of making the employees comfortable. Each
permanent single hand has his own sleeping room, besides the general reading and smoking room.
Several of the employees being married men, comfortable cottages with every convenience have been
erected for every family. In addition to the usual drafting yards at the woolshed and dip, drafting yards
have been erected at the centre of the property, and again further north, so that sheep may be yarded
with a minimum of travelling.
1 ravelling over the estate one is struck with the precautions taken to guard against destructive
grass fires. A break of from 2]/ 2 to 5 chains in width is burnt on the north and west of the property,
the total length being about 8 miles. Besides this, numerous smaller ones divide the estate into
sections. On bad north wind days all sheep are mustered in the early morning to specially prepared
camps, these camps are mostly in the form of a diminutive paddock, and are securely fenced. Thev
are, wherever possible, in the vicinity of water, so that with water carts filled and horses standing
ready harnessed the full fighting force is prepared to turn out at a moment’s notice. In connection
with fire-fighting appliances a patent beater is carried strapped on to the front of the saddle in place
of the time-honoured man-killing bag. Telephone lines are seen running in all directions on Caramut,
being found invaluable in quickly locating fires, and also in the general working of the property.
Experiments have been made to determine the value of applying artificial manures to the pasture's.
Several varieties have been tried, being spread by a specially-constructed machine, which with one
man and a horse covers from 20 to 30 acres a day. It has been found that the soil responds readily
to treatment, but whether the ranker and richer growth which follows is beneficial to Merino sheep
must be regarded as a question yet to be decided. There can be no doubt that as regards cattle the
carrying capacity of land is greatly enhanced. The manured pastures come away more quickly and
dry off earlier than the unmanured, and results are appreciable for at least three years after the
application.
Gbc Sheep,
The Caramut flock was started about 1850 by Messrs, de Little Bros., but from 1854 the late
Mr. Henry de Little carried it on alone. He imported from Tasmania a number of pure Merino
ewes, but unfortunately there is no record of from what flock they came. They were mated with rams
purchased from Ercildoune. and the progeny formed the nucleus of the present Caramut stud and
flock. In the year 1871. after the death of Mr. Henry de Little, the present stud was started by Mr.
Jas. Todd, who had that year been appointed manager of the Caramut Estate. He selected 100 of the
best ewes from the Caramut flock and put them to Ercildoune rams. Since then no flock rams have
been purchased, the introduction of occasional stud rams being made mostly from Tasmania.
In 1873 a son of the celebrated Sir Thomas was purchased; this ram won the £SO prize at
Hamilton Show, and proved himself a successful sire, being one of the old plain-bodied type, with
The Pastoral Hojhcs of Australia.


*L ■* 4: *■ y>' j r.ffi-**>'**: 'r - ‘ r
Grand Champion Ram, Hamilton Show, 1904, 5, 6, 7 & 8.
Bred by Mr. H. F. de Little.
great symmetry and excellent length and quality of wool. He was also a sheep of great size, as his
live weight was i/o lbs. The stud and flock were carried on for the next nine years with the progeny
of the Sir 1 homas ram and those from Ercildoune. In 1882 another ram of the Sir Thomas strain was
introduced, the price paid for him being 400 guineas. Mr. Todd spoke of this ram as being his idea of
perfection as regards a stud sire, being free from body wrinkles, very symmetrical, and carrying
a fleece of bright, silky wool of great length and character. He proved a great acquisition to the stud.
Since that time, and up to the year 1901, a few Tasmanian sires were purchased, but in the year 1901.
when the craze for wrinkles was about at its zenith, it being almost an impossibility to procure a sire
without an excess of body wrinkles, Mr. 11. F. de Little (who had then been managing the property
since 1891, and who had never departed to any extent from the old plain-bodied type) made an
innovation by purchasing from Mr. Albert Austin for 270 guineas his champion fine-wool grass-fed
ram at the A.S.B.A. Show. This sire nicked well with the Caramut ewes, and left behind him a
number of high-class sheep, including the winner of the grand champion prize for rams at the
Ca.ra.inut North, Victoria.


FLOCK RAMS.


Two-tooth Rams.
A Married Employee’s Well-sheltered Cottage.
Hamilton Show for the last five successive years, which is a record for the district, if not for
Australia. 1 he progeny of the Hamilton champion have also been very successful in the show ring.
In the years 1897 and 1898 the
Caramut North sheep were first
in the scouring contest at Hamil-
ton Show. Since the purchase
of the Wanganella ram the
stud has been bred within it-
self. The constitutions of the
sheep have been kept in view,
whilst close attention has al-
ways been paid to the length
and quality of wool. As an
illustration of the progress
that has been made in the im-
provement of the flock, it may
be mentioned that since 1891 (when Mr. Henry de Little undertook the management), although the
sheep have always been of the plain-bodied type, the weight of wool per sheep has been increased by
no less an amount than 2]/ 2 lbs.
As actual results are the best
test of merit, it may be as well
to give the prices received for
the Caramut North clip at a few
of the sales of recent years.
The sheep there are of the pure
Caramut strain. The returns
are as follows: —In 1908 all the
fleece wool averaged i6d. per
lb.; in 1907, Isj4 ( k P er lb.; in
1906, iSC4 ( I- P er lb.; in 1905.
T4d. per lb.; in 1904, per
lb.; in 1899, I7d. per lb.
Cattle, Sic.
Cattle have, of late years
especially, been looked upon as
a necessary adjunct to the successful working of Caramut North, and the numbers range from
500 to 700, according to the season.
Ca.ra.mut North, Victoria.


Breeding Ewes, carrying Three Months’ Wool.
T „ aw 4 , aML~ j ; ** -jt .. %T-yr. -.. *'"~ -' 5*sr-: _^>f ..'v
flMBSHHHHHBHBHHB9lljjwMMHirijHp^ % ''’ v ' ■ ypr * w . . <g0nr
1 * v, .-*r
*“■ ■ "'..., -
'* ■»»-/ , *- ' ~ £ " * ' ** * % '
r •- ■ .. , • - ■ " ,vj ' * >: ...-«•■ ,<fc .
~~'-' w r* w '-'•' "* \ ' ' • ~ "
■■ -’• £1, ’ * '■ •’’ . , „ vv
-<•>* - ■(WiSBaES*db<.~-. -•. *,.,. ■• i- **•> ..»..>
- T ■ ■ ’• - '* '■' * ■ '*•■ • v. .. ♦ -;• ■’ ;4*.. ,-.,
Breeding Remounts.


Hereford-Shorthorn Cross Cows and Calves.
1 he present herd consists of the Shorthorn-Hereford cross, which is found very suitable to the
country, which unless very lightly stocked, will not fatten except in the spring. The drafts of bullocks
fattened annually about Christmas are eagerly sought after by butchers, and for the last five years have
brought from £lO to £l3 on the ground.
Mr. de Little also goes in on a small scale for horse-breeding. He has about twenty mares,
mostly thoroughbreds and old polo mares, and for years a stout pony of the old Shanter strain was
used. Mr. G. H. Whitehead, of Goodwood, bred this pony, and it has left some fine serviceable stock,
which have quite a name in the district. A great number were purchased for India. When the pony
died it was found well nigh impossible to procure another of the same stamp, so Mr. de Little purchased
a stout, compact, active draught stallion, a bit on the small side, and has put him with the mares. By
this means he expects to breed useful gun horses for the Indian market.
agriculture.
Agriculture has been gone in for a good deal on North Caramut, about too acres being cultivated
annually, but owing to the prevalence of big bodies of stone on the bulk of the country, it has been
found difficult to get a field of more than 40 acres in extent. The land is cultivated on the three-plot
system, and rape is grown as a catch crop. More land is being broken up and cleared each year. All
sorts of experiments have been tried with regard to agriculture—different kinds of manures, shallow
Caramut North, Victoria.


’ T'V v '. - ij ' v ' f- ;* '*[ 1 £/'~" *
' 8,
The Class of Country on Cakamut North.
and deep ploughing, fallow with summer working, early and late crops, to say nothing of an extensive
system of drainage. The results are carefully noted and acted on accordingly.
Taking everything into consideration, this estate, and also the surrounding ones, strike one as
being essentially fine, clean wool-growing properties. The chances are that in spite of the changes which
are looming in the distance, the succeeding generations will find, perhaps to their cost, that year in and
year out the country is better adapted to growing that superfine Merino wool for which it is world-
renowned than any other commodity. In any case experience goes to show that once the natural
pastures are destroyed they never return with the capacity to produce the wool of such excellence as
at the present time.


f
*?/ v . *.,• . :*^0^-■ y? -'
iL . ~ -. pr&gji, s|
$'*\*MSWiqhP'V' />f---;; •'’■■ '■*> ' < ' :?■ H ’®v ’•
The Drive, Mountside.
Cbe Hftutbebuhe an 6 /Pountsibe
Zbc properties of the lEyors. of the late ni>r. peter fPc3ntpre.
MURDEDUKE, the property of the Executors of the late Mr. Peter Mclntyre, lies about six
miles due west of Winchelsea. The estate was bought by Mr. Mclntyre from the
Executors of the late Mr. Arthur Hopkins in September, 1886. and it then consisted of
13,000 acres. Two years later (in 1888) the Mt. Pleasant Estate, containing some 3000 acres, was
purchased from the Hon. S. Austin, and in January, 1900, Mountside, a property of 8000 acres,
was bought from Mr. Walter Tully. The properties are all close together, and are worked from the
Murdeduke and Mountside homesteads.
The estates comprise two classes of volcanic land, which is mostly undulating, and consists
of rolling plains interspersed with stony rises. It lies in the direct line of that stretch of similar
formation extending from the outskirts of the Melbourne suburban area to beyond the South
i
(Section 74, panes ISI - 172.)


The Murdeduke Homestead.
Australian border. Part of the property bears very distinct traces of having at a, geologically speaking,
recent period been submerged in a lava stream, and the stony rises are really the remains of the
waves or wrinkles in the sea of molten rock. The stone has partly decomposed, and forms soil of
an excellent character, being rich in plant food and not readily water-logged in wet weather. Indeed,
one of the problems to be faced in dealing with such land as this is to provide accommodation for
storing water. Tanks made on the surface will not hold water on account of the porous nature of
the ground, and wells with troughs have usually to be resorted to. The plain country is not so recent
in its formation as the stony rises, and though its carrying capacity may not be so high, it has certain
good points which the other is without. For one thing, it will hold surface water, and the moisture
does not evaporate so rapidly during the summer. The soil also is somewhat deeper, and consequently
it is better summer country. In winter time, on the other hand, the stony rises have advantages
which cannot be surpassed in any other country in Australia. The broken surface of the ground,
with the plentiful outcrops of rocks, not only allows the pastures to grow throughout the cold weather,
but affords excellent shelter to the sheep. This naturally in lambing time prevents deaths from
exposure, thus assuring the owner larger returns than if he were in a more exposed situation. Not
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


" v ■■■ ' * ■"* ■•■' •>• . •». ■ •
THE HOMESTEAD, MOUNTSIDE.
Mountsic/e, Victoria.


BEL - . _ Jm i
t v te» & *. jk
' 3 %JOUk^o^m
- • A
i. View of Homestead from Hill. 2. A. Pine Plantation on the Estate.
3. The Entrance Gate.
MOUNTSIDE.


Stud Ewes and Lambs at Murdeduke.
only is the broken country useful for sheep, but it is invaluable for cattle, and helps to keep them in
good condition in the very coldest of weather. The carrying capacity of the whole place is about a
sheep to the acre, and a total of some 30,000 are shorn annually. The shearing is still done by hand.
The grasses on the holdings are of the natural species, and include such varieties as are characteristic
of the best Western Victorian land. The properties are divided into about thirty paddocks.
£bc StOCfT
Mr. Peter Mclntyre, who died on 3rd December, 1908, at the ripe age of eighty-two years
eleven months, was one of the best-known sheepbreeders and woolgrowers of \ ictoria, and was at
different times identified with properties which are famous for the high standard of the clips they
produce. In the early portion of his pastoral career he was associated for several years with the late
Hon. Niel Black. After that Mr. Mclntyre took up the management of Hopkins Hill, which then
was a very extensive holding belonging to the late M,. John Moffatt. He held the position for
twenty years, and most of his family were born during that time. When at Hopkins Hill he gained
a valuable insight into the technique of woolgrowing. The sheep there were considerably above the
ordinary standard, the country was well adapted for growing high-class wool, and the clip had already
attracted considerable attention. Indeed, the progress made was in 1 small degree due to the efforts
of Mr. Mclntyre, who was not one to allow such an opportunity for gaining experience to slip by him.
At that time the woolgrowing industry had not nearly reaches the advanced stage it has since attained,
and the late owner of Murdeduke was certainly one of the pioneer fine-wool producers of Victoria.
M urde fluke anti Mountslde, Victoria


■ V-
Photo hy Kricheldorff,
The late Mr. Peter McIntyre.
He soon showed himself to have the necessary powers of observation and accurate judgment so
necessary to a successful stockbreeder, and throwing himself with ardour into the business, he
achieved great results at a period when developments, such as may now be reached by plain sailing
along well-marked roads, were matters of uncertain speculation.
When Mr. Mclntyre relinquished the management of Hopkins Hill, he obtained a lease of
Mawallock Station, about twelve miles from Beaufort. The property consisted of about 21,000 acres,
and contained stony rises, volcanic plains, and light timber country. It would have been difficult to
have found better wool-growing country on which to establish a first-class flock of Merinos elsewhere
in Victoria. It was well adapted to growing large-framed sheep, the conditions were favourable
to the production of high-grade fleeces, and the rises provided land on which surplus stock could be
fattened to advantage before being sold. Mr. Mclntyre worked Mawallock for twelve years, and
during that time he established a first-class flock of Merinos as well as a valuable herd of Hereford
cattle. These formed the foundation blood of the stock now on Murdeduke and Mountside.
Ercildoune sheep were used when starting the stud. At that time the Ercildoune rams were famed
throughout Australia for their large and symmetrical frames and excellent quality of the wool.
With a good commencement of this nature, Mr. Mclntyre was not long in creating a high-class flock.


Two-tooth Stud Rams at Murdeduke.
Royal Admiral, two-year-old Hereford Bull at Mountsidk.
Hlurdeduke and Hlountside, Victoria,


w
General View of the Homestead.
_• w '^~
Bhr fr iis gp^.
Part of the Garden.
MOUNTSIDE.


Scotch Thistle.
4- year-old Station-bred Draught Stallion.
Group of Herefords.
His sheep became famous throughout the colonies, and the wool won prizes at exhibitions in many
countries. In 1879 ne won a certificate of merit at the Sydney International Exhibition for a bale
of washed ewes’ wool; at Calcutta in 1883 he took
a prize in the International Exhibition with Merino
fleeces, and during the same year his wool also
won a diploma and a silver medal at the Amsterdam
International and Colonial Exhibition for Merino
fleece wool.
Great consistency of judgment was shown
throughout in selecting the rams used in the flock.
Besides the before-mentioned Ercildoune sheep,
others from Barunah and Wanganella were at differ-
ent times introduced, and in each case quality and
length of wool was aimed at combined with a large
and valuable carcase. In purchasing these sheep Mr.
Mclntyre probably got the best then available, and
when he afterwards selected rams from Belle Vue,
Tasmania, care was taken to maintain the length
of staple and size of frame, whilst adding something to the density and weight of the fleeces. As a
consequence the flock of to-day is of robust constitution, free from body wrinkles, nicely developed
on the neck, well grown, and pro-
duces excellent clips. The wool
always commands a satisfactory
figure, though, of course, the actual
price per lb. is not so great as it
would be from the same sheep on
lighter country. Still the cash
yield per head leaves very little
to be desired, and owing to the size
and shape of the sheep, the surplus
stock, when offered for sale, usually
top the market for prime “fats ”
Murdeduke still carries a herd
of pure Hereford cattle. They
are descended from the old
Hopkins Hill strain and from the best bulls obtainable outside. At various times sires have been
bought from Australian herds of proved merit.
Murdeduke and Mountside, Victoria,


> '*
' : 'j£ '.
* , : S ' ■'.
.-^». *f
Photo by Talma.
Mr. C. D. McIntyre.
Photo by Lafayette.
The late Mr. A. J. McIntyre.
Z\k late ni>r. peter Sous.
Mr, Peter Mclntyre was survived by his widow, two sons, and six daughters. Charles Duncan,
one of the sons, is the managing trustee of his late fathers estate. He was horn at Hopkins
and, with the exception of four years spent at the
Geelong Grammar School, he has all his life been
in the environment of the pastoral industry, having
been tutored in* sheep and cattle breeding by his
father. He inherited the elder’s natural taste for
the business, and has taken a prominent place in
the wool-growing world. In 1906 he acted as judge
of strong-wool Merinos at the Canterbury Show,
New Zealand, and in 1908 he was appointed judge,
along with Mr. Thompson, at the Australian
Sheepbreeders’ Show in Melbourne.
In 1900 Mr. C. D. Mclntyre married Miss Maggie
Armytage, the daughter of Mr. Felix Armytage.
There are two sons and a daughter. He is a
member of the Council of the Geelong Agricultural
Societv. One of his hobbies is coursing, and he is an enthusiastic supporter of that sport
His brother, Mr. Andrew John McIntyre, who
died on the 15th May, 1909, lived at Deep Dene,
which was purchased from Mr. Herbert Holland in
March, 1908. Deep Dene lies about 6 miles south
of Birregurra, and contains 2900 acres, mostly of rich
river flats. The late Mr. A. J. McIntyre married
Miss Armstrong, daughter of Mr. Robert Arm-
strong, Salt Creek, and left one son and three
daughters. At the time of death he was a member of
the Winchelsea Shire Council. On several occasions
he acted as judge of ponies at agricultural shows,
Jmprovcmcnts.
The homesteads at Murdeduke and Mountside
have been improved up to a standard of considerably
more than ordinary beauty and comfort. Acetylene gas is laid on throughout, and the houses are sewered
on the septic tank system. About 100 acres of plantations have been established on the runs, and have


THE HOMESTEAD, MUKDEDUKE.
M urdeduke, Victoria .


The Rabbit Pack.
The tame fox in the foreground hunts with the dogs.
Ploughing at Murdeduke.
reached maturity. They consist chiefly of wattles and sugar gums, and form \ei} welcome shelter
the cold winds which so frequently sweep up from the Southern Ocean and across the naturally bare
plains of Western Victoria. The way in which the trees grow shows that they will thrive on the rich
volcanic soil, and that an un-
limited area might be put
down successfully in plan-
tations if land could be spared
for the purpose.
There are three bores on
the property. A good flow of
water is obtained 118 ft. from
the surface. Sinking is
through masses of hard ig-
neous rock, but the supply is
unfailing, and proves very
healthy for stock. There
is also a number of wells
scattered throughout the run,
which bring water from considerably less depth, but are very certain in their supply. This regularity
of flow is characteristic of similar underground drifts in volcanic country.
About 200 acret have been put under lucerne at Murdeduke. The leguminous plant proved to
be well suited to the natural conditions, and provides most valuable supplies of green fodder at times
of the year when most needed.


B£state
(The property of ni>r. Mai ter Ibopftino.
THE homestead at Wormbete, the property of Mr. Walter Hopkins, lies about five miles due
south of the Winchelsea Railway Station, and a mile from the Barwon River, which flows
through part of the run. The holding has been in the hands of the same family for three
successive generations. In the very earliest days of pastoral settlement in Victoria, or, rather, the then
Port Phillip district of New South Wales, Mr. Henry Hopkins, the grandfather of the present owner,
leased Wormbete from the Crown. Grazing at that time was carried on in the most primitive fashion,
and all the runs were nnfenced. It was almost impossible under those conditions for any single settler
to work his land alone, and the neighbours used to join together in mustering the stock and keeping
them on the holdings of their respective owners. The runs were devoted entirely to cattle, and as
practically the only value in stock was represented by the worth of hides and tallow, not much
attention was generally given to the breeding. Shorthorns were bred on Wormbete, because they
were best suited to the natural conditions. Thanks to the rush of population in the early fifties, when
gold was discovered, fat stock improved in value wonderfully, and from then on more trouble was
taken to produce a better class of beast. The estate in question, with its foundation of Shorthorns,
soon took a leading place in this respect.
The property was acquired as freehold by the late Mr. John Rout Hopkins, a son of the original
lessee, between the years 1850 and 1855. The area was then about 20,000 acres, but shortly
afterwards some selectors who had settled on the block were bought out, which added to the total
area, besides giving it greater compactness. When the profits derived from pastoral enterprise began
to increase with the growth of population, Wormbete, like most other estates, was greatly improved.
First, the boundary was completely fenced, and the run divided into a large number of small paddocks,
after which the greater portion of the cattle were cleared off and Merino sheep substituted. Mr. John
Hopkins had previously received an excellent grounding in woolgrowing. At that time Tasmania
was a good deal ahead of the mainland in sheepbreeding, and he had worked for some years with the
1
(Section 13, pages 173-180.)


Part of the Verandah.
The Drive.
Gibsons, who were then, as
their descendants are now,
among the most successful
breeders of Merinos in the
island. Mr. Henry Hopkins
had previously realised how
much of the profitableness of
the place could be increased
by substituting sheep for
cattle, and he gave an expert
buyer in Tasmania instructions
to make a selection there
of rams and ewes suitable for
forming the foundation of a
flock in Victoria. With the ma-
terial thus found for him, his
son was able to apply, when he
took charge of the property, the knowledge he had gained, and thus the Wormbete type was developed
and fixed. Inbreeding was afterwards practised with success. The largest number of sheep ever shorn
on the property in a year was
26,000.
Among the other early im-
provements was the excavation
of tanks and dams. In the
days of first settlement the
Barwon River and Wormbete
Creek provided ample water
for the great mobs of cattle
which roamed through the
trees and over the open grass
lands. As the country was
cjuite unfenced, cattle were able
to, and would, travel consider-
able distances in search of
drink when the weather was hot
and dry. However, when the
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
Wormhete, Victoria •


Jj*-' ",
"*• , <► , ' ’ '■ y #***
Wormbete Creek.


I, *r 'M n| km*
*' >; W ■ jr -p- '.^jjjj&r
. ... j .. TjjKjt j j k t
_ ''m ■", jHflr "-t
Cypress Tree, planted in 1864.
land was subdivided into paddocks portions of the run were cut off from the natural water supplies,
and it thus became necessary to devise means of storage.
Originally the estate was fairly heavily timbered. A remarkable feature about it was the great
number of wild cherry trees that grew there. Latterly this picturesque class of timber has become
very scarce. Other varieties of trees have also been thinned off by artificial means as well as natural
agencies, and the country has taken quite an open appearance. Liberal belts of timber have, however,
been left in all the paddocks for stock shelter, which materially add to the beauty of the country.
Latterly the property has been very much reduced in area. After the death of Mr. John
Hopkins portions of the estate were from time to time sold, and finally the remainder was divided
among the family. The homestead block is worked on the lines of a model pastoral estate. A
quantity of lucerne is grown for the sheep, and it thrives well, adding greatly to the carrying capacity
of the country. The rainfall is liberal and fairly regular, and the soil appears to possess those
constituents needed by leguminous crops.
The Wormbete homestead is one of the oldest in the Western District of Victoria. It is a
rambling comfortable house, of the old-fashioned type. In 1861 two wings were added to it, and since
then modern improvements have been installed. The site chosen was just behind the Wormbete Creek,
and there is a delightful orchard stretching over some acres in front of the house, whilst a pleasant
flower garden surrounds the residence.
Wormbete, Victoria.


The late Mr. Henry Hopkins.
4
f Pi
I IfeSiWKr-^
» Jk n
--> fatf- '■-': - f j'.fj i -Aw
Photo by Sarony.
Mr. v
The late Mr. John Rout Hopkins.
personal.
Mr. Henry Hopkins was a pioneer of the Australian woolgrowing industry, and his name is
likely to be remembered by subsequent generations, not only because die Hopkins River was called
corner of Collins and Russell streets, and in 1866,
when it was decided to build a new church on the
after him, but also because he was the first to export
wool from Tasmania. He conducted a general
agency business for pastoralists in the island State,
and as a result accumulated a considerable fortune.
He was closely associated with the affairs of the
Independent Church, and held the distinction of
having laid the foundation stone of the first church
ever built in Melbourne. This was erected at the
same site, Mr. Hopkins came over specially from
Tasmania to lay the foundation stone. The second
building is the handsome brick structure which now
stands on the Collins-street hill.
Mr. John Hopkins succeeded his father as owner
1 Wormbete, and took considerable interest
n public affairs, as well as being a keen station
manager and a skilful breeder of Merino sheep. He
was for some yeai of the Legislative Assembly. He was appointed a member of the old
Rote' Board, which mought him into touch with local government matters. He had a great deal to
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


r. Bridge over Wormbete Creek. 2. Outbuildings at ± ad.
3. Entrance Gate to Homestead.
Worm beta, Victoria.


JhhL'**£' V. *ytfH|
A General View of the Wormbete Homestead.
do with the passage of the first Local Government Bill through Parliament, for which he received the
title of “ The Father of Local Government in Victoria,” the late Mr. Service inventing the name. Lie
also held the position of president of both the shires of Winchelsea and Barrabool on several
occasions, besides being mayor of Geelong and chairman of the Municipal Association at different
times. Apart from his public duties, Mr. John Hopkins was a great supporter of rowing, and w r as
president of the Corio Bay Rowing Club, Geelong. In his young days he would think nothing of
riding into Geelong, 25 miles, train for a race, and ride another 25 miles home again. Two of his
sons (Henry and Ernest) were on different occasions members of Victorian crews in the intercolonial
eight-oar races, and in each race they rowed in Victoria won. Mr. John Hopkins was also an
enthusiastic yachtsman, and was for some time Commodore of the R.V.Y.C., Melbourne. He was a
member of the Church Assembly, being their chairman of committees on many occasions.
Mr. Walter Hopkins, the present owner of Wormbete, is the eldest surviving son of the late
Mr. John Hopkins. He was educated at the Church of England Grammar School, Geelong (during
the period in which the late Mr. J. B. Wilson was head master), and matriculated at the Melbourne
University. Like his father, he takes a practical interest in local government affairs. He has been
a member of the Winchelsea Shire Council for many years, and has occupied the presidential chair.
Mr. Hopkins devotes considerable attention to the working of his property, which is regarded as being-
one of the most thoroughly managed in the neighbourhood. The area is not very large, and he has
adopted many methods for adding to the productiveness of the estate.


The Approach to the Homestead.
XUbe (3lenonmston Estate
£bc property of nr>r. S. (5. Black.
GLENORMISTON Estate, the property of Mr. Steuart Gladstone Black (second son of the
late Hon. Niel Black), lies about eight miles to the north-east of Terang, near the foot
i of Mt. Xoorat. The road from the railway station is well made, and provides a very
pleasant run through rich agricultural and dairying land, all of which has been subdivided, and is
turned to good use by prosperous-looking farmers, most of whom are freeholders. Some of the land
in this district has recently cost purchasers as much as £B9 per acre, and the owners appear to be
thriving excellently, even after paying that high price. Many of these men started in the district
without capital, obtaining their first experience in dairying by working properties on the share system.
Part of the original Glenormiston run was sold some years ago, without improvements except some
fencing, and then fetched €4O per acre. This was before the butter export trade had been properly
(Section T6. pages JSJ-792.)


The Homestead.
• ** a *&•.«*v~j.
% >3fy ***& :: &ik
v* ■■ 2;, -> 5j^ftJs
; . ' **%, 9
* 'M- JB> | Mr ’ a I . '»>• > *p •^'■'**®Hi
W'B .... -. J ' ,^’l 'K>.v^^EB
Part of the Drive.


The Glenormiston Butter Factory.
The Home Farm.
established, and when the value of such land was much lower than it is now. Most of the settlers
on Glenormiston started with borrowed money on practically unimproved land, and yet to-day all
have credit balances at the
bank, and some of them run
motor cars. The farms are
well kept, the improvements
are substantial, and the
houses comfortable. There
is probably not a place in
Victoria where the develop-
ment of dairying industry
has made more steady or
substantial progress than
round Terang.
On the way to Mr. S. G. Black’s estate from Terang the visitor passes through the village of
Noorat —a township which is fast springing into prominence. Quite a large hotel has recently been
built, and there are everywhere signs of prosperity and stability. On leaving that centre, the road
skirts round the foot of Mt. Noorat, and in so doing passes the gates of the Alt. Noorat homestead.
This is a stately house which stands conspicuous in a terraced garden, with a forest of pine trees and
the mount for a background.
Here, as further on, the coun-
try is exceedingly fertile,
being of volcanic origin. At
the time of writing—Christ-
mas, 1909 —the grass in the
paddocks was green and lush,
and the lucerne, cultivated
without irrigation, was mak-
ing great growth. Meadow
hay was being cut and stacked
in great quantities, while the
crops of oats, which had just
been harvested, told a further
tale of the productiveness of the soil.
The famous Glenormiston butter factory is situated close to the gate leading
into the Glenormiston Estate. This factory turns out one of the best brands of Victorian butter
Glenormiston, Victoria,


The Lower Drive.
at an average rate, during December, of about 3 tons per day. Ihe factory itself is an up to date
establishment. It is built of bluestone, which, besides being solid, keeps remarkably cool in summer.
The drive from the entrance g'ate to the house is somewhat less than half a mile in length,
and is shaded with a double row of mature English trees. The house is built on a stony rise, and
is one of the most charmingly situated in Victoria. The fertility of the soil and the 28 in. of
annual rainfall combine to give great luxuriance to the wealth of shrubs which surround the buildings.
The bright green of the English trees, the dark hues of the Pinus insignis, and the mixed foliage
of the indigenous species give a brightness to the scenery unique under Australian conditions. Ihe
garden falls away gently from the house and joins a meadow, where cattle graze knee-deep in
waving green grass, quite unlike anything found in the drier parts of the State. There is a tower
at the top of the house, and from there a very widespread view is obtained of the surrounding
dairying country, stretching away past Camperdown and towards Colac. The most
conspicuous feature is the great number of old volcanoes which dot the landscape on every
side. These conical hills are usually quite treeless, and each one stands in a kind of solitary
grandeur. Some of them are simply the worn stumps of what they once were; but it is unlikely
any of them were ever very high. They are the origin of the district’s great productiveness.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Two Views in the Garden.
Glenormiston, Victoria .


The Hall,
■
The Drawing Room.


The Homestead from the Drive.
The history of Glenormiston dates back to the earliest days of Victorian pastoral settlement,
when the land, together with other properties in the locality, was taken up by a syndicate of
Tasmanians. In 1839 they sold out to a company consisting of Messrs, the late Hon. Niel Black,
Thomas Stenart Gladstone, A. S. Finlay, and William Steuart. The property was then called
Strathdownie, the name being changed to Glenormiston in 1840. In 1869 this partnership was
dissolved and the properties divided. On the division, Glenormiston fell to the lot of Mr. A. S.
Finlay, and Mr. S. G. Black bought back the homestead when the estate was subdivided in 1889 by
the Land Company of Australasia, who were at that time the owners. In the early clays a great deal
of the land was very heavily timbered, and until comparatively recently—eleven or twelve years ago
—was devoted almost entirely to cattle breeding and fattening.
The portion of the Glenormiston Estate now belonging to Mr. S. G. Black covers an area of
about 1750 acres. There are eleven tenant farmers on this, and all but one pay a straight-out rent.
The rent is low, and does not in any case come to within 5 per cent, of the market value of the
land. Thanks to the action of the numerous volcanoes the soil on the Hats is wonderfully fertile,
Glenormiston, Victoria


A Wealth of Bloom near the Glass House.
and mixed farming and dairying is the use to which it is generally put. Behind the house the
stony nature of the ground renders it less valuable for agricultural purposes. Great boulders rise
above the surface, and a few feet, often only inches, below the top the formation is almost entirely
of volcanic rock. This land has been planted with a large number of mixed trees, which shelter the
house from the northerly winds. Pines, gums, and English trees cluster together in such profusion
that they give the impression of forming a natural forest. They cover some hundreds of acres, and
provide nesting places for numberless native birds.
A visitor to Glenormiston should not fail to climb up Mt. Noorat at the back of the house.
Not only is the old volcano itself of interest, but the outlook commanded from its summit is probably
as comprehensive a view as can be obtained of the Western District from any spot. There are
five craters on the mount. The formation of at least one of these is still quite perfect, there being
hardly any sign of the action of the weather. The mountain, especially near the top, is a mass of
undecomposed rock and hard grit, and bare of vegetation. The Black Bros, have established a
look-out here, connected with their various homesteads by means of telephone. This has frequently
been found very effective in providing early information of the approach of a bush fire.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A Bank of Lilies.
A Pleasant Walk.
G/enormlston, Victoria.


"■&■’ Nli *TKT N M >mZPx "'Zri^
Dairy Cattle in the Home Paddock.
_jWf_. --j^ppn 1 i ' iiiiiiiiw
£ &‘’-v . iw I* ,C^L ”' rial j p'J^Wrr^
The Hall.
East from the top of Mt. Noorat is to be seen the extensive sweep of the country which once
comprised Glenormiston and the other holdings belonging to the late Hon. X T iel Black. Ihe landscape
is dotted thick with the cot-
tages of farmers, and stretch-
ing away for very many
miles are the same signs
of closer settlement and in-
tense culture. As far as
the eye can see there are fer-
tile plains, volcanic hills,
and lakes. But when you
look away to the north you
see one of the most remark-
able panoramas of open land
to be found anywhere in Australia. There for eighty unbroken miles aie the western
wheat plains—that wonderful belt of country that so fascinated Major Mitchell on his
journey of exploration be-
fore settlement began. Some
eighty or ninety miles away
lies the blue outline of
Mt. Cole. Further west
is Mt. Mistake. Still fur-
ther along the horizon
lie the rugged Grampians,
visible from Mt. William
to Mt. Abrupt. Then to
the north-east lies Bunin-
yong —a solitary peak on
the far side of Ballarat,
and more than seventy miles
away. Practically the whole
of the intervening country
is one huge uniform wheat
plain.
Besides Glenormiston, Mr. S. G. Black owns The Sisters—another rich dairying property lying
about ten miles west of Glenormiston. IT is area there some few years ago amounted to about
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A Dairy Farmer’s Home on the Glenormiston Estate.
Mangel-Wurzels for Dairy Cattle.
Glenormiston, Victoria .


A Peep of the House.
12,000 acres, but the majority of that has recently been sold to dairy farmers —in nearly every case
to the tenant who had previously rented the farm. The balance is under lease, but the owner is
gradually reducing his property as opportunities lo sell present themselves. Ihe Sisters derives its
name from the character of a very old weather-worn volcano which stands on the property. Two
portions of what was a crater still stand, and bear the appearance of sister hills. A peculiar
coincidence is that whilst Mt. Noorat was one of the most recent Western District volcanoes in
activity, The Sisters must have been one of the oldest.


Merino Ewes and Lambs.
flfoelton park lEstate.
Zbc property of flftr. Ibarvcv Patterson.
THE Melton Park Estate, which lies about 23 miles from Melbourne, comprises a portion of the
famous old Green Hills Station, and was purchased by Mr. Harvey Patterson, the present
owner, in 1889. At the time of the sale the holding contained some 7500 acres, but about
2000 have since been sold. It is mostly open plains and box-timber country. A considerable
proportion of the latter has been ringbarked and cleared, but belts of trees have been left for
ornamental purposes and shelter for stock. Apart from the green trees purposely left standing, the
land is being completely cleared of dead wood and stumps, so as to be fit for agriculture. To assist
in this direction a traction engine is employed in pulling up old stumps. The thorough elimination
of the dead timber has given a park-like appearance to the estate.
The majority of Melton Park consists of volcanic country, whilst a small proportion is of
Silurian formation. The origin of the former evidently dates to a period more remote than that
during which most of the volcanic country of Victoria was formed. hrom to to 12 ft. of soil now
covers the sheet of lava, and the stones have long since decomposed, so that the ground is in many
I (Section 17, payes 193-200.)


- * - . ' • ’ »***■ 1 - ■■-.
— r . “ ...
..
A Flock of Melton Merinos.
places ready for immediate cultivation. The rock beneath is of great thickness, and in one spot where
a diamond drill bore was put down it penetrated a layer of lava of no less than 90 ft. Beneath the
rock there was a gutter of quartz wash, but it did not contain payable gold.
The homestead is built on the rim of an extinct volcano. Near to the house lies a small lake,
containing in wet seasons some 10 ft. of water, which .obviously is the old crater, as it is almost
surrounded with a circular bank. The soil about here is very rich, and volcanic stone is still to be
found in places on the surface.
(I be Sbccp.
A good deal of attention has been bestowed at Melton Park on Merino sheep, which have been
bred from pure Tasmanian blood. Stud rams and ewes were bought at different times from the
Messrs. Taylor, the Messrs. Wm. Gibson and Sons, and Messrs. James and Thomas Gibson. Some
of these were by the well-known sires Golden King, Wool Prince, Iron Sides, Priam, Harmony, and
Primus. Many of the sheep were secured at high prices. The ram Conquest was purchased from Mr.
Thomas Gibson, Eskvale, for 600 guineas. Conquest is by Harmony, by Survivor, by the grand
champion ram Primus. He shows his breeding to a pronounced degree, and is densely packed with
wool. Last year he cut the phenomenal weight of 42 lbs. Out of a shipment of Melton Park Merinos
sent some little time ago to South Africa one took first prize at a leading show there.
The rugged range of timbered hills which, stretching across the northern horizon. “forms so
charming and picturesque a background to Melton Park, is not without its disadvantages from a
sheepbreeder’s point of view. Considerable difficulty has been experienced in keeping down rabbits,
and though in a recent drive over the estate not one of the rodents was sighted, the cost necessarily
incurred in the past has been very heavy. Foxes also cause great damage, as during lambing time
they come down from the ranges to the open country, and each year a large number of lambs are
destroyed by them,


A View on the Estate.
The Homestead.
Melton Park, Victoria*


'
Red Polled Norfolk Bulls.
Red Polled Norfolk Cows.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


**w / >^ r
( ■ y. . rjSv.,
* ” f t * *.' .. r '* ' * ** ' * * -
- '. " •*: . ' - ; ; ' * * - r; v •*
Yearlings.
• ■ <*♦ •
■■ , ■ ■ "■ • -* , ■, -*-rr:-r*
r ? - * **• , — ;
* '■ ■ *
' ■ * > -- - •
Brood Mares.
Melton Park, Victoria,


vSr irimi m H
• - <• ** c 3f>r-' v :,•; v ''t-~ * >is^'.■^^A.v r ( , *>,*■
.* * vv&SSWmHI
Wizard.
Menschikoff.
Cbc Cattle.
The Melton Park cattle comprise one of the 4ASM
prettiest herds in Victoria. They are Red Polled
Norfolk, whch are famed for their beef and milking pro-
perties, being practically Shorthorns without having horns.
They are large-framed, heavy-weight beasts. A feature of
great value about them is that when crossed with other
breeds the progeny is hornless. They are also very hardy, and
in poor country or in adverse seasons remain in good con-
dition. Mr. Patterson has gained most of the prizes offered
for this class of cattle at the Royal Agricultural Society's Melbourne Show. Wizard, by Magician
(imp.) from Ruby Spot—Magician being by Laurette (imp.) from Spot (imp.)—gained first prize in
1905 and the champion prize in 1906 and 1907; Conjuror, by Magician from Meda, by Primate from Mirth,
secured second prize at Melbourne Royal Agricultural Society’s Show in 1905. Mr. Patterson has in
Red Emperor a full brother to Red Empress, a cow which won first prize at Sydney, Wagga, Albury,
Corowa, and at the Royal Agricultural Show, Melbourne. He is by Belmont Regent, from Red
Empress 3rd. Belmont Regent was by Lauretta (imp.) 1563 from Spot (imp.) 5136. The imported
cows at Melton Park are by the following English bulls : —Pendant, by Dexter from Palm : Emperor,
by Cromwell from Press, by Core from Jago from Silent Woman; Columbus ; Brutus: and Defender.
Cbe Iborscs.
The Melton Park horse stud contains some of the best blood in Australia. Both Mr. and Mrs.
Patterson take a keen interest in the thoroughbreds, and there are on the property some of the most
promising young stock one could wish * j to see. In addition to twenty-five brood mares,
the stallion Menschikoff and the foals, about a
dozen horses are in training (August, 1909). Most
of these are stylish-looking yearlings, and in the
string is Delaware, who ran so great a race in the 1908
Melbourne Cup. After making most of the pace in that
event. Delaware finished third, without being properly
ridden out.
Other horses in work (August, 1909) are the three-
year-olds Tinker Bell, by Wallace —Vendetta, and
Baymore, by Aphorist—Warrawing. Among the two-
year-olds are Lord Kilcheran, by Kilcheran—Fan
Tan, Tobasco, by Majestic—Becky Sharp, and Lady
Maorina, by Stepniak—Reel.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


#_
vv, '
T" * _v «*n ■•^YT_.■«’_ ,«■«*,
i. Exercising the Horses. 2. On the Training Track.
3. The Stables.
Melton Park, Victoria.


The~Melton Park Trainer’s Cottage.
Menschikofif is by Stepniak from Pibroch. His record on the New Zealand turf has probably
never been equalled there or elsewhere. As a two and three year old he started nineteen times, won
fifteen races, including the Great Northern Derby and Canterbury Cup, and was second four times.
He then sprung a tendon, and did not race again. Before being purchased by his present owner, he
was used on mares in New Zealand, and his stock have already made their mark. Armlet is one
of them, and she holds the seven-furlong record for Australia and New Zealand, having covered the
distance in x min. secs.
Menschikofif is a very shapely brown horse of about 15 hands 3 in. high. Besides showing
great power and weight-carrying ability, he has an abundance of quality. He is particularly well
built on the back, loins and quarters, and has a well-set-up forepart, with a strong crested neck and
a small shapely head. The proof of the stallion’s merit is, however, to be found in his progeny, and
one could not but be struck by the ten foals by this horse at Melton Park. They are notable both
for their size and likeness to their sire. All of them are short and powerful on the back, strong
in the loins and hindquarters, and have their heads well set up. There is certainly not one among
them with the slightest tendency to weediness.
Among the Melton Park brood mares is a winner of the Oaks in Litigant, by Martini Henry
from Leonie. A very fine yearling filly is in training from this mare. Other striking-looking
mares are by Bill of Portland, Pilgrim’s Progress, Light Artillery, Wallace, St. Swithin, and other
notable sires.
There are two excellent training tracks on Melton Park. One of these is two miles in length,
and the other one mile and three-quarters.


•: riBiyi^
n’ifjlk ii "'<•''■■ ” »'7^*'
••‘afaflljP * 5 ' * H w . v- -*■ ., .TTXXn- - r - •**• —^
- “ 4 ati 5 -
Mob of Merino Ewe Lambs ready to Shear.
UBarunab (Mains BEstate
the property of fll>r. James IKussell.
BARUNAH PLAINS is one of the finest woolgrowing estates in Western Victoria. The area
is 51,000 acres, made up of volcanic stony rises and hard plains. There are also some
swampy lands on the property, which as a whole is practically devoid of natural timber.
Being of volcanic origin, the country is particularly healthy for stock, whilst the climate is all that
can be desired for woolgrowing purposes. The grass is sufficiently nourishing to grow big-framed
sheep, and the general conditions are favourable to evolving hardy constitutions.
The homestead lies about 30 miles due west of Geelong. The run is included in the Great
Western Victorian Plain, but for various reasons it is less fitted for agricultural purposes than many
other portions of the same belt of land. It is impossible to plough the stony rises, whilst the plains
(Section 78, panes 201-212.)


Front of the House.
Part of the Garden, showing Roses on Two Tank Stands.


View from the Tank Stand, looking South-east.
consist of a hard clay that can only be cultivated with difficulty. Some time ago an effort was made to
grow lucerne for sheep feed, but it was found that the plants died out after two or three years, and the
attempt was abandoned. The Warrambine Creek Hows through the estate.
i he property was founded in the very early days of pastoral settlement by Mr. A. Hopkins, who
after a time disposed of it to Mr. James Austin. The next owners were Messrs. T. Russell and Co.,
and since then it has never passed out of the hands of that family. They sold to Messrs. G. Russell
and Sons, from whom it afterwards passed to Messrs, j. and A. Russell, and finally to Mr. James
Russell, who is now the sole proprietor.
The estate has been subdivided into ninety-five paddocks, and in other ways greatly improved.
The homestead and its environs are among the most comfortable to be found anywhere in Victoria.
The house itself is a bluestone structure built of rock quarried on the estate. Part of it was put up
in the forties, and it has from time to time been added to, and now forms a most commodious dwelling.
The garden has been tastefully laid out, and is well kept. An electric lighting plant has been installed.
Enough electricity can be stored in the batteries to last for a week, and during shearing time twenty
Wolseley machines are driven by the same power. The lighting extends to the stables, and the power
is used for cutting all the chaff and firewood used on the place. The house and quarters arc sewered on
the septic tank principle.
Barunah Plains, Victoria.


Mr. G. K. Russell’s House (just built).
The property is excellently watered by means of tanks and windmills. Originally very large
sums were spent in boring, but at a later date Mr. Russell found he obtained the best results by using
a divining rod. His first efiforts with this instrument were, however, discouraging. Following the
indications of the rod, he put down a hole which tapped a stream so weak that it dried within a few
hours. Pie was afterwards induced to continue the bore for another 9 ft., when a splendid supply was
obtained. Since then he has used the rod with success on many portions of the run. The water has
generally been obtained at depths ranging from 30 to about 100 ft. It is slightly brackish, but stock
like it, and it has proved to be very healthy. Altogether, there are some twenty windmills working
on the estate. In addition, there are three or four waterholes, catching the surface flows, in each
paddock. The plains country is admirably suited to holding surface water without any loss through
soakage.
Plantations have been established in many parts of the property, but the trees are very slow in
coming to maturity. Either the soil lacks some constituent needed by them, the rock is too near the
surface, or the high winds retard their growth. Sugar gums and wattles are the varieties which have
been most used. The woolshed is a fine roomy structure, fitted with twenty machines. Mr. Russell,
however, is not enthusiastic about machine shearing. He says that if it were possible to get the
same class of men as he had twenty years ago, he would revert to the blades. The nearest railway
station is Bannockburn, which lies about 18 miles from the homestead. A postal service comes from
there three times a week.


The Front of the House.
Looking towards the Stables from the Front Door.
Barunah Plains, Victoria,


» jib ' :>s^m?''
t % w > ft ;:
M| ■
• w bp
Pair of Prize Buggy Horses.
Electric Power House.
She Stock.
Very few Merino flocks are as
well known as that at Barunah.
The type has been specially
evolved to suit the conditions
peculiar to the district in which
it is bred. The sheep are charac-
terised by large frames and a
liberal covering of long, bright
wool. They arc free from body
wrinkles, but are well developed
about the neck, and the fleeces
always fetch a high price. The
Barunah sheep are of the true
Australian Merino type, but they
differ from the leading Riverina
strains in that they produce finer and softer wool. They are bred in a locality where the highest known
grades of Merino wool are grown, and full advantage has been taken of the special local conditions.
The flock is one of the very
oldest in Australia. It was
established by Mr. Thos. Aus-
tin, who placed on the property
stock he obtained from Ton-
Hill, a property owned by the
Austin family in Tasmania.
The Austins at that time were
very well-known breeders of
high-class Merino sheep, and
they had obtained foundation
stock from Mr.-W. A. Bethune,
of Dunrobin, Tasmania, one
of the earliest importers of
Merinos into the colonies. The
Messrs. Austin had also them-
selves made direct importations
from Germany. When Messrs. T. Russell and Co. purchased Barunah Plains in 1851,
active steps w r ere immediately taken to still further improve the sheep. The breeding ew-es
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Stud and Overseer’s Cottage, with Woolshed on the Hill.
The Stables.
Barunah Plains, Victoria,


View from Top of Windmill, looking West.
Pair Buggy Horses.
ist at Geelong, Colac, and Ballarat Shows, igog.
8


Champion Hand-fed Fine-wool Ram and Grand Champion
Fine-wool Ram
At the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Show, Melbourne, 1909.
Bred at Barunah Plains.
Champion Ghass-fed Fine-wool Ewe and Grand Champion
Fine-wool Ewe
At the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Show, Melbourne, 1909.
Bred at Barunah Plains.
were heavily culled, and the best rams obtainable were purchased. At about that time the
management of the flock was taken over by Mr. Kininmonth, who was a leading sheepbreeder of his
day. It was largely due to his energy and keen
judgment that the subsequent progress of the
Barunah flock was due. About 1853 twenty-five
rams were bought from Mr. J. L. Currie, of Larra,
and some others from Mr. John Bell, the then
owner of Warrambeen. Those two studs were at
that time probably unsurpassed in Victoria.
In iB6O, Mr. Kininmonth decided to found a
special stud at Barunah. For that purpose he
selected the 150 best ewes on the property, and
put them to rams bred by Mr. J. L. Currie. Some
three years later, a Rambouillet ram was obtained,
and was used for a season on the special stud
ewes. He died after the first year, but his male
progeny were classed, and the best of them used in
the stud. The Barunah sheep of to-day bear many of the Rambouillet characteristics. In the sixties
a system was adopted for gauging the merit of every ram used in the stud. A note was kept of the
weight and character of the fleece of each sire, and
these were compared one with the other. Not
only did this show at a glance which were the
best sires, but when rams fell off suddenly after a
few years’ service the fact became patent. Up to
about 1879 the Barunah sheep were exhibited very
little at shows. Their great merits, however, had
long before spread throughout the Western District
of Victoria. A steady demand had set in for the
surplus rams, and this has never since slackened.
There are never enough rams bred on the property
to satisfy the inquiries which come in. Nearly
all the sheep sold are used within a radius of 150
miles of Barunah Plains.
Since 1880 the stud has been prominent at shows,
and has been remarkably successful in taking
prizes. This has mostly been at the annual exhibition of the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Association
held in Melbourne, and at the Sheep Show held each year at Ballarat. At the 1909 Melbourne Show
Barunah Plains , Victoria.


Champion Grass-fed Fine-wool Ram
At the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Show, Melbourne, 1909
Bred at Barunah Plains.
Champion Hand-fed Strong-wool Ewe and Grand
Champion Strong-wool Ewe
At the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Show, Melbourne, 1909.
Bred at Barunah Plains.
Barnnah sheep were practically invincible in the line-wool sections, winning almost every first prize,
besides all six championships. In the class for aged fine-wool rams, hand-fed, they won the first
prize. With 2-tooth rams they again took the pre-
mier honours, whilst they won two firsts in the
section for fine-wool, hand-fed ewes. In classes for
fine-wool, grass-fed rams, the stud was placed first
for aged and 2-tooth rams, and with the ewes it
was unbeaten. In addition, the grand championship
for strong-wool ewes went to Barnnah for a 4 tooth,
which was placed first in her class. At the
Ballarat Show, held shortly after the Melbourne
event, these victories were repeated. Ihe Barnnah
sheep secured the grand championship for both
rams and ewes, in addition to the championship for
grass-fed ewes. They were also placed first in the
class for aged rams, 2-tooth grass-fed rams, aged
and 4-tooth ewes (hand-fed), aged and 4-tooth grass-fed ewes, pens of three 2-tooth, and pens of
three 4-tooth ewes. In the Ballarat Show of 1885. the Barnnah sheep weie placed fiist in every
class they were entered for, with only two exceptions. I his annual exhibition was then, as it is
now, the finest show of grass-fed Victorian Merinos
held anywhere. At that year's show a 2-tooth
Barnnah ewe carried off the championship as being
the best grass-fed ewe in the show, and she was
afterwards awarded the grand championship for
being the best ewe in the show. It is also interest-
ing to note in this connection that as early as 1885,
when weights of fleeces did not run nearly as heavy
as they do now, over twenty of the 2-tooth rams cut
over 12 lbs. ozs. of light greasy wool, whilst
two 2-tooth rams exhibited at Ballarat cut lbs.
each. Those weights may not now seem very im-
pressive, but at that time, having consideration for
the quality of the wool, they were particularly
meritorious.
An important reason for the Barunah rams giving such widespread satisfaction among those
breeders who have tried them is that they have been bred true to type for a large number of
generations. The influences of atavism do not, when these rams are used, tend towards reverting to


jj[ *
The Shearing Floor.
*!% ■ I fHB ■HHiHiim ■
*'■ 'jt { ,
The Wool Tables. —Lambs’ Fleeces being Sorted.
Barunah Plains, Victoria.


A
,
Show Horses—all prize-takers at Geelong and Colac
an inferior previous type. When the sires throw back to progenitors of half a dozen generations earlier
they are still throwing to high-grade sheep.
The carrying capacity of Barunah is rather less than a sheep to the acre. The usual number of
sheep shorn is from 45.000 to 47,000, including lambs. By the surplus stock being disposed of, the
number is reduced to some 35,000 to 37,000. In addition to the sheep, some 300 head of pure
Shorthorn cattle are carried. They are descended from the famous herd of Robertson Bros. Only
pedigreed bulls are used on the cows.
personal.
Mr. James Russell, the present proprietor of Barunah Plains, was born in 1859 in Fifeshire,
Scotland, and was educated at Collegiate College, in Charlotte-square, Edinburgh. He came to
Victoria in 1877, and went straight to Barunah. After working there for three years, he accepted the
position of manager, and ultimately became owner. He married in 1880, and has five sons and one
daughter.


* *• , ■' ‘ - I *.**■• ■* v . „.
. . *>•'<'' ' '* ‘ • » *> ' v ‘ n H' • i ’*‘ j , . . 'S'** ’*■ Nr
General View of the Homestead Buildings.
lRippon Ibucst Estate.
<lhc property of flbr. Ib. rib. Sarooob.
THE homestead of Rippon Hurst lies between seven and eight miles from Macarthur, in the
south-western district of Victoria. The boundary of the estate extends to within a couple of
miles of the township. The area is approximately 17,000 acres, of which about a third consists
of stony volcanic country, and the remainder of deeper soil, originally densely clothed in heavy forest
and fern patches.
The first owner of Rippon Hurst was Mr. William Carmichael. He and his relatives held a
quantity of valuable land in the locality, and Rippon Hurst remained in their hands for some forty
years. In 1898, however, Mr. Sargood and his brother-in-law, Mr. Leslie Jenner, purchased the
property from the executors of Mr. Carmichael, and worked it in partnership until 1902, when Mr.
Sargood became sole possessor, having bought the other’s share. For many years the estate was
known as Harton Hills, but in 1898 the name was changed, and that of Rippon Hurst, an old family
name, substituted.
(Section Ift, pages 213-220.)


V . .-^T
KSBk J*k |- ; 3|ro|jkp
J*j 1
Mr. H. M. Sargood.
The Homestead.
The rainfall at Rippon Hurst is about 26 in., and the fertile soil grows a great wealth of sweet
natural pastures. Ihe carrying capacity is a little over the sheep to the acre standard, and about
19,000 crossbreds are run all through the year. The
normal number shorn, including lambs, is 24,000.
The volcanic land carries one and a-half sheep to
the acre, and the remainder of the property about
one. The country grows a bright, clean wool, free
from seed or burr, and the clip always averages a
high price at auction.
Zb c Stock.
The Rippon Hurst sheep are of the Lincoln-
Merino cross. The method of breeding is to put
first cross ewes to pure Merino rams, and then to
mate the ewes of the next generation with pure
Lincoln rams. The sheep are of large frame, and
grow nice fleeces of lengthy soft wool. The first
breeding stock consisted of crossbred ewes from
Muntham and Mount William, and Merino rams
from Edgarley. At a later date Lincoln rams were obtained from Xew Zealand, and from Mr. Christie
and Mr. Forsyth, of Victoria. At the present time Barunah Merino sires are being used.
A herd of some 600 head
of Shorthorn cattle are also
run on the property. Mr.
Sargood breeds these him-
self, and has used some
very high-class stud stock.
Colbinabbin blood has been
used on the bull side, and
the cows trace back to Ga-
zette and Tarronne blood.
3mprovemento.
The value of Rippon
Hurst has been greatly in-
creased by a judicious out-
lay of capital during the


The Homestead.
last ten years. The nicely-laid-out and cleared paddocks, the growth of grass (which a proper clearing
of the land has improved), the absence of vermin, the orderly fences, and the plentiful supplies of water,
form a scene very different from that of some ten years back. At the time of Mr. Sargood purchasing
it the property was in such a rough, dirty, and unimproved condition that it gave harbour to myriads
of rabbits, which further reduced the carrying capacity of what is to-day so prolific a holding.
I he rabbits presented the most formidable task to be faced in bringing the estate into its
present workable condition. They had riddled the paddocks with great warrens, where whole
colonies of them lived in the soft porous soil. Hollow logs and trees were full of them, and no
lasting impression could be made by fumigating and trapping. The only possible means of
eliminating the pest was by working the property in sections and destroying all the cover acre by
acre, and permitting none of the rodents to escape. That was the task Mr. Sargood undertook, and
the expense was very heavy, as many as too men on occasions being employed at one time. To
thoroughly carry out the scheme and to ensure the property in future being free from vermin, the
boundary and nearly all of the subdivisional fences were netted, and the whole place “ dug out.”
About 70 miles of netting was used in this way. "Che result is that one may now ride almost all day
through the estate without seeing a single rabbit, and even when a few find access to one paddock
Rippon Hurst, Victoria


-■■ -dSStTV%' n||». . -Wi'lf''ff/ v;^JSME«ffflW!S*% ..JaMMRO^iBfeSWi
Two Views in the Garden.


Hawthorn Bushes on Blackfellows’ Creek.
- >■ '
The Rapids, Blackfellows’ Creek.
too porous for the formation of dams, and provision
is made for stock there by means of boring, a
plentiful supply of splendid sub-artesian water hav-
ing been obtainable in all paddocks at shallow
depths. In other parts of the estate dams have
been constructed, and natural creeks are plentiful.
The property is subdivided into thirty-seven pad-
docks. and a permanent supply has been established
in each.
The shearing shed is constructed of wood and
iron. It is fitted with fourteen Moffat-Virtue
machines. Accommodation is provided for about
2000 sheep, and most of the yards at the shed are
paved with stone pitchers obtained on the estate.
Rippon Hurst is provided with a delightful
homestead. The original house has been largely
they are not able to extend to the others. T hough
the natural features of the country present many
difficulties in keeping down vermin, the annual ex-
pense has been reduced to what may be called an
insurance.
The natural timber on Rippon Hurst consists
chiefly of yellow and white box. All but about
2000 acres have been cleared, and as there is an
abundance of green timber artificial plantations are
unnecessary. The grasses are mostly natural, but
on some of the better land rye-grass and strawberry
clover has been established with good results. The
improvements have given a more vigorous and
healthy growth to all classes of pastures.
The water supply has been established in a
variety of ways. The soil on the volcanic rises is
Rippon Hurst, Victoria.


Flock Merino Rams.
Oi,i) Crossbred Ewes and Lambs.


• /-vi.' 'C* * ‘V.- *T- S* •/ ' .
* - % ’„ • fe t •«►' & -a - • - . j. fc v, Istofc. l*->* v -
w •-' «4f* UreyHi#'' a' - sSj •• i
. 'x ft ~- .£/* r *■ v w • «£>*;;■ *’>*£ ’* *-.- r . . ‘ .•£.■’< ■'■ *V: - ‘C**
■*'*■•' ■ ~; * . ~ * _> • >** 4 .. • ■’*■ ,‘T >** '%££&& ’ -; i ■:&■■£**•■$$'» f v . .-• '. jL .•,•%►«.' A' .* , * ’ ’ --. . *• r V A '^ r .-*5*^' >. "X-- ,- * £
Station-bred 6-tooth Crossbred Wethers.
rebuilt and added to by Mr. Sargood. The additions are planned on modern lines, the rooms being
large, airy, and well lighted. Acetylene gas is provided throughout, and every convenience which
can be made to contribute to the comfort of a country home has been installed. The surroundings are
also delightfully attractive. But for a very short while in the latter end of summer the neighbouring
hills are always green, and the landscape presents a charming variety of scene. The garden and
grounds, at the foot of which runs the Blackfellows’ Creek, have been liberally planted with many
and varied species of trees, shrubs, and flowers, and water is laid on to all parts.
ni>r. Ib. C\ i>. Sargoob.
Mr. Harry Morton Sargood is the fourth son of the late Sir Frederick Sargood, K.C.M.G., and
was born in 1870 at Rippon Lea, Elstermvick, Victoria. He received his education partly in England,
and at the Hawthorn Grammar School and the Scotch College, Melbourne, and practically ever since
leaving school has been directly interested in pastoral affairs. He devotes much time to the workin gof
his estate, personally supervises the management, and takes a practical interest in local and public affairs.
Mr. Sargood has made a hobby of rifle shooting, having followed that sport ever since a boy.
When at school in 1883 he was instructed by Lieut.-Colonel M. H. Irving, whom he considers one of
the best coaches Victoria has seen. In 1905 he attended the big meeting at Bisley, England, in hopes
of gaining experience, but much to his surprise he won a much-coveted King’s Badge, having
finished twenty-third in the final hundred. Mr. Sargood also won several less important prizes at the
Rippon Hurst, Victoria,


Cattle at Dam.
same meeting. In 1907, when a British rifle team was being selected in England, Mr. Sargood
cabled an invitation to them to visit Hamilton, and meet a district team there. The invitation was
duly accepted, and on 2nd November, 1907, Hamilton gained the distinction of being the place where
the British rifle team fired their first shot in Victoria. At present Mr. Sargood is chairman of the
executive of the Hamilton District Rifle Clubs’ Union, one of the most successful bodies of its kind in
Victoria. He was largely instrumental in initiating it, and has held the chief official position since
its inception. Eight years ago he also organised a rifle club in Macarthur, and has been elected
captain there every year since. In 1906 he proposed, in a letter to the press, a scheme for an Empire
rifle match to be first fired in Sydney. This was inaugurated in 1907. when the British rifle team
came out. In his active interest in, and practical help to, rifle shooting, Mr. Sargood is following in
the footsteps of his father, Sir Frederick Sargood, who was all his life closely identified with this
branch of military work, especially when Minister of Defence for Victoria.
In 1905 Air. Sargood married, in England, his cousin, Aliss Hilda Alexander, the daughter of
Mr. and Airs. J. Alexander, of Crouch End, London. The following year they returned to Victoria
through America. They were in San Francisco during the terrors of 18th April, when the whole city
was ruined by earthquake in a few moments.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


JSroofclsn anb IHlerowie Estates
£he jpropcrtico of flftr. Stephen John Staugbton.
BEFORE coming into the hands of Mr. Stephen John Staughton, the Nerowie and Brooklyn
Estates had for many years been in the possession of the Staughton family. The two properties
adjoin one another, and consist of very much the same class of country, which is undulating,
and volcanic in its origin. The estates lie in the Melton district, and only about thirty miles from
Melbourne. Nerowie consists of some 9000, and Brooklyn of about 1000 acres.
About half of Mr. Staughton’s land comprises part of a natural plain. It lies in the grassy,
fertile expanse of open pasture country which surrounds Melbourne on three sides for many miles,
and which attracted some of the earliest settlers when pastoral industry first commenced to push out
from what is now the metropolis. The remaining portion of the property is timbered with box and
other species of gum trees. Originally it was covered by a dense forest, though one not impenetrable
in its undergrowth as are the woods of Gippsland, the Otway Ranges, and wetter parts of Victoria.
However, the trees were so close and so large that very little grass grew there before the country
was ring-barked. The timbered paddocks now consist of open box land, liberally grassed and nicely
sheltered. Some of the original trees were left standing, and now have great green branches giving
wide shelter over the ground, their development being assisted by thinning out the forest. Numbers
of the rung trees remain standing white and gaunt, but so great is the demand for firewood at a spot
so accessible to a city of 600,000 inhabitants, that large quantities have been felled, split, and long
since carted away, leaving the land clean and open.
Mr. Staughton has greatly improved Nerowie by systematically continuing the clearing
operations which had commenced before he obtained the holding. Quantities of the rung timber
have been cut and carted in his time, thus greatly adding to the park-like appearance of the country.
Though many of the trees have been used for firewood, they are suited for a better purpose, as the
Melton box is generally recognised to be the most durable grown in Victoria.
(Section 20, pages 221-228.)


r^
p -j
Photo hy Lafayette.
Mr. S. J. Staughton.
'c. ; .%jg ■ ..y
Photo hy Lafayette.
Mrs. S. J. Staughton.
The line of demarcation between the timbered and plains land probably denotes a difference in
the rainfall of the two kinds of country. The Melbourne plain is bordered all along its northern
quently about seven miles to the east of Bacchus
Marsh. Not only do these streams yield an excel-
lent water supply, but they have also formed some
very rich alluvial flats along their course.
Though the greater part of the two estates is
covered almost exclusively with ordinary pastures,
the river flats contain a sprinkling of trefoil, and
about thirty acres of Brooklyn have been sown with
lucerne, which grows well. Nerowie is not favoured
by a good natural water supply, and the require-
ments of stock in that respect are met with tanks
extremity by natural forests, which cloak the ranges
and spread down over the flatter land, probably
marking the track of the showers which the hills
attract. It is a popular belief that ring-barking the
trees will increase liability to drought, but experi-
ence in Australia has not proved this to be a fact.
The supposition arises, in all probability, because of
a confusion between cause and effect. It is the rain
which has brought the timber, and not timber the
rain.
Brooklyn lies at the junction of the Werribee
River and the Djerrwarrh Creek, and is conse-
which have been excavated in each of the paddocks. As there is a stiff clay below the volcanic surface
soil, no difficulty is experienced in getting holes to hold water.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


~ t '-—^—>..-«r^-^K^ | r ' "*■ '"*JSP<J(pBB»*<j'’'‘* ».. &, .V?”,' 43W
$•£&.'.*££>*& *"' * ' ~ », , L 1 ' y '•'&&&''&? -■$&&*&& ‘g^fh
THE VALLEY FLATS AT BROOKLYN.


i. Cattle in Paddocks at Brooklyn. 2. Paddocks at Nerowie.
3. The Deep Cheek, Brooklyn.


JL
Brooklyn Homestead.
1 he accompanying illustrations give a fair idea of the extent to which cultivation is carried on
at Brooklyn. At Nerowie also a good deal of land is under the plough. On this property between
200 and 300 acres are cultivated each year, and excellent crops of both oats and wheat are grown.
1 he soil is volcanic in origin, and very productive, and wherever the timber has been cleared it pays
handsomely to till.
Ebe Stock-
Nerowie is devoted almost exclusively to sheep. The carrying capacity is fairly heavy, being equal
to about a sheep to the acre. The owner finds that comebacks suit the natural conditions better than
any other type, and he has been to some trouble to get together a flock giving a good wool return.
The land produces a clean fleece of sound staple, and the clip always commands a satisfactory price.
The country is quite free from disease, and the surplus stock always meet with a steady demand.
They are noted for the hardness of their constitutions, whilst they also are of large, shapely frames.
A considerable advantage is held in disposing of fat and store stock on account of the proximity to
Melbourne markets. Sheep can be quickly sent in by road, without loss of condition, to meet any
sudden demand that may arise.


’^V /_ ■'' *'v? i? V'’/^"- f je45&^'«,?_* ;>' >' i^' 1 , - - Vj ■ /; •-*~ S« •• \ 1 '35H
S Ss^lirsl^?^'-- -< v - r,iV * "
*
’
Nerowie Homestead.
On Brooklyn Mr. Staughton also runs some comeback sheep, but he devotes a considerable
portion of the property to breeding useful dairy cows, which he sells as heifers when they are
springing. The country is well suited to growing cattle of good shape and sound constitutions, and
as the breed is known to be a reliable one, there is always a steady inquiry for the cows about the
neighbouring Bacchus Marsh dairying district, and even further afield.
niM\ Stephen John Stmuibton.
Mr. S. J. Staughton is the eldest son of Mr. Stephen George Staughton, and consequently a
grandson of the late Mr. Simon Staughton, who landed with his family in Melbourne in the year
1841. and shortly afterwards bought the Exford Estate, on the Werribee River. It was at Exford that
the first-named was born on nth July, 1870.
He was educated at the Toorak College, and after leaving there decided to gain northern
experience. He consequently settled down for two years on Weinteriga Station in New South Wales,
where he worked as a Jackaroo. Having gained a quantity of useful pastoral knowledge in the parent
State, he returned to the family estates, and managed Brooklyn for twelve months.
In 1893 the Nerowie Estate was made over to Mr. Staughton by his father, whilst thirteen years
later he was presented with Brooklyn. Since he first settled down on the property he has devoted


£>. ' ». .Li - Jllpr ' ; '
A FORD ON THE WERRIBEE RIVER, BROOKLYN.


The Woolshed, Dip and Yards, Nerowie.
The Garden, Brooklyn.
himself consistently to the pastoral industry, and he has made many improvements to the two
properties, but more especially, of course, to the first, which has been so much longer in his hands.
Among the more important of
these has been that of making
the water supply more secure.
Though near to the coast, and
usually subject to a good rain-
fall, the Melton district is
sometimes afflicted with sharp
spells of drought, during which
water, when supplied by arti-
ficial means, may easily give
out. The most effective means
for guarding against this has
been found to be deep tanks,
if kept clean. If, however, they are neglected, they are liable to fill up with foreign matter to such
an extent as to reduce the holding capacity, so that what had originally been a large hole eventually
becomes but a shallow sheet
of water ready to give out in
the first long dry autumn.
Mr. Staughton has been a
member of the Bacchus Marsh
Shire Council for the past six
years, and has held office as
president of that body. In
other ways he has taken an
active part in local affairs.
In 1907 he was married to
Amy, the third daughter of
Mr. E. A. Price, of Montclair,
Beckenham, Kent, England.
They have one son.


Carrs [plains, olen Ibolforb anb JSretton.
Cbe properties of Hbcssra. Ib. Ib. Mcttcnball anb Sons.
IN 1861 Mr. H. H. Wettenhall first came in the position of overseer to Carr's Plains, which was
then owned by Messrs. Dennis Bros., who acquired the property by purchase about the year
1852. Eighteen months after his arrival the full management of the property and the sheep
was placed in the hands of Mr. Wettenhall, and he held this appointment for some years. At a
later date he obtained a lease of the estate, which then consisted of 30,000 acres, and he subsequently
purchased a portion of it. When Mr. Wettenhall took the property into his own hands about 30,000
sheep were depastured on it, all of them being pure Merinos.
In 1866 Mr. Wettenhall married Miss Mary Burgess Dennis, of Tarndwarncoort, and the union
has been blessed with seven sons and two daughters, all of whom are grown up. The success which
the various members of the family have met in their respective walks of life is in no slight degree
attributable to the keen sense of motherly duty exercised by Mrs. Wettenhall.
Carr’s Plains lies in the Wimmera district, on the Richardson River. The average rainfall is
16 in. per annum, and during the last two years it has been 15.82 in. The country is well adapted
to breeding sheep and growing a good quality of wool. The estate has been made famous in the
pastoral world by the establishment of the Ideal type of sheep.
Carr’s Plains is favourably situated from the standpoint of the studbreeder. The district is
what might be termed an intermediate class of country. Whilst the Western District to the south
of the Divide has certain drawbacks for breeding sheep for use in the hot and arid interior, such
objections would not apply to the Wimmera district, where the sun is powerful enough, and the dry,
scorching north winds frequent enough to provide an analogy. This, doubtless, is one of the
reasons for the demand for Carr’s Plains rams being so widespread. They are eagerly sought after
by breeders in the north and the interior of the continent. At the same time, Carr’s Plains is not
far enough north for the rams from there to be much influenced by the change to the more southern
parts of Victoria. There is an equally strong demand for them from districts where the climate is
cool and the rainfall sufficient and regular.
1
(Section 21, pages 229-244.)


JB ■ Bk
j F mm b
~"~ **-*% a
%Jr gp >v %3|**■■
> X II I / 1
". 1 X, 11 -f ir^BM|M|
I X. w /
A a# JT * ■ H
Photo by Vandyck.
MR. HOLFORD H. WETTENHALL.
Hbc 3bcal Stub jflocf!.
About twenty years ago, Mr. H. H. Wettenhall determined to improve his breed of sheep on
lines quite original, and, at the time, experimental. On the stud Merino ewes he used Lincoln rams.
Into the resultant stock he introduced no fresh blood, breeding the flock within itself, and accomplishing
what most breeders had regarded as impossible—establishing a new type on the basis of a cross
between distinct varieties. Mr. Wettenhall since then has improved and fixed the type by judicious
selection and careful inbreeding. The merits of the sheep are now established, and it is known that
their characteristics are as firmly fixed as those of many breeds propagated on uniform lines for many
generations. The Ideal strain has achieved for itself a prominent place among the best-known studs
of Australia,


THE HOMESTEAD, CARR’S PLAINS.
Carr’s Plains, Victoria .


SOME IDEAL RAMS.


Photo Iy Lafayette,
Mr. Herbert H. Wettenhall.
jm Ik
m sal I
Photo hy Johnstone, 0’Shannessy & Co.
Mr. Arthur V. Wettenhall.
Contrary to the expectations of those who believed Mr. Wettenhall’s task to be an impossible
one, the flock to-day is remarkable for the uniform symmetry of the sheep. By having in his mind’s
eye a very definite objective, by using by selec-
tion every characteristic tending in the required
direction, and then intensifying it, he has established
a wonderfully even flock, distinguished by well-
shaped frames nicely set on short legs, fine hams,
light bone, deep bodies, and broad, straight backs.
In their wool-growing propensities the sheep
have many points to recommend them. The
fleeces are even, dense, and beautifully soft, the
staple is about 4 in. long, whilst the fibres are deeply
serrated, and are well packed all over the body,
Felly, and points. The clip always commands a top
price, and in 1899 the grown sheep, of which two-
thirds were breeding ewes, returned the phenomenal
figure of an average of 11s. per head for
wool.
The firm of Messrs. H. 11. Wetlenhall and
Sons at present produces about 800 Ideal rams for
sale each year. These are readily disposed of, and
find purchasers in all the States of the Commonwealth. The number for sale will be increased from
year to year as the hitherto continued improvement of the stud maintains itself. The owners, however,
have always stoutly resisted the temptation to re-
gulate the numbers of their sale rams by the extent
of the demand existing for them. Only sheep up to
a certain standard are either used for breeding at
home or are allowed to leave the property to be
used by other woolgrowers. However, the remark-
able degree of evenness both of frame and wool
already acquired in the Hock is manifested by the
fact that in the classing from 12 to 15 per cent,
of sheep are all that it is found necessary to reject.
It is important to note that the Merino
blood originally used was of the very best. A stud
of that breed was formed on the property as far
back as 1863, and in the very early days the flock
was notable for record yields of wool, for the good
class of the clip, and for the great durability and
vitality of the sheep. Between 1886 and 1892 stud
rams from Ercildoune, Stony Point, Jellallabad,
and Fairfield (Tasmania) were selected for use with
Carr’s Plains ewes. Four-tooth rams have been known to give 28 lbs. of wool on Carr’s Plains, and
this without there being very much condition in the fleeces.
Carr’s Plains , Victoria


The Woolsheds at Carr’s Plains.
*•*** wi>jf _
Harvesters Stripping at Carr’s Plains.
The Ideal sheep are not so strong in the wool as a crossbred. They have been bred rather
towards the Merino, and the fibre is more of the character usually yielded by a comeback. 1 his
accounts for the high price obtained for the clip, and gives it a unique character. Real comebacks,
not being of fixed type, are, of course, uneven. This reflects itself into the clip, for it is not possible
to class wool from an uneven flock as well as from
an even one. But in the Carr’s Plains Ideal sheep,
or in wool from sheep bred from them, the buyer
is able to get something better than the best come-
back wool, with all the evenness of the best Merino
clip.
£be Carrsbales.
To meet the requirements of a number of
breeders who need a stronger-woolled sheep than
the Ideal, Messrs. Wettenhall and Sons are now
breeding high-class first cross Lincoln-Merino rams,
which they have named the Carrsdales. No expense
was spared in obtaining really high-class stud
Lincoln rams, and these were used on high-grade
Merino ewes. The Carrsdale sheep are splendidly
covered with blocky-tipped wool, which is quite unique in crossbred sheep. The staple is about
5 in. long, and the wool very free; whilst the fleece carries sufficient yolk to give plenty of nourish-
ment, and the fibre shows plenty of character, being heavily serrated.
By using Carrsdales on crossbreds breeders can maintain the crossbred type. Those with pure
Merino ewes may establish an excellent class of comebacks by using Carrsdale rams, and they may
fix and maintain the comeback type by using Ideal rams on the progeny.
Sheepbreeders who have been using Ideal rams have been induced to do so by, among other
considerations, certain selling advantages possessed by the wool yielded by the breed. It is found
that there is always a ready sale for it, as it is
equally acceptable to buyers when either Merino or
crossbred clips are most in demand. Compared
with Merino clips, it is likely to always sell at a
very high price, as there is a keen and special
demand for it in Yorkshire, which alone can absorb
all the wool of this kind which is at all likely to
be grown for years to come.
agricultural Modi.
Messrs. Wettenhall and Sons have thoroughly
established the fact that agriculture may profitably
be conducted on a large scale. The area they
crop is each year increasing. The agricultural
country is undulating plains, it is naturally suited to farming, and very heavy crops are produced.
Milton and Allan Wettenhall, who control this department, are thoroughly practical farmers and


- ■- _ j '' W ' '' S “P ■
-•^r. ■ -• ‘ ’ ■■••■'**’ ■••' ■'■'**-• mV ■ v. "••■ * " ■ 1 >*t*» ,' • ;*' "v - ■%-<•
p-Y .-. ■„ "*'• ■■■• ■ _ •■'■■ v * .
.. - ........ r; ' .. , ■ • * • •£*& v?i - ,
' V- . -. ,...;, - ■ •:/ ■ ■■■-'■. W ... - ■ - .
. W- ... - rv>, ...r >‘:&y.yr~f?r —- ..... •
*f ' "" ' r ” ’ * r fr * % ’ *:•; i *J*
• •; . _
SOME IDEAL STUD EWES OFF SHEARS.
Carr’s Plains, Victoria.


IDEAL TWO-YEAR-OLD SALE RAMS.


BARN AT CARR’S PLAINS. —Capacity gooo Bags Wheat.
necessarily use a very considerable plant. The latest improvements in agricultural methods are all
tested by the two brothers, and the best of them are adopted. Among these is a set of portable
feed boxes, by the means of which the fodder is brought to the horses instead of the horses to the
fodder. By this, as well as by similar devices, every ounce of available energy is g - ot out of the
horses, and there is no wasted efifort.
Ihe modern iron barn is another one of the improvements which have been adopted. Besides
being practically fireproof, this is built to hold 9000 bags of wheat, and is situated near the hay
yard, so that the grain and chaff may be housed with the least possible expense for handling.
Cbc jfinn.
The firm of H. H. Wettenhall and Sons comprises the father, Holford H., and
four of his sons —Herbert H., Milton 8., Allan H., and Arthur V. All of them were
born at Cai r’s Plains. Herbert, who is the eldest, manages the sheep department of the
estates, and is an enthusiast, having taken a trip to the Old Country three years ago, where he visited
the woollen mills and factories. Needless to say he gained much very useful information about the
requirements of the wool trade as from a grower’s point of view. Milton controls the firm's
interests at Bretton, where both agricultural and pastoral pursuits are followed. He is a keen,
observant, and a thoroughly practical man, as is also his brother, Allan, who lives at Carr’s Plains,
and manages the agricultural enterprises there.
Carr’s Plains and Bretton, Victoria.


THE HOUSE AT BRETTON, GLENORCHY. Mr. M. B. Wettenhall’s Home.
LUNCH TIME DURING HARVESTING ON CARR’S PLAINS.


Ptioto by Vandycl;.
-lan H. Wettenhall.
Photo hy Sears.
Mr. Milton B. Wettenhall.
Photo hy Lafayette.
Mr. Marcus E. Wettenhall.
Marcus E. is an orchardist, and is manager at Glen Holford, of which more later. Marcus
is piobably one of the best known men in the Australian fruit world. He has been elected president
of the State Fruitgrowers’ Association, and also
president of Interstate Conference of Fruitgrowers.
He holds these positions largely because orchardists
realise him to be thoroughly conversant with the
conditions of the industry. He has frequently,
through the medium of the press and by other means,
had occasion to point out ways by which growers
could improve their position, and also evils that
have existed and do exist. The result of his wide
experience, and his careful search after technical
knowledge, have proved of the utmost value to
inspection and regulation. It frequently happens
that in a young industry a few pioneers, who think
problems out for themselves, and have the courage
of their convictions, lead the way to success along
which all the others follow. Mr. Wettenhall is one
of these.
The other members of the family, although
not actually in the firm, have always helped those on
the land whenever occasion or necessity offered.
Besides Marcus E., mentioned above, Alexander
L. is a solicitor in Melbourne, and Roland R. a
others engaged in the same industry at a time when
all have been pioneers, and the Government has
been but groping towards a coherent scheme of
doctor working with Dr. Herman Lawrence in Melbourne. Mrs. James B. Lempricre and Miss Viola
are the daughters. Four of the family are married, ml, singularly, there arc four pairs of grandchildren.
Carr’s Plains, &c., Victoria.


APPLE PICKING AT GLEN HOLEORD.
6\cn ibolfotrfc.
In 1890 Mr. Wettenhall purchased about 400 acres on the eastern slopes of the Grampian
Mountains, at a spot about fifteen miles from the town of Stawell. Although he is still the leading
light of the firm, both in sheepbreeding and agricultural activities, he spends most of his time at
Glen Holford, where he shares in Mrs. Wettenhall's enthusiasm in making it one of the most beautiful
homes in the neighbourhood.
The Grampians are rugged, serrated ranges of wild picturesqueness, thickly clothed with giant
eucalyptus trees, and a dense undergrowth of tangled ferns and sweet-smelling shrubs. dhe
formation is partly silurian, and great numbers oi sparkling streams gurgle musically through thick
mats of maidenhair, creepers, and great boulders, showing that a favourable rainfall is attracted to
the heights and neighbouring slopes. Mr. Wettenhall has taken full advantage of the prolific natural
beauty with which his home is surrounded, and he has added to it by artificial planting and a
tasteful arrangement of buildings.
As his industrial efforts at Carr’s Plains were of a pioneering character, so at Glen Holford
has he also broken up new ground. An area of 120 acres has been planted at the latter place in
carefully-selected fruit trees, and he, together with his son Marcus, was one of the very first to test
the possibilities of the apple export trade, which they have probably done more to develop than any
other single firm of growers. The trade is now established on a firm basis, and it is expected that
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD, GLEN HOLFORD.
Glen Halford, Victoria.


GLEN HOLFORD GARDEN, LOOKING EAST.
Victoria will this year (1909) ship away to oversea ports a total of 200,000 cases, which will constitute a
record. The Australian crop reaches the London market at a time when similar fruit is out of season
in the Northern Hemisphere, and when there is a general scarcity of all varieties of fruit. For that
reason the production of apples and other exportable fruit is rapidly increasing, and with the
adjustment of several anomalies and difficulties in the matter of shipping and marketing, it promises
to develop even at a faster rate in the near future. Mr. Wettcnhall was one of the men who blazed
the track. When he launched out into the industry its results were by no means as certain as they
are now. Moreover, there was not the same security from the destruction of an orchard by pests,
as efficient Government inspection and stringent measures to combat the spread of harmful scales, flies,
grubs, moths, &c., has since provided.
The largest part of Mr. Wettenhall’s orchard is devoted to apple trees, and care has been taken
to plant with varieties which from their good keeping qualities are most suitable for the export trade.
The kinds used are Jonathan, Munroe’s Favourite, Esopus, Spitzenberg, Prince of Pippins, Rome
Beauty, and Stunner. The Wettenhalls were induced to engage in the export trade by the increasing
size of the crop, and in 1901 they sent away the first shipments. The results were satisfactory, and
each season since the shipments have increased, until last year (1908) 6000 cases of apples were
consigned to the Old World. Besides growing apples, they have planted peach, pear, and lemon trees.
It is likely that in the not distant future a profitable trade will open up with Europe in pears
also. Shipments hitherto have been very uncertain in the returns they have brought to the grower.
In some instances up to 38s. per case have been received. In other instances loss has resulted. It
is, however, probable that the success of the undertaking is a matter of transit facilities and


MR. MARCUS E. WETTENHALL’S HOME.
on the Side of the Grampians.
arrangements for keeping the fruit at low temperature. To export pears satisfactorily it appears
necessary to place them in a temperature of under 40 degs. immediately after picking, and not
to let them get again heated. Very few growers have cool chambers sufficiently near their
orchards to do this; but, with required facilities, the trade is certain to develop into an important
one. Perhaps the Wettenhalls will prove pioneers also in this field of enterprise.
Mr. Marcus Wettenhall is optimistic about the outlook before the fruit export industry.
His experience, however, has shown him that there is room for ample improvement in the
facilities for disposing of the output in England. It has been proved conclusively that there
is a profitable field before Victorian fruit producers in oversea markets; but until the smaller
orchardists come together, as the dairy farmers did, for mutual protection and co-operative
enterprise, it will be difficult for them to progress very rapidly. The Canadian fruitgrowing
industry owes much of its success to co-operation in packing, grading, and exporting, and
similar steps should be taken here.
Fruitgrowing is a pleasant occupation, and forms an interesting study. Mr. H. H.
Wettenhall has shown that a pastoralist who is an active and original sheepbreeder, as well as
an enterprising agriculturist, can make a hobby of it, and make it pay. The work of the
orchardist would often add to the variety of country life, and add value and interest to home-
steads. It is somewhat strange that more pastoralists have not made a pastime of this attractive
enterprise.
Glen Holford, Victoria


THE HOMESTEAD AT GREENVALE,
Referred to on the opposite page—now a Boys’ School conducted by Mrs. W. J. Austin.


■Z^^ s ? i i^-*^ r < m: ’~’ • mLj "'T^ : — ..... _ ■ ' . .'
M
"" “■ \.j'i—■
*1— m»i —.'- -^t
JL i- T*',
'" I « |* ||p ytp wr
Back View of the Homestead.
This picture was taken in 1884 before the plantations had grown sufficiently to hide the building.
also IDemluium Stub path anb lluillu, ißcw South Males.
Che properties of f!Dr. Chomas fllMUear.
EDGARLEY, the estate of Mr. Thomas Millear, originally belonged to his father, the late Mir.
Thomas Millear, who came to Victoria from Edgarley Farm, in Somersetshire, in 1858.
The deceased gentleman soon after his arrival settled at Green Vale, in the Western
District, which holding he worked in partnership with the late Messrs. Thomas Maidment and
Josiah Austin. Green Vale then consisted of some 52,000 acres, and was purchased by the three
partners. They also leased other properties, among these being Avalon and Berrambool, the two
latter together comprising 57,000 acres. The partnership was dissolved in 1877, and during its
currency Mr. Millear managed Green Vale. The greatest number of sheep shorn by the firm in one
season was about 100,000, of which 73,000 passed through Green Vale and 27,000 through the
Avalon shed.
1
(Section 22, pages 243-260.)


f-
The late Mr. Thos Millear.
£f>oadc\> of
On the dissolution of partnership in 1877, the late Mr. Millear bought 18,390 acres of Green
Vale, and named it Edgarlcy, after the home of his boyhood in the old country. In 1890 the
present proprietor purchased a piece of Green Vale on the southern boundary of Edgarley, leasing
that area to his father, so that the whole estate comprised 22,411 acres. As soon as the late
Thomas Millear obtained possession of the property on his own account he began to establish
substantial improvements. The first of these was the erection of a delightful rambling bluestone
house, containing nearly forty rooms. Each year plantations were sown as breakwinds, and to-day
there are about 600 acres of trees on the estate. Mr. Millear departed from the stereotyped method
of laying his plantations in monotonous straigh lines. Many of them are planned on seemingly
irregular design, and the added pictnresqueness of their general effect is very marked. The seed used
has mostly been blue gum, with a smaller proportion of red gum, light wood, sheoak, and various
kinds of wattle.
r/ie Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WESTERN ENTRANCE AND SIDE VIEW OF HOMESTEAD.
Eclgarley, Victoria.


... ' : ' ? ■ ■ ■" '• i • 4" * *
Illllllll^^
FRONT OF THE HOMESTEAD, EDGARLEY.


.
'\.. ■■«/' B>*j», k. *®f : ■' 1% &"! :«S»
, J: . WtBKT 'JHjBr ~w-JwBBBrjf "isV., ;,*■”;■ -t ,4 ? ',A.
***©^088^' JM m'lrM B
W/jw ' jflH
*~
EASTERN ENTRANCE TO THE HOMESTEAD.
Edgarley, Victoria,


The Hall.
Edgarley consists of undulating country, lightly grassed, but growing a good deal of kangaroo
grass and a variety of sweet nourishing herbs. The carrying capacity is rather less than a sheep to
the acre, and probably there is no sounder sheep country in Australia than the plain of which this
estate is part. It is divided into thirty-eight paddocks, the subdivisional fences being of se\en
wires. The Hopkins River passes through the property, and water is provided for stock by means
of surface tanks and windmills.
The garden, sheltered from the wind by plantations and liberally supplied with water, now
presents all the varied bloom and blaze of foliage which can be derived from a mixture of almost
every known plant which the local conditions favour. The detached orchard covers an area of
two acres.
Mr. Millear now shears about 12,000 sheep on Edgarley, but before any of the estate was
leased to farmers as many as 22,000 were shorn in one season. The homestead is included in a
telephone system, by which most of the large landowners in the district are able to communicate
either with one another or with the post-office at Willaura. In addition, the Edgarley house is
connected with the manager’s residence. The convenience of the telephone is apparent, when it is
stated that Mr. Millear can by its aid, together with that of the telegraph department, communicate
right through with his New South Wales properties, which also have telephone facilities.


THE DRAWING ROOM.
Edgarley, Victoria.


* • ■ .M,*
• ■ v/' • '
A VIEW IN THE FRONT GARDEN.


ANOTHER PART OF THE GARDEN.
Edgarley, Victoria.


The Home of Mr. Thomas L. Byron, a Tenant Farmer on the Estate.
Water for the homestead is taken alternately from two large dams formed in gullies. A 2-in.
pipe service covers a length of two miles, and supplies flower and vegetable gardens. The stables,
about 100 yards from the house, are built of bluestone. The coachhouse and motor garage
provide ample accommodation. The woolshed is of bluestone, and contains twelve Wolseley
machines.
agriculture on lEbgarlc^
The discovery of what the wheatgrower could do with the great Western District plains
by the application of superphosphates has quite revolutionised their value. Edgarley consists mostly
of undulating plains, is close to the Willaura Railway Station, and the roads are flat and well made.
Mr. Millear offers his land on terms which are more liberal than those prevailing in most other
parts of the Western District. The agreement with the tenant provides that if the yield exceeds
two bags, the owner of the land receives one bag {4% bushels) of wheat for every acre cultivated.
If the yield falls short of two bags to the acre, then the tenant pays as rent only half a bag for
every acre of land cultivated. As a matter of fact, the yield at Edgarley has only once fallen below
16 bushels, viz., in 1903. The last crop taken off yielded between 24 and 34 bushels. At the present
time about 6000 acres are leased to twenty-three thriving tenants, some of whom are living in
comfortable and permanent homes erected on their holdings. They pay no rent for the land the
year it is lying in fallow, and have the right at all times to graze their working horses and cows
needed for their own use. The leases are for a period covering three crops, and one while
the land lies fallow.


Photo by Lafayette.
Mr. Thomas Millear.
?■ I. | pp r
Photo by Lafayette.
Mrs. Thomas Millear.
DIM*. Gbomas fllMUcar.
Mr. Thomas Millear was born on 24th April, 1866, at Green Vale. He received his schooling
at the Melbourne Grammar School, and has recently been chosen as the first country president of
In 1893 Mr. Millear married Rosa Elizabeth,
the second daughter of the late Rev. Walter Fel-
lows, of St. John’s Church, Toorak. There are
three sons and two daughters.
On the death of Mr. Millear, sen., in 1895,
Edgarley was left to the present holder and his
mother. But when the later died in 1906 the estate
became solely the property of the son.
the Old Melburnians’ Society. After rejoining his
father at Edgarley, he soon became keenly in-
terested in sheepbreeding. He finds a deep fascina-
tion in improving sheep by selection, and every
success is a matter of personal satisfaction. He is
well known in pastoral circles throughout the
Commonwealth, and has always been prominent in
any movement or organisation aiming to benefit
woolgrowing or the interests of woolgrowers.
Mr. Millear has occupied the position of president of the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Association,
Melbourne, on several occasions, and for the past fifteen years has been a member of the Ararat
Shire Council, occupying the chair at intervals.
Edgarley, Victoria.


“DONALD DINNIE.” — Three-year-old Ram.
Bred and sold by Mr. Thomas Millear, Deniliquin Stud Park, N.S.W., through Messrs. Herbert Power and Son, to the Proprietors
of the Canowie Estate, South Australia. Price, 1200 guineas.
The above photo was taken at Canowie Estate on 3rd September, 1907.


i456. :Jp|
Deniliquin Stud Park Homestead.
Photo taken at the end of a very dry Summer.
BcntUquin Stub parfi anb Ikulhi.
The Deniliquin Stud Park Estate was purchased by Mr. Thos. Millear in 1898 for the purpose
of meeting the growing demand for the Wanganella rams bred at Edgarley. 1 his property
carries on an average 5000 sheep, and the rams, both flock and stud, meet with a ready sale. In
1906 the proprietors of the Canowie Estate, South Australia, gave 1200 guineas for the celebrated
stud ram Donald Dinnie, then two and a-half years old, Mr. Millear first having a month’s stud
service from him, and recently four studs were sold to one buyer for 1190 guineas. In conjunction
with Stud Park, Mr. Millear works the property known as Kulki, consisting of 26,000 acres freehold,
near Jerilderie, N.S.W., and about 55 miles from that property. The two estates are connected by
private telephone. Kulki was purchased in 1908 as an outlet for the surplus sheep from Stud Park.
It is Myall country, watered by wells and windmills.
Hbc Sbcep.
The Edgarley sheep have been bred from Wanganella stock since 1880. In that year a
number of Wanganella rams were introduced, and eight years later 3362 ewes were brought from
the same flock. No alien blood has ever been introduced. The Edgarley sheep have departed
remarkably little from the Wanganella type. In 1899 the 10,411 grown sheep shorn averaged
10 lbs. 1 1-5 ozs. of wool, yielding ns. gross and us. net.
DenHiquin Stud Park & Kulki, N.S.W.


hj>"> y
' -'f *•* >***-' ■*- ••
Pine Ridge at Back of Homestead.
The Homestead.
TWO VIEWS UN KULKI.


-v . -
PUMPING FROM WELL AT KULKI FOR TRIAL IRRIGATION PURPOSES.
Ka/Af/, /V.S. W,


The Stockyards at the Kulki Stables.
Reservoir at Stud Park.
Banked on four sides. Inlet is from a natural fall. When filled to the
level of the inlet it is closed and more water pumped over the bank from
a small catchment tank.


The Homestead from the Garden.
J£ucambeen Estate, Dictoiia
Übe property of flDessrs. IBcqqb Bros.
E"'* URAM BEEN, which lies at the foot of Mount Cole, and about six miles from Beaufort, is the
original home of Messrs. Beggs Bros., who also own Hopkins Hill, Swanwater, and land near
Beulah, in the Mallee. Besides being charmingly situated, the estate is of ideal nature for
breeding Merino sheep and growing exceptionally high quality of wool, as has been proved
time and again when the clip has topped the market at the Geelong sales. The ivy-covered house of
bluestone, which is surrounded on all sides with a tastefully-arranged plantation of nicely-selected
indigenous and imported trees of great variety, stands on a green hill, round the foot of which the Fiery
Creek runs through a picturesque red gum flat. Portion of the estate consists of silurian hills, lightly
timbered with sheoaks, box, and honeysuckle trees, whilst another portion is of volcanic origin.
None of the estate is heavily grassed, however, though all of it is sound sheep country. The western
end extends on to the great plains that stretch away to Shelford, and nearly to Hamilton, and which
have increased so much in value of late years through their agricultural value having been
discovered by the application of artificial manuring.
I CSection 23. pages 261 - 268, )


■■fV I
/ Vi* ■
■Jr*
-M - -j? i* ,,. i
a8j a ng$ -mBMB 1 <jr'-.. ,•*.,.
Photo hif T. Humphrey Sf Co.
MR THEODORE BEGGS.


Stacking Hay.
Eurambeen was founded as a freehold property after iB6O by the late Francis Beggs, the
father of the present owners, and his brother George.
Prior to then, however, it was a Crown lands run held by Mr. Campbell, who took it up as
far back as 1839. At a later-date it was leased by Messrs. Russell and Simpson. In the year
mentioned the brothers Messrs. F. and G. Beggs purchased it. At that time 30,000 sheep and some
hundreds of head of cattle were run on the holding. Latterly some of the inferior paddocks near the
ranges, which skirt the property in a half-moon shape, were from time to time sold, and at present
about 7000 sheep are shorn annually. They subsist almost entirely on natural grasses.
1 he Eurambeen Estate consists, or rather until a few years ago it consisted, of three distinct
classes of country. The homestead is built on a Silurian hill, and portion of the run comprises land
of this formation. It is of light-carrying capacity, and part of it is lightly timbered. The Silurian
hills and flats are dotted with those peculiar “crab holes,” the origin of which has greatly puzzled
geologists. It seems probable, however, that they have been caused through the bulk of the soil
being lessened in patches by some constituent of it going into solution with surface water, or water
close to the surface, and in that way causing a sinking or declivity in the ground. Another part
of the estate is made up of soil of volcanic origin, and is part of the great volcanic belt which
stretches from Melbourne to Mount Gambier. The ground of this description is highly charged
with small igneous ironstone pebbles. This class of country would be rich but that it lacks a
sufficiency of phosphoric acid. When treated with superphosphates it becomes valuable for wheat-
growing, and at all times is very healthy for live stock. Eurambeen also, up to a few years ago,
contained paddocks of granite, though these have since been sold as being the least valuable.
Eurambeen, Victoria.


Group of Eurambeen Stud Rams.
Sheep.
The Eurambeen flock has been managed by the present owners, Messrs. Theodore, Robert,
and Hugh Beggs, with remarkable continuity of effort. They have set out with a very definite
objective before them, and have not been deflected from their course by any of the changing
fashions and the passing popularity of various studs in other districts. Ihe type has changed veiy
little during the last quarter of a century, but by keen observation and very close attention the
yield of wool has been greatly increased, and the type has been fixed so deeply that the Eurambeen
rams now rarely fail to transmit their characteristics to progeny even when mated with ewes of
inferior or unlike descriptions.
The foundation of the flock was laid by Messrs. Simpson and Russell, who left their sheep
behind them when they relinquished the property. At no time since then have any ewes been
introduced from outside studs, but at dates prior to 1878 rams were purchased from the best Victorian
breeders. In 1883 two stud rams were bought from the Messrs. Gibson’s Tasmanian studs, and
others later, but of late years no new blood of any description has been introduced, and the flock
has been bred entirely within itself. Nevertheless, great progress has been made, and this has
been most marked during the last fifteen years. The method of selection has been to retain what merits
the sheep already had, even at the expense of acquiring new ones more slowly than might other-
wise have been the case. Originally the sheep were of good size, with a long staple of bright high-
quality wool. These qualities have been retained unimpaired. If anything, they have been developed
to an even higher standard. But with them the flock has attained considerable density, and the
weight of the fleeces has been greatly added to. The progress has not, perhaps, been so rapid as
some breeders try to attain, but it has been on a very solid foundation, and those who admire the
rams can to-day use them with absolute certainty of their transmitting their traits to progeny.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


*00% l §
CLASSING FOUR-TOOTH EWES.
Eurambeen, Victoria.


f'ih* v-fr - ‘ ' . . ...... •
CATTLE ON FIERY CREEK.


The Woolshed.
Sheep which have, by means of a cross of strains, been evolved more rapidly are of a type less firmly
fixed, and the progeny often display a tendency to revert to original types.
Considering the light-carrying class of country they run on, the Eurambeen sheep are of
exceptionally large and robust frames. They are plain about the body, but carry several deep folds
of skin on the neck. The covering extends well underneath, and on the points, so that a sheep
turned up opens with a deep fleece of even quality wool on all portions of the body. The fleece is
of a long staple, of very bright, lustrous wool of considerable character and body. Being of such
length, the fleeces do not show on the tip to their full advantage in the matter of density; but when
the wool is opened, the body it carries manifests itself. The staple opens stiff and free, with each
fibre well marked with waves and lying close and parallel to the others. This characteristic is not
common in fine-woolled sheep, and it goes a long way to help to withstand the climatic adversities
of districts usually regarded as unsuitable to high-quality fleeces.
The Eurambeen wool sold at the 1907 Geelong sales for is. 3d. per lb. for fleece and is. 6d.
per lb. for lambs’, and averaged I2 l / 2 d. per lb. for the whole output. During recent years there has
been an increasing demand for the sale rams Messrs. Beggs annually have for disposal, whilst an
encouraging feature about the sale they meet is, from the owner’s viewpoint, that the same buyers
repurchase drafts year after year. One of the reasons for this probably is that Messrs. Beggs Bros,
extend very little artificial treatment to either their stud or sale sheep. They believe that high
feeding and housing tends to hide faults both from themselves and from buyers. They consider a ram
being reared under practical woolgrowing conditions of life should return after he has been sold quite
as satisfactory a fleece as before, and that his stock which run with the ordinary flock should have
as good a chance of yielding satisfactory returns of fleece and carcase as the sire had himself.
Moreover, as wool grown at Eurambeen returns a very heavy scouring yield, there is a probability
that sheep taken from there to elsewhere will give fleeces of increased gross weight in cases where
the price obtained for the wool is somewhat less.
The demand for the Eurambeen rams is not limited to the Commonwealth. Shipments have
been purchased by buyers and woolgrowers for South Africa. One consignment was purchased by
the East African Syndicate, and shipped to Gil Gil, near Uganda, in British East Africa, some little
lime ago.
Eurambeen , Victoria .


First Prize Fine-wool 4-T00TH Ram (Hand-fed Class)
at Ballarat, igoo.
©thcr (properties.
Some few years ago Messrs. Begg Bros, purchased Swanwater Estate, near St. Arnaud. A
little time afterwards they added to it, and held a total area there of about 12,000 acres. Lately,
however, about half that property was sold to agriculturists, and 6000 acres, together with the
homestead, now belong to the firm. The property is managed by Mr. Hugh Beggs, the youngest
member of the firm, who lives there, and also supervises a Mallee block of 6800 acres which the
brothers own near Beulah. Between 3000 and 4000 sheep are run on the latter, and 1600 lambs bred
there during 1908 were all sold during this summer in the Melbourne yards at an average price of
14s. 6d. per head. On most occasions when lots of them were offered they topped the market.
Within the last four or five years the brothers purchased Hopkins Hill Estate, of some
9000 acres, and situated near Caramut and twenty miles from the Glen Thompson railway station.
This property is naturally most suited to woolgrowing. The estate is mostly open plains and of fair
carrying capacity, though it is not fertile enough to throw sufficient fatty matter into the fleeces to
interfere with high prices being obtained. .1 lopkins Hill sheep of to-day are all of Eurambeen blood
and a stud of the same is bred there.
At Swanwater, however, it has been found more profitable to keep a fairly large proportion
of crossbred ewes and to put Shropshire rams to them. The country and the clmiate there are not
suitable to producing high-class Merino wool, but are well adapted to the production of export
lambs. Some of the Merino rams are, however, bred or reared at Swanwater, and are sold from
there, a draft being sent each year to the annual Melbourne Ram Sales, where these rams have
become notable for their large frames. Besides about twenty draught horses kept at Swanwater for
farming purposes, nicely-bred hacks of good substance and bone, together with considerable quality,
are to be found on all three places, as well as pairs and single buggy horses and ponies of good
pace and breeding.


Jfflp? ‘ * - ’ ; ; f | J-Tf lg5?SreMSpE fflfe#Birii fc i *“" .*
SBffiji "af ,: ■. . , Wear gf
S ■ IB , 1 >; ' H . '*.• ’ ■■ *u- ' i *v. *',^V^MBilfei' 1 ..SB 3 «
/ H|
8psPR^^£
The Homestead.
Hbonmgburb Estate
Zb c property of HIM*. John Xcc fl&atbcoon.
MORAXGHURK was purchased by the late Mr. John Matheson in 1857. It was then a small
sheep run, and in the early sixties he added some 40°° acres of adjoining freehold to it.
Shortly afterwards he further added to the property by buying \\ oodburn Estate, of 2500
acres, from Mr. \\ . J. Reid, and in 1878 he acquired the Native Creek Estate, of some 12,000 acres,
from his uncle, Mr. Robert Sutherland. These were all merged into Moranghurk, of which the area
now is 18,500 acres. The properties are situated at Lethbridge, between Geelong and Ballarat, and
form a compact block.
The late Mr. John Matheson was one of the most striking personalities of his day in pastoral
and financial circles. Born at Lairg, Sutherland, Scotland, he, when fourteen years of age, came out to
his uncles, Robert and Joseph Sutherland, in Tasmania. He shortly afterwards went to Sydney to
complete his education, and on his return to the island colony entered an office. Soon after he
accepted a post in the Union Bank of Australia, and rose so rapidly in that* service that in he
t (Section 24, payes 269-272,)


jk>.
i -;\ | t "• ■
The late Mr. John Matheson.
m wL m
Bv
Mr. J. Lee Matheson.
sented a very formidable task, as labour then was not
easy to obtain, and the forest was of a very heavy
description. Indeed, the enterprise did not at that time
ofifer any very alluring financial inducements, and even
now, when the cost of the original clearing is subtracted,
along with the cost of the other improvements, from the
total value, the remaining unimproved value of the land
is surprisingly small.
Some 1100 acres of the property are now leased to
farmers. About half the country is stony, and the carry-
ing capacity is approximately a sheep to the acre,
together with 400 odd head of cattle, which are kept to
eat down the rough grass. The clip is very clean, and
always sells at the top of the market. As the country
is deficient in fattening properties, the surplus sheep are
disposed of as stores. The sheep are all pure Merinos,
and have been bred from Tasmanian stock, the strain
mostly used being Bellevue. A stud of about 100
was appointed manager of the Geelong branch. Shortly
afterwards he was promoted to the manager’s chair in
Melbourne, and held that position till 1853* when he
accepted the general managership of the Bank of Vic-
toria, being the first general manager of that institution.
He first launched into squatting enterprises when in
Geelong. Besides Moranghnrk, he owned Mt. Napier,
in the Hamilton district, and was also part owner, with
his brother, of Marysvale and Ulswater Estates. He
held an interest, in conjunction with his uncle, Mr.
Joseph Sutherland, and Mr. Joseph McDonald, in the
Kilfera run, New South Wales. He died in July, 1882,
aged sixty-two years.
Originally about half of Moranghnrk was very
heavily timbered with a dense forest, and unhealthy for
sheep. In the seventies the land was cleared, and the
property fenced, with the result that the stock-carrying
capacity was nearly doubled. Clearing operations pre-


A General View of the Homestead.
The Outbuildings.
Moranghurk , Victoria.


View looking towards Moranghurk.
specially selected ewes are kept. The cattle on the property are mainly Herefords, though a few
Jerseys are kept for home milking purposes.
Moranghurk is particularly well watered, having frontage to the Moorambool River, the Native
Creek, and Goolebaryhurk Creek. A number of dams, tanks, and wells have also been established.
The property contains several miles of subdivisional stone walls, whilst a quantity of rabbit netting
has also been erected. There are about thirty paddocks. The shearing shed is a stone building,
containing fourteen stands. Very fine stone stables have been put up, with all the most modern
conveniences. The house is surrounded by an acre and a-half of garden, and some sixty acres are
each year cultivated for hay.
Mr. Matheson left Moranghurk to his eldest son John, who was first educated at the Scotch
College, Melbourne, and after matriculating at the local University, went to Jesus College, Cambridge.
He died in 1893, and the estate then went to his eldest son, John Lee Matheson, who was educated at
Harrow and at the Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took his B.A. degree. He was also called
to the English bar, taking his LL.B. degree. Lie intends residing at Moranghurk. Since the late Mr.
Matheson’s death, the management of the property has been supervised by Mr. Robert A. Molesworth,
as executor and trustee under the will of the late Mr. John Matheson, sen.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Union BEstate,
(The property of HDr. MUHam Xinbsa^.
UNION Station is in the county of Villiers, about 2 miles east of Wool'sthorpe, and was first
taken up in 1843 by George and James Carmichael on behalf of themselves and Elizabeth
and Grace Carmichael and William Jamieson. That firm worked the holding- for some
years, but afterwards sold it to the late David Kennedy, who had married one of the Carmichaels.
In 1864 the late Mr. William Lindsay, who owned Ouamby, an adjoining estate, purchased the
property. On the death of the latter in 1898 (when he had reached the ripe age of eighty-five)
Union was inherited by his son, the younger Mr. William Lindsay, who owns it now. Lrora the
time of passing into the hands of the Lindsay family until 1906, Union and Ouamby were worked
in conjunction.
Union was one of the first estates in Western Victoria to be made freehold. The greater
part of the 15,000 acres of which it consisted was purchased at auction from the Government in
1856. The owners were consequently not troubled as were so many pastoralists during
the sixties, with the inconvenience of selection going on in the midst of the run. When neighbouring
holdings were being split into fragments by speculative selectors, Union was held intact in fee
simple. The result of this certainty of possession was very important. Not only did it give peace
of mind to the owner, but with an absolute security of tenure it became profitable to push on with
many improvements which it would have been folly to have undertaken had there been a chance of
the land passing compulsorily out of his hands.
Up till 1906 Mr. William Lindsay was in partnership with his brother, the late Mr. James
Lindsay, of Ouamby. In that year the estates were separated, and some twelve months afterwards
10.000 acres of Union were subdivided, and offered for sale in blocks of from too to 700 acres
to farmers and dairymen. Owing to the well-known fertility of the soil, and the plentiful rainfall,
the land met with a ready sale, and Mr. Lindsay was left with 5000 acres and the original
homestead.
1 (Section 23, pages 273-254.)


View on Spring Creek.
Like Quamby, Union consists of undulating- country interspersed with rich alluvial flats.
Originally it was very heavily timbered, but a large proportion of the old trees were ring-barked
and cleared, or burned by bush fires, with the result that about 170 acres have had to be put down
in plantation to provide shelter for stock. The native timber consisted mostly of eucalyptus,
wattles, blackwood, and honeysuckle. For shelter purposes Mr. Lindsay has planted sugar and blue
gum and other varieties.
The settlers on Union are now able to cultivate almost as much of their land as they choose.
Much of it is as clear of stumps and tree roots as though a vigorous forest had never hid the ground
from the sun's rays. The soil is deep, of a stony character, and responds readily to cultivation.
With the moderate use of manure, repeated cropping appears to take none of the natural fertility
from the ground, and no doubt time will show that mixed farming, together with proper rotation
of crop, adds to, rather than diminishes, the yielding capacity. Already dairying has proved well
suited to the locality. Much of the land possesses a rare capacity for growing green pastures well
into the heat of summer, and English grass sown on the alluvial Hats thrives. The soil remains
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
Union, Victoria


A Garden Walk.
m ajnnnnHEQiv
Part of the Drive.


'<' - '* : ■". ''■ v “- • • ‘ ' ~4|S -
Ijj. * *Ik ' vn* '•&&&<} i „ rjtn -> ,s * • *^ v , r“?~ v yS , ,. '**
The Motor leaving Union.
moist late in the year, and as a consequence the milk yield does not decrease until comparatively
late in the season.
besides dairying, the Union settlers are engaging in various other forms of farming enterprise,
though Mr. Lindsay had, during the ten years preceding' the subdivisional sale, made great
improvements to the portion of the original estate which tne settlers now own, they have hardly yet
had time to put their blocks into first-class farming condition. When silos are erected, the holdings
fully subdivided, a complete rotation of crops established, and the productiveness of the soil under
a process of intense culture accurately measured, there is little doubt that even heavier returns will be
obtained from the farms. It is safe to say that few parts of Victoria are so uniformly prolific
throughout the year, and at the same time so healthy for stock, as in this strip of country.
There are several creeks running through Union, and springs of wholesome water are numerous.
Dams have also been made and bores sunk to pro.dde an unfailing supply for stock purposes. As
is the experience in so much of the Western District, boring rarely fails to find water at a moderate
depth, and the flow is affected to a very small extent by whatever changes there may from time
to time be in the character of the seasons.
Union, Victoria.


£ |5 -N. JH
kS. .■>
Photo by Sears.
Mr. Wm. Lindsay.
niM\ MUliam
Mr. William Lindsay was born on Union, and has been connected with the property practmall}
all his life. He takes an active interest in sporting and other public matters in the distiict, has
been a justice of the peace for about fifteen years, and is a member of the Warrnambool Shire
Council. For the last eight consecutive years he has been president of the Warrnambool Racing Club,
and is a member of the committee of the Warrnambool Club, and also of the Warrnambool Amateur
Turf Club, in 1897 he married Alice, the third daughter of Mr. Crawley, of \\ arrnambool.
(Ibe Stock.
The carrying capacity of Union is equal to about a sheep and a-half to the acre, ihe property,
however, has not at any time been devoted entirely to sheepbreeding. Prior to the subdivision of
the 10,000 acres previously mentioned, the normal size of the flock was 16,000. In addition to these,
a fairly large herd of cattle was always maintained, and considerable success was attained in
breeding blood horses.
Latterly Mr. Lindsay has had to abandon horsebreeding on a large scale. In the early days
the Union horses were well known throughout the State because of the abundant quality which
they combined with a plentiful supply of bone and sinew. They were a type which unfortunately


I' •
X
THE HOMESTEAD FROM THE GARDEN.
Union , Victoria.


A River Flat.
A Peep of the Homestead from Spring Creek.


Side Entrance to Homestead.
is now becoming far too scarce. \\ hen prices dropped, and other industries became more profitable,
breeding did not pay. idle experience is precisely the same as that afforded on many other pastoral
estates. I nion is naturally well adapted to the business. The sound, healthy character of the land
gives early maturity and strong constitutions to the young stock, for the wide open country provides
just such opportunities as colts and fillies need to develop their limbs and muscles. It has lately
been shown that the Imperial Army is short of sources of remount supplies, and with favourable
prices ruling, country such as composes Union might easily be made to profitably meet this demand.
However, the position now is that with rates at their present level it pays better to rear sheep and
cattle. Being a horse-lover, Mr. Lindsay takes pride in using only good horses and in breeding them
himself. He keeps some high quality brood mares for this purpose, and sends them to suitable
stallions. But horse production for sale purposes has been absolutely abandoned, and unfortunatelv
Union is only one of many places where the same thing has taken place. This is to be regretted,
because the probability is that the average type would improve (and it needs to) if a better market
could be established for stock.
Union, Victoria,


A WELL-COVERED ARCH IN THE GARDEN.


GROUP OF CROSSBRED EWES IN FRONT OF WOODSHED.
Union, Victoria.


l|j; .. r11Tl .., jr .- — — * -»■
Two Blood Yearlings.
Even since Union has been so much reduced in size, a fair number of beef cattle ha\e been
kept on the estate. The herd now averages some 200 head, mostly Hereford-Shorthorn cross ; they
are large-framed animals, and weigh heavily when fat.
The sheep at Union are crossbreds, being a mixture of Lincoln and Merino blood. About
7000 are shorn annually. The wool has established a reputation for quality, and always fetches a
high price at the Geelong market. Of course this is greatly the result of the judgment shown in
selecting the pure rams on the one side and the pure ewes on the other. Ihe aim has been to
produce a clip of long-stapled, sound wool of bright, lustrous fibre, the character of the countiy
also contributes largely to the quality of the fleeces. \he staple is even throughout, showing signs
of a growth well maintained without check during the whole of the year.
Jmprovcmcntcn
For many years the im-
provements on Union have
been increasing, but since the
estate was reduced to 5000
acres Mr. Lindsay has been
able to concentrate his atten-
tion on to a smaller area and
work the holding more as a
model estate. The homestead
has received a good deal of at-
tention in this respect. It was
originally built by the late Mr.
David Kennedy, but three years ago the present owner added to it greatly, and installed many modern
appliances. It is now an excellently-appointed country residence. No pains have been spared on
the garden surrounding the house. Water is laid on from a large storage dam, and is used liberally
on flower beds and lawns. Besides covering a big area, the garden has been tastefully planned.
The property is divided into a great number of small paddocks. Not only does this render
the place more convenient to work, but, in addition, it probably increases the carrying capacity
The shearing shed is of iron, and contains eight stands, with sheep accommodation for about a day’s
shearing. The other station buildings are numerous and extensive, and include roomy stables and
ample shelter for farm implements and vehicles.


The Homestead.
Cbc Clifton
Cbc property of flDr. H. 3. Simpson.
THE nucleus of what is now the Clifton Estate consisted of about 500 acres purchased by Mr.
A. J. Simpson in 1895. ihe property has since been added to from time to time, and now
comprises 1500 acres. Ihe holding is situated about five miles west of Hamilton, and the
greater portion is of rich undulating land, splendidly watered by three never-failing creeks, the
Grange, the Muddy, and the Violet, which all run through the estate and join the Wannon River
a few miles further on. It is an ideal spot for a stud farm, indeed it would be difficult to find a
more suitable place for that purpose in Victoria. The homestead, built of bluestone, is commodious,
with every convenience, and is in every sense a “ home.” The house is situated on a high rise,
from which a beautiful view of the surrounding district can be obtained.
The country is lightly timbered with gum; while plantations of Finns Tnsignis, single
specimens of Lambertianas, sugar gums, Cootamundra wattles, &c., give additional shelter to the
stock, besides adding to the beauty of the place.
(Section 26, pages 285-292.)


ftl ■ m & Pi5
- ■ .jaggr '^ra.-' 1 / ‘•';fj^'.^s.’
iJKSl ■
Photo hy Lafayette,
Mr. A. J. Simpson.
lll^
Muddy Creek.
Clifton is famed throughout the Commonwealth and New Zealand for its Shorthorn cattle and
Shropshire sheep. The Shorthorn herd was founded with selected females bought at the dispersion
tion and Silver King have secured champion
and first prizes at Hawke’s Bav, and other
leading shows in the Dominion. At the Melbourne
and Sydney Royal Shows they have also done
well, winning numerous prizes, while at the sales
the young bulls always command top prices. Five
head were sent over to the Royal Show, Sydney,
in April, 1909, and although there was very strong
competition, they won both championships, four
firsts, and one second. Clifton Chorister, the first-
sale of the Noorat herd, purchases also being made
at different times from Belinda Vale, Mr. John
James, and Mr. John Tweddle. Of late years the
bulls used have all been Belinda Vale bred. Only
the very best females have been retained in the
stud, and with the exception of one family from
Noorat, all of them now trace back to Morton's old
Mount Derrimut herd.
In the show yards Clifton cattle have been
very successful. In New Zealand, Clifton Corona-
prize bull calf at that show, being considered by many competent judges to be the best young bull
seen out of recent years.


St'-. ’
Shorthorn Cows. —The Homestead in the Distance,
A View on the Estate.
Clifton, Victoria.


£V .1 *i MbJLu.
( - "v»■•;’■. **2&9
i0it .-^
Stud Bull, Bolinda Duke of Derrimut 244TH.
Champion Royal Show, Melbourne, 1907; Royal Show, Sydney, igog.
wmmmm v A 'Zj
*$k. i\jf jmpjKS *
BHh hr *' flC?- SB&, Vgar
BmBB - / m. I; .
■ k <4r i % / . «%•*< aSwI. h 11 TO9BHr
m K ''"I <* ”3 W^iB •’'fiB
«• ■ ® m * « B B
.*- _. J|h , 4lK»’ , Mth^v^ | % '•Sj^L^
■ ; ‘
Boys Starting for School.


STUD SHROPSHIRE EWES AT CLIFTON.
Clifton, Victoria.


Stud Bull, Two Years Old.
Lindenow Duke of Derrimut 27TH.
1 TIf if I »V;V« flN^
i fgfi&m ’■
f r . ., , ••• • ... V
a m'/ly h s' ‘ tT.*' * >
*$^ >v ,/&
Me and My Pony.
The stud bulls now in use at Clifton are Bolinda Duke of Derrimut 244 th, which was
champion at the Melbourne Royal 1907, and champion at the Sydney Royal 1909, anf l Lindenow
Duke of Derrimut 27th, a dark red two-year-old, bred by Mr. A. J. Webb, but never
Hh|l shown.
and Old Judge, both bred by Mr. A. E. Mansell,
were also brought out from England. Mr. Simpson
considers Dreamland to be the best Shropshire
he has ever seen, and his blood is strongly in-
fused through the flock. Other noted rams have
been used from time to time, and the ewes have
always been heavily culled. When the Shropshire
boom was on, sheep from Clifton figured promi-
nently at the Melbourne Royal Shows, and, amongst
numerous other prizes, both championships were won
in 1899 and the ewe championship in 1902. Although
they have not been shown further away than Hamil-
ton of late years, the same attention is paid to their
breeding, the ew r es being a fine even lot, sym-
metrical in carcase, with short legs, and carrying a
profitable fleece of wool. Every year the young'
rams have been sold at remunerative prices. The
three stud rams now in use w r ere all bred by Mr.
A. E. Mansell.
The Shropshire stud was founded in 1896,
when a ram and five ewes were imported. With
the exception of one lot brought out by the late
Mr. H. Beattie in 1888, these were the first
Shropshires imported into Victoria. Another im-
portation of seven ewes was added to the Clifton
stud in 1897, and in 1900 two rams, Dreamland
both cattle and sheep are under the personal supervision of Mr. Simpson, a breeder who is
w r cll known as a judge at the leading shows in Victoria and the neighbouring States.


■ ywf * HT' ....
\ Vi-,- Aiaw “ •"’’•'C* -ji$5SS? <li S^‘'\»' v ' ’ l Va</ "V */
Dreamland (Imp.)
Clifton Care at Eighteen Months Old.
Bred by Mr. A. J. Simpson, ist and Champion at Royal Show, Melbourne, i8gg.
Clifton, Victoria,


Sowing and Harrowing.
The Garden, Looking Towards the Stable, at Clifton.
harming is carried on at Clifton in a fairly extensive manner. Oats and hay are the main
crop, but barley and wheat are also grown. A quantity of rye grass is cut for hay each year, and
great crops of roots, such as mangolds, carrots, and potatoes, are taken from some of the rich slopes
that run down to the creeks. Maize, kale, rape, and peas are also grown, so that there is always a
variety of feed on hand and coming on for the stock. Two teams of horses are kept going
cultivating practically the year round.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


Hvalon (3eelono,
£be property of HIM*. jfranft Hustin.
k VALON, the home of Mr. Frank Austin, the well-known sheepbreeder, is situate in one of
/ \ the most attractive and productive localities in Victoria. When the late Mr. James
I V Austin, the father of the present owner, chose a new home in a new land, immense areas
of the most fertile and well-watered sheep country in Australia lay at his disposal.
Melbourne and Geelong were then little villages, and hundreds of miles of waving pastures lay in
all directions, untracked and unoccupied. It was in the thirties when such ardent spirits made homes
in the garden of a continent, little dreaming how in a few years’ time the discovery of gold would
bring men pouring in from all the corners of the globe at the rate of 10,000 per month. These
early settlers set out to lead pastoral lives of strenuous pioneering, unconscious of the extraordinary
development time held in store for the land they were doing so much to build up. Such were the
prospects in the Port Phillip district when Mr. Austin built his first house and settled with the flocks
and herds he had brought with him from Tasmania on a spot close to Avalon, and from which he
afterwards purchased the latter property. Avalon is a few miles from the port of Geelong, and is
surrounded with a grassy plain, the You Yang Mountains rising like sentinels to the north, the high
peaks of Macedon in the further distance, and the sparkling waters of the sunlit bay to the south-
east.
In the early days a large extent of country was worked under an old squatting license
from the Avalon homestead, which was established in the thirties. The busy manufacturing town
of Geelong of to-day, with something like 35,000 inhabitants, stands on the old run where the
flocks of Mr. Austin once grazed peacefully among lonely, silent hills. The Barwon River ran for
3 (Section 27, pages 293-314.)


miles through the holding, coming to within a few miles of the beach at the head of Corio Bay,
and then being turned again off south by a range of hills to flow on for a considerable distance
till it reaches the surf-bound ocean coast to the west of the Port Phillip Heads. The locality was
a happy choice on the part of Mr. Austin. The land is open, fertile, as sound as a bell, well
watered, and subject to a good and regular rainfall. The formation is volcanic, though over most
of the area there is an absence of the stones which in other parts of the State render so much rich
volcanic land either difficult or impossible to cultivate.
At a later date Avalon, of course, became exclusively freehold, and in iBBr, when Frank
Austin acquired the property, it consisted of 23,700 acres. The heavy carrying capacity of the land
is indicated by up to 26,000 sheep having been depastured on it at one time. Recently the peculiar
advantages Avalon holds, both in the proximity to a market and in the great productiveness of the
soil, made it apparent that woolgrowing was not the most profitable use to which the estate could
be put. New possibilities were opening out in agricultural industry, and an increasing demand was
manifesting itself for \ ictorian farms. Mr. Frank Austin accordingly decided to reduce his flock,
to subdivide Avalon, and to lease a considerable area of it to farmers. Three years ago the estate
was therefore reduced to 7000 acres, the balance now being in the hands of tenants. So rich have
the farms proved that tons of good manger hay to the acre is an average yield, and droughts
are practically unknown there. From that time Mr. Austin's industrial attentions have been mainly
devoted to producing stud Merino sheep, and Avalon is now worked as a stud farm.
Because of its situation, and because of its eventful history in the hands of father and son,
Avalon is, among Victorian landed estates, of more than ordinary interest. The tiny village of
Geelong, on its original boundaries, has become a thriving and bustling city, whilst away 35 miles to
the north-east a haze of smoke shows the proximity of the second largest city in the Southern
Hemisphere, and the only existing capital of a whole continent, on a spot where Mr. James Austin
doubtless rode often enough through desolate ti-tree scrub and over lonely hills. Nor are there
many estates in Victoria where after but a short drive you may have the wavelets of a beach-
rimmed bay rippling sleepily at your feet, from where, in fact, you may watch the majestic ocean
liners, the blackened and busy cargo steamers, the stately clippers that carry wool and wheat—
the commerce of a State—passing up and down a bay which Mr. James Austin found an undisturbed
haven for wild sea birds.


y-
VIEW OF AVALON HOUSE.
Showing the Garden and Bay beyond.
Avalon, Victoria.


* '?-* * *>
RHSnk.' «*r'
ANOTHER VIEW OF AVALON HOUSE.


I* >
The Late Mr. JAMES AUSTIN
James Hustm.
As parts of New South Wales have been settled and made productive by Victorians, so
was a good deal of Western Victoria settled at a much earlier date by Tasmanians. It was to the
island State, then known as Van Diemen's Land, that Mr. James Austin, together with his parents
and brothers, migrated in the year 1830. A very few years afterwards, however, the elder couple
returned to England, several of the sons, including James, remaining to work the land their father
had taken up. Shortly after the departure of Air. and Airs. Austin, James and his brother Thomas
decided to strike out in wider fields and seek their fortunes in a land seeming to offer more
prolific resources than those of the island. The two young men consequently chartered a ship,
which they filled with sheep, other kinds of live stock, and things necessary to pastoral work.
Entering Port Phillip Heads they turned to the West of Corio Bay, and landed at Point Henry on
A vaion, Victoria.


the south beach. Here for a while they settled. This was on the opposite side of the bay, though
not far away from Avalon, which Mr. James Austin subsequently bought. Mr. Austin saw Geelong
grow from practically nothing till it was incorporated as a town in 1842, when he took an active
interest in its welfare, and was created the second mayor of the infant municipality. The district
was then under the rule of the New South Wales Government, the Colony of Victoria not having
been formed. For the ten years succeeding 1842, the progress of the Port Phillip district, as the land
south of the Murray was then called, was not marked with any sensational development. Pastoral
industry was successful, but there was no great tide of immigration flowing into the place. Sheep
represented a healthy and growing industry, but they represented practically all the use that was
being made of the great latent resources of the country. Life in the interior was then hard and
dull enough, though Avalon was advantageously placed in being near to settlement and close to
a seaport.
But in 1851 gold was discovered. In 1852-3 fleets of ships were arriving at Port Phillip
discharging passengers by the thousand, and in a short space of time a quarter of a million additional
persons at the most active age of their lives had poured into the virgin country, and had laid the
foundation of its future greatness. At Geelong and Melbourne ships were lying idle, with their
crews stricken by the gold fever, and left for the diggings. From Avalon the forests of masts
could be seen. Here was a change in the fortunes for the landholders throughout the colony, and
more especially for those near a port and market. The result was that in 1854 Mr. James Austin,
who had been suffering in his health, was able to leave the land of his adopted home to permanently
reside in the Old Country. He purchased a property at Glastonbury, England, and lived there until
1896, when he died at the ripe old age of eighty-six. While in England he long and honourably
filled several posts of public importance, and he was mayor of Glastonbury no less than five times,
in addition to being an alderman. As a director of the Bank of Victoria he had displayed before
leaving this country that business sagacity which enabled him to carry most of his undertakings
to a successful issue.
Mr. Austin was married to Miss Rebecca Savage, and they had nine children, three of
whom were daughters and six sons. On his temporary return to Victoria in later years, Mr. Austin
received a public demonstration of welcome from the people of Victoria.
It was in the early fifties when the Geelong residents lost an opportunity of placing their
town in a position from which it must have soon completely overshadowed Melbourne in size and
importance. When the first country railway was about to be built the Geelong people appeared to
think they had most to gain by being connected with the capital, but had they accomplished the con-
struction of the line to the goldfields of Ballarat most of the stream of trade and travellers from
that most populous portion of the colony would inevitably have been diverted away from Melbourne
and through the port on Corio Bay. The sturdy enterprise and the keen judgment of Mr. Austin
r/ie Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW ON AVALON.
Showing the Pine-tree Breakwinds and the Yon-Yang Mountains in distance.
A valon, Victoria.


m .
i c
MR. FRANK AUSTIN.


were, in a financial sense, well repaid. He had struck out in a new country when its possibilities
were little known. Had not gold been discovered, and when he settled on Corio Bay there was no
indication of its existence, he would have had to devote himself to work and hardship for much
longer than proved actually to be the case. The initial risks of his undertaking were very great, and
it was only a bold sprit who would have launched with all his worldly possessions into an enterprise
the nature and prospects of which were at the time so little understood. His sound judgment and
his unfailing stability of character brought him abundant success, and enabled him to preserve the
fruits of it through long after years of qnieter life.
At Glastonbury there was no better-known or more widely-respected resident than Mr.
Austin. In 1861 he was able to purchase the Glastonbury Abbey and House, and from time to time
he acquired other estates in the neighbourhood, wdiilst his public spirit and his active interest in all
local matters made him a man looked up to as a leader and a source of strength to the district.
tTbr. Ifranh Husttn.
Mr. Frank Austin, the present owner of Avalon, is a second son of the late Mr. James
Austin. He was born in 1859, and was educated at Clifton College, England. When his school days
were over he came to settle in Victoria, taking over the management of Avalon. After leasing the
property for three years, he purchased it in 1881. Though brought up in the Old Country, Frank
Austin soon assimilated the spirit of the pastoral atmosphere which was to make his future environ-
ment. He not only acquired an active interest in the management of the estate, but he also became
prominent in public movements initiated for the welfare of the wool-growing industry. During latter
years he has proved a pillar of support to the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Association, and he is pro-
bably as well known as any of the pastoralists who congregate at different times of the year in
Melbourne. In 1887 Mr. Austin married the daughter of the late Mr. Thomas Edward Bostock,
father of the present Mr. T. E. Bostock, of Strachan, Murray and Shannon Proprietary Limited,
Geelong, and brothel of Messrs. James and Augustus Bostock, now living in the Warrnambool
district. Mrs. Austin was brought up as the adopted daughter of the late Mr. A. Francis Ormond,
the founder of Ormond College at the Melbourne University. The union has been blessed with
two sons and two daughters.
Mr. h rank Austin has followed in his father's footsteps in not only taking a keen interest
in all local movements, but also in lending a helping hand and a guiding counsel when either are
needed. Fie is President of the Geelong Racing Club, and has been President of the Geelong
Agricultural Society, besides having given liberal support to numerous institutions founded in the
district which he has made his home.
A vaion, Victoria,


Air. Austin takes a genuine interest in the horsebreeding industry, and the present standard
of ponies owes no little of the progress that has been made to his efforts and his enterprise. On
his property, known as Yoe, in the Colac district of Victoria, he has established a stud of this breed,
and illustrations arc given of Mahboob and Magistrate, two of his ponies, both of which are of Arab
blood. The powerful frames, great endurance, and the hard, thorough quality legs of this type have
become deservedly popular throughout the State.
Every visitor to the annual show at Melbourne of the Australian Sheepbreeders’ Association
will be familiar with the Avalon sheep. Other competitors will no doubt be even more familiar with
them, for when Mr. Austin does not make a clean sweep of the prizes he at any rate carries away
a large proportion of them. On one recent occasion he took no less than seven-eighths of the total
prize money given in the Merino section.
Mr. Austin’s ideal in evolving a distinctive type of Merino sheep has been to acquire length
and density of wool, somewhat on the strong side in the fibre, and to achieve a hard constitution.
So large a measure of success has he achieved in accomplishing what he has aimed at that he has
some 300 stud and flock rams and a similar number of stud ewes available for sale every year.
When Mr. Frank Austin bought Avalon in 1881, the property was stocked with crossbred
sheep. These, however, he gradually worked off, simultaneously supplanting them with a high-class
Merino, which formed the foundation of the present stud. The original ewes were purchased from
the well-known Mawallok flock, belonging to Mr. Philip Russell, and near to Beaufort. The
Mawallok sheep have been for very many years managed by Air. George Lewis, who is himself
an enthusiastic and widely-known breeder. The sheep were derived largely from the old Scone
blood at a time when it was rightly believed to be the best Tasmania had to offer. Air. Austin
bought his rams from the stud of Messrs. McFarland and Sons, of Barooga, in Xew South Wales. The
flock on the latter property were bred from what was considered to be the best strain of Vermont
Alerinos imported into this country. For a while Air. Austin continued building on this foundation,
but with the object of more rapid progress he afterwards bought sheep from the famous Bellevue
stud, which by that time had come to hold the leading place among Tasmanian strains. In pur-
chasing high-class stud rams Air. Austin adopted a bold policy, and once satisfied that a sire would
benefit his flock he was rarely prevented from securing him by the price required. On one notable
occasion he bid 1575 guineas for the famous Bellevue sire President. Another breeder bid 1600
guineas, and in this instance Mr. Austin failed to secure the sheep. The price paid, however,
was probably higher than that given at any time for any other Australian ram.
No other blood has ever been introduced into the Avalon sheep, and their owner has made
subsequent progress exclusively by judicious selection within the flock and by skilfully applied
inbreeding. What the sheep have accomplished in competition against other studs is forcibly
illustrated by the long list of prizes they have won at the Melbourne show of the Australian
Sheepbreeders’ Association during the last nine years.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


, ,-/■,
Wfe ATly’ * . 1 *gfe »- -w ..,* /•/jV.nJlw* *: * •
ARAB STALLION MAHBOOB.
A vulon, Victoria.


■ aiiiinm/iTWirr ~'r tc?w~ £ l.*±,
/ J I *** ~~**~*'*****’ • ****>m 1 **''*' ■
'^*y.:>/?iy * ; '' ’ * ■ *~' . •- * ,|pfp
ARAB STALLION MAGISTRATE.


t J5r**I C^i
t' '*^ l r #1 gfl| '*’
s' r "
« w* *
■pfgfy igjjP 1 fc-l» K
iwpi * if *jT^i
■ # f > «s. - ■ «• *?■ -^PP
iPPW-j. • <*§> - nqw" «»■ .■ jSs^fljnfifc'
m Ik V** , < *P l
* ,fi '* ■ -r, \n r w-1 . -> - • ?: l^^|
The Deniliq.uin Champion in 1888.
Bred by Messrs. McFarland and Sons, Barooga, and purchased by Mr. F. Austin for use in his stud at Avalon.
Avalon, Victoria


Record of Prizes won by the Avalon Merino Sheep
AT THE
Annual Shows of the Australian Sheepbreeders’
Association.
[F.W. signifies Fine Wool ; S.W., Strong Wool; H.F., Hand-fed; G.F., Grass-fed ]
1892.
First and Fourth, ram, F.W., H.F., under i i y 2 years.
1893-
Second, ewe, S.W., H.F., under years and over i l / 2 years.
1894.
Third and Fouth, ram, S.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
iSgS-
Third and Fourth, ram. S.W., G.F., under IJd years.
Second, ram, S.W., G.F., under 2>4 and over 13T years.
First, ram, S.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
Third and Fourth, ewe, S.W., H.F., under \ l / 2 years.
Fourth, ewe, S.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
1896.
Champion, ram, S.W., G.F. (special certificate).
First and Third, ram, S.W., G.F., over 2 l / 2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., G.F., under \ i y 2 years.
Third, ewe, S.W., H.F., under and over i l / 2 years.
1897-
First , ram, S.W., FI.F., under i l / 2 years.
Third, ram, S.W., G.F., over years.
Second, ram, S.W., G.F., under 2 y 2 and over 1 ]/ 2 years.
Third, ewe, S.W., G.F., under i i y 2 years.
1898.
Second, ram, F.W., IFF., under \y 2 years.
Third and Fourth, ewe, F.W., FI.F., under i i y 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., H.F., under years.
Second, ewe, S.W., IFF., under iy> years.
1899.
Fourth, ram, F.W., H.F., under iy 2 years.
Second, ewe, F.W., H.F., under i i y 2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., IFF., under 2)/> and over iy> years.
First and Fourth, ram, S.W., G.F., under 2 y 2 and over \y 2 years.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TOM.
Bred by and the property of Mr. Frank Austin.
Champion Strong-wool Grass-fed Ram, Melbourne Sheep Show, 1902 and 3, and Champion of the Show at
Ballarat in igoi, 2, and 3. 4 years 8 months. ry/ihths Vermont.
A valon, Victoria,


THREE AVALON-BRED CHAMPION EWES BY TOM.


igoo.
Third, ram, F.W., H.F., under i]/ 2 years.
hirst, ram, F.W., G.F., under and over i]/ 2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., H.F., under iy 2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., G.F., over years.
1901.
Fourth, ram, F.W., H.F., under 1y 2 years.
First, ewe, F.W., H.F., under 1y 2 years.
Second, ram, F.W., G.F., over 2>< years.
First and Fourth, ram, F.W., G.F., under 13/2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., G.F., under and over iy 2 years.
1902.
Champion, ram, S.W., G.F. (trophy, guineas, and £5 55.).
hirst, ram, F.W., G.F., under 23/2 and over iy 2 years.
Fourth, ram, F.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
Second, ewe, S.W., H.F., under and over i l / 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., G.F., over 2>4 years.
First and J hircl, ram, S.W., G.F., under 23C and over Iy, vears.
First, ram, S.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
Second, ewe, S.W., G.F., under and over years.
1903-
Champion, ram, S.W., G.F. (trophy, guineas, and £5 55.).
Second, ram, F.W., G.F., over years.
Third, ram, F.W., G.F., under 1y 2 years.
1 bird and Fourth, ram, S.W., H.F., under IP2 years.
Fourth, ewe, S.W., H.F., over 2 l / 2 years.
First and Third, ewe, S.W., H.F., under 1y 2 years,
hirst, ram, S.W., G.F., over years,
hirst, ram, S.W., G.F., under and over 1y 2 years,
i bird, ram, S.W., G.F., under i l / 2 years.
Second, ewe, S.W., G.F., over years.
Fourth, ewe, S.W., G.h., under 1y 2 years.
1904.
Champion, ram, S.W., G.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., hi. or G.F.
Second and 1 bird, ram, F.W., H.F., under 1y 2 years.
Second, ewe, h.W., H.F., under 13/2 years.
Fourth, ram, F.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
Ihil d, ewe, h.W., G.h., under 23/2 and over i l / 2 years,
hirst, ram, S.W., H.F., under and over 1y 2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., H.F., under iy 2 years.
Second, ewe, S.W., H.F., under iy 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., G.F., over years.
Fourth, ram, S.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
I bird, ewe, S.W ~ G.h., under 2 l / 2 and over i l / 2 years.
A valon, Victoria.


1905-
Champion, ram, F.W., H.F.
Champion, ram, F.W., H. or G.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., H.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., G.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., H. or G.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., H.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., G.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., H. or G.F.
First, ram, F.W., H.F., over 23A years.
First, ram, F.W., H.F., under 23/2 and over i l / 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., H.F., under 23A and over i l / 2 years.
First and Second, ram, S.W., H.F., over 23X years.
Second, ram, S.W., H.F., under i]/ 2 years.
First, ewe, S.W., H.F., over 2 l / 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., G.F., over 2 y 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., G.F., under 2 3/2 and over i]/ 2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., G.F., under \ l / 2 years.
First, ewe, S.W., G.F., under 2 3d> and over \]/ 2 years.
First, ewe, S.W.. G.F., under \ l / 2 years.
In this year (1905) Mr. Austin took all the Champion Prizes
in the Strong Wool section.
1906.
Champion, ram, F.W., H.F.
Champion, ram, F.W., H. or G.F.
Champion, ewe, F.W., H.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., H.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., G.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., H. or G.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., H.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., G.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., H. or G.F.
First, ram, F.W., H.F., over 2]/ 2 years.
Second, ram. F.W., H.F., under years and over i]/ 2 years.
Second, ram, F.W., G.F., over 2]/ 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., H.F., over 2]/ 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., H.F., under years and over i]/ 2 years.
First, ewe, S.W., H.F., over 2 l / 2 years,
hirst, ewe, S.W., H.F., under \ l / 2 years.
First and Second, ram, S.W., G.F., over years.
First and Third, ram, S.W., G.F., under and over i]/ 2 years.
Second, ram, S.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
First, ewe, S.W., G.F., over years.
This year (1906), as in the previous one, Mr. Austin took all
the Champion Prizes in the Strong Wool section, totalling, for
two_ years, 17 Champions in the Fine Wool and Strong Wool
sections.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE AVALON CULTIVATIONS.— Ploughing with Traction Engine.
Breaking up Virgin Soil with three sets of Seven-disc Ploughs, making 21 furrows in all.
A valon, Victoria.


>»»S&kL %' : T -.-.-V' ••••'.'■ -• >•.... ■-• . •-■ ■ ■ t >’ - ■ ■ -*• ■ ~ ' , - ..v „.. -. «£
:> : vvS&- : :
v -s ■'Zi.*!* Hr^ , M^ :^(ri^-? £ '‘V~T • ••** - '•'-. , ■ ■ ’■*’-■*• ~‘** t ±s.il !$».... - ~
iyi ,-., ;- .''•^ - ■-—'• ''• •>.'■ . - >' ■ ■ ~ a .-.,. --* ■*: MMSt-
-V* A • i v %~‘T v 1^-, ?Mg ;3»
" • • - ;-• •- -
THE AVALON CULTIVATIONS.—Harrowing with Traction Engine.


SUMMARY, BY YEARS,
OF
PRIZES
WON
BY
AVALON SHEEP.
N
Oh
co
ro
Oh
oo
IO
Oh Oh
CO co
*sO
Oh
CO
4
Oh
00
co*
Oh
CO
Oh
Oh
CO
6
o
Oh
o
Oh
O
Oh
ro
O
O'
4
o
Oh
•n
O
Oh
o
Oh
o
Oh
oo’
O
Oh
a
o
4
Champions
I
I
I
2
8
9
6
3
31
Specials ...
2
2
Firsts
I
I
i
I
I
I
I
2
4
3
2
9
8
12
3
50
Seconds...
I
I
I
I
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
3
4
5
I
33
Thirds ...
I 2
2
2
I
...
I
I
4
3
I
I
2
21
Fourths ...
I
I 3
I
2
I
3
2
I
J 7
2
I
2 7
5
4
5
5
4
6
9
i3
13
20
22
26
IO
154
1907-
Special, “ Best Dam," S.W., ewe, any age, with lamb.
Special, “ Best Dam,” F.W., ewe, any age, with lamb.
Champion, ewe, F.W., H.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., H.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., G.F.
Champion, ram, S.W., H. or G.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., H.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., H. or G.F.
Second, ram, F.W., H.F., over years.
First, ram, F.W., H.F., under 2 l / 2 and over i l / 2 years.
First, ram, F.W., H.F., under i l / 2 years.
First, ewe, F.W., H.F., over 2y 2 years.
First and Second, ewe, F.W., H.F., under \ i y 2 years.
First and Third, ram, S.W., H.F., over years.
First, ram, S.W., H.F., under iy 2 years.
First and Second, ewe, S.W., H.F., over years.
First, ewe, S.W., H.F., under and over \y 2 years.
First and Second, ewe, S.W., H.F., under iy 2 years.
First, ram, S.W., G.F., over 23T years.
First, ewe, S.W., G.F., over years.
First and Second, ewe, S.W., G.F., under and over years.
1908.
Champion, ram, S.W., H.F.
Champion, ewe, S.W., H.F,
Champion, ram, S.W., H. or G.F.
First and Second, ram, F.W., H.F., under and over 13/ I years.
First, ram, S.W., H.F., over 23d years.
First, ewe, S.W., H.F., under 134 years.
Fourth, ram, F.W., G.F., under 23d and over 134 years.
Third, ewe, F.W., G.F., under iy 2 years.
Third, ewe, S.W., G.F., under years.
23
A valon , Victoria


SUMMARY OF FOREGOING RECORD.
Fine Wool.
Strong
Wool.
Fine
Wool. Strong Wool.
Total.
, r , 1
Ram.
Ewe.
Ram.
Ewe.
Ram.
Ewe. Ram.
Ewe.
1892 —
1903—
First prize
1
I
Champion
I
I
Fourth prize
I
1 = 2
First
2
I
3
1893—
Second ...
I
I
2
Second prize
I
I = I
Third
I
2
I
4
1894—
Fourth ...
I
2
3 '3
Third prize
I
I
Fourth prize
I
I = 2
1904—
1895—
Champion
2
2
First prize
I
I
First
2
2
Second prize
I
I
Second ...
I
t 1
I
4
Third prize
I
I
2
Third
I
I
I
3
Fourth prize
1
2
3 = 7
Fourth
I
I
2 13
1896 —
Champion (special certi-
T 9°5 —•
ncate) ...
I
1
Champion
2
3
3
8
First
I
I
First
2
4
3
9
Second ...
I
I
Second
3
3 =■ 20
Third
I
I
2 = 5
GO
VO
1906 —
First
I
I
Champion
2
1 3
3
9
Second
I
I
First
I
4
3
8
Third
• I
I
2 = 4
Second ...
2
4
1898 —
Third
I
First
I
I
Second ...
I
I
2
i9°7—
Third
I
I
Champion
1 3
2
6
Fourth
I
1 = 5
Specials (Best Dams) .
1
I
2
1899—
First
2
2 3
5
1 2
First
I
I
Second
I
I
3
5
Second ...
I
I
2
Third
1
1 = 26
Fourth
2
2 = 5
1900 — ■
1908 —
First
I
I
Champion
2
I
3
Second ...
2
2
First
1
I
I
' 3
Third
I
1 = 4
Second
I
igoi —
Third
1 t
2
First
I
I
2
Fourth
I
1 =■■ 10
Second ...
I
I
2
Fourth
2
2 = 6
1902 —
Total
prizes won in 17 years— 154
Champion
I
I
First
I
3
4
Second ...
2
2
Third
I
I
Fourth
I
i = 9


W% WWIJWRI I^PWf^ 1
Station-bred Cattle.
(taramut Ibouse Instate
Che property of flhr. ai. IR. he Xittle.
CARAML i HORSE ESTATE lies between Hexham and Penshurst, and some miles south of
Chatsworth. It consists largely of volcanic soil, is nicely watered by creeks running into the
Hopkins River flowing to the east of the property, and now belongs to Mr. Ernest Robert de
Little, who makes it his home. The land has been in the hands of the same family for many years. In
the early days Caramut belonged to Dr. Palmer, but about 1850 he sold it to the late Mr. Henry de Little
(the father of the present proprietor) and Ids two brothers, all three of them being in partnership. Soon
afterwards Mr. Henry de Little bought the shares of his brothers, and carried on the management
of the property himself until his death in 1871.
After the death of the late Mr. Henry de Little, the property was managed by that gentleman's
trustees, Messrs. Alfred Douglas, J. J. Hickling, and W. Ross, until the year 1890, when the land was
divided between the two sons, Ernest taking the section known as Caramut House for his share, and
Henry Frank receiving Caramut North.
(Section 28, pages 37 5-330.


*»
A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.


View from Homestead.
Showing Clumps of Pine for Stock Shelter.
The Caramut House Estate consisted then of about 8000 acres, but at a later date Mr. Ernest
de Little sold the greater part of it to his brother. The money obtained from the sale he invested in
the purchase of Barwidgee Estate, comprising 9600 acres, and lying so close to his remaining portion
of Caramut I louse that the two could easily be worked from the one homestead. In the Port
Fairy district Mr. Ernest de Little also owns the Aringa North Estate—about 3500 acres of the
old Aringa property, which was subdivided for sale some five years ago. He grows avool on that
property, and as the soil is rich, he also does a good deal of stock-fattening there.
The Caramut House and Barwidgee properties, though of rich soil, are well noted for the very
high-class wool they produce. The clip frequently tops the market at Geelong wool sales, and the
price it sells for is often taken as a standard from which to gauge the conditions of the market
generally. There appears to be some peculiarity about the soil and climate which gives an unusual
lustre and quality to fleece. The same characteristic extends through some twenty miles or so of
similar country. Blackwood, The Gums, Laureney, and adjoining properties are all noted for the
high quality of fleeces grown on them. Of course, it is only with the right kind of sheep that the
wool market can be topped, but given a flock of the required type, the Hopkins country from about
Hexham to near Penshurst will produce wool that can be equalled by only a few other choice spots of
limited area in Australia,
Caramut House , Victoria.


PART OF THE GARDEN.


Mr. Ernest R. de Little.
From an Oil Painting.
The Late Mr. Henry de Little.
The fertility of the two estates renders them most suitable for crossbred and comeback sheep,
of which Mr. de Little runs about to.ooo head. The country is highly adapted to fattening both sheep
But his education did not cease when he left that
institution, and he was sent travelling with a pri-
vate tutor to various parts of the world. Two years
of pleasant and eventful life were spent in this way,
and after the term of roving had been completed,
he settled down to life at Jesus College. Cambridge.
Lie soon threw himself body and soul into the spirit
of the famous old University, where his athletic
powers, as well as other qualities, won him many
friends. There were not then so many Australians
attending the great seats of learning in the United
Kingdom as there are now, and the present squire of
and cattle, and on the flats big-framed bullocks may
be seen almost at any time of year standing knee
deep in a wealth of rich, waving grass. The sheep
also grow to a fine size, and the wethers sell at top
rates when offered.
HIM*. Ernest Hebert be Xittlc.
Mr. Ernest Robert de Little was born in his pre-
sent home in 1868. lie is the youngest son of
the late Mr. Henry de Little, and received his
primary education at the Geelong Grammar School,
where he stayed until he was fifteen years old.
Caramut soon found himself having a very good time. He received his “blue” for cricket, playing in
the \ arsity match against Oxford in 1881;. when he was twenty-one years of age.
Caramut House, Victoria.


THE DRIVE TO THE HOMESTEAD.


THE TENNIS COURT.
Caramut House, Victoria.


''*•% A' Jfw *SS* n km i •*$**& y ?,gjBW^SHP
- ■
POLO PONIES.


Young Motorists.
The Son and Daughter of Mr. and Mrs. E. de Little.
Mr. dc Littles love for cricket was not abandoned by him when he left the precincts of the
University. Lins taste for the fine old English game was in 1890 responsible for him seeing still
more of the outside world, for in that year he visited India with Lord Hawke’s team.
Besides being a first-class cricketer, he is one of the best known Victorian polo players. The
Caramut Polo Club has been the champion of the State for the last two years, and Mr. de Little has
been an active member of that team ever since he returned from Cambridge. Numerous valuable prizes
and trophies have been won by him at the game.
Mis liking for polo does not arise solely from a love for exciting sport. He is also a
horse lover, as are most good polo players. It is the joy and poetry of the twisting and bounding of a
strong and nimble animal beneath one that adds just as much to the delights of polo, as the satisfaction
of fighting to beat the skill of an opponent. Mr. de Little is an enthusiastic breeder of polo ponies, as
well as others of a lighter type, and has won many races with his stock. He is the owner of the
famous sire Predominant, which he purchased from Mr. John Calvert some four seasons ago.
Predominant is an imported horse by Balfe from Dominante. (A full pedigree appears on another
page.) Ihe progeny of this well-known stallion have been very successful on the turf, while others
Caramut House, Victoria.


- L# Jm MlWMfJ
•;* ?: /i
1HL ' J. A:|0
• wppF^
lift 4 %fl9f|RB
IjiM "
JSm
n Ml BS M
£ ■ Jr
"
♦ '
PREDOMINANT.


1
1 Genealogical pebioree of “ predominant”
Melbourne or
( Pantaloon, 1824, by Castrel—Idalia, 1815, by Peruvan ; Musidora, 1804.
Thormanby,
Windhsund.
' Pyrne, 1840, by Touchstone—Decoy, 1830, by Filho da Puta—Finesse, 1815.
it 1
Q
1857- I
Alice Haw-
( Muley Moloch, 1830, by Muley—Nancy, 1813, by Dick Andrews—Spitfire, foaled 1800.
I
thorne, 1838
( Rebecca, 1831, by Tottery—Cervantes—Anticipation, 1802, by Beninbrough, 1791.
D i
( Fletman Platoff,
836, by Brutandorf—Comus mare, her dam Marcirna, by Stamfred.
< 1
Springy Jack.
< Oblivion, 1831, by Jerry—Remembrance, 1805, by Sir Solomon — Queen Mab—■
* 1
Plausible, 1
( Sister to Mercury.
1852. j
Pasquinade,
J Camel, 1822, by
Whalebone—Gaberlunzie’s dam, 1812, by Selim—Maiden, 1801.
/W
I
1830.
1 Banter, 1826. by Master Henry—Boadicea, 1807, by Alexander—Brundtte.
S
1 Totlery, 1820, by Tramp—Mundane, 1800, by Pot-8-os—Young Camilla, 1787, by
Woodpecker.
<
|
Sheet Anchor,
cc
Weatherbit, ;
1842.
1832.
j Morgiana, 1720, by Muley—Miss Stevenson, 1814, by Scudd or Sorcerer—Pre-
(, cipitate mare, 1795.
<
Miss Tetty.
J Priam, 1827, by J
t Miss Fanny’s dam
imilius—Cressida (sister to Eleanor), by Whisky—Young Giantess.
£
s
1834.
, 1815, by Orville— Golden Teg’s dam, 1800, by Buzzard—Horn Pipe.
<1
X
Hetman Platoff
( Brutandorf, 1821
by Blacklock—Mandane, 1800, by Young Camilla, 1787.
O
k CQ
(
1836.
' Comus mare, Marciana, by Stamford—Marcia, by Corianda —Faith, 1779.
£
Cossack
\ Maid, 1843. 1
(
Sister to Fox,
f Whisker, 1812, by Waxy—Penelope, 1798, by Trumpator—Prunella, 1788, by High-
flyer, 1774.
[ Torchbearer’s dam, 1803, by St. George—Pontac Mare—Pencil’s dam by Syphon, 1770.
Ui
1823.
H
1
T oxophilite,
1855-
I Longbow, 1849, by Thuriel—Miss Bowe, by Catton-—Tranby’s dam, 1812, by Orville,
1799.
( Tigerdemain, 1846, by Pantaloon — Decoy, 1830, by Filhoda Buda—Finesse, 1815.
1850, by Melbourne—Mowerina, by Touchstone—Emma, 1824.
I867.
I
Half-sister to
I West Australian,
/ W
X
X
Gen. Peel’s
J Brown Bess, 1844, by Camel—Petty Tarcemy’s mare, 1829, by Brutandorf—Mrs.
Dam.
( Cruickshank.
r i
Q
O <
1 Orlando, 1841, by Touchstone—Vulture, 1833, by Tangar—Kite, 1821, by Bustard—
O
j
T rumpet.
Olympia.
2
1856.
1 Cavitina, 1845, by Redshank—Oxygen, 1828, by Emihns—Whiz-gig, 1819, by Reubens
ui
h
<
Orchestra.
( Penelope, 1
798.
p.
Q
1868.
Overture,
< Teddington, 1848, by Orlando—Miss Twickenham, 1838, by Rockingham, 1830.
<
i
i860.
( lone, 1846, by Ion —Malibran, by Whisker—Garcia, by Octavian, by Stripling.
s
Stockwell,
( The Baron, 1842,
by Irish Birdcatcher, 1833, Echidna, 1838, by Economist, 1825.
by Glencoe—Marpessa, 1830, by Muley —Clare, 1824, by Marmion,
2
l
1849.
• Pocahontas, 1837
0
0
Bromielaw.
1816.
1862.
Q
Queen Maty.
< Gladiator, 1833, by Partisan—Pauline, 1826, by Mac's Quadrille, 1815, by Selim, 1802.
1843.
( Charming Woman’s dam, 1840, by Plenipotentiary—Myrrah, by Whalebone, 1807.
U
Tambton,
1 The Cure, 1841,
by Physician—Morsel, 1830, by Mulatto—Tinder, by Waterloo- -
C/)
(
-j Cressida, 1807.
5
I
I
Elsham
1850.
( Elphino, 1827, by Emilius—Variation, by Bustard—Johanna Southcote.
Lass, 1S66
Prescription’s
Dam, 1849.
j Hampton, 1833, by Sultan—Rachel, 1823, by Whalebone—Moses’ dam by Gohama.
1 Bonby Betty, 1834, by Robinhood—Argantes’ dam, by Bellerophon—Delphini mare.
Some of “ ipre&ommant’s” performances.
Predominant.
Br E. H. by Balfe, out of Dominante, 14 hands.
Ran Second in Zeal Cup, Calcutta, 1893, to Fidale L, beat by a
Won International Pony Stakes,
Calcutta, 1891,
J-mile. gst. 31b.
head. |-mile. gst. 51b. T ime, im. 17s.
Time, imin. ig^sec.
Time, 1 m. 5s.
Fourth International Pony Stakes, Calcutta, 1892, carrying top
Fen Stakes
, Calcutta, 1892, 5 furlong=, IO st, alb.
weight, lost. 31b. Time, im. 20s.
Innovation H’cap, Calcutta, 1892, 1 mile. lost.
Consolation Purse, Calcutta, 1893, J-mile. lost.
Time, im. 47§s.
Time, im. 2i|s.
Second to Sylvia in Pony Race, Calcutta, 1891. 5 furlongs,
Time, im. 51s.
International Pony Stakes, Calcutta, 1893. |
mile. lost. 61b.
Time, im.
iq4s.
lost. i2lb. Time,
Second to Lord Clyde, who carried gst.; Predominant, lost ylb.
Innovation
Handicap, Calcutta,
1893. 1 mile.
Pony Handicap, 1892, Calcutta, 7 furlongs. Time, im. 35|s.
im.
46s.
Caramut House, Victoria.


X.-<r
_ ~* ’«i
A GARDEN WALK.


«Jv®£ * -...'■ f'^ K Jf* 4 -»,v-..- . W.* ,„ * *. t ■ . **■ '■ ■ '*
■ > -. .. ' ~ T.;- •- -v /..?-. v »•■ iifi
The Homestead and Garden from Windmill Platform.
of his stock aie valued highly as polo ponies. As Mr. de Little has some high-class mares, the horse
wdl have a chance to further distinguish himself at Caramut House, and some of his get already
appear to be all that might have been expected of them.
In 1896 Mr. E. R. de Little married Ethel Ludlow, the fourth daughter of the late Mr. Colin
Simson, a well-known pastoralist. They have a son and daughter.
£bc Ibomcstcab.
Ihe Caramut House homestead is one of the most charming of Western Victoria. The residence
has been built on a rise, round which a creek twists through rich alluvial flats. The building itself is
of Milestone in one story, being on the plan of the older country homes, with large, airy rooms, wide
verandahs, and long windows. On several sides it is half hidden with thick-foliaged creepers and
flowering shrubs. Beyond the garden is a dense and varied plantation, which not only shelters the
house from both cold and hot winds, but adds greatly to the picturesque effect of the general
surroundings. The plantation is rather different from the rectangular type so common about station
homes and runs. Indigenous trees have been mixed with pines and other exotic varieties, and the
general outline of arrangement, with the timber stretching down on the one side to the water's edge,
destroys any impression of artificial planning which otherwise might arise. The mixture of hue and
character in the foliage also adds greatly to the beauty of the trees. It is strange that numbers of
Caramut House, Victoria


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOUSE.


OUTLOOK FROM THE HOMESTEAD.
Looking across the Orchard and Plains, showing portion of Training Track to the right of picture.
Caramat House, Victoria.


■JStSfc dlHSi^'lfcli
Homestead from Muston Creek.
varieties of trees are not more often planted together, instead of a strip of one species and then a strip
of another kind alternating with mathematical regularity, as is often adopted. Not only is the varied
shape and colour of the trees a source of special charm, but it will be found that causes interfering with
the health of some species will not as a rule affect others. Sometimes miles of station plantations of
the one kind of tree will be seen stunted or half dead. Had a mixture of seed been used, it would
generally be found that where one species failed to thrive, others would flourish all the more vigorously,
and ultimately take the places of the failures.
1 he garden at Caramut House is delightfully laid out with flowers and shrubs, and is nicely
sheltered by the plantations beyond. Ihe outbuildings and stables, although fairly adjacent to the
house, are divided from it by trees, and they also are well sheltered.
Country {Telephones.
One of the most modern and useful improvements at Caramut House is the country telephone
system with which it is connected. For some distance round it is the exception rather than the rule
for the large landholders not to be connected with one another and with the nearest telegraph office.
The proved saving in the expenses of station management, and the social advantages which have
resulted, are such that country life would now assume quite a different aspect if the convenience were
to be dispensed with. On many occasions serious and widespread loss from fire has been prevented
by the same agency.


f; 7. - ■ '
The Front of the Homestead.
Zhc JServambool BEstate.
Zb c {property of flDr. Militant flDoffatt.
BERRAMBOOL ESTATE is situated in the Western District of Victoria, about midway
between Wickliffe and Chatsworth. It is on the commencement of the hill country, and
from elevations on the run you can obtain an uninterrupted view over many miles of the
great western plain that stretches away to the north and east for over 100 miles. These hills are
lightly timbered with box, red gum, and sheoak, and are typical of the best woolgrowing country in
Australia, and it is doubtful if the fleeces grown on them are surpassed by those from any other part
of the world. It is good lambing country, and the percentages are amongst the highest in the district.
Berrambool was originally part of the Hopkins Hill property, which in the early days, when
acquired by the late Mr. John Moffatt, consisted of over too,ooo acres. In 1869 the estate was
subdivided, and it was then that Berrambool was constituted a separate place, with an area of
1
(Section 20, pages 331 -342.)


Mr. William Moffatt on his Grey.
A Corner of the Garden.
32,000 acres. in the following - year Air. Moffatt died, and his land was held in trust till 1904.
Air. Willie Moffatt, the present owner, is a nephew of the deceased gentleman, and since he became
possessed of the property has
sold about 11,000 acres of it.
The Hopkins River runs
through the holding, and the
homestead is pleasantly situ-
ated on an elevation not far
from its course. Though the
stream does not provide an un-
failing water supply, under-
ground flows are found in
many parts of the property at
depths varying up to 35 ft.
from the surface. Of late
years a number of bores have
been sunk into these sub-ar-
tesiau streams, and windmills arc used for lifting water to the surface.
In the early days the timber was somewhat thicker than it is now. The sheep often eat
off the young trees when they
show above the ground, and
thus prevent them from re-
placing the older trees which
from time to time perish from
age and other causes. In
some cases artificial planta-
tions have had to be estab-
lished to provide sufficient
shelter for stock, especially
on the flatter portions of the
run, where the land never was
very heavily timbered. The
pastures consist of native
grasses, and the carrying ca-
pacity is rather less than a
sheep to the acre. The natural characteristics of Berrambool are similar to those existing over a
considerable area of country stretching to the south and including properties producing such famous
The Pastoral Hontes of Australia.


' y- V, ' " '
/ ? x
-a,,. a- J* "V'
.. f ' .■-'^ i »T- i- 1
.. — • -I',. - v ’• ~ *“ -' ’K* • • .,. ■• . ■>* - '" •’ p/!S*flJfv« i- ■
A FORD ON THE HOPKINS RIVER.
Berrambool, Victoria.


A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.


IT'' \ IL I fflfl *
4* ** * i : " - *%> Joi®
*•■-'• ’ V ■ - . y.- y ja
A View on the Estate
clips as those from Blackwood. Bushy Creek. Hopkins Hill, Caramut. &c. The character of the soil
and the climate keeps the grass growing right through the winter. Xo doubt this may be accounted for
partly by the shelter provided by the timber and the irregular surface of the ground. There is.
however, something peculiarly healthy in the soil, for although in a wet winter (when the ground
becomes so thoroughly waterlogged that to leave the beaten track is to sink almost girth deep in
the soft yielding soil), the health of the sheep remains almost phenomenal. It is no uncommon
experience for a boundary rider in that country to work for months without seeing a single dead
sheep in the paddocks.
The estate is devoted entirely to pastoral purposes, for the country is capable of growing
wool of great character and lustre. The property is divided into paddocks ranging in area from
640 to 900 acres. The subsoil is suitable to holding water by means of surface tanks, and these
are used to a large extent, in addition to the bores and windmills already referred to. In some
seasons the dams provide excellent shooting, as the swamps on the neighbouring plains attract great
quantities of duck and teal, which often make a home on the water in the timbered country.
The house is a fine roomy stone structure. It was built in 1808 by Mr. John Moflfatt, but has
been greatly added to and improved by his nephew since he took possession. Of late years an
Berrambool, Victoria,


The Stables.
. -
The Woolshed,
electric light service has been installed, as well as a sewerage system with septic tanks. A fine
plantation of stately Pinus insignis trees surrounds the homestead, these wei e planted
twenty-six years ago by Mr.
Willie Moffatt. and his bro-
ther John (who now lives
at Chats worth House), and
they have attained consider-
able size. The house stands
some distance from the road,
and along the drive a fine row
of the scented gums of Wes-
tern Australia and Cootamun-
dra wattles are making vigor-
ous growth. On the run sugar
gums have generally been
used for forming plantations.
The house is connected by telephone with the Willaura Railway Station, the post-office at
Wickliffe, and with neighbouring station properties.
The garden has been greatly improved of late years, and is kept continually watered during
the hot months of summer. A hot air pump is used for lifting water from a large dam excavated
at a spot about 150 yards
from the house, where the
gentle slope of the ground
renders available for storage
the drainage of a considerable
watershed.
The woolshed was erected
in 1868 and added to in 1890.
It contains sixteen Wolseley
machines, and has accommo-
dation. for 1300 sheep, so that
enough sheep may be penned
overnight to keep the men
employed for almost the whole
of the subsequent day. An average of about 24,000 sheep, including lambs, are shorn annually on
the station. These subsist on the natural pastures, aided only by the produce from about 100 acres
of lucerne, which was planted some time ago. The result from this cultivation has, however, been
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


. V -' 1 ‘:.v ' ' ■' .’■ ' I
£ ■ - ‘ . - .... ,J V <• : ■ , U , S A V
Hav Crop for Station Use.
so satisfactory that Mr. Moffatt intends in future to add about 50 acres to it each year, until he has
a large area under the leguminous crop. It proves an excellent stand-by for weaners in the autumn,
and is useful and profitable in many other ways.
personal.
Mr. \\ illie Moffatt was born at Shirva, Kirkintulloch. in Dumbartonshire, Glasgow, Scotland,
in 1863. and came to Victoria in 1871. He afterwards attended the Church of England Grammar
School at Geelong. Since he left school he has been interested in quite a number of pastoral
enterprises. In 1881 he took up the management of the Burnawang Estate for the trustees of his
late father, and carried on that Avork till 1884, Avhen he relinquished the duty to engage in
undertakings on his own account. In December of the same year he obtained a lease of the Lake
Bolac Estate (22.000 acres), and AA'orked it Avith Watgania. the latter comprising some 4000 acres
and lying on the plains country near to the foot of Mount William, in the Grampians. Lake Bolac
Avas a noted woolgrowing property extending round the fertile shores of the lake, and included a
fair proportion of lightly timbered undulating land. In 1901, however, Lake Bolac AAas bought
by Mr. Peter Tyson, and Avas subsequently successfully privately subdivided and sold in agricultural
blocks. Part of the time, Avhile at Lake Bolac. he also Avorked Berrambool, of Avhich he obtained
a lease in 1893. The tAvo estates are only a feAv miles apart, and Avere easily managed in
conjunction with one another. Berrambool did not again pass out of his hands, and he purchased
Berrambool, Victoria,


«
A '
”' wf | . ' Je
Photo hy Seaj-s.
Mr. William Moffatt.
Photo htj Vandyck.
Mrs. William Moffatt and Youngest Daughter.
it in 1903. The same year as buying Berrambool he took over Strathkellar Estate, ncai Hamilton,
and comprising 11,000 acres of exceptionally rich country. He retained that estate until it was
tralian border. There is a family of two sons,
William Harold, who assists his father in the
management of the station, and Donald McLcllan,
and three daughters, Bessie Isabel, Marie Fairie,
and Jessie.
Mr. Moffatt takes a good deal of interest in
municipal affairs. Berrambool lies in three shires,
and he has been a member of the council of all
of them. From 1884 to 1895 he belonged to the
Ararat Shire Council, and was several times its
president. On being elected to the Mortlake Coun-
cil in 1894, he shortly afterwards resigned from
sold to the Closer Settlement Board some few years
later. In 1900 he added to his freehold by purchas-
ing two properties in the Victoria \ alley, near the
Grampians. These are Brookdale Estate, of 2800
acres, and Minanalina, of 2400 acres. Both the
holdings consist of excellent summer country, and
are sufficiently close to Berrambool to permit
stock being driven backwards or forwards in a
few days.
In 1885 Mr. Moffatt married Jessie, the young-
est daughter of the late Mr. Donald McLellan, of
Cove Station, near Lillimur, on the South Aus-
Ararat, and was presented by the ratepayers in that shire with an illuminated address in recognition
of his services. He has belonged to the municipal body at Mortlake ever since 1894. and has been


iTHE HOPKINS RIVER AT BERRAMBOOL
Berrambool, Victoria.


Flock Merino Rams.
Merino Ewes and Lambs.


Flock Sale Merino Rams.
president there during two years. He also is a member of the Mount Rouse Shire Council, in the
boundaries of which part of his estate lies.
Mr. Moftatt is an active station manager, spending most of his time in the open air. Having
been a champion athlete and an expert at many kinds of sport in his school days, he is now in his
element when riding or driving about his property. His taste for thoroughbred horses has brought
him into touch with most of the racing clubs formed about the district where he lives, and he has
acted as starter to the Hamilton Racing Club for the past fifteen years.
Zbc Stocfc
The Merino flock at Berrambool was founded by the late Mr. John Moftatt on pure Rambouillet
blood. This gave great size of carcase and good length of staple. With the idea of adding other
merits, without losing either of those valuable features, rams were purchased from Wanganella in
1884. The cross nicked well, and Mr. Moftatt was so pleased with the result that he used stud sheep
from the same origin on subsequent occasions when desiring to improve his flock. The clip always
meets with a ready sale at high prices. It is a strong, lengthy combing, giving a high scouring
yield, and is of very uniform quality. The fibre is perhaps not so fine as grown on some of the
neighbouring properties or as the country could be made to produce, but the object of the owner has
been to secure a high cash return per sheep, rather than a record price per lb. for the fleeces.
From 400 to 500 head of cattle are run all the year round on the property. They are bred on
the estate, and drafts of sale steers always meet with a keen demand on the Terang market, where
Berrambool, Victoria.


Stud Red Polled Cattle.
it is the practice to dispose of them. The type found most suitable to the country is a cross between
the Hereford and Shorthorn. Besides these, a small stud of Red Polls has now been got together.
Mr. W. Moffatt takes a practical interest in breeding thoroughbred horses, and quite a number
of district, as well as some metropolitan, races have been won by stock that first saw the light of
day in the sheoak paddocks at Berrambool. The stallion Bowling Green, by Gretna Green, from
a Premier mare, is at present being used on the property for stud purposes.
Mr. Moffatt himself enters horses occasionally, and his colours are usually carried by horses
bred at Berrambool. He has been successful chiefly in jumping events, and has won good prizes,
on Melbourne and country courses.


XDalinbert an 6 (3narpurt Estates,
Zbc properties of fll>r. 3. C. flftanifolb.
TALINDERT forms part of what was amongst the first country in the present State of Victoria
to he turned to pastoral uses. The homestead is two and a-half miles out of Camperdown ;
and the run was originally included in a block of 50,000 acres, of which Messrs. John, Peter,
and Thomas Manifold owned the freehold in the very early days. In the forties the brothers
worked about 100,000 acres of this country under license, but they afterwards obtained the freehold
of half that amount. Mr. James Chester Manifold, the present owner of Talindert, is the son of the
late Mr. John Manifold, who died in 1879. Peter died in 1885, whilst Thomas, the other member of
the firm, retired from the partnership very early, and took land near Warrnambool. Mr. J. C.
Manifold came into possession of Talindert in 1890. It then consisted of 7500 acres.
i£arl£ Settlement.
The fertility of Talindert and its neighbourhood was apparent to experienced settlers from
the first time they saw it, whilst the grass, trees, vegetation generally, and the whole appearance of
the country bore traces of a sufficient and fairly regular raintall. Lake Purrumbete provided an
abundant and conveniently distributed water supply at a time when labour was difficult to obtain
and there were very few facilities for establishing artificial storage. The timber in most places was
heavy, but the country as a whole was highly suitable, by reason of cpiality and luxuriance of natural
pastures, for being turned at once to stock-raising purposes.
But before the discovery of gold the uses to which country of this kind could be put were
extremely limited. Its productiveness was quite apparent, but the facilities for reaching market
with the kind of products it was best suited to yield were extremely limited. Industry could be
carried on successfully only by management being conducted on a large and cheap scale. Bullocks
were fattened for beef when it was saleable, and at other times for their hides and tallow. Often
large drafts of store cattle were purchased in the Riverina at 17s. per head, overlanded to the
holding of the Manifolds, and after being fattened, sold at no more than £3 per head. Ridiculously
small as that figure might seem, it paid well enough when done on a big scale and on such land as
comprised Talindert. The overlanding excursions, however, were no light undertaking. The inter-
vening country was unfenced, much of it unsettled, and parts of it hardly known. Rivers had to
be crossed before the days of bridges, and the herds had to be kept in hand at night when there
were neither paddocks nor yards to put them in. Of course the discovery of gold gave quite a new
outlook to the industry. Bullocks were no longer sold for a boiling-down value. In the space of
1 (Section 30, pages 343-350.)


Photo by T. Humphrey & Co.
Mr. J. C. Manifold.
A Garden Walk at Talindert with the Stables in the distance.
twelve months, in the early fifties, their value
multiplied greatly, and never again receded to
the old level. Many enterprising stockmen laid
the foundations of subsequent fortunes by pur-
chasing cattle from the breeders or fatteners,
droving them to the diggings, and reselling them
at a good profit. With the commencement of
this trade, the Manifold Brothers began to reap
the full reward accruing from the judgment they
exercised in selecting their country. They were
able to sell cattle in prime condition, while many
other settlers were only able to offer stores and
so miss a great deal of the harvest secured by
their more fortunate neighbours.
£he ftaltnfccrt property.
Talindert is the native name for “ Long Bank.”
The homestead is beautifully situated, and com-
mands an extensive view of the surrounding
country. It is built on the foot of Mount Leura,
just below the steep ascent to the volcano’s crest.
About 600 acres of very rich land, which Mr.
Manifold works himself, lie around, and the outbuildings, gardens, and improvements generally
cover a very large area. From the side of the mountain an extremely picturesque view of the
property may be obtained.
Away for many miles there
lies an extensive panorama of
fertile pastoral lands of won-
derfully varied plains, natural
timber, and dense artificial
plantations. The country is
usually green and heavily
grassed, whilst everywhere
there is a pleasant appear-
ance of comfortable and solid
prosperity. The rich volcanic
soil has readily lent itself to
the beautifying of nature, as
well as to giving heavy re-
turns to the landholders.
The Talindert garden in
spring time presents a blaze
of varied colours, and nicely
mixed native and imported shrubs give a charming effect of many hues at all times of the year.
The appointments about the homestead are substantial and modern. The stables are roomy
well ventilated, and well lit, and allow of ample accommodation for vehicles.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD, TALINDERT.
Talindert, Victoria.


■
„ • - , - ’ m >. H •. %
■ . ..iimk
i. The Men’s Quarters, Gnarpurt. 2. A Dairy Farm on Talindert.
3. The Stables, Talindert.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Photo by Mrs. J. C, Manifold .
A Wealth of Bloom in the Rosary, Talindert.
The Talindert land is formed apparently of ash. Though there are numbers of outcrops of
igneous rocks, there are no signs of the land being formed by the gradual decomposition of a mass
of solidified lava, as in the stony rise country. There the flow has covered the surface of the
ground, and it has afterwards broken into fragments which subsequently have decomposed further
into soil, and are still undergoing that process. Country such as at Talindert, where the origin is ash
and fine material, is rather the richer of the two. in addition to which there is far greater depth of
soil.
Talindert is not well suited to sheep. It is too rich. Cattle have consequently from the
very first been the principal stock kept on it. Originally they were used for meat production, but
latterly the development of the dairying industry has greatly increased the value of the property and
added to its usefulness. When Mr. J. C. Manifold took over the estate in 1890, there were half a
dozen tenants on it. He soon afterwards subdivided further portions, and let them on the share
system to dairymen. The experiment proved highly satisfactory, and there are now nearly twenty
tenants on the property, holding an area of from 300 acres each. The holding of each is well
Talindert, Victoria.


The Homestead, Gnarpurt.
Stud Rams on Creek at Gnakpurt.
managed, and all of them show considerable enterprise in the methods they adopt. Ihe cows are
carefully treated during the winter time, artificial fodder crops are grown, and such modern devices
as oil engines enable the
tenants to become prosperous
and contented producers.
Among the improvements
Mr. Manifold has effected on
his estate have been the pro-
vision of water by means of
bores and windmills. The
porous volcanic soil is not
suitable to holding surface
water, and the subdivision of
the property into dairy farms
rendered a well-distributed
and plentiful suppl}" essential.
Mr. Manifold, consequently,
carried out a series of experi-
ments with bores. In most
cases an ample flow was
struck beneath the top layer
of basalt about 100 feet from the surface. The result has been great convenience to the tenants, and
an additional value to the estate.
(Bnarpurt.
This estate lies near Lis-
more, and merinos are found
to do well on it and to grow
a good class of wool. The
property consists of 16,000
acres, and from it about
20,000 sheep are shorn an-
nually. It was purchased by
the Manifolds from Mr. A. S.
Robertson in 1882. The
sheep are now of a good type.
They were originally worked
up with rams and ewes
brought from Carngham.
This gave a wool of exceed-
ing quality and good length
of staple, together with bold
frames. Some blood was in-
troduced from Belle Vue, Tas-
mania, a lew' rams being
bought from the late Mr. James Gibson. The clip from the property always sells well, and as the
good shape and size of the sheep has been maintained, the wethers fetch high prices.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


1^
EWES CROSSING CREEK AT GNARPURT.
Gnarpurt, Victoria.


, ** , . i i m m ■, T —. ■, ali |.
The Outlook from Talindert Homestead.
fl&r. James Chester flDamfolfc.
Mr. James Chester Manifold is well known throughout Victoria on account of his public
activities. He was one of the members of the first House of Representatives, and has long identified
himself with matters concerning the district. For many years he has been a member of the Hampden
Shire Council.
Mr. Manifold was born at Pnrrumbete, and educated at the Geelong and Melbourne Gram-
mar Schools. He has always taken a keen interest in polo, which he pla} r s. Also at different times
has owned and bred some good racehorses, among the sires used being Wellington and Pivot.
In 1891 he married a daughter of the late Mr. Thomas Curie, a well-known merchant of
Geelong. There are a son and daughter by the marriage.


Cbe IDeybam Jbarb Estate.
Cbc piopert? of ni>r. ICI. 3. C. Hnnstroiuj.
HEXHAM PARK ESTATE, the property and home of Mr. Walter Armstrong, is part of one
of the historic pastoral holdings of the early days. The tract of country in which it is
situated was first occupied as a grazing area by Captains Adams and Webster (in the
forties), whose stock ranged over all the land between Mount Shadwell, Flat Top Hill, and the
Hopkins River. 1 hough heavily timbered with sheoak, honeysuckle, lightwood, and gums, this
country, even in those far back years, had the reputation of being particularly sound, an effect
caused, it was thought, by the favourable medicinal qualities of the waters of the Salt Creek, which
had its course through the run.
On the demise of Capt. Adams, and the advance of population, Capt. Webster obtained
freeholds on and adjacent to Mt. Shadwell, and Hexham Park passed into the hands of F. R. W.
Dunlop, who secured the pre-emptive section (where the present homestead now stands) by selection,
and called it “ Parasia." a name, however, which appeared to have been used “ for office purposes
only.’ In 1851 the late Am. Armstrong came from Devon Park, which property he had been
working under a partnership agreement with Silas Harding, and purchased the estate. Here he
remained to the end of his days. When he bought Hexham Park the pre-emptive section alone was
freehold, but by selection and purchase he gradually added to the original holding until the area of
the estate reached 23,000 acres.
The late Mr. William Armstrong was an enthusiastic and successful sheepbreeder, and during
the seventies Hexham Park was the home of a very high-class flock of Lincoln sheep. Individual
sheep from this stud took many prizes at the Western District shows, which in those days, notably
those held at Skipton, Hamilton, Hexham, and Colac, were of considerable importance. It was at the
Hexham Show that a Hexham Park Lincoln ram was sold to the Rutledges for £4O0 —a record price.
As interest in the local shows waned, owing to the growth of larger and more distant associations.
Mr. Armstrong ceased to exhibit his sheep, and the Lincoln flock was maintained merely for cross-
breeding purposes.
I (Section 31, pages 351-358.)


•■ . ■. ■ ' V...'.
THE HOMESTEAD.


if
SHORTHORN CATTLE.
Hexham Park, Victoria.


MOB OF FOUR-TOOTH COMEBACK EWES.


f $*suk djL _&». *
Trophies won by Hexham Park Sheep (Lincolns).
Bred and Exhibited by the late Win. Armstrong.
Relinquishing active participation in business in 1889, Mr. William Armstrong let Hexham 1 ark
to his son, Mr. Walter Armstrong, and son-in-law, Mr. R. R. Urquhart. L hese two, besides leasing
the property, purchased all the stock thereon.
In addition to Hexham Park, the late Mr. William Armstrong acquired at later periods Shadwell
Park, a property of 4000 acres, near Mortlake, and Pirron Yallock Estate, containing 54°° acies >
adjacent to the township of that name. Pirron Yallock was one of the best fattening propci ties in
Victoria, and was eventually purchased in part by the Government for closer settlement purposes.
Messrs. Walter Armstrong and R. Urquhart continued to rent Hexham I’ark, Shadwell lark, and
Pirron Yallock from the time of Mr. William Armstrong’s death until 1902. when the executor of the
estate, the late Mr. Thos. Shaw, of Wooriwyrite, decided to realise. The properties were therefore
sold, part of Hexham Park being purchased by Mr. Walter Armstrong and part by Mr. R. Liquhart.
The former subsequently cut up and disposed of the larger part of his holding, retaining 3000 aciL>
round the homestead, which, on a smaller scale, he continues working in the usual pastoial mannei.
The sheep now kept on the property are comebacks, which have been found after long
experience to give better returns on this particular class of country than any others, ihe comeback
flock was started by Messrs. Armstrong and Urqu-
hart, and its foundation was as follows;— 2000 Ist
cross ewes (bred by Mr. Hugh Ross on the Serpen-
tine out of Caramut North and Boortkoi Merino
ewes by Danedite Lincoln rams) crossed with
Barunah Merino rams, which (owing to their size,
good staple, and freedom from wrinkles and general
tied-inness so prevalent in many Merino studs
even on the plains) have been found eminently
suitable for this purpose. One hundred and fifty of
the pick of the Ist cross ewes were mated with
three of the best Barunah rams, the male progeny
being kept as comeback rams.
Mr. Walter J. T. Armstrong is the fourth
son of the late Mr. William Armstrong. He was
educated for six years at the Geelong Grammar
School under that fine old chief, James Bracebridge
Wilson. After passing the matriculation examina-
tion in 1884. Mr. Armstrong came to the station and
took up pastoral work under his father. He has
Hexham Park, Victoria


A CORNER OF THE GARDEN.


BLACK SWANS ON THE HOPKINS RIVER.
Hexham Park, Victoria.


been a member of the Mortlake Shire Council for fourteen years, and twice occupied the president’s
chair. He holds His Majesty’s commission to dispense justice to the extent allowed by the
honourable the Court of Petty Sessions without honorarium, in the Western Bailiwick, and is a
member of the Council of the Pastoralists’ Association of Victoria. He played polo for ten years
with the Mortlake, and later Caramut, Clubs, at which sport be won several trophies.
In 1897 Mr. Walter Armstrong married Miss Mabel M. Ross, of “The Gums”; the resultant
olive branches are five.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


- mz--
Salt Creek with Homestead in Distance.
Zbc oorook Estate.
Cbc property of flDr. M. C. alien.
THE Boorook property, which was bought by the present owner, Mr. William Thomas Allen,
in 1906, was originally part of the Moffatt Estate. When the executors of the latter held
their sale, Mr. Frank Beggs, of Bushy Creek, bought Boorook, which then contained 4700
acres. He held it, however, only about three years, and then parted with it to Mr. Allen,
the latter having since added 2370 acres. The country is of typical Western District wool-growing
land, of a kind that can also be used for wheat. It is mostly plains and lightly timbered with
sheoak and blackwood, as clean and sound for sheep as is possible; the Salt Creek runs for about
miles through the paddocks, and is of great benefit during summer months.
I (Section 32. payes 359-362.)


The late Mr. W. B. Allen.
Photo hy Sears .
Mr. W. T. Allen.
As Mr. Allen has been brought up among sheep, and thoroughly understands the technique
of wool-growing, he has been able to make the best of the property. He has so far kept mostly
comebacks and crossbreds, and runs about 7000 all
the year round, exclusive of an annual drop of
about 1500 lambs. Along the creek frontages there
are different grasses growing, such as clover, clover
burr, and rye grass, which greatly add to the carry-
ing capacity.
The property has also been greatly improved
since Mr. Allen obtained it by the establishment
of plantations as shelter for stock and man. Pines
and sugar gums have been the trees principally
selected. Though they are still too young to serve
the purpose for which they have been planted, they
nevertheless are making rapid progress, and it is
apparent that the conditions specially suit the pine
trees.
Air. Allen takes a great deal of interest in his sheep, and always classes his wool himself. The
‘ get-up’’ of the clip draws favourable comments from the brokers who sell it, and prices received are
usually among the highest in its class at the sale.
The sheep are bred from Lincoln rams on Merino
ewes, the rams used being from the flock owned by
Mr. R. A. D. Hood, of Merrang, Hexham, the ewes
pure Merino, Mount Hesse bred. The progeny
have turned out finely-developed sheep, of robust
constitution, and carrying splendid fleeces of good
length and character.
There is little doubt that, with a continuance
of the improvements he has already effected.
Mr. Allen will greatly add to the value of
Boorook. The country is of the kind to respond
readily to cultivation for grasses or crops. It is
well watered, subject to a good rainfall, and with
progressive management is quite rich enough for
lamb fattening. With cultivation under superphos-
phates its carrying capacity will each year increase, and this must naturally add to the fertility of the
soil. The plantations will, when they grow taller, add considerably to the pastures of the estate.


THE HOMESTEAD.
Boorook, Victoria.


Flock of One and Two-year-old Station-bred ist Cross Ewes.
Wool Samples off ist Crossbred Ewe'Hoggets.
besides keeping live stock in better condition by the direct effect of the shelter they afford.
Aloreover, the estate, having an agricultural value to the wheat grower, is sure to get more valuable
in the not distant future
through the natural expansion
of farming industry and its in-
creasing needs.
The homestead is a com-
fortable, roomy building, sur-
rounded by a wide verandah,
and, being built on a rise,
commands an extensive view
of the country. It is neces-
sarily new, because when Air.
Allen bought the place three
years ago there was no suit-
able house on it, and he had
to put one up himself. This
accounts for the somewhat
bare appearance of the homestead in the picture on the preceding page. However, a tasteful garden
has been laid out, and it will only be a matter of a few years before the buildings are well sheltered
by trees and shrubs.
Air. W. T. Allen, of
Boorook, is the only son of
the late Air. William Breaton
Allen, of Drysdale, Ballan-
geich, who was a well-known
figure in the pastoral world
throughout the Western Dis-
trict and Victoria generally.
He was born in 1876, and
educated at the Warrnambool
College. After he left that
school he worked among sheep
with his father, and received
a thorough tuition in all
branches of stock raising. For
some years he was engaged
in pastoral pursuits at Hyde
Park, near Cavendish, but sold that property to Mr. John Fenton about the time he bought Boorook
In 1906 Mr. Allen married the third daughter of Mr. Geo. Murch, Ouranos, Glen Thompson.


tUbe /Hberrang Estate.
2bc property of HIM*. IR. H. 2). Iboob.
MERRANG ESTATE is on the Hopkins River, near Hexham. It was founded as a separate
property by Messrs. Farie and Roger in the early days of settlement, but prior to this
primitive squatting industry had been carried on there by the Boldens, who held an immense
area of country extending right down to the present site of \\ arrnambool.
The late Mr. Robert Hood, the father of the present owner of Merrang, came to the district
in 1856, when he married the widow of the late Mr. Sceales, and took over the estate. Merrang then
consisted of 25,000 acres of rich land, fairly heavily timbered rvith sheoak and white gum, and well
grassed with that \ r ariety of pasturage peculiar to the Western District. Ihe country is undulating,
and the present carrying capacity is heavy.
For about ten years, starting before his father’s death, Mr. R. A. D. Hood leased Merrang,
and worked it on his own account. After the termination of the lease, he purchased the property from
the family, and now holds 12,700 acres. He has always taken a keen interest in his Avork, and his
pastoral career has been a A T ery successful one.
Merrang is very fa\ r ourably situated, for besides being of fertile soil it is excellently Avatered.
The Hopkins runs through it, and a considerable portion of its area is of rich river flats. There are
also some creeks, and as Avater can be obtained in other places by sinking, a number of windmills
have been erected. About 3000 acres are held on lease by farmers who are successfully folloAving
agricultural pursuits. On the balance of the estate some 13,000 sheep are kept, which denotes the
productiveness of the soil. The estate is highly improved, and contains a comfortable and attractive
homestead.
Sbccp.
The Merrang stud of Lincolns was established in 1872. The country is particularly adapted
to Longwools, as the soil was found to be too rich and the rainfall too heavy for Merinos. Not
I (Section 33, pages 363-378.)


The late Mr. Robert Hood.
Photo by Lafayette,
Mr. R. A. D. Hood.
only are the natural conditions different from those obtaining where high-class Merino wool is
produced, but flocks of that breed were found to get down with footrot, and the enterprise of keeping
flats on the Barwon; and Mr. Austin had worked
consistently at evolving the kind of Lincoln best
able to yield heavy returns on such fertile soil.
Merrang presents natural features somewhat similar
to those prevailing there. Mr. Hood, in purchasing
these sheep, was drawing on very pure blood.
However, he was determined to go even further
afield in laying the basis of what he hoped to make
one of the best flocks in Victoria. He decided to go
to the very fountainhead of Lincoln purity and
excellence, so sent to England for a large shipment.
Eleven rams were imported from the famous studs
them had to be abandoned. As a consequence, the
late Mr. Robert Hood decided to start with the
best foundation of Lincoln blood he could get, and
to breed high-class Lincoln sheep. The great
success that attended his efforts, and those of his
son after him, is made abundantly evident by the
long list of prizes which has been won at shows by
the stud, and by the unfailing demand that exists
every year for Merrang sale rams.
In 1872 Mr. Robert Hood purchased sixteen
ewes from the stud of Mr. Thomas Austin, at
Barwon Park. The merit of that stud was then well
established. Barwon Park consists largely of rich
of Messrs. Marshall and Kirkham, of Lincolnshire, and thirty-three ewes were obtained from the
same sources. The rams cost an average of £35 per head, and the ewes £25. Importing sheep in
those days was a more formidable and expensive undertaking than it is now. There were not the


THE HOMESTEAD FROM THE LAGOON.
Merrang, Victoria.


'*ljt>t' ‘ | . \r,.%ijB
• ■#: J^kiL<!>tife r : ' v?> T:3ia
THE HOMESTEAD.


■ Q&P JrZmm
Mrs. Robert Hood.
same facilities for shipment, and the risks were greater. However, Air. Hood’s enterprise repaid tc
him many times over, for he had the foundations of an excellent flock, and at that time enterprise and
judgment in breeding good Lincoln sheep were less common than they are now, although there were
several high-class studs about.
With the progeny of this stock Air. Hood persevered until 1879. He exhibited his sheep at
most of the leading shows in the Western District, and usually with marked success. Prizes of plate
were won to the value of no less than £843, whilst cash prizes totalled £630. In addition to these,
the record of his win-
gold and twenty-six
many of bronze.
Air. Hood introduced
stud for the first eight
He was probably as
he undoubtedly was in
nal stock from too
a definite ideal in his
to get nearest to it by
sheep as like his objec-
then by fixing their
expedient of inbreed-
the Langi Kal Kal stud
he purchased it. This
with notable blood in
pense had been spared
order of merit in the
coins, and they were of
cause them to nick well
sheep. The flock was
Barwon Park ewes,
bred by Air. Duckling,
nings contains three
silver medals, besides
no other blood into his
years of its existence,
right in doing this, as
not drawing his origi-
many sources. He had
mind, and he was able
purchasing his first
tive as possible, and
type with the simple
ing. In 1880, however,
was on the market, and
also contained sheep
their veins. Xo ex-
in establishing a high
Langi Kal Kal Lin-
a descent likely to
with the Alerrang
descended from eleven
eleven imported ewes
of Lincolnshire, Eng-
land; nine ewes imported direct from the stud of Air. Alarshall, of Lincolnshire; and six ewes which
Alessrs. Dalgety and Blackwood had purchased from Air. Alarshall. In addition there were three ewes
imported by Air. E. Wilson. All these sheep were acquired with the stud, eighteen of the ewes when
imported being in lamb, four by a ram of Clarke's, one by a ram of Kirkham s, three by Budding s
first-prize ram at the Royal Cardiff Show, and ten by Budding’s first-prize ram at Kelso. In 1885
two rams were purchased from Air. Thomas Rutledge, at Farnham Park, near Warrnambool, and
Merrang, Victoria .


r . ‘ *'<4^^^
vi - ■• .|» w Jib0&' jpwr^
Four-Tooth Lincoln Rams.
|P' £*Ai v IRB *' , , ■
Stud Lincoln Rams.
in 1889 three rams from Messrs. Black Bros., Mt. Noorat; also in 1902 the present Mr. Hood imported
two rams from the Kirkham stud, in Lincolnshire, and in 1906 he purchased another sire, on that
occasion going to the well-known stud of Messrs. Richardson Bros., of Newlands, near Ballarat,
In the years 1882, 1883, and 1884, the Merrang Lincolns proved very hard sheep to beat in the
show ring. During that period they won £76 in trophies, and £63 in cash, representing twenty-
seven prizes. Earlier still there was a Longwool Shecpbreeders' Association’s show at Hexham, at
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


entrance gate and part of drive.
Merrang, Victoria


55p£' *** *
LAGOON IN FRONT OF HOMESTEAD.


Two-Tooth Lincoln Rams,
I,| iipm | ihmhh- —- ' ' ** mmtm m**"* | | - | j^||
Stud Lincoln Rams.
which Mr. Hood was a very successful exhibitor. There were a number of progressive and expert
Longwool breeders in the immediate neighbourhood, and, needless to say, competition was very
fierce. This body was in existence in the middle seventies, and held what was probably the first
Longwool Show in Australia. It was afterwards amalgamated with the Australian Sheepbreeders'
Association. At Ballarat, Warrnambool, Melbourne, and Hamilton, Mr. Hood's stock won many
prizes.
Merrang, Victoria.


*? j*
Looking across the Merrang Estate from outside the Plantations.
For the ten years the Merrang sheep were exhibited they took a total of £1630 in plate and
cash, besides the before-mentioned medals. Since 1884 they have not been shown.
That the present Mr. Hood has maintained the previous high standard of the Merrang
Lincolns is made manifest by the ready sale his rams meet with, and by the very high price the wool
always fetches. The stud has obviously been managed with remarkable continuity of method by
father and son, and no break has occurred in the progress made.
The sheep are characterised by an excellent quality of wool, their robust constitutions, and
shapely, masculine heads. It would indeed be difficult to anywhere find a better sample of Lincoln
wool than that produced at Merrang. To some extent this is the outcome of' one of those happy
nicks sometimes occurring in stud breeding, and which often shapes the destiny of a whole flock. In
the original shipment of rams which Mr. Hood, sen., brought from England in the seventies, were
two famous sires, one named “ Victor,” which was well known at show yards and was almost
invincible. He was a ram with exceptional heavy lock of wool. The other was “ Sherwood,” a sire
from the Kirkham flock. He was specially notable for the quality and lustre in his fleece. Both
rams were used in the stud, and a union of the families of each was found to give a remarkable


FOUR-TOOTH LINCOLN RAMS, READY TO BE SHORN, 1908.
(The Twelve Averaged 22 lbs. 2 ozs. Grass Fed Only.)
Merrang, Victoria


‘ * Vv^
■ .V- ' ■ . ■ ■ ■ " M - 41 &. > Jt
_.. ; ■; ' ! ‘ _ ;> ’j,' '-V
FRONT ENTRANCE TO HOMESTEAD.


Looking over the River Flats from the Homestead.
combination of the merits of both. The interbred progeny of these two rams were for a while used
more than any other blood in the stud, and the characteristics they stamped on the flock have been
maintained to the present day.
ni>r. IRobert Hlcyanber SDavib Iboofc.
The pastoral experience of Mr. R. A. D. Hood is not confined to Victoria. He was born in
1863, and after being educated at the Geelong Grammar School, he put in some time at Burenda
Station, on the Warrego River, Queensland. The knowledge he gained there stood him in good
stead later on, and shortly after his return to Victoria he took charge of Merrang. Though he has
always been actively engaged in pastoral work, Mr. flood finds time to be an enthusiastic polo player,
and was associated with the club in Mortlake since its inception, and until amalgamated with the
Caramut Club. For most of this time he was captain of the team. He captained a team sent from
Victoria to New Zealand in the early part of 1901, which won seven out of ten matches played there,
and also teams to South Australia and New South Wales. The latter team in 1905 won all their
seven matches. A number of high-class polo ponies have been bred at Merrang.
Merrang, Victoria.


« v- j®r* '^?
P<i%v' ,, ‘ ■ 'T~^>.^-? : '~**\& ji*\ ' ■. '
t%v- 7 fV»S*A '“■. £**-, > ; 5 * .
POLO PONIES.


~ »*• • •. >M ' ■ ■ I
, ; * i II
, * - .»• •
Four-Tooth Lincoln Rams. Five Months’ Wool.
**
■
0
The Woolshed.
Merrang, Victoria.


The Stables, Merrang.
Mr. Hood takes an active interest in the turf, holding- various offices on most of the racing
clubs in the surrounding district. He is committeeman and steward of the W arrnambool Racing
Club, president and steward of the Warrnambool Amateur Turf Club, and president and trustee of
the Mortlake Racing Club.
Mr. Hood interests himself a good deal in public affairs concerning his district. He has been
a member for the Ballangeich riding of the Mortlake Shire Council since 1892.


The Homestead.
BEumeralla Estate.
(The property of fll>r, IR. H. StauQbton.
THE Eumeralla Estate is located on the Eumeralla River, about a mile from the township of
Macarthur and cine south of Hamilton. It comprises some 10,100 acres of rich volcanic
country of prolific grazing and fattening properties, being healthy for stock as well as of
high carrying capacity. The holding came into the possession of Mr. Robert Allan Stanghton during
iooB, when it was made over to him by his father, to whom it had belonged for many years
previously.
Enmeralla was taken up in the days of the first Western District settlement by the late Mr.
Edward Hurst. The country in its native condition presented many difficulties to the pioneering
I (Section 34, panes 379-386.)


# # -4N a
The Front Garden.
pastoralists who first attempted to make it productive. One of the results of the fertility of the land,
coupled with the copious rainfall, was the dense timber. So large and close were the trees that very
little grass grew, while the masses of foliag'e obscured the sun’s rays from the ground beneath.
Clearing was not an easy task in those days. It was almost impossible to secure the necessary
labour, and the capital available for such a risky undertaking, as the pastoral industry was then
considered, was extremely limited. But to the far-seeing, the nearness to the coast, the great
productiveness of the land, and the certainty of the rainfall, ofifered definite advantages to the
Macarthur district which it was difficult to find elsewhere in equal proportions. Consequently the
land was bit by bit selected, and with the stream of immigration which set into the colony in the
early fifties, fortune came to those who, literally, had blazed the track. When Mr. Hurst selected
Eumeralla, he prepared it for pastoral industry by ringbarking the timber over most of the area.
The property was purchased in 1891 by Mr. Stephen George Staughton, the father of the
present owner. He worked the estate till 1905, when he handed it over on lease to Mr. R. A.
Staughton, who held it on that tenure until he became the proprietor in 1908.
Owing to the richness of the soil, Eumeralla is unsuited to Merino sheep, and from the first
crossbreds have been grazed there. The carrying capacity is rather more than a sheep to the acre,
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Flock Merino Rams.
Mob ob Fat Cows.
Eumera.Uu, Victoria.


Photo by Johnstone, O’Shannessy it’ Co.
Mr. S. G. Staughton.
■ ’
Photo by Lafayette.
Mr. R. A. Staughton.
for besides horses and some 400 head of cattle, which are kept continually on the run. not less than
10,000 sheep are shorn annually. The flock has been bred principally with the view to producing
stands in the shed, so that each shearer has on the
average a run of about 1000 sheep. The wool is
sold each year in Melbourne, and commands a high
price, being of considerable length with ample
body.
A great deal of attention has been devoted
to breeding the Eumeralla Polled Angus cattle.
The original stock came from the famous stud of
the Staughton Bros., which was so well known
throughout Victoria. Mr. Staughton finds he can
obtain the best results for practical purposes by
mating the Polled Angus variety with Shorthorns.
The resultant stock, besides having particularly
hardy constitutions, are able to thrive well over a
a weighty and valuable clip. The methods of sheep-
breeding adopted have been continued unchanged
since 1891, when Mr. Staughton purchased
Eumeralla, and Lincoln rams were put on Merino
ewes. Fresh drafts of Merinos and Longwools
are purchased alternately every three years, and by
these being carefully selected, the clip has acquired
a high reputation among woolbuyers. The progeny,
besides being of large frames and hardy constitu-
tions, give a profitable fleece of bright wool of long
staple. Excepting Merinos, which it is impracti-
cable to keep on such country, probably no other
breed or combination of breeds would so readily
fill the wool bales with fleeces of good quality.
The shearing is done by hand, there being ten
wide range of varying climates, and possess most of the qualities needed by cattle breeders under
ordinary conditions. They mature early and, where other types would make a very poor living


Photo by Lafayette
Mrs. R. A. Staughton.
The Children.
fatten readily. Being of handy, compact frames, they are in
some ways better than animals of larger bone and looser
structure.
The pastures at Eumeralla are mostly of native origin. The
ground is coated with a fairly dense mass of vegetation, and
there is considerable variety in the grasses, which are of
that peculiarly sweet and nourishing kind characteristic of
the volcanic parts of Western Victoria. The primary difference
between light carrying and rich country in the locality is
in the greater profusion of fattening herbs which grow on
the latter. Not only does the soil never become sour, but
from its nature it appears to hold precisely the proportion of
moisture needed for giving prolific growth to the smaller
kinds of vegetable life. In springtime the growth of grass
is often more than the ordinary supply of stock can eat
down, but it is all of that sweet sort of which none
becomes wasted. Mr. Staughton has cultivated special pastures, and about 200 acres have been put
down in strawberry clover, which the fertile volcanic soil suits well. A few paddocks also grow
cocksfoot in profusion. The
results obtained from cultiva-
tion have been altogether satis-
factory.
The new homestead was
built in 1906 on a green hill,
from which it commands a de-
lightful view over a wide pano-
rama of picturesque country
lying away to' the south-east.
The situation of the house is
one of the features of the pro-
perty, for besides the surround-
ings being delightfully attrac-
tive to the eye, the whole
character of the district lies
apparent from the verandah. The homestead is tilted with most of the conveniences which can be
attached to a modern country residence. It is sewered throughout on the septic tank system, and
Eumera.Ua, Victoria.


A Mob of Fat Bullocks.
The Old Homestead.


The Eumeralla River.
The Drive.
is lit throughout with acety-
lene gas, whilst an efficient
supply provides water for
both house and garden. The
grounds are served by water
falling by gravitation from
two 3000-gallon tanks, which
in turn are filled from the
Eumeralla River by a
Hornsby oil engine driving a
Worthington pump. This ap-
pliance brings the water 42 Ra
chains, and it is capable of
lifting 2000 gallons per hour.
The estate is connected by
telephone with Macarthur.
The property is liberally served with water throughout. The Eumeralla River, which is fed
by the Breakfast and Blackfellows’ Creeks, becomes a fine stream before it reaches Mr. Staughton’s
land. Several of the paddocks also have frontage to the Blackfellows’ Creek, whilst there are quite a
number of springs scattered about the run. In addition to these, three bores have been sunk, and
draw good flows from be- .
neath the basaltic rock.
Mr. Robert Allen Staugh-
ton, who was born in 1879,
is the youngest son of Mr.
Stephen George Staughton,
now living in retirement at
Woodside, Queen’s-road, Mel-
bourne. He was educated at
the Melbourne Church of
England Grammar School
and the Hamilton College.
After leaving school he spent
some time on a station in
Queensland, where he gained
experience of stock generally,
Eumeralla, Victoria.


View from the Homestead, looking towards’'Macarthur.
but most particularly of cattle breeding. He then settled down on Eumeralla, and after spending
eighteen months obtaining an insight into the working of the place, he assumed command. In 1903
he married Constance E. C., the youngest daughter of Mr. Harry Etches, of Toronto, Canada.
There are two sons and a daughter.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


lDalviu BEstate.
ahe property of IRtcl TO. Black.
THE Dalvui Estate first came into the possession of the Black family as far back as 1840,
when it Avas taken up, together with surrounding country, by the late Mr. Niel Black (the
father of Mr. Niel Walter Black, the present owner), in conjunction with Messrs. Stcuart
Gladstone, and Finlay. The property was once part of Mount Noorat, and consists of the
portion of that estate lying nearest to the township of Terang. The area is approximately 6000
acres.
With Dalvui in its present state of de\ r elopment it would be extremely difficult to fix how
much of its value is due to impro\ r ements. The character and general aspect of the land have been
completely altered. Pleasant farms, serviceably subdivided, carefully sheltered with tasteful
plantation, green meadows, an abundant water supply, and all the contrivances for getting the
greatest production from the ground, have supplanted thickly-timbered plains. Dalvui, having the
M ount Noorat property between it and the old volcano, does not consist of soil so uniformly
volcanic in its origin as composes the latter property. There is rather less ash and scoria in the
ground, and the accumulation of decomposed vegetable matter is somewhat greater. The mixture
of these two ingredients gives land of great fertility. About 900 acres of the estate are made up of the
bed of an old lagoon. This sheet of water has been drained since the country Avas settled, and it is
found that the sun’s rays have a constantly improving effect on the soil, sweetening it and adding
to its productiveness with each successive year. The pasturage which it noAV growls, besides being
particularly luxuriant in the springtime, remains green and nourishing when the heat of summer has
scorched the grass on the higher land. The soil in the reclaimed firea is a kind of peat mixed with
a volcanic substratum,
I (Section 33, pages 387-402.)


Photo by Vandyck
Mr. Niel Walter Black.
When originally selected, parts of the country were densely clothed with almost impenetrable
woods, but in other places the timber was more open. To face this country in the early days,
\\hcn the open grass land was scarce and scattered, and labour for clearing operations extremely
difficult to secure, was no light undertaking. At first the returns from pastoral industry were by
no means large, for the local meat market was over-supplied, and bullocks could only be killed for
the tallow they yielded and their hides. The country was not suitable to Merino sheep, and
though a number of Lincolns were run on the holding, they were more suitable for producing mutton
than wool, whilst in those times it was wool more than mutton which it paid to grow.
The discovery of gold opened up new markets, but that was not without its concomitant
evils. The original firm had not selected country on which they had merely to wait for the general
development of the colony to bring them wealth. To make the most of the property it was essential
for them to clear off a quantity of the timber. When the rushes of the early fifties took off all the
best of their men it seemed as though the difficulties of pioneering were multiplied tenfold. But
the work was proceeded with, and to-day on Dalvui, as well as on other properties that formed
part of the original holding, you will find paddocks some hundreds of acres in extent where the
Plough will not strike a single stump or root during a whole day’s work.


JP 1 P— T
.
■ "***y v' ' /'
♦-■ ■.-•••- . . *■•:.* ■;. -\ .
THE HOMESTEAD.
The building is just approaching completion.
Dalvui, Victoria


* V
A
f /
LAKE IN THE GARDEN


A WELL-SHELTERED DAIRY FARM ON DaLVUI ESTATE.
The native timber on the estate is of the kind which grows on rich land subject to a heavy
rainfall. The few gaunt remains of old forest trees in themselves denote land of high value. The
forest there shot out of the soil, virile and rapidly growing, straight and sound, each trunk a pillar
of resistance to the pioneering axemen. You will find timber of that kind only where roots may
strike down deep through rich porous soil.
So thoroughly was the original timber cleared from the property that it was subsequently
found necessary to establish a number of artificial plantations. These proved eminently successful,
as the conditions that suited the self-sown trees also proved favourable to the planted species. One
of the charms of the property lies in the exotic trees which have been planted about it.
The plantations are continually being added to, and a great variety of seed is being used.
The soil and rainfall is such that almost any species of trees, either indigenous or imported, will
flourish there, and the Finns lusignis, when set in belts, grows almost like a solid wall. Though
the present homestead has only recently been built, the garden is long established. In it varied
flower beds, belts of shrubs, and pleasant green lawns surround an island-dotted lake, whilst further
Dalvui, Victoria.


back a wealth of semi-tropical and native plants form a wall of leaves and blossom. Being
liberally supplied with water throughout, and sheltered on most sides by stately and mature
plantations, the garden maintains its freshness and verdant colouring throughout the changing seasons
of the year.
H)atnnno at Dalvm.
The Blacks were practically the pioneers of the dairying industry at Terang. Previously
Lincoln sheep and beef breeds of Shorthorn cattle had been kept on the estate, the late Mr. Xiel
Black establishing the flocks and herds. For a time they certainly represented the most payable
industries to which the country could be turned, and to change from that form of pastoral business
to dairying involved a revolution of the methods used. When the land was used simply for grazing
purposes natural pastures were alone relied on, and large paddocks were as useful as small ones.
However, soon after 1900 it was decided to devote the resources of Dalvui almost entirely to
dairying. The estate then had to be divided into farms, and the farms into suitable paddocks.
Homesteads were erected, and the water supply added to by boring and the establishment of windmills.
Before, when breeding cattle and sheep, not nearly so elaborate a water supply was needed. A
considerable area of the run, when the paddocks were larger, had access to the Emu Creek, which
is at this point a very fair stream of water. For dairying, however, it became necessary to provide
for each of a great number of small paddocks.
In most instances fodder crops are grown in plenty for the dairy cows. In this way the
production from the farms into which the property is divided has been protected from violent
fluctuation caused by temporary and constantly-changing seasonal conditions. The plan is
unquestionably a wise one, and until it comes to be universally adopted the most will never be made
out of the dairying industry. When production is set back by shortage of succulent feed the
immediate loss of butter fat is the most apparent evil, but it is not the most extensive. The loss
of condition on the cattle represents a waste of previous feeding, and that necessitates a
considerable future expenditure of fodder before the volume of production assumes its normal
proportions. The dairy farmer who starts a milking season with his herd in poor condition never
in that year catches up (in the profits he makes) to the farmer who, by artificial feeding or other
means, starts calving with his cows in good order. It is only by methodical cultivation that the
butter producer can in any way be rendered safe against the uncertain vagaries of the season.
For this reason, silos arc likely to come in for a more extended use in the immediate
future. To some extent they have already been used on this class of country, and results show
them to greatly increase the possibilities of profitable dairying.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


A PROSPEROUS TENANT FARMER’S HOME AT UALVUI.
Dali/uif Victoria.


A View from Terang, looking across the Dalvui Paddocks.
£hc (Bcolooical formation.
One of the natural advantages of Dalyni, which is common through all the same belt of
volcanic country, is the excellent water supply underlying the top layer of igneous rock. Apparently
the overflow of lava from the now extinct volcanoes submerged the country, into which flowed
the drainage from other areas. In certain formations, running water has a tendency to sink to
the lower strata. Obviously it must in this way leave the surface when passing over ground not
protected with hard igneous rock. But when it flows on till it becomes imprisoned beneath a sheet
of stone, it can only rise to the top when tapped by a bore. As the volcanic formation is not,
geologically speaking, of great area, the underground drifts do not rise as true artesian springs, for
there is no heavy pressure behind them, but the water is nevertheless plentiful. One experienced
in local conditions can, in the country described, nearly always tap water by sinking bores to up
to too ft., and will never have to travel very far before finding likely and suitable spots. It is
fortunate that this should be so, for dam making on the volcanic country is impracticable, the
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


4 ~ >rr X X A 4
. f Jf jjpE '' ||k|F *■ / Jrr *■;■ \ v * '••*»%*. ,* 'VjK ’ .- t ' •*/ f/ v • ** . ■'l<**y*‘ ' pB \R| JflH
1 a3p fjf .• - v s® > Sfc- •
THE HOMESTEAD, FROM THE GARDEN.
Oaivui, Victoria.


••'^3pS^ t; • w’ f . .'V **■”-•.»•., x u ■ , « i ■V !^%: = '< t
VIEW FROM SIDE OF MOUNT NOORAT.
Looking across Dalvui, with Township of Terang in distance.


HI— n '»*— "jl * I .n. ., ...SiliJ ..... ;* —..--S..... —i1 in* mil I—
VIEW FROM TERANG.
Looking over Dalvui towards Mount Noorat.
Dalvui, Victoria.


A Corner in the Garden.
water quickly soaking through the soft porous earth. Though the underground supply is unfailing
and abundant, it is not always put to full advantage. At Dalvui, on the contrary, every farm and
paddock is liberally provided for.
How completely and even suddenly the lava overflow has covered the former surface of the
country has been illustrated several times on this belt, both by mining and boring. On Hopkins
Hill since it was purchased by Messrs. Beggs Bros., the bore on one occasion cut out a piece of
red gum log (with the structure and nature of the timber unaltered so far as a layman could tell)
over too ft. below the surface, and beneath an immensely thick stratum of rock. In the Bitfield
mines several perfect tree trunks were unearthed at even greater depths. Apparently in such cases
the molten lava had covered timber together with what was the surface of the ground, and by
excluding the air has suspended the decomposition of any organic matter that may have fallen before
its flerv onrush. In some places considerable flows of water have been liberated by natural means
through a fracture in the imprisoning rocks above it. In such instances the perpetual supply from
a single spring is often sufficient to form the commencement of a creek. The water is usually
as clear as crystal, and is excellent for stock to drink.


A Dairyman’s Home on Dalvui.
It is in country of such remarkable formation as surrounds Mount Noorat where one would
expect interesting scientific discoveries to be made, and experiments are now being carried out by
geologists on Dalvui which may have some most important results. Some little time ago a cutting
was being driven through the top of a rise for road-making purposes, and it was necessary to drive
through a stratum of volcanic sandstone of great antiquity. L nder this layer of ancient rock human
bones and a rude stone axe Avere discovered. The approximate age of the sandstone is now being
inquired into, and the facts surrounding the discovery are being investigated. It is thought that
if the discovery is a genuine one, the articles not having slipped to where they were found while
the work was being done, not only will new light be thrown on the period during which the
Australian continent has been inhabited, but that fresh and possibly disturbing evidence will be
thrown on the antiquity of man. The problem of the length of time elapsing since human
beings first came to the continent is full of complex phases, and present theories are not sufficiently
fixed by evidence to justify a hasty conclusion that such discoveries as this one are not likely to
be made. It is very remarkable that the Australian native does show signs of relation to any of
the races of Southern Asia, and if he has not come from that part of the world, the place of his
Oalvui, Victoria


- „ -*-♦• — ■ „J _ - __ ■
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH AT NOORAT.
This building was erected in 1883 in memory of the late Hon. Niel Black by his widow and three sons.


Bringing in the Cows for Milking.
View from the Homestead.
origin and the length of time he has been here cannot be easily answered. Ihe common belief
that the black and the dingo immigrated into the north-east of Queensland or some other part of
the continent at a date not greatly remote, requires a good deal of justification. If the question of
whether South-eastern Asia
filled up after Australia was
populated is answered, the
question then crops up of how
the ancestors of the first Aus-
tralian tribes crossed that coun-
try without leaving traces be-
hind them. One view is that
the Australians descended from
races, part of which migrated
to Europe, and that those
tribes which found their way
to the island continent de-
teriorated physically and morally because of the scarcity of food, whilst their cousins continued
evolving upwards for converse reasons. As an evidence of this it may be remarked that the finest
natives were found about the Murray, in the north, and in other places where a living was not so
difficult to secure as in the arid interior. The whole problem is a very fascinating one, and the results
of any discoveries which may be made will be watched with the keenest interest, not only by scientists,
but also by those laymen who
take interest in the ancient his-
tory of the Australian conti-
nent.
m>r. IRlcI Malta - Blaclt.
The owner of Dalvui was
the third and youngest son of
the late Hon. Kiel Black,
M.L.C., who came originally
from Argyleshire, Scotland.
Mr. N. W. Black has lived
practically all bis life on the
properties his father founded near Terang. He was born in 1864 at Glenormiston Station. After his
schooling was over he determined to graduate at one of the higher seats of learning. In pursuance
of that purpose, he, after matriculating, took up his residence at the Ormond College attached to the
Dalvui, Victoria.


Melbourne University, and entered on his career as a student in engineering. After living and studying
there for some time, he sailed for England, and resumed work at Cambridge. At the end of the three
years’ course he secured honours in the Mathematical Tripos, and obtained his B.A. and afterwards
M.A. degree.
Mr. Black is unmarried. He interests himself keenly both in the management of his property
and home, and in the public affairs of his district. Besides having taken a practical hand in
developing the dairying industry locally, he is generally ready to help in public movements and
institutions of a social as well as those of an industrial character. He has rendered a deal of assistance
in establishing at Noorat a Mechanics’ Institute. He is an elder of the local Presbyterian Church, the
building for which was erected in 1883 by Mrs. Black and her three sons to the memory of the late
Hon. Niel Black.


Station-bred Cattle.
'Gbe Skene Estate.
(Ihe property of flDr. 3amc6 IRoherteon.
SKENE is situated about nine miles north of Hamilton, and is one of the historic properties of
that district, and is still among the best known. The estate was purchased in 1881 by the
late Mr. John Robertson from Messrs. W. and D. Skene, who had inherited it from their
father, the Hon. W. Skene, on his death in 1877. From Mr. John Robertson, Skene passed to his
son, Mr. James Robertson, the present owner. The holding to-day consists of 11,000 acres. An
additional 4000 are rented and worked with it, whilst the proprietor also has another estate, where
he carries on pastoral work. Altogether he runs about 25,000 Merino sheep.
Skene consists of basaltic plains, slightly undulating, very healthy for stock, and growing a
good variety of sweet natural pastures. It is part of that immense stretch of volcanic country lying
across the Western District, and which has during the last ten years been found so valuable for
wheatgrowing, i. he soil is stiff and dark, and is thickly charged with small igneous pebbles a\ ei aging
about the size of a pea. From this characteristic the term “ buckshot plains” is derived. Unlike
the chocolate soil of more recent volcanic formation, the buckshot plains will hold water on the
surface. Swamps are found scattered about them, and water is usually provided for stock by scooping
tanks which fill from natural drainage.
T (Section 36, pages 403-414,


t- * ly$*' .<j|
’ ' -v ♦♦*■«*;
The Homestead.
£arlv llMstor^
The property was one of the first in the locality to be taken up, as it was bought by the late
Hon. W. Skene in 1851 from Messrs. Lockhart and Mercer. Ihe area then was about 22,000 acies,
and extended in a northerly direction towards Karabeal. It was known as the I lains Station. The
homestead was built in 1858. and about the same time the name was changed to Warrumbeech, the
native name for that part of the country. However, when carelessly written, this was too much like
Warrnambool, so it was altered to Skene, a territorial name in the county of Aberdeenshire, Scotland,
from which the owner came.
Woolgrowing was carried on from the days of first settlement. Before the period of railways
the clip was sent by bullock teams, either to Geelong or Portland, along bush tracks, and weeks were
often occupied on the journey. Perhaps the greatest difficulty Mr. Skene had to face was brought
about by the discovery of gold soon after he bought the property. As a result of the rush to the
diggings, he was left with hardly a shepherd to guard his stock on an unfenced run. It was almost
impossible to keep a good man on the place, and the work had to be done in any way that offered.
In those days he spent nearly the whole of his time on the plains. By daybreak on seven mornings
of the week he was miles from home, and it was long after dark before he returned at night. On one
The Pastoral Homes of Australia>


Illy*' * - rT1r _ vr --.-...
; t‘ 4 ' r ' ’ n •riCTBMl■ ; *•
igL..... # a.• yW^/t^^w2^ «SUS5fl
A View from the House showing the Grampian Range in the Distance.
Skene, Victoria.


etui'll
Vm\\Sm' 94*
Disc Harrowing.
Looking across the Paddocks towards the Grampians.


lyrggir* • *» Ti — j i 1Spc i ■ - —---fr-m
A View from the House, looking South.
occasion three months passed without his once having seen the home station by daylight. Every
available hour was spent in inspecting the out-station huts and in searching for the flocks, which
the shepherds had deserted.
An interesting stage in the history of the estate was reached when land was being offered for
selection throughout the Western District, and farms were established on what had been the squatting
runs. In many instances, where portion of a holding remained in the hands of the original occupier,
its value was greatly detracted from by its unworkable shape, selection being dotted about all over
it, so that it lost all symmetry and became difficult and costly to manage. Mr. W. Skene, however,
avoided all trouble of that kind. He made it a rule not to bid against any poor man who wanted a
farm to work. His attitude was much appreciated by the would-be selectors, and they were glad to
reciprocate in the same spirit by coming to an understanding that they would select only on one
side of the run, leaving the other side intact. The land was then being offered by the Government
at the upset price of £i per acre, and the selection on Skene started on the boundary next to Mt.
Sturgeon Station.
One of the best flocks of Merino sheep in Victoria was established on the run in the early
days. Not only were they famous for the wool returns they yielded, but rams from the property
Skene, Victoria.


‘ 1
Sheep in front of the Dam.
were bought by studmasters who had themselves established types far above the average. Such
noted breeders as the late Mr. J. L. Cnrrie and others equally successful in their day drew on Skene
for fresh blood to improve their studs. The Ercildoune flock was also to a considerable extent built
011 the same strain, and when the cattle on that property were reduced on account of changing
industry, 1500 ewes were brought from Skene to take their place.
Skene was inherited in 1877 by the late proprietor’s sons, W. and D. Skene, the Hon. Thomas
Skene, the eldest son, having in 1869 received the Basset property, in the Branxholme district, from
his father.
{The Stock on Skene
During his term of ownership Mr. James Robertson has also done much towards establishing
a high-class flock of Merinos on the estate, and he has introduced some of the best blood of A\ estern
Victoria into the sheep. In every case in which he has purchased rams he has drawn on a strain noted
for good frames and high quality fleeces Barunah Plains and Carngham have both been resorted to
at different times, and rams have also been purchased from the Nerrin Nerrin stud. On another
occasion a number of ewes were secured from Blackwood.
As might be expected from their breeding, the Skene sheep grow a long staple of lustrous fine
wool. The property is sound, clean sheep country, and the clip consequently sells usually at near
the top of the market. Indeed, phenomenal returns have been obtained from the sale of the wool.
In 1890, the last year of what was probably the worst spell of drought ever experienced in Western
Victoria, sixty-seven bales of Skene pieces sold at the exceptional rate of i6d. per lb.
The wool is very bright, usually well grown, long in the staple, sound, and is characterised with
well-defined serrations in the fibre. The fleeces open with plenty of body in them. The wethers sell
readily, for besides being large, they are of the description which fattens quickly.


- >
2400 6-tooth Wethers.
The Homestead Entrance.
Skene, Victoria,


Mr. James Robertson.
,-i .
- ' ■ * ' ;>iA
’^^RFSH^HrHH
wk _ isy ■■■ • - ■
The Pine Avenue.
Mr. Robertson keeps a small
herd of Shorthorn cattle. He finds
that breed most suitable for sta-
tion use, filling the dual purpose
of providing milking cows for
the homestead and giving steers
of value to send to market.
Jmprovcmcnts.
The house at Skene is a typi-
cal Western Victorian home-
stead . being airy, roomy, and
surrounded with well-tended
grounds. The soil lends itself
readily to garden cultivation, and
gives an almost unusual richness
to the bloom of flowers. The
woolshed is a substantial structure of bluestone, and shearing is still done by hand. The outbuildings are
well planned and built on solid and permanent lines.
Some Skene Iborses*
Mr. James Robertson is well known on the
Australian turf. He breeds thoroughbreds on
the estate, Burrama, a well-known blood sire,
being used at the stud until he died two years ago.
The yellow jacket and black cap of Skene have
been successful over many courses, both about the
metropolis and in the Western Distiict. Mr.
Robertson often rides his own horses, and has been
very successful in the pigskin, especially over
heavy timber. Among races won by horses both
owned and ridden by him is the Hamilton Hunt
Club Cup, which he carried off with Killarney, a
very fast horse bred by Mr. Thomas Robertson at
Moyne Falls. The same horse also carried his
owner to victory in the Hunt Club Cup at Ballarat
in 1894 and in the Heavy Weight Hunters’
Steeplechase at Flemington. In the following year
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


.
.Jar •■ |iag|i' -».
dH| «K ft fl fl a
* * .*, ‘ ■ -
Brood Mares and Foals.
** 1^*^
A Corner of the Stables.
Skene, Victoria.


Killarney Screen.
From an Oil Painting. SONGSTER QUAIL.
FOUR NOTABLE HORSES RACED BY MR. ROBERTSON.


A Corner of the Garden.
he won the Melbourne Hunt Club Cup, likewise run at Flemington. Mr. Robertson also owned
Quail, when she won the Bierly Steeplechase and the Warrnambool Steeplechase. In partnership with
Mr. Harold Armytage he raced Songster, a very fast horse over big timber, which won races on
Melbourne courses. Mr. Robertson has ridden in six point-to-point steeplechases at the Hamilton
Hunt Club meeting, winning four.
Probably the most noted performer ever raced by the proprietor of Skene was the pony mare
Screen (13 hands 2 in.), with which he won no less than fifteen events. One of these was an amateur
race at Warrnambool, in which Screen carried the phenomenal weight of 13 stone 3 lbs. to victory.
She afterwards went to India, and won a number of races there before being retired from the turf.
Screen’s performances in that country were: Between 1895 and 1902 sixty-three starts, won 32,
second 13, third 9, unplaced 9. She won £2230 in stakes, the most notable races being the Lucknow
Civil Service Cup of six furlongs, carrying 9 stone 4 lbs., in 1 m. 22 4-5 secs., and the Calcutta
Handicap of five furlongs, with 7 stone 13 lbs., in 1 m. 5 4-5 secs.
After finishing her racing career, Screen was sent back to Mr. Robertson, and she now grazes
peacefully on the ample pastures of Skene, apparently well content to rest on the laurels of past
victories. There is still an odd Skene horse in training.
Skene, Victoria.


Ifc 1 ' ■> 0/ '%> f Wf a '" k ** v &" - j-Xf^"
Some of the Trophies won by Mr Jas. Robertson.
niM\ 3as. IRobertson.
Mr. Jas. Robertson was born in 1870, and educated at the Hamilton Academy and the Hamilton
College. During his school days he took an active part in athletic sports, and when fourteen years
of age won every jumping event, including the Hurdle Race (in all six events). He was also a good
Hat runner. Since he left school he has won four Old Roys’ races (two flat and two over hurdles),
two of them being run twenty years after leaving school.
In 1906 he married Naomi, the daughter of Mr. Robert Moffatt, a Western District pastoralist.
There is one daughter by the marriage.
Golf has for many years been a favourite sport of the Squire of Skene, and he has been an
ardent supporter of the Hamilton Golf Club. He is now the president of that body. Among other
public positions he has for some years been representative for the East Riding in the Dundas Shire
Council.


!ftsusb\> Cveeb Estate
IT be property of flfcr. jf rands Beogs.
BUSHY CREEK, the property of Mr. Francis Beggs, the eldest son of the late Mr. Hugh
Lyons Montgomery Beggs, lies ten miles south of Glen Thompson, in picturesque
undulating country. Originally it was heavily timbered with sheoak, honeysuckle, and
eucalyptus gums, but is now so cleared that in places it is quite treeless, and in others the timber
is merely sufficient to give the necessary protection to stock. dhe hills in which the estate is
situated rise gradually from the great plain that stretches for many miles to the north-west, and is
skirted on the far horizon by the faint blue outlines of the Pyrenees, the Grampians, and wooded
ranges of lesser altitude. Parts of the run command a panorama of sixty miles of rolling pasture
lands, plains and timber belts alternating, and dotted here and there with the solitary peaks of
isolated and extinct volcanoes.
On the south, Bushy Creek joins Nareeb Nareeb and Chatsworth, on the east Berrambool, on
the north Narrapumelap, and on the west some small holdings. The Hopkins flows near by, and
the holding consists of excellent Merino country, heavily grassed and crossed by creeks. The
property was originally taken up by Messrs. Kidd and Hutchinson in the early forties, but they
sold out in 1852 to Messrs. H. L. M. Beggs and Precious Willan. That partnership lasted till iB6O,
when Mr. Beggs bought out Mr. Willan’s share, and became the sole proprietor. At first the area
was about 8000 acres, but before his death, in 1885, Mr. Beggs had got together a very compact
estate of 14,700 acres. After Mr. Beggs died the estate was carried on in trust for the family for
eight years, and was managed by the present owner. Then it was rented for five years by Mr. Francis
Beggs, in partnership with his half-brother, Mr. Hugh Beggs, and for a further term of eight years
the former leased it on his own account. In 1905 the estate was offered for sale by auction, and on
the bids failing to reach the reserve, 10,280 acres, including the homestead, were purchased privately
by Mr. F. Beggs, who in March, 1909, added 2336 acres he had bought from Nareeb Nareeb. Ihe
latter block is excellent grazing country, and lies only three miles from the Bushy Creek houndaiy.
Since he'obtained the freehold Mr. Beggs has greatly improved the property. Originally it
was well watered by natural creeks, but of late years these have silted up, and he has constructed a
(Section 37, pages 415-422.)


-
Photo by Lafayette.
Mr. Francis Beggs.
I
: •. :,...vy -•
% : r
Photo by Lafayette.
Mrs. F. Beggs.
number of clams, and has also put down two bores, in which water has been struck at 52 and 63 ft.
respectively. In addition, wells have been established. At the time of the sale the holding comprised
a very comfortable and ornamental house has
now been established. The foundations of the
new portion are of rock-faced concrete, and the
building itself is of square blocks of coarse sand
and quartz rubble bound with cement. The
material proves durable, and is of pleasing
appearance. The house is fitted with modern
appointments, and there is a telephone service
connecting it with the public exchange at Glen
Thompson. The homestead stands on a hill, with
a creek flowing round the foot. An attractive
view is commanded over several miles of undu-
lating pastoral land.
only ten paddocks, but these have since been
subdivided into twenty-four. A great deal of
additional clearing has also been carried out, and
the property is now in a high state of perfection
for woolgrowing purposes. The carrying capacity
is about a sheep to the acre.
In 1905 Mr. Francis Beggs married Edith M.,
third daughter of the late James Turnbull, late of
Emu Plains, Benalla, and there are two daughters
by the marriage.
Part of the present homestead was built in
1873 by Mr. H. L. M. Beggs, but during the
last year extensive additions have been made, and
The shearing shed is about half a mile from the house, and is fitted with eight Wolseley
machines. It holds nearly tooo sheep, a sufficient number in wet weather to keep work going for a
day with the sheep penned overnight.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Bushy Creek near the Homestead.
- v ‘.'-j
A View on Bushy Creek, looking towards the Homestead,
Bushy Creek, Victoria.


-jlif
■ ■ .
The Homestead.
(I be Bus bp Creek Sbecp.
The Bushy Creek clip has become famous among growers and buyers for its even length,
rare elasticity, silky lustre, and superb character. The wool on this estate is as near perfection as
any sheepbreeder working under ordinary practical conditions can hope to attain. Invariably it sells
at the top of the market, and it is generally admitted to form one of the most successful clips
grown in what is perhaps the choicest piece of Merino country in any part of the world. Ihe staple
is long and evenly ribbed with corrugations, and each fibre lying close to the others constitutes a
staple of great body, and makes the fleece of con iderable density. Ihe rarity of the clip lies in
the combination of great character, together with superabundant quality.
The sheep are notable for their even covering' and the weight of wool they carry beneath
the body and on the points. For the country they run on, they are large-framed, and the fleeces are
dense. It is obvious that there is Tasmanian blood in their veins, but they have the size of some
of the larger-framed mainland strains.
The stud was formed about thirty-five years ago from eighty ewes selected from the flock
then on the station, which had been founded from blood obtained from Ercildoune, Mt. Fyans,
Jellalabad, and Challicum. Flic first ram to be used on these ewes was purchased from Challicum,


Selected Four-tooth Merino Rams.
Stud Merino Ewes and Lambs.
then famous for the high quality of the clip it produced. In 1883 several sires were bought from
Scone, in Tasmania, and from Mr. D. Taylor, of St. John’s, also in that State. In both instances
selections were made of sheep with wool of great body, coupled with a silky lustre and elasticity
of fibre, which is probably even rarer now than it was then. These characteristics have been
maintained unimpaired in the Bushy Creek sheep right down to the present, whilst at the same
time the weight of fleece has been fully doubled. At a later date a ram was secured from Esk
Vale, Tasmania. Since then no other blood has been introduced, the stud and flock being bred to
its present high standard entirely by selection within itself. Ever since the formation of the stud,
the sheep have been managed by Mr. Francis Beggs.
There is a steady demand for Bushy Creek stud and flock rams, hrom 200 to 250 are sold
privately and by auction each year at satisfactory prices. As the sheep are fed entirely on natural
grasses, and are subjected to no artificial treatment, they give satisfaction to buyers requiring them
to breed sheep for woolgrowing under ordinary conditions, and the progeny inherit the features
which characterise the sires.
Bushy Creek, Victoria


View from the House looking South-east.
View from the House looking South-west.


m
Mr. Francis Beggs on his Grey.
Special Stud Ram —Five Years Old.
At the 1908 Geelong sales
the Bushy Creek fleece wool
all sold at from igd. to 17/ d.
per lb., whilst it is common
for the rams to cut up to 26
lbs. Some years ago the
6-tooth wethers which Mr.
Beggs had running on Borook
(then owned by him) aver-
aged [2 lbs. 6 ozs. all round.
A sample of fifty fleeces was
awarded a gold medal at the
Greater Britain Exhibition,
held at Earl's Court, London,
in 1899, and in commenting
on the exhibit the special
Bradford contributor to the
"British Australasian" wrote:
—“ I was drawing near to the
end of the exhibits, but there was evidently the best —if that could possibly be —left till last.
The next table contained the wool grown by Mr. Francis Beggs, of Glen Thompson, and if I had
been called in to judge the
wool I would have placed
‘ first prize’ on this table. My
notes made on the spot say
‘ best in the lot.’ This was
greasy Merino wool of Bo’s
quality, and though greasy, it
looked almost scoured. Com-
ment here is superfluous, for
it was perfect in every known
wool characteristic.” And in
describing the whole collec-
tion of samples from various
clips, the same expert wrote.
—“ Further comment about
the entire exhibit seems super-
fluous, and 1 venture to say
Bushy Creek, Victoria.


View of Run near the Boundary.
that such a fine collection of wools cannot be seen in any other part of the world, and the results
must he far reaching.” The above result was attained in spite of the Bushy Creek sample having
been chosen and packed at considerable disadvantage, as Mr. Beggs had forgotten to choose and
set aside the fleeces during shearing, and he afterwards picked them almost at random from pressed
hales opened in the Geelong stores for the inspection of buyers.
In addition to the excellent wool returns of the sheep, the wethers sell readily, for though of
considerable neck development, and with great width of thigh, they are plain on the body and fatten
quickly. The country is remarkably healthy for sheep, and no form of disease has been known there
since it was first used for pastoral purposes.


iLjfc | \ I f Kj^L
t » § \ t * J jr 'fc 9 9 W m *
" ' ■ ' .■#. . ' V , '• .
' , ... :' .. . ; '*■ tvi.-. -*c.
"’ ■'■•' . . ■ ‘ v;--'. ‘ . ' r> ‘
Betsy Burke with Pistol Foal. Cross Keys with Caiman Foal. Reproach.
Blood Mares and Foals at Melville Park.
®unbabullangana anb flbavh
Mestern Hustralia. Dictoria.
ahe {properties of flhr. S. IP. Hhac(uu).
MUNDABULLANGANA Station, in Western Australia, lies about 80 miles to the east of
Roeburne, on the coast, and 50 miles from Port Hedland, where a railway, which will tap a
considerable area of back country, is now being constructed. When first selected by Messrs.
Donald McDonald Mackay and Roderick Mackay (the uncles of Mr. Samuel Peter Mackay, the
present owner), it consisted of over 1,000,000 acres. In 1890 Roderick Mackay was drowned, and
about a year later the surviving proprietor took into partnership his other brother (whose name
was also Donald), and the latter’s sons. Some years later the present owner and his father bought
out the interests of the other partners.
(Section 38, pages 423-44-2.)


. ' '" * '
The Late Mr. Donald Mackay.
Photo by Lafayette.
Mr. S. P. Mackay.
Mr. S. lb Mackay is reallv a self-made man and won the money which enabled him to start
in squatting enterprises by pearling. It was after being successfully engaged at that occupation for
many years of hard pioneering life. However, it
was planned and carried through with untiring
energy, and the property is now one of the most
valuable in Western Australia.
The present area of Mundabullangana is about
400,000 acres. Some 50.000 sheep are shorn
annually on the station, whilst 250 head of cattle,
and a similar number of horses, are grazed all the
year round. The run is plentifully watered by means
of wells, which draw on a copious underground
supply that has never been known to fail. The
pastures consist of natural grasses, of which soft
spinifex is the most abundant. The country is
gently undulating, and intersected with long sand
ridges. It is lightly timbered on the flats with gum
trees.
some years that he was able, together with his
father and brothers, to buy into Mundabullangana.
He became the sole owner in 1903, when on the
death of his parent he purchased the remaining
interests.
The Mackay family immigrated to Victoria
in 1852. They came from Benmore, Portree, in
the Isle of Skye, where they had long been known.
After spending about twenty years in the
eastern States, the Mackays resolved to strike out
into what was then an almost untried squatting
venture in Western Australia. They went far up
into the back country, where huge areas could be
obtained, and operations conducted on the largest
scale. The enterprise was a risky one, and involved
The homestead and other improvements on Mundabullangana are planned on elaborate and
substantial lines. The house is of solid masonry, and is surrounded by a 10-ft. concrete verandah. The


flH ' %:* .,.
**"■ * ***** *. 4
KEITH THE SON OF MR. S, P. MACKAY-ON RUBY, WITH HIS DOGS.
Mundabullangana, Western Australia.


Shipping Wool at Forrestier’s Island, W.A.
Wool Teams leaving Mundabullangana for Forrestier’s Island.


■
Rod — a Western Australian Aborigine- and the Dogs.
rooms are large and comfortable, and water is laid on throughout the building, and about the
grounds. The living accommodation is of a kind not often found on back country stations in
Western Australia. The men’s quarters, stables, outbuildings generally, and the woolshed (with space
for twenty-two shearers), are fully up to the -standard of the most highly improved properties in
even the longest settled parts of the Commonwealth. At shearing time the wool is carted direct
to the coast at Forrestier’s Island, ten miles away.
Donkeys are used for haulage. The bales are
stacked at the island landing until a shipment is ready.
In the immediate future there will probably be a rapid development in the locality. A railway
is now being built from Port Hedland to Marble Bar, a distance of 114 miles, and a lot of new
country will consequently be opened up. Mundabullangana is already connected with Port Hedland
by telephone,
Ulunflabullangana, Western Australia.


Betsy Burke wins the Karrakatta Plate (Perth) in a Canter.
I
Mr. Mackay’s Training Stables at Brunswick (90 Miles from Perth).
These Stables are now leased to the Western Australian Government.


Burrah Sahib.
Zbc Stock.
Mundabullangana is usually regarded as bein one of the best stocked properties in the north-
west of Western Australia. The sheep have been bred consistently from the large-framed South
Australian Merinos. For some years drafts of rams have been purchased from Mr. Alick J. Murray,
of Mount Crawford, South Australia. From the very first, Murray rams were used, but in the
foundation blood there was also a dash of the Canowie strain. Besides being of large robust frame,
the Mundabullangana sheep are evenly covered with valuable fleeces of long bright wool. The staple
is sound and true, and there is an absence of kemp, both among- the lambs and the grown sheep.
The result has been good prices for the clip and a steady demand for the wethers, which fatten
readily.
A good deal of the station work is done with donkeys, which prove hardy, and well able to
withstand back country conditions, beside being capable of performing a great quantity of work. Mr.
Mackay imported Don Quixote and Bandolero, two Spanish jacks, at a cost of £240 each, direct from
Spain.
Mundabullangana, Western Australia.


Photo by Lafayette
Mr. S. P. Mackay and Keith.
HIM*. Iborscs.
Though he now has his headquarters in Victoria, the name of Mr. S. P. Mackay will linger
long in the memory of the racing men of Western Australia as a true lover of horses and an
enterprising and capable horseowner. When he took charge of the station, he had a very
valuable foundation to work on. The stud was founded by the late Mr. Roderick Mackay. who
was considered to be one of the best horse judges in Western Australia. The first stallion used
was Sir James Ferguson, by Talk o’ the Hill, a horse very well known in his day, and bred in 1872
b} Mr. William Gerrard, of South Australia. Sir James Ferguson’s dam was Apparition, by South
Australian There were other famous horses at Mundabullangana in the early days, among them
being the mare Meranda, by The Premier. When mated with Sir James Ferguson, Meranda threw
Shadow, a very notable mare. Wandering Willie was bred on the station, being by Two-of-Hearts


• , . , e i**' .
'■ ’V. * Vo ‘ ' , „ * ' * ’ . .
V' J V"' I a-V. •■' "I 1 ■ A' * f '■>* V •* A* *' \ 4 • ’• * :■* , K * /*> * {L if' $
DRAUGHT MARES AND FOALS RUNNING IN THE PADDOCKS AT MELVILLE PARK.
Mundabullangana, W,A. y and Melville Park, Vic.


■■. : '■ ' ■ :> 'a-- |9^
JgKip 111® - ■‘-^' •-■•
Kw fflp • — ‘> ; .
jyB
MH j V
|p| , |r=
.,, * '■" . : * : • ■ \;f;-:>i
Betsy Burke.
BE k k f
P|P .. j.
fi
W \hi *# H
■V LI mBM Aflp
Le Var.


liHBP 3?
■ H gmM' jp
* jt£Bm /4fc4»
Wandering Willie.
(Copied from an old photo).
from Shadow, and after being sold won the Perth Cup twice, the last time carrying to st. 5 )S -
Two-of-Hearts, with Cynic, by Yattendon from Hebe, were used at Mundabullangana on the mares
after Sir James Ferguson. Two-of-Hearts was by Tubal Cain from Ace-of-Hearts.
Since Mr. S. P. Mackay became sole owner of the property, he has done much to further
improve the stud by from time to time purchasing the best blood obtainable. Ihe owner of Le
Var, The Corsican, Loch Shiel, and a number of other famous horses, is more of a sportsman than a
sporting man, and aims at rather more than merely winning races. It has always been his object to
win with horses he has bred himself. It is sufficient to say that the stud at Mundabullangana has
sent forth some of the best horses that have sported silk over Western Australian courses. Air.
Alackav’s own colours have time and again been carried to important victories, and the wins, whether
falling to favourites or outsiders; have invariably proved popular. The first horses he purchased were
the splendidly-bred The Corsican and Sunny Days. Sunny Days was sired by Hawthorn from
Sunshine, and The Corsican, by Neckersgat from Josephine. The pride of place, however, must be given
to Le Var. one of the best weight for age horses Australia has seen. This speedy son of Lochiel and
La Valette was bought privately after a career of conspicuous brilliance in the eastern States.
Mundabullangana, Western Australia.


SOULTLINE.
v
Mazarin.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Caiman Yearling from Cross Keys. A Two-year-old Full Brother to Brunswick.
Two Colts at Melville Park.
Le Var has sired a number of successful horses, and many of them have carried Mr. Mackay’s
colours first past the post. During' two seasons he topped the list of Western Australian sires, once
being represented by seven winners, which accounted between them for eighteen races to a total value
in stakes of £2345. During three seasons his stock won no fewer than thirty-five races. But of all
Le Vans successful progeny the one which must have afforded Mr. Mackay most personal satisfaction
■was the mare Betsy Burke, from Laura. She was undoubtedly one of the fastest Australian mares of
her day. She is now at the stud. Mr. Mackay scored important wins with another Le Var horse m
Loch Shiel, with which he won an important race at Perth and the Hannan’s Handicap at Kalgoorlie,
besides other big events. In the Hannan’s Handicap Loch Shiel paid the phenomenal dividend of
£l3B 18s. Flora Mac was also by Le Var, and she won some big events, including the Kalgoorlie
Cup. Although Mr. Mackay has not yet succeeded in annexing the Perth Cup, he went very near to
it when Fifeness ran into second place. Fifeness was by Bill of Portland, and was regarded as the
most brilliant performer of his time in Western Australia. Mr. Mackay secured him for 300 guineas
as a yearling in Victoria. Other Victorian purchases include Scotland, Mazarin, and Soultline, the
latter in 1909 winning in succession the St. George Stakes, Futurity Stakes, and the Newmarket
Handicap. In the Newmarket Soultline carried 9 st 11 lbs. on a wet day—the heaviest weight ever
carried to victory in the history of that race.
M nndahullantfana, IV.A., and Melville Park, Vic,


yr. ww
THE HOME PADDOCK AT MELVILLE PARK.


Horse-yards and Cow-sheds.
The Drive, Melville Park.
Melville Park, Victoria.


>
THE DRIVE AND HOUSE, MELVILLE PARK.


Kismet —Champion Single Buggy Horse.
1 he stallion now being used at Mundabullangana is Rhubarb, by Persimmon from jersey Lily,
Le \ar having been sold after some years’ service. Rhubarb is an imported horse, and he ran second in
the Perth Cup. He also has some English races to his credit. Rhubarb promises to exercise a very
potent influence on the blood stock of Western Australia, as besides having what is now the most
favoured blood of England in his veins, he is a horse of great symmetry and power.
niXivnic padL
Mr. Mackay was certainly very fortunate in the home he selected in Victoria. Melville Park lies
in the most picturesque part of the Berwick district, and comprises 817 acres of rich grazing land.
The property is only a mile from the railway station, and less than an hour’s motor run from Melbourne.
r he house is built on the top of a hill, from which green meadows fall away on all sides. The
•Mows look out on an expanse of fine country, with timbered hills further off. The property was
ght in 1905, and with subsequent improvement has cost about £4O per acre. The house was built
he present owner, and is a delightful building of two stories, with many of the most modern
venicnces. It is sewered, water is laid on everywhere, and a plant on the establishment generates
Munclaballangana, W.A., and Melville Park, Vic.


_ 1
Harrowing a Cultivation Paddock.
4i
The Front of the House, Melvilte Park.


Grade Dairy Cows with Stud Ayrshire Bull.
'* ' " -w ‘ * « * •- t mlmZm -'
***• ’,. *.**-•!» .. 4 "‘fiYUgfl* .Kgs>» —
' ,, •:» ■ *'■ 1 . *•
' ■
;.- fc . . v - „ • ••-■• ••-• - ••,.■
Pigs in the Paddocks, Melville Park.
Melville Park, Victoria.


B» ffiPPffiB SMBBSl jjL ”* ■ • ■
The Pumping Station on Cardinia Creek.
electricity for lighting purposes. The property has a frontage to the Cardinia Creek, from which an
engine pumps water to the various paddocks and the homestead.
The paddocks at Melville Park have been put into excellent condition for rearing young blood
stock. Rich in rye and clover, they are valuable for any class of stock-raising or fattening, whilst the
soil is such that fodder may be grown for the winter months. A few selected blood mares are now kept
on the place for Mr. Mackay’s own purposes. In addition, he has a number of Clydesdale mares
on the property. These are selected from the best strains in Victoria, including prize-winners at the
Melbourne Royal Show. A dock of pure Shropshire sheep is also to be seen in the paddocks. Mr.
Mackay purchased the whole of Mr. D. M. Aitken’s stud ewes when that gentleman’s Gleniffer flock
was dispersed, and is now breeding from them with Mansell rams. There is an up-to-date dairy and
piggery on the farm.


®,uamb£ Estate.
Ibclb hv> the trustees of the late flbr. 3amcs Xinhsa^.
QUAMBY Station is located about 12 miles from Caramut and 22 miles from Warrnambool.
It comprises some 25,000 acres, and is held by the Trustees of the late Mr. James Lindsay,
son of the late Mr. William Lindsay, who purchased the property as a squatting lease in
1854. The beneficiaries are Mrs, Lindsay and her seven children.
Ihe country at Quamby is slightly undulating. It is volcanic in origin, but the fiats show a
considerable depth of alluvial deposit. On the higher ground there are frequent outcrops of igneous
rock, ihe Spring Creek runs through the estate, and provides a permanent water supply. Dams and
bores have also been established. The run is fenced oft' into about twenty-five paddocks, and the
property is well suited to sheepbreeding, being of heavy carrying capacity and very sound. The
drained portions grow green feed at times of the year when pastures elsewhere are like so much
parched and sapless straw, while the higher land provides excellent lambing country, 80 per cent, of
lambs being a common record. The best lambing returns are often obtained on rough hilly ground,
and the outcrops of stone at Quamby provide splendid shelter for newly-dropped lambs. Fortunately,
the original timber was not swept relentlessly away without regard for future requirements, and a
large number of the old trees still remain. The thinning of the original forest has led to the fuller
development of these, and they add greatly to the attractiveness of the country as well as increasing
its value for stockbreeding purposes. In addition, about 150 acres have been put under plantations,
which vary in age from one to eight years, and are scattered about the run in long strips where
most needed. The trees grow quickly in such rich country, and many of them have already attained
considerable size. Sugar and blue gums and golden wattles have been used more than any other
species for planting.
£bc )£arlj) Ibteton?.
Messrs. Mussle, Brown and Wickham were the first owners of Quamby. From them it passed
to Mr. George Youl, who in turn sold out to Mr. Paul de Castella. The late Mr. William Lindsay
1 (Section 39, pages 4-43-434.)


V \ v
\ J '''&S& . ■>-■''■;■ v - : v'
*..
v>i v .y tni^K
„ ’ i I f/ f'-M f . #V tfttfe
• <t Vil ■s4s r ~'W ■ %.*,- - J %zS$i* *■ Vti *'f£^'»<T. j$fa.
jg£ ~lt|T% »L | |>
III | mWBf ..
*|F . I || -. a . ■;.,... 4^
_. ' • # /« ., ,i
P* ,_ ; \ •
■**“• -*<***' ’’
El . * 4t«si
The Family Group.
purchased the holding from the last-named gentleman in 1854. It then consisted of 30,000 acres
of Crown land, and was stocked with cattle. On the demise of Mr. William Lindsay, the late Mr.
James Lindsay inherited the estate, and worked it till the time of his death on 6th March, 1908.
The squatting lease which Quamby originally comprised embraces parts of the present estates
of Minjah, Kilmorey, and Warrong, as well as Quamby. When Mussle, Brown and Wickham first
took up the run it consisted of very rough country, densely timbered in places, and included large
swamps. It was suitable then for cattle, and for many years cattle-breeding was the only use to which
it was put. There were not any fabulous profits in that business up to the time the holding was taken
over by the first Mr. Lindsay, and the difficulties in working the place were very great. The blacks
gave a lot of trouble. They keenly resented the invasion of the white men, and showed their dislike
by spearing stock whenever an opportunity presented itself. They knew the country better than did
the newcomers, and the timber afforded cover to lie in hiding when they chose to do so. The
■dingoes also were very troublesome. Game abounded in the locality, and wild dogs had bred in great
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


j L 9 m&-'‘ ■ % jftUUHbMfe4MUMfclA/~ I •■* ■ c z z z s * i* *3 / *, * *; f •* * .»jJ|
THE HOMESTEAD,
Quamby, Victoria,


Photo hy Jordan.
Mrs. James Lindsay.
numbers. Before the country was cleared it was practically impossible to dislodge them, and for
many years afterwards they were a source of annoyance and caused losses. However, by the middle
fifties the pastoral outlook had grown much more promising. The market for cattle improved, thanks
to the rush of diggers into the country, and prices increased to more than double what they had been.
With the returns showing this improvement it became worth while to increase the carrying capacity of
the country. The task of clearing Quamby was no light undertaking, and years were occupied in
completing the work. Some of the land was ring-barked, and when the timber had died it was burnt.
Tn other portions the trees were grubbed. Eventually enough of the timber was removed to allow
the grass to grow well. Draining the swamp lands was also a long business, and could only be
accomplished in sections. Cuttings were first made through banks which had dammed up the water.
Big drains were then scooped to take off the bulk of the swamps, and afterwards smaller courses
were cut at all sorts of angles. It was not till the whole of this work was completed that the grass
began to grow in full vigour. The general experience in dealing with this class of country is that
very little benefit results unless the soil remains permanently exposed to the air. Land submerged
for a month in winter time loses whatever benefit it may have accrued from draining which proved
efficient during the other eleven months. The artificial watercourses on Quamby (of which there
are 120 miles) are so planned that even a flood soon disappears, and a great wealth of sweet and
nourishing pastures grow practically all the year round.


pF
i Jm
■L-s
* 1ll^Bi^^|fc^?fM4f : -S,
Jff
Wgi | K|L * 'Jjk H ■
Photo by Scott Barry .
The late Mr. James Lindsay.
Ouamby was turned into a freehold property during 1862. In the six succeeding years a further
20,000 acres were acquired by purchase, and under various Land Acts. At that time there was a
large population in the colony, and the pastoral industry was booming. Big drafts of cattle were
annually sent to Melbourne and to other centres, and high prices were prevailing. The pioneers who
led such strenuous lives of self-denial were then reaping a solid reward for their pluck and
industry.
personal.
ihe late Mr. James Lindsay was born at Union Station, adjoining Ouamby, in 1846. He was
the eldest son of the late Mr. William Lindsay, and had one brother, Mr. William Lindsay, who
owns Union Station. He took great interest in local affairs of public importance, and, like his father
before him, was for many years a prominent member of the Warrnambool Shire Council, of which
body he occupied the president’s chair for a number of years. He was also well known for his
charitable disposition, and is much missed in the district, where he was respected by all who knew
him. On the 20th January, 1887, Mr. Lindsay married Margaret Esther, the eldest daughter of the
late Mr. Samuel Shaw Parker, C.E.. of Warrnambool, who surveyed some of the main streets of that
town. The family consisted of five sons and two daughters. Mrs. Lindsay and family live at
Quamby.
Quamby, Victoria


Cattle on Spring Creek.
Another View of Spring Creek.


The Motor Garage and Outbuildings.
* - — ’ a ! . . - • . « .' ‘
The Station Entrance.
Quamby, Victoria


The Side of the Homestead.
A Corner of the Garden,
Zb e Stoch.
About 25,000 crossbred, Lincoln, and Merino sheep are run constantly on the property.
The general flock is composed of a Lincoln-Merino cross. A stud of Lincolns is used for
principally used in founding
it was from Challicum, Mount
Fyans, Trawalla, and Wood-
house. Each one of those
properties is notable for the
good prices obtained for their
clips. The resultant cross
between the progeny of these
Lincolns and Merinos are ex-
cellently suited to Ouamby
country. They possess fine
carcases, and readily fatten,
which enables surplus stock
to be sold in a prime con-
dition, and bring top prices.
The clip also is of a high
order of merit, as much as
breeding rams for home use
and for sale. The strain is
founded on sheep bred on
Moorak, and others purchased
from Messrs. R. A. D. Flood
and Fowling. The type bred
is large-framed, and produces
a very high class of wool.
Merino rams are also bred on
Ouamby, a stud being main-
tained. The Merinos are de-
scended from flocks notable
for the high character of the
wool they yield. The blood
per lb. having been obtained for fleece wool at the Geelong sales.
A small herd of pure Hereford cattle is kept on the estate. They have been bred from stock
obtained from the Cressy and Clarendon herds in Tasmania and the Ercildounc stud in Victoria.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


■ **"' \ ' '
i. Mares and Foals. 2. Some of the Lincoln Ewes (carrying six months wool).
3. Station-bred Cattle and Red Gum Timber.
Quamby, Victoria


Miss Lindsay holding Clio, Brittania and Jin.
The Herefords are used for crossing with Shorthorns and other varieties for fattening purposes.
Altogether about 600 head of cattle arc grazed on the run.
Considerable attention has been bestowed on horsebreeding.. The country is well suited to the
purpose, producing large-boned, sound animals. Among the types maintained are hacks, draughts, and
thoroughbreds. Some of the best blood in Victoria has been used on the light mares. Included in
the sires they have at one time or another been put to are Panic, Lord Wilton, Hamlet, Morris
Dancer. King Alfred, Portsea, Coil, Vengeance, Harvester, Falkirk, Alva, and Graftondelle. As might
he expected from such notable breeding an excellent type of young stock has been produced, and it
is unfortunate that the prevailing prices for horses do not encourage the operations being carried out
on a more extensive scale.
3mprovemcnto.
The present homestead at Quamby was built by the late Mr. James Lindsay in 1893. It is a
large, well-appointed house, constructed of wood, and very picturesquely situated. The fertility of the
soil is evidenced by the great growth of flowers in the garden surrounding the residence. The
conveniences about the homestead are plentiful, and have been kept well up to date.
The woolshed is of wood, with an iron roof, and attached is a fine dip, built of concrete, with
a swim of 40 ft. Shearing is still done by hand. During shearing about sixty men are engaged on
the place.


„Q n A
. J *SBHBBhfeal J |L *
The Old Sheepwash Dam.
i
Mrs. Lindsay and Her Three Younger Sons.
Quamby, Victoria•


The Woolshed.
The Quamby Motor.
The rabbits are kept in check by the aid of a couple of packs of dogs, working all the year
round, and also by poisoning in the summer months, there are a few rocky patches from which it
is difficult to dislodge vermin, hut as a whole the run cannot be described as bad rabbit country. Tor
are there any specially
troublesome breeding grounds
in the neighbourhood. For
that reason it has not been
found necessary to resort to
wire netting fences, and nei-
ther the boundary nor any of
the subdivisions have been
netted.
At the time of writing
(1909) there are about 350
head of kangaroos on Quam-
by. These are in two mobs,
and are increasing rapidly.
In the early days the country abounded with native game, but settlement led to the marsupials
being almost eliminated. Mr. Lindsay, however, managed to save a few kangaroos, and insisted on
them being strictly preserved on his property, with the result that there are now two fine, one might
almost say unique, mobs on the station.


Mr. Winter’s Team of Polo Ponies.
/WbonMUM Estate.
£bc property of ni>i\ John 3- Winter.
MONDILIBI ESTATE, the property of Mr. John James Irving Winter, is part of what was
once the original estate of the late Mr. John Moffatt. It consists of 5 2 °° acres, and contains
some of the best land in the old Hopkins Hill holding, which included over 100,000
acres. The country is volcanic in formation, the igneous rocks being strewn over the ground in such
profusion as to render it unfit for cultivation, but it is fertile and healthy for the sheep to depasture
on. The homestead is built at the foot of the Flat Top Hill, the northern end of which bears traces of
having given vent to a volcanic outburst at no very distant date. It is apparent that from here part of
the lava which covers the surrounding land has flowed in a molten state. The hill forms a charming
back ground for the house, and makes a pleasant break in the scenery of the place.
Mondilibi consists of a compact block, so that no part of the run is at a great distance from the
house, and the length of the boundary is small, considering the acreage. This, of course, lessens the
T (Section 40, pages 433-462.)


The late Mr. James Winter.
*5% K
■
Mr. John I. Winter.
expenses of management, and in other ways proves an advantage. Except for the stony rises, such as
occur so often on the plain of the Western District of Victoria, the paddocks are all flat. The soil
They are fine-woolled, and typical of the true Aus-
tralian Merino type, as specially evolved to fit Wes-
tern Victorian conditions. Mr. Winter established
his flock about five years ago. The rams he bought
from Mr. James Russell, of Barunah Plains, and the
ewes from Carngham and Langi Willi, and it would
be difficult to find flocks more likely to nick well
with one another. The Barunah sheep are of large
commanding frames, with full necks, deep sides,
and stoutly built. The wool is very long, con-
sidering how dense the fleeces are, whilst it is also
bright, and of the kind to command a high price.
I he Langi Willi and Carngham sheep are very
similar in some of these traits. They also are of good
is fairly deep, and the pastures are dense and
vigorous, there being a good variety of nourish-
ing and sweet natural herbs and grasses. Amongst
these, prairie grass is interspersed with kangaroo
grass, and owing to the presence of the latter the
estate is provided with excellent summer feed. This
is not always the case with volcanic formations, the
porous character of the soil being apt to allow
speedy evaporation, and thus causing grasses to
wither early.
Sbecp.
The Mondilibi sheep are pure Merinos, of large
frames and a long staple of bright, lustrous wool.
frames, but their wool differs from that on the Barunah sheep in that it is somewhat longer and
hardly as dense. Mr. Winter has had occasion to be well satisfied with his selection of the foun-


m - .
THE HOMESTEAD.
Mondilibi, Victoria .


11 ■
-^0
f '- • f .
_ ...... .. • .
• • ; .f? * ’.'.■ ft
*v,>
Sheep on Mondilibi.
Photographed during an exceptionally dry Autumn.
dation of the flock, as the young stock appear to have retained the merits of the original sheep in a
striking manner. Consequently he has decided to import no fresh blood, but, instead, to fix the merits
his sheep already have by methodical inbreeding. The quality of the wool is illustrated by the fact
that at the wool sales of the present season (1908-9) the Mondilibi clip realised ibjTd. pec lb., though
when it was offered prices were lower than they had been immediately before, and were still falling.
£he Country
Though Mondilibi is unsuitable for purposes of cultivation, and is in its natural condition
somewhat treeless in appearance, there is little better sheep country in Australia, even apart from
the improvements. The stony rises are peculiarly favourable for lambing in, and for the past five
seasons the station ewes have returned a splendid percentage of lambs. The irregular surface of
the ground on the stony rises gives a shelter for young lambs which appears to be of more value to
them than even overhead foliage.
A considerable area of plantations has already been established at Mondilibi, and each year
it is being increased by about 30 acres. In this way it is intended to have the whole run ultimately
provided with a sufficiency of stock protection in each part. Though the stony rises prove excellent
lambing country (the small lambs being able to coil comfortably among the fragments of rocks and
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


. . = r *‘ - • - * ■ '
• . ; 4. ... ■ p| M AM . /r ■ i | m
., 4 ■ f ■ ' '
• — *4 -
■ * . k -\ Cf V‘ u' ■ i ■' - U » ■ ■ ■' .
■ } ■ - ■
'■ '* ' v v /,$- ' * '* v|
Homestead, showing Flat Top Hill.
The Drive.
Mondilibi, Victoria,


■ >• . I
\' Jw,'' - >*' '
. V J £ -* ■ w
VIEW ON SALT CREEK.
Taken after a long dry Summer.


mm
'
_ ’ . .. • ■ ... ■
Station-bred Cattle watering at Well.
in the crevices of the broken surface), they are in winter and early spring too cold for large animals
and even for older lambs. During a cold storm last August a large number of ewes and lambs were
lost partly through lack of shelter. This, however, will speedily be rectified. The young trees grow
rapidly in the fertile volcanic soil, and they are being arranged in such fashion as to give the
maximum shelter. As a general rule it is found that scattered clumps of trees are more
serviceable for stock purposes than long strips of plantations, for to obtain its full benefit shelter
must be readily accessible from all parts of the paddocks. The tendency amongst lambing ewes is
to scatter widely, and where there is no natural protection it is advisable to plant trees in such
positions that the newly-dropped lambs can reach them with a minimum of travelling. This is what
has, and still is, being done at Mondilibi, and when the trees are grown up it will form an ideal
property for breeding sheep on. By nature it is sound, well watered, and compact. Its failing in the
past has been the biting winter winds that have swept over it, especially across the paddocks of less
broken surface. The growing plantations are already affording protection from these, besides
affording a pleasant relief to the eye, which previously could wander for miles across unbroken
expanses of grass and stones.
The valley of Salt Creek affords a very interesting idea of the nature of the country at Mondilibi.
The water, through the course of ages, has cut a deep declivity in the suitace of the countiy, and by
examining its banks an impression may be gained of the depth of the volcanic soil. Having formed
a twisting and deep valley running through a wide, flat plain, the creek offers excellent shelter for
stock, where shelter is naturally scarce.
Mondilibi, Victoria.


I . -v. • '* ;.;:.^Si-i:|
The Homestead from the Drive.
Outcrops of rock occur at different parts of the property, and how well the soil responds to
cultivation is made manifest by the growth in the garden. The land proves specially adapted for
horse-breeding, growing well-built animals particularly sound in the feet.
AIM*. 3obu 3amcs 3rvmo TOintcr.
Mr. John I. Winter is the eldest son of the late Mr. James Winter, of Shurringile, Victoria,
and was born in 1872. He received his education in England and Europe under private tuition. Mr.
\\ inter is enthusiastic about woolgrowing and sheepbreeding, and with the foundation he has already
laid, hopes to establish a stud characterised with all the traits that go to stamp the type of the best
\\ estern \ ictorian sheep, and also each year to sell wool at about the top of the market. The latter
object was attained last year.
In 1900 Mr. A\ inter married the second daughter of the late Mr. M. P. Blundell, of the
Bank of Australasia, but has no family.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Some of the Station Horses.
BEvmesbun? BEstate.
Che property of the Eyecutors of the late Captain S3. C. Staughton.
EYNESBURY consists of some 20,000 acres, mostly of stony volcanic land, and is situated
about 23 miles from Melbourne in a north-westerly direction. The drive to the homestead
from Melton is both interesting and picturesque, the eight miles presenting several different
varieties of country. At first one passes for two or three miles over comparatively flat land, at
one time heavily timbered with grey box, but now practically cleared and cultivated. Later the
land grows more undulating and the timber somewhat thicker. The track lies along a private road
past the Exford Homestead, which is picturesquely situated, and overlooks the fertile valley of the
Werribee River. A date on the bluestone stables shows they were erected in 1856. Exford was
part of the original run purchased by Mr. Simon Staughton. grandfather to the late Captain
Staughton, in the early forties. Staughton Vale and other properties were a few years afterwards
1
(Section 41, pages 4G3-474,)


The late Capt. S. T. Staughton, D.S.O.
added, and by 1850 Mr. Staughton held an immense area of country in the locality, which since has
been divided among his descendants. Exford is now the home of Mr. H. W. Staughton, a son of
Mr. Simon Staughton.
After passing the Exford House, the track takes a long dip and runs down to the main road
near the \\ erribee River, which is crossed at this point. The stream has cut a gorge for itself in
the volcanic plain, which appears to be at least 200 ft. deep. When ascending again, an interesting
cutting is passed through. Quite near the top there is a stratum of water-worn quartz, which bears
all the appearance of having been the course of a stream. It would almost seem that countless
centuries ago the Werribee flowed along this comparatively elevated bed, and since then has changed
its position and has cut for itself the tremendous declivity through which it now flows. Shortly
after leaving the Werribee, the boundary of Eynesbury is reached, and simultaneously the visitor
passes into a dense belt of timber. The trees, which have grown naturally, are so thick that there
is no vegetation beneath them, and the sunlight is only able to penetrate in patches to the ground.
On a fine day a chorus of native birds make the timber ring again with their varied notes, and the
whole place teems with native life. The trees have been left for shelter, as the greater part of the run
is quite bare.


General View of the Homestead.
The Side Entrance.
Eynesbury, Victoria.


View from the Homestead looking South-west towards Mt. Mary.
View looking North-east.


The Lake at the Homestead.
The homestead and outbuildings at Eynesbury are substantially built of bluestone quarried
on the property. The main building is of two stories, and the front of the house is surrounded with
a fine old shrubbery and garden. A very pleasing effect has been obtained in the arrangement of
the latter. As one stands on the verandah gazing through openings in the foliage, across some
miles of open grass land beyond, the view is uninterrupted with any surrounding fence. This is
due to the ground dropping away from the house on all sides, and the garden soil having been
banked to near the top of a stone wall which divides the garden from the paddock. The far side
of the wall is fully 4 ft. above the ground, while on the house side it is only close examination which
reveals the presence of any division at all.
The soil is admirably suited to dowers, ana shrubs have been selected so as to provide almost
endless variety in the hue of their leaves. There are, in addition, a number of imported and native
trees growing round the homestead. At the rear of the house is a wide sheet of water formed by
damming the surface drainage.
An elevation on the plain stands out conspicuously about a mile in front of the house. This
is Mount Mary, of volcanic origin, and which is included in the run. From the top of this hill a
very unique view may be obtained of the surrounding country. On the one side a speckled blur in
the distance, shaded with a Laze of smoke, denotes the locality of Melbourne. Mount Macedon, the
Eynesbury, Victoria.


A Corner of the Garden.
A Growing Crop.
Pentland Ranges, and a wide
stretch of plains extending away
over towards Geelong, all come
into the field of vision. There
are few spots from which one can
obtain so clear and convincing an
impression of the magnitude of
the great volcanic plain which at-
tracted the Staughtons, Clarkes,
and Chirnsides in the earliest
days of Victorian pastoral settle-
ment.
The whole of this country has
apparently been formed, from the
hills to the sea, by a mighty
overflow of lava from Mount Macedon or thereabouts. The sheet of volcanic rock is shown by the
W enibee gorge to be of great thickness. On several spots on Eynesbury bores have been put
down for water supply purposes, the average thickness of the volcanic rock was then shown to be
200 ft. L nderneath this is a layer of another kind of igneous rock, which is of a harder description, but
is only some to ft. thick. In all cases water has been found beneath the rock, though the strength of
the flow has varied in the different spots. The lava sheet extends to the Yarra, and the road from
Melbourne to Geelong passes over
it for nearly all the distance.
How far it extends over what is
now the bed of the bay can only
be conjectured.
A drive over Eynesburv shows
plainly enough that, of the 20,000
acres, sheepbreeding is the most
productive use to which 15.000
acres can be turned. The great
majority of the estate is light
stony land, with a carrying capa-
city of some two sheep to three
acres. ihe soil, however, is
peculiarly healthy, and disease


The Orchard.
Station-bred Cattle.
Eynesbury, Victoria.


“ '"* *" t - | . .: • ' ' * 1 1 f ' ’ ' *
The Woolshed.
* r v IL,
J * •■'•’. .: V I-
*ir ‘ T , • .* s *'**'£ ■>& ’ ?h4*- .£' 5 S
Crossbred Sheep.


Stud Lincoln Ewes and Lambs.
is unknown there among stock. The store Merino-Lincoln crossbreds from Eynesbury
invariably bring top prices because of their large frames and their reputation for good
constitutions. The country is somewhat susceptible to droughts. Though so close to Melbourne
and to the coast, it is visited by long dry spells, and the soil is of a nature which rapidly
dries. The average rainfall is 18 in., but during the last three years only half that amount was
recorded. About 16,000 crossbred sheep and lambs are usually shorn each year, and after shearing,
sales to the extent of 6000 are effected. About 4000 acres of Eynesbury are fit for agriculture.
Approximately half of that is now leased to seven farmers, who cultivate it, portion of what they
hold being well suited to dairying, whilst the balance gives satisfactory results from general
farming. Oats and barley are grown, and wheat has given up to 26 bushels to the acre, with an
average of about 20. flay is also grown for staton use, whilst lately lucerne has been tried, though
sufficient time has not elapsed to allow an estimate being formed of how the experiment is likely to
result.
Though one end of Eynesbury has been nicely timbered by natural causes, the rest was, until
a few years ago, practically bare of trees. In the early days there were honeysuckle trees scattered over
the run, but they have since died out. Plantations are now being formed each year, and as some of
these have already attained an age of ten years, a good deal of artificial shelter is provided.
Eynesbury, Victoria.


The Front of the House.
Eynesbury is bounded on the east by the Werribee River, with small holdings on the far
side of it, on the north by Exford, on the south by Captain Chirnside’s property, and on the west by
Greystones and Staughton Vale. The river provides a never-failing supply of water, and in the very
driest year a strong stream is found a foot or two below the surface sand. The banks of the stream,
besides being of great altitude, are very bold and steep, the stream having cut a course for itself through
the great sheet of rock almost as though some mighty chisel had been used for the purpose. In
other parts of the run the water supply is provided by surface tanks. It is found practical to scoop
excavations in spots free from stone, and the soil in such places has proved to hold water without
loss through soakage.
The late Captain Staughton was one of the three sons of the late Mr. S. T. Staughton, M.L.A.,
who was so well known in Victorian political circles. Captain Staughton was a twin brother of Mr.
Arthur J. Staughton, the owner of Keayang. The third son is Roy, who inherits Lindisfern under
his father’s will. The latter property, however, is worked with Eynesbury, and the sheep from both
estates are shorn in the shed of the latter, which was one of the first in Victoria to be fitted with
Wolseley machines.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


A View on the Werribee River.
Eynesbury, Victoria.


*?-•'*’ -* ,'r r /i ?~T •* "^ v *v f |ffi^|»j^
River Flats.
Captain Staughton died in 1903, after having seen a great deal of active service in South Africa,
where he went with the First Contingent as a lieutenant. He won promotion, and obtained his D.S.O.
in the war there. Pfe is survived by an only child —-a son —who was born two months after his
death.
The Staughton estates of Exford, Eynesbury, &c., form what was among the first land to be
settled by pastoralists in Victoria. It was originally taken up by Dr. Wotton, who was one of a
syndicate formed in Tasmania by Batman for pastoral enterprise on the mainland. Dr. Wotton sold
the holding to Mr. Simon Staughton, who had come from England with his family in 1841. iwo of the
sons —Samuel Thomas, the father of Captain Staughton, and Stephen George—were then but babies
in arms. Some 60.000 sheep were shorn on the Staughton's River Exe (as the Werribee was then
called) properties in the fifties. There were then very few holdings in the Port Phillip district with
such high carrying capacity. The brothers worked, after the death of their father, in partnership,
which was continued till 1870, when they divided their property. Mr. S. T. Staughton died in August,
1901, two years before his son.


Station-bred Cattle, Glengower.
(3lenoowcv, Xahe /Ifoenema, anb
IkUlarnq? BEstatcs.
Zbc properties of flftr. Thomas 3- ©'Xouoblin.
GLENGOWER originally belonged to Mr. 'l'. J. O'Loughlin’s uncle, the late Mr. Martin
Longhlin, who died on 23rd December, 1894, and who was a well-known Victorian
landowner. The estate lies between Climes and Newstead, and comprises some 18.000
acres of valuable pastoral land, a large portion being composed of fertile alluvial flats admirably
suited to agriculture. About 3000 acres consist of open red gum flats, where creeks wind pleasantly
through luxuriant pastures, and stock find ample natural shelter both from the cold of winter and the
strong summer sun. The Burches Creek, Middle Creek, and dunes Greek all run through the property,
and for most of their courses their banks are rimmed by the gnarled and twisted forms of ancient trees,
t (Section 42, panes 473-482.)


The Glengowek Homestead.
Deep Creek.
which meet above the streams.
As these creeks hold a good
supply of water during the au-
tumn months as well as the
wetter portions of the year,
stock are well provided for.
However, four windmills have
been established to supple-
ment the supply, and bores
have been put down where
necessary.
The property usually car-
ries more than a sheep to the
acre. In a normal year about
18,000 sheep are shorn, and a
number of Shorthorn cattle
are also kept all the year
round. In any ordinary season the rich flats yield a quantity of excellent cattle feed, and bullocks
may be seen there during almost any time of the year grazing knee deep in rye grass and other
vigorously growing herbage.
The sheep are for the most
part crossbreds, having been
sired by Merino rams from
Lincoln ewes. The wool is
well grown, having the
double merit of density and
good length. It also is of
excellent quality, and sells on
the Geelong market at high
prices. At the 1908 sales the
top lots brought is. 4d. and
is. sd. per lb.
The homestead at Glen-
gower is a substantial blue-
stone structure of the older
type, and is very attractively


The Station Outbuildings.
Crossbred Sheep on Red Gum Country.
GLENGOWEK.
Glengower, Victoria.


Photo hy Sears.
Mr. Thomas J. O’Loughlin.
View on Deep Creek near the Glengower
Homestead.
docks only once, and thus escape with a minimum
of knocking about.
Glengower was held on lease by the late Mr.
Alexander Clark for about thirty years. That
gentleman died some few months ago, and the pro-
perty is now leased to his son, whose name is also
Alexander Clark.
Xafce flftcnenia.
Lake Mencnia is another of Mr. O’Loughliirs
large properties. It consists of 16,000 acres,
and lies some 12 miles from Maroona, in the Ararat
district. Though not of such a picturesque
character as Glengower, Lake Menenia has risen
greatly in value during recent years. The soil is ol
a stiff volcanic nature, and contains quantities of
small round igneous pebbles. The grasses hold
situated. The house itself, which consists of
twelve rooms, is one-storied, very roomy, and
is surrounded with a garden and orchard. The
site lies in gently undulating red gum country, on
the banks of the Deep Creek, which at this point
forms a fine stream. Water has been laid on
throughout the homestead and grounds.
The woolshed has also been built of bluestone.
In one portion it is of two stories, and Wolseley
machines have been fitted up, there being stands
for fourteen shearers. Water is laid on throughout
the building from iron tanks, which are filled by
means of a windmill. A sheep dip is also adjacent
to the shed. By this means dipping can be carried
out, if desired, at the same time as shearing, so
that the sheep have to be driven in from the pad-
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Cattle on Red Gum Flats at Glengower.
considerable fattening properties, a large proportioi being kangaroo grass (which keeps green until
well into the autumn), whilst there is also a great deal of the “ challicum” plant, the presence of
which denotes fertility, and is found only on land of sufficient strength to yield good returns of cereal
crops.
The country is without natural timber, and to supply that deficiency nine substantial plantations
have been established. Seven windmills have been erected on the estate. These draw water from
bores, which tap good flows of water at a comparatively shallow depth. Water is also obtained from
Lake Menenia, which is fresh, and has never been known to go dry. hurther supplies are kept in
surface tanks.
About 16,000 sheep are shorn annually on the estate, the carrying capacity thus being equal to
a sheep to the acre. This is somewhat better than most of the surrounding country. Wheat has been
grown successfully on estates near by, similar in all respects, excepting that the carrying capacity on
some of them varies from only two sheep to three acres to three sheep to four acres. Lake Menenia
has been leased to Mr. John Farrell since 1900.
Lake Menenia, Victoria.


The House at Killarney.
IkUlarucvT
Mr. O’Loughlin has his own residence at Killarney, Warrenheip, near Ballarat, and which is one
of the show places of the district. The holding consists of 327 acres of rich agricultural land situated
in one of the most prolific localities in Victoria.
The homestead is a magnificent two-storied house of brick, surrounded on all sides by a verandah
and balcony, from which a splendid view may be obtained of the surrounding country. Mount
\\ arrenheip lies only two or three miles away, whilst ten miles in another direction Mount
Buninyong throws its massive outline against the sky. For a long distance gently undulating country
may he seen stretching away in the north-west towards Ballarat. The surrounding hills are mostly
clothed with eucalyptus, and take a dark green hue, which adds greatly to the picturesque effect of the
landscape.
The house itself, which was built by Mr. O’Loughlin, was planned by Mr. Clegg A. Miller, the
well-known architect of Ballarat, on the most modern lines, whilst Messrs. E. Tuxer and E. Guilfoyle
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


.; T : '." ' ■.. -T ■ "~ ’ ; ' ' *'• 7 S - r^'-
«* ' , • . ‘
The Entrance Gates, Killarney.
of the Melbourne botanical Gardens, laid out the garden, shrubberies, and plantations. It is hardly
necessary to say that the grounds are most tastefully arranged, and when the trees are more fully
grown the establishment will constitute one of the most charming country homes in Victoria. A wide
drive leads to the front door through massive wrought-iron entrance gates that are guarded by a
substantially-built lodge. Acetylene gas is laid on, not only throughout the house, but also in the
gardens. The premises arc sewered on the septic tank system.
The Killarney stables alone cost a deal of money to build. They arc a massive structure of brick,
and are fitted with all the latest and most labour-saving appliances. Special features have been made of
the drainage, lighting, and ventilation.
The soil at Killarney is very rich, most of it being fertile potato land. Originally it was heavilv
timbered, but being now thoroughly cleared, almost anything may be grown there. The rainfall is
fairly heavy and regular.
Killarney, Victoria,


Potato Digging at Killarney.
personal.
Air. Thomas J. O’Loughlin was born in Kilkenny, Ireland, and educated, first at the local school,
and afterwards at St. Keiran’s College, Kilkenny. On the death of his uncle, the late Air. Alai tin
Loughlin, he inherited the above-mentioned estates. He came out to Australia at the end of 1898.
travelling* across the continent of America, and has resided in the colonies ever since.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Cdest Cloven Ibills Estate.
Che property of flDcssrs. Cole 36 ros.
THE estate of West Cloven Hills is situated in the southern portion of Western Victoria,
where the overflows of lava from craters long extinct have given a fertility to the soil rarely
found in other parts of Australia.
When in 1839 the late Mr. Nicholas Cole and the late Mr. Peter McArthur landed in
Geelong, they found the plains in that vicinity already taken up, so they determined to proceed
westward. Accordingly, with a small flock of sheep, they travelled through the plains where Cressy
and Rokewood now stand, and avoiding the stony rises, reached Camperdown district. The Manifold
Brothers had by crossing the Barrier arrived a few weeks before, and had taken up the rich land
which now forms the estates of Talindert, Wiridgil, Purrumbete, and Danedite.
From the top of Mount Leura, the two pioneers viewed the country round, and decided to settle
on the eastern bank of the Emu Creek, and their first camping ground was on a portion of the present
Wooriwyrite Station. The water of the creek proved unwholesome, so they disposed of their run to
the late J. G. Ware for a team of bullocks, and took up the country now known as Meningoort;
together with a portion of the Gnotuk property, the present West Cloven Hills Estate being then
unoccupied owing to the absence of water. A friendly black, however, showed Mr. Cole a native well,
and the partners then took up the country as an outstation.
For several years Messrs. Cole and McArthur worked the runs conjointly, and when they
separated Mr. Cole took West Cloven Hills, while Mr. McArthur retained Meningoort.
When the late Mr. Cole settled on West Cloven Hills the estate comprised 21,800 acres, but
during the land sales of 1869, 6000 acres passed out of his possession, and he further disposed of
several thousand acres to his sister.
1 (Section 43, pages 483-407.


**£'-' • • • • --,-3
*» *
THE NEW HOMESTEAD.


Mk‘- f ' '* •****»»*.*,
I ,f: / JF ipfe
■ * h- ■. v * ' !
•, / ' \/i
The late Nicholas Cole.
The system of land selection by which an applicant who was lucky enough to draw a prize in
the lottery was able to select 640 acres of land at £1 per acre, and was given twenty years to pay it
in, was now introduced, and Mr. Cole was singularly unfortunate in that an enormous portion of his
run was so selected, and he had to buy these men out at prices ranging from £3 to £8 per acre,
while his neighbours had been enabled to purchase their land under the Duffy Act at £ 1 per acre.
In the very early days the life of the pastoralists was a very hard one; low prices ruled for
wool and tallow, and the cost of carriage to the coast towns was enormous. Things somewhat
improved when the diggings broke out, and the influx of adventurers from all parts of the world
caused a demand for mutton and beef, but all the able-bodied men left their work on the station
and flocked to Ballarat and Bendigo, leaving only the old or lazy on the place. Mr. Cole escaped
the great Black Thursday fire, when nearly the whole of the Western District was swept clear of
erass and stock, for a week earlier his run was burned and he lost all his stock, his woolshed and
outbuildings, only the dwelling-house being saved.
West Cloven Hills, Victoria.


|P d$f? ' |i
Sf 'Jp- I \ §f
'40*"' 'sKT z AT if t if' ■'■'—iuni
<**, *■ ..ff.. ; .:jh. 1 i ja ab
lift . ,A ~iritiin • /R M ; flf. % \ i« JgnSfig^K
|^1»H
Mr. Nicholas Cole, Sen.
The late Mr. Cole stocked West Cloven Hills with pure Merino sheep, and throughout his
life he kept to a type yielding a high quality of wool, while developing large frames. Like many
Victorians, he laid the foundations of his flock with sheep from Tasmania, and at a later date pur-
chased rams from Ercildoune and Chalicum.
The present Mr. Nicholas Cole founded a stud of Merino sheep, and continued the purchase
of rams from Ercildoune and Carngham, as well as from the flock of the late Mr. Thomas Shaw, of
Woonwyrite. It will thus be noted that though four different strains were introduced into the
West Cloven Hills Merinos two characteristics were common to them all. In each case the highest
quality of wool was combined with good frame and strong constitution. Having thus laid the
foundations of their stud, the Messrs. Cole continued breeding the flock within itself with the most
satisfactory results. At no time was the blood polluted with the introduction of the Vermont strain,
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


*v. M **-■*■**». * f^l
A PEEP OF THE WEST CLOVEN HILLS.
From between the Tennis Court and the Homestead.
West Cloven Hills, Victoria.


Swr
-\ . V . ,- #W.j [ V
-' "v - * ' v. .....- •*.•■. *’' -■*•<•'■» ? ■ j* .:••*• -TT \ * v • * * '-**•>..... A ■..
. ****V •.*«• .. • * *-’ ' v 1
• .v, ■ ■ v ; ' 4
‘%A:. V> . ‘ . v’fcX •■>» w > , Vl i • ■' . ’■ ~ 4 > T :., * J' • \*
•*ljW 0 C^OfejS^P^ ££* ** ’■ 'CjV ~-i X ■’ ■ * ■•■ " •* ’-'■ ■ -* ■■ “-
WSgtt**' IZJim. Jkv ■ «■ *L ««♦ ' * *- .. -* •*««. • |l* mm •■».. ., -•:.„
FLOCK OF SHEEP.—BREEDING LAMBS FOR EXPORT.


-*jfi ;f|||
M f ' It
I \j if WttoSFW^^^i&'-'& ■. 1$ ,-jj
Four Generations.
which might have lessened the value of the wool and deteriorated the carcase or its fattening
properties.
Ihe A\ est Cloven Hills (N.C.) w r ool is sold in London, and generally tops the market. The
Merino hogget wool of 1906 averaged i;d., and crossbred hogget wool 13d., while the Merino lambs
reached 19/2 d. Besides being of stiong and robust constitution, the sheep grow a dense wool of long
staple.
About fifteen years ago it was decided that the volcanic country was too rich for Merino sheep
and since then first-cross Lincoln and Merino have been kept on the richer land, the ewes being- put
to Shropshire rams, with excellent results. The lambs from this combination have realised at five
months old from 12s. 6d. to 15s. per head on the place.
1 he Messrs. Cole have gone in largely for ploughing the flats on the estate, and thousands of
acres, which at one time were tussocky swamps, are now laid down in rye grass and clover
M/est Cloven Hills , Victoria,


SOME DEVONS.


-- i ■ C'-'u * v * ■ * *. •■
" ’ 'r r*‘ >■*■?. „ * ;jf ..■> ■' ' *'**" .'. ; « *
Group of Shorthorn Cattle.
Originally, owing to the porousness of the volcanic soil, the storage of water was a great diffi-
culty, but this has been successfully overcome by sinking wells and bores all over the run, and the
place has been cut up into small paddocks with a much greater carrying capacity than formerly.
1 here are no less than twenty-five windmills on the estate.
Finding that the West Cloven Hills is too dry for weaners in the summer months, Messrs. Cole
Bros, have purchased and leased paddocks in the summer country to the south of Camperdown, and
from December to March the young sheep are depastured there, whence, after the March-April rains,
they are brought back to the station. Thus no check occurs in their development, nor is any break
observed in the wool, which is often the case when weaners experience a prolonged diet of dry grass.
1 he crossbred wethers so develop on the volcanic soil that instead of keeping them until 6-tooth, as
is usually done, the Cloven Hills sheep sell readily at top prices as fats at 4-tooth.
Many years ago the present Mr. Nicholas Cole purchased Shorthorn hulls and cows from
Keilembete, and succeeded in establishing a fine herd of Durham cattle, but it was found that the
breed is too delicate for the plains part of the estate. In consequence, Devons have been introduced,
which, it is anticipated, will provide the needed resistance to the difficulties of life on the poorer
parts of the run.
The estate is nicely subdivided, and is well provided with station buildings. A considerable
difference in the appearance of the place has been effected both by clearing of old timber and the
judicious planting of trees.
West Cloven Hills has been throughout a pastoral property, for though the volcanic land is
suitable for dairying in the late winter and spring, it has been found that the rearing of fat lambs is
more profitable.
West Cloven Hills, at present, is a trust estate, and is leased by Messrs. Nicholas and William
Cole (trading as Cole Bros.), who are the sons of the late proprietor. The present Mr. Nicholas
West Cloven Hills, Victoria.


:
• C s ? • ■ * ", #
VIEW FROM THE WEST CLOVEN HILLS.


THE OLD HOMESTEAD.
West Cloven Hills, Victoria.


._. . - - -' .-
The Bakn, Stables, &c.
Cole, who manages the run, married in 1885 the eldest daughter of Mr. Walter Anderson, of Geran-
gamete. Birregurra, and has one son and three daughters. The son, who is also named Nicholas,
married the youngest daughter of the late Sir Graham Berry, and has two sons. Ihe original
estate, as taken over by Messrs. Cole Bros., consisted of 11,000 acres, but since having it in their
hands the present occupiers have added to it 8000 acres, and they shear about 30,000 sheep, besides
running several hundred head of cattle and horses.
Mrs. Cole, sen., wife of the founder of the Estate, is still alive and well. She lives at West
Cloven Hills, and has probably been living in the Western District longer than any other woman
now alive, as she first went there in 1849, sixty years ago. During that period Mrs. Cole had made
four trips to England, the last being a short time ago, when, despite her eighty years, she travelled
home through Japan and Canada, her only companion being a lady of sixty odd years. In addition
to the sons Nicholas and William S. (the latter lives at Oakleigh, a suburb of Melbourne), Mrs.
Cole is the mother of Dr. R. H. Cole, the City Coroner (Melbourne), and Dr. Francis Cole, who is
in practice at Deloraine, .on the north coast of Tasmania, and is known throughout the island as a
keen sport and great fisherman.
West Cloven Hills forms part of that immense area which was covered, geologically speaking,
with a great overflow of lava. The view has been expressed that probably the south-western plain
of Victoria was submerged in one continuous sheet of molten basalt. In support of this theory, it
is argued that the volcanic rock has come probably not from ordinary volcanoes, but has been pushed
up in great volumes by subterranean pressure through long fissures in the ground. Careful and
critical examination of the country, however, has subsequently shown that the overflowing of melted
rock originated from the isolated and conical extinct volcanoes with which the district is dotted, and
many of which have no doubt long since departed in consequence of the action of water. So great


■ e ' » *t . m m '
SHORTHORN BULLOCKS.
West Cloven Hills, Victoria •


Mr. W. S. Cole.
(Junior Partner in the firm of Cole Bros.)
pf a ■ «c • ■
1 is ,
f" * 4 JSf*w»*
L 3
> . ■ „ ■ - . * •• I ■'.¥
)
In the West Cloven Hills.
was the volcanic activity of the district that lava streams met lava streams, and the outlets of
different mountains joined one another, leaving an almost unbroken area of volcanic formation.
The late Mr. Nicholas Cole always got on well with the natives, although some of his
neighbours had troubles. He held that kindness pays better than harshness in dealing with blacks,
and certainly in his case it did. His stock was generally respected, and he mostly had plenty of
men about to do odd jobs. This was at the cost
of fair words, blankets, and tobacco. Mr. Cole had
a great fund of anecdotes about the tribe living
on West Cloven Hills when he first went there.
The Chief’s son, commonly known as Charley, was
evidently a bit of a character, as the following story
shows :
Mr. Cole once, in the very early days of
settlement, ran out of tobacco, so, pending the
arrival of the teams, he borrowed from his neigh-
bour, Mr. Hall, of Stony Point. When a fresh
supply came up from Melbourne, Mr. Cole sent
Charley over to Stony Point to return the tobacco,
and gave him a short note. Charley arrived in due
course, and handed the note and parcel to Mr. Hall,
who, when he read the letter, which happened to
mention the quantity, found that some of the goods
had been stolen.
“How is this, Charley?” Mr. Hall said.
“All tobacco not here. You been taken some?”
Charley was dumbfounded for a moment, and replied, “ How dm know? Me hid dm (pointing
to the note) under stone. How dm know?” Charley was not undeceived about the white man’s
paper being able to talk, and was sent back to his boss.
A few days after one of
Mr. Cole’s bulls got on a neigh-
bour's run, and Charley was
sent to fetch it back. How-
ever, he had not forgotten the
power of writing, so, probably
with the idea of saving himself
some trouble, he asked the boss
to “ Give dm (the bull) note.”
On another occasion
Charley was with Mr. Cole on
a back station, in the Tatiarra
country on the South Aus-
tralian border. The wild dogs
were very troublesome, so
Charley was given a gun and
told to go out and shoot the dogs and bring in any he killed. Charley started off proudly, and after a
while was heard blazing away in fine style, but at the end of the day he returned to the homestead


The Old Homestead.
:r ' J Tyir‘- >J - ~ '•~g^.-»|j^ar— r-jj- m m „
The Woolshed.
without a single dog. He was asked where the dogs were, and replied, contemptuously, “Me no kill ’im
fellow dog; me shoot plenty wild blackfellow.”
To prevent further
troubles and complications,
Charley was packed off home to
West Cloven Hills. Evidently
for the sake of company, he
stole a lubra from the tribe
there, and, despite hostile
natives, managed to get her
safely home, a distance of
fully 150 miles. However, he
showed lack of tact in taking
her home, as he already had a
wife at West Cloven Hills, and
she naturally resented the ar-
rival of number two. Like a
true woman, she used her first
weapon, her tongue, on him,
but he stood calmly by and
answered nothing. At last she lost her temper properly, and picking up a double handful of hot
ashes, dropped them on his feet and fled. Charley let out a terrific yell, picked up his nulla, and hit
the first thing he saw, which happened to be number two. Poor innocent number two fell like a log,
and Charley, to cover his guilt, promptly dragged her outside and commenced to bury her. The
matter was reported to Mr.
Cole, who went down to the
creek to investigate. True
enough, there was Charley dig-
ging a grave, and while Mr.
Cole was remonstrating with
him, the supposed dead woman
began to show signs of return-
ing life. Charley was highly
delighted, and rushed off and
fetched water to bathe her face
in, &c. Thanks to the thickness
of a blackfellow's head, she
soon recovered, but Charley
was in a quandary. As he ex-
plained to Mr. Cole, “ Kitty
(his first) no like her; she say
two lubra too many.” The opportune passing of a team going west relieved him of the encum-
brance, and the superfluous lubra was returned to her fathers.
West Cloven Hills , Victoria.














