

THE LIFE
OF
PHILIIP
WIRTH
Jhe Great Circus Man !


Creamoata
. . ... non-heating
yet sustaining .....
the ideal breakfast
for summer. 2>a
Makes Youngsters Crow.
P.
■MM
SEND 20 PACKET TOPS FOR DESSERTSPOON .
10 FOR TEASPOON.
. . . And you simply mu£t try
Crisp, Crunchy, Healthful
rHEAMOATA
" BISCUITS
Made by Guests, for and on behalf of
Fleming & Co. (Aust.) Pty. Ltd.
Temple Court, Melbourne


The Life
of
Philip
Wirth


Wholly id up and printed in Australia by
TROEDEL & COOPER Pty. Ltd.
MELBOURNE


Now
m
m
Under the Big Top
or Under the Stars
IN the open, at home, or at
the pictures - - there’s
nothing to equal the smooth
luscious refreshment of a
Peters Ice Cream. You can
buy Peters anywhere! What’s
more you can depend upon its
quality. Peters Ice Cream,
perfect blend of milk, cream,
and pure milk products is
made by the largest firm of
its kind in the Empire, and
not a quart is sold until
chemists have vouched for its
purity. That’s why doctors
recommend Peters.
PETERS ICE CREAM
The Health Food of a Nation ”
s
9L
GRCYM
SILK CUT VIRCINIA TOBACCO
FINE CUT
Manufactured entirely from
the Finest Imported
Virginia - Tobacco


YOU CANNOT ALWAYS TAKE YOUR CHILD-
REN TO THE CIRCUS to make them good. You
need something handier —Laxettes. Laxettes are
delicious —not as exciting as a circus, but as nice
as a “lolly”— and they cure the “ cranky ” moods of
childhood. When tempestuous times at home show
that the children’s livers, stomachs, kidneys or
bowels are causing trouble, produce the Laxette
tin and happy harmony will reign again.
LAXETTES
Insist always on genuine Laxettes—the square tablets—sold always
in tins (never loose) with the name Laxettes on every tin and tablet.


[?]


Be kind to your l
Animals and Birds •
If fowls or canaries have lice; if your dog
has fleas, think of the discomfort and use
INSECTIBANE
INSECTIBANE is non-poisonous and is
useful too, to kill ants, flies, mosquitoes,
cockroaches, aphis, thnp, etc., etc.
ROCKE, TOMPSITT & CO. ES:
MELBOURNE Established 1877
Watch Your Eyes!
Ask for and insist on
If not procurable at your Local Chemist or Store,
send direct to the Proprietors:
3 OWEN BUILDINGS
Glenferrie, E. 2, Victoria, Australia
Established in Australia over 60 years


The Life of
PHILIP WIRTH
A LIFETIME WITH
AN AUSTRALIAN
CIRCUS
by
PHILIP WIRTH


RAPID RELIEF from COUGHS,
COLDS, etc.
take
Dr. JENNER’S
COUGH
BALSAM
Children love it!
lona Produds Co. Pty. Ltd.
CITY ROAD, MELBOURNE
TRENCH’S TREATMENT for FITS
Fits and Epilepsy are said to be incurable but
TRENCH’S TREATMENT has benefitted many
thousands of cases that were considered hopeless.
It seldom fails. Clergymen of all churches recom-
mend it, and the late Archbishop Carr advised
several to use it, all of whom were cured. The
treatment usually controls the attacks from the first
dose and the complete cure depends chiefly upon
care in observing the simple directions. Send for
Valuable Free Booklet and ask for the addresses
of cured patients who are willing to assure enquirers
of the genuineness of the treatment.
Sole Agents for Australia
THE UNION MANUFACTURING & AGENCY
COMPANY
299 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER PAGE
I.—Pioneering Days .. .. .. 17
Fruitless Search for Gold—Living
Over a Gold Mine —Advising Burke
& Wills —Held Up by Bushrangers
—My Father Joins a Circus.
ll.—Evolution of Wirths’ Circus .. 22
Two Narrow Escapes—Star Troupe
of Varieties—Our First Circus Re-
cord Marooned by Floods A
Fishing Expedition with Black-
fellows —-Novel Method of Fording
a River.
111. —Showing at the Shows .. .. 29
Carnival Time —Incredible Fishing
in the Darling —Our First Sydney
Season —Following the Agricultural
Shows.
IV. —Trials and Tribulations .. 34
Melbourne Cup in the Eighties —
Fighting to Uphold the Prestige
of the Show—Almost Ruined by
Rain Across the Ninety - Mile
Desert—Back to Melbourne.
V.—Noumea and Tasmania .. .. 42
Weathering a Hurricane —A Shock-
ing Tragedy—A Diabolical Revenge
—Amusing Incidents in Tasmania.
Vl.—Off to New Zealand .. .. 45
Three Greatest Sights in the World—
—Windy Wellington —Over 1,000
Cod in Seven Hours.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER PAGE
Vll.—The Three-Ring Circus .. .. 49
Wirths’ Wild West Show—The
Battle of the Stallions.—Nerve-
Racking Performance in Dunedin.
VIII. —Playing the Big Cities .. ~ 53
“ Bonny Black Bess " Crippled —
Yet Another Record —Two Separ-
ate Shows—We Tour Queensland —
A Ton of Schnapper—The Shows
Reunite—The Land Boom De-
pression—We Sail for South Africa.
IX. —South African Incidents .. 57
Difficulty in Securing a Pitch—l
Unintentionally Add to My Jockey
Act Excitement at the Amphi-
theatre.
X. —Our First South African Tour 61
A Hurried Trip to England —Amaz-
ing Recognition—Our Great Popu-
larity - Death of “ Lottie " —We
Leave for South America.
XI. —South America .. .. .. 65
We Lose Our Troupe of Zulus—
Burned Out—Breaking in Two
Mustangs—Christmas Festivities.
XII. —Our Most Exciting Season .. 70
As Foreigners We are Taken Ad-
vantage Of—We Fall Foul of the
Students—We Witness a Murder—
Unscrupulous Interpreters —Odd
Customs.
Xlll.—Pernambuco .. .. .. 76
Unusual Treatment for Horse —
Danger from Black and Yellow
Fever —A Thrilling Performance —
We Board the “Liguria" for England
contents continued.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER PAGE
XIV. —We Tour England .. .. 80
Low Prices as Compared with
South Africa —Band Wagon Drawn
by Zebras —The Queen's Birthday
Unknown —Life of the Circus Folk.
XV.— Southport 84
Delights of Our English Tour—Under
Royal Patronage —Extended Season
in Southport—Outstanding Dis-
play of Horsemanship—Loss of 14
Horses.
XVl. —Africa During the Boer War 88
Johannesburg in a State of Unrest
—Our Neutral Policy—We Remain
on Good Terms with Both Sides —
We Retreat to Beaufort West —We
Leave for Colombo.
XVII. —Ceylon, India and Burmah . . 93
Beauties of the Orient—An Unique
Orchestra Burmese Pagodas
Strange Bathing Customs.
XVIII. Through the Orient to Java . . 98
A Flattering but Unsuccessful Imi-
tation —Birds and Natives Both
Thieves —Monkey Tricks —Superb
Hotel Service—The Beginning of a
Menagerie.
XIX. — Back to Australia .. . . 105
Making the Menagerie Pay—Several
Wirth Customs-A Broken Promise-
Some Remarks on Railways and In-
ternational Affairs; and Australian —
Irrigation—Moree and its Baths—
My Horoscope An Elephant's
Revenge—Finis.
contents — continued.
The Life of Philip Wirth




FOREWORD
THE majority of children have a most embarrassing
habit of asking their elders questions which they
are unable to answer correctly, and the most difficult
question of all is probably the youngster’s, “ Dad, what’s
a circus ? ” Actually a circus is a natural educational
entertainment where a child, or for that matter, an adult
of any age, can assimilate more knowledge during a single
performance than could be learned in any other way during
as many years as the show takes hours.
Wirth Brothers’ Limited Circus always travels in a
special train consisting of 8 passenger coaches and
over 20 trucks. The 10 elephants are carried in 8
trucks, and the other vehicles contain the 14 cages of
wild animals, 40 horses and ponies, and the tents, of which
there are 8, of varying sizes. The largest measures
170 feet across, and has a seating capacity of 3,000, as
well as containing a4O foot ring and a3O foot stage. The
artistes number over 40, and give a superb programme
consisting of 25 different acts —the whole performance


taking 3 hours. In addition to the actual performers,
there are grooms, tent hands, agents and others, so that
actually the company numbers about 150 persons.
The special train usually arrives at the town to be
played, at about 7 o’clock in the morning. The sleeping
cars are shunted to a side track, while the trucks go straight
to the platform to be unloaded. In the smaller towns
practically the entire population is waiting at the station
to watch the gear and animals being unloaded, and it is
really a most impressive sight. The transport men with
their elephants, unload the 500 tons of equipment in
1| hours, and the huge beasts then proceed to pull the
wagons on which all of this has been loaded, to the spot
chosen for the erection of the tent. The tentmen are
ready waiting, and by the time another 1| hours have
passed, everything is in readiness for the afternoon and
evening performances. Think of it! Within 3 hours
the contents of a railway train have been transformed
into a splendid circus of 7 tents.
At 4 o’clock in the afternoon the Zoo is opened
to the public, and thereafter there is a lecturer in attendance
to explain to the patrons the habits and natures of the
glorious wild creatures they have come to see. This
feature is always popular with the school children and
with their teachers also. Many school masters have said
FOREWORD :: :: continued


that an hour in Wlrths’ Zoo is of greater value to the
children than years of school, and for once, children and
teachers agree.
Between the hours of 7 and 8, early comers are held
entranced by a delightful programme of recorded music
reproduced on the superb panatrope belonging to the
show. All the greatest artistes and bands the world has
produced, may be heard during this period, and at 8 o’clock
sharp, the actual show commences with the overture,
** Poet and Peasant.” For the next 2\ hours the patrons
are held entranced by the delightful, thrilling and even
death-defying acts which the remarkably gifted artistes
perform for their entertainment. The programme usually
ends at about 10.30, and within an hour there is no sign
that the land where the tents stood, was ever anything
but vacant. The dismantling of the tents and their re-
moval to the train is all performed so quickly that a
Police Sergeant once said to me that the memory of the
show seemed but a pleasant dream.
By 12.30 the great circus train is once more on its way,
this time to some other town perhaps 100 miles away,
while the tired artistes are enjoying their well-earned rest.
By 7 the next morning the train will have reached its new
destination, and the procedure of yesterday is repeated.
FOREWORD :: :: continued




CHAPTER I .
PIONEERING DAYS.
Fruitless Search for Gold —Living over a Gold
Mine—Advising Burke and Wills— Held up
by Bushrangers —My Father Joins a Circus.
BEFORE commencing the actual history of
Wirths'’ Circus we must first go back to
the early years of the second half of the
Nineteenth Century, when continued bad luck
as a prospector forced my father, John Wirth,
Senior, reluctantly to abandon his search for
gold and to commercialise his talent for enter-
taining others. He was naturally gifted as a
musician and a composer,being able to play any
musical instrument with great skill, and from
the time when he commenced earning his living
in this way, we can watch the gradual develop-
ment of Wirths’ World Famous Circus.
At this time Australia was reputed to
be a country where gold nuggets lay thickly upon
the surface of the earth and immense wealth
was the lot of everyone. The gold fever was
in the blood of all, and Dad was no exception.
In disproof of these tales, it was not until my
father’s dreams of wresting a fortune from the
earth faded away, that his family were able to
live in any comfort whatsoever. His wife, an
The Life of Philip Wirth


Englishwoman, accompanied ham on his fruit-
less wanderings in search of wealth, and this in
days when railways were unknown and made
roads few. She endured frightful hardships
without complaint, and, refusing to leave either
her husband or her babies, stayed with him as
he followed rush after rush, from Bendigo to
Ballarat, from Beechworth to Turumba, on and
on, leaving their old claim whenever a new field
was discovered, hoping in vain that the time had
come for their luck to change. Their journeying
took them from the south of Victoria to the
north of Queensland ; but this marvellous woman
with the true spirit of the pioneer, never mur-
mured. Now and then my father would strike
a little paying dirt, but it would soon give out
and they would be penniless once more.
In desperation, with what little money they
could gather, these two built in Tamberoora a
dance hall and restaurant where food and enter-
tainment could be had in exchange for gold
dust. This could have been made quite a profit-
able venture, but my father was impatient and
would not give up his prospecting to make it
pay. In the end the place was sold and he and
my mother made yet another fruitless dash to
another new field. To show how discourag-
ing was their continued bad luck, the hall had
been built over a particularly rich reef and the
new owner, after sinking a shaft through the
floor of the dining room, found enough gold to
make him a very wealthy man. He was able to
live in luxury for the rest of his life, and while
on a visit to London drove to the Doncaster Cup
in a drag drawn by four horses wearing gold
shoes.
For a short time at Beechworth my father
thought his bad luck had at last deserted them,
but the reef was soon worked out. As with all
The Life of Philip Wirth


prospectors, there was never a thought of to-
morrow, and money was spent lavishly while
it lasted. They had no funds to fall back on,
and they were forced to recommence their
wanderings. They moved slowly across the
continent from south to north, carrying only
flour, salt and sugar as provisions, and relying
on the rifles of the men for more substantial
food. It was a life of terrific hardship, and
when you remember the lawless nature of the
times it was inevitable that they should have
some exciting experiences—though to them
they probably seemed more frightening than
adventurous. It may be noted here that
among the famous figures in the history of this
period with whom my parents came in contact,
were Burke and Wills. Soon after the birth of
my brother Harry in 1860 they shared a camp
with the exploring party led by these intrepid
men, and my father was able to give them valu-
able information as to their route through
Victoria to the Darling River.
This was also the time when the lonely parts
of the country were infested with bushrangers,
and the little party was on several occasions
held up by different gangs. The notorious
Morgan attacked them, and after taking all
their possessions, left them stranded in their
spring cart. After this my mother took the
precaution of hiding all their little hoard of
savings in odd places, so that later when they
were accosted by Gardiner and his companions,
their money remained undiscovered, sewn in the
clothes of my brother Harry. My mother al-
ways shuddered at the mere recollection of this
affair which took place at daybreak. She and
my father were awakened at dawn by the
thunder of four men galloping down on their
tiny camp. They were dragged from their beds
The Life of Philip Wirth


in the wagon and thrown on to the cold, wet
grass, while their clothing and possessions were
roughly searched. The outlaws had already
taken possession of the small store of provisions,
all my father’s clothes, and most of the blankets,
when horsemen were heard approaching. They
had been about to make off with the horse, but
they abandoned the animal, and quickly dis-
appeared in a neighbouring forest. While my
people were still stunned by their losses, a posse
of mounted police raced up, and after securing
all the information they could, raced after the
fugitives, but not before my mother had dis-
covered that the miscreants had just committed
a brutal robbery and murder, in which a young
man had been cruelly murdered while trying
to protect his mother from a foul outrage.
All the rangers were not of this type for-
tunately, as was proved when my father met
Thunderbolt, near Tenterfield, while carrying
£7O which he intended sending to my mother
in Dalby, Queensland. My father pleaded with
the man not to take the money as my mother
was destitute and would be in dire straits if he
were unable to assist her. Thunderbolt apolo-
gised for taking the money, explaining that he
was in urgent need of funds, but promised to
return it to my father if he would call at the
Post Office in Warwick as he was passing
through that town. My father had no faith in
the outlaw’s promises, but to his delight, found
when he arrived at Warwick, that Thunderbolt
had kept his word —and my mother was saved
from starvation.
After privations so severe that they lost a
tiny baby through an illness brought on by
lack of water, my father and his family settled
in Dalby in Southern Queensland. My mother
The Life of Philip Wirth


and my father’s brother gave music and dancing
lessons there in a hall which they built for the
purpose. For about three years all went well
—we had a home—and the children were schooled
and well fed, but the Brisbane-Toowoomba ra.il-
way was extended from Dalby to Roma. The
former town had been the terminus, but as soon
as the line was continued a large number of
people went to live in Roma. As a result of this,
and later of the discovery of tin at Stanthorpe,
Dalby was almost deserted. However, prior to
these happenings, in 1870, Ashton’s Circus had
come to Dalby and my father had been persuaded
to join it. For a short time he left his family
and went on his wanderings alone, but he soon
returned to take the three eldest boys, John,
Harry, and Philip with him. Since then the
Wirths have never stopped travelling.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER II.
EVOLUTION OF WIRTHS’ CIRCUS.
Two Narrow Escapes —Star Troupe of Varieties —
Our First Circus Record —Marooned by Floods
—A Fishing Expedition with Blackfellows —
Novel Method of Fording a River.
I HAD two very narrow escapes from death
in 1872. We were living in Stanthorpe at
the time, and with my brothers, I made a
habit of swimming in a large water hole nearby,
whenever the opportunity offered. On this par-
ticular occasion, I was standing on the bank,
when my brother John suddenly pushed me
off into deep water. I managed to struggle to
the surface and saw John still standing there,
watching me with interest, but making no effort
to assist me. I sank for the second time, and
then lost consciousness. I knew nothing more
until I found myself lying on the ground with
water pouring from my mouth and nose as
a result of the rough resuscitation methods of my
companions.
Later, while we were still at Stanthorpe,
my brothers John and Harry became very fond
of Buffalo Bill stories. Their favourite con-
cerned a torture devised by a Sioux chieftain
by the name of Sitting Bull. The victim was
tied to a tree while the braves performed the
The Life of Philip Wirth


Dance of Death around him ; then he was scalped,
and eventually burned to death. This appealed
to my brothers very strongly, so they decided
to try it on me. They stripped me, bound me
tightly to a tree trunk and then commenced their
conception of the Death Dance. Unfortunately
for me the tree which they had chosen had a
nest of sugar ants at its foot, and my brothers’
antics disturbed these ferocious insects, which
swarmed over my naked body. I was soon
screaming with pain, but John and Harry merely
thought that I was entering into the spirit of the
game splendidly, and took no notice. Eventually
my yells attracted the attention of my sister,
Mina, who came rushing to my aid. She im-
mediately saw my plight, and cut the ropes, so
that I collapsed, sobbing with agony in her
arms.
My father, in addition to his other gifts
was one of the strongest men of the period,
but he did not care for circusing. He con-
sidered that there was not enough money
in it and that his band which he had gathered
together some time before and which was, as
the result of his great talent as a conductor,
in great demand for balls, parties and processions,
was a better paying proposition altogether. As
a matter of fact, at this time, no function of any
size was considered a success unless Wirth’s
Band of " Sweetheart ” and “ Blue Danube ”
Waltzes’ fame was there to provide the music.
In 1876, Messrs. Hiscox and Watkins brought
from the East a show known as the Royal Tycoon
Circus which included a number of particularly
clever Japanese performers, but the John Wilson
Circus, of San Francisco, met it in Rockhampton
and knocked it out. A Mr. Ridge bought the
outfit and engaged my father and brothers for
The Life of Philip Wirth


the band. They played in Sydney for a fairly
successful season and then the show was put on
wagons for a tour of New South Wales and
Queensland.
In 1878 we left Ridge’s Circus and started
on our own. We had no horses and called our-
selves the <f Star Troupe of Varieties.” Our
company comprised the four Wirth Brothers—■
John, Harry, Philip and George—a Japanese
named Cooma and a German comedian, Fritz
Christu. We engaged a hall, and although our
programme contained acrobats, horizontal bars,
trapeze acts, bamboo perch, stilts, Roman rings,
clowns, contortionists, throwing and spinning
hats, boxing and comic songs, we estimated
that the show would be over by 10 o’clock. We
considered this too early for the performance
to end, but we were at loss for something to
make it last longer. Eventually my brother
John came to me with the suggestion that we
should include a few double and triple tongue-
ing polkas and cornet solos. He added rather
doubtfully, “ They can only count us out.”
This tragedy did not occur, fortunately,
but, on the contrary, we received so many
encores that the National Anthem was not
played until 10.45. We soon made enough
money to buy a secondhand Cobb & Co. coach,
a wagon of the same make, and two horses—
“ Bullion ” and " Spangles.” As we played our
way through Mudgee and Dunedoo to Coona-
barabran we spent every spare moment in making
a 45 foot tent so that before we left the last
named town we had the satisfaction of playing
in our own tent. We moved on through Pilliga,
Narrabri, Gunnedah, Quirindi and Tamworth to
Armidale. We arrived in Armidale in time for
the opening of the railway from Tamworth, by
The Life of Philip Wirth


the Duke of Clarence, in 1879. John persuaded
the station master to give his permission for
the erection of our tent on a vacant block op-
posite the station, and we had a marvellous stroke
of luck in that the Duke was an hour late in
arriving. Making the most of our opportunity,
as there were over five thousand people waiting
to welcome the Royal visitor, w r e gave four
quick performances of 25 minutes each to
packed houses. Then we dismantled the tent
and rushed it to the Show Ground. While the
Duke was opening the Show, we hurriedly re-erected
the tent and gave nine more performances.
Then we again moved our pitch to the main
street and gave our final performance there.
We had put up and taken down the tent five
times and given 14 shows during the day. This
was the first of the numerous records for circus
folk that we made. Although we were abso-
lutely exhausted after this day’s work, we had
the satisfaction of knowing that the bag we
used as a pillow that night contained over £4O.
We travelled on through Glen Innes, Tenter-
field, Stanthorpe and Warwick. Leaving Warwick
we proceeded to Inglewood where we gave a
hurried show, packed our gear and started off
the same night, hoping to arrive at St. George’s
Bridge in time for the races. We passed
through Goondiwindi in very heavy rain and
soon after were by the flood waters
of the Condomine River. The rain had fallen
without ceasing for four days, so that the river
suddenly but quietly overflowed its banks. We
were camped on the side of a small hillock wait-
ing a chance to cross an already swollen stream,
when, without warning, the floods
up, and we were in three feet of water. There
was none of the usual flurry of raging water
one usually associates with an occurrence of
The Life of Philip Wirth


this kind, but the water rose none the less
swiftly. Before we had time to strike camp
we were forced to take refuge in the wagons,
of which, after a short time, only the bodies
showed above the surface of this new lake which
stretched as far as could be seen in every direc-
tion. By great good luck we had chosen one
of the highest spots for several miles around
for our camp, otherwise we might not only have
lost all our belongings, but possibly our own lives
as well. At night the sight of the tall gum
trees rising from this placid stretch of water
with the moonlight causing strange shadows
and reflections was thrilling in its weird
beauty. After being marooned for
two days, help was sent to us from a neighour-
ing station, and we were shown a way along
the higher ground levels by which we were able
to reach a hill about three miles away. We
camped here for six days until the floods sub-
sided, and though our friends from the station
kept us as well supplied with food as they could,
towards the end of our stay we realised that
we were running short of meat. We were look-
ing for opossums on the morning of the fourth
day, but when the grooms went to see after
the horses which were wandering about on the
plains below, they found thousands of fish which
had been trapped by the receding floods. They
brought back as many as they could carry, and
never was a meal more appreciated. There were
golden perch of six pounds, bream of eight, and
marvellous cod weighing anything up to 40
pounds. Before our departure our camp was
visited by several blacks who took us with them
on a fishing expedition. The water on the
plains was now only knee deep and our black
friends provided each of us with a nulla nulla to use
in killing the fish as they struggled in the shal-
lows. They also showed us how they cooked
The Life of Philip Wirth


the fish in the native way in a bed of red hot
coals. We were not worried by our supplies of
salt running short as we found that gunpowder
with its high content of saltpetre answered
equally well.
Three days later we managed to ford the
river, but of course, v by the time we reached St.
George the races were over, so we gave only one
performance there and hurried on to Surat.
We arrived in time for the races there, and gave
three performances to large audiences before
going to Mitchell, Roma and Charleville. The
Warrego River was now in flood and was run-
ning about 20 miles wide, but with the exception
of the course proper, the water was only about
three feet deep, so that we were able to proceed
slowly until we reached the banks of the actual
river. The stream was over 50 yards wide
and quite 20 feet deep, but we decided that we
could not afford to wait for the river to go down,
so we devised a scheme by which we could get
all the equipment across without delay. My
brother John and I swam the swollen river
with sash lines in our mouths, and though the
current was so strong that it carried us about
80 yards downstream, we managed to get ashore
on the opposite bank. Then we were able to
drag across the pulleys and ropes which were
used in the erection of the Big Top, and attach
them to a great gum tree. We were then able to pull
the wagons across the river bed. It was a strange
sight to see the wagons, five of which had
covered tops, disappear down into the river
on one side out of sight, and then later slowly
emerge on the other. We then set to work to
make rafts of the wagon seats, on which we
floated the canvas and other gear across. The
whole procedure took two days, and as we were
forced to work almost naked, the mosquitoes
The Life of Philip Wirth


and sand flies were able to add their stings to
the tortures of sunburn. We had all crossed
safely and were enjoying our evening meal with
great satisfaction, when tragedy struck us un-
awares. While we were eating, there was a
sudden thunderstorm, and one of our men was
killed by lightning. I will always remember
the ghastly experience of seeing the poor fellow
crumpled up in a second. I have been afraid
of lightning ever since.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER III.
SHOWING AT THE SHOWS.
Carnival Time—Incredible Fishing in the Darling
—Our First Sydney Season—Following the
Agricultural Shows.
\V / E always made a point of being at Bourke
Vv during their carnival week, as the popula-
tion of the town was usually increased
by about 10,000 for that time. In those days
this carnival was a sight really worth seeing.
Graziers would bring with them their prairie
wagons drawn by a score of horses or bullocks and
laden with thousands of bales of wool which
would later be carried away by the fleet of steamers
anchored in the Darling, each with a string of
barges and punts.
As soon as the carnival was over, the wool
would begin its long journey down the Darling
to the Murray, thence to Melbourne, Sydney or
Adelaide for shipment to the other side of the
world.
IThe carnival itself Jcommenced two
days’ horse racing, two days of agricultural
show, followed by dog fights, cock fights, boxing
and sports of every kind for the rest of the week.
We were always assured of large and appreda-
The Life of Philip Wirth


tive audiences here, but I remember Bourke more
for the incredible fishing to be had there rather
than the successes we had with our show. On
one occasion I saw two men standing on the
bank of the Darling rubbing salt into what I
took to be the carcase of a sheep. As I drew
nearer, however, I saw that what I had taken
to be a fair sized animal, was in reality, a mag-
nificent cod, weighing as we found later, over
150 pounds. As I was a very keen fisherman
myself I must admit I was rather jealous of
these fellows’ good luck so I asked them where
they had caught the monster. I was on my
way to draw some water from the river for the
horses, and as I always carried a couple of lines
baited with raw steak, I threw them in at the
spot indicated, leaving them attached to a tree,
while I returned to the camp with my bucket.
When I again reached the river bank a short
time later, I found one of the lines taut, and
after a struggle of over 10 minutes, I managed
to land still another huge fish, although this
one, in spite of weighing 75 pounds could easily
have been hidden inside the first big chap. I
have never tasted any fish which were more
delightful than these Darling cod and strangely
enough the larger they are, the sweeter the
flavour.
After our season in Bourke we turned our
cavalcade towards Sydney, and after playing
all the towns on the way, opened in Paddy’s
Markets. The late Mr. George Hudson, senior,
had our pitch railed off for us and we played
there for eight weeks. As soon as it became
known that Wirth's show was having a splendid
season at the Markets, the place was invaded
by side shows of every description, and later
by other circus companies so that rivalry then
began in earnest. The majority of our com-
The Life of Philip Wirth


petitors, however, forced themselves out of the
running by putting on such a brave showing out-
side the tent before the performance commenced,
that there was nothing left for the crowd to
see when they went inside. These tactics did
much to besmirch the name of the “ line up ”
shows, so we decided to commence another
tour of the country. Playing in country towns
is much more enjoyable than playing in big cities,
but apart from that we thought that we had a
better chance of making big money quickly among
the country folk.
The Agricultural Shows were absolute
gold mines for us, as we were frequently able
to give as many as 12 performances in one day,
and what is more important, the committees
of the shows so appreciated the good taste of
our entertainment that we were always asked
to return for the next function. There were
few worries in those days, and we kept on making
money, progress and many friends. It was to
be expected that others would hear of our suc-
cess and try to share it, but we really enjoyed
competition when there was a spirit of good, honest
rivalry. We found that it brightened up our
show considerably. However, tricksters and
fakirs grew in numbers around us, and we were
forced to use strong methods to awaken the
public to the nature of these people. We always
took care to keep the name of the decent circus
people fair and unsullied, and, in fact, were so
proud of our own good name that for a time
we seriously considered joining forces with Sam
Bernard, Jack and Adam West—all of whom
were fine straight fellows —and launching out
as Australia's Big Show. We actually tried this
arrangement for a while, but it failed to work,
as there were too many bosses and not enough
men for them to boss.
The Life of Philip Wirth


During the year 1881 we toured all through
New South Wales following the Agricultural
Shows, and the following year repeated this pro-
cedure in Victoria. We achieved our second
record at the Sandhurst (now called Bendigo)
Easter Fair, The committee of the fair which
ran in those days for a week comprised such fine
men as Mr. Wright, Mr. Hemming and Mr. Marks,
the Secretary of the Show ; Mr. Honeybone, the
Town Clerk, was also greatly interested in the
Fair and wished to make it a success. These
splendid people gave us a great welcome and
offered every assistance.
On the first day of our season in Sandhurst
we gave 13 performances taking £1,070, giving
such a magnificent show that the members of
the committee warmly congratulated us on our
superb performance. For this particular tour, we
had, in addition to our five other wagons, a beauti-
ful band wagon built for us by Pickles & Sons,
the great wheelwrights and blacksmiths. These
were built in the record time of two weeks and
were painted orange and green. We were all
proud of these striking vehicles which made a
great impression on the onlookers as we paraded
into the various towns. We overheard many ex-
pressions of delight at the gay appearance of our
procession and this was an excellent advertise-
ment. During our Bendigo season, during which
we played to enormous business, we presented
" Dick Turpin’s Ride to York ” and the “ Life
and Death of Bonny Black Bess.” The latter
frequently brought tears to the eyes of the ladies and
children in the audience. We thought that these
two acts were delightful fiction, but when I was
in England in 1895, I visited the circuses of
Albert Hengler and Lord Sanger, and found to
my surprise that the former of these gentlemen
who presented both these acts in his own show,
The Life of Philip Wirth


was prepared to vouch for their historical authen-
ticity. In Mr. Hengler’s show the part of the
Dashing Highwayman was taken by David Abby
Seale who was Queen Victoria’s jester and one
of the finest clowns and comedians in England.
He was succeeded to this post in the Royal House-
hold by Harry Dale who accompanied us when
we made our second tour of South Africa.
After leaving Bendigo we moved to Numur-
kah. The distance from this town to Benalla,
our next scheduled stop, was in the neighbour-
hood of 60 miles. As a result of a wager with
a friendly rival, Mr. Taylor of Burton & Taylor’s
Circus, which with Ashton’s Show shares the
honour of being the first circus in Australia,
we made the trip in one day. Our bet obliged
us to reach the town and have all our gear in
readiness for a performance by 3.30 of the after-
noon following the day on which the wager was
made. We reached Benalla at 2 o’clock, and
the tent was in readiness by 3.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER IV .
TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS.
Melbourne Cup in the Eighties—Fighting to Up-
hold the Prestige of the Show—Almost Ruined
by Rain—Across the Ninety-Mile Desert —
Back to Melbourne.
IN 1884 we were joined by Ted Banvard, another
showman whose company was of the same
type and of about the same size as our own.
It was comprised largely of members of his
own family, and he spent most of his spare time
training the younger members of it, so that when
they became old enough, they also would be
able to take part. We wintered at Ballarat
that year and while there decided to train some
horses for ring work. I bought a horse called
“ Badger,” a splendid mount, for which I paid
the then unheard of price of 40 guineas. Never-
theless he was worth it, as he had the necessary
strength for us to throw somersaults on his
back.
Trick riding was soon included in our pro-
gramme, which was continually improving. As
a matter of fact, we were so delighted with it
that we decided to perform before the people
of Melbourne. We obtained permission to erect
The Life of Philip Wirth


our tents on the Show Grounds, but on arrival
from the city the next morning we found that
our new tent, of which we had been very proud,
had been blown to shreds by the wind during the
night. Bad luck seemed to dog us in Melbourne,
as, in 1883, when we opened at Flemington during
Cup Week, our show was deserted, as no one
seemed to want to go to a circus while there
were races to be seen, so we ended up by going
to the races ourselves. Those who know the
famous racecourse today, find it hard to visualise
it as it was in the early eighties when drags and
fours-in-hand arrived with bugles blowing, and
cargoes of sweetly demure ladies in long billowing
frocks.
After the disaster at the show grounds the
Banvards went their own way, leaving with us a
wagon, two horses, and a very clever apprentice,
Peter, as their share of the losses incurred during
the last season. For some time we struggled
hard to pay off the debt we owed for the making
of our new tent, but as our tour through
Victoria was quite successful, we were soon on
our feet again financially. We made our way
leisurely from one country town to another,
putting in every spare moment in hard practice,
and we managed to perfect some splendid new
acts. We had no teachers and whatever we
achieved was due solely to our own persever-
ance. We had some very severe falls, as trick
riding is the most dangerous of all circus acts.
Strangely enough, it is not the most thrilling,
as the flying trapeze is far more exciting. The
latter, however, can be learned in a few weeks,
but with riding it takes months and even years
of steady practice before even a balance is
achieved. Then each trick must first be per-
fected on the ground before it is transferred to
the back of the horse.
The Life of Philip Wirth


After the Banvards left us my mother and
two sisters joined us, and as the girls soon learned
to ride and do other acts they became a decided
acquisition to the show. They learned quickly
and soon became most enthusiastic about their
work. By this time we were well established,
and our equipment was of the very best. We
had splendidly fitted sleeping wagons, as we
preferred our own clean beds to the rather dubious
ones offered by the majority of country hotels
of the period. Our horses also were of the finest,
and were always in the prime of condition. They
could, when called upon, do 60 miles in a day,
arriving at the pitch in time for the erection of
the tents, and a performance the same night.
However, they were rarely called upon to do
this.
I was about 18 years of age at this time
and experienced a very unpleasant accident while
we were pla}dng in Penola. We always opened
our programme with an act in .which I leapt
over horses and bayonets, but while we were
in this town we bought a new horse. We put
him last in line, between the 19th horse and
the straw mattress on which I made my final
landing. We thought that he would give no
trouble there, and advertised the act as the
" Leap for Life over Twenty Horses.” How-
ever, just as I was about to drop on to the mat-
tress, after clearing the horses, the new one saw
me and reared. His head struck my spine with
terrific force, so that I thought for some time
my back was broken, but after my brothers had
rubbed the injured part with embrocation, the
pain lessened.
An interesting sequel to this incident occurred
when I was in the United States in 1923, for the
purpose of buying seals. I went to some hot
The Life of Philip Wirth


springs in Virginia to try the baths for my back
which still frequently gave trouble. The doctor
asked me if I had suffered an injury to cause this,
and I told him of this blow I had received in
Penola. He put me in a very hot bath for about
20 minutes, and then massaged my back for
some time. He explained that a nerve had
been displaced by the impact, and that
massage with the two thumbs by an expert
masseur was necessary to move it back to the
proper place.
It was a long established custom at the
time, for the crack fighting man of each country
town to challenge any member of a show that
was showing there. There were many fine
fighters in most of the places at which we stopped,
and one season through the Monara we could
produce no boxer to cope with the local men
until a young man named Dick Mathews joined
up with us. He was over six feet in height
and a splendidly built handsome youngster of
21, but we had no idea of his ability in this direc-
tion until one night he was drawn into a fight
over a game of cards. He was an American
and naturally fond of a game of poker. One
night while playing with the town bully he
found that his opponent was cheating, and as
he refused to pay up the money the card sharper
had unfairly won, he found himself threatened
with a thrashing. However, he quietly sent the
fellow to sleep for an hour, to the great delight
of everyone, as the man was the champion of
the district. Dick was forced to fight several
other battles to prove that his victory in this
case pvas no fluke, and his continued success
made him, for a time, our greatest drawing card.
There was still plenty of opposition, but
we were so satisfied^with our own progress that
The Life of Philip Wirth


we decided to play a big city, and picked on
Adelaide, with most pleasing results. We made
a big hit there and heartened by the stamp of
the city's approval, made a most successful
tour of the South Australian country towns.
During a visit to Berry, near Kiama, we
were forced to cross a very deep gutter to reach
our pitch, and to make it easier for the wagons
to cross, we placed two bags of chaff in the drain.
I was driving a four-horse Cobb & Company
coach, and as the vehicle passed over the sacks,
the jolt caused the foot board to break, allow-
ing me to fall between the heels of the pole horses
and the front wheels. I landed on my stomach,
and before I had time to roll clear, the front, and
then the back wheel passed over my shoulders.
Although I was terribly bruised, I could only
be thankful that the path of the wheels had not
been four inches higher up, as they would, in
that case, have passed over my neck, and un-
doubtedly caused my death.
We found ourselves able to conquer other
shows with the greatest of ease, as on one oc-
casion when another circus followed us from Victoria
to beat us. They pitched their tents on a block of
land adjoining that on which we were playing.
Their equipment was superior to ours and their
show was excellent, but their tents remained
empty every night while ours were packed. In
town after town it was the same, so they left us
to rest on our laurels and went on their
way. Peculiarly enough, as soon as they went
our good business went also. It had been rain-
ing heavily for days and though the crowds
thronged to see us while the opposition lasted,
as soon as we were left alone the downpour kept
them indoors.
The Life of Philip Wirth


We had been feeling equal to the conquest
of anything, but we found that there was one
thing we could not conquer. For days on end
the rain streamed down without ceasing. Our
tents were soaked, and even our beds were
saturated. We dragged on as far as Murray
Bridge, and worn out with worry and overwork,
with exhausted horses and almost at the end of
our funds, decided to send our baggage on to
Bordertown by train over the new line across
the Ninety-Mile Desert. We rested two or
three days and then set off with the empty
wagons across the wasteland. As soon as the
train with our equipment on board left, the rain
stopped, and we had perfect weather for our
jaunt across the desert. Nevertheless the trip
was far from pleasant as it took us five days
to cross this mallee-root strewn country. By
the end of the first day we were bruised black
and blue, and had come to the conclusion
that these fiendish roots had been especially de-
vised for the discomfort of anyone travelling
in a wheeled conveyance. As soon as one of the
wheels mounted to the top of a root the thing
would turn over, hurling the wagon on to yet
another, which would perform the same trick.
For hours on end the wagons would bounce
from one to another, jumping from side to side,
and sometimes even backwards. Both ws and
the horses were exhausted by the time we arrived
at Bordertown. Still we pitched our tents
hoping to play for three nights, but no sooner
was all in readiness, than the rain recommenced
and the country was again inundated. We just
managed to reach the hard surface of the road
with the wagons, before the earth became im-
passable for wheeled traffic. For days we
struggled to dismantle the tent and drag the
drenched canvas across between the intervening
space to the wagons. All our workmen deserted,
The Life of Philip Wirth


and my three brothers and I, assisted by our
agent and four old German musicians, struggled
gamely to load the seats, poles and all the rest
of the cumbersome paraphernalia. We were so
shorthanded that my mother and sisters were
each obliged to drive a wagon apiece until we
reached the next town. The rain did not cease,
and we dragged on from town to town, giving
performance after performance, but could make
no money. At Nhill a few hundreds came to
see our show, but it was not an inspiring exhibi-
tion as we were so lacking in assistants that it
was a miracle we were able to put on a show
at all.
At last we reached Donald at show time.
The town was crowded with people and we
actually struck a fine day, so at last had a bumper
house. We forgot all the worries and trials
of the past six weeks and played with renewed
enthusiasm. Then came our Melbourne season
in the spring of 1885. This time we played in
the heart of Melbourne, in a site near the gaol
in Swanston Street, in conjunction with a man
named Ridgway, who had just arrived from
India with a purely gymnastic entertainment
and a particularly fine aerial act. Together we
made a splendid combination and our Melbourne
season was an unqualified success. We parted
from Ridgway and toured Gippsland.
We hired a paddock at Dandenong for our
70 horses and gave them two months out there
in the open. At the end of this period they
were naturally very frisky and collar proud so
that for three days we struggled in pouring rain
to get them and the fourteen wagons ready for
our Gippsland tour. We were bogged several
times and had great difficulty in reaching
Warragul as the horses kicked, bucked and played
The Life of Philip Wirth


up terribly. However, the weather cleared and
we had a most successful tour. The farmers and
graziers were all contented as a result of a splen-
did season, so we also did well. The bush in
that part of Victoria was then a sight worth
seeing. Tall, straight trees grew as thickly as
grass and it seems incredible that nearly all of
them have gone. Our train of 14 wagons made
a splendid spectacle as it wound its way along
the narrow bush roads. However, this was our
last tour with the wagons as our show had be-
come too large for such means of transport so
that we were forced to try the railways. We
kept our splendid band wagon with which to
parade, but all the other vehicles were sold.
We arranged with the railways for special trains
and the arrangement still stands today, though
with certain rather unpleasant modifications
which I have explained at the end of this book.
After a short tour of Southern New South
Wales we returned to Melbourne in 1887 and
reopened at the Alexandra Theatre (now His
Majesty's) on a matting ring on which the
horses were able to maintain their footing only
with the greatest difficulty. We were glad to
get back to the earth rings after the falls we
had experienced, and the horrible tension during
the whole of the performance at this theatre.
We again toured Gippsland and then decided to
take our show for its first sea trip across to
Noumea in New Caledonia.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER V.
NOUMEA AND TASMANIA.
Weathering a Hurricane—A Shocking Tragedy —
A Diabolical Revenge—Amusing Incidents in
Tasmania.
WE took the steamer " Gunga ” and left
on the 4th of July, 1888, and on
the second day out ran into a terrific
hurricane which, as none of us had ever been to sea
before, made us all violently ill. We had been
able to make quarters for only 20 of our horses
in the hold, so had made a temporary stable
for the remaining five on deck. Three of these
were washed overboard and lost, while the other
two were so knocked about that they were unfit
for use for several weeks. For two unforgettable
days we expected the old “ Gunga ” to founder
at any moment, but she pulled through, and we
arrived in Noumea 48 hours late. We made a
great hit with the populace of this quaint old
world town by playing “ Dick Turpin’s Ride to
York,” the spoken parts being, of course, in
French. Our strange accents delighted our
audiences, and during our stay of five weeks
we cleared a thousand pounds over our expenses.
Among our artists on this trip was a man
known as French Charlie, who in addition to
being a slack wire expert, did a very effective
The Life of Philip Wirth


stone and sword swallowing act. One night
after the performance he did not bring up the
30 stones in the usual way, but allowed them
to remain in his stomach. He started to drink
heavily and was drawn into a fight with a mem-
ber of a Noumean famity. This young fellow
kicked Charlie in the stomach, and the impact
of his foot on the stones severed an artery so that
the poor man bled to death in less than 20minutes.
We were unable to have his assailant punished
because of his high birth, and although the
authorities took charge of the body, as the dead
man was of French birth, they later sent us a bill
for the funeral expenses.
We found that the townspeople always
looked forward to Tuesday night, as on that
evening the convict orchestra of 100 musicians
gave a recital in the band rotunda in Cocoanut
Square. This was the finest combination I have
heard, and comprised every musical instrument
ever invented. Hearing them play “ Les Cloches
de Corneville ” will always remain with me
one of the most delightful experiences of my
life. I heard from the manager of the com-
pany which owned the “ Gunga,” the rather
ghastly history of the conductor, who had been
an Impresario of the Opera in Paris. He was
passionately fond of his wife, but discovered
that she was carrying on an affair with a friend
of his, a certain M. de Freur. One night he
waylaid de Freur and murdered him. Before
disposing of the body he removed the man's
heart and had it cooked for breakfast the next
morning. After his wife had eaten her por-
tion he asked her what she thought of the new
delicacy. She said that she of course thought
it either a lamb’s or a sheep’s heart. He then
quietly told her that she had eaten the heart oi
The Life of Philip Wirth


her lover. She, in horror, rushed to the police
with her tale, and her husband was sentenced
to penal servitude for life.
The islanders gave us a wonderful send-off
when we left, and on our return to Australia
we found that we had lost interest in our country
tours which of old provided us with so much
pleasure. We decided to concentrate for a
while on the larger cities. We played Melbourne
to the end of Cup Week, 1889, and then sailed
for Tasmania. We had a very successful two
weeks’ season in Launceston and Hobart, and
I will always remember the night on which Mr.
Jack Curran gave a benefit for the erection of
a memorial to the soldiers killed in the first
South African War. He was one of Hobart’s
and Tasmania’s leading sportsmen, and one of
the finest men I have ever met, so that the tent
was crammed on this particular night with
people anxious to see him take the ring
with my six brumbies, performing horses, the
high school horse " Bobs ” and the riding bear.
He gave a splendid exhibition to the great delight
of the huge audience. We moved on to Launces-
ton for a week, and our last night in this city was
considerably brightened by Mr. James Quigley
entering the lion’s cage in an attempt to give the
man eater, “ Pasha,” some wine. We went
back to Hobart and as soon as the trucks were
opened the elephants dashed away up the hill to
the spot where the circus had previously been,
and waited there to be fed. These animals have
marvellous memories, especially in a case like this
where their stomachs are concerned.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER VI.
OFF TO NEW ZEALAND.
Three Greatest Sights in the World—Windy Welling-
ton —Over a Thousand Cod in Seven Hours.
WE sailed from Hobart in December, 1889,
for New Zealand. We took the S.S.
“ Wairapa ” bound for the Bluff by way
of Milford Sound. My personal opinion is that
New Zealand is the most wonderful country in
the world and its people are the finest. In
addition to their marvellous climate they have
the three most glorious sights to be seen any-
where on earth.
The first is Milford Sound where the river
falls from cliffs a mile high, reaching the sur-
face of the sea in a fine spray like rain. It is
frequently said that in the Sound the rain never
ceases, but in reality it is not rain, but only the
spray from these marvellous falls. The echoes
are deafening, so that when the captain blew
the ship’s siren, we thought, for quite a few
minutes, that all the devils in Hell were let
loose.
The Life of Philip Wirth


Next come the Waitoma Caves near Te
Kuiki, with their glow worms. A Maori guide
takes the visitors deep into the bowels of the
earth, until the glow worms can be seen ahead
like fairy lights in the darkness. They disappear
at the slightest noise and gradually reappear
when all is quiet again. The lights are of vary-
ing sizes ranging from two very large ones to
great numbers of quite small ones. The local
legend is that these two great lights are the
King and Queen, the next in size are the other
members of the Royal Family, then the Court,
and so on until the smallest stars of which there
are a multitude, are the people. When a noise
is heard the lights disappear gradually, the
smallest going first and the largest last. Later,
when all is quiet again, the King reappears first,
then the Queen, the Princes, Lords, Dukes and
Earls, then all the smaller stars. From the glow
worm cave you return to the entrance by boat
through an underground tunnel.
The third spectacle is Rotorua where there
is the greatest variety of hot springs in the world.
There are numerous baths which are frequented
by sufferers from Rheumatism and kindred
complaints, and of these the Priest bath is the
hottest, becoming unendurable after about 10
minutes. There are many of these pools of
varying temperature, but the favourite is the
Rachel, which is of medium heat, and is delight-
fully refreshing. In 1891 I was accompanied
to Rotorua by that fine man and eminent
physician, Dr. Lewis, who was at that time
walking on crutches. He was, in addition to
being a doctor, a surveyor and architect, and
was mainly responsible for the building of the
town of Rotorua. He made a habit of sitting
in the Priest bath for an hour every day, and
after three days of this treatment was able to
The Life of Philip Wirth


take a ten mile walk without even the aid of a
stick. Maggie Papakura, a lovely Maori guide,
was the greatest attraction in those days, and
when she (accompanied by her troupe of 50
pupils) performed the famous poi dance everyone
was carried away by the graceful but barbaric
rhythm. She is dead now, but I believe she
has left many descendants, so that I may still
be able to exchange reminiscences when I again
visit this enchanting place.
In December of this year, 1933, I hope to
take the circus again to New Zealand. Six
years have passed since I was last there, and
this time I hope to lead the Grand Parade myself,
as it is the biggest and best show I have ever
taken to that county. I have been deeply
touched by hearing from my sons and daughters
how my absence has been noticed by our old
patrons, when the circus has been touring there in
recent years. There are many friends living
in this delightful country, whom I am looking
forward to seeing, with great anticipation. One
of them is the Reverend Dr. Bates, of Wellington,
who on one occasion awakened me at about 4
o'clock in the morning with the news that a
terrific cyclone was expected at 5. I hurried
down to the location blowing my danger whistle,
and within 50 minutes we had the tents rolled
up and all our gear stowed safely away. We
were not a moment too soon, as the hurricane
arrived punctually at 5 and everything that
was not securely held down was torn away. It
was a most awesome sight, as the force of the wind
was so great that large stones were lifted from
the ground and hurled into the air. We have
always been grateful to the Reverend Bates fjr his
timely warning, especially as on a former occasion
in this town, which is well called “ Windy Welling-
ton/’ our tents were actually reduced to ribbons by
The Life of Philip Wirth


a similar storm. It was during this tour that
all four of us brothers became Freemasons, while
in Auckland, through Grand Master Devore.
I would like to mention here a wonderful
experience which happened during a visit to
New Zealand about 20 years ago. We were
at Picton and our steamer was being unloaded.
It was expected that this proceeding would
take about 10 hours, so I hailed a fisherman
and asked him what his charge would be for
taking us fishing for about seven hours.
He mentioned the moderate figure of 30
shillings, so I promised him two tickets for
the circus as well. He was delighted at this
and took us out about six miles, casting
anchor opposite a large mountain, about a
100 yards off shore. He produced two camp
stools on which we perched ourselves on the
stern and had barely cast in our lines when I
got a bite. I removed two three pound blue
cod from the hooks and had no sooner cast the
fines back than I felt them drag again—two
more cod. This went on and on. For four
hours we didn’t move from our stools, when we
had a bite of lunch and then back to our fines.
Between us we caught over 840 fish in the eight
hours, while the other members of the party
had about 200. This is without doubt the most
marvellous day’s sport I have ever had —over
a 1000 fish in seven hours and most of them
between three and six pounds in weight.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER VII.
THE THREE-RING CIRCUS.
Wirth’s Wild West Show —The Battle of the
Stallions —Nerve-racking Performance in
Dunedin.
TO return to our season of 1890. For three
months we played in Auckland, in the large
hall which was variously known as the
drill hall, skating rink, market, and agricultural
hall, while awaiting the return of my brother
Harry, who had made a hurried trip to the
United States of America to engage a Wild West
Show for our Australian and New Zealand tours.
When he returned he was still spellbound by
the size of Barnum & Bailey’s Three-Ring Circus
Hippodrome and Wild West Show. Their tent
had five poles and held over 20,000 people. As
this huge affair was packed twice daily he insisted
that we should adopt the system of performing
three acts simultaneously in as many rings.
Consequently we hired a piece of waste land in
Auckland on which to practice hippodrome riding
with two and four horses, in chariots and bare-
back, until our Wild West Show arrived on the
<r Zealandia ” on September 13th, 1890. This
was the first time a show of this description
had visited Australasia and crowds lined the pier
tb watch the arrival of the steamer. It was the
fashion in Auckland at this time for the men to
The Life of Philip Wirth


wear cowboy hats, and when our friends on the
steamer saw so many of the people on the wharf
wearing them, they remarked that there seemed to
be more cowboys in Auckland than in Texas.
All the cowboys were splendidly built, tall,
handsome fellows, and with the exception of
two were straight from ranches in America.
The other two, Broncho George and Captain
Sutton were the only two showmen in the troupe.
Captain Sutton had the misfortune to lose his
wife on the voyage out, and she was buried at
sea. She had been known as “ Prairie Pearl,” and
was a sharp-shooter and helped in the Wild West
Programme in “ The Chase for a Bride.” In this
she had to cut with a bullet a rope with which
a horse thief was being hung. My sister, Marizles,
undertook to play this part and had to start
learning straight away to shoot and lasso, but
knowing how dangerous it was to discharge a
loaded rifle in a crowded tent, we allowed the
rifles to be loaded with blanks only, and faked
the rope for this particular act, with a dog slip.
We now had a five-pole tent, three rings and
a hippodrome track for the chariot races and
the Wild West Show.
Rain fell heavily on the day set for the
opening, but to our great delight the huge tent
was packed, and all went well until after the
Grand Parade. Each ring was then occupied
by a stallion. I had “ John Bull ”in the first;
the centre was occupied by Harry with “General
Gordon,” and in the third were George and
“ Sultan.” Each horse had been galloped around
its respective ring once or twice when “ John
Bull ” and “ Sultan,” both of whom hated
" General Gordon,” saw him performing in the
centre ring. They both tackled him simul-
taneously and for about 10 minutes there was
a terrific fight with George, Harry and myself
The Life of Philip Wirth


trying to quieten them. Eventual!}’ we calmed
them and led them away leaving the stage to
the bucking horses which were brought on by
Captain Sutton, Cowboy George and the Arkansas
Kid. As soon as they mounted they bucked
so very efficiently that they kicked their way
out of the rings on to the seats where the audience
was sitting. His Worship the Mayor, who was
sitting with his party in the front row, was
knocked over, but by some miracle escaped
unhurt from the flurry of flying hooves. By this
time the rain had increased to such an extent
that water was beginning to run under the tent
into the ring, so I had the band play the National
Anthem and the audience went home very wet
but most amused.
From the first, this new venture of ours was
an unqualified success. The following Saturday
we gave a matinee to a crowd of 20,000 people
in Potter’s Paddock. The cowboys with their
wild horses, and my sisters with the chariots,
excelled themselves in recklessness, with the
result that the great crowd was both thrilled
and delighted. We toured back through the
Dominion, playing every town, ending our season
in Dunedin.
We played here in the Caledonian Society’s
splendid sports ground, and on our last Saturday
drew a crowd of 18,000 people to witness the
most nerve-racking performance I have ever
seen. The first event was a hurdle race for
both men and women, and at the last hurdle
my sister Marizles fell, and all the seven horses
following galloped over her. At first she seemed
so terribly mangled that we had no hope for
her recovery, but within a week,although still very
stiff and sore, she insisted on doing all her old
acts once more. Later, Broncho George was
The Life of Philip Wirth


thrown, breaking his arm ; my brother George
was driving his eight white horses, when one of
the two he had his feet on, slipped, so that he fell
under them all, breaking his knee badly. A
fourth accident befell the Mexican, Ralph. His
horse fell while he was lassoing a steer, and both
he and his mount were dragged across the arena.
The Arkansas Kid jumped on the steer, trying to
ride it away, but it stumbled and rolled on him,
then staggered to its feet and made a wild rush
at a woman who was making her way across the
ring. Ralph, the Mexican, who had regained
his seat, spurred his horse across in front of her,
taking the full force of the impact which was so
great that the steer’s neck was broken. Its
horns, however, struck the big Mexican saddle
and Ralph was thrown to the ground breaking
his wrist, but he rescued the woman who was
unhurt. The fifth, and fortunately, the last
mishap occurred when my sister's chariot was
rounding the turn in a furiously contested race.
The vehicle capsized, and although she was
knocked senseless, she escaped serious injury.
After this exciting day we chartered a steamer
and sailed direct from Dunedin to Adelaide,
where we hoped to open in Christmas week.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER VIII.
PLAYING THE BIG CITIES.
“ Bonny Black Bess” Crippled—Yet Another Re-
cord—Two Separate Shows—We Tour Queens-
land—A Ton of Schnapper—The Shows
Reunite—The Land Boom Depression — We
Sail for South Africa.
WHEN we arrived in Adelaide on December
15th, 1890, and found in the harbour a
German steamer on which was another
Wild West Show, Sutton and I went over in the
Customs launch, and although nearly everyone
on board was asleep, we were able to discover
that it belonged to Dr. Carver, who had just
completed a most successful tour of Europe
with Buffalo Bill and his famous show. He was
astonished on his arrival in Adelaide to find
another show of the same type as his own adver-
tised all over the city. This had deterred him
from landing, so we made an arrangement there
and then to play the various cities in such a way
that we would not clash with one another. They
were to have Melbourne, we were to have Adelaide
and Brisbane, and we were to share Sydney.
Ours was, however, by far the bigger show as
his was Wild West only, and also our cowboys
were far superior to his, although his Indians
were a fine looking lot, and Carver himself was
the acknowledged champion sharp shooter of
the world. Their show lasted only a short time,
The Life of Philip Wirth


however, as their manager took most of the
Indians and rough riders back to America, leaving
Carver to produce a few Western dramas at the
Alexandra Theatre, Melbourne.
During our Adelaide season, Mrs. John
Wirth, while competing in a ladies’ race on
“ Bonny Black Bess,” had the misfortune to
have a very bad fall. She was unhurt, but the
splendid mare broke a fetlock, and we had given
up all hope of saving her, when a friend begged
us to give her to him. We were all terribly
fond of this fine animal which had given us such
marvellous service, so we acceded to his request
and to our great joy he performed a miracle
and saved her life, and although she was, of
course, unfit for circus work any longer, she later
had two very fine colts.
We had with us at this time a cowboy by
the name of Felton, who chased, lassoed and
branded a steer in the amazing time of 12 seconds.
This was in a contest with Mick Fenton, the
champion Australian rider, who took 40 seconds,
which still stands as the second record for this
feat. I was delighted at hearing at Richard
Ringling’s Wild West Show at Madison Square
Garden in New York many years later, a prize
offered to any man who could break this record
of twelve seconds, “ put up by George Felton
with Wirth Bros.' Circus in Adelaide in 1893.”
The best effort at New York was 45 seconds.
Mick Fenton, who was, I consider, the best rider
Australia has ever produced, left us in Perth
some time later to act as instructor to the mounted
police in that city. After Adelaide we went to
Ballarat for the New Year, and from there on
to Sydne}/, and though for some time we had
trouble with our cowboys, being forced in one
instance to take the matter to court, they soon
quietened down again and all went well.
The Life of Philip Wirth


On January 24th, 1891, we opened in the
Agricultural Show Grounds, Sydney. At the
" paddock ” show in the afternoon the gates
were rushed and the back fence of the ground
was pushed down, so that the pitch was swarm-
ing with people who had paid no admission fee.
Not satisfied with this they tried to rush the
enclosure where the cowboys were working:
I stopped the show and tried to clear the ground,
but was nearly mobbed, so I had two of the
boys with an end of a lasso tied to each saddle,
gallop through the crowd and mow them down.
A few were hurt, but the result was satisfactory,
and we were left in peace. The crowd at the night
show was satisfactory both as to size and be-
haviour, as was also that on the following Mon-
day, A.N.A. Day.
jOur show had by this time grown to such a
size as to be really too large for our needs, so we
decided to split it into two. John and George
took the Three-Ring Circus, and Harry and I the
Wild West Show. They went to the inland
towns of New South, Wales, while we went to
Queensland. We were forced, as we had no
tents, to engage 17 show grounds and give after-
noon shows. This was unsatisfactory, as we
found at Gympie that large numbers of people
had come into the town to see our night show,
to find that our only performance for the day
had already been given during the afternoon at
the racecourse. As a result, when wc arrived at
Breakfast Creek, just outside Brisbane, we en-
gaged a minstrel show to play at night, while we
continued to give our own show at the matinee.
This proved quite satisfactory and we played
this town for two weeks.
We then chartered the " Lady Musgrave’
and played to Ballina, and then up river
The Life of Philip Wirth


Coroke, Lismore and other towns. When we
arrived at Ballina we found that the tide was
so low that we would be unable to disembark
for at least six hours, so Captain Collins suggested
some fishing to fill in the long wait. We sailed
across to a mountain about three miles from the
pier, and anchored. Using mullet as bait we
threw our lines over the rail and within a few
seconds were having great sport. There were
about 40 people on board and between us we
caught over a ton of schnapper, the majority of
the fish weighing about 32 pounds apiece. We
smoked most of it and gave it away in the
country towns we visited, where fish was naturally
a great delicacy. After this tour we sailed back
to Newcastle, still in the “ Lady Musgrave ” and
reunited with John and George.
We decided that the two shows together
made a splendid combination and vowed that we
would never divide them again. We felt that
the split had not only weakened both shows,
but had done our name no good, as our patrons
received the impression that they were getting
only half their money’s worth.
Then came 1893, and the aftermath of the
Land Boom. All but three of the banks closed
their doors, and the depression was general.
Finding that the majority of people had little
or no money to spend on entertainment, we
decided to travel to England via South Africa,
counting on the trip to act as an excellent ad-
vertisement on our return. We went overland
to Adelaide, and on November 7th, 1893, sailed
for the Cape in the S.S. " Damascus.” The
voyage was most enjoyable, although without
incident, and our live stock, with the exception
of one small dingo pup which fell overboard
and was drowned, arrived in the best of health.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER IX.
SOUTH AFRICAN INCIDENTS.
Difficulty in Securing a Pitch —I Unintentionally
Add to My Jockey Act —Excitement at the
Amphitheatre.
IN Capetown it was some time before we could
come to any arrangement about accommoda-
tion for our show, as there were only two
pieces of ground large enough for the circus.
Mr. Bonamici, a well-known South African
theatrical manager, who had grand opera playing
at the Opera House, took them both to keep his
monopoly of the entertainment of the city. We
went up to the Opera House to see Bonamici
and tried to persuade him to rent us the land to
play on. He was of the opinion that if we played
in opposition to his opera, he would be forced
out of business. We, however, had heard that
he was planning to produce a pantomime for the
Christmas season, and as we already had one
with which we closed the show, we threatened to
wait a few weeks and open in opposition to his
panto. Striking while the iron was hot, we
then suggested that he should transfer his opera
elsewhere and allow us to play in the Opera
House. He was dumbfounded at our audacity,
but we eventually came to terms. These were
The Life of Philip Wirth


not entirely satisfactory to us, but there had
to be some capitulation on both sides, so we
agreed to them. He was to manage our South
African tour which was to include a season at
the Opera House, one at his Amphitheatre in
Johannesburg, and another in our own tent,
though still under his management, in Pretoria.
He was to pay all expenses, put the ring on
the stage in each theatre, supply extra musicians,
find the house light and take over the advertis-
ing, etc., for 30 per cent, of the takings.
We opened in Capetown on a Monday night
and I made quite a hit with the audience during
my jockey act. When I went to jump on the
horse’s back while it was galloping, I leapt too
high, so that I cleared the animal and landed
in the orchestra pit among the musicians. The
crowd applauded loudly, thinking it was part of
the act, but my second effort was quite success-
ful, and I think was more effective owing to
my original failure.
From Capetown to Johannesburg we travelled
by special train at the expense of our manager, and
though the journey of 1013 miles took the best
part of three days the unusual and varying
nature of the country through which we passed,
kept us keenly interested throughout the trip.
First we passed through delightful culti-
vated country with scattered old-world towns
with fruit trees growing in the streets, then we
saw huge mountains, broad rivers and peaceful
valleys. Later we passed into the great Karoo
which is seemingly barren country, but which
furnishes enough nourishment for enormous
flocks of goats and sheep. From the Karoo we
passed into the veldts —large plateaux of the
Orange Free State and Transvaal, where all is
The Life of Philip Wirth


silent and lonely, with here and there a little
village of thatched mud huts, inhabited by
almost nude natives.
When we arrived at Johannesburg we found
it to be a city built entirely of corrugated iron,
with no sewerage system. We discovered from
experience that only by walking in the middle
of the street was one safe, as waste water was con-
tinually being thrown from some window or
another, and duckings were frequent.
We had by now quite recovered our land
legs after our long voyage, and were able to give
an excellent showing. The ring, too, was much
better than the one in Capetown and I was able
to introduce a new finish to my jockey act which
drew much applause. After standing on the
back of my mare, “ Lottie," while she jumped
first one fence and then another, two other mares,
" Maud " and " Elsie," were brought in, and the
three horses were placed around the ring at
equal intervals, with their heads towards the
centre. I would make my way around the ring,
jumping over each in turn, and ending with a
great jump over the three of them together,
I was delighted with my own showing, but had
to be content with standing second to my brother
George, who, before he broke his knee, was uni-
versally acknowledged to be the greatest all-
round circus performer in the world.
He was able to do an entire performance of
two-and-a-half hours alone, and was able in
all to do 23 acts, viz, Polandric Ladder, Balanc-
ing on his Head, Contortionist, Clubs, Tumbling,
Acrobats, Horizontal Bars, Single Trapeze, Rings,
Somersault Act on Horse, Jockey Act, Seven
Horse Act, Two Horse Carrying Act, One Horse
The Life of Philip Wirth


Carrying Act, Leaps, Indian on Horse, Perch,
Bob Walker, Bar Act, Two Horse Hurdle Act
and Three Clown Entrees.
For our last two weeks at the Amphitheatre
we put on the Wild West Show, and on the
opening night the place was nearly destroyed
by fire. There was one scene in which Sioux
Indians enter a hunter’s cabin during his absence,
and on his return he shoots a burning arrow
at the shack in the hope of burning the savages
out. On this night the flames from the burning
cabin leapt up so high that they set alight to
the decorative curtains in the dome of the theatre.
All was confusion until George, seizing an empty
bran bag, swiftly climbed his trapeze rope, swung
himself on to a beam and quickly beat out the
flames, while I hurried the horses and ponies
out through the back door of the theatre. Later
we were able to bring them back to finish the show
amid the wild enthusiasm of the audience.
The Life of Philip Wtrth


CHAPTER X.
OUR FIRST SOUTH AFRICAN TOUR.
A Hurried Trip to England —Amazing Recognition
—Our Great Popularity —Death of “ Lottie ” —
We Leave for South America.
IN 1893-4 I left for London in the "Dunnotar
Castle ” to book some new acts. I reached
the great metropolis with plenty of money,
and as I had promised my mother I would call on her
sisters I decided to make the call in state. Wear-
ing a new Chesterfield suit, a bell topper and
carrying a gold mounted cane, I drove up to the
address in South Hackney in the best cab I
could find, expecting to give my Aunt Mary a
delightful surprise. However, she opened the
door of her home and to my amazement said,
"You are my sister Sarah’s son, Philip ! Won't
you come in ?’’ To say I was staggered was
putting it mildly, but I followed her down the
hall and was soon made comfortable by a roar-
ing fire, as it was snowing heavily. While I was
having tea she telephoned my mother’s other
sister, Caroline, who, she said, lived quite near,
to say that we would be calling, and soon after-
wards we set out. I discovered that the house
which was " quite near ” was in reality three
miles away at Forest Gate, but my Aunt who
was over 60 years of age walked briskly for the
The Life of Philip Wirth


entire distance. I was very amused by the
attitude of my Aunt Caroline’s family toward
me. Her husband, Mr. Bolden, and her six
children, kept scrutinising me until at last one
of the girls said, “But mother, he is not black
at all. He is as white as we are !’’
My relatives in England were very anxious
for me to give up the circus life, my Aunt Mary
going so far as to promise me a terrace of houses
if I would remain in England and become an
auctioneer. However, when our show was play-
ing in Southport in 1898, she came to stay with
us for a fortnight, and ended by staying for over a
month. During that time she did not miss a
single performance, and before she left she
apologised for having wished to take me away
from such a delightful existence.
After my return to South Africa we continued
to have great successes in the country, as well
as in the large cities. We were surprised at the
large numbers of people who seemed to come
from nowhere, even in the smallest towns, to
see us. I remember on one occasion when our
special train stopped at Harrismith, a township
so small that we, who were accustomed to
Australian populations, did not consider it worth
our while to play it, a gentleman asked me why
we were not giving a show there. I replied that
the population was too small, but he said he
would guarantee us to £250. We Wirths have
always prided ourselves on our sportsmanship
so I decided to take the chance. We took £2BO
and decided to play the town again on our re-
turn from Bulawayo, six months later. We
again had a full house and we could find no sign
of our friend of the previous visit. We found out
that he had had the misfortune to lose all his stock
from horse disease, and was now destitute. All
his sheep and cattle had been wiped out by
The Life of Philip Wirth


this disease, which is caused by a fog rising from
the ground. Once the animals inhale it there
is no hope for them and they usually die within
24 hours. During our stay in Kimberley I lost
my mare, “Lottie," to whom I was very devoted,
in this way, and on the morning when I found
her, lying terribly swollen about a hundred
yards away from the tents, I having had no pre-
vious experience of this terrible plague, suspected
that she had been interfered with. An old Boer
told me of the frightful scourge and remarked
on our great good fortune in that none of the
horses in the tents had been affected.
“ Lottie " was one of the most intelligent
animals I have ever seen, and could understand
every word I said to her. When I was doing
my jockey act she would sway her back in under
me as I jumped, and whinny with delight as I
made a safe landing. After being associated
with birds and animals of every kind throughout
my life, I am of the belief that they can all
talk in their own way and that all which is said
in that marvellous book of India, “ The Elephant
God,” is true, and I would advise all of my readers
who have not yet read it to do so as soon as they
possibly can.
Later, while we were still in Kimberley, we
heard that the Jamieson raid was brewing, and
as we did not wish to be involved in anything of
that nature, we decided that the time had come
for us to leave Africa. We were not yet ready
to go to England, and were for some time un-
decided as to which country we would next visit.
Eventually we decided on India, but one of our
star turns feared for their health in the climate
there and flatly refused to come. We then
changed our plans and chartered the Donald
Currie steamer “ Almona" for Monte Video
The Life of Philip Wirth


The men who had jibbed at going to India again
changed their minds and declined to accompany
us to South America. We spent two days try-
ing to persuade them to come, but they were
obdurate, and they cost us £2OO demurrage as
we did not discover their absence until just on
sailing time.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XI.
SOUTH AMERICA.
We Lose our Troupe of Zulus — Burned Out-
Breaking in Two Mustangs — Christmas
Festivities.
WE left Durban on August 11th, and had
perfect weather for the whole trip across.
As the steamer was ballasted with loose
sand this was very fortunate. The surface of
the sand in the hold was quite smooth so that
we were able to use it as an exercising ground
for the horses, but had the ship struck any rough
weather the ballast would undoubtedly have
shifted, with very unpleasant results. On one
occasion, during this trip, we saw a school of
whales spouting water a hundred feet into the
air, and later, as we were nearing our destination,
I noticed that the water we were ploughing our
way through had suddenly become yellow. I
questioned the captain as to the cause of this
phenomenon and he explained that the mighty
Amazon was in flood and that these were the
flood waters.
We had brought with us from South Africa
a troupe of 30 splendid Zulus to give their war
dance and to help in the erection of the tents.
The Life of Philip Wirth


When we arrived at Monte Video they took
to strolling round the town in their native dress,
which naturally covered very little, and the towns-
folk became rather incensed, insisting that we
should clothe them decently. I thought their
wild clothing an excellent advertisement for us,
but we were forced to put them into European
attire, and as none of them had ever worn either
trousers or boots before, we had a very trying
time with them indeed. There were, however,
a /large number of coloured people in South
America, many of them holding quite responsible
positions, and it was not long before our blacks
had found many friends and were drinking
heavily. They became quite unmanageable and
were finally enticed away to the country by
some ranchers who put them to work on their
holdings. I was sorry to lose them as their war
dance had been most effective, and in the quiet
of the African veldt their stamping and yells
could be heard 30 miles away. We had made use
of them in another act known as the “ Death of
Major Wilson ” which I regretted being forced
to remove from our bills. It portrayed the last
stand of the gallant Major when he was slain
by the Zulu King, Lo Bengoola. I made my
entrance from the back of the ring as Major
Wilson, accompanied by a small band of white
troopers, as the Zulus with light bamboo canes
for spears came rushing in from the front. First,
all my men were killed, then my horse fell, and
I, leaping to my feet put up a desperate fight
until I too was mown down, when the Zulus
went into their war dance. They then made
their exit and my horse, “ Colonel,” staggered
to his feet and rolled me out with his nose. It
was one of our most effective turns and you can
understand how we regretted having to eliminate
it.
The Life of Philip Wirth


Monte Video we found was a most delight-
ful city with marvellous hotels. We spent a
great deal of time admiring its beauty,- and
above all, its startling cleanliness, during the
fortnight we were obliged to wait before we
could open. The " Politeama ” (Big Theatre)
was occupied by a company playing Italian
Grand Opera. The theatre had been designed
for circus work as well as for legitimate stage
shows, and the ring was built in the centre of
the auditorium. When the seats and floor were
removed there was revealed one of the finest
rings I have ever seen. The stage split down
the middle to allow us an entrance to the ring,
while the unused portions of it were turned into
an additional dress circle. This conversion took
place immediately after the last performance
of the opera, and we had great hopes of a splen-
did season. We hoped to open the next night
and went to our beds full of hope and expectation,
but we had barely retired when the news reached
us that the theatre was on fire. Fortunately,
our 35 horses had not been stabled at the “ Poli-
teama, ” so they were unharmed, but everything
else was destroyed. We had booked a theatre
in Buenos Aires, so we moved on to that city,
arriving just eight days before the date adver-
tised for our opening. We immediately set to
work to replace our equipment, and opened at
the scheduled time. Of course, had it not been
for the invaluable assistance of the large English
population we would never have been able to
open at all, but as it was we played to large
houses for over five weeks. In this city, Friday
night was “ Fashionable Night,” and no one not
in evening dress was admitted to the tent. This
is a very old custom and I intend to introduce
it again as soon as possible. On these occasions
our tent presented a dazzling spectacle—beauti-
ful women, elaborately gowned and blazing with
The Life of Philip Wirth


fine Brazilian diamonds, and accompanied by
immaculately dressed men, the majority of whom
were over six feet in height.
During our season here I had the pleasure
of meeting Mr. Moncrieff, the owner of one of
the largest ranches in the country, and a well-
known horse breeder. He was most impressed
with the way I had trained our horses, and sug-
gested that I should try my hand at breaking in
some white mustangs he owned. These horses
were so wild and vicious that usually there was no
alternative to shooting them for their skins,
and boiling down the carcases for fat. I expressed
my willingness to try, and two days later received
the following letter : —“ Dear Wirth, —I am
sending you by rail two white mustangs, a
stallion and a gelding. We had great trouble
with them for about four hours before we could
get them into the trucks. It took four of the
gauchos to do the job and all are suffering from
bites and kicks. They should arrive at Buenos
Aires at about 10 o'clock tomorrow morning.
I wish you the very best of luck with them, but
fear that you will have to shoot them. Will drop
in next week to see how you are getting on.
Regards—Moncrieff. ’ ’
The next morning I took four grooms to
unload the horses and found to my disappoint-
ment that they were not white at all, but a dirty
slate colour. This proved on closer inspection
to be caused by dried blood. A terrific struggle
ensued, and in the end I was forced to send
to the circus for four more men who brought
quarter poles on which we were able to carry them
back to our stables. For two days the mustangs
sulked and refused their food, but after that
they became hungry, and would eat from my
hand. Bv the time of Mr. Moncrieffs arrival
The Life of Philip Wirth


they were splendid mounts, and I had taught
them to waltz. I called them “Moncrieff” and
“Gaucho,” and during a fortnight’s season at
Rosario I completed their training, so that
on our return to Buenos Aires they were fit to
take their place in the performance. Mr. Mon-
crieff wrote a most complimentary letter about
my feat to the newspaper, and to this, I am
sure, we owe a great deal of our phenomenal
success in that city.
Our season at Rosario covered Christmas
and New Year and the town was en fete over the
whole period. Everyone was in fancy dress
all the time and the entire population went mad
while the festivities lasted. What surprised me
most, however, was the sight of large numbers
of English people drinking dozens of cocktails
before breakfast.
On our return to Buenos Aires we decided
to open with a Three-Ring Circus, Hippodrome
and Wild West Show combined, but were obliged
to hire a Spanish Circus owned by a man named
Anselmi to complete the third ring. On our
first night a member of this company fell while
trying to leap as high over a banner as I did.
He managed to get over, but was unable to turn,
landing on his forehead and breaking his neck.
We had a splendid pitch here, as we were situa-
ted just off the most fashionable street, the
Calle Florida, which was closed to vehicular
traffic during the afternoon so that the fashionable
set of the city might promenade there.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XII.
OUR MOST EXCITING SEASON.
As Foreigners We are Taken Advantage Of —We
Fall Foul of the Students —We Witness a
Murder-Unscrupulous Interpreters-Odd
Customs.
WE had for some time considerable trouble
with our interpreters, who, taking ad-
vantage of our ignorance of the language,
made large sums of money for themselves.
When any of the tradespeople quoted us for any
goods the interpreters would double the price,
keeping the difference for themselves. In ad-
dition to this we were forced by the terms of
our contract to give the proprietors of the theatre
a hundred tickets for the best seats in the place.
These were sold on the pavement outside the
theatre, so that all the finest seats were occupied
before we sold a ticket. Again, when we went
to pay our stable account we were informed that
the amount we had been quoted was not for the
week, but for the day. Our horses were con-
fiscated until we paid up—seven times as much
as the scoundrels were entitled to. This sort of
thing kept on happening, and as the law was
so slow that there was no chance of getting
any satisfaction there, we decided to protect
The Life of Philip Wirth


ourselves by securing someone who would take
all the responsibility and pay all outside expenses
while we found the company. We arranged
with two seemingly fine Spanish gentlemen, Dal
Negropa and Rederelli to manage our tour
through the country in this way, for which they
were to receive one half of the gross takings.
We had previously played in San Nicholas,
Rosario, Santa Fe, Parana and Buenos Aires twice,
and then under the management of these two
gentlemen, we proceeded to Rio Grande, where we
commenced our season on April 11th, and then
to Palotes, Port Alegre and Santos. They were
to have taken us on to Sao Paulo in the August,
but in Santos, which was known in those days
as the White Man's Grave, they left us and we
continued alone. Just before we reached Santos
one of the crew of the ship we were travelling on
died of Yellow Fever, but he was buried at sea
and the matter hushed up, otherwise we would
not have been allowed to land. When we were
unloading our gear we discovered that there
was already an Italian circus playing there, but
we drew such marvellous houses that they were
forced to leave. After a two weeks' season
we were ready to proceed to Sao Paulo, when we
discovered that our managers had not paid the
rent for our pitch. We then went into all our
accounts and found that they had been accept-
ing their share of the proceeds without settling
any of our debts. After we had settled all of
these we were not sorry to see the last of them,
but the delay made us two days late for our
opening at Sao Paulo. To account for this we
issued a notice explaining the situation in which
we mentioned the names of these two fellows as
the cause of everything. They promptly issued
a writ for defamation, claiming as damages about
two thousand million reils. We were astonished
at the huge amount of their claim, but were
The Life of Philip Wirth


relieved to find that it only amounted to £BO.
We settled the matter out of court by giving
them £4O, bringing their profits as we estimated
them, up to about £l,ooo.
Our season in Sao Paulo was distinguished
by several incidents which were almost too ex-
citing to be thrilling. We were playing to
excellent houses, but one night rain fell heavily
and the water came through into the cheaper
seats. Numbers of students who had been
sitting there moved into the expensive seats
and crowded their rightful occupants out. I
mentioned the matter to our manager, saying
that I did not consider it fair that people who
had only paid one milrea should take the seats
of others who had paid six. He explained that
these students were the terror of the city and
did not pay to go anywhere ; they had been at
our show every night and had paid no entrance
money at all. The next night about 200 of them
arrived, and when they were refused admittance
at my orders, they commenced to hew their way
with daggers through the canvas walls of the
tent. However, we tactfully put it to them
that we depended on the money we received for
our living, and as gentlemen it was fair neither to
themselves nor to us for them to force their way in
night after night without paying. We suggested
that we should give them the best seats for half the
usual price, and they agreed. This arrangement
worked splendidly as they continued to patron-
ise our show nightly, but gave us no more
trouble.
Later, we had the unpleasant experience
of seeing one of them murdered in a cafe. At
this time the Italians had suffered a reverse in
Abyssinia against King Menelik, and the students
took great pleasure in tormenting every Italian
The Life of Philip Wirth


they saw with cries of " Menelik!” On this
particular evening we were sitting in one of the
numerous restaurants when a young Italian
couple entered and ordered some wine. They
were quietly drinking when some of the students
came in, and seeing them, gave this cry of theirs.
The “ Lady” rose and went forward, offering her
hand to one of them, but as he took it, she plunged
a dagger into his stomach. "She” then shed
her female garb showing male attire beneath,
and fled from the place, while the duped young men
were vainly trying to revive their slain com-
rade. The whole affair had been arranged, we
learned later, by some of the Italians, to gain
their revenge for the continual insults they had
suffered.
During our stay in Brazil we had it con-
tinually impressed upon us that the only way
to keep ourselves free from smallpox, yellow
and black fevers, was by drinking plenty of
whisky. Although the necessity for keeping our-
selves fit handicapped our indulgences, hangovers
were plentiful, but we remained immune from
these diseases which were rife at this time.
When we were in Sao Paulo we acquired
another interpreter, who seemed for a while to be
an absolute gem. When we were settling our
accounts preparatory to leaving the town, we
found that we were asked to pay less than we
had contracted for, but our new-found friend
would not divulge the means by which he had
secured the reduction. We later found that he
had told our creditors that we would be playing
Sao Paulo again after our season in Campinas
and that we would only pay a portion of our
accounts, renewing our patronage and paying
the remainder on our return. By these means
he was able to make quite a substantial sum for
The Life of Philip Wirth


himself. However, we proceeded to Bahia with-
out returning to either Sao Paulo or Santos,
and here he played us a very dirty trick, indeed.
We wished to play in our own tent, but he, for
some reason of his own, wished us to play in the
theatre. When he saw that he was not likely to
have his own way, he gave orders that the sling
containing the lamps, bale rings and tent pegs
should be dropped into the water as it was being
unloaded from the ship, so that we then had no
alternative but to use the theatre.
From Bahia we went to Rio de Janiero, but
did not play there. We had all heard such
marvellous accounts of the beauty of the har-
bour at Rio that we were most disappointed,
and I must confess that we all preferred our
own Sydney Harbour for beauty, cleanliness
and health. We took an American steamer and
proceeded to Pernambuco, which has three sea
fronts. It seems to me as though there are
three fingers of land running into the sea, be-
cause from our pitch on one sea front we could
see another stretch of water between us and
the mainland. The customs of the Brazilians
never ceased to intrigue us. For instance, one
very hot afternoon I saw a man collapse on the
pavement, and would have rushed to his assist-
ance but for the restraining arm of a friend
who explained that such an action would surely
entail arrest, as being the last person to touch
the poor fellow. He was allowed to lie in the
blazing sun for over an hour, when prompt
attention might have saved his life.
On another occasion, my brother George,
when returning to his hotel after the performance,
stumbled over the dead body of a man, but his
companions would not allow him to touch it for
the same reason. It is also quite startling to
The Life of Philip Wirth


see the youths of the city indulging in fights
with daggers, in the streets, just as we see the
youngsters at home sparring good naturedly, but
these lads are, however, so expert with their
weapons that there is rarely any damage done.
One night during the performance, one of
the big men of the city, who was the guest of
the British Consul at the show, suddenly took
it into his head to have a pot shot at one of the
performers, who happened to be myself. For-
tunately the Consul's wife was sitting next to
him and knocked his arm up, spoiling his aim
so that the bullet passed through the roof. This
made the fellow very annoyed, so that his friends
were forced to remove him to the bar, where he
soon calmed down and was taken home.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XIII.
PERNAMBUCO.
Unusual Treatment for Horse—Danger from Black
and Yellow Fever —A Thrilling Final Per-
formance —We Board the “Liguria” for
England.
SOON after our arrival in Pernambuco, my
brumby, “ Major/’ commenced to limp.
One front hoof was very swollen and the
infection began to spread. I tried every oint-
ment I could find, but all to no avail, and I was
beginning to despair of saving him when one
of our Spanish friends offered to try a treat-
ment of his own. I was desperate, so I agreed.
He plastered the hoof with powdered sugar, and
to my surprise and delight the swelling disappeared
within 24 hours, and the foot was completely
healed in less than a fortnight.
Two brothers, John and Clarence Cooke,
belonging to our company, contracted yellow
fever, and we lost all hope of saving John, for
a while. He was covered with red spots, and
I can remember the doctor calling me from the
sick room to tell me that as soon as these spots
turned black he would die. He said that he
The Life of Philip Wirth


would go to lunch and return later bringing the
undertaker with him. As soon as the physician
left, John called to me, saying that he had been
starved, and was also terribly thirsty. I had
some champagne and biscuits sent up to him,
and after he had eaten these he fell into a deep
sleep. The doctor returned after his lunch, but
was dumbfounded to find that the spots had all
disappeared. We tried to move the invalid to
a fresh room, but every time any of the waiters
approached the bed, John’s dog, “ Perlutus,"
would rush at them and knock them over. At
last I picked up the sick man, slung him over
my shoulder, and marched off with him to his new
quarters. The doctor insisted that I should stay
in bed for a short time as he feared I might have
contracted the dreaded disease also, but his fears,
fortunately, proved groundless.
While we were touring South Africa we
heard that we would make a fortune in Mexico,
so we made our plans for a tour of that country.
However, we were told that black fever had
broken out in Parar and the surrounding dis-
trict through which we would have to pass on
our way north, so we were reluctantly obliged
to forego our Mexican tour. As we did not wish
to retrace our steps through Brazil and the
Argentine, we decided to go straight to England.
Our last day in Pernambuco was a Sunday
and was unpleasantly full of incident. The
matinee was well patronised, but mostly by the
rougher members of the community. Numbers
tried to force their way through the back door
of the tent without paying, and some of the men
tried to push their way into the women’s dress-
ing tent. With the help of other members of
the company I tried to make them leave, but
they threatened me with daggers, and I was
The Life of Philip Wirth


forced to cover them with my revolver. They
made a hurried exit, but soon returned with a
policeman, saying that I had no right to have
a revolver. However, I managed to persuade
the gendarme that I had bluffed the intruders
by holding the largest key on my ring as one
does a pistol, and as he knew the Intendente of
Police was a great friend of ours, he did not press
the matter further.
Our evening performance was a benefit for
ourselves, and the English population had prom-
ised to turn up to a man, and they certainly
kept their word. They were all seated around
the ring in the loges, when word came that
the Brazilians were after the scalps of the English
colony, and after doing a great deal of damage
to their homes were converging on the circus
with the intention of killing them all. I believe
that the troubles were all caused by the rumour
that England had annexed Trinidad from Brazil,
and there was a possibility of war. We quietly
spread the news of the trouble among the British
portion of the audience, and when the interval
came they all strolled out as though heading
for the bar. As soon as they were out of sight
of the rest of the patrons they made their way
to the water front, and boarding yachts and
launches, made their escape to their homes in
that way. Had they gone home by road they
would certainly have met the crowd of would-
be-assassins, and the bloodshed would undoubt-
edly have been terrific. Before they left they
told us that we were in no danger whatever as
we had only to tell the rioters that we were
Australians and they would not molest us.
We had fortunately sold the tents, wagons,
seats, etc., so that only our wardrobe and personal
effects had to be taken to the steamer, and as a
The Life of Philip Wirth


lighter was lying at the pier waiting to take all
these out to the S.S. “ Liguria,” we expected no
trouble in reaching the ship. Just as we were
about to embark, Mrs. J. J. Wirth, suddenly
remembered that she had left her hat box con-
taining all her money in her dressing tent. She
insisted on returning for it, and as she could not
go alone, my brother George accompanied her.
They were attacked on the way, and as they
were given no time to explain that they were
Australians, they were in a perilous situation.
Fortunately, I had followed with some of the
others, and arrived just in time to save my
brother from taking a man’s life to save his own
and that of his sister. We made the roughs
listen to our assertion of our nationality, and
then were allowed to return unmolested. As
we were obliged to carry John and Clarence
Cooke on board, we explained that they had been
wounded in the scrimmage, as we knew if it were
discovered that they were recovering from black
and yellow fever respectively, the}/ would never
have been allowed on the ship. However, the
sea trip improved their health marvellously, and
within a month of our landing in England they
were riding again, although it was some time
before they recovered their full strength. After
we left this exciting city we learned that
“Pernambuco” means “Mouth of Hell,” and
we all thought it most appropriate.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XIV.
WE TOUR ENGLAND.
Low Prices as Compared with South Africa —Band
Wagon Drawn by Zebras—The Queen's Birth-
day Unknown —Life of the Circus Folk.
WE recognised the “ Liguria ” as one of
the mail steamers which used to ply
between England and Australia. While
she was in port at Williamstown there had been
a robbery on board in which two boxes of gold
had disappeared. As a result of this the ship
had been taken off the run and placed in the
South American trade.
We arrived in England late in November
and opened in “King Joe” Ohmy’s circus building
at Birkenhead on December Ist. We had hoped
to open if possible in Hengler’s building in
Liverpool, but “ Dick Whittington ” was in pro-
duction there, and so Albert Hengler could neither
let us have the building nor engage our show.
As the admission prices in South Africa had
ranged from ten shillings to a pound, we were
astonished to find that in England the lowest
was threepence, and the highest one shilling.
On our first night the crush was so great that
The Life of Philip Wirth


several women fainted, and one had her arm
broken, but in spite of the great attendance,
the receipts for this or any of the following
nights never amounted to more than £25. Our
show was too large and too expensive to main-
tain for England. Other circus managers told
us that we could dispense with every one but the
members of our own family and still have the best
show in the country. However, we continued
to play in Ohmy’s building until January Bth,
and were entertained royally by the Mayor,
Alderman Shaw, but we were amazed to find that
Australia was so little known on this side of the
world. Mrs. J. J. Wirth, when purchasing some
meat from a butcher one day, commented on
the high price of meat as compared with what
we were accustomed to pay in Australia. The
butcher inquired if she were an Australian, and
she explained that she was a member of the
Australian circus which had arrived in England
four weeks previously. “ My,” said the butcher,
in admiration, “You soon picked up English !”
After leaving Birkenhead we went to Don-
caster, where I caused a terrific sensation by
driving the band wagon through the streets,
drawn by two horses and two zebras. Zebras
had never been seen in this town before, and as I
held the reins in my left hand, held and played
the cornet with my right, steered the four animals
with one foot and used the brake with the other,
you may imagine the commotion this turnout
caused. On our return to the theatre I found
a local grocer named Winterbottom waiting there
to accuse me of cruelty in driving the zebras through
the streets without shoes. I stood up in the
wagon and addressed the crowd, asking them to
inspect the feet of the animals to see if they
had suffered any harm through being driven
unshod. I explained that it was not natural for
The Life of Philip Wirth


these animals to be shod, and as the streets
were covered with snow it was quite impossible
for them to have been injured in any way.
Several of the onlookers examined the ani-
mals and all agreed that they were in perfect
condition. Winterbottom quietly slipped away
into the throng, and the incident became the
talk of the town, providing an excellent adver-
tisement, so that we played to crowded houses at
every performance.
After Doncaster we went to Barrow-in
Furness and Dewsbury, but business did not pay,
so we arranged with Joe Darby, champion jumper
of the world, to tour the provinces with a tented
circus. He was to find the tent, horses and
wagons, receiving 25 per cent, of the gross takings,
while we were to provide the show itself. On
May 24th we were at Durham, and I gave orders
for the erection of every available seat, to the
amazement of our colleague, Darby. He asked
me why I was expecting such a crowd, and I
replied that surely the Queen’s Birthday was a
holiday. He shrieked with laughter and told
me to ask any of those around us if they knew
whose birthday it was. I did so, and
staggered to find that none of the crow r d even
knew the date of their sovereign’s birthday.
We soon found that circus people in England
were not accorded the respect we were accus-
tomed to on our travels in other parts of the
world, but we came to the conclusion that this
was their own fault. The majority of shows
advertised acts which never appeared on their
programmes and resorted to any trick by which
they could fill their tents. English circus people
as a whole are quiet and retiring, not liking to
mix with "outsiders” as they term the public.
They live in a world apart from that of the average,
The Life of Philip Wirth


and even their taste in clothes is usually so
original that one can pick them out by their
appearance. Their life is concerned only with
their work, and all their spare time is spent in
practising, as “ going over big ” is their only
delight. Success comes early with show people,
as an artist is at his prime at 30, whereas in
ordinary business a man rarely gains a splendid
position before 40. Circus life not only makes
the body perfect, but it also broadens the mind,
and in my opinion, these folk are the most
moral I have ever met.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XV.
SOUTHPORT.
Delights of Our English Tour —Under Royal Patron-
age-Extended Season in Southport — Out-
standing Display of Horsemanship—Loss of
Fourteen Horses.
ENGLAND is an ideal country for travelling
circuses, as the roads are splendid and the
towns close together. We used large,
luxuriously equipped living caravans, which
could not possibly be used in Australia, but which
here only required one horse to pull them. Each
contained a kitchen, a living room and a bed-
room. The show leaves its old pitch at about
six in the morning, reaching the next town in
time for the erection of the tents for the per-
formance the same evening. As the procession
of wagons moves along the beautiful country
lanes of Old England, through the open windows
of the caravans come the songs of birds and the
smell of the flowers growing wild in the fields,
all combining to give a feeling of glorious free-
dom and happiness. We had, for a time, the
misfortune to be playing between the circuses
The Life of Philip Wirth


of Lord John Sanger and Claud Genet te, one
being a day or two ahead, and the other a few
days behind. We did very poor business for
a while, as each of our competitors feared we
were heading for Scotland, and raced to get
there before us.
After the conclusion of our provincial tour
we went to Southport, where on May 18th, 1898,
King Edward VII, then Prince of Wales, visited
our show and honoured us with his congratula-
tions on the quality of our performance, saying
that he was particularly impressed by my six
Australian-trained brumbies. The Winter Garden
in Southport was situated in the main street,
and comprised the Grand Opera House, a music
hall, a sports ground, a concert hall and
the circus building. Although Genette's circus
had been playing there immediately before we
arrived, our season continued for 21 months.
After we had been there for a short time George
took half the show and toured the country towns
again, while I stayed at the Winter Garden to
break in new acts. After six weeks he returned,
and almost immediately left for South Africa.
I still remained at Southport and I can safely
say that during this extended season all the
first-rate circus artists in England passed through
my hands. I also arranged with the committee
of the sports ground to let me secure the attrac-
tions for them, and for over a year I drew great
crowds to this portion of the Winter Garden, as
well as to our own show. Barnum & Bailey’s
Three-Ring Circus and Hippodrome gave one
performance in Southport during this period,,
and left the English audience spellbound. There
were as many as six or eight acts going on at the
same time, and although I cannot see how the
show could have paid in England, it drew
enormous crowds.
The Life of Philip Wirth


Southport was also visited by an American
horse tamer who advertised that within 24 hours
he could train the wildest horse obtainable, so
that it would be a fit mount for a child. The
following morning another advertisement ap-
peared in the Southport Guardian to the effect
that Philip Wirth could perform the same feat
within 24 minutes. A huge crowd flocked to
the circus to watch me perform this miracle.
The wild creature was dragged struggling into
the ring, and after some trouble I mounted.
He kicked and reared all over the ring but I
managed to set him galloping and kept him at
it. Within 10 minutes the pace began to tire
him so I pulled him up and let him stand for
a few moments, while I patted and caressed him
—then I drove him hard for another five minutes.
By this time he was quite docile, so I called a
small boy from the audience and with the little
fellow mounted on the animal I led them both
around the arena, to the thunderous cheers of
the crowd. Although this took the popular
fancy it was quite easy to do, but teaching the
animals to sit up, lie down, skip, and so on, is
much more difficult.
Before we left this city I had the terrible
misfortune to lose 14 horses through glanders
and farcy. I called in one of the finest veterin-
ary surgeons from London and he inoculated
all our horses with Professor Malien’s test, to
find which were infected. Those which were still
healthy we removed to Finlay’s Hotel stables,
but the others soon had to be destroyed. Of the
two mustangs I brought from South America,
“ Moncrieff " and “ Gaucho ” —although we fought
to save them both, only the former recovered.
On June 22nd, 1897, we led the procession
which was arranged by the citizens of Southport
The Life of Philip Wirth


to celebrate Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee,
and made a splendid showing. We were very
popular with these people, who found us very
different from the ordinary run of circus people
in that we always carried a schoolmaster for the
education of our children, and our families were
always to be seen at church.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XVI.
AFRICA DURING THE BOER WAR.
Johannesburg in a State of Unrest—Our Neutral
Policy—We Remain on Good Terms with
Both Sides—We Retreat to Beaufort West —
We Leave for Colombo.
WE were playing at Crewe when I received
a cable from George suggesting that we
should join him in South Africa, and so
we sailed on April 16th, 1899, by the “Braemar
Castle/’ On our departure from Southport I
was presented with a beautiful illuminated ad-
dress and a purse of 90 soverigns by Sir George
Pilkington on behalf of the citizens. This address
is still one of my most treasured possessions in my
home, “Yarraman House,” at Coogee. The Com-
pany for our South African tour was a particularly
fine one, including the Howard Bros., with their
baffling second sight act which set all Capetown
agog; Harry Dale, Queen Victoria’s jester, and
two of England’s greatest favourites, lona Genette
and Adele Libra, both of whom were strikingly
pretty. The former was a champion equestrienne
and the latter a superb wire walker. In addition,
we had the Saxon Bros., one of whom, Arthur,
was the strongest man in the world, and held
The Life of Philip Wirth


the record for a slow bar bell lift with 330 pounds.
The second best effort was that of Herr Pagel,
who joined us in Australia after the Saxons left
us, and who managed 300 pounds. After Pagel
concluded his season with us, he went to South
Africa, at my advice, to start a circus of his
own, and I believe he is still the leading circus
man in that country.
After a season in Capetown we went to
Johannesburg where we found that things were
in a most unsettled state. Great preparations
were being made for war by the Boers, and we
received word from a friend in Pretoria that it would
be unsafe for us to visit that town as the Dutch
were openly making plans for driving the British
out of Africa. Many of the English in Johannes-
burg locked and barricaded their homes and fled
to Capetown, leaving all their possessions to the
mercy of the bands of lawless marauders who
did not stop at murder, but forced their way
into these deserted houses, taking whatever they
wished.
While we were still in Johannesburg, Colonel
Baden-Powell asked that he might be allowed
to hold a meeting in our tent. Though, of course,
our sympathies were with those of our own race,
we wished to remain entirely neutral for the
sake of our own safety. I was placed in a very
awkward position, but told the Colonel of an
incident in my youth when my father found me
fighting with another lad. He gave me a sound
thrashing, saying, "You are here to amuse
people, not to fight them.” I said that I wished
to follow my father’s teaching, and so regretted
being unable to give my permission for the use
of the tent. Later, General Cronje, Tjchard
Kruger and Lieutenant Eloff made the same re-
quest, but in each case I made a similar reply.
The Life of Philip Wirth


In Pretoria there was no attempt to hide
the preparations for war, and drilling was done
quite openly in the streets. The Boers, in full
fighting kit, patronised the show nightly, but
President Kruger, with whom we had a personal
interview, when we invited him to be present at
a special performance in his honour, shook his
head sadly, and refused, saying, “ This is no
time for such things.” However, his son, Tjchard
Kruger and Lieutenant Eloff were frequent
patrons, although the latter was most impatient
to get at the British, and was confident that they
could be whipped within 12 months. He tried
to persuade us to remain in Pretoria during the
struggle, as he considered we would be safest
there, but as the town was already swarming
with armed Boers, we made our way straight
to Natal without playing any of the towns on
the way.
We had good houses in Newcastle, Dundee
and Ladysmith, all of which were British towns
and well garrisoned. We were taken around
the camps in each town and the Tommies came
in force to our show each night. Their sole
topic of conversation was of the oncoming
struggle, how soon they would lay Oom Paul
low, and whether they would be able to take
home locks of his whiskers as souvenirs.
In Durban and Pietermaritzburg there was
no sign of war, although the inhabitants were
very apprehensive, especially in the former town,
which lies in a valley. It was feared that if the
Boers took Ladysmith they would be able to
march on Durban and smash it from the moun-
tain tops with their artillery. As things still
remained quiet we went from Natal to East
London and then to Port Elizabeth, where every-
thing was quite normal and trade still flourished.
The Life of Philip Wirth


We played all over the Eastern Province and then
went on to Kimberley, where we saw that at
last the British were preparing for war in earnest.
Then we moved to Mafeking and Bulawayo and
found ourselves in the heart of the conflagration.
We gave three performances in Mafeking and Lady
Sarah Wilson and Colonel (as he was then) Baden-
Powell were both present at our Circus. Lady
Sarah was a splendid horsewoman, and both she
and the Colonel expressed great delight at the
high standard of the performance we presented.
At the end of this short season, Baden-Powell
and his officers -watched us strike our tents in
one of Mafeking’s frequent and blinding sand-
storms. Exactly 55 minutes after the orchestra
played the National Anthem, at the conclusion
of the entertainment, our train steamed out of
the station. The famous soldier was so im-
pressed with this achievement that he said to
his officers, “ There’s an object lesson for you;
it takes you about that time to shave.”
Strangely enough, when Sir Phillip Game visited
Wirth’s Circus in 1931, at the Sydney Glaciarium,
he had with him as aide-de-camp an officer
who had been with Baden-Powell at Mafeking.
This gentleman told me that my policy of amusing
people but not fighting them had saved us from
molestation during the ensuing turmoil.
We reached Bulawayo and were astounded
by its size. It possessed a theatre, a skating
rink, and seven splendid hotels, but the whole
place was usually covered with a coating of red
dust. Several times I was impressed by the
variety of colours shown in the frocks of the
women in the audience, but by the time the show
was over, they were all the same shade —a dirty
red. We were doing splendidly here until we
received wires from Kimberley that the Boers
The Life of Philip Wirth


were surrounding the town and that fighting
was liable to start at any moment. The enemy
had made an advance on the town on the evening
previous, and, although they retreated as soon
as they found they had been seen, this sally had
been enough to upset all the women folk in
residence there. As it was feared we might be
cut off, we made arrangements to leave immedi-
ately for Cape Colony. Baden-Powell met us
at Mafeking and advised us to make all speed,
as actual warfare was about to start.
At Vryburg we were halted by the Boer forces,
and only our friendship with Tj chard Kruger
saved us from having all our horses taken from
us. Our families were overjoyed to see us on
our arrival in Kimberley, and we lost no time
in resuming our journey. Our special was the
last train out of Kimberley, as the Boers barely
waited until we had crossed the Modder River
before they blew up the railway bridge. After
a week of travelling we arrived at Beaufort West
where there had been a most appalling accident.
A train filled with refugees had been taking
water at a place called Three Sisters, when another,
with the driver and fireman both sound asleep,
after 48 hours' continuous driving, crashed into
the back of it at full speed, with shocking results.
We eventually reached Capetown and w r ent on
to Lorenzo Marques, where we waited for a
steamer to take us to Colombo. We chartered
the Donald Currie liner, “ Umonia,” and without
sending an agent ahead or making publicity
arrangements of any kind, set sail for the Orient.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XVII.
CEYLON, INDIA AND BURMAH.
Beauties of the Orient—An Unique Orchestra —
Burmese Pagodas—Strange Bathing Customs.
WE had a calm and uneventful voyage all
the way, but when we were a day out
from Colombo we ran out of food and
water so that we had some arrears of eating to
make up when we landed. We were met on
arrival by a number of Parsees who took the
whole of the first night’s booking at splendid
figures and yet made a profit by re-selling the
tickets at still higher prices. We stayed in Colombo
for two weeks and had Christmas and New
Year there, playing in the Parsee Theatre while
our tent was being repaired. It was here that
I learned that no white man is ever seen doing
any work as this would cause him to lose caste with
the natives.
We were entranced by the beauty of Ceylon
which is as different as possible from Africa.
In Africa both the country and the inhabitants
are huge, everything being built on correspond-
The Life of Philip Wirth


ingly generous lines. For instance, the rickshaws
hold two persons with ease, and are drawn by
a colossal Zulu. In Ceylon, as the boy is quite
a diminutive chap, the vehicles barely hold one.
The whole island is bright with colour, the natives
always wearing the gaudiest clothing, and there
are innumerable pagodas scattered about, all of
them in bright, cheerful colours. Another intrigu-
ing inhabitant of this country is the crow which
is noted here for its thieving propensities. Any-
thing bright and glittering attracts the attention
of the little marauder, and it is unsafe to leave
jewellery lying about if the window of the room
happens to be open. We had an excellent time
while we were here and joined in the celebrations
which ushered in the beginning of the twentieth
century. We were surprised to find, that al-
though Ceylon has been a British possession for
hundreds of years, the white people are still of
the race which originally owned it —the Dutch.
Our next move was to Tuticorin in the South
of India, but we only gave one performance
there and went on to Trichinopoly.
While we were in Kimberley all our musicians
who were Germans, had left us, and we finished
our South African season with a makeshift band
composed of a cornet, piano, mandoline, bass and
drum. After this we depended entirely for our
music on the local talent of the town we were
playing. We had had some very queer orchestras
as a result, but the weirdest combination of all
was the one we had in this Southern Indian
town. It was composed of three Indians who
played on yellow clarionettes. Their entire reper-
toire was composed of “ God Save the Queen "
and a few bars of “ Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-ay/' which
they would repeat over and over again. They
The Life of Philip Wirth


played the National Anthem for the overture,
for the first act the scrap of the then popular
song, then “ God Save,” once more.
We played after this in Madras, which is a
miserably hot place, for two weeks, and then
took ship for Rangoon. We were forced to row
our horses out to the ship one at a time in a small
dinghy, and then hoist them aboard in a sling.
After a two days’ journey we arrived on February
Ist, and here we had to reverse the procedure.
The horses were lowered into a small boat, but
whereas in Madras we were able to walk the
horses straight from the beach into the boat,
here we had to make them jump from the small
craft on to a wet, slippery jetty. It seemed too
much to expect that we could get them all ashore
safely, but apart from a few minor abrasions,
we eventually managed it.
At the time of our visit the Irrawaddy River,
on the banks of which the city is built, was in
flood, and was carrying great quantities of debris
and thousands of snakes out into the Bay of
Bengal. The river is a fast evil-looking stream
with low banks covered with thick tropical
undergrowth, and everywhere are tiny pagodas
with tinkling wind bells. As soon as a Burman
becomes rich he builds one of these pagodas,
believing that he will, as a result, be forgiven any
sin he commits. The greatest pagoda of all
is the Shwi Dagon Pagoda, which from its
position on the top of a hill, dominates the
country for miles around. It is covered with
gold leaf and is studded with precious stones
of every kind. As one ascends the broad stair-
way from the street leading to the pagoda proper,
one passes through a series of bazaars in which
all kinds of flowers, fruit and foods can be
bought. Chief among the last-named are the
The Life of Philip Wirth


betels —a damp, green leaf is smeared with lime
made from burnt shells, powdered cinnamon,
cloves, allspice, a pinch of tobacco and a little
crushed betel nut. The natives chew this con-
coction incessantly, and although it is said to have
a delightful flavour, it stains the lips vermillion
and the teeth black. This, and searching each
other's heads for vermin, seem to be the only
pastimes of the Hindu race.
The Burmese women are, I consider, the
most beautiful and also the most graceful of all
the coloured races. The men and women dress
alike in a piece of silk a yard wide wrapped round
the hips and a white jacket pinned in front ; but
the men wear turbans on their heads, and the
women flowers. There are also, of course, many
Indians whose costume is quite different. The
Indian women are wrapped in gorgeous silks
from head to foot, with scores of brilliant bangles
on WTists and ankles, rings on' the fingers and
through the ears and nose. The weight of the
great nose rings usually drags this organ well
down over the mouth.
Throughout Burma and India I was aston-
ished at the respect which is accorded the tiger.
The animals are rather too plentiful through-
out both countries, but our trained tigers were
always the star turn with the natives, who gazed
at the trainer with awe and respect, and who
gathered in crowds around the bills which de-
picted these turns. I suppose that there are so
many natives killed by these animals that they
fear them and reverence any one who can tame
them, as a superhuman being.
The bathing customs here were strange to
us, as instead of a bath or a shower, there would
be a great jar of water, which one ladled out
The Life of Philip Wirth


over oneself with the aid of a dipper. George
did not know this, and so climbed into the great
jar to soak, then out to lather himself, and then
back again to rinse the soap off. Of course he
spoilt the whole of the water, and the hotel pro-
prietor was most annoyed ; but it was a good
joke for the rest of us.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XVIII.
THROUGH THE ORIENT TO JAVA.
A Flattering but Unsuccessful Imitation—Birds
and Natives both Thieves—Monkey Tricks —
Superb Hotel Service —The Beginning of a
Menagerie.
WHILE we were showing in Rangoon I
received a visit from a big Scotsman
who was a timber merchant exporting
teak and other woods to England and Australia.
He was very taken with my six brumby act
and asked if he might see them at practice. I
arranged with him to come to the circus at 9 the
following morning, and he promised to take me
afterwards to watch his three elephants saw
wood. We arrived at his timber yard at midday
to see two diminutive Hindus perched on the
necks of two great male elephants which were
each carrying a teak log weighing about four
tons. These animals forced their tusks under
the log so that there is room for the trunk to
take a hold, and then they tramped off to the
saw mill. They would lay the log on the moving
pedestal, then push the whole affair along to the
circular saw. As soon as the log was sawn in
two, they would take the pieces away and neatly
add them to the stack. My friend —I learned
The Life gf Philip Wirth


that his name was McDonald —had an elephant
just on 200 years old, and this animal had the
most enormous tusks I have ever seen. The
tusks play a very important part in this work,
and only male animals can be used as the tusks
of the female are unsuitable.
Playing near us there was a native show
known as the Chartre Brothers’ Circus, which
possessed a company of 300 natives. After
seeing my six brumbies in their act, the Chartres
procured six horses and announced that they
would produce a similar act. I was asked to
be present at this show, by some friends, and it
was the most amusing sight I have ever seen.
40 men, with sticks, were stationed around the
ring to keep the horses from jumping out; then
the proprietor appeared with a long whip and
proceeded to flog the startled animals. The
horses became frantic and made a dash for the
back door, knocking over several men in their
flight, disappearing into the darkness of the
streets. The ring-master bowed to the audience,
which was composed mostly of coolies, and they
applauded loudly.
After Rangoon we went to Mandalay where
the natives as well as the birds are incorrigible
thieves. One of the boys tried to get away
with my gold sleeve links and some Kruger
sovereigns, but I managed to recover these. The
heat was terrific, and all one could do during
the hottest part of the day was to sleep, but as
the punkah boy was always missing, and the
mosquitoes were about four times as large as
ours, this was usually impossible.
From Mandalay we went to Penang in
Sumatra, where we bought four orangoutangs—
mother, father, son and daughter. They were of a
The Life of Philip Wirth


marvellous golden shade, and were always playing
some trick or other. At sundown the father
would prepare a bed and spend quite a long time
rushing round, jabbering at the other members
of his family in the attempt to make them retire.
The young male always gave trouble, and we saw
him being chastised by his irate parent as a
result.
Our next stop was Singapore, a splendid
city with superb hotels and marvellous shops.
It is built on an island where everything seems
always green, and the sea is always a delightful
shade of sapphire blue. One sees steamers from
every part of the world, and the population
includes members of every race on the face of
the earth. The climate is trying, and all the
Englishmen look gaunt and worn ; but the white
women here have a marvellous time as there
are 50 white men to every woman. Living in
the East is undoubtedly luxurious as one never
even as much as lights one’s own cigar. At
dinner there is always a coolie with a fan be-
hind each diner to keep away the mosquitoes ;
but as he is unable to keep the insects away
from the feet and ankles of the feminine mem-
bers of the party, each of these is supplied with
a calico bag into which she inserts her pedal
extremities for the duration of the meal. The
first impression I received in Singapore was of
a huge Chinaman in the bank sorting bad money
from good by throwing the coins from one hand
to the other. His skill was nothing short of
miraculous, as he never failed to detect an im-
perfect dollar.
We sailed across from Singapore to Batavia,
and on the trip we first met the Javanese dish,
“ Muckan,” which is composed of rice, cold
The Life of Philip Wirth


chicken, sliced eggs, grilled steak, sausages, Bom-
bay duck, fried bananas, and any other delicacy
to hand, all being saturated with a thick curry,
and eaten with a soup spoon. It looks a horrible
mess, but is delightful to eat, and very nourishing.
Batavia is a delightfully clean town and
its inhabitants are to my mind, the cleanest
people in the world. The city is honeycombed
with canals and at all times of the day the natives
spend all their spare time in swimming. The
main street is over 60 yards wide and also has
a canal lo yards wide and 4 feet deep. These
canals are used both for irrigation and sanitation.
The hotels are delightful, and everyone has
his or her own particular native servant. These
“boys” generally assembled in the hotel yard
after dinner, and although there were probably
a hundred guests in the hotel, one had only to
call, “ Boy !” and one’s own boy would always
come running. They never made a mistake as
long as we were there. Horses and ponies are
loved by everyone, and some of their ponies are
the smallest I have ever seen. I bought 12 of
them and trained them to do a delightful act.
Two of them I named “ Corbett ” and “ Fitz-
simmons,” after the two world-famed boxers,
and taught the little animals to perform a replica
of the famous match, when the New Zealander,
Bob Fitzsimmons, knocked out Corbett, his
opponent, who was then champion of the world.
The two ponies, one of which was black and the
other chestnut, loved the fight, but I always had
trouble parting them after each round as they
would want to keep on fighting.
From Batavia we went to Samarang, where
George, who was suffering from his old complaint,
asthma—left us to go home to Australia. We
The Life of Philip Wirth


then played every town in Paradise (Java), to
the wild enthusiasm of the Dutch audiences, who
packed the tent at every performance, and wished
to encore every act.
The natives are ruled by the Dutch with a
rod of iron. They are expected to salute every
Dutchman they pass, and should they fail to
do so, they are sharply reminded of their duty
by a sharp blow; but no stranger is allowed to
illtreat any of the boys—this is purely a Dutch
privilege.
During our season in Samarang I took the
company to the Wunderboom, in Rickshaws. We
drove for about 10 miles before we came to this
great stretch of water, 20 feet deep, but so clear
that the great fish swimming in the depths couM
be seen quite plainly. Around the shore, the
branches of the tall trees were swarming with
monke}/s, which chattered continually as they
watched our movements. We swam for a
while, and then lunched, and as soon as we com-
menced to eat, many of the female monkeys,
with their young ones, would come near as if to
ask for food. We offered them cakes, and as
they greedily fought for them, we were able to
catch about a dozen of them, as the young ones were
always an attraction with our patrons. We were
about to make our way back to the circus when
a thunderstorm broke, and about two inches
of rain fell in less than an hour. The sun re-
appeared immediately after the storm, but we
feared for our tents. Fortunately, the storm
had been local only, and had not reached the
town, so that our visions of being flooded out
were not realised.
After leaving Samarang we went to Soura-
baya, where we played in a delightful park on
The Life of Philip Wirth


the banks of a river. Here I met a Dutchman
by the name of Herr Von Grosser, who was one of
the greatest sportsmen on the island, and was ex-
tremely wealthy. He had quite a menagerie,
containing a pet elephant, a white faced baboon,
three tiger cubs aged only a month, and several
monkeys. He sold us an elephant about 15
years old, the tiger cubs, and a large cage, for
which we paid him £l2O. In addition, he pre-
sented me with the baboon and some monkeys,
so that with the orang-outangs I had acquired
in Sumatra, we had quite a good, small menagerie.
Knowing that elephants loved the water
as much as hippopotami, I decided to give the
great brute, which we had named “ Gunnesah,”
a swim in the river. She was lumbering about
quite happily, so I thought it quite safe to leave
her for a short time, while I returned to the tents.
To my dismay, when I returned, there was no
sign of her. I rushed up and down the bank
frantically calling her name, which she usually
answered like a dog, but there was no response.
I rushed to tell von Grosser of my loss, but he
shrieked with laughter, and suggested that we
should return to the river. When we arrived
there he pointed to what was apparently a snag
protruding above the surface of the stream,
and again burst out laughing. He picked up
a stick and threw it at the snag, which began
to move about. As it emerged more and more
from the water, it showed itself as the animal's
trunk. He called to her, and she immediately
came out of the river, much to my relief.
She was a most intelligent creature and
understood every word which was said to her.
She proved to be invaluable, as I taught her
to push the four-ton tiger cage and to unload
and load the tent, poles, seats and all our gear.
The Life of Philip Wirth


In addition, she soon showed her worth by the
ease with which she could lift the huge, wet
tent tops on to the wagons. Elephants need
no practice, as they are able to follow any
directions one gives them.
Herr von Grosser had a nephew who ac-
companied us back to Australia to look after
“ Gunnesah.” He travelled with us on our
Australasian tours for about two years, but after
that time he became home-sick and returned
to his uncle’s home in Sourabaya.
The Life of Philip Wirth


CHAPTER XIX.
BACK TO AUSTRALIA.
Making the Menagerie Pay Several Wirth
Customs—A Broken Promise —Some Remarks
on Railways and International Affairs— and
Australian ! — Irrigation — Moree and its
Baths —My Horoscope —An Elephant's
Revenge—Finis.
WE finished our season in Java with a clear
profit of £3,000. We chartered the
steamer " Karrakatta,” from Singapore
to Fremantle for £l,ooo, so that we still had
£2,000 in hand when we landed once more in my
dear old home country. We were overjoyed to
be home again, but when George came aboard,
he was not too pleased at the sight of our menagerie
—he said that it would be no draw whatsover
as the Australian zoos were free on Sundays, and
the admission charge was only threepence on
other days.
However, while in Java, I had conceived
the idea of opening our zoo between the hours
of 4 and 5 in the afternoon with an admission
charge of one guilder for adults and a half guilder
for children, to give them a chance to see the
animals being fed. This feature had proved so
popular that it more than paid for the food of
the animals, so that our menagerie was in no
way a liability. Our bear trainer, Whincherman,
spoke German and Dutch fluently, so that he
The Life of Philip Wirth


was able to lecture on the animals and their
habits. I am the first circus man to introduce
this feature, and schoolmasters in many towns
have expressed their delight in the educational
entertainment it gives the children. They say
the youngsters learn more in the one hour in our
menagerie than they could in two years in
school.
Our idea in leaving Australia was to make
a tour of the world for an advertisement. Be-
fore we left we were the biggest and best show
in the Commonwealth; but now when we returned
with a world-wide reputation, we found that
our own country people had forgotten us. How-
ever, we opened in Perth on August 9th, 1900,
and in Adelaide on September, 29th. We had
an excellent season in the South Australian
capital until October 13th, when we moved on
to Broken Hill. We toured parts of South
Australia and Victoria, opening in Melbourne
on Derby Night, November 3rd ; but we stayed
here only a short time as we wished to proceed
to New Zealand via Launceston and Hobart.
During the many years of our travels through
Australia we have established many customs,
the best known of which is the presentation of
a gold-mounted whip to the jockey of the winner
of the Melbourne Cup. We also instituted the
distribution of Hot Cross Buns and Ginger Beer
to the poor children of Sydney on Good Friday.
Those of you who can recall Wirth's Park
in Melbourne in pre-war days will remember that
in 1916 we gave a great portion of it to the Red
Cross Society for the purpose of erecting a rest
home for the soldiers as they returned. A fine
building was constructed by public subscription,
and although the arrangements were that we
The Life of Philip Wirth


should have the land returned to us at the end
of the war, this was never done.
In 1882 our show had grown too big for the
wagons, so we decided to use the railways for
transport. Through my dear old friend, George
Hudson, of George Hudson & Sons Limited, I
received an introduction to the Chief Secretary,
Mr. McLaughlin, who arranged to give us special
trains complete with six passenger coaches and
the required number of trucks. We were to pay
10/- per mile for the outward journey, and 6/-
for the return. At these figures our transport
expenses were reasonably low, but to our dismay,
after 10 years, the new Railways' Commissioners
increased the charge to 10/- per mile for the whole
journey. After another 10 years it became 16/-,
and then we were forced to increase all our admission
prices by 1/-. We made no secret of the reason
for the increase, and our patrons continued to
give us their support. In 1912, after we had
been using the railways for 30 years, the charge
was made £l per mile, and as we could not
possibly make things pay, we were again forced
to increase our prices, this time to 4/-, 5/-, 6/-
and 8/-. As the country people were all having
good seasons they continued to patronise us
splendidly, until the beginning of the war. Dur-
ing the war period and since the depression began,
we have lost large sums of money, so that we
find our train fares an increasing worry.
As none of the newspapers will publish the
true facts of the case, I am inserting this com-
plaint in my book so that our patrons, at least,
will realise just how unjust is our treatment by
the railways All we need is a guard, engine
driver and fireman, who would, all told, not re-
ceive more than £2O a week ; then the station
master who superintends the shunting of the
The Life of Philip Wirth


passenger cars to a side track while the rest of
the train goes to the loading platform, gives us
some assistance. All the loading and unload-
ing is done by our own men with the elephants,
and we never use any of the stationary equip-
ment belonging to the railways. We even fur-
nish our own carriages, and yet we are charged
these exhorbitant figures. I estimate that the
weekly cost of our special train, including wages
of the crew and guard, coal and wear and tear,
would not amount to more than £SO a week.
As we always cover at least 200 miles in that
time, and often 500, it is easy to see the enormous
profit the railways must make from our show.
It is interesting to compare the rates charged
by the American railway companies with those
we have to pay at home. In the United States
the circus rates are one dollar (4/6) per mile,
and even then a good profit is assured.
My Dear Telegraph —" I would like to bring
to your notice the disgraceful treatment we have
received in Sydney, at Easter, this year. I sent
my Mr. Petersen and Mr. Murphy to secure the
Exhibition Building in Prince Alfred Park, but
it was refused. Then they tried to secure our
old site behind the Exhibition Building, where
we have played for 40 years. There is a certain
sentimental attachment for a show that has
played for so long on the one site, and many people
like to see the show playing where they first saw
it as children. We only require 300 feet of the
park, and the position is ideal, being sheltered
by the bulk of the Exhibition from the wind.
In Moore Park, near the Bandstand, there is a
piece of ground which would suit us perfectly,
and would in no way incommode any of the
players in the various matches which take place
there.
The Life of Philip Wirth


“ In my travels all over the world I have
always been allowed to erect my tents in public
parks, but in Sydney, this year, I was forced to
give my show on a block in Wentworth Avenue
and Goulburn Street, which was so small that
only one tent could be erected and the menagerie
had to be dispensed with. Our attendance for
the six weeks' season usually is in the neighbour-
hood of 30,000 people, but this year our limited
accommodation reduced it to about half that
number.
“ Animals have a universal appeal, and I
know that authorities on education have expressed
delight at the knowledge children derive from
watching the education of trained horses and
ponies. Surely my countrymen will not allow
a national institution such as Wirths' Australian
Circus to be treated in the manner it has been
for the past years. I appeal to you as the best
democratic paper in the Commonwealth to grant
me an interview. I consider the Telegraph the
only newspaper which has the courage of its con-
victions, and I feel sure that you will not ignore
this plea of mine. I also appeal to the new Mel-
bourne newspaper, The Star , to publish my inter-
view and I will be grateful for their kindness."
I pray that the Almighty will so influence
Mr. Roosevelt that he will persuade his people
to release England and France from the debt of
two billion pounds which is owing to the American
people. When I was in the United States in
1924 I was shown over a number of the Govern-
ment buildings. I saw large boxes of gold from
England being stored in new strong rooms which
The Life of Philip Wirth


had been built to accommodate the overflow
of this precious metal from the old vaults which
were full. I hear that America has in her treas-
ury nearly one hundred billions, so surely two
billions would not be missed if this debt were
cancelled. Should Roosevelt manage to do this
he would go down through history as the greatest
man of his day and one of the greatest of all time.
During this visit of mine, Mr. Lloyd George,
who was then Prime Minister of England, arrived
to negotiate for the reduction of the interest on
these debts from 8 per cent, to 5, or less. I was
delighted at his success, and was most impressed
by the size of the crowd which assembled at the
pier to greet him on his arrival.
As far as Australian affairs are concerned,
my opinion is that His Majesty the King should
send to us 50 of the cleverest clergymen in Eng-
land of all denominations—and also his clever and
sporting son, the Prince of Wales, to be
our Prime Minister. I am sure that with the
government in the able hands of these people,
this Southern Paradise of ours would soon be on
its feet again.
I remember reading in the Melbourne Herald an
interview with the then Commonwealth Treasurer,
Mr. Fenton, who said that the only way to re-
store prosperity to Australia was by eliminating
the State Parliaments. He said that each State
cost £10,000,000 yearly to run, or £70,000,000
annually for the whole country. One govern-
ment could do all the work for about £10,000,000,
and there would then be a yearly saving of
£60,000,000.
On the 25th June, 1933, I read with interest
a splendid article in the Sydney Sunday Sun,
The Life of Philip Wirth


written by Adam McKay, and entitled " North
of 26.” I consider that the people of Australia
should form a syndicate with this fine man at
its head to realise his wonderful plan, as I con-
sider it the best money-making proposition I
have yet come in contact with. In this Northern
Country he writes of, there are three deep bays
and inlets, so that the largest vessels could call
there to carry away the fruit, cattle, grain and
other commodities he intends to produce.
When I was travelling in the United States
I met Mr. John Ringling, who owns every circus
in America, and is also a director of the Twentieth
Century Limited, which runs between New York
and Chicago. He is a millionaire several times
over, possessing oil fields, and being generally
well known in the great financial world of the
United States.
He told me of a stretch of land which he
and some of his associates discovered. The
country was undoubtedly fertile, but was hindered
by scarcity of water. Mr. Ringling and seven
other wealthy men formed a syndicate which
promised to build a railway through this portion
of the country if the Government would irrigate
the land by bringing water from the Missouri
River, 90 miles away. All was arranged, and
both canal and railway were built, while good,
steady, married men were settled on the land.
These people were financed at the outset, being
given 10 years to pay off the debt so incurred ;
but the scheme flourished so that the majority
had discharged their liability within half that
time.
If only our Government would introduce a
similar scheme for the men working the land
between Murray Bridge in South Australia and
The Life of Philip Wirth


the Barcoo River! In this territory there are
wheat, rice and fruit growers, and sheep and
cattle men. All of these would benefit by a
similar scheme, and in this great stretch of
country, which is, according to Lord Stonehaven,
3,750 miles across, including portions of South
Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and Queens-
land, there are many great rivers, from the
Murray and Darling to the Barcoo, all of which
could be utilised for supplying the water for
irrigation. In addition to the actual irrigation
channels there would also have to be storm
water canals, so that floods could be permitted
to cover the plains, and by this means eliminate
dangers from fires and droughts.
LEETON.
I consider that the growing of rice in Aus-
tralia will develop into one of its greatest in-
dustries. At Leeton, in addition to the fruit-
growing, there are fine rice crops to be seen.
The rice is sown and grown in soil which is covered
with water for about seven months. At the end
of that period the water is allowed to drain away,
and as soon as the grain is dry, it can be cut
with an ordinary reaper which removes the
actual rice heads, leaving the stalks still stand-
ing. I consider this rice to be the finest in the
world and far superior to that which I have
seen in India and Java. In the East the rice
frequently has weevils and brown spots, but this
Australian rice is without blemish.
The Life of Philip Wtrth


The Leeton canneries employ 300 girls and
100 boys who average £8 a week each during the
season. These youngsters, whose ages range from
18 to 25, are the healthiest specimens to be seen
in Australia. They are the children of Melbourne
and Sydney folk who pioneered the settlement
of the town about 25 years ago. The skill with
which the girls can skin pears, and peel and stone
peaches, is nothing short of miraculous, and I
saw one young lady who made no less than
30/- per day by stoning peaches alone. These
youngsters work for eight hours a day. They
are paid extra for overtime, but otherwise are
paid for the work they do—piece work.
Although irrigation has been brought to
such a degree of perfection in America, nowhere
in that country can be seen a better example
of what can be done by this means than at Leeton,
which has, without doubt, one of the finest
schemes of irrigation I have ever seen. Although
the initial outlay must have been enormous, the
system of canals, which was laid out by Mr.
McCaughey, is most ingenious and effective.
We were very popular with the young cannery
workers, who gave us a great reception when our
train arrived at 7 in the morning, and they
crowded the tent at night. Another great can-
nery town is SHEPPARTON, in Victoria, where
on Saturday nights the streets are thronged with
10,000 workers. I believe that these canneries
are among the largest in the world, and I con-
sider that Shepparton (Victoria), and Leeton and
Moree (New South Wales), are the three most
thriving towns in Eastern Australia. It is worthy
of note that no person is on the dole in these
three towns.
The Life of Philip Wirth


MOREE.
Moree, the great winter resort of New South
Wales, has a population of 7,000, and is noted
for its fine hot bore-water baths. Its climate
is similar to that of the North Island of New
Zealand, and the hot baths have come next in
value to those in Rotorua. The town lies in
rolling plains and splendid pastoral country,
about 413 miles from Sydney. It is
beautifully laid out with wide, well-made streets,
and possesses an excellent reticulated water supply
and is lighted by electricity. The business
centres are in Balo and Herber Streets, while
the Government and professional buildings are
in Frome Street. Large recreation parks are
situated on the town boundaries, and sports of
every nature can be enjoyed.
The Country Women's Association has a
hostel here for the accommodation of visitors,
and I think every lodge in existence is represented
here. There is an excellent Public Library
attached to the School of Arts, and visitors may
become monthly members for a small fee, while
a continuous telephone service keeps one in
touch with the rest of the world.
Too many people have been miraculously
cured by the waters in the Artesian Baths for
me to give here any outstanding examples.
Thousands of visitors flock to Moree between the
months of April and September, as the days
during that period are usually bright and sunny.
The cheery weather, together with a daily visit
to the baths, ensures sparkling health of mind and
body. In addition to the baths, such sports as
excellent fishing, quail, duck and kangaroo shoot-
ing and wild pig hunting, may be enjoyed. Any-
The Life of Philip Wirth


one living within 100 miles of Moree, and wishing
to undergo treatment at the baths, is allowed
concession fares by the Railway Commissioners.
The actual baths are situated in Ann Street,
East Moree, and are served by a splendid bus
service from the business part of the town. There
are three basins —one for ladies, one for men,
and the third for mixed bathing. The water
comes from a depth of 2,792 feet into the basins,
which are built of concrete, and are 50 feet long
and 18 feet wide. There are also cubicles equip-
ped with hot and cold showers and spray massage
pipes, and for those who wish privacy and quiet-
ness, private bath rooms may be had. , The
bath buildings contain lounges, writing rooms,
massage parlours, and refreshment rooms, while
there are innumerable attendants for the assist-
ance of invalids.
The analysis of the water is as follows ~
Chemical Characters.
Chlorine Orchlorides .. .. 6.3
Free and Saline Ammoniac .. 0.046
Organic Ammonia . . . . 0.0004
Nitrogen as Nitrites . . .. 0.000
Nitrogen as Nitrates .. .. 0.001
Oxygen absorbed in 15 minutes 0.050
Oxygen absorbed in 4 hours .. 1.000
Permanent Hardness .. .. None
Poisonous Metallic Contamination None
Analysis. *w.oSo
Sodium Chloride . . 10.25
Sodium Sulphate . . .. 1.16
Sodium Carbonate .. .. 47.55
Magnesium Carbonate .. 0,16
The Life of Philip Wirtii


Calcium Carbonate .. .. 0.75
Iron and Alumina .. . . 0.30
Silica .. .. .. . . 2.60
Organic Matters .. .. Traces
Total solid matter dried at 63.75 parts per 100,000
Physical Characteristics ;—Colour, greenish ;
clearness, slightly turbid ; odour, essential oil;
reaction, alkaline.
This analysis was supplied by the courtesy
of the Board of Health, to whom samples were
submitted by the Council, and it was found by
this means that the water could be taken intern-
ally as well as externally. Many people have
derived great benefits by treating themselves in
this way, and find that the water acts as a mild
laxative.
The Chief Justice of the High Court of
Australia, Sir Francis Gavan Duffy, is a frequent
visitor to Moree, and I had the pleasure of accom-
panying him on a day’s fishing in the Mclntyre
River, where it runs through Mr. Rowley Munro’s
Station, where we caught about 14 eight-pound
trout.
I have made many friends in this delightful
district, and would like to mention some of them.
There are Mr. and Mrs. Nell (pioneers of Moree)
and their family; the Mayor (Mr. Jones) ; the
Town Clerk (Mr. Thompson) ; Messrs. Webb,
Comerford, Wilson, Carrigan, McGroder, Foote,
Sydney Longworth, W. C. Moodie, Brand (ex-
Mayor), Mr. and Mrs. Glenrie, Mr. and Mrs.
Fitzgerald, Mr. and Mrs. Long, Mr. and Mrs.
O’Sullivan (three families), and Professor Ford
(one of the finest masseurs known). In addition,
The Life of Philip Wirth


Mr, Beaston, of the Family Hotel ; Mr. and Mrs.
Langworthy, who have a splendid guest house
next to the baths; Mr. and Mrs. Elliott (our
worthy host and hostess) of the Victoria Hotel,
which is noted for its superb catering; Mr. Daly,
whose grazing property is about 20 miles from
Moree, and has splendid fishing ; Miss Manning,
the Post Mistress; and Miss Moore.
After our seven years’ trip round the world,
we sailed from Java in the S.S. “ Karakatta,”
and made Broome, where we disembarked and
went for a stroll about the town. We found very
little to see, and returned to find the steamer
high and dry, the tide having run out. When
the tide came in, we floated off, and getting up
steam, made for Fremantle, where it was very
pleasant to land and mingle with our own country
folk once more.
We played at Fremantle, then to Perth, rail-
ing then to Kalgoorlie and Albany. In the
latter place we took steamer for Port Augusta,
and then a special train to Adelaide. Leaving
the last-named city, we played all the principal
towns to Melbourne, arriving for the Melbourne
Cup season.
My first contact was with our agent, Mr.
Middleton, from whom I learned that all avail-
able ground had been taken up by an opposition
circus, but on interviewing Mr. Fink, who had
been our landlord many years previously, he
permitted us to occupy the same old site in
Swanston Street, whereon we had played in the
’eighties and in 1890 also, when that wonder
horse, Carbine, won the Melbourne Cup with
10 st. 5 lb. on his back. This marvellous steed
was the only horse that ever won the Cup carry-
ing that enormous weight.
The Life of Philip Wirth


After the Cup Season we went to Tasmania,
and in Hobart I renewed acquaintanceship with
four old friends, viz. :—Mr. J, Curran, Supt.
Pedder, Supt. Cooke and Mr. Quigley (who always
gives me the Prince of Wales’ room to sleep in.
—Good Luck to you, Jim !). These gentlemen
presented me with two photographs of each of
the last of the Tasmanian aborigines.
From Hobart we went to God’s Country,
New Zealand, where it is possible to enjoy one of
the finest summers and the most beautiful sights
in this world—in the North Island.
I should like to meet the Chief Justice of
Australia, Sir Francis Gavan Duffy, in Picton,
New Zealand, to take him on a fishing expedition
for blue cod, which run up to 7 lb. in weight, in
calm water surrounded by beautiful scenery.
The Life of Philip Wirth.


PHILIP WIRTH’S LIFE
THROUGH Horoscope.
WHY HE IS FOND OF ANIMALS.
Incidents in a Complex Character.
THE RULING PLANETS.
The Signs of the Zodiac.
Ariea The Ram T Mars &
Taurus „ Bull d Venus 9
Gemini „ Twins H Mercury S
Cancer ~ Crab Moon J
Leo ~ lion Q Sun ©
Virgo „ Virgin TOP Mercury §
Libra ~ Scales Venus 9
Sagittarius „ Centaur t Jupiter %
Capricornus „ Sea Goat v> Saturn b
Aquarius „ Water-bearer »* Saturn b
Pisces „ Fishes K Jupiter %
Pisces „ Fishes K Neptune W
Scorpie „ Scorpion HI Uranus §
The Life of Philip Wipth


Mr. Philip Wirth was born in Victoria on
June 29th, 1864, at a time when the planetary
configurations were such that they opposed, yet
balanced each other—thus forming an intensely
interesting study.
Towards his children, the opposite sex,
and his beloved animals, Mr. Philip Wirth shows
the generous, tender nature and patient dis-
position of the sign of Cancer (®).
But to his own sex he manifests the tem-
per and thunder of Mars (cf) in Aries ( f), and
where work is concerned, he is Saturn (T?) hard
and stern.
The Life of Philip Wirth


Mars (S') in the first house in his own sign
Aries (T) is fearless, unsubmitting, proud and
combative —opposed to all forms of sentiment,
emotion and weakness.
MARS (o) THE WAR LORD.
Mars (d) is the warrior, and, like the soldier
of old, does not believe in being held back by
the troubles and incompetence of his weaker
brothers. The Martian thus earns for himself
the reputation of being hard-hearted. In this
chart, Saturn (]?) falling in opposition to the
ascendant, is again an indication of hardness.
Possessed of an over-abundance of energy,
Mr. Wirth finds it hard to understand that all
cannot keep pace with himself. When he de-
mands this quality in others he is somewhat
ruthless, or hard-hearted, in seeing that his plans
are carried out.
The Life of Philip Wirth


Aries (T) is the sign of the pioneer, and it
is the strength of this sign in the horoscope
which has made it possible for Mr. Philip Wirth
to become the leader and pioneer of his brothers
in their chosen occupation of the circus.
The Arian demanded action, novelty and
variety, without which he would find it well
nigh impossible to live. The restless energy
of Mars (<?) together with the Moon (*) in the
first house has been the driving power to all
Mr. Wirth’s wanderings.
Mr. Wirth's journeys have not been aimless.
Behind all his actions is the tenactiy, the labour
and perseverance of Taurus (t?), Cancer (®) and
Saturn (T?).
Originality, independence, executive and or-
ganising ability is further shown by Mars (J 1 )
in sextile —60 degrees —to Uranus (§) from the
signs Aries (T) to Gemini (H). The Moon (j)
exalted in the first house shows preferment,
business ability and a strong mentality inclined
to stubbornness. This position on the cusp of
the second house shows wealth by accumulation.
Quick thoughts, quick actions and mathe-
matical ability is shown by Mercury (£) in his
own sign Gemini (jt) in good aspect to the moon
(j). Neptune (w) in Aries (T) in square—
-90 degrees—to the Sun, indicates disappoint-
ments, treachery from others and losses.
We now come to a consideration of the sign
Cancer (0). Within himself and to his inti-
mate friends, Mr. Wirth responds to the influence
of the Sun (©) and Venus (?) in this sign, and
of the Moon (j) in Taurus (tf). These posi-
tions are the very opposite to the Mars (cf)-
The Life of Philip Wirth


Aries (t) influence. Here we find a kind and
loving disposition, a protecting and sympathetic
nature. Cancer (®) is the Zodical Sign of the
Mother, and all born under her influence have
the mothering instinct well developed. How-
ever, so strong is the position of the ascendant,
we find that Mr. Wirth conceals this aspect of
his character, and presents to the external world
the hard coat of mail of the Martian.
The sign Cancer (®) has been called the
“ Paradox of the Zodiac.” It is the sign of in-
finite patience and changeability, one moment
hopeful, the next depressed. One moment
clinging to an idea or scheme with unflagging
tenacity, the next letting it go without apparent
thought or regret. Cancerians have a great
love of home and family—they want to guard
and mother all who are dependent on them.
It is this sign which gives us the key to
Mr. Wirth’s power over the animals. To train
an animal one has to be as a mother to it. The
animals must have confidence in the trainer
as a child in the mother. Animals are taught
in the same manner as the mother teaches her
child to walk, to run, to play, and to imitate
her own actions.
The fifth house of a horoscope describes
our pleasures, speculation and young folk. In
this chart we find that the regal sign Leo (ft)
is the ruler thereof. This is the sign which
describes Mr. Wirth’s children, and indicates
that he has a royal pride in them.
Symbolised by the lion, it may well be said
that Mr. Wirth’s daughters do not lack in
physical stateliness and charm. Those of you
who have seen them in the saw-dust ring, will
The Life of Philip Wirth


agree with me that they possess the grace of
action which characterises the lion-cat.
I must again draw my reader's attention to
the conjunction of the Sun and Venus in the
protective sign of Cancer (®), ruling the fourth
house. It is this position which colours the real
individuality of Mr. Wirth, and shows that he
takes great care of his children, giving them all
a profession to follow, enabling them thus to earn
their own living.
Mr. Wirth is an outstanding example of a
man whose wealth has not been the means of
spoiling his children. Furthermore, this con-
junction of the rulers of the second and fifth
house placed in the third, show gain through
brethren, children, travel and amusements.
Mr. Wirth's environment is further shown
by the sign Cancer (®), and the restless change-
able Cancerian soul finds contentment in the
life of the circus—the life of strange people and
daring situations, of sensation and action.
Since his eighth year, Mr. Wirth has been
travelling, and he will continue to do so. While
the Arian (T) influence is such that he cannot
bear to sit down and be idle—such people
usually die in harness.
As mentioned before, the sign Cancer (®)
rules the home, these people usually have many
homes and are lavish in the spending of money
for the beautifying of them, and Mr. Wirth is
no exception to this characteristic.
J. CHARLTON-SMITH,
Sydney, N.S.W.
The Life of Philip Wirth


AN ELEPHANT’S REVENGE.
WHILST Wirth Bros/ Circus and Menagerie
were travelling by steamer from Sydney
to Brisbane, a practical joker—an en-
gineer on board —thought he would have a
lark with one of the elephants. He got an
orange, and taking out some of the inside, re-
placed it with a lot of cayenne pepper, and
bowled it down amongst them. Toby, the
biggest of the herd, reached out and snapped
it up quickly from all the other trunks that
also reached out hungrily for the tit-bit, and
in her hurry, nearly bolted it whole, but managed
to give it one crunch before swallowing it. The
effect was instantaneous, for, with a terrific
bellow, the poor beast tugged at its leg-chains,
trying to get to the water tank. The other
elephants also became frightened, and the whole
herd started trumpeting for all they were worth.
Their noise startled the wild animals in the
25 different cages. The half-dozen lions roared;
the tigers and other beasts beat the bars of their
cages ; the monkeys chattered ; the dogs barked,
and altogether, it was an awful din. The keepers
rushed from their games of cards in the smoke-
room ; the passengers rushed for their respec-
tive cabins, thinking, no doubt, and not with-
out cause, that the whole of the menagerie had
broken loose, and were fighting among them-
selves. The keepers, however, could make
The Life of Philip Wirth


nothing out of it. What caused the noise was
a mystery, for only a couple knew the facts,
and they were afraid to divulge them for fear
of further trouble. However, the secret be-
came known a couple of weeks later, when the
circus was returning to Sydney per same boat,
though the incident had been forgotten. The
engineer, happening to pass Toby one day,
found out that one at least had not forgotten
the joke, for she picked him up in her trunk
and tried to dash him overboard, and would
have succeeded, had it not been for the riggings,
which saved his life, although he got a severe
shaking. He then told the whole story, and
admitted it served him right.
The Life of Philip Wirth


RETROSPECT
AND now, looking back over the years covered
by this book, I am forced to agree with
my friends when they tell me that mine has
been a full life. By land and water —through
fire and flood —encountering murder, treachery,
sudden death, war and pestilence —the beauty
of strange lands and the people thereof (as well
as the absence of any beauty in some of them)
—the triumphs and sorrows —the laughter and
tears all these things have been my lot.
That they have had their effect on my nature
is to be expected.
The contrasts and comparisons—the lights
and shades of my experiences—have given me a
sense of proportion-—the ability to discard the
non-essentials and to cherish the fundamentals
—they have given me a deep and abiding faith
in the essential kindness and good heartedness
of the general run of humanity —and this, de-
spite frequent contacts with those who have
neither —which marks them for me as exceptions.
I have learned the lesson that all living
things —human and otherwise —respond to Kind-
ness. That the fierce animals of the jungle
will lie down like the lamb if they are treated
with intelligent gentleness and a lack of fear
—and that the threatened dangers of this life
—the frightening clouds of impending catas-
trophies—recede and diminish with a speed that
matches exactly the manner of our facing them
—the audacity and fearlessness of our approach
—and that the terrors we anticipate are largely
imaginary.
The Life of Philip Wirth.


Above all else that I have learned is this
Truth —that this, my native land of Australia
is the fairest land on God's Earth —its women
are the loveliest —its men are the sportiest,
bravest, most broadminded and fairest to be
met with anywhere—its horses are the fleetest —
and its future is the most pregnant with glori-
ous possibilities —nay, certainties—if we but play
the game of nationhood boldly and fairly.
In my book I have in places expressed my
views on many subjects. I have been frank —
and if my thoughts have been helpful to any-
one, so much the better —and if they have
offended where no offence was intended —then so
much the better again.
And if those who have read my book have
been interested —have enjoyed its perusal —then
my task of remembering and arranging these
happenings will have been well worth while.
Who knows ? —but it is more than likely that
if I am more than convinced that the book-has
been appreciated—l may, in the near future,
continue the recounting of my memories from
the period reached in my last chapter until the
present day—another thirty odd years cramful
of incident, excitements and triumphs.
Until I take up the pen again, dear reader,
I wish you,
Adieu !
PHILIP WIRTH,
Governing Director,
Wirth Bros. Ltd.
" Yarraman House,”
Coogee, N.S.W.
The Life of Philip Wirth.


“GREAT OAKS
FROM LITTLE
ACORNS GROW”
MO GREAT ENTERPRISE EVER
sprang into being fully grown.
Whether it he a Circus, a News-
paper, or a Trading Concern, the
early stages of development are
slow.l
The wise outlay of money,
careful attention to detail, and
perseverance, are the three essential
factors that build success.
The same is true of individual
lives. If you would progress, —
begin with the wise use of money;
build for to-morrow as well as for
to-day. Spend less than you earn,
and persevere in the effort to make
to-morrow safe.
Spend wisely and Save]wisely.
And Bank Your Savings with the
State Savings Bank
OF VICTORIA
For 92 Years the People’s Bank
Head Office: 139 -153 Elizabeth Street , Melbourne
213 Branches, 372 Agencies ALEX. COOCH, General Manager


R. J. POULTON
CHEMIST
Established 40 years
119 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE
Poultons Special —
BONJEAN FEMALE PILLS
Core all Female Weaknesses and IrTegtdarities, Safe and Effective
Price, 5/* per box; Extra Special, 10/-
Dr. PARERIA’S VITA TONIC PILLS-
-7/6 bos; 3 for 20/-}
Extra Special Tablets, 33 Days’ Supply, 25/-
POULTON’S ECZEMA OINTMENT-
-2/6 and 5/- tin
Catalogue of Rubber Goods, etc., posted free
Qualified Medical Practitioner in Attendance
SHELL
those of any other first
grade motor spirit.
Jhe reason for this is
simply- Qualify
Shell is tile Quality
Spirit of Australia arid
of the World.
Australia easily exceed


EXHILARATING
IN ITS
FRAGRANCE
Kau lie Cologne, Lavender Water, [
Parfuin Belly Joy
Perfumes Miniatures:
Betty Joy, Boronia. Hyacinth, No.iOO
Violet, Lilac, Lily of the Valley
Kan de Betty Joy, Kan de Mtigucl
CAlso
Kace Powders, Face Creams,
Manicure, and Bath Preparations


i O i-
W
and
MAKE THE
MOST OF
EVERY MEAL
k\\
i,
A
r
e
A
G
rs
1
V
