

'^Vi
v>°\
THE LAW OF GIVING.
(Reprinted from the “Christian Times ” of June 15, 1861 .)
To the Editor of the Christian Times.
Sik, —It has occurred to me that, as a
sequel to the paper on “Systematic Giving
on New Testament Principles,” which I
read at the recent Council of the Congre-
gational Union, and which you published
in your last issue, it would be well to fur-
nish your readers with a few illustrations
from time to time of the practical working
of the system of giving advocated in that
paper.
Allow me, however, to correct one mis-
apprehension which might arise from read-
ing the statement I made in the document
referred to. In unfolding the law of the
tenth , I do not affirm any unalterable rule
for the positive direction of Christians. I
believe firmly in the law of Christian
liberty, and all I plead for is the principle
of regular and systematic giving, merely
looking on the old law of the tenth as a
guide to Christian liberality. I find the
whole principle best exhibited in the fol-
lowing pledge or covenant adopted by one
of the American systematic benevolent
societies ;
PLEDGE OR COVENANT.
Believing that the Scripture system of benevo-
lence requires every one statedly “ to lay by him
in store as God hath prospered him,” I engage,
on every Sabbath, or at other stated periods, to
set apart such a portion of what God shall
give me, as my judgment and conscience shall
dictate; to be sacredly applied to charitable
objects, according to my sense of their respective
claims.
[Signature.]
It would be well for the c.use of truth if
societies could he established in all our
churches and congregations on some such
liberal basis as that afforded by this mutual
covenant, or if a larger association could
be formed still greater anil more permanent
practical results might ensue, for such a
society might from time to lime publish
suitable tracts for general distribution,
bring the matter under the notice of minis-
ters and others who might advocate it, or
prepare and publish model account books
for use among Christians. This has been
done in England, but the books issued
there are hardly suitable for this colony.
But as facts are far better than theories,
and illustrations are as the windows which
let in the light, without which the walls
of argument would be useless, being in-
visible, I add one or two authentic facts
which I have got from an American pub-
lication on this subject.
The biography of eminently pious and
useful men since the Reformation, shows
that great numbers of them have recog-
nised the obligation statedly to devote a
portion of their income to charitable uses.
Lord Chief Justice Hale, Rev. Dr. Ham-
mond, Baxter, Doddridge and others re-
gularly gave a tenth, and Dr. Watts a
fifth.
The Rev. John Wesley when his income
was £3O lived on £2B and gave two, and
when his income rose to £6O and after-
wards to £l2O he still lived on £2B and
gave all the remainder.
Mr. Nathaniel R. Cobb, a merchant connected
with the Baptist church in Boston, in 1821, at
the age of twenty-three, drew up and subscribed
the following covenant, to which he faithfully
adhered till on his deathbed he praised God that
by acting according to it he had given in charity
more than $40,000: —
‘‘ By the grace of God, I will never he worth
more than $50,000.
“ By the grace of God, I will give one-fourth
of the nett profits of my business to charitable
and religious uses.
“ If I am ever worth $20,000, I will give one-
half of my nett profits; and if lam ever worth
$30,000,1 will give three-fourths; and the whole,
after $50,000. So help me God, or give to a
more faithful steward, and set me aside.
“N. R. Cobb.”
This illustration is from mercantile life.
It may seem no very difficult thing for a
man when worth his twenty or forty thou-
sand dollars to give liberally ; but the ob-
jection is often made that this system is
inapplicable to the poor, or the labouring
classes. The truly poor are among the
objects for our charity, but who are the
poor i Who are those who are so low in
the scale of position that they are to be
denied the blessedness of giving rather
than receiving ? Let this next fact speak
for itself;—
A shoemaker being asked how he contrived to
give so much, replied, that it was easily done by
obeying St. Paul’s precept in I. Cor. xvi. 2: —
“ Upon the first day of the week let every one
of you lay by him in store, as God hath pros-
pered him.” “ I earn,” said he, “ one day with
another, about a dollar a day, and I can without
inconvenience to myself or family lay by five
cents of this sum for charitable purposes; the
amount is thirty cents a week. My wife takes
in sewing and washing, and earns something like
two dollars a week, and she lays by ten cents of
that. My children each of them earn a shilling
or two, and are glad to contribute their penny ;
so that altogether we lay hy us in store fort}'
cents a week. And if we have been unusually
prospered, we contribute something more. The
weekly amount is deposited every Sunday morn-
ing in a box kept for that purpose, and reserved
for future use. Thus, by these small earnings,
we have learned, that it is more blessed to give
than to receive. The yearly amount saved in
this way is about twenty-five dollars; and I dis-
tribute this among the various benevolent societies,
‘ according to the best of my judgment.”
Again, an objection is made that those
of small stated incomes find it very diffi-
cult to carry out this principle. • Clergy-
men are not generally very wealthy, and
perhaps this illustration may serve the
additional purpose of showing how minis-
ters should not, because they “ live hy the
Gospel,” think themselves exempted from
tnis duty :
A clergyman every Sabbath evening sets apart
a portion for his charity-fund. If at any time
he has not the money, he credits the sum on a
benevolent account. As calls are presented, he
draws from this fund ; and if an urgent call at
any time requires more than he has thus set
apart, he charges the balance on his benevolent
account, to be replaced from future incomes.
Thus his contributions are identified with his
own enjoyment of religion and growth in grace ;
he gives “not grudgingly,” but of “a willing
mindapplications for charity are met with
pleasure ; and he feels that in all he receives and
expends, he is acting as a steward of God. He
has also secured the adoption of the system by
his congregation with very encouraging success.
Many practical objections are made to
this scheme : one says he cannot balance
his accounts except annually; another says
he cannot tell his income except by taking
an average of years; another that he must
fir.-t accumulate wealth, and then begin to
give; another objects that he is living on
the daily results of his labour, and he
should not he putonthesame platform as he
who has the same income coming in as
interest on capital, or rents of Louses.
But where there is a will there is a way,
and he who recognises the divinity of the
principle will soon adjust his practice to
Ids convictions. The following illustra-
tion is pertinent to all these objections ;
A merchant, in answer to inquiries, refers
back to a period, when, he says, “In conse-
crating my life anew to God, aware of the en-
snaring influence of riches and the necessity of
deciding on a plan of charity before wealth
should bias my judgment, I adopted the follow-
ing system.
“I decided to balance my accounts, as nearly
as I could, every month; and reserving such
portion of profits as might appear adequate to
cover probable losses, to lay aside, by entry on
a benevolent account, one-tenth of the remaining
profits, great or small, as a fund for benevolent
expenditure, supporting myself and family on
the remaining nine-tenths. I further determined
that if at any time my net profits, that is,
profits from which clerk-hire and store expenses
had been deducted, should exceed $5OO in a month,
I would give 12| per cent. ; if over $7OO, 15 per
cent. ;if over $9OO, 174 P er cent - 5 over
$l,lOO, 20 per cent. ; if over $1,300, 224 per
cent. ; thus increasing the proportion of the
whole, as God should prosper me, until, at $1,500,
1 should give 25 per cent., or $375 a month. As
capital was of the utmost importance to my
success in business, I decided not to increase the
foregoing scale until I had acquired a certain
capital, after which I would give one-quarter of
all nett profits, great or small; and on the acqui-
sition of another certain amount of capital, I
decided to give half, and on acquiring what I
determined would be a full sufficiency of capital,
then to give the whole of my nett profits.
“ It is now several years since I adopted this
plan, and under it I have acquired a handsome
capital, and have prospered beyond my most
sanguine expectations. Although constantly
giving, I have never yet touched the bottom of
my fund, and have repeatedly been surprised to
find what large drafts it would bear. True,
during some months I have encountered a
salutary trial of faith, when this rule has led me
to lay by the tenth while the remainder proved
inadequate to my support ; but the tide has soon
turned, and with gratitude I have recognised a
heavenly hand more than making good all past
deficiencies.
“ This system has been of great advantage to
me, enabling me to feel that my life is directly
employed for God. It has afforded me happiness
in enabling me to portion out the Lord’s money,
and has enlisted my mind more in the progress
of Christ’s cause. Happy privilege, which the
humblest may enjoy, of thus associating the
common labours of life with the grateful service
of the Saviour, and of making that which natu-
rally leads the heart from God subserve the
highest spiritual good.
“ 'This system has saved me from commercial
dangers, by leading me to simplify business and
avoid extensive credits. It has made me a bet-
ter merchant; for the monthly pecuniary obser-
vations which I have been wont to take, though
often quite laborious, have brought me to a
better knowledge of the state of my affairs, and
led me to be more cautious and prudent than I
otherwise should have been. I believe this
system tends to enlarge the Christian’s views,
increase his disinterestedness, and lead him to
shun the tricks of trade. My own observation
also confirms the belief, that even warm hearted
Christians must determine beforehand on the
system they will,adopt, if they would secure the
benefits of the Gospel plan to themselves, under
the grace and providence of God, or its happy
results to the cause of Christ.”
Hoping that the publication of these
facts may be of some use in opening the
benevolent sympathies of the Churches,
I am, yours faithfully,
WM. ROBY FLETCHER.
Congregational Parsonage, Sandhurst,
sth June, 1861.
W.m. Goouuugh it Co., I’rinters, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.


'
.
-
■ ,
-
*
- - 4 i ' 2
‘ >
* •
'■ • •
• ■,
'
*
'
»
. . .
* '
u
v.
•:
■?
v I
. < . -
\
■ f
,
--
»
.• *
IH■ ' ’
"Udd * '•‘T-ypy • . -■
