

THE BOMBARDMENT OF ALEXANDRIA
FROM SKK h'H F'-- BY •R RT oPIHHM VfUi-l PHY P. V( IL'I. H R
The Graphic Extra Number 1
.Reffi at General Post Office as a Newspaper J
WITH EXTRA f PRICE SIXP
supplement I Or by Post Sixpenct my
Kt)XS!,\V, JIM V 24, 1882
“Beacon"
" Bittern”
" Condor "
H.M. GUNBOATS “CONDOR,” “BEACON.” AND “BITTERN” COVERING THE LANDING PARTY AT FORT MEN
COVERING THE LANDING PARTY AT FORT MEX—THE FORECASTLE OF H.M. GUNBOAT “CONDOR"


The Bombardment of Alexandria
Ancient Alexandria
ALEXANDRIA'S BIRTH
When Alexander the Great, after the capture of Gaza, bent his
march towards Egypt he was received with no opposition in the
ancient land of the Pharaohs. The Egyptians hated the Persians,
who had trampled on their national rites and customs, whereas the
policy of the Macedonian conqueror xvas to treat respectfully the
shrines and gods of the lands which he subdued. Partly impelled
by curiosity, and partly to pay respect to one of the most celebrated
shrines of the day, Alexander journeyed to the Oasis of Ammon, in
the Libyan desert, and visited there the oracle of Jupiter Ammon.
We may take it that the conqueror xx’as not displeased when the
subservient oracle declared him to be the son of great Jove
himself. His mother Olympias, indeed, used laughingly to
profess to dread the possible embroilments with Jupiter’s
wife xvhich might result from her son’s proclamations issued
in the name of “King Alexander, son of Jupiter Ammon.”
There xvas, hoxvever, no great man of antiquity whose birth was
not attended by some miraculous portent, and as Arrianus
quaintly observes: “I cannot condemn him for endeavouring to draw
his subjects into the belief of his divine origin, nor can I be induced
to think it any very great crime, for it is very reasonable to imagine
that he intended no more by it than merely to procure the greater
authority among his soldiers.” Whatevermay have been Alexander’s
private opinion, there is no doubt that the utterance of the famous
oracle was by no means unwelcome. It harmonised xvell with the
dreams of a universal Greek dominion xvhich then possessed him,
for on descending the Nile, and navigating the western branch
of the Delta, he had reached a spot xvhich seemed admirably suited
for the foundation of a great city.
ITS SITE
The spot at which Alexander arrived xvas some twelve miles
xvest of the Canopic branch of the Nile. The coast xvas flat, and
took the form of a large bay xvith two jutting promontories.
Between these lay a long low island, which formed a perfect natural
protection for the hay. Inland was an extensive lake. Upon the
shore stood the small Egyptian town of Racotis. The advantages
of such a situation xvere seen at once by the trained eye of
Alexander. It xvas the ideal centre for the universal Greek empire,
and was already celebrated in the x-erse of Homer. Foreign sailors,
particularly Greeks, used to take refuge there in bad weather, and
the spot was used, 100, for getting supplies of fresh water. Homer
had written of it in lines done into stately English by Chapman
A certain island call’d
Pharos, that with the hich-waved sea is wall’d,
Just against Egypt ....
And this island bears a port most portly, where sea passengers
Put tn still for fresh water.
And tradition pointed to the island as the home of Proteus, the
son of Oceanus, who possessed such a marvellous power of exuding
importunate questioners. Jealous of the use made of this convenient
harbour by foreign sailors, the Egyptian Kings established there the
small garrison of Racotis. There was no finer site in Egypt than this
for the establishment of the great city which was to unite the East
and West. On the eastern Egyptian coast lay the ancient ports of
Pelusium and Tanis; but it had not escaped the notice of Alexander’s
watchful engineers that the xvash of the Mediterranean on that
coast sets from west to east, and that the quantities of alluvial soil
brought down by the Nile were gradually blocking the ports of
ancient fame—Pelusium, Ascalon, Tyre, and Sidon. Alexander
conceived that the new city would be the centre, not only of the
commerce, but of the intellect of the world ; and he flattered him-
self with visions of the xvarm breath of Hellenic culture kindling
into fresher life the still and drear existence of Egypt.
ITS FOUNDATION
Never had human plans a grander result than had those of
Alexander for the city which was to be named after himself, and
never was there an abler lieutenant to carry out a great design than
Dinocrates, the restorer of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, and the
author of the design for carving Mount Athos into an image of his
royal master. The encouragement of the Invisible Powers seemed
to follow the Macedonian King from the Oasis of Ammon to the
sandy shore of the Mediterranean. It is said that an. aged man
appeared to Alexander in a dream, and repeated to him the already-
quoted lines of Homer, The city xvas planned and laid out by
Dinocrates in the form of a Macedonian mantle, “ xvith a circular
border full of plaits, and projecting into corners on the right and left;
the fifth part of its site being even then dedicated to the palace.” For
xvant of chalk, flour xvas used to mark the boundaries of the new city.
“While Alexander was pleasing himself xvith this project,” says
an ancient xvriter, “ an infinite number of birds of several kinds,
rising suddenly like a black cloud out of the river and the lake,
devoured all the flour that had been used in marking out the lines;
at which omen he was much troubled, till the augurs encouraged
him to proceed, by observing that it was a sign that the city he was
about to build would enjoy such abundance of all things that it
would contribute to the nourishment of many nations.” Under
these favourable auspices xvas founded the city xvhich xvas long to
rank as the capital of the world. Dinocrales built broad streets,
the two principal ones intersecting each other at right angles, and
adorned the town with temples, palaces, and gardens. Merchants,
traders, Jews, and men of letters soon flocked to the new city,
which had a climate of unusual salubrity owing to its peninsular
position and its cool sea breezes,
ITS RISE
Unsated by conquest, and cut off while planning great enter-
prises, Alexander died at Babylon B.C. 323. Ptolemy Soter
succeeded him as governor of Egypt. He chose Alexandria as his
capital, and under his benignant rule the city grew yearly in
importance and power. Its population was divided into three
distinct classes:—Macedonians; the Mercenaries who had served
under Alexander ; and the native Egyptians. Just as no modern
capital of wealth seems complete without its population of Jewish
inhabitants, so it was in the ancient cities. Both Alexander and
his successors, the Ptolemies, took particular pains to induce the
Jews to settle in Alexandria. Alexander himself brought Jews from
Palestine, and Ptolemy Soter brought 100,000 more. Phila-
delphus redeemed from slavery 198,000, and all these were
admitted to the same privileges as the first division of the
population, the Macedonians themselves. Their religion was
respected, and in consequence of their favourable treatment
numbers of Jews flocked to the city, of the population of whiih
in future they always formed one of the most important elements.
Under Ptolemy Soter and Ptolemy Philadelphus Alexandria became
the most beautiful city in the world.
At the intersection of the two main streets stood the Mausoleum of
Alexander, whose body had been brought from Babylon with the
utmost pomp. Years afterwards the sarcophagus was opened, and
the first of the Caesars gazed upon the features of the illustrious
conqueror of the Old World, Connecting the outlying island with
the mainland was a massive mole, called the Heptastadium, which
thus divided the harbour into two parts ; and because the entrance
was beset by shoals and sandbanks, a lighthouse called the Pharos
was set at the extremity of the island. The structure was reckoned
one of the Wonders of the World. Trade was wonderfully stimu-
lated. It was the object of Ptolemy Soter to draw to Alexandria
• all the trade of the East, which up till now had been monopolised
by Tyre. He built two cities, Berenice and Arsinoe, on the Red
Sea, whither were brought all the products of the south and east.
Thence the goods were carried on camels to Coptus on the Nile,
xvhere they were again shipped for Alexandria, whence they were
distributed to all the nations of the West, in exchange for mer-
chandise exported to the East.
THE MUSEUM
Titus xvas fulfilled the first part of Alexander’s mighty dream.
Alexandria was the central mart of the xvorld, the Queen of the
East, the wealthiest city of the world. But its material power would
never have given it the abiding place it has in the world’s history,
had it not been the centre of an intellectual movement, the influences
flowing from which can never die away, and which are at this
moment moulding to a great extent the destinies of the nineteenth
century. The Museum was the intellectual centre of Alexandria.
It stood in the Bruchion or aristocratic quarter, and contained within
its circuit large courts with arbours and fountains, spacious apart-
ments for residence and study, and ample colonnades for walking and
conversation. This magnificent building'was begun by Ptolemy
Soter, and was finished by his son, Ptolemy Philadelphus. It was,
in fact, a large university. No fewer than 14,000 students were at
one time said to be in attendance there. It xvas divided into four
distinct departments, those of medicine, literature, mathematics,
and astronomy, and to facilitate studies of particular sciences,
zoological and botanical gardens were maintained. Many of the
leading men of learning lived in ■ the Museum, where they used to
dine together, the King himself sometimes sharing their repast.
They reclined at tables placed according to their respective schools,
the Aristotelian with the Aristotelian, the Platonist with the
Platonist. The library xvas one of the most important features of
the Museum. A body of transcribers was maintained especially to
add to its treasures. Every book of importance which was brought
into the country was taken from its owner, transcribed, and the
transcript banded back, the original behig kept in the library.
Ultimately this noble collection numbered 400,000 volumes, and a
daughter library was established, and placed in the Temple of
Serapis. The smaller library comprised at length 300,000 volumes.
Sometimes original works and translations were undertaken by the
authorities of the Museum, the most notable cases being those of
the Septuagint translation of the Bible, made under Ptolemy Soter
or Ptolemy Philadelphus, and Manetho’s “History of Egypt,”
undertaken by the command of Philadelphus.
ALEXANDRIAN PHILOSOPHY
As xvas to be expected from the friendship existing between
Alexander, Ptolemy, and Aristotle, the philosophy of the Stagyrite
xvas the basis of the scientific school of Alexandria. The Museum
was the cradle of physical science; for there science xvas studied by
that method of induction by which all its lasting achievements have
been gained. Experiment xvas largely resorted to, and though
there had been science in Chaldea and India before the foundation
of the Museum at Alexandria, it is to the planned and consistent
methods of study laid down by the Museum that physical science
really owes its origin. And probably never before or since in the
xvotld’s history was there collected together such an illustrious
cluster of men as those . who made the name of the Alexandrian
Museum in its palmy days. Demetrius Phalereus, the fellow-pupil
of Menander, xvhen driven from Athens, took refuge at Alexandria,
where he became the chief of the Museum. The connection of the
one name of Euclid with that of Alexandria would suffice to render
the city illustrious, but there xvere many more names of note
Eratosthenes xvas at one time the librarian, and he may be regarded
as the father of astronomy and geography ; Apollonius xvas a
geometer hardly second to Euclid himself; Archimedes was the
greatest engineer of antiquity; Ptolemy was an astronomer who
deserves to rank with Hipparchus and Newton ; and Ctesibius
invented the fire-engine. Zeno was the source whence the Museum
drexv its ethical inspiration.
SOCIAL LIFE
IT had been the policy of Alexander to tolerate all forms of
religion in the countries he conquered, and his leniency xvas continued
by the Ptolemies in Egypt. The xvorship of Serapis flourished
side by side with the Greek philosophy, and the Serapcum ultimately
became the rallying-point of the old as against the new or Christian
ideas.. The Ptolemies restored the old sanctuaries and built nevi
ones. In Denderah, Edfoo, Esneh, and Philse they emulated some
of the most striking edifices of the old Pharaohs. Theocritus has left a
lively picture "of the adventures of two xvives of citizens of
Alexandria on the day of the festival of Adonis. In his account
we can see the life of ancient Alexandria reflected faithfully and
minutely. The ladies, hindered by a lazy tiring maid, at length
completed their toilettes. Not without trouble from the crowds in
the streets, they started for the Soma, avoiding the broad and level
Royal Road from the palace to the upper streets (the road which
furnished Euclid xvith his saying “there is no Royal Road to learn-
ing”), they reached at last the palace, where they xvere permitted
to see the statue of Adonis, and to hear the festal song before they
hastened back to prepare their husbands’ food. The feast 0 1
Dionysius xvas, however the greatest flte of the Alexandrians, and
incredible were the sums of money spent on these occasions by lavish
monarchs for the delectation of their subjects. Under Soter coinage
was introduced, arid trade much augmented, while his wives Thais
and Berenice “set the fashions” for the Alexandrian ladies, and
taught them how to wear their dresses gracefully. So flowed on
the easy brilliant life of Alexandria under the Ptolemies. It
combined the Greek love of beauty with the Oriental love of
splendour. It was full, rich, and harmonious. The scepticism of
the philosophers was accompanied in most cases by the most rigid
morality; the superstition of the masses was too often stained by
the lower forms of sensualism. The description of the people given
by Trebellius Pollio, and quoted by Gibbon, answers as xvell for the
time of the Ptolemies as that of the Romans. In reading it one is
reminded of the fractious mobs of the Verona of alater time. Among
people so sudden and quick in quarrel as these, the biting of
a thumb would probably have led to quite as serious consequences
as did that unfortunate remark about the shoes which is recorded
by the historian : —“ Frequently, on account of an omission of
civilities, the refusal of a place of honour at a bath, the sequestra-
tion of a ballad or a cabbage, a slave’s shoes, or other objects of
like importance, they have shoxvn such dangerous symptoms of
sedition as to require the intervention of an armed force. So
general indeed xvas this disposition, that when the slave of the
Governor of Alexandria happened to be beaten by a soldier for
telling him that his shoes xvere better than the soldier’s, a multitude
immediately collected before the house of zEmilianus, the com-
manding officer, armed with every seditious weapon, and using
furious threats. He was xvounded by stones, and javelins and
swords xvere thrown at and pointed at him.”
THE FALL OF THE PTOLEMIES
Under Ptolemy Euergctes I. the palmy days of Egypt continued.
All the best intellect of the day thronged his Court. But under the
rule of the indolent and cruel Ptolemy Philopator theruinof the dynasty
began. Under Ptolemy Epiphanes matters became worse. Internal
dissensions rent the country. Antiochus the Great attacked it from
without. The guardians of the King initiated the downfall of the
Ptolemies when they besought the protection of the Roman Senate.
From that moment Egypt became in fact, though not in name, a
province of the Roman Empire. Under Philometor Egypt regained
something of its former grandeur, and his reign is of note for the
secession of the Alexandrian Jews from the Temple of Jerusalem,
and the foundation by them of anew temple at Heliopolis. A revolt
of the always excitable Alexandrians in favour of Cleopatra, the
sister and divorced wife of Ptolemy Euergetes 11., was the most
noteworthy event in the reign of that monarch, from xvhich to that of
Cleopatra there is nothing to be recorded save a series of family
feuds usually ending in murder or rebellion. Of the battles of
Pharsalia and Actinm, and the capture of Alexandria by
Octavianus, nothing need be said here. With the suicide of
Cleopatra the Ptolemaic dynasty came to an end, and Egypt became
from that time a Roman province governed by prefects.
ALEXANDRIA UNDER THE ROMANS
Under Roman rule neither the trade nor the importance o(
Alexandria shoxved any visible destine. It continued rich, and xvas
well governed, and we find from the account of Strabo, who visited
the city in B.C. 24, that it had lost none of the features which had
tendered it so remarkable under the Ptolemies. “ The whole,” he
says, “is intersected xvith spacious streets, through which horses
and chariots pass freely; but two are of greater breadth than the
rest, being upwards of a plethrum wide, and these intersect each
other at right angles. Its temples, grand public buildings, and
palaces occupy a fourth or a third of the whole extent; for every
successive king, aspiring to the honour of embellishing these con-
secrated monuments, added something of his own to what already
existed,”


LATER TIMES
There is not space here to follow in detail the fortunes of
Alexandria, and we must pass rapidly over many important events.
The Alexandrian Age may aptly be divided into two epochs, the
first under the Ptolemies dating from B.c. 323 to B.c. 30; the
second from D.c. 30 to A.D. 640; 1. e. , from the fall of the Ptolemaic
dynasty with Cleopatra to the irruption of the Arabs. Under
Caligula the persecution of the Alexandrian Jews, who formed a
large and influential part of the population, the pleading of
their cause by Philo, and Josephus’ reply to the attack
of Apion upon the Jews and their religion, were the
most stirring incidents; but about this time occurred an
event which was destined to deeply influence the whole future of
Alexandrian history, and that event was the introduction of
Christianity. Tradition affirms that St. Mark himself introduced
Christianity into Alexandria, and points to the site of the “ Mosque
of 1001 Columns,” near what is now the Gabari Gate, as
the spot where the Church of St. Mark once stood, where
the Evangelist himself lived, and where also he was put to
death. It is certain that the Christians regarded the building
with the utmost reverence, but their efforts were unavailing
to induce the Moslems to spare it. It was destro3'cd by the
latter when the Crusaders were besieging Damictla. Whatever
may have been the actual date and means of the introduction of the
new religion, it is certain that its influence soon began to make
itself slowly felt, and added one more to the conflicting currents of
thought, the struggle between which, later on, shook Alexandria to
its centre. The foundation of the school of Neo-Platonists by
Ammonius Saccas and Plotinus was the most important event in
the later intellectual life of Alexandria. They may be said to have
united the religious notions of the East with Greek dialectics, and
they represent about the last struggle of ancient civilisation with
Christianity. The torch of Neo-Platonism was handed from
Plotinus to Porphyry, and from Porphyry to lamblichus, with
whom the system may be said to have been first degraded. Its
influence is to be traced long afterwards in Paracelsus, and our own
100 little known Richard Fludd. The temptation is strong to
linger over the other celebrated names in Alexandrian history ; but
considerations of space warn us to deal briefly with the Arian
controversy, and the decision of the Council of Nicea in favour
of the Homoousians; and with the struggle between Athanasius
and George of Cappadocia. George is more familiar to us
English than any other Alexandrian, through his doubtless
fanciful effigy upon the reverse of our sovereigns. Whether
he was a “parasite,” “rogue and informer,” and “pre-
cious knave ” as Mr, Emerson says in the “ English Traits ”
(harsh words, the fairness of which Mr. Ruskin, if we
recollect rightly, disputed in a number of “Fors Clavigera,”) we
cannot now stay to debate. It is enough for us to know that St.
George of Cappadocia, afterwards Bishop of Alexandria, was
lynched by the turbulent Alexandrian mob, and that he “became,
in good time, St. George of England, patron of chivalry, emblem
of victory and civility, and the pride of the best blood of the
modern world.'’ The storming and destruction of the Serapeum
by the Christians marked the final downfall of the old Egyptian
religion, though the other clement of its former intellectual life
survived in the persons of Thcon and his beautiful daughter. How
Cyril’s fanatical and bloodthirsty monks stamped out the last
remnant of Greek culture when they destroyed Hypatia is to be
read in Chailes Kingsley’s glowing romance. Much of the history
of these times turns on the struggle for supremacy carried on
between the three great metropolitan cities of Rome, Alexandria,
and Constantinople, and the contests between rival religious
factions were the chief events in Alexandria until a new power
appeared upon the scene, and swept away all factions in the ruin
'i hich overtook the common religion.
Decline and Renaseence
While the Christian Church in the East had been split up
into factions, Arians, Carpocratians, Ncstorians, Valcnllnians,
Gnostics, Marcionites, Marionitcs and others, incessantly quarrelling
with one another, the Mohammedan power had been rapidly
spreading, and Amru, a general who had been very successful in the
Syrian Wars, commenced the conquest of Egypt. Memphis fell,
ami Alexandria was invested. Having the command of the sea,
Heraclins was able to succour the town, but after a siege of fourteen
months it fell into the hands of Amru. Writing to the Caliph,
Omar, to announce the victory, Amru said that he had found in the
city, “ four thousand palaces, four thousand baths, four hundred
theatres, twelve thousand shops for the sale of vegetable food, and
forty thousand tributary Jews.” Thus fell Alexandria, as Jerusalem
had fallen, and the two most important Christian cities of the East
were in the hands of the infidel. With the fall of Alexandria
disappeared the last remnant of the library of the Serapeum. That
of the Museum had been destroyed by Julius Caesar. When, at the
instance of his friend, John Philopomcs, a Greek grammarian,
Amru attempted to save the books, Omar replied : “If the hooks
agree with the Koran, the Word of God, they are useless and need
not be preserved ; if they disagree with it they are pernicious. Let
them he destroyed.” And Gibbon adds, with one of his solemn
sneers, “If the ponderous mass of Arian and Monophysite
controversy were indeed consumed in the public baths, the
philosopher may allow, with a smile, that it was ultimately devoted
to the benefit of mankind.” It is but fair to say that the whole
story of Omar’s vandalism is denied by the Arab historians. In
another half century, however, the Saracenic power was found
decisively on the side of science and philosophy. There was a
sympathy which was not unnatural between the believers in the
Koran and the monotheistic Jews and Nestorians whom they
found in Egypt, and a time followed during which there was
a well-marked revival of science. But of Alexandria itself under
the Caliphs little need be said. Amru had dismantled its
fortifications, and dynasty succeeded dynasty while the town
gradually lost its trade, and declined in importance. Under
the Memlooks the gradual decay of its ancient glory was in
no way checked, and when Selim defeated Toman, brought the
Memlook dynasty to an end, and formed Egypt into a Turkish
pashalik, its ruin was complete. For two hundred and fifty years
Egypt has no history worth recording. The Turkish pashas
governing it soon became subordinate to the Memlook Beys, for the
Memlook aristocracy had been left intact by Selim when he destroyed
the monarchy. Ali Bey succeeded in throwing off the Turkish yoke,
and his successors, Murad Bey and Ibrahim Bey, shared the chief
power when, on July Ist, 1798, Napoleon landed at Alexandria,
with dreams of founding an empire in the East.
THE RENASCENCE
«
With the landing of Napoleon begins the modern history of
Egypt and of Alexandria. It is the boast of the French that, in the
words of M. Barthelmy St. Hilaire, “our expedition, half scientific,
half military, resuscitated Egypt.” Napoleon announced that he came
as the friend of the Sultan to rescue Egypt from the tyranny of the
Memlooks. The latter were routed at the Battle of the Pyramids,
and Napoleon was reorganising Egypt at Cairo, when news came of
the destruction of the French Fleet by Nelson at the Battle of the
Nile. Having carried out his expedition to Syria, Napoleon quilted
Egypt, leaving Kleber in command, and hurried to Paris fur the coup
d'Jlat of the iSth Brumaire. Then came Kleber’s Convention for the
evacuation of Egypt, his subsequent defeat of the Turks, his assassina-
tion, and the victory of the English under Sir Ralph Abercrotnby,
by which the French were finally driven out of Egypt. During the
operations before Alexandria the English cut off the water-supply of
the besieged by letting in the sea to Lake Mareotis, and thus
converted what was once a fertile plain, with only a fresh-water lake
in its centre, into the baneful salt-marsh which is the worst
drawback to the climate of modern Alexandria.
ME HEMET AL{
On the retirement of the French from Egypt, the country again
fell a prey to the Memlooks and anarchy, till there appeared upon
the scene one whose name is indeed stained with some deeds of
treachery and blood, but who was undoubtedly one of the greatest
men the East has produced in modern times. This was Mehemet Ali,
who was born at Cavalla, in Roumelia, in 1769, the same year in
which Napoleonand Wellington first saw thelight. Beingleft an orphan
when quite young, he was adopted by an officer of Janissaries, com-
manding at Pravusta, and at the age of fourteen he distinguished him-
self by bringing to submission the population of a village which had
refused to pay its taxes. Commercial speculation, of which he early
showed himself fond, and the taste for which never left him, put him
in possession of a small fortune, and in iSoi he was sent to Egypt
in command of a small Turkish force. His intrepid spirit soon
showed itself, and having attracted the notice of Khosrew, Pasha of
Egypt, he rose to be commander of the Arnauts, the hardy Albanians
who then formed the flower of the Turkish army. The confused
and disorganised state of Egypt, which followed the expulsion of the
French, offered the best possible opportunities to such a man as
Mehemet Ali. The Memlooks were furious against the Porte
because they had not been reappointed to their former posts of pro-
vincial governors. They were, however, weakened as a party by
the rivalry of their leaders, El-Elfy and El-Bardisy. On the other
hand, the Turkish Pasha had not yet consolidated his position, and did
not feel himself secure from recall by the Porte. Under these cir-
cumstances, Mehemet Ali got himself appointed head of the police
of the country, a position which offered him admirable opportunities
for playing off one party against the other. The rapacious tyranny
of the Memlooks had made them bitterly unpopular with the
people; the Turks were hardly less grasping. Mehemet Ali skilfully
fomented the hatred of the people to both parties, and at length he
allowed himself, not unwillingly, to be selected as their ruler by the
Cairenes. Khosrew, however, did not yield the victory without a
struggle. He entrenched himself in the citadel at Cairo, to which
Mehemet Ali, aided enthusiastically by the populace, vigorously laid
siege. A remorseless fire was kept up for weeks, and it is difficult to
know how the struggle would have ended, had not a firman arrived
from the Porte, acknowledging the popular vote and appointing
Mehemet Ali Governor of Egypt.
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE MEMLOOKS
Mehemet Ali had thus gained one of his chief points ; he had
won if not the friendship, at least the support of Constantinople.
But he had convinced himself that his position was insecure so long
as the Memlooks retained even a vestige of their former power.
Many of them were encamped to the north of Cairo, and some
of Mehemet Ali’s party entered into communication with the Beys,
telling them that on the 17th of August, 1805, the Governor with
all his troops would leave’ the city to witness the ceremony of
cutting the first sod of the dam of a canal, pointing out that
this was a favourable opportunity to seize the city, and stipu-
lating for a sum of money to be paid for the information if the
attempt upon the city were successful. The Beys fell into the trap.
In the morning they arrived, broke open one of the gates, and
marched through the town. Some soldiers fired upon them from a
window, and with that signal began a massacre which for incidents
of atrocious horror rivals any that have been recorded. Eighty-
three heads were stuffed and sent to Constantinople; but this
number represented a small part of those actually killed in the
massacre. Most of the Memlook Beys retired to Upper Egypt,
and handsome presents from Mehemet Ali induced the Porte to
abstain from interference. The chief Shahin was defeated in a
pitched battle ; and after this Mehemet Ali adopted a more
conciliatory attitude, which prepared the way for another act of
shameless treachery. An expedition was to be undertaken against
the Wahabees of Arabia, and the Memlook Beys then in Cairo were
invited to be present at the ceremony of investing Toosoon,
Mehemet Ali’s favourite son, with the command of the army.
Four hundred and seventy Memlooks entered the citadel, where they
were courteously received, but afterwards in passing down the
narrow road leading to the gates of the Citadel, the gate was
suddenly closed upon them, and a second indiscriminate massacre
began. This was on the Ist of March, ISII. Hardly any of the
Memlooks escaped. One, it is said, leaped his horse from the
battlements, and escaped uninjured, and the site of “The Memlook’s
Leap ” is still shown to curious visitors. The massacre in the
citadel of Cairo was the signal for a rising against the Memlooks
all over Egypt. In Cairo itself scenes of horrible atrocity took
place. Such was the famous massacre of the Memlooks—one o|
the greatest slaughters which history has to record. But it answered
the purpose of its author. It firmly established him upon the
throne, and gave him undisputed authority over the length and
breadth of Egypt.
All obstacles being now removed Mehemet Ali was at liberty to
undertake measures of reform for Egypt similar to those which the
Sultan Mahmoud was at the same time endeavouring to carry out
in Turkey. He organised the army on the European model. He
built and manned a considerable fleet. He introduced all the
ordinary machinery of European life—police, regular taxation,
education, telegraphs, quarantine laws, manufactories, hospitals,
and colleges. He took the whole industry of Egypt into his own
hands, and executed his industrial schemes by the aid of forced
labour. He compelled the cultivation of, cotton, planted olive and
mulberry trees, and improved the breed of cattle. He sent the
File of the Egyptian youth to France for their education, whence,
too, he drew skilful officers and civilians to aid him in his reforms.
He established a college of medicine, and the printing-press at
Boulac. Many of these measures have proved of the utmost benefit
to Egypt ; some, however, are ill-suited to the requirements of the
country. The confiscation of land, the excessive taxation, and the
system of forced labour led to the utmost wretchedness among the
fellaheen. He doubtless misunderstood the real resources of the
country, which are not manufacturing, but agricultural, and
so skilled an observer as the late Mr. Cobden could
speak of his administration in such harsh terms as these:
—“Mehemet Ali is pursuing a course of avaricious mis-
rule which would have torn the vitals from a country less
prolific than this long since. As it is everything is decaying
beneath his system of monopolies. The Pasha has by dint of force
and fraud possessed himself of the whole of the properly of the
country. I don’t mean that he has obtained merely the rule of the
Government, but he owns the whole of the soil, the houses, the
boats, camels, &c. There is something quite unique in finding only
one landowner and one merchant in a country in the person of its
Pasha.” And in writing when in Egypt of the ruin of the cotton works
he adds:—“All this is not the work of Mehemet Ali. The miserable
adventurers from Europe, who have come here to act the parasites
of such a blood-stained despot—they are partly the cause of the
evil. But they knoiy his selfish nature, and his lust of fame, and
this is only their mode of deluding the one, and pandering to the
other.” One mgy admit that there is much justice in some of
Cobden’s strictures, and yet not withhold one’s approbation from
Mehemet Ali’s attempt to improve his country. Apologists have
even been found for his terrible massacres, which, it is alleged, were
committed not from innate cruelty, but from boundless ambition.
But judge him as we will, Mehemet Ali is the commanding figure
-in the late history of the East. Of his determined struggle with
the Porte there is no space to speak here. Had it not been for the
intervention of the European Powers he might have sat in the scat
of the Caliphs, and the current of Turkish history might have been
turned into another channel. But he was no match for the united
powers of the west, and he did not long survive the humiliation
caused by the deprivation of the Government of Syria, and the
reduction of his army. ■- - -
The reign of Ibrahim, Mehemet Ali’s son, lasted but four months,
and we have, therefore, no opp.ortunity of knowing whether he would
have been as able as an administrator as he was skilful as a general.
Ibrahim was succeeded by Abbas, an ignorant, cruel, and bigoted
voluptuary, whose reign was a disgraceful retrogression from all that
had dignified his grandfather’s rule. He met his death at the hands
of his own servants, and was succeeded by the amiable and accom-
plished Said, third son of Mohammed Ali. Under him Egypt again
entered upon the path of reform; but under him, too, she com-
menced the descent of the fatal incline of debt, which has led ulti-
mately to the ruin which has now fallen upon her. Under Said the
Suez Canal was begun, railways were constructed, and steps were
first taken for the study and care of the national monuments. But
he had neither health nor vigour of character for the arduous task of
governing Egypt, and he will be remembered for good intentions
rather than for great deeds. He was succeeded by Ismail Pasha,
his nephew, the son of Ibrahim Pasha and grandson of Mehemet
Ali.
Modern Alexandria
There is probably no other city in the world with antecedents in
any way coming near those of ancient Alexandria, which shows in
the modern city so few traces of its ancient grandeur, as does the
Alexandria of to-day on the banks of Lake Mareotis. The most dili-
gent searchers have failed to identity positively any of the famous sites
of the ancient city. The place which is identified with most proba-
bility is the height of Kom-el-Dik, where probably stood the
ancient Pancum, or Temple of Pan, whence Strabo says a
good view could be obtained over the whole city. Ancient Alex-
andria extended further east and west along the shore, and to the
south-east into what is now almost a desert. The modern city, as
is seen at once when it is approached from the sea, lies almost
entirely upon the ancient Heptastadium of Ptolemy Soter which was
built to connect the Isle of Pharos with the mainland. In courseo(
ages accumulations of debris and the wash of the sea have turned
the original mole into a wide tongue of land, on which the modern
city stands. So low is the coast, that no view of it is obtained until
the vessel is close to land. Then is seen the long Isle of Pharos,
with the lighthouse at one end and Ras-el-Tin Palace at the other.
Despite its name—Cape of Figs—no Figs grow there, and the
Palace, while pretty enough with its verandahs and balconies, possesses
no architectural features. Along the sand banks to the west rise
the forts, which were lately knocked to pieces by the British
guns, and on the extreme right is Marabout Island, and the
small cove, where Napoleon landed his army, marching after-
wards on Alexandria along the sandy shore. The entrance
to the harbour is difficult, as we have lately been often reminded.
The Boghaz Pass is the best entrance, and once through that narrow
opening, good anchorage is to he had inside the great breakwater,
which was built by an English firm and finished in 1873. As the
vessel approaches the shore, the now deserted and ruined palace of


VIE W O F FOR T PHAR OS, ALEXANDR I A, FROM THE GREE K CIIURCH
ON BOARD H.M. GUNBOAT “CONDOR" CLOSE IN SHORE DURING THE ATTACK ON FORT MARABOUT


T HE QUA Y, OLD POR T, ALEXA N DRIA
H. M. GUNBOAT “CONDOR” ATTACKING FORT MARABOUT


Said Pasha at Gabari is to be seen on the right, and the quarries
of Mex, from which the stone was brought for building the break-
water and the new quays, which stretch from the mole along the
shore as far as the Arsenal of Mehemet All. The European or
Frank quarter lies at the other extremity of the town from the quay,
and the way to it from the harbour is through the narrow streets of
the native city, few of which has the distinctively Oriental cha-
racter which gives such a charm to Cairo. In former days no
foreign vessels were allowed in the western harbour, and the
European houses are therefore built along the shore of the eastern,
or old harbour. This is now used only by some native boats, for it
is shallow, and exposed to the winds from the north. One of the
most striking of Mehemet All’s great works for the improvement of
Alexandria was the Mahmudiyeh Canal, constructed by the forced
labour of some 250,000 fellaheen, 20,000 of whom, it is said,
perished during the progress of the works. The Canal commences
at the village of Atfeh on the Rosetta branch of the Nile, and is
identical in part of its course with the ancient Canopic branch of the
Nile. It is fifty miles long, and at the Alexandria end is bordered
by pretty villas and gardens. On leaving the city, however, its
scenery becomes monotonous, and there are no features of interest
upon its banks. Of fine buildings Alexandria can boast none. The
Theatre Zizinia and the Bourse are much inferior to such buildings
in cities much less wealthy than Alexandria; the Greek, Catholic,
Coptic, English, and German churches have no noticeable features
whatever. The Grand Square, or the Place Mehemet Ali (for
the French nomenclature of the streets is the more popular),
was built of irregular houses, without any picturesqueness. Another
large square, the Place de I’Eglise, or Square Ibrahim, con-
taining the Post x Office and the Hotel Abbat, is also in
the European Quarter, as is the Boulevard Ismail and the Rue
de la Colonne Pompee (Pompey’s Pillar). Generally speaking
the features that one is accustomed to think essential in an Eastern
city are put much in the background in Alexandria, owing to the
presence of a large floating foreign population. Our illustrations
on page 20, taken from Professor G. Ebers’ handsome volumes on
“Egypt,Descriptive,Historical, and Picturesque” (Messrs. Cassell,
Petter, and Galpin) show some of the social features of Alexandria.
The scorpion-eating dervish is, however, a rare sight, for which
one must usually go to Cairo, but the Bedouin can be seen in the
outskirts of Alexandria. No Europeans stay long in Alexandria
unless business detains them, A day or two is sufficient to see
the chief features of the city, and Cairo, with all its wealth of
beauty, calls the traveller from the other end of the Delta. Ramleh
is the favourite suburb of the Europeans. There are seven stations
on the Ramleh Railway, and in a small building near one of them,
the Mustapha Pasha Station, died Sir Ralph Abercromby after his
victory over the French, Concerning Alexandria, we may quote
the words of Warburlon ;—“ Here the Hebrew Scripture expanded
into Greek under the hands of the Septuagint; here Cleopatra
revelled with her Roman conquerors ; here St. Mark preached the
truth upon which Origen attempted to refine ; here Athanasius held
warlike controversy; here Amru conquered ; here Abercromby
fell.” It seems, however, not unlikely that with the present
century Alexandria may finally decline. The Suez Canal has
tapped its trade, and Port Said is rapidly rivalling it in influence.
Egyptian Commerce
Concerning the trade of ancient Alexandria nothing shall be
said here. A wide gulf of decadence and decay separates the
ancient city of the Ptolemies from its modern namesake. When the
French invaded Egypt in 1798 Alexandria consisted merely of a
congeries of Arab huts, containing, according to Denon’s calculation,
9,000 persons, according to that of Savary only 6,000.
A few weeks ago, before the massacre of June nth, and the sub-
sequent stampede, and the still more disastrous events of July,
Alexandria contained a population of about a quarter of a million
souls, of whom some fifty thousand were Europeans, At the time of
Mehemet All’s death the Europeans were only seven thousand in
number. In fact, from that epoch may be dated the rise and pro-
gress of modern Egyptian commerce.
“ European immigration,” says Mr. John Slagg, M.P., in a valuable
article which appeared in a recent number of the Pall Mall GazctU,
“began in Mehemet All’s time, and has been encouraged by suc-
cessive Viceroys down to the time of Ismail Pasha and Tewfik
Pasha. Under European influence the impetus given to the pro-
sperity of Egypt has been enormous. The crops since iB6O have
been nearly tripled. The natives did not formerly possess capital
for conducting the cultivation of the soil, and the necessary advances
have been made by Europeans, who have also assisted in bringing
an immense area of waste land under cultivation. Steam pumping
machinery for irrigating purposes has been introduced on a large
scale. Europeans have erected cotton-ginning factories and steam-
presses, which cause the cotton to be sent to market in a much
cleaner and more valuable condition than formerly; and European
capital has brought the produce from the grower to the shipping
ports, and helped its final distribution. At the time of Ismail
Pasha’s deposition the natives were in a condition of bankruptcy,
and the credit establishments which have since sprung up have
enabled them to borrow moneyfortheirimraediatewants, and to relieve
the extortionate charges of their old mortgage system. The security
given by the Anglo-French Control caused further capital to flow into
\the country, and interest fell to legitimate instead of usurious rates.
Unaided the natives are incapable of conducting an export trade.
For mechanical skill, and in the management of railways, factories,
and, indeed, of industrial undertakings generally, they depend on
the skill and experience of Europeans, who, however, only occupy
the position of heads of departments, and seldom acquire landed
property. ”
These observations show the fatal deceptivencss of the cry
raised by Arahi and his adherents, “Egypt for the Egyptians.”
The European element was the life-blood of Egypt, and now that
that element has almost vanished the gathered crops arfi lying in
the interior unsold. The native grower can neither continue his
cultivation nor pay his taxes, the rate of interest has advanced,
commerce is paralysed, agriculturists cannot buy coal to work their
irrigating machinery, and thousands of native work-peaple are
threatened with starvation.
These are sad facts, and they are mentioned here to siiovv that
Egypt, although almost entirely a country of agricultural industry,
has suffered far more seriously from the effects of the recent troubles
than is usually the case with agricultural communities, because the
mainspring of her energies lay in the foreign population which, as
it were by another Edict of Nantes, has been driven out of the
country.
A map of Egypt shows a region of considerable extent; but it
must be borne in mind that by far the greater portion of this is
barren, waterless desert. Egypt as a habitable, cultivable country,
consists in reality of the Delta or alluvial flats through which
the Nile finds its way to the sea, and of the river valley,
a strip of land varying from one to six miles wide, on
either side of that celebrated river. It is this strip only
which receives the benefit of the annual inundation. Besides
these there is a fertile region called the Fayoum, 700 square
miles in extent, about 80 miles south of Cairo, and several oases
in the Western Desert, which, however, are necessarily somewhat
inaccessible. Altogether the cultivable part of Egypt, exclusive of
Nubia and the Soudan, amounts to something over 11,000 miles,
or, roughly speaking, it is as big as Wales with Devonshire and
Cornwall added in. The population of this tract consists of some
5,500,000 persons, so that the fertile part of Egypt is one of the
most densely-peopled countries in the world.
The three staple exports from Egypt are cotton, cereals, and
sugar. The cotton trade began to assume importance when the
supply from the United States was checked by the Civil War. ‘ ‘ The
average crop now,” says Mr. Slagg, “is about 280,000,000 lbs.
weight, valued at 9,000,000/, Two-thirds of this comes to England.
In the Bolton district alone some 5,000,000 spindles are employed
on this staple, and 20,000 hands occupied ; and if we take 2,000,000
spindles for other districts, even excluding Scotland, we may safely
assert that fully 25,000 workpeople, whose earnings amount to 20 s.
each weekly, would be affected by the stoppage of our supply of
Egyptian cotton.”
In this connection, the trade in cotton seed should be mentioned.
This is comparatively a new industry. Formerly the seed was burnt
in bath-houses and ovens, or even thrown away. The total value
of the crop is now nearly 2,000,000/., and 90 per cent, of this is
exported to England. In 1881 120,000 tons came to Hull alone.
The seed costs Js. a ton to crush, and 2,500 men and boys are
engaged in the industry'. But if the importation were to cease, not
only would these people be thrown oat of employment, but the
farmers would suffer seriously as they would lose their cotton cakes,
so valuable for cattle feeding on account of their peculiar astringent
properties. The soap-boilers also would lose 50,000 tons of oil
annually derived from the same source.
Next in importance come the corn exports, consisting chiefly of
wheat and-beans. They amount annually to about ij 009,000
quarters, valued at 1,250,000/. Three-fourths of'this produce is
taken by England. Maize, barley, and rice come next, though in
smaller quantities. Of the two former products the larger part
goes to England, while the rice is shipped to Constantinople and
the Greek islands. Lentils, chick-peas, and peas, are also abundantly
produced, and for nine-tenths of this crop Great Britain is the
customer.
The production of flax has fallen off considerably since the expan-
sion of the cotton cultivation, not more than 2,000 bales a year
having been shipped during the last ten years.
“ The production and export of sugar,” says Mr. J. C. M'Coan,
M.P., in his admirable “ Egypt As It Is,” “on any large scale only
date from 1867, when the erection of the first of the great Daira
factories raised the manufacture of this article to the first rank of
native industries. Egypt now equals Brazil in her production,
exporting some 30,000 tons, valued at 600,000/. Most of it goes to
the English and French markets. A considerable quantity of rum
is also distilled, but this is all consumed in the country.”
Among minor exports may be mentioned natron (muriate of soda),
most of which goes to Italy and Austria ; bones, of which 10,000
tons a year used to be sent to England. A large percentage of this
export consisted of mummy bones, Mr, M'Coan tells us. The
trade has of late years fallen off, for two reasons. The pillage of
tombs for this purpose has been prohibited, and the Daira sugar
factories consume most of the modern cattle bones now collected,
to make animal charcoal for decolorising the sugar. There is a
paper-mil! at Boulac; still all-devouring England manages to extract
from Egypt every year some 1 5, 000 bales of rags. Dates, henna
(this goes almost entirely to France), wax, saffron, and opium are
also exported.
The articles above enumerated are all produced upon the soil of
Egypt, l> u t) besides this, there is an extensive transit-trade from
Nubia, the Soudan, Abyssinia, Arabia, and the remote southern
provinces in such articles as coffee, ivory, mother-of-pearl, gum,
skins, incense, ostrich feathers, tortoise shell, senna, tamarinds, &c.
The Indian and Chinese transit-trade, consisting chiefly of silk, tea,
and indigo, passes through the Suez Canal, and can scarcely there-
fore be reckoned as appertaining to Egyptian commerce.
For imports Egypt.pays to foreign nations about 5,500,000/., or
just about a pound sterling for every individual in the country. These
imports consist of manufactured cotton goods, silk, coal, charcoal,
building materials, oil, wine, spirits, and machinery. England
supplies 45 per cent, of the whole, Turkey and Syria 20 per cent.,
while the remainder is contributed by France, Austria, Italy,
Barbary, Greece, Belgium, Russia, and Sweden. Most of the
“madapolams,” long cloths, grey shirtings, and cotton yarns are from
Lancashire, although both France and Austria are serious rivals.
England furnishes half-a-million tons of coal and coke, and the
profitable character of this immense trade depends very much on
the return freights which are expected to be obtained at Alexandria.
Turkey and Syria supply most of the considerable domestic con-
sumption of charcoal ; wood for building purposes comes from
Italy, Austria, Sweden, and Turkey; stone from Italy and Austria;
oil from Italy, Barbary, Syria, and Greece ; wine and liquors from
France and Italy; machinery from England and list
need not be prolonged with minor articles.
Many people in this country are apt to regard Egypt as chiefly
interesting to us because across its territory lies the shortest road to
our Indian Empire, and no doubt this is a fact of the first imp
tance. i
But Egypt would, without doubt, be interesting to us, especi,;
since the making of the Suez Canal, even if her territory vj
all as barren as the sands of the Libyan Desert, and if
whole of her population were as averse to labour as
wandering Bedouins. She is, however, still more interesting to
inasmuch as she possesses a soil, comparatively small in cxt<
if we exclude the southern provinces, but of unrivalled fertility, |
inhabited by a population who have been noted as patient, ind
trious labourers ever since the days of the Pharaohs. Moreol
the foregoing details have clearly shown that, apart from the rej
to India, England has a greater commercial interest in Egypt tjj
any other nation. Egypt buys from us nearly half her imports, |
we take in return fully three-fourths of her exports. The n|
selfish motives, therefore, to say nothing of political expedierl
should induce us to use every effort to bring back peace within!
borders, !
Ismail Pasha
♦ i
The accession of Ismail in January, 1863, to the Vice-royaltj
Egypt, which had been made hereditary in the family of Mehemet|
by the Firman of 1841, has justly been described as the commei
ment of a new epoch in the political and social history of
country. The new Vali—the higher title of had not t
been given him —was, indeed, in all respects a Prince from wli
the world had reason to expect much. His early life, w
apparently far from the Vice-regal throne, had shown that
possessed considerable ability and still greater shrewdn
Educated in France, he had little in his appearance of the <
fashioned Oriental, saving a latent look of pride and obstinacy,
spoke French fluently, and in the management of his estates, wh
Ismail Sadyk, the notorious Finance Minister of after times, ■
his steward and factotum, had proved himself an accomplished n
of business. In the reign of his uncle Abbas he had formed one
the opposition party of “ the Princes ” without, however, putf
himself so prominently forward as to incur the special displeasun
the sullen despot. Under the liberal and kind-hearted Said he
acted as Regent during the Vali’s absence on the Meccan pilgrims
had himself revisited France, and made a tour in Italy, and :
been entrusted with the command of an army in the rebelli
Soudan, in which he had contrived to overcome opposition less
force of arms than by conciliation and intrigue. His person, thoi
under the middle height, was not without dignity, and his mann
especially to foreign visitors, at once genial and imposing.
railway accident which had removed his elder brother in the nicl
time when Said’s life was drawing towards its close, tho
scandal-loving tongues talked strangely of the matter, had c
increased among the multitude the general belief in his lucky s
The country under the easy rule of Said had greatly recovered fi
the strain of Mehemet All’s long-continued wars; the revenue m
than balanced the expenditure, and the debt which, much to
regret of the Vail, had begun to form towards the end of his rei
was after all a trifling matter for the great resources of the St;
The political career which lay before him demanded precisely t
dexterous mixture of intrigue, expenditure, and now and tl
though rarely, of bold daring, in which Oriental genius is n
at home. Though French by training and acquired habits,
brought up in a Court where French influences had from
limes been steadily at work to maintain a supremacy over ev
rival, he was from the first rather inclined to put his trus
England, of the two great European Powers which alone at
date seriously contested the prize of political ascendancy
the Nile. But his main object, unremittingly pursued for years,
crowned at last with a deceptive success, was to emancipate him
from the oppressive sovereignty of the Porte, and wring or buy f;
the Sultan such concessions as might restore Egypt to the posi
it had held in the brighter days of his warlike grandfather,
enable him to build up in the persons of his own lineal descend:
a new dynasty of virtually independent Sovereigns. And if
game was lost by him after all, overmatched as he was by the
more subtle and equally unscrupulous financiers of Europe, bac
in the last resort by the material strength of the great Wes;
Powers, it may at least be admitted that he played it in right re
fashion, and yielded only to irresistible force. But among the 11 r .
things which he inherited from his predecessor, the dam. jv
hereditas (for himself, if not for Egypt), which in the end pro
more decisive of his fate than all beside, was the Ship Canal fi
Sea to Sea, for which M. de Lesseps, a short time before, had
the concession from his old pupil Said, and the construction
which was now pushed on in the teeth of all imaginable obsta
from the scanty resources of the promoters, the distress of
fellaheen under the monthly corvle of 20,000 labourers, and 1
not least, the persistent opposition of the powerful Government
Lord Palmerston.
THE VICEROY AND THE CANAL
To Ismail himself, as we have said, the enterprise of M.
Lesseps was from the first a source of political and finan
embarrassments, though none at that time could possibly h,
guessed that it would supply in after days the real motive for
overthrow; for it was assuredly not to save bondholders from Ii
but to prevent the land through which the Canal passed from gc
to ruin that the Great Powers of Europe took the extreme step
compelling the insolvent Khedive to abdicate. Lord Palmersti
as was well known, had been hostile to the enterprise all aloj
because he feared it would give the French a footing in Egypt
the exclusion of other Powers, and might also form a danger
British commerce, which he thought would still follow the old ro
by the Cape. The Porte opposed it, chiefly to oblige Engla 1
but partly, too, from natural jealousy of foreign interference with I
of its richest provinces. Neither Oriental nor Western diplomat!
had any notion that it would become at once a great commerr
success, of which the profits would be monopolised by Brit'
enterprise, and an international highway, which would necessa*
bring Egypt under the guardianship of the Powers, and coni
her formal dependence on the Forte into a very real subjection


the will of Christian Europe. Nor possibly did Ismail himself
apprehend at first that it would also prove a cause of indebtedness,
a burden round his neck which, if it did not create his subsequent
embarrassments, at any rate had a great share in aggravating them.
For when in the extreme need of 1875 he sold his shares in the
Company to the British Government for a sum much below their
real value, it was calculated, with apparent show of reason, that
his enterprise, from first to last, had drawn from him, directly or
indirectly, some 17,000,000/., for which he had not received
any compensation—even Egypt itself being only slightly benefitted
by the mere transit of goods or passengers. The first difficulty
with the Canal Company was not long in coming. The permission
given by Said to employ the forced labour of the fellaheen was a
sore burden to the industrious peasant, and Ismail, soon after his
accession to the throne, was easily persuaded to revoke it. His
doing so has been called the most honourable action of his life. It
was also one of the most costly. M. de Lesseps could be very
obstinate, and he was strongly backed in France. The matter
was submitted to the arbitration of the Emperor, and the
Viceroy, after much pleading and counter-pleading, was con-
strained to pay over 3,336,000/, (borrowed at 10 per cent,
for the purpose) in compensation for a concession which had
originally been a free gift, and had already indirectly cost his
country considerable sums. A few years later, when the Company
was in further straits, the Viceroy was again induced to come to its
relief, and buy up the tolls on the Fresh-water Canal, the right of
fishing in the lakes, the Company’s store-houses, and other
buildings for 1,200,000/. more. All this, however, was in the
heyday of his greatness, when he cared little what he spent so that
he could dazzle Europe w-ith his magnificent hospitalities and his
costly enterprises, and when money could be raised easily for any
purpose of possible utility or sumptuous extravagance. And,
doubtless, he thought his capital well laid out when the success of
the enterprise was finally ascertained ; and at the opening file
(November, 1869) the Emperor of Austria and Empress of
the French "were among his guests, and the honours paid
him in Paris in 1867 were much more than repaid by the
splendid festivities which for days made brilliant that new
City in, the Desert whose greatness has proved as ephemeral as
his own. Much also was there in this first decade of his reign for
which the Viceroy deserves real credit. The extension of cotton-
planting that met the demand created by the American Civil War,
the harbour works at Suez, the commencement of the breakwater at
Alexandria, the reforms in public instruction, in the Customs, and
in the Post Office—all carried out with the help of experienced
officials supplied from England—were achievements of which any
ruler, much more an Oriental despot, might have been proud. The
admirable scheme for the supercession of the old Consular Courts
by mixed international tribunals, though not realised until 1576,
through the persistent opposition of France, was also the work of
this happier period. Not was it, perhaps, solely to throw dust in
the eyes of the Western Powers by a meaningless aping of European
customs that an attempt was made in 1868 to lay the foundation of
Parliamentary institutions by the.convocation of a “Chamber of
Notables” at Cairo. But all this time his life-long purpose to
loosen link by link the chain which bound him to the Porte was
steadily kept in view, and with it were even mingled from time to
time still more audacious projects, if he has not been belied, of
supplanting his liege lord in the esteem of Islam, and regaining for
the ruler of Egypt the mysterious dignity of the Khalifate.
THE VICEROY AND THE TORTS
Wixii a Sultan, however, of the stamp of Abd-ul-Azir in his
better days, and Viziers such as Fuad and A’ali, it was necessary to
deal warily. And Ismail had personal enemies at Constantinople—
his brother Mustapha Fazyl and his uncle Halim above all. But
whenever difficulties arose at Court his well-filled purse came always
to his aid with bribes, and free gifts, and presents to the ladies of
the harem, all of which, one year with another, more than doubled
the annual tribute, though this too had been raised from 400,000/.
to 700,000/. in recompense for the Firman of 1866, which abrogated
the old law of succession in favour of his young son Tewfik—an
innovation upon Moslem custom which certainly would not have
been conceded had it not harmonised with a pet scheme of Sultan
Abd-ul-Aziz for nominating in like fashion his son Yusuf Izzeddin
as his successor. And thus, step by step, from permission to raise
the army to 30,000 men and take, instead of Vali, the higher title
of “Khidiv-el-Misr,” “Sovereign of Egypt,” to unrestrained
liberty of action in all affairs of internal administration, and from
this again to the right to contract loans without first asking his
Suzerain’s assent, and to make treaties profrio motu of a non-
political character, he had come in 1873 within measurable distance
of complete independence. But the way had been strewn with
difficulties. He had been obliged to aid the Porte with men and
money for the suppression of the revolt in Crete, and had incurred
heavy censure for recalling his regiments prematurely. He had
been accused of giving himself sovereign airs on his visit to
Europe, and of entering into negotiations with Foreign Powers on
the - subject of the new International Courts of Justice ; and, worst
of all, he had been compelled to abandon definitely his cherished
plan of creating an ironclad navy, and to sell his ships and needle
guns to the Sultan. And even when all his wishes had been granted
the ease with which Turkish troops sent through the Canal put
down an extensive revolt in Yemen was ample proof that, after
concession had reached its limit, there was still no question of the
relative strength of the Suzerain and his vassal.
AGGRANDISEMENT AND COLLAPSE
The six years between the opening of the Suez Canal and that
utter collapse of Egyptian credit which was contemporaneous with
the outbreak of troubles in European Turkey, were years of showy
but unprofitable enterprises, France had no leisure to think of
Egypt, and England for the greater part of the period was content
to watch with considerable interest the seemingly earnest efforts of
the Khedive to put down the slave trade in his southern provinces
—once only stepping forward with effect when Egypt ventured to
encroach on Zanzibar. Under Sir Samuel Baker first, and then under
Colonel Gordon, the rule of the Khedive was extended almost to the
Equator. War with Abyssinia was less fortunate, and the Egyptian
army sustained two defeats, the latter of which was so severe —it
was even reported that Prince Hassan was taken prisoner—that
since that time no Khedivial force has ventured to invade the
dominions of King John. But the interests upon successive loans
and the intolerable amount of floating debt were more at length than
the Viceroy could cope with. In the winter of 1875 the sale to
England for less than 4,000,000/. of the Canal shares which had
cost poor Ismail over 5,000,000/. was a sign that money could be
obtained by no other means. The institution of International
Tribunals—three of First Instance at Cairo, Ismailia, and Alexandria,
and one of Appeal at Alexandria—passed almost unnoticed in the
general confusion. The <4,000,000/. were a drop in the bucket,
and since nothing more could be got until confidence was restored,
Mr. Cave, the Paymaster-General, was sent out, at the Khedive’s
own request, to report upon the financial condition of the country.
The complicated negotiations of the next three years have been
excellently described in brief words in a recent magazine article
by Mr. Justin H. McCarthy. Mr. Cave’s report showed that nothing
could be done “without accepting heavy financial responsibility,”
and Mr. Rivers Wilson, who succeeded Mr. Cave, was equally
powerless to effect any good. The Khedive could not yet make up
his mind to the sacrifice of his enormous private estates, and to
that thorough purifying of the whole system of collecting taxes,
without which any sugested reform could only be a make-shift.
Unable to obtain advances on any terms, he boldly issued, in May,
1876, a decree of repudiation. But now the new International
Tribunals stepped in, and decided that the Khedive had broken
his contract to the foreign creditor, and that the May decree
was of no effect; and finally the “Goschen-Joubert Mission”
was despatched to make the best terms possible under the
circumstances for the French and the English bondholders.
The same inability to gel at the whole truth which had been
experienced by Mr. Cave was experienced also by the new mission.
The Khedive and his servants were still too cunning for them.
There can be no doubt, however, judging from the later action of
the Control, that the rate of 7 per cent, fixed by them for interest
and sinking-fund was altogether too high, and that when there came
a bad Nile next year the Khedive was within bounds in stating that
the amount exacted by “the Goschen-Joubert Decree” was more
than an impoverished country could pay, and in demanding a new
Commission of Inquiry. One thing, however, Mr. Goschen’s mission
had accomplished : it had rid Egypt of Ismail Sadyk, “ the
Mouffetish.” Accused by the Commissioners of falsification of his
accounts, he was arrested as a criminal, to prevent his examination
before the International Tribunal, and sent south to Dongolah,
whence not long after a medical certificate of his death from
“ natural causes ” and his burial was forwarded to the Porte and
the foreign Consuls-General, and the whole matter was allowed to
drop. Two several Commissions had now been foiled ; the third,
of which Mr. Rivers Wilson, aided by M, de Eesseps, was the
guiding spirit, was more successful. No real reform, it was clearly
shown, could be expected, until the Khedive yielded up the enormous
estates —a fifth, or nearly so, of the entire cultivated land of Egypt
—of which he had gradually become the owner, and which were
now “so miserably administered as to result in a loss, not only to
the country, but to the Khedive himself.” With great reluctance,
the Viceroy at length consented to surrender a million acres to the
creditors of the State, and shortly after took the further step of
summoning Nubar Pasha from exile to his counsels, with Rivers
Wilson as Minister of Finance, Riaz Pasha as Minister of the
Interior, and M. de Blignieres (to appease the jealousy of France)
as Mr. Wilson’s colleague with the portfolio of Public Works. The
overthrow of a Ministry so admirably constituted to carry out
a reforming policy, though directly brought about by a
“ small army entente," a foreshadowing of the greater
movement which was to come just two years later, was also due
in part to personal incompatibilities. Nubar himself was stiff
and unconciliatory. He knew that he had been forced on the
Khedive by events, and was by no means beloved by the Egyptians
generally, and he took no pains to disarm opponents by civilities.
The foreign members of the Cabinet were inimical because they
were foreigners, while of Riaz Pasha it was boldly said that he was
simply the most unpopular man in the country. On the other hand,
the soldiers, to whom considerable arrears were due, had been rather
hardly dealt with by the Ministers. They saw many of their old
comrades begging in the streets; and they feared to be dismissed like
them, without receiving payment for past service. Whether Ismail
exaggerated or not when he assured The Times correspondent that
by dismissing his Ministers he had saved their lives, there seems ,at
any rate reason to believe that the attack on Mr. Wilson in the streets
of Cairo on the 18th of February, 1879, was due at least in part to
slighted national sentiment, for which the soldiery from the circum-
stances in which they were placed were naturally the first to find
expression. Unfortunately for the Khedive, his slight success caused
him to go further. Quickly discovering that the Western Powers
were rather inclined to bark than bite, he sent both Nubar and Riaz
into exile, called his old favourites once more around him,
and announced that he would take into his own hands the
settlement of the Egyptian liabilities. The unexpected declara-
tion of the German Government that the claims of German subjects
would be maintained at all hazards, brought matters promptly to a
crisis. The Sultan, at the request of the Western Powers, decreed
the deposition of the rebellious insolvent, and Ismail, after one
desperate but futile effort to propitiate his Suzerain, was forced to
leave his throne for Naples, taking with him a vast treasure, which
has been roughly estimated at several millions.
TEWFIK PASHA
The deposition of Ismail raised to the vacant throne, by virtue of
the Firman of i 865, his first-born, Tewfik, a well-intentioned and
(with the fellaheen) not unpopular young Prince, who had for some
time been associated with his Father in the Government, and in the
Nubar-Wilson Administration, had held the Presidency of the
Council. A man of greater amiability than force of character,
the new Khddive will seem to many as undeserving of the sar-
casms aimed at him by the friends of Halim—the legitimate ruler
according to old Moslem law—as ofthe praises which have been lavished
on his conduct in resisting the demands of the rebel soldiery. The
opening of the new reign was memorable for the definitive establish-
ment of the Anglo-French Control—M. de Blignieres for France,
Major Baring first, then Mr, (now Sit) Auckland Colvin for Great
Britain, being the two Controllers General, with powers of the
amplest character. They had seats, but not votes, in the Council of
Ministers ; could call for any document they wished to inspect;
could demand weekly reports of receipts and expenses from the
Department of Finance, and monthly Reports from the other
Ministers ; could dismiss any functionary whom they considered use-
less, while they themselves were irremoveable save with the consent
of their own Governments; and, last of all, were charged each year
with the preparation of the Annual Budget. A few months later,
April sth, 1880, a Commission of Liquidation was appointed, on
which England, France, Germany, Austria, and Italy, the Inter-
national Tribunals and the Egyptian Government were equally repre-
sented, and a report was issued fixing the interest of the Unified
Debt at four and of the Privileged Debt at five per cent, and pro-
viding that any surplus revenue exceeding five pet cent, should be at
once applied to the reduction of the debt by purchases in the open
market. Riaz Pasha was the new Premier, and for a considerable
time all things went smoothly. Fault-finders, indeed, began to make
it a complaint that the fellaheen who could borrow now at nine pet
cent, per annum where they used to pay four per cent, per month, were
beginning to abandon their old thrifty ways.
Egypt for the Egyptians
It is difficult even now to describe impartially the events which
gradually, and as it were by an inexorable necessity, led onwards
from some trivial ententes, which a little firmness might at once have
arrested, to troubles of a graver kind than Egypt has known for
many centuries. It would not probably be correct to say that
Jeshurun has waxed fat and kicked ; but beyond a doubt the
revival of prosperity kindled once more into dangerous activity the
ambitions of the old race of place-hunters who had thriven on the
corruptions of a corrupt regime , and who now found their occupa-
tion gone beneath the vigilant eye of the Control. The multitude,
on the other hand, who saw only the bare fact that an army ol
officials of foreign origin were deriving large salaries under a system
which had been called into existence not to benefit the country, but
to secure the payment of the bondholders’ claims, and who only
imperfectly recognised the truth that high salaries meant honest
work, complained with bitterness that their hard-earned gains
should go not simply to pay old debts, bat to make the fortunes of
intrusive strangers. And not a few may have felt an honest wish
that the Arab, in their own phrase, should hold up his head and
take some share in the government of his country. Besides all this,
from a very early stage in the movement false hopes were raised by
foreign sympathisers, while mutual jealousies on the part of
European States rendered them for a long time more inclined to
hamper the action of the Western Powers, and prevent their ruling
Egypt for the common good than to curb, while it might still have
been done with ease, the progress of an agitation from which not
Egypt only, but all who are interested in the prosperity of Egypt,
must suffer in their turn no little loss. And the army, from whom
the first impulse for evil came, was not without some natural
grievances. Its pay, indeed, was no longer in arrears, as in the last
year of Ismail’s reign.' But it knew that it was looked down upon,
and that its reduction was among the contemplated reforms ; and its
officers were well aware that once put upon half-pay they had little
hope of further provision from the State. Still its first movement
was not against the Control, but against the Turkish and Circassian
officers. These, it was urged, were unduly favoured at the expense
of the native Arabs, and soon a very trivial quarrel became the signal
for a somewhat formidable entente. Ali Bey Fehmy, the Arab Colonel
of the First Regiment of Infantry on guard at that time at the Abdin
Palace, had accused a certain Circassian of supplanting him in the
favour of the Khedive. The complaint had been addressed to
Osman Rifky, the Minister fur War, and he, a Circassian, has
taken the Circassian’s part. Three Colonels, the offended Ali Bey,
Ahmed Arabi of the 4th Regiment, quartered at Abassieh, and
Abdullah, Colonel of a Negro Regiment at Tantah, united in a
remonstrance to Jhe Premier Riaz. A Council of War ordered
their arrest; but Ali Bey had warned his regiment, and two
battalions broke into the room, delivered the Colonels, and com-
pelled the Council to make their escape through the open windows.
The Khedive, after vainly trying to appease the rioters, was
persuaded by the foreign Consuls-General to give way. Mahmoud
Baroudi, previously Minister of Religious Institutions, was installed
at the War Office in Osman Rifky’s place, and for the time the
agitation came to an end. Now, however, there came to light a
disastrous diversity of aims among certain of the representatives of
France, which has continued even to the time when Arabi’s
position became one of open hostility to the Western Powers.
Baton de Ring, the French Consul-General, had sympathised with
the Colonels all along. He was at variance with M. de Blignieres,
whom he considered too Anglophile, and still more hostile to the
Egyptian Prime Minister, and lie was imprudent enough, even after
the disorders of February Ist, 1881, to carry on a secret correspondence
with the Colonels, advising them to insist on the dismissal of Riaz
and the nomination of Osman Pasha, the Khedive’s cousin, in his
room. This came to the knowledge of Riaz, and Baron de Ring
was recalled to France —a step which had the incidental result ol
proroguing for a year (since nothing could be done in the absence ol
one of the delegates of France) the meeting of the International Com-
mission for the reform of the mixed Courts. These reforms, proposals
in all cases of the Egyptian Government, were yet another sign of
the rimes; for their real object, under covet of improving the native
Courts, was to reduce in every possible way the foreign element in
the judiciary. Meanwhile, by Sit E. Malel’s advice, the Khedive
issued a conciliatory address to the army, whose suspicion ol
the authorities was very marked; and on the 20th of April pub-
lished a decree, increasing their pay, and nominating- a military
Commission, on which were four foreign Generals in Egyp-
tian employ, and among them Sir Frederick Goldsmid, English
Administrator of the Daira Sanieh, to inquire into matters affecting
military regulations, promotions, retirement, and half-pay. The
agitators were represented on the Commission by Colonel Arabi, but
in the presence of the foreign members Turks, Arabs, and Cir-
cassians forgot their differences, and all united against the alien


LANDING PARTY FROM H.M.S. "IN-VINCIBLE," UNDER LIETENANT BAR
LAMBTON. DESTROYING


ON R. BRADFORD AND FLAG-LIEUTENANT THE HON. HEDWORTH
UNS AT FORT MEX


Jeraent. More meetings were held denouncing Riaz, and Arabi
pven declared in the bosom of the Commission that he should refuse
gbedience if ordered to the Soudan. Tiie popularity of the Khedive
Urnong the fellaheen was evidenced in his April visit to the Canal.
But he lacked force for self-assertion, while Riaz, on the other hand,
Jude enemies on every side by his overbearing manners-—even M. l)e
!“?lignii‘res beginning to turn against him. No other Premier seemed,
iowever, possible just then, for Nubar was quite as unpopular as he,
nd the time had not come when Sherif would be accepted. The Mili-
ary riots at Alexandria in July, when the corpse of an artilleryman
vho had been run over in the streets was borne by a party of his
Comrades to tin; Palace of Ras-el-Tin, and the heavy sentences passed
ftpon the rioters, further augmented the displeasure of the soldiery,
pf the guilty artillerymen, the leader had been sentenced to bard
labour for life; the rest, to three years in the galleys at Khartoum;
jvhile almost at the same time nineteen officers, cashiered for
mutinous conduct towards their colonels, were permitted to retire
bn half-pay. Abdullah Bey remonstrated with the Minister of
but nothing was done, and in the coarse of August Mahmoud
|saroudi was replaced by Daoud Pasha.
} THE SEPTEMBER EMEUTE
; | The return of the Khedive to Cairo in September appears to
pave brought matters to a climax. The colonels were in perpetual
fear of arrest, or of being sent South, where mutineers are
pasily disposed of. Even Sir E. Malel’s absence at Constantinople
ptxdted their suspicions ; it was thought that he bad gone thither to
help for the Khedive from the Porte. A story got abroad that
j|he Khedive had procured a secret decree from the Sheik-ul-Islam
Condemning them to death for high treason. Spies were continually
jtiovering about their residences. Colonel Arabi in particular, whose
wegiment was under orders for Alexandria, entertained no doubt but
■hat a man had been sent from the Prefecture of Police to murder
ipim. On the morning of the 9th the unsuspecting Khedive was
fctartled by the news that the troops were coming from the Abassieh
||o put him to death. Of the Anglo-French officials only two were
Ijwith him, Mr. Cookson, the British Consul, and Sir Auckland
(polvin, who had arrived that morning. But there was still time
Bor a prompt and resolute ruler to rally the regiments dose at hand,
Bind intercept the mutineers upon' the way. Unfortunately the
jwiceroy frittered the time away, and when the insurgents appeared
jpefore the Palace, 4,000 strong (for the faithful regiments of the
Iporning had now gone over to them), and with eighteen cannon
|pointed at the windows, he lacked the courage to follow Sir Auckland
t Colvin’s advice, and when Arabi presented himself before him at once
• command him to give up his sword. “ What can I do ?" he
t vhispered. “Wo arc between four fires. We shall be killed.”
; >0 he bade Arabi sheath his sword instead, and the opportunity for
! t bold stroke was lost. The demands of the insurgent troops were
’ hree : the dismissal of the Ministry, the Convention of a National
| Parliament, and the immediate carrying out of the recommenda-
£ ions of the Military Commission, including the increase of the
1 at my from 12,003 to 18,000 men. To an inquiry from Tewfik if
.hey had forgotten that he was “the Khedive and their master,”
t “The ruler,” answered Arabi, from the Koran, “is he who is just,
f Me who is not just is no longer ruler.” The Khedive fell back in
lipismay, and Abdullah’s negroes replaced the First regiment as
■guard about the Palace. Mr. Cookson now took up the discussion,
land after a while prevailed on Arabi to waive the immediate
•execution of the last two demands, and content himself for the
||time with the dismissal of Riaz and the appointment of
■Sherif Pasha as the new Prime Minister. Sherif, however,
“was by no means anxious to take office : in truth ha did not clearly
see his way. He wanted above all free choice of colleagues,
and the removal of Arabi’s and Abdullah’s regiments from Cairo.
Assistance from Constantinople was not to be expected, for Arabi’s
influence was now in the ascendant at the Porte. At length the
interposition of the Notables, whom the Colonels had summoned
to consult with them and had found unexpectedly on the side
of order, induced the latter to moderate their demands ; and
I Sherif, once more appealed to by the Khedive, consented finally
|j to take office, only pledging himself to restore Mahmoud Baroudi
|t to the Ministry of War, and to carry out the recommendations of
I the Military Commission on alt points except the immediate increase
If of the army. That, as well as the proposed Constitutional
|| changes, was to stand over for consideration. Nor were the officers
|| very hot upon these points even yet. To provide for their own
security was still the chief concern of the men who had now com-
mitted themselves so deeply.
(( THE ATTITUDE OF THE PORTE
|j Two years before this time the Sultan would have been the
* first person called upon to reduce the unruly military to order. At
| present the Porte was in no wise anxious to move in the matter—
t fast of all to strengthen the hands of the Western Powers and their
tlfrote«l; and neither France nor England desired Turkish help. To
the former, especially in the midst of her Tunisian troubles, the mere
’ idea of Turkish intervention on any point of Northern Africa was
most unpalatable. The Sultan, however, without consulting either,
i determined to send two Commissioners, Ali Nizam Pasha and Ali
f huad, with “compliments and advice.” Their visit was only of
tw.tve clays’ duration, in which they were received with marked
(o'dness by the Khedive, while France and England signified their dis-
pl( a are by ordering each an ironclad to Alexandria, there So remain
tim 1 the envoys left. Tewfik, meanwhile, had gratified the army with
t 1 sessions on the score of pay, leave, promotion, and retirement,
cm the ,(tk of October bad decreed the meeting of a Chamber
of Notables, to be elected under the old law ot 1*1.7, 1 r the
discussion oi internal reforms, but not of anythin; . or the
financial engagements of the country. Arabi now ( ..n • I to
lev,o Cairo for Ouady, Abdullah Bey for Damic't 1. Tim tens
which had been entertained of mi annexationist policy on the part of
England were almost wholly allayed by Lord Granville’s November
despatch, in which much stress was wisely laid on the desire of
” (Beat Britain to see Egypt in the enjoyment of “ administrative
I independence,” and on the advantages to her of her present con-
! flection with the Porte as a “ valuable safeguard against foreign
'* intervention.” To the French, on the other hand, this straight-
-1 orward missive of Lord Granville’s, for some cause or other, was
most displeasing. They professed to cherish the greatest appre-
hensions of the approaching meeting of the Chamber of Notables
the elections were on November 10, and the Session opened on
December 26—-and at length persuaded England to join them in
THE JOINT NOTE OF JANUARY 3
This Note, in which the French and English Governments
assured the Khedive of their intention to support him against
any complication, “internal or external, which bright menace
the order of things as established in Egypt,’’ had the misfortune of
irritating people all round. The so-called National .party took
it for a bint that Egypt might share the fate of Tunis; the
Sultan, who saw himself again ignored, instructed his Ambassadors
to complain of it as “unjust and unnecessary;” while Germany,
Austria, Italy, and Russia gladly embraced the opportunity to
snub France and England, by informing the Porte that any
change in Egypt would be “ a matter for the consideration of all
the European Powers.” Had M, Gambetta remained in office, the
Note might not have proved a brutum futmen, and it must be
owned the conduct of the Egyptian Chamber, which at once began
to meddle with the Budget, justified to a great extent his previous
apprehensions. As it was, the fall of the French Premier, the
indifference of England, and the almost ignominious retreat
of M. Garabetta’s successor from a position which seemed to him
and his countrymen too hazardous, produced in Egypt a most
unhappy impression, which led the Nationalists on from bad to
worse. From this time forth their downward course was rapid.
The ciaims now advanced by the Chamber, including the right
“to vote the Budget, complete Ministerial responsibility, and
the initiative in all laws,” were more than even Sherif could approve,
and were fatal, as Sir A. Colvin pointed out, to the very existence
of the Control, for if Ministers were to be responsible, not to the
Khedive, but to the Notables, there was no longer any power to
which the Controllers could appeal if over-ruled. Early in February
Sherif Pasha resigned, and a new Ministry was formed by Mahmoud
Haroudi, in which Mustapha Fehmy Pasha was Minister of Foreign
Affairs, and Arabi, no longer Under-Secretary as in January, but
full-blown Minister of War and virtual Premier. France and
England marked their sense of the crisis by a Collective Note,
invoking the European Concert, and accompanied by a separate
Note, of a somewhat apologetic nature, to the Sultan, in answer to
his previous Protest. The hope that Turkey would consent to act
as policeman on behalf of Europe was fondly cherished everywhere
except in France. Meanwhile the protests of the Control became more
despairing every week. There was no longer “an efficient Govern,
inent ”in the country ; since April, ’8 1, there had been added to the
estimates 300,000/., or, account of military expenditure, and now, in
issuing their Report for 18S1, showing only a moderate surplus, they
were constrained to add that in their judgment the equilibrium for
ISS2 would be imperilled. In other matters too besides finance the
Military began to over-ride the law. On March 13 Arabi had
insisted that certain friends of his should be promoted without passing
the examination required by the State. A month later a graver inci-
dent occurred, which was, in fact, the beginning of the end. Though
560 officers had been promoted, 200, mostly Circassians, were left
out, and among these a plot was said to have been discovered
against the life of the War Minister, No less than fifty were arrested,
and subjected, it is believed, to torture. Forty were sentenced to
exile for life in the Soudan, and a list of other names had been pre-
pared, including even that of Sherif Pasha; the beginning, in fact,
of a veritable proscription. But the Khedive, backed by the foreign
Consuls, now stepped in, and commuted the sentences to simple
banishment, unaccompanied even by military degradation. The
English Agent suffered no one to approach until the commutation
had been actually signed. This led to an open rupture with the
agitators. The Notables convoked by them “over the Khedive’s head,”
refused by an overwhelming majority to obey the call The
popularity of Arabi began rapidly to decline, and men like Sultan
Pasha, the President of the Chamber, became bold enough to with-
stand him to his face. But his last move had broken the patience
of the Western Powers, and the despatch of the Allied Fleets to
Alexandria marked the commencement of a new act in the drama,
the end of which has not yet arrived.
THE EGYPTIAN ARMY
Although rated low by military critics, the Egyptian soldier
has not had always a bad “record.” The annals of our own service
could tell tales of an unpleasant little defeat of a picked British
force, 800 strong, by an Egyptian army in 180 S. The troops of
Mehemet AH did fair work some fifty years ago in Greece and
Syria ; and, though the Egyptian won little honour in Abyssinia,
or in the grander battle fields of the Bulgarian campaign—it is
said by some that he did fairly well at Karahassankoi—there
are doubtless tough hearts among the regiments, above all among
those recruited from the negroes of the Soudan. The short service
system was introduced by Ismail, and the soldier, as a rule, is half
his time on furlough; but the cadres are maintained for a much
larger force than has ever since Mehemet AH’s days been assembled
under the colours ; while, besides those absent on leave, there are
the redifs or reservists, who have served their time, roughly
estimated at 30,000 men, and behind these again 60,000
Bedouins, irregular cavalry of very dubious value, furnishing their
own arms and horses, and commanded in battle by their own chiefs.
Of regular infantry there are eighteen regiments, each of three bat-
talions, armed with Remingtons, and of cavalry, four regiments of
six squadrons each, part armed with sabre and carbine and part with
lances and revolvers; 150 guns (ioq Krupps, and 50 smooth-bores),
arc set down to the artillery ; and the supply of stores and ammuni-
tion of ad sorts is said to be ample ami complete, though the want
of a miliary train greatly detracts from the general efficiency of the
The Aabal Demonstration
THE FORTS AT ALEXANDRIA
The forts which guard the approach lo Alexandria form (or
should we say formed) two separate systems of defence, of which
one commands the New Port and the eastern part of the town, in
other words, the approaches eastward from the sea and landwards
from Atxmkir, the other the Western Harbour and the passes
through the shoals, known severally to mariners as the Corvette,
the Boghaz or Centra!, and the Marabout or Westernmost Pass.
The Pharos Castle is the easternmost ; the batteries of Mnrsa-
el-Kanat, of Marabout Island, and of Fort Adjirai, the most
western of the long line of coast defences. Between these (wo
extremes most conspicuous are Fort Ada, guarding the north
part of the town, the batteries to the east of Ras-el-Tin and the new
lighthouse, and the line of forts extending almost without a break
from Fort Tsale to Marsa-el-Kanat. Within the town itself,
Cafarelli, a relic of old French occupation, could have opened from
its elevation cf tog feet, a formidable plunging fire on the New
Port and Inner Harbour; as could Marabout Island on the outer
roadstead. The armaments of these forts were more formidable than
generally imagined. Those of Fort Marabout may be taken as a
specimen. There were two iS-tonand two 12-ton guns, two [O-inch
and two 8-inch, twenty 32-pounders, and five mortars. At Ras-el-
Tin, again, was an 8-inch Armstrong in a Mancrieff pit and not far
off three 8-inch guns in a beautifully constructed earth-work, which
had resisted every attack. Such forts, even in Egyptian hands, would
almost certainly have given a good account of Mediterranean
squadrons fifteen years ago.
ARRIVAL OF THE ANGLO-FRENCH SQUADRON
On May 20 the British and French Fleets reached Alexandria,
their intended arrival having been notified to the Khedive by the
French and English Consuls-General some days before. The
British vessels consisted of the flag-ship Invincible, with Admiral
Sir Beauchamp Seymour on board, and the gunboats Falcon and
Bittern , while France sent the Galissonilre, bearing Rear-Admiral
Conrad and the gunboats, Forbin and Aspic. Received with due
honour by the forts, the Admirals immediately exchanged visits
with the Alexandrian authorities, while four of the ships took up
their positions inside the Mole, the two others remaining outside,
A few days later the English were reinforced by the ironclad
Inflexible and the gunboat Condor , which had left the remainder of
the squadron in Suda Bay, while two Greek war vessels joined the
allies. Up to the last moment Arabi Pasha strove vigorously to
evade the naval demonstration, declaring that he would send troops
to prevent the vessels entering the harbour. His failure to coerce
the Chamber of Notables and his forced reconciliation with the
Khedive, however, showed Arabi his weakness, and he was obliged
to be content with vigorous protests, and endeavours to arouse
fanaticism by representing the presence of the squadron as infringing
the Sultan’s rights. The majority of the population, however,
remained indifferent, and Arabi even found it difficult to assemble
the army reserves, some of the sokliers being so unwilling to join
that they had to be brought in chains. Still, the Military party
by no means lost heart, and the Consuls’ efforts to open unofficial
NEGOTIATIONS WITH ARABI
Produced no satisfactory result. Arabi was willing to consult
with the French Agent, but steadily refused to comply with the
Powers' demands that the malcontent generals, including Arabi
himself, should leave Egypt. He further announced that he would
not entertain any negotiations whatever until the Allied Fleet was
withdrawn. Finding Arabi impracticable, stronger measures were
taken, and on May 25 the British and French agents presented to the
Egyptian Premier an
ULTIMATUM
Demanding the dismissal and banishment of Arabi, the exile of
Ali Fehmy and Abdullah, and the resignation of the Cabinet. The
demand was refused by Mahmoud Samy; but as the Khedive had
accepted the Ultimatum in opposition to Ministerial advice, the
Ministry resigned forthwith. The Khedive took up the
reins of government with unwonted activity, summoned
Cherif Pasha to form a Cabinet, and issued proclama-
tions to the military and provincial authorities bidding them stop
recruiting and promote tranquillity. Tewfik then assembled the
State dignitaries, the Ulemas, Deputies, and chief officers at the
Palace, and informed them that the Anglo-French demonstration
was purely friendly, and that he himself intended to take the
supreme command of the army. Such an arrangement did not suit
the officers, who replied most insolently, refusing to recognise
foreign interference, and left in a rage. Immediately afterwards
the military commanders at Alexandria telegraphed to the Khedive
that they would not recognise any commander but Arabi, giving
Tewfik twelve hours for consideration, while in their turn the Cairo
Ulemas, Notables, and military held a stormy meeting at the house
of Sultan Pasha, the President of the Chamber, and finally
sent Sultan Pasha to Tewfik proposing that Arabi should be
maintained as War Minister. This proposal was at once rejected
by the Khedive, and his refusal caused the most intense excite-
ment in Cairo; the army assuming a threatening attitude. Arabi not
only roused the military, but warned the religious bodies, merchants,
and the chief inhabitants that unless they forced the Khedive to yield,
they would lose their lives. Greatly alarmed, they at once went off in a
body to the Palace, and so strongly urged the Khedive that he at last
unwillingly gave way. Accordingly, a proclamation was issued an-
nouncing the reinstatement of Arabi at the requestor the Ulemas and
the Chamber of Notables, and underthe pressure of the army, the latter
passage giving great umbrage to the officers, who complained bitterly
to Arabi, and demanded that the insult should be repaired by the
Khedive’s deposition. As Arabi, however, had only just assured
the foreign representatives that he would maintain peace ha was
obliged to calm his turbulent followers, and once more go through
the farce of reconciliation with the Khedive. Not that this recon-
ciliation restored public confidence. It was felt that such a patched-
tin peace could not last, and the excitement prevailing among the
natives created a
PANIC AMONG THE EUROPEANS,
Who literally poured out of Cairo and Alexandria, the home-
ward bound steamers at the latter port being obliged to turn away
passengers. The banks sent away their valuables, and the British
Consular Alexandria, Mr. Cookson, while endeavouring to allay the
excitement, thought it prudent to instruct the British community in
the best means of reaching the shore in case of emergency. The
British squadron was further reinforced by five ships, and French
(Continued on page 16)


J^EATH
and ROSS’S COLUMN.
QLVKALIKH,
Cl
.. for
nts
p.LYKALINE fffetiuaHy relieves
VJF ms \tn i i \i» 'i ii ■>, io prevalent
p>; iiora Mucus,
? Colds are cured
n unprecedented
in v.'
and
in a
rerawh ! . An m- . .”-r-
TNDEPENDENTTESTIMONIAL
i ill l\io IN! *
niiy under
medicine has the
I -N A., anti so to confer a ouon o
GLYKALINE Is the surest and
sDeediest Remedy for relieving at! who sutler
from obstructed breathing- In botlles, is. t%d. f as, gd. f
and 4s. fid. By post, is. qd.and js. Sold by ail Chemists
Full directions with each bottle.
Nhttraune,
OVED SPECIFIC,
1 For dy relieving Toothache, New
ralgi Nerves.
i ISJEURAHNE is known as a reliable
i cases of K hcumai
> ves often insta ntan
ntble to aM who a
and
will
»VU.tj
NEURALINE seldom fa
v ’x i' u v n , ;.! throt
kx I >■ ,i > i v \<f e Fains
"m v ',t’ <' >r • 1 ' \ 1 ames It?
v■" b 11 1 1r ft 1 M: Edgai
h* , o'u \ » >1 * \ h t “Mr
'< • s ) r thanks to Lady Matheson 1
1 1 i THE MOST SUCCESSFUL R
' « !ED. The relief expericn *
■
! V \N A is sold by all Chemists, in bottles,
I. by post, is. 3d. and 3s. Illustrated
;;h.
A V RuSINE,
• n 4V mm'roved application for
.mjs, the Skin, and Lips from Rough-
A
UKuS 1 ME quickly removes Chaps,
il'mess of the Skin after exposure to
U renders the surface of the skin
JI _ imparts _ suppleness, whiteness,
1 1 111* 1, ♦ of health, wkhc-mi;i any w:ty injuring
... ... mg the pores, but, on the contrary,
' ‘ I > 1 :asant to use, agreeable in perfume,
t greasy. In bottles, i-s.; by jh>si,
A
NH3EPTIC TOO Ul
RK, UR LIQ !
The Best Preparation
, _ This eiegunt and appro
! in all confidence. It clea iV'
, pm'n!'. decay, improves o
n.a U-ns thr Gums, and ii 1
.Kcsy.-it, antiseptic, an x 1
ir, <te and is in n m.
iu-iiß mses the odour !
od , .md is. 6d. Post f *
riNC-
,;k,
Gums.
,y be used
' he Teeth,
: umsmet,
a As an
ntifricc is
It cifec-
tiles, is.,
ocl.
DERBERINE,
*-? For Liver 1 terarigeroent. Indigestion, and Const!-
remedy ior removing
Liver, Biliousness, and
N >■ a 5 >mv •- U Piliv xClion in the stomach,
with a feeling of gid-
,IUXE is really excc!-
ic loins and kidneys ;
ipattem it stands ’urn
n bo lies, is. and
ptZONISED OIL,
W Mil* NEW PREPARATION
FOR THE HAIR.
By the use of this Oil, not only is the Hair nourished
and its natural appearance improved, hut decay and
weakness are arrested, the growth excited, ani pre-
judicial influences eradicated. It is proportionately
welcome to a!) who complain of their Hair failing off. as
OZONISED OIL distinctly and speedily strengthens
the fibre, while merely requiring to be well brushed into
the roots. The Hew Preparation Is not a i>ye, and
may be unhesitatingly used. Sold in bottles, is., is. 6d.,
ami zs. gd.; by post, is, 3d., 25., and 3s.
fYDONTALGIC ESSENCE
V-/ A Liquid Stopping for Decayed Teeth. It is
applied on wool, and hardens in the cavity. This Jkjnid
stopping, when it hardens, protects the exposed nerve
from cold or from any foreign substance, ami while
giving security and ease, causes no inconvenience. This
Essence cores Tooihaehe f and makes- mastication pos-
sible. The application is simple. Sold in bottles, i».
and as. gd.; by post, 15. 3d. and 3s.
PLAIN DIRECTIONS fo
A Complaints, and Com
Ethic Medicines, Medicin
■ndon and Frovincial Hor
a Catalogue of the most us«
free by post on application.
W OK
OKM POWDERS
:ia!Sy prepared
These powde
; Adults.. IT
the pe
pnOSPHO MURIATE of Qu-
Few TOILET
Y)OKl *S FU A NSTAovF F 1 bOA f*
ami irom
¥ HATH and ROSS,
HOMtEOPATHIC CHEMISTS,
S, Si. Paul’s Churchyard, E.C.; and q, Vere Street,
Oxford Street. Tondon. \y.
and GIBBS
’ A urOMATIC "
SILENT SEWING MACHINE
Owing to the Self-Regulating character >■{ .tv s- -n
struction, Is so simple that the most mrvi'ct irr. -rd .'in
at once do perfect work upon It—«>nk of pcrfrit
Beauty, Security, and Durability—a qndidy
EXCLUSIVELY by this Sewing Machine.
Its simplicity, Silence, and exceptional Utility fit
it pre-eminently for use alike in Mansion, Cottage, and
Workroom.
rpHE
and GIBBS
“ A UTOMATIC ”
SILENT SEWING MACHINE,
On account of its instant readiness for use, wide
adaptability to various kinds of work, and the saving it
effects m time and labour. Is found to be at once the
most useful and economical of Sewing Machines.
In elegance of Design and perfection of Finish its
excellence is unquestioned; and Its constant efficiency
and unfailing accuracy become apparent upon a short
trial.
'J'HE
and GIBBS
“ AUTOMATIC "
SILENT SEWING MACHINE,
Embodies a great advance In sewing mechanism, by
wluch all difficulty in the use of a Sewing Machine Is
totally obviated, and the operation simplified to a mar-
vellous extent.
It is always ready for use, and no preparatory experi-
ments or testing arc necessary when work is to be done,
but a saving of time is effected in doing even a few
inches of sewing.
'J'HE
and GIBBS
" AUTOMATIC ”
SILENT SEWING MACHINE
Does not interfere with the ordinary domestic
occupations ; Reading, Music, and Conversatian can be
continued during its use, and the sleeping infant is not
awakened.
It never fails, with the most ordinary care, even in
ibe hands of beginners, to produce perfect work—work
which has all the elasticity and security of the beat
knitting.
pREE TRIAL AT HOME, before
purchase for a Month, long enough to test bath
Machine and Sewing.
QARRIAGE PAID {both ways if
the machine is not desired after trial).
pRICE LISTS POST FREE, and
any particulars desired before or after purchase.
-yyiLLCOX and GIBBS
SEWING MACHINE COMPANY.
J^ONDON,
IS®, CIIEAPSIDE, Chief Office for Europe.
135. REGENT street, w.
MANCHESTER,
10, CROSS STREET, Royal Exchange.
QLASGOW,
115, HOPE STREET, comer Bothwell Street.
gRIGHTON,
3-» NEW ROAD (Taring North Street).
QAHTERBORY,
IS, MERCERY LANE,
JS|OTTIHGHAM,
>9. MARKET STREET,
PEETIFIED AGENT IK E¥EE¥
V TOWN.
D R |. COLLIS BROWNE’S
pHLORODYNE.
D R
I V!ROW.Mi S
]T)R J. COITUS BROWNE 5
QR J. ('Oil b ROW In* S
l/r? J, Coiiis 'isrowne was'un'dmibtedly* the
sworn to.-*** the 7Vw« t
JQR J. COL! IS CROWNO 0
JQR. J. COLLIS CROWNE if
QHLORODYNE.
QOLDS,
jgRONCHITIS,
QOUGHS,
j|STHMA.
IF 7 J. COLLIS BROWNE’S
QHLORODVNE.
Extract from ■ ■ > > ; ( , . t p /,
"ll , ' . . • , l ... !. ■ I
practu wi * - 1(l
thus s i ' i 1 t
want r ( ( j
D R J. COLLIS BROWNE'S
pHLORODYNE.
From Simreon Hawthorns-, CU
fm J C’OIUS BROWNE’S
O'
JQR. J. COLLIS BROWNE’S
OHLORODYNE
£?ie great specific for
QIIOLERA,
jQYSENTERY,
JQIARRH(TA.
FAR. J. iOLLIS BROWNE’S
JL -' pHLORODVNE.
PROM
X ceuticai >.
5, 1880.
To J. T, DAt
d of Health, London,
as a charm, one dose
! CO., Pharma-
-1 ,S "' H Simla.—January
Russell Street,
jQR J CO!.Lib BROWNE S
QHLORODYNE.
rapidly cuts short ah attacks of
jgPILEPSY, pALPITATION.
gl jvSMS, J_J Y3TERJA,
QOLIC.
JQR. J. COLLIS BROWNE’S
(J LORODYNE
is the true palHative in
p HEUMATISM,
c oy T, .' ’ MCER.
nrOfi i” A HE.
JMPORIi.M i ! A)'
D R J. COLIN;. •’i<OvV UE.
Sold in Bottle; s. 6J.
J- T.
35, Great Russell St: aufacturer.
'!/!/>
rumen'
gPECIAL NOTICE.
J_J AMPTON and SONS'
pXIimiTION SALE,
OPEN anti! AUGUST S
QF the MAGNIFICENT
pURNITURE, CARPETS, and CURTAINS,
REMOVED from the
COURT, CRYSTAL PALACE, which,
pHROUGH aa ARRANGEMENT with
'pHE BRUSH ELECTRIC POWER STORAGE COMPANY,
NOW SELLING at LESS than COST,
the SOCIETY of BRITISH ARTISTS’ spacious GALLERIES,
gUFFOLK STREET, PALL MALL EAST,
WILL INCLUDE a GREAT NUMBER of the
PICTURES LATELY EXHIBITED,
'pOGETHER WITH a FINE COLLECTION of
PERSIAN CARPETS from the SHAH’S PALACE.
LSO SEVERAL SPECIAL MANUFACTURES,
CURPLUS STOCKS of FURNITURE, CARPETS, CURTAINS,
O i; nd ORNAMENTAL OBJECTS,
EXHIBITED at the GALLERY, and at their SHOW-ROOMS, PALL
XL MALL EAST.
'"THE WHOLE will be SOLD at EXTRAORDINARY LOW PRICES
X for cash only,
at the GALLERY by VISITING CARD.
"pHE FURNITURE
pROM the ALHAMBRA COURT
|S COMPOSED of LUXURIOUS
TAIVANS, SOFAS, and EASY CHAIRS in RICH EMBROIDERED
LJ COVERINGS ;
TABLES, PERSIAN STOOLS, LAMPS; a NUMBER of VERY
X FINE VASES, some being very LA ROE and RARE-
FEW CARPETS, RUGS, and the CURTAINS.
fVECORATIONS.—NEW TREATMENTS will be SHOWN at the
LJ GALLERY
JN CARTON PIERRE WALL DECORATION,
p'HE WALTON LINCRUSTA WALL DECORATION,
TppOOD DADO PANELLINGS:
pNGLISH, FRENCH, and JAPANESE PAPER DECORATIONS ;
AIN and DECORATIVE PAINTING.
f'HIMNEY-PIECES, in VARIOUS STYLES, at the GALLERY, and
V_/ the SHOW-ROOMS, PALL MALI, EAST.
pNGLISH, FRENCH, NDIAN, and JAPANESE ART POTTERY,
THE ENTIRE COLLECTION of SPLENDID SPECIMENS of
A MOULTON FAIENCE, lately exhibited at the SOCIETY Ob AIUS,
gTOVES, hand-painted TILES, FENDERS, and FIRE BRASSES.
DINING-ROOM FURNITURE, at the GALLERY, and the SHOW-
ROOMS, PALI, MALI. EAST.
TTRAWING-ROOM FURNITURE, at tie Gallery, and the Show-Rooms,
LJ Tall Mall East. •
| N GREAT VARIETY, Amongst which are the Following:—
pIFTY ELEGANT EBONIZED CABINETS, 4ft. wide and 6ft.
F
25 by 20. (Usual price 30*.) 18s, bd.
’T'HREE HUNDRED WALL-BRACKETS, Chippendale Design,
1 with live bevelled Plates, 3 ft. hiffh by s ft. 3 in. wide. (Usual |>n« 4I» ) 335.
A MANUFACTURER’S LONDON STOCK OF SAMPLE SUITES
xl OF BEDROOM FURNITURE will be offered at the usual co»t pn«e.
SUITES IN ASH AND WALNUT, with Silvered Plate Glass Door
to Wardrobes, from £g. ios.
'"THREE HUNDRED BRASS AND IRON BEDSTEADS, the whole
X of a First Class Manufacturer's Stock, will be s d t the usual cost price.
UANDSOME STRONG BRASS FRENCH BEDSTEADS, 3 ft. by
I ! 6ft 6 in. (usual price £s) } £$ 15s. ditto, 4 ft. 6 in. by 6 ft. 6 in. high, £3 jSs. 6<i.
BEDDING.— Large Stock, Manufactured on the Premises, of the Purest
Materials, n Special Coves
QEVERAL SHIPMENTS of Very Fine and Rare ISPAHAN and
O TEHERAN PERSIAN CARPETS, Imported direct from daces* offering an unprecedented
Dppor!unity to Connoisseurs and collectors of acquiring matchless om a nearly exhausted market.
Also a large quantity of
JTERAGHAN PERSIAN CARPETS, in all Sizes, which will be
JL sold much under the usual
'THE ENTIRE STOCK OF TURKEY CARPETS, in all Sizes,
X I3S. per square yard. They are the best ted.
'pHE HOME CARPETS at the SHOW ROOMS, Pall Mail East.
IVE HUNDRED OCCASIONAL OBLONG TABLES, Ebonised or
m;f Tops, covered with R.
{Usual price 305.) 18s, 6d.
Walnut Tops, covered with Kiel) Velvet Me, imitation Persian Saddle-bag, with fringed border. Site
one of
USSELS and
Hows
MESSRS. HAMPTON and SONS, having Purchased
:- c I--: 1 ' v > ,v'n Carpet Manufacturers their whole Stock of best five 1 >
V‘ T I i bi.l i wli- i S, will SELL them at lower prices than have ever been sold
BRUSSELS CARPETS, Best Five Frame, New Do.yis, 3s. 3d.
per yard.
\A7TLTON PILE CARPETS, of the Newest Designs, 4s. 6d. per
V V yard, {usual price 6s, 6d. per yard),
THE WHOLE STOCK OF SUMMER CURTAINS IN MADRAS,
1. Crete, Brussels, Ecm Lace, Swiss, and other makes, will also be offered at a oreat reduction.
-TEN THOUSAND PIECES OF EMGLISH AND FRENCH
X CRETONNES and CHINTZES* at 4<l tor s. per yard ; usual prjee 8d lo 3s.
Five hundred pieces of English and french tapestries
for Window and 'Portiere Curtains.
REMNANTS WILL BE SOLD AT HALF-PRICE.
pOR CASH ONLY. Patterns cannot be sent.
JyJ OW OPEN. Continuing till August $.
UAMPTON and SONS. Pall Mall East (Telephone No. 3,506), Charing
I I Cross* S.W, Worksj 43, Belvedere Koad, S.E*


PALACE O F SAI D PASHA, CABA R I
PLACE DE L'EGLISE, ALEXANDRIA
DRILLIN G THE “IDLERS " ON BOA RD H.M. GUNBOAT "CONDOR"


THE BOURSE, ALEXANDRIA
RUE DE LA COLONNE POMPEE, ALEXANDRIA
ENTRANCE TO THE PALACE OF RAS-EL-TIN, ALEXANDRIA
HOTEL ABBAT, PLACE DE L"EGLISE, ALEXANDRIA
Now Oçupied by the French as a Consulate
GARDEN OF THE KHEDIVE'S PALACE AT RAMLEH
Looted by Bedouins
THE ZIZINIA THEATRE, BOULEVARD ISMAIL, ALEXANDRIA


vessels were held in readiness to join their consorts off Alexandria,
where the Egyptians on their side had already begun covertly
to strengthen the fortifications and erect new works while fostering
a spirit of fanatic resistance among the poorer classes. Meanwhile
the Khedive asked the Sultan to send a Turkish Commission to assist
him, and after considerable hesitation and delay the Porte agreed to
THE DESPATCH OF DERVISH PASHA AS TURKISH
COMMISSIONER
This decision was hastened by the Powers’ proposal for a Con-
ference at Constantinople on the Egyptian Question, in which
Turkey firmly refused to join, preferring to act solely on her own
responsibility. Dervish Pasha, who had shown considerable vigour
in pacifying Albania, was chosen for the mission. The Khedive
immediately expressed his gratitude, and Arabi, who had evidently
taken his cue throughout from Constantinople, duly joined in the
welcome at Cairo on June Bth. Dervish was received with great
ceremony and apparent enthusiasm, and brought with him presents
and a letter announcing that his mission was intended to restore
order and strengthen the Khedive’s authority. Arabi was to have
been outwardly ignored, but the wary Minister sent his under-
secretary to greet Dervish at Alexandria, and his representative,
contrary to the Khedive’s orders, managed to obtain a seat in
Dervish’s carriage on his entry into Cairo. But the Commissioner
was somewhat cool to Arabi himself, and while giving numerous
interviews, carefully abstained from compromising remarks. At first
the Turkish mission produced a good impression, and it was hoped
that the difficulties might even yet be settled peacefully, but
gradually Arabi and his military party, finding that Dervish confined
his efforts to talking, regained confidence, and the situation at
Cairo once more grew critical.
THE SHADOW OF THE COMING CONFLICT
Had meanwhile appeared at Alexandria, Fresh vessels were
fast being added to the Anglo-French Squadron, which lay opposite
the forts, with steam always up, and Admiral Seymour now
perceived that not only were the forts being extensively armed, but
that formidable earthworks were thrown up on all sides. He
accordingly complained to the Porte, and the Khedive was
requested to command Arabi to stop the works. After a slight
demur Arabi complied, asserting, however, that the works were
only necessary repairs, and repeating his usual protest against the
presence of the Foreign Squadron. The following Sunday brought
matters to a crisis.
THE RIOT OF JUNE nth
Insolent as the natives had become to Europeans, no immediate
outbreak was feared at Alexandria, where indeed many ladies
and children had come from Cairo for safety. But in the afternoon
of June nth a serious disturbance broke out, which though pro-
fessedly aroused by a quarrel between a Maltese and a donkey-boy,
was evidently premeditated, as the assault began simultaneously in
several parts of the town. The Maltese attempted to thrash the
donkey-boy, and was immediately set upon by the Arabs, who, as
the conflict took place do ;e to the Great Square, or Place Mehemet
Ali, rushed in great lone into the Square and attacked every
European they met. Armed with stout sticks, the Arabs now
appeared on all sides, hunted through cafes in search of Europeans,
and specially attacked all those in carriages. Mr, Cookson,
the British Consul, who was going to the Governor to ask for aid,
was badly hurt, and, indeed, his life was only saved by his cavass
diverting the aim of a knife. The Greek and Italian Consuls were
also injured, while the situation was made worse by the Greeks and
Maltese firing on the Arabs from the surrounding windows, and thus
injuring many Europeans. The fight spread toother streets, several
of which were sacked, and while many unfortunate Europeans took
refuge in the police-stations, only to be massacred by the guard,
others were flung into the harbour in a dying condition. For five
hours the city continued in a most alarming state, and at last
the town authorities, who had looked on indifferently, condescended
to send troops to quell the riot, but not until nearly fifty Euro-
peans were known to be killed, including the engineer and two
seamen from the British ironclad Superb. Subsequently it was
estimated that 250 Europeans in all lost their lives, while large
numbers were seriously wounded, the Arabs doing their best to
beat the heads of their victims to a pulp so as to prevent recognition.
As the evening came on those Europeans hidden away in different
houses gathered at the Consulates and chief buildings, and most of
the ladies and children —who had behaved with great courage—
were taken off to the Superb, and subsequently transferred to the
P. and O. Co.’s Tanjorc, which conveyed them to Venice. The
city was patrolled by the Egyptian soldiers during the night, and
next morning a perfect stampede of Europeans set in, people
leaving their property to take care of itself, and crowding on to
the vessels in harbour regardless of the scanty accommodation.
The British authorities did their best to provide a refuge by
chartering vessels and despatching those available to Malta, Cyprus,
and other ports, but as most of the refugees belonged to the poorer
classes, and were utterly destitute, considerable difficulty was
experienced in providing for them. Day by day the exodus
increased, till soon more than 50,000 Europeans had left the
country, while their departure stopped most of the public works,
and threw an enormous number of natives out of employ. This
added a new element of danger to the situation. The news of the
massacre created the utmost alarm at Cairo and the panic was not
lessened by «
THE DEPARTURE OF THE KHEDIVE FROM CAIRO
Tewpik had found his position untenable at his capital where, in-
deed, Arabi had been virtually declared master of the situation. So
the Khedive departed with Dervish, Arabi ostentatiously giving his
master his arm to the carriage, and paying him every mark of
respect; and Tewfik’s example was followed by every European
who could possibly leave. Vainly endeavouring to restore con-
fidence, the Khedive constantly drove through Alexandria, scantily
attended, and ordered a band to play in the Great Square every
evening; but the natives maintained their sulky attitude, and
openly insulted the Europeans, who closed their shops, fearing
pillage. Every effort was made by the Europeans to avoid arousing
native hostility, and the British dead were buried at sea lest a
funeral on land should give fresh cause for an outbreak. But all
this time Arabi at Cairo was pulling the strings, and his influence
resulted in the formation of a Cabinet under Ragheb Pasha,
in which Arabi kept the War Ministry. As the Khedive
declined to return to Cairo, the seat of Government was accord-
ingly transferred to Alexandria, where Arabi’s arrival did not
mend matters, for the natives, emboldened by his presence,
knocked off the hats of peaceable Englishmen in the streets, ami
jeeringly told them that they would be treated as Arabi treated the
British sailors. Accordingly the Consuls formally warned their
countrymen to leave, and the different war-ships embarked their
respective compatriots with all despatch, many being so eager to get
away that they even sold their property by auction in the streets,
and parted with their land at absurdly low prices. Meanwhile the
Ministry published their programme, which included the main-
tenance of the status qm and all international operations, and the
promise of an amnesty for all, except those implicated in the
massacre of tire nth. Admiral Seymour had already demanded
that the rioters should be punished, and a Commission of Inquiry
was duly formed but the French and British representatives soon
found that the inquiry was a mere farce, and refused to attend, while
shortly after the Commission was dissolved, on the pretext that it ex-
cited the public mind. Nevertheless the Egyptian Government con-
tinued to assure the Europeans that order was restored, and that there
was no necessity to leave, while the Porte boasted of the “happy result
of Dervish’s mission,” and sent Arabi the Order of the Medjidieh
in recompense for his services. This mark of approval from his
suzerain further strengthened Arabi’s prestige, and the War Minister
openly declared that he had been secretly supported by Turkey all
along, and could prove his assertion. Anxiety had made
the Khedive ill with fever, and sickness also prevailed
amongst the British representatives. Sir E. Malet was obliged to
leave for change of air, Mr. Cookson was invalided from the
injuries received in the riots, and the Vice-Consul, Mr. Calvert,
also broke down in health, so that the Suez Consul, Mr, West had to
take charge of the British interests while awaiting the arrival of
Mr. Cartwright from England as acting Consul.
THE SAFETY OF THE SUEZ CANAL
Was another source of anxiety. Alarming reports were circulated
of 5,000 disaffected soldiers being on the watch, of Bedouins haunt-
ing the banks, and of explosives being stored at Ismailia. Many of
the officials left, and the Egyptian Ministry were asked by M. de
Lesseps to ensure the protection of the traffic, Ragheb returned a
vague reply, hardly calculated to allay the anxiety, which was
heightened by the'rumour that Arabi intended to blow up the Canal
on the first sign of British hostile intentions. Throughout the interior
of the country also alarm prevailed, while distress increased from the
lack of employment. Numbers were starving in Alexandria, so that
the Ministry decided to enrol all strong destitute natives in the army,
and employ the remainder on public works. Somewhat late in the
day, also Ragheb and Dervish issued appeals to the Europeans to
stay and resume business, as Alexandrian commerce was fairly at a
standstill. Cargoes lay about on the wharves for any one to take
away, many vessels arrived laden and left without discharging their
freights, and the whole body of dock labourers, porters, &c., were
completely idle. The city itself appeared miserably desolate. Long
lines of shops were closed, and few people were about except the
soldiers, n,ooo of whom were then occupying the town and neigh-
bourhood. Refusing to allow natives to leave, and threatening to
confiscate their property in ease of flight, Arabi tried to obtain a levy
m masse of the population. Having persuaded an Ulema to issue a
“ fetvah ” legalising war with Turkey should she adopt armed
intervention, preparations for defence were so energetically pursued
tha: nearly the whole of the remaining Europeans retreated to the
harbour, where they took up their abode and transacted business.
THE FORTS ARMING
Although the works on the fortifications had been stopped for
some time in deference to the Sultan’s orders, Arabi now resumed
the operations, arming the forts with all possible despatch. Again
Admiral Seymour complained, and the Sultan commanded the
immediate cessation of all work, warning the Khedive that the
British fleet would certainly bombard the forts if his orders were
disregarded. The Ministry at once promised to comply, and indeed
the soldiers ceased in the daytime, but worked secretly by night.
The electric light from the Alexandra speedily disclosed their bad
faith, and thoroughly scared the Arabs, who ran away in tenor,
declaring that a new sun had arisen. The British Admiral, there-
fore, on July 6th, communicated directly with the Egyptian
Ministry, declaring that the military preparations were hostile to the
fleet, and that unless they were immediately discontinued he would
fire on the forts. Greatly alarmed, the Cabinet immediately sent
back a formal assurance that no fresh works had been undertaken.
This reply was plainly unsatisfactory, yet the Foreign Consuls wrote
to Admiral Seymour inquiring whether he was satisfied with the
Ministerial promise, and offering to obtain fresh conciliatory
assurances. The Admiral politely acknowledged the offer, pointing
out the worthlessness of written promises, and in the mean time took
steps for action. The electric light by night and reconnoitring
parties by day plainly showed the Egyptians as busy as ever in the
forts, and the Admiral decided to permit no further trifling.
Summoning a Council of War bn board his yacht the Helicon, he
arranged to despatch an ultimatum to the Egyptian Government
after a day's interval to allow all the Europeans to get off safely.
THE EUROPEANS LEAVING ALEXANDRIA
All day long on Sunday, the 9th, the exodus continued. The
British Consul notified the Foreign Consuls to warn their country-
men, and the English and foreign authorities one by one removed
their official property and staffs on board ship. Some few Europeans
decided to stay and defend the property of which they were in
charge, notably Mr. Cornish, at the Water-works, and the managers
of the Anglo-Egyptian Bank and Credit Lyonnais, who stoutly
barricaded their houses. The majority departed, however, and
some of the richer natives so far followed their example as to send
off their women and jewellery. The Khedive, with praiseworthy
courage, refused to leave his country in the hour of danger,
although Sir Auckland Colvin and Mr. Cartwright begged him to go
on board one of the men-of-war. All arrangements having been
completed, the British officials took up their quarters on the
P. and O. Co.’s vessel Tanjart,
ADMIRAL SEYMOUR’S ULTIMATUM
"Was despatched on the following morning at daybreak, giving the
Ministry twenty-four hours to surrender the forts for disarmament,
under the penalty of bombardment. The British squadron at once
began to prepare for action, while the foreign and merchant vessels
left the inner harbour for safer quarters. Their departure was
described as roost impressive. Under a bright blue sky, with
scarcely a breath of wind astir, the war-ships of the various nations
steamed out in squadrons, saluting as they passed the Admiral’s
flag, while the bands played the national airs. All the vessels
anchored outside, except the French Squadron, which had strict
orders not to join in the conflict, and so went off to Port Said.
Meanwhile, the British message did not reach the Ministry at once,
for during the morning Ragheb and others came off to the Invincible
to inquire the reason for the preparations, and were considerably
excited on hearing that an ultimatum had been sent. Shortly after,
the note was brought to them on board, and they returned ashore
to consult. The day passed without sign of submission, much to
the evident satisfaction of the British officers and crews, and by
4 a.m. on the nth inst. the order was given to prepare for action.
Whilst the vessels took up their positions the men watched eagerly
for signs of life in the forts, as they feared that the Egyptians
would bolt without fighting, and on seeing the soldiers grouped in
the defences, “a smile of grim satisfaction pervaded all laces.”
Hopes of the encounter were, however, damped by the appearance
of the Helicon bearing some Turkish officers, who announced that
they had been rowing about all night to find the Admiral. They
brought a Ministerial letter offering to dismount the Egyptian guns,
but Admiral Seymour replied that the lime for negotiations had
passed, and gave orders to commence
The Bombardment
Although a full description of the vessels engaged will be found
in another column, we may mention that eight ironclads were
engaged—the Inflexible, Tem/raire, Superb, Sultan, Alexandra,
Invincible, Penelope, and Monarch, representing a strength of
3,539 men and 66 guns, while five gunboats assisted—the iieacon.
Bittern, Condor, Cygnet, and Decoy, these vessels maintaining a
continuous chain of attack along the defences. The Alexandra,
Sultan, and Suteri being of considerable draught, were posted in
deep water in front of the Lighthouse on Ras-el-Tin. The Inflexible
and TemJraire were opposite the mouth of the harbour, the Monarch,
Invincible (with Admiral Seymour on board), and the Penelope
commanded Fort Mex, while the gunboats at first hovered in the
rear, ready to assist at any point. At 6.30 A.M. all was ready,
the men were at the guns eager to begin and at 7 A.M. the Alexandra
was signalled to fire
THE FIRST SHOT
After a few minutes’ delay to see whether the Egyptians would
at once give in or would retaliate, the remainder of the fleet opened
fire, and a fierce cannonade was poured upon the forts. “A
deafening salvo from five 9-inch guns poured from the side of the
Invincible," % ays a correspondent on board the flag-ship, “while
overhead ten Nordenfeldt guns in the tops swelled the din which
burst forth from the ships with a succession of drum-like tappings.
The Monarch and the Penelope bad set to work close at hand, and
the roar of their heavy guns, the ceaseless rattle of the Gatling
and Nordenfeldt machines, and the rush of the Monarch’s rockets,
added to the sound of our own guns, made up a deep and continuous
din which was almost bewildering.” The Egyptians replied on all
sides with, unexpected energy, but their aim was bad and their firing
virtually powerless against the armoured ships. Nevertheless both
officers and men showed remarkable courage under heavy fire, the
former setting an admirable example, and jumping upon the parapets
to see the effect of their shot Still the fierce British cannonade
soon began to tell, and the first sign was the blowing up by the
Monarch of a small fort near Mex at 8 a.m., while in another half
hour Fort Marsa succumbed. Fort Mex proved a formidable
opponent, but by nine o’clock all the guns were silenced, except
four heavy pieces, which were well maneuvered and gave consider-
able trouble, constantly hitting the vessels and wounding the sailors.
The Timhaire had unfortunately got aground at the beginning of
the action, but as by this time she had been helped off by "the
Condor, she joined the attack, and shortly after the gunboats lent
further assistance at the close of a plucky engagement with Fort
Marabout.
THE LITTLE " CONDOR" ATTACKING THE BIG
FORT
Sf,EING that the important Marabout batteries were trying to annoy
the vessels attacking Fort Mex, Lord diaries Beresford was ordered
to take the Condor close in shore and single-handed assailed the fort,
which was strong enough to have sunk the small craft by a single
shot. So cleverly did she manoeuvre that the Admiral signalled,
“Well done, Condor the commander’s approval being acknow-
edged by the crew with a cheer for their captain. The Condor
steamed as close in shore as the shoal would allow, and at last
attracted the fire of the batteries, which had previously ignored her.
The Beacon soon after shared the honoursoflheaction, and while shots
fell thick and fast around, not one did any material injury—although
the Condor had her boats knocked to pieces and was put sadly out of
trim, and with the aid of the Cygnet and Bittern, which came up
later, Marabout was soon completely silenced. This feat accom-
plished, the gunboats joined the fray off Fort Mex, where their
small size en abled them to pepper the batteries at close quarters,
and thus lend valuable aid. As they passed by the Invincible and
Inflexible, the crews cheered the little vessels heartily, giving groans
for Arabi, whom the sailors had christened “ Horrible Pasha.”
Fort Mex was demolished by 11 a.m., but the Monarch was
despatched to thoroughly level the fort, and it was thought prudent
to send ashore to spike the remaining gups.
A LANDING-PARTY FROM THE “INVINCIBLE ”
Was accordingly organised, the service being one of great
danger, as it was unknown whether troops were lurking behind
the fort, or whether the ruins were mined. Volunteers were
plentiful, however, and a party of twelve men went off under the
command of Lieutenant Barton R. Bradford, Flag-Lieutenant the
Hon. Hedworth Lambton, and Major Tulloch, having to swim
ashore through the surf. The Condor covered them with hei
fire, but no one was visible in the fort, where numerous
dead bodies lay about, and, after blowing up some of th<
guns with gun-cotton and spiking the rest, the small party returnee
afloat in safety.
DESTRUCTION OF THE EASTERN DEFENCES
Although the battle was perhaps more eventful on the weslen
side, the other ironclads engaged had been equally successful. Tin
Inflexible hovered between both attacking parties, and made sorm
admirable shell practice with her 81-ton guns. Early in the mornini
the Ras-el-Tin Palace was fired by the shells aimed at the neighbour
ing fort, which with the Lighthouse batteries became a mere shapeles
mass. At 1.30 the Inflexible finished off Fort Ada, blowing in th
whole face of the fort, and the vessels moved eastwards to complet
the destruction of Fort Pharos. By this time the work was done
the forts were ruined, and though Pharos kept up a weak struggl
till 4 P.M., the engagement had been practically finished by on
o’clock. Still the British ships continued to fire until 5.30 P.M
when the bombardment closed for the day, and the ships set to wor
to count the cost of their ten hours and a half action. The resu
had been in every way satisfactory, for the harbour defences wei
entirely destroyed, while, as we detail below, though most of tl
British ships were slightly damaged, none had received any serioi
injury.
Careful as the vessels were to avoid needless destruction beyor
the forts, some outlying pans of the town evidently suffered, and t!
Palace of Ras-el-Tin was seriously damaged As the night came o
fires were seen in different parts of the city, and these conflagratio
were at first pat down to the shells from the squadron, but subs
quent events proved that the British fire was not in fault, Otherwi
all was dark in the town, Arabi having extinguished all guiding high
The vessels ranged themseves in a line for the night, watching dose
throughout the darkness by help of the electric light for boats a;
torpedoes. The morning dawned dull and cloudy with a rising hea
swell, and the melancholy aspect of the squadron with their fla
half-mast high added to the gloomy appearance.
- THE BURIAL OF THE BRITISH DEAD
Was the first step, and the gunboats collected the five bodies
readiness. Buried with due military honours, the dead were lowei
overboard, and the vessels ran up their fighting flags and prepai
for fresh action. The high sea, however, was not favourable
fighting operations, and nothing was done till 10 A.M., when, as •
enemy was espied in the Hospital batteries, near Fort Ada,
Inflexible and Tcmeraire at once opened fire. The Egypt!
speedily disappeared, the firing ceased, and shortly after
{Continned on ban 20)


I
x
X
1
s
w
a
H
H
<
&
<
X
G
do
G.
W
ro
DO
W
>
a
:A
£
2 ,2
a s
CA -
a -
H
St* £Z
Q E.
rj
O <
P*
2 a
a* h
? u.
§ 3
2
<T
5
x
<
X
so
<*
X
o
~s
E>
o
A3
<
so
X
H
X
O
X


“WELL DONE, ' CONDORP'"- THE MEN OF THE " INVINCIBLE"


CHEERING THE "CONDOR" AFTER HER ATTACK ON FORT MARABOUT


THE GRAPHIC
SUMMER NUMBER
o
]S[ow
NE SHILLING.
J^EADY.
By Post, z)4i. Extra.
CONTAINS the following Illustrations, which are fac-simile
V/ reproductions of the original Water-Colour Drawings:—
BY THE RIVER.
By R. J. Gordon.
a holiday on the continent.
Seven Sketches. By Adeieh Marie.
ON THE MOORS.
By W. Small.
Drawings:-
OUR LAWN TENNIS PARTY. Three
Sketches. By E. K. Johnson.
YOUNG SKA DUGS. By S. E. Waller.
PLAYMATES.
By Miss Manley.
THE JOYS OF ANGLING. Five
Sketches. By C. E. Fripp.
THE LEGEND OP OLD CHROMER
Six Sketches, By R. Caldecott.
A HOLIDAY ON THE THAMES.
Ten Sketches. By J. C. Dollman.
TOURISTS IN JAPAN. Seven Sketches.
Bv H. F. Abell,
HOLIDAYS IN INDIA. Five Sketches.
By W. Wilson.
Also an EXTRA PLATE from a Painting by C.* GREEN, entitled
GOODS.
By Arthur Hopkins.
LOTOS EATERS.
By C. J. Staniland.
>N and
WON ancf LOST.
By C. J. Staniland,
A PAIR OF TOUR ISTS. Nino Sketches.
By W. Ralston.
SUMMER
The whole of these
60 ILLUSTRATIONS
Are PRINTED in COLOURS.
'J'HE FOLLOWING are the STORIES
MOUNTAIN MYSTERIES.
HIS MAJESTY’S BARBER.
THE MAID OF MOYTURA.
THE SIREN.
QFFICE : 190, STRAND, LONDON,
ALL’S FAIR IN LOVE AND
WAR.
AUNT OR NIECE.
&c. &c.
'J'ERMS
OF SUBSCRIPTION.
The following are the Terras of Subscription for One Year, paid in advance including
vd the extra Christmas and Summer Numbtrt, fQr which the pubisbdris
Postage and
prepared to supply The Graphic.
United Kingdom ....... 31s.
Egypt
Jamaica
Mexico
Monte Vide
Natal
New Zealand
St. Thomas
Suez
United States
West Indies
All Parts of Europe
Africa, West Coast
Australia
Brazil
Canada
Cape of Good Hope
375. 6d. Thick Edition, or 335. for the Thin Paper Edition.
The Postage of a Single Copy of The Graphic (either the Thick or Thin Edition) to
any part of the United Kingdom is %d. .... .... . , ... .
to any other country mentioned in the above list the charge is j.d. thm and ad. thick
but all Newspapers which are sent abroad must be posted within eight days after Ui®
date of publication
W* 1 IS
435. fid. Thick Edition, or 365. the Thin Edition.
Postage of Single Copses, 311 and i%d.
Note.—Subscribers are strongly recommended to procure the ordinary Thick
Edition, as the illustrations when printed on the thin paper are never satisfactory. The
difference is merely the extra cost of postage, amounting to 4s. 6d. or 6s. 6d. for the
whole year, as indicated in the foregoing list.
Subscriptions can be paid by means of a cheque or post-office order made payable to
E. J. Mansfield, xgo, Strand, London.
" THE GRAPHIC ” IN PARIS
i Can be obtained at The Graphic Office, where all information respecting
Subscriptions and Advertisements will be given.
ts, RUE HLEUE, PARIS.
Now Ready,
VOLUME XXV.
OF
“THE GRAPHI C,”
Comprising over 500 Illustrations of the Current Events of Interest, Portraits, and
Copies of Celebrated Paintings and Works of Art.
Handsomely bound in blue doth, gilt letters, and gilt edge*, price 20s.
This Volume forms one of the most Handsome and Useful Presents of the Season.
Sent, carriage free, to any railway station in England on receipt of P. 0.0, for sis.
A FLAG OF TRUCE
I WAS hoisted on the Arsenal, and Lieutenant Lambton was sent
jyith the Bittern to hold a parley. Received by the Military Com-
Ifiandant, Toulba Pasha, he demanded the surrender of several
>rts, Toulba answered that he could not consent until he had
omnmnicated with the Khedive and Ministry at Rami eh, but he
.■as told that no time would be allowed for negotiations, and that
nless he yielded at once hostilities would recommence. All was quiet,
owevet, till 4 P. M., when the Invincible again fired one shot, and
second flag of truce was immediately hoisted. Once more a British
unboat went in shore to negotiate, but this time found no one to
real with, and by the evening it wag discovered that Alexandria was
ompletely abandoned, and that the flag of truce had been used
uerely as a device to get the army safely out of the city. The city
s-as now aglow from a serious conflagration, so a reconnoitring
arty went ashore and found the population gone, and
ALEXANDRIA IN FLAMES
Befor* retreating, the soldiers had plundered the houses,
lad set fire to different parts of the city, and let loose the
onvicts and Bedouins to pillage at leisure. Until daylight
t was hardly safe to enter the city; but early on the
norning of the 13th inst., several of the vessels were sent into
he tarbour, and a force of Marines and Blue-jackets were landed.
Alexandria was then in a most appalling condition. Burning houses
topped the way on all sides, dead bodies lay scattered about the
treets, and theonlysignsof life werepillaging Arabs, distracted refugees,
,nd starving animals. The unfortunate survivors had a miserable
ale to tell, although, as most of them had barricaded themselves in
heir houses, they could give little information of the popular effect
if the bombardment. The most detailed account was furnished by
be manager of the Anglo-Egyptian Bank, M. Goussio, who had
iravely remained at his post. He relates that on the night before
Ke bombardment the majority of the population fled, disregarding
rabi’s orders to join the army, while the troops were matching
fown to the forts.
THE OPENING OF THE BOMBARDMENT
Created a terrible panic, and while Arabi tried to restore
confidence by driving through the town the people continued to
msh away, with loud cries and howls, amidst the noise of Shells,
many of which whistled over the town, and one fell in the Square
(lose to the Bank. Meanwhile a detachment of soldiers paraded
he town to see whether the Europeans were communicating with
<jhe Fleet, and cut the telegraph and telephone wires. When the
bring ceased at five o’clock, the Arabs recovered their spirits, and
Embraced each other, officers coming in from the front to announce
»at two British ironclads had been sunk and five disabled,
evertheless, the exodus continued all night, and next day the
oldiers assembled in the Great Square, and attempted vainly to
mter the Bank and the Credit Lyonnais opposite, which was also
iefended by its manager, M. Monge. Soon after the soldiers began
E pillage, under their officers* orders, and breaking into the houses
d shops brought out the contents pell-mell to divide the spoil,
straying all they were unable to take away. The plunder
Completed, they flung the remains back into the houses, and with
ghe aid of petroleum set the place alight, hurrying off to repeat the
Operation elsewhere. Soon after five the army departed to join
|krabi, who, with singular cowardice, had kept scrupulously oat
Iff harm’s way. At first he remained in Fort Kafarelli, in the
yjentre of the : town, but at the first shell retired to the Rosetta
(late, and thence to Kafrdawar. Left to the tender mercies
iff Bedouins and convicts, the town was speedily sacked from end to
|tod, and the conflagrations spread so rapidly that M. Goussio was
Isbliged to make constant sorties during the night to keep the
fceighbourhood free from incendiaries. Early in the morning he
E lined forces with the manager of the Credit Lyonnais, where
iveral European families had taken refuge, and the whole party,
umbering 105, marched down to the harbour, the pillagers being
00 busy to molest them, and were taken off by the fleet. Less
ortunate than these survivors, a number of Europeans and native
Christians were massacred, both by the soldiery and the marauders,
.nd it is doubtful whether the loss of life will ever be accurately
scertained, as many bodies lie crushed under the calcined ruins.
Jndeterred by the arrival of the British, the incendiaries and
allagers continued their work, and it was found necessary to adopt
he strongest measures to restore order. The streets were regularly
iatrolled by a naval police force organised by Lord Charles
JBeresford, with strict injunctions to severely punish looting, and by as
fciany Marines and Blue-jackets as could be spared from the fleet,
mder the command of Captain Fisher, of the Inflexible, the
(jAmericans contributing a small body of Marines to assist as police.
THE STATE OF ALEXANDRIA
Was most terrible. The European quarter was a mere wreck,
ttnd those buildings still standing had been completely pillaged, while
4 was difficult to pick a way over the smouldering ruins and
amidst the danger of falling houses. The handsome Great Square
was such a mass of ruins that a resident who had known the city
for seventeen years could not find the openings of the different
streets, and could only guess his position by the aid of the statue of
jMchemet Ali, which stood intact amidst the glow. At first the
British Consulate and Telegraph Office were found safe, but they
here subsequently burned, while most of the other Consulates had
disappeared. The English, Greek, and Catholic Churches were
untouched, as well as the Bourse and several banks, and both the
Eui opean and the German Hospitals. In the latter the Sisters behaved
most courageously, keeping to their post, although the mob burst in
upon them, and compelled them to pull down the German flag which
had been hoisted for their protection. Fortunately they were not further
molested, although when the British entered they were forced to
Shift their quarters, with their invalids, to the German gunboat, as
:hc hospital was surrounded by British troops and guns in readiness
;o repel any attack from Arabi. The native hospital was left to
itself, and a British surgeon found the patients with but one
attendant, several having died from want, and all being in a
fniserable state from starvation and lack of attention to their
wounds. As the British patrolled the city in reconnoitring parties
they met a few natives, who ostentatiously showed either a white
tag or the red band on the arm denoting allegiance to the KWdive,
»nd paid the foreigners every sign of respect. The streets,
however, were mainly deserted, the very dogs had disappeared, and
die only sound was the mewing of famished cats, which seemed to
jaunt every house. Piles of rubbish and plunder filled up the
footway, and the ruins were so inflammable that it was sufficient to
dirow a burning stick across the road to kindle a fresh conflagration.
Owing to this, many of the buildings which had escaped the
first fires, were subsequently destroyed. All Thursday night
ind during the next day the fires continued, partly through
die industry of the incendiaries, and the British were obliged
;o punish the marauders severely. Those caught in the act
if incendiarism were shot, pillagers were flogged, and their hair cut
>n one side of the head to provide for future recognition. It was
turious, by-the-bye, to see how little the thieves understood the
mine of what they were stealing. One man had his shirt filled
with fragments of fragile glass, and another was carrying off an old
woken pair of scales. Little dry little the people ventured out,
hiding that the British solely intended to restore order. Most of
he poor inhabitants were starving, and when offered money replied
hat it could not buy bread when none was to be found. Indeed it
is hardly possible to estimate the distress in the city, or even the ruin
to those hitherto prosperous Europeans who have lost all by the
results of the bombardment. Even so far afield as Ramleh the
houses have been looted, and as many of the wealthy English had
houses in the suburb this loss is considerable.
On assuming the protection of Alexandria the British went round
the demolished forts and spiked the remaining guns, finding the
batteries mere heaps of crumbling masonry, and filled with dead
bodies. Marines were quartered at all gates, and the town was
divided into districts under guards, the men working with the utmost
zeal. Houses were blown down to prevent the progress of the flames,
some of the loyal natives being pressed into this service to provide
them with food and occupation, while the precaution was taken to
deprive everybody of any weapon, even a stick. Soon the shops began
to re-open, and at the present time some semblance of order and
business is maintained in the city, notwithstanding alarm as to Arabi’s
movements, and the dread of riots in Cairo and other parts of the
country. For a short time the naval force on shore was very insuf-
ficient to resist attack, but at the beginning of last week the temporary
garrison was reinforced by some 6,000 British troops, thus enabling
the marines and Blue-jackets to return to their vessels.
THE FATE OF THE KHEDIVE
Had given much anxiety during the bombardment and subsequent
disastrous events, as it was feared that Tewfik’s courageous conduct
might cost him his life. Accompanied by Dervish, who seems to
have shown equal pluck, he retired to Ramleh during the bombard-
ment, where the ill success of the Egyptians placed him in great
danger. Arabi sent a body of troops to surround the Palace and
kill Tewfik, but on the news of the army’s retreat this guard were
so demoralised that the Khedive and Dervish managed to temporise
with them. Admiral Seymour was then communicated with, and as
he sent the Condor to keep the men in check, Tewfik and the
Turkish Commissioner escaped—and took refuge in the ruined Ras-
el-Tin Palace, where their safety was ensured by a British guard.
Signs of the bombardment are visible everywhere in the Palace, the
glasses are shattered, and bullets stick in the wall, while the English
sailors ate quartered in the magnificent apartments.
The Bombarding Fleet
Great as was the interest taken by the general public in the
accounts of the bombardment, it was equalled if not excelled by
that of military and naval scientists who looked upon the artillery
duel from a purely professional and technical point of view, a fact
which is hardly to be wondered at considering that the action is the
first of its kind which has taken place since the bombardment of
Sebastopol, when guns and ships were of a very different type and
calibre. The accounts which have as yet come to hand are not of
a very detailed or critical character, a fact which is mainly due to
the density of the smoke, which made it impossible to do more than
guess at the direction and effect of each shot, but the tremendous
destructive power of monster artillery upon earthworks and fortifica-
tions was made plain, and whatever has yet to be told respecting
the ships and guns, the reports of the behaviour of the crews of
the various vessels are indisputable proofs that the modern British
sailor is as cool under fire and as eager to get at the enemy as were
ever his predecessors in the olden time, before the wooden walls of
Old England had given place to “iron pots "and “kettles of steam.”
The men worked the guns with eagerness and enthusiasm, the crews of
each vessel cheering the others whenever they chanced to come within
hail, and exhibiting the liveliest anxiety as to the effect of each shot,
which was only observable from aloft, and not always thence, in con-
sequence of the smoke. Every hit was hailed with cheers and hand-
clapping, whilst the luckless gunners whose aim proved untrue were the
victims of good-humoured chaff. On board the Invincible a young
midshipman named Hardy stationed himself in the main-top, and
signalled the effect of each shot to the officers on deck. On the
same vessel a young sailor who was wounded in the leg hopped
about immediately after amputation had been performed, exhibiting
the severed limb to his comrades ; whilst on board the Alexandra
a gallant act was performed by Gunner Harding, who seized a live
shell which came through upon the main deck, and coolly carried
it to a bucket of water in which he immersed it to extinguish the
fuse. He will, probably, be recommended for the Victoria Cross.
Admiral Seymour’s disposition of the vessels for the attack
seems to be generally regarded as the best possible under the
existing conditions, and the accounts agree in describing the fire of
the ship as accurate rind effective. The damage sustained by the
ships is trifling, compared with what it might have been had the
Egyptian gunners been more skilful, whilst if torpedoes had been
employed against them, the result would in all probability have been
very serious. Happily for us this was conspicuous by its absence.
The total number of casualties on board the fleet were six
killed (including Lieutenant Jackson of the Inflexible, who died of
his wounds on Sunday last) and twenty-six wounded, a list which
may be looked upon as exceedingly light.
According to the calculated force and resistance of guns and
armour-plates respectively, the g-inch rifle guns of the forts ought to
have been capable of piercing the armour of all the ships engaged,
with the exception of the Inflexible, but they failed to do so ; a result
which, the Army and Navy Gazette says: “Will surprise the
theorists, but it Is only what really practical men have long ago
urged. The official trials being, in fact, no trials at all of the practical
power of resistance of plates to penetration, as they were then
placed in an exact right angle to the guns, whereas in action shots
would almost never strike at the right angle ; and they were fixed
rigidly and backed so solidly as to prevent the slightest give,
whilst in practice the give would be considerable ; the vessel
would bodily yield to the strokes of a very heavy shot, and the
framework would also yield somewhat.” It is stated that in no
single instance was the armour of any of the ships penetrated by
the enemy’s shots, although, according to one account, that of the
Superb was pierced in one place.
The following details with regard to the various ships engaged
may prove interesting :—-The Alexandra, which is the Flag Ship
of the Mediterranean Fleet, although during the bombardment
Admiral Sir B. Seymour’s flag was borne by the Invincible,
is a double-screw, two-decked iron ship, 9,490 tons, 8,610 horse-
power, being armour-plated from Sto 12 inches in thickness. She
carries two 25-ton guns, and ten 18-tons, four of which can fire right
ahead and two right astern, whilst all can be employed for broadside
fire. Her crew numbers 671, and she is commanded by Captain Charles
F. Hotham ; the Hon. Hedworth Lambton being Flag-Lieutenant.
She is said to have been as much knocked about as any of the fleet,
receiving some twenty-five shots in her hull, and several shells, one
of which burst in the commander’s cabin, whilst another passed
right through the captain’s cabin, and others damaged the
funnel, passed through the gun room, and smashed the steam
launch. She is also stated to have two of her guns disabled by
“ splitting ” —accidents which may either have resulted from a blow
of a hostile shot, or a premature explosion of the charge. Her
casualties were one man killed and three wounded.
The Inflexible, Captain John A. Fisher, is a double screw iron
ship with armour sixteen to twenty-four inches thick, her tonnage
being 11,400, and horse-power 8,480. She is divided into 135
watertight compartments, and has'two turrets placed en echelon
within the walls of a central citadel io which are mounted four
monster guns of eighty-one tons each, which are wotked by
hydraulic power, and throw shells of 1,700 lbs. weight, whilst she is
also armed with a powerful ram, and is pierced for Whitehead tor-
pedoes. The number of her crew is 349. Her loss was one killed
and two wounded, one of the latter being Lieutenant Francis Syd-
ney Jackson, who has since died. He joined the Royal Navy in
1866 as a cadet, and was promoted midshipman in 1861, Sub-Lieu-
tenant in 1872, and Lieutenant in 1876.
The Thniraire, Captain Henry F. Nicholson, which with the
Inflexible carried off the chief honours of the fight, is a vessel of
8,540 tons, 7,700 horse-power, with armour eight to ten inches
thick. She carries four 18-ton, and four 25-ton guns, six of
which are placed in a double central battery on the main deck,
whilst the other two are mounted on the disappearing principle
in turrets fore and aft with open tops. She also carries White-
head and Harvey torpedoes, and has a ram which projects 8 feet
beyond her bow. Her crew numbers 534, and she appears to have
had no casualties.
The Invincible, Captain Robert H. M. Molyneaux, 6,010 tons,
4,830 horse-power, has armour 6 to 8 inches thick, and carries
fourteen 12-ton guns. She was struck many times, bat only six
shots penetrated the unarmoured portion of the vessel, scattering
splinters in all directions. Of her crew of 450 none were killed,
but a midshipman and five men were wounded.
The Sultan, Captain Walter J, Hunt-Grubbe, 9,290 tons, 7,720
horse-power, 10-inch to 12-inch armour, carries eight 18-ton
and four 12-ton guns. She was hit several times, and one report
says that her, mainmast was seriously injured, while of her crew of
400 two were killed and eight wounded.
The Superb, Captain Thomas Le Hunter Warde, 9,100 tons, 6,580
horse-power, mounting sixteen guns, and protected by armour of
10 to 12 inches, which, according to one account, was pierced, had a
crew of 620, of whom one was killed and one wounded. She was
built on the Thames in 1878 for the Turkish Government, but
stopped as contraband of war, and subsequently purchased for the
British Navy.
The Monarch, Captain Henry Fairfax, C. 8., 8,320 tons, 7,840
horse-power, has armour of 8 inches to 10 inches, and seven
guns, four of which are 25-tonners. She was not hit once, probably
owing to her being able to keep on the move, but her gun practice
is spoken of as inferior to that of the Invincible.
The Penelope, Captain St. George C. D’Arcy-Irvine, 4,470 tons,
4,700 horse-power 5-inch to 6-inch armour, mounting eleven 12-ton
guns, was struck five times, and had eight men killed, and one gun
disabled.
The fiveganboats— Beacon, four guns. Commander Hand ; Bittern,
three guns, Commander Brand ; Cygnet, four guns, Commander
Ryder ; Condor, three guns, Commander Lord Charles Beresford
(our special artist, Mr. F. Villiers, was on board this vessel during the
bombardment); and Decoy, four guns, Commander Boldero, seem to
have altogether escaped injury, although heavy missiles fell thick
around them, their diminutive size being naturally their best protection.
All the thirteen vessels were fully manned, and in addition to their
heavy armament most of them were furnished with machine guns of
the Nordenfeldt and Gatling patterns.—We have gathered some of
the above details from the July edition of the “ Royal Navy List”
(Witherby and Co.. 74, Cornhill) Which is the only publication
containing a complete record of the war-services of the Naval and
Marine Officers who have distinguished themselves in the operations
in Egypt. We should also state that some of our engravings of
views in Alexandria are from photographs by Fiorillo, Alexandria.


lOHN I
J path:
Now >. gll
Tl-
> and SONS'
K PIANOS.
Triable Improve*
,nt Perfect Check
mtc Sounding
’ompensatm".
e Sustaining
iidated Mcts!
The KKLNSMKAD Talent Tone Kenovator, &c
|Ol U CrtiNSM* ai.h SONS
he Two Firm Special
Iney, 1880; the Legion
JOHN BRIN r 7J T “‘ MA *-d SONS'
J SO.STE
For 1
With the Perfect Check Repeater Action,
Pa ■i,
TOHN BKFI Sts i' f \o jo*; SONS’
J TATE
“ I Stave attentively examined pianos ol
Messrs. John Rrinsmead and Sons that arc exhibited
«*;■■■ >.l ■ < ■ i .
O * 1 > l v, i i k _<*•, « c ' , 1 i \
15 nvi > P• , anist.”
Ch. Gounod
j
OHN BRINSMEAD and SONS'
PATENT SOSTENKNTK PIANOS.
*' We, the imtlersi
seen and most it on si
Pianos al the I'mve
the palm belongs to
BimsmeadT
(Court Ptai
“ Paris, Sept 8,187 S.
that, alter having
amined the English
on of i8;8, find that
anos of the house of
ÜBSKSTEINj
ITOINE DE K.ONTSKI,
nperor of Germany.)
JOHN BRINSMEAD and SONS 5
w.
JC O I i' S'%n O ) ' S * a tGTN
PATENT SUSTKi
Illustrated London .
J
OHN BRIK
PATENT SC
* and SONS’
E PIANOS.
Da
e insti it i 'h and
touch ' l , i ' illness.
<ead may certainly be i,, < -d upon
J
OHN B
FATE;
“ In adds! ion
Messrs, John 1 :
tkm of 5878, th
Chevalier of the .t-egiun or uumwi.
I SONS’
NOS.
5 awarded to
Paris Exiubh
been created
JOHN B
J fate;
*' Anew Plant:
AD SONS’
i - '
rOHF ”
May b
Ev
‘ ~ ~NS*
18, so, am
HTE “1
T, LONDON, W.
GRAFTON RD.
N.W.
T ]
ORGAN
;r, by the best
A, with a!t the
. M. Coward,
METZLER and CO., 37, (treat Marlborough Street,
Loudon, W.
NEW LISTS NOW READY.
PIANOFORTES,
X by the le.st English and foreign makers, re-
turned from hire, at greatly reduced prices.
PIANOFORTES,
JT By Ford. of Paris. New list at reduced prices.
A RIiiRICAN ORGANS,
XIl By M ascm and Hamlin and os her makers, re-
turned from hire, at reduced prices.
Harmoniums,
Ky Alexandre and other makers, at reduced
m/r EC HAN 1 CAL PIANOFORTES,
JIfJL Flaying xo tunes, price 35 guineas; 20 tunes,
price 4? guineas
TV/TETZLER and CO.,
,i¥l 37 GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET,
LONDON, W.
B
A u i
WILLIAMS’ New Publications.
Y’S STATE BALI.,
ALACK.
,ver). Waltzer.
favour with winch
,-ed bids fair to out-
hr " in popularity.
yell). Waltzer.
3
his \va!
strip shi
f e:
JL-rf By OSCAR SKYDFL.
nPHEOLDand theYOUNGMARIE.
A By Weatherly and Cowan. Sung by Miss
Clara Samuel!, ss. net.
| OVE ABIDES. By Weatherly
JL-< and Roeckel. Sung by Madame Evans War
wick. 25. net.
HTHRO’ SQLDEN GATE.
A Words b Wood, Music by George
Fox. Sung L ; Lloyd, as. net,
London; li IS, 60, Paternoster Row.
|lf LEVEL, WOLFF, and CO.’S
Jl T ery description of these celebrated
1 outrun jEor HIKE.
Sole >, NEW BOND STREET, W.
pOPULAR SONGS.
T THINK OF ALL THOU ART
A TO MK, In D and F, Cowes. Net, as. Sung by
Mrs Osgood, Miss tie Fonblanque, Clara Myers, Car-
lolta Elliott.
Not always young, in e
and F. Paladilue. Net as. Sung by Madame
Trebelli and all principal vocalists.
1
i
3 and F.
y Miss Annie
alch, Madanu
i
h f'OLD IN THE I’WiLIGHT. In
I >, F, and G, Weatherly and Mou.oy. In
f ■ suit all voices. .Net, as. Sung by Miss Annie
1 mmeline Dixon, M'Lcan, and Madame Worrell.
. WE WILL SHINE ALL
A™/ THROUGH (Contralto). FINSUTI. Net w
Sung by Miss Clara Myers, &c.
THE c
1 HEAV
Net, as Ami
of exquisite it
most charming
, LETTER TO
-mo or Contralto). Levey,
rawing- room song. “ Wards
id blended with'music of a
-Vide Press,
pOWEN'S LATEST SONGS. In
.Keys to Suit all Voices. .Each net, 2S.
If Thou VVfit Remember i Good Night.
Rondel (Kiss Me, Sweet- | The Night IlasaThousand
heart). I Lyes.
lOLD THOMAS. OPERA-
J ! TIC FAN 1 V ■’ w
1 1. enots. 1 * 1 ■).
t rmS. l>m i . , a.
moderate! difficult, price 2s. net each.
SALLY BROWN.
FOX. This is without exi
cantata bufTa we have yet seen. S
voices or chorus. Price as. 6d. n
sent to any Choral Society, post fr<
yust out.
Ai: VHUR KOBfiRTSS NEW
A SONGS, FVI -ONE ANYTHING
SINCE. Words, ID ls. Music, Stanis-
laus. Net, as. ——• —
Tidings of comfort and
JOY will be ready in a few days.
RGE
wilrie?,l
■"or Sour
!.e Copy
In the Press,.
THE VICAR OF BRAY
A (Grundy and Solomon),
COMIC OPERA IN TWO ACTS.
/
of ■,
V\
OI
T T
imrUtfUrKr the above)
c mcerts free
She Wore a
w" (Wallace;
■JLIJAMS.
|-{E!
'.ULo.L VIOLIN
.Piano
i ' , ameau.
:• I • ffit.
I 1
•vdm- f P .locche-
BLAt
Arranged ii
T ON DON: J. WILLIAMS, 24,
JU/ BERNERS STREET, ami CHEAPSIDE.
pETER KOM.vroN, Oxford
- Silk
DN.-
tson, in-
THE STOCK of LADIES’ and
DREN'S OUTFITTING of Misses F,
r sti, of 104, Regent Street; (retiring from
I be on sale at half-price.
ROBINSON, Oxford
X STREET, W.
THE STOC
X BU RY, of So,
DRESSES,
DRAPE!
L. Kings-
ulham Road,
IS, SILKS,
a, LACK,
he assignees of
■■■ ■ r cent, off cost
• 1 i 1 l \ mual Sale now
Street.
i : ' s ' < i il! descriptions
apery 1 ' o s price of less
( Fancy Wools, Toys, and Pictures ■will
‘or future sale, of which notice will be
npHE NEW SALOON (lately a
X portion of the London Crystal Palace Bazaar) is
NOW OPEN, with a grand collection of
OSTO
V-/ mere, \
promenade, c-
all greatly red
Velvet, Cash-
■ materials for dinner,
% and ordinary wear,
.rttculars to
DETER ROBINSON, Oxford
I STREET, LONDON.
| .j r TRY CLAVE’S
Ull #•!»«• tv T> rt CAD
i) \v‘
Includi
ANCE SALE
Tins MONTH,
F. BREWER, of
, Norwood.
> OST FREE.
WE
50 ]:
d AT A SLIGHT
N
:es
MUL | * »*OCADED I LKS,
Which we shall offer during the SALE at the low
fixed price of
3s, fid. per yard.
;,;t inches wide,
quite perfect, and the styles and
j
sent post free.
_AVE,
86, 83, NEW OXFORD
STREET, W.C.
c°
*ER j^OBINSONi
U R
h
D GENERAL
WAREHOUSE,
STREET,
'pAMILY BEREAVEMENTS. 1
Uncm Receipt of Letters or Telegram
( 11 ' > IXFEF H N 1 W !
P t * W . ' ERS t W' ‘ - i
I 1 s mV (no ;
jplionally law rates,
small families.
Funerals Condi; n or Country a,
S s.
Address asfi to 263, Regent Street, London.
LEXER ROBINSON’S.
THE BEST CRAPES*
NOT SPOT WITH RAIN,
li.shed by the manufacturer in this
olely to the order of PETER
m s*. 6d to 125. od. per yard,
by this process, from is. 6<i.
ISON, Mourning Warehouse*
*5O to 20a, Regent Street, London* W.
SUPERIOR BRITISH MANUFACTURE.
C Egerton Burnett’s
T Q LAD f ES. . \ , v T\' i
.black should write for pat-
EGERTON BURNET'
Wellington,
DUS’S NEW
'ee hy post.
NEW WOR IK 1 WAIN.
Crown nra. 6s.
pm SIOLEN Will V
<■ > > > i v. Bv Mark V
i.; I, -a.,. With “A
> ' intent ; ' 1
i ' ' . s spec t i i
p l --- ” • ■ ■ " u,, r
Coat,” 3 vois., crown Bvo. !i ‘Coals of Fire 1 is a story
c k I \ \ . f three volumes
o ch continued
pleasure. "-T thtnamm.
NEW STORIES.
", .**- . mavJ Of WALES’S
A GARDEN PARTY, and other Stories, By-
Mrs. J, 11. Riddell. Crown Bvo., 6s. /‘ 'i'hey are
all ex'-ellem reading. Not many men of to-day could
P :s showing as much firmness, grip, and
k human nature as Mrs. Riddell shows.’
r pcchanan’s new novel.
“TUP- MARTYRDOM OF
A , MADELINE. By Robert Buchanan, Author
ol “ God and the Man," &c. 3 vols. At every library.
GUI DA'S NEW STORIES.
BIMBI; Stories for Children. By
Ou! da. Small 4t0., cloth extra, cinnamon
edges, 7s, 6d. “ Full of quaint fancies and fantastic
suggestions ; thoroughly healthy in tone, as weh as
charming in style,”— Manchester Examiner.
COLLECTED EDITION OF
pHARLES READE’S NOVELS.
L.' T ' s L >wn Bvo., cloth extra,
m, 3s. 6T each,
TATION.
IEI.R.
HIS PLACE.
LATE TO MEND.
ONE,
MAGE.
> ' '' 1 **" LONG.
1 ( i ; ( \ 1 ( n.
The > r O M IRAPI \\- ' " lEF, he.
RH. 11 v>, \
C,'\ 1•' .. 1 WIN’ '1 ... . lilljr, W.
Shilling), No. 373. .
LL MAGAZINE
;h by George
ENTS 1
illustration}. Chap. X.-Mr,
ads. Chap. Xt—-Colonel
Now read
THE (
1 for A U
du Maurier a
No New Thinj
Stanniforth
Kenyon goes so t.
Talk and ’Talk id.)
Botticelli at th . ' id. By VeRNON Lee,
1 i > > rse of t • [ os-
Mrio S> 1 <
1 1 ' nhreu
' > . 1 •ne Heart of the Wolds.
cs. By the Author of “For PercivalT (With
ustraiicm.) Chap. XII.—A New Face, Chap.
Akxt,- —Dick's Opinions,
London; SMITH. ELDER, ami CO., ic Waterloo
Place.
PUBLISHED by BLACKIE and
A SON, and sold by all Booksellers. Stationers,
and Art Dealers.
WERE FOSTER’S DRAWING
w BOCKS. A Complete Course of Drawing,
ons and Paper [or Copying, in Twelve
s, price One Shilling each.
I Marine.
Trees.
Landscape.
BLACKIE and SON.
Animals (two books).
Human Figure.
Geometrical.
Mechanical.
49 and 50, Old Bailey.
1/ERE FOSTER’S WATER-
V COLOUR BOOKS, a Complete Course of
Painting in Water-Colours. By eminent Artists.
With full instructions In Six separate Books.
Sepia. By John Callow,
is. fid.
Marine. By E. .Duncan.
Animals. By
\\ eir, as.
Harrison
BLACKIE ami SON, 49 and
F lowers. By Various
Artists, is. 6d.
Flowers (Advanced). By
Hu!
Illumi Mediae-
val
ey.
l; asy studies in water-
l~t COLOUR PAINTING, By TL T. Lmrcu and
j. Callow. A series of Nine Plates executed in
Neutral Tints, With full instructions for drawing
each subject, and for Sketching from Nature. In
Three Parts, 410, is. fid. each ; or one vol., doth
elegant, 6s.
BLACKIE and SON, 49 and 50, Old Bailey.
Sketches in \va tr rr
COLOURS. By T,
Leitch, J. A. Houston,
Duncan, and Needham ,
executed in colours. With)’ ’
each subject, by an experi ;
Parts, 410, is. fid, each ; or c
BLACKIE and SON, ,
OOYNTER’S SOUTH KENSING-
-1 TON DRAWING BOOK. Prr ’•• •* ' r
the superintendence of E, J. Poyntki
sanctioned by the Committee of Council *
Freehand. S
Four Books,
Elementary Hi
Two Books,
i by u
Freehand, Elementary.
Two Books, fid, each.
Freehand, First Grade.
Six Books, fid. each.
Each Book contains Fine Cartridge Paper
for drawing on,
BLACKIE and SON, 49 and 50, Old Bailey.
J
OHN BROGDEN.
TV/TRS. V
J 3THING
QAMPSON LOW,
W and CO/S NEW
MARSTON.
BOOKS,
Now Beady, Crown Bvo, Boards, 4s.
O' 0 P Mb KM
Genera! in Egypt, *Witii Bird's-eye View of the Gan
Cloth limp, with good Map and Illustrations,
price 3s. fid.
’pGYPT. mley Lane-Poole.
“To those who rep i u >,l \ 1 ' t, as it is
at the present day, A 1 - n ;, 1 , tile work
will be very welcoms
THE RUSSIAN ADVANCE TO-
A WARPS INDIA. By Charles Marvin.
Demv Bvo. cloth. r 6«. fßeadv.
e F
li'shetfthat MsVc
tynicenuu review.
WATCH BELOW; OR,
YARNS .SPUN WIIII.B OFF DUTY. Uy
Crown Bro. fancy boards, as. fid.
[Now Ready.
THE INVASION OF ENGLAND;
I ' ■ I 1 . : 'I • ■ \ . • iy
Hon r cv
The Hew Addition to LOW’S STANDARD NOVELS,
crown Bvo. doth, price 6s, each, is
A DELA CATHCART. By George
-CjL MacDonald, LL. I). Crown Bvo. cloth extra, 6s
London I LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE,
and N T , Crown Buildings, i&% Fleet
Street, w
’SIA and the SEVERER
I— / FORMS OF INDIGESTION, A small pam-
phlet on these distressing complaints and their complete
cures.
Published by the Author, RICHARD KING, Esq.,
Staff Surgeon, Royal Navy, Warwick St,, Rugby.
CWORILINE! FOR THE TEETH
I '' i D "K” 'Til,—A few drops of the liquid
d on a wet tooth-brush produce a
eh thoroughly cleanses the teeth
1 1 ■> decay, gives to the ‘■-■mh -
«' i t u vs, ami a delightful fr o
* 1 « all unpleasant odoui t ' n
,1 1v.... ! * tobacco smoke. 86 D 1 d
Flonbne,” being composed in part of ho t
herbs, is delicious to the taste, and the t
discovery of the age. Sold everywhere a
Vo
.11 ABLE DISCOVERY for the
AIR.--If vour hair is turning grey or white.
WM 1 .
county
Sketch,
wife bk
and stee; urea, ul
Said ring, ig-carat,
fanual of Heraldry
LETON, ss, Cranbot
CREST and
ime and
Plain
\an aruS
books,
w uh i.itaSL, Solid
d, with crest, 425.
js. gd. —T. CUL-
o( bt. Martin’s Lane.
r.*.vrs R rulleton.-
* * I '' ’ 1 • , including ths
E ards, 50 each,
fmie, 13s. 6d.—
Iranboum St.
{<-
UT.T,FTON'SGtntiea BotoCST *-
’O TSONERV contains a Ream of the very best
NOT!
ained
indaws
st with
andon.


DANCING APE
ALEXANDRIAN LADY WITH HER BLACK ATTENDANT
A DERVISH EATING SCORPIONS
SELLER OF DATE BREAD
A WINDOW OF THE HAREM
A BEDOUIN AT MORNING PRAYER
A SAIS OR RUNNING FOOTMAS
“EGYPT:" - BY PROFESSOR G . EBERS


THE NEW PORT, ALEXANDRI A
MUSTAPHA PASHA STATION, ON THE WAY TO RAMLEH
ENTRANCE TO THE MA HM OUDIYEH CAN AL ALEXANDRIA
VIEW O N THE MAHMO U DIYEH CANAL ALEXANDRIA


The Subscription Lists WILL BE CLOSED on or before MONDAY, 31st July, for London and the Country.
FIVE PER CENT. REAL PROPERTY INVESTMENT, REDEEMABLE WITH 27 PER CENT. BONUS.
CASINO MUNICIPAL DE LA VILLE DE NICE
SOCI&TE ANONYME DULY INCORPORATED IN FRANCE
(Under French Companies' Law of July, iS&j).
SHARE CAPITAL, £160,000 <4,000,000 francs). All Subscribed and Fully Paid Up.
SUBVENTIONS HAVE BEEN VOTED TO THE COMPANY:—
1. By the Town Council of Nice, annually, francs 85,000 for 80 Years, Total .... 6,800,000 Francs.
2. By the Town Council of Hyeres, annually, trues 12,000 do do. .... 960,000 Francs.
AUTHORISED DEBENTURE CAPITAL. £440,000 {11,000,000 Francs), BEARING 4 PER CENT. INTEREST, OF WHICH £190,000 HAS ALREADY BEEN
PUBLICLY SUBSCRIBED ABROAD.
ISSUE OF £250,000 DEBENTURES TO BEARER
(BALANCE OF THE ABOVE) IN 12,500 BONDS OF £2O EACH (Francs 500).
Messrs. MADDISON and CO, are Authorised to Offer for PUBLIC SUBSCRIPTION
the above 12,500 Debentures (of £2O each) at £l5 10s, per Debenture payable
£1 00 On Application,
£7 00....... .On Allotment,
£7 10 0 ........ . One Month after Allotment,
£iS~'io o
Or the Balance of £l4 I os. may be paid np in full on Allotment, under discount
at the rate of 5 per cent per annum.
The Debentures are Redeemable at Par, by Annual Drawings spread over a period of
80 Years, and the next Drawing will take place on the Ist of September, 1882.
Interest payable in London, at the Bankers of the Company, in sterling at 16s. per annum pet
Debenture, or in Paris, at the Offices of the Company, at 20 francs per annum, at Holder’s Option, Half-
yearly Coupons of 8 shillings (francs 10) being attached, payable Ist April and Ist October in each year.
At the price "of issue the return to the Investor will exceed 5 per cent, per annum
exclusive of the benefit derived from the Annual Drawings.
THE DIRECTORS OP
MM. le COMTE de TOCQUEVILLE, President, Proprietor, Paris,
de PUYMORY, Proprietor, Paris.
le BARON de CLAMECY, Proprietor, Chevalier de la Legion d’Honnenr, Paris,
le BARON de CASTILLON, Proprietor, Paris.
THE COMPANY ARE:
MM. le COMTE D’ADHEMAR de CRANSAC, Chevalier de la Legion d’Honneur,
Proprietor, Paris and Nice,
le MARQUIS de la BIGNE, Proprietor, Paris.
G. de MONTFUMAT, Proprietor, Paris.
SOLICITORS IN LONDON.
MESSRS, NEWMAN, STRETTON, HILLIARD, and WILLINS, 75, Comhill, London, E.C.
BANKERS IN LONDON.
LONDON and SOUTH WESTERN BANK, Limited, 7, Fenchurch Street, London, E.C., and BRANCHES.
OFFICES OF THE COMPANY.- 4 9, Rue Taitbout, Paris.
LONDON AGENCY: 31, LOMBARD STREET, LONDON, E.C.
PROSPECTUS.
The Concession of the Casinos both at Nice and Hyeres are exclusive; no similar Institution is in
existence at either place, and both Municipalities are bound by their contracts not to authorise or permit any
similar Institution during the period of 80 yews, for which this Company’s concession is granted. Under
the laws of France gambling of any kind is prohibited.
Nice has now become so well-known in England as the winter resort of thousands of English and
Americans, who yearly flock southward in search of a milder climate, that its institutions practically possess
an international character ; and it is believed that the present investment will commend itself to the notice
of the large numbers of English investors acquainted with Nice, by whom its prospects of large and certain
profits will at once be recognised.
The Company called “La Society Anonyme du Casino Municipal de la Ville de Nice ” was duly
incorporated in France in the year 1881, according to the Law of July, 1867, with the object of covering
over the River Patllon at Nice, and utilising the land thus reclaimed for the construction of a Municipal
Casino, and for building purposes, and with the further object of acquiring land and erecting public and other
buildings in other towns.
For this purpose the Municipality of Nice has granted a subvention of 6,800,000 francs, payable by an
annuity of 85,000 francs for eighty years, and the exclusive right for eighty years to carry on the “ Casino
Municipal.”
The erection of the “Casino de Nice,” and the covering over of the River Paillon are being actively
proceeded with according to plans which have been accepted by the public authorities.
The Contracts for its erection and fitting up (for the due performance of which substantial guarantees
have been provided) stipulate (under daily penalties in case of default) for its completion in December next.
This Casino will be superior to any similar establishment now existing on the Continent, and will be
the largest in the world, covering an area of more than 10,000 square metres.
The Casino d’ Hyeres will, under similar guaranteed contracts for its construction, be completed in
December, 1883.
'Hie land acquired by the Company in pursuance of the concession granted by the Municipality of
Hyeres comprises 40,000 square metres between the town aad the Jardin d’Acclimatalion, and includes the
Hotel de Parc, one of the best and most frequented Hotels in the town, now doing a good business.
About 20,000 metres of the land are devoted to the Casino and its grounds and annexes. The
remainder is intended to be re-sold at a much enhanced price, consequent upon its proximity to the Casino.
The subventions have been duly and legally granted by the Municipalities of Nice and Hyeres, and are
an obligatory charge upon those respective towns.
gECURITY.
The Debenture Council is, and by the resolution of the Board passed on the 14th June last, will remain
the only charge on the whole of the freehold other property of the Company, including the Casinos,
Shops, Hotel, and other buildings, occupying about 50,000 square metres, or nearly 12 % acres of ground
in the very best part of the towns of Nice and Hyeres, as well as the annual subvention from their
Municipalities, viz. :
Nice .... 85,000 francs per annum for 80 years,
Hyeres .... 12,000 francs per annum for 80 years.
Besides the guarantees mentioned, the payment of the INTEREST aad BONDS DRAWN for
THREE YEARS from date of this issue wifi be secured by a CASH DEPOSIT with the well-known
CREDIT FONCIER OF FRANCE, whose Sons de Caisse (Deposit Note), payable on the due dates of
the next six half-yearly Coupons, will be deposited in the hands of the LONDON and SOUTH-WESTERN
BANK (Limited), 7, Fenchurch Street, London, E.C., thus making them practically an undoubted security,
the period so provided for being greatly in excess of what is necessary to admit of both Casinos getting into
full operation, and the Company into full receipt of its revenues.
'J'HE REVENUE OF THE QOMPANY.
Francs.
Annual Subventions from the Municipalities of Nice and Hyeres, as above . . . 97,000
Annual Rents receivable under the various Leases already entered into for the Buffets
and Restaurants, Cercle Massena, Hotel du i’arc, Cafes, Shops, Advertising
Spaces, &c. ...... ...... 612,000
Less sum required for the Annual Interest and Drawings in the Total Debenture Capital. 459,955
Surplus Balance .... 249,045
Thus it will be seen that the present RENTS and SUBVENTIONS ALONE exceed by nearly
£lO,OOO the requirements for the service of the Debentures, without taking into account the gradual increase
in rent as the terms for which the leases granted progress, nor of the profits arising from the Working of the
Casino, which are estimated at more than £40,000 per annum (1,000,000 francs).
As regards the rate of interest and redemption, and the nature of the security, the Debentures resemble
the “Obligations Communales,” issued by the Credit Foncier of France, at 480 francs (£l9 45.) pet
Debenture, which form one of the standard investments of that country.
So large a part of the annual revenue of the Company being assured by the Municipal subventions, and
by rents receivable under long leases, the Debentures now offered for subscription are exceptionally secured,
and yield to the subscriber not only a Bonus profit of about 27 per cent., or £4 103. per Debenture when
redeemed, but in the mean time an interest of more than 5 per cent, per annum upon the amount invested,
the whole being fully secured upon Municipal subventions and landed property of ample value.
In addition to a positive security, these Debentures present to English Investors the following
advantages not ordinarily possessed by mortgages upon real property :
1. Facility of realisation, by reason of the Debentures being for the comparatively small sums 01
£2O each, to bearer, transferable by mere delivery, without registration or other formality.
2. Easy collection of interest by means of the half-yearly Interest coupons attached to each
Debenture, which are payable in London or Paris at holder’s option.
3. Interest at more than 5 per cent, per annum, a much higher rate than can now be obtained upon
, good mortgage investments in England.
4. The Bonus of £4 tos. per Debenture, or £2O for every £l5 10s. invested when each Debenture
is drawn for redemption.
The Debentures will Ire delivered to the subscribers upon payment of the full amount of £l5 tos. pet
Debenture. Failure to pay any instalments will render previous payments liable to forfeiture.
The formalities in the formation of the Company and the issue of the Bonds have all been duly and
properly fulfilled. This question has been referred loan independent French Counsel of Eminence, M.
Choppin d’Arnouville, who has certified that everything is in order in this respect.
The Statutes of the Company, copies of the concessions, and plans and drawings of the properties ami
buildings, with authenticated translations of the several leases, can be inspected at the Offices of Messrs.
Newman, Stretton, Hilliard, and Willins, 75, Cornhill, London, E.C., Solicitors.
Prospectuses, with Forms of Application for Debentures, may be obtained of the London Agents
3t, Lombard Street, London, E.C. ’
20th July, 1882.
CASINO MUNICIPAL DE LA VILLE DE NICE.
SOCI £ T £ ANONYME DULY INCORPORATED IN FRANCE.
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR DEBENTURES TO BEARER OF £2O EACH (500 FRANCS).
Bearing r 6 Shillings (20 Francs) Interest per Annum, at the Price of £l5 tos. per Debenture.
ISSUE OF £250,000 DEBENTURES
NO. ~ ~
TO THE LONDON AND SOUTH-WESTERN BANK (Limited), No. 7, FENCHURCH STREET. LONDON, E.C.
I herewith remit the sum of £ , being a Deposit of £1 per Debenture upon Debentures of ths Societe Anonyme Casino Municica!
de la Ville de Nice, for which number of Debentures I hereby apply, aad I hereby agree to accept the same or aay less number, and to ma’ce the rema ning payments of £14x05. pe.
Debenture in accordance with the Prospectus dated the 20th July, 1882. _
Name in Full
Occupation
Address
Signature
Date
July, 1882.


C ASI NO MU NICIPAL D E L A V ILLE DE N ICE


MAPPIIV i WEBB’S
TRAVELLING
BAGS
MamUm HOUSE BU3
OXFORD STREET, W.
WRITE FOl
TMTEB
BAG CATALOGUE
• POST FEEE.
’ GS » CITY, &| LONDON.
Lunn’s " Horncastle'’ Lawn Tennis
per cent, below usual prices,
Lunn’s 7s. 6d. "Club” Racquet, Cedar
Handle, strung with stout gut.
Lunn’s IGs. 6d. “ Paragon - ” Racquet,
Cedar Handle, double strung with stout gut.
Lunn’s Half-Guinea Regulation Net.
Lunn’s 7s. 6d. Regulation Ash Poles,
unjoining, complete with Pegs and Guys. If brass
jointed gs. 6d. extra.
Lunn’s Eclipse Match Balls, j«• per do*.
Unsurpassed in quality by anything offering.
Col. Godfrey’s Marking Pins. Copyright
For permanently marking Tennis Court boundaries.
"PUREST, CHEAPEST. AND BEST FAMILY
MEDICINE EVER MADE."
HOP BITTERS.
HOP BITTERS.
HALF COURT LINE
)UE
” July 24th, 1880 ;
ZAAR,” Aug. 25th,
iiended by the “ ''TELIT
m,' Aug. 21st, iBbo; s< BAZ^.
: per Complete Set of 10 Fins, ss,
.rated Price last of Lawn Tennis, Cricket,
with the latest revised Laws of Lawn
Cricket, post free 00 application. All Goods
i to the nearest Railway Station,
TffJKN & CO., Patentees,
Bridge Street, Horncastle.
' “TING, made by
r yards for 18 stamps.
LACE, Real Modern
0 Insertion, and
A ork. Stockings Knitted,
W . t aars. MilH-
1u <> k > iy solicited.
V • ‘ '’l ' 22, Delancey
They are compounded from Hops, Buchu,
Mandrake {Podophyllin), and Dandelion— the
oldest, best, and most valuable medicine?
in the world, and contain all the best and most
curative properties of all other Bitters, being
the greatest Blood Purifier, Liver Regulator,
and Life and Health Restoring Agent on
earth,
NO DISEASE OR ILL'HEALTH CAN
POSSIBLY LONG EXIST WHERE
THESE BITTERS ARE USED,
so varied and perfect are their operations.
DO SOT SUFFER YOURSELF OR LET YOUR
FRIENDS SUFFER, BUT USE AND URGE
THEM TO USE HOP BITTERS.
ECMEMBRE. HOP BITfEES is no
vile drugged nostrum, but the Purest and
Best Medicine ever made ;
THE
“INVALID’S FRIEND AND HOPE,"
and no person or family should be without
them.
TRY THE HOP BITTERS
TO-DAY.
TO
E 6LEAVEEy'y£/AST,
From any Part of the World, for Samples and Price Lists (post free) of their
IDIOII I IISCIiO Real Irish Linen Sheeting, 2 yards wide, is. iid. per yard. Extra
Inf if! Llncno Heavy (a most durable article), 2% yards wide, 3s. 3d. per yard.
en, Bfad. yd. Roller Towelling, 18 in. wide, 3 % M. per yard. Linen Dusters, 3s. 3d,
ns, 3s. fid. Glass Cloths, 4s, 6d. per dozen. Fine Linens and linen Diaper, sod.
■ ■■'?*& 11l DAMABKS. pcry?rd
'able
-t 3S. ncl : 2# yds. by 4 yds., 13s. 4L each.
Specially Appointed to Supply
H.M. the Queen and Royal Family.
SEASONABLE DELICACY.
BROWN AND POLSON’S
CORN FLOUR
AS BLANC MANGE, CUSTARD, BAKED PUDDING, &c.
WITH STEWED FEUIT OF All KIND.
HUGO DANGER’S
Cane Window Blind Manufactory.
3| CLIPSTOHE ST,, ET, PORTLAND ST., LONDON, 1.
Pattern Sheets in all the Newest Designs Post Free,
Also every'’ description of Cane, Wicker, ami
Bamboo Work Furniture.
N.B.—The Best Workmanship by Sp&iaiild
Foreign Artisans under my own personal supervision
on the above premises, warranted.
THE TRADE SUPPLIED.
Cane Window Wind,
QIAMOND
]y[R. gTREETER, j ’ J. G. THEOBALD AND (
PEARL, and GEM
MERCHANT,
jgOND STREET, W.,
j^ondol7^clyXPn7TaM¥l
jvTrIRL STREETER receives by mail
IVI from all parts of the world consignments of
Diamonds, Pearls, ami Precious Stones, and is there-
fore able to offer them to purchasers at exceptional
prices,
jQIAMONDS,
INDIA,
and CAPE,
BRAZIL,
D
lAMONDS. NECKLACES.
STARS, BRACELETS.
QAPPHIRES. CEYLON, SIAM,
K? and INDIA.
SAPPHIRE S'- RI N GSi
CHES, STUDS.
Rubies. bormah7'' china,
»r SKOK.
EARRINGS, 'SOLl-
tairks, RINGS.
J^UBIES
PEARLS. PERSIA, PACIFIC,
JL and CEYLON.
''NECKLACES, RflGSi
BRACELETS.
pEARLS.
C s^
’S-EYES. PINS,
RINGS.
STUDS,
SPECIAL NEW FIELD CL
THE “ECLIPSE” FIELD'
The great speciality of this glass is th:
with double drawers, the consequence of w
the lenses ; * iced farther apart than they c
in an ordii ield Glass, and this gives a
power and jvement in seeing. The both
with real R leather, shades, case, and str.
This glass tarry thirty miles, and is one
powerful y« mfactured It will show bulle
target at I, _ irds, a church dock five miles
for” a!! purposes, sea or land, far or nea»,, it
glass as yet made. We are receiving the m
testimonials, and have not had one single co
order to fully introduce them, will be sent earring
next twenty-eight days, for JJ4-.
J. C. THEOBALD AND CO, WHOLESALE OPT
20, CHURCH STREET, KEF aTW ' ir,,nw tawtvvw
PRECIOUS STONES of all de
JL senptions, both rough and cut, see
PRECIOUS STONES^and
GEMS.” Third Edition, cloth, 15s. Bell and
Sons, London, and of
TV/TR. STREETER, Diamond and
iVI Gem Merchant,
ELECTRICITY IS LIFE.
PULVERMACHER’S
GALVANISM, NATURE’S CHIEF
RESTORER OF IMPAIRED VITAL ENERGY.
In this Pamphlet the most reliable proofs are given
of the vast and wonderful curative powers ofj. L.
Pulvcrmacher’s Patent Galvanic Chain-Bands,
Belts, &c.,in Rheumatic, Nervous, and Functional
Disorders. Sent post free for three stamps, on
application to
J. L. PULVERMACHER’S GALVANIC
ESTABLISHMENT, x<m« Kogent Street, London, W
PiiilSS HELENE OF WALDECK
BRACELET {r.vnmTßi..
i
Prices from 3 to 10 Guineas
This Bracelet is a roost complete novelty, and is
quite unique, possessing every advantage over all pre-
sent makes in point of ease and comfort, as well as per-
fect security to the wearer. Being hammered out of
one piece of gold, it requires no hinge, but forms a
natural‘spring and clasp to _ the wrist, consequently it
cannot come undone, and will not break. It is hand-
somer and more effective than ordinary Gold Bracelets
of double the cost, and is beautifully and artistically
embossed with mottoes, sentiments, or devices in
Eastern hieroglyphics, and last, but not least, it con-
tains more real value in solid, gold than any Bracelet
hitherto made. Any Family Motto or fancy device
embossed to order without extra charge.
An Illustrated Price Card Post Free on Application
w. B. FASE,
16, Brook Street, Bond Street, W.
Or at the Factory,
50, Oxford Street, W.
THIN BUSTS PERFECTED.
IDEAL CORSET.
After three years' wear
thousands of Ladies refuse
all others. The only Corset
with softly-padded laced regu-
lators (patenteed in Europe
and America) inside breast
gores. Imparts this charmin;
contour and more or less ful
ness to figures wanting the
roundness of a beautifully
proportioned bust; regulated
to a mcetv, increased
dii pleasure. It
pe; of every dress,
Ily supersedes
>c!ai
iming “ lm-
’nprecedented
Drapers and
irocure it from
SL
Outfitters tnn p:
London Wholesale Houses
If occur, or doubt
of its matchless effect, sample
„ > sent on approval, plain parcel
carriage paid, after remittance only.
EVANS/ BALE, &CO., 52, Aldermanbury,London
White or Black, stitched gold, Bs. 3d., ms. gd.,
14s. gd., to 18s. Length 13 inches. Beware of per-
suasion 1.0 lake substitute when u IDEAL” not in
stock. Also beware of called “Beau Idea!,’
or similar sounding names, which are quite different
See words “ IDEAL CORSET, PATENTED,”
damped on breast regulators. Waist measure required
of ordinary corset unstretched.
Hi
JE\
& B)
o
ip
mm
111^
IMijMreWE
RIKNTAL TOOTH
Lor Gieansmg, .beautHysng, and
the Teeth and Gums to Old
TEWSBURY & BROWN, MAN
The ORIENTAL TOOT
is of pu
compou
efficacy
TSFUL a
action (
the bre
TO OLD
turners
Caut
Pots, a!
angle).
i Mil
pAPER
WRINCH &
St. Lawrence Works, Ipswich,
Viaduct, Londo
HORTICULTURAL
AND
HOT WATER E
ILLUSTRATED CATALOCUE Fk
QZONE
OORTHE IMMEDIATE RELIEF
F and SUBSEQUENT CURE of ASTHMA,
CHRONIC BRONCHITIS, HAY FEVER, and
INFLUENZA. . , . ,
Dr. Thorowgood, Physician to the City of London
Hospital for Diseases of the Chest, in his “ Notes on
Asthma,” page 62, says “ The Ozone Paper prepared
by Mr,. Huggins contains nitrate of potash, chlorate of
ELash, and iodide of potassium, and of its efficacy I
ve had abundant evidence.’
as. gd. and 4s- 6d._ per Box The size
contains twice the quantity of the 2s. gd. Of all Chemists,
or from the Proprietor for 33 and 34 stamps.
QZONE QIGARETTES
These arc made of porous paper saturated with
the same Chemical Solution as the Ozone Paper, and
are intended for use when the burning of the Paper
is inconvenient, as. 6d, per box, by post for 30 stamps.
Prepared by R. HUGGINS, Chemist, 199, Strand,
(Design i
REGISTERED
SPIN - ROOF CONS’
BY FAR
Every 'Descrij
for and ,
Can also be supplied through sm
monger or Deal.
OEPRODUCTIVE
IV TWEL
Six ditto, is. Bd. ; One cabinet CY"
is. each. “ uih.u'-u :...
orders will hi ;:as'.::o.,
to CARLTO: 3, Hoi
I" MAKE. JELLY ..BLANC MANGE
Buy a Sixpenny Packet of
CANNON'S GELATINE POWDER.
This Preparation is Simple in its Use and perfectly
Pure. Directions enclosed in each packet. Sold by ali
Grocers and Oilmen.
B. CANNON and CO., Manufacturers,
Lincoln, England.
GUARAN
excess of Fat extracted.
Cocoas Thickened yet W<
really cheaper. The Fa<
nutritious, perfectly diges
FAST, LUNCHEON, c
for Invalids and Chiidn
Requires no Cooking,. A'
costing less than«
55. 6d., &c., by Ch
JWldb
UpTfiORTTBLE
This valuable specific for TOOTHACHE and all. II HI
maladies of the mouth is named after its inventor, M. .toothac* 1 "
Suez, and is the most valuable discovery of the . 1U 1 i i H
inasmuch as the use of it ensures FREED
from TOOTHACHE a,ad DECAY OF T
TEETH
There are three kinds, distinguished from each, o
by a YELLOW, GREEN/ and RED silk th:
attached to each bottle.
THF GRF.KN THREAD must be considered Mi >
ni< 1 < 11, and should be used as a c s E 1 '
me '' ' I e who suffer periodically ! ' 1
to-* 1 h ness of the teeth and gums, di v *.
an ' • 1 t, %vi!l never suffer ggain, and 1 1 ' ! <
pr ? i , i sound and white till the _em < * '
using ten or twelve drops in a little water, to rinse 1 is 1
mouth well night and morning.
I
READ
ROYAL VISIT. OPENING OF THE BRADFORD TECHNICAL
BURANO LACE-CLOTH
(REGIS?
; and PRINCESS OF WALES has directed the attention ol
H, now admitted by all to be one of th
The recent Visit of the . _ .
red BURANO LACE—CLOTH, now admitted by all to be one of the most useful and fashionab.
'OND SERIES OF REGISTERED DESIGNS, comprising the most approved and newest
loes not slip : it is soft, and drapes with remarkable elegance ; is not liable to become crushed, nor to ha'
in w’ear, thus entirely superseding all classes of Silk Grenadines. The following short extract
3URANO LACE~CLOtH, which may be obtained of the leading Drapery Establishments throe
1 ' f > he production of Bradford Looms. Amongst the first Clot! * 'it.
TlTsIMt R DRESS FABRICS ever produced. Encouraged by tin 1 > 1 ‘ ' f
• H BLACK and SELECT COLOURS. The special f a
" ! l gather dust; has the brightness of the Silk Brocade, with th u 1 1 1
’ h s v lady desirous of purchasing a DURABLE yet ELEGANT SUMMER DKbSb>, that
It or v
Cloth
doubt: the r:
and for us-
OF
THf FASHION JOURNALS MYRA’S JOURNAL says:-", .burano Lace Cloth is admirably adapted for Summer Costumes, combined with silk, saf.uq_or Surah, as it
e lustre of silk, and a durability surpassing both. It will be exceedingly serviceable to ladies who are in slight mourning, or who wear black dresses habitually from choice.” S\ LVIA S HOME- JOuL YU 1
:> a very high place. It is soft and lace-like in texture, and is yet so well roa.de that it is not liable to become crushed, nor to gather dust, as too many of these light materials do. I here is a great van v '
become a very popular one," THE QUEEN, the Lady's Newspaper, says Burano Lace Cloth.—This lace cloth is of Bradford manufacture, is 24 in, wide. i> made In black and colours artistic and aauheue,
;sses will prove acceptable to those who require smart demi-toiiettes of clicap but serviceable fabrics.”
vST PLEASE MOTE.—The Manufacturers’ Trade Marl {a fountain), with lla Name “BURANO I.AGE CLOTS,” is stamped on the back of each fold, without wMchnone a
