

' " '‘ ,l
iiiniiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiitifiimiiiiiiiiiiiiifiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiimiiimii r *
Xf w
♦
tS
SHOWS HOW TO GIVE
CONSTANT WORK,
THROUGH
JAMES GRAY .
FOR VICTORIA,” ETC., ETC.
Price—Tliiespence.
Brighton
INDEPENDENT ” OFFICE, BAY-STREET.
m
'Hi 'Hi" nr ''Hr nr nr nr"'r ''r ni nr nrnr wnr ' l| r' n firnr nr n nr-nr nr t w-w ■'
TiiimiiiMiimimmmiimimmimiim 111111111
I dll. .11l 111. ..til, .(111, .illh. .Jill,..dill. .11l iIIk „||||. -,il|., .ili., .iUi. ,111 ill., ..ill.. ,ih„ .11,. .ill,, ~illi, .nil. .ill Hi. ~111,
THE LABOUR PROBLEM,
SOCIAL SALVATION FOR VICTORIA.
AN ORGANIZATION OF LABOUR ACT,
AUTHOR OK SCIENTIFIC I. EG I SLAT lON, OR THE THEORY OF LA HOUR
equivalents” ; “ FREE, compulsory, and secular education
f 1 4
h = 4
MM
'¥-4
► I i
1 = 1
¥ 1 4
►| 4
=. = 4
►:i 4
¥ =H
■ks4
►l*
m
i-l 4
¥ = 4
fll
m
i
fH
h*
M
i *
il
n
n
i!
I!
* 4
:
f |4
iiiHiiiiiiHuimmiHHiiiiMimiHnC^^^l




THB LABOUR BBOBLBM,
SOCIAL SALVATION FOR VICTORIA.
SHOWS HOW TO GIVE
UUB UREHIPLiiITKiI
CONSTANT WORK,
THROUGH
AN ORGANIZATION OF LABOUR ACT,
JAMES GRAY.
AUTHOR OF “ SCIENTIFIC LEGISLATION, OR THE THEORY OF LABOUR
equivalents”; “ FREE, compulsory, and secular education
FOR VICTORIA,” ETC., ETC.
Prlce-Tliieepen.ce.
Hriglrtun:
“ INDEPENDENT ” OFFICE, BAY-STREET.


PHKFACK.
This pamphlet propounds a practicable scheme for keeping “ The
Unemployed ” in constant work ; and proves that the 8-hours daily work
in Victoria can give full-time employment to only 180,000 average
workers, in normal times, and that must necessarily leave a large and
ever-increasing chronic Unemployed, which must be legislated for in an
organized manner.


THE VICTORIAN LABOUR PROBLEM.
The subject named the “ Victorian Labour Problem,” because
every country has its own peculiar economic conditions, although the
general problem is the same, and relates to the distribution of labour and
maintenance.
(a) The Labour Problem can never be a finality, What would
have suited 50 years ago, and what will suit 50 years
hence, will not suit now.
{b) The Labour Problem consists in finding a set of legislative
expedients that will yield the maximum of well distributed
physical maintenance for the minimum of well distributed
organised labour.
(c) The principal thing is to show that under an eight hour
system it is necessary to make permanent provision for a
large chronic Unemployed. This can be done by estab-
lishing an organised system of public works.
yd) All that can be done at present is to begin by showing how
to get a rough first approximation of what ought to be.
Many speakers on the Labour question seem to imply that there is
eight hours work throughout the year for all workers in normal times.
This is not the case. Through machine labour and other causes there is
only full time eight hours’ work for about one-third of the workers.
hty years ago four-fifths of the population were required to work
12 hours a day. hut now one-eight of the population, working eight
hours daily, can do the work for respectable maintenance.
ISTow, one man can cut out 125 suits of clothes, he can stitch 160
boots, he can make 4,000 pins for one he could do 60 years ago.
Now, by one man s labour of 300 days of eight hours daily can be
produced 70 tons of meat, 40 tons of bread, 100 tons of potatoes,
33,000,000 cigarettes, 90,000 pairs of boots. (See page 940, History
of Labour and Machinery.)
With these productive forces at work it is impossible to give even
half-time normal work to the working classes of any country.
Any true economic scheme must be based on consumption.
The consumption of an average working class family will slioav
approximately the amount of labour and services required in Victoria
for a given population Let all workers receive Is. 3d. an hour, and
work eight hours daily. A four-roomed brick house can be built for
£250. It can be furnished and repaired for 100 years for £2lO, and


allow £IOO for the land. This gives a total of £560, which divided by
100 gives £5 12s. a year, or 2s. Id. a week, or 6d. a room, assuming a
four-roomed house has accommodation for four persons, A ration of
food, allowing lib. of bread, lib. of meat (daily), lib. butter (weekly), and
other good food necessaries for one adult can be got for 4s. 6d. a week.
Two hats, 2 pair of boots, 1 suit of clothes, and 2 suits of underclothing
can be got for £6 10s. a year, or 2s. 6d. a week. For common luxuries,
beer, trams and tobacco, allow 2s. 6d. a week. This gives a total of 10s.
for an adult’s board, lodging, clothes and luxuries for a week. This, we
define, as respectable maintenance. Now 10s. is the wage of one adult
for one day. Therefore, one adult, by working a week, can provide for
six adults, or for eight units of population, allowing the consumption of
one adult is equal to two children. Therefore, one-eighth of the popu-
lation (1,140,000) or 142,000 eight-hour workers are sufficient to supply
the entire population of Victoria with “ respectable maintenance,”
I visited the Shaker’s community at Troy, N.Y., U.S., and found
they worked only two hours a day, and three outside workers were equal
to five Shakers. That is, they did one hour and twelve minutes’ average
work daily for “ respectable maintenance,” or 128,000 workers would
yield respectable maintenance for a population like Victoria.
Hovle, the Lancashire Statistican, states :—One hour and fifteen
minutes "is enough time for an average worker to obtain respectable main-
tenance. This would give 133,000 eight-hour workers for Victoria.
If the direct method is applied, and allowing for extra luxuries for
the rich, and for the waste labour of the present system, it is difficult to
show that there is normal work for so many as 180,000 full time eight-
hour daily, or (2,400 hours yearly) workers.
If we now allow 38,000 workers to work for the rich, for extra
luxuries, it will give, when added to our 142,000 workers, 180,000 as the
total probable normal full-time work for Victoria ; or in Victoria there is
in normal times 432,000,000 hours’ work yearly of ohe man.
If more than 180,000 eight-hours 300 days a year workers are
employed in Victoria in normal times, then they must work less hours.
If six hours be the day’s work, then there is work for 240,000 six-hour
workers ; if four hours then 360,000 four-hours workers can be employed
in Victoria for a population of 1,140,000 persons.
Even if all the available land in Victoria (6,000,000 acres) were put
to butter, meat, or wheat culture it would not employ more than 30,000
eight-hour 300 days a year workers, still leaving 290,000 unemployed.
So that doing away with the unemployed by settling people on the land
is a superstition. Especially is this the case when land products are
exported. £6,000 worth of boots imported employs 20 workers, whereas
£6,000 worth of exported meat employs only two workers on large
•stations. So that by exporting £6,000 worth of meat and importing
in exchange £6,000 worth of boots, Victoria loses the work and purchas-
ing power of 18 workers’ wages.
The reason that the work to be done in Victoria, appears more is,
because the work done by the worker is so intermittent. A worker may
get two weeks’ work, but then he gets two or three weeks’ holidays, then
a week’s vrork then more holidays, &c.


EMPLOYMENT TABLET FOR VICTORIA
Working class population
Upper class, 10 per cent, of population
1,026,000
114,000
1,140,000
RESPECTABLE WAGES TABLET,
Workers who work for the respectable maintenance of
the working class .. ... ... 127,800
Workers who work for the respectable maintenance of
the upper class .. .. ... .. 14,200
142,000
Workers who work for the upper class luxuries .. ... .. gg 000
Total full time normal workers in Victoria .. ~ .. 180,000
Proposed probable relief “ Unemployed” workers (full time) .. 4o",000
Total workers (normal and relief) .. .. .. 220,000
Total workers, of all ages, in Victoria (Hayter) ... .. ~ 500 000
Deduct full time normal and relief workers .. ... .. 220,000
Remaining unemployed (married women and children chiefly) 280,000
Further tariff restrictions on ready-made, manufactured, semi-
manufactured, and prison-made imports ; and bonuses given for Victorian
woven silks, woollens, cottons, the finest cloths, beet-root sugar, &c., &c.,
&c., would give additional work to seven or eight thousand of our present
idle workers ; but that will not alter the unemployed problem much, as
there are more than 100,000 unemployed to be legislated for.
Protection forms an important part of the Labor Problem, but the
only consistent tariff is a prohibitive one, except where extortion is proved
and monopoly cannot be prevented. If a tariff is to create and support
home industries, then prohibition conduces to that end ; but a moderate
tariff engenders distrust in the minds of intending manufacturers
and producers, and kills the good intention. The objections to prohibi-
tion may be removed by direct taxation, open business accounts, and sale
stamps.
What is wanted is a system that will support the Home market to
the extent of prohibition, reduce commerce to a minimum, regulate rents,
and abolish usurers, middlemen, and competition (among toilers, for
money or self-aggrandizement) ; organise all labor, and thus find peace,
plenty, and abundant leisure for workers, and goodwill for all mankind.
The Shaker society in the United States did this ; and did it by the
organisation of labor. What a society can do can be done by a nation,
by legislation. There should be no poor in Sunny-South Victoria,—
no charity doles. The poor require the organization of Labor and
Justice.
The present productive and distributive forces in Victoria, under
positive social-labor organization management, with an 8-hours system
and 50 per cent of the population working, will yield respectable
maintenance eight times over. That is, it will yield eight furnished rooms,
sixteen hats, sixteen pairs boots, eight suits of clothes, sixteen suits of
underclothing, Bibs of bread, Bibs of meat daily, Bibs of butter weekly,


&c. ; and eight times the ordinary luxuries for every adult unit of
population in Victoria,
Why does it not do this ? Why do people starve and suicide in
Victoria ? Why are people homeless, ragged, hungry and idle ? _ Because
the present unrestricted individualism is a brutal disorganizing force,
carrying stagnation and starvation in its horrible track. Because even
our advanced legislators are too apathetic to study the first principles of
the Problem of the Organization of Labour.
Any true economic system must be based on consumption, and the
employment consequent on that consumption.
It must embrace the whole field of labour, or it will collapse from
outside pressure.
It must be a system that will ensure continuous respectable living
wao-es j' or all willing to work, and a pension for sexagenarians.
How can this system be obtained ?
Let an Organization of Labour Act be passed, establishing the
following clauses: —
1. A Labour Department.
2. Two hundred State Labour Offices.
3. A Minimum Wage for all Workers.
4. An Apprentices’or Youths’ Regulation.
5. An Alien Immigration Limitation.
6. Sales Stamps on Goods,
7. Business Accounts open to Inspection.
8. Transfer of Unused Plant.
0, A State Bank.
10. An Eight Hours Day.
ytote.—Two hundred being the number of Local Governments in Victoria.
THE LABOUR DEPARTMENT.
At present anarchy reigns in the region of production. No one
knows how much of a particular article is coming on the market, nor how
much of it will be wanted, hence booms and failures. Boom means blind
speculation and over production. Booms are caused by the ignorance of
the amount of economic production in existence, or the future demand
for such products.
The duty of the Minister of Labour will be to furnish statistical
information to intending producers, manufacturers, farmers, distributors,
and consumers to enable them to approximately apportion supply to
demand.
The statistical branch can show that 2,280,000 hats, 1,140,000
suits of clothes, 2,280,000 suits of underclothing, 2,280,000 pairs of
boots, 180,000 tons of bread, 20,000 tons of butter, 142,000 tons of
potatoes, 90,000 tons of meat, the vegetables, fruit, poultry, milk, that
are acquired for respectable maintaintenance can now be got by the work
of 47,000 full-time average workers. Similar guiding information can
be obtained from producers about how much they intend to produce, and
thus limit excesses in particular lines.
The Minister will also direct the legal supervision of all work—
private, public and unemployed—allot the work for the unemployed and
distribute the funds for the unemployed, and for the sexagenarians.


THE UNEMPLOYED.
The unemployed are the surplus workers, not demanded by employers
of labour.
A Government Free Labour Office will be established in each of the
two hundred Local Government districts, for the convenience of private
employers and employes, as well as for the unemployed.
Unemployed adults who have been two months in the local district
and twelve months in Victoria each can be enrolled in his district, as
eligible for 48 hours’ weekly work, at Gd. an hour on the butty gang
system, supervised by officers appointed by the Government and local
council, and all sexagenarians can have 4s. per week, provided they have
resided in Victoria for ten years.
The work to be done by the Unemployed should be such as artisans
out of work can be engaged in—work which will not involve the stigma
of pauperism ; work which does not compete with that of other labourers
at present in employ ; work which is not likely to interfere with the
resumption of regular employment in their own trade by those who seek
it. The kind of work will be such as deepening, widening, walling,
embanking, and making navigable the Yarra and other rivers ; making
cross canals to join the navigable rivers ; cutting down hills «n main
coach roads ; thinning out and planting State forests ; establishing State
municipal laundries, and State tailoring factories for police and militia
clothes. Establishing State collective farms, with the latest steam
machine agricultural appliances, and practical farmers as teachers to the
Unemployed.
The Unemployed to be employed, as far as possible, in their own
local district, the remainder to be drafted on to general public works.
About 40,000 Unemployed at Gd an hour, and 60,000 sexagenarians
at 4s a week, would avail themselves of this work and fee, which would
cost £60,000 weekly, or £3,000,000 yearly. This weekly money being
spent Avith the landlord, baker, butcher, hatter, tailor, and grocer Avould
revive trade ; and if continued yearly trade would always be good.
Give a purchasing power to the working class and they will spend
the money, and on this depends the revival and continuance of trade.
Mr Gillies spent, on non-productive works, during the last four years of
his Premiership, millions a year, and, by spending that money, trade was
kept fairly good.
Of the £3,000,000 yearly expenditure the local councils would, be
required to pay 5 per cent. Let the treasurer order their usual banks to
print between them £60,000 notes weekly, branded “Labor Department.”
Make these notes a legal tender in Victoria. Disburse these notes as
loans required by local councils, for sexagenarians, and for State Avork and
labor done.
In England, the spending of millions by the independent unemployed,
who live on the interest of the National Debt ; the spending by the army,
the navy, the arsenal workers, &c., all non-productive tax-eaters, is a
national advantage.
So, in Victoria, if £8,000,000 a year were given out to 100,000


unemployed persons by the Government, on the condition that they spent
it, the circulation of that money would prove a national gain.
In France and Germany it is regarded as part of the proper function
of Government to provide those public improvements in which all subjects
are alike interested.
Suppose Collingwood and Kew had 200 unemployed. Send them
under the local engineers and assistant staff, with a national plan, to
widen, deepen, make navigable, and embank the Collingwood Yarra. Let
Richmond and Hawthorn do the same for their respective portions.
Other local districts can make necessary improvements, &c,
The trend of public opinion is to endorse the principle adopted in the
fifth year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. That is ‘‘ That every
indigent human being has a right to maintenance from the State.” They
adopted the parish system—without work The system now proposed for
Victoria is the municipal system, with maintenance for work and labor
done.
At present there are degrading and demoralising voluntary charity
organisations in nearly every local government district of "V ictoria. The
benevolent few support, without work, these elaborately scrutinised
charity-dole unfortunates ; whereas, in an organised municipal system,
there would be no degradation »r loss of self-respect to the recipient; the
expense would be paid for equally by all. Public works and public wealth
would be created, and this everlasting system of begging and imposing
on the good-natured few would be done away with.
THE MINIMUM WAGE.
There shall he a minimum wage fixed for all workers.
The principle of the minimum wage is implied in the Health or
Factory Act. By the Health or Factory Act employers are bound to
give workers wholesome air, by means of ventilation. On the same grounds,
the legislator can insist on employers giving their workers a minimum
wage, that will command wholesome food, clothing, and lodging.
A living wage must he viewed in relation to what goods and services
it will command. In the 15th century wages were at 6d. a day, but goods
were so cheap that a worker could keep his family a year by 20 weeks’
work. (Thorold Rogers).
The minimum living wage that would give the least disturbance to
prices, and keep up a maintenance purchasing power among the lower
stratum of workers, would run thus : —All adult workers shall receive not
less than Bd. an hour. Youths, 2d., 3d., 4d, and sd„ an hour, in
their 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, and; 19th years of age respectively : Unem-
ployed adult workers, 6d. an hour ; Domestics, an hour, and found.;
Sexagenarians of 10 years’ residence in Victoria, 4s. a week.
Employers will be protected from the competition of cheap labour of
foreign imports by a prohibitive tariff for all produce and goods that can
possibly be made in the colony. Workers will be insured a first chance of
work by an alien clause, and the public will be secured from extortion by
a sales stamp clause.
A minimum wage will not interfere with State, Municipal, youths,
domestic, piece work, selected labourers, or tradesmen, nor any of those


who are receiving higher wages ; and it leaves the capitalist to fix his own
prices.
Fixed wages will give employers a basis lor determining prices.
Fixed wages will diminish competition, and promote honest trading.
Fixed wages will diminish strikes and arbitrations ; abolish sweat-
ing, and obliterate distinctions between unionist labourers and blacklegs.
A fixed minimum wage system will give common justice to women
and girls, by giving them the same wages as men and boys get, for doing
the same quantity and quality of work. It will place the country toiler,
on an equal footing with the town worker.
A fixed wage system is as fair for one capitalist as another. It does
not compel an employer to keep an unprofitable worker. A fixed wage
system diminishes the risks of honest business.
It minimises sub-letting and the repudiation of contractors, and leads
to the abolition of the contractors.
A minimum wage may raise prices in some lines, especially in cloth-
ing ; but then, the working class having a greater purchasing power, can
buy more goods; causing increased reproduction, which is the basis of
wages and profits.
A minimum wage and uniform Trades Union wages will be necessary,
to carry on equitably, exchanges between socialised municipalities and in-
ternational traders.
A Trades Union, in insisting on a fixed minimum wage for all their
workers, is acting on the scientific principle of averages, adopted by life
insurance and other business societies. It shall be the duty of the
Government to ratify by law the Log Prices of any Trades Union, where
the majority of that trade agree to work for the uniform wage, of from 6d.
to Is. 6d. per hour; making it penal to give or take less, i. e., Take each
trade at its own value. The place or room, where one or more wage
earners work, shall be deemed a factory.
Where work is given out from the main factory or warehouse, the
place, where the out-door work is done, shall be deemed a part of the main
factory; and shall be licensed, and subject to the minimum wage and ap-
prentice law. The age, number of domestic-factory workers, and space
clauses of the Factory Act, are now systematically evaded by employers. A
girl 12 years old told the inspector, she was years old; and 20 women
were rushed out of a too small room, when the inspector was announced,
A special Record Sheet shall be kept open for inspection in the
factory, at the main and domestic or branch factory, showing that the
wages paid for out-door work is the same, plus domestic factory rent, as
that of the main factory Log; and not less than the minimum wage. An
hour’s work of the average worker, in the main factory, shall be the wage
(per article) for the out-door factory work.
The Record Sheet in the factory shall show the number of persons
working, in factory, premises or workroom; the hours worked, the earnings
weekly of each worker, by piece or day work; the certificated ages of the
non-adults. All places, where goods are made up, intended for public sale
or use, shall be open for inspection.
Daily entries shall be made (under affirmation) by each worker on
the Record Sheet, showing the quantity and quality of work, the time


taken to do the work, the time wasted in waiting for the work, and the
money earned by such work.
This will make every worker a sub-inspector, who will (under secrecy
and protection) communicate to the Labor Department any violation of
the Factory Act. Piece workers kept idle in any factory or workroom
shall be able to claim 30 per cent of the money that could have been
earned in the time so wasted.
Much tyranny is now exercised over workers, especially girls, in
keeping them days in the factory without work.
If the cabman’s fare, the Irishman’s rent, and the civil servant’s
minimum wage are fixed by law; why not fix the minimum wage for all
workers ? Why continue the insidious hard-hearted competition wages
system, which shortens the average duration of the worker’s life by one-
half ? Why permit the multiform sweater to slowly destroy his helpless
victim by low pay and long hours of labour. Disputed raising or lower-
ing of wages will be adjudicated by compulsory arbitration.
The Victorian producers who now export will find it more profitable
to sell in the home market to the Unemployed than in a foreign market.
Let every worker urge his Parliamentary representative to bring for-
ward in the House the Organization of Labour. Victorians lead the world
in free, compulsory and secular education, and in the Victorian system of
ballot let them lead in establishing a scientific system of work and wages.
Unless a purchasing power is kept up, by a minimum wage among the
lower stratum ®f workers, the present civilization must cease. For let us
suppose, that the workers’ wages are run down so low as only to afford him
a potato diet. Two days work of one worker are sufficient to produce
enough potatoes to feed him for one year. Allowing one day more for
clothing him in sugar-bag cloth, and lodging him in a log hut. This
gives three days’ work of one worker, or 7000 full-tim# workers for the main-
tenance of the whole working class population; whereas 2#- days, or
127,000 workers are required to supply the working class population with
respectable maintenance. Thus, lowering workers’ wages increases the
Unemployed by 120,000, and reduces the annual income by two thirds.
W. Morris and Rev. E. B. Bax in their work on Socialism, p. 279,
say:—“ In order to raise the unskilled workers to a human level, a
minimum legal wage and a maximum price for all necessaries of life should
be enacted.” And Shaffie in his great work on “ The Impossibility of Social
Democracy,” p. 802, say: —“ Common rights and administrative justice
compel the ‘ Iron Law of Wages ’ to rise to a level befitting human
beings to live.
LOW WAGES TABLET.
Workers who work for the Working Class (Potato Diet) .. •• 7000
„ ~ Upper Class (respectable maintenance) 14,200
„ „ „ extra „ (luxuries) .. ... 38,000
” ’ ’ 52,200
Total possible Full-time Workers in Victoria (under Potato Diet) .. 59,200
Total Workers in Victoria (Hayter') ... • • •• 500,000
Deduct Full-time Workers (on Low Wages or Potato Diet) .. 59,200
Remaining Unemployed under Low Wages (chiefly men) .. 440,800


YOUTHS OR APPRENTICES.
No wage earner shall be under 15 years of age ; and no employer
shall employ more than one youth for the first four or less adults, and one
youth for every additional four adults employed. The members of the
employer’s family will not be counted.
The number of youths between the ages of 15 and 20 is nearly one
to four adults between the ages of 20 and 60 years. One youth to four
adults is a natural proportion, giving equal advantages to employers.
ALIEN IMMIGRATION.
To prevent the failure of labour legislation, or the overcrowding of
the labour market by immigration, employers employing persons who have
not been residents of the colony 12 months will have to take out a licence
from the Labour Department for each such immigrant.
SALES STAMPS.
All sold goods, where practicable—hats, boots, clothes, furniture, &c.
—shall bear a stamp showing the origin, the labour costing price, and the
selling price. If the article has been made in a factory it shall be stamped
(F) ; if made out-door, i.e.. Sweated (S).
A blue stamp shall be placed on Caucasian colonial-made goods, a
yellow stamp on Chinese and other Asiatic colonial-made goods ; a red
stamp on imported goods (home invoices), and a black stamp on prison-
made goods.
The colour of the stamp or brand informs the buyer at sight the
origin of the article.
The stamp will have on it the charge for material, wear, and tear,
supervision, and labour. The user of the stamp will cancel it.
The real employer of labour is the consumer ; and the nearer he is
brought to the producer the better and cheaper the article becomes.
This stamping will bring the producer and consumer together.
Competition among the sellers will gradually bring about the
self-annihilation of middlemen, usurers and landlords ; and all goods
and house rents will come to a labour-costing price, and land will come to
its minimum value, which will lead to its nationalisation. Most
manufacturers who attempt to sell their goods direct to the retailer are
liable to be boycotted and ruined by the secret society of Melbourne
importers and middlemen. The stamping of goods would abolish this
immoral and treacherous trading. The cheapening of goods by stamping
them will increase the demand for labor, diminish the Unemployed,
because less time, perhaps six or four hours, will be spent in obtaining
respectable maintenance for a family. Middlemen and Unemployed will
thus be brought into the field of labour.
It must be constantly borne in mind that the tax imposed
insidiously by importers and other intermediates is 66 per cent of the
annual income (Dr Giffen), whereas the revenue taxes which are so
rancorously debated in our Parliament, are only about 5 per cent of the


annual national income (Hayter). Revenue taxation discussion is the
red rag held up to a gullible public. Squaring the national ledger is used
as a means for blocking all progressive legislation.
The Organisation of Labour Act would bring Chinese Cabinet
Manufacturers, Sweating Bakers, Clothing Sweaters, and Sweaters
generally under law and order.
The Sales Stamp Tax at, say, per cent, ad valorem , will be
worked thus :
On a Caucasian colonial made article the manufacturer’s price is
3s 4d. A penny blue sale stamp must be affixed before it is sent to the
warehouseman.
The warehouseman puts his advance at, say, 25 per cent, which runs
the article up to 4s 2d. He, in turn, before sending it to the retailer,
affixes a 1.2 d blue stamp.
The retailer then puts his advance at, say, 50 per cent, and before
selling at 6s 3d affixes a I.Bd blue stamp. Ho stamp to be less than
one-tenth of a penny.
The Sales Stamp, or price-marking, will protect the general public,
who have no technical knowledge of the value of their purchases. The
Sales Stamps carrying the history and value of the article will afford
protection to buyers and sellers by preventing haggling deceptions and
suspicions of overcharges.
A ad valorem Sales Stamp tax would yield enough money to
give free railways, and lead to the nationalising of the Victorian Marine
locomotion, and cover any deficiency in customs, caused by a prohibitive
tariff for all the goods we can make, or are likely to make.
Specimen of Sales Stamp, which would be blue, yellow, red, or black,
according as the goods were Caucasian, Chinese, imported, or prison-made.
Three stamps will be used when the article passes through maker, middle-
man, and retailer ; two stamps when no middleman : and one stamp
when the maker or producer sells to the consumer.
An article made of, or mixed with a cheaper material will be shown
generally by the “ cost of material ” on the stamp
maker’s stamp.
middleman’s stamp
s. d. s. d
Material, Wear and Tear Maker’s price ..34
and Supervision fF) 2 0 Labour in Handling 0 10
Labour in Making ~14
Middleman’s price 4 2
Maker’s price (Stamp Id) 3 4 (Stamp 1.2 d,)
No Middleman.
maker’s stamp.
retailer’s stamp.
Material Wear and Tear and
Maker’s Price
Supervision (F) .. 2 0 Labour in Selling-
Labour in Making .. 14
Selling Price
Maker’s Price (Stamp Id.) .. 3 4 (Stamp, 1.6 d.)


Material, Wear and Tear and Supervision (F)
..2 0
Labour in Making
• • • • . • • «
... 1 4
Labour in Selling
..12
Selling Price
..4 6
(Stamp, 1, 3d.)
Neither Middleman Nor Shopkeeper.
MAKER AND SELLER’S STAMP.
Note I.—lf the article is made outside the factory then (S) will be substituted
for (F).
Note 2.—lmporter’s invoice price would appear instead of Maker’s price,
Tariff added, on a red stamp.
OPEN BUSINESS ACCOUNTS.
All building societies, bankers, distillers, factory employers, farm or
station employers, &c., shall keep and have their account books and record
sheets open for inspection.
Open business accounts inspection will assist to prevent the thrifty
from being defrauded. It will also protect the revenue, and the honest
employer and worker from the tricks of the unscrupulous sweater.
A London loan office keeper, whose income was £BOOO a year, and
whose bank balance was £17,000, said to the author “ I pay income tax
on only £l5O, because no banker would ever reveal my account.”
Financial secrecy in business promotes fraud.
The inspecting officer shall be bound, except in cases of infringement
of the law, to observe secrecy as to all information on the concerns of a
business obtained by him in pursuit of his official duties.
TRANSFER OF UNUSED PLANT.
In the event of a company or capitalist finding that it would not
suit him to work his plant, the State shall empower, by loan, the municipal
council to compensate the owner, and take over the plant and workmen,
providing the production were saleable at labour-costing prices, the
municipality taking the profits over expenses.
In constitutional countries a man cannot do what he likes with what
he calls his own. A drunken, silly, insane, or greedy employer, may throw
hundreds of families on strike by his freaks, or drunken bouts, or greed.
It is a crime against public morals that irresponsible persons—
capitalists or unionists—should, without adequate cause, or arbitration,
be allowed to lock up plant, thereby starving the workers, their wives,
and their children, The coal mines of France are confiscatable to the
State by two months idleness.
By the transfer of plant strikes could be prevented, and the means
of production and distribution gradually municipalised or nationalised.
Under municipal production and distribution an average worker
would be able to keep his wife and four children in respectable maintenance
by two hours daily work. (See Proof Scientific Legislation , p. 63.)
Any municipality that would undertake the sale of milk, bread, meat,
clothes, and liquor, could effect its social salvation in two years.


For example,—On the ordinary consumption of these five articles
the Collingwood council could make a profit of £200,000 a year. (See
tablet O.)
In the first year this £200,009 profit would pay for the work of 500
unemployed at a year \ and pay for 16,000 acres of wheat land,
and 2000 acres for potato and factory and building-sites land at £8 an acre.
In the second year, buy wheat and potato seed, sheep and oxen ;
grow the potatoes and wheat, rear the cattle ; buy plant for a hat, clothes,
and boot factory.
In the third year pull down the old insanitary houses, and build new
suburban ones on cheap or free railway routes, and let them at labour-
costing rents. With such a start the municipality could go on producing
and consuming.
Doctors, teachers, old age insurances could be municipalised.
If the Collingwood council would begin by selling milk, they would
gain half the rates and secure the municipality from typhoid fever. Milk
should be sterilised and under inspection
COLLINGWOOD
MUNICIPAL
COUNCIL SALES
(Population
32,0000
ANNUAL PROFITS BY SALES.
EXPENDITURE OF PROFITS.
Ist Year.
Ist Year.
Receipts.
500 Unemployed at a
year .. .. • •
16.000 acres wheat, and 2000
potato land, at £5 acre .. 54,000
32.000 acres pasture land, at £3
acre .. .. .. 96,000
2.920.000 pints of milk yearly
—-profit Id. pint •• £12,166
11.680.000 lbs bread, yearly-
profit Id. lb. .. • • 12,166
5.840.000 lbs. meat yearly-
profit Id. lb. .. • • 12,166
32.000 x £5 4s. clothes yearly
—profit 33 per cent, .. 54,912
32,000
x two-thirds £6,000,000
1.140.000 liquor (1893)— profit
200 per cent. ... 112,280
200,000
2nd Year.
500 Unemployed at .£‘loo a year 50,000
Wheat and potato seed .. 7,000
Stock sheep and cattle .. 100,000
Plant and material for boot, hat,
and clothes factories .. 50,380
Total annual profit £203,690
2nd year, ditto ... 203,690
407,380
The reason why it takes so many as 180,000 workers of eight hours
to do the normal work of Victoria, under the present individualistic
system, is because two thirds of the energy and time spent is wasted or
misdirected. Watch a milkman. He serves one customer, then he drives
two streets before he serves the next; perhaps three or four streets for
the next. The same is the case with the butcher and baker, &c.
A municipal milkman, baker or butcher, would serve every conse-
cutive house on one side of a street ; then crossing over serve the other
side. A business street in Collingwood was visited between the hours of
9 am. and 11 a.m. and 2 p.m. and 3 p.m., and only 13 or 15 customers
were being served in 150 shops. That is, the shopkeeper and assistants
are imprisoned idlers the greater part of the day ; whereas municipal
distribution would be continuous.


STATE BANK.
or Public security and public profit there should be established a
State Lank of Issue and unlimited deposit, with the usual convenience of
using cheques. It should loan money at per cent, giving depositors
2 per cent. Notes of 2s, 4s, ss, and 10s should be issued to diminish
the necessity for so much gold and silver. Colonel Stanford says,
1 aper is the proper medium of exchange. The cry for gold is to keep
up a monopoly of a scarce article.” Herbert Spencer says (Essays,
p 881) “ An expanded paper currency is self-adjusting : it contracts to
its normal limit as fast as the need for its expansion disappears.’’
McLeod (Theory of Banking, p. 381) says “It is as certain as anything
m existence that it is nothing but the circulation of a few bits of paper
beating promises to pay, that calls into existence property and commodities
to the value of millions in Scotland.” The Government can utilise the
labour of the unemployed by the circulation of bits of paper. McLeod
says also “ Credit is equal to capital,”
Ihe btate Bank could give municipalities, farmers, manufacturers, and
others, money at 2-| per cent, and thus relieve ratepayers, and the
community generally, from the grasp of the 8 to 10 per cent usurers.
EIGHT HOURS DAY.
The maximum labor day shall be eight hours. In Melbourne bakers
are working seventeen hours a day. Railway men by retrenchment are
made to work eighteen hours a day. Tram men work 60 hours a week.
In factories women and girls are working eleven and twelve hours a day,
and without any pay for the overtime. There are plenty of unemployed
able to do this overtime work. Permits for extension of time over the
eight hours should require an employer’s affidavit, stating that no
unemployed persons could be got by advertisement to do his work.
Overtime should be made a time-and-a-half rate of pay. This would give
a modicum of justice to the unemployed.
The farm laborers of the 13th and 14th centuries worked only eight
hours a day. Most of the London bakers now work eight hours. Eight
thousand shopmen on the Pacific slope work only eight hours. Eight
hours should be sufficient for Victorian shopping—from 8 a.m. till 6 p.m.
with two hours rests between, or any eight hours definitely fixed by law,
suitable to any trade or calling. The usual permits given to chemists,
restaurants, confectioners, &c. Saturday night’s shopmen’s slavery should
be abolished.
The labour troubles of Europe, America, and Australia, bear a
threatening aspect. Victoria may not long remain calm. Human
endurance has a limit. To say that social salvation can be obtained by
cheap-labour-produced mutton, wool, beef, butter, wine ; or by building
societies, bi-metallism, or by debenture raising or ledger squaring is a
delusion or bluff. Initial failure is stamped on small land selectors
labour colonies, gold fossickings and village settlements.
The sole food of a large number of village settlers for months has
been boiled bran with a little treacle, and their clothes have been made


from sugar bags. In other cases it has been two meals of potatoes a
day.
Misery and starvation will exasperate the returning and despairing
unemployed worker. No Government can restrain the anger of an
educated mass when once fully roused ; and our legislators have no
remedy, no comprehensive organised scheme, no constructive policy to
propose. The majority of them are importers and middlemen, who are
pecuniarily interested in bolstering up the present laissez jaire freedom
of contract fraud.
Charles Kingsley, in his preface to Alton Lock, said, “ Thousands
of ladies and gentlemen in Great Britain are saying ‘ Show what we ought
to do to be just to the artisan, and we will do it, whatever it cost.’ ”
Carlyle said “ No man should presume to be a legislator unless he
has studied the problem of the Organisation of Labour. By the
organisation of labour, this gloomy sooty hell upon earth can be
transformed into a heaven ; God and the angels looking on well pleased.”
This proposed Organization of Labour Act taxes nobody, yet raises
money without interest. It sets to work the unemployed, whose initial
expenditure sets to work all the other workers, thereby creating production
and manufactures. It yields public works for nothing by labour that
would have been wasted. It increases the annual income and national
wealth because all are employed. If trade were kept fairly good by an
expenditure of millions yearly on public works it can be done again,
but without borrowing. First by the issue of legal tender notes, and
afterwards by direct taxation. If the Victorian unemployed are organised
and spending the money the normal trade must necessarily be the result.
The proof that this plan will pay is that the work of one-eighth of the
population, or 142,000 of average workers, working eight hours daily for
300 days in the year yields respectable maintenance for the entire
population of 1,140,000. This includes the unemployed. The
unemployed being thus provided for by production, a system of direct
taxation on unimproved land values, incomes, profits, wealth, absentees,
&c., pays for the support of the unemployed on public works. This taxing
will require to be done after the legal tender notes issue have satisfied the
requirements of the Victorian internal paper currency ; which would be in
about two years after the first issue.
When free, compulsory, and secular education was proposed for
Victoria, people said it would never become law, but it did, and the
Victorian system of education and the Victorian ballot system have been
adopted by most nations.
The foundation of law and authority rests with the majority. The
working classes of Victoria constitute per cent of the community.
They are seriously interested in the adoption of positive social reform
legislation. In fact to them it is a question of life or death. They must
therefore use every effort to bring positive social reform into the field of
practical politics. Still agitating for referendum, adult one vote suffrage,
electoral reform, &c., &c., other nations will follow the lead of Victoria.
Bit-by-bit legislation often defeats its own object ; and therefore an
Organization of Labour Act should be passed as a complete scheme.
Constant work for the Unemployed, without an alien clause, would be


frustrated by an in-rush of foreign workers, A minimum wage without
protection, sale stamps and real penalties, the minimum being fixed, would
be frustrated by unscrupulous importers and sweaters. Neglect to label out-
door, sweater-made goods, in New Zealand is a £lO penalty. Here, for over-
working seven girls for months, the magistrates fined the employers only
155., just enough to encourage sweaters. The present factory*law is a
sham.
At present a brutalizing anarchic selfish competitive system governs
the world and endangers the safety of society.
It is time that the intellect and common sense of the majority aroused
and asserted their sovereign rights, by insisting on the members introducing
into the House, an Organization of Labour Act ; and thus give work to
the workless ; remove the necessity of those Victorian bread funds, old
clothes distributions, shelter sheds, limited soup kitchen doling ; put a
stop to the slow deferred murder, now going on by sweating and long-
hours in unhealthy dens ; in fine, prevent society from drifting into social
parasitic cannibalism and internecine anarchy.
Spasmodic and temporary work given to selected labourers gives no
relief to artisans, clerks and chronic Unemployed.
Every Minister of Works says he has solved the Unemployed
Problem. The present Minister says, “ There are only a few deservedly
genuine Unemployed now in Melbourne ”. How is it that all the Melbourne
soup kitchens and charity concerns are in full swing ? One Minister
said, in the House:—“ When I was in office, I settled the Unemployed
Question in two hours, I told them to go down to Sandridge. I ordered
the biggest barrows and got them to wheel wet sand up an inclined plank.
They all caved in in less than two hours, (laughter). ” Whether by legal
tender of notes, or by AUctorian local debentures, or by universal direct
taxation incomes, the spending of the money by the organized Victorian
Unemployed for useful public works, is the fulcrum on which trade can
be moved and prosperity continued.






