

np 1
I ''”' V *■ - il.j ■* ■'' '•■ I
I| -j* tf#fi •>* * * I
| HHK <** M 1,5 JR - 1
*-* . ; ‘ •• j£ t /• Ml ii Lv. ; : -
!»&,. y?: pi:. I
I * yMJP'** 'll i
r ▼
Ulrr
(Imnana
Anb ®l|nr Artiuiliea
3n (EXrtttci & ijnng Kong
Jlrmtont Jlanl non ifinbmburg
Supplement to ttje
Canton Joails
iff SMi
X 034
■Pnblißfyeb fau
®lje National PufaltHtyero Ktb.
4, iS'ljalu'r tSoafa. Canton. Cljtna.


i
<v :V *' ■ ■ ' ■ ‘ iSSM^^^^S
jfflP
’ '
ADOLF HITLER
Chancellor of the “Third Reich ”


HINDENBURG FIRMLY HOLDS THE REINS OF GOVERNMENT
His strong sense of duty has never failed him.
Herbert von Hindenburg
(Ex-Ambassador and Nephew of the Great Soldier.)
Herr von Hindenburg is the President’s Assistant and
adviser in all political matters.
On the top of the beautiful palace in the Wilhelm-
strasse, Berlin, flutters the ensign of President
Hindenburg, and as in previous years two Reichswehr-
soldiers with steel helmets-are on guard at the ascent
of the middle building. With the exception of the
new brown paint, its exterior has remained unchanged,
only the interior rooms being redecorated and partly
transformed. Thus the alterations of the palace,
completed during the 85th year of the President,
symbolise both; renovation and maintainance of
tradition.
Hindenburg has come to live in this venerable
building where, in October, 1931, he first received
Herr Hitler in an interview that both men will never
forget. The evolution that brought these two great-
est Germans together has been long and painful. As
to Hindenburg’s own activity the world is frequently
mistaken. For the reason that during the eight years
of his presidency, he has appeared in public only at
big occasions, and has hardly ever made a speech.
It is often believed, that even the most important
decisions are submitted to him to be signed. this of
course, is completely wrong. 1 he official report will
prove some day that, though full of understanding, he
flrmly holds the reins of government; that even less
important matters were dealt with utmost care and
that frequently he interfered with the formulation
of minor details.
It should be remembered that Hindenburg is not
confined to his surroundings, but that a stream of
various written and oral information, Reaches him
every day. Whoever brings interesting news is
greatfully received by the President especially when
the community is concerned. The visitor will notice
that Hindenburg is an attentive and intelligent auditor
who digests in his mind everything he is told. The
Great General Staff of the Prussian Army was a good
school. If a vivid sympathy is proved for even less
important matters, it must be all the more intense
if a problem of world-wide importance like the pro-
gress of National Socialism is concerned.
1 do not need here to go into details of the
revolution, which, to a steadily growing extent, is
supported by the vast majority of the population.
To-day 1 particularly want to emphasise that the mira-
cle, the coming into existence oi the New State, also
manifested itself in Hindenburgs’s mind. This was
only possible because he has preserved a young spirit
inspite of his great age and is still capable, not only
to understand the nation, but to take an active part
in its life.
History has now united Hindenburg and Hitler.
The celebration of the battle of Tannenberg on August
27th has cemented this alliance. The presentation of
the Langenau estate and the Prussian forest has added
to our ancient family estate. The President, ac-
companied by Chancellor Hitler and the Prussian
Prime Minister Goering, appeared before a vast crowd.
The speech of Herr Hitler about the Great War and
Hindenburg’s work was extremely impressing.
“At that time, Sir,” he said, “Fate had granted
me the favor to light as a simple rifleman in the
ranks of my brothers and comrades for the liberty
of our country. To-day, in the deep emotion of my
heart, 1 think it a benevolent gift of providence to
be allowed to express to you here, on the Great War’s
famous battle fields, in deep devotion, the everlasting-
gratitude of a united German people.”
Hindenburg after remembering the dead and his
Commander-in-Chief, accepted the gift of the estate
for himself and his family with the significant words
that he had ‘‘merely done his duty.”
I believe that these simple words give a closer
insight into his character than any biographer could
achieve. Since his days as a cadet his strong sense
of duty has never failed him even up to this very day.
INDEX.
Hindenburg Firmly Holds the Reins of Government..!
Staff of the German Consulate at Canton 2
Brief Biographies 3
Baist & Co
Germany’s Trade With China —Sien-Ming Chan ....17
Schmidt & Co 18-20
The Berlin Mission In South China 21
Siemssen & Co 22-24
R. Johnson & Co 24-26
The Rhenish Mission in South China 27
Deutsch-Asiatische Bank 28-29
Jebsen & Co 30-36
F. Feld & Co 37-39
Koehler & Co 39
Johnson Engineering Co 40-41
Engineering In China —Dr. Eng. K. L. Klingbriel. .. .42
Chien Hsin Engineering Co 43-48
German Medical Activities in S. China —Dr. J. H. 0tt0.49-51
Reuter, Brockelmann & Co 52
Boediker & Co 53
Bornemann & Co 53
Frolich, Tselee & Co., Ltd 54-55
The Mission of the German-Chinese Medical Faculty .56-59
China Export & Import & Bank Co 57-58
Carlowitz & Co. 60-63
Goeke & Co 64
Staff of the German Consulate at Hongkong & Brief
Biographies 65
Melchers & Co 66-68
A. Goeke & Co 68-70
Meyerink & Co
German Geographers in South Gnina — Hr. Wolfgang
Panzer 72-73
Carlowitz & Co 74-76
Norddeutscher Lloyd 78-80
Sander Wieler & Co 82
Jebsen & Co 83-86
Hamburg American Line 87
Siemssen & Co 88
Schmidt & Co 89-92
Introductory Article *93
German Club 94
German Dispensary 94


|J5a5HSH5HSE?a5H52SaSa5Z5E5HEaSE5HSHSHSH5aSB5aSE5EJZSHSHSH5a5H52SZSE5BSH5HSS5S5H5HSHSZ5HSa5^2SH53Sa55SHSHSHS^5HSa5a5HSS5H5H5aSB^
CONSULATE GENERAL FOR GERMANY I
a ft
j UNA IN ,
Dr. C. H. Voskamp. ' Mr. C. H. Kanter. Mr. P. Beckmann.
Vice-Consul. Chancellor. Secretary.
Dr. W. Wagner, Dr. Jur.
Consul General


BRIEF BIOGRAPHIES
of the members of the German Consulate General
Canton
DR. C.H. VOSKAMP, VICE-CONSUL
DR. W. WAGNER, DR. JUR.
Consul General
1925—Joined the Foreign Office, Berlin
as attache.
Bom July 3, 1884 at Wetterfeld in
Central Germany, attended the Grammar
Schools of Laubach and Darmstadt,
1929 —Secretary of the German Legation,
Peking.
Studied Law and Social Economies at
the Universities of Geneva, Berlin and
Giessen,
1930 —Vice-Consul at Hankow
1909 Student Interpreter at the Ger-
man Legation at Peking,
1932 —Vice-Consul at Shanghai (three
months)
1913 acting Consul at Swatow,
During the War, officer at various
parts of the front
Since 1930 German Consulate-General,
Canton.
1918 Vice-Consul at Geneva,
1919/20 service in the Foreign Office,
Berlin,
1920 member of the Commission for
the conclusion of the new Sino-German
Treaty.
1921-1923 Vice-Consul and Acting
Consul General at Canton.
1923-1925 Consul at Vladivostok,
1925-1918 Consul at Hongkong,
1928-1929 Councillor of the German
Legation in China,
Since Ist July 1929 German Consul
General at Canton,
MR. C. H. KANTER, CHANCELLOR
Born 1876 in a village near Berlin.
Passed the primary and intermediate
school, attended a training-college for
teachers. Taught for three years. From
1900 to 1901 served in the German Army.
Joined the German Legation Guard at
Peking in 1901 as Paymaster’s Assistant.
Left the military service in 1906 to join
the consular service. Served at the con-
sulates in Hankow and Nanking until
1917, when he returned to Germany. From
1917/1918 was member of the staff of
the German Consulates at Zuerich,
Schaffhausen, Sofia. Then the Foreign
Office-1919 to 1921. Returned to China
in 1921. Since then member of the Ger-
man Consulate General at Canton.
MR. P. BECKMANN, Secretary.
Born 1897 in Schwerin (Mecklenburg) ;
Studied at the State Grammar School in
Schwerin
1916 —1918 military service at the front;
1919 —1925 government official in Sch-
werin, Buetzow, Wismar,
Grabow (Mecklenburg) ;
1925 joined the service of the Foreign
Office in Berlin;
1925 — 1926 Foreign Office, Berlin;
1926 — 1928 German Legation, Kabul
(Afghanistan);
1928—-1930 German Consulate General
Tientsin;
Since 1930 German Consulate-General,
Canton,


■ll /-pf^S'^ : ;
S&£ •;
i '' S **" -■
. \^r
/f' &
t
T
I A>
I
I
f/. /?. Baist, General Manager
BAIST & Co.
(KUNST & ALBERS)
No. 39 Shameen, French - Concession.
IMPORTERS- EXPORTERS
ENGINEERS
ISEHHSZSHSasaS
3^SZSESHSZSZS?.


Messrs. BAIST & CO.
This company was established in August 193 2
Mr. H. R. Baist of Canton and Mr. Appenroth of
Hamburg to represent the well-known firm of Kunst
& Albers, Hamburg, Shanghai, Hankow, Harbin,
Mukden, whose activities in the Far East date back to
1868. Before the World War, Kunst & Albers, was
the biggest foreign concern in Harbin and Vladivostok,
Siberia, and was the chief supplier of railway materials,
steel, building materials, modern mining and engineer-
ing equipment, etc., in these cities. The Soviet Re-
volution put an end to the old concern in Siberia and
henceforth its activities were confined to China. The
Far Eastern head office was established several years
ago in Shanghai, where in the office alone more than
40 Europeans and over 30 Chinese are employed.
Baist & Co. hold all agencies of Kunst & Albers,
whose agents in Europe and America enable this firm
to offer any kind of merchandise to the Chinese clien-
tele at competitive prices.
Mr. Baist is addition to being a prominent figure
in commercial circles is likewise an active sportsman
and horseman.
The general manager of the firm is Mr. H. R.
Baist. He started his career in the Far East in 1909
when he entered the Import Dept, of Messrs. Carlowitz
& Co. in Hongkong with whom he was connected until
August, 1914. At the outbreak of the World War,
Mr. Baist went to Tsingtao where he joined the volun-
teers and was decorated for distinguished service.
After the war, he went to Japan and North China.
In 1924 he resumed activities in South China, manag-
ing in succession three well-known local German firms,
The import and export departments of the firm,
which are also managed by Mr. Baist, deal in;
Sundries:
Paper, stationary goods, paint boxes, toys, leather,
buttons, sewing machines, bicycles, etc.
Hardware & Metals:
Tools, small tool machinery, household goods,
building material, structural steel, tool and other steel,
electric wires, cables, fittings, etc.
Piecegoods & Yarns:
British and Continental woollen and cotton piece-
goods, woollen and cotton yarns, rayon yarns, etc.
Chemical & Pharmaceutical Goods:
Light and heavy chemicals for industrial use and
dispensaries, fertilizers, patent medicines, surgical in-
struments, thermometers, etc.
Export:
All China products, mattings, hides, canes, ores,
Metal:
Structural steel, concrete reinforcing bars, steel
> sheet piling, steel plates, joists & channels, steel hoops,
galvanized, corrugated and plain sheets, black sheets,
wrought iron and mildsteel tubes and fittings for gas,
water and steam, tool steel and metal ingots.
Oil:
Greases and transformer oils, emulsifying cutting
oils for workshops, power stations, water works, ar-
senals, paper mills, locomotives, motor cars & lorries,
gas, steam, oil and Diesel Engines.
Manufactured by the famous Mercury process of
The Sun Oil Company of Philadelphia.
The Mercury Process for refining lubricating oil
is entirely a Sun Oil Company development, and is
protected by many basic patents. It is utterly unique;
totally different from any other system. The years
of research work and the millions of dollars given to
this undertaking have resulted in the New Sunoco
Motor Oies which will stand up in service better than
any heretofore known.
Motor Oils in Use Are Subjected to
Two Destructive Changes
When a motor oil is used, the heat, pressure and
violent agitation to which it is subjected in the engine,
cause two destructive changes to take place in the oil;
(1) All oils ultimately break down or wear out.
Breaking the molecules of oil releases fine carbon which
forms sludge or crankcase deposits. (2) Air com-
bines with other parts of the oil, forming tarry sub-
stances. The heat of the piston head cracks some of
the oil, making more tar and also some liquid products
thinner than the original lubricant.
The Mercury Process produces oils which have
an ability to resist these destructive forces to a degree
never before known.
Sunoco Motor Oils, Mercury made, retain their
full lubricating properties; crankcase drainings, after
over two thousand miles of service, show that the used
oil has undergone practically no change, except for
slight contamination by gasoline seeping by the piston
rings, and dirt sucked in the breather pipes. A com-
plete removal of dirt and gasoline vields an oil scarce-
ly distinguishable from the new oil except for slight
darkening. ' Just as stainless steel may get dirty but
does not rust, so Mercury made oils may be blackened
by soot but do not decompose.


Outstanding Durability
Mercury made oils give an outstanding durability
in lubricating quality. As they are consumed in an
engine they leave no harmful products of decomposi-
tion. No sticky substances appear in the crankcase,
no oil carbon forms on the piston heads. Drained and
flushed just often enough to remove dust accumula-
tions, engines serviced with the new Sunoco Motor
Oils stay clean. Between such occasional flushings,
with the necessary small amount of replenishment, the
driver has the assurance that the crankcase is always
full of “live bodied” oil.
Practically all motor oils are good in some respect
but are usually lacking in some other. An oil may
give remarkable mileage but also create exceptional
amounts of carbon. Another oil may be very low in
piston carbon but very high in crankcase sludge. This
is because of imperfections in conventional refining
methods.
The new Sunoco Motor Oils rank high in any
test that can be made, either in the laboratory or on
the road. They are good from every viewpoint and
do not merely possess certain advantages which are
offset by corresponding drawbacks.
More Advantages combined in this one oil
. than ever before offered to motorists
Some oils boast of little carbon; some oils of long
mileage.
But the new Sunoco Motor Oil possesses more
outstanding advantages than ever before offered in
any motor oil.
This New Sunoco
will provide unexcelled lubrication;
is of such outstanding durability that it will not break
down during long periods of service which would ren-
der many oils unfit for use;
will give instant and safe lubrication at all tempera-
tures ;
will provide a perfect piston seal to insure full power;
will form no hard carbon on pistons or valves;
will not foul spark plugs;
will not leave sludge deposits in the crankcase.
Information or advice regarding Lubricants will
be given on application by Baist & Co. s Sunoil Dept,
or any Agent in the town or in the Province.


I”' 1 " r 1 11 1 -.." ■ — ■■■' — —1
I
zSfes SPERM IN*
l®) MAMMIN-
: j j uiui
S~" el II
ROCHLING STEEL
SIINDCO
SUN OIL CO. PHILADELPHIA PA. U.S.A
MERCURY MADE
MOTOR OIL
Registered Trade Mark


PATENT MEDICINES
SPERMINUM-POEHL
Professor Poehl was the first to bring to light the
general tonic effect and specific action of Spermin and
to introduce this remedy into therapy. According to
Poehl’s physiologico-chemical investigation Spermin
is present in a number of tissues and organs of either
sex, also in the blood, but the largest amount is in the
testicles. Spermin was discovered by Poehl in its
chemically pure state and considered by him to be of
the important normal protective agents of the human
organism. Rrown-Sequard laid great stress on the
possession by testicular extract of general tonic powers
and Poehl made a similiar one for his Spermin, this be-
ing due to its being a powerful positive catalytic agent
(accelerator of oxidation). Spermin-Poehl acts as a
“ferment” oxidizing the products of regressive meta-
morphosis, freeing the tissues and organs from accu-
mulation of toxic products of disassimilation, preser-
ving the body from autointoxication, and increasing
as a factor of natural immunity the resistance of the
organism towards infections (microbes and their
toxins). The physiological and therapeutic value of
Spermin-Poehl, its general tonic effect has been demon-
strated by numerous observations of many cliniater,
the results of which coincided with those of laboratory
researches. For this reason Spermin-Poehl is to be
employed in all cases where it is necessary to raise the
tone of the nervous system, to supply vital energy
and restore former resistance of the organism, in
cases where the intraorganic oxidation is diminished.
By taking Spermin-Poehl systematically for some
considerable time working ability improves, memory
becomes more active, the energy of muscular con-
tractions more strengthening (effect on development
of muscular power) and therefore the outlook on life
becomes more cheerful.
The principal indications for the use of Spermin-
Poehl with its general tonic effect are given in
Neurasthenia, in changes characteristic of Senility,
in cases of Cachexia (lack of vigour), —briefly in all
diseases, where it is necessary to supply vital energy,
to restore to the normal state the nutritive processes
of the tissues, to give physiological “tone ’ to the ner-
vous system and to light against the troubles of ex-
change of matter (insufficient metabolism), against
depressed tissue respriation as a consequence of over-
irritation or overexhaustion of the nervous and other
tissues. Spermin-Poehl has a beneficial action on the
nervous system, which reacts favourably on the dis-
eased parts or their functions. For this reason
Spermin-Poehl can exert a beneficial action in human
beings. The evidence that Sperimin-Poehl is of thera-
peutic value is by no means suggestive. The results
obtained by taking Spermin-Poehl are mostly very good
indeed, especially when regularly and continually used
(for many weeks) and there are undoubted effects
resulting from its beneficial action on the organism.
Spermin-Poehl is easily digested. No detrimen-
tal effects have been observed as a result of using
Spermin-Poehl even in prolonged use of this remedy.
Treatment by Spermin-Poehl requires no special diet.
Further organical preparations like
MAMMIN POEHL
manufactured by
Organotherapeutical Institute Prof. Dr. v. Poehl &
Soehne, Berlin
DYSENTULIN
Dysentulin (iodo-oxy-quinolin-sulphc acid) is
one of the most widely prescribed treatments for
dysentery. Your doctor recommends it because of
its known results, and particularly because of its
natural curative effects on the intestinal tract.
Your doctor will tell you about Dysentulin, and
keep a supply handy in your medicine cabinet, so
that you may start treatment at the first signs of
dysentery, Dysentulin comes in convenient pack-
ages of 23 and 30 tablets.
DR. MEYER-CASTENS & CO., HAMBURG
The Treatment ol Amoebic Dysentery by ‘ Dysentulin”.
(Dr. Meyer-Castens, Hamburg).
Amoebic dysentery is endemic chiefly in the
Mediterranean countries and the tropics and occurs
but little in northern latitudes. After malaria, amoe-
bic dysentery is the greatest scourge in the regions
named and it entailed an enormous mortality until
its causal agent was, in 1 903, discovered by Schaudinn
in the entamoeba hystolica or ameba bacillus, when
chemistry set to work to find an effective amebicide.
All manner of drugs had been used in the past,
indigenous and foreign; laxatives of many kinds,
such as calomel, castor oil &c, bismuth, ipecacuanha,
promegrenate bark: generally speaking, to little pur-
pose. Much had been expected from emetin hydro-
chlor, which again proved disappointing as it failed
to reach cysts and to affect the minutia forms, the
disease thereby very frequently attaining a state of
chronicity. The emetin hydrochlor, treatment also
had the drawback of producing secondary phenomena,
such as cardiac dysfunction, irritation of the gastro-
intestinal mucous membrane and, finally, serious
nerve trouble.
It fell to Muehlens and Menk to discover an ideal
amebicide in an iodo-oxyquinolin-suipho-acid com-
bination and to prove in actual practice that treatment
with this preparation left all previous curative efforts
far behind. The results, in all stages of the infection,
were striking from the start and the use of the sub-
stance against amebic dysentery is to-day as general
as that of quinine against malaria. The literature is
much too voluminous to be referred to in detail,
countries where literature is published are:
China, Dutch-India, Japan, India, Austria, Bel-
gium, England, Germany, Holland, Chile,
Venezuela, Brazil etc.
“Dysentulin” represents an iodo-oxyquinolin-
sulpho-acid combination with abouth 23% iodine and
an addition of soda bicarb., the latter serving the pur-
pose to avoid certain possible secondary effects.
The clinical effect, is due to the directly amebici-
dal action combined with a healing influence on the
tissue cells. Tht excellent tolerance of the Dysentulin
pills on the part of the gastro-intestinal tract is of
especial importance. In the clinical doses, the pre-
paration is absolutely non-poisonous.
The rapidity with which improvement follows
the therapy, also as regards secondary phenomena
(physical arid, still more, psychical), is very striking
and due, in ,the first place, to an improved intestinal
function following the killing of the bacilli. The by-
effects, common with other methods of treatment,
especially by emetin hydrochlor., are not met with in
the case of the Dysentulin treatment which, more-
over, gives patients very little inconvenience. Dy-
sentulin is given per os in the form of pills; in chronic
cases, enemas with a 2—3 % Dysentulin solution are
applied.


SALVACID
A Relief from Stomach Troubles, a providential
discovery which has never failed against Hyperacidity,
Gastritis, Ulcer and all kinds of stomach disorders.
Salvacid removes not only the symptons, but the
basic underlying pathological causes. NO STO-
MACH TROUBLES may they be bitter eructuation
acid stomach, gastritis or even ulcer duodeni. will
any longer stand between you and your personel
enjoyments.
The latest discovery Salvacid will relieve you
from all stomach ailments.
Obtainable at all Pharmacies in town
GenuineTßES PRODUCT manufactured by
TRES CORPORATION, BUDAPEST
(HUNGARY)
The only liver preparation in the world is
AS-HEPATRAT
a wonderful remedy against
Morbus Basedowii and Anaemia gravis
Arsen Hepatrat & Ferro Hepatmfc
Whilst liver extract nullifies the aggravated
haemolysis of toxic origin and supplies the required
material for building up erythrocytes, iron and to a
much greater degree arsenic, exert a stimulus on the
blood-forming organs, especially on bone marrow,
thus promoting the production of the red blood cor-
puscles. A combination of both pharmaceutical pro-
ducts, the role of which is respectively to increase the
production and the resistance of blood corpuscles,
was obviously the next step, and this combination
was for the first time achieved in As-Hepatrat.
The arsenic compound as used in As-Hepatrat
belongs to the phenylarsenic acids made known bv
Ehrlich as far back as 1909, and which Levaditti and
Fourneau first brought to the fore in therapy.
Phenylarsenate has proved effective in a series of
tropical diseases, such as yaws, febris recurrens,
parasitosis, intestinalis, amabiasis lambliosis, spiro-
chaetosis intestinalis and bronchititis, paludismis and
trypanosomiasis. In addition to this there is also
the remainder of the whole sphere of arsenic therapy.
In former times arsenic, as is well-known, was used
as a tonic and a roborant, for it not only promotes
the formation of red corpuscles, but also exerts a
formative stimulus on protoplasma. The general
effects to arsenic therapy are a better nutritional state
with an improved body weight and increase of fatten-
ing, clear skin, larger increment of nitrogen, improved
physical strength and in cases of young people, an
increased growth of the bones.
As it frequently occurs in those cases where an
arsenic cure is indicated that the stomach and intestine
are in a very bad state from the secretory and motory
point of view, the fact that phenylarsenate is well
tolerated deserves special mention.
As-Hepatrat is indicated, apart from the above
mentioned tropical diseases, for malignant diseases of
the skin (psoriasis, lichen ruber, acne, eczema)
tymphoma, anaemia of any aetiology, leucoma,
neurosis (neurasthenia, chorea), neuralgia. Further
As-Hepatrat has proved effective in certain forms of
malaria which do not react to quinine, more especially
in the so-called malaria cachexia, also in the case of
streptococcensepsis (endocarditis lenta and toxic
rheumatism of the joints).
The duration of an As-Hepatrat treatment de-
pends on the gravity of the case. In any event, it
should be extended over several weeks, beginning
with small doses, increasing them for 3 weeks, then
keeping these at the same level for 1 to 2 weeks, and
finally decreasing slowly.
Genuine Product manufactured by
NORDMARK-WERKE, HAMBURG 21
EUPHYLLIN
Euphyllin in Ampoules, Tablets and Sup-
positories of highest therapeuttic effect as:
DIURETIC in diseases of the heart and kidneys and
their sequelae: edema, uremia, eclampsia.
VASO DILATING AGENT FOR CORONARY
VESSELS in the various desease of the
heart due to arteriosclerosis angina
pectoris cardiac asthma, myodegeneratio
cordis.
AGENT PROMOTING BLOOD —COAGULATION
in haemorrhagic diatheses haemophilia. Werlhoff’s
diseases etc, and in haemorrhages of the most diverse
kind.
Obtainable for:
Internal administration in Tablets Tubes of 1 0 or 20
Tablets Rectal Administration Suppositories packages
of 10, 100, 500 suppositories of 0.36 gr.
For injections intramuscular and intravenous in am-
poules of 22 cc
Genuine Manufacture of
BYK—GULDENWERKE, Berlin N.W. 7
BROMO —STRONTIURAN
Strontiuran a modern Therapeutic Brom Com-
bination to heal & treat malignant diseases
of the skin such as Eczema, Urticaria acuta, and
chronica, Pityriasis rosea, Dermatitis, Neurodermitis,
Tumors, Mycosis fungoides etc. supplied in ampoules
for intramuscular and intravenous injections, am-
poules of 1 0 cc.
Genuine Manufacture of
Drs. R & O. Weil, Frankfurt O/M.
There are other Pharmaceutical Preparations
such as CEREBRIN—BI OVAR—ORCHITIN—
POEHL MYCARDOL, ICHTOTERPAN, TURIOP-
IN, SOMNACETIN, DROSERIN SPASMOPURIN
WEILL AORTALGIN BYK YSATE PREPARA-
TIONS BUERGER
HERBA Ointment, Obermeyer etc. etc.


The Biography of Dr. K. L. Klingbiel
Dr. K. L. Klingbiel was born in Hamburg' in saki Dockyard in Kobe, and with the Yokohama Dock-
-1897, and educated in the colleges of Hamburg and yard of Yokohama.
Luebeck. He spent two years’ apprenticeship at the A . , r , ~, , ,
famous Reiherstieg Schiffswerfte und Maschinenfa- ~ . At *e World Power Conference and World
brik, one of the oldest and most famous dockyards in Engmeermg Congress m Tok.o, Dr. Klmgb.el acted as
Hamburg, in the worshops as a naval volunteer. Secretary to the Conference.
The year 1930 found Dr. Klingbiel again in Ger-
At the beginning of the World War he joined the many with the MAN. He stayed in his old works
German Navy. During the four years of hostility he for more than a year, during which time he made a
was detailed on several men-of-war, including battle round trip of the MAN and G H H works to gain
ships, destroyers, and submarine boats, and he witness- special knowledge and collecting other valuable hi-
ed the end of the German fleet at Scapa Flow in the formation.
Orkney Islands. .n-.11 .
• v■ '•** lx*,' z
pvr ** v;*
Returning to Germany in 1918, Dr. Klingbiel . . , •
studied at the University of Hamburg, and the •** ,
Technical Universities in Braunschweig and Karlsruhe. ‘
During his stay at these colleges, all available spare ’ '
time was spent to practice in different firms, in locomo-
tive works, in large contracting firms working at the
large hydraulic power schemes in South Germany, and ♦ m. \ .. -
on the Rhine River, as well as on the River Danube *• ; iRH
Dam Reconstruction near the Austrian border at * i
Passau, etc. This second apprenticeship lasted nearly p||i if .
From Karlsruhe, Dr. Klingbiel graduated as
Dipl. Eng., and later as Doctor of Engineering. He
then entered the Augsburg Works of the M A N con-
cern working in the Designing Department, and later , I ( ,|>
on at the diesel engine test place. He was afterwards —————
transferred to the project department, where he con- Dr. Klingbiel came again to the East in 1931,
trolled and supervised the sales and projected schemes staying for one year in Shanghai taking over the
especially of the near Orient and the Far East. temporary management of the Technical Department
In 1926 he was sent out to Japan with the Messrs. Kunst & Albers during the home leave of
special charge of introducing and selling the MAN Mr. Kapper. After the latter s leturn Di. Klingbiel
products, more especially diesel machines. During his proceeded South to open the Fechmcal Department of
stay in Japan, up to 1930, diesel engines amounting to j s Shanghai fiun in Canton, whei e he is co-ordinated
about 60,000 BHP were ordered and delivered, as well, with Mr. H. R. Baist, the General Manager of Messrs,
the granting of licences was arranged with the Kawa- Faist & Company,
Hensoldt Optical Works
The famous Hensoldt Optical Works was Hensoldt works can supply microscopes of all sizes
founded in 1852. In the first few years the firm and magnifying powers such as pocket microscopes
manufactured precision Optical Instruments especially and ordinary microscopes and any othei
microscopes, astronomical instruments as well as kind of instruments for scientific and civil purposes,
telescopes and binoculars, which soon gained a world- Besides being to supply all kinds of optical c
wide attention and the products soon established a instruments for Military and Naval purposes, the
reputation second to none. A few years later the Hensoldt works are able to supply complete Optical
factory embarked on the manufacture of Optical outfits for Artillery regiments and so on.
instruments and apparatus for Army and Naval use The name of Hensoldt incorporates long years
and these were also very well received and taken up °f experience and first class workmanship, as well as
by nearly every country. These snecial lines had a reliability in every respect only the best and most
culmination point during the World War when suitable materials are used in the process of manufac-
Hensoldt products due to its absolute reliability had timing of all its products.
such a demand on its resources made that the factories hhe representatives for Hensoldt Optical Pro-
could not cope with all standing orders. The ducts are:
South China: y W North & Central China:
Baist & Co., y Kunst & Albers,
Canton, China.
Tel: 15825
Shanghai, China.


... t» ot CO *
M *>»•


■JEZFEsasssE Hsraszsasa
ARE GOING TO BUILD CHINA’S FIRST
STEEL WORKS
BECAUSE THEIR NAME INCORPORATES A
MAXIMUM EXPERIENCE IN ENGINEERING
RELIABILITY.
afnaaSS REPRESENTATIVES:
feHSaSZSZSZSHSHSHSZSHSZSZSaSSSHSHSHSZSSSZSZSdSHSH HSaSHSZSHSZSHSiISHSESZSZSZSESISS’aSHSESESiS2SZSHSESESES2
BAIST & CO.,
South China


I
In
Stationary and Marine Diesel Engines
Printing Machines - Brewery Equipments
Diesel-and Gasoline Driven Trucks-Bridges-
Cranes and Transportation Plants-
Steel Structures - Hydro Constructions
Diesel Locomotives and Railway Oars
Steam Turbines-Gas Engines-
Steam Engines - Propeller
Pump Plants - Gasholders -
All Kinds of General Engineering Works
BAIST & CO.,
ffnssa representatives:
South China


THE YEARLY PRODUCTION OF THE G H H
4 - 5,000,000
tons of
coal
1,000,000
tons .of
coke
300,000
tons of briquettes
15,000
tons of
sulphate of ammonia
40,000
tons of
tar
9,000
tons of
benzole, toluole, solvent naph-
tha and heavy benzol
0
0
CO
tons of
crude napthaline
240
tons of
Coumaron resin
26,000,000
bricks
5,000,000
cubic meters of town gas 1 .....
Notable Features of the M. A. N. with Special Consideration of the
Development of the Diesel Machine.
It is well known all over the world that the Diesel
machine originated in the Augsburg Works of the
Maschinenfabrik Augsburg Nuernberg A.G., then
known as the Maschinenfabrik Augsburg. In the
years 1893 to 1 &97’ workshops and technical resources
were placed at the disposal of Rudolf Diesel for the
designing and construction of the first diesel machine
in the world, which is now in the “German Museum
of Technical Master Works” in Munich.
Although this initial success induced other firms
to take out licences, the practical and technical diffi-
culties which developed caused them to lose heart.
THE “M A N” AUGSBURG CARRIED ON
ALONE DURING THE FOLLOWING
YEARS, WITHOUT ANY OUTSIDE
HELP, AND WITH GREAT SACRIFICE
OF ENERGY AND MONEY, TO PERFECT
THE DIESEL ENGINE TO ENABLE IT
TO OPERATE CONTINUOUSLY, RELIA-
BLY AND ECONOMICALLY OUTSIDE
THEIR WORKS AND IN THE HANDS OF
INEXPERIENCED PEOPLE.
It was only after 1900, by which time the M A N
Augsburg had reached this goal that the great expan-
sion of the Diesel Machine took place, and other firms
came again, re-encouraged after the main work was
done. The Diesel Machine extended to all countries
of the world, and in subsequent years the MAN has
maintained its position at the head of the development.
The MAN built the first reversible Marine
Diesel Engine and on the strength of the experience
gained, proceeded with the development of high
powered Diesel Engines of 12,000 and 15,000 BHP
output per unit.
The MAN developed the airless injection
engine, not only for stationary and marine installa-
Development of
The origin of the Gutehofifnungshuette can be
traced back to 1741. In the neighbourhood of
Oberhausen three siderurgical Works were founded
between 1741 and 179 1: the Antony Works located
in the present Community of Osterfeld, the Gutehofif-
nungshuette at Sterkrade and the Iron Works Neu-
Essen in the actual Community of Oberhausen. These
three Works amalgamated in 1808 under the firm of
“Huettengewerkschaft and Handlung Jacobi, Haniel
& Huyssen.” In 1873 this firm was formed into a
limited company under the name of Gutehofifnungs-
huette Aktienverein filer Bergbau und Huettenbe-
trieb.
The history of the Gutehofifnungshuette repre-
sents an exact record of the development of the
German Iron and Steel Industry during the last two
centuries. The first blast-furnaces worked the raw
material, such as charcoal and limonite found in the
neighbourhood, into foundry goods. These local
supplies, however, were soon exhausted, at the begin-
ning of the 19th century, they were obliged to procure
pig iron from elsewhere by utilising the Rhine: firstly
from Siegerland and the Lahn valley, and later on, in
increasing quantities from England and Belgium. By
the forties of the 19th century, the Gutehofifnungs-
huette had developed into a pig iron refining works,
pure and simple, by adapting the puddling process and
depending upon foreign pig iron. Then a change
came, when it was found possible to convert Westpha-
lian coal into furnace coke. In 1855 the Gutehofif-
nungshuette decided to put down a large blast furnace
plant. This, on the other hand involved the imme-
dons, but also recently in special light high-speed
construction for motor lorries, locomotives, cranes,
boats and so on.
A proof that the M A N is still leading the way in
Diesel Machines is that the German Navy entrusted
the Augsburg Works of the MAN with the design-
ing and construction of the complete machinery for
the famous German Pocket Battleships. These ships
are entirely diesel driven, with two new types of diesel
engines of the Double acting Two Cycle design, with
speeds and weights never before attained by any other
engines.
The most well known type of diesel engine, and
the most used type, is the Single Acting Four Cycle,
G Vu Engine, representing the maximum reliability
and first class service, simple operation and cheap
competitive prices, and last but not least, a first class
spare part service.
It is interesting to note that the M A N works
are dealing in other special lines, of which only a few
points may be mentioned.
The M A N Nuernberg Works ;
Gas engines
Cranes and transportation plants
And General Engineering.
The MAN Gustavsburg Works:
Waterless Gasholders
Propeller pumps
BRIDGES (famous all over
the world)
The M A N have a good name in all parts of the
world, especially in China already many years before
the world war.
The name MAN represents:
Reliability—Quality—A I Service.
the G H H
diate establishment of coal mining and the extension
of the iron ore properties.
Since then, three points have influenced the
development of the Gutehofifnungshuette: the manu-
facture of pig iron and the extension of the refining
departments; the development of coal mining; and the
acquisition of ore properties.
190.000. KW hours of electrical energy
300.000 tons of iron ore
180.000 tons of limestone
45,000 tons of dilomite
1,000,000 tons of pig iron
1.100.000 tons of raw steel
800.000 tons of roller products
76.000. cubic meters of water raised by the water
works
108.000. ton/Km of transport effected by the
works railway
2.800.000 tons of goods handled by the port of
Walsttm.


BAISJ & f a
The most reliable en-
gineering firm whose %
experts are at your j
■r w¥ K
'*► ** ,
*^***^**"^^^
| prepared
I to help
Manager: Dr. Klingbiel
!SHSHSH£aSiL“


■
The picture below shows the staff of Messrs. Baist & Co., a new branch of the well known old tree,
Messrs. Kunst & Alberts, representing a long list of leading firms in industrial circles as for example:—
1. M.A.N. (Maschinen Augsburg-Nurnberg
A.G.) the leading concern in the manufac-
ture of Diesel engines, Printing Presses,
Hydro Steel Structures, Waterless Gashold-
ers, Railway Cars, Bridge Building, Gas
machines upto the largest units in the world,
cranes of all kinds and sizes, Diesel-Trucks
etc., etc.
G.H.H, (Gutehoffnungshutte Oberhausen
A.G.) Works, comprising of Iron Works,
Steel Works, Rolling Mills, Shipbuilding
Yards Bridge Building, Boiler Construction,
Wire Rolling Mills, Cast Steels and Forgings
of any dimension, Water Works Construc-
tion, etc., etc.
3. Roechling-Buderus Steel Works supplying
all grades of Tool Steel, High Speed Steel,
Alloy Tool Steel, Carbon Tool Steel, Electric
Alloy Steel, Forgings, Die Blocks, Springs,
Rolls, Chrome Nickel Steel, Valve Steel,
Manganese Steel, Magnet Steel, Special
Diamond Tungsten Steel, etc., etc.
4. Gehr. Pfeiffer Barbarossaworks, the leading-
well known works for manufacturing com-
plete cement factories and its relative side
industries.
5. The Flottman Works, well known all over
the world for their air compressors and tools
operated by compressed air for mining and
works of all other descriptions.
6. The Elin Electric Works, in Austria, with
their enormous building programme enabling
them to supply all kinds of electrical ma-
chines combined with first class workman-
ship and competitive prices.
7. Ritz & Schweizer, Pump works. The name
being a guarantee for quality of the highest
grade, based on long years of experience in
all types of pumps.
cS. Messrs. Krause & Co. One of the leading
German Tool machine concerns, not only
capable to supply single machines but being-
able to project complete schemes and indus-
trial installations in their special lines.
9. Messrs. Schule & Co. —Well known for
their portable pumpmobiles suitable for con-
tractors, fire-brigades, gardeners, irrigation
& drainage work and their second but also
very important line of manufacture being-
rice mills and all kinds allied machinery.
10. Messrs. Messer & Co. The leading factory
in all kinds of gas producing and welding
and cutting machines for all special kinds of
work.
11. Messrs. Hatz & Co. Builders of high grade
Diesel Engines of smaller outputs upto about
50 H.P. with low speeds and corresponding-
long life.
12. Messrs. Villeroy & Boch. Manufacturers
of all types of sanitaryware of highest grade
and quality, whose supplies are already too
well known on the China market.
Besides a large number of well established and reputed manufacturing concerns capable of sup-
plying any type of machinery, but whose names are not mentioned due to lack of space.
Messrs. Baist & Co., and Kunst and Albers holds available for their customers and the public a
large staff of technical Experts fully experienced in all lines of engineering undertakings, thus assuring
jointly with first class manufacturers a responsible, reliable and highly efficient engineering service.


'33
10,153,000,000 marks
Long-term notes clue after Feb.
'33
10,470,000,000 ,,
German bonds in foreign
markets .
400,000,000 ,,
Foreign interest in German
enterprises
3,500,000,000
Foreign owned German real
properties
2,000.000,000 ,,
Other indebtedness
77,000,000
MILLIONS OF REICHSMARKS
Iron Products
Textiles
Chemical and dyes
.47.2
Machinery (electrical machinery not included)..
. 6.6
Metal goods (non ferrous)
• 5-t
Electrical machinery & electrical articles
• 7-9
Paper
. 5 ,X
Leather
. 1.5
Total export
• LSi -5
GERMANY’S TRADE WITH CHINA
By Sie'n-Ming Chan.
Chairman, the Bankers' Association,
Canton.
According to the figures extracted from the
“World Almanac 1933”, German indebtedness to
foreign countries, on February 29, 193 A amounted to
approximately 26,000,000,000 marks, composing of
the following items:
Short-term notes maturing Feb.
Interest payable on short and long term notes
alone aggregated 1,225,000,000 marks, or nearly 5,000
marks per capita, dhe Government’s balance sheet of
1932 showed a deficit of 350,727,000 marks. In view
of such financial discrepancies, students of public
finance have aptly said: “Only the German people
can shoulder the reparation burdens imposed upon them
by the Allied Powers without mental recourse to de-
featism”.
Germany’s rapid recovery from economic and
financial disorganisation following the World War
was due to maximum production under minimum cost.
Scientific management of industries brought about in
1927 an increase of 40% in production as compared
with that of the year 1924. Every measure was taken
by the government to preserve the physical and in-
tellectual strength of the people.
The huge reparation obligations have had the
effect of forcing Germany to carry out her national
reorganisation in the most efficient manner, although
her progress has not been uneffected by high foreign
tariffs and political intrigue. Whether or not a
change will occur in Germany’s financial position, only
time can tell.
Germany’s trade with China prior to 19°5 was
almost insignificant. But since that time imports and
exports have gained with unusual rapidity.
According to “Industrial and Commercial Ger-
many”, by Dr. J. Blum, (Berlin-Steglitz). “The de-
velopment of Germany’s foreign trade relations has
been most favorable in regard to her Asiatic trade.
German exports to every Asiatic country have con-
siderably increased, so much so that Germany now
exports larger quantities of goods to Asia than she
did before the war.” From the table given below, we
can readily see that during the fiscal year 1925-1926
China ranked third in importance in Germany’s trade
with Asia both in regards to exports and imports.
Germany’s foreign trade classified according to
the figures represents values expressed in millions of
reichs marks.
Imports Exports
1926 1925 1926 9125
Merchandise 9,951,3 12,362.1 9,783.3 8,798.5
Precious Metals 615.2 718.1 36.2 39.6
Total foreign trade 10,566.5 13,080.2 9,819.5 8,838.1
TRADE WITH ASIA
1926 1925 1926 1925
British 436.6 644.0 244.2 193.5
Malay Peninsula 23.3 42.5 19.5 14.3
Ceylon 37.5 41.5 6.9 3.7
CHINA 197.2 228.6 151.5 117.9
French Indo-China 2.7 2.5 0.6 0.7
Japan 18.9 29.0 236.8 178.5
Dutch Indies 311.8 366.4 138.2 106.1
Palestine 0.5 0.4 10.5 14.1
Persia 15.9 12.5 8.2 8.1
Philippines 10.9 14.4 12.4 10.3
Russia in Asia 21.0 25.2 1.0 1.1
Siam 14.2 9.0 10.7 8.4
Turkey 54.7 69.1 75.4 65.2
Others 2.6 5.5 8.6 8.2
The Chief commodities which Germany exports
to China are woollen yarns, iron products, chemicals
and dyes, machinery, paper and electric articles.
China’s exports to Germany are mostly raw ma-
terials, such as wood oil, ore, vegetable oil, cotton,
feather, dried eggs, cowhides, beans, etc.
Due to the general world-wide depression, trade
statistics reveal decrease in both imports and exports
in recent years as compared with the year 1926-27.
January, 1932 to June, 1933
Exports to China 465,720,534 marks 296,466,519 marks
Imports from China 946,296,995 „ 771,108,085 „
China’s principal exports to Germany, silk and
tea, suffered extensively during the depression years,
which fact accounted largely for the decrease of im-
ports from Germany to China.


Mr.P. A. Schenk, Manager
Messrs. SCHMIDT & Co., CANTON.
Messrs. SCHMIDT & Co., C
|
Mr. P. A. Schenk, Manager
I J
it 1 The Show Room
II
s
♦♦
I IT"
...j&?*r m * v ' ibop*''
♦* i C MTi »• •f'wflLfm- MmMKmmm: mm pp tm^t.-
♦♦ Ui I I «’ 1 fW<' ■'■ ■■ HwJl l ® WsMaSßmffit Warn - pll m *
♦♦ ffiMU, £ :■;: .^|L g Ei/T |Hb ! ®S fe J ,y-^^
L- t.dy i i '■ Jjthtkw i
♦♦ «;■: BMuhi . . nuKtifi y —a tpev;
:: ltefcA/|* w gwCi jßßwPdfr flMmr iSi
:: IraJr* |l|| 9 fe» *m, MMK. it* -•
J{ *J6ti^c n » rflat h S > F'
♦♦ dBWBr, ‘ JMaK*wr * , Wg I Mw jMH*' ••
:: wHIl.%»
m Jr-r W 'Jr i. .-s«KiWa
5: Vl ■ Wi/1 Jr. Mdl t- .
♦♦ < Iwik. W 3B9WWMI 4 mL «r J
♦♦ 9BT' JBMjfr jWk ■> W|
:: ill* -«nß|9Mm
♦♦ smSSSBm H >• Afln JWMMKi rLJ^Hi
♦♦ PiHiß ■ifffcr MmlMtr 9L* VlHb^ UH^tm
rSHHn 4•1 WT t W i a P
iß^| aw » at i ■ j
«uHnl 1 '•f .j JK* ■ *
. ,* ...£. l : ■ . *a|Li -v.
| The Staff of Messrs. Schmidt & Co., Canton.
♦'
♦'
*>♦
♦♦
* ♦♦
• A ♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
The Office Building
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
<*♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦


SCHMIDT 8c CO. IN CANTON
Schmidt & Co., Canton was established in 1929
at No. 20-24 Ching Yuen Maloo, occupying a whole
four story building with modern show rooms where an
up-to-date exhibition of the latest inventions and
developments of electro-medical apparatus, optical,
scientific and medical instruments is greatly appreciat-
ed by its many patrons in this progressive and steadily
improving city.
The business program is strictly specialised in the
above mentioned lines and a detailed outline of all
activities that applies to the Hongkong as well as to
the Canton branch is given in the Hongkong section
of this firm’s essay. We therefore restrict ourselves
here to only give the internal particulars of the local
establishment.
Below a number of German manufacturers which
are represented by Schmidt & Co. in Canton.
E. Leitz; Wetzlar.
Microscopes, Microtomes, micro-photographic
apparatus, metalurgical microscopes, Dilato-
meters, forensic instruments, projection appara-
tus, colorimeters, nephelometers, clinical instru-
ments, fieldglasses, magnifiers and last not least
the well known Leica Camera.
F. W. Breithaupt & Sohn; Cassel.
Surveying and mining Instruments like Transits,
Theodolits, Tacheometers, Levelling Instruments,
Levelling Rods, Steel Taps, Compasses, etc.
Sanitas, Electricitaetsgesellschaft; Berlin.
X-Ray plants for hospitals, medical practitioners
and dentists. Long and Short Wave Diathermy
Apparatus, Electromedical Apparatus and
Quartzlamps.
Jetter & Scheerer; Tuttlingen.
Surgical and Clinical Instruments, Hospital Sup-
plies, etc.
Continental Caoutchouc Co. Hannover.
All kinds of surgical and household rubber goods.
Koehler & Volckmar Co., Leipzig.
Educational Apparatus and Appliances for
Physics and Chemistry.
R. Fuess; Berlin-Steglitz.
Astronomical, meteorological and measuring
Instruments.
Julius Brueckner; Illmenau.
All kinds of glassware for chemical laboratories
and schools.
G. Siebert; Hanau.
Platinum Ware for scientific purposes.
August Sauter; Ebingen.
Analytical and Precision Balances.
Vogel & Halke; Hamburg.
Personal Scales.
Kindermann & Co. Berlin.
Photographic Accessories and Darkroom Equip-
ments.
And many other manufacturing firms.
Mr. Paul Schmidt the proprietor of the large
concern of Messrs. Schmidt & Co. soon perceived the
necessity of having a well trained staff of experts
in the principal business lines to render a satisfying
service to all patrons. In the following lines we are
giving a brief biography of those gentlemen at Schmidt
& Co.’s Canton branch, who are responsible for the
rapid development of this establishment.
Mr. P. A. Schenk.
Born at Kiel in Germany, Mr. P. A. Schenk after
having past his high-school examination received his
commercial training in Berlin. Due to his vast
experience in the surgical and medical business line he
was asked by the Seehandelsgesellschaft in Dresden
to join their China representatives, the Medicon Ltd.
in Shanghai who at that time was a German business
concern. On account of reorganisation in this firm
Mr. Schenk after two years left the Medicon Ltd. in
1926 and secured a position with the American Drug
Co. Shanghai. Later on he was re-engaged by the
now Swiss organized Medicon Ltd. to take over the
management of this firm.
it was on January Ist 1929 that Mr. Schenk was
asked by Mr. Schmidt to enter his service and to take
over the management of the newly established Canton
branch.
Mr. L. O. Rohrbacher.
Born at Saarbruecken in Germany, where
his father is a representative of the well known
Electricitaetsgesellschaft Sanitas, Berlin, Mr. Rohrba-
cher entered the high school of this town and after
having past the final examination apprenticed to the
Saarlaendisches Stahlwerk Dingier & Karcher and
after two years joined the well known factory of Ernst
Heckel, Gesellschaft fuer Foerderanlagen in Saar-
bruecken.
For his further career Mr. Rohrbacher, however,
chose the electromedical line and received his
theoretical and practical training at the office and
factory of the Sanitas in Berlin.
In November 1931 Mr. Rohrbacher was appoint-
ed representative of the Electricitaetsgesellschaft
Sanitas to the Far Eastern Agency, Messrs. Schmidt
& Co. in Canton.
Mr. A. R. Tuerk.
Born at Wetzlar on Lahn one of the centers of
the German optical industries, Mr. Tuerk after having
received his high school education at Giessen, appren-
ticed to Messrs. Schlesicky-Stroehlein in Frankfurt
on Main where he after a 3JJ years training passed
his examination as a master of optometry. To
complete his knowledge in optics he entered the
high school for optics and photography at Berlin and
became an optical engineer. He then returned to
Wetzlar and passed the various departments of the
well known optical - factory of Messrs. E. Leitz in
order to prepare for his future career as a represen-
tative of this firm at their Chinese agencies, Messrs.
Schmidt & Co.
In 193° Mr. Tuerk came to China and organised
the photographical departments of Messrs. Schmidt
& Co’s various branches. In March 1933 he was
transferred to Canton to take charge of the optical
and photographical department of the local branch.
Mrs. G. Krasselt.
Mrs. Krasselt was born in Goerlitz in Schlesien
from where she after having passed the high school
and the commercial school entered the service of the
LG. Farbenindustrie’s Javabranch. Later on she joined
Messrs. Siemens Schuckert in Batavia and after five
years left this firm for Shanghai where she joined the
I ung Chi University. After the destruction of this
institute in the Japanese war she was engaged by
Messrs. Schmidt & Co. Canton, in July 1933 to fill a
long felt need in this firm’s scientific department.


'.VV.V.V.V.V.V.V.V.V.V.V.V.V^
5
ii
,a
0'
CHEMICAL AND
BIOLOGICAL
SURGICAL &
PHYSICAL APPARATUS
INSTRUMENTS
MICROSCOPES
EPIDIASCOPES
BALANCES &
WEIGHTS
ELECTROMEDICAL
INSTRUMENTS
The X-Ray Plant for Modern Demands
Leica Camera
Canton
Hongkong-Shanghai |:
Branches; Peking-Tientsin •:
20-24 Ching Yuen Maloo
Telephone No. 13739.
n
rS
Harbin-Mukden
a
.^^^ ! O SV H “e“ B “» ,, B " a V B “-"-"o"n-n“ n "oV D " n - D -D" D 'n-pV%-n-D n n n n H a n U "D- U
r.V.V.V.Vr.V.V.'


Jl
“^^PP 5 '^,i*"!'-'« - *
THE BERLIN MISSION IN SOUTH CHINA
» ♦ »
The Berlin Mission Society was established in
South China in 1882. But long before that time
Berlin missionaries employed by other missions, were
spreading Christianity in the province of Kwangtung.
Two of these pioneer-workers should never be for-
gotten; they are Karl Guetzlaff and August Han-
spach. During Guetslaff’s time, mission work in
China was almost impossible, but due to his uncon-
querable spirit, he drew German Christians’ attention
to China’s millions.
Hanspach arrived at Kwangtung in 1854. His
field of activity was in the districts of Sion, [ ungkun,
Waichow, Fayuen and as far as Namhung on the
North River. No suffering or disease could dis-
courage him. His activity and endurance became
proverbial among friends of missions. At one time,
Dr. J. Legge, the well known sinologist, said of him:
“He always makes me think of Elijah, for often it
seems at if a whirlwind seizes him and carries him
away.” Until now his name is called by many of the
old Chinese Christians on the North and East Rivers.
Following Hanspack’s return to Germany in
1870, two more workers were sent to the Chinese
mission-field. Rev. Hempel, who began work in
Waichow District at Fumui near the market of
Wingwu, suffered under the unfavourable climate and
died after a short period of work, just when his bride
arrived at 1 longkong to join him.
Lehman and Kollecker worked there successively
for several years. In 1900 the station counted 275
Christian men and women.
The most strategic point was at Waichow, but
the anti-foreign and anti-Christian attitude of the
inhabitants prevented the missionaries to enter the
city. In 1905, however, Rev. Giesel succeeded in
erecting several station-buildings. In the meantime
mission work was established in many other centers:
Dachutongau (East River) Shiuchow, Chilling,
Namhung (North River), Lukhang, Shekkok, (Fa-
yuen), Nanafu (Kangsi Province). Names of some
of the pioneer missionaries may be mentioned: IT 11-
brig, Kollecker, Voskamp (Father of the Vice-Consul
Dr. Voskamp), Leuschner, Kunze, Wohlgenuth,
Rhein and others.
Until the beginning of the twentieth century the
Berlin Mission was represented only among the Hak-
ka people, but in 1901 Rev, Zimmerling began to pass
the Punti districts of Shuntak, Heungshan and Sun-
wui, preaching and creating Christian circles. In
1900, the year of the Boxer Rebellion, the number of
Christians of the Berlin Mission exceeded B,uco.
Since the beginning, mission work has met with
hindrance and persecution. At one time, Hanspach
and Hubrig had a narrow escape from death at Tam-
shui. The stations at Lukhang and Chihing were
destroyed during the Boxer uprising. In 1902 the
Lukhang station was burned down by an excited
The Church of the Rhenish Mission
Hafongtsuen
population for the second time. In 1900 Shan Da
Wui (spiritual fighters) violated Nananfu. For a
long time the Berlin Mission planned the foundation
of a hospital at Namhung, but the upper North River
districts were persistently troubled by bandits and
communists, and so many of the chapels there were
occupied by soldiers that development of evangelistic
work was more or less impossible. Several German
doctors as Gloeckler, Deussen and Lenders were
temporarily stationed at Namhung to do medical work,
but this mission was afterwards given up when Rev.
Schramm with his family were kidnapped at Nananfu
and his property confiscated by communists.
At the outbreak of the-great war the mission
continued its work. After China declared war,
German missionaries were prohibited to travel in the
country. Chinese fellow workers left, and as a con-
sequence, mission work hovered on a stage of stagna-
tion.
Besides Christianisation work, the Berlin Mis-
sion also conducted education. Primary schools were
founded in many districts of the country. Up to the
war, a middle school was maintained at Lukhang to
prepare young men for the Lutheran Theological
Seminary at Hafongtsuen, where students to this date
are trained for evangelistic work. After the war the
Berlin Mission took possession of the Chinese-German
(Chung Tak) Middle School. Last year, an agree-
ment was made with the Chinese members of the
board of directors that hereafter three German tea-
chers of the foreign mission should collaborate. Up
to the close of last year, a Seminary, where girls were
prepared for teaching, was maintained at Shiuchow.
At the present time a junior girls’ middle school is
being maintained there to provide education for scores
of students.
Owing to financial difficulties, the Berlin Mission
is not in a position to engage the necessary number
of workers. Despite the fact, considerable work is
going on.
F. Schmidt


WV.^VViVV^SV ,, .% t \,^W.V.V.W.V. n . D ." 1 , ,V. . ,
| ESSIES. SlEMSSEN ov .
% Mr. G. T. Siemssen, founder of the firm Mr. W. M. Eckert.
5 of Messrs. Siemssen & Co.
Messrs. Siemssen & Co., Canton.
The Office of Messrs. Siemssen Co., Hongkong, iB6O.
The Staff of Messrs. Sieinssen & Co., Canton.


SIEMSSEN & CO
CANTON.
Established 18 4 6
VMy
“Cash Chop”
EXPORT IMPORT INSURANCE SHIPPING
Agents for:
I. G. Farbenindustrie, Frankfurt
Orenstein & Koppel, Berlin
The Poldi Steel Works, Kladno
Deutsche Werke, Kiel
Koenig & Bauer A. G. Wuerzburg
Various manufacturers of;
High class machine
Tools,-Arsenal-machines
Steam-engines & boilers
Pumps
Chemicals
Railway-material
Dredgers, Excavators
Highspeed-steel
Tool-steel
Stainless-steel
Constructional-steel
Diesel-engines
Printing-presses
Fire-engines
Electric motors
W atthour-meter s
Water-meters
Compress Ice plants


Messrs. SIEMSSEN CO.
The well-known German firm of Siemssen & Co.
belongs to the most important exponents of German-
Chinese trade.
The firm was founded in Canton in 1846 by Mr.
G. T. Siemssen. On January Ist, 1855 the first branch
office was opened in the British Colony of Hongkong.
This branch office developed so quickly that it soon
became the seat of the senior partners of the firm in
China. Offices were opened in Shanghai, 1858, in
Hankow, 1863, (this branch office was closed from
1869 to : 893), in Tientsin, 1890, in Tsingtao, 1898.
Other branches were later established at Peking, Muk-
den, Taiyuanfu and Tsinanfu.
Mr. G. T. Siemssen returned to Hamburg, his
birthplace, in 1858. There on the following year, he
established an office. He went into partnership with
Woldemar Nissen (1852-1896), F. A. Gueltzow
(1864-1913), N. A. Siebs (1864-1910) and A. Fuchs.
The present partners are Otto Struckmeyer and H.
A. Siebs.
At the outbreak of the great war, the liquidation
of the Hongkong branch and the repatriation of the
partners and employees interrupted the activity of the
firm. At the end of 1919, reestablishment of business
relations was begun at Shanghai and in a few years
all branches were reopened.
Resides the import of general merchandise, the
firm also deals in German machinery and acts as
agent for a number of leading German technical
establishments. The firm imports chemicals and
pharmaceutical goods. It exports Chinese products
not only to Germany but also to Great Britain, Hol-
land, France, Spain and countries in North and South
America. The firm is also interested in insurance
and represents a great number of German and foreign
leading Insurance Companies.
The Canton stafif consists of Messrs. W. M.
Eckert (signs per pro), H. Rode, H. Gerriets, W.
Brunke and G. Arndt.
W. Eckert, the present manager for Canton,
joined the firm in 1921 -at Hamburg. He came to
Canton in 1923, and was formerly in charge of the
import department. He succeeded F. Lund to the
management of the Canton office in May 1931.
R. .JOHNSON & CO., CANTON.
Staff Messrs. R. Johnson & Co., Canton


Ik ■
Messrs. R. JOHNSON & Co. CANTON.
The firm was established on January Ist, 1926,
jointly by Mr. R, Johnson of Hongkong and Mr. C.
Stender of Hamburg, under the name of R. Johnson
& Co., and was re-organized under its present name
on January Ist, 1932.
Business developed well and the firm is now
firmly established in the South China Trade. Both
Import and Export business are conducted. Among
the chief lines of the Import Trade are Paper, Chemi-
cals and Colours, Glass, Hardware, Yarn, Metals,
Piecegoods and General Import. The Export em-
braces all kinds of China Produce, such as Wolfram,
Bismuth and Antimony Ores, China Mats, Canes,
Hides, Blackwood and China Ware, Cassia, Ginger,
Tobacco, Waste Silk, etc.
In 1929, Mr. E. Dillner joined the firm as a
partner. Mr. Dillner came first to China in 1910 and
was connected with several leading firms in the South.
His domain is China Produce and he personally
manages the Export Department of the firm, assisted
by Mr. E. A. Harneik who joined the firm in 1932
after several years of activity in Hongkong.
The Import Department is managed by Mr. L.
Werner who has been connected with the firm since
its foundation. Formerly with the firm’s European
connection, Messrs. Carl Stender & Co. of Hamburg,
he came to Canton in 1926. Assisting Mr. 1.. Werner
in the Import Department is Mr. F. Busse who was
also with Messrs. Carl Sender & Co. and came to
Canton in 1929.
Mr. Liu Tit Chow, the Compradore, with his
excellent ability and close friendship with the Chinese
business community, has contributed largely to the
development of the firm.
The firm is represented in Europe by Messrs.
Carl Stender & Co. of Hamburg with whom a very
close connection is maintained, while equally close
relations exist with Messrs. R. Johnson & Co. of
Hongkong. Business relations extend to all impor-
tant places in Europe and America.
Among the agencies held by the firm should be
mentioned:
Messrs. Klingelnberg-Works, Hamburg-Remscheid,
leading German manufacturers of Hardware,
Tools, Cutlery and Machine Knives;
Messrs. Salescorporation of Bohemian Sheet Glass
Factories, Ltd., Prague, who control the
whole of the Bohemian Sheet Glass produc-
tion and sell their products under the well-
known “Vitrea”-Brand;
Messrs. Pacotira Papierhandels-G.m.b.H., Berlin, the
Sales-Organisation of a number of outstand-
ing German Paper Mills;
Messrs. Jobs. Girmes & Co. A.-G., Oedt, Germany,
manufacturers of all kinds of Plushes and
Velvets.
Mr. A. Werner
Mr. Erwin Dieener


♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ I jsf S f
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦ I /y n v\ |
ff m m * m
n a
lit if
* It
« IJ
li' li?< =6
li li
ft * f f :
« $
e;.
>V *ft * if-
§
3 h ®
» m \\ (f
3» m JkkA
3 & m
P tu
m <a
US l£‘
m m
j£ f-
if It
IS
51 S
%
j£ ft
► >♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦<
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
R. JOHNSON & CO. CANTON
♦ *
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
•«
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
n
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
WE IMPORT:
Paper
Chemicals
Colours
Yarn
Metals
Sundries
Piece Goods
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
Window Glass
I!
::
t:
Thick Drawn Glass
KLINGELNBERG
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
::
Tools
ii in ± m
» m
& m » fj
71 $ «
Hardware
Cutlery
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
|
::
♦♦
It
V:
♦♦
♦♦
Machine Knives
♦'
♦'
♦'
♦<
j:
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦«
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
WE EXPORT:
Wolfram Ore
Bismuth Ore
Antimony Ore
Hides
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Canes
Mats
Tobacco
Ginger
Cassia
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
and other China Produce
ft do it m m # a


“ " ' ... ; , i.
. llffila v L , . * s | , 1W| , f
'f ■ .„-4f
Ml * ag
■iHll: JwiM'P \Sp I Mi A#
v wS gHL
' \ A i s \\ /•' : -/' rv ■ \f&&\' / f | \ • ■■ •'
THE RHENISH MISSION IN SOUTH CHINA
The Rhenish Mission is one of the great German
Mission Societies. Its history dates back to 1828
when it was founded with seat in Barmen in the
Rhineland. It is supported principally by the church-
people in West Germany. Rhenish missions of great
importance are located in Southwest Africa and in
the Netherlands Indies. In the former, there are 30
Rhenish missions with 57 European workers and
77,600 church members. In the latter, there are 40
stations with 132 European workers, 1150 paid and
1050 unpaid native mission-workers. The total num-
ber of church members is 428,550. In comparison
with the African and Netherlands Indies missions,
the field in South China is rather small.
In the year 1845, the prominent missionary, Dr.
Guetzlaff, while in Hongkong, requested the Rhenish
and Basel missions to establish stations in China.
Both missions complied. In March 1847, Genaehr
and Koester of the Rhenish Mission and Lechler and
Hamberg of the Basel Mission were sent to Hong-
kong where these two missions were first established.
From the beginning, it was the intention of the mis-
sion to preach the gospel to the country-folks. There
is no need to tell of the many difficulties which the
pioneer missionaries encountered. Many times they
were forced to take shelter in Hongkong, but always
they returned to their stations as soon as the situation
improved.
Of the great number of Rhenish missionaries,
mention may be made of the famous sinologist, E.
Faber, d.d. and the Rev. I. G. Genaehr, u.n., the editor
of the revised “Chinese-English dictionary in the
Cantonese dialect” or the so-called “Eitel-Genaehr”.
Others who worked for more than 30 years on the
missionfield are Louis, Dietrich, Mans, Rieke, Diehl
and Linden. Rev. Diehl is now chairman of the
Rhenish mission in South China.
At the present time the city of Tungkun in the
East River district is the centre of the Rhenish mis-
sion. There, are located one hospital station and a
leprosarium of the mission. The hospital was esta-
blished by Rev. Dietrich in 1888, and the first medical
missionary was Dr. Kuehne who arrived in China in
1889. The leprosarium is a foundation of Dr. Kuehne
and has now about 300 inmates. Other stations are
located in Taipeng, Tongtowha, Kangpui in the Tung-
kun district, Taileung in the Shuntak District and in
Hongkong and Canton. The European staff is com-
posed of seven missionaries, two medical men, one
deacon and seven women, three of whom are doing
evangelistic, two in medical and two in educational
work. There are fifty-one native workers of whom
eighteen are women. Some twenty local churches
have been established, four of which are now entirely
self supporting.
W. Kempgen.
Staff of the Rhenish Mission


>>
■ ■ y’f'
. ■*. .„■• - p,
if
i?* *'*'•%i,4r * i *
rjiT'-*'- 1 ' 7 .jM\ f ><5^.^*\"y , '<82fc!* * * * ’■ «f. V**,
St' ~ * -V. h* . i ip :
|-: J M W’ *'
" '-'Jim" ijk'u%$„
. , ■. - Y|"' -■ > J" " v * I
:> r' \ ■ ,\; A? V; ;ffT’ I»%T -.- V-*•<>&£ * • ■
: g
■ ! - . ,ai~.i •—'■■ r* .* ,%r • • yrs\-m ~«R;T<fe». last 7JLLj A.-v S# RS■■■',-> Sm
rsB i; Jf ® S*S&SSh 4 5 \
fr, \3&i - v£B "”*■•” <*■ . ' jr^Br , '
iw?'. '-r-'i:' ‘.
i.VAVVV^VWVVWV^VVVWVV^™vvWVWV^V.V^W^.W^VW.WA%WAWAW.WA%W.^W.%WA".W.W.V^
DEUTSCH-ASIATISCHE BANK
I
■
■
=:
%
%
?
:=
■
n
m
*•
m
%
i
n
■
I
p. n
b
S
a .
I
r a
r°
r n
"
>
n n
r n
°»
r
r »
5
|
■c
B
r n
r n
>
B
i
n
n .
I
i
(CANTON BRANCH)
Mr. Richard Franz
The Staff of the Deutsch-Asiatische Bank. Canton.
First Row (from left to Right) Mr. H. von Essen, Mr. R. Franz,
Manager, and Mr. R. E. Kuehng.
I
V
5
5
■o
'n
"a
I
5
§
i
5
%
I
:■ i
b" "a
"^WnV n V B V»WnVnV B W^%V-%^W-VVV-V^^W-Vn^ ] W„W-V n W B^Wn SV-VAW>%V B V n W--n--WnV n Wn-. 1 -n“n°n-n»


♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
tt
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Berliner Handelsgesellschaft,
Mendelssohn & Co., Berlin,
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
it
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Berlin,
Jacob S. H. Stern, Frankfurt
«
♦♦
tt
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
S
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
S. Bleichroeder, Berlin,
a/M.,
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
tt
♦♦
♦♦
Sal. Oppenhelm jr. & Cie.,
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
tt
♦♦
♦♦
1
Deutsche Bank und Disconto-
Koeln a'Rh.,
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
«
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Gesellschaft, Berlin,
Bayerische Hypotheken-und
♦♦
tt
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
»♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Dresdner Bank, Berlin,
Wechsel-Bank, Muenchen.
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
4
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
*♦
♦♦
tt
tt
ttttnttttttttttttttntttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttt
DEUTSCH-ASIATISCHE
BANK
J!
I / IN % ii
II ,C SHANGHAI \
Paid up Capital Yuan 6,440,000 h
♦♦ i . it
:: S I?
I ,/ Branches in I
V Berlin, Hamburg, |
tt It
♦♦ tt
♦♦ tt
Canton, Hankow, Peiping, Tientsin, Tsingtao.
i! II
IS ♦♦
tt S
n ♦♦
tt it
♦♦ ::
I 8
I Every description of banking business transacted. |
tt tt
*i tt
I Current Accounts opened and Fixed Deposits received «
tt tt
tt ♦♦
♦♦ ♦♦
I in Local and Foreign Currencies. |
tt II
tt ♦♦
I Purchase and Collection of Documentary Bills. \\
♦♦ tt
♦♦ tt
♦♦ tt
ii Transfers by Cable and Letter. Issue of Cheques and Letters of Credit, y
: ♦♦
Transactions in Foreign Exchange.
I Etc., etc. ii
is ii
It ii
H ii
Is i|
ii if
tt ♦♦
i* ii
The following Banks and Banking-houses are represented on the |
tt tt
♦♦ tt
ii Board of Directors: ii
♦♦ tt
♦♦ tt


/ ?4 - ¥ - <?WWm
£ %r , %, *,
wB| % 5 * .
I
The Staff of Messrs. Jebsen & Co., Canton. S°
. __ 1
Messrs. JEBSEN & Co.
CANTON.
Mr. Adolf von Hamsn, Manager.


History of Messrs. Jebsen & Co., Canton.
A few years after the firm of Jebsen & Co. had
been established at Hongkong in 1895 the partners
found it imperative to open up a branch office at
Canton, the first Manager of which was Mr. Vogler,
At the beginning the attention of the Canton Office
was mainly directed towards the general export bu-
siness from China to Europe and America; but the
activities were soon extended to comprise all other
lines of business as Shipping, Insurance, Machinery
and General Import. After Mr. Vogler had gone
home, Mr. Krueger became Manager of the Canton
Branch being assisted by Mr. Finke for the Import
Department and by Mr. van der Star for the Export
Department. An Office-Building was acquired in
Shameen, and the business developed favourably as
the years went by.
But the outbreak of the war affected a serious
curtailment of the firm’s activities. Towards the end
of the war the firm was Houidated and all its pro-
perties were confiscated by the British Authorities in
Shameen. As a result of the war the partners of
the firm, residing in the town of Apenrade (now
Aabenraa) became Danish subjects.
It was only in 1920 that in a small office in the
Canton City the firm started again, and under the Man-
agement of Mr. Julius Riecken set out to recapture its
former position. Old connections were revived, and
especially the ready help of the Company’s Chinese
friends enabled the firm to effect a comparatively
quick recovery,
Indigo and dves produced by the Badische Anilin
and Soda Fabrik, LudwiVshafen am Rhine, for which
there was a great demand after the war, formed the
nucleus of the firm’s business, and soon most lines
mentioned before were successfully dealt in once
more.
When the B.A.S.F. was amalgamated into the
T G, Farbenindustrie. A.G. Tebsen & Co., were appoint-
ed agents of this concern for the sale of Indigo and
Dyes in Canton. —In addition the firm received
Agencv for South China for Synthetic fertilizer pro-
duced by the T.G. and exported from Germany by the
Stickstoff-Svndikat, G.m.b.H., Berlin.
The shipping department was also revived, the
firm taking over the Canton Agencv of the N.D.L.
(North German Lloyd) and of the Tung On S.S. Co.
Later on the firm was appointed agents of the Coal
steamers of the K.P.M. (Koninkliike Pnketvaart
Maatschappii). and when the Maersk Line (Mr. A.P.
Moller, Copenhagen) started their trade between
America and the Orient, the firm took on their Agency
in Canton too. In addition the firm acted as agents
for several coast-steamers including six of their own
ships built after the war, of which three have been
kept, running now mostly in time-charter between
Hongkong-Bangkok and Saigon.-
The threat developments which had taken place in
the industrial field and China’s advanced interest for
the latest products of Western Industry induced the
firm to pay special attention also to the engineering*
field. Diesel engines for stationary and marine use,
manufactured by the Motoren Werke, Mannheim,
Benz & Co. were sold in growing numbers. Diesel
driven motor lorries, constructed by the Daimler-Benz
A.G. Stuttgart (Mercedes-Benz) and electrical ac-
cessories, made by the famous Bosch Works, Stuttgart,
became in recent years important items of the firm’s
business. In order to render a special service to the
purchasers of Bosch electrical motorcar accessories
a “Bosch Service Station” was opened bv the firm in
Canton city in 1933.
An extensive Insurance business both Fire
and Marine Insurance is carried by a special Depart-
ment of the firm as agents for the South British In-
surance Co., the N.V. Verzekering Maatschapnii and
the “National” All gemeine Versicherungsgesellschaft.
The snlendid development of Canton as a modern city
has made the Fire Insurance business more attractive
bv reducing the risk, up to date fire stations having
been established throughout the citv and the widening
of maloos giving fire fighting appliances easy access
to all parts of the city.
After having established a branch office in Hong-
kong in it was found advisable to tranfer the
Company’s headofifice back to Hongkong in 1926
The Canton office was carried on almost unchanged
as a branch office under the management of Mr. C.
Ofifersen. The growing activities soon demanded a
bigger office space, and in TO2Q the office was removed
to the Hongkong Bank Building in Shameen
In spite of the world-wide depression in the recent
years the firm has maintained a fair share of Canton’s
foreign trade without curtailment of its foreign or
Chinese staff and it is looking forward to a further
improvement in times to come.
Biography of Mr. A. von Haenisch.
Mr. A. von Haenisch was born in Saarbruecken
in 1902 and educated in Halberstandt am Harz-Monn-
tains. After having served in the German army
during the last year of the war he received his business
training in Hamburg. He came to China in March
1923 and work at Canton and Hongkong for
Messrs. Bornemann & Co. until the end of 1928.
Since January 1929 he has been employed by Messrs.
Jebsen & Co., and during the temporary absence of
Mr. C. Ofifersen, who is at present on home leave, he
was appointed acting Manager of Jebsen & Co.’s
Canton branch.
He was married in 1925 to Minnie, eldest daught-
er of Mr. and Mrs. Otto Gebcl of Hamburg, and has
two daughters and one son.


Sole Agents for China
JEBSEN & CO.
Electric (Sj
V A R T A xg. Service
'o* Station
Sign Arms
LSS3 Magnetos
BOSCH
| THE BEST
SPARKPLUG ■ 'rnm
iha:r«i.fri!i W ipers
§
|
BATTERIES
CANTON, No. 215/217 MAN MING MALOO
OPPOSITE THE FIRE BRIGADE HEAD STATION


GERMAN FORESTERS IN CANTON.
By Dr. Hanns Eschenlohr.
Professor in Forestry at the National Sun Yat-sen
University, Canton (China)
There are four reasons which just in China
proper, within the frame of a general programme of
reconstruction, demand a particularly energetic en-
gagement of the authorities concerned with the
question of the reforestation of barren lands.
i) The fact that the reckless devastation of
the natural forest cover gone far beyond any economic
necessity in earlier times, results in a woodfamine be-
coming already very grave in some parts of the
country.
2) The knowledge that forests, apart from
their purpose of supplying the population with timber,
firewood and other minor products derived from the
trees, have also protective purposes being by no means
inferior to their immediate economic use. For
nowadays, it is a well-established and generally ack-
nowledged fact that a sufficient forest cover has a
decisive influence on the absolute amount and the
seasonal distribution of the annual precipitation of a
certain region as well as on the prevention of erosion,
torrents and floods, and also on the general regulation
of the hydrostatic conditions of a country.
3) The fact that, particularly in South China,
there are many barren hills furnishing at present no
use except a poor yield of grass, which only by means
of a systematic reforestation may be turned into a
productive state. So, for instance, in Kwangtung,
more than 80% of the total area of this province is
composed of such barren hills deprived of their
original forest cover which, owing to the steepness of
the slopes, cannot be used for agricultural purposes,
and on which, therefore, forestry represents the only
possible and promising method of cultivation.
4) The last and most decisive fact that, at least
in South China, according to the results of metereolo-
gical observations, the climatic conditions and their
leading factor, the rainfall, would nowhere forbid the
successful reestablishment of forests.
It was, therefore, a great merit of Messrs. Dai
Chi-tao and Dr. Chu Chia Hua, the former chancellor
and vice-chancellor of the Sun Yat-sen University in
Canton, to have recognized the importance of a
systematic afforestation activity with regard to the
promotion of the public welfare of the Chinese people.
And it is due to the initiative of both these gentleman,
that at the beginning of 1926, a German forester, Mr.
Gottlieb Fenzel, member of the government board of
the Bavarian Forest Administration, was appointed
as professor of forestry at the College of Agriculture
of the a fore-said university.
It was not just by chance that a German forester
was selected for this appointment. For, among the
countries possessing an old forest culture Germany
holds a special and world-wide position.
The beginning of true forestry in this country
goes back as far as mediaeval times. It was also
the first of all western countries in which a regular
forest management was developed, and connected
therewith a forest science based on scientific methods
of research. Therefore, Germany is chiefly respon-
sible for the scientific development of forestry and
thoroughly entitled to be called the “mother of forest
science”.
The names of great German forest scientists like
Hartig, Cotta, Hundeshagen, Pfeil, Heyer, Pressler,
Judeich, Gayer, von Guttenberg, Meyer, Endres,
Wagner and others are world-renowned. At six
German Forest State Colleges forestry is taught, and
some of them such as the h orest College of 1 harandt,
founded by the great forest scientist Heinrich Cotta,
are the oldest in the world. And, as the Government
Forests of Germany and likewise the big private
forests have been managed for a long time on scientific
lines, they afford splendid examples of practical fores-
try with all its problems of management, silviculture,
timber utilization and so on.
For all these reasons, and because of the great
variety of natural and economic conditions within the
German forests, the German foresters are in the happy
position of being able to help other countries wishing
to start systematic forestry, to help in theoretical
teaching as well as by practicing the knowledge and
results of long experience.
During the first year of his stay in Canton, Pro-
fessor Fenzel restricted himself chiefly to theoretical
lessons on the different branches of forest science.
Rut soon he perceived that he had to put the stress
of his activity not on teaching but on doing some
practical work and on investigating the general
climatic, geological and silvicultural conditions of
China, and particularly of Kwangtung, gathering in
this way useful knowledge for the starting of a
systematic afforestation activity.
For, what China needs, urgently needs and with-
out any delay, is not so much a theoretical training of
students who, owing to the complete lack of practical
experience, cannot realize their acquired theoretical
knowledge, but afforestation stations which managed
by foreign advisers and well distributed over the coun-
try, furnish instructive and living models illustrating
the possibilities and practical ways of a systematic
reforestation.
For this reason, Mr. Fenzel made several trips to
North Kwangtung, East Kwangtung and the island
of Hainan with the chief object of looking for pri-
meval forest remnants in these remote and moun-
tainous regions of South China, and to study there the
dendrological and silvicultural composition of the ori-
ginal forest vegetation. The results of these excur-
sions are laid down in some reports which, owing to
their many practical suggestions, represent valuable
documents for Chinese forestry. Unfortunately,
none of these reports have been printed and, therefore,
they are only to be found as manuscripts in the col-
lection of the First Demonstrative Forest Station
under the College of Agriculture of the Sun Yat-sen
University.
And therewith I come to the most important
section of Professor Fenzel’s activity in Canton being
so rich in indefatigable efforts to realize his ideas, that
is, the establishment of the above-mentioned Demons-
trative Forest Station in the White Cloud Mountains
near Canton.
Owing to the convincing arguments and the
energetic assistance of Messrs. Dai Chi-tao and Dr.
Chu Chia Hua, he succeeded in raising the necessary


funds and in commencing during the summer of 1927
the first works of establishing this station. The ob-
ject connected therewith was a threefold-one;
1) To have an experimental area large enough
to permit afforestation experiments on a big scale, and
to gather therewith practical experience as to the re-
forestation of the barren hills in Kwangtung province.
2) To get in this way an opportunity for the
forest students of the College of Agriculture to com-
plete and illustrate their theoretical lessons on forestry
by practical exercises.
3) To establish a model station which in its
turn should encourage private landowners as well as
the authorities concerned with the promotion of the
public welfare to lay out similar stations in different
parts of the province, and, by these means, to convert
rural population gradually to a constructive reforesta-
tion policy.
It is not the place here to discuss the manyfold
reasons which inevitably must lead to the disastrous
deforestation of the Chinese hills being so impressive
to any foreign visitor of this country. But there is
no doubt that one of the chief reasons are the agricul-
tural methods of the Chinese farmers being so ex-
tremely devastative to all natural vegetation. It is
a feature repeated in the records of the early settle-
ment of each country, that the forests primarily are
regarded as mere obstacles to civilization and, there-
fore, are recklessly destroyed, far beyond any economic
necessity. As, in China, unfortunately no opposite
movement arose later on, when the destruction had
already gone far enough, it has since been continued
to the bitter end.
From these points of view, the establishment of
the a fore-said Forest Model Station, the first in
Kwangtung province, was an important enterprise
which perhaps indicates the commencement of a new
era in China being more friendly to forestry than the
past centuries.
Apart from this large Demonstrative Forest
Station which is to-day in a flourishing and prosperous
state of development, Professor Fenzel, during a tem-
porary employment in the services of the Kwangtung
Provincial Government, established also the “Bureau
of Agriculture and Forestry” in Canton. It was his
idea to concentrate on this bureau the whole public
afforestation work in Kwangtung province, and, by
the authoritative means of the government, to come
in a close touch with the local magistrates. Along
with others, he saw the chief task of this institute in
the following heads;
i) Elaboration of legislative outlines as a
break-a-way-measure for a constructive forest policy
within the whole province.
2) Public enlightment of the farmers and pri-
vate landholders by popular pamphlets about the
economic advantages of a systematic reforestation of
barren lands.
3) Establishment of small model stations in
different parts of the province with the object of pro-
pagating the afforestation activity among the rural
population, of finding out by experiments the most
suitable methods of cultivation and those species which
promise the best success in afforestation, and finally
of supplying the private landowners with plants
raised in nurseries.
As regards the last point, Professor Fenzel suc-
ceeded, during his short activity as director of this
bureau, to establish two more forest stations, of which
one is situated in Nam Hwa (North Kwangtung) and
the other in Chau An (East Kwangtung). Both are
to-day still working and represent valuable afforesta-
tion centres in their respective regions.
After his return to the university, Professor
Fenzel, besides the regular lessons, was principally
engaged in investigating the climatic conditions of
Kwangtung and their relations to forestry. The re-
sults of these investigations are laid down in two
articles. “The seasonal distribution of rain in
Kwangtung and its relation to forest types” and “Pro-
blems of reforestation in Kwangtung with respect to
the climate”, of which the latter was published in the
Lingnan Science Journal (Vol. 9, 1930).
In the summer 1929, Professor Fenzel, according
to request of Dr. Chu Chia-hua, vice-president of
the Sun Yat-sen University, investigated the hills,
bordering the West Lake of Hangchow (Chekiang),
with the view to the possibilities of reforestation,
respectively of transformation of the existing shrub-
vegetation into valuable forest stands. The results
and proposals of this informative trip are laid down
in a comprehensive report which is likewise in the
collection of the First Demonstrative Forest Station
of the College of Agriculture in Canton.
In this report, Mr. Fenzel makes some interesting
proposals as regards the purification of land ownership
which he considers as the starting point for any suc-
cessful afforestation policy in China. Because of the
generally interesting character of these deductions,
I shall give in the following a short extract of his
ideas about this question.
Professor Fenzel divides all barren lands suitable
for reforestation purposes in three chief categories;
1) Land, on which no claims of private or
communal ownership are raised, or where such claims
eventually raised cannot be sufficiently supported by
documents. For this category he recommends the
sequestration by the government and be treated as
State owned barren lands, the reforestation of which
should be undertaken first of all.
2) Land belonging to temples, monasteries and
public corporations. This category, if not suitable
for other kinds of cultivation, should be subjected to
the same regulation and measures for reforestation,
as it will be the case with State owned land. The
right of ownership, however, should not be interfered
with. The necessary expenses for reforestation,
protection and administration, incurred by the govern-
ment, should be repaid later on from the yield of the
established forests.
3) Land in the possession of private owners.
This category must be left at the free disposal of the
respective landholders, provided that the ownership
can be proved satisfactorily. Because, however, from
the points of view of forest protection and forest
management, it would be intolerable to have many
small patches of privately owned land scattered over
the area of the State-owned reforestation territory, it
is recommended to exchange such enclosures against
outlying areas belonging to the State, if necessarv in
a compulsory way. Besides, some recompensations
must be made also for those village people who could
not bring forth any documents of ownership, but who
nevertheless depended since time immemorial upon
the cutting of brushwood and grass for their own
supply in the sequestered areas,


Towards the end of his activity in China, Pro-
fessor Fenzel undertook, owing to the kind assistance
of His Excellency Dai Chi Tao, former President of
the Sun \ at-sen University and Head of the examina-
tion Yuan of the Central Government, an extensive trip
to the forested regions of the provinces of Fengtien
and Kirin in Manchuria. The results of this excursion
which brought forth very interesting material as re-
gards the location, extension and classification of the
forested areas of both these provinces, are published
in the Lingnan Science Journal (Vol. 11/1932 and
Vol. 12/1933) under the title “Report on forest re-
gions of Fengtien and Kirin provinces, Manchuria”.
As regards details, 1 may, therefore, be allowed to
refer to these publications.
After Mr. Fenzel’s return to Germany, Dr.
Hanns Eschenlohr, likewise member of the govern-
ment board of the Bavarian Forest Administration,
was invited to take his position as professor of fores-
try and forest adviser at the College of Agriculture
of the Sun Yat-sen University. Dr. Eschenlohr ac-
cepted this important appointment, and arrived in
Canton at the end of October 1931.
He started his activity with a trip to the forested
region of the Wag Shui Shan, situated in the Ying-
teh district of North Kwangtung. The object of this
excursion was a threefold one:
1) To explore the primeval forests which are
said to occur in this region, with regard to their ex-
tension, composition, and yield in material as well as
to the possibilities of their exploitation.
2) To investigate the general topographical,
geological, silvicultural and communication conditions
of the whole area in order to be enabled to criticize
the suitability of this region for the establishment of
a forest station.
3) To give an approximate economical balance
of the expenses involved in the opening of the forested
area, and of the revenues which might be expected in
the case of its systematic exploitation.
The results of this trip laid down in a compre-
hensive report may be summarized in the following
resume. There is indeed still a large coherent area
of primeval forests in the above-mentioned region
which may be estimated of about 300 ha. Because,
however, one third of the area has been deprived of
the best timber by selective cuttings carried out by the
natives of the surrounding villages, and another third
cannot be made accessible owing to the steepness of
the rocky slopes, only about 100 ha may be taken into
consideration for a systematic exploitation. The
yield in material on this area was estimated by Dr.
Eschenlohr of about 5000 cbm with an approximate
value of about $60,000 Canton currency. Opposed
to that, the expenses indispensable in opening the
forested area were estimated to at least $40,000.
Although, according to this balance, no great
profit may be expected in exploiting these forests, Dr.
Eschenlohr recommended urgently the establishment
of a forest station in the respective region, because
he considered the climatic and general silvicultural
conditions as extremely suitable for forestry, and be-
sides. as he recognized that there would be a rare
opportunity to protect one of the last forest remnants
in Kwangtung province from complete devastation by
the natives.
Unfortunately, owing to the lack of funds, it has
not been possible as yet to realize this idea. So, Dr.
Eschenlohr, could devote all his activity, apart from
the regular lessons at the College, to an extensive and
systematic research work as to the many problems
connected with the reforestation, of Kwangtung.
Above all, he considered it as his most import-
ant task to base the management of the Demonstrative
Forest Station in the White Cloud Mountains on
scientific lines, and particularly to establish, by means
of exact experiments, well-proved rules for the special
treatment of the main trees which have to form the
backbone of reforestation in South China. In pur-
suing this object, Dr. Eschenlohr drew up the follow-
ing programme which met with the approval of His
Excellency Chow Ln, President of the Sun Yat-sen
University, who like his predecessors is keenly inter-
ested in forestry:
1) Investigation of the dendrological and sil-
vicultural conditions of the sub-tropical South Chinese
climate zone by excursions to forested regions in
Kwangtung as well as in the neighbouring provinces.
2) Laying out of practical experiments in the
First Demonstrative Forest Station with a twofold
object. Firstly, to find out those species which, con-
sidering the climatic conditions of Kwangtung and the
sites and soil-conditions- of the barren hills to be
reforested, are best suited for general afforestation
purposes, and secondly, to investigate separately the
most suitable method of cultivation for each of these
species.
3) Publication of the tentative conclusions
derived from these experiments as well as of the
silvicultural observations gathered on trips, in a
journal published by the afore-said Forest Station
under the College of Agriculture, Sun Yat-sen
University.
As to point 1), apart from some smaller trips to
North Kwangtung, Dr. Eschenlohr, owing to the
kind assistance of Mr. Dang Chi-yi, Dean of the Col-
lege of Agriculture, had the opportunity of inspecting
the hills in the environs of Kwangning-, situated in the
catchment basin of the West river, and famous be-
cause of their luxuriant forest vegetation.
This trip which led from Sam Shui over Sie Wifi,
and along the Kwangning river to Kwang Pu and
Kwangtung, and from there over Fu Lau, Chong Tan
Kong and Hong Tung near the boundary of Kwang-
si, afforded very valuable and instructive information
as to the forest conditions in this part of Kwangtung
province. Above all, the artificially raised stands of
bamboos, pines, firs and broad-leaved trees cultivated
by the farmers of this region since the earliest times,
show evidently that the general climatic and physio-
graphic conditions of Kwangtung are not opposed to
forestry. And they are also a striking proof that the
Chinese people are not so destructive by far to forests
as they are supposed to be, by the whole world. If,
therefore, all authoritative means of legislation, pro-
paganda and public enlightment are strained, it should
be possible to convert gradually the rural population
in Kwangtung province to a constructive forest policy.
There are four forest types which Dr. Eschenlohr
submitted to a particularly exact investigation during
this trip. Bamboo forests, mixed stands of bamboo
and pines, Cumfinghanfia forests and Schima
superba coppicewoods, which are all four typical to


the silvicultural physiognoiny of the inspected region,
in a comprehensive report which shortly will be
printed, he submits these four types to a critical con-
sideration with regard to their suitability from an
economic and silvicultural point of view, and especial-
ly from the standpoint of their soil-protective
properties.
An effective soil protection afforded by a suf-
ficient forest cover, Dr. Eschenlohr considers as the
first and most important task of every afforestation
activity in Kwangtung as well as in all China. Be-
cause, namely, most of the barren hills to be reforested
are fairly steep with angles of inclination of 30 to 70
and more, and, besides, the soils are, as a rule, very
deeply decomposed, all slopes are more or less en-
dangered by erosion. Therefore, in such localities,
the capacity of a forest type in fixing the soil, in check-
ing the disastrous effects of torrential rains and in
preventing erosion ranks before economic delibera-
tions. And that forest type is the best which has the
most efficient protective properties.
Starting from these points of view, Dr.
Eschenlohr makes many proposals in the above-men-
tioned report, the realization of which is adapted to
put the management in the forests of Kwangning on
a sounder basis, and to preserve above all the natural
productive power of the localities concerned. As the
report shortly appears in the “Forest Information”
edited by the College of Agriculture of the Sun Yat-
sen University, those who are interested in details
may refer to this journal.
Another and more extensive trip led Dr. Eschen-
lohr for about two months to Formosa. As this island
was, without doubt, formerly a part of China, its
forest vegetation, as regards the representation of
the species as well as the composition of the crops,
closely resembles that of South China. And as, be-
sides, the forests in Formosa are to-day still on large
areas in a thoroughly primeval and untouched state,
they offer a rare opportunity for the studying of the
original South Chinese vegetative cover which, owing
to human interference, is almost entirely destroyed
in China proper. For this reason, Dr. Eschenlohr
together with Dr. Wolfgang Panzer, the German pro-
fessor of geography at the Sun Yat-sen University,
spent nearly the whole summer vacation of 1933 in
investigating the dendrological and silvicultural
conditions of this island. The material gathered
during this trip will likewise soon be published in the
above-mentioned journal.
As regards finally point 2) and 3) of Dr.
Eschenlohr’s programme, he succeeded, owing to the
kind assistance of Messrs. Shen Peng Fi, Ho Kow
and Hwang Koo-tung, who relieved one another in
the direction of the Demonstrative Forest Station in
the White Cloud Mountains, in laying out there a
great number of experimental areas with the object of
finding out species suitable for afforestation purposes
under the climatic conditions of Central Kwangtung,
and also of investigating, at the same time, their
most successful methods of cultivation.
Considering the more or less deterioriated soils
of the barren hills to be reforested, there is no doubt
that the pine and, it is true, the South Chinese species,
Pinus Massoniana. owing to its pronounced hardiness
and resistance to extreme atmospheric agencies, is de-
termined to form the backbone of every afforestation
activity within Kwangtung province. Dr. Eschenlohr
started, therefore, his experimental activity in investi-
gating first of all the conditions under which the
cultivation of this species promises to be most success-
ful. The results and tentative conclusions of these
experiments investigating the superiority of direct
sowings or plantings, the most suitable sowing—and
planting season under the climatic conditions of Cen-
tral Kwangtung and the most successful sowing—and
planting methods with reference to the various sites
and soil conditions, are laid down in a pamphlet which
is the first of a series published under the title “Forest
Information” by the First Demonstrative Forest
Station under the College of Agriculture, Sun V at-
sen University.
Besides the pine, similar experiments were laid
out with a great number of other species, partly in-
digenous and partly imported from India and Austra-
lia, the results of which are not published as yet with
regard to the Camphor tree (Cinnamomum Cam-
phora), the Wood Oil trees (Aleurites montana and
mollucana) and Eucalyptus robusta in the above-
mentioned journal.
It is obvious that these short biographies of
timber trees cannot give a thorough description of their
silvicultural treatment and biological characters, but
nevertheless they will be very helpful to show the lines
upon which any scientific afforestation activity must
be based, unless the whole success will be endangered
by failures and drawbacks.
And that must be avoided by all means, because
there are too many people in China who doubt the
useful ness of a systematic reforestation of barren
lands. For the Chinese mentality aiming at quick
returns from investments is not favourable to forestry
with its long rotations and its low rates of interest.
And especially in reforesting barren lands, great pa-
tience is necessary, a long experience must be gathered,
and much expenditure must be made before an obvious
success is to be seen. And, no other science as forestry
requires such a long and such a thorough knowledge
of the local edaphic and climatic conditions, and of the
special biological characteristics of the timber trees,
one is concerned with.
But the object is worth the trouble. Apart from
the indirect and mere protective advantages of forests
in absorbing the rainwater, in checking of erosion on
steep slopes, in preventing gullies, torrents and floods
and preserving the productive power of all localities
not used for agricultural purposes, systematic refores-
tation policy would also be of the greatest economic
importance which just in China ranks by no means
behind and other practical reconstruction activity. It
would assure local merchantable supplies of all kinds
of timber, stimulate and provide wood-working indus-
tries, give employment to hundreds of thousand of men,
and would make millions and millions of acres barren
lands produce the only crop being an assured success
upon such kind of soils.
When, therefore, from these points of view, the
activity of German foresters in Canton and South
China should stimualte the Chinese authorities con-
cerned with .the promotion of the public welfare to in-
clude the reforestation of barren lands in their pro-
gramme of -reconstruction, these gentlemen who de-
voted all their energy to this task would, in the most
satisfactory way, be rewarded for their efforts.


■
f IBB \
a \
I
V /
jjfHB ns y
\jMp /
n_
iiWJW.WAW.VAVAVm^WVM%W
F. FELD & Co., Ltd.
ENGINEERS, CONTRACTORS, AND GENERAL MERCHANTS.
CANTON & HONGKONG.
SOLE AGENTS
for
F. SCHICHAU • G.M.B.H. • ELBING • GERMANY
Steel Castings and Forgings, Locomotives, Dredgers, Passenger and Cargo Vessels, Ferries,
River Boats, Floating Cranes, Marine Engines, Stationary Steam Boilers, Hydraulic Ash
Removing Plants, Gearings, Iron and Steel Structures, Bridge-Building, Tank Construction,
Distillery- and Potato Drying Apparatus, Radiators, School-Furniture, etc.
HOESCH-KOLNNEUESSEN • A. G. • DORTMUND
“HOESCH” STEEL SHEET PILING
for plants subject to high stresses such as Lock-Chambers, and Heads Harbours, Docks,
I . . S;
3 Loading-Ramps, Moles, Wiers, Coffer-Dams, Foundations for Bridge Heads and Piers, ”«
S.. . . £
1 Protection of existing Foundations, Safeguards of submerged Constructions against /
> scouring and so on. J
I
I Please apply for Estimates & Catalogues
i \


Iji " **
LaBEMK'.''' . . mill UH 1100—— Ml H»M» —1^SS
Messrs. F. FELD & Co., Ltd
CANTON.
Dipl.-Eng. Th. Janssen, Manager.
The Staff of Messrs. F. Feld & Go., Ltd.
] -ESZSHS^SHSHS?-S?-FasaS' I L c r2S^SZSBSHSBSHSd


F. FELD & Co. - CANTON & HONGKONG
Established 25 years ago, with Dead Office in
Canton and Branch Office in Hongkong. Special bu-
siness Line: supply of all kinds of Machinery, complete
Factories, Iron Constructions, Supervising of Erec-
tions, Designing & Planning of all Industrial Plants
etc.
The Engineering Departments in Canton and
Hongkong are in charge of approved engineers.
Many big engineering works have been completed by
the Company in South China.
Agencies are held from the following well-known
Factories:—
F. Schichau G.m.b.H. : Shipyard and Factory,
with a big manufacture Programme as per advertise-
ment on previous page.
Arn. Jung G.m.b.H. Kirchen: manufacturers of
the most up-to-date portable Diesel-Compressors of
which 7 sets are in service on Railway Construction
Works on the Canton-Hankow Line.
Hoesch Steel Works: manufacturing the well-
known Hoesch-Steel-Sheet Piles, which have been
used for the construction of the new Honam Bund
and on Dutch Folly.
Ironworks Weserhuette: manufacturing Float-
ing Dredgers of which two are in service with the
Kwangtung River Conservancy Board, and the
Canton Public Works Department.
L. & C. Steinmueller, Gummersbach: famous
for the construction of Vertical Watertube Boilers.
Just recently a big Water Tube Boiler from this
Company has been installed at the Canton Municipal
Waterworks.
Koerting Diesel Engines; of which are many
stationary and Marine type, up to the highest capacity
running in South China.
Cable Works Felten & Guilleaume: manufactur-
ing High Tension Cables, Lead-covered Cables, Sub-
marine Cables, Scientific Electrical Testing Appara-
tus, Wires of all kinds.
Balcke A.G. Frankentaal: manufacturing port-
able Fire Engines, which are always kept in stock, in
Canton.
and other Manufacturers.
Besides the Firm is doing business in all kinds
of Sundries. Special Line: Printing Ink in all
standard Colours, manufactured by: “Deutsche
Druckfarben Fabrik, Zuelch & Dr. Sckerl.
Messrs. Koehler & Co., Canton.
Koehler & Company, general importers and
exporters, was established in November 1931.
Mr. W. O. Koehler, senior partner and manager.
Mr. Cheung Shiu-tung, partner, (the Company
is registered with the German Consulate General,
Canton.)
Firm’s representative in Germany: Messrs. San-
der, Wieler & Co., Hamburg.
Koehler & Co. are shareholders in the Hang Fling
Neonlite Co., Ltd.
Sole agents for H.H.N.C.L. (For foreign
business)
Koehler & Co.’s special department: German
bookstore.
Brief Biography of Mr, W. O. Koehler
Mr. Koehler, manager and partner of Koehler &
Co., Canton, was born in Hannover, Germany, 1880,
youngest son of Mr. W. Koehler, founder and partner
of Koehler & Willeke, Hannover, rubber manufac-
turers and exporters. Mr. Koehler was apprenticed
in Bremen at B. Groverman & Co. He served one
year in the army, (Feldartillerie Reg. von Scharnhorst,
1. hannov. No. 10) and left for Shanghai, China, in
1900. There he was connected with Melchers & Co.
until 1902 when he was transferred to Hongkong.
In 1907, he returned to Shanghai as manager of the
export department of Melchers & Co. until the out-
break of the world war. In 1914 he left for Tsingtao.
Mr. W. 0. Koehler
From 1914 to 1919 he was a prisoner of war in Japan.
In March 1920, he returned to Germany. From 1921-
1924 he was in Hamburg and was engaged in the
importing of .cotton and as manager and partner of the
American Commercial Co. Hamburg. In 1924, he
returned to -China. From 1924 to 1931, he was
manager of the local offices of some Hongkong firms.
Since November 1931, he has been the manager of
Koehler & Co., Canton.


/ i |Qi \
/ r f \
Johnson Engineering Co.
CANTON
Dipl. Eng. F. G. Paechnatz,
Mr. Lo In Nin,
Compradore
Technical Manager
The Johnson Engineering Co,,
AND CANTON
HONGKONG
The firm was founded by Mr. R. Johnson and
Mr. F. Kraemer with offices at Hongkong and Canton.
The technical work is in the hands of Mr. F. G.
Paechnatz, Dipl. Eng., who served with the German
Army during the Great War and later with the Com-
mission of Peace. He came to the Far East in 1921
and joined the Agriculture Department of the Chosen
Government. In 1923 he was transferred to Japan
and latter to Formosa where he assisted the govern-
ment to improve the sugar cane production. He in-
-1 reduced improved methods of growing sugar cane by
the use of machines specially constructed by him for
different soils.
Mr. Paechnatz came to China in 1926. After
travelling in Honan, Kweichow, Hunan, unnan and
Kwangsi, he served with the Kwangsi Mining Bureau
at Nanning. In April, 1927, he joined the Govern-
ment Testing Arsenal at Canton. As the result of an
accident, he lost his right hand. In October, 19 2 /’
he was invited by Messrs. Reuter, Brockelmann &
Company to organize their machinery Department at
Canton, and was at the head of it six years.


♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
ft
♦♦
ft
♦♦
ft
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦ |H
♦ ♦
♦♦ B9I
■■
♦♦ mm
♦♦ m
♦♦ H
♦♦ n
♦* HR
♦♦ |b|
♦ ♦ A Bg
♦« n e»
♦♦ xHifc<fir
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
it
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
[OHNSON
E
vroyv
I
s
I
NGINEERING ( .0. |
C4/
HONGKONG.
«
it
ii
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
if
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
H
I
II
«
8
8
♦ ♦
8
§
♦ ♦
Tool Machineries for Workshops
|
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
«•
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
8
♦♦
♦ ♦
Shipping & Weaving Machines
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
• •
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
«
♦.
::
u
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
8
♦♦
♦♦
Printing Machines
I
♦♦
♦♦
»
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Agricultural Machines
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Steel Constructions.
♦♦
if
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
jj AJJ Canton Office
C able Address
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦f
♦♦
8
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
ts , . . ,) 87 B. C. Shameen
“Johnengme
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦o
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
P. 0. Box / 04, Canton.
8
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
8
♦♦
:::h
-♦
>♦
-♦
-♦
>♦
>♦
>♦
Complete Factory Installations
Diesel Power Plants
Steam Power Plants
Sugar Factories


ENGINEERING IN CHINA
Dr. Eng. K. L. Kungbiel.
The industrial development of China, it seems,
must follow on similar lines to that of the Japanese
Empire, of course, with consideration of Chinese
local requirements and conditions.
Excluding perhaps, a few small advanced indus-
trial centres, China is working under the handicap of
one of her old morals, which, up to now, has largely
governed the technical trade, namely; “The cheaper
the better, regardless of the quality.” This slogan,
combined with the lack of experienced and competent
workmen has cost, and still costs China many millions
of dollars yearly, and years and even decades may be
necessary before the Chinese customer himself will
become aware that this maxim is not the right way to
save money, and before he learns to take advantage
of the experience gained by Western countries. This
experience has cost these countries unlimited amount
of money and work, but is available for China at a
minimum cost.
The younger generation of Chinese engineers
who have been educated abroad, knows about this
question, and they endeavour to let their country have
the full benefit of their knowledge. This young
generation of engineers has to endure a hard fight in
their own country to dissuade their fellow countrymen
from their old ideas.
There are two great reasons why the policy of
“The Gleaner the Better” is so well established. The
first is the entire lack of forethought while the second
and nerhans the more domineering reason is usually
the shortage of monev. Tn most cases it would be
possible to overcome the financial difficulties, and see
the wav clear to purchase quality if only a very simnle
little calculation were made, which shows that a little
higher price often means the saving of considerable
amount of money.
For example, take the case of a bus comnany
which are about to increase their fleet of vehicles.
Should the company in question purchase buses equip-
ped with gasoline motors there is absolutely no risk
whatever, as there are many well-known firms building
such buses and cars, and also there is no difficulty in
operation. Furthermore, the gasoline driven cars are
extraordinarily cheap in comparison with the modern
diesel driven vehicles. Calculating on the same carry-
ing capacity a bus equipped with a diesel engine costs
fifty per cent or even more than a bus fitted with a
gasoline machine.
Now, the gasoline bus requires during its life
many times the value of its original cost for fuel oil,
and here is a point where a lot of money can be saved.
The diesel equipped bus saves its owner from 45 to 65
per cent of these fuel costs, due to the cheaper price
of crude oils, and to the better and much higher
efficiency of the diesel engine as compared with the
gasoline motor.
It will clearly be seen that the higher price initially
paid for the diesel machine will very soon be reim-
bursed by the savings in fuel costs. After this, during
the rest of the vehicle’s life time, the owner gains the
45 to 65 per cent saved in running costs of the diesel
motor as a real net profit.
It must be pointed out that the diesel driven bus
is not only equally safe in running as any first class
gasoline bus, but it also shows great advantages which
the petrol motor cannot claim. The ignition point of
crude oil is considerably higher than that of gasoline,
and therefore the diesel machines are absolutely safe
from fire and explosion of fuel caused by collisions, etc.
Further to be considered is the fact that the diesel
machines for buses are generally “low speed” and con-
sequently they have a long life.
To sum up, the expenditure of a little more in
initial costs means the saving of a great deal of money,
the reduction of risk and the ability to maintain a good
reliable service.
An example such as this can be shown in nearly
every line of engineering. There is no doubt that the
time will come when the Chinese are no longer in a
position to spend and waste money in buying cheap
technical products, and the Chinese buyer must make
up his mind and learn to calculate where the benefit
lies, or he will find himself out of competition, and
only wasting money and time in a dangerous technical
regress.
As already mentioned the lack of experienced
engineers, foremen and workmen, makes the task of
the new generation of Chinese engineers doubly hard,
and it must be appreciated that several attempts have
materialised to build technical laboratories and to fit
them with well-equipped workships, and the time is soon
to arrive when the shortage of trained men will be
overcome.
It is the duty of the foreign engineering firms to
assist the Chinese engineers in their endeavour to
introduce quality, and this can only be done by
technical firms who have a proper staff of qualified
engineers, thus giving a guarantee of good responsible
work and service. These engineers must have in
addition a good all-round engineering knowledge, in
order to fulfil their duties and to help China to develop
her industries.
The German engineers have traditionally worked
for decades in China for mutual benefit and will con-
tinue to assist the Chinese in technical achievements.
The start is made —China go ahead.


Messrs. Chien Hsin Engineering Co., Ltd.
CANTON
s
I
Lr l
i
Two Diesel Generating Sets, 1500 H. P. each, supplied to the Honam Electric Power Plant by HUMtsOLDT-
DEUTZ Motoren A. G. in Koeln, Germany, through their Canton agents Messrs. Chien
Hsin Engines ring Co., Ltd.
ci
c
i
Si
i
Shse
MAGIRUS Motorcar Fire Engine combined with Fire escape.
sold by the Chien Hsin Eng. Co. to the Canton Charity Fire Brigade.


GRAB CRANES SUITABLE FOR /m'
HANDLING AND DISCHARGING
ALL KINDS OF GOODS, COAL,
GRAVEL AND SANDS, ETC., /
ALSO APPLICABLE
1 •
Wj
\
DEMAG: TRAVELLING AND STATIONARY
■
I
DEMAG: PORTABLE AIR COMPRESSOR PLANTS FOR
WORKING PNEUMATIC PLUG DRILLS IN MINES
& STONE QUARRIES, ALSO FOR HARBOUR
AND HYDRAULIC CONSTRUCTION
Sole Representative:
CHIEN HSIN ENGINEERING CO.,
Telephone: 14560
TAI PING ROAD SOUTH, CANTON.
.VVn^V.V.SSV.V/AVAVMWAV.V.nmVV


Diesel-Electric Power Plant of the Kwangtung Electric Supply Co. Plant in Honam.
On February 15th 1933 the Mayor of Canton
opened the new Diesel-electric power plant on the island
of Honam. Since March of the same year the plant has
been in continuous operation. It is not only the largest
of its kind in South China regarding the total output,
but also in regard of the size of the units it consists
of, and therefore of special interest in the technical
world.
The plant consists of two Diesel Generating Sets,
each of a capacity of 1000 KW. The Diesel engines
are supplied by the H U M B O L D T - D E U T Z
Motoren A.G. in Koln, Germany, through their agents
the Chien Hsin Engineering Co. They are single
acting, four stroke engines are less bisection, of
plunger piston type with 8 cylinders. r I hough the
output of each cylinder is already rather big, the sim-
ple design without cross-head is used. The pictures
give a very good idea of the sturdy, uncomplicated
construction of the engines.
The electric generator part of the plant is sup-
plied by SIEMENS. It consists of high tension
threephase generators of 2300 Volts and the complete
switch gear, suitable to run the 2 sets in parallel with
each other and with the turbines of the main city
station.
Special attention was given to the cooling water
supply for the engines. Ihe direct use of the muddy
river water would endanger the engines. Therefore
a special filtering plant is provided. By pressing the
water through the 2 — High Pressure Gravel Filters
of impurities. To allow cooling of the engines with-
out use of the cooling water pumps for 5 hours, a
Elevated Cooling Water Tank is provided. After
having passed the engines the water is recooled in a
Cooling Tower.
The necessary Filterpnnips and Cooling Water
Pumps are supplied by W E I S E Soehne in Halle,
Germany. All machinery of the plant is supplied by
German manufactures and certainly will be a good
recommendation for their efficiency.


.VVWVWW.VWWVVWV
l n
I
c u
i
i
2XIOOO KW. Lighting Plant “Honam Electric Station. Supplied by CHIE IST HSIN ENGINEERING Co.
vuwwv
.V a V a V,W B V.W Q V D VnV


J • '■ /v* P# *' '•’
!■ Another picture of Deut? diesel engine at tine Honam Electric Station.
£
Deutz Diesel engine with generator supplied to the Honam Electric Station.


;
Bg — —
" * ' Another pictureof 1450 HP. Deutz diesel as above. J
mju w„W n W-- n -oW n " n W a - B , B %%Wo-n- a , l .%%W n -nW [3 W-W B -»W 0 W B -- MV» , . , . , . , .VV b V^V.VA\V.VuV, , .V.\^ 11
VWVWVVVWVWWWWWVWW 1 WVUWVWVWVWWVVWVI
Eight cylinder 1450 HP. Deutz diesel engine direct coupled 1,000 KW, light generator supplied to
Honam Electric Station.


■' ♦ . . .
GERMAN MEDICAI
t, vities
in Canton and Kwangtung Province
I. H. Otto, M. D
The outline of the German medical activities
in Canton and Kwangtung Province can not but start
with a thankful remembrance of what German physi-
cians had done in Hongkong before the World War
to establish a very high reputation for German medical
work. That the Doctors Mueller, Justi, and Hoch,
who had to return to Germany after the outbreak of
the war, are still in the minds of many former patients
in South China and the bordering colonies, is shown
by the fact that the writer has been asked again and
again concerning their future life.
Not before 1920 did German physicians return
to Canton. When Dr. and Mrs. Rummel began their
work in that year, the situation was rather awkward;
German business had just been re-established; the
small number of firms, now required to be established
in Canton proper, were scattered over the city and
met with stiff competition from other foreign firms,
which during the war, had taken over their business.
However, every possible assistance was given to Dr.
Rummel by the German firms retaining him as their
medical adviser in their mutual benefit.
With due respect, it might be said that only a man
of so unusual capacity as Dr. Rummel could have
paved the way for future development. A physician
and surgeon of outstanding ability, a man of
unusual energy, a practitioner of the highest con-
scienciousness, he overcame the seemingly insurmount-
able difficulties existing at the time and gained an
esteemable reputation among the Chinese and foreign
international circles.
One of the outstanding problems was the erec-
tion of a hospital, but because German firms in Canton,
and South China for that matter, were struggling
very hard for reestablishment, the erection of a “Ger-
man Hospital” such as the ones in Peking and
Shanghai was out of the question.
However, through the kindness of Dr. Todd, Dr.
Rummel was permitted to operate on and treat patients
in the “Kung-Yee” Hospital. For this assistance the
German physicians will never forget. But the pro-
blem had to be solved in another manner. Through
the initiative of Dr. Leung Pui-kee, who seeing the
possibilities of medical development in close coopera-
tion with Dr. Rummel, started the Canton Sanitarium
(Yee Yeung Yuen) on the ideal location at Yee Sha
Island, former residence of General Ngai Bong-ping.
Another step forward was the establishment of
the German Dispensary. So far, Dr. Rummel had
Dr. Med. I. H. Otto.
his office near the French Dispensary, and M. Helary’s
readiness to cooperate is well remembered, but it is
obvious that a much greater efficient service could be
obtained by bringing hospital work, dispensary and
general practice under the same personal influence.
In this matter, Mrs. Rummel, with her wide experi-
ence as a laboratory worker, was a tremendous help
to Dr. Rummel.
In 1922, in the face of growing demand for
German medical service, Dr. Schneider, a man with
an excellent medical education and with more than
fourteen years of experience in tropical medicine, was
asked to join the Deutsch Aerztevereinigung.
In 1924 still more assistance was needed, and
Dr. Otto was asked to come to Canton to take over
the special work in internal medicine and Roentgenno-
logy. The purveyance of a first class X-Ray equip-
ment at the time added efficiency to the service render-
ed by the Deutsche Aerztevereinigung.
By this time, the reputation of German physician
was fully established. It is significant to note that
when the Chinese Government thought of adding a
medical faculty to the Sun Yat-sen University, Ger-


man physicians, the members of the Deutsche
Aerztevereinigung, were repeatedly offered professor-
ships. The opportunity to spread medical knowledge
and to further serve the community was very tempt-
ing but because the University Hospital was to be
established in the former Kung Yee Hospital, the
members of the Deutsche Aerztevereinigung felt that
out of personal indebtedness to Dr. and Airs. Todd
who had devoted their lives to the hospital they should
not become their successors. So the offers were
definitely declined and the Chinese Government had to
secure physicians and scientists from Germany direct-
ly-
In the meantime the Canton Sanitarium was
becoming more and more developed. New buildings
were being erected and X-Ray-therapy was introduced
for the first time in South China, thus bringing the
Sanitarium up to the standard of the best European
private hospitals
When Drs, Rummel and Schneider left for Ger-
many, Dr. Breitlaender and Dr. Nissen came to take
over their work. In 1930. Dr. Pflomm, Dozent for
surgery and roentgennology at the University of Jena,
took over Dr. Breitlaender’s work.
It is worthwhile to note that the University-
Hospital and Faculty of the Sun Yat-sen University
has contributed to the prestige of German medical
work in South China much more than private practice
ever could do. Despite political changes and econo-
mic difficulties, the physicians and scientists have,
through constant self-sacrificing work, maintained an
institute for medical education of the first rank, which
from year to year has gained more widespread re-
cognition throughout China.
The first foreign faculty was composed of:
Prof. Dr. Kudicke (bacteriology), Prof. Walbaum
(pharmacology), Prof. Dr. Basler (physiology) Dr.
Dormanns (pathology), Dr. Andresen (anatomy),
Dr, Bernauer (internal Medicine), Dr. Canaval
(surgery), Dr. Frommholt (gynaecology). All of
them have in a short time gained fame as teachers.
For many years Prof. Dr. Kudicke was the dean
of the faculty, and he more than anyone else was
responsible for the great progress and achievements
of the institution. His ability as a scientist, his never-
tiring efforts to render service, and his fascinating
personality will be long remembered by those who
came into contact with him. His return to Germany
was a loss keenly felt by the faculty and the com-
munity.
In the course of the years, several changes have
occurred in the University. Dr. Scheyer has assumed
the professorship of gynaecology and has gained
special recognition for creating the mid-wifery school.
Lately, the department of surgery has secured the
service of Prof. Dr. Martin, a physician of established
fame, and an associate of Germany’s greatest surgeon,
Geh. Rat Bier. Professor Martin became dean of the
faculty when Professor Kudicke left for Germany.
Another branch of medical work was opened
when Dr. Charlott Andresen began her special practice
for children’s diseases.
In 1925, the Berlin Mission founded a hospital
at Nam Yung (North River). Dr. Gloeckner, Dr.
Deussen and Dr. Lueders were in charge of it succes-
sively until 1930, just when the natural disinclination
of the country population to submit to western me-
thods of medicine was overcome, it had to be aban-
doned following several “visits” by Communists.
A general and leprosy hospital has been main-
tained by the Rhenish Mission at Tung Kiang (East
River). It was founded by Prof. Dr. Olpp, the now
well-known head of the famous Institute for Tropical
Medicine at Tuebingen. In this institution is a large
collection of bladder stones to show how many people
have been relieved of suffering from one disease
alone. The high standard and reputation of the
hospital has been maintained by Dr. Olpp’s successors,
Drs. Schwenn, Hueck, and Diehl.
Last but not least, there are two Mission
Hospitals in north-eastern Kwangtung, founded and
operated by the Basel Mission. One is in Kaying
(near Swatow), and the other is in Hoyun (near
Waichow). Drs. Traut and Graetzel are in charge
respectively.
Writer’s Biography: Johann Heinrich Otto
was born in 1892 in the town of Kiel, situated near
the Baltic Sea and the Kiel Canal. During boyhood,
he longed to travel. Objects of Chinese Art which
his father brought home from his voyages to this
country directed his mind especially to the Far East.
He began his university training in 1912. When
the World War broke out, he joined the German army
as a Kriegsfreiwilliger (war volunteer). In 1915,
he was transferred to the medical service. After a
year of special training in one of the field lazaretts,
he joined his old front regiment. In 1918, he return-
ed to Germany and continued his training at the Uni-
versities of Kiel and Jena. He graduated from the
latter in 1920.
After working in pathology, he specialized in
internal medicine and neurology under the L. v. Krehl
in Heidelberg. In 1921, he was offered the position
of chief-physician of the hospital for outpatients at the
University of Rostock, where he worked under
Professor E. Grafe. In December, 1924 he joined
the Deutsche Aerztevereinigung in Canton.


i
|
%
**' *&*... I , (I
I —| — U-|4-t
Tennis Court and kth Building Bird’s eye view on the Corner of the Hospital Island %
(taken from Water Toiver). Ij
u-^^W n W n W n W■V a V [1 W u V-^^V□V B V□V■V■^V□^^^^^^^^V■^^^^^^^^^ , -W D^lWo^WaW-V-W>^W■^V■V-■A^Vy%v?
k^.
THE CANTON SANITARIUM
■i
c „
□
|
n
□
c"
c
n
R
n
j
i
|
f u
YEE YEUNG YUEN
AT YEE SHA TAO ISLAND
NEAR CANTON
Yee Yeung Yuen {as seen from North-West)
Aseptic Operation Room {Gray Marble and Glass)
Corner of the Tuberculosis Ward.


Kohler of Kohler, U.S.A.
Sanitary installation, plumbing fixtures
Construction Supplies Comp, of America, U.S.A.
Builders Supplies
Jones & Laughlins Steel Corporation, U.S.A.
Sheet Pilings, Tubes, Pipes
Spalato Portland Cement Company, Italy.
Asbestos Cement Sheets
R. B. Steel Window Co.
Iron-windows
C. P. Brick Factory
Bricks and Tiles
M. Schmitt & Sohu, Germany
Lifts
C.I.D.E.O.-Marelli, Italy
Electrical meters
Linke Hofmann Busch, Germany
Diesel Engines up to 3000 HP.
Schlueter Motors, Germany
Diesel Engines, Kerosine Oil Engines
H. Meinecke, Germany
Watermeters
Bussing, Germany
Diesel trucks
Henschel, Germany
Locomotives
Bohler Steel Works, Austria
All kinds of steel
Please apply for offers of—
Tel. No. 14016
Jg
*
IT
ft
«
ft
a
UP
ft
m
*
ft
*
if
M
it
>g&
ilM
—•
%
k
ill
ft
«
'>h
©
JR
m
ft
H
%
m
Ifl
1-X
r/rt
tt
,13
m
a
UP
ft
Hi
vM
35
tfi
[Ml
-1 +»
IS
|||
ffi
Is
ft
•ttft
>6/X>
s
iff
rV-i
*
m
31
ft
X
%
I'M
ffl
3H
m
%
m
n
UP
IT
iT
s
LI
UP
ft
k
&
A~\
>n
i
#
lx
i|
ft
&
¥
IT
g
1
m
>'n
«
-L'
%
m
iM
)H
•
m
>Vll
TH
ft
¥
js
£
rn
UP
■I-
if m
REUTER, BROCKELMANN & Co
Engineering Dept. - Agents for
Iron Windows, Fire-Engines, Hemp and Flax-hoses, Iron-Construction for Bridges also Com-
plete Factories, Power-Plants, Chemical-Plants, Chemical-Works, Water-Works and Sugar
mills.
We keep stock of—
Diesel engines up to 100 H.P.-Fire engines-electrical Motors, Diesel-Trucks,


.
*
b '^vif
Importers-Exportfc rtsurance Agents
Hongkong & Canton
The well known Hong-name of the firm, She-la-
si, dates back to 1890, when it was first used by its
predecessor, E. Schellhass & Co. It has been in use
ever since.
For a period of 25 years, from 1906 to 1938
the management was in the hands of Mr. W. Brock-
stedt, who, although handicapped by the loss of eye-
sight in 1914, carried on and was mainly instrumental
in renewing the activities of the firm after the great
war. The Hongkong office, which had been liquidat-
ed owing to the war, was reopened in 1922.
After the death of Mr. Brockstedt, the gen-
eral-management of the firm passed into the hands of
Mr. O. May, who has to his credit 21 years’ experi-
ence in China. Besides the general management, Mr,
May is looking after the import business of the Hong-
kong Office.
Mr. B. Soltau, who joined the Hongkong Office
in 1922, is in charge of the export business.
Mr. G. Boediker, proprietor of the firm, who is
at present in Hamburg, has spent several years in
Chin
The Hamburg connection of the firm is George
Boediker & Co.
Messrs. BORN EM ANN & CO.
The firm of Bornemann & Co. was originally
started in the late eighties of last century by Mr. Ferd.
Bornemann under the name and style of herd. Borne-
mann with Branches at Shanghai, Canton and later,
Hankow.
At first the activities of the firm were confined to
the buying of feathers for bedding purposes which
were exported to Europe and America, the firm hold-
ing the Agencies of a number of wellknown feather
factories in Europe and America. Later other depart-
ments were gradually added to the firm, such as
Piecegoods, Sundries, Insurance and Shipping De-
partments, until at the outbreak of the great war, the
firm attained very considerable dimensions. The war
paralysed the firm’s business to a certain extent, but
in 1920 the Canton Office opened up again and in 1923
the Hongkong Office, with practically the same kind
of business as done before. Mr. F. Ortlepp the owner
of the firm is now in charge with Mr. A. Reinecke
looking after the Import Departments with the aid of
an experienced staff.
Mr. Ortlepp came out to Hongkong in 1905 join-
ing the firm of Reuter, Broeckelmann & Co., Hong-
kong, after having been with their Hamburg Office
for some time. In 1911 Mr. Ortleph joined this firm
in Canton and has ever since been connected with it.
Mr. F.-Ortlepp, Senior Partner and Manager of
Messrs. Bornemann & Co.


This Company had taken over the business of
The Canton Trading Association since November,
1932, and is acting also as the Sole Agents of Messrs.
Melchers & Co., Hongkong, whose Import and Export
■ sf
Business is done through the channels of this Company.
With the established introduction of all the
famous German Patent Medicines and Pharmaceutical
Preparation like
Arsenoferratose, an excellent blood tonic of Messrs.
Boehringer & Soehne,
w
All sorts of Quinine preparations against Malaria
of all stages,
Cardiazol of Messrs. Knoll A. G. with its wonderful
effect in any cases of heart collapse, with its
. •• J
combines,
j '
Formamint against colds,
m a
A nerve tonic like Sanatogen, or Bromural in cases
of acute nervousness.
Gonosan an old established preparation for the
v'
internal treatment of gonnorrhea,
w
Hirisan Paste against the bad healing exzemas,
Codliver Oil Emulsions, the well known “MAN &
FISH” Brand of Messrs. Riedel,
Calcium Diuretin and its combines against the com-
plaints of men over forty,
Mr. H. J. Prolich,
Partner and Manager,
Messrs. Frolich, Tselee & Co., Ltd.
The FROLICH, TSELEE & Co., ud., Canton.
Neo-Hexal against urinary troubles,
Olobintin a turpentine oil injection,
Noctal a perfectly harmless medicine against sleep-
lessness,
The really cheap but equally effective Quadronal
against pains of any description, etc., etc.
The principal item of Import, taken up by this
Company is the Trade with these preparations. Like-
wise the Company acts as local Agents for the well
known and inexpensive microscopes of Messrs.
Hensoldt, Surgical Instruments of “Mira” Brand,
Laboratory apparatus, medical examination sets,
etc. pp. Chemical Glass Ware, so having a
complete programme most interesting to all Doctors
and Medical practitioners. Application for
catalogues and prices will readily be attended to.
All dispensaries and local drug companies have had
large dealings for the use of same, both in the city and
in the interior.
All kinds of Wines, products from the well tasting
Shantung grapes of the region of Tsingtao under the
trade mark “MELCO”, and the “ALCA” Mineral and
Aerated Waters from Laoshan, manufactured by
Melco Weinkelterei Ltd. of Tsingtao, of which they
are the Sole Agents, have been introduced with
promising prospects.
Other great branches of their Import business
are Sundries, Cotton Yarn for weaving factories, and
Hurricane Lamps, the latter occupying a very promin-
ent position in the Cantonese Lantern shops owing to
their specialized construction to economize kerosene oil
consumption and to endure a long life. They are also
interested in Essential Oils for the use of dispensaries
and soap factories, a very capable factory entrusting
them with their representation in this market. Motor-
car Tyres “Continental”, the best German make are
coming next. Only started lately but rather success-
fully especially as far as the heavy duty tyres are
concerned which last longer even on rather primitive
country roads. The newly invented AERO TYPE
CONTINENTAL, though little higher in price, will,
even half inflated, render service equally as good, while
the common kinds of tyres would certainly cause
troubles and damages under similar circumstances.
The great variety of Aniline Dyes from J. R.
Geigy, for which they are the Sole Agents in South
China, has already stood a good demand in the market
locally.
Exports connecting with many parts of the world
is another line, mainly covering Bamboo Ware, Fire
Crackers and Tobacco Leaves.


XvVWWWVWWWWWVWWWWWWVVWWtfWWWWVV
ARE
VERMOUTH
YOU LOOKING
PORTWINE
WINES
at prices within
reach ?
HOCKS
Boxbeutel
THEN
iT R Y
Scharzhofberger
Rudesheimer
MELCO
♦♦c••»
KUEMMEL
WINES
■
“• Sole Agents
AQUAVIT
SHERRY BRANDY
i| Frolich, Tselee
;i Co., & Ltd.
■I 39, B. C., Shameen
RUM
PEPPERMINT
Tel. No. 10918
MELCHERS & CO
Hong Kong
onlinenlal
Canton Agents:
FROLICH, TSELEE & CO., LTD.
Type Aero
Tel. No. 10918, 12841
No. 39, B. C, Shameen
comfortable riding
free from jolts
even on the worst of roads!
Sub-Distributors:
fi « « ± M H
Ft m &
■ViW.V.V,


gif' • - ; ‘ v \ ' '
Hz/ .mp- m
• y
|B j H -0 i
If
r al Faculty
of the Ui* ui Uunese iVi
of Sun University, Canton
by Pro. Dr. B M nhard Martin,
Director of The Surgical Department, 1. Hospital
Dean of the Faculty.
Since China had left the seclusion of past
centuries, modern medical science formed a prominent
attraction for the educated and advanced Chinese.
Whereas such departments as Law and Theology are
founded (comforming to) on national peculiarities,
Medical Science is particularly fitted to have a uniform
basis throughout the whole globe. The living, animal
or man, in its original parts is everywhere subject to
the same fundamental principles:
Its origin is the ovula, from which it is developed
to an independent being. It passes through an in-
dividual life, and finally declines and dies. May be the
diseases of these living beings differ to all outward
appearance, defying any comparison in their symptoms
and history, they are all following universal funda-
mental principles, which originates from the fact that
each and every living being consists of the same
particles which we call cells
We owe this knowledge really to the discovery
of the cell in the first half of the 19th. century. This
discovery is the foundation stone of modern Medical
Science. Its outstanding aim is to assist the pain-
stricken mankind through its scientific findings and
the progress achieved. This is not to be interpreted
in the sense that the old Medical Science had not lived
up to the same ideal. On the contrary, medical art and
science were serving mankind as back as the history of
men can be traced. And how excellent physicians past
centuries have produced! However, their art was
hampered by a lack of general experience, as we have
them to-day thanks to largely advanced technical
development. If we want to-day to give an idea of the
methods, theories and medicines from a historical view
point, we can but give great credit to the high standard
of the medical art of these times
This is also true with the Chinese medical science,
which has come to us from past centuries, and which
deserves the highest praise.- Considering the primitive
knowledge of science and of the origin of sickness in
general, its high standard is quite remarkable. This
is a fact, which remains in spite of later developments,
which through modern research work have led medical
art a new and more successful way
Every progress outshines the splendour of the
past. Our to-day’s knowledge of cause and effect in
the medical art is by far more thorough, than it was
in the past. The discovery that many diseases are
caused by microscopically small beings, known as
“bacterias”, for in Cholera, Typhoid, Tuberculosis,
was made only 100 years ago. The nature of other
diseases, such as malignant tumors, has only been
found out by the discovery of the “cell”. These are
such fundamental and new results of modern research
work, that without them a correct analysis of cause
and effect in the medical art is utterly impossible
This progress becomes manifest most amazingly
in the general hygiene. Its achievements on the basis
of up to date research have been proven in the great
war 1914-1918. Never before in history has such a
big army as Germany there possessed gone through
years of fighting and suffering without a single
Prof. Dr. Bernhard Martin
epidemic disease. None of the most dreaded ones of
their kind have found their way into the German army,
the credit for which goes to the eminent achievements
of German Medical Science.
The more thorough understanding of the funda-
mental principles has particularly done away with the
old method to treat an individual case according to
strict and rigid general rules. Great experience and
thorough knowledge of the various ways and means,
are however, indispensable. Just in this department
lies the key of the'latest amazing progress of modern
medical art
China has come out in the open, after having been
violated and neglected, and is striving hard to acquire
the achievements of modern science also in the medical
line. To this purpose, the Chinese-German medical
faculty of the Sun Yat Sen University in Canton,
founded in 1927, is devoted. Its importance is in-
creased by the fact that is an institution of and sup-
ported by the Chinese Government. Apart from that
also the German Government is giving its close
attention to this faculty as well as to the one in
Shanghai
Modern Chinese Medical Science is yet in the
early stage of development. The number of genera-
tions of physicians in China is still too small to provide
for the necessary fundamental basis. The develop-
ment is growing with the increasing confidence and
acknowledgement in the great masses. <


&-* * '\.
m WL I v-r -j
|T a «* f f " ’••*» ■' wnpl >**v. ’■ •
fe-MI • T-a«" • .. • * ! - ■ J5 v Jjf r iak.
- "3^Ri
hB<V -a “*^P^ 5 » iK''^^^BslBo
I
j j ji * '*"^ kV^^P?r t” * ■ y^ki
Jf %iffli WilT fe'Jp ;|Ji hbI > Jk* ■ - IJR Jfc
8||$&r . K| I ;tt. ; IjfcJ ll l£ j *&&£ ■B|mm
||§ 4 i ife in. ||y S&ilp _y : * .Hk - ;
fe. 4'^^Hp®r'- < ‘ It&L Jggp| ''* wB^SSsM%m
# iffs* jP^, - ®’
•gk ■ .
w jgpr ' ~
_fHSHSaSHSHSHSHSaSHSHS2SZr >Ws . c ZSBS'tS? i _• v.
CHINA EXrORT-IMF "T & BA*’ CC
CAN TON.
Mr. H. D. Kuhrt.
Manager, China Export-Import & Bank Co. and Bu-
siness Manager, Chien Hsin Engineering Co., at Canton.
The Staff of Messrs. China Export-Import & Bank Co.
PSHSa?aSHSa!?2SaSHSHSHSHSaSHSHSSSHSESHSHS2S^SHS'HSHSEHHSBSHSHSHScISHSEFc


$)cnV cctufi
Scf/wyou /
TAKg
" tmswAL \
BAYER |vV^fe;
1 i I m
Discomfort?
* 6ARDAN' l
Promptly Reueves a |p|
| ALSO PREVENTS PAINS : ;«|
rAtclsl&t /juclii/S<* »HBS^^^9
CHINA EXPORT-IMPORMn&GvSwS I
I A. G. (11 H MIBM


The raising of a modern class of physicians is
not exhausting itself in teaching the students, it
requires a certain standard as basis of the real studying
without it, otherwise it is impossible to understand the
principle of Medical Art. Schools are assisting in
preparing the students not only through teaching gen-
eral items such as reading and writing, but moreover
in providing the students with a certain knowledge of
Natural Science, such as Physic, Chemistry, Lotasy and
Zoology and with an ability for intellectual work.
Not the learning and mere acceptance of certain facts
without knowing “how” and “why”, but personal
intellectual cooperation and the right and sensible use
of the acquired knowledge are forming the basis for
successful work. Therefore, to be admitted as student
of the Medical Faculty one has to supply a testimony
of successful graduation from a Middle School. The
higher the requirements for such test are the better
the student is prepared for his work. Not the know-
ledge of various facts is important, but the understand-
ing of everything that goes on in our sphere, of the
living and of the ways to handle and usefully apply
such understanding is the real necessity.
The German Medical tuition is giving the students
a wide range of knowledge. For this purpose it is
especially made to provide the students with practical
experience through intuitive instruction and demon-
stration. Only a student who has seen and observed
much, will apply the right treatment in an individual
case, if later he is called upon to act independently and
at his own responsibility. Experience is nowhere as
important as in Medical Science. Every human being
differs from the other, each time the reaction varies.
What is causing sickness for the one, is curing the
other. Hie one has a great healing strength within
himself, whilst the other is suffering severely from the
same cause. There is no medicine, that is helping
everyone in the same degree. There will be always
variations, which however generally are doing no
harm. There are on the other hand cases, where at
the surprise of the physician the treatment fails, where
the believing in treating the disease according to a
general schedule, may have the worst consequences.
To build up a generation of physicians well versed
in modern medical science, it requires a careful pre-
paration in the fundamental basis, anatomy and
physiology of the human being. The aim is to create
a solid general physicianship. A nation which has
not yet discovered the blessing and progress of such
modern medical science, is still inclined to accept the
old traditional medicine of the past. Failures in the
traditional methods are taken as fate and not given any
consideration. On the other hand sporadic successful
performances are overestimated and given publicity.
The task of a modern physician is to prove his better
ability, A high standing of accomplishment in the
general practice is quite necessary, which is including a
sufficient knowledge of the diseases of each part of the
human body, dhe great masses have but little appre-
ciation of medical specialities. They must be inspired
with confidence in the treatment of the all round
physician, who must also be able to discriminate,
whether a specialist of a certain department must be
called in, for instance, an eye specialist, a surgein. a
gynaecologist etc., or whether he himself can cure the
patient by the means available to an all round physician.
He is the real good friend of the masses. It depends
upon him, whether they have confidence in modern
medical science or not.
This is the principal task of our faculty to provide
a solid general foundation for the medical practicant.
We are applying the experience of our German Home
Universities, which was developed for centuries. We
take care not to let the student take in too much. He
wants his full term of tuition to acquire a solid basis,
which qualifies him to enter the practice with full
responsibility. A student who is desirous of getting
special experience has afterward sufficient time and
opportunity. This task is the real aim and governing
factor of our faculty.
However, there is still another task, equally
important. A profession of physicians without con-
fidence of the general public has neither basis nor
future. The teachers of our faculty, who are special-
ising in certain lines, are directors ol the corresponding
departments. Our patients get to know on their own
body the accomplishments of modern science, where
there is a chance at all to hold up disease or death. The
institution and management of the First Hospital of
the Faculty are to set the fashion of a modern hospital.
'Hie directors are attaching great importance to advise
the authorities for a modern development of sanitary
institutions. , i* ,
I .It i i
It is not necessary to be a physician in order to
understand the high value of such a model-hospital.
The student and young practicant are gaining definite
impressions which acompany them in their general
practice. The one physician may successfully apply
modern science by primitive means, whilst another
though aided by up-to-date institutions, and fashionable
surroundings may work in a unhygienic inferior way.
The direction will be indicated by the customs acquired
as student and assistant. We hope that our intentions,
and suggestions will meet with the- full understanding
and final success through the men in charge. There
is much to achieve yet, which is of the utmost impor-
tance.
1 cannot finish without saying a few words about
our students. It is pleasant and gratifying for us, to
acknowledge the great zeal with which they are doing
their part and submit wholly and fully to their advisors.
The faculty of memory, so eminent in the Chinese race,
enables them to learn easily in all departments. We
are doing our best to cultivate this faculty and couple
it with an ability to adapt themselves to the peculiar
needs of each individual patient.
In conclusion: our Faculty has a great task before
it, to serve the people and the whole Chinese nation in
particular. This task is not solved within a short
period, it requires undisturbed, steady, educational
research work. It is apparent that such a young
branch needs improvements and encouragement. This
is also the express desire of the Government. Let us
hope that they can provide the necessary means for it.
Such a development is of real service for the people.
Science is international, and in a way it is not.
Every nation has also in this respect her own indi-
viduality and peculiarities. The German Medical
Science has the quality, apart from its well known
thoroughness, to tackle the practical problems on a
large scale and not get lost in small details. This is
the reason for its world wide fame and leading position.
I believe in a good and close understanding with our
Chinese friends. To foster this understanding is our
principal aim.


. ' ' ' ' '
■ Jr' |
I
'
| ,<• " y-;; : V; V ||p r ■". TT^'l
!l ■■■■■■■■■■* — .y M8K>yrv- ■ •
| B mm®&?- ■' - • -*■■ ~' ~' - -~ w ■: —-—i
i gHIl
/ WiiPw, . * : . 4\
/| OP Sf SBI T
; M||BHMI T x |p|||
{£'9' I A*
iMiaiiiHMi i
■ ' f\ ■ |
- — El
i d J£S^SESHSZSZSZSZSZSI2SZSIESEiSZS£SZSZSHSIESESES£SESZSZSZSZS^SHS?. i iZSES2SHSESZSiESIESHSj
Messrs. Carlowitz & Co.
Mr. Chr. A. Schneider,
Mgr. Engineering Dept.
CANTON.
Mr. R. von Carlowitz,
Founder of the firm (18^6)
The Present Canton Office of Messrs.
Carlowitz & Co.
The Staff of Messrs. Carlowitz & Co. in Canton
-ii—ii—ii —ir^i^iTTiirTiirrir^nncaczitr^CPCTPCPcrpcpcrpcrpcrpc:
Mr. H. Lehmann,
Gen. Mgr. for South China.
Mgr.
R. G. Hardt, g
Export Depart.
i t
h
a
a
3
|
S
c!
I
i


Mes.-o. CARLOWITZ & Co.
The history which leads to the establishment of
this firm goes back to the year 1843 an d pictures a
real romance of trade. In 1843 two old established
and highly respected Leipzig firms C. Hirzel & Co.
and Carl & Gustav Harkort desiring and hoping to
develop new and important markets in the Far East,
jointly equipped an expedition, the management ol
which was entrusted to two young and enterprising
merchants Mr. Richard von Carlowitz and Mr.
Bernhard Harkort. The valuable cargo which the
two young men carried on their vessel, the Bremen
barque “Anna and Elisa”, consisted for the most part
of Saxonian and Rhenish-West-phalian textile and
metal goods, and was sold under very favourable
conditions notwithstanding the serious difficulties
which this undertaking naturally encountered when
coming into competition with other enterprises, chiefly
British which had been in the market long before
them. Starting the trip on November 2nd, 1843 from
Bremerhaven, they reached Singapore on the
29th, March, J844, owing to unfavourable winds.
They visited the markets of Calcutta, Singapore,
Batavia, Manila, Shanghai, Chusan, Ningpo, Amoy,
Hongkong and Canton. With the proceeds from the
sale of their own goods they purchased a quantity of
Chinese products forwarding these for sale to their
Leipzig firms. Encouraged by the good results R.
v. Carlowitz and B. Harkort established their own
firm on January Ist, 1846 in Canton, which city was
considered most appropriate for the trade they had in
view. Von Carlowitz was shortly afterwards ap-
pointed consul for Prussia and Saxony. For the first
10 years the course of business continued to be regular
and satisfactory in every respect until the political
disturbances and the siege of Canton brought hard
times for the firm. The terrible crisis which overtook
Germany and more especially Hamburg in the year
1857 was also severely felt in China; also the effects
of the Taiping rebellion, which was raging in various
provinces of China tended severely to retard the pro-
gress of the firm. Confidence was slowly restored by
the Treaty of Tientsin between Great Britain and
China, ratified at Peking on 24th, October, iB6O,
which was followed a few months later by the treaty
between Prussia and China (both for Prussia and for
the German Customs Union) and the firm was one of
the first to benefit from these political measures Mr.
Harkort retired from the firm in 1856 and from that
time on it was continued under the name of Carlowitz
& Co. The opening of a regular steamship service
between London and Marseilles and China as well as
between San Francisco and China considerably con-
tributed to increase the trade in these directions.
Up to the beginning of the “sixties” the financial
business had been principally carried on upon the
strength of credits of London banks and London pri-
vate bankers. But the entire banking business now
experienced a change, when British Bankers, the
Oriental Bank, the Agra Bank, the Chartered Bank
of India, Australia and China, and others made their
appearance, —and above all. when through the intia-
tive of a few British and German merchants in the
year 1885, the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation at Hongkong and Shanghai (with subse-
quently, numerous branches on the coast) was found-
ed, which largely facilitated the local financing of all
business transactions. About ten or fifteen years
previous to the outbreak of the great war, the Hon-
Kong partner of the firm as always been a member
of the Board of Directors of the Hongkong and
Shanghai Banking Corporation.
in order to meet competition which began to
develop, the firm opened a branch in Hongkong 1866.
In addition to the regular produce trade the charter-
ing business took quite an unexpected expansion and
the firm became greatly interested in the chartering
business and the sale of steamers and sailing vessels
on the entire coast.
When in the year 1869 the sea passage to the
Far East was considerably shortened by the opening
of the Suez Canal and when in 1871 a telegraph cable
was laid to Hongkong, a great revolution took place
in the entire Eastern trade; which the firm was able
promptly to make use of in its own interest. The
active way in which the partners of the firm took part
in the foundation of financial institutions and under-
takings of public utility tended to add to their influence.
In order to increase its sphere of .activity in
America, Otto Benecke, a partner of the firm, under-
took an extensive and at that time very fatiguing
journey through the United States, Central and South
America with very satisfactory results; some of the
connections then made still existing to the present day.
The year 1877 brought to head the long cherished plan
of the establishment of a branch office at Shanghai.
Thanks to the central position of this port, it developed
so rapidly and to such an important extent, that it
soon took the lead of all the branches in the Far East.
An interval of another ten years showed the
necessity of further expansion. An office was opened
at Tientsin in 1886; and owing to the proximity of
Peking, apart from the regular produce trade, trans-
actions on a very successful and important scale were
undertaken with the Chinese Government. The firm
acted as intermediary for the negotiation of the first
German loan with the Berlin banking firm of Messrs.
Robert Warschauer & Co. for the Chinese Imperial
Household at Peking. In the course of time it sup-
plied minting machinery to various Provincial Govern-
ments for coining silver and copper coins, machinery
for Brick-factories, Paper-making-machinery, Flour-
mills, Powder, Cartridge and Rifle factories, steel-
works, machinery for the dressing of ore and Elec-
trical-plants of various kinds. Large contracts were
executed for Railway material, Locomotives, Passen-
ger-cars and Freight-cars, Rails and Bridges and also
Mining machinery. A further event of importance
was the establishment of a branch at Hamburg in
1886, which was considered necessary to render the
firm entirely independent and effectually to watch all
business connected with the import and export of
goods, Marine Insurance and financial matters. From
this centre a well organized system of agencies was
established all over Europe.
During the “eighties” and “nineties” of the last
century the shipment of goods by sailing vessels from
Hongkong was again an item of considerable im-
portance and 6 to 8 sailing vessels were despatched
annually by Carlowitz & Co. to Havre, London and
Hamburg, loaded chiefly with Cassia lignea (at that
time an important article of speculation in Europe),
Gallnuts, Ginger, Matting, Fire-crackers etc., and 10
to j 2 sailing vessels were despatched to New York
annually, to which port a very extensive business was
carried on in Matting, Ginger, Firecrackers, Palm-
leaf-fans, Goat, Sheep and Dogskin-rugs, Sheep, Goat


in 1801 the
J Cel.
. lea. in icu uic
jj nkow to obtain
ui n^ )r ' in g l )lace .
in Vegetable i«ui w, various seeds, Woodoil, Galindo
Cantharides, Cotton, also animal products such as
Goose and Duck-feathers, Bristles, Albumen and Egg-
yolk as also untanned Cow and Buffalo-Hides and
Goatskins. Connection with Government circles en-
abled the firm to take up business in that direction as
well. It was a source of great satisfaction that the
firm succeeded, in the face of a very strong foreign op-
position, to bring about the great Binghsiang Colleries.
this move brought in its train the placing of the
entire outht and its financing by the firm. Ihe Pingh-
siang Colleries used to supply, amongst other industrial
undertakings, the entire wants of the Hanyang Iron
and Steel-works in Hanyang near Hankow both in
coal and coke. Since then owing to various mis-
fortunes the Han-Y eh Ping Co. has ceased to be an
important factor in China’s economical life.
Opposite Hankow at Wuchang a large ore wash-
ing plant was put up by the firm in 1903 on Chinese
territory. In order to secure a regular and safe sup-
ply of the ores it was necessary a few yeais latei to
establish a branch at Changsha (Province of Hunan)
and to inaugurate a regular service of transport on the
Siang-River and the Yangtsze. Immediately after
the German Lease of Tsingtao (1898) the firm settled
there (a little later also in Tsinanfu) and interested
itself financially in the Syndicate of the Shangtung
Railway and Shangtung Mining Company.
As agents of various Steamship Cos. but more
especially of the Hamburg-American-Line, the firm
founded jointly with the latter and with Messrs Am-
hold Karberg & Co., the predecessors of the present
firm of Arnhold & Co. The Y angtsze Wharf and
Godown Co. and shortly afterwards the Central and
North China Godowns and Press-Packing Co., Ltd. in
Shanghai, both institutions giving very satisfactory
results until the outbreak of the World War. In the
course of time the firm was also appointed agents in
China for a number of first class industrial establish-
ments as well as Insurance Companies for Life, hire
and Transportation.
Business in Matting from Canton and Kobe to
New York and in Strawbraids from Shanghai, iien-
tsin, Chefoo, Tsingtao and Kobe to New York and
Germany experienced such an expansion that it was
resolved to make specialities of these articles, a course
which led to the inevitable establishment of a branch
of the firm on January Ist, 1904 M New dork, where
the same had been represented for 22 years by Ameri-
can agents. Their representative, Mr. Townsend
Rushmore, who had already in reality been for many
years in the service of the firm of Carlowitz & Co.,
was from this date admitted a partner, dhe steady
increase of business further necessitated the opening
of branch establishments at Peking and Mukden.
On January Ist, 1906 Carlowitz & Co. absorbed
the firm of H. Handle & Co. and thereby became sole
agents in China of the world-famed house or fried.
Krupp A. G. Essen-Ruhr., Fried Krupp A. G. Gruson-
Krupp A. G. Essen-Ruhr., Fried, Krupp A. G. Gruson-
Germaniawerft, Kiel-Gaarden; this connection as well
as most others, are still in force. Thus from a small
beginning the firm has developed into one of the most
important German enterprises in the Far East. The
sum represented by the turnover of the total imports
of the firm with Eastern Asia before the outbreak of
the war amounted to about fifty million Marks Gold
Uie exports from
,nma to an
per '.‘nuu.
equal sum. led property buildings be-
mging to tht rin were valued at 3F2 Million Marks
.old, whilst the number of hands employed in all the
various branches could be put down at 300 Europeans
and thousands of Chinese. ihe founder ol the him,
Richard von Carlowitz, returned to Europe in 1873
and retired into private life settling down in Dresden,
where he died in 1886.
China although at first quite uninterested and re-
luctant was gradually also drawn into the war, the
final result being, that all German trade was prohibited,
private property confiscated and finally in the spring
of 1919 the Germans themselves repatriated and sent
home via Suez. Thus ended—for the time being—the
work extending over 73 years of peaceful German
enterprise in China! All that was left was defiance,
courage and the strength of will to regain the lost
position. Without loosing much time and not waiting
for any compensation for the property confiscated, the
partners with their staff set to work to rebuild the
ruins that surrounded them on all sides. At present
the following branches of Carlowitz & Co, .are again
at work: Shanghai, Canton, Hankow-Wuchang,
Tsinanfu, Tientsin, Peking, iaiyuanfu, Mukden,
Dairen and Hongkong. About 100 foreign and
nearly thousand Chinese employees are at the present
day again at work in the Far East and 80 assistants
are forming the staff of the Hamburg Office.
The office of Carlowitz & Co. in Canton after
the war, was reopened by Mr. H. Lehmann, the pre-
sent manager of this office and simultaneously general
manager of all Carlowitz officers and agencies in South
China. Mr. Lehmann signs for the firm. He came
to China joining the firm in 1910, and was appointed
to the management, when Mr. \\ . Schuechner, the
former partner who was connected with the firm for
over 30 years, retired from business in 193°-
South China the business of the firm is mainly con-
ducted along the lines of engineering, government con-
tracting, import and export, shipping and insurance.
The Engineering Department under the manage-
ment of Mr. Ch. A. Schneider is subdivided into thiee
sections, i.e. Machinery, Optics and Government C on-
tracting. Mr. Ch. A. Schneider joined the firm in
1924. At that time he took charge of the Engineering
Department in Hongkong'. In 19-7 he was entrusted
with the management of the firm’s engineering business
in South China, after having been transferred to
Canton and since 1930 he signs for the firm per pro.
The Machinery Section of his Department is in charge
of Mr. H. Weckert, M. E. who joined the firm in 1927,
while the Section for Optics and Scientific Instruments
is under Mr. W. Heckel, M. E. who entered the firm
in 1928. The Government Contracting business is
under the personal direction of Mr. Schneider, Mr. H.
Becker who recently came to the firm from the Krupp
Steel Works, acting as assistant. Mr. J. Gianei is
permanently attached to the department as supervising-
engineer for the erection of machinery, etc.
The Export and Shipping Department is under
the management of Mr. G. Hardt who joined the firm
in 1926 and who signs the firm per pro since I 93 2 -
Mr. W. Heitzig, who entered the firm 1927, is in
charge of the section for export specialities.
The Import Department is in charge of Mr. F.
Seegelken who joined the Hamburg Office of the In 111
in 1926 and came to Canton in I9 2 9> w hhe Mr. A.
Weiss, connected with the firm since 1930, heads the
Insurance and Booking Department.


\
V ' .
. ■ • v • ■ ■■■■-' ' -^
’5Z525? affiHFSSESK
’SHSTu
SHSHSHSHSHSL ■’.^SHSHSHSHSESMasasare'T
The Office of Messrs. Carlowitz & Co. in 1866
The Present Canton Office of Messrs. Carlowitz d Co.


I 3E!Sc!SHSHSE5H5aSE5H5iaSE51SHSZSBSa5E5H5a5ZSESiaSHSiJHSESSSESZSHSESHEESHSHSHSHSHSiSaSHSaSEHSSiib t3c^TESHSaSHF?
s con I
I U I SHAMEEN * t t I A SI* lift
I i| I CANTON. I i H «i j
II11 y/%/7 t /ffl a I s 11 If -fl
iiijl |f
1 ■w-w-w-w'.r-vw- ▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼▼ w>r •wwwww'vw^'w'w^www^r'www'ww'wr*
lib eta SEiTHSHF 7! '
▼ VTTTTVTTTTTTTTTTTVTTTTTVTVV r TTVTWTWTTVTT\rvTTTTT TTTVTTTTVTTVTVVTV


. i> SSa • ■■118111* '/ •■
■ B» i -fT^B
ilk Bg "
THE CONSULATE FOR GERMANY !
HONG KONG.
H. GIPPERICH, GERMAN CONSUL,
HONGKONG.
joined the German Consular service in
1914 as Commercial Attache to the Ger-
man Consulate at Tientsin, left China on
the declaration of war in 1917, attached
to the German Legation at The Hague
(Holland) 1917 —1920, worked at the
Foreign Office, Berlin, 1920, appointed
Secretary to the German Legation at Pek-
ing 1921, Consul at Tsinanfu 1924, at
Harbin 1925, at Shanghai 1927, at Hong-
kong 1928, again in Tsinanfu 1929, again
in Harbin 1930, at the Foreign Office in
Berlin 1932 —1933, again in Hongkong
since June 1933.
Mr. H. Gipperich, Consul
WILHELM G.K. FREDERKING,
Chancellor of the German
Consulate Hongkong.
Born 18. January 1871 at Leipzig.
Since 1901 in the German Consular
Service of the Far East
Formerly Shanghai, Ichang, Changtu,
Hankow, Batavia and since
1926 in Hongkong.
Mr. W. Frederking
Chancellor


I I j
Messrs. Melchers & Co.
HONG KONG.
Mr. Carl Gerhard Melchers
Hongkong.
Mr. Hermann Melchers,
Founder of Melchers & Co.,
China.
Messrs. Melchers & Co., Hankow, on the left, office
building, on the right, egg factory, in the
foreground: the Yang-tse-kiang which
carries less water in winter.
M-essrs. C. Melchers & Co., Bremeyi,


*♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦
1
S
♦♦
♦ ♦ M
I ±
I if:
♦ ♦ "
♦ ♦
♦ ♦ > A
♦ ♦
I i
MEIxHtRS & Co.,
Pf
It
GENERAL MERCHANTS.
Importers, Exporters, Manufacturers, Shipping, Insurance & Forwarding Agents,
Offices at: —
Shanghai, Hongkong, Hankow, Tientsin, Tsingtao, Swatow, Canton, Peiping, Tsinanfu
HEAD OFFICE:—C. Melchers & Co., Bremen (established 1806) New York Agents;—Melchers Inc.
General Managers:
The Laoshan litis Mineral Water Co., Tsingtao
litis Brunnen, Table Water, Alca Water, Bronte,
Melco Weinkelterei Tsingtao
Wines, Vermouths, Liquors, Champagnes.
♦<
♦<
♦'
SOLE AGENTS IN HONGKONG AND CHINA:
Import Department.
Ferd Muelhens Koeln a/Rh.
Nr. 4 7 11 Eau de Cologne and Toiletries
International Continental Caoutchouc Co. Amsterdam and Hannover
Continental Tyres and Tubes & Accessories
Franke & Heidecke G.m.b.H. Braunschweig
Rolleiflex Photo-Cameras
Emil Busch Optical Works A.G. Rathenow
Prism Binoculars, Microscopes, Optical Instruments
Nitsche & Gunther A.G. Optical Works Rathenow
Spectacle frames, Ophthalmologic Instruments &c
Friedrich Mauthe G.m.b.H. Schwenningen a/N.
Metal Clocks, Wall Clocks &c
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
Gebrueder Thiel G.m.b.H. Ruhla i/Th.
Watches
Friedr. Herder Abr. Sohn, Solingen
High Class Cutlery
Hermann Nier Beierfeld i/S.
Hurricane Lanterns “Firehand” brand
Carl Freudenberg G.m.b.H. Weinheim i/B.
All kinds of leather
A. Wulfing & Co.’s Chemical Products Amsterdam—Holland
Sanatogen Kalzana Formamint
Chemical Works Von Heyden A.G. Radebeul-Dresden
Pharmaceutical, Chemicals, Patent-Medicines
Asta A.G. Chemical Works, Brackwede i/Westf.
Quadronal Quadro-Nox
C.F. Boehringer & Soehne G.m.b.H. Chemical Works, Mannheim-Waldhef
Patent Medicines —Quinine
H
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
«♦
♦ ♦
♦ «
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦O
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦o
♦*>
♦♦
«
♦♦
<V*
♦ ♦
Kaffee Handels A.G. Bremen
Shipping Department.
Norddeutscher Lloyd, Bremen
Knoll A.G. Chemical Works, Ludwigshafen a/Rh.
Patent Medicines
Meyerhof & Cie. A.G. Kassel
Medical Surgical—& Druggists—Sundries
Polaks Frutal Works Amersfoort—Holland
Essential Oils, Soap-Perfumes, Essences &c
Kali Chemie A.G. Berlin N.W.
Dry Colors
Geigy & Co. S.A. Basle—Switzerland
Aniline Dyes
H.A.G. Coffee
Zschopauer Motoren Werke J.S. Rasmussen A.G. Zschopau i/S.
D K W Motors, Motorcycles, Motor-Cars
R. Avenarius & Co. Stuttgart
Avenarius Carbolineum the Wood preserver
Paul Lechler Stuttgart
Inertol the concrete and iron preserver
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
1% Germanischer Lloyd, Berlin
Aachen & Muenchener Fire Insurance Co. Aachen
|| Verein Bremer See-Versicherungs—Gesellschaften, Bremen
Reliance Marine Insurance Co., Ltd., Liverpool
|« Railway-Passengers Assurance Co., London.
t* ......


me;.
Hie business of C. Melcneia w v.0., Bremen, vas
started on January ist, 1806, and during the first 60
years this well-known Firm which has seen, amongst
its partners, so many leading business men, was mostly
interested in the trade with Central America, especially
Cuba, and in the shipping business. C. Melchers &
Co., Bremen, were at that time one of the leading sail-
ing ship owners in the old Hansa town Bremen whose
privately owned sailing ships crossed the oceans.
Whilst on a business trip, Mr. Hermann Mel-
chers, grandson of the founder of C. Melchers & Co.,
Mr. Anton Friedrich Carl Melchers, visited the Far
East in 1866 and general business conditions in China
and Hongkong, caused Mr. Hermann Melchers to esta-
blish in the same year in Hongkong the Import
and Export Firm of Melchers & Co. Ihe business in
Hongkong soon flourished to such an extent that the
Firm opened branches in Shanghai (1871)? Canton
(1892), Hankow (1884), Tientsin (1898), Chinkiang
and 1 chang (1901) and Tsingtau (1906).
In the majority of these treaty ports Melchers
& Co. soon acquired large properties on which they
built their office premises, godowns, and factories,
Special mention should be made of the Firm’s old
Hong in Canton in the British part of Shameen and
of the large property on the French Bund in Shanghai,
consisting of offices and spacious godowns which to-
gether with Melchers & Co.’s properties on Chinese
soil were confiscated and sold without compensation
at the outbreak of the War in 1914 and the following-
years. It is a fact which is, however, still not yet
sufficiently known that the Treaty of Versailles stipul-
ated that compensation should be given to private in-
dividuals who suffered losses during the War, but the
German Government, which had to pay all available
funds as reparations to the Allies, was unable to fulfill
these obligations.
As soon after the end of the Great War as con-
ditions permitted, Melchers & Co., well known as one
of the German pioneers in the Far East were on the
spot again and restarted their activities. Offices were
opened in 1921 and the following years again in Shang-
hai, Hongkong, Hankow, Tientsin, Canton, Swatow,
Tsingtau, Tsinanfu and Peking, and due to their large
activities in the United States, their own office under
the name of Melchers Inc. was also opened in New
York. Many friends of the old days joined the Firm
again, and with their combined experience and know-
ledge, Melchers & Co. soon flourished again.
Whilst on a visit to Shanghai in 1927, the Senior
Partner of C. Melchers & Co., Bremen, Mr. Adalbert
Korff, decided that it would be in the best interests
of the Firm to buy property again in, Shanghai.
Consequently, a site was acquired in Shanghai on
Broadway opposite the Shanghai & Hongkew Wharf
where a modern 6 story concrete godown with lifts for
cargo was erected. This new large and spacious
godown situated only a few yards from the wharves
serves for storing of imported goods and for preparing
and storing the export cargo. —In 1930 Melchers &
Co. bought in Tsingtau near the sea shore at litis
Hook an extensive property comprising the famous litis
Spring and here it is where they operate their Laoshan
Mineral vVater Factory, the products of which
have become quickly well known all over China. Men-
tion should also be made here of the “Melco Weinkel-
terei, Tsingtao” which produces excellent wines, ver-
mouths, liquors and champagnes made of Chinese
grapes.
The most important property of Melchers & Co.
is, however, situated in Hankow in the former German
concession on the Bund. Here Melchers & Co. owned
many years ago a fine site on which many important
industrial enterprises have been developed. First of
all the Egg Factory where eggs are dried by tons and
shipped in powder to Europe and the United States.
Then the electric plant, newly equipped with two
modern Diesel Engines from where both light and
power current are delivered not only to the Firm’s own
enterprises but also to a large part of the City of
Hankow. Their highly developed industrial plants
in Hankow comprise also seed cleaning machines
for sesamumseed, beans, and peas, and plants for work-
ing woodoil, China grass, gallnuts etc.
As this essay deals, however, principally with the
activities of German Firms, in South China no further
mention can be made of the other activities of Mel-
chers & Co. in Central and North China. We must,
therefore, turn again to the South, particularly to
Hongkong, Canton and Swatow.
Mr. Carl Gerhard Melchers, great nephew of Her-
mann Melchers, the founder of the China firm, took
over the management of Melchers & Co., Hongkong,
in 1926 since which time he stayed continuously in
South China. In 1927 Melchers & Co. were entrusted
with the liquidation of the TransmarinaTrading Co.,
a Dutch Firm which necessitated them to open branches
in this year in Canton and Swatow. The boycott
against Hongkong had come to an end by that time,
and business in South China was reestablished again on
a normal basis. Melchers & Co. expanded their
activities and now, in the middle of 1933, are employ-
ing in Hongkong 9 Germans and approximately 50
Chinese.
The Hongkong business comprises generally Im-
port, Export, Shipping and Insurance. Mr. G. Schuldt
is the head of the piecegoods, sundries and yarns de-
partment, Mr, E. Becker of the Hardware, Chemical
and Optical Department, Mr. G. Leopoldt looks after
the patent medicines, whilst Mr. H. Schmidt and Mr.
H.P. Meuser work jointly in the Export and South
Sea Department. Miss A. Schuette is private
secretary to Mr. C.G. Melchers.
In the Import business Melchers & Co. act as
sole agents for many European as well as American
and Australian factories. Their buying and selling-
agents in the principal cities all the world over, keep
them in close contact with all events.
In the Shipping Department where Melchers &
Co. represent in all Chinese ports of call the North
German Lloyd, Mr. W. Sporleder acts as Manager
assisted, since the inauguration of the South Sea line
of the Norddeutscher Lloyd, by Mr. Siemens.


Messrs. A. Goeke & Co. are general Importers,
Mac Millan Petroleum Corporation, Los Angeles (Lu-
and commission merchants, and proprietors of the
brication Oils etc)
“Fiat Garage”.
The K. D. Petroleum Company, Los Angeles.
The firm was Established in Canton in 1904 and
Tropisko Paints G.M.B.H., Hamburg (Tropic Anti
in Hongkong and New York in 1910. After the war
rust and Ship Bottom paints)
the firm was reestablished in Hongkong in 1923 and
N. V. Biskuitfabrieken “Victoria” Dordrecht, Hol-
in Canton in 1924.
land (Biscuits)
They are representatives of:
Societe International des Placements, Basle (Inter-
Soc. Anonima “F I A T,” Torino (Motor cars,
national Bonds)
Aeroplanes etc.)
A. Mendel & Co. Berlin Patent Medicines: Tussamag,
M. Michelin et Cie, Clermont Ferrand (Tyres and
Ormicettes, Rheukomen, Argolaval, Laxagettes
accessories)
Remedium A. G. Berlin
International Harvester Export Co., Chicago (Com-
G. Rodenstock, Muenchen. (Optical Instruments,
mercial Trucks)
Cameras, Lenses)
As . separ o 111
activities of the h • ie 1 " ' T[ & l m P ult
mention can hen. oe iiuu '«!} o. th I ■ The mrtllv;r:i Jx Meich.rs & Co.
chers & Co, are intimately connected with the Nord-
deutscher Lloyd since its start in 1856. At that time
Mr. L.H. Carl Melchers was one of the founders of
the Norddeutscher Lloyd, Mr. Hermann Melchers was
for a number of years on the Board of Directors, and
Mr. Karl Lindemann, partner of C. Melchers & Co.,
Bremen, has recently become the Chairman of this
leading German Shipping Company.
In Swatow Melchers & Co. are mainly interested
in the general import business and in the manufacture
and export of Chinese drawnworks. For a number
of years Melchers & Co. have specialized in this drawn-
work business in Swatow under the management of
Mr. A. Wessel and Mr. A. Schmidt. But even in this
field of business, competition has become very keen
since both European and American buyers send at
times their own buying agents to Swatow. Owing,
however, to their intimate connections and experience
in this specialized trade Melchers & Co.,’s Drawnwork
Department still employs from 50 to 60 women, for
washing, ironing, and packing alone, whilst the actual
needle work is done in different villages in the interior
of the Provinces
The partners or MeicUrs & Co., Bremen, are
Mr. Adalbert Korff, and Mr. Karl Lindemann, whilst
Mr. Adolf Widmann (Shanghai), Mr. C.G. Melchers
(Hongkong), Dr. A. Korfif (Shanghai), and Mr.
Eduard Michaelsen (at present in Bremen) are the
partners of Melchers & Co., China. Mr. Adolf Wid-
mann, Shanghai, the Senior of the China Firm, re-
presents Melchers & Co. on the Board of Directors of
a number of industrial enterprises and is at the same
time the President of the German Community in
Shanghai, President of the German School, and of the
German Chamber of Commerce.
No particular mention can be made here in detail
of the many Chinese friends and assistants who have
assisted Melchers & Co. in building up their business
with great ability, diligence and fidelity. At least one
Chinese friend of the Firm in South China, however,
must be mentioned: i.e. Mr. Ip Loo Sin, Compradore
of Melchers & Co., Hongkong, for about 25 years.
This gentleman was a fine example of all the good
qualities which are characteristic of so many Chinese.
He died to the Firm’s great regret in 1928 since which
time his son, Mr, Ip King Fan acts as Chief Com-
pradore for Melchers & Co., Hongkong.
Messrs. A. GOEKE & CO.
BRIEF BIOGRAPHY OF Mr. A. GOEKE
Mr. A. Goeke, senior partner of A. Goeke & Co.
was born in Bad Pyrmont, Germany, in 1870, arrived
in Hongkong in 1896, established himself in Canton as
an export and import merchant in 1904, and in Hqpg-
kong and New York in 1910. Returned to the feast
after the war in 1923 when he re-established his firm
in Hongkong, and in 1924 in Canton.
BRIEF BIOGRAPHY OF
Mr. Hugo Ammann
Born 1896-After final Examination (Realgymn-
asium Munich). 1913-Apprentice in Hamburg (Carl
Boediker & C 0.,) till outbreak of War 1914, volunteer
for warservice in 1914 and officer on various fronts
until 1918, after armistice University Munich, 1920/21
in Amsterdam in commercial service 1922/23 Canton,
1924/25 Hongkong, 1925 with A. Goeke & Co., Hong-
kong Canton as attorney, 1.1.30 Partner in the same
firm.


I^V.V.V).V.%’.SV.V.V. n V.V h ■ g . B .%WV.V I .W." D V V, VrSVA" *
■■J
I
Messrs, A. GOEKE & Co.
HONGKONG
A Goeke, Senior Partner
Mr. Hugo Ammann, Partner
♦•• • ♦ ♦
•**
The Staff of Messrs. A. Goeke & Co., Hongkong.
5
c
s
5
i
I
i
9
9
5
i
>-W B^WB W H W u W»WnV B V n^WH VoV B Vn%^W a W-V < ,W B W I .SSSW-* ) u V B W-W-W>W-%W n W---W B W.--V»VAVV


jf VJ w it
| E' - If
♦ ♦ M
♦ ♦ 21
♦ ♦ II
♦♦ 22
i A. GOEKE & CO.,
it /
HONGKONG CANTON
♦♦
♦t
P. O. Box 240 Chin, P, O, Box 105
Tel, Address Asteridian Tel. Address Asteridian
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
::
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
<♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
M
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
tt
Importers of Piece Goods (Cottons and Woollens) and
Sundries. Woollen, Cotton and Art Silk Yarns for all
purposes, Heavy Chemicals, Patent Medicines, Motorcars
and Trucks, Motorcar Parts and Tyres, All Kinds of
Paper, Printing Inks etc.—
Exporters of Preserved Ginger in cases, jars and casks,
♦♦
♦♦
::
it
:t
♦♦
8
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
if
tt
♦♦
♦♦
Woodoil, Essential Oils, Soy, Cassia Lignea, Duck and
Goose Feathers, Seagrass, Rattancore, Bristles, Rubber-
shoes, Cotton and Art. Silk Hosiery, Wolfram Ore
&c, &c.
Owners of Fiat Garage, Hennesy Road Hongkong
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
Agents of
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
M
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
Fiat S. A. Torino (Italy) Motorcars, Diesltrucks, Dieselengines etc.
International harvester Expert Corp. Chicago, International Trucks.
Michelin & Cie, ClermontTernad (France), Michelin Tyres of all kinds.
A. Mendel dr Co., Berlin, Patent Medicines.
N. V. Biscuitfabrieken Victoria, Amsterdam, Biscuits etc. — Tropisco Farben
Aktiengesellschaft, (Hamburg) ships and Rustpaints, Gebr. Schmidt, Berlin,
(Printing Inks) Soc. Internationale de Placements, Basle (Switzerland).
(International Investments Deposit Certificates)
Correspondence Invited
:: l|
:: I
♦♦ fy
♦♦ it
♦♦
* - .AA«*»***«M«M*mMm**m**«««**m«*«m«**mmmm**m«vM»«Mm**M»#m4*«m«***vM*HH*H***««M>**»**«*M**«o**«»«MMH»MH«*mM*»**«**«H*»4*tM««*****MMM*«*«44l


bing* the 4000 m. Tien Tshang Shan Prof, Credner When he returned ' Canton, Pro*^^
discovered traces of an ancient whose bed is special aim during the
~»w occupied by a mountain Nothing was was to educate stude 1 -
: % fe existent I s M *
I WM. Meyerink & to.
General Import & Export
IMPORTERS OF; Piece Goods, Yarns, Metals, Sundries, Clocks
and Watches
EXPORTERS OF: Skins, Ores and Sundries.
Established since 1873
SHANGHAI: — Mr. H. Tiefenbacher, Partner
Mr. E. W. Schramm, Partner
HAMBURG:
HONGKONG: —Mr. W. Egge, Manager
SHIPPING:
Agents for Hong Kong and South China:
RICKMERS LINE, HAMBURG.


and at the Sun Yat-sen University in Canton (Chi..
Geography in China is as old as the Chinese
people. The famous “Yuekung” is an Empire
Geography written more than 4000 years ago! And
at the end of the Manchu Dynasty the number of
Chinese geographical works amounted to fifteen
thousand! But all these works, —laudable deeds of
their time —belong to the older period of science, when
geography was a mere description of rivers and moun-
tains, an enumeration of place names, an accumulation
of statistic material without the modern spirit of
scientific questioning. The rapid advancement of
natural sciences within the last hundred years placed
geography on an entirely new basis. No great dis-
coveries were to be expected in China. Maps of a
certain reliability were available, but nothing was
known of the facts controlling the physiognomy of the
landscape, nothing of the laws determining the dis-
tribution and arrangement of relief features, nothing
of the peculiarities of the climate, the vegetation, the
social and economic life of the people as controlled by
environmental influences, racial inheritance and
national tradition. It must be considered as an
extremely lucky chance that a geologist and explorer
of the high qualities of Ferdinand Freiherr von
Richthofen directed his attention to China and, sup-
ported by the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce, spent
five years in the country, travelling through all pro-
vinces and acquiring a knowledge of the Chinese
Empire so intimate, so well founded and so new in its
conception and angle of view as practically neither
before nor after any scientist or explorer was able to
obtain. Richthofen’s work on China, six big volumes
and an atlas, is not only a standard work in geography,
but is up to now unequalled as the fundamental source
of information on Chinese geographical problems.
No scientist engaged in investigating problems of
Chinese geography or geology can pass over Richtho-
fen’s work without pleading guilty to unpardonable
negligence. Richthofen himself was geologist, but
China, the Chinese landscape, the Chinese people, its
economic activity, the relation between land utilisation
and soil condition, both being dependent on the climate,
were so impressive, so striking features of the physiog-
nomy and physiology of the country as to convert him
from an expert geologist to one of the principal
founders of modern geography. When returned to
Germany and appointed chairman of the Geographical
Department of Berlin University, the charm of his
personality as well as the immense knowledge and the
efficiency of his scientific methods assembled very soon
a retinue of scholars whose most prominent living
representative is Dr. Sven Hedin, the great Swedish
explorer of Central Asia.
Richthofen’s journey through Southern China
brought the first scientific account of the geological
structure and the principal geographical facts of
Kwangtung Province and the South China Coast.
And it remained the last one practically up to our days.
The immense importance of a solid geographical
knowledge as the back ground of any economic activity,
political power and national wealth was early recognis-
ed and clearly pointed out by Dr. Sun Yat-sen. His
plans to national reconstruction, emphasizing especially
the development of means of transportation, the crea-
tion of commercial ports, utilisation of water power,
exploitation of mineral resources improving of farm-
ing methods, construction of new irrigation works,
afforestation, colonisation in the outer provinces: they
all are impracticable without intensive geographical
research and investigation.
Convinced of the necessity and the urgent need
of a scientific preparation of Chinese students to such
high aims, the National Sun Yat-sen University at
Canton decided to open a Geographical Department.
Prof. Dr. Wilhelm Credner from Kiel University
(Germany) who had just completed a two years’
journey through Siam, was entrusted with establishing
the new department, providing books and maps and
instruments, and fixing a scheme of instruction.
Within a short time the new established Geographical
Department became one of the most modern and best
equipped ones in the Far East. The Sun Yat-sen
University and especially her Vice Chancellor,
Dr. Chu Chia-hua realising the importance of such
institution never tired in rising funds for a practical
and scientifically justified equipment. No expenses
were spared in furnishing the Department with excel-
lent wall maps, most of them from the world wide
known publishing house of Justus Perthes in Gotha, a
set of instruments for surveying and observation and a
stock of books, quite limited it is true. A four years’
scheme of education was accepted, and English intro-
duced as language of instruction. At the very begin-
ning of the scientific training, Professor Credner had
to work out special methods of teaching and practic-
ing, adapted to the particular needs of Chinese stud-
ents. The necessity of acquiring a sufficient know-
ledge in foreign languages was especially emphasized,
and the geographical training of students was pursued
by an elaborate scheme of lectures, practicing courses
and weekly excursions to the neighbourhood of Can-
ton or several day trips to different regions of Kwang-
tung Province. A fortnight expedition in winter to
the upper North River region up to the Hunan boun-
dary will be kept in pleasant memory by those who
were fortunate enough of having been able to partici-
pate, inspite or better because of unrivalled experiences
on snowclad mountain trails and robber endangered
passes.
As not only instruction but also scientific research
work is on the department’s programme —and South
China is still awaiting scientific exploration in many
a direction —Professor Credner prepared and under-
took in 1930 an expedition to Yunnan which lasted
more than 4 months and turned out very successfully.
The expedition, —all members of the National Sun
Yat-sen University at Canton, —reached Yunnanfu via
Indo-china, and after a couple of days only the convoy
was able to start, well equipped and ready for doing-
valuable work. Professor Credner’s great practice
from his Siamese experiences allowed the expedition
to apply elaborate methods of travelling. In Tali,
right in the center of Yunnan Province, the expedi-
tion was divided into two. A party of four, conduct-
ed by Prof: Credner, started westward into almost
unknown regions, while the other remained on the
shore of Orl Hau. collecting valuable meteorological
and anthropogeographical observations. When clim-


Ik, , ake.
hithe w Known of tne of —~
far southeast in continental Asia. After that climb
the expedition managed to cross the deeply entrenched
valleys of Upper Mekong and Salween, and only the
strict refusal by British authorities rendered it im-
possible to enter Burmanese territory. So they turn-
ed north and swayed east till they reached the Upper
Yangtse Valley which was partly used for returning
eastward. North of Tali they joined the remaining
group and reached Kun Ming (Yunnanfu) combined
on a route north of the former. The expedition re-
turned safely to Canton after months absence.
Hundreds of miles were carefully mapped, extremely
interesting observations on the origin of special land-
forms, the natural and human causes of landscape
differences, the density, distribution and economic
activity of the population were collected, vocabularies
of native dialects were gathered, hundreds oi pictures
taken and a very interesting film, which is the first
scientific geographical movie picture record of that
region. The results of the expedition are published
in the first volume of the “Mitteilungen aus dem
Geographischen Institut der Sun Yatsen Universitaet
Kanton” which periodical was also founded by Prof.
Credner.
The observations on the Yunnan Expedition be-
came especially valuable as at the same time a geolo-
gical expedition, also equipped and sent by the Sun
Yat-sen University with two German Professors,
Prof. Dr. A. Heim from Zuerich (Switzerland) and
Prof. Dr. Karl Krejci-Graf from Vienna University
travelled from Yunnanfu to the Upper Yangtse Valiev
and to those parts of Szechuan, which are known as
Chinese Tibet. Entirely new conceptions of the geo-
logical structure could be based on intensive observa-
tions in Yunnan and great parts of Szechuan. The
surroundings of Kun Ming (Yunnanfu) and the long-
way to Tatsienlu was carefully mapped, step by step,
by Professor Krejci, and the Minya Gongkar Massive
(7500 m) and Omeishan researched by Prof. Heim
under assistance by the famous Swiss Topographer
Prof. Tmhoff. The combined activity of the above
mentioned German geologists with their Chinese collea-
gue Mr. Lee Cheng-Shan furnished a very valuable
geological map of the surroundings of Canton. The
head of the Geology Department of Sun Yat-sen
University, Prof. Dr. Chang Hsi-chih himself _ is
scholar of German Universities, and the cooperation
of the Geological and Geographical Departments of
Sun Yat-sen University proved always very friendly
and successful.
After Professor Credner’s return to Germany in
193 t, another German Geographer, Professor Dr.
Wolfgang Panzer from Berlin University was called
to Canton. Soon after his - arrival he set out for a
three weeks’ journey to the Southwest of Kwangtung
Province, accompanied by his two assistants. Mr. Lui
Yat Hing, and Mr. Lin Chao. Valuable observations
on the landscape types between the lower West River
and the Gulf of Toughing, the rural settlements,
transportation facilities, the lava plateau of Lui chow
Peninsula and the French Concession of Kwang Chao
Wan, the urban geography of Pakhoi and so on were
collected and inspite of heavy rains, which had ren-
dered some roads almost impassable, the trip was
completed in a satisfactory way,
io _ Lff. Panzer’s
following terms of instruction
,nts to independent observation.
i\iany excursions in the neighbourhood of Canton were
effected to that aim and together with the scientific
training of the students, more and more material on
the Regional Geography of Kwangtung Province was
gathered.
lli the meantime the political situation of the
country did not remain without serious influence on
the financial condition of the University, and Prof.
Panzer’s plan for a three months’ expedition to
Kwangsi, Yunnan and Kweischow could not be effect-
ed owing to the lack of funds. Therefore all efforts
were concentrated upon the investigation of nearby
problems. The question of the origin of the North
and West River gorges was taken up and carefully
collected observations lead finally to a satisfactory
explanation. Special studies on the shore line deve-
lopment in connection with the general morphological
history of the so-called Canton Delta were directed
or personally pursued by Prof. Panzer on the Hong-
kong Coast. Full attention was paid to the occurence
and distribution of house types and village types in
Kwangtung, most especially in connection with the
interesting problem of the origin and migration of the
Hakka people whose history has so intensively been
studied by President of -Sun Yat-sen University,
Mr. Chow Lu. The mountain landscapes North
and South of the Lower East River region were
researched and the highest peaks climbed. A special
course in Urban Geography resulted in the complete
mapping of house types of the old intramural city of
Canton. Other special courses in landscape drawing,
physiogeographical mapping and climatological obser-
vations were opened and successfully attended. The
increasing demand for special courses lead to an in-
crease of the staff of teachers. Several new profes-
sors were appointed, most of them French returned
students, and there was observed always a unanimous
co-operation of the Chinese instructors with their
German colleague.
The amplified staff made it necessary to work out
an amplified scheme of instruction. Its principles
were based upon Prof. Panzer’s teaching experiences
in German and U.S.A. Universities and published in
1932.
Unfortunately the Geographical Department of
the Sun Yat-sen University was not able to use the
summer vacations of’ 1932 and 1933 by sending out any
expeditions, owing to the painful reduction of its
budget. Therefore Prof. Panzer travelled on his own
risk and expenses in 1932 to the tropical regions of
the former German colony in New Guinea and the
Bismarck Archipelago, and in 1933 to the well-forested
and scientifically unknown region of Kwangning
(NW Kwangtung), to the Island of Formosa and to
Japan. All except the latter were effected together
with the German professor of the Forestry Depart-
ment of the Sun Yat-sen University Dr. Hanns
Eschenlohr. The combined geographers and foresters
travelling and observing proved extremely useful and
successful. Most especially the study and comparison
of Formosa with its f,0% forest cover and the practic-
ally barren South China landscape furnished regretful
conclusions as well as valuable clues to the important
deforestation and afforestation problem in South
China, so deeply anchored in Chinese history and
cultural development,


Germany’s geopolitical situation may well be
compared with the Chinese situation in the Far East,
although on different scales, and therefore German
geographers have a deep understanding of Chinese
national problems which are so deeply rooted in the
country, its natural outfit and necessities. It is the
earnest will of German geographers to help the Chinese
people in facing, analysing, understanding and master-
ing geopolitical problems of the present time.
Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Panzer
Dr. Wolfgang Panzer, professor of Geography
at the University of Berlin (Germany) was born in
1896 in Munich (Germany) was the eldest son of Pro-
fessor Dr. Friedrich Panzer, now chairman of the
Department of German Language and Literature at
the University of Heidelberg. Wolfgang Panzer’s at-
tention was early attracted by natural science, stimula-
tated by his parents and supported by his teachers
of the Lessing Gymnasium at Francfort on
Main. In 1914, at the very beginning of the world
war he joined the German Army as a volunteer and
fought in the trenches of the Eastern and Western
Front. In 1915 he was seriously wounded. After
more than 4 years front service in the army he returned
home in December 1918 decorated with several high
German and A* ,C!f rH,n war orders. Immediately after
his return he tooi. ' 0 tudy oi Geography, Geology
and Zoology at the Um.ersities of Franck -*■ on Maim,
Heidelberg and Freiburg. In geology he hau 1 ready
obtained an intensive training in his boyhood under the
late Prof. Dr. Fritz Dreverman of the famous “Senck-
enberg” Museum of Natural History at Francfort on
Main. In 1921 after having passed his examination
with the mark: “excellent”, he acquired the degree of
doctor of philosophy and science at the University of
Freiburg i/B as as scholar of Prof. Dr. Norbert Krebs,
now chairman of the Geographical Department of
the University of Berlin. In 1922 he entered the
Geographical Department of the University of Gissen
as assistant to Prof. Dr, Fritz Klute, the famous ex-
plorer of the Kilimandjaro region in East Africa.
In 1925 he became “Privatdozent” at the same Uni-
versity and after having taught for two years he
was called to the Berlin University, where he became
again Privatodzent and assistant to Prof. Dr. N.
Krebs. In 1929 he was called for one year to the
University of California at Berkeley.
After his return to Berlin he was nominated in
1931 “a.o. Professor” by the German Government
and was called in the same year to the
Geographical Department of the Sun Yatsen Univer-
sity at Canton on a three year contract. Professor
Panzers special line is Geomorphology—he is coeditor
of the German “Zeitschrift filer Geomorphologie”-and
Regional Geography. He has travelled in many
parts of Europe, spending about one year in Spain,
more then 2 years in France and one year in Western
Russia, besides shorter trips to England and Scot-
land, Norway, Italy and Spanish Morocco. In Ameri-
ca he crossed the continent twice and spent much time
in researching the Sierra Nevada and the desert re-
gions of California, Nevada and Arizona, In China
he led many excursions to different regions of Kwang-
tung Province, and during the University vacations
travelled to New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago,
to Formosa und to Japan,
His scientific publications all dealing with pro-
blems of different subject and regions as observed
during these travels.
Messrs. CARLOWITZ & Co., HONGKONG
The firm of Carlowitz & Co., established 1846 in
Canton and with a branch in the British colony of
Hongkong opened in 1866, developed soon into one of
the most important German enterprises in the Far East.
The Hongkong branch has been in existence ever since,
with the exception of the years of 1914-1922 when all
German firms were forcibly liquidated by the Hong-
kong Government. When the restrictions were with-
drawn at the end of 1922, the firm was among the first
to settle again in Hongkong. The Head Office of
Carlowitz & Co. is in Hamburg, with branches all over
China viz. Shanghai, Hankow, Peking, d ientsin,
Tsingtao, Mukden, Harbin, Taiyuanfu, Tsinanfu,
Canton, Hong Kong, and Dairen. While the main
activity of the firm in South China is concentrated in
Canton, the Hongkong branch is chiefly interested in
the general import business, woollen and cotton piece-
goods, woollen yarns, glass ranking amongst the more
important articles imported into the colony of Hong-
kong. As General Agents for Messrs. Zeiss Ikon
A.G., Dresden, and Carl Zeiss, Jena, the optical trade
consisting of photo cameras, binoculars, films, micros-
copes and other scientific instruments is well taken care
of. Recently the firm has taken over the Agency of
The International B. F. Goodrich Corporation, Akron,
Ohio, U.S.A., specialising in rubber tires and tubes,
rubbers hoses and beltings, druggists rubber sundries,
bathing caps, etc., etc.
The management is in the hands of Mr. R.
Schmidt who arrived in the colony in the beginning of
1923. Before the war, Mr. Schmidt was with
Messrs. Carlowitz & Co. in Hamburg and Shanghai,
and until 1922 looked after after the firm’s interests in
Amsterdam.


I f)
V 7 ,
-■ ‘
The Show Room
——— — — - ■■ ~~ ... ~ f
S3? SHb'ibucJ cLj dSila l_ ‘ l ' da db cS la dSESfia Cb dSHSLu dj l . /cSHSHSHSdi u d^
■SSESSSHHca
CARLO WITZ & Co.
Messrs.
HONG KONG
Mr. R. Schmidt, Manager
I
s
J7&e S£a# 0/ Messrs. Carlowitz & Co., Hoiigkong.
b33ESHSHEH£^SHSHSHSdiBSHS2SaSHSHS^SHS2SdSaSHSaSBS2SH£^aSHHaSHSHSHS^S2SHSBSHSHS^SHSHSE?ES^SaSE?2SHSa


rcSRLZEis^i
~ Jena 1
A
♦♦
♦♦
::
::
♦ c
♦♦
*♦
Carlowitz & Co.
HONGKONG, 4 QUEEN’S ROAD.
Sole Agents for:
ZEISS
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦o
♦o
MICROSCOPES
SURVEYING INSTRUMENTS
BINOCULARS
PHOTO LENSES
PUNCTUAL LENSES
THREE
SEARCHLIGHTS
OPTICAL-
MEDICAL—
SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS.
ZEISS IKON I
P
CINE-CAMERAS |
AND PROJECTORS |
PHOTO. ACCESSORIES «
I
::
CO
P
♦ ♦
OO
**
oo
AND PROJECTORS
PHOTO-ACCESSORIES
FILMS
CAMERAS ::
AND THE 8
♦♦
CONTAX II |
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
MOST MODERN CAMERA OF 8
THE WORLD. ||
to
oo
CO
oo
♦♦
oo
GOODRICH I
p
SAFETY SIEVERTOWN TIRE |
♦♦
FOR PASSENGER CARS,
TRUCKS AND BUSES ||
♦♦
OO
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
M
♦ ♦
♦ ♦
' ♦
♦ ♦
OO
OO
8
♦ ♦
♦ *
♦ ♦
oo
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦ ♦
♦o
♦♦
♦t
♦♦
ff
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
oo
♦♦
oo
♦♦
::
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
♦♦
MECHANICAL RUBBER GOODS
DRUGGIST RUBBER SUNDRIES «
BRANCH OFFICES: shanghai, Tientsin, hankow, feking
TSINGTAO, CANTON, MUKDEN, HARBIN,
DAIREN, TAIYUANFU, TSINANFU.
I
♦♦
♦♦ **


jj The Norddeutscher iJoyd, Bremen
\ MELCHERfe CO.,
| HONG KONG
j Express Freight Steamer “LA^A
I Single Berth Cabin of an Express
Freight Steamer on the Far Eastern
Service of the N.D.L.
A
’ & “lH Jill
S.S. “FRIDERUN” of the Hong Kong—Snvtli Sea T ”
Islands Service of the N.D.L Dining Room of a Passenger Steamer of the
. • Far Eastern Service of the N.D.L
\W.V.“V,


A Brief History ut the Norddeutscher Lloyd,
firemen —1757 to 1933.
Foundation:
In ancient times when people did not see such
floating vessels as we have here to-day, merchants in
Bremen realised how important it was for Bremen to
make herself independent in the matter of transporta-
tion with a view to enhancing German trade and
to linking up the world’s commercial connections.
Many individual attempts to form up steamship com-
panies having failed, Herr H. H. Meier, the most
influencial merchant in Bremen, set his wits to work
in order to bring the idea into actual practice that had
long been sought after and striven for. After many
ups and downs, Meier’s plans for the founding of a
steamship company gave promise of a more definite
form and through his untiring energy coupled with the
help from some other merchants, he founded the Nord-
deutscher Lloyd, Bremen, when on 20th February
1857 the company was incorporated.
Opening Business;
The first line that the Norddeutscher Lloyd open-
ed in the year 1857 ran to England and the steamers
used in its service were the S.S. “Adler", u Moewe”
and “Falke”.
Opening of the Overseas Service:
In the first half of the second business year the
service from Bremen to New York so long looked
forward to was announced open. On June 12th, 1858
the first of the four Transatlantic steamers, the "‘Bre-
men”, a ship of 334 ft. long and 42 ft. broad was ready
to commmence her maiden trip, sailing on June iQth.
Following this initial vessel were the S.S. “Hudson”,
“Weser” and "‘New York”, thus enabling the company
to maintain a regular fortnightly service between Bre-
menhaven and New York, facilitating both the freight
and passenger traffics, which was welcomed by all
concerned.
Improvement of the Situation:
The company continued to develop its enterprise
more and more despite the difficulties and knotty'pro-
blems at trying times. In 1867 the line to Baltimore
was inaugurated for the purpose of securing the trans-
port of the American tobacco and cotton. In the
next year several ships were put on the run and the
service was extended to New Orleans. This proved
a good result, when in 1869 ""The most productive
year in the history of the Lloyd” was felt.
The German Imperial Lines to East Asia and Australia:
In the middle of the Bo’s there opened up to the
Lloyd new prospects for an important expansion of
its shipping lines. At the initiative of the Reich-
stag, Prince Bismarck, the then Chancellor, was em-
powered to commission a suitable private enterprise
with the founding of regular Imperial Mail Lines to
East Asia and Australia with a contract valid for 15
years. Overcoming a sharp struggle with Hamburg
to secure this Government contract, which was coveted
more as a matter of prestige thai for any pecuniary
advantage connected with it, the choice fell on the
Lloyd, which was considered in Government circles
to be more fitted to be entrusted with such a responsible
enterprise. According to the contract, two main lines
were to be founded, one to China inclusive of a branch
line to Japan and Korea and the other to Australia
connecting Samoa and the Tongaian Islands, for
each of which 13 sailings were provided. Fur-
ther a branch line from Trieste via Brindisi to Alexan-
dria was to be established. Fifteen ships should be
placed for this service. The S.S. “Oder” was the
first ship to represent the Far East Line, which was
opened with great ceremony on June 30th, 1886 in the
presence of representatives of the Imperial Government
and of the State of Bremen.
Extension of the Lines:
Meanwhile the directors of the N.D.L, lost no
opportunity towards the improvement of the Company
and due to their strenuous efforts the tonnage of the
N.D.L. fleet had risen to 194,264 in 1892. Service
was gradually extended to South America. In 1898
in order to meet the demand of the situation in East
Asia, a fleet with a total of 26 steamers were put on
the run and later nine or more vessels were ordered to
place on the berth for East Indian coastal service.
Several ships were also plying between the Straits,
Sumatra, Philippine Islands and South China, main-
taining reliable and regular calls. Concerning the
Australian branch line, a new connection of every 6
weeks was arranged for Sydney via ports of New
Guinea to Hongkong and Yokohama and vice versa.
In November 1904 a new weekly Mediterranean line
was established, which was joyfully welcomed by the
travelling public. In 1897 a new twin screw steamer,
the ’’Kaiser wilhelm der Grosse” was built for the
Transatlantic run. Her tonnage was 14,349 G.R.T.
Her maiden trip to New York, making a speed of 22
knots an hour, had achieved for the first time in the
history of shipping and due to her other great advan-
tages that the Lloyd became the first shipping company
of the world. Following this splendid vessel, several
other ships, some of which had a tonnage of 17,000
G.R.T., were built and placed on the run, proving
eventually a remarkable success. From this time on-
ward repeated orders were placed with the German
shipyards for new vessels with speed and all round
suitability to meet with the situation.
The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Norddeutscher Lloyd:
The fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the
Norddeutssher Lloyd, was a landmark in the history
of the company. The festivities took place on Febru-
ary 20th to 23rd 1907 and were celebrated not only
on board all their ships at sea, but also in all over
the places where they were respresented, which many
prominent persons including representatives of the
Imperial Government attended. The magnificent
ovations that the Lloyd received, showed to what ex-
tent their successful endeavours to further trade, in-
dustry and crafts and their service in the improvement
of German overseas traffic were appreciated by one
and all.


Development of Business:
Credit must be given to the directors, who seized
every chanCe for development. In 1912/13 several
vessels of agnificenu and modern types were built,
such as the .win screw saloon steamer “Columbus
of G.R.T., which was launched on December
17th, 1912 and which was to be the largest ship of the
fleet.' Sailings all over the places were increased
wherever necessary. Improvement in safety devices
for their ships were made. Quite a number of ships
were fitted out with appliances for closing all bulk-
head doors, with fire extinguishing and disinfecting
plants according to the Clayton System, with apparatus
for submarine bell signals, etc. Since the foundation
until 1913 the Lloyd’s fleet had increased to 494 ves-
sels with an aggregate tonnage of 982,951 G.R. L and
an engine efficiency of 722,095 I.H.P.
The Outbreak of War:
The outbreak of war on August Ist, 1914, which
is undoubtedly still fresh in the mind of every one, had
caused a great hindrance to the N.D.L. m their shipp-
ing activities. Fortunately due to the intelligence on
the part of the captains many ships were only able
to reach safety with much difficulty and by taking
circuitous routes. The Lloyd had suffered an inevit-
able loss throughout.
Reconstructions of the Norddeutscher Lloyd
However difficult and confused the situation, in
which the Lloyd found itself when armistice was de-
clared, the Lloyd lost no time in making ways for
reconstruction. Since the business had to be re-
started all anew, the Lloyd were confronted with two
problems, first the forming of a program for reorgani-
sation on the grand scale and then to raise means to
carry the program out. It was only after painstaking
work that they could begin to carry out the desire in
tqiq and from the year of 1921 the reconstruction of
the Lloyd fleet went forward without ceasing. Quite
a good number of orders for freight as well as pas-
senger ships were placed with the shipyards. The
steamers “Vegesack”, “Bremerhaven”, “Mueden” and
the ocean steam tugs “Widder” and “Stier” with ag-
gregate tonnage of G.R.T. were finished by
December 31st, 1921. In the course of 1922 four
passenger and freight steamers and three freight
steamers with an aggregate tonnage of 40.49Q G.R.T.
were finished and put in the service. The building
program was extended bv two further freight steamers
with altogether 12,000 G.R.T. In 1023 the ocean fleet
was increased by eight newly built passenger and
freight steamers, the “Columbus”. “Muenchen”,
“Sierra Ventana”, “Stuttgart”, “Werra”. “Saar-
bruecken”, “Sierra Cordoba” and “Coblenz” and bv
further four freight steamers with a total tonnage of
132,925 G.R.T. Further the passenger and freight
steamers. “Derfflinger” and “Luetzow” with together
17.884 G.R.T. were purchased. From the years
1Q24/25 onward many vessels were built and pur-
chased. The years of 1928/2Q brought the increase
of the new construction of the S.S. “Europa” of
40,746 and the .S.S. “Bremen” of 51.656 G.R.T.
These two greyhounds are the fastest in the true
sense of the word, crossing the Atlantic in round about
a and half days. Throughout the whole world the
Lloyd have been extending their services both in the
way of freight and passenger lines. Since the
restoration of their activities after the war, the fleet
,n- I Joy 1 has been increasing from time to time,
insists c s with a total tonnage of 831,
4 t 0 G.R.T.
ar Eastern Service:
Reference should be made to their service to
the Far East. On resuming this line after the war,
monthly sailings were provided. Starting from the
home port, Bremen, they called at Hamburg, Antwerp
Rotterdam, Genoa and Port Said then onward to Co-
lombo. Delawan Deli, Singapore, Manila and Hong-
kong in South China and thence to Shanghai, Taku
Bar in Tientsin, finally touching Japan, and similar
route to be made on the homeward voyage. Sailings
were later increased to fortnightly, which were main-
tained until the present. The fleet in this line consists
of the splendid passenger and freight steamers, the S.S.
“Coblenz”, “Saarbruecken”, “Trier” and M.S.
“Fulda”, and of the newly built express freighters,
which carry a limited number of passengers with com-
fortable cabins, M.S. “Trave”, “Havel ’, S.S. “Tsar ,
“Franken”, “Neckar”, M.S. “Saale”, S.S. “Aller”,
S.S. “Donau”, S.S. “Main”, etc. On the homeward
trip the passenger steamers touch Lisbon, Barcelona
and Dover in addition to the ports set out in the above,
whilst the freighters are on the berth for Marseilles.
New Guinea and British Solomon Islands Service:
The Lloyd also show marked activities in the
Far East in their line to New Guinea, which was re-
commenced in February 1929. The S.S. “Bremer-
haven” was the first ship on the service. Making
Hongkong a home port, the ship at the beginn-
ing was on the berth for a number of ports in the
territory of New Guinea and her visit was later ex-
tended to the British Solomon Islands with a six-
weekly service between Hongkong. As there appear-
ed prospects for demand of a further vessel to cope
with the situation, the S.S. “Friderun” was added
on the run at the end of 1932 for the purpose of
facilitating the passenger traffic, as this vessel has
better passenger accomodation capacity. These two
ships are now giving a monthly service and are highly
welcomed by both the Chinese and foreign merchants
between the places. The ships are visiting finite a
number of Islands in the South seas, and should be of
vital interest to those, desiring to travel over there.
Types of N.D.L. vessels.
It is impossible to go into details concerning the
outer and inner of the ships, as they have appeared
during the different decades. A description of the
different types of Lloyd steamers would be more or
less tantamount to a history of the development of ship
building* after introduction of steamships. Such a
description, however, could only stress the fact that
it is the Lloyd with the construction of new ships have
often played a pioneer’s part and have later become
the criterions for other steamship companies. This
is especially true in the line of passenger traffic. Those
express steamers built within these few years are all,
if we are permitted to say with pride, products of
German shipbuilding. They should deserve attention
on their appearances, their technical appliances, and
their beautiful and artistic decorations of their in-
teriors. These good points together with the service
on board, which is worth mentioning, have given the
Lloyd steamers their world-wide reputation.


NORm>* TTT
"aMBURG
"W
-W/VuVu'mWWiWA'VWA
5
*- VAVuW.V VW^
HAMBURG-AMERIKA LIME
Regular weekly
Passenger, Mail and
Freight Service
between
Japan, China, New Guinea, Hong Kong, Manila, Singapore, Belawan,
Penang, Colombo, Dijbouti, Port Said, Genoa, Marseilles,
Barcelona, Lisbon, Dover, Rotterdam, Hamburg and Bremen.
London
Far East via America to Europe and vice versa
Far East via Europe to America j
Through-Tickets issued at reduced rates to:
Summer Cruises to North China and Japan
Summer Cruises Hongkong/South Sea Islands
per S. S. “FRIDERUN” & “BREMERHAVEN”
monthly service
EXPRESS SERVICE HAMBURG/NEW YORK
Independent Tours around the World
apply to:
For particulars
HAMBURG AMERIKA LINIE
JEBSEN & CO., Agents.
NORDEUTSCHER LLOYD
MELCHERS & CO., Agents,
Queen’s Building, Tel. 26378.
12, Redder Street , Tel. 28363.
CANTON AGENTS:
JEBSEN & CO., Shameen, B. C. GARLOWITZ & CO., Shakes Road.
v
■


-F j*,
- rnmm
i
FUU C^Nc'^^
\ r a <5- perfect system '<-**[J £A >7
filtered-gas/zro/Tz jr<7
CLEAN GAS HEAT automatical!*
generated.
CANNOT SMOKE OR SMELL
7/t* Stove can be left tor long periods without
attention or, adiuslmenl j$ //i* cannot
»* ro /6 /tours burning wth each tilling,
ff«M< f«»
Imported by:
Messrs. Sander, Wider & Co., Hongkong-
The firm was founded by Mr. Friedrich Sander
in 1864, who arrived in Hongkong in 1857. The
firm’s name was formerly F. Sander and Sander &
Co. It was amalgamated in 1898 with the firm of
Wider & Co. and has since then been trading under
the name of Sander. Wider & Co.
Mr. F. Sander died in Hamburg in 1899 and the
present owner of the firm Mr. Albrecht Sander who
came to Hongkong in 1895 is the son of Mr. F. Sander.
The firm was re-opened in Hongkong after the
v
War in 1923 and has branch offices in Canton and
Harbin.
The firm is engaged in exports and imports in-
cluding machinery.
Mr. Fredrick Sander,
The founder of the firm of
Messrs. Sander , Wider & Co. (1864)
Sander Wider & Co., Hongkong
Sander Wider & Co., Canton
5, Des Veoux Rd., C.
71, B. C. Shameen
Tel. 24411
Tel. 14005


■' ,-f
”' 19HHRI
1 yf_ r_
History of Messrs. Jebsen & Co., Hongkong
Long befoie the fi'.,, of Tebsen & Co. was
established at Hongkong in 1895 by Mr. Jacob Jebsen
and the late Mr. J. H. Jessen, ships of the Jebsen Line
used to trade in Far Eastern waters. The firm was
therefore essentially a shipping concern and operated
up to about a dozen coastal steamers on trade routes
between Indo-China, Sumatra, the Straits Settlements,
Hongkong’ and South China ports.
It was, however, not long before the attention of
the firm was turned towards merchandise and several
import lines were taken up and developed, the most
important one being indigo and dyes produced by the
Badische Anilin und Soda Fabrik, Ludwigshafen
o/Rhine, which was in recent time amalgamated into
the LG. Farbenindustrie Aktiengesellschaft.
Amongst the other more important lines handled
by the firm may be cited, leather, piecegoods, soap and
perfumery, beer, needles and general sundries.
In order to participate in the great trading possi-
bilities opened up in North China through the taking
over of the Kiaochow territory by Germany and later
in the Russo-Japanese war, the activities of the firm
were extended to North China in association with
Diederichsen, Jebsen & Co. The shipping services of
the Jebsen steamers including the Shanghai-Tsingtao
mail line run under mail contract of the German
Government, were later on taken over by the Hamburg-
Amerika Linie. Thereafter the firm again concen-
trated on the South China trade.
The growing importance of the export business
to Europe and America induced the firm to open up a
Canton branch in the early years of this century.
In Swatow, Jebsen & Co., took over the old firm
of Lauts & Haesloop in connection with the coolie trade
carried on by the Company’s ships to Sumatra.
Furthermore a large sized plantation was started
in the South Sea for the production of copra.
The outbreak of war found the firm at the height
of activity engaged in almost every field of import,
export and machinery business and the shipping trade.
The war imposed on the firm a cessation of all
enterprise for about six years and as a result of it the
partners of the firm, residing in the town of Apenrade
(now Aabenraa) became Danish subjects.
It was in a small office in the city of Canton that
the firm began in 1920 to start all over again and under
the management of Mr. Julius Riecken set out to re-
capture the former position. Old connections were
revived and especially the ready help of the Company’s
Chinese friends enabled the firm to effect a compara-
tively quick recovery. The name of the late Mr. Chau
Yue Teng deserves mention in this connection, who like
his father had been Compradore of Jebsen & Co. for
many years before the war and with whose family the
firm has for several generations been closely related.
It was again the agency of the Badische Anilin
und Soda Fabrik which formed the nucleus of the
firm’s business and most lines mentioned before were
successfully dealt in once more.
But the great developments which had taken place
in the industrial field and China’s advanced interest for
the latest products of Western industry demanded
careful attention. Synthetic fertilizer, produced by
the 8.A.5.F., now the LG. and exported by the
Stickstofif-Syndikat, G.m.b.H., Berlin, became a very
important article for the firm and necessitated the
creation of an elaborate organisation for distribution
and propaganda throughout South China. The grow-
ing volume of the fertilizer business later on led to the
opening of branches under European management at
Swatow and Amoy.
Also the engineering field demanded special
attention. Diesel engines for stationary and marine
use, manufactured by the Motoren Werke Mannheim,
Benz & Cie, were sold in growing numbers. Diesel
driven motor lorries, constructed by the Daimler-Benz
A.G., Stuttgart (Mercedes-Benz) and electrical acces-
sories, made by the famous Bosch Works, became in
recent years important items of the firm’s business.
Mr. J. H. Jessen
Partner and General Manager
Messrs. Jebsen & Co.
In Hongkong a branch office was opened in 1923,
mainly for the purpose of taking care of the Company’s
reviving interests in shipping. Altogether six ships
were built after the war, of which three have been kept,
running mostly in time-charter to Bangkok and Saigon
charterers. In 1925 Jebsen & Co. were appointed
Hongkong agents of the H.A.L. for their two-weekly
service between Europe and the Far East. When the
Maersk Line (Mr.'A. P. Moller, Copenhagen) started
their trade between America and the Orient, the firm
took over their agency in Hongkong.
In 1926 the Company’s headoffice was transferred
back to Hongkong and Mr. Wong Sik Kay appointed
Chief Compradore. Shortly afterwards the firm’s
investments in North China led to the opening of an
office at Shanghai.
Of the exporting lines special mention must be
made of the feather export to Europe and the U.S.A.
carried out under expert supervision.
Messrs. Jebsen & Jessen, Hamburg, have for
many years been the firm’s associates at that town.
Taking’ also interest in many other lines, not
mentioned in this report, the firm has —progressive in
objects and conservative in methods —maintained close
and pleasant relations with the trading interests not
only at Hongkong but in all coastal and interior towns
of South China.


-j-v. ft- % w-5Bk ; jBB^am I^P^
or ~ Nj^jP"
•W .’.WW.'. *,sw W.WMW-V-%W ".SW' ■ .WAWb'.SS'AW. MWWWWWVAWA *•>
! Jtß -N & Cu:
HONGKONG
SHANGHAI—CANTON—AMOY—SWATOW
AGENTS for;
STICKSTOFF SYNDICAT BERLIN
HAMBURG AMERIKA LINIE
MAERSK LINE
RHEDERI M. JEBSEN A.S. AABENRAA
CORN. HEYL A.G. WORMS
KABELWERK RHEYDT, A.G. RHEYDT
GEORG DRALLE, ALTONA & SOERABAJA
THE COLEMAN EXPORT CORP., CHICAGO
ROBERT BOSCH A.G., STUTTGART
MOTORENWERKE MANNHEIM, vorm. BENZ & CO
DAIMLER-BENZ, A.G. GAGGENAU
I
I
$
I
Any electric
equipment
Any Garage
JEBSEN & Co.


. • 11 h ■irMaTiiM —• : —
.. • ' "~ ~"~~***^** MBt — — : 1
* Q < v “fliiafrini nifidavir.hsp.vi.”
i
. -• -'Mm ifcrtO ■"** " "* *
-
" A Jg* jk jt ~J ■» ■
U
HUriwt
Sailing Ship “J. H. Jessen” of Messrs. Jebsen & Co.
made her first trip from Germany to
Amoy in 1870.
S.S. “Gustav Diederichsen”
,S.S. “Clara Jessen”.
S.S. “Michael Jebsen”


, | 1 J
r | I
■ ■"
j M/S “Vogtland” M/S “Duisburg” jj
I ij
i ■“
i * : 4 I
i; • i\ _ ft v %
1 I
? $
■■ - ■ - !1. ' - ■ ..**- *■
£ S.S. “Resolute”, a 20,000 ton, triple screw oil-burner. ■■
: : * ~ * <
Ji S.S. “Resolute”, Ladies Parlor S.S. “Resolute,” Swimming Hall Jjj
V.W-%^%^-.%^%VS%^- 0 -B%'u^'n^"-W-V^^W-W B W n W-SV- a^%Wa-D-o%W-V- ,f ---- B - , iW-"-- , i B ---V-V-V-n-n- B " B -oVa-a--- n - n V-- a - n -n“ B - a - n - n '
I J^vw^vvvv^ssv^%vss%%vsw-vw-^w-vvv%vw-'-w-w-v-w-w.--vw-w-w-“-w.w-w-“---w-w a n .w.w- o . n - il
I THE HAMBURG-AMERICAN LINE
JEBSEN & CO., HONG KONG AGEN I =>


THE HAMBURG-AMERICAN V-iNE
ilie Hamburg-American Line was established in
18 under the name of the “Hamburg-Amerikanische
Packetfahrt-Acticn Geseilschaft.” The word “Hapag”
was composed by taking the first letter of each word
whicn forms the company’s name, and has since
become a world-known trademark distinctive of the
Hamburg-American Line and its steamers. It owns,
at the present time, a fleet of about i's7 ocean-going
steamers, aggregating nearly one million gross tons,
which sail to all parts of the world.
During the eighty-five years of its existence, the
Hamburg-American Line has consistently exercised the
greatest care and attention to improve its transatlantic
passenger service. The high standard of its steamers,
the excellent cuisine and service given to passengers of
the different classes, have gained for the Hamburg-
American Line a world-wide reputation.
Agencies of the Hamburg-American Line have
been established in almost every town of Germany and
in all the large cities of Europe and Oversea countries,
where full information regarding travel of every
description will be gladly furnished free of charge.
In the Tourist offices of the Hamburg-American
Line Steamship tickets, Railroad tickets, Aeroplane
tickets, Sleeping car tickets, etc. can be obtained at
regular rates. Itineraries of various Tours through
Europe and Oversea countries can be obtained on
application. Independent Travel Tours according to
the wishes of passengers can also be arranged.
The Homeport of the “Hapag” steamers is the
Free and Hanseatic city of Hamburg which, with a
population of over one million, is Germany’s second
largest city and also the largest commercial port in
Germany. Numerous Railroads, Steamer and Aero-
plane-lines connect Hamburg with all parts of the
world, which make it possible for both outgoing and
incoming passengers to reach their destinations con-
veniently and quickly.
The Hamburg-Amerika Line maintain a regular
passenger service from Hamburg via Genoa to all the
most important ports of the Far East with a fleet of
fine modern steamers and motor-ships.
A number of these vessels offer accommodation
for twenty-five to sixty Cabin-Class nassengers. The
meals are served in a large comfortably appointed din-
ing saloon, in addition to which there is a cosv smoking
room and an elegant ladies room available. The cabins
are equipped with .good beds, wash-basins, sofas or
settees, wardrobes, and other modern comforts to which
passengers are accustomed.
In addition to these ships there are several vessels
with limited accommodation for about ten to twenty
passengers. These are furnished with a comfortable
dining saloon, light airy cabins, the usual bath rooms,
etc., and in some cases a social room. A library con-
sisting of English and German works is available.
As many of the vessels call outwards and home-
wards at Genoa, passengers who wish to shorten their
sea voyage may embark or disembark at this port.
The regular - - detained by the Hamburg-
American Line on p.mcipal route between Hamburg
and New York via the Channel ports —established morp
than eighty y. rs ago—is organised m such a way
that it admirably meets the requirements of every class
of passenger. It is run on uniform schedules and each
one of the eight big liners employed on that route is
thoroughly modern in design and equipment. Pas-
sengers insisting upon luxurious appointments and
great speed in travelling will find this service just as
suitable for their needs as those who desire to travel
at a somewhat slower pace.
Passengers have the choice of three different cate-
gories of ships, viz.:
i. the twin-screw express steamers ‘‘ALBERT
BALLIN,” “DEUTSCHLAND,” “HAM-
BURG,” and “NEW YORK” (the so-called
“Bailin’’ class),
2. the triple-screw de luxe steamers “RESOL-
UTE” and “RELIANCE,”
3. the twin-screw motorships “ST. LOUTS” and
“MILWAUKEE.”
The advantages possessed by the “Bailin’’ type
of ships are so conspicuous that they can be summaris-
ed in a few words. They travel at express speed—
requiring seven days only for the Atlantic passage —
they are provided with special facilities (the so-called
“blisters” combined with anti-rolling tanks) which
greatly increase their steadiness, and all their classes
of passenger accommodation—First, Tourist and
Third Class—are exceedingly comfortable. They are
run on absolutely uniform schedules, a steamer leaving
Cuxhaven and New York every Thursday.
The triple-screw de luxe steamers “RESOLUTE”
and “RELIANCE” are first-class modern passenger
ships, as may already be gathered from their smart
outward appearance and the rakish lines of their hulls.
They are distinguished for the excellent design of
their numerous First Class public rooms and for the
comfort and good taste of their Tourist Class appoint-
ments.
The two motorships “ST. LOUIS” and “MIL-
WAUKEE” contain a Cabin Class, a Tourist Class
and a Third Class and are of the most modern type.
They, like all the other Hamburg-American liners em-
ployed on the New York route, are well-known for
their remarkable steadiness. Their Cabin Class con-
tains large public rooms, beautiful and comfortable
staterooms, a sports deck, a gymnasium and a number
of other facilities for sporting purposes, hygiene, en-
tertainments, etc.
Much attention is paid on all these vessels to the
various forms of entertainment available to passengers,
such as fetes, concerts, moving picture shows, sport-
ing contests, etc., and there are also well-stocked
libraries. Passengers’ material needs are specially
looked after, thanks to the excellence of the cuisine and
the courtesy of the staff. No matter which class of
accommodation passengers may decide upon, they are
sure to find that everything is done to render their
passage across the Atlantic as comfortable and en-
joyable as possible.


' tfSl ♦ : i -
Ln . ~ nJ
. . ' ' t . ' *
(n * * " ' ”' ' f " ' *"'•' ’' ' ‘ ' ~ " ' n
c:SZij?ijHSES'L
iJ^SHJSES"oj
Ln
cSiiSZSe
G J
*3
SIEMSSEN ° r <
Ij -
T-
g
HONG
BRIEF BIOGRAPHY
OF Mr. H. STEHR,
Mr. H. Stehr, manager of the Hongkong
branch of Messrs. Siemssen & Co., first came
out to China in June, 1923 when he joined
the Shanghai staff of the firm as assistant
in their Import Department. In September of
the same year, he was transferred to the
Canton Office where he occupied a similar
position till January of the following year
when he was again transferred to the Hong-
kong branch. In 1925, Mr. Stehr was
appointed manager of the Hongkong office
and was authorized in 1931 to sign for the firm
per procuration.
Mr. H. Stehr, Manager
LONG STROKE LOG FRAME
SAW with roller feed, supplied by
Messrs. Siemssen & Co. to Messrs.
Wing Shing Cheong, Hongkong.
The saw is driven by an electric
motor of 100 H.P., the frame
admitting timber up to 4' 3
diameter.
Side view of 1 KOENIG & BAUER ROTARY BOOK PRINTING
PRESS, supplied by Messrs. Siemssen & Co. to Messrs. Chung Hwa
Book Co., Ltd., Hongkong.


/
Jr
'' ' -'if Jk' , ■ > .,S
- r ' , ' ' ~
,/ ' : '
* S®fF>
Mr. G. W. Hoelmann, Manager Mr. W. Prang Mr. A. N. Betts
y.v.v.v. iaw.v.v ,' w. v.w.w' . ,v,v . ' ” • WAWWAmwiv
■C - 5
-• - Ml SCh C
HO SKf N| V~
Mr. F. Ortlepp, Partner
Mr. P. Schmidt, Partner
The Staff of Messrs. Schmidt & Co., Hongkong.


Messrs. SCHIVJIHT & CO., HONG KONG.
The steady pi... ress of science and the
nient on a large of medical and scientific educa-
tion, and activities in both he medical and commercial
fields in South China necessitated the supply and ser-
vice of 7 '* 1 surgical instruments
locally.
This opportunity was fully appreciated by Mr. P.
Schmidt. Already this active business gentleman had
grasped similar opportunities in Shanghai, Peking,
Tientsin, Harbin and Mukden so far as China was
concerned and was the proprietor of a similar business
concern in Japan. Wishing therefore to make the
name of Schmidt & Co. as well-known and as univer-
sally respected in South China as it was in Northern
China, he secured the co-operation of Mr. F. Ortlepp
who, as the proprietor of Bornemann & Co., had vast
experience of business in South China. These two
gentlemen, therefore, as partners commenced the new
branch of Schmidt & Co. in Canton in 1928 and later
another branch was established in Hong Kong. In
this article we are concerned with the activities of the
Hong Kong branch; the history of the Canton branch
is given in the Canton section of this book.
Schmidt & Co. in Hong Kong started originally
with one or two well-known firms as their principals
for whom they acted as agents in their allotted dis-
trict. It is now a many-sided organisation dealing
with a vast number of instruments and apparatus
which all have some connection with surgery, science
or medicine.
This specialising must be considered as a cour-
ageous pioneering effort in so far as previously, firms
had only concentrated on export-import business with-
out specialising in any true sense of the word. The
sound principle of this method of business is now
being amply proved in so far as they have gained an
unrivalled position and reputation amongst the indivi-
duals and institutions upon whose good-will they
depend. •
Specialising in apparatus naturally necessitated
the specialising in a staff of experts with long experi-
ence acquired mainly in factories in Germany, and
Europe in general, which forms today the basis of the
management in Schmidt & Co. The whole business is
linked to the representation of many manufacturing
firms in Europe and America and whose products are
indispensible to modern science. We give herewith
some of the firms which have entrusted their reputa-
tion to Schmidt & Co. in the Far East:—
Medical Profession:-
Jetter & Scheerer:— Surgical instruments
SEsculap” trademark.
Sanitas: —X-Ray and Electro-medical apparatus.
Vogel & Halcke:—Personal scales.
Merck: —Chemicals, patent medicines and drugs.
Promonta Works:—Biological and scientific
preparations.
Leitz:—Clinical and optical diagnostic instru-
ments.
Internationale Continental:— Medical rubber
goods.
Research and Education:—
Leitz: —Microscopes, microtomes, photo micro-
graphic apparatus, projection apparatus
Sauter: —Analytical, chemical and dispensing
balances
■: —Astronomical and meteorological instru-
ments, CLC.
Koehler & Volckmar: —Physical and
apparatus.
Industry:——
Merck: Chemicals.
Leitz:—Optical instruments for industries i.e.,
metallurgical microscopes, photo-micro-
graphic apparatus, dilatometers, colori-
meters and optical testing instruments
for various industries.
Fuess: —Measuring instruments.
Specialities:—
Leica camera and accessories, field-glasses, cine
cameras, barometers, hygrometers, hair-dryers,
vibrators, avometers, etc., etc.
In Hong Kong and South China - generally,
Schmidt & Co. is known to the general public, (as
differing from the scientific and medical members of
the community) for their activities in placing the
Leica camera upon the market. So excellent a camera
definitely necessitated special methods and service in
selling. A modern darkroom therefore was con-
structed in Gloucester Building which is capable of
undertaking' in an expert manner all service upon
Leica film. This service depends upon expert Euro-
pean supervision, using well-trained operators.
In 1931 the rapid development of the Company
and foresight on the part of the partners influenced
the removing of the whole concern to the newly erected
and most modern building in Hong Kong, Gloucester
Building. The showroom in the Arcade of Gloucester
Building is now well-known to everybody and those
who do not actually make use of Schmidt & Co’s
services at least are always interested in the window
displays showing the latest developments in apparatus.
On the second floor of the same building are
situated the X-ray demonstration and projection
rooms together with the general office and the mana-
gement. Also on the second floor is situated the
darkroom. To complete the facilities under one roof,
Messrs. Schmidt & Co. earlier in the year made
arrangements for a godown in the basement of the
same building. Now, therefore, they have a complete
organisation capable of demonstrating the latest opti-
cal, X-ray and electro-medical instruments which are
indispensible to progress in modern science and
surgery.
The periodical exhibition of apparatus specially
imported for the purpose is already well-known in
scientific and medical circles and is giving* new ideas
and inspirations to all concerned. This is only possi-
ble by the excellent co-operation of the manufacturers
on the one hand and the consumers on the other by
the medium of the technical experts attached to
Schmidt & Co. It is now no exaggeration to say that
there is no important hospital, university or school in
South China in which Schmidt & Co’s, articles are not
known.
The latest development of this Company is to
extend their business to Swatow, Amoy, Macau and
Hainan where their name is becoming well-known
through the staff of well trained salesmen who perio-
dically visit these ports.


Biography of Mr. G. W. Hoelmann.
Mr. G. W. Hoelmann, manager of Schmidt & Co.-
Hong* Kong, was born in Wetzlar, Germany, a name
which is linked with the well-known firm of 1 "list
Leitz G.m.b H. Optical Works in that ck
After having finished his high school educat.
’ T r. Hoelmann joined Messrs. Ernst Leitz, following
upon the traditions of his family. In this ■'.dory he
was given a thorough education in all technical and
commercial departments. After more than a year
spent in practical working in the technical departments
of the factory he spent a similar period in the com-
mercial departments. His good knowledge of optical
precision instruments and apparatus combined with
his commercial education and knowledge of English
induced the management to place in his charge the
English correspondence of the firm. Subsequently,
being especially interested in propaganda work, he was
appointed as their representative at various technical
exhibitions in Germany and was later sent by them to
their London office, Messrs. Ernst Leitz, 20 Mortimer
St., W.i. This experience, together with a tour in
France and combined with his knowledge of conditions
in Germany, provided him with excellent opportunities
of studying continental business methods.
It was whilst in London that he was asked by his
principals to join their Ear Eastern representatives,
Messrs. Schmidt & Co., at their Hong Kong office.
After a short time in this port he was transferred to
their Canton Office to take charge of the Leitz depart-
ment and the scientific activities of that branch in
general. Business tours in the interior of South
China enabled him to acquire an insight into the needs
and possibilities of the recently inaugurated Chinese
universities and institutions in this district.
In the summer of 1932 he was transferred to
Messrs. Schmidt & Co., Hong Kong, in the absence
of the manager on leave and subsequently was con-
firmed as manager of the Hong Kong organisation.
The Biography of Mr. W. Prang.
Mr. W. Prang was born in 1905 in Neumark,
East Prussia, Germany. He received his high school
education in Jena and Berlin and after passing his
final examination in Berlin he left for Hamburg in
order to prepare for his overseas commercial career.
He joined the well-known Export & Import firm
of Schlubach, Thiemer & Co. where he stayed for
years and where he received a thorough knowledge of
export and import business. When he left Hamburg
he went to London and Amsterdam and later on to
Paris to study languages and the business methods of
these countries.
The Stickstoffsyndikat G.m.b.H., Berlin, which
is a partner of the LG. Farben Industrie Aktiengesell-
schaft, Ludwigshafen, offered him an appointment in
China and after studying the export business for
artificial fertilizers for one year in Germany he was
sent to the Far East. He there joined the agents of
the LG. Farben Industrie in Shanghai, and was later
appointed assistant manager in Changsha, Hunan
Province. During this time, Mr. Prang made exten-
sive trips into the interior of China and there made
himself familiar with Chinese methods of business.
After three years in China he returned to Europe
to join the chemical works of Messia Schering-
Kahlbau- A.G Berlm, where he I Hin i export
department for cuemicals and pharmaceutical pi e-
parations to the Far East and ' the propaganda
department for pharmaceutical preparations.
Mr. Prang returned to C hina to join Messrs.
Schmidc & Co., Hong X.. w 1 ’as taiven charge
of the chemical department.
The Biography of Mr. A. N. Betts.
Mr. Arnold N. Betts, manager of Messrs.
Schmidt & Co’s showroom, is British by birth, and was
born in London in 1903. He was educated in London
at St. Olaves and St. Saviour’s Grammar School and
subsequently in electrical engineering at the Nor-
thampton Polytechnic.
He chose for his career the manufacture of
X-ray and electro-medical appartus and for this pur-
pose was apprenticed to the well-known him, the
Medical Supply Association, Grays Inn Road,“ London.
After four years he joined the sales staff of the
Dowsing Radiation Heat Co., Ltd. in London who,
besides being manufacturers of electro-medical appa-
ratus, run their own electro-medical clinics. Mr.
Betts was in charge of all electro-medical apparatus
used in their clinics for service purposes and was also
appointed to represent them at the British Empire
Exhibition in 1924.
Messrs. Allan & Hanburys, Whigmore St., next
provided him with further experience, particularly in
surgical instruments and electro-surgical apparatus.
During the two years he was with them, unrivalled
opportunities were given to study the needs of modern
surgery. His duties included the demonstration of
apparatus in the operating theatres of the large Lon-
don hospitals to test and suggest improvements, in
co-operation with the operating surgeons.
Tiring of London and wishing to use his know-
ledge to the best advantage, he sought and secured a
position with the Indian representatives of Carl Zeiss,
Jena, who also represented Koch & Sterzel, Dresden
and other famous German manufacturers. So that
he might gain knowledge of all the apparatus handled
by his principals, an educational tour through Ger-
many, Holland and-France was undertaken, when
Jena, Dresden, Berlin, Hamburg, Eindhoven and other
manufacturing" centres were visited and the local
products thoroughly studied. Then to India where
his education may be said to have been completed.
In India where no factories exist and no “Work s
Manager” may be consulted, he learnt to be sufficient
unto himself —and to his customers. Several years
were spent in travelling in India erecting X-Ray ap-
paratus, selling optical, scientific and surgical instru-
ments and eventually, on his appointment to Messrs.
Baird & Tatlock (London) Ltd., Eastern branch,
Calcutta, and also took an active interest in the pro-
ducts of Messrs, Ernst Leitz, Wetzlar.
After two years with the latter firm he was
appointed to represent Messrs. Schmidt & Co. in
Hong Kong where, since his arrival in September 1931
he has been showroom manager.


L£)
T
jf, 1 1
/•
<0 If,
Lj
r"%*
&
'
.’IP# i
Ik S '
m
BM:t »
wi
\
1
R '
1
,
l
1
a
a
♦ ♦
♦♦
M tf iuii
BBB ||«J| 1Wi';® >
M|| w&s - mm ' titty |
if llPlSS^'
k, mi 'B|
1111 j
’
K p.
«*$
-L»
•Jf \'"< 1
h rfflf*** r
■ii
mr^a udB»' ■
fit
r
a
a
.
-
i
I rf
1r
I
I
♦♦
♦♦
I
♦♦
♦♦
I } n
♦♦ T
|| Filing Department
R
♦♦
♦♦
::
1
2 ♦♦
I I
22 ♦♦
22 ♦♦
22 ♦♦
22 ♦♦
22 ♦♦
22 ♦♦
,|1
♦♦ 22
Messrs. SCHMIDT & Co.
HONGKOhG
Microscope Demonstration Table
Ground Floor Showroom
X-Ray and Electro-Medical Demonstration Room
“Leica” Show-window
Enlarging Battery, Dark Room


The Germans and Their Activities in South China and Hongkong.
1 pit *-.r. e F bringing out A sup-
plti.iem .* • e active aid and coojiti ation of the
mn peopie residing in c h China. T ’ olnme
was intended to be publisher b« nt the begin’■
this year, but for various unavoidable rt , It r
not be completed until to-day. This production owes
its origin to two other supplements of the same nature
that preceded it —the American Supplement published
on the American Independence Day, July 4th, 1933,
and the French Supplement, published on the Republic
Day, July 14th, 1933. Our underlying motive in un-
dertaking these publications is to acquaint the people
on this side of the world with the historical, cultural,
industrial and commercial information of the various
foreign nations connected with China one way or the
other. It is a matter of genuine pride to us that the
various nationals concerned have exhibited keen in-
terest and given us their active co-operation and help
in manifold ways, but for which these publications
would probably not have appeared at all. We are
deeply indebted to them and trust that the same co-
operation and help will be forth coming in the case of
subsequent publications that will be issued from this
office.
The association of Germany with China, although
of a more recent date, has nevertheless been more inti-
mate and more genuine than that of many other
European Powers. This association is signified not
only by the growing volume of export-import trade
between the two countries, but is also manifested in
the closer relations between them in cultural and gov-
ernmental activities. At least so far as South China
is concerned, there is so much collaboration between
the Germans and the Chinese that almost every de-
partment of activity has something to do with German
people either at its start or in its further developments.
The Board of Studies for Geography, Medicine,
Forestry, and other Sciences of the Sun Yat-sen Uni-
versity, (the premier National University of South
China at Canton), have been founded, equipped and
even now presided over by distinguished Germans who
have been working disinterestedly in the cause of the
Chinese people. Detailed account of the services thus
rendered by the Germans will be found in this supple-
ment under their respective headings. The causes of
this intimate friendship may be attributed to the fact
that Germany is considered as nascent acquaintance
with all the enthusiasm of a new friendship or to the
one that the Germans have no extraterritoriality in
China which bespeaks well of the intentions of the Ger-
man people in this country. Whatever it may be. the
fact remains that China and Germany have been
getting on together in an appreciably advantageous
manner and their future development is woith
watching.
The first German contact with China appears to
have been brought about through one Italian Mission-
ary, Mateo Ricci, in or about the year 1582. But the
trade between the two countries for several years was
more or less indirect, mainly through the British and
the Dutch by sea and through the Jews and Arabs by
land. Later on, however, there is a historical
evidence that the Emperor Erederick took great in-
terest in developing direct trade with China and in
1752 a Company named “Asia Trading Company was
established in Canton. A li .e of steamers now
followed a 1 u " bv the mtscher T ! oyd was
■naupurate to this trade. Hut re .nd
. jtematir development ot this trade dates to a period
after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. Between
1870 to 1900, it was more or less in a preliminary
stage; but from the beginning of the present century
it began to assume more important proportions. For
instance, during the ten years preceding the World
War, it was doubled from the figures of 1905 from
which year figures of this trade are available. During
the War, the entire trade was suspended, but on re-
sumption since 1919, it has grown with tremendous
strides. In fact since 1920 it has grown five times.
Whereas in 1920, the total trade of Germany with
China represented only 1.33% of China’s total trade,
in 1932 it was 6.26% having increased from Tls
20,122,773 in 1920 to Tls 106,652,803 in 1931 and
Tls 97,410,817 in 1932. The principal items of im-
ports into China from Germany are woollen and cotton
piece goods and yarns, glass, rubber tires, optical in-
struments, patent medicines and chemicals, colours and
aniline dyes, electrical goods, paper and paper ma-
chinery, soaps and toilet requisites, dye-stuffs, fertili-
zer, etc. China exports to Germany wolfram and
antimony ores, hides, blackwood, cassia and cassia
products, ginger, tobacco, fire-crackers, bamboo wares,
lamp-sheds, beans and bean products and a variety of
other products. This trade as is seen from the articles
appearing in this supplement, both import and export,
is almost in the hands of the German firms themselves
who have been peacefully carrying on their trade with
the Chinese both before and after the War. As we
have seen above, the trade is gradually developing and
in 1931 Germany sent a Trade Mission to China to
investigate into the possibilities of finding a more
extensive market for German products in China,
specially machinery. The result is seen in the in-
creased purchases of German machinery by China.
And it now depends upon both the Germans and the
Chinese to keep up a further healthy development of
these commercial and cultural relations between the
two peoples.
In concluding this brief survey, we may be per-
mitted to quote in part what we wrote on August 1 t ,
1932, the German Republic Day: —
We feel confident that there is a great future in
the trade relations between China and Germany.
Germany is entitled to a very significant share of
China’s trade, firstly, because she can offer China
finished products to meet China’s specific needs, while
China’s industrial development goes on unimpeded, and
she can do this in the face of the keen competition put
up by other countries. But since German is one of the
countries which has already renounced extra-
territoriality and relinquished all leased territories in
China, she should be given preferential treatment
where circumstances are equal. China has the man-
power and the natural resources; Germany has the
technical ability and the machinery, and between the
two the needed funds are bound to be forthcoming.
The exchange of trade delegations and tours devoted
to sight-seeing —the historic and scenic spots in both


' ,v ~ i _.* jc’ %L
\,
■
MMUKI
countries present equal attractions —is something- that
should be particularly encouraged.
August nth and every October loth that will be cele-
brated from year to year to commemorate the birth
Both China and Germany are caught in a com- the two Republics,
mon struggle for survival, both heavily burdened with anton, ist March 1934
indemnities and this community of interests spells well
The Editor.
for a new era that will lend special lustre to every
THE GERMAN CLUB , TUNG SHAN
THE GERMAN DISPENSARY, LTD. $
(DEUTSCHE APOTHEKE)
M iN‘l fi IB dc 15 B •:
Manufacturing Chemists and Druggists v
German management. - Own made patent medicines - surgical instruments - Hospital supplies-
Glassware, bandages and dressings - accessories and perfumery.
agents fob
K. ENGELHARD
(Dialon, Sterioles)
(S.) J
LUITPOLD- WERKE
(Clauden, Spuman etc. etc.)
Dr. OESTREICHER
(Terpichin, Mentopin)
DIALON Dusting Powder, Antiseptic, hygienie, highly
efficient against all tropical skin diseases as preventive
and cure.
STERIOIES - Ampules. Made in Germany.
ASTPMOLYSIN - For bronchial, Asthma and Hay Fever
Anti tuberculosis, gynaecological inflammations.
CLAUDEN - The Classical Organo Haemostyptic
The Classical Organo Haemostyptic.
TERPICHIN - Eor purulent inflammations and
infectious diseases.
MENTOPIN - For lung trouble.
M. MUELLER , Manager.
WWVVVVVbV'-VbVW'IA.VWiVVVVV^VVVVVVWV^.VWVWWWVWVV




CARLOWITZ & CO.
vy -4
33S* SSi^ (? slZ'7s'
m «. aai 3 i.
'I 1 -ft-fif # £ AA IS £ IS Hit
-$• il -
iA it * A It ? £ «* «
1-41. A :$■•&• IS. &-ta «■
# t -£ i■& It -tt t l7 *
■& it 4-« «AIT * « If t
Al4 *<S#fl-t£ *£ # 81
#*■?•-s-*»s ftim
lit ir «,-$« tn*-t a is &
# # 4®- S «
♦> I js£ ¥ 8 €, Asf « *
-# *-#««: # -fi ii A» A
if *•£ %% HSfftf +
ft* 5.&48 £ S2tA $ A .*:
# # ffl Aft )§4ISt +
in $u ,ft $• T& IS ;8 £
&T» ♦ If, *f IS t
gf * n*t
