

Kern mvn
THE
GREAT REFUSAL
A 9 kf. iu*dt~~ )
L
W. H. ALLEN & 00., LIMITED,
LONDON AND CALCUTTA.
1890.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
*x«.


6
.
-
.


THE GEE AT EEEUSAE.
“ Oolui
Che fece per viltate il gran rifiuto!
The great refusal branded by Dante as worthy of eternal condem-
nation, has been imputed to various criminals.
For the English, in modern time, there exists one great refusal,,
the viltate —or “ indelible disgrace ” —of which must formally re-
main with Mr. Gladstone, though he had accomplices who must,,
in varying degrees, bear with him the shame.
They who called General Gordon to extricate them from embar-
rassments in Egypt, who pledged themselves to support him both
in England and in Egypt; they are the men who, by their “ great
refusal ” to keep faith with him, have earned their place among
the infamous in history.
But it seems now that, on the presumption that the public
memory is as treacherous as themselves, they or their parasites
deem it safe to deny that, in refusing to let Zebehr Pasha go, on
Gordon’s demand, to Khartoum, Mr. Gladstone and his henchman
Lord Granville broke faith with Gordon and disgraced their
country.
A brief statement of the facts has, therefore, become necessary.
The victim of the Ministry had, in 1884, set them an example
which made their conduct to him signally shameful. In 1881 he
had suggested to a friend a journey together in Palestine. In 1888,
when his friend had an opportunity to join him there, Gordon
wrote: “A week ago I was invited by the King of the Belgians to
take up Stanley’s work on Congo in the spring. This has been for
years on the tapis, and I was bound to go if the King asked me,
which he now has. I have telegraphed home to ask whether Her
Majesty’s Government will let me go.” Receiving a telegram to
the effect that he was permitted to go, Gordon hastened to Brussels,
arriving there on the Ist January 1884. On that day he wrote to


his friend: “I shall see the King this evening. In answer to my
telegram asking for leave to go I got an answer thus, ‘ Sec. of
State sanctions your going Congo.’ Well, about three weeks after,
it appears from a letter from my brother that the telegram sent
was thus, ‘ Sec. of S. refuses to sanction your going Congo,’ which
makes all the difference! It now depends on what the King will
do. I promised him to go , and go I must unless he will let me
off.”
On the same evening he wrote again, “ I saw the King to-night,
and sequence is I have to resign my Commission and go to Congo
next month.”
It may be remembered that for a time the public were led to
believe that Mr. Gladstone’s Government would exact the penalty
alluded to by Gordon, although, as Gordon had made his final
promise to the King, on faith of a telegram purporting to emanate
from the Secretary of State, it would have been ungenerous if not
unjust to drive from the army on such grounds a man of whom an
English General has been heard to say that, not since the days of
Hannibal has any commander done such great things under such
disadvantages as to means. After an interval of suspense, it was
announced that the Government would not proscribe Gordon for
keeping faith.
The incident is instructive with regard to the subsequent “ great
refusal,” for it shows that, rather than break faith, Gordon would
sacrifice all worldly prospects, even though a deceitful telegram had
led to his promise. Also it shows that though so scrupulous in
keeping personal faith, he devotedly recognized the paramount
claims of his country ; and when appealed to by Gladstone and
his colleagues in the name of duty he promptly flew to their aid.
They, meanwhile, to obtain his help, made unlimited promises ;
and having bound him to the stake in the name of duty, obstinately
refused to perform that which they had promised, and callously
looked on while he lingered, starving, until treachery, foreign and
domestic, put an end to his earthly sufferings, and sealed the “ in-
delible disgrace ”of his betrayers. The hurried manner in which
Gordon was called from Brussels to London when the Ministry -was
in distress, can have been forgotten by none. Summoned suddenly
he obeyed as suddenly, and was on his way to Khartoum on the
18th January 1884 before the fact of his having been summoned
was known in many parts of Great Britain.
It is recorded in a volume written by the Eev. Reginald Barnes
and a coadjutor* that Gordon received a summons at Brussels on
the 17th of January; crossed the Channel forthwith, saw Lord
Wolseley on the morning of the 18th in London, and “ later in the
* Charles George Gordon. (Macmillan & Co. London, 1884.)


day he saw Lord Granville, Lord Hartington, Lord Northbrook,
and Sir Charles Dilke,” after which he started, on the same day,
for Khartoum.
Mr. Gladstone, who was out of town, was communicated with
by telegram. Perhaps a cautious man careful for himself might
have dictated terms which even so suave a shuffler as Lord Gran-
ville might have found it hard to evade.
But Gordon was thinking only of life which might be saved, and
of the honour of his country. In such services, both in counsel
and in the field, his sagacity was expended, and not for himself.
But though he was not self-seeking, the crisis in which his
services were sought was so imminent, that there are ample public
records to convict his betrayers.
The destruction of the army under Hicks ; the beleaguering of
the Egyptian garrisons; and the probability, if not the certainty,
that men, women, and children would be ruthlessly massacred
under the immediate superintendence of an English Government
had pressed upon the public conscience.
To pacify that conscience the Ministry took pains to declare that
they gave Gordon a free hand, and guaranteed to him uncondi-
tional support in such measures as he might deem necessary. His
mission was expressly mentioned in Her Majesty’s Speech to Par-
liament on the sth February 1884: “ I have also despatched
General Gordon to report on the best means of giving effect to the
resolution of the Khedive to withdraw from the interior of the
Soudan, and have permitted him to act in the execution of the
measure.”
Even if the responsibility of the Ministry for these words were
not undoubted, the addresses in both Houses in reply to the
Speech would have bound both them and the majorities in the
Houses. Each address gave thanks for the information that Her
Majesty had despatched General Gordon, and “ had permitted
him to act in the execution of the measure ” of withdrawing from
the Soudan.
On the 6th February, Mr. Gladstone told the Commons that
Gordon had “ full power to take all measures, civil and military,
which he may think neecssary .”
The Lord Chancellor told the Lords (12th February), “One
reason why we have availed ourselves of the services of heroic
man, General Gordon, is because he, with his vast knowledge of
the country and great influence over the tribes and chiefs, was
better able than any other man to say by what means a policy of
conciliation and pacification might succeed in extricating the
different scattered garrisons from the dangerous positions in which
they were, and withdrawing them,” &c. In their distress, the


Gladstone Ministry had given Gordon a blank charter, and
“ permitted him to act.”
The “ great refusal ” which must doom them and their accom-
plices to the worst maJeholge of history, is their obstinate refusal
to permit Gordon to act, though they were thus solemnly pledged.
The general condition of Egypt and those Soudanese provinces
which may be treated as portions of Egypt, or Egyptian territory,
must be borne in mind. In 1879 Gordon wrote —“the Soudan is
a part of Egypt.” From 1874 to 1879, Gordon himself had
tamed and ruled vast regions in the South.
How he toiled against rapine and slavery ; administered justice;
overcame in the field ; and established a moral supremacy which
was a power in the minds of men equal to that which the terror of
his military skill inspired, may be gathered from Dr. Birkbeck
Hill’s book/ 1 '
Whether he could have conferred permanent peace on the
country, if financial blunders and European intrigues had not
brought about the deposition of Ismail in 1879, it is needless to
discuss here.
While he controlled the Soudan, the English Government were
able to make (1877) a convention with Egypt for the suppression
of the slave trade; and to arrange that, in 1889, slavery should
cease in the Egyptian provinces in which Gordon had laboured.
Before Gordon appeared there, the most powerful Arab chief
had been one Zebehr Pasha, who traced his descent “ through
forty generations from Abbas, uncle of the prophet, ”t and whose
ancestors went from Mecca to Cairo in the ninth century.
Zebehr himself, after trading and fighting in the Soudan, routed
a powerful chief, captured a city —Mandugba—and secured the
allegiance of neighbouring petty sultans, or rulers. Professedly
an encourager of commerce, Zebehr, like all other rulers in those
regions, was a slave-owner, and his birth, reputation, ability, and
success, made him pre-eminent. He that he only
“ gave protection to slave caravans exactly as he gave it to others,”
and argued that he could not be expected to undermine his general
policy by opposing “the passage of slave caravans.”
There is, perhaps, no reason to believe that he was worse in
principle than other rulers in the land, but his talent made him
more powerful for evil, or for good.
In 1871 he fought with one Belial, who had been sent by the
* Colonel Gordon in Central Africa. Fourth Edition. (London: De la Rue & Co.
1885.)
f Contemporary Review, 1887, p. 336. For convenience, the spelling of Zebehr’s
name as it occurs in the Blue-Books of 1884 is adopted.
I Ibid,, p. 582.


Khedive to the Bahr Gazelle, with a view to conquer Darfour, but
who quarrelled with Zebehr. Belial attacked him and was slain.
Dafir Pasha, then Egyptian governor of Khartoum, sent a Com-
mission to inquire as to the death of Belial, and the result was that
Zebehr’s excuses were accepted.* The Sultan of Darfour, in his
contention with Belial, had taken measures which Zebehr re-
sented. The Khedive, alarmed at the growing power of Zebehr,
and apprehensive of his conquering Darfour for himself, deter-
mined to act with Zebehr, whom he made a Bey. Ismail Pasha
Yacoob, from Khartoum, co-operated with Zebehr; the Sultan of
Darfour was killed in battle, and Zebehr was made a Pasha. He
desired to be made governor-general in the South ; was invited to
Cairo to discuss matters, and was there detained by the Egyptian
Government.
The German traveller, Dr. Schweinfurth, saw and described the
horrors of the slave-trade ; the position of the slave hunters ; and
the petty sultans who ruled where slave caravans passed to and
fro.
Zebehr was, he said, “ surrounded with a Court that was little
less than princely in its details ” . . . all visitors were conducted
into carpeted divans “ by richly-dressed slaves.”
All the petty sultans were slavers. Zebehr's army was composed
of slaves; and we learn from General Gordon’s diary, in 1879,t
“ seven-eighths of the population of the Soudan ” were then
slaves.
Dr. Schweinfurth summed up the matter thus: “An in-
eradicable propensity to slave-dealing has always shown itself in
every Government official, be he Turk or Egyptian.”!
As regarded complicity with slavery, there was no difference
between one Arab and another throughout the Soudan.
The resolution to abandon the territory to the caprices or
cruelty of the Arabs was not conceived by the Khedive and his
advisers.
Before they appealed for Gordon’s help the Gladstone Ministry
had compelled the Khedive to agree to abandon the Soudan. They
had thus renounced the convention of 1879, under which a former
Government had striven to arrange that slavery should cease in
the Soudan in 1889.
Lord Granville’s “ instructions ” to Gordon in London on the
18th January (woe worth the while when such a man could give
instructions to such another!) were vague : “ You will consider
yourself authorized and instructed to perform such other duties
* Colonel Gordon in Central Africa, p. xxxix.
f Dr. B. Hill, p. 351.
J Heart of Africa, vol. i., p. 383.


(besides considering and reporting) as the Egyptian Government
may desire to intrust to you, and as may be communicated to
you by Sir E. Baring ” (Blue-Book, Egypt, No. 2, 1884).
The vagueness of Granville was fortunately corrected by the
incisiveness of Gordon, who, while journeying on board ship on
the 22nd January, recorded some facts as to the stipulations made
with him by the Ministry in London on the 18th :
1. “I understand that Her Majesty's Government have come to
to the irrevocable decision not to incur the very onerous duty of
securing to the peoples of the Soudan a just future government.
That, as a consequence, Her Majesty’s Government have deter-
mined to restore to these people their independence, and will no
longer suffer the Egyptian Government to interfere in their
affairs.
2. “ For this purpose Her Majesty’s Government have decided
to send me to the Soudan to arrange for the evacuation of these
countries, and the safe removal of the Egyptian employes and
troops.
3. “ Keeping paragraph No. 1 in view, viz. that the evacuation
of the Soudan is irrevocably decided on, it will depend on circum-
stances in what way this is to be accomplished.
“ My idea is that the restoration of the country should be made
to the different petty Sultans who existed at the time of Mehemet
Ali’s conquest, and whose families, still exist. . . . The most
difficult question is how and to whom to hand over the arsenals of
Khartoum, Dongola, and Kassala, which towns have, so to say, no
old standing families, Khartoum and Kassala having sprung up
since Mehemet Alis conquest.”*
Colonel Stewart, who had accompanied Gordon from London,
and who had previously been employed in the Soudan, indepen-
dently supported Gordon’s views. He wrote (22nd January) : “I
have carefully read over General Gordon’s observations, and cor-
dially agree with what he states, ... As it is impossible for Her
Majesty’s Government to foresee all the eventualities that may
arise during the evacuation, it seems to me the more judicious
course to rely on the discretion of General Gordon and his know-
ledge of the country. I, of course, understand that General
Gordon is going to the Soudan with full powers to make all
arrangements as to its evacuation, and that he is in no way to
be interfered with by the Cairo Ministers.”
Another Blue-Book (No. 6) contains a despatch from Sir Evelyn
Baring (25th January) to Gordon, which irrefragably proves that
the “ abandonment ” policy was directly dictated by Mr. Glad-
stone’s Government. “ You will bear in mind that the main end
* Blue-Book Egypt, No. 7, 1884.


to be pursued is the evacuation of the Soudan. This policy was
adopted after very full discussion by the Egyptian Government, on
the advice of Her Majesty's Government."
Sir Evelyn proceeded to say, with regard to Gordon’s memoran-
dum as to restoring the country, &c.: “In this view the Egyptian
Government entirely concur. . . . But the Egyptian Government
have the fullest confidence in your judgment, your knowledge of
the country, and your comprehension of the general line of policy
to be pursued. You are, therefore, given full discretionary power
to retain the troops for such reasonable period as you may think
necessary. ... In undertaking the difficult task which now lies
before you, you may feel assured that no effort will he wanting on
the part of the Cairo authorities, whether English or Egyptian, to
afford you all the co-operation and support in their power."
Nor was Lord Granville less effusive. Long after his receipt of
Gordon’s memorandum he desired Sir Evelyn Baring (Blue-Book
No. 12, 1884, p. 57) to convey to Gordon (then, 12th February,
at Berber) “ the thanks of Her Majesty’s Government for his
messages, which fill them with increased confidence in him.”
“ All co-operation and support in their power ” was, therefore,
pledged to Gordon by Egyptian authorities, with approval of Mr.
Gladstone’s Government. In the language of the Speech from
the Throne, he was “ permitted to act.” No limitation, as to the
local authorities he w r as to set up in the Soudan, was implied in
his sanctioned memorandum, or imposed upon him by the Egyp-
tian or English Ministries. It was undoubted that, whatsoever
appointment he might make, his hand was to be strengthened
from Egypt and from England.
In Egypt the promises made were loyally respected. On
the 26th January the Khedive publicly proclaimed (Blue-Book
No. 12, p. 28) that Gordon was to be obeyed in all things;
made him Governor-General of the Soudan (“ by reason of your
perfect knowledge of that country and charged “ all theMudirs,
Governors, Cadis, Ulema, Notables, Merchants, ( Bedouin Sheiks,
and all natives and Bedouins of the Soudan ” to obey Gordon,
and follow his advice in all things.
On the 29 th January, Nubar Pasha wrote to Gordon : “We will
do all that you wish.” ( Ih ., p. 79.)
On the 6th of February Gladstone had informed Parliament
that Gordon had been appointed “ Governor-General* of the
Soudan for the purposes described in the Queen's Speech, with
full power to take all measures, civil and military, which he may
think necessary." (Hansard , vol. 284, p. 98.) On the 12th
February he added “It is no exaggeration, in speaking of General
Gordon, to say that he is a hero. . . . It is no exaggeration to say


that in his dealings with Oriental people he is also a genius. . . .
We received General Gordon’s plan ... it was evidently a well-
reasoned and considered plan. . . . He went for the double pur-
pose of evacuating the country, by the extrication of the Egyptian
garrisons, and of re-constituting it by giving back to those chiefs
their ancestral powers, which had been withdrawn or suspended
during the period of the Egyptian government. ... I have told
the House already that General Gordon had in view the withdrawal
from the country of no less than twenty-nine thousand persons.
paying the military service to Egypt. The House will see how
vast was the trust placed in the hands of this remarkable person.
We cannot exaggerate the importance we attach to it. We were
resolved to do nothing which should interfere with this great
pacific scheme; the only scheme which promised a satisfactory
solution of the Soudanese difficulty, by at once extricating the
garrisons, and reconstituting the country upon its old basis, and
its local privileges. It was our duty, whatever we might feel as to
a particular portion of the garrisons, to beware of interference
with Gordon’s plans generally, and before we adopted any scheme
that should bear that aspect, to ask whether in his judgment
there would or would not he such an interference .” In another
part of the same speech, referring to the Soudan and its inhabi-
tants, Gladstone quoted Gordon as “ a man whom I look upon as
by far the highest authority on the subject.” Two days later (14th
February) Mr. Gladstone said —“I have already stated, in the
most distinct manner, that substantially Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment are in the strictest way responsible for the action of General
Gordon ” —and unreservedly reaffirmed that Gordon was entitled to
the unquestioning support of the Government:—“ The direct
action and direct functions in which General Gordon was imme-
diately connected with this Government are, I think, pretty much
absorbed in the greater duties of the large mission which he has
undertaken under the immediate authority of the Egyptian
Government, with the full moral and political responsibility of the
British Government .” On the 14th February also, another
Cabinet minister (one of those who pledged themselves in person
to Gordon in London on the 18th January), Sir Charles Dilke,
told the House in reply to Mr. Stanhope’s questions as to Gordon’s
instructions —“ I reply that General Gordon drafted his own in-
structions. . . . Believing him to be the highest authority, that
he knew more of the conditions, and that he was better able to
form a judgment on the subject than anybody else, we asked him
to draft his own instructions. We showed that he had the highest
confidence which could be placed in any man. General Gordon
has had all the support for which he asked. He will have, I make


no doubt, any support which he can need in the prosecution of
his mission. ... I say that we have implicitly followed the advice
we have received from General Gordon.”*
Sir M. Hicks-Beach having commented upon the dangerous duties
thrust upon Gordon, Sir John Lubbock, with fatal prophecy, said
“ It is impossible not still to feel much anxiety for General Gordon
himself, but I believe that danger is greater from treachery behind
than from any open foe in front.”
In the House of Lords, Lord Cairns, though unprescient of the
“ treachery behind ” which Lord Granville was soon to practise,
said, “ General Gordon is one of our national treasures, and I do
not think Her Majesty’s Government had any right rashly to
expose our national treasures.” Lord Cranbrook also told the
Ministry—“ You are responsible for the life of Gordon as well as
for those agonizing garrisons; and upon you will the country call
to redress the wrongs that you have done. It will inevitably hold
you responsible for that which is so precious.”
Lord Granville, on the 19th February, protested (with how much
sincerity his despatch of 22nd February was soon to reveal) “there
is no shirking of responsibility in declaring our undiminished con-
fidence in that distinguished officer (Gordon), and that we take the
responsibility for anything he does.”
Most of the Ministerial protestations of trust in Gordon were
made while he was speeding to Khartoum, and keen anxiety existed
in England as to the Egyptian garrisons, one of which, at Sinkat,
was reported on the 12th February to have been massacred.
“ There is no doubt,” Mr. Gladstone coolly said on that day,
“ that the garrison of Sinkat has been cut off, or, as another tele-
gram expresses it, ‘ cut to pieces.’ ”
Such was “ the present horror of the time,” that patriotic
persons hoped that even Gladstone’s obsequious following might
refuse to walk farther with him on a path bedewed with blood;
and no one could then foresee that, to stave off their own annihi-
lation, the Ministry would not only sacrifice their own honour, but
would in cold blood look on and allow Gordon to perish—starved.
* For a specimen of the manner in which Lord Granville and Sir 0. Dilke respected
their faith, personally plighted to Gordon, see the Blue-Book No. 16 of 1884. Sir E.
Baring informed Granville that, among other possibilities, Gordon had mentioned to
him at Cairo a visit to the Mahdi, and the taking possession by the King of the
Belgians of certain remote districts.
Lord Granville telegraphed forthwith (11th February) that “Her Majesty’s
Government are of opinion that General Gordon should not at present go beyond
Khartoum.”
The dutiful, but much-thwarted Gordon telegraphed (12th February) that he would
not go farther to the south than Khartoum without Sir E. Baring’s permission.
But how did this supervision and constraint agree with Mr. Gladstone’s and with Sir
C. Dilke’s protestations in Parliament ?


but, as his armorial motto promised, “faithful always” to his
country and his God.
But we must follow him on his road to Khartoum. After
writing (on the 22nd January, while travelling) his memorandum
about restoring Arab rulers in the Soudan (the plan which Mr.
Gladstone told the House was evidently “well-reasoned and con-
sidered”), Gordon saw Zebehr at Cairo on the 26th January.
Zebehr, in addition to his complaint against being detained by
the Khedive at Cairo for so many years, deemed himself ill-treated
by Gordon, because Gessi, Gordon’s lieutenant, had caused the
execution of Zebehr’s son Suleiman, who, after armed revolt, was
captured, tried by court-martial, and executed in 1879, the execu-
tion being approved subsequently by Gordon. At the court-
martial a letter from Zebehr to Suleiman was produced, which was
construed as implicating Zebehr in the revolt, and Gordon believed
the imputation.
Scanning the situation, and perhaps even then forced to the
conclusion that no capable native government could be established
at Khartoum except by the appointment of Zebehr, Gordon saw
Zebehr in Cairo. Zebehr denied that he had incited Suleiman to
revolt, and asked for the production of the incriminating letter,
which, if still existent, was amongst Egyptian archives; but as it
could not be produced, the question whether Zebehr had incited
his son was not solved, though Zebehr declared that if it could be
proved that he incited the revolt he was ready to suffer death ;
and Gordon admitted that if there had been no such incitement,
amends should be made to Zebehr.
The calm outlook of Gordon upon facts and difficulties is shown
in Sir E. Baring’s report (after the interview) to Lord Granville.
“ General Gordon entertains a high opinion of Zebehr Pasha’s
energy and ability. He possesses great influence in the Soudan,
and General Gordon is of opinion that circumstances might arise
which would render it desirable that he should be sent back to
the Soudan,” (Egypt, No. 12, 1884, p. 38.)
On his rapid journey from Cairo to Khartoum, Gordon saw many
Arabs at Abou Hamed, Berber, and elsewhere, and it cannot be
doubted that, as was his wont, he revolved in his mind the con-
tingencies which might follow upon any course adopted.
He arrived at Khartoum on the 18th February, and it was tele-
graphed, though not by himself, that he met with a wonderful
demonstration of welcome on the part of the population. But he
was tenax propositi, and no applause shook his prudence. On the
day of his arrival, he telegraphed that Zebehr must be sent to him.
“ He alone has the ability to rule the Soudan, and would be uni
versally accepted by the Soudan.” (Egypt, No. 12, 1884, p. 72.)


He gave many reasons, but they were very foreign to Lord Gran-
frame of mind.
They related to the removal of thousands of fellow-creatures
from imminent massacre—to the arrest of disorder —and to the
safeguarding of England’s honour, which would be imperilled by
her insisting on a shameful abandonment of scattered populations
to anarchy, which “ would be a misfortune and inhuman.' ” In the
eyes of the Foreign Secretary this was wildly sentimental.
Gordon might think his mission was to save thousands of lives,
but Lord Granville knew it only as a manoeuvre to prop up a
discredited Ministry. What grief it would be to Lord Granville if
Gordon should perish Lord Granville himself exhibited when the
time arrived, and Mr. Gladstone’s feeling was shown by his gay
appearance at a theatre while surrounding London was horror-
struck at the widespread notices of Gordon’s death.
Sir Evelyn Baring forwarded Gordon’s telegram, and added
(p. 78) : “I believe Zebehr Pasha to be the only possible man.
He undoubtedly possesses energy and ability, and has great local
influence. As regards the slave trade, I discussed the matter with
General Gordon when he was in Cairo, and he fully agreed with
me in thinking that Zebehr's presence or absence would not affect
the question in one way or the other.”
Lord Granville, seeking meanwhile perhaps for public opinion,
did not answer at once, and when after consideration (p. 95)
he replied (22 Feb.), he based his objection entirely on the
position in England , and not on that in the Soudan ; and he gave
no hint of any apprehension on account of Gordon.
“ Her Majesty’s Government are of opinion that the gravest
objections exist to the appointment by their authority of a suc-
cessor to General Gordon. The necessity does not indeed appear
to have yet arisen for going beyond the suggestions * contained in
General Gordon’s memorandum of the 22nd January, by making
a special provision for the government of the county. In any
case the public opinion of this country ivould not tolerate the appoint-
ment of Zebehr Pasha”
Let the reader weigh well the shamefulness of this refusal.
Not only to Gordon, but to their Queen and country, the Ministry
were breaking faith.
On the sth February they had publicly and solemnly declared
that Gordon had been appointed with power to act.
* It was one of the suggestions in that memorandum that local rulers should be
appointed, and Mr. Gladstone had commended it as “a well-reasoned and considered
plan.” Lord Granville could hardly have been so foolish as not to perceive that if it
was right to sanction (as the Ministry had sanctioned) Gordon’s proposals, it was
all-essential to act upon them promptly.


On the 22nd February—behind the scenes —Lord Granville
intercepted Gordon’s acts, and for some time concealed the fact.
It was of no avail that Sir E. Baring and Col. Stewart sup-
ported Gordon. “ I believe (said Sir E, Baring, Egypt, No. 12,
1884, p. 115) that General Gordon is quite right when he says
that Zebehr Pasha is the only possible man. I can suggest none
other, and Nuhar Pasha is strongly in favour of him."
Four days afterwards Sir Evelyn repeated his advice. ( lb .,
p. 135.) “I have carefully reconsidered the whole question, and am
still of opinion that Zebehr Pasha should be allowed to succeed
General Gordon. I do not think that anything would be gained
by postponing a decision on this point; on the contrary, I should
say that delay would be injurious.”
Sir Evelyn’s advocacy of keeping faith with Gordon brought
upon him a despatch (sth March) which for “ bald, unjointed ”
irrelevance could hardly be surpassed. {lb., p. 140.) “ Her
Majesty’s Government would be glad to learn how you reconcile
your proposal to acquiesce in such an appointment with the pre-
vention or discouragement of slave-hunting and slave-trade, with
the policy of complete evacuation, and with the security of Egypt.
They would also wish to be informed as to the progress which
has been made in the extrication of the garrisons, and the length
of time likely to elapse before the whole or the greater part may
be withdrawn.” The noble lord was in no hurry about saving
lives, for he telegraphed: “ As Her Majesty’s Government require
details as to each garrison, your report should be a full one and
may be sent by mail. (!) In your telegram now under reply no
allusion is made to the proposal that the local chiefs should be
consulted as to the future government of the country, and Her
Majesty’s Government desire to know whether that idea has been
abandoned.” (This from a man whose colleague had boasted that
General Gordon had been permitted to draft his own instruc-
tions, and who was present when the permission was given!)
Surely the “ insolence of office and the spurns that patient merit
of the unworthy takes ” were never more glaringly exemplified.
Sir E. Baring had informed the ignoble Earl some weeks before
that Gordon fully agreed with him that Zebehr’s appointment
would not at all affect the question of slavery. The question of
saving the garrisons altogether depended upon the faith kept with
Gordon, or the speed with which extrication might be prevented by
slaughter, as at * Sinkat and Tokar, and the Earl had repeatedly
* On the 22nd February Earl Granville was so exceptionally curious about the
garrisons as to ask by telegraph about “ the fate of the women and children in Sinkat.”
(Blue-Book, Egypt, No. 12, p. 96.) The answer, on the same day, “ The women of
Sinkat were very probably killed . . . the fate of the children is more uncertain
. . . ,” did not avail to prevent the issue of the cold-blooded despatch in the text.


been told that “ the future government of the country ” was,
humanly speaking, dependent upon keeping faith with Gordon by
“ permitting him to act.”
The “ patient merit ” of Gordon under Granville’s “ insolence,”
is seen in a telegram of the Bth March ( ib ., p. 145), “ The sending
of Zebehr means the extrication of the Cairo employes from Khar-
toum, and the garrisons from Sennaar and Kassala. I can see
no possible way to do so except through him, who, being a native of
the country, can rally the well-affected around him, as they know
he will make his home here. ... I have already said that the
Treaty of 1877 was an impossible one, therefore, on that head,
Zebehr’s appointment would make no difference whatever. ... As
to progress made in extrication of garrisons, all I have done is to
send down from Khartoum all the sick men, women, and children
of those killed in Khordofan. ... It is quite impossible to get the
roads open to Kassala and Sennaar, or to send down the white
troops unless Zebehr comes up. ... It is impossible to find any
other man but Zebehr for governing Khartoum. No one has his
power. ... If you do not send Zebehr you have no chance of
getting the garrisons away; this is a heavy argument for sending
him. . . . Zebehr is fifty times the Mahdi’s match. He is also of
good family, well known and fitted to be Sultan. . . .”
Sir E. Baring gallantly (9th March) contended (ib., p. 146) that
the employment of Zebehr was “in harmony with the policy of
evacuation,” and that “as regards slavery it will not affect the
question in one way or the other/’
It appears, from Sir Henry Gordon’s memorandum prefixed to
General Gordon’s last Journals, that “a Cabinet Minister of high
position was from the first in favour of sending Zebehr up, and so
indeed was Lord Wolseley.” Of course if that Minister had been
Gladstone, he was bound, if a man of honour or even of duty, to
keep faith with Gordon, and had the power, enjoyed by none of his
colleagues, to insist on doing so.
But sinister whispers were heard to the effect that some of the
customary supporters of the Ministry were hostile to the saving of
the garrisons by means of Zebehr. Perish the garrisons ! Perish
Gordon! rather than admit that Gordon, Colonel Stewart, and
Sir E. Baring knew more about Egyptian affairs than a coterie in
London knew.*
* These well-meaning enthusiasts have since furnished a melancholy tribute to
Gordon’s foresight. He frequently warned them and the Government that unless order
should be promptly established in the Soudan, bloodshed, anarchy, famine, and death
would ensue. Through Lord Granville's perfidy Gordon was prevented from establish-
ing any settled government, but neither the ignoble Earl nor his accomplices could avert
the misery which Gordon predicted; and which, too late, some charitable persons, if
not the Earl, have striven to alleviate. Who can be so bold as to deny that if Gordon


For Lord Granville’s honour they cared as little as he cared.
They were of course within their own rights in opposing the
appointment of Zebehr, or of anyone else; but the Ministry
being unconditionally pledged to “permit Gordon to act,” had no
choice but to support him, or to be forsworn. When Gordon
telegraphed (3rd March) “ how could I look the world in the face
if I abandoned (the Khartoumese) and fled ? As a gentleman
could you advise this course ? ” Sir E. Baring was able to
assure the chained hero that Lord Granville had no more desire
to extricate him than to save his dependants. ( lb ., p. 156.) “On
the contrary, as you will have seen from Lord Granville’s tele-
gram, the Government is anxious that you should remain.” But
nothing could induce the Earl and his associates to take the step
which, they were advised, might save the garrisons.
( lb ., p. 158.) They would not send Zebehr, but would “ agree
to any other Mahomedan assistance.” To a drowning man they
would not give a life-buoy, but would cheerfully load him with
any encumbrance.
As danger encircled Khartoum closer and closer, and Gordon
notified (9th March) that even “retreat to Berber might not be in
his power in a few days,” and Baring reported that the tele-
graph line was interrupted, Earl Granville, indifferent to the
dangers of others, declared (p. 162) that “Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment were unable to accept Gordon’s proposals,” and that if
Gordon thought that by staying at Khartoum he could accom-
plish his task, “he is at liberty to remain there. In the event of
his being unable to carry out this suggestion* he should evacuate
Khartoum and save that garrison by conducting it himself to Berber
without delay.”
This the. Earl had the insolence to write, though on the Ist
March Gordon had telegraphed, on the refusal of Zebehr (p. 152),
“ I will do my best to carry out my instructions, but I feel con-
viction I shall be caught in Khartoum.”
A conviction that he might be accused of acting foolishly as well
as meanly, seems to have found its way to the noble Lord’s mind,
for he added, “ Her Majesty’s Government trust that General
Gordon will not resign his commission.”*
had pacified the Soudan by the appointment of Zebehr, and had gone to the Congo to
aid the King of the Belgians, he might have done more to quench the horrors of
slavery than his detractors may now live to see accomplished ? And who can deny
that during the last five years Gordon’s foresight has been proved correct ?
* Lord Granville’s despatch rejecting all Gordon’s “proposals” and inanely sug-
gesting that Gordon was “ at liberty to remain ” at Khartoum, hut if ‘ ‘ unable to carry
out this suggestion he should evacuate Khartoum and save that garrison by conducting
it himself to Berber without delay,” but he must not resign, was dated 13th March.
Sir E. Baring sent it forward, but Khartoum was invested before the despatch reached


Never, surely, since Hotspur was “ pestered with a popinjay ”
at Holmedon can military matters have been descanted upon as by
this modern Boyet.
The fellow pecks up wit as pigeon’s peas:
He is wit’s pedlar, and retails his wares
At wakes, and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs.
Unhappily, the life of Gordon was in his power; and (at p. 176,
ib.) Sir E. Baring reported that he had told Gordon that “the
idea of sending Zebehr must be regarded as finally abandoned,”
and that Gordon “ must act as well as he can up to your Lordship’s
instructions.”
But it may be said that although Gordon knew the importance
of Zebehr, “ a native of the country,” Lord Granville may have
been ignorant of the facts.
The Blue-Book, No. 18, 1884, removes all doubt upon this point.
His Lordship there (March 1884) sketches Zebehr's career. He
was “a kind of king of the slave-hunters who devastated the
country bordering the White Nile. His Court (the capital C
appears to be the noble Turveydrop’s), his wealth, his troops of
slaves, and his fortified stations were graphically described by
Dr. Schweinfurth. In 1869 the Khedive made an ineffectual
attempt to curb his power, and he was subsequently employed to
conquer the kingdom of Darfour.”
The noble Lord’s reference to slavery comes within Mr. Bur-
chell’s censure as “fudge.” All the petty Sultans of the Soudan
were equally connected with slavery, and when the Gladstone
Ministry compelled the Khedive to resign control of the Soudan,
they w T ere, by their own act, re-establishing the control of the
slavers.
Blue-Books are preserved, and speeches are made in Parliament
by Ministers, in vain, if it is not clear beyond doubt that the
Ministry of 1884 were bound by all that was honest to “ permit
Gordon to act ” in the appointment of Zebehr. Gordon’s memo-
randum of the 22nd January, though it did not categorically name
Zebehr, comprehended him as an eligible ruler of Khartoum where
there were “ no old standing families ” ; and if persons seeking
for excuse for breaking faith required further authority it was to
be found in the declarations of the Ministry when they openly
declared to Parliament that Gordon drafted his own instructions,
*
the neighbourhood. The date may be learned from Gordon’s Journal, which records
the commencement “of our imprisonment ”; and Major Kitchener, in his report on the
fall of Khartoum, says “ the siege ” began on the 15th March. If it were not registered
in Hansard, could it be credited that on the 3rd April Gladstone told the House :
“ General Gordon is under no constraint and under no orders to remain in the Soudan
nor is General Gordon in any way hampered in the prosecution of his work ” ?


and that the Ministry were hound not to interfere with his
plans.*
Gordon’s demeanour when his betrayers were bringing about
not only his destruction, but that which his spirit strove more
against—the dishonour of his country and a general massacre of
the helpless—was sublime, but painful to contemplate :
ls£ March.—“ I will do my best to carry out my instructions, but
I feel conviction I shall be caught in Khartoum.”
4 th March. —“ My weakness is that of being foreign, and Christian,
and peaceful; and it is only by sending Zebehr that prejudice can
be removed.”
10 th March.- —“ Through the weakness of the Government many
have joined the rebels. All news confirms what I have already told
you, viz. that we shall before long be blockaded. The utility of
Zebehr is greatly diminished, owing to our weakness, which has
forced the loyal to join the enemy.” (On the 16th March there
was much fighting, and Gordon’s people were beaten.)
28 rd March. —Gordon reports treachery in his camp, and execu-
tion of two Pashas, after trial.
29 th March. —“ Had you sent Zebehr, how different would have
been the state of affairs.”
9 th April. —Baring reports a telegram to Ist April, and that
there had been more fighting, Khartoum being attacked, and that
Gordon had received no “ telegrams from Cairo since 10th March.”
17 th April. —Baring reports that Zebehr has received a telegram
from Gordon, appointing him Sub-Governor, but that Zebehr
“ will be watched, and his departure will be prevented.”
18 th April. —Baring repeats that Gordon says that “ scarcely
a day passes without his inflicting losses on rebels,” that with 8,000
Turkish troops the Mahdi might easily be put down, and that
Gordon “evidently thinks he is to be abandoned.” (Blue-Book,
No. 13, 1884.)
On the 21st April Lord Granville recognizes that “the danger
at Berber appears to be imminent,” and asks Baring if “ any step
by negotiation or otherwise can be taken at once to relieve it.”
On the 23rd April Granville decides (Blue-Book, No. 18, p. 15)
that English troops shall not go to Berber, and no Egyptian troops
shall “go alone ” : that Gordon must “ keep us informed . . . not
only as to immediate, but as to any prospective danger at Khar-
* In Gordon’s Journal (17th Sept.), p. 31, we read: “ Had Zebehr Pasha been sent
up when I asked for him, Berber would in all probability never have fallen, and one
might have made a Soudan Government in opposition to the Mahdi. We choose to
refuse his coming up because of his antecedents in re slave trade ; granted that we had
reason, yet as we take no precaution as to the future of these lands with respect to the
slave trade, the above opposition seems absurd. I shall not send up A because he will
do this ; but I will leave the country to B, who will do exactly the same.”


toum ”; that he will receive no Turkish or other troops for
military expeditions, and “ that if with this knowledge he continues
at Khartoum, he should state to us the cause and intention with
which he so continues.”*
This heartless telegram was amplified in a despatch of the
Ist of May (Blue-Book, No. 20, 1884), the concluding paragraph of
which was : “ with respect to his request for Turkish troops with a
view to offensive operations (this to a closely besieged man !) General
Gordon cannot too clearly understand that these operations cannot
receive the sanction of Her Majesty’s Government, and that they
are beyond the scope of his mission.” When his Lordship declared
that he believed that in Khartoum “ the market was well supplied,”
it is not easy to determine whether he thought himself civilly
sneering or insolently jocose.
Meanwhile, before this cold-blooded repulsiveness could reach
Khartoum, the sad conviction that a man might “ smile and smile ”
and have no noble humanity in him, had been forced upon Gordon.
Before quoting his words it is right to mention that efforts
were made in April to arouse the Ministry to their duty to
England and to their own pledges.
On the 21st April Gladstone, suo more , denied that Gordon was in
danger : there were peculiar events near Khartoum —“ the general
effect being . . . that Gordon is hemmed in—that is to say, that
there are bodies of hostile troops in the neighbourhood, forming
more or less of a chain around it. I draw a distinction between
that and a town being surrounded. ... It may be the opinion of
hon. gentlemen opposite that General Gordon is in imminent
danger. In our view that is an entirely erroneous opinion.” This
was in the Commons.
In the other House Lord Carnarvon was told by Lord Granville
on the 22nd April, in a speech which bristled with equivocation :
“ I have no fear as to the personal safety of General Gordon in
Khartoum now.” Of course not; the noble Lord had no fear as to
the safety of anyone but himself; and Gordon had no fear for
himself; but if any other man than Gordon had been in Khartoum
it was probable that the streets of Khartoum would have been
reeking with the blood of the garrison before Lord Granville
declared that he was without fear for Gordon.f
* Sir E. Baring duly forwarded the request in one of the few messages reached
■Gordon, who, on 31st July, wrote and succeeded in sending messages by way of
Massowah, where they arrived on the 25th September. He devoted a postscript to the
noble Lord’s request. ‘“You ask me to state cause and intention in staying at Khar-
toum, knowing Government intends to abandon Soudan,’ and in answer I say I stay at
Khartoum because Arabs have shut us up and will not let us out.”
f Lord Carnarvon was indignant at the answers he received hut contempt was
mingled with his indignation when he spoke to a friend in the House about the refusal


On the 16th April, Baring received the following telegram from
Gordon, and it was in the hands of the Ministry when they equivo-
cated with Parliament on the 21st and 22nd April, “ As far as I can
understand, the situation is this : you state your intention of not
sending any relief up here or to Berber, and you refuse me ZebehiL
I consider myself free to act according to circumstances. I shall
hold on here as long as I can, and if I can repress the rebellion I
shall do so. If I cannot I shall retire to the Equator, and leave
you the indelible disgrace of abandoning the garrisons of Sennaar,
Kassala, Berber, and Dongola, with the certainty that you will
eventually be forced to smash up the Mahdi under great difficulties
if you would retain peace in Egypt.” (Blue-Book, No. 15, 1884.)
He offered to send Colonel Stewart and Mr. Power to Berber if
possible; but Stewart telegraphed, “ I shall follow the fortunes of
General Gordon,” and Power did the same; adding, “we are quite
blocked on the north, east, and west.” What Mr. Power would
have thought of Mr. Gladstone’s asseveration in Parliament that
Khartoum was not surrounded, must remain unknown, but may be
surmised.
The south was the region in which the Mahdi’s friends abounded,
and all other directions were “ quite blocked ” ! “ Imprisonment ”
had begun in the middle of March. “ Scarcely a day ” passed
without assaults and skirmishes; and Gordon, reporting the fact
on the Bth April, said, “ The losses of the rebels are quite unneces-
sary if we are eventually to succumb.”
He telegraphed to Sir Samuel Baker to appeal to moneyed men
to advance the means of engaging 8,000 Turkish troops with whom
to put an end to the Mahdi, which at that time was not difficult ;
and he told Sir E. Baring, “ It would be the climax of meanness —
after I had borrowed money from the people here, had called on
them to sell their grain at a low price, &c. —to go and abandon
them without using every effort to relieve them, whether those
efforts are diplomatically correct or not; and I feel sure, whatever
you may feel diplomatically, I have your support —and that of
everv man professing himself a gentleman—in private.” (Blue-
Book, No. 15.)
of the Government to recoup the King of the Belgians the expense of Gordon’s journey
from Palestine to Brussels. Gordon, always generous, had no money about him when
he started from Jaffa. He drew on Belgium. When the Gladstone Government sum-
moned Gordon to London, and sent him to Egypt, Gordon left his brother, Sir Henry,
to arrange for repayment to the King of the Belgians. Sir Henry applied to the
Government in the hope that they would enable him to recoup the King, as they had!
withdrawn Gordon from his service. They declined, and pleaded that they could not
make themselves responsible for an indefinite sum. Sir Henry guaranteed that it
should not exceed £5O. Still they declined, and Sir Henry recouped the King out of
General Gordon’s army pay, which Sir Henry drew for him.


One thing is very clear. Gordon had neither the support of Mr.
Gladstone nor of Lord Granville.
Those so-called statesmen, however, intently watched the political
barometer in England. If public opinion should demand that they
must keep faith with Gordon, they would do so; not as bound in
honour, nor for his sake, but for their own. If public opinion
should not care more for Gordon and honour than the Ministry
cared, then Gordon must die.
When they denied in Parliament in April that Gordon was in
danger, they knew they were not telling the truth; but they
trusted in the chapter of accidents, and hoped that public opinion
would not be hypercritical. With Gordon's and Mr. Power’s tele-
grams in his hand, Mr. Gladstone told the House (21st April),
The position of General Gordon is, so far as we know, a “ position
of security.” Still, this immeasurable deception did not leave the
Ministry quite easy in their minds.
A colleague of Mr. Gladstone was introduced on the 21st April,
by a mutual friend, to a friend of Gordon ; and although Gladstone
and Granville were then protesting so loudly that Gordon was in no
danger it appeared that there was a desire to know if Gordon would
avail himself of means to escape if they were offered to him.
The answer was, “ Those who think that Gordon would come
away to save his own life, while there is anyone in Khartoum, white
or black, rich or poor, old or young, to whom he feels that he owes
a duty, know nothing of Charles Gordon.” The Cabinet Minister
replied, “What a wonderful man he must be, when his friends have
such confidence in him ! ”
To do public opinion justice, it must be admitted that there was
a general feeling that Gordon was being foully treated; but it is
common for ministries to evade justice until time has crystallized
into form concurring elements for their condemnation.
The periods, sometimes long, during which no tidings of Gordon
reached England will be remembered with grief.
As Gordon had foretold, Berber was in imminent danger, and it
fell at the close of the month of May, with the usual slaughter of
captives which accompanied the Egyptian exploits of Lord Gran-
ville. He, meantime, after his confident misstatements to the
House of Lords, became fretful in his despatches, as to how he was
to give orders to Gordon. Before Berber fell he was condescending
enough (30th April) to suggest that, “In the event of telegraphic
communication with Berber being restored, the Governor of that
place might be able to send a message through by the agency of
the Bishareen or Shaggieh tribes.” (Blue-Book, No. 25, 1884.)
Mr. Gladstone came to his perplexed colleague’s aid. Mr.
Chaplin had asked, “If the Government still adhere to the


■opinion which they expressed on 21st April, that the position of
General Gordon is one of complete security.”
“I adhere to the opinion,” said Mr. Gladstone (May Ist), “I
have given in this House more than once, that there is no military
danger at the present moment besetting Khartoum ” ; but such
catachrestical audacity could deceive no one. Since his message
on the “ indelible disgrace of abandoning the garrisons,” Gordon,
and the thousands of dependants to whom he was daily doling out
the food he had so strenuously collected, had not been heard of.
Even at Dongola, far down the Nile, between the third and
fourth Cataracts, Mr. Egerton reported (12th May) that there was
•“panic.” (Blue-Book, No. 25, 1884.)
But for the marvellous influence of Gordon over the minds of
men, and his inexhaustible ingenuity in devising means of defence,
Khartoum would probably have fallen as soon as Berber,* and no
one in Europe knew whether it had fallen.
In May, Sir M. Hicks-Beach moved, “ That this House regrets
to find that the course pursued by Her Majesty’s Government has
not tended to promote the success of General Gordon’s mission,
and that even such steps as may be necessary to secure his personal
safety are still delayed,” and the ministerial majority fell to 28,
and was believed to have vanished out of doors.
Justice must be done to Mr. Gladstone by stating that he did
not adopt the sham plea that the “ great refusal ” was made with
any consideration for Gordon’s safety.
Lord Granville’s despatch of the 22nd February had assigned
the fear of public opinion as the reason.
Mr. Gladstone, on the 12th May, took the same ground.
“General Gordon told us, and gave us his reasons for thinking
so, that Zebehr, if inclined to the slave trade, would not be able to
pursue it, and would have the strongest possible reason for not
attempting to pursue it, in case we allowed him to stay at Khartoum.
For my part I thought the arguments and the weight due to
General Gordon so great that in my own mind it would have been
a great question whether we ought not to have given way to his
wish. Yes ! hut for one consideration. And what was that con-
sideration? Why that we should not have announced that
intention forty-eight hours, when a vote would have been passed in
this House, not merely to condemn the Government, but. . .
Sir John Gorst said he heard with shame the new theory of
ministerial responsibility which Lord Granville’s despatch had
promulgated. “ The Prime Minister said in so many words that
* Berber fell about the Ist June, (Blue-Book, 1884, No. 25, p. 117.) Major
Kitchener reported, “ Everyone massacred. The Governor and all his family, and all
ihe soldiers, and many merchants killed.”


he thought General Gordon was right, and that he should ha\e
yielded to his importunity if he had not believed that had he done
so a motion might have been made which would have placed the
Government in a minority. . . . Her Majesty s Government were
not to be animated by the sense of what was right, and by their
duty to the Queen and country, but were to pursue that particular
line of conduct which would secure for them a majority. • • •
While the debate was going on, there rang from the Liberal
benches a voice which reflected the real, and not the sham,
Liberal feeling of the country.
“ The Ministry desire ” (said Mr. Joseph Cowen) “to dissociate
General Gordon from the garrisons. This is impossible. They
sneakingly suggest that he should sacrifice his comrades in cap-
tivity and decamp. But they mistake their man. It was the
helpless to help, and the hopeless to save, that sent him on his
forlorn and chivalrous mission, and he spurns such cowardly
counsels. . . • He has been accused of inconsistency. The charge
cannot in equity be sustained. He has never faltered in his purpose,
though he has varied his plan to the exigencies. All his plans have
been rejected. He has been systematically contravened , thwaited ,
restrained, and trammelled. Not a single request he has made
has been complied with, not a solitary proposal has been acted
upon. And the Cabinet, after having committed every error the
circumstances allowed, are shabby enough to attribute their own
failure to their baulked but sedulous and heroic agent.
Sir Charles Dilke, who once boasted that the Ministry had given
carte blanche to Gordon, tried to propitiate public feeling by aver-
ring in the House, 18th May, “ For the protection of General
Gordon we intend to do that which practically can be done.
He admitted that they had reason to believe that Khartoum had
provisions for not more than five months from the 7th April.
With inexpressible meanness, Sir C. Dilke insinuated that on
the 27th February Gordon’s plans were culpably changed. No
one knew better than the shuffling baronet knew, that on arriving
at Khartoum (18 February) Gordon demanded Zebehr, and that
on the 22nd Granville perpetrated the great refusal. Yet Dilke
upbraided Gordon for altered conduct, because Gordon, when thus
betrayed, took measures to protect Khartoum against the sur-
rounding Arabs.
* The Ministry had received from the Adjutant-General, on the Bth April, details of
measures for relieving Khartoum by the Nile route and by Suakim, and though the
Nile rises at Cairo in the beginning of July, it was not until the 26th August that they
resolved to send Wolseley to Egypt, and he reached it two months after the Nile had
risen! Mr. Egerton had telegraphed on the 6th August: “The Nile will soon be
high, and the time is short within which any river expedition is possible.” (Blue-
Book, No. 35, p. 6.)


Lord Granville, beginning to entertain fears for his own position,
authorized (17th May) Mr. Egerton to pay money to Zebehr (!)
for sending a message to General Gordon, and £4OO more if he
could obtain Gordon’s reply. For a Gordon to employ Zebehr to
save more than 25,000 lives was not to be endured ; but it was
tolerable for a Granville to use him in a ministerial crisis.* Too
truly had Mr. Cowen augured as to the nobility of Gordon and the
meanness of the Ministry.
On the 17th May, Lord Granville sent a despatch (Egypt, No. 22,
1884) “enjoining” Gordon “to consider and report upon, or if
feasible, to adopt measures for his own removal, and for that of
the Egyptians,” &c., “ having especial regard for his own safety and
that of the other British subjects.” The beleaguered General,
whom many despatches never reached, was to be “ at liberty to
assign sums ” in payment for successful escapes. But in June,
the noble Earl, who thus instructed generals, learned that Berber
(to which he had once glibly ordered Gordon to march with the
Egyptians) had been sacked.
It was feared that public opinion might be sensitive as to the
treatment of Gordon. It was stated that Mr. Gladstone’s incon-
stant mind was exercised for many weeks in debating whether an
expedition should be sent by the Nile Valley, or from Suakim via
Berber.
Vainly had Lord Wolseley provided details in the first week in
April for men who would not decide until 26th August whether
they would adopt the Nile route. Nevertheless, Gladstone himself,
when Gordon was dead, made merry with the question, and was
not ashamed. “No doubt ” (he said in the House in Feb. 1885)
“ much time was spent in the examination of the question. Are
hon. gentlemen ready to say that too much time was spent upon
it ? I think I may say for some months the balance of evidence
seemed to be in favour of the Suakim route, difficult as it was.
. . . In the meantime, we had no reason to believe that Khar-
toum was in immediate danger.”
This he had the effrontery to tell the House, while Blue-Books
gave evidence to the contrary, and his own colleague, speaking in
May 1884, had stated that the provisions in Khartoum would be
exhausted early in September.
Doubtless Gordon had eked out his supplies by occasional cap-
* Zebehr sent letters by a messenger who was reverently received by the Mahdi’s Emir
commanding at Berber. The messenger travelled safely to Shendy, but was there stopped
by the besiegers of Khartoum, and he returned to Cairo in October. (Blue-Book, 1885,
Egypt, No. 1, p. 64.) The respect paid to Zebehr at Berber after it was in the Mahdi’s
hands is strong evidence that Gordon might have saved the garrisons if Zebehr had
been allowed to go to him.


ture of cows and of dhoora, but he had 40,000 mouths to feed,*
and was undergoing daily bombardment. It might be difficult to
decide whether to adopt the Nile route or not; but it was palpable
that if it were to be adopted at all it must be adopted without delay,
for the constant river, whose floods had been registered by Egyp-
tian rulers from the Pharaohs downwards, was no respecter of
persons, and the delay of some months was sure to be fatal. Even
the Nile was blamed by some ministerial parasites for being low ;
but we read in Gordon’s Journal: “It was not a low Nile —it was
an average Nile, only you were too late.”
Gloom could not but possess the minds of those who knew the
characters of Gordon and of those who were dooming him to
starvation and to death. Readers of his Journal will remember
the scorn with which he resented the insinuation that an expedition
should be sent for his personal relief. Alone —Stewart and the
others having descended the river—he writes :
24 th September. —“ I altogether decline the imputation that the
expedition has come to relieve me. It has come to save our
national honour in extricating the garrisons, &c., from a position
our action in Egypt has placed these garrisons in. I was relief
expedition No. 1 ; they are relief expedition No. 2. As for myself,
I could make good my retreat at any moment if I wished. Now
realize what would happen if this first expedition was to bolt, and
the steamers fell into the hands of the Mahdi; this second relief
expedition (for the honour of England engaged in extricating
garrisons) would be somewhat hampered.”
3rd October. —“ I hope lam not going down to history as being
the cause of this expedition, for I decline the imputation. The
expedition comes up to deliver the garrisons. ”
9th November. —“The people up here would reason thus if I
attempted to leave. . . . ‘We suffered and are suffering great
privations in order to hold the town. . . . Now we can, after our
obstinate defence, expect no mercy from the Mahdi, who will avenge
on us all the blood which has been spilt around Khartoum. You
have taken our money and promised to repay us; all this goes for
nought if you quit us ; it is your bounden duty to stay by us and
to share our fate; if the British Government deserts us, that is
no reason for you to do so, after our having stood by you.’ I
declare positively and once for all, that I will not leave tli& Soudan
until every one who wants to go down is given the chance to do
so, unless a government is established which relieves me of the
charge. Therefore, if any emissary or letter comes up here order-
ing me to go down, I will not obey it, but will stay here, and fall
* Gordon’s last Journal, p. 272.


with the town and run all risks.” His Journal of 17th September
said, “ D.Y. I will not give up the place except with my life.”
So lived and so thought Gordon, doing his duty, just as
Gordon’s friend told Mr. Gladstone’s colleague in April that he
would do it. He had already sent Stewart, Power, Herbin, and
others away, and wrote, sth November, “ I say in defence of my
letting Stewart go, that both he, Power, and Herbin felt our situa-
tion here was desperate after the defeat at El Foun —that I had
over and over again said it was impossible for me to go; physically
impossible, because even my servants would have betrayed me
(even if I had felt inclined to leave), and I would die here (even
going so far as to have two mines brought to the palace, with
which to blow it up, if the place fell).”
A part of the delay of some months , which Gladstone justified,
appears to have been occupied in tempting Gordon to share the
shame of the Ministry. Mr. Egerton, on the 22nd July, suggests
“that £lO,OOO, and even double,” might be offered for “bringing
out Gordon” (Blue-Book, 1884, No. 82, p. 28), and Granville ( ib .,
p. 81) graciously replies, 25th July, that Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment “ would not grudge the amount,” and would not restrict it,
“ relying as they do upon Major Kitchener’s discretion not to
expend more than is necessary . . . for the release of General
Gordon.”
Within a week of this intimation, Gordon was writing (in a
despatch which he sent safely by Massowah to Suakim) —“It is a
sine qua non that you send me Zebehr, otherwise my stay here is
indefinite.” *
This despatch reached Cairo in September, when Wolseley, after
chafing at delay, had arrived in Egypt; but it is significant as
showing how “ wide as the poles asunder ” were the views of the
Ministry and of Gordon on points of duty and of honour.
Of course no attention was paid to Gordon. The “ great
* All the pretences put forward at later dates about the apprehensions of the
Ministry lest Gordon’s life should be endangered, may be dismissed as false. They
were afterthoughts. Lord Granville’s despatch, 22nd February, already cited, based
the refusal on his estimate of the “ public opinion of this country. ” By the terms of
that refusal, the Gladstone Ministry must stand or fall. Zebehr’s character, what-
ever it may Se, is not tainted with telling untruth to deceive the House of Commons
or the House of Lords, and he told the lady who saw him at Gibraltar (Contemporary
Review , 1887, pp. 679-80) —“ All was wiped out between us. Though he was against
me, I knew Gordon to be a great and good man. He wanted to have me sent up. I
wanted to go. If I had gone, Gordon would have come home safe. Then who killed
Gordon? Not the Soudanese. It was the English who refused to let him have the
friend he asked for. The English killed him, and why ? Because they were like
children, frightened and believing in evil.” It is melancholy to think that abroad the
“ great refusal and its consequences may be ascribed not to the perpetrators, but to
the English,


refusal ’’ of the only chance to save the garrisons had been made
on account of its effect on a division in the House, and if the
Khartoum garrison was to be massacred like the others, it must
be massacred rather than faith be kept with Gordon.
Earl Granville filled up some of the time by impertinent mes-
sages to Gordon. On the 24th July (Blue-Book, No. 82, p. 29) he
directed Mr. Egerton to repeat his messages to Gordon of 28rd
April and 17th May (asking why he remained at Khartoum, &c.),
to tell him that those communications proved the interest taken
by Her Majesty's Government in him, and that they desired to
hear from him, “ so that if danger has arisen or is likely to arise
in the manner they have described, they may be in a position to
take measures accordingly."
Those who ascribe the greatest blame to Gladstone must admit
that this despatch raises Granville’s claims to a high pitch.
About this time M. Herbin, French Consul at Khartoum, wrote;
“ Aucune crainte si ce n’est le manque de vivres (dans deux mois
nos vivres seront epuises) . . . mais nous sommes sans nouvelles
sures, et nos moments sont comptes.’’ The gallant Frenchman,
like Colonel Stewart and Power, could hardly be persuaded to
leave Gordon and essay the descent of the Nile.
When Wolseley furnished in April details of measures for re-
lieving Khartoum, he included an alternative scheme to the long
route by the Nile. The route from Suakim to Berber was ,245
miles and from Berber to Khartoum the distance was 210 miles. The
Nile Valley routes varied from 1,320 miles to 1,750 miles, according
to the extent to which land marches were availed of. General
Stephenson, who commanded in Egypt, advocated the route by
Suakim, and we learn from official documents that, on 14th June,
the Government “ determined to prepare ’’ for constructing a rail-
way from Suakim to Berber. The character of their determination
is shown by the fact that, on the 7th August, they obtained a vote
of credit for £300,000, to enable them to take measures “ for the
relief of General Gordon should they become necessary .’’ (Blue-
Book, No, 35, p. 14.)
Mr. Gladstone’s “ some months ” of hesitation, were not com-
pleted, however, until the 26th August, when a telegram from the
War Office iib., p. 60), dated midnight, stated that, “ after anxious
consideration,’’ they had made up their minds, and that, after two
months of the Nile inundation had been lost, the some months of
the Government backwardness were at an end. Too late was in
the minds of all, but not in the actions of Wolseley and his com-
rades.
Their campaign, so creditable to them, and so damning to the
Ministry, proved clearly enough that if Wolseley had been com-


missioned in the end of April instead of in the last days of August,
he might have accomplished his task. There is a pathetic sad-
ness in his statement (25th October) —“the labour of working up
this river is immense.” It was only on that day that the first
whale boat was hauled through the great gate of the second Cata-
ract at Wady Haifa, though in “ nuggers ” troops had arrived at
Dongola in September.
On the 2nd November the sad tidings of the loss of the Ahhas
steamer, near Merawi, with Colonel Stewart and his companions
(18th September), reached Wolseley’s people near Korti.
Military authorities have described the campaign ; and here it is
fitting to deal only with a few facts concerning the victim whose
fate, Lord Granville had graciously informed him, was interesting
to Her Majesty’s Government.
As far as human mismanagement could prevail, that Govern-
ment had made it impossible for Gordon and Wolseley to meet in
the Soudan. But Gordon succeeded in sending a characteristic
letter, dated 4th November, to Wolseley (Blue-Book, Egypt, No. 1,
1885, p. 97) : “ . . . We can hold out forty days with ease; after
that it will be difficult. Terrible about loss of steamer. I sent
Colonel Stewart, Power, and Herbin down, telling them to give you
all information. . . . We have occasional fights with Arabs.
Since 10th March we have had up to date, exclusive of Kitchener’s
14th October, only two despatches; one, Dongola, with no date;
one from Suakim, sth May; one of same import, 27th April. I
have sent out a crowd of messengers in all directions during eight
months. ... I should take the road from Ambukol to Metammeh,
where my steamers wait for you. . . . The Arabs camped outside
Khartoum on the 12tb March. We attacked them on the 16th
March, got defeated, and lost heavily, also a gun.* . . . We have
built two new steamers. . . . Your expedition is for relief of
garrison which I failed to accomplish. I decline to agree that it is
for me personally. . . . We defended the lines with wire entangle-
ments and live shells as mines, which did great execution. We
put lucifer matches to ignite them.”
Gordon’s last Journals tell us (15th November, when heavy
firing was being sustained) : “I feel quite indifferent, for if not
relieved for a month, our food supply fails, and even at the above
rate of expenditure of ammunition we have fifty days cartridges. I
like to go down with our colours flying.”
On the sth December there were only “ 737 ardebs of dhoora,
121,300 okes of biscuit in store.” On the 10th he wrote : “ Truly I
* It was on the Ist May, after much fighting at Khartoum had been reported, that
Gladstone declared that he “ adhered to his opinion that there is no military danger at
the present moment besetting Khartoum.”


am worn to a shadow with the food question ; it is one continual de-
mand. Five men deserted to-day. The Arabs shape the stones they
fire like to the shells of their guns; they will soon spoil the rifling of
their guns if they continue this.” The close of the Journal, 14th
December, is : “ Now, mark this ; if the expeditionary force, and I
ask for no more than two hundred men, does not come in ten days,
the town may fall, and I have done my best for the honour of our
country. Good-bye. C. G. Gordon.”
In addition to the last entry in his Journal, letters of the same
date were sent with it to Metammeh. To his sister, he said, “ I
am quite happy, thank God, and, like Lawrence, I have tried to do
my duty.” To a military friend (Watson) he wrote : “ All is up.
I expect a catastrophe in ten days time. It would not have been
so if our people had kept me better informed as to their intentions.
My adieux to all.” Facts are useless to those who do not see that
it is almost a certainty that “ it would not have been so ” if the
Ministers who vaunted that they had empowered Gordon to “ draft
his own instructions,” had kept faith and allowed him to have
Zebehr.
Starving, like the other ghost-like haunters of Khartoum;
“worn to a shadow” (as his Journal tells us) many weeks before
the fall of the town —there being left, on the 14th December (for
many thousands of persons) only 546 ardebs of dhoora, and
88,525 okes of biscuits, the deserted General, nerved by a
courage and endurance which seemed more than mortal, and
were, indeed, prompted from on high, sent words of comfort to
his sister, and unimpassioned words to an old comrade.
But, among all the inhabitants, heroism could not be looked for;
and it w r as almost certain that the hope of favour from the Mahdi
for successful treachery, and of release from the fangs of hunger,
would tempt some to betray the General, and those who were too
deeply involved in the defence of the city to have any hope of
mercy at its fall. Therefore “ the catastrophe ” was expected.
Meanwhile, with his steamers, the General secured scraps of food
on the river banks, and an occasional capture of a cow revived
hope, though it could not remove famine.
When his last Journal (to 14th December) was taken to
Metammeh, he sent by an Arab messenger a brief message (to
be carried on to the Commander of the Belief Expedition)
which, if seized by the enemy might mislead him, but which
the trusty bearer was to explain to Wolseley, in words sadly
in unison with the last records in the Journal of the same date
(14th December). The written message was—“ Khartoum * all
right. 14 December 1884.” The verbal was longer; but Arabs
have trustworthy memories. “. . . Fighting goes on day and


night. Enemy cannot take us except by starving us out. Do
not scatter your troops. . . Specially “ secret and confiden-
tial ” were other words which doubtless were urgently pressed
upon the Arab’s memory by those Khartoumese notables who had
hazarded their lives by aiding Gordon to defend the city. “ Our
troops in Khartoum are suffering from lack of provisions. Food
we still have is little; some grain and biscuit. We want you to
come quickly. ... In Khartoum there are no butter, nor dates,
and little meat. All food is very dear.”* (Blue-Book, 1885,
No. 1, p. 132.)
A written letter to Wolseley, dated 14th December, accompanied
the Journal and remained with it at Metammeh, so that Wolseley
never saw the letter until the result of the “ great refusal was
completed. He sent it to England on 10th February. Its terms
were: “. . . The state of affairs is such that one cannot foresee
further than five to seven days, after which the town may at any
time fall. I have done all in my power to hold out, but I own
I consider the position extremely critical, almost desperate; and
I say this without any feeling of bitterness with respect to Her
Majesty’s Government, but merely as a matter of fact. Should
the town fall, it will be questionable whether it will be worth the
while of Her Majesty’s Government to continue its expedition,
for it is certain that the fall of Khartoum will ensure that of
Kassala and Sennaar.”t
One more communication from Gordon reached Wolseley’s hands,
but it was only a fac-simile ( lb., p. 141) of the previous note—“ Khar-
toum all right. 14 Dec. 1884.” It was taken to Wolseley by a man
who had been sent by Wolseley from Korti on the 18th December,
and who returned to him on the 11th January. He said he had been
one day in Khartoum, that he was taken prisoner on his return,
and that “ Gordon’s letters were taken from him.” He bore marks
of having been bound and beaten. He brought no verbal message
from Gordon. He told Wolseley that the steamers seized cattle
and grain, and took them up the river to Khartoum ; and Mr.
Gladstone had the ineffable meanness to tell the House, in Feb-
ruary 1885, that “ the despatch of 28th December overrides the
account of December 14th ” (though the only despatch was a repetition
of that of December 14th), “ and represents a state of things in which
there was not the smallest reference to a scarcity of provisions.”
Such prevarication could deceive no one. No one could imagine
* Sir E. Baring telegraphed this to Lord Granville on the Ist January, 1885. (Blue-
Book, No. 1, 1885, p. 132.)
f The Blue-Book (No. 9, 1885) which contains this despatch (p. 23) is worth read-
ing for the sake of the despatches of Lord Wolseley and Sir G. Wilson, and their
testimony to the loyalty of Khasm-el-Mds; a report from whom to Lord Wolseley is
included in the Blue-Book.


that many thousands"' of people could be supplied by an occasional
capture of a cow and a few bushels of dhoora on the banks of a
river held by hostile troops.
Khasm-el-Mus described how (before Sir C. Wilson’s arrival in
January) one steamer, the Mansourah, with captured dhoora, was
struck by a cannon-ball, and sunk with her booty. When Khasm-
el-Mus got to Metammeh finally (he wrote), “ we had not a day's
rations for ourselves or the soldiers.”
And yet Gladstone dared to tell the House that a despatch (which
had no existence) represented “ a state of things at Khartoum in
which there was not the smallest reference to a scarcity of provi-
sions ” —and, so great is the credulity or so little the honour of some
people, that he secured a majority of 14 in the House when Sir
Stafford Northcote righteously moved a vote of censure in February
1885.
We know that all previous despatches showed that by the 14th
December supplies would be exhausted. We know from Gordon’s
Journal that for all practical purposes they were so exhausted.
Let us see what the real state of affairs proved to be so far as the
subsequent inquiries by Major Kitchener, of the Staff Intelligence
Department, enable us to judge. He had spoken with all refugees
from Khartoum whom he had been able to meet, and had special
duties in communicating with the tribes from 26th January to 18th
August 1885, the date of his report. Communication between
Omdurman and Khartoum was cut off on 3rd November 1884,
Omdurman then having only one and a half month’s provisions ;
so that the Omdurman garrison “ must have been in great diffi-
culties for food and necessaries after 20th December.”
Gordon’s position was “ weakened ” by sending the steamers
(with Stewart and) to meet the expeditionary force.
He had already (22nd November) “ found it necessary to issue
9,600 lbs. biscuit to the poor,” and then wrote, “I am determined,
if the town has to fall, the Mahdi shall find precious little to eat
in it,”
It may be considered (writes Kitchener) “ that even on reduced
rations the supply in store must have been almost, if not quite,
exhausted about Ist January 1885.”
On the 6th January, when he proclaimed freedom for all to leave,
Gordon wrote to the Mahdi “ requesting him to feed
these poor Moslem people as he had done for the last nine months.”
* The exact population at Khartoum in December 1884 cannot he ascertained.
Originally, in February, there had been 40,000; but Gordon sent 2,000 persons
to Berber before Khartoum was invested, and lost no opportunity of letting others
leave. On the 6th January 1885 he proclaimed that all might go who would. Major
Kitchener’s final report says that “ great numbers availed themselves of this permis-
sion.” Major Kitchener estimated that in September the population had been reduced
to 34,000.


About the 18th January there was desperate fighting, and about
200 of the Khartoum garrison were killed. Gordon publicly
thanked the troops for their conduct.
“ The state of the garrison was then desperate from want of food ;
all the donkeys, dogs, cats, rats, &c., had been eaten. A small ration
of gum was issued daily to the troops, and a sort of bread teas
made from pounded palm-tree fibres. Gordon held several councils
of the leading inhabitants, and on one occasion had the town most
rigorously searched for provisions ; the result, however, was very
poor, only yielding four ardebs of grain through the whole town.
This was issued to the troops. Gordon continually visited the
posts, and personally encouraged the soldiers to stand firm. It
was said during this period that he never slept.”
On the night of the 25th January “ many of the famished troops
left their posts on the fortifications in search of food in the town.
Some of the troops were also too weak from want of nourishment
to go to their posts.” At 8.80 the south front was attacked. “In
my opinion, Khartoum fell from sudden assault ichen the garrison
were too exhausted by privations to make proper resistance.”
When Gladstone averred in the House, “ It was plain that the
despatch of 28th December overrides the account of 14th December,
and represents a state of things in which there was not the smallest
reference to a scarcity of provisions,” his object was, if not to tell
an untruth, to induce the House to believe a lie.
There was no despatch of 28th December at all. Wolseley’s
despatch says that the only written document borne by the mes-
senger was dated the 14th December ; “ a fac-simile,” indeed, of
the former brief words similarly dated.
And Wolseley’s messenger carried no verbal message. There-
fore, the 14th December despatch was overridden by no other
despatch, and the words reported as used by Gladstone in the House
were untrue.
It is perhaps proper to record here what Major Kitchener’s care-
ful inquiries elicited as to the fall of Khartoum. He prefaces it
by saying that “ the last accurate information received about
Khartoum is contained in General Gordon’s Diary, and dated the
14th December 1884.”
Major Kitchener obtained no proof that the gates were treacher-
ously opened, but shows that Farag Pasha, to whom treachery was
generally imputed, was well received by the Mahdi, although three
days after the fall of the city, when he failed to discover treasure,
Farag “was killed on the public market-place at Omdurman.”
“ Hassan Bey Balmasawi ” (he says), “ who commanded at the
Mesalamia gate, certainly did not make a proper defence,” and
Hassan “ afterwards took a commission under the Mahdi” and
went to Khordofan. Major Kitchener considered there was “ very


full and complete evidence that General Gordon was killed at or
near the palace. . . . All the evidence tends to prove that his
death happened near the palace where his body was subsequently
seen by several witnesses.” One who claimed to have been a
witness said “ General Gordon was walking in front leading the
party. The rebels fired a volley and Gordon was killed at once.
Nine of the cavasses, Ibrahim Bey Rushdi, and Mahomed Bey
Mustafa, were killed. The rest ran away.” Major Kitchener adds,
“ the massacre in the town lasted some six hours, and about 4,000
persons at least were killed. . . . The Bashi-Bazouks and white
regulars numbering 8,827, and the Shaikiyeh irregulars, were
mostly all killed in cold blood after they had surrendered and had
been disarmed. . . . The women ivere distributed as slaves amongst
the rebel chiefs ” (those chiefs whom the Gladstone Ministry
exalted in preference to Zebehr). The town was given over to
pillage for three days.
The rigid official narrative of Major Kitchener concludes with
two brief sentences wrung from his heart by the working out of
the “ great refusal.” “ The memorable siege of Khartoum lasted
317 days, and it is not too much to say that such a noble resistance
was due to the indomitable resolution and resource of one English-
man. Never was a garrison so nearly rescued, and never was a
commander so sincerely lamented.”
The gallant Major wrote nobly on a noble theme. But there
were one or two of those who had lured Gordon to his doom, who
seem not to have shared the Major’s feelings. When the tidings
of the fall of Khartoum and the consequent moral certainty of the
death of Gordon arrived in London at the War Office on Thursday
the sth February 1885, it was announced in the newspapers on the
6th that “ the news was sent to Mr. Gladstone, Lord Hartington,
and Lord Granville.”
On the 7th February the Times reported that a “ Cabinet Coun-
cil was held yesterday,” and added, “ We are asked to state that
Mr. Gladstone came to London on Thursday by the first train
after the news of the fall of Khartoum reached him.”
On the 9th the Times printed the formal announcement of a
Cabinet meeting for that day.
All men knew that Gordon was not a man to be captured alive.
Indeed, his telegram to Sir E. Baring of Bth April 1884 Jiad said
(Blue-Book, 1884, No. 15), “ I do not see the fun of being caught
here to walk about the streets for years as a dervish with sandalled
feet; not that (D.Y.) I will ever be taken alive,” and Gordon was
a man of his word. But those who are promise-breakers them-
selves do not comprehend the virtue of truthfulness.
The particular mode in which the immolation of Gordon was
accomplished cannot be said to be known even now; but that he


was immolated at the fall of Khartoum by the joint labours of the
Gladstone Government and the Arab slave-owners was as certain
in London on the 10th February 1885 as it is now. Such being
the facts, the horror with which loyal Englishmen read that on the
night of the 10th February Mr. Gladstone was observed as a
“ guilty creature sitting at a play ” may be imagined.
Some time afterwards Sir F. Milner, speaking at York, alluded
to the fact. Some one brought Sir F. Milner’s speech to the notice
of Mr. Gladstone, who desired his secretary to write “that there
was not even a rumour of General Gordon’s death at the time
alluded to.” Sir F. Milner set forth these facts in a letter which
appeared in the Morning Post, 2nd November 1885, and showed
that the death of Gordon was placarded throughout London on the
10th February, whereupon Mr. Gladstone reiterated on the 3rd
November “that he was absolutely ignorant of the rumour to which
Sir F. Milner referred.”
He must have doubted whether he was believed, for we find him
writing {Times 27th November 1885), “It is absolutely untrue
that either any news or any rumour, supported by any colour of
evidence that General Gordon was dead, had reached Mr. Glad-
stone on the evening to which reference has so improperly been
made by some political opponents.”
If this be so, it was useless to summon Mr. Gladstone to a Coun-
cil on the fall of Khartoum; and if it be improper to call attention
to gross behaviour in a public man, it must be indecent in a by-
stander to call the attention of the police to any crime which he
sees committed in the street.
The situation in Egypt was, nevertheless, not calculated to raise
the reputation of the Ministry, and to pacify a public which they
felt must be sorely offended Mr. Gladstone declared in Parlia-
ment (19th February) that “the Government decided that it was
their duty to instruct Lord Wolseley to frame his military mea-
sures upon the expectation and upon the policy of proceeding to
overthrow the power of the Mahdi at Khartoum."
Brave words! But who could trust them in the mouth of the
“ broker that still breaks the pate of faith ” ? Had he not used
the same words about the Transvaal, and did his conduct in South
Africa augur that he would care for England’s honour in the
North ? “ Time, the clock-setter,” was soon to show him as ready
to run from the Mahdi as from the Boers; but not before he had
squandered England’s blood and treasure.
But here it is proper to show the statements which he and his
accomplices put forward in defence of their “great refusal” when
challenged by Sir Stafford Northcote.
Gladstone, on 28rd February, reiterated his strange assertion
that Gordon “ was able to remove himself by going to the South.


. . . Then came the recommendation to send Zebebr, but it was
well known that if, when that recommendation was made, we had
complied with it, an Address from this House to the Crown would
have paralyzed our action. . .
We see in newspapers that Mr. Gladstone enchants worshippers
by entering tabernacles and reading lessons. If in any such
assemblage he should read about the qualities of him who shall
dwell in the Supreme Tabernacle : —“ He that sweareth unto his
neighbour and disappointeth him not, though it were to his own
hindrance,” —he would need surpassing vanity to escape qualms of
conscience for those who broke their pledges to Gordon.
The friends of Gordon, on the other hand, from the same sen-
tence may derive enduring comfort.
Some points of Gladstone’s speech—the choice of the route by
the Nile and the “ hypothesis of starvation ” —have already been
touched upon. His obstinate assertion ( Hansard , vol. ccxciv.,
p. 1092) “ There is no reason at present to believe that a great
effusion of blood attended the occupation of Khartoum,” must
have jarred upon all humane minds ; but though the massacres
which Mr. Gladstone minimized as merely an “ occupation of
Khartoum ” involved Gordon’s death, he did not venture, in Feb-
ruary 1885, to disparage the character of one whom he had called
“ a hero of heroes.” At a later date, however, he threw out hints
that Gordon had overweening confidence in himself, and over-
rated his influence.
On the 30th April 1885, Gladstone was asked in the House to
produce the evidence on which he had said, “ We have no reason*
to suppose that any very considerable body ever attached them-
selves to General Gordon, and we have no reason to suppose that
the general population of Khartoum —though I have no doubt that
some of his immediate adherents may —have suffered in consequence
of what has taken place.” One reads in Hansard these strange
words from Gladstone, which certainly cannot be called an answer :
“ I entirely differ from the hon. gentleman as to the preamble
of his question; and as to his request, I cannot comply with it.”
As to the mean suggestion that Gordon over-rated his own im-
portance, Gordon gave, by anticipation, the fullest refutation to
such a slander when, on the day of his arrival at Khartoum, amid
the acclamation of thousands, he telegraphed that Zebelmmust be
sent thither to enable the work of evacuation to be done.
* But the telegrams of February 1884 furnished ample reason, and in conformity with
them we read in the work of the Rev. Mr. Barnes (C. G. Gordon. Macmillan, 1884),
p. 79 : “ The people appeared in their thousands at Khartoum to kiss his feet, styling
him the Sultan of the Soudan.” Fortunately, it is difficult for deceivers to weave their
sophistries so as to escape detection when the truth is sought for; and expert as Mr.
Gladstone is in the art of distortion*his subtleties do but confirm the old saying that it is
better to tell the truth than by any temporizing subterfuge to gain brief credit for a lie


The other ministers who defended in the House of Commons
their abandonment of Gordon, may be briefly dismissed.
Sir Charles Dilke, who had boasted in 1884 that he had con-
curred in authorising Gordon to “ draft his own instructions,”
made a speech which was one long shuffle. He had no plea to
make for the refusal of Zebehr, but he pointed out “ that only one
hon. gentleman (SirF. Milner) attacked us for not sending Zebehr.”
His morality seemed to be such as might make promise-breaking a
virtue if no one objected to it.
Sir W. Harcourt declared (26th February) that he “ would not
have been a party to sending out Zebehr,” and he had the un-
speakable meanness (which even Gladstone had not exhibited) of
pretending that considerations for Gordon’s safety made the refusal
necessary. Privileged to say anything, however inhuman, he de-
clared, “ If Gordon had been able to hold out a week or ten days
longer it is quite certain that Sir H. Stewart’s force would have
been in Khartoum. I say we were not too late, and lam entitled
to say so.”
Sir Robert Peel replied that Harcourt had been “ good enough
to admit that the Government had experienced failures and made
some mistakes. Made some mistakes! Why, good God; then-
hands were deep in blood. They were ankle-deep in it.”
The patriotic enthusiasm which despatched the New South
Wales contingent to the Soudan, and wafted offers from other
Colonies, was acknowledged with effusion by Mr. Gladstone in
Parliament on the 20th February. If he had known how largely
indignation at his own treachery had actuated many colonists, and
that he himself was more than once burned in effigy in Australia at
the time, by lovers of their country and admirers of Gordon, it would
have required all his power of dissimulation to appear sincere.
A feeble member of the Cabinet, unwarned by the abstinence of
his more astute colleagues from disparagement of Gordon, ven-
tured to sneer at the victim of Khartoum.
Lord Kimberley told his brother peers (27th February), “ General
Gordon was not infallible. ... He was of opinion that his influence
in the Soudan was such that he might be able to accomplish the
pacification of the country by his name and by his influence with
the tribes. . . . General Gordon, it is impossible not to say, was
mistaken* in his calculations. ... I never was more clear in my
life upon any subject than that it was the absolute duty of Her
Majesty’s Government to refuse to send Zebehr.” One would think
* If Gordon presumed confidently that the Gladstone Ministry would keep faith with
him, no doubt he was mistaken. But such was his sense of duty to his country, that
if anyone had warned him that the Ministry would not keep faith and would betray
him, it is possible that he would have replied, “ If the Ministry be false, what is that
to me ? They apply to me in the name of my country and I must do my best for its
honour.” This, at any rate, is what he did, when they betrayed him.


that his mind must always have been muddy, if it was never
clearer than when he broke his word.
Never was the fable of the living donkey and the dead lion
illustrated more completely than by the living lord.
If G-ordon was “ mistaken in any calculation,” it was in sup-
posing that an English Ministry would not wantonly be forsworn;
and his prompt demand for Zebehr on his arrival at Khartoum,
proves that the Kimberley complaint of Gordon’s self-conceit as to
his own “ name and influence ” was as false as unworthy.
What Gladstone was not unblushing enough to do in the
Commons House, Lord Granville did without shame in the Lords.
With his despatch of 22nd February 1884, assigning the fear of
public opinion as the reason for the “great refusal,” on the table
to refute him, he had the insolence to aver (19th February 1885),
“ we considered that Zebehr’s appointment would have constituted
a danger to Gordon. . . . My Lords, we agreed to any other form
of assistance which he might prefer.”
His speech, of course, included praise of Gordon, but his words
were to the friends of Gordon offensive, as would be the intrusive
presence at a funeral of those by whose machinations the funeral
had been caused.
“ The noble Earl spoke with justice (said Lord Salisbury) of the
sympathy and deep regret with which we all of us have heard of
the fall —I might say the sacrifice—of our Christian hero. But
these are not the only feelings which have been excited in the
breasts of the people of his country. There has not only been
sympathy and regret, but bitter and burning indignation. General
Gordon has been sacrificed to the squabbles of a Cabinet, and the
necessities of Parliamentary tactics.”
When, at a later date (18th May 1885), Lord Napier of Magdala
expressed unwillingness to “ re-open the wound caused by the
delays and refusals to relieve General Gordon,” and added that
“ the military character of the country had sustained a great blow
—he would almost say an irretrievable blow,” Lord Granville was
not ashamed to reply that he did “ not understand what the
gallant Field Marshal can have meant.”
Perhaps his answer was true, and he was not able to comprehend
anything noble. His intelligence, however, appears to have stag-
gered strangely. How otherwise can be explained his maundering
contention that the Ministry would “ have been accomplices in the
murder of General Gordon if they had acceded to his demand for
Zebehr,” and that it would have been “a positive act of treachery”
to Gordon, to keep their promises to him ?
This modern Boyet, however, who had gambled with the life of
Gordon, could “ chide the dice in honourable terms,” for he
added, “ when we have destroyed the Mahdi, and are masters of


the situation, as I hope and believe we shall be ... I imagine
that we shall desire, all of us equally, to form the best govern-
ment that can he formed on the spot” Yet he had, by his share
in the great refusal, rejected the advice of Gordon, of Colonel
Stewart, of the Khedive, and of Nubar Pasha, as to the best
government that could be so formed.
The fate of the garrisons weighed lightly on the noble Earl.
Lord Ellenborough asked on the 3rd March how it was proposed
to relieve Kassala, and Granville replied pleasantly—“ It is out-
side the scope of our military operations.”
Those operations soon culminated in withdrawal, and in what
Lord Napier of Magdala could not help calling, in spite of the skill
and gallantry of the soldiery, an almost irretrievable blow to the
military character of the country.
And so the long tragedy caused by the “ great refusal ” came to
an end in action: but never can be blotted out of the national
memory while virtue is held in reverence and hypocrisy is despised
among Englishmen. Lord Granville, and others, thought it be-
coming to simulate in Parliament some sorrow for the death of
Gordon ; but when the indignation of the country had expended
itself without hurling the Ministry from office, and other events
having intervened, it seemed safe to smile upon the past, he said,
in public, at Shrewsbury (in November), “ I can never look back
without regret that General Gordon was sent on that mission ; but
at the same time I cannot, with truth, admit that I feel remorse on
the subject.” It was wasteful excess in the noble culprit thus to
gibbet himself as insensible to shame. His despatches had proved
what manner of man he was ; and in 1890 he has been hung—
where now a-days we hang such offenders—on the walls of the
Eoyal Academy; and on the complacent effigy there were, indeed,
no traces of remorse for the fate of Gordon.
Yet, what severer censure could be passed on a man than that he
was active in the betrayal of Gordon, and was without remorse when
the victim of the great refusal was immolated on the altar of duty,
to which the sacrificial priests had sent him, in order that they
might prolong, for a brief term, their miserable tenure of office ?
The fire which burned in their bosoms was not lit at the source
which warmed the breast of Gordon. Duty, the handmaid of
right, animated the victim. Self-seeking, the slave of meanness,
prompted the officiating ministers.
Time, the redresser of wrong, will guard with reverence the victim
as a type of that which is noblest in humanity; and will as surely
doom his betrayers to the perpetual scorn of mankind.
Yindex.
>.uj< ■;is ii. < . ■ .
London; Printed by W. H. Allen & Co., Limited, 13 Waterloo Place, Pall Mall. S.W.


mm
Tl !!■■■ IHTI
NATIONAL
I IBKAKY or AUSI KM I A


*
