

POLYNESIAN LABOUFf TIRADE:
:r:e:m:-A.:r:k:s
ON THK
Report written by Rear-Admiral J. CRAWFORD
WILSON,
ON THE
Labour Trade in the Western Pacific.
Hobart,
PRINTED AT “ THE MERCURY ” OFFICE, MACQUARIE STREET,




POLYNESIAN LABOUR TIjADE:
BEMAEKS
ON THE
Report written by Rear-Admiral J. CRAWFORD
WILSON,
ON THE
Labour Trade in the Western Pacific,
Hobart,
PRINTED AT “ THE MERCURY ” OFFICE, MACQUARIE STREET,




THE POLYNESIAN LABOUR TRADE.
REMARKS ON THE REPORT WRITTEN .BY REAR-
ADMIRAL J. CRAWFORD WILSON ON THE LABOUR
TRADE IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC.
The report on the above trade, written by the late
Commodore on the Australian Station, was published in the
“ Sydney Morning Herald,” of 10th October last, but it did
not reach Fiji until towards the end of last month, and, owing
to my absence, I have had no opportunity of commenting
upon it until the present. I write principally Irom memory,
and many papers that I would like to refer to are now in Fiji;
but, as I do not return for some time, and it is necessary to
refute the charges at once, I will not delay on that account.
It must be understood that, as a Fijian planter, I only speak
for and on behalf of Fiji —New South Wales and Queensland
are able to take care of themselves—and everything I state I
shall be prepared to prove if the opportunity is given to me.
As this pamphlet will necessarily extend to a greater length
than I can expect any one not interested in Fiji to care to read,
I will mark in the margin such parts as may be of interest to
those who have the welfare of Her Majesty’s colonies at heart.
All through this document Admiral Wilson shows he still I
believes that labourers are unfairly obtained; but that it is
impossible they can be so by Fijian vessels, the following
facts will prove:—Every captain of a labour vessel, before
starting on a cruise, has to enter into a bond and give
sureties in the sum of .£SOO, that no irregularity shall take
place on board his vessel during the voyage, and as the Fijian
language is now spoken on most of the islands from which
labourers are obtained, it is pretty certain that no master will
endanger his certificate, and the £soo—not to say his life
by resorting to irregularities, which are sure to be reported in
Fiji before many mouths are passed. And what is the induce-
ment for the captain to obtain labourers dishonestly ?
Absolutely none. His vessel is chartered from him, or his
employer, at so much per month, whether she obtains any
labourers or not, and, therefore, the advantage to him would
be that she should be a long time obtaining the labourers ;


the captain has no pecuniary interest in the success of the trip.
But besides this, the Government send one of their own
servants on the ship, who is called the “Government Agent,” to
see that no irregularity takes place ; that none but willing
labourers are recruited ; that all understand the nature of the
contract into which they enter; that on the expiry of their
engagement they are landed at their own homes ; etc., etc.
The Agent, also, has no pecuniary interest in the success of the
trip. In order that the Admiral’s theory should be
maintained there must be dishonest collusion between
the charterer and his agent, the owner, the captain,
the Government Agent, and the crew ; and I think no one
will believe such an unholy alliance possible. The logs of
the vessel and of the Government Agent might be made to
tally, but as the latter is most carefully read by the Agent-
General of Immigration on his return, and any suspicion
created would lead to the Agent’s instant dismissal, and per-
haps prosecution, I think this possibility may also be dismissed
as infeasible. The mode of recruiting is as follows: Only
captains with good characters are employed, who are never
supposed to leave their vessels, and the bonds been
taken and the Government Agent being on board, if the
vessel passes the Harbourmaster’s inspection the voyage com-
mences. The Agent examines every recruit separately as to
his willingness to engage before taking him into his custody.
All the labourers are in his charge, and it is his duty to see
their food served, to attend to the water supply, and to
administer medicine and medical comforts when necessary.
These are supplied by the owners of the vessel to a regulation
scale, and are examined by the Government medical officer
before the departure of the vessel, to which officer the treat-
ment of all sick recruits is on arrival of the vessel reported.
Every daily occurrence on board is entered by the Govern-
ment Agent in his official diaiy, and it is his duty to see that
friendly relations are at all times maintained with the
islanders. The women have a separate compartment, which
is strictly guarded. Only one recruit can be obtained for
each registered ton of the vessel: vessels may not leave Fiji
between Ist November and 25th March, for fear of bad
weather; presents are given to the friends of the recruits
when they leave home ; and every recruit has 61b. of food per
day, clothes, mat, blanket, pipes, and tobacco. Arrived in
Fiji, he is examined by the medical officer, and if sick sent to
the hospital until cured; if not, he is sent to the depot and
vaccinated, and after the sores are healed allotted to the
plantations.
The evidence against the labour trade upon which Admiral
Wilson chiefly relies is mostly hearsay, and his mode of cast-


ing a slur upon the Fiji trade by referring to the case of
kidnapping by the French vessel Aurora is, to say the least,
very disingenuous; for how does the proof of a Frenchman’s
guilt demonstrate the criminality of an Englishman ? What
has it to do with the labour system of Fiji? And as to the
barrister employed by the French captain asserting that
English labour vessels still kidnapped their men, and Admiral
Wilson saying it looked suspicious that the people in court
should think we were still slavers, yet he is candid enough
to admit that the false charge made by the Frenchmen against
our vessel, the Winifred, was, after careful enquiry before the
Judicial Commissioner, proved to have been made without any
ground whatever. As was said in the “ Fiji Times” of 29th
November: —“ Divest the Admiral’s statements of superfluous
verbiage and they refute themselves. For instance, ‘ cases of
kidnapping occasionally disgrace the English labour trade
because the French vessel Aurora has been proved a slaver
and kidnapper. A bad feature in the case is that the wit-
nesses and members of the court believe Englishmen do
kidnap, though enquiry into the case on which this belief is
based proved it to be without foundation.’ ” His remarks
upon, the beche-de-mer and pearl-shell fishing are also not
ingenuous, for Fiji has no connection whatever with that, the
most objectionable phase of the general system, yet he leaves it
to be inferred that she has. With regard to his objection to
presents being given to the men or their friends at the time
they are engaged, if this practice was stopped, it would be
useless trying to get any men in future : and any attempt to
get them without giving them the usual presents leads them
to say that they are being stolen, and ends in the murder of
the boat’s crew. In English this is rendered “ kidnapping,”
and these alleged cases of kidnapping have been but too often
made the excuse for massacre. The presents are given as
“ bounty ” to the recruit, and is not more objectionable than
the system of giving bounty to recruits of the British army in
war time, or that of advancing to seamen in the merchant
service ; nor is the system more degrading than the hiring of
servants at statute fairs in England at the present day.
But there is one statement in Admiral Wilson’s report which
is not true , and that is, “a Snider rifle and a proportion
of Snider ammunition is part of the kit of every returning la-
bourer from Queensland and Fiji.” Ido not charge him with
making this intentionally, but I say it is pure invention. I
refer him to our Immigration department, through which
every labourer is paid off, to be convinced of his error, and he
will see that they receive only trade muskets and trade fowl-
ing-pieces (which it is almost as dangerous to stand behind
as before), and which are far more harmless than their own |


\\ poisoned weapons, which they used before their introduction. |
I agree with Admiral Wilson when he says that “ the Mystery
and May Queen and other boats’ crews were murdered on purpose
to get the trade they contained but wish that in another
part of his report he had not almost insinuated that these
murders were committed by way of reprisal. Speaking of
reprisal reminds me of a report signed by Captain Maxwell, of
H.M.S. Emerald, in January, 1881, in which he says he
burnt the islanders’ houses, shelled their towns, cut down
their cocoanut trees, destroyed their crops, wrecked their
canoes, fired into distant groups of natives, etc.; and I a,sk
Admiral Wilson whether he thinks the exercise of this “ in-
discriminate vengeance ” a means likely or otherwise to make
the savages commit reprisals. If Captain Maxwell had been
in command of a recruiting vessel he would probably have
been hanged, but as he was doubtless acting under the High
Commissioner’s orders, of course no question of his guilt could
arise. And here I feel compelled to make a remark about
the High Commissioner and the manner in which he has per-
formed his duties. Previous to his accepting office in 1878,
murders in the islands were comparatively rare to what they
afterwards were in 1879-80-1, and I can only attribute the
enormous increase in the list of crimes to the High Commis-
sioner having issued orders to British vessels not to tabe the
law into their own hands and summarily chastise the natives
for any outrage, but if fired upon they were to retire at once.
The refusal of the Judicial Commissioner, acting in concert
with the High Commissioner, to punish Aratuga, the mur-
derer, on the ground that he had no jurisdiction, was, to say
the least, a most unfortunate occurrence. He had cost the
British Government a large sum to bring to trial, and his
guilt was clearly proved ; but if the question of jurisdiction
had been thought could arise, why should so much money
have been expended over him ? His friends thoroughly ap-
preciated the kindness extended to Aratuga, for, as soon as
they heard of his being at liberty, they immediately murdered
one of two traders (Chaffin and Johnson), and sent word to Fiji
that they had pigs ready to pay the fine as soon as the man-
of-war demanded them. This, I believe, was because one of
H.M.S., acting under the High Commissioner, had inflicted a
fine of ten pigs on some of the islanders for the murder of a
British subject. The return also of the Borealis murderers
to their homes, fat and well clothed, without any punishment
whatever, could but be looked upon by these savages as an
incentive to commit further outrages. That they were not
slow to avail themselves of the privilege let the crews of the
following vessels testify, some or all of whom were murdered
during the time indicated:—Hippie, Esperauza, Loelia,


Mystery, Borealis, Dauntless, Annie Brooks, Sandfly, etc.,
etc. The murder of my friend, poor Commander Bower,
brought things to a climax ; and Bishop Selwyn gave all his
assistance to the Cormorant and Renard to catch and execute
his murderers. Had this not have been done there is no
telling to what lengths these fiends would have gone, and one
or two such lessons would make life in the Solomons and Hew
Hebrides comparatively safe ; in fact, since the execution of
Bower’s murderers, it is very much more safe than it was
before, and what I am astonished at in connection with them
is that the Aborigines Protection Society have not howled at
all concerned. The only explanation I have ever heard for
this murder was, that the chief one morning looked very
sulky, and on his followers tremblingly asking what ailed
him, he replied, “ I want a white man’s skull.” The Sandfly
arriving the same day they were able to gratify his desires;
and I honestly believe that during the past few years nearly
all murders have been committed from no greater provocation
than that. I can quite believe that in the olden days reprisals
were often exacted on account of the treatment of the islanders
by the recruiting vessels’; but since 1876 I am unable to per-
ceive where an abuse can ci'eep in under the system of
recruiting as adopted in Fiji. Since I have been in New
Zealand more than one of poor Lieutenant Luokcraft’s friends
have not hesitated to say that they lay his blood at the door
of the High Commissioner; for the instructions lam told the
Cormorant received before starting on the expedition to punish
some murderers were, that they were not to fire until fired upon,
and then only to return it over their heads! Those who had the
honour of Luckcraft’s acquaintance are aware of his great
courage and personal bravery, and it was through obeying his
orders implicitly that this Christian martyr met his melan-
choly end. To return: —The “Fiji Times” of 2nd instant
says of the Admiral’s report:—“lt is not difficult to under-
stand what influences have swayed Rear-Admiral Wilson in
dealing with this matter. The assumption is a safe one, that
before commencing his investigation into the labour traffic he
had adopted the common error of regarding it as a whole, that
he was not unnaturally influenced by the very general homo
sentiment in its disfavour, and that he therefore started with
a remarkably pronounced prejudice against it. In prosecuting
his enquiries he discovered the four-fold character of the
system, but has not given that weight to his discovery which
shouldhave prevented any attempt atageneral finding. It would
appear that with regard to the side issues in the several cases
the facts have forced themselves upon his knowledge, and he
has pronounced accordingly. Then, as if fearful of offending
too flagrantly against home prejudices, or compelled by the


necessity of finding unfavourably on the general case, he has
delivei'ed a verdict totally at variance with the patent facts
established in particular instances, and the result with respect
to Fiji is a diametric contradiction.” With these remarks I
agree. I cannot, however, submit to be sneered at by
Admiral Wilson without putting on record my protest. Ho
says:
heartily hated and abused by the planters, who only too
frequently wished to treat their free labourers as slaves,
because he insisted on justice being done to the men.” Any-
thing more wickedly untrue could not have been published
about the planters of Fiji. There is no similarity to truth in
a single word of it. Libels upon the Fijian planters have
been uttered so often, without contradiction, that it is time
some one spoke in their behalf. The planters consist, for the
most part, of gentlemen’s sons, public school and University
men, retired Army and Naval men, and superior pioneer
colonists from New Zealand and Australia. Ak I have lived
in Fiji for the past seven years, I think I may be permitted to
know the reason for the hatred to Sir Arthur Gordon better
than Admiral Wilson imagines he does. But it is not Sir
Arthur Gordon with whom I have now to deal; yet I will
here quote from his message to the Legislative Council, in
July, 1877, to prove Admiral Wilson in the wrong. He
sa y S.—“ . —“ The Governor is thoroughly confident thatas ageneral
rule, and with but very few exceptions, the treatment of Poly-
nesian immigrants in Fiji, by their employers, is kind,
considerate, and equitable; and that those who assert that
the hesitation of the natives of the Western Groups to come to
Fiji arises from ill-treatment met with by them in this colony
(and that such is the case has been asserted by high
authority) are altogether in error.”
Polynesian labourers in Fiji are, as a matter of fact, treated
better than white men; and if one says he feels ill, it is a
crime to send him out to work, although you know he is
shamming. Hospitals, doctors, sick-nurses, every kind of
medicine, are not unknown on nearly every plantation in Fiji,
and if a man dies it is not through want of care or attention.
He is paid just the same whether he works or no, and I say
that Polynesian labourers, with their small wages, are far
better off than most of the agricultural labourers in England;
for how many of them at the end of three years have saved up
.£9 a-piece ?
Admiral Wilson’s digression to praise Sir Arthur Gordon’s
Native Taxation Scheme was as absurd as it was uncalled for;
and, as he speaks of a “native tax on produce,” it shows that
he did not understand what he was writing about. But yet
he goes out of his way to hurl another anathema at the heads


of the “unscrupulous traders and planters.” To prove the
value that his opinion on the working of a scheme that would
take a very long time to master would be, I will give the dates
when Admiral Wilson was in Fiji, during which he only could
have personally acquired the information. He arrived in
H.M.S. Wolverene on 27th April, and left on 6th May, 1879,
and during this interval the vessel was in Levuka Harbour;
so that his knowledge must have been gained by a nine days’
experience of his subject in Levuka. Levuka is not Fiji; but
is the principal town, situated on one of the smaller islands.
Admiral Wilson may be a very brave man, but he is also a
veryfoolish one, to pronounce upon a subject of which he knows
absolutely nothing —to contradict most flatly the officially-
delivered opinion of Sir Arthur Gordon as to the disposition
of the planters with respect to their labourers, and to asperse
the general character of men who, in common justice, he
should have spoken of with the strictest impartiality. To
demonstrate the firm graspand capable knowledge ofhis subject,
which the Admiral possessed when he doubted whether the
labourers could possibly cost the Fijian planters more than <£9
per head per annum,it is but necessary to say that the firstvessel
sent away by the Government for labour this year introduced
her men at a cost of nearly £39 per head, which, divided over
three years, is d£l 3 a head, without reckoning food, wages,
etc., which would bring the cost up to <£2l or £22 per head—
and this is quite as much as hired farm servants cost at home.
And it was very puerile to quote what Mr. Godeffroy’s men
cost him, as he is a German, and lived in a country where
there are no British laws in force. As nearly every estate in
Fiji has either river or sea frontage, the Admiral is wrong in
assuming that the extra cost of our men is incurred thi’ough
the extra cost of the carriage of provisions—as were they not
so situate, most of our food is grown on or near the estates
where the men work. He also complains of the labourers
being given too much meat in Queensland, of their having to
work 10 hours a day, and not receiving sufficient wages. The
first form of cruelty I will not speak about; the second de-
pends entirely upon the man himself, as most of my men can
finish their task by 2 o’clock comfortably—some do so by 1
o’clock; the third is one which time only can alter. In
the July number of the “ Nineteenth Century,” entitled/' With
the Emigrants,” it will be observed that an Irishman in Con-
nemara is considered fortunate who can obtain an occasional
day’s employment for one shilling a day, out of which he has
to pay his rent, and support a wife and large family. I, of
course, am prejudiced; but I should have imagined that a man
who has his stomach filled three times a day, who does no
more work than he feels inclined, who is housed and clothed,


has tobacco, mosquito nets and mats, and has not, in fact, a-
want ungratified, and at the end of three years receives £9,
and has a free passage home again, should not deserve to be
styled as “ far worse off than were even slaves under Europeans
arid Americans,” as Admiral Wilson says the Polynesians are.
But the article in the “Nineteenth Century” was not written at
the date he made his report. Admiral Wilson also says he
can see no difference between an African slave and a recruited
Polynesian, but thinks the condition of the former may be
the better ; as he originally cost most he would be considered
the more valuable animal. I should have thought the
Admiral would have shown better taste than to speak of it
human being as an animal; but if the African cost more than
.£39, his opinion of the Fijian planters is a very erroneous one,
if he thinks they do not take very good care of animals which
cost so much money. I would sooner give a Chinaman three
or four dollars a week, and he to feed himself, than I would
employ three Polynesians, as I should feel quite certain of
having my work better done, although, perhaps, less of it, and
I should also save doctors’ bills, hospitals, sick nurses, medi-
cines, and overseers; besides I should not always live in a state
of fear of being prosecuted for manslaughter in case any of
my men died from natural causes. I have undergone one
prosecution for a case of this kind, at the instance of Sir
Arthur Gordon, although I live on another island, forty miles
distant from my plantation ; and so has my friend Lieutenant
E. C. Chippindall; and how often Imay be subjected to
the same indignity and annoyance the Lord only knows.
As Admiral Wilson went out of his way to praise Sir
Arthur Gordon’s Native Taxation Scheme, I must beg to bo
allowed to say a word on the other side. The result of its
seven 3'ears’ working has been to make the whole of the
native race slaves to the Crown; for the Fijians are not
allowed to freely engage with the planters, but they are com-
pelled —men, women, and children —to work all the year
round on Government plantations for a remuneration of some
two or three shillings a head, out of which they have to sup-
port themselves, their wives, and families; and there is no
shirking allowed by the Government “ nigger” driver; even
women with child are not allowed to escape. The Rev.
Frederick Langham, the Chairman of the Wesleyan Mission
in Fiji, in his letter to the Melbourne “Argus,” published on
24th March last, mentions a case where a woman at work in
the field for the Government was delivered of a child, and she
and the child both died. There is not a native in Fiji,
except the chiefs, in favour of the Scheme. It is the principal
cause of perpetuating the atrocious power of “ lala and as
a financial matter it is a miserable failure, and the receipts


from it have been less and less every year for the past two
or three years. The accounts in connection with it are not
made public. They only pass through the hands of the
Colonial Secretary, and he is his own auditor. That such a
cruel system of slavery could ever be sanctioned by a British
Government is cause for wonder to all visitors to Fiji. Until
a Eoyal Commission is appointed to enquire into its working
I fear the curse will never be removed.
If Admiral Wilson would but make specific charges, or
suggest definite remedies without qualifying his remarks, I
should be able to deal with them seriatim, but I do not think
sailors, as a rule, can be accused of reasoning logically. If I
were to say that none of his charges are true as regards
Fiji, and that all his suggested remedies are impracticable, I
should not be far wrong; for there can be no doubt that his
personal experience of the matters about which he wrote was
almost nil. I can but deny, on behalf of Fiji, that the boat
steerers are paid so much per head for as many men as they
recruit, and Admiral Wilson forgets that the Government
Agent is responsible for every man recruited; the Agent
surely must be a stupid man not to be able to understand
whether the recruit comes willingly or not, even though he
cannot understand his language. As to “pressure being
brought to bear on the returning labourers, who are
threatened with retention on board unless they can induce
others of their village to take their place,” this is too absurd
to require any denial. Immediately the man puts his foot on
shore he is master of the situation, and I could understand
that persuasion and propitiation would be the means em-
ployed for securing the above end, not harshness and intimi-
dation. Admiral Wilson says the most distressing hardships
lay in the way the unfortunate creatures are returned to
their homes. “ The labour agents complain themselves of
the very insufficient data they are provided with to enable
them to find the homes of the labourers they are required
to see returned.” I should like to ask him the name of any
agent from Fiji who ever made this complaint to him. “ The
natives themselves probably do not know their own islands
when they see them.” Fancy a man forgetting his native
place after an absence of three years. “ Not unfrequently,
after a vain search for some time, the unfortunates are landed
anywhere, and have been seen gesticulating and wild with
despair, as the boat pulls away leaving them to their fate.”
Admiral Wilson deals so in generalities. Let me ask him
the name of any Government Agent whom he can tell who
did such a thing as he mentions. Where is the Polynesian
who will be landed except at his own home ? Would he not,
rather than be landed on a strange island with the certainty


of being killed, sooner go back again in the same ship to work
for another term, and would not the Government Agent be
but too glad to take the man back again instead of consigning
him to his destruction ? Admiral Wilson’s report no doubt
sounds very wonderful and very terrible when read in England
by the Aborigines Protection Society, but if only the true
facts of the case were stated there would be much less, and
perhaps no, objection raised to the Polynesian labour trade
as now conducted. Bishop Selwyn is not altogether averse to it,
and I invite the Admiral to ask his opinion on the civilising
influences it has on his Melanesian Mission. The Bishop
sends young boys away every year to Norfolk Island to be
educated, who leave home and parents in a tropical country,
to live in a civilised society. Would it not be the height of
absurdity to say that these boys were not legally obtained P
Yet the Polynesian labourers are obtained even more legally
than they. The Admiral says he “can hardly imagine any one
not interested in obtaining cheap labour for a moment
countenancing the labour trade.” But is it cheap labour?
I say most decidedly it is not. But it is the cheapest
labour available to us in Eiji, and it is easy to get, through
being so near to us; only the Admiral would have every one lose
sight of the fact that labour we must have, and, unless we
are all prepared to immediately abandon our estates, labour
we will have. The Indian coolie can only be employed by the
richest men, and is too great a luxury even for them. The
natives of Fiji, under Sir A. Gordon’s Native Taxation
Scheme, are prevented from engaging as free men, and the
Polynesian is at present our only standby. But if Admiral
Wilson’s repoi’t is to be acted upon, and the Polynesian trade
entirely prohibited, the British Government will do a very
great injury to the planters and others in Fiji, if they do not
arrange that we shall be able to import Chinese. Chinese, in
my opinion, will be our best, and, in the long run, the cheapest
labour that we can employ ; and if we can get them in quantity,
we shall then perhaps be allowed to work on quietly without
resting under the stigma of being kidnappers, slavers,
scoundrels, unscrupulous rascals, and all the other hard words
which Admiral Wilson has said in his report we now are.
I am sorry the Admiral notices “An interesting paper
written to him by Baron Miklouho Maclay,” and for the follow-
ing reason:—In August, 1881, as soon as I saw Baron
Maclay’s letter to Commodore Wilson, I wrote to him, and
requested him to name any Fijian labour vessel that had been
guilty of the practices of which he complained, and I told him
it was his duty to write to the High Commissioner on the
subject. His reply was a pitiful one, but in effect admitted
that he did not mean what he said to Admiral Wilson when


he mentioned labour vessels from Fiji, The majority of com-
plaints about the labour trade are written from tradition
and upon hearsay evidence; scarcely one of them is made from
personal observation, as in the instance of Baron Maclay.
Bishop Selwyn and the Reverend Mr. Rooney are the only
missionaries I know (but there are no doubt many others),
who are capable of giving an unbiassed opinion on the
Polynesian labour traffic, and to either of them I am
willing that Admiral Wilson’s report shall be submitted for
comment. But I think Admiral Wilson himself admits, by
publishing his suggestions for its amendment, that it cannot
present even a faint resemblance to a slave trade, and on this
subject the “ Fiji Times” of 9th instant says : —“ We claim that
the writer of the report has conclusively disproved his own
case, since he has shown that a critical examination into the
matter has exposed no defects greater than can be remedied
by the adoption of measures, which certainly cannot be called
drastic, radical, or anything other than such as will effect mere
improvements in matters of detail.” Fiji and its system of
Polynesian immigration clearly stands by itself, and can only
be honestly judged by itself; it is a British colony, and its
employers of labour and everything connected with it are under
the direct and rigorous supervision of the Governor himself. It
having been admitted that our traffic is free from kidnapping,
that the labourer is well treated, and the laws administered
without respect to colour, we claim judgment upon these facts,
without the importation of French atrocities, beche-de-mer
fishing abuses, or Queensland irregularities into it. We
challenge the proof that the free labour system of Fiji is
not as honest and legitimate a mode of regulating the
relationship between master and servant as that adopted in
any other part of the world, and Admiral Wilson’s report
is conclusive evidence on the case, if all extraneous matter be
excluded. Let the system be examined in an earnest and
straightforward manner, and it will be discovered that nothing
has been disclosed which would justify a logical mind in
advocating its prohibition.
Before finally dismissing this matter from my mind, I
will point out some of the statements which Admiral Wilson
makes in his very valuable report. At the end of paragraph
5, he says:—“ Such practices, as a means of getting cheap
labour, are as likely as not to exist.” Paragraph 8. —“ I have
heard of the master of a trading vessel openly toasting,” etc.
Paragraph 9.—“1 do not think sufficient care is taken,” etc.
Paragraph 11. —“Since then, however, he is reported to have
committed a breach of the law,” etc. Paragraph 12. —“ I
doubt much if a single recruit,” etc. Paragraph Ifi. —“ The
natives themselves probably do not know their own islands,”


etc. “ The labour agents complain themselves and I ask
what evidence are these ? But whenever he commits himself
to an assertion it is singular how often he is wrong. For
instance, “ the Fiji labourers all have a Snider rifle and ammu-
nition given to them as part payment“ Sir Arthur Gordon
was hated by the planters because they were prevented by
him from treating their men as slaves.” The natives of the
Navigator and Friendly Groups are never recruited as
labourers ; the boat steerers are not paid for each native they
recruit; men are not taken against their will to Fiji; pressure
is not brought to bear on returning labourers; they are not
landed except at their own homes ; labourers do not forget
their own village after three years’ absence; they do not
re-engage because of the reasons Admiral Wilson stated,
etc., etc.
I am quite aware that the publication of these hastily
written notes may do no good, but if circulated in the
proper quarter, I trust they will do something towards
counteracting the libels on the Fijian planters, which have been
so recklessly disseminated by Admiral Wilson.
WM. FILLINGHAM PARR.
Auckland, December 27, 1882.
Printed at The Mercury Steam Press Office, Hobart.




i S6oS££oo 80S1 i




« "i
... ' - *!
■%-.-! :&4' '
fwfiliiir
jpigF
